ACCOUNT of the LIFE Of the late Reverend Mr. David Brainerd, Minister of the
Gospel,

Missionary to the INDIANS, from the honorable Society in Scotland, for the
Propagation of Christian Knowledge, and Pastor of a Church of Christian INDIANS
in New Jersey.

Who died at Northampton in NEW ENGLAND, October. 9th 1747. in the 30th Year of
his Age:

Chiefly taken from his own Diary, and other private Writings, written for his
own Use; and now published,

By JONATHAN EDWARDS, A. M. Minister of the Gospel at Northampton.

BOSTON: N. E. Printed for and Sold by D. HENCHMAN, in Cornhill. 1749.

The PREFACE.
THERE are two Ways of representing and recommending true Religion and Virtue
to the World, which GOD has made Use of: The one is by Doctrine and Precept;
the other is by Instance and Example: Both are abundantly used in the holy
Scriptures. Not only are the Grounds, Nature, Design and Importance of Religion
clearly exhibited in the Doctrines of Scripture, and it is Exercise and Practice
plainly delineated and abundantly enjoined and enforced in it is Commands and
Counsels: But there we have many excellent Examples of Religion, in it is Power
and Practice, set before us, in the Histories both of the Old Testament and New
-- JESUS CHRIST, the great Prophet of God, when he came into the World to be
the Light of the World, to teach and enforce true Religion, in a greater Degree
than ever had been before, he made Use of both these Methods: In his Doctrine
he declared the Mind and Will of God, and the Nature and Properties of that
Virtue which becomes Creatures of our Make and in our Circumstances, more
clearly and fully than ever it had been before, and more powerfully enforced it
by what he declared of the Obligations and Inducements to Holiness; and he also
in his own Practice gave a most perfect Example of the Virtue he taught. He
exhibited to the World such an illustrious Pattern of Humility, divine Love,
discreet Zeal, Self-denial, Obedience, Patience, Resignation, Fortitude,
Meekness, Forgiveness, Compassion, Benevolence, and universal Holiness, as
neither Men nor Angels ever saw before. God also in his Providence has been
wont to make Use of both these Methods to hold forth Light to Mankind, and
Inducement to their Duty, in all Ages: He has from Time to Time raised up
eminent Teachers, to exhibit and bear Testimony to the Truth in their Doctrine,
and oppose the Errors, Darkness and Wickedness of the World; and also has, from
Age to Age, raised up some eminent Persons that have set bright Examples of
that Religion that is taught and prescribed in the Word of God; whose Examples
have in divine Providence been set forth to public View. These have a great
Tendency to engage the Attention of Men to the Doctrines and Rules that are
taught, and greatly to confirm and enforce them; and especially when these
bright Examples have been exhibited in the same Persons that have been eminent
Teachers, so that the World has had Opportunity to see such a Confirmation of
the Truth, Efficacy, and Amiableness of the Religion taught, in the Practice of
the same Persons that have most clearly and forceably taught it; and above all,
when these bright Examples have been set by eminent Teachers in a variety of
unusual Circumstances of remarkable Trial; and God has withal remarkably
distinguished them with wonderful Success of their Instructions and Labors,
consisting in glorious Events that have been in many Respects new and strange.

Such an Instance we have in the excellent Person, whose Life is published in
the following Pages. His Example is attended with a great Variety of
Circumstances, tending to engage the Attention of religious People, especially
in these Parts of the World: He was one of distinguished natural Abilities; as
all are sensible, that had Acquaintance with him: He was a Minister of the
Gospel, and one who was called to unusual Services in that Work, whose Ministry
was attended with very remarkable and unusual Events, an Account of which has
already been given to the Public; one whose Course of Religion began before
the late Times of extraordinary religious Commotion, but yet one that lived in
those Times, and went through them, and was very much in the Way of the various
extraordinary Effects and unusual Appearances of that Day, and was not an idle
Spectator, but had a near Concern in many Things that passed at that Time; one
that had a very extensive Acquaintance with those that have been the Subjects
of the late religious Operations, in many of these British Colonies, in Places
far distant one from another, in People of many different Nations, of different
Educations, Manners and Customs; one who had peculiar Opportunity of
Acquaintance with the false Appearances and Counterfeits of Religion: One who
himself was the Instrument of a most remarkable Awakening, and an exceeding
wonderful and abiding Alteration and moral Transformation of such Subjects as
do peculiarly render the Change rare and astonishing.

In the following Account, the Reader will have Opportunity to see, not only
what were the external Circumstances and remarkable Incidents of the Life of
this Person, and how he spent his Time from Day to Day, as to his external
Behavior; but also what passed in his own Heart, the wonderful Change that he
experienced in his Mind and Disposition, the Manner in which that Change was
bro't to pass, how it continued, what were it is Consequences in his inward
Frames, Thoughts, Affections and secret Exercises, through many Vicissitudes
and Trials, from thenceforth for more than eight Years, 'till his Death; and
also to see how all ended at last, in his Sentiments, Frame and Behavior,
during a long Season of the gradual and sensible Approach of Death, under a
lingering Illness, and what were the Effects of his Religion in dying
Circumstances, or in the last Stages of his dying Illness. The Account being
written, the Reader may have Opportunity at his Leisure to compare the various
Parts of the Story, and deliberately to view and weigh the whole, and consider
how far what is related is agreeable to the Dictates of right Reason and the
holy Word of God.

I am far from supposing, that Mr. Brainerd's inward Exercises and Experiences,
or his external Conduct, were free from all Imperfection: The Example of Jesus
Christ is the only Example that ever was set in the human Nature, that was
altogether perfect; which therefore is a Rule, to try all other Examples by;
and the Dispositions, Frames, and Practices of others must be commended and
followed no further, than they were Followers of Christ.

There is one Thing in Mr. Brainerd, easily discernable by the following
Account of his Life, that may be called an Imperfection in him, which though not
properly an Imperfection of a moral Nature, yet may possibly be made an
Objection against the extraordinary Appearances of Religion and Devotion in
him, by such as seek for Objections against every Thing that can be produced in
Favor of true vital Religion; and that is, that he was one who by his
Constitution and natural Temper was so prone to Melancholy and Dejection of
Spirit. There are some who think that all serious strict Religion is a
melancholy Thing, and that what is called Christian Experience, is little else
besides melancholy Vapors disturbing the Brain, and exciting enthusiastical
Imaginations. But that Mr. Brainerd's Temper or Constitution inclined him to
Despondency, is no just Ground to suspect his extraordinary Devotion, as being
only the Fruit of a warm Imagination. I doubt not but that all who have well
observed Mankind, will readily grant this, that it is not all those who by
their natural Constitution or Temper are most disposed to Dejection, that are
the Persons who are the most susceptive of lively and strong Impressions on
their Imagination, or the most subject to those vehement impetuous Affections,
which are the Fruits of such Impressions; but that many who are of a very gay
and sanguine natural Temper are vastly more so, and if their Affections are
turned into a religious Channel, are much more exposed to Enthusiasm, than many
of the former. And as to Mr. Brainerd in particular, notwithstanding his
Inclination to Despondency, he was evidently one of that Sort of Persons who
usually are the furthest from a teeming Imagination; being one of a penetrating
Genius, of clear Thought, of close Reasoning, and a very exact Judgment; as all
know, that knew him. As he had a great Insight into human Nature, and was very
discerning and judicious in Things in general, so he excelled in his Judgment
and Knowledge of Things in Divinity, but especially in Things appertaining to
inward experimental Religion; most accurately distinguishing between real solid
Piety and Enthusiasm, between those Affections that are rational and
scriptural, having their Foundation in Light and Judgment, and those that are
founded in whimsical Conceits, strong Impressions on the Imagination, and those
vehement Emotions of the animal Spirits that arise from them. He was exceeding
sensible of Men's Exposedness to these Things, how much they had prevailed, and
what Multitudes had been deceived by them, of the pernicious Consequences of
them, and the fearful Mischief they had done in the Christian World. He greatly
abhorred such a Sort of Religion, and was abundant in bearing Testimony against
it, living and dying; and was quick to discern when any Thing of that Nature
arose, though in it is first Buddings, and appearing under the most fair and
plausible Disguises; and had that Talent at describing the various Workings of
this imaginary Enthusiastical Religion, evincing the Falseness and Vanity of
it, and demonstrating the great Difference between this and true spiritual
Devotion, which I scarcely ever knew equalled in any other Person. -- And his
Judiciousness did not only appear in distinguishing among the Experiences of
others, but also among the various Exercises of his own Mind; and particularly
in discerning what within himself was to be laid to the Score of Melancholy; in
which he exceeded all melancholy Persons that ever I was acquainted with (though
I have been in the Way of Acquaintance with very many;) which was doubtless
owing to a peculiar Strength in his Judgment: It Is a rare Thing indeed, that
melancholy People are well sensible of their own Disease, and fully convinced
that such and such Things are to be ascribed to it, as are indeed it is genuine
Operations and Fruits. -- Mr. Brainerd did not obtain that Degree of Skill,
which he had in this Matter, at once, but gained it gradually; as the Reader
may discern by the following Account of his Life. In the former Part of his
religious Course, he imputed much of that Kind of Gloominess of Mind and those
dark Thoughts, to spiritual Desertion, which in the latter Part of his Life, he
was abundantly sensible, were owing to the Disease of Melancholy; accordingly
he often expressly speaks of them in his Diary as arising from this Cause; and
he was often in Conversation speaking of the Difference between Melancholy and
godly Sorrow, true Humiliation and spiritual Desertion, and the great Danger of
mistaking the one for the other, and the very hurtful Nature of Melancholy,
discoursing with great Judgment upon it, and doubtless much more judiciously
for what he knew by his own Experience.

But besides what may be argued from Mr Brainerd's Strength of Judgment, it is
apparent in Fa^t, that he was not a Person of a warm Imagination. His inward
Experiences, either in his Convictions or his Conversion, and his religious
Views and Impressions through the Course of his Life to his Death (of which he
has left a very particular Account) none of them consisted in, or were excited
by, strong and lively Images formed in his Imagination; there is nothing at all
appears of it in his Diary, from Beginning to End: Yes, he told me on his Death
Bed, that, although once when he was very young in Years and in Experience, he
was deceived into a high Opinion of such Things, looking on them as superior
Seize in Religion, beyond what he had ever arrived to, and was ambitious
of them and earnestly sought them, yet he never could obtain them; and that he
never in his Life had a strong Impression on his Imagination, of any V^sage,
outward Form, external Glory, or any other Thing of that Nature; which Kind of
Impressions abound among the wild enthusiastic People of the late and present
Day.

As Mr. Brainerd's Religious Impressions, Views and Affections in their Nature
were vastly different from Enthusiasm, so were then Effects in him as contrary
as possible to the ordinary Effects of that. Nothing so puffs Men up, as
Enthusiasm, with a high Conceit of their own Wisdom, Holiness, Eminency and
Sufficiency, and makes 'em so bold, forward, assuming, and arrogant: But the
Reader will see, that Mr. Brainerd's Religion constantly disposed him to a most
mean Though It of himself, an abasing Sense of his own exceeding Sinfulness,
Deficiency, Unprofitableness, and Ignorance; looking on himself as worse than
others; disposing him to universal Benevolence, Meekness, and in Honor to
prefer others, and to treat all with Kindness and Respect. And when Melancholy
prevailed, though the Effects of it were very prejudicial to him, yet it had not
those Effects of Enthusiasm; but operated by dark and discouraging Thoughts of
himself, as ignorant, wicked and wholly unfit for the Work of the Ministry, or
even to be seen among Mankind, etc. -- Indeed at the Time forementioned, when
he had not learned well to distinguish between Enthusiasm and solid Religion,
he joining and keeping Company with some that were tinged with no small Degree
of the former, for a Season partook with them in a Degr^e of their D^spositions
and Behaviors; though as was observed before, he could not obtain those Things
wherein their Enthusiasm it self consisted, and so could not become like 'em in
that Respect, however he erroneously desired and sought it. But certainly it is
not at all to be wondered at, that a Youth and a young Convert, one that had
his Heart so swallowed up in Religion, and so earnestly desired the flourishing
of it, but had had so little Opportunity for Reading, Observation and
Experience, should for a while be dazzled and deceived with the glaring
Appearances of that mistaken Devotion and Zeal; especially considering what the
extraordinary Circumstances of that Day were. He told me on his Deathbed, that
while he was in these Circumstances he was out of his Element, and did Violence
to himself, while complying, in his Conduct, with Persons of a fierce and
imprudent Zeal, from his great Veneration of some that he looked upon much
better than himself. So that it would be very unreasonable, that his Error at
that Time should nevertheless be esteemed a just Ground of Prejudice against
the whole of his Religion, and his Character in general; especially
considering, how greatly his Mind was soon changed, and how exceedingly he
afterward lamented his Error, and abhorred himself for his imprudent Zeal and
Misconduct at that Time, even to the breaking of his Heart, and almost to the
overbearing and breaking the Strength of his Nature; and how much of a
Christian Spirit he showed, in his condemning himself for that Misconduct, as
the Reader will see.

What has been now mentioned of Mr. Brainerd, is so far from being just Ground
of Prejudice against what is related in the following Account of his Life,
that, if duly considered, it will render the History the more Serviceable. For
by his thus joining for a Season with Enthusiasts, he had a more full and
intimate Acquaintance with what belonged to that Sort of Religion, and so was
under better Advantages to judge of the Difference between that, and the other,
which he finally approved and strove to his utmost to promote, in Opposition to
it: And hereby the Reader has the more to demonstrate to him, that Mr. Brainerd
in his Testimony against it and the Spirit and Behavior of those that are
influenced by it, speaks from impartial Conviction, and not from Prejudice;
because therein he openly condemns his own former Opinion and Conduct, on
Account of which he had greatly suffered from his Opposers, and for which some
continued to Reproach him as long as he lived.

Another Imperfection in Mr. Brainerd, which may be observed in the following
Account of his Life, was his being excessive in his Labors; not taking due
Care to Proportion his Fatigues to his Strength. Indeed the Case was very often
so, and such the seeming Calls of Providence, that it was extremely difficult
for him to avoid doing more than his Strength would well admit of; yea, his
Circumstances, and the Business of his Mission among the Indians, were such,
that great Fatigues and Hardships were altogether inevitable. However, he was
finally convinced, that he had erred in this Matter, and that he ought to have
taken more thoro' Care, and been more resolute to withstand Temptations to such
Degrees of Labor as injured his Health; and accordingly warned his Brother,
who succeeds him in his Mission, to be careful to avoid this Error.

Besides the Imperfections already mentioned, it is readily allowed, that there
were some Imperfections that ran through his whole Life, and were mixed with
all his religious Affections and Exercises, some Mixture of what was natural
with that which was spiritual; as it evermore is in the best Saints in this
World. Doubtless there was some Influence that natural Temper had in the
religious Exercises and Experiences of Mr. Brainerd, as there most apparently
was in the Exercises of devout David, and the Apostles Peter, John and Paul:
There was undoubtedly very often some Influence of his natural Disposition to
Dejection in his religious Mourning, some Mixture of Melancholy with truly
godly Sorrow and real Christian Humility, and some Mixture of the natural Fire
of Youth with his holy Zeal for God, and some Influence of natural Principles
mixed with Grace in various other Respects, as it ever was and ever will be
with the Saints while on this Side Heaven. Perhaps none were more sensible of
Mr. Brainerd's Imperfections than he himself; or could distinguish more
accurately, than he, between what was natural and what was spiritual. It Is easy
for the judicious Reader to observe, that his Graces ripened, and the religious
Exercises of his Heart became more and more pure, and he more and more
distinguishing in his Judgment, the longer he lived: He had much to teach and
purify him, and he failed not to make his Advantage thereby.

But notwithstanding all these Imperfections, I am persuaded, every pious and
judicious Reader will acknowledge, that what is here set before him is indeed a
remarkable Instance of true and eminent Christian Piety in Heart and Practice;
tending greatly to confirm the Reality of vital Religion and the Power of
Godliness, most worthy of Imitation, and many Ways tending to the spiritual
Benefit of the careful Observer.

It Is fit, the Reader should be aware, that what Mr. Brainerd wrote in his
Diary, out of which the following Account of his Life is chiefly taken, was
written only for his own private Use, and not to get Honor and Applause in the
World, nor with any Design that the World should ever see it, either while he
lived or after his Death, excepting some few Things that he wrote in a dying
State, after he had been persuaded (with Difficulty) not entirely to suppress
all his private Writings. He showed himself almost invincibly averse to the
Publishing of any Part of his Diary after his Death; and when he was thought to
be dying at Boston, gave the most strict peremptory Orders to the Contrary: but
being by some of his Friends there prevailed upon to withdraw so strict and
absolute a Prohibition, he was pleased finally to yield so far as that his
Papers should be left in my Hands, that I might dispose of them as I thought
would be most for God's Glory and the Interest of Religion. -- But a few Days
before his Death, he ordered some Part of his Diary to be destroyed (as will
afterward be observed) which renders the Account of his Life the less
complete. And there are some Parts of his Diary are here left out for Brevity's
Sake, that would (I am sensible) have been a great Advantage to the History, if
they had been inserted; particularly the Account of his wonderful Successes
among the Indians; which for Substance is the same in his private Diary with
that which has already been made public, in the Journal he kept by order of
the Society in Scotland, for their Information. That Account, I am of Opinion,
would be more entertaining and more profitable, if it were published as it is
written in his Diary, in Connection with his secret Religion and the inward
Exercises of his Mind, and also with the preceding and following Parts of the
Story of his Life. But because that Account has been Published already, and
because the adding it here would make the Book much more bulky and more costly,
which might tend to discourage the Purchase and Perusal of it, and so render it
less extensively useful, I have therefore omitted that Part. However, this
Defect may in a great Measure be made up to the Reader, by his purchasing his
public Journal, and reading it in its Place, with this History of his Life;
which undoubtedly would be well worth the while for every Reader, and would
richly recompense the additional cost of the Purchase. I hope therefore, that
those of my Readers who are not furnished with that Book, will, for their own
Profit and Entertainment, and that they may have the Story of this excellent
Person more complete, procure one of those Books; without which he must have a
very imperfect View of the most important Part of his Life, and (on some
Accounts) of the most remarkable and wonderful Things in it. -- I should also
observe, that besides that Book, and antecedent to it, there is a Narrative
relating to the Indian Affairs, annexed to Mr. Pemberton's Sermon at Mr.
Brainerd's Ordination; which likewise may the more profitably be read in
Conjunction with his Diary previous to Nov. 5. 1744.

But it is Time to end this Preface, that the Reader may be no longer detained
from the History it self.

N. B. Those Parts of the following History, that are included between Brackets
thus [] are the Words of the Publisher, for the most Part, summarily
representing (for Brevity's Sake) the substance or chief Things contained in
Mr. Brainerd's Diary, for such a certain Space of Time as is there specified:
The rest is the Account that he gives of himself in his private Writings, in
his own Words.

I presume, scarce any Reader needs to be told, that [ A. Aet.] on the top of
the Page, signifies The Year of his Age, and [A. D.] The Year of our Lord.

Besides the Errata a^ the End of the Life, the Reader is desired to correct
the following.
Page 69. l. 36. r. cries. p. 77. l. 35. r. wring out. p. 122. l. 31. r. have
more. p. 124. l. 24, 25. r. and often feel. p. 128. l. 12. ^. Blessed be God.
p. 154. l. 16. r. Neshaminy. p. 177. l. 22. r. any Spirit. p 311. l. 14. r. to
assist. p. 315* l. 29. r. taken from.

The Names of Subscribers to the Rev. Mr. Brainerd's Life.
Province of the Massachusetts Bay.
His Excellency JONATHAN BELCHER, Esquire late Governor of the Massachusetts, now
Governor of New Jersey. The Hon. Sir WILLIAM PEPPERRELL, Baronet.
A
HOn. John Alford, Esquire Daniel Appleton, Esquire Rev. Nath. Appleton Rev. Hull Abbot
Rev. Joseph Ashley Joseph Appleton Samuel Adams, A. M. Capt. William Avres
Capt. J^cob Abbot A^ton Austin Elisha Allis Joseph Allen Samuel Adams Samuel
Adams, jun. Da^id Adams J^^n Applen Capt. Noah Ashley Ric^ard A^well Ma^y
Austin Samuel Allen J^hn Adams Peter Adams Is^^el Ashley John Ashley Benjamin
Austin Sa^ah Allen
B
HOn. Tho. Berry Esquire Hon. Sylv. Bourn Esquire Rev. John Barnard Andrew Burley, Esquire
Rev. Daniel Bliss Rev. Thomas Balch Rev. Simon Bradstreet Edward Bromfield J^hn
Barret Jeremiah Belknap Joseph Belknap Jer. Belknap jun. Thomas B^xter Mary
Bennet Thomas Bromfield Epharim Brown John Beatton John Barnard Jonathan Burt
Fellows Billings Reuben Belding Joseph Billings Joseph Bacon Preserved Bartlet
Joseph Baldwin Elkanah Burt Samuel Brett Capt. -- Brown Samuel Bancroft jun.
Abigail Beck Moses Bradstreet Spencer Bennet William Brown jun. Samuel Bass
John Ballentine Cotton Bradbury Joseph B^agdon jun. Tabitha Bragdon Samuel
Bragdon Jeremiah Bragdon Mary Bulman Israel Butler Joseph Bishop Joseph Bucklin
William Brown Jacob ^urgis Jacob Barney Edward ^l^ke Grinfill ^lake James Brigs
William Brettur John Brigs James B^ake Benjamin Blaney David Blood William
Bartlet John Bulkley Joshua Barton Robert Blake Samuel Bliss Stephen Badger
Benjamin Belknap Samuel Bascumb David Blair Daniel Bucknam Noah Brooks Jonathan
B^ker Jonathan B^ker
C
HOn. John Chandler, Esquire Hon. Ez. Cheever Esquire Joshua Cheever, Esquire Rev. Ames
Cheever Rev. Peter Clark John Choate, Esquire Roland Cotton, Esquire Jonas Clark, Esquire
Rev. Sam. Checkley Benj. Crocker M. A. Rev. Aaron Cleveland Rev. Samuel Cooper
Rev. S. Checkley, jun Rev. James Chandler Rev. John Chandler Rev. Josiah
Crocker Rev. Sylvanus Conan Benj. Church, M. A. t Capt. John Codman Nathan
Cheever William Cooper Thomas Cushing John Call Ralph Cross Richard Carry
Bejanmin Chapin John Chamberlain Capt. Moses Curtiss John Clement Eleazer Clark
Elisha Cook Noah Cook, jun. David Clark Charles Clap Selah Clark Ithamar Clark
Eliphalet Clap J^siah Clark, jun. Moses Clark Daniel Clark Aaron Cook Josiah
Chauncey ^apt. Jonathan Clark Eliakim Clark Josiah Clark John Clap Joseph Clark
Isaac Child Samuel Colburn Abraham Cumings Joseph Capron Samuel Cushman Capt.
Elea. Carpenter Benjamin Crabtree John Crabtree James Coding Nathaniel Carver
Samuel Caswell Capt. Thomas Cobb Ebenezer Crane Josiah Connant Israel Cheever
John Croxford Stephen Crawfoot Lamberton Cooper Zacheus Crocker Ebenezer Child
Jonathan Church Moses Coffin.
D
HOn. Sam. Danforth, Esquire Hon. Jos. Dwight Esquire Timothy Dwight Esquire William Down,
Esquire Rev. Joseph Davis Stephen Dean Samuel Deming John Deming Nathaniel Davis
Capt. Eliphalet Day Col. Thomas Dunnell Hannah Dyer Simeon Dwight John Deman
Christopher Dyer William Dunning Isaac Dodge Ezekiel Dodge Samuel Dwight
Obadiah Dickinson John Dickinson Thomas Dickinson Jonathan Dickinson Azariah
Dickinson Samuel Dakin Benjamin Day Samuel Day Ephraim Dean David Dean Elijah
Dean Ebenezer Dean John Dexter.
E
REv. Jos Emerson Rev. Andr. Eliot Rev. Joshua Eaton Rev Jos. Emerson, jun.
Andrew Eliot Brown Emerson Jacob Emmons ^oseph Edwards Benjamin Edwards John
Eli Samuel Edwards Josiah Edson Jonathan Everet.
F
HOn. Francis Foxcro^t. Esquire* Hon. Wm Fo^e, Esquire John Fairweather Esquire Rev. John
Fox Rev. Tho. Foxcroft John Foster, Esquire William Fenwick William Fairfield
Andrew Friswel James Foster Samuel Frothingham Ebenezer Fisher James Fosdick
Philip Freeman Joseph Foster Ralph Farnam Matthew Farnam Joseph Farnam Grafton
Feveryear Benjamin Foster Elisha Fish Eli Forbush Obadiah Frary Jacob French
John Field Gershom Fletcher Isaac Farnsworth Timothy Fuller Edward Foster
Jonathan Freeman Stephen Fuller Jonathan Fox Jabez Fisher Ebenezer Freese.
G
HOn. John Greenleafe, Esquire Rev. Dan. Greenleafe David Gorham Esquire Rev. Ebenezer
Gay Rev. Ellis Gray Rev. John Graham John Greenleafe Joseph Green Samuel Grant
Benjamin Greenleafe James Green Samuel Green Ezekiel Goldthwait Thomas
Greenough Benjamin Goldthwait Abiel Goodwin Daniel Grove Robert Gordon Jabez
Gay William George Joseph Gillson Benjamin Got James Gray Edward Goodwin
Samuel Gayford John Gunn Ebenezer Guild Robert Gray Chauncey Graham Robert Gray
Ichabod Goodin.
H
HOn. Ed. Hutchinson, Esquire Edw. Holyoke, Presi. of Harvard-College Robert Hale,
Esquire Thomas Hubbard Esquire Thomas Hancock Esquire John Hill, Esquire Edw. Hayward, Esquire Rev.
Nath Henchman Rev. William Hobby Rev. Ivory Hovey Rev. Samuel Hopkins Rev.
Abraham Hill Rev. Phi. Hemingway Rev. Elias Haven Abiah Holbrook John H^l^er
Capt. John Harmon Capt. Dan. Hayward Reuben Hermon Daniel Hubbard Aaron
Hichcock Enoch Holcomb Simon Hunt John Hammond Lawrence Heart Nehemiah Hall
David Hall Stephen Hoskins William Hodges Joseph Hall Abigail Hall Joseph Hall,
jun. William Hack John Hall Shad. Hathway M. A. Jacob Hayward Thomas Hayward
Nehemiah Hobart Joseph Hews Nath Healy Aaron Haws Capt. Elisha Hedge Jonathan
Hale John Hacks Stephen Hall Elisha Hill Henry Hayward Samuel Haven Moses Hale
Benjamin Holt Nehemiah Harrend^^ Joseph Holt Caleb Hopkins John Harburt William
Homes Joseph Hidden Ephraim Hayward John Heart John Hay Nicholas Hopping John
Hancock Benjamin Hurd, jun. Aaron Hutchinson.
I
HOn. John Jeffries, Esquire Thomas Jenner, Esquire Rev. Jedidiah Jawet Rev. Samuel
Jefferds Rev. Isaac Jones Rev. Jonathan Judd Thomas Judd Samuel Jones Jonathan
Ingram Benjamin Ingott Daniel Johnson Eli Ingraham John Johnson Samuel Johnson
Edward Ingraham.
K
SAmuel Kent, Esquire Rev. Sam Kendall John Knight John Kneeland John Kneeland,
jun. Jonathan Kettle William Kettle Dudley Kent Samuel Kinsley David Kennedy
Benjamin King Ebenezer Kendall John Kendall Nathaniel Kimball Richard Kimball
Caleb Kimball.
L
HOn. Ezekiel Lewis Esquire Hon. Geo Leonard Esquire Joseph Lemmon Esquire Samuel Leonard,
Esquire Rev. Dudley Leavit Thoma^ Lambert Esquire Maj. Zeph. Leonard Caleb Lyman Noah
Lyman Gad Lyman Elias Lyman Caleb Lampson Samuel Lord John Langdon Ebenezer
Little Edward Langdon jun. Joseph Lyman Isaac Lyman William Lyman Nathaniel
Lewis Robert Luscomb Jabez Lothrop James Leonard Jonathan Lincoln Jonathan
Lilley James Leland Jeremiah Lawrence John Longley, jun. Peleg Lawrence
Ebenezer Lane Capt. Eliph. Leonard John Littlefield John Littlefield, jun.
Daniel Little Joseph Low William Lamson Joseph Lord Robert Lawtridge Ebenezer
Luce.
M
HOn. Jer. Moulton Esquire Hon. James Mino^ Esquire Rev. Hen. Messenger Daniel Moulton,
Esquire Capt. Jer. Moulton Rev. John Moorhead Rev. Thad. Maccarty Tim. Minot M. A.
Daniel Marsh Buriah Man Capt. Eleazer Melvin Capt. Sam Mountagu James Mears
Moses Marsh Richard Millberry Samuel M^rsh Ebenezer Marsh jun. Daniel Marsh
John Mountagu Jonathan Moody Edward Mackard John Mitchel Michael Metcalf John
Mountgomery Benjamin Mors Moody Mors John Mudge Sarah Martyn Richard Martyn
Gershom Makepeice Nathaniel Metcalf Cutting Moody Samuel Millberry Joseph Main
Robert Martyn Michael Metcalf Samuel M^riam Edward Martindale.
N
FRancis Nichelsen As^ Noble Thomas Norton Daniel No^ce Jonathan Nichols John
Nichols John Noyce
O
HOn. John Osborn, Esquire Hon. Andr. Oliver Esquire William Owen Jonathan Oaks.
P
HOn. Jos. Pynchon Esquire Timothy Prout, Esquire Rev. Thomas Prince Charles Pierce,
Esquire John Phillips, Esquire Oliver Partridge, Esquire Samuel Pool, Esquire Thomas Pain, M.
A. Rev. Samuel Phillips Rev. Jona. Parsons Rev. Tho. Prentice Rev. Solo.
Prentice Rev. John Porter Rev. Eben. Parkman Rev. John Parker Rev. Moses
Parsons Rev. Samuel Porter Charles Phelps Martin Phelps Elisha Pomroy William
Phillips Sam Phillips jun. M. A. Moses Peck Elisha Pomroy John Perry Benjamin
Parker William Prescot James Pullen William Pullen Abiel Packard Lydia Packard
James Packard Isaac Packard Ebenezer Pitts Peter Pratt John Pickens Zechariah
Padeford Cornelius Putnam Jacob Parker Eleazar Pearce John Parker Jerathmeel
Pierce Joseph Phipps Elijah Phipps Lemuel Powers Edward Putnam Stephen Prentice
John Pearson John Powers Josiah Putnam Nathan Peabody Timothy Prat Joseph
Parker Jacob Porter Thomas Pain John Procter Daniel Pomroy Isaac Parsons
Josiah Parsons Jacob Parker William Patten.
Q
HOn. John Quincy, Esquire
R
HOn. Daniel Russel Esquire Sylv. Richmond, Esquire Rev. Nath. Rogers Isaac Royal, Esquire
Rev. Solomon Reed Capt. Obadiah Reed Capt. William Reed Joseph Roberts M. A.
Joseph Robey, M. A. James Rankin John Robbins Noah Robinson Daniel Reed
Benjamin Rockwood Isaac Rand Nathaniel Rand George Robinson Thomas Rich Jacob
Reed James Reed John Robbins Simeon Root.
S
REv Jos. Sewall D.D Rev. Nath. Stone Samuel Sewall, Esquire John Storer, Esquire
Joseph Sawyer, Esquire John Steel, Esquire Nathaniel Stone, Esquire Rev. John Shaw Rev.
Nathan Stone Capt. Ebenezer Storer Joseph Sherburn Malachi Salter John Symmes
John Scollay Capt. Edward Sheaf Samuel Phil. Savage Thomas Symmes Zechariah
Symmes Abigail Stevens Capt. Jonath. Sheldon Jonathan Sheldon jun. Elijah
Sheldon Obadiah Smith Thomas Smith Samuel Smith Ichabod Strong Noah Strong
Caleb Strong Elisha Searl Caleb Sheldon Elizabeth Strong John Strickland Samuel
Smith Daniel Smith Aaron Smith Constant Southworth Zechariah Snell Matthew Smith
Simon Slocomb Benjamin Slack Ru^^ Slack Noah Sabin Samuel Shackley Capt. John
Stevens John Shed Jeremiah Shuttack John Swallow John Spafford John Scott
Thomas Strowbridge Samuel Sumner Nathaniel Snell M.A. Capt. John Stockwell John
Stockwell jun. William Shepard Francis Stratten Richard Stratten Stephen
Sewall, M.A. Michael Shute Abraham Smith Isaac Smith Benjamin Smith John Smith
Isaac Smith jun. Samuel Sargent Daniel Shaw Joseph Swain James Sayward Samuel
Sewall Samuel Sewall, jun. Samuel Sewall, Ter. Benjamin Stone Jonathan Sayward
Joseph Simpson, jun. Benjamin Slack Ruth Slack Thomas Stanley Luke Stebbins
E^hanan Spear Joseph Swain.
T
OXenbridge Thatcher, Esquire Rev. Samuel Tobe^ Rev. Roll. Thacher Rev. Peter
Thacher William Thomson Maj. Nath. Thwing Joseph Torry Richard Thompson Stephen
Titcomb Samuel Treadwell William Thomas Henry True Peter Thayer Gershom Tinney
Archibald Thomas Israel Tisdale Joh^ Tisdale Bartholemew Town John Town Solomon
Townsend David Trail David Tailor Richard Tappen Timothy Tappen Samuel Ti^comb
Capt. Samuel Tyler Capt. Samuel Tingley James Tillson John Titus William Fenill
Wigglesworth Tapen Moses Tuttle Eldad Tailor.
U
HUgh Vans Jabez Upham Richard Upham Nathaniel Upham.
W
HOn. Josiah Willard, Esquire Hon. Jacob Wendell, Esquire Hon. Sam. Wells Esquire Hon.
Sam. Watts Esquire Rev. Edward Wigglesworth, D. D. Rev. Nehe. Walter Edward
Winsl^w, Esquire Rev Jeremiah Wise Rev. Wm. Williams Joshua Winslow, Esquire Rev. (...)
Wigglesworth, Nahum Ward, Esquire Rev. John Webb Rev. Abijah Weld Rev. John Wales
Rev. John Walley Rev Chester Williams Peleg Wiswall A.M. Isaac Walker Jonathan
Wills Thomas Wait John Winslow John West Daniel Wair Capt. David Wyet David
Wood Thomas Wood Bezaliel Wilder Joseph Whitney Jonathan Wells Thomas Wire
Stephen Wright Oliver Warner Joshua Wells Nathaniel Wells Icabod Ward Artemas
Ward Benjamin White Jeremiah Whipple Nathaniel Whitney Benjamin Wheeler Francis
Wheeler Nath. Whittemore Hezekiah Ward Obadiah Walker Sarah Williams Simeon
Williams James Walker Peter Walker Isaac Whitney Nath. Williams Abiel Williams
Josiah Waters William Whitwell J^nathan White John Woods Isaac Woods Obadiah
Wright James Wilson Jonathan Wheelock Oliver Watson Ebenezer Warren John
Watson, jun, Jotham Walton Jabez Weaze John Whiting Jonathan Whiting Joshua
Winter Ephraim Wessen.
Y
BEnajah Young.
COLONY OF CONNECTICUTT.
A
CHristopher Avory, Esquire Capt. John Avered Abraham Avery John Allen Joshua
Avered Joseph Allen Jason Allen Richard Andrews Joseph Arnold Enoch Arnold
Samuel Andrews John Abbie Phillip Abbot Samuel Ashley, jun.
B
THeophilus Baldwin* Esquire* Col. Aaron Brownson William Buel, Esquire John Biggs* Esquire
Samuel Basset, Esquire Rev. Wm. Burnham Rev. Joseph Bellamy Rev. Geo. Beckwith Rev.
Nehem. Barker Joseph Bird, Esquire Rev Dan Buckingham Capt. Jonathan Baker Capt.
John Bebee Timothy Brownson Richard Brownson Matthew Bellamy Matthew Bellamy
jun. Samuel Bellamy Abel Bains Jonathan Benedick Thomas Benedick Thomas Betts
Isaac Brownson Josiah Brownson Thomas Brownson James Baldwin Josiah Bumb James
Bradford Hezekiah Bissel Daniel Butt Ebenezer Balch Capt. Samuel Bebee Enoch
Bayer Benjamin Baldwin Theophilus Baldwin Benjamin Blackman Ichabod Brown
Jonathan Brownson Theop. Baldwin jun. Jonathan Billings Jonathan Bradford
Pelatiah Bliss William Bennet Capt. Samuel Bishop Samuel Butt Ebenezer Baldwin
Nathaniel Brown Moses Barret Elijah Belcher Jonathan Brewste^ Samuel Branch
Benjamin Blogget Tho. Benedick, jun. James Baldwin Abraham Bennet Caleb Baldwin
Jonathan Botsford Jacob Bunee James Bebee Abel Beech Jonathan Burr Noah Baldwin
Joel Baldwin Nathaniel Brownson Charles Brownson William Bebe^ Daniel Brainerd
Azar Beech Jonathan Badger Jonathan Bingham Joseph Bingham Malichi Butler
Solomon Bill Oliver Brewster.
C
COl. -- Conant Esquire Maj Samuel Coit Joseph Clark, Esquire Rev Thomas Canfield John
Crery, Esquire Capt. Eleazer Carey Josiah Conant Joseph Clark Hezekiah Camp Charles
Chopen Nathaniel Compalk James Clap John Comstock Zebadiah Comstock Samuel
Comstock Gideon Comstock John Copp Nathaniel Cushman Deindatus Curtiss Jonathan
Cass Nathaniel Cone Joseph Cone John Church Capt. Samuel Cowles Matthew Cole
George Clark, A.M. Matthew Cadwell Capt. Tho. Curtiss Ebenezer Coe Azariah
Curtiss Joseph Clark Eleazer Clark Daniel Curtiss Obadiah Cook Jonathan Clark,
jun. Seth Cutler John Clark Benjamin Chaplin Benjamin Chaplin jun. Samuel
Coburn.
D
ELiphalet Dyer, Esquire Rev. Moses Dickinson Samuel Dorrance George Dorrance
Robert Denison Avery Denison Capt. John Douglass Seth Dean, A. M. William
Denison Adam Denison Jonathan Dean Ebenezer Dains Jedidiah Dana Abi Dammon
Daniel Dudley John Down Eleazer Dickinson Asa Douglass Josiah Dean Jonathan
Devereux Nathaniel Dean William Dean Benjamin Denton Benjamin Duning Ebenezer
Down Ebenezer Dains Silas Doan Jedidiah Dana.
E
SAmuel Emmons Ebenezer Everit John English
F
JOseph Fowler, Esquire Rev. Joseph Fish Capt. Benjamin Fenn Amos Fuller Nathaniel
Fish John Flower Ephraim Fellows Nathaniel Ford William Farnam Ezekiel Fox
Thomas Fargo Stephen Fuller Zebediah Farnam Phineas Ford Elisha Fitch Pelati^h
Fitch Ruth Fobes Simon Fobes Daniel Fitch Josiah Finney John Finney Abigail
Falmon Ebenezer Fuller Samuel Fielding James Flint Matthias Fuller Thomas
Fitch, jun.
G
REv. John Graham Math. Griswold Esquire Capt. Nathan Giddens Rev. Jacob Green
Obadiah Gore Joseph Gennings Henry Gibbs Thomas Goodwin John Gourdon John
Groman John Gillet Francis Guiteau Timothy Goodwin Ebenezer Grant Benjamin
Graves Lemuel Griffin Jedidiah Graves Samuel Gillet Isaac Grisworth A^exander
Gordon Daniel Gates.
H
HOn Hezek. Huntington, Esquire J^b^z Huntington Esquire Rev D^n. Humphry Noah H^nman,
Esquire Capt. Ele Hutchinson J^hn Hutchinson J^mes Han^s, jun. Samuel Hare Barnabas
Hall Nathanie^ Hall William Holt Robert Holt J^siah Hammon N^thaniel Hovey
N^^haniel Hovey jun. Z^bediah Holt John House Stephen Hutchinson Samuel House
Lebu^t Harris Isaac Higley Isa^c H^fford J^^eph Hinsdell J^siah Hurlburt Daniel
H^ff^rd J^si^h Hooker Capt. Moses Hawkins Benjam^n Hicock Ele^zer H^^m^n
Stephen H^cock Andrew Hinman Justus Hicock John Hovey James Hurlburt M.D.
Joshua Holt Pau^ Holt John Hibbard Henry Hewit Daniel Holt Nehem. Huntington
Richard Hide Obadiah Heath David How Robert Hebard James Mc'Hillhouse Abel
Holbrook John Hall Nathaniel Hide Jonathan Hinckley Thomas Harvey Joseph
Huntington Joshua Hendie Christo. Huntington Reuben Hubbard William Hambleton
Isaac Hill, jun. James Hooker Hez^k. Hooker, jun. William Hooker Hugh Hanna
Ahira Hill.
I
REv. David Jewit Rev David Judson Jacob Johnson, A.M. James Ingalls William
Johnson J^seph Jacobs, jun. Nathaniel Jewit James Jud Abel Judson Ebenezer
Jones Caleb Johnson.
K
JOnathan Kelsey R^bert Kennedy Dennison Kingsberry Jonathan Kingsberry Thomas
Kenny Azariah K^nny Timothy K^mball Josiah Ki^^sley James K^sson Samuel Knowles
Eldad King John Kasen Benjamin Kellogg Samuel Kellogg.
L
HOn. Samuel Lynde Esquire Rev. Henry Lord Rev. Jonathan Lee Rev. Mark Leavenworth
Sam. Lockwood A* M. James Lockwood Joseph Lee Joseph Lee, jun. Simeon Lyman
J^hn Landon Ebenezer Leach Nathaniel Loomis Jacob Lyman David Lyman Isaac
Lawrence Joseph Lockwood Peter Lockwood Nehemiah Lewis Hezekiah Lee John
Ledyard Ebenezer Lyman Josiah Lyman Benoni Loomis J^seph Loomis Benjamin
Lothrop Thomas Lyman Nathaniel Loomis Thomas L^^mis Samuel Lee Isaac Lawrence
Benjamin Lord.
M
SImeon Minor, Esquire Rev. Gideon Mills Rev Evander Morrison Capt Richard Monson
Daniel Meeks Samuel More Jonathan Mearitt Hezekiah May Samuel Miner John Meigs
John Meigs, jun. Samuel Marshall James Morris Jonathan Munger Ephraim Minor
Clement Minor Matthew Minor Matthew Mitchel Simon Mitchel Jonathan Martin Sarah
Millard David Miller Thomas Millard Jonathan Mal^tby Josiah Mack William Morgan
Daniel Morgan Joseph Morgan Thomas Marshal Rev. Samuel Mosely Nathaniel Mosely
George Martin George Martin, jun. Ebenezer Martin.
N
JOhn Newcomb Obadiah Newcom Nathaniel Newell Ruth Newell Hezekiah Newcomb
Isaac Norton, jun. James Norton J^nathan North Ebenezer North
O
CApt. Samuel Olmstead John Owen Joseph Otis William Osgood Daniel Osgood James
Occom.
P
SAmuel Prentice Esquire Joseph Pitkin, Esquire Joseph Perkins, A. M. John Porter
Experience Porter Benjamin Pain Joseph Preston John Potwine John Pain William
Peabody Samuel Plumb Jonathan Prentice Peter Powers Thomas Phelps Nathaniel
Porter Richard Peet Nathaniel Porter jun. Isaac Peck Henry Peck Mic^jah Pride
David Palmer John Palmer Rufus Price John Phelps Ezekiel Pierce James Pinnes
Mary Pierce Capt. Edward Phelps John Peir^o Theodore Preston Timothy Pearl
Capt. Isaac Parish Edward Pain Joseph Porter Abraham Peirson Gershom Palmer
Benjamin Pomroy Timothy Porter William Porter John Peck Jacob Preston William
Preston.
R
REv. Dav. Rowland Rev. Nath Roberts Rev. Asher Rositer John Robinson Ichabod
Robinson Elisha Rockwell Nathan Randall Joshua Raymond Josiah Rose Rufus Rude
George Richards Ebenezer Richardson David Ripley Azariah Rood Joseph Richards
Samuel Raymond Jonathan Russell Samuel Robbins Eliakim Raymond Joseph Rofts
Samuel Rindle.
S
THomas Storrs Esquire Rev Rich. Salter Benjamin Styles A. M. J^seph Spencer
William Steward James Steward Peter Spencer Joseph Skiff Nathaniel Shattock
Joseph Sullard Israel Shaw Eliakim Smith Daniel St. John Thomas Seymour William
Sumner Samuel Steel Asa Strong Nathaniel Skinner Elisha Sheldon Azar Smith
Capt. John Sprague Huchens Storrs Capt. Samuel Storrs Capt. Jos. Sweetland
Recompense Smith Jos. Sweetland, jun. Thomas Shaw Jacob Stebbins Jonathan Smith
John Steel Samuel Strong John Sherman Giles Slaughter Isaac Scudder Joseph St.
John Daniel St. John Samuel Sanford John Sanford Andrew Sanford David Sanford
Ephraim Strong A. M. Joseph Safford Solomon Safford Ezekiel Story Joseph
Sanford Ephraim Smith Jacob Strong John Shepard Zebulon Seymour Samuel Smedley
Capt. Elisha Stoddard Josiah Strong James Stoddard David Stowell Ebenezer
Stowell David Smith Ann Seldin Samuel Spencer Benjamin Smalley El^jah Sprague
Elizabeth Swift.
T
CApt. James Tyler Moses Tyler Stephen Tucker Jedidiah Tracy Hopestil Tailor
Nathaniel Tracy Daniel Tracey Joel Thrall Samuel Tracey Elisha Tracey Philip
Turner Nathaniel Tracey Joseph Tracey Eliakim Tupper Edmond Tompkins Nathaniel
Thornton Samuel Tonsly Capt. Josiah Thatcher James Tompson William Trumball
Jonathan Twiss Ebenezer Tompson Ebenezer Tailor John Tweedy James Tuttle.
U
CApt. James Utley.
W
COl Elish. Williams Jos. Wilcockson, Esquire Roger Wolcott, Esquire David Whitney, E^q
Rev. Solom Williams Ebenezer Wales, Esquire Nathaniel Wales, Esquire Rev. Stephen White
Rev. Jabez Wright Rev. Eben. Wheelock Warham Williams Tut. Yale Col. Peletiah
Webster Elisha Warien Benoni Wright William Williams Ebenezer Williams John
Watson Caleb Wheeler William Wadsworth Benjamin Wheat Joseph Williams William
Whitter Eleazer Wright Nathaniel Wales Joseph Warner Katharine Webster Samuel
Woodward Israel Woodward Preserved Wright Ichabod Warner Benjamin Winchol
Charles Woodruff Benjamin Woodruff Elnathan Whitman Joshua Whitney, jun. Daniel
Williams Samuel Warner Sibylla Whitehead*
Province of NEW YORK.
A
WIlliam Adams, A. M.
B
ISaac Barnes, Esquire Elias Bailey, Esquire Rev. David Bostwick Rev. Isaac Brown Rev.
Samuel Buel Jona. Barber, A. M. Capt. William Bryant Samuel Brown Benjamin
Bailey Nathaniel Bailey Elias Bailey, jun. Elizabeth Breeze John Bailey Jacob
Bergen Benjamin Bruster.
C
HOn. Tho. Chatfield, Esquire Joseph Conklin Joseph Conklin Ter. Samuel Cox Thomas
Cooper John Cook David Corwith Nehemiah Carpenter Joseph Carpenter Jacob Carle
Ann Carle.
D
SAmuel Denton Joseph Davis Margaret Du Bois Daniel Da^ton.
E
EZekiel Everet N^cholas Everet J^hn Everet (...)
F
STephen Foster
G
MAj. Abra. Garner William Glean Thomas Goldsmith Daniel Goldsmith Jasper
Griffin.
H
ELisha Hutchinson, Esquire Rob. Hempsted, Esquire Josiah Howell, Esquire Rev. Azar. Horton
Jon. Hunting, A. M. William Hedges Joseph Hicks Samuel Hazard Jonathan Hazard,
jun. Nathaniel Hazard John Hunting Ezekiel Hedges John Hedges Benjamin
Hutchinson Abigail Hull Constant Havens Samuel Howell Samuel Hunting Capt.
Theo. Howell Elisha Howell Israel Halsey Capt. Eleaz. Hawkins Eleazer Hawkins,
jun. Charles Howell Abraham Howell Ezekiel Howell Benjamin Hinchman Samuel
Higbee, jun.
I
JOhn Jennings Thomas (...) Nathan Jagg^^.
L
SAmuel London Esquire Willi. Lawrence Benjamin Lawrence Capt. Benj Lhomedieu PVB
Levingston A. M James Lopor.
M
HOn. E. Miller Esquire Andrew Miller Samuel Mulford Daniel Miller Thomas Mulford
Lemuel Mulford Israel More Thomas More John Mackie Capt. -- Mersey Daniel More
John Mitchell John Marston Zebulon Mills Isaac Mills William Miller Hannah
Menish.
N
GEorge Norton
P
REv. Ebenez. Pemberton
R
JOhn R^e
S
WIlliam Smith, Esquire Capt. Wm* Smith William P Smith A. M. (...) Smith Elizabeth
Stitwell ^^^bert Smith Richard Smith Job Smith Benjamin Strong Selah Strong
Benajah Strong Thomas Strong.
T
REv. Wm. Throop John Thurston Jonathan Tompson.
U
Joseph Valentine.
W
JOseph* Wickam, Esquire Rev. Sylvanus White Elnathan White Richard Wiggins
Benjamin Wright Richard Woodhull Rich. Woodhull, jun. Obadiah Wells.
PROVINCE OF New Jersey.
A
REv. Tho. Ahthur John Airs, Es^ William Allen John Anderson Janet Aikman
Hannah Anderson Moses Airs William Axtell Jonathan Arrison Henry Axtell Thomas
Applegate James Ashton William Aline.
B
REv. Aa. Burr Presi. of N. Jersey Col. Rev Eliab Byram Robert Barkley Henerica
Bennom Samuel Brown Daniel Bayles, jun. Caleb Baldwin Isaac Babbet Ebenezer
Byram, jun. William Boyd Samuel Bealy Solomon Brown Frederick Buchelow John
Buckelow Samuel Barren Timothy Ball John Black Francis Brewster Robert Breden
Peter Booth Robert B^air.
C
REv. Jam Campbell James Crumnoe Mary Craig Thomas Commy Barnabas Curtiss
Jonathan Comes John Carr, jun. William Collwell Elizabeth Crawford William
Cruckshank Jean Cathcart John Chambers William Covenhaven Alexandria Craig Ezra
Carry John Carry Daniel Carry Jacob Coazocart Thomas Cock Samuel Clark.
D
REv. James Davenport Nathaniel Dotey Henry Disbroy Lucus Dwedt William Davison
William Davison, jun Samuel Dalyhigh Duncan Dove.
E
MAskell Ervin David English James English Noah Eley.
F
JAmes Fullerton Jeremiah Field Michael Field Katharine Frazier Charles Ford
Jonathan Fraze^ William Ford Sarah Francis Nathaniel* Foster John Finley.
G
WIlliam Gaston David Grozett Ellenor Gilliland Joseph Gaston Hendrick Gulock
Jocham Gulock.
H
JOnath. Holmes, Esquire Rev. Andr. Hunter Thomas Hamblin Jonas Hoey Adam Hall
Moses Hemb Mary He^d Francis Hall James Hamilton Simon Horn William Horn Hannah
Horn William H^gan John Henderson John Hill Michael Henary William Henary
Daniel Henary John Hoey.
I
SAmuel Johnson, Esquire Richard Jewel William Jones Stephen Jesup.
K
JOhn King John Kelly Alexander Killp^trick William Ker Samuel Ker Joseph Ker.
L
REv. Joseph Lamb Rev. Tho. Lewis Ephraim Lockheart Peter Leconte, M.D.
Katharine Llord Bryan Li^esly James Lyan Levi Lewis James Lesley Roger Lawson
Eliphalet Lewis Mary Leffers Abraham La Ru^ Thomas Lak^ Samuel Lowden.
M
Rev. Charles Ma^knigh^ Samuel Mac'Conkey Mary Millikin Elizabeth Millikin
James Moore Robert Mc'Fee Mary Mattison Aaron Mattison John Mac^erran Peter
Mac'Dowel David Mac'Cowin Matthias Mount Anne Mount John Morehead Thomas
Mershon Joseph Monow John Macombs Mary Macombs Samuel Macomaly Andrew Mackmakin
James Magee Sarah Macalaster James Martin John Mac'Gillird George Mills Isaac
Mills Benja. Mackfarling George Mac'Kisk^n Jacob Mattison Hugh Martin James
Martin Francis Mac'Konnie
N
WIlliam No^^ross Rob. Newell Samuel Neilson Thomas Newman.
O
JOhn Olivant^ Stephen Ogden.
P
REv John Peirson Tho. Paget, Esquire Joseph Peck, Esquire John Peirson jun. M.D Tobias
Polemus Ephraim Phillips Peter Parine Howell Powell Herbert Peck James Pitney
John Porter.
R
HOn. John Reading Esquire Martin Rverson, Esquire Robert Rolfe James Ross Sarah Read
Brice Rihy John Roy Nath. Fitz Randolph Matthew Rue Samuel Rolfe Robert Roe
Abraham Reeves John Rosbrugh John Rancy Robert Renolds.
S
RAlph Smith, Esquire Rev. Tim Symmes Rev. Elihu Spences Michael Sweetman Derick
Sutvan Jacob S^^phen John John Stockton John Sodon Derick Sutvan Alburt Shank
William Suobey Luke Scank Henry S^oan James Stout Henry Scaly.
T
REv. Wm Tennent John Tomson Ruth Toweshend Aaron Tomson Josiah Throope.
U
THomas Vandike Art Vankirk Koart Van Voorhaas Henrick Voorhas Thomas U^mstone
Tobias Van-Norden.
W
REv Eleazer Wales J. Wetherill, Esquire Agnis Watson James Wales.
PENNSYLVANIA.
A
WIlliam Adams Arch. Anderson Thomas Armstrong David Allen.
B
REv. Char. Bea^ty Rev. Samuel Blair Rev. John Blair Thomas Brown Hugh Bartley
John Bowrlen Stephen Bower Isaac Billion Nathaniel Britten Robert Breden George
Bradley John Blakly Edmond Beach William Biddle E. Boudinot Thomas Bourne
Joseph Biddome Andrew Blackburn Joseph Brown John Boyd.
C
WM. Craig, Esquire Tho. Craig Esquire Rev. Alex. Cumming Alexander Colbreth Matthew
Clarkson Thomas Clark John Carsen James Craig Katharine Culley David Chambers
Jacob Cooper Samuel Cheeseman John Campbel Mary Campbel William Clingan George
Clingan Moses Crawford James Cumings James Craven Daniel Craig John Crawford.
D
RObert Downey Thomas Davis Tristram Davis John Davis Jonathan Drewrel Mary
Dobin.
E
DAvid Edmiston John Edward Robert Eastburn William Edmiston.
F
REv. Sam. Finley Magnus Falconar John Finley Hugh Farguson John Fullerlawn
Thomas Francis John Fisher Robert Finley Manasseh Finley William Falconar John
Freeman Joseph Fox Samuel Fisher John Frazier.
G
CApt. Wm. Grant John Gray Hugh Gunning.
H
ALex. Hunter, Esquire Capt Jam. Huston Samuel Hazard Joseph Hair Benjamin Hair
Hugh Hamilton Robert Henry Alexander Hannah William Hodge Andrew Hodge Hugh
Hodge Kathrine Harrison Joseph Hall Mary Heron Penn Hoale James Horner Thomas
Hutchinson Thomas Herren William Heslet
I
CApt. Rob. Jamison Samuel Johnson Henry Jamison Henry Jotenston.
K
THomas Kid Mary King Henry Kelsey James Kelly J^^n Kirkpatrick (...) Ker (...)
Ker.
L
REv Dan Lawrence Thomas Logan Thomas Lewis Francis Linsil Archibald Leard
Robert Lyle Charles Lions Joseph Leech.
M
CApt. Nath Magee Alexander Moore John Mc'Ferren Robert Mc'Cracken John
Mc'Cullock John Mitchell Isabel Mc'Donnel Matthew Mc'Min Thomas Miller John Man
Joshua Maddox John Mc'Call Sarah Moore Collen Mac'Sweny Abel Marple John
Mac'Coombs Alexander Magee Hugh Mc'Cullough James Mc'Cullough Anthony Morris
John Mc'Nair James Martin Thomas Mc'Cracken Alexander Miller John Miller Tho.
Mountgomery James Mc'Kee Alex. Mc'Clintock John Mushet John Mackmath.
N
SAmuel Neilson James Neilson Thomas Nesmith.
O
HAnnah Owen.
P
THomas Poe John Poak John Potter James Pethoren Jeremiah Peck Sarah Prichard
John Peet.
R
REv. John Roan William Rankin Francis Richley Evan Rawland John Riddle Thomas
Ruddy Elizabeth Roberdeau S. Robertson James Ralston William Rush Sarah
Reynolds.
S
SAm. Smith, Esquire Samuel Smith William Shippen Joseph Shippen John Smith James
Simpson Abraham Scott Benjamin Snodgrass* Thomas Smith Robert Stewart Anthony
Scout Adnari Scout George Spafford Mary Stevens Thomas Sloan.
T
REv. Gilb. Tennent Rev. Rich. Treat Moses Thompson Tunis Titus Joshua Thomas
Hugh Torrence.
U
HEnry Vernor Henry VanDyke Isaiah Vansandt.
W
CApt. Rich. Walker Cornel. Wynkoop Nicholas Wynkoop John Wigton James Wire
William Walker Robert Wyer Moses White Hugh Wilson John Walker Edward Warner
Rachal Wallace Thomas Welsh.
Y
WIlliam Youg.
Province of NEW HAMPSHIRE.
A
JOseph Adams.
B
EZra Barker Ebenezer Barker Moses Boynton Samuel Brown Josiah Brown Benj.
Blanchard, jun. Joshua Boynton.
C
REv. Ward Cotton Wm. Cummings James Cate Nathaniel Clement Josiah Conant.
D
ZEdekiah Drury.
E
REv. Dan. Emerson John Eliot.
G
PEter Gilman, Esquire Col. Sam. Gilman Capt. Daniel Gilman Josiah Gilman M.D. John
Gilman Samuel Goodhue -- Griffis.
I
BEnjamin Jewit.
L
MOses Leavitt, Esquire Mat. Livermore, Esquire Jonathan Low.
M
REv. David Mc' Gregore for himself and 30 of his Parish William Moore Daniel
Mason John Mead.
N
THomas Neivins Joshua Neal.
P
John Phillips, A.M. Capt. Peter Powers Thomas Patch William Pottle John Purmet
Josiah Pyper James Pike.
R
REv. Dan. Rogues.
S
HEnry Sherburne, jun. Job Strong, B.A. Theophilus Smith Elias Smith Jacob
Smith.
T
BEnjamin Thing Jonathan Tailor Edward Tailor.
W
COl. And. Wiggins Simon Wiggins Thomas Wiggins Andr. Wiggins, jun. Francis
Worcester.
Colony of RHODE ISLAND.
A
COl. Job Almy.
B
HErmione Banister Joseph Bayley Constant Bayley Timothy Balch Alexander
Bradford.
C
REv. O^h Campbell Thomas Crandell Nathaniel Coggeshall Thomas Coggeshall
Martha Church Henry Coggeshall James Cahoon.
D
DAniel Donham J^cob Dehane.
F
EBenezer Fisher Peter Franklin.
G
EBbenezer Gray Nath. Greenhill.
H
WM. Hall, Esquire J^s. Howland.
K
EBenezer Knight.
M
DAvid Moore John Morris.
P
BEnjamin Peabodie Simeon Price.
R
WIlliam Richmond, Esquire Ichabod Richmond Samuel Rhodes Jeremiah Ross.
S
NAth. Searles, Esquire: John Sawyer.
T
HEnry Tisdale James Tanner.
U
REv. William Vinal.
W
JOseph Wood, Esquire Benjamin Wyat John Willson Benjamin Willson Abigail Wanton.
Y
SAmuel Yeats.
The Names of the following Subscribers, not being received in Season, we have
though it it proper to insert them here.
DAvid Burt Dr. Jonathan Bliss Nathaniel Burt Alexander Bolckum Simon Colton
Obadiah Carpenter William Carpenter Thomas Co^per Nathaniel Ely Amos Dennison
Thomas H^bbert B.A. Dr. Charles Pynchon Rev. John Sergeant Capt. Berj Savage
S^. Carolina. William Stebb^n^ Robert Sanderson Henry Sweet John Sweet Thomas
Sweet Moses Stebbins Rev. Peter Thacher Rev. Benj. Tappen John Tyler Henry
Tolm^n Rev. Steph. Williams R^chard Woolworth Josiah Welman.
The Names of many others who have subscribed, are not yet come to Hand. And in
the foregoing Lists, where any Gent^emen are mentioned without their proper
Addition or Title, or out of their proper Place, the Publisher rely's on their
Candor to excuse it.

An ACCOUNT Of the LIFE of The Reverend Mr. David Brainerd.
PART I. From his Birth, to the Time when he began to devote himself to the
Study of Divinity, in order to his being fitted for the Work of the Ministry.
[MR. David Brainerd was born April 20. 1718* at Haddam, a Town belonging to
the County of Hartford, in the Colony of Connecticut, NEW ENGLAND. His Father,
who died when this his Son was about nine Years of Age, was the Worshipful
Hezekiah Brainerd Esquire an Assistant, or one of his Majesty's Council for that
Colony, and the Son of Daniel Brainerd Esquire a Justice of the Peace, and a Deacon
of the Church of Christ in Haddam. His Mother was Mrs. Dorothy Hobart, Daughter
to the Rev. Mr. Jeremiah Hobart, who preached a while at Top^field, and then
removed to Hempstead on Long Island, and afterward removed from Hempstead (by
Reason of Numbers turning Quakers, and many others being so Irreligious, that
they would do nothing toward the Support of the Ministry) and came and settled
in the Work of the Ministry at Haddam: Where he died in the 85th Year of his
Age: Of whom it is remarkable, that he went to the public Worship in the
Forenoon, and died in his Chair between Meetings. And this Rev. Gentleman was
Son of the Rev. Mr. Peter Hobart, who was, first, Minister of the Gospel at
Hingham, in the County of Norfolk in England, and by Reason of the Persecution
of the Puritans, removed with his Family to New England, and was settled in the
Ministry at Hingham, in the Massachusetts. He had five Sons, viz. Joshua,
Jeremiah, Gersh^m, Japheth, and Nehemiah. His Son Joshua was Minister at
Southold on Long Island; -- Jeremiah was Mr. David Brainerd's Grandfather,
Minister at Haddam, etc. as was before observed: Gershom was Minister of Groton
in Connecticut: Japheth was a Physician, and went in the Quality of a Doctor of
a Ship to England, (before the Time for the taking his second Degree at
College) and designed to go from thence to the East Indies, and never was heard
of more: Nehemiah was sometime Fellow of Harvard College, and afterward
Minister at Newton in the Massachusetts. The Mother of Mrs. Dorothy Hobart (who
was afterward Brainerd) was Daughter to the Rev. Mr. Samuel Whiting, Minister
of the Gospel, first at Boston in Lincolnshire, and afterward at Lynn in the
Massachusetts, New England: He had three Sons that were Ministers of the Gospel.

Mr. David Brainerd was the third Son of his Parents. They had five Sons and
four Daughters: Their eldest Son is Hezekiah Brainerd Esquire a Justice of the
Peace, and for several Years past a Representative of the Town of Haddam, in
the General Assembly of Connecticut Colony: The second was the Rev. Mr.
Nehemiah Brainerd, a worthy Minister at Eastbury in Connecticut, who died of a
Consumption Nov. 10. 1742. The fourth is Mr. John Brainerd, who succeeds his
Brother David, as Missionary to the Indians, and Pastor of the same Church of
Christian In^ians in New Jersey: And the fifth was Israel, lately Student at
Yale-College in New Haven, and died since his Brother David. -- Mrs. Dorothy
Brainerd having lived several Years a Widow, died, when her Son, whose Life I
am about to give an Account of, was about fourteen Years of Age: So that in his
Youth he was left both Fatherless and Motherless. -- What Account he has given
of Himself, and his own Life, may be seen in what follows.]

I Was, I think, from my Youth, something sober, and inclined rather to
Melancholy, than the contrary Extreme; but don't remember any Thing of
Conviction of Sin, worthy of Remark, 'till I was, I believe, about seven or
eight Years of Age; when I became something concerned for my Soul, and
terrified at the Thoughts of Death, and was driven to the Performance of
Duties: But it appeared a melancholy Business, and destroyed my Eagerness for
Play. And alas! This religious Concern was but short-lived. However, I
sometimes attended secret Prayer; and thus lived at Ease in Zion, without God
in the World, and without much Concern, as I remember, 'till I was above
thirteen Years of Age. But sometime in the Winter 1732, I was something roused
out of carnal Security, by I scarce know what Means at first; but was much
excited by the prevailing of a mortal Sickness in Haddam: I was frequent,
constant and something fervent in Duties, and took Delight in reading,
especially Mr. Janeway's Token for Children; I felt sometimes much melted in
Duties, and took great Delight in the Performance of 'em: And I sometimes
hoped, that I was converted, or at least in a good and hopeful Way for Heaven
and Happiness, not knowing what Conversion was. The Spirit of God at this Time
proceeded far with me; I was remarkably dead to the World, and my Thoughts were
almost wholly employed about my Soul's Concerns; and I may indeed say, almost I
was persuaded to be a Christian. I was also exceedingly distressed and
melancholy at the Death of my Mother, in March 1732. But afterward my
religious Concern began to decline, and I by Degrees fell back into a
considerable Degree of Security; though I still attended secret Prayer frequently.

About the 15th of April 1733, I removed from my Father's House to East-Haddam,
where I spent four Years, but still without God in the World; though for the most
Part I went a Round of secret Duty. I was not exceedingly addicted to young
Company, or Frolicking (as it is called) But this I know, that when I did go
into Company, I never returned from a Frolic in my Life, with so good a
Conscience as I went with; It always added new Guilt to me, and made me afraid
to come to the Throne of Grace, and spoiled those good Frames, I was wont
sometimes to please my self with. But alas! all my good Frames were but
Self-Righteousness, not bottomed on a Desire for the Glory of God.

About the latter End of April 1737, being full 19 Years of Age, I removed to
Durham, and began to work on my Farm, and so continued the Year out, or near,
'till I was 20 Years old; frequently longing, from a natural Inclination, after
a liberal Education. When I was about twenty Years of Age, I applied my self to
Study; and sometime before, was more than ordinarily excited to and in Duty:
But now engaged more than ever in the Duties of Religion. I became very strict,
and watchful over my Thoughts, Words, and Actions; and thought I must be sober
indeed, because I designed to devote my self to the Ministry; and imagined I
did dedicate my self to the Lord.

Some Time in April 1738, I went to Mr. Fiske's, and lived with him, during his
Life. Mr. Fiske was the Pastor of the Church in Haddam.
And I remember, He advised me wholly to abandon young Company, and associate
myself with grave elderly People: which Counsel I followed; and my Manner of
Life was now exceeding regular, and full of Religion, such as it was: For I
read my Bible more than twice through in less than a Year, I spent much Time
every Day in secret Prayer, and other secret Duties; I gave great Attention to
the Word preached, and endeavored to my utmost to retain it: So much concerned
was I about Religion, that I agreed with some young Persons to meet privately
on Sabbath-Evenings for religious Exercises, and thought my self sincere in
these Duties; and after our Meeting was ended, I used to repeat the Discourses
of the Day to my self, and recollect what I could, though sometimes it was very
late in the Night. Again, on Monday-Mornings, I used sometimes to recollect the
same Sermons. And I had sometimes considerable Movings of Affections in Duties,
and much Pleasure, and had many Thoughts of joining to the Church. In short, I
had a very good outside, and rested entirely on my Duties, though I was not
sensible of it.

After Mr. Fiske's Death, I proceeded in my Learning with my Brother; and was
still very constant in religious Duties, and often wondered at the Levity of
Professors; 'twas a Trouble to me, that they were so careless in religious
Matters. -- Thus I proceeded a considerable Length on a self-righteous
Foundation; and should have been entirely lost and undone, had not the mere
Mercy of God prevented.

Some Time in the Beginning of Winter, Anno 1738, it pleased God, on one
Sabbath Day Morning, as I was walking out for some secret Duties (as I
remember) to give me on a Sudden such a Sense of my Danger and the Wrath of
God, that I stood amazed, and my former good Frames, that I had pleased myself
with, all presently vanished; and from the View, that I had of my Sin and
Vileness, I was much distressed all that Day, fearing the Vengeance of God
would soon overtake me; I was much dejected, and kept much alone, and sometimes
begrutched the Birds and Beasts their Happiness, because they were not exposed
to eternal Misery, as I evidently saw I was. And thus I lived from Day to Day,
being frequently in great Distress: Sometimes there appeared Mountains before
me to obstruct my Hopes of Mercy; and the Work of Conversion appeared so great,
I thought I should never be the Subject of it: But used, however, to pray and
cry to God, and perform other Duties with great Earnestness, and hoped by some
Means to make the Case better. And though I Hundreds of (...) renounced all
Pretenses of any Worth in my Duties (as I thought) even in the Season of the
Performance of them, and often confessed to God that I deserved nothing for the
very best of them, but eternal Condemnation: Yet still I had a secret latent
Hope of recommending my self to God by my religious Duties; and when I prayed
affectionately, and my Heart seemed in some Measure to melt, I hoped God would
be thereby moved to pity me, my Prayers then looked with some Appearance of
Goodness in 'em, and I seemed to mourn for Sin: and then I could in some
Measure venture on the Mercy of God in Christ (as I though it;) Though the
preponderating Thought and Foundation of my Hope was some Imagination of
Goodness in my Heart Meltings, and Flowing of Affections in Duty, and
(sometimes) extraordinary Enlargements therein, etc. Though at some Times the
Gate appeared so very strait, that it looked next to impossible to enter, yet
at other Times I flattered my self that it was not so very difficult, and hoped
I should by Diligence and Watchfulness soon gain the Point. Sometimes after
Enlargement in Duty and considerable Affection, I hoped I had made a good Step
toward Heaven, and imagined that GOD was affected as I was, and that he would
hear such sincere Cries (as I called them) and so sometimes when I withdrew for
secret Duties in great Distress, I returned something comfortable; and thus
healed my self with my Duties.

Some Time in February 1738, 9. I set apart a Day for secret Fasting and
Prayer, and spent the Day in almost incessant Cries to God for Mercy, that he
would open my Eyes to see the Evil of Sin, and the Way of Life by Jesus Christ.
And God was pleased that Day to make considerable Discoveries of my Heart to
me: But still I trusted in all the Duties I performed; though there was no Manner
of Goodness in the Duties I then performed, there being no Manner of Respect to
the Glory of GOD in them, nor any such Principle in my Heart: yet God was
pleased to make my Endeavors that Day, a Means to show me my Helplessness in
some Measure.

Sometimes I was greatly encouraged, and imagined that God loved me and was
pleased with me, and thought I should soon be fully reconciled to God; while
the Whole was founded on mere Presumption, arising from Enlargement in Duty, or
Flowing of Affections, or some good Resolutions, and the like. And when, at
Times, great Distress began to arise, on a Sight of my Vileness and Nakedness,
and Inability to deliver my self from a sovereign God, I used to put off the
Discovery, as what I could not bear. Once, I remember, a terrible Pang of
Distress seized me, and the Thoughts of renouncing my Self, and standing naked
before GOD, stripped of all Goodness, were so dreadful to me, that I was ready
to say to 'em as Felix to Paul, Go thy Way for this Time. Thus, though I daily
longed for greater Conviction of Sin, supposing that I must see more of my
dreadful State in order to a Remedy, yet when the Discoveries of my vile
hellish Heart were made to me, the Sight was so dreadful, and showed me so
plainly my Exposedness to Damnation, that I could not endure it. -- I
constantly strove after whatever Qualifications, I imagined others obtained
before the Reception of Christ, in order to recommend me to his Favor.
Sometimes I felt the Power of an hard Heart, and supposed it must be softened
before Christ would accept of me; and when I felt any Meltings of Heart, I
hoped now the Work was almost done: And hence, when my Distress still remained,
I was wont to murmur at God's Dealings with me; and thought, when others felt
their Hearts softened, God showed them Mercy: But my Distress remained still.

Sometimes I grew remiss and sluggish, without any great Convictions of Sin,
for a considerable Time together; but after such a Season, Convictions
sometimes seized me more violently. One Night I remember in particular, when I
was walking solitarily Abroad, I had opened to me such a View of my Sin, that I
feared the Ground would cleave asunder under my Feet, and become my Grave, and
send my Soul quick into Hell, before I could get Home. And though I was forced to
go to Bed, left my Distress should be discovered by others, which I much
feared; yet I scarce durst Sleep at all, for I thought it would be a great
Wonder if I should be out of Hell in the Morning. And though my Distress was
sometimes thus great, yet I greatly dreaded the loss of Convictions, and
returning back to a State of carnal Security, and to my former Insensibility of
impending Wrath; which made me exceeding exact in my Behavior, lest I should
stifle the Motions of God's Spirit. When at any Time I took a View of my
Convictions of my own Sinfulness, and thought the Degree of 'em to be
considerable, I was wont to trust in my Convictions: But this Confidence, and
the Hopes that arose in me from it, of soon making some notable Advances
toward Deliverance, would ease my Mind, and I soon became more senseless and
remiss: But then again, when I discerned my Convictions to grow languid, and I
though it them about to leave me, this immediately alarmed and distressed me.
Sometimes I expected to take a large Step, and get very far toward Conversion,
by some particular Opportunity or Means I had in View.

The many Disappointments, and great Distresses and Perplexity I met with, put
me into a most horrible Frame of contesting with the ALMIGHTY; with an inward
Vehemence and Virulence, finding Fault with his Ways of Dealing with Mankind. I
found great Fault with the Imputation of Adam's Sin to his Posterity: And my
wicked Heart often wished for some other Way of Salvation, than by Jesus
Christ: And being like the troubled Sea, and my Thoughts confused, I used to
contrive to escape the Wrath of God by some other Means, and had strange
Projections, full of Atheism, contriving to disappoint God's Designs and
Decrees concerning me, or to escape God's Notice, and hide myself from him: But
when, upon Reflection, I saw these Projections were vain, and would not serve
me, and that I could contrive nothing for my own Relief, this would throw my
Mind into the most horrid Frame, to wish there was no God, or to wish there
were some other God that could control him, etc. These Thoughts and Desires
were the secret Inclinations of my Heart, that were frequently acting before I
was aware; but alas, they were mine! Although I was affrighted with them, when I
came to reflect on them: When I considered of it, it distressed me, to think,
that my Heart was so full of Enmity against God; and it made me tremble, left
God's Vengeance should suddenly fall upon me. I used before, to imagine my
Heart was not so bad, as the Scriptures and some other Books represented.
Sometimes I used to take much Pains to work it up into a good Frame, a humble
submissive Disposition; and hoped there was then some Goodness in me: But it
may be on a sudden, the Thoughts of the Strictness of the Law, or the
Sovereignty of God, would so irritate the Corruption of my Heart, that I had so
watched over, and hoped I had brought to a good Frame, that it would break over
all Bounds, and burst forth on all Sides, like Floods of Waters, when they
break down their Damm. But being sensible of the Necessity of a deep
Humiliation in order to a saving Close with Christ, I used to set my self to
work in my own Heart those Convictions, that were requisite in such an
Humiliation: As, a Conviction, that God would be just, if he cast me off for
ever: And that if ever God should bestow Mercy on me, it would be mere Grace,
though I should be in Distress (...) Y^^rs first, and be never so much engaged in
Duty; that God (...) not in the least obliged to pity me the more for all past
Duties, Cries, and Tears, etc. These Things I strove to my utmost to bring my
self to a firm belief of, and hearty assent to; and hoped that now I was
brought off from my self, and truly humbled and bowed to the divine
Sovereignty; and was wont to tell God in my Prayers, that now I had those very
Dispositions of Soul that he required, and on which he showed Mercy to others,
and thereupon to beg and plead for Mercy to me: But when I found no Relief, and
was still oppressed with Guilt and Fears of Wrath, my Soul was in a Tumult, and
my Heart rose against God, as dealing hardly with me. Yet then my Conscience
flew in my Face, putting me in Mind of my late Confession to God of his Justice
in my Condemnation, etc. And this, giving me a Sight of the Badness of my
Heart, threw me again into Distress, and I wished I had watched my Heart more
narrowly, to keep it from breaking out against God's Dealings with me, and I
even wished I had not pleaded for Mercy on Account of my Humiliation, because
thereby I had lost all my seeming Goodness.

Thus, Scores of Times, I vainly imagined my self humbled and prepared for
saving Mercy.

While I was in this distressed, bewildered, and tumultuous State of Mind, the
Corruption of my Heart was especially irritated with these Things following:

1. The strictness of the divine Law. For I found it was impossible for me
(after my utmost Pains) to answer the Demands of it. I often made new
Resolutions, and as often broke them. I imputed the whole to Carelessness, and
the Want of being more Watchful, and used to call my self a Fool for my
Negligence: But when, upon a stronger Resolution, and greater Endeavors; and
close Application of my self to Fasting and Prayer, I found all Attempts fail,
then I quarrelled with the Law of God, as unreasonably rigid. I thought, if it
extended only to my outward Actions and Behaviors, I could bear with it: But I
found it condemned me for my evil Thoughts, and Sins of my Heart, which I could
not possibly prevent. I was extremely loath to give out, and own my utter
Helplesness in this Matter: But after repeated Disappointments, thought that,
rather than perish, I could do a little more still, especially if such and such
Circumstances might but attend my Endeavors and Strivings; I hoped, that I
should strive more earnestly than ever, if the Matter came to Extremity (though I
never could find the Time to do my utmost, in the Manner I intended:) And this
Hope of future more favorable Circumstances, and of doing something great
hereafter, kept me from utter Despair in my self, and from seeing my self
fallen into the Hands of a sovereign God, and dependent on nothing but free and
boundless Grace.

2. Another Thing was, that Faith alone was the Condition of Salvation; and
that God would not come down to lower Terms, that he would not promise Life and
Salvation upon my sincere and hearty Prayers and Endeavors. That Word, Mark
xvi.16. He that believes not, shall be damned, cut off all Hope there: And I
found, Faith was the sovereign Gift of God; that I could not get it as of my
self, and could not oblige God to bestow it upon me, by any of my Performances.
( Ephesians. ii.1, and 8.) This, I was ready to say, is a hard Saying; who can hear
it? I could not bear, that all I had done should stand for mere nothing, who
had been very Conscientious in Duty, and had been exceeding religious a great
while, and had (as I thought) done much more than many others that had obtained
Mercy. I confessed indeed the Vileness of my Duties; but then, what made 'em at
that Time seem vile, was my wandering Thoughts in them; not because I was all
over defiled like a Devil, and the Principle corrupt from ^^^nce they flowed,
so that I could not possibly do any Thing that was Good. And therefore I called
what I did, by the Name of honest faithful Endeavors; and (...) not bear it,
that God had made no Promises of Salvation to (...).

3. Another Thing was, that I could not find out what Faith was; or what it was
to believe, and come to Christ. I read the Calls of Christ, made to the weary
and heavy laden; but could find no Way, that he directed them to come in. I
thought, I would gladly come, if I knew how, though the Path of Duty directed to
were never so difficult. I read Mr. Stoddard's Guide to Christ (which I trust
was, in the Hand of God, the happy Means of my Conversion) And my Heart rose
against the Author; for though he told me my very Heart all along under
Convictions, and seemed to be very beneficial to me in his Directions; yet here
he failed, He did not tell me any Thing I could do, that would bring me to
Christ, but left me as it were with a great Gulf between me and Christ, without
any Direction to get through* For I was not yet effectually and experimentally
taught, that there could be no Way prescribed, whereby a natural Man could, of
his own Strength, obtain that which is supernatural, and which the highest
Angel cannot give.

4. Another Thing that I found a great inward Opposition to, was the
Sovereignty of GOD. I could not bear, that it should be wholly at God's
Pleasure, to save or damn me, just as he would. That Passage, Romans ix.11, --
23. was a constant Vexation to me, especially Verse 21. The reading or
meditating on this always destroyed my seeming good Frames: When I thought I
was almost humbled, and almost resigned to God's Sovereignty, the reading or
thinking on this Passage would make my Enmity against the Sovereignty of God
appear. And when I came to reflect on my inward Enmity and Blasphemy, that
arose on this Occasion, I was the more afraid of God, and driven further from
any Hopes of Reconciliation with him; and it gave me such a dreadful View of my
self, that I dreaded more than ever to see myself in God's Hands, and at his
sovereign Disposal, and it made me more opposite than ever to submit to his
Sovereignty; for I thought God designed my Damnation. --

All this Time the Spirit of God was powerfully at work with me; and I was
inwardly pressed to relinquish all Self-Confidence, all Hopes of ever helping
my self by any Means whatsoever: And the Conviction of my lost Estate was
sometimes so clear and manifest before my Eyes, that it was as if it had been
declared to me in so many Words, "'It Is done, it is done, it is forever impossible
to deliver your self." For about three or four Days, my Soul was thus
distressed, especially at some Turns, when for a few Moments I seemed to my
self lost and undone; but then would shrink back immediately from the Sight,
because I dared not venture my self into the Hands of God, as wholly helpless,
and at the Disposal of his sovereign Pleasure. I dared not see that important
Truth concerning my self, That I was dead in Trespasses and Sins. But when I
had as it were thrust away these Views of my self at any Time, I felt
distressed to have the same Discoveries of my self again; for I greatly feared
being given over of God to final Stupidity. When I thought of putting it off to
a more convenient Season, the Conviction was so close and powerful with Regard
to the present Time, that it was the best Time, and probably the only Time,
that I dared not put it off. It was the Sight of Truth concerning my self,
Truth respecting my State, as a Creature fallen and alienated from God, and
that consequently could make no Demands on God for Mercy, but must subscribe to
the absolute Sovereignty of the divine Being; the Sight of the Truth, I say, my
Soul shrank away from, and trembled to think of beholding. Thus, he that does
Evil (as all unregenerate Men continually do) hates the Light of Truth, neither
cares to come to it, because it will reprove his Deeds, and show him his just
Deserts. ( Joh. iii.20.) And though, some Time before, I had taken much Pains (as
I thought) to submit to the Sovereignty of God, yet I mistook the Thing; and
did not once imagine, that seeing and being made experimentally sensible of
this Truth, which my Soul now so much dreaded and trembled at a Sense of, was
the Frame of Soul that I had been so earnest in pursuit of heretofore: For I
had ever hoped, that when I had attained to that Humiliation, which I supposed
necessary to go before Faith, then it would not be fair for God to cast me off;
but now I saw it was so far from any Goodness in me, to own my self spiritually
dead, and destitute of all Goodness, that, on the contrary, my Mouth would be
forever stopped by it; and it looked as dreadful to me, to see my self, and the
Relation I stood in to God, as a Sinner and a Criminal, and he a great Judge
and Sovereign, as it would be to a poor trembling Creature, to venture off some
high Precipice. And hence I put it off for a Minute or two, and tried for
better Circumstances to do it in; either I must read a Passage or two, or pray
first, or something of the like Nature; or else put off my Submission to God's
Sovereignty, with an Objection, that I did not know how to submit: But the
Truth was, I could see no Safety in owning my self in the Hands of a Sovereign
God, and that I could lay no Claim to any Thing better than Damnation.

But after a considerable Time spent in such like Exercises and Distresses, one
Morning, while I was walking in a solitary Place as usual, I at once saw that
all my Contrivances and Projections to effect or procure Deliverance and
Salvation for my self, were utterly in vain: I was brought quite to a stand, as
finding my self totally lost. I had thought many Times before, that the
Difficulties in my Way were very great: But now I saw, in another and very
different Light, that it was forever impossible for me to do any Thing toward
helping or delivering my self. I then thought of blaming my self, that I had
not done more, and been more engaged, while I had Opportunity (for it seemed
now as if the Season of doing was forever over and gone) But I instantly saw,
that let me have done what I would, it would no more have tended to my helping
myself; than what I had done; that I had made all the Pleas, I ever could have
made to all Eternity; and that all my Pleas were vain. The Tumult that had been
before in my Mind, was now quieted; and I was something eased of that Distress,
which I felt, while struggling against a Sight of my self, and of the divine
Sovereignty. I had the greatest Certainty, that my State was forever miserable,
for all that I could do; and wondered, and was almost astonished, that I had
never been sensible of it before.

In the Time while I remained in this State, my Notions respecting my Duties,
were quite different from what I had ever entertained in Times past. Before
this, the more I did in Duty, the more I thought God was obliged to me; or at
least the more hard I thought it would be for God to cast me off; 'tho at the
same Time I confessed, and thought I saw, that there was no Goodness or Merit
in my Duties: But now the more I did in Prayer or any other Duty, the more I
saw I was indebted to God for allowing me to ask for Mercy; For I saw, it was
Self-Interest had led me to pray, and that I had never once prayed from any
Respect to the Glory of God. Now I saw, there was no necessary Connection
between my Prayers and the Bestowment of divine Mercy; that they laid not the
least Obligation upon God to bestow his Grace upon me; and that there was no
more Virtue or Goodness in them, than there would be in my paddling with my
Hand in the Water (which was the Comparison I had then in my Mind) and this
because they were not performed from any Love or Regard to God. I saw, that I
had been heaping up my Devotions before God, Fasting, Praying etc. pretending,
and indeed really thinking, at some Times, that I was aiming at the Glory of
God; whereas I never once truly intended it, but only my own Happiness. I saw,
that, as I had never done any Thing for God, I had no Claim to lay to any Thing
from him, but Perdition, on Account of my Hypocrisy and Mockery. Oh how
different did my Duties now appear from what they used to do! I used to charge
them with Sin and Imperfection; But this was only on Account of the Wanderings
and vain Thoughts attending them, and not because I had no Regard to God in
them; for this I thought I had: But when I saw evidently that I had Regard to
nothing but Self-Interest, then they appeared vile Mockery of God,
Self-Worship, and a continual Course of Lies; so that I saw now, there was
something worse had attended my Duties, than barely a few Wanderings etc. For
the whole was nothing but Self-Worship and an horrid Abuse of God.

I continued, as I remember, in this State of Mind, from Friday-Morning 'till
the Sabbath-Evening following, July 12. 1739. when I was walking again in the
same solitary Place where I was brought to see my self lost and helpless (as
was before mentioned) and here, in a mournful melancholy State, was attempting
to pray; but found no Heart to engage in that, or any other Duty; my former
Concern and Exercise and religious Affections were now gone. I thought, the
Spirit of God had quite left me; but still was not distressed: Yet
disconsolate, as if there was nothing in Heaven or Earth could make me happy.
And having been thus endeavoring to pray (though being, as I thought, very
stupid and senseless) for near half an Hour, (and by this Time the Sun was
about half-an-hour-high, as I remember) then, as I was walking in a dark thick
Grove, unspeakable Glory seemed to open to the View and Apprehension of my
Soul: I don't mean any external Brightness, for I saw no such Thing, nor do I
intend any Imagination of a Body of Light, some where away in the third
Heavens, or any Thing of that Nature; but it was a new inward Apprehension or
View that I had of GOD, such as I never had before, nor any Thing which had the
least Resemblance of it. I stood still, and wondered and admired! I knew that I
never had seen before any Thing comparable to it for Excellency and Beauty: It
was widely different from all the Conceptions* that ever I had had of God, or
Things divine. I had no particular Apprehension of any one Person in the
Trinity, either the Father, the Son, or the Holy Ghost; but it appeared to be
divine Glory, that I then beheld: And my Soul rejoiced with Joy unspeakable, to
see such a GOD, such a glorious divine Being; and I was inwardly pleased and
satisfied, that he should be God over all forever and ever. My Soul was so
captivated and delighted with the Excellency, Loveliness, Greatness, and other
Perfections of GOD, that I was even swallowed up in Him; at least to that
Degree, that I had no Thought (as I remember) at first, about my own Salvation,
and scarce reflected there was such a Creature as my self.

Thus God, I trust, brought me to a hearty Disposition to exalt him, and set
him on the Throne, and principally and ultimately to aim at his Honor and
Glory, as King of the Universe.

I continued in this State of inward Joy and Peace, yet Astonishment, 'till
near Dark, without any sensible Abatement; and then began to think and examine
what I had seen; and felt sweetly composed in my Mind all the Evening
following: I felt myself in a new World, and every Thing about me appeared with
a different Aspect from what it was wont to do.

At this Time, the Way of Salvation opened to me with such infinite Wisdom,
Suitableness and Excellency, that I wondered I should ever think of any other
Way of Salvation; was amazed, that I had not dropped my own Contrivances, and
complied with this lovely blessed and excellent Way before. If I could have
been saved by my own Duties, or any other Way that I had formerly contrived, my
whole Soul would now have refused. I wondered, that all the World did not see
and comply with this Way of Salvation, entirely by the Righteousness of Christ.

The sweet Relish of what I then felt, continued with me for several Days,
almost constantly, in a greater or less Degree: I could not but sweetly rejoice
in God, lying down and rising up. The next Lords-Da^ I felt something of the
same Kind; though not so powerful as before. But, not long after, was again
involved in thick Darkness, and under great Distress: yet not of the same Kind
with my Distress under Convictions. I was guilty, afraid and ashamed to come
before God, was exceedingly pressed with a Sense of Guilt: But it was not long
before I felt (I trust) true Repentance and Joy in God.

About the latter End of August, I again (...) under great Darkness; It seemed
as if the Presence of God ^as clean gone forever. Though I was not so much
d^stressed about my ^^iritual State, as I was at my being shut out from God's
(...) I then sensibly was. But it pleased the Lord (...) g^aciously to me, not
long after.

In the Beginning of September I went to College Yale College in New Haven.
, and entered there: But with some Degree of Reluctance, fearing lest I should
not be able to lead a Life of strict Religion, in the midst of so many
Temptations. -- After this, in the Vacancy, before I went to tarry at College,
it pleased God to visit my Soul with clearer Manifestations of himself and his
Grace. I was spending some Time in Prayer, and Self-Examination; and the Lord
by his Grace so shined into my Heart, that I enjoyed full Assurance of his
Favor, for that Time; and my Soul was unspeakably refreshed with divine and
heavenly Enjoyments. At this Time especially, as well as some others, sundry
Passages of God's Word opened to my Soul with divine Clearness, Power and
Sweetness, so as to appear exceeding precious, and with clear and certain
Evidence of it is being the Word of God. I enjoyed considerable Sweetness in
Religion all the Winter following.

In Jan. 1739, 40. The Measles spread much in College; and I having taken the
Distemper, went home to Haddam: But some Days before I was taken Sick, I seemed
to be greatly deserted, and my Soul mourned the Absence of the Comforter
exceedingly: It seemed to me, all Comfort was forever gone; I prayed and cried
to God for Help, yet found no present Comfort or Relief. But through divine
Goodness, a Night or two before I was taken Ill, while I was walking alone in a
very retired Place, and engaged in Meditation and Prayer, I enjoyed a sweet
refreshing Visit, as I trust, from above, so that my Soul was raised far above
the Fears of Death; indeed I rather longed for Death, than feared it. O how
much more refreshing this one Season was, than all the Pleasures and Delights
that Earth can afford! After a Day or two I was taken with the Measles, and was
very Ill indeed, so that I almost despaired of Life: But had no distressing
Fears of Death at all. However through divine Goodness I soon recovered: Yet, by
Reason of hard and close Studies, and being much exposed on Account of my
Freshman-ship, I had but little Time for spiritual Duties; my Soul often
mourned for Want of more Time and Opportunity to be alone with God. In the
Spring and Summer following I had better Advantages for Retirement, and enjoyed
more Comfort in Religion: Though indeed my Ambition in my Studies greatly wronged
the Activity and Vigor of my spiritual Life: Yet this was usually the Case
with me, that in the Multitude of my Thoughts within me, God's Comforts
principally delighted my Soul: These were my greatest Consolations Day by Day.

One Day I remember in particular (I think it was in Jun^ 1740.) I walked to a
considerable Distance from the College, in the Fields alone at Noon, and in
Prayer found such unspeakable Sweetness and Delight in God, that I thought, if
I must continue still in this evil World, I wanted always to be there, to
behold God's Glory: My Soul dearly loved all Mankind, and longed exceedingly
that they should enjoy what I enjoyed. -- It seemed to be a little Resemblance
of Heaven.

On Lord's Day, July 6. being Sacrament-Day, I found some divine Life and
spiritual Refreshment in that holy Ordinance. When I came from the Lord's
Table, I wondered how my Fellow-Students could live as I was sensible most did.
-- Next Lord's Day July 13. I had some special Sweetness in Religion. -- Again
Lord's Day July 20. my Soul was in a sweet and precious Frame.

Sometime in August following, I became so weakly and disordered, by too close
Application to my Studies, that I was advised by my Tutor to go Home, and
disengage my Mind from Study, as much as I could; for I was grown so Weak, that
I began to spit Blood. I took his Advice, and endeavored to lay aside my
Studies. But being brought very low, I looked Death in the Face more
steadfastly; and the Lord was pleased to give me renewedly a sweet Sense and
Relish of divine Things; and particularly in October 13, I found divine Help
and Consolation in the precious Duties of secret Prayer and Self Examination,
and my Soul took Delight in the blessed God: -- so likewise on the 17th of
October.

Saturday October 18. in my Morning-Devotions, my Soul was exceedingly melted
for and bitterly mourned over my exceeding Sinfulness and Vileness. I never
before had felt so pungent and deep a Sense of the odious Nature of Sin, as at
this Time. My Soul was then unusually carried forth in Love to God, and had a
lively Sense of God's Love to me. And this Love and Hope, at that Time, cast
out Fear. Both Morning and Evening I spent some Time in Self-Examination, to
find the Truth of Grace, as also my Fitness to approach to God at his Table the
next Day; and through infinite Grace, found the holy Spirit influencing my Soul
with Love to God, as a Witness within my self.

Lord's Day October 19. In the Morning, I felt my Soul hungring and thirsting
after Righteousness. In the Fore-Noon, while I was looking on the Sacramental
Elements, and thinking that Jesus Christ would soon be set forth crucified
before me, my Soul was filled with Light and Love, so that I was almost in an
Ecstasy; my Body was so weak, I could scarcely stand. I felt at the same Time an
exceeding Tenderness and most fervent Love toward all Mankind; so that my Soul
and all the Powers of it seemed, as it were, to melt into Softness and
Sweetness. But in the Season of the Communion there was some Abatement of this
sweet Life and Fervor. This Love and Joy cast out Fear; and my Soul longed for
perfect Grace and Glory. This swe^^ Frame continued 'till the Evening, when my
Soul was sweetly spiritual in secret Duties.

Monday, October 20. I again found the sweet Assistance of the holy Spirit in
secret Duties, both Morning and Evening, and Life and Comfort in Religion
through the whole Day.

Tuesday, October 21. I had likewise Experience of the Goodness of God in
shedding abroad his Love in my Heart, and giving me Delight and Consolation in
religious Duties. And all the remaining Part of the Week, my Soul seemed to be
taken up with divine Things. I now so longed after God, and to be freed from
Sin, that when I felt myself recovering, and thought I must return to College
again, which had proved so hurtful to my spiritual Interest the Year past, I
could not but be grieved, and I thought I had much rather have died; for it
distressed me, to think of getting away from God. But before I went, I enjoyed
several other sweet and precious Seasons of Communion with God (particularly
October 30. and Nov. 4.) wherein my Soul enjoyed unspeakable Comfort.

I returned to College about November 6. and through the Goodness of God felt
the Power of Religion almost daily, for the Space of six Weeks.

November 28. In my Evening-Devotion, I enjoyed precious Discoveries of God,
and was unspeakably refreshed with that Passage Heb. xii.22, 23, 24. That my
Soul longed to wing away for the Paradise of God; I longed to be conformed to
God in all Things. -- A Day or two after, I enjoyed much of the Light of God's
Countenance, most of the Day; and my Soul rested in God.

Tuesday, December 9. I was in a comfortable Frame of Soul most of the Day; but
especially in Evening-Devotions, when God was pleased wonderfully to assist and
strengthen me; so that I thought nothing should ever move me from the Love of
God in Christ Jesus my Lord. -- O! one Hour with God infinitely exceeds all the
Pleasures and Delights of this lower World.

Sometime toward the latter End of January 1740, 41. I grew more cold and dull
in Matters of Religion, by Means of my old Temptation, viz. Ambition in my
Studies. -- But through divine Goodness, a great and general Awakening spread it
self over the College, about the latter End of February, in which I was much
quickened, and more abundantly engaged in Religion.

[This Awakening here spoken of, was at the Beginning of that extraordinary
religious Commotion through the Land, which is fresh in every one's Memory.
This Awakening was for a Time very great and general at New Haven; and the
College had no small Share in it: That Society was greatly reformed, the
Students in general became serious, and many of them remarkably so, and much
engaged in the Concerns of their eternal Salvation. And however undesirable the
Issue of the Awakenings of that Day have appeared in many others, there have
been manifestly happy and abiding Effects of the Impressions then made on the
Minds of many of the Members of that College. And by all that I can learn
concerning Mr. Brainerd, there can be no Reason to doubt but that he had much
of God's gracious Presence, and of the lively Actings of true Grace, at that
Time: But yet he was afterward abundantly sensible, that his religious
Experiences and Affections at that Time were not free from a corrupt Mixture,
nor his Conduct to be acquitted from many Things that were imprudent and
blameable; which he greatly lamented himself, and was willing that others
should forget, that none might make an ill Improvement of such an Example. And
therefore although in the Time of it, he kept a constant Diary, containing a very
particular Account of what passed from Day to Day, for the next thirteen
Months, from the latter End of January, 1740, 41. forementioned, in two small
Books, which he called the two first Volumes of his Diary, next following the
Account before given of his Convictions, Conversion, and consequent Comforts;
yet, when he lay on his Deathbed, he gave Order (unknown to me, 'till after
his Death) that these two Volumes should be destroyed, and in the Beginning of
the third Book of his Diary, he wrote thus, (by the Hand of another, he not
being able to write himself) The two preceding Volumes, immediately following
the Account of the Author's Conversion, are lost. If any are desirous to know
how the Author lived, in general, during that Space of Time, let them read the
first thirty Pages of this Volume; where they will find something of a Specimen
of his ordinary Manner of living, through that whole Space of Time, which was
about 13 Months; excepting that here he was more refined from some Imprudencies
and indecent Heats, than there; but the Spirit of Devotion running through the
whole, was the same.

It could not be otherwise than that One whose Heart had been so prepared and
drawn to God, as Mr. Brainerd's had been, should be mightily enlarged, animated
and engaged, at the Sight of such an Alteration made in the College, the Town
and Land, and so great an Appearance of Men's reforming their Lives, and
turning from their Profaneness and Immorality, to Seriousness and Concern for
their Salvation, and of Religion's reviving and f^ourishing almost every where.
But as an intemperate imprudent Zeal, and a Degree of Enthusiasm soon crept in,
and mingled it self with that Revival of Religion; and so great and general an
Awakening being quite a new Thing in the Land, at least as to all the living
Inhabitants of it; neither People nor Ministers had learned thoroughly to
distinguish between solid Religion and its delusive Counterfeits; even many
Ministers of the Gospel, of long standing and the best Reputation, were for a
Time overpowered with the glaring Appearances of the latter: And therefore
surely it was not to be wondered at, that young Brainerd, but a Sophimore at
College, should be so; who was not only young in Years, but very young in
Religion and Experience, and had had but little Opportunity for the Study of
Divinity, and still less for Observation of the Circumstances and Events of
such an extraordinary State of Things: A Man must divest himself of all Reason,
to make strange of it. In these disadvantagious Circumstances, Brainerd had the
Unhappiness to have a Tincture of that intemperate indiscreet Zeal, which was
at that Time too prevalent; and was led, from his high Opinion of others that
he looked upon better than himself, into such Errors as were really contrary to
the habitual Temper of his Mind. One Instance of his Misconduct at that Time,
gave great Offense to the Rulers of the College, even to that Degree that they
expelled him the Society; which it is necessary should here be particularly
related, with it is Circumstances.

In the Time of the Awakening at College, there were several religious Students
that associated themselves one with another for mutual Conversation and
Assistance in spiritual Things, who were wont freely to open themselves one to
another, as special and intimate Friends: Brainerd was one of this Company. And
it once happened, that he and two or three more of these his intimate Friends
were in the Hall together, after Mr. Whittelsey, one of the Tutors, had been to
Prayer there with the Scholars; no other Person now remaining in the Hall, but
Brainerd and these his Companions. Mr. Whittelsey having been unusually
pathetical in his Prayer, one of Brainerd's Friends on this Occasion asked him
what he thought of Mr. Whittelsey; He made Answer, He has no more Grace than
this Chair. One of the Freshmen happening at that Time to be near the Hall
(though not in the Room) overheard those Words of his; though he heard no Name
mentioned, and knew not who the Person was, which was thus censured: He
informed a certain Woman that belonged to the Town, withal telling her his own
Suspicion, viz. that he believed Brainerd said this of some one or other of the
Rulers of the College. Whereupon she went and informed the Rector, who sent for
this Freshman and examined him; and he told the Rector the Words that he heard
Brainerd utter, and informed him who were in the Room with him at that Time.
Upon which the Rector sent for them: They were very backward to inform against
their Friend, of that which they looked upon as private Conversation, and
especially as none but they had heard or knew of whom he had uttered those
Words; yet the Rector compelled them to declare what he said, and of whom he
said it. -- Brainerd looked on himself greatly abused in the Management of this
Affair; and thought, that what he said in private, was injuriously extorted
from his Friends, and that then it was injuriously required of him (as it was
wont to be of such as had been guilty of some open notorious Crime) to make a
public Confession, and to humble himself before the whole College in the Hall,
for what he had said only in private Conversation. -- He not complying with
this Demand, and having gone once to the separate Meeting at New Haven, when
forbidden by the Rector, and also having been accused by one Person of saying
concerning the Rector, that he wondered he did not expect to drop down dead for
fining the Scholars who followed Mr. Tennent to Milford, though there was no
Proof of it (and Mr. Brainerd ever professed that he did not remember his
saying any Thing to that Purpose) for these Things he was expelled the College.

Now, how far the Circumstances and Exigences of that Day might justify such
great Severity in the Governors of the College, I will not undertake to
determine; it being my Aim, not to bring Reproach on the Authority of the
College, but only to do Justice to the Memory of a Person who I think to be
eminently one of those whose Memory is blessed. -- The Reader will see, in the
Sequel of the Story of Mr. Brainerd's Life, Particularly under the Date,
Wednesday, Sept. 14. 1743.
what his own Thoughts afterward were of his Behavior in these Things, and in
how Christian a Manner he conducted himself, with Respect to this Affair; though
he ever, as long as he lived, supposed himself much abused, in the Management
of it, and in what he suffered in it.

His Expulsion was in the Winter Anno 1741, 2. while he was in his third Year
in College.]

PART II. From about the Time that he first began to devote himself more
especially to the Study of Divinity, 'till he was examined and licensed to
preach, by the Association of Ministers belonging to the Eastern District of
the County of Fairfield in Connecticut.
[MR. Brainerd, the Spring after his Expulsion, went to live with the Rev. Mr.
Mills of Ripton, to follow his Studies with him, in order to his being fitted
for the Work of the Ministry; where he spent the greater Part of the Time 'till
the Association licensed him to preach; but frequently rode to visit the
neighboring Ministers, particularly Mr. Cook of Stratfield, Mr. Graham of
Southbury, and Mr. Bellamy of Bethlehem.

Here (at Mr. Mills's) he began the third Book of his Diary* in which the
Account he wrote of himself, is as follows.]

Thursday, April 1. 1742. I seem to be declining with Respect to my Life and
Warmth in divine Things: Had not so free Access to God in Prayer, as usual of
late. O that God would humble me deeply in the Dust before him. I deserve Hell
every Day, for not loving my Lord more, who has (I trust) loved me and given
himself for me; and every Time I am enabled to exercise any Grace renewedly, I
am renewedly indebted to the God of all Grace for special Assistance. Where
then is Boasting? Surely it is excluded, when we think how we are dependent on
God for the Being and every Act of Grace. Oh, if ever I get to Heaven, it will
be because God will, and nothing else; for I never did any thing of my self,
but get away from God! My Soul will be astonished at the unsearchable Riches of
divine Grace, when I arrive at the Mansions, which the blessed Savior is gone
before to prepare.

Friday, April 2. In the Afternoon I felt something sweetly in secret Prayer,
much resigned, calm and serene. What are all the Storms of this lower World, if
Jesus by his Spirit does but come walking on the Seas! -- Some Time past, I had
much Pleasure in the Prospect of the Heathens being brought home to Christ, and
desired that the Lord would improve me in that Work: -- But now my Soul more
frequently desires to die, to be with Christ. O that my Soul were wrapped up in
divine Love, and my longing Desires after God increased. -- In the Evening, was
refreshed in Prayer, with the Hopes of the Advancement of Christ's Kingdom in
the World.

Saturday, April 3. Was very much ^miss this Morning, and had an ill Night last
Night. I thought, if God would take me to himself now, my Soul would
exceedingly rejoice. O that I may be always humble and resigned to God, and
that God would cause my Soul to be more fixed on himself, that I may be more
fitted both for doing and suffering.

Lord's Day, April 4. My Heart was wandering and lifeless. -- In the Evening God
gave me Faith in Prayer, and made my Soul melt in some Measure, and gave me to
taste a divine Sweetness. -- O my blessed God! Let me climb up near to him, and
love, and long, and plead, and wrestle, and reach, and stretch after him, and
for Deliverance from the Body of Sin and Death. -- Alas, my Soul mourned to
think I should ever lose Sight of it is Beloved again! O come, Lord JESUS! Amen.

[On the Evening of the next Day, he complains that he seemed to be void of all
Relish of divine Things, felt much of the Prevalence of Corruption, and saw in
himself a Disposition to all Manner of Sin; which brought a very great Gloom on
his Mind, and cast him down into the Depths of Melancholy; so that he speaks of
himself, as astonished, amazed, having no Comfort, being filled with Horror,
seeing no Comfort in Heaven or Earth.

Tuesday, April 6. I walked out this Morning to the same Place where I was last
Night, and felt something as I did then; But was something relieved by reading
some Passages in my Diary, and seemed to feel as if I might pray to the great
God again with Freedom; but was suddenly struck with a Damp, from the Sense I
had of my own Vileness. -- Then I cried to God to wash my Soul and cleanse me
from my exceeding Filthiness, to give me Repentance and Pardon; and it began to
be something sweet, to pray: -- And I could think of undergoing the greatest
Sufferings in the Cause of Christ, with Pleasure; and found my self willing (if
God should so order it) to suffer Banishment from my native Land, among the
Heathen, that I might do something for their Souls Salvation, in Distresses and
Deaths of any Kind. -- Then God gave me to wrestle earnestly for others, for
the Kingdom of Christ in the World, and for dear Christian Friends. -- I felt
weaned from the World and from my own Reputation amongst Men, willing to be
despised, and to be a gazing Stock for the World to behold. -- It Is impossible
for me to express how I then felt: I had not much Joy, but some Sense of the
Majesty of God, which made me as it were tremble: I saw my self mean and vile,
which made me more willing that God should do what he would with me; it was all
infinitely reasonable.

Wednesday, April 7. I had not so much Fervency, but felt something as I did
Yesterday-Morning, in Prayer: -- At Noon I spent some Time in secret, with some
Fervency, but scarce any Sweetness: And felt very dull in the Evening.

Thursday, April 8. -- Had raised Hopes to Day respecting the Heathen. O that
God would bring in great Numbers of 'em to Jesus Christ. I cannot but hope I
shall see that glorious Day. -- Every Thing in this World seems exceeding vile
and little to me: I look so to my self. -- I had some little Dawn of Comfort to
Day in Prayer: But especially to Night I think I had some Faith and Power of
Intercession with God, was enabled to plead with God for the Growth of Grace in
my self; and many of the dear Children of God then lay with Weight upon my
Soul. Blessed be the Lord. It Is good to wrestle for divine Blessings.

Friday, April 9. Most of my Time in Morning-Devotion was spent without
sensible Sweetness; yet I had one delightful Prospect of arriving at the
heavenly World. I am more amazed than ever at such Thoughts; for I see my self
infinitely vile and unworthy. I feel very heartless and dull; and though I long
for the Presence of God, and seem constantly to reach toward God in Desires,
yet I cannot feel that divine and heavenly Sweetness that I used to enjoy. -- No
poor Creature stands in Need of divine Grace more than I, and none abuse it
more than I have done, and still do.

Saturday, April 10. Spent much Time in secret Prayer this Morning, and not
without some Comfort in divine Things, and I hope had some Faith in Exercise:
But am so low, and feel so little of the sensible Presence of God, that I
hardly know what to call Faith, and am made to possess the Sins of my Youth,
and the dreadful Sin of my Nature, and am all Sin; I cannot think, nor act, but
every Motion is Sin. -- I feel some faint Hopes, that God will, of his infinite
Mercy, return again with Showers of converting Grace to poor Gospel-abusing
Sinners; and my Hopes of being improved in the Cause of God, which of late have
been almost extinct, seem now a little revived. O that all my late Distresses
and awful Apprehensions might prove but Christ's School, to make me fit for
greater Service, by learning me the great Lesson of Humility.

Lord's Day, April 11. In the Morning, felt but little Life, excepting that my
Heart was something drawn out in Thankfulness to God for his amazing Grace and
Condescension to me in past Influences and Assistances of his Spirit. --
Afterward had some Sweetness in the Thoughts of arriving at the heavenly
World. O for the happy Day! -- After public Worship God gave me special
Assistance in Prayer; I wrestled with my dear Lord, with much Sweetness; and
Intercession was made a sweet and delightful Employment to me. -- In the
Evening, as I was viewing the Light in the North, was delighted in
Contemplation on the glorious Morning of the Resurrection.

Monday, April 12. This Morning the Lord was pleased to lift up the Light of
his Countenance upon me in secret Prayer, and made the Season very precious to
my Soul. And though I have been so depressed of late, respecting my Hopes of
future Serviceableness in the Cause of God; yet now I had much Encouragement
respecting that Matter. I was specially assisted to interceed and plead for
poor Souls, and for the Enlargement of Christ's Kingdom in the World, and for
special Grace for my self, to fit me for special Services. I felt exceeding
calm, and quite resigned to God, respecting my future Improvement, when and
where he pleased: My Faith lifted me above the World, and removed all those
Mountains, that I could not look over of late: I thought I wanted not the
Favor of Man to lean upon; for I knew Christ's Favor was infinitely better,
and that it was no Matter when, nor where, nor how Christ should send me, nor
what Trials he should still exercise me with, if I might be prepared for his
Work and Will. I now found sweetly revived in my Mind the wonderful Discovery,
of infinite Wisdom in all the Dispensations of God toward me, which I had a
little before I met with my great Trial at College: every Thing appeared full
of the Wisdom of God.

Tuesday, April 13. Saw my self to be very mean and vile; wondered at those
that showed me Respect. Afterward was something comforted in secret
Retirement, and was assisted to wrestle with God, with some Power, Spirituality
and Sweetness. Blessed be the Lord, he is never unmindful of me, but always
sends me needed Supplies, and from Time to Time, when I am like one dead,
raises me to Life. O that I may never distrust infinite Goodness.

Wednesday, April 14. My Soul longed for Communion with Christ, and for the
Mortification of indwelling Corruption, especially spiritual Pride. O there is
a sweet Day coming, wherein the weary will be at Rest. My Soul has enjoyed much
Sweetness this Day in the Hopes of its speedy arrival.

Thursday, April 15. My Desires apparently centered i^ GOD, and I found a
sensible Attraction of Soul after him, sundry Times to Day: I know I long for
GOD, and a Conformity to his Will, in inward Purity and Holiness, ten Thousand
Times more than for any Thing here below.

Friday and Saturday, April 16, 17. Seldom prayed without some sensible
Sweetness and Joy in the Lord. Sometimes I longed much to be dissolved and to
be with Christ. O that God would enable me to grow in Grace every Day. Alas, my
Barrenness is such, that God might well say, Cut it down. -- I am afraid of a
dead Heart on the Sabbath now begun: O that God would quicken me by his Grace.

Lord's Day April 18. Retired early this Morning into the Woods for Prayer; had
the Assistance of God's Spirit, and Faith in Exercise, and was enabled to plead
with Fervency for the Advancement of Christ's Kingdom in the World, and to
interceed for dear absent Friends. -- At Noon, God enabled me to wrestle with
him, and to feel (as I trust) the Power of divine Love in Prayer. -- At Night,
saw my self infinitely indebted to God, and had a View of my Short-comings: It
seemed to me, that I had done as it were nothing for God, and that I never had
lived to him but a few Hours of my Life.

Monday, April 19. I set apart this Day for Fast^^g and Prayer to God for his
Grace, especially to prepare me for (...) Work of the Ministry, to give me
divine Aid and Direction in my Preparations for that great Work, and in his own
Time to send me into his Harvest. Accordingly, in the Morning, endeavored to
plead for the divine Presence for the Day, and not without some Life. In the
Forenoon, I felt a Power of Intercession for precious immortal Souls, for the
Advancement of the Kingdom of my dear Lord and Savior in the World; and
withal, a most sweet Resignation, and even Consolation and Joy in the Tho'ts of
suffering Hardships, Distresses, and even Death it self, in the Promotion of
it; and had special Enlargement in pleading for the Enlightening and Conversion
of the poor Heathen. In the Afternoon, GOD was with me of a Truth. O 'twas
blessed Company indeed! God enabled me so to agonize in Prayer, that I was
quite wet with Sweat, though in the Shade, and the Wind cool. My Soul was drawn
out very much for the World; I grasped for Multitudes of Souls. I think, I had
more Enlargement for Sinners, than for the Children of God; though I felt as if I
could spend my Life in Cries for both. I enjoyed great Sweetness in Communion
with my dear Savior. I think, I never in my Life felt such an entire
Weanedness from this World, and so much resigned to God in every Thing. -- O
that I may always live to and upon my blessed God. Amen, Amen.

Tuesday, April 20. This Day I am twenty-four Years of Age. O how much Mercy
have I received the Year past! -- How often has God caused his Goodness to pass
before me! And how poorly have I answered the Vows I made this Time
twelvemonth, to be wholly the Lord's, to be forever devoted to his Service!
The Lord help me to live more to his Glory for Time to come. -- This has been a
sweet, a happy Day to me: Blessed be God. I think, my Soul was never so drawn
out in Intercession for others, as it has been this Night. Had a most fervent
Wrestle with the Lord to Night for my Enemies; and I hardly ever so longed to
live to God, and to be altogether devoted to him; I wanted to wear out my Life
in his Service and for his Glory.

Wednesday, April 21. Felt much Calmness and Resignation, and God again enabled
me to wrestle for Numbers of Souls, and had much Fervency in the sweet Duty of
Intercession. -- I enjoy of late more Sweetness in Intercession for others,
than in any other Part of Prayer. My blessed Lord really let me come near to
him, and plead with him.

[The Frame of Mind, and Exercises of Soul, that he expresses the three Days
next following, Thursday, Friday and Saturday, are much of the same Kind with
those expressed the two Days past.]

Lord's Day April 25. This Morning spent about two Hours in secret Duties, and
was enabled more than ordinarily to agonize for immortal Souls; though it was
early in the Morning, and the Sun scarcely shined at all, yet my Body was quite
wet with Sweat. Felt much pressed now, as frequently of late, to plead for the
Meekness and Calmness of the Lamb of God in my Soul: Through divine Goodness felt
much of it this Morning. O it is a sweet Disposition, heartily to forgive all
Injuries done us; to wish our greatest Enemies as well as we do our own Souls!
Blessed Jesus, may I daily be more and more conformed to Thee. At Night was
exceedingly melted with divine Love, and had some feeling Sense of the
Blessedness of the upper World. Those Words hung upon me, with much divine
Sweetness, Psalm. lxxxiv.7. They go from Strength to Strength, every one of them
in Zion appears before God. O the near Access, that God sometimes gives us in
our Addresses to him! This may well be termed appearing before God: It Is so
indeed, in the true spiritual Sense, and in the sweetest Sense. -- I think I
have not had such Power of Intercession, these many Months, both for God's
Children, and for dead Sinners, as I have had this Evening. I wished and longed
for the Coming of my dear Lord: I longed to join the Angelick Hosts in Praises,
wholly free from Imperfection. O the blessed Moment hastens! All I want is to
be more holy, more like my dear Lord. O for Sanctification! My very Soul pants
for the complete Restoration of the blessed Image of my sweet Savior; that I
may be fit for the blessed Enjoyments and Employments of the heavenly World.

Farewell, vain World; my Soul can bid Adieu:
My Savior's taught me to abandon you.
Your Charms may gratify a sensual Mind;
Not please a Soul wholly for GOD designed.
Forbear t'entice, cease then my Soul to call:
It Is fixed, through Grace; my GOD shall be my All.
While he thus lets me heavenly Glories view,
Your Beauties fade, my Heart's no Room for you.
The Lord refreshed my Soul with many sweet Passages of his Word. O the New
Jerusalem! My Soul longed for it. O the Song of Moses and the Lamb! And that
blessed Song, that no Man can learn, but they that are redeemed from the Earth!
And the glorious white Robes, that were given to the Souls under the Altar!

Lord, I Am a Stranger here alone;
Earth no true Comforts can afford:
Yet, absent from my dearest One,
My Soul delights to cry, My Lord!
JESUS, my Lord, my only Love,
Possess my Soul, nor thence depart:
Grant me kind Visits, heavenly Dove;
My God shall then have all my Heart.
Monday, April 26. Continued in a sweet Frame of Mind; but in the Afternoon
felt something of spiritual Pride stirring. God was pleased to make it a
humbling Season at first; though afterward he gave me Sweetness. O my Soul
exceedingly longs for that blessed State of Perfection of Deliverance from all
Sin! -- At Night, God enabled me to give my Soul up to him, to cast my self
upon him, to be ordered and disposed of according to his sovereign Pleasure;
and I enjoyed great Peace and Consolation in so doing. My Soul took sweet
Delight in God to Night: My Thoughts freely and sweetly centred in him. O that
I could spend every Moment of my Life to his Glory.

Tuesday, April 27. Retired pretty early so secret Devotions; and in Prayer God
was pleased to pour such ineffable Comforts into my Soul, that I could do
nothing for some Time but say over and over, O my sweet Savior! O my sweet
Savior! Whom have I in Heaven, but Thee? and there is none upon Earth, that I
desire beside Thee. If I had had a Thousand Lives, my Soul would gladly have
laid 'em all down at once to have been with CHRIST. My Soul never enjoyed so
much of Heaven before; 'twas the most refined and most spiritual Season of
Communion with God I ever yet felt: I never felt so great a Degree of
Resignation in my Life: I felt very sweetly all the Forenoon. -- In the
Afternoon I withdrew to meet with my God, but found my self much declined, and
God made it a humbling Season to my Soul: I mourned over the Body of Death,
that is in me: it grieved me exceedingly, that I could not pray to and praise
God with my Heart full of divine heavenly Love. -- O that my Soul might never
offer any dead cold Services to my God. -- In the Evening had not so much sweet
divine Love, as in the Morning; but had a sweet Season of fervent Intercession.

Wednesday, April 28. Withdrew to my usual Place of Retirement in great Peace
and Tranquillity, and spent about two Hours in secret Duties. I felt much as I
did Yesterday-Morning, only weaker and more overcome. I seemed to hang and
depend wholly on my dear Lord; wholly weaned from all other Dependances. I knew
not what to say to my God, but only lean on his Bosom, as it were, and breathe
out my Desires after a perfect Conformity to him in all Things. Thirsting
Desires and insatiable Longings possessed my Soul, after perfect Holiness: God
was so precious to my Soul, that the World with all its Enjoyments was
infinitely vile: I had no more Value for the Favor of Men, than for Pebbles:
The LORD was my ALL; and He overruled all; which greatly delighted me. I
think, my Faith and Dependence on God scarce ever rose so high. I saw Him such
a Fountain of Goodness, that it seemed impossible I should distrust him again,
or be any Way anxious about any Thing that should happen to me. I now enjoyed
great Sweetness in praying for absent Friends, and for the Enlargement of
Christ's Kingdom in the World. -- Much of the Power of these divine Enjoyments
remained with me through the Day. -- In the Evening my Heart seemed sweetly to
melt, and I trust, was really humbled for indwelling Corruption, and I mourned
like a Dove. I felt that all my Unhappiness arose from my being a Sinner; for
with Resignation I could bid Welcome all other Trials; but Sin hung heavy upon
me; for God discovered to me the Corruption of my Heart: so that I went to Bed
with a heavy Heart, because I was a Sinner; though I did not in the least doubt
of God's Love. O that God would purge away my Dr^ss, and take away my Tin, and
make me seven Times refined.

Thursday, April 29. Was kept off at a Distance from God; -- but had some
Enlargement in Intercession for precious Souls.

Friday, April 30. Was something dejected in Spirit: Nothing grieves me so
much, as that I cannot live constantly to God's Glory. I could bear any
Desertion or spiritual Conflicts, if I could but have my Heart all the while
burning within me with Love to God and Desires of his Glory: But this is
impossible; for when I feel these, I cannot be dejected in my Soul, but only
rejoice in my Savior, who has delivered me from the reigning Power, and will
shortly deliver me from the Indwelling of Sin.

Saturday, May 1. Was enabled to cry to God with Fervency for ministerial
Qualifications, and that God would appear for the Advancement of his own
Kingdom, and that he would bring in the Heathen World, etc. Had much Assistance
in my Studies. -- This has been a profitable Week to me; I have enjoyed many
Communications of the blessed Spirit in my Soul.

Lord's Day, May 2. God was pleased this Morning to give me such a Sight of my
self, as made me appear very vile in my own Eyes: I felt Corruption stirring in
my Heart, which I could by no Means suppress: felt more and more deserted: was
exceeding weak, and almost sick with my inward Trials.

Monday, May 3. Had a Sense of vile Ingratitude. In the Morning I withdrew to
my usual Place of Retirement, and mourned for my Abuse of my dear Lord: spent
the Day in Fasting and Prayer: God gave me much Power of wrestling for his
Cause and Kingdom: And it was a happy Day to my Soul. God was with me all the
Day, and I was more above the World, than ever in my Life.

[Through the remaining Part of this Week, he complains almost every Day of
Desertion and inward Trials and Conflicts, attended with dejection of Spirit;
but yet speaks of Times of Relief and Sweetness, and daily refreshing Visits of
the divine Spirit, affording special Assistance and Comfort, and enabling, at
some Times, to much Fervency and Enlargement in religious Duties.]

Lord's Day, May 9. I think, I never felt so much of the cursed Pride of my
Heart, as well as the Stubbornness of my Will before. Oh dreadful! what a vile
Wretch I am! I could not submit to be nothing, and to lie down in the Dust! Oh
that God would humble me in the Dust. I felt my self such a Sinner, all Day,
that I had scarce any Comfort. Oh, when shall I be delivered from the Body of
this Death! I greatly feared, lest through Stupidity and Carelessness I should
lose the Benefit of these Trials. O that they might be sanctified to my Soul.
Nothing seemed to touch me but only this, that I was a Sinner. -- Had Fervency
and Refreshment in social Prayer in the Evening.

Monday, May 10. Rode to New Haven; saw some Christian Friends there; had
Comfort in joining in Prayer with them, and hearing of the Goodness of God to
them since I last saw them.

Tuesday, May 11. Rode from New Haven to Weathersfield; was very dull most of
the Day; had little Spirituality in this Journey, though I often longed to be
alone with God; was much perplexed with vile Thoughts; was sometimes afraid of
every Thing: But GOD was my Helper. -- Caught a little Time for Retirement in
the Evening, to my Comfort and Rejoicing. Alas, I cannot live in the midst of a
Tumult! I long to enjoy God alone.

Wednesday, May 12. Had a distressing View of the Pride and Enmity and Vileness
of my Heart. -- Afterward had sweet Refreshment in conversing, and worshipping
God, with Christian Friends.

Thursday, May 13. Saw so much of the Wickedness of my Heart, that I longed to
get away from my self. I never before thought, there was so much spiritual
Pride in my Soul: I felt almost pressed to Death with my own Vileness. Oh, what
a Body of Death is there in me! Lord, deliver my Soul. I could not find any
convenient Place for Retirement, and was greatly exercised. -- Rod^ to Hartford
in the Afternoon: had some Refreshment and Comfort in religious Exercises with
Christian Friends; but longed for more Retirement. O the closest Walk with God
is the sweetest Heaven, that can be enjoyed on Earth!

Friday, May 14. Waited on a Council of Ministers convened at Hartford, and
spread before them the Treatment I had met with from the Rector and Tutors of
Yale-College; who thought it advisable to interceed for me with the Rector and
Trustees, and to entreat them to restore me to my former Privileges in College.
The Application which was then made on his Behalf, had not the desired Success.
-- After this, spent some Time in religious Exercises with Christian Friends.

Saturday, May 15. Rode from Hartford to Hebron; was something dejected on the
Road; appeared exceeding vile in my own Eyes, saw much Pride and Stubbornness
in my Heart. Indeed I never saw such a Week before, as this; for I have been
almost ready to die with the View of the Wickedness of my Heart. I could not
have thought I had such a Body of Death in me. Oh that God would deliver my
Soul.

[The three next Days (which he spent at Hebron, Lebanon, and Norwich) he
complains still of Dullness and Desertion, and expresses a Sense of his
Vileness, and longing to hide himself in some Cave or Den of the Earth: But yet
speaks of some Intervals of Comfort and Soul-Refreshment each Day.]

Wednesday, May 19. [At Millington] I was so amazingly deserted this Morning,
that I seemed to feel a Sort of Horror in my Soul. Alas, when God withdraws,
what is there that can afford any Comfort to the Soul!

[Through the eight Days next following, he expresses more Calmness and
Comfort, and considerable Life, Fervency and Sweetness in Religion.]

Friday, May 28. [At New-Haven] I think, I scarce ever felt so calm in my Life;
I rejoiced in Resignation, and giving my self up to God, to be wholly and
entirely devoted to him forever.

[On the three following Days, there was, by the Account he gives, a
Continuance of the same excellent Frame of Mind, last expressed: But it seems
not to be altogether to so great a Degree.]

Tuesday, June 1. Had much of the Presence of God in Family Prayer, and had
some Comfort in Secret. I was greatly refreshed from the Word of God, this
Morning, which appeared exceeding sweet to me: some Things that appeared
mysterious, were opened to me. O that the Kingdom of the dear Savior might
come with Power, and the healing Waters of the Sanctuary spread far and wide
for the Healing of the Nations. -- Came to Ripton; but was very weak: However,
being visited by a Number of young People in the Evening, I prayed with them.

[The remaining Part of this Week, he speaks of being much diverted and
hindered in the Business of Religion, by great Weakness of Body, and necessary
Affairs, that he had to attend, and complains of having but little Power in
Religion; But signifies, that God hereby showed him, He was like a helpless
Infant cast out in the open Field.]

Lord's Day, June 6. -- I feel much deserted: But all this teaches me my
Nothingness and Vileness more than ever.

Monday, June 7. Felt still powerless in secret Prayer. -- Afterward I prayed,
and conversed, with some little Life. God feeds me with Crumbs: Blessed be his
Name for any Thing. I felt a great Desire, that all God's People might know how
mean and little and vile I am; that they might see I am nothing, that so they
may pray for me aright, and not have the least Dependence upon me.

Tuesday, June 8. I enjoyed one sweet and precious Season this Day: I never
felt it so sweet to be nothing, and less than nothing, and to be accounted
nothing.

[The three next Days he complains of Desertion, and Want of fervency in
Religion; but yet his Diary shows that every Day his Heart was engaged in
Religion, as his great and as it were only Business.]

Saturday, June 12. Spent much Time in Prayer, this Morning, and enjoyed much
Sweetness: -- Felt insatiable Longings after God, much of the Day: I wondered
how poor Souls do to live, that have no God. -- The World, with all its
Enjoyments, quite vanished. I see my self very helpless: but I have a blessed
GOD, to go to. I longed exceedingly to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, to
behold his Glory. Oh, my weak weary Soul longs to arrive at my Father's House!

Lord's Day, June 13. Felt something calm and resigned in the public Worship:
At the Sacrament saw my self very vile and worthless. O that I may always lie
low in the Dust. My Soul seemed steadily to go forth after GOD, in longing
Desires to live upon him.

Monday, June 14. Felt something of the Sweetness of Communion with God, and
the constraining Force of his Love: How admirably it captivates the Soul, and
makes all the Desires and Affections to center in GOD! -- I set apart this Day
for secret Fasting and Prayer, to entreat God to direct and bless me with
Regard to the great Work I have in View, of Preaching the Gospel; and that the
Lord would return to me and show me the Light of his Countenance. Had little
Life and Power in the Forenoon: Near the middle of the Afternoon, God enabled
me to wrestle ardently in Intercession for absent Friends: -- But just at
Night, the Lord visited me marvellously in Prayer; I think, my Soul never was
in such an Agony before: I felt no Restraint; for the Treasures of divine Grace
were opened to me: I wrestled for absent Friends, for the Ingathering of Souls,
for Multitudes of poor Souls, and for many that I thought were the Children of
God, personally, in many distant Places. I was in such an Agony, from Sun half
an Hour high, 'till near Dark, that I was all over wet with Sweat; but yet it
seemed to me that I had wasted away the Day, and had done nothing. Oh, my dear
JESUS did sweat Blood for poor Souls! I long for more Compassion toward them.
-- Felt still in a sweet Frame, under a Sense of divine Love and Grace; and
went to Bed in ^uch a Frame, with my Heart set on GOD.

Tuesday, June 15. Had the most ardent Longings after GOD, that ever I felt in
my Life: At Noon, in my secret Retirement, I could do nothing but tell my dear
Lord, in a sweet Calm, that he knew I longed for nothing but Himself, nothing
but Holiness; That He had given me these De^^res, and He only could give me the
Thing desired. I never seemed to be so unhinged from my self, and to be so
wholly devoted to God. My Heart was swallowed up in GOD, most of the Day. In
the Evening I had such a View of the Soul's being as it were enlarged, to
contain more Holiness, that my Soul seemed ready to separate from my Body, and
stretch to obtain it. I then wrestled in an Agony for divine Blessings; had my
Heart drawn out in Prayer for some Christian Friends, beyond what I ever had
before. -- I feel differently now from what ever I did under any sweet
Enjoyments before, more engaged to live to GOD for ever, and less pleased with
my own Frames: I am not satisfied with my Frames, nor feel at all more easy
after such sweet Strugglings than before; for it seems far too little, if I
could always be so. Oh, how short do I fall of my Duty in my sweetest Moments!

[In his Diary for the two next Days, he expresses something of the same Frame,
but in a fat less Degree. Here end the 30 first Pages of the third Volume of
his Diary, which he speaks of in the Beginning of this Volume (as was observed
before) as containing a Specimen of his ordinary Manner of living, through the
whole Space of Time, from the Beginning of those two Volumes that were
destroyed.
]

Friday, June 18. Considering my great Unfitness for the Work of the Ministry,
my present Deadness, and total Inability to do any Thing for the Glory of God
that Way, feeling my self very helpless, and at a great Loss what the Lord
would have me to do, I set apart this Day for Prayer to God, and spent most of
the Day in that Duty; but amazingly deserted, most of the Day: yet I found God
graciously near, once in particular, while I was pleading for more Compassion
for immortal Souls, my Heart seemed to be opened at once, and I was enabled to
cry with great Ardency, for a few Minutes. -- Oh, I was distressed, to think,
that I should offer such dead cold Services to the living God! My Soul seemed
to breathe after Holiness, a Life of constant Devotedness to God. But I am
almost lost sometimes in the pursuit of this Blessedness, and ready to sink,
because I continually fall short and miss of my Desire. O that the Lord would
help me to hold out, yet a little while, 'till the happy Hour of Deliverance
comes.

Saturday, June 19. Felt much disordered; my Spirits were very low: but yet
enjoyed some Freedom and Sweetness in the Duties of Religion. Blessed be God.

Lord's Day, June 20. Spent much Time alone. -- My Soul longed to be holy, and
reached after GOD; but seemed not to obtain my Desire: I hungered and thirsted;
but was not sweetly refreshed and satisfied. My Soul hung on GOD, as my only
Portion. O that I could grew in Grace more abundantly every Day.

[The next Day he speaks of his having Assistance in his Studies, and Power,
Fervency and Comfort in Prayer.]

Tuesday, June 22. In the Morning, spent about two (...) in Prayer and
Meditation, with considerable Delight. Toward Night, felt my Soul go out in
longing Desires after God, in secret Retirement. In the Evening, was sweetly
composed and resigned to God's Will; was enabled to leave my self and all my
Concerns with Him, and to have my whole Dependence upon Him: my secret
Retirement was very refreshing to my Soul: It appeared such a Happiness to have
God for my Portion, that I had rather be any other Creature in this lower
Creation, than not come to the Enjoyment of God: I had rather be a Beast, than
a Man, without God, if I were to live here to Eternity, Lord, endear thy self
more to me.

[In his Diary for the next seven Days, he expresses a variety of Exercises of
Mind: He speaks of great Longings after God and Holiness, and earnest Desires
for the Conversion of others, of Fervency in Prayer, and Power to wrestle with
God, and of Composure, Comfort and Sweetness, from Time to Time; but expresses
a Sense of the vile Abomination of his Heart, and bitterly complains of his
Barrenness, and the pressing Body of Death; and says, he saw clearly, that
whatever he enjoyed, better than Hell, was free Grace: Complains of his being
exceeding low, much below the Character of a Child of God* and is sometimes
very disconsolate and dejected.]

Wednesday, June 30. Spent this Day alone in the Woods, in Fasting and Prayer;
underwent the most dreadful Conflicts in my Soul, that ever I felt, in some
Respects: I saw my self so vile, that I was ready to say, I shall now perish by
the Hand of Saul.. -- I thought, and almost concluded, I had no Power to stand
for the Cause of God, but was almost afraid of the shaking of a Leaf. Spent
almost the whole Day in Prayer, incessantly. I could not bear to think of
Christians showing me any Respect. I almost despaired of doing any Service in
the World: I could not feel any Hope or Comfort, respecting the Heathen, which
used to afford me some Refreshment in the darkest Hours of this Nature. I spent
away the Day in the Bitterness of my Soul. Near Night, I felt a little better;
and afterward enjoyed some Sweetness in secret Prayer.

Thursday, July 1. Had some Sweetness in Prayer, this Morning. -- Felt
exceeding sweetly in secret Prayer to Night, and desired nothing so ardently as
that God should do with me just as he pleased.

Friday, July 2. Felt composed in secret Prayer* in the Morning. -- My Desires
sweetly ascended to God this Day, as I was traveling: and was comfortable in
the Evening. Blessed be God for all my Consolations.

Saturday, July 3. My Heart seemed again to sink. The Disgrace I was laid under
at College, seemed to damp me, as it opens the Mouths of Opposers. I had no
Refuge but in GOD only. Blessed be his Name, that I may go to Him at all Times,
and find him a present Help.

Lord's Day, July 4. Had considerable Assistance. In the Evening, I withdrew
and enjoyed a happy Season in secret Prayer: God was pleased to give me the
Exercise of Faith, and thereby brought the invisible and eternal World near to
my Soul; which appeared sweetly to me. I hoped, that my weary Pilgrimage in the
World would be short, and that it would not be long before I was brought to my
heavenly Home and Father's House: I wa^ sweetly resigned to God's Will, to
tarry his Time, to do (...) Work, and suffer his Pleasure. I felt Thankfulness
to God for all my pressing Desertions of late; for I am persuaded, they have
been made a Means of making me more humble, and much more resigned. I felt
pleased, to be little, to be nothing, and to lie in the Dust. I enjoyed Life
and sweet Consolation in pleading for the dear Children of God, and the Kingdom
of Christ in the World: and my Soul earnestly breathed after Holiness and the
Enjoyment of God. O come Lord JESUS! Come quickly. Amen.

[By his Diary for the remaining Days of this Week, it appears that he enjoyed
considerable Composure and Tranquillity, and had Sweetness and Fervency of
Spirit in Prayer, from Day to Day.]

Lord's Day, July 11. Was deserted and exceeding dejected in the Morning. -- In
the Afternoon, had some Life and Assistance, and felt resigned: I saw my self
exceeding vile.

[On the two next Days he expresses inward Comfort, Resignation, and Strength
in GOD.]

Wednesday, July 14. Felt a Kind of humble resigned Sweetness: Spent a
considerable Time in Secret, giving my self up wholly to the Lord. -- Heard Mr.
Bellamy preach, toward Night: felt very Sweetly, part of the Time: Longed for
nearer access to GOD.

[The four next Days, he expresses considerable Comfort and Fervency of Spirit
in Christian Conversation and Religious Exercises.]

Monday, July 19. My Desires seem especially to be carried out after Weanedness
from the World, perfect Deadness to it, and to be even crucified to all its
Allurements. My Soul longs to fe^l it self more of a Pilgrim and Stranger here
below; that nothing may divert me from pressing through the lonely Desert,
'till I arrive at my Father's House.

Tuesday, July 20. It was sweet, to give away my self to GOD, to be disposed
of* at his Pleasure; and had some feeling Sense of the Sweetness of being a
Pilgrim on Earth.

[The next Day, he expresses himself as determined to be wholly devoted to God;
and it appears by his Diary, that he spent the whole Day in a most diligent
Exercise of Religion, and exceeding comfortably.]

Thursday, July 22. Journeying from Southbury to Ripton, called at a House by
the Way, where being very kindly entertained and refreshed, I was filled with
Amazement and Shame, that God should stir up the Hearts of any to show so much
Kindness to such a dead Dog as I; was made sensible, in some Measure, how
exceeding vile it is, not to be wholly devoted to God. I wondered, that God
would suffer any of his Creatures to feed and sustain me, from Time to Time.

[In his Diary for the six next Days, are expressed various Exercises and
Experiences, such as sweet Composure and Fervency of Spirit in Meditation and
Prayer, Weanedness from the World, being sensibly a Pilgrim and Stranger on the
Earth, Engagedness of Mind to spend every Inch of Time for God, etc.]

Thursday, July, 29. Was examined by the Association met at Danbury, as to my
Learning, and also my Experiences in Religion, and received a License from them
to preach the Gospel of Christ. -- Afterward felt much devoted to God; joined
in Prayer with one of the Ministers, my peculiar Friend, in a convenient Place;
went to Bed resolving to live devoted to God all my Days.

PART III. From the Time of his being licensed to preach, by the Association,
'till he was examined in New York, by the Correspondents or Commissioners of
the SOCIETY in Scotland for propagating Christian Knowledge, and approved and
appointed as their Missionary to the INDIANS.
FRiday, July 30. 1742. Rode from Danbury to Southbury; Preached there from 1
Pet. iv.8. Had much of the comfortable Presence of God in the Exercise: I
seemed to have Power with God in Prayer, and Power to get hold of the Hearts of
the People in Preaching.

Saturday, July 31. Exceeding calm and composed, and was greatly refreshed and
encouraged.

[It appears by his Diary, that he continued in this Sweetness and
Tranquillity, almost through the whole of the next Week.]

Lord's Day, Aug. 8. In the Morning felt comfortably in secret Prayer; my Soul
was refreshed with the Hopes of the Heathens coming home to Christ; was much
resigned to GOD, I thought it was no Matter what became of me. -- Preached both
Parts of the Day at Bethlehem, from Job xiv.14. It was sweet to me to meditate
on Death. In the Evening, felt very comfortably, and cried to God fervently, in
secret Prayer.

[It appears by his Diary, that he continued through the three next Days, engaged
with all his Might in the Business of Religion, and in almost a constant
Enjoyment of the Comforts of it.]

Thursday, August 12. This Morning and last Night was exercised with sore
inward Trials: I had no Power to pray; but seemed shut out from God. I had in a
great Measure lost my Hopes of God's sending me among the Heathen afar off, and
of seeing them flock home to Christ. I saw so much of my hellish Vileness, that
I appeared worse to my self, than any Devil: I wondered, that God would let me
live, and wondered that People did not stone me, much more, that they would
ever hear me preach! It seemed as though I never could nor should preach any
more, yet about 9 or 10 o'Clock, the People came over, and I was forced to
preach: And blessed be God, he gave me his Presence and Spirit in Prayer and
Preaching: So that I was much assisted, and spoke with Power from Job xiv.14.
Some Indians cried out in great Distress, It was in a Place near Kent, in the
Western Borders of Connecticut, where there is a Number of Indians.
and all appeared greatly concerned. After we had prayed and exhorted them to
seek the Lord with Constancy, and hired an English Woman to keep a Kind of
School among them, we came away about one o'Clock, and came to Judea, about 15
or 16 Miles. There God was pleased to visit my Soul with much Comfort. Blessed
be the Lord for all Things I meet with.

[It appears, that the two next Days he had much Comfort, and had his Heart
much engaged in Religion.]

Lord's Day, August 13. Felt much Comfort and Devotedness to God this Day. At
Night, it was refreshing, to get alone with GOD and pour out my Soul. O, who
can conceive of the Sweetness of Communion with the blessed God, but those that
have Experience of it! Glory to God forever, that I may taste Heaven below.

Monday, August 16. Had some Comfort in secret Prayer, in the Morning: -- Felt
sweetly sundry Times in Prayer this Day: But was much perplexed in the Evening
with vain Conversation.

Tuesday, August 17. Exceedingly depressed in Spirit. It cuts and wounds my
Heart, to think how much Self-Exaltation, Spiritual Pride, and Warmth of
Temper, I have formerly had intermingled with my Endeavors to promote God's
Work: And sometimes I long to lie down at the Feet of Opposers, and confess
what a poor imperfect Creature I have been and still am. -- Oh, the Lord
forgive me, and make me for the future wise as a Serpent and harmless as a
Dove. -- Afterward enjoyed considerable Comfort and Delight of Soul.

Wednesday, August 18. Spent most of thi^ Day in Prayer and Reading. -- I see
so much of my own extreme Vileness, that I feel ashamed and guilty before God
and Man: I look, to my self, like the vilest Fellow in the Land: I wonder, that
God stirs up his People to be so kind to me.

Thursday, August 19. This Day, being about to go from Mr. Bellamy's at
Bethlehem, where I had resided some Time, prayed with him, and two or three
other Christian Friends, and gave our selves to God with all our Hearts, to be
his for ever* Eternity looked very near to me, while I was praying. If I never
should see these Christians again in this World, it seemed but a few Moments
before I should meet 'em in another World. -- Parted with them sweetly.

Friday, August 20. I appeared so vile to my self, that I hardly dared to think
of being seen, especially on Account of spiritual Pride. However, to Night, I
enjoyed a sweet Hour alone with God [at Ripton] I was lifted above the Frowns
and Flatteries of this lower World, had a sweet Relish of heavenly Joys, and my
Soul did as it were get into the eternal World, and really taste of Heaven. I
had a sweet Season of Intercession for dear Friends in Christ; and God helped
me to cry fervently for Zion. Blessed be God for this Season.

Saturday, August 21. Was much perplexed, in the Morning. -- Toward Noon
enjoyed more of God in secret, was enabled to see that it was best to throw my
self into the Hands of God, to be disposed of according to his Pleasure, and
rejoiced in such Thoughts. In the Afternoon, rode to New Haven; was much
confused all the Way. -- Just at Night, underwent such a dreadful Conflict, as
I have scarce ever felt. I saw my self exceeding vile and unworthy; so that I
was guilty, and ashamed, that any Body should bestow any Favor on me, or show
me any Respect.

Lord's Day, August 22. In the Morning, continued still in Perplexity. -- In
the Evening, enjoyed that Comfort that seemed to me sufficient to overbalance
all my late Distresses. I saw, that God is the only Soul-satisfying Portion,
and I really found Satisfaction in him: My Soul was much enlarged in sweet
Intercession for my Fellow-Men every where, and for many Christian Friends, in
particular, in distant Places.

Monday, August 23. Had a sweet Season in secret Prayer: The Lord drew near to
my Soul, and filled me with Peace and divine Consolation. O, my Soul tasted the
Sweetness of the upper World; and was sweetly drawn out in Prayer for the
World, that it might come home to Christ! Had much Comfort in the Thoughts and
Hopes of the Ingathering of the Heathen; was greatly assisted in Intercession
for Christian Friends.

[He continued still in the same Frame of Mind the next Day, but in a lesser
Degree.]

Wednesday, August 25. In Family Prayer, God helped me to climb up near Him, so
that I scarce ever got nearer.

[The four next Days, he appears to have been the Subject of Desertion, and of
Comfort and Fervency in Religion, interchangeably, together with a Sense of
Vileness and Unprofitableness.]

Monday, August 30. Felt something comfortably in the Morning; conversed
sweetly with some Friends; was in a serious composed Frame; prayed at a certain
House with some Degree of Sweetness. Afterward, at another House, prayed
privately with a dear Christian Friend or two; and I think, I scarce ever
launched so far into the eternal World, as then; I got so far out on the broad
Ocean, that my Soul with Joy triumphed over all the Evils on the Shores of
Mortality. I think, Time and all its gay Amusements and cruel Disappointments,
never appeared so inconsiderable to me before: I was in a sweet Frame; I saw my
self nothing, and my Soul reached after GOD with intense Desire. O! I saw what
I owed to God, in such a Manner, as I scarce ever did: I knew, I had never
lived a Moment to him, as I should do: Indeed it appeared to me, I had never
done any Thing in Christianity: My Soul longed with a vehement Desire to live
to GOD. -- In the Evening, sung and prayed with a Number of Christians: Felt
the Powers of the World to come* in my Soul, in Prayer. Afterward prayed again
privately; with a dear Christian or two, and found the Presence of God; was
something humbled in my secret Retirement; felt my Ingratitude, because I was
not wholly swallowed up in GOD.

[He was in a sweet Frame great Part of the next Day.]

Wednesday, September. 1. -- Went to Judea, to the Ordination of Mr. Judd. Dear
Mr. Bellamy preached from Matthew. xxiv.46. Blessed is that Servant etc. I felt
very solemn, and very sweetly, most of the Time; had my Thoughts much on that
Time when our Lord will come; that Time refreshed my Soul much; only I was
afraid, I should not be found faithful, because I have so vile a Heart. My
Thoughts were much in Eternity, where I love to dwell. Blessed be God for this
solemn Season. -- Rode home to Night with Mr. Bellamy; felt something sweetly
on the Road; conversed with some Friends 'till it was very late, and then
retired to Rest in a comfortable Frame.

Thursday, September 2. About two in the Afternoon, I preached from John vi.67.
And God assisted me in some comfortable Degree; but more especially in my first
Prayer; my Soul seemed then to launch quite into the eternal World, and to be
as it were separated from this lower World. -- Afterward preached again from
Isaiah v.4. God gave me some Assistance; But I saw my self a poor Worm.

[On Friday, September 3. He complains of having but little Life in the Things
of God, the former Part of the Day, but afterward speaks of Sweetness and
Enlargement.]

Saturday, September 4. Much out of Health, and exceedingly depressed in my
Soul, and was at an awful Distance from God. -- Toward Night, spent some Time
in profitable Thoughts on Romans viii.2. -- Near Night, had a very sweet Season
in Prayer; God enabled me to wrestle ardently for the Advancement of the
Redeemer's Kingdom; pleaded earnestly for my own dear Brother John, that God
would make him more of a Pilgrim and Stranger on the Earth, and fit him for
singular Serviceableness in the World; and my Heart sweetly exulted in the
Lord, in the Thoughts of any Distresses that might alight on him or me, in the
Advancement of Christ's Kingdom. -- 'Twas a sweet and comfortable Hour unto my
Soul, while I was indulged Freedom to plead, not only for my self, but for many
other Souls.

Lord's Day, September 5. Preached all Day: was something strengthened and
assisted in the Afternoon; more especially in the Evening: had a Sense of my
unspeakable Short-comings in all my Duties. I found, alas! that I had never
lived to GOD in my Life.

Monday, September. 6. Was informed, that they only waited for an Opportunity to
apprehend me for Preaching at New Haven lately, that so they might imprison me:
This made me more solemn and serious, and to quit all Hopes of the World's
Friendship: It brought me to a further Sense of my Vileness, and just Desert of
this, and much more, from the Hand of God, though not from the Hand of Man:
Retired into a convenient Place in the Woods, and spread the Matter before God.

Tuesday, September. 7. Had some Relish of divine Things in the Morning.
Afterward felt more barren and melancholy. Rode to New Haven, to a Friend's
House at a Distance from the Town; that I remain undiscovered, and yet have
Opportunity to do Business privately with Friends, which come to Commencement.

Wednesday, September. 8. Felt very sweetly, when I first rose in the Morning. In
Family Prayer, had some Enlargement, but not much Spirituality, 'till Eternity
came up before me and looked near; I found some Sweetness in the Thoughts of
bidding a dying Farewell to this tiresom World: Though sometime ago I reckoned
upon seeing my dear Friends at Commencement, yet being now denied the
Opportunity, for fear of Imprisonment I felt totally resigned, and as contented
to spend this Day alone... the Woods, as I could have done, if I had been
allowed to go to Town. Felt exceedingly weaned from the World to Day. -- In the
Afternoon discoursed something on some divine Things with a dear Christian
Friend, whereby we were both refreshed. Then I prayed, with a sweet Sense of
the Blessedness of Communion with GOD: I think, I scarce ever enjoyed more of
GOD in any one Prayer. O it was a blessed Season indeed to my Soul! I knew not
that ever I saw so much of my own Nothingness in my Life; never wondered so,
that God allowed me to preach his Word; never was so astonished as now. -- This
has been a sweet and comfortable Day to my Soul: Blessed be God. -- Prayed
again with my dear Friend, with something of the divine Presence. -- I long to
be wholly conformed to God, and transformed into his Image.

Thursday, September. 9. Spent much of the Day alone: Enjoyed the Presence of God
in some comfortable Degree: was visited by some dear Friends, and prayed with
them: Wrote sundry Letters to Friends; felt Religion in my Soul while writing:
Enjoyed some sweet Meditations on some Scriptures. -- In the Evening, went very
privately into Town, from the Place of my Residence at the Farms, and conversed
with some dear Friends; ^elt sweetly in singing Hymns with them; and made my
Escape to the Farms again, without being discovered by any Enemies, as I knew
of. Thus the Lord preserves me continually.

Friday, September 10. Longed with intense Desire after GOD: my whole Soul
seemed impatient to be Conformed to him, and to become Holy, as he is Holy. --
In the Afternoon, prayed with a dear Friend privately, and had the Presence of
God with us; our Souls united together to reach after a blessed Immortality, to
be unclothed of the Body of Sin and Death, and to enter the blessed World,
where no unclean Thing enters. O, with what intense Desire did our Souls long
for that blessed Day, that we might be freed from Sin, and forever live to and
in our GOD! -- In the Evening, took leave of that House; But first kneeled down
and prayed; The Lord was of a Truth in the midst of us; 'twas a sweet parting
Season; felt in my self much Sweetness and Affection in the Things of God.
Blessed be God for every such divine Gale of his Spirit, to speed me on in my
Way to the New-Jerusalem! -- Felt some Sweetness afterward, and spent the
Evening in Conversation with Friends, and prayed with some Life, and retired to
Rest very late.

[The five next Days, he appears to have been in an exceeding comfortable,
sweet Frame of Mind, for the most Part, and to have been the Subject of the
like heavenly Exercises as are often expressed in preceding Passages of his
Diary; such as having his Heart much engaged for God, wrestling with God in
Prayer with Power and Ardency, enjoying at Times, sweet Calmness and Composure
of Mind, giving himself up to God to be his forever, with great Complacence of
Mind, being wholly resigned to the Will of God, that God might do with him what
he pleased, longing well to improve Time, having the eternal World as it were
brought nigh, longing after God and Holiness, earnestly desiring a complete
Conformity to him, and wondering how poor Souls do to exist without God.]

Thursday, September 16. At Night, felt exceeding sweetly* Enjoyed much of God
in secret Prayer: Felt an uncommon Resignation, to be and do what God pleased.
Some Days past, I felt great Perplexity on Account of my past Conduct: My
Bitternes^, and Want of Christian Kindness and Love, has been very distressing
to my Soul: The Lord forgive me my unchristian Warmth, and want of a Spirit of
Meekness.

[The next Day, He speaks of much Resignation, Calmness and Peace of Mind, and
near Views of the eternal World.]

Saturday, September. 18. Felt some Compassion for Souls, and mourned I had no
more. I feel much more Kindness, Meekness, Gentleness and Love toward all
Mankind, than ever. I long to be at the Feet of my Enemies and Persecutors.
Enjoyed some Sweetness, in feeling my Soul conformed to Christ Jesus, and given
away to him forever, in Prayer to Day.

[The next Day, he speaks of much Dejection and Discouragement, from an
Apprehension of his own Unfitness ever to do any Good in Preaching; But blesses
God for all Dispensations of Providence and Grace; finding that by all God
weaned him more from the World, and made him more resigned.

The next ten Days, he appears to have been for the most Part under great
Degrees of Melancholy, exceedingly dejected and discouraged; speaks of his
being ready to give up all for gone respecting the Cause of Christ, and
exceedingly longing to die: Yet had some sweet Seasons and Intervals of
Comfort, and special Assistance and Enlargement in the Duties of Religion, and
in performing public Services, and considerable Success in them.]

Thursday, September 30. Still very low in Spirits, and did not know how to
engage in any Work or Business, especially to correct some Disorders among
Christians; felt as though I had no Power to be faithful in that Regard. However
toward Noon, preached from Deuteronomy. viii.2. And was enabled with Freedom to
reprove some Things in Christians Conduct, that I thought very unsuitable and
irregular; insisted near two Hours on this Subject.

[Through this, and the two following Weeks, he passed through a Variety of
Exercises: He was frequently dejected, and felt inward Distresses; and
sometimes sunk into the Depths of Melancholy: At which Turns, he was not
exercised about the State of his Soul, with Regard to the Favor of God and his
Interest in Christ, but about his own sinful Infirmities, and unfitness for
God's Service. His Mind appears sometimes extremely depressed and sunk with a
Sense of inexpressible Vileness. But in the mean Time, he speaks of many
Seasons of Comfort and spiritual Refreshment, wherein his Heart was encouraged
and strengthened in God, and sweetly resigned to his Will, and of some Seasons
of very high Degrees of spiritual Consolation, and of his great Longings after
Holiness and Conformity to God, of his great Fear of offending God, of his
Heart's being sweetly melted in religious Duties, of his longing for the
Advancement of Christ's Kingdom, and of his having at some Times much
Assistance in Preaching, and of remarkable Effects on the Auditory.]

Lord's Day, October. 17. Had a considerable Sense of my Helplesness and
Inability; saw that I must be dependent on GOD for all I want; and especially
when I went to the Place of public Worship: I found I could not speak a Word
for God without his special Help and Assistance: I went into the Assembly
trembling, as I frequently do, under a Sense of my Insufficiency to do any
Thing in the Cause of God, as I ought to do. -- But it pleased God to afford me
much Assistance, and there seemed to be a considerable Effect on the Hearers.
-- In the Evening, I felt a Disposition to praise God for his Goodness to me,
in special, that he had enabled me in some Measure to be faithful; and my Soul
rejoiced to think, that I had thus performed the Work of one Day more, and was
one Day nearer my eternal, and (I trust) my heavenly Home. O that I might be
faithful to the Death, fulfilling as an Hireling my Day, 'till the Shades of
the Evening of Life shall free my Soul from the Toils of the Day! This Evening,
in secret Prayer, I felt exceeding ^olemn, and such longing Desires after
Deliverance from Sin, and after Conformity to God, as melted my Heart. Oh, I
longed to be delivered from this Body of Death! I felt inward pleasing Pain,
that I could not be conformed to God entirely, fully and forever. -- I scarce
ever preach without being first visited with inward Conflicts and sore Trials.
-- Blessed be the Lord for these Trials and Distresses, as they are blessed for
my humbling.

Monday, October. 18. In the Morning, felt some Sweetness, but still pressed
through some Trials of Soul. My Life is a constant Mixture of Consolations and
Conflicts, and will be so 'till arrive at the World of Spirits.

Tuesday, October 19. This Morning and last Night, felt a sweet Longing in my
Soul after Holiness: My Soul seemed so to reach and stretch toward the Mark of
perfect Sanctity, that it was ready to break with Longings.

Wednesday, October 20. Exceeding infirm in Body, exercised with much Pain, and
very lifeless in divine Things. -- Felt a little Sweetness in the Evening.

Thursday, October 21. Had a very deep Sense of the Vanity of the World, most
of the Day; had little more Regard to it, than if I had been to go into
Eternity the next Hour. Through divine Goodness, I felt very serious and solemn.
O, I love to live on the Brink of Eternity, in my Views and Meditations! This
gives me a sweet, awful and reverential Sense and Apprehension of God and
divine Things, when I see my self as it were standing before the Judgment Seat
of Christ.

Friday, October 22. Uncommonly weaned from the World to Day: My Soul delighted
to be a Stranger and Pilgrim on the Earth: I felt a Disposition in me never to
have any Thing to do with this World: The Character given of some of the
ancient People of God, in Heb. xi.13, was very pleasing to me, They confessed
that they were Pilgrims and Strangers on the Earth, by their daily Practice;
and O that I could always do so! -- Spent some considerable Time, in a pleasant
Grove, in Prayer and Meditation. O it is sweet, to be thus weaned from Friends,
and from my self, and dead to the present World, that so I may live wholly to
and upon the blessed GOD! Saw my self little, low, and vile, in my self. -- In
the Afternoon, preached at Bethlehem, from Deuteronomy. viii.2. and felt sweetly both
in Prayer and Preaching: God helped me to speak to the Hearts of dear
Christians. Blessed be the Lord for this Season: I trust, they and I shall
rejoice on this Account to all Eternity. -- Dear Mr. Bellamy came in, while I
was making the first Prayer (being returned Home from a Journey) and after
Meeting, we walked away together, and spent the Evening in sweetly conversing
on divine Things, and praying together, with sweet and tender Love to each
other, and returned to Rest with our Hearts in a serious spiritual Frame.

Saturday, October. 23. Something perplexed and confused. Rode this Day from
Bethlehem to Sinsbury.

Lord's Day, October. 24. Felt so vile and unworthy, that I scarce knew how to
converse with human Creatures.

Monday, October 25. [At Turkey-Hills*] In the Evening enjoyed the divine
Presence in secret Prayer: It was a sweet and comfortable Season to me: My Soul
longed for God, for the living God: Enjoyed a sweet Solemnity of Spirit, and
longing Desire after the Recovery of the divine Image in my Soul: Thou shall I
be satisfied* when I shall awake in GOD's Likeness, and never before.

Tuesday, October 26. [At W^st Suffield,] Underwent the most dreadful
D^stress^^, under a Sense of my own Unworthiness* It seemed to me, I deserved
rather to be driven out of the Place, than to have any Body treat me with any
Kindness, or come to hear me preach. And verily my Spirits were so depressed at
this Time, as well as at many others, that it was impossible I should treat
immortal Souls with Faithfulness: I could not deal closely and faithfully with
them, I felt so infinitely vile in myself. Oh, what Dust and Ashes I am, to
think of preaching the Gospel to others! Indeed, I never can be faithful for
one Moment, but shall certainly d^^b with untempered Mortar, if God don't grant
me special Help. -- In the Evening, I went to the Meeting House, and it looked
to me near as easy for one to rise out of the Grave and preach, as for me.
However, God afforded me some Life and Power, both in Prayer and Sermon: God
was pleased to lift me up, and show me that he could enable me to preach. O the
wonderful Goodness of God to so vile a Sinner! -- Returned to my Quarters; and
enjoyed some Sweetness in Prayer alone, and mourned that I could not live more
to GOD.

Wednesday, October 27. Spent the Forenoon in Prayer and Meditation: Was not a
little concerned about Preaching in the Afternoon: Felt exceedingly without
Strength, and very helpless indeed: Went into the Meeting House, ashamed to see
any come to hear such an unspeakably worthless Wretch. However, God enabled me
to speak with Clearness, Power, and Pungency, But there was some Noise and
Tumult in the Assembly, that I did not well like, and endeavored to bear
public Testimony against, with Moderation and Mildness, through the Current of
my Discourse. -- In the Evening, was enabled to be in some Measure thankful and
devoted to God.

[The Frames and Exercises of his Mind, during the four next Days, were mostly
very Similar to those of the two Days past; excepting Intervals of considerable
Degrees of divine Peace and Consolation.

The Things expressed within the Space of the three following Days are such as
these; some Seasons of Dejection, mourning for being so destitute of the
Exercises of Grace, longing to be delivered from Sin, pressing after more of
God, Seasons of sweet Consolation, precious and intimate Converse with God in
secret Prayer, Sweetness of Christian Conversation etc. -- Within this Time he
rode from Suffield to Eastbury, Hebron, and Lebanon.]

Thursday, November. 4. [At Lebanon.] Saw much of my Nothingness, most of this
Day; but felt concerned that I had no more Sense of my Insufficiency and
Unworthiness. O it is swe^t lying in the Dust! But it is distressing, to feel in
my Soul that Hell of Corruption, which still remains in me. -- In the
Afternoon, had a Sense of the Sweetness of a strict close and constant
Devotedness (...) God, and my Soul was comforted with the Consolations of God;
my Soul felt a pleasing, yet painful Concern, left I should spend some Moments
without God. O may I always live to God. -- In the Evening, was visited by some
Friends, and spent the Time in Prayer and such Conversation as tended to our
Edification. It was a comfortable Season to my Soul: I felt an intense Desire
to spend every Moment for GOD. -- GOD is unspeakably gracious to me
continually: In Times past, he has given me ine^pressible Sweetness in the
Performance of Duty: Frequently my Soul has enjoyed much of GOD; but has been
ready to say, Lord, it is good to be ^ere; and so to indulge Sloth, while I have
lived on the Sweetness of my Feelings. But of late, God (...) been pleased to
keep my Soul hungry, almost continually; so that I have been filled with a Kind
of a pleasing Pain: When I really enjoy GOD, I feel my Desires of him the more
insatiable, and my Thirstings after Holiness the more unquenchable; and the
Lord will not allow me to feel as though I were fully supplied and satisfied, but
keeps me still reaching forward; and I feel barren and empty, as though I could
not live, without more of GOD (...) me; I feel ashamed and guilty before GOD.
Oh, I see, the Law is spiritual, but I am carnal! I don't, I cannot live to GOD.
Oh for Holiness! Oh for more of God in my Soul! Oh this pleasing Pain! It makes
my Soul press after GOD; the Language of it is, Then shall I be satisfied, when
I awake in GOD'^ Likeness (Psalm. xvii. ult.) but never, never before: and
consequently I am engaged to press toward the Mark, Day by Day. O that I may
feel this continual Hunger, and not be retarded, but rather animated by every
Cluster from Canaan, to reach forward in the narrow Way, for the full Enjoyment
and Possession of the heavenly Inheritance. O that I may never loiter in my
heavenly Journey.

[These insatiable Desires after God and Holiness continue^ the two next Days,
with a great Sense of his own exceeding Unworthiness, and the Nothingness of
the Things of this World.]

Lord's Day, November. 7. [At Millington*] It seemed as if such an unholy Wretch
as I never could arrive at that Blessedness, to be holy, as God is holy. At
Noon, I longed for Sanctification, and Conformity to God. Oh, That is THE ALL,
THE ALL! The Lord help me to press after GOD for ever.

Monday, November. 8. Toward Night, enjoyed much Sweetness in secret Prayer, so
that my Soul longed for an Arrival in the heavenly Country, the blessed
Paradise of God. Through divine Goodness, I have scarce seen the Day, for two
Months, but Death has looked so pleasant to me at one Time or other of the Day,
that I could have rejoiced the present should be my last, notwithstanding my
pressing inward Trials and Conflicts: And I trust, the Lord will finally make
me a Conqueror, and more than so; that I shall be able to use that triumphant
Language, O Death, where is thy Sting! And O Grave, where is thy Victo^^!

[Within the next ten Days, the following Things are expressed: Longing and
wrestling to be holy and to live to God; a Desire that every single Thought
might be for God; feeling guilty, that his Thoughts were no more swallowed up
in GOD; sweet Solemnity and Calmness of Mind, Submission and Resignation to
God, great Weanedness from the World, Abasement in the Dust, Grief at some vain
Conversation that was observed, Sweetness* from Time to Time in secret Prayer
and in conversing and praying with Christian Friends. And every Day he appears
to have been greatly engaged in the great Business of Religion and living to
God, without Interruption.]

Friday, November. 19. [At New-^^ven] Received a Letter from the Rev. Mr.
Pemberton of New York, desiring me speedily to go down thither, and consult
about the Indian Affairs in those Parts, and to meet certain Gentlemen there,
that were entrusted with those Affairs: My Mind was instantly seized with
Concern; so I retired with two or three Christian Friends, and prayed; and
indeed it was a sweet Time with me; I was enabled to leave my self and all my
Concerns with God; and taking Leave of Friends, I rode to Ripton, and was
comforted in an Opportunity to see and converse with dear Mr. Mills.

[In the four next following Days, he was sometimes oppressed with the Weight
of that great Affair, about which Mr. Pemberton had written to him; but was
enabled from Time to Time to cast his Burden on the Lord, and to commit himself
and all his Concerns to him: And he continued still in a Sense of the
Excellency of Holiness, and Longings after it, and earnest (...) of the
Advancement of Christ's Kingdom in the World; and had from Time to Time sweet
Comfort in Meditation and Prayer.]

Wednesday, November. 24. Came to New York; felt still much concerned about the
Importance of my Business; put up many earnest Requests to God for his Help and
Direction; was confused with the Noise and Tumult of the City; enjoyed but
little Time alone with God; but my Soul longed after Him.

Thursday, November. 25. Spent much Time in Prayer and Supplication: Was examined
by some Gentlemen, of my Christian Experiences, and my Acquaintance with
Divinity, and some other Studies, in order to my Improvement in that important
Affair of Gospellizing the Heathen: These Gentlemen that examined Mr. Brainerd,
were the Correspondents, in New York, New Jersey and Pennsilvania, of the
honorable Society in Scotland for propagating Christian Knowledge; to whom was
committed the Management of their Affairs in those Parts, and who were now met
at New York.
Was made sensible of my great Ignorance and Unfitness for public Service: I
had the most abasing Thoughts of my self, I think, that ever I had; I thought
my self the worst Wretch that ever lived: it hurt me and pained my very Heart,
that any Body should show me any Respect: Alas! methought, how sadly they are
deceived in me; how miserably would they be disappointed, if they knew my
Inside! Oh my Heart! -- And in this depressed Condition, I was forced to go and
preach to a considerable Assembly, before some grave and learned Ministers; but
felt such a Pressure from a Sense of my Vileness, Ignorance and Unfitness to
appear in Public, that I was almost overcome with it; my Soul was grieved for
the Congregation, that they should sit there to hear such a dead Dog as I
preach; I thought my self infinitely indebted to the People, and longed that
God would reward them with the Rewards of his Grace. -- I spent much of the
Evening alone.

PART IV. From the Time of his Examination by the Correspondents of the Society
for propagating Christian Knowledge, and being appointed their Missionary, to
his first Entrance on the Business of his Mission among the Indians at
Kaunaumeek.
FRiday, November. 26. Had still a Sense of my great Vileness, and endeavored as
much as I could to keep alone. Oh, what a Nothing, what Dust and Ashes am I! --
Enjoyed some Peace and Comfort in spreading my Complaints before the God of all
Grace.

Saturday, November. 27. Committed my Soul to God with some Degree of Comfort;
left New York about nine in the Morning; came away with a distressing Sense
still of my unspeakable Unworthiness. Surely I may well love all my Brethren;
for none of them all is so vile as I; whatever they do outwardly, yet it seems
to me none is conscious of so much Guilt before God. Oh my Leanness, my
Barrenness, my Carnality, and past Bitterness, and Want of a Gospel-Temper!
These Things oppress my Soul. -- Rode from New York, thirty Miles, to White
Plains, and most of the Way continued lifting up my Heart to God for Mercy and
purifying Grace; and spent the Evening much dejected in Spirit.

[The three next Days, he continued in this Frame, in a great Sense of his own
Vileness, with an evident Mixture of Melancholy, in no small Degree; but had
some Intervals of Comfort and God's sensible Presence with him.]

Wednesday, December. 1. My Soul breathed after God, in sweet spiritual and
longing Destres of Conformity to him; my Soul was brought to rest it self and
all on his rich Grace, and felt Strength and Encouragement to do or suffer any
Thing that divine Providence should allot me. -- Rode about twenty Miles, from
Stratfield to Newtown.

[Within the Space of the next nine Days, he went a Journey from Newton to
Haddam, his Native Town; and after staying there some Days, returned again into
the Western Part of Connecticut, and came to Southbury. In his Account of the
Frames and Exercises of his Mind, during this Space of Time, are such Things as
these; Frequent Turns of Dejection, a Sense of his Vileness, Emptiness, and an
unfathomable Abyss of desperate Wickedness in his Heart, attended with a
Conviction that he had never seen but little of it; bitterly mourning over his
Barrenness, being greatly grieved that he could not live to God, to whom he
owed his all ten Thousand Times; crying out, My L^^nness, my L^^nness! A Sense
of the Meetness and Suitableness of his lying in the Dust beneath God's Feet,
Fervency and Ardour in Prayer, longing to live to God, a being afflicted with
some impertinent trifling Conversation that he heard; but enjo^ing Sweetness in
Christian Conversation.]

Saturday, December. 11. Conversed with a dear Friend, to whom I had Thought of
giving a liberal Education, and being at the whole Charge of it, that he might
be fitted for the Gospel Ministry. Mr. Brainerd having now undertaken the
Business of a Missionary to the Indians, and expecting in a little Time to
leave his native Country, to go among the Savages, into the Wilderness, far
distant, and spend the Remainder of his Life among them, and having some Estate
left him by his Father, and thinking he should have no Occasion for it among
them, (though afterward, as he told me, he found himself mistaken) he set
himself to think which Way he might spend it most to the Glory of God; and no
Way presenting to his Thoughts, wherein he could do more Good with it, than by
being at the Charge of educating some young Person for the Ministry, that
appeared to be of good Abilities and well disposed, he pitched upon this Person
here spoken of, to this End: who accordingly was soon put to Learning; and Mr.
Brainerd continued to be at the Charge of his Education from Year to Year, so
long as he (Mr. Brainerd) lived, which was 'till this young Man was carried
through his third Year in College.
I acquainted him with my Thoughts in that Matter, and so left him to consider
of it, 'till I should see him again. Then I rode to Bethlehem, and so came to
Mr. Bellamy's Lodgings; spent the Evening with him in sweet Conversation and
Prayer: We recommended the important Concern before mentioned (of sending my
Friend to College) unto the God of all Grace. Blessed be the Lord for this
Evening's Opportunity together.

Lord's Day, December. 12. I felt, in the Morning, as if I had little or no Power
either to pray or preach, and felt a distressing Need of divine Help: I went to
Meeting trembling: But it pleased God to assist me in Prayer and Sermon: I
think, my Soul scarce ever penetrated so far into the immaterial World, in any
one Prayer that ever I made, nor were my Devotions ever so much refined, and
free from gross Conceptions, and Imaginations framed from beholding material
Objects. I preached with some Sweetness, from Math. vi.33. But seek ye first
etc. And in the Afternoon from Romans xv.30. And now I beseech you, Brethren,
etc. There was much Affection in the Assembly. This has been a sweet Sabbath to
me; and blessed be God, I have Reason to think, that my Religion is become more
refined and spiritual, by Means of my late inward Conflicts. Amen! May I always
be willing that God should use his own Methods with me.

Monday, December. 13. Joined in Prayer with Mr. Bellamy; and found Sweetness and
Composure in parting with him, who went a Journey. Enjoyed some Sweetness
through the Day, and just at Night rode down to Woodbury.

Tuesday, December. 14. Some Perplexity hung on my Mind: was distressed, last
Night and this Morning, for the Interest of Zion, especially on Account of the
false Appearances of Reli^ion, that do but rather breed Confusion, especially
in some Places. I cried to God for Help, to enable me to bear Testimony against
those Things, which instead of promoting, do but hinder the Progress of vital
Piety. In the Afternoon, rode down to Southbur^, and conversed again with my
Friend about the important Affai^ of his following the Work of the Ministry;
and he appeared much inclined to devote himself to that Work, if God should
succeed his Attempts to qualify himself for so great a Work. In the Evening, I
preached from 1 These. iv.8. And endeavored, though with Tenderness, to undermine
false Religion. The Lord gave me some Assistance; but however, I seemed so
vile* I was ashamed to be seen when I came out of the Meeting House.

Wednesday, December. 15. Enjoyed something of God to Day, both in secret and
social Prayer; but was sensible of much Barrenness, and Defect in Duty, as well
as my Inability to help my self for the Time to come, or to perform the Work
and Business I have to do. Afterward, felt much of the Sweetness of Religion,
and the Tenderness of the Gospel-Temper: was far from Bitterness, and found a
dear Love to all Mankind, and was afraid of scarcely any Thing so much as left
some Motion of Anger or Resentment should some Time or other creep into my
Heart. Had some comforting Soul-Refreshing Discourse with some dear Friends,
just as we took our Leave of each other, and supposed it might be likely we
should not meet again 'till we came to the eternal World. It had been
determined by the Commissioners, who employed Mr. Brainerd as a Missionary,
that he should go as soon as might be conveniently, to the Indians living near
the Forks of Delaware River in Pensylvania and the Indians on Susquehanneh
River; which being far off, where he would be exposed to many Hardships and
Dangers* This was the Occasion of his taking Leave of his Friends in this
Manner.
But I doubt not, through Grac^^ but that some of us shall have a happy Meeting
there, and bless God for this Season, as well as many others. Amen.

Thursday, December. 16. Rode down to Darby; had some sweet Thoughts, on the
Road: My Thoughts were very clear, especially on the Essence of our Salvation
by Christ, from those Words, Thou shall call his Name Jesus, etc.

Friday, December. 17. Spent much Time in sweet Conversation on spiritual Things
with dear Mr. Humphreys. Rode to Ripton; spent some Time in Prayer with dear
Christian Friends.

Saturday, December. 18. Spent much Time in Prayer in the Wood^* seemed raised
above the Things of the World: my Soul was strong in the Lord of Hosts: But was
sensible of great Barrenness.

Lord's Day, December. 19. At the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, seemed strong
in the Lord; and the World with all its Frowns and Flatteries in a great
Measure disappeared, so that my Soul had nothing to do with them; and I felt a
Disposition to be wh^^ly and forever the Lord's. -- In the Evening, enjoyed
something of the divine Presence* Had a humbling Sense of my Vileness,
Barrenness, and Sinfulness. Oh, it wounded me, to think of the Misimprovement
of Time! God be merciful to me a Sinner.

Monday, December. 20. Spent this Day in Prayer, Reading, and Writing; and
enjoyed some Assistance, especially in correcting some Thoughts on a certain
Subject; but had a mournful Sense of my Barrenness.

Tuesday, December. 21. Had a Sense of my Insufficiency for any public Work and
Business, as well as to live to God. I rode over to Derby, and preached there:
It pleased God to give me very sweet Assistance and Enlargement, and to enable
me to speak with a soft and tender Power and Energy. -- We had afterward a
comfortable Evening in Singing and Prayer: God enabled me to pray with as much
Spirituality and Sweetness as I have done for some Time: My Mind seemed to be
uncloathed of Sense and Imagination, and was in a Measure let into the
immaterial World of Spirits. This Day and Evening was, I trust, through infinite
Goodness made very profitable to a Number of us, to advance our Souls in
Holiness and Conformity to God: The Glory be to Him forever: Amen. How blessed
it is to grow more and more like God!

Wednesday, December. 22. Enjoyed some Assistance in Preaching at Ripton; but my
Soul mourned within me for my Barrenness.

Thursday, December. 23. Enjoyed, I trust, something of God this Morning in
Secret. Oh how divinely sweet is it to come into the Secret of his Presence,
and abide in his Pavilion! -- Took an affectionate Leave of Friends, not
expecting to see Them again for a very considerable Time, if ever in this
World. Rode with Mr. Humphreys to his House at Derby; spent the Time in sweet
Conversation; my Soul was rferesh'd and sweetly melted with divine Things. Oh
that I was always consecrated to God. Near Night, I rode to New Haven, and
there enjoyed some Sweetness in Prayer and Conversation, with some dear
Christian Friends: My Mind was sweetly serious and composed: But alas, I too
much lost the Sense of divine Things!

[He continued much in the same Frame of Mind, and in like Exercises, the two
following Days.]

Lord's Day, December. 26. Felt much Sweetness and Tenderness in Prayer,
especially my whole Soul seemed to love my worst Enemies, and was enabled to
pray for those that are Strangers and Enemies to God with a great Degree of
Softness and pathetick Fervor. In the Evening, rode from New Haven to
Branford, after I had kneeled down and prayed with a Number of dear Christian
Friends in a very retired Place in the Woods, and so parted.

Monday, December. 27. Enjoyed a precious Season indeed; had a sweet melting
Sense of divine Things, of the pure Spirituality of the Religion of Christ
Jesus. In the Evening, I preached from Matthew. vi.33. with much Freedom, and
sweet Power and Pungency: The Presence of God attended our Meeting. O the
Sweetness, the Tenderness I felt in my Soul! If ever I felt the Temper of
Christ, I had some Sense of it now. Blessed be my God, I have seldom enjoyed a
more comfortable and profitable Day than this. O that I could spend all my Time
for God.

Tuesday, December. 28. Rode from Branford to Haddam. In the Morning, my
Clearness and Sweetness in divine Things continued; but afterward my spiritual
Life sensibly declined.

[The next twelve Days, he was for the most Part extremely dejected,
discouraged and distressed, and was evidently very much under the Power of
Melancholy; and there are from Day to Day most bitter Complaints of exceeding
Vileness, Ignorance, Corruption, an amazing Load of Guilt, Unworthiness to
creep on God's Earth, everlasting Uselesness, Fitness for Nothing, etc. and
sometimes Expressions even of Horror at the Thoughts of ever Preaching again.
But yet in this Time of great Dejection, he speaks of several Intervals of
divine Help and Comfort.

[The three next Days, which were spent at Hebron and the Crank (a Parish in
Lebanon) he had Relief, and enjoyed considerable Comfort.]

Friday, Jan. 14. 1742, 3. My spiritual Conflicts to Day were unspeakably
dreadful, heavier than the Mountains and overflowing Floods: I seemed enclosed,
as it were, in Hell it self! I was deprived of all Sense of God, even of the
Being of a God; and that was my Misery! I had no awful Apprehensions of God as
angry. This was Distress, the nearest akin to the Damned's Torments, that I
ever endured; Their Torment, I am sure, will consist much in a Privation of
God, and consequently of all Good. This taught me the absolute Dependence of a
Creature upon God the Creator, for every Crumb of Happiness it enjoys. Oh! I
feel that if there is no God, though I might live for ever here, and enjoy not
only this, but all other Worlds, I should be ten Thousand Times more miserable
than a Toad! My Soul was in such Anguish I could not eat, but felt as I
supposed a poo^ Wretch would that is just going to the Place of Execution. I
was almost swallowed up with Anguish, when I saw People gathe^ing to (...) to
hear me preach. However, I went in that (...) to the House of God, and ^ound
not (...) Relief in the first Prayer; It seemed as if God would let loose the
People upon me to destroy me, nor were the Tho'ts of Death distressing to me,
like my own Vileness. But afterward, in my Discourse from Deuteronomy. viii.2. God
was pleased to give me some Freedom and Enlargement, some Power and
Spirituality; and I spent the Evening something comfortably.

[The two next Days, his Comfort continues, and he seems to enjoy an almost
continual Sweetness of Soul in the Duties and Exercises of Religion and
Christian Conversation. On Monday was a Return of the Gloom he had been under
the Friday before. He rode to Coventry this Day, and the latter Part of the Day
had more Freedom. On Tuesday he rode to Canterbury, and continued more
comfortable.]

Wednesday, Jan. 19. [At Canterbury.] In the Afternoon preached the Lecture at
the Meeting House: Felt some Tenderness, and something of the Gospel-Temper:
exhorted the People to love one another, and not to set up their own Frames as
a Standard to try all their Brethren by. But was much pressed, most of the Day,
with a Sense of my own Badness, inward Impurity, and unspeakable Corruption.
Spent the Evening in loving Christian Conversation.

Thursday, Jan. 20. Rode to my Brother's House between Norwich and Lebanon; and
preached in the Evening to a Number of People: enjoyed neither Freedom nor
Spirituality; but saw my self exceeding unworthy.

Friday, Jan. 21. Had great inward Conflicts; enjoyed but little Comfort. Went
to see Mr. Williams of Lebanon, and spent several Hours with him; and was
greatly delighted with his serious, deliberate and impartial Way of Discourse
about Religion.

[The next Day, he was much dejected.]

Lord's Day, Jan. 23. Scarce ever felt my self so unfit to exist, as now: I
saw, I was not worthy of a Place among the Indians, where I am going, if God
permit: I thought, I should be ashamed to look them in the Face, and much more
to have any Respect shown me there. Indeed I felt my self banished from the
Earth, as if all Places were too good for such a Wretch as I: I thought I
should be ashamed to go among the very Savages of Africa; I appeared to my self
a Creature fit for Nothing, neither Heaven nor Earth. -- None knows, but those
that feel it, what the Soul endures that is sensibly shut out from the Presence
of God: Alas, it is more bitter than Death!

[On Monday, he rode to Stoningtown, Mr. Fish's Parish. -- On Tuesday he
expresses considerable Degrees of spiritual Comfort and Refreshment.]

Wednesday, Jan. 26. Preached to a pretty large Assembly at Mr. Fish's Meeting
House: Insisted on Humility, and Stedfastness in keeping God's Commands, and
that through Humility we should prefer one another in Love, and not make our own
Frames the Rule by which we judge others. I felt sweetly calm and, full of
brotherly Love; and never more free from Party-Spirit. I hope, some Good will
follow, that Christians will be freed from false Joy, and Party-Zeal, and
censuring one another.

[On Thursday, after considerable Time spent in Prayer and Christian
Conversation, he rode to New-London]

Friday, Jan. 28. Here I found some fallen into some Extravagances, too much
carried away with a false Zeal and Bitterness. Oh, the Want of a Gospel-Temper
is greatly to be lamented. Spent the Evening in conversing with some about some
Points of Conduct in both Ministers and private Christians; but did not agree
with them; God had not taught them with Bri^rs and Thorns to be of a kind
Disposition toward Mankind.

[On Saturday, he rode to East-Haddam, and spent the three following Days
there; and in that Space of Time he speaks of his feeling Weanedness from the
World, a Sense of the Nearness of Eternity, special Assistance in praying for
the Enlargement of Christ's Kingdom, Times of spiritual Comfort etc.]

Wednesday, Feb. 2. Preached my Farewell-Sermon, last Night, at the House of an
aged Man, who had been unable to attend on the public Worship for some Time;
and this Morning, spent the Time in Prayer, almost wherever I went; and having
taken Leave of Friends, I set out on my Journey toward the Indians; though by
the Way I was to spend some Time at East-Hampton on Long Island, by the Leave
of the Commissioners who employed me in the Indian Affair; The Reason why the
Commissioners or Correspondents did not order Mr. Brainerd to go immediately to
the Indians, and enter on his Business as a Missionary to them, was that the
Winter was not judged to be a convenient Season for him first to go out into
the Wilderness, and enter on the Difficulties and Hardships he must there be
exposed to.
and being accompanied by a Messenger from East-Hampton, we traveled to Lyme.
On the Road I felt an uncommon Pressure of Mind: I seemed to struggle hard for
some Pleasure in something here below, and seemed loath to give up all for gone;
but then saw my self evidently throwing my self into all Hardships and
Distresses in my present Undertaking; I thought it would be less difficult to
lie down in the Grave: But yet I chose to go, rather than stay. -- Came to Lyme
that Night.

[He waited the two next Days for a Passage over the Sound, and spent much of
the Time in inward Conflicts and Dejection, but had some Comfort.

On Saturday, he crossed the Sound, landed at Oyster-Ponds on Long Island, and
traveled from thence to East-Hampton. And the seven following Days he spent
there, for the most Part, under extreme Dejection and Gloominess of Mind, with
great Complaints of Darkness, Ignorance etc. Yet his Heart appears to have been
constantly engaged in the great Business of Religion, much concerned for the
Interest of Religion in East-Hampton, and praying and laboring much for it:]

Saturday, Feb. 12. Enjoyed a little more Comfort, was enabled to meditate with
some Composure of Mind; and especially in the Evening, found my Soul more
refreshed in Prayer, than at any Time of late; my Soul seemed to take h^ld of
God's Strength, and was comforted with his Consolations. O how sweet are some
Glimpses of divine Glory! How strengthening and quickening.

Lord's Day, Feb. 13. At Noon, under a great Degree of Discouragement; knew not
how it was possible for me to preach in the Afternoon, was ready to give up all
for gone; but God was pleased to assist me in some Measure. In the Evening, my
Heart was sweetly drawn out after God, and devoted to him.

[The next Day, he had Comfort and Dejection intermingled.]

Tuesday, Feb. 15. Early in the Day I felt some Comfort, afterward I walked
into a neighboring Grove, and felt more as a Stranger on Earth, I think, than
ever before; Dead to any of the Enjoyments of the World as if I had been dead
in a natural Sense. -- In the Evening, had divine Sweetness in secret Duty: God
was then my Portion, and my Soul rose above those deep Waters, into which I
have sunk so low of late: -- My Soul then cried for Zion, and had Sweetness in
so doing.

[This sweet Frame continued the next Morning; but afterward his inward
Distress returned.]

Thursday, Feb. 17. In the Morning, found my self something comfortable, and
rested on God in some Measure. -- Preached this Day at a little Village
belonging to East-Hampton; and God was pleased to give me his gracious Presence
and Assistance, so that I spoke with Freedom, Boldness and some Power. In the
Evening, spent some Time with a dear Christian Friend; felt sweetly serious, as
on the Brink of Eternity; my Soul enjoyed Sweetness in lively Apprehensions of
standing before the glorious God: prayed with my dear Friend with Sweetness,
and discoursed with utmost Solemnity. And truly it was a little Emblem of
Heaven it self. -- I find my Soul is more refined and weaned from a Dependence
on my Frames and spiritual Feelings.

Friday, Feb. 18. Felt something sweetly most of the Day, and found access to
the Throne of Grace. Blessed be the Lord for any Intervals of heavenly Delight
and Composure, while I am engaged in the Field of Battle. O that I might be
serious, solemn and always vigilant, while in an evil World. Had some
Opportunity alone to Day, and found some Freedom in Study. O, I long to live to
GOD.

Saturday, Feb. 19. Was exceeding infirm to Day, greatly troubled with Pain in
my Head and Dizziness, scarce able to sit up. However, enjoyed something of God
in Prayer, and performed some necessary Studies. I exceedingly long to die, and
yet through divine Goodness have felt very willing to live, for two or three
Days past.

Lord's Day, Feb. 20. Was something perplexed on Account of my Carelessness; I
thought I could not be suitably concerned about the important Work of the Day,
and so was restless with my Easiness. -- Was exceeding infirm again to Day; but
the Lord strengthened me, both in the outward and inward Man, so that I
preached with some Life and Spirituality, especially in the Afternoon, wherein
I was enabled to speak closely against selfish Religion, that loves Christ for
his Benefits, but not for himself.

[During the next Fortnight, it appears that he for the most Part enjoyed much
spiritual Peace and Comfort. In his Diary for this Space of Time, are expressed
such Things as these* Mourning over indwelling Sin and Unprofitableness;
Deadness to the World, Longing after God and to live to his Glory,
Heart-melting Desires after his eternal Home, fixed Reliance on God for his
Help, Experience of much divine Assistance both in the private and public
Exercises of Religion; inward Strength and Courage in the Service of God, very
frequent Refreshment, Consolation and divine Sweetness in Meditation, Prayer,
Preaching, and Christian Conversation. And it appears by his Account, that this
Space of Time was filled up with great Diligence and Earnestness in serving
God, in Study, Prayer, Meditation, Preaching, and private Instructing and
Counselling.]

Monday, March 7. This Morning when I arose, I found my Heart go forth after
God in longing Desires of Conformity to him, and in secret Prayer found my self
sweetly quickened and drawn out in Praises to God for all he had done to and
for me, and for all my inward Trials and Distresses of late; my Heart ascribed
Glory, Glory, Glory to the blessed God! And bid Welcome all inward Distress
again, if God saw meet to exercise me with it; Time appeared but an Inch long,
and Eternity at Hand; and I thought I could with Patience and Cheerfulness bear
any Thing for the Cause of God: -- For I saw that a Moment would ^ring me to a
World of Peace and Blessedness; and my Soul, by the Strength of the Lord, rose
far above this lower World, and all the vain Amusements and frightful
Disappointments of it. Afterward, was visited by some Friends, but lost some
Sweetness by the Means. After that, had some sweet Meditation on Genesis v.24. And
Enoch walked with God etc. -- This was a comfortable Day to my Soul.

[The next Day, he seems to have continued in a considerable Degree of
Sweetness and Fervency in Religion.]

Wednesday, March 9. Endeavored to commit my self and all my Concerns to God.
Rode 16 Miles to Mantauk* Mantauk is the Eastern Cape or End of Long Island,
inhabited chiefly by Indians.
and had some inward Sweetness on the Road* but something of Flatness and
Deadness after I came there and had seen the Indians: I withdrew, and
endeavored to pray, but found my self awfully deserted and left, and had an
afflicting Sense of my Vileness and Meanness. However, I went and preached from
Isai. liii.10. Had some Assistance; and, I trust, something of the divine
Presence was among us. In the Evening, again I prayed and exhorted among them,
after having had a Season alone, wherein I was so pressed with the Blackness of
my Nature, that I thought it was not fit for me to speak so much as to Indians.

[The next Day, he returned to East-Hampton; was exceeding infirm in Body
through the remaining Part of this Week; but speaks of Assistance and
Enlargement in Study and religious Exercises, and of inward Sweetness and
breathing after God.]

Lord's Day, March 13. At Noon, I thought it impossible for me to preach, by
Reason of bodily Weakness and inward Deadness; and in the first Prayer, was so
weak that I could hardly stand; but in Sermon, God strenthgned me, so that I
spoke near an Hour and half with sweet Freedom, Clearness, and some tender
Power, from Genesis v.24. And Enoch walked with God. I was sweetly assisted to
insist on a close Walk with God, and to leave This as my parting Advice to
God's People here* that they should walk with God. May the God of all Grace
succeed my poor Labors in this Place!

Monday, March 14. In the Morning, was very busy in Preparation for my Journey,
and was almost continually engaged in ejaculatory Prayer. About ten, took Leave
of the dear People of East-Hampton. My Heart grieved and mourned, and rejoiced
at the same Time, rode near fifty Miles to a Part of Brook-Have^, and lodged
there, and had refreshing Conversation with a Christian Friend.

[In two Days more he reached New York; but complains of much Desertion and
Deadness on the Road. He stayed one Day in New York, and on Friday went to Mr.
Dickinson's at Elisabeth-Town. His Complaints are the same as on the two
preceding Days.]

Saturday, March 19. Was bitterly distressed under a Sense of my Ignorance,
Darkness and Unworthiness; got alone, and poured out my Complaint to God in the
Bitterness of my Soul. -- In the Afternoon, rode to Newark, and had some
Sweetness in Conversation with Mr. Burr, and in Praying together. O! blessed be
God forever and ever, for any enlivening and quickening.

Lord's Day, March 20. Preached in the Fo^enoon: God gave me some Assistance
and Sweetness, and enabled me to speak with real Tenderness, Love and
Impartiality. In the Evening, preached again; and of a Truth God was pleased to
assist a poor Worm. Blessed be God, I was enabled to speak with Life, Power,
and passionate Desire of the Edification of God's People, and with some Power
to Sinners. In the Evening, I felt something spiritual and watchful, lest my
Heart should by any Means be drawn away from God. Oh, when shall I come to that
blessed World, where every Power of my Soul will be ince^^^ntly and eternally
wound up, in heavenly Employments and Enjoyments, to the highest Degree.

[On Monday he went to Woodbridge, where he speaks of his being with a Number
of Ministers; These Ministers were the Correspondents, who now met at
Woodbridge, and gave Mr. Brainerd new Directions, and instead of sending him to
the Indians at the Forks of Delaware, as before intended; they ordered him to
go to a Number of Indians, at Kaunaumeek, a Place in the Province of New York,
in the Woods between Stockbridge and Albany. This Alteration was occasioned by
two Things, viz. 1. Information that the Correspondents had received, of some
Contention now subsisting between the white People and the Indians at Delaware,
concerning their Lands, which they supposed would be a Hindrance at present to
their Entertainment of a Missionary, and to his Success among them. And 2. Some
Intimations they had received from Mr Sergeant, Missionary to the Indians at
Stockbridge, concerning the Indians at Kaunaumeek, and the hopeful Prospect of
Success that a Missionary might have among them.
and the Day following of his traveling part of the Way toward New York, and
lodging at a Tavern: On Wednesday, ^e come to New York: On Thursday, he rode
near 50 Miles, from New York to North-Castle: On Friday, went to D^nb^ry: On
Saturday, to New-Milford: On the Sabbath, he rode 5 or 6 Miles to a Place near
Kent in Connecticut, called Sc^ti^o^^, where dwell a Number of Indians, These
were the same Indians that Mr. Brainerd mentions in his Diary, on Aug. 12. the
preceding Year.
and preached to them: On Monday, being detained by the Rain, he tarried at
Kent: On Tuesday, he rode from Kent to Salsbury; Wednesday, he went to
Sheffield: Thursday, March 31. he went to Mr. Sergeant's at Stockbridge. He was
dejected and very disconsolate, through the main of this Journey from New Jersey
to Stockbridge; and especially on the last Day his Mind was overwhelmed with an
exceeding Gloominess and Melancholy.]

PART V. From his first Beginning to instruct the Indians at Kaunaumeek, to his
ORDINATION.
FRiday, April 1. 1743. I rode to Kaunaumeek, near twenty Miles from
Stockbridge, where the Indians live, with whom I am concerned, and there lodged
on a little Heap of Straw: was greatly exercised with inward Trials and
Distresses all Day; and in the Evening, my Heart was sunk, and I seemed to have
no God to go to. O that God would help me!

[The next five Days, he was for the most Part in a dejected depressed State of
Mind, and sometimes extremely so. He speaks of God's Waves and Billows rolling
over his Soul; and of his being ready sometimes to say, Surely his Mercy is
clean gone for ever, and he will be favorable no more; and says, The Anguish
he endured, was nameless and inconceivable: But at the same Time speaks thus
concerning his Distresses, What God designs by all my Distresses I know not;
but this I know, I deserve them all, and Thousands more. -- He gives an Account
of the Indians kindly receiving him, and being seriously attentive to his
Instructions.]

Friday, April 7. Appeared to my self exceeding ignorant, weak, helpless, and
unworthy, and altogether unequal to my Work. It seemed to me, I should never do
any Service, or have any Success among the Indians. My Soul was weary of my
Life: I longed for Death, beyond Measure. When I thought of any godly Soul
departed, my Soul was ready to envy him his Privilege, thinking, Oh, when will
my Turn come! Must it be Years first! -- But I know, those ardent Desires, at
this and other Times, rose partly for Want of Resignation to God under all
Miseries; and so were but Impatience. Toward Night, I had (I think) the
Exercise of Faith in Prayer, and some Assistance in Writing. O that God would
keep me near him!

Friday, April 8. Was exceedingly pressed under a Sense of my Pride,
Selfishness, Bitterness, and Party-Spirit, in Times past, while I attempted to
promote the Cause of God: It Is vile Nature and dreadful Consequences appeared
in such odious Colors to me, that my very Heart was pained: I saw how poor
Souls stumbled over it into everlasting Destruction, that I was constrained to
make that Prayer in the Bitterness of my Soul, O Lord, deliver me from
Blood-Guiltiness. I saw my Desert of Hell on this Account. My Soul was full of
inward Anguish and Shame before God, that I had spent so much Time in
Conversation tending only to promote a Party-Spirit. Oh, I saw I had not
suitably prized Mortification, Self-denial, Resignation under all Adversities,
Meekness, Love, Candor, and Holiness of Heart and Life: And this Day was
almost wholly spent in such bitter and Soul-afflicting Reflections on my past
Frames and Conduct. -- Of late, I have thought much of having the Kingdom of
Christ advanced in the World; (...) now I saw I had enough to do within my
self. The (...) merciful to me a Sinner, and wash my Soul.

Saturday, April 9. Remained much in the same State as Yesterday; excepting
that the Sense of my Vileness was not so quick and acute.

Lord's Day, April 10. Rose early in the Morning, and walked out, and spent
considerable Time in the Woods, in Prayer and Meditation. Preached to the
Indians, both Forenoon and Afternoon. They behaved soberly in general: two or
three in particular appeared under some religious Concern; with whom I
discoursed privately; and one told me, her Heart had cried, ever since she
heard me preach first.

[The next Day, he complains of much Desertion.]

Tuesday, April 12. Was greatly oppressed with Grief and Shame, reflecting on
my past Conduct, my Bitternes^ and Party-Zeal: I was ashamed, to think that
such a Wretch as I had ever preached! -- Longed to be excused from that Work.
And when my Soul was not in Anguish and keen Distress, I felt Senseless a^ a
Beast before God, and felt a Kind of guilty Amusement with the least Trifles;
which still maintained a Kind of stifled Horror of Conscience, so that I could
not rest any more than a condemned Malefactor.

Wednesday, April 13. My Heart was overwhelmed within me: I verily thought I
was the meanest, vilest, most helpless, guilty, ignorant, benightned Creature
living. And yet I knew what God had done for my Soul, at the same Time: Though
sometimes I was assaulted with damping Doubts and Fears, whether it was
possible for such a Wretch as I to be in a State of Grace.

Thursday, April 14. Remained much in the same State as Yesterday.

Friday, April 15. In the Forenoon, very disconsolate. In the Afternoon,
preached to my People, and was a little encouraged in some Hopes God might
bestow Mercy on their Souls. -- Felt something resigned to God under all
Dispensations of his Providence.

Saturday, April 16. Still in the Depths of Distress. -- In the Afternoon,
preached to my People; but was more discouraged with them than before; feared
that nothing would ever be done for them to any happy Effect. I retired and
poured out my Soul to God for Mercy; but without any sensible Relief. Soon
after, came an Irishman and a Dutch-m^n, with a Design, as they said, to hear
me preach the next Day; but none can tell how I felt, to hear their profane
Talk. Oh, I longed that some dear Christian knew my Distress. I got into a Kind
of Hovel, and there groaned out my Complaint to God; and withal felt more
sensible Gratitude and Thankfulness to God, that he had made me to differ from
these Men, as I knew through Grace he had.

Lord's Day, April 17. In the Morning was again distressed as soon as I waked,
hearing much Talk about the World and the Things of it: Though I perceived the
Men were in some Measure afraid of me; and I discoursed something about
sanctifying the Sabbath, if possible, to solemnize their Minds: But when they
were at a little Distance, they again talked freely about secular Affairs. Oh,
I thought what a Hell it would be, to live with such Men to Eternity! The Lord
gave me some Assistance in Preaching, all Day, and some Resignation, and a
small Degree of Comfort in Prayer at Night.

[He continued in this disconsolate Frame the next Day.]

Tuesday, April 19. In the Morning, enjoyed some sweet Repose and Rest in God;
felt some Strength and Confidence in God; and my Soul was in some Measure
refreshed and comforted. Spent most of the Day in Writing, and had some
Exercise of Grace sensible and comfortable; my Soul seemed lifted above the
deep Waters, wherein it has been so long almost drowned; felt some spiritual
Longings and Breathings of Soul after God; found my self engaged for the
Advancement of Christ's Kingdom in my own Soul, more than in others, more than
in the Heathen World.

Wednesday, April 20. Set apart this Day for Fasting and Prayer, to bow my Soul
before God for the Bestowment of divine Grace; especially that all my spiritual
Afflictions and inward Distresses might be sanctified to my Soul. And
endeavored also to remember the Goodness of God to me in the Year past, this
Day being my Birthday. Having obtained Help of God, I have hitherto lived, and
am now arrived at the Age of 25 Years. My Soul was pained, to think of my
Barrenness and Deadness; that I have lived so little to the Glory of the
eternal God. I spent the Day in the Woods alone, and there poured out my
Complaint to God. O that God would enable me to live to his Glory for the
future.

Thursday, April 21. Spent the Forenoon in Reading and Prayer, and found my
self something engaged; but still much depressed in Spirit under a Sense of my
Vileness and Unfitness for any public Service. In the Afternoon, I visited my
People, and prayed and conversed with some about their Souls Concerns: and
afterward found some Ardour of Soul in secret Prayer. O that I might grow up
into the Likeness of God.

Friday, April 22. Spent the Day in Study, Reading and Prayer; and felt a
little relieved of my Burden, that has been so heavy of late. But still in some
Measure oppressed: had a Sense of Barrenness. Oh, my Leanness testifies against
me! My very Soul abhor^ it self for it is Unlikeness to God, it is Inactivity and
Sluggishness. When I have done all, alas, what an unprofitable Servant am I! My
Soul groans, to see the Hours of the Day roll away, because I don't fill them,
in Spirituality and Heavenly-Mindedness. And yet I long they should speed their
Pace, to hasten me to my eternal Home, where I may fill up all my Moments,
through Eternity, for God and his Glory.

[On Saturday and Lord's Day, his Melancholy again prevailed: He cried out of
his Ignorance, Stupidity, and Senselesness; while yet he seems to have spent
the Time with utmost Diligence, in Study, in Prayer, and in Instructing and
Counselling the Indians. On Monday, he sunk into the deepest Melancholy; so
that he supposed he never spent a Day in such Distress in his Life; not in
Fears of Hell, (which, he says, he had no pressing Fear of) but a distressing
Sense of his own Vileness etc. On Tuesday, he expresses some Relief. Wednesday
he kept as a Day of Fasting and Prayer, but in great Distress. The three Days
next following, his Melancholy continued, but in a lesser Degree, and with
Intervals of Comfort. On the last of these Days he wrote the first Letter added
at the End of this History.
]

Lord's Day, May 1. Was at Stockbridge to Day. In the Forenoon had some Relief
and Assistance; though not so much as usual. In the Afternoon, felt poorly in
Body and Soul; while I was preaching, seemed to be rehearsing idle Tales,
without the least Life, Fervor, Sense, or Comfort: and especially afterward,
at the Sacrament, my Soul was filled with Confusion, and the utmost Anguish
that ever I endured, under the Feeling of my inexpressible Vileness and
Meanness: It was a most bitter and distressing Season to me, by Reason of the
View I had of my own Heart, and the secret Abominations that lurk there: I
though it the Eyes of all in the House were upon me, and I dared not look any One
in the Face; for it verily seemed as if they saw the Vileness of my Heart, and
all the Sins I had ever been guilty of. And if I had been banished from the
Presence of all Mankind* never to be seen any more, or so much as thought of,
still I should have been distressed with Shame; and I should have been ashamed
to see the most barbarous People on Earth, because I was viler, and seemingly
more brutishly ignorant than they. -- I am made to possess the Sins of my Youth.

[The remaining Days of this Week were spent, for the most Part, in inward
Distress and Gloominess. The next Sabbath, he had Encouragement, Assistance and
Comfort; but on Monday ^unk again.]

Tuesday, May 10. Was in the same State, as to my Mind, that I have been in for
some Time, extremely pressed with a Sense of Guilt, Pollution, Blindness: The
Iniquity of my Heels have compassed me about; the Sins of my Youth have been
set in order before me; they have gone over my Head, as an heavy Burden, too
heavy for me to bear, Almost all the Actions of my Life past seem to be covered
over with Sin and Guilt; and those of them that I performed in the most
conscientious Manner, now fill me with Shame and Confusion, that I cannot hold
up my Face. Oh! the Pride, Selfishness, Hypocrisy, Ignorance, Bitterness,
Party-Zeal, and the Want of Love, Candor, Meekness and Gentleness, that have
attended my Attempts to promote Religion and Virtue; and this when I have
Reason to hope I had real Assistance from above, and some sweet Intercourse
with Heaven! But alas, what corrupt Mixtures attended my best Duties!

[The next seven Days, his Gloom and Distress continued, for the most Part: but
he had some Turns of Relief and spiritual Comfort. He gives an Account of his
spending Part of this Time in hard Labor, to build himself a little Cottage to
live in amongst the Indians, in which he might be by himself; having (it seems)
hitherto lived with a poor Scotch-Man, as he observes in the Letter just now
referred to in the Margin; and afterward, before his own House was habitable,
lived in a Wigwam among the Indians.]

Wednesday, May 18. My Circumstances are such that I have no Comfort, of any
Kind, but what I have in God. I live in the most lonesom Wilderness; have but
one single Person to Converse with, that can speak English: This Person was Mr.
Brainerd's Interpreter; who was an ingenious young Indian belonging to
Stockbridge, whose Name was John Wauwaumpequunnaunt, who had been instructed in
the Christian Religion by Mr. Sergeant; and had lived with the Rev. Mr.
Williams of Long-Meadow, and had been further instructed by him, at the Charge
of Mr. Hollis of London; and understood both English and Indian very well, and
wrote a good Hand.
Most of the Talk I hear, is either Highland-Scotch or Indian. I have no
Fellow-Christian to whom I might unbosom my self, and lay open my spiritual
Sorrows, and with whom I might take sweet Counsel in Conversation about
heavenly Things, and join in social Prayer. I live poorly with Regard to the
Comforts of Life: most of my Diet consists of boiled Corn, Hasty-Pudding, etc.
I lodge on a Bundle of Straw, and my Labor is hard and extremely difficult;
and I have little Appearance of Success, to comfort me. The Indians Affairs are
very difficult; having no Land to live on, but what the Dutch People lay Claim
to, and threaten to drive them off from; they have no Regard to the Souls of
the poor Indians; and, by what I can learn, they hate me, because I come to
preach to 'em. -- But that which makes all my Difficulties grievous to be born,
is, that God hides his Face from me.

Thursday, May 19. Spent most of this Day in close Studies: But was sometimes
so distressed, that I could think of nothing but my spiritual Blindness,
Ignorance, Pride, and Misery. Oh, I have Reason to make that Prayer, Lord,
forgive my Sins of Youth, and former Trespasses!

Friday, May 20. Was much perplexed, some Part of the Day; but toward Night,
had some comfortable Meditations on Isai. xl.1. And enjoyed some Sweetness in
Prayer. Afterward my Soul rose so far above the deep Waters, that I dared to
rejoice in God: I saw, there was sufficient Matter of Consolation in the
blessed God.

[The next nine Days, his Burdens were for the most (...) alleviated; but with
Variety: at some Times having considerable Consolation, and at other Times more
depressed. The next Day, Monday, May 30. He set out on a Journey to New Jersey,
to consult the Commissioners that employed him about the Affairs of his
Mission: His Business with the Commissioners now was, to obtain Orders from
them to set up a School among the Indians at Kaunaumeek, and that his
Interpreter might be appointed the Schoolmaster: Which was accordingly done.
performed his Journey thither in four Days; and arrived at Mr. Burr's in
Newark on Thursday. I^ great Part of his Journey, he was in the Depths of
Melancholy, under like Distresses with those already mentioned. On Friday, he
rode to Elisabeth-Town; and on Saturday to New York; and from thence on his way
Homewards as far as White-Plains; where he spent the Sabbath, and had
considerable Degrees of divine Consolation and Assistance in public Services.
On Monday, he rode about 60 Miles to New Haven. There he attempted a
Reconciliation with the Authority of the College; and spent this Week in
visiting his Friends in those Parts, and in his Journey Homewards, 'till
Saturday, in a pretty comfortable Frame of Mind. On Saturday, in his Way from
Stockbridge to K^^naumeek, he was lost in the Woods, and lay all Night in the
open Air; but happily found his Way in the Morning, and came to his Indians on
Lord's Day, June 12. And had greater Assistance in Preaching among them than
ever before, since his first coming among them.]

[From this Time forward he was the Subject of various Frames and Exercises of
Mind: But it seems, in the general, to have been with him much after the same
Manner as it had been hitherto from his first coming to Kaunaumeek, 'till he
got into his own House (a little Hut, that he made chiefly with his own Hands,
with long and hard Labor) which was near seven Weeks from this Time. Great
Part of this Space of Time, he was dejected and depressed with Melancholy, and
sometimes very extremely: his Melancholy operating in like Manner as has been
related of Times past. How it was with him in those dark Seasons, he himself
further describes in his Diary for July 2. in the following Manner. My Soul is,
and has for a long Time been in a piteous Condition, wading through a Series of
Sorrows, of various Kinds. I have been so crushed down sometimes with a Sense
of my Meanness and infinite Unworthiness, that I have been ashamed that any
even the meanest of my Fellow Creatures should so much as spend a Thought about
me, and have wished sometimes while I have traveled among the thick Brokes, as
one of them, to drop into everlasting Oblivion. In this Case, sometimes, I have
almost resolved never again to see any of my Acquaintance; and really thought,
I could not do it and bold up my Face; and have longed for the remotest Region,
for a Retreat from all my Friends, that I might not be seen or heard of any
more. -- Sometimes the Consideration of my Ignorance has been a Means of my
great Distress and Anxiety. And especially my Soul has been in Anguish with
Fear, Shame, and Guilt, that ever I had preached, or had any Thought that Way.
-- Sometimes my Soul has been in Distress on feeling some particular
Corruptions rise and swell like a mighty Torrent, with present Violence; having
at the same Time, ten Thousand former Sins and Follie^ presented to View, in
all their Blackness and Aggravations. -- And these attended with such external
Circumstances as mine at present are; destitute of most of the Conveniences of
Life, and I may say, of all the Pleasures of it; without a Friend to
communicate any of my Sorrows to, and sometimes without any Place of
Retirement, where I may unburden my Soul before God, which has greatly
contributed to my Distress. -- Of late, more especially, my great Difficulty
has been a Sort of Carelessness, a Kind of regardless Temper of Mind, whence I
have been disposed to Indolence and Trifling: And this Temper of Mind has
constantly been attended with Guilt and Shame; so that sometimes I have been in
a Kind of Horror, to find my self so unlike the blessed God; and have thought I
grew worse under all my Trials; and nothing has cut and wounded my Soul more
than This. Oh, if I am one of God's chosen, as I trust through infinite Grace I
am, I find of a Truth, that the righteous are scarcely saved!

It Is apparen^, that one main Occasion of that distressing Gloominess of Mind
which he was so much exercised with at Kaunaumeek, was Reflection on his past
Errors and misguided Zeal at College, in the Beginning of the late religious
Commotions in the Land. And therefore he repeated his Endeavors this Year for
Reconciliation with the Governors of the College, whom he had in that Time
offended. Although he had been at New Haven in June, this Year, and had attempted
a Reconciliation, as has been mentioned already, yet in the Beginning of July,
^e made another Journey thither, and renewed his Attempt, but still in vain.

Although he was much dejected, great Part of that Space of Time that I am now
speaking of, yet there were many Intermissions of his Melancholy, and some
Seasons of Comfort, sweet Tranquillity and Resignation of Mind, and frequent
special Assistance in public Services, that he speaks of in his Diary. The
Manner of his Relief from his Sorrow, once in particular, is worthy to be
mentioned in his own Words, in his Diary for July 25, which are as follows: Had
little or no Resolution for a Life of Holiness; was ready almost to renounce my
Hopes of living to God. And Oh how dark it looked, to think of being unholy for
ever! This I could not endure. The Cry of my Soul was that, Psalm. lxv.3.
Iniquities prevail against me. But was in some Measure relieved by a
comfortable Meditation on God's Eternity, That he never had a Beginning, etc.
Whence I was le^ to admire his Greatness and Power etc. in such a Manner, that
I stood still and praised the Lord for his own Glories and Perfections; though I
was (and if I should forever be) an unholy Creature, my Soul was comforted to
apprehend an eternal, infinite, powerful, Holy GOD.]

Saturday, July 30. Just at Night, moved into my own House, and lodged there
that Night; found it much better spending the Time alone in my own House, than
in the Wigwam where I was before.

Lord's Day, July 31. Felt more comfortably than some Days past. -- Blessed be
the Lord, that has now given me a Place of Retirement. -- O that I might find
God in it, and that he would dwell with me for ever.

Monday, Aug. 1. Was still busy in further Labors on my House. -- Felt a
little of the Sweetness of Religion, and thought it was worth the while to
follow after God through a Thousand Snares, Deserts, and Death it self. O that I
might always follow after Holiness, that I may be fully conformed to God. Had
some Degree of Sweetness, in secret Prayer, though I had much Sorrow.

Tuesday, Aug. 2. Was still laboring to make my self more comfortable with
Regard to my House and Lodging. Labored under spiritual Anxiety; It seemed to
me, I deserved to be kicked out of the World; yet found some Comfort in
committing my Cause to God. It Is good for me to be afflicted, that I may die
wholly to this World and all that is in it.

Wednesday, Aug. 3. Spent most of the Day in Writing. Enjoyed some Sense of
Religion. Through divine Goodness I am now uninterruptedly alone; and find my
Retirement comfortable. I have enjoyed more Sense of divine Things within a few
Days last past, than for some Time before. I longed after Holiness, Humility
and Meekness: O that God would enable me to pass the Time of my sojourning here
in his Fear, and always live to him.

Thursday, Aug. 4. Was enabled to pray much, through the whole Day; and through
divine Goodness found some Intenseness of Soul in the Duty, as I used to do,
and some Ability to persevere in my Supplications: Had some Apprehensions of
divine Things, that were engaging, and that gave me some Courage and
Resolution. It Is good, I find, to persevere in Attempts to pray, if I cannot
pray with Perseverance, i. e. continue long in my Addresses to the divine
Being. I have generally found, that the more I do in secret Prayer, the more I
have delighted to do, and have enjoyed more of a Spirit of Prayer: and
frequently have found the contrary, when with Journeying or otherwise, I have
been much deprived of Retirement. A seasonable steady Performance of secret
Duties in their proper Hours, and a careful Improvement of all Time, filling up
every Hour with some profitable Labor, either of Heart, Head, or Hands, are
excellent Means of spiritual Peace and Boldness before God. Christ indeed is
our Peace, and by him we have Boldness of Access to God; but a good Conscience,
void of Offense, is an excellent Preparation for an Approach into the divine
Presence. There is Difference between Self-Confidence and a Self-righteous
pleasing ourselves (with our own Duties, Seize, and spiritual Enjoyments)
which godly Souls sometimes are guilty of, and that holy Confidence arising
from the Testimony of a good Conscience, which good Hezekiah had when he says,
Remember, O Lord, I beseech Thee, how I have walked before thee in Truth and
with a perfect Heart. Then (says the holy Psalmist) shall I not be ashamed,
when I have Respect to all thy Commandments. Filling up our Time with and for
GOD is the Way to rise up and lie down in Peace.

[The next eight Days, he continued for the most Part in a very comfortable
Frame, having his Mind fixed and sweetly engaged in Religion; and more than
once blesses God, that he had given him a little Cottage, where he might live
alone, and enjoy a happy Retirement, free from Noise and Disturbance, and could
at any Hour of the Day lay aside all Studies, and spend Time in lifting up his
Soul to God for spiritual Blessings.]

Saturday, Aug. 13. Was enabled in secret Prayer to raise my Soul to God, with
Desire and Delight. It was indeed a blessed Season to my Soul: I found the
Comfort of being a Christian: I counted the Sufferings of the present Life not
worthy to be compared with the Glory of divine Enjoyments, even in the World.
All my past Sorrows seemed kindly to disappear, and I remembered no more the
Sorrow, for Joy -- O, how kindly* and with what a filial Tenderness, the Soul
hangs on, and confides in the Rock of Ages, at such a Season, that he will
never (...) it nor forsake it, that he will cause all Things to work together
for its Good, etc! I longed, that others should know how good a God the Lord
is. My Soul was full of Tenderness and Love, even to the most inveterate of my
Enemies: I longed they should share in the same Mercy. I loved and longed that
God should do just as he pleased, with me and every Thing else. I felt
exceeding serious, calm and peaceful, and encouraged to press after Holiness as
long as I live, whatever Difficulties and Trials may be in my Way. May the Lord
always help me so to do: Amen, and Amen!

Lord's Day, Aug. 14. I had much more Freedom in public, than in private. God
enabled me to speak with some feeling Sense of divine Things; but perceived no
considerable Effect.

Monday, Aug. 15. Spent most of the Day in Labor to procure something to keep
my Horse on in the Winter. -- Enjoyed not much Sweetness in the Morning: Was
very weak in Body, through the Day, and though it this frail Body would soon drop
into the Dust: Had some very realizing Apprehensions of a speedy Entrance into
another World. And in this weak State of Body, was not a little distressed for
want of suitable Food. Had no Bread, nor could I get any. I am forced to go or
send ten or fifteen Miles for all the Bread I eat; and sometimes it is moldy
and sour, before I eat it, if I get any considerable Quantity: And then again
I have none for some Days together, for want of an Opportunity to send for it,
and cannot find my Horse in the Woods to go my self; and this was my Case now:
But through divine Goodness I had some Indian Meal, of which I made little Cakes,
and fried them. Yet felt contented with my Circumstances, and sweetly resigned
to God. In Prayer I enjoyed great Freedom; and blessed God as much for my
present Circumstances, as if I had been a King; and thought, I found a
Disposition to be contented in any Circumstances: Blessed be God!

[The rest of this Week, he was exceeding weak in Body, and much exercised with
Pain; and yet obliged from Day to Day to labor hard, to procure Fodder for his
Horse; excepting some Part of the Time he was so very ill, that he was neither
able to work nor study: But speaks of Longings after Holiness and perfect
Conformity to God; complains of enjoying but little of God; yet says, That
little was better to him, than all the World besides. In his Diary for
Saturday, he says, He was something Melancholy and sorrowful in Mind; and adds,
I never feel comfortably, but when I find my Soul going forth after God: If I
cannot be holy, I must necessarily be miserable for ever.]

Lord's Day, Aug. 21. Was much straightened in the Forenoon-Exercise: my Thoughts
seemed to be all scattered to the Ends of the Earth. At Noon, I fell^down
before the Lord, and groaned under my Vileness, Barrenness, Deadness, and felt
as if I was guilty of Soul-Murther, in speaking to immortal Souls in such a
Manner as I had then done. -- In the Afternoon, God was pleased to give me some
Assistance, and I was enabled to set before my Hearers the Nature and Necessity
of true Repentance, etc. Afterward had some small Degree of Thankfulness. Was
very ill and full of Pain in the Evening; and my Soul mourned that I had spent
so much Time to so little Profit.

Monday, Aug. 22. Spent most of the Day in Study; and found my bodily Strength
in a Measure restored. Had some intense and passionate Breathings of Soul after
Holiness, and very clear Manifestations of my utter Inability to procure, or
work it in my self; it is wholly owing to the Power of God. O, with what
Tenderness the Love and Desire of Holiness fills the Soul! I wanted to wing out
of my self, to GOD; or rather to get a Conformi^^ to Him: But alas, I cannot add
to my Stature in Grace one Cubit. However, my Soul can never leave striving for
it; or at least groaning, that it cannot strive for it, and obtain more Purity
of Heart. -- At Night, I spent some Time in instructing my poor People: Oh,
that God would pity their Souls.

Tuesday, Aug. 23. Studied in the Forenoon, and enjoyed some Freedom. In the
Afternoon, labored Abroad: Endeavored to pray much; but found not much
Sweetness or Intenseness of Mind. Toward Night, was very weary, and tired of
this World of Sorrow: The Thoughts of Death and Immortality appeared very
desirable, and even refreshed my Soul. Those Lines turned in my Mind with
Pleasure,

Come, Death, shake Hands; I Will kiss thy Bands:
It Is Happiness for me to die.
What! Do thou think, that I will shrink?
I Will go to Immortality.
In Evening-Prayer, God was pleased to draw near my Soul, though very sinful and
unworthy: Was enabled to wrestle with God, and to persevere in my Requests for
Grace: I poured out my Soul for all the World, Friends and Enemies. My Soul was
concerned, not so much for Souls as such, but rather for Christ's Kingdom, that
it might appear in the World, that God might be known to be God, in the whole
Earth. And Oh, my Soul abhorred the very Thought of a Party in Religion! Let the
Truth of God appear, wherever it is; and God have the Glory for ever, Amen.
This was indeed a comfortable Season: I though it I had some small Taste of, and
real Relish for the Enjoyments and Employments of the upper World. O that my
Soul was more attemper'd to it.

Wednesday, Aug. 24. Spent some Time, in the Morning, in Study and Prayer.
Afterward, was engaged in some necessary Business Abroad. Toward Night, found
a little Time for some particular Studies. I thought, if God should say, Cease
making any Provision for this Life, for you shall in a few Days go out of Time
into Eternity, my Soul would leap for Joy. O that I may both desire to be
dissolved to be with Christ, and likewise wait patiently all the Days of my
appointed Time 'till my Change come. -- But alas, I am very unfit for the
Business and Blessedness of Heaven. -- O for more Holiness.

Thursday, Aug. 25. Part of the Day, engaged in Studies; and part, in Labor
Abroad. I find, it is impossible to enjoy Peace and Tranquillity of Mind without
a careful Improvement of Time. This is really an Imitation of God and Christ
Jesus: My Father works hitherto, and I work, says our Lord. But still, if we
would be like God, we must see that we fill up our Time for him. -- I daily
long to dwell in perfect Light and Love. In the mean Time my Soul mourns, that
I make so little Progress in Grace and Preparation for the World of
Blessedness: I see and know that I am a very barren Tree in God's Vineyard, and
that he might justly say, Cut it down etc. O that God would make me more lively
and vigorous in Grace, for his own Glory! Amen.

[The two next Days, he was much engaged in some necessary Labors, in which he
extremely spent himself. He seems, these Days to have had a great Sense of the
Vanity of the World; and continued Longings after Holiness, and more Fervency
of Spirit in the Service of God.]

Lord's Day, Aug. 28. Was much perplexed with some irrel^gious Dutchmen. All
their Discourse turned upon the Things of the World: which was no small
Exercise to my Mind. Oh, what a Hell it would be to spend an Eternity with such
Men! Well might David say, I beheld the Transgressors, and was grieved. -- But,
adored be God, Heaven is a Place, into which no unclean Thing enters. Oh, I
long for the Holiness of that World! Lord, prepare me therefore.

[The next Day, he set out on a Journey to New York. Was something dejected,
the two first Days of his Journey; but yet seems to have enjoyed some Degrees
of the sensible Presence of God.]

Wednesday, Aug. 31. Rode down to Bethlehem: Was in a sweet, serious, and, I
hope, Christian Frame, (...) I came there; Eternal Things engrossed all my
Thoughts; and I longed to be in the World of Spirits. O how happy is it, to
have all our Thoughts swallowed up in that World; to feel one's self a serious
considerate Stranger in this World, diligently seeking a Road through it, the
best, the sure Road to the heavenly Jerusalem!

Thursday, September. 1. Rode to Danbury. Was more dull and dejected in Spirit,
than Yesterday. Indeed, I always feel comfortably, when God realizes Death and
the Things of another World to my Mind: Whenever my Mind is taken off from the
Things of this World, and set on GOD, my Soul is then at Rest.

[He went forward on his Journey, and came to New York on the next Monday. And
after tarrying there two or three Days, set out from the City toward
New Haven, intending to be there at the Commencement; and on Friday came to
Horse-N^ck. In the mean Time, he complains much of Dullness, and Want of Fervor
in Religion: But yet from Time to Time, speaks of his enjoying spiritual Warmth
and Sweetness in Conversation with Christian Friends, Assistance in public
Services, etc.]

Saturday, Sept. 10. Rode six Miles to Stanwich, and preached to a considerable
Assembly of People. Had some Assistance and Freedom, especially toward the
Close. Endeavored much afterward, in private Conversation, to establish
Holiness, Humility, Meekness etc. as the Essence of true Religion; and to
moderate some noisy Sort of Persons, that appeared to me to be acted by unseen
spiritual Pride. Alas, what Extremes Men incline to run into! -- Returned to
Horse-Neck, and felt some Seriousne^^ and sweet Solemnity in the Evening.

Lord's Day, Sept. 11. In the Afternoon, preached from Titus iii.8. I think,
God never helped me more in painting out true Religion, and in detecting
clearly, and tenderly discountenancing false Appearances of Religion, Wildfire
Party-Zeal, spiritual Pride, etc. as well as a confident dogmatical Spirit, and
it is Spring, viz. Ignorance of the Heart. -- In the Evening, took much Pains in
private Conversation to suppress some Confusions, that I perceived were amongst
that People.

Monday, Sept. 12. Rode to Mr. Mills's at Ripton. Had some perplexing Hours;
but was some Part of the Day very comfortable. It Is through great Trials, I
see, that we must enter the Gates of Paradise. If my Soul could but be Holy,
that God might not be dishonored, methinks, I could bear Sorrows.

Tuesday, Sept. 13. Rode to New Haven. Was sometimes dejected; not in the
sweetest Frame. Lodged at ****. Had some profitable Christian Conversation,
etc. -- I find, though my inward Trials are great, and a Life of Soli^ude gives
'em greater Advantage to settle and penetrat^ to the very inmost Recesses of
the Soul; yet it is better to be alone, than encumbered with Noise and Tumult. I
find it very difficult maintaining any Sense of divine Things, while removing
from Place to Place, diverted with new Objects, and filled with Care and
Business. A settled steady Business is best adapted to a Life of Strict
Religion.

Wednesday, Sept. 14. This Day I ought to have taken my Degree; This being
Commencement Day.
but God sees fit to deny it me. And though I was greatly afraid of being
overwhelmed with Perplexity and Confusion, when I should see my Class-Mates
take theirs; (...) in the very Season of it, God enabled me with Calmness and
Resignation to say, The Will of the Lord be done. Indeed, through divine
Goodness, I have scarcely felt my Mind so calm, sedate, and comfortable for
some Time. I have long feared this Season, and expected my Humility, Meekness,
Patience and Resignation would be much tried His Trial was the greater, in
that, had it not been for the Displeasure of the Governors of the College, he
would not only on that Day have shared with his Class-Mates in the public
Honors which they then received, but would on that Occasion have appeared at
the Head of that Class* which, if he had been with them, would have been the
most numerous of any that ever had been graduated at that College.
: But found much more Pleasure and divine Comfort, than I expected. -- Felt
spiritually Serious, tender and Affectionate in private Prayer with a dear
Christian Friend to Day.

Thursday, Sept. 15. Had some Satisfaction in hearing the Ministers discourse
etc. It Is always a Comfort to me, to hear religious and spiritual Discourse. O
that Ministers and People were more spiritual and devoted to God. -- Toward
Night, with the Advice of Christian Friends, I offered the following
Reflections in Writing, to the Rector and Trustees of the College (which are
for Substance the same that I had freely offered to the Rector before, and
entreated him to accept) and this I did that if possible I might cut off all
Occasion of Stumbling and Offense, from those that seek Occasion. What I
offered, is as follows.

Whereas I have said before several Persons, concerning Mr. Whittelsey, one of
the Tutors of Yale College, that I did not believe he had any more Grace, than
the Chair I then ^^an'd upon; I humbly confess, that herein I have sinned
against God, and acted contrary to the Rules of his Word, and have injured Mr.
Whittelsey. I had no Right to make thus free with his Character; and had no
just Reason to say as I did concerning him. My Fault herein was the more
Aggravated, in that I said this concerning One that was so much my Superior,
and one that I was obliged to treat with special Respect and Honor, by Reason
of the Relation I stood in to him in the College. Such a Manner of Behavior, I
confess, did not become a Christian; it was taking too much upon me, and did
not savor of that humble Respect, that I ought to have expressed toward Mr.
Whittesey. I have long since been convinced of the Falseness of those
Apprehensions, by which I then justified such a Conduct. I have often reflected
on this Act with Grief; I hope, on Account of the Sin of it: And am willing to
lie low, and be abased before God and Man for it. And humbly ask the
Forgiveness of the Governors of the College, and of the whole Society; but of
Mr. Whittelsey in particular. And whereas I have been accused by one Person of
saying concerning the Rev. Rector of Yale-College, that I wondered he did not
expect to drop down dead for fin^^g the Scholars that followed Mr. Tennent to
Milford; I seriously profess, that I don't remember my saying any Thing to this
Purpose. But if I did, which I am not certain I did not, I utterly condemn it,
and detest all such Kind of Behavior; and especially in an Undergraduate
toward the Rector. And I now appear, to judge and condemn my self for going
once to the separate Meeting in New Haven, a little before I was expelled, though
the Rector had refused to give me Leave. For this I humbly ask the Rector's
Forgiveness. And whether the Governors of the College shall ever see Cause to
remove the Academical Censure I lie under, or no, or to admit me to the
Privileges I desire; yet I am willing to appear, if they think fit, openly to
own, and to humble my self for those Things I have herein confessed.

God has made me willing to do any Thing, that I can do, consistent with Truth,
for the Sake of Peace, and that I might not be a Stumbling Block and Offense to
others. For this Reason I can cheerfully forego, and give up what I verily
believe, after the most mature and impartial Search, is my Right, in some
Instances. God has given me that Disposition, that if this were the Case, that
a Man has done me an hundred Injuries, and I (though ever so much provoked to it)
have done Him one, I feel disposed, and heartily willing humbly to confess my
Fault to him, and on my Knees to ask Forgiveness of him; though at the same Time
he should justify himself in all the Injuries he has done me, and should only
make Use of my humble Confession to blacken my Character the more, and
represent me as the only Person guilty, etc. Yea, though he should as it were
insult me, and say He knew all this before, and that I was making work for
Repentance, etc. Though what I said concerning Mr. Whittelsey was only spoken in
private, to a Friend or two; and being partly overheard, was related to the
Rector, and by him extorted from my Friends; yet, seeing it was divulged and
made public, I was willing to confess my Fault therein publicly. -- But I
trust, God will plead my (...)* I was witness to the very Christian Spirit Mr.
Brainerd showed at that Time, being then at New Haven, and being One that he
saw fit to consult on that Occasion. (This was the first Time that ever I had
Opportunity of personal Acquaintance with him.) There truly appeared in him a
great Degree of Calmness and Humility; without the least Appearance of Rising
of Spirit for any ill Treatment he supposed he had suffered, or the least
Backwardness to abase himself before Them who he thought had wronged him. What
he did was without any Objection or Appearance of Reluctance, even in private
to his Friends, that he freely opened himself to. Earnest Application was made
on his Behalf to the Authority of the College, that he might have his Degree
then given him; and particularly by the Rev. Mr. Burr, of Newark, one of the
Correspondents of the Hon. Society in Scotland; He being sent from New Jersey
to New Haven, by the rest of the Commissioners, for that End; and many
Arguments were used; but without Success. Indeed the Governors of the College
were so far satisfied with the Reflections Mr. Brainerd had made on himself,
that they appeared willing to admit him again into College; but not to give him
his Degree, 'till he should have remained there, at least a Twelvemonth, which
being contrary to what the Correspondents, to whom he was now engaged, had
declared to be their Mind, he did not consent to it. He desired his Degree, as
he thought it would tend to his being more extensively useful; but still when
he was denied it, he manifested no Disappointment or Resentment.


[The next Day he went to Derby; then to Southbury, where he spent the Sabbath:
and speaks of some spiritual Comfort; but complains much of Unfixedness, and
Wanderings of Mind in Religion.]

Monday, Sept. 19. In the Afternoon, rode to Bethlehem, and there preached. Had
some Measure of Assistance, both in Prayer and Preaching. I felt serious, kind
and tender toward all Mankind, and longed that Holiness might flourish more on
Earth.

Tuesday, Sept. 20. Had Thoughts of going forward on my Journey to my Indians;
but toward Night was taken with a hard Pain in my Teeth, and shivering Cold,
and could not possibly recover a comfortable Degree of Warmth the whole Night
following. I continued very full of Pain all Night; and in the Morning had a
very hard Fever, and Pains almost all over my whole Body. I had a Sense of the
divine Goodness in appointing this to be the Place of my Sickness, viz. among
my Friends that were very Kind to me. I should probably have perished, if I had
first got Home to my own House in the Wilderness, where I have none to converse
with but the poor rude ignorant Indians. Here I saw was Mercy in the midst of
Affliction. I continued thus, mostly confined to my Bed, 'till Friday-Night;
very full of Pain most of the Time; but through divine Goodness not afraid of
Death. Then the extreme Folly of those appeared to me, who put off their
turning to God 'till a Sickbed. Surely this is not a Time proper to prepare
for Eternity* -- On Friday-Evening my Pains went off something suddenly; and I
was exceeding weak, and almost fainted; but was very comfortable the Night
following. Those Words Psalm. cxviii.17. I frequently revolved in my Mind; and
thought we were to prize the Continuation of Life only on this Account, that we
may show forth God's Goodness and Works of Grace.

[From this Time, he gradually recovered: And on the next Tuesday was so well
as to be able to go forward on his Journey Homewards: But was 'till the Tuesday
following before he reached Kaunaumeek. And seems, great Part of this Time, to
have had a very deep and lively Sense of the Vanity and Emptiness of all Things
here below, and of the Reality, Nearness and vast Importance of eternal Things.]

Tuesday, October 4. This Day rode Home to my own House and People. The poor
Indians appeared very glad of my Return. Found my House and all Things in
Safety. I presently fell on my Knees and blessed God for my safe Return, after
a long and tedious Journey, and a Season of Sickness in several Places where I
had been, and after I had been sick my self. God has renewed his Kindness to
me, in preserving me one Journey more. I have taken many considerable Journeys
since this Time last Year, and yet God has never suffered one of my Bones to be
broken, or any distressing Calamity to befall me, excepting the ill Turn I had
in my last Journey; Though I have been often exposed to Cold and Hunger in the
Wilderness, where the Comforts of Life were not to be had; have frequently been
lost in the Woods; and sometimes obliged to ride much of the Night; and once
lay out in the Woods all Night. Blessed be God that has preserved me.

[In his Diary for the next eleven Days, are great Complaints of Distance from
God, spiritual Pride, Corruption, and exceeding Vileness. He once says, his
Heart was so pressed with a Sense of his Pollution, that he could scarcely have
the Face and Impudence (as it then appeared to him) to desire that God should
not damn him forever. And at another Time, he says, He had so little Sense of
God, or Apprehension and Relish of his Glory and Excellency, that it made him
more disposed to Kindness and Tenderness toward those who are blind and
ignorant of God and Things divine and heavenly.]

Lord's Day, October. 16. In the Evening, God was pleased to give me a feeling
Sense of my own Unworthiness; but through divine Goodness such as tended to draw,
rather than drive me from God: It filled me with Solemnity. I retired alone
(having at this Time a Friend with me) and poured out my Soul to God, with much
Freedom; and yet in Anguish, to find my self so unspeakably sinful and unworthy
before a holy God. Was now much resigned under God's Dispensations toward me,
though my Trials had been very great. But thought whether I could be resigned, if
God should let the French Indians come upon me, and deprive me of my Life, or
carry me away Captive (though I knew of no special Reason then to propose this
Trial to myself, more than any other) and my Soul seemed so far to rest and
acquiesce in God, that the Sting and Terror of these Things seemed in a great
Measure gone. Presently after I came to the Indians, whom I was teaching to
sing Psalm-Tunes that Evening, I received the following Letter from
Stockbridge, by a Messenger sent on the Sabbath on Purpose, which made it
appear of greater Importance.

Sir, Just now we received Advices from Col. Stoddard, that there is the utmost
Danger of a Rupture with France. He has received the same from his Excellency
our Governor, ordering him to give Notice to all the exposed Places, that they
may secure themselves the best they can against any sudden Invasion. We thought
best to send directly to Kaunaumeek, that you may take the prudentest Measures
for your Safety that dwell there. I am, Sir, etc.

I thought, upon reading the Contents, it came in a good Season; for my Heart
seemed something fixed on God, and therefore I was not much surprised: But this
News only made me more serious, and taught me that I must not please my self
with any of the Comforts of Life which I had been preparing for my Support.
Blessed be God, that gave me any Intenseness and Fervency this Evening.

Monday, October. 17. Had some rising Hopes sometimes, that God would arise and
have Mercy on Zion speedily. My Heart is indeed refreshed, when I have any
prevailing Hopes of Zion's Prosperity. O that I may see the glorious Day, when
Zion shall become the Joy of the whole Earth! Truly there is n^thin^ that I
greatly value in this lower World.

[On Tuesday, he rode to Stockbridge; complains of being much diverted, and
having but little Life. On Wednesday, he expresses some solemn Sense of divine
Things, and a longing to be always doing for God with a godly Frame of Spirit.]

Thursday, October. 20. Had but little Sense of divine Things this Day. Alas,
that so much of my precious Time is spent with so little of God! Those are
tedious Days, wherein I have no Spirituality.

Friday, October. 21. Returned home to Kaunaumeek: Was glad to get alone in my
little Cottage, and to cry to that God who sees in secret and is present in a
Wilderness.

Saturday, October. 22. Had but little sensible Communion with God. This World is
a dark Cloudy Mansion. Oh, when will the Sun of Righteousness shine on my Soul
without Cessation or Intermission.

Lord's Day, October. 23. In the Morning, had a little Dawn of Comfort arising
from Hopes of seeing glorious Days in the Church of God: Was enabled to pray
for such a glorious Day with some Courage and Strength of Hope. In the
Forenoon, treated on the Glories of Heaven, etc. -- In the Afternoon, on the
Miseries of Hell, and the Danger of going there. Had some Freedom and Warmth,
both Parts of the Day. And my People were very Attentive. In the Evening, two
or three came to me under Concern for their Souls; to whom I was enabled to
discourse closely, and with some Earnestness and Desire. O that God would be
merciful to their poor Souls.

[He seems, through the whole of this Week, to have been greatly engaged to
fill up every Inch of Time in the Service of God, and to have been most
deligently employed in Study, Prayer and instructing the Indians; and from Time
to Time expresses Longings of Soul after God, and the Advancement of his
Kingdom, and spiritual Comfort and Refreshment.]

Lord's Day, October. 30. In the Morning, enjoyed some Fixedness of Soul in
Prayer, which was indeed sweet and desirable: Was enabled to leave my self with
God, and to acquiesce in him. At Noon, my Soul was refreshed with reading Rev.
iii. more especially the 11th and 12th Verses. O my Soul longed for that
blessed Day, when I should dwell in the Temple of God, and go no more out of
his immediate Presence!

Monday, October. 31. Rode to Kinderhook, about 15 Miles from my Place. While
riding, I felt some divine Sweetness in the Thoughts of being a Pillar in the
Temple of God in the upper World, and being no more deprived of his blessed
Presence and the Sense of his Favor, which is better than Life. My Soul was so
lifted up to God, that I could pour out my Desires to him, for more Grace and
further Degrees of Sanctification, with abundant Freedom. Oh, I longed to be
more abundantly prepared for that Blessedness, with which I was then in some
Measure refreshed! -- Returned Home in the Evening; but took an extremely bad
Cold by riding in the Night.

Tuesday, November. 1. Was very much disordered in Body, and sometimes full of
Pain in my Face and Teeth: Was not able to study much, and had not much
spiritual Comfort. Alas, when God is withdrawn, all is gone! -- Had some sweet
Tho'^s, which I could not but write down, on the Design, Nature, and End of
Christianity.

Wednesday, November. 2. Was still more indisposed in Body, and in much Pain,
most of the Day: Had not much Comfort; was scarcely able to study at all; and
still entirely alone in the Wilderness. But blessed be the Lord, I ben't
exposed in the open Air: I have a House, and many of the Comforts of Life, to
support me. I have learned, in a Measure, that all good Things, relating both
to Time and Eternity, come from God. -- In the Evening, had some Degree of
quickening in Prayer: I think, God gave me some Sense of his Presence.

Thursday, November. 3. Spent this Day in secret Fasting and Prayer, from Morning
'till Night. Early in the Morning, had (I think) some small Degree of
Assistance in Prayer. Afterward, read the Story of Elijah the Prophet, 1
Kings, xvii, xviii, and xix Chapters, and also 2 Kings ii. and iv. Chapters. My
Soul was much moved, observing the Faith, Zeal and Power of that holy Man; how
he wrestled with God in Prayer, etc. My Soul then cried with Elisha, Where is
the Lord God of Elijah! Oh, I longed for more Faith! My Soul breathed after
God, and pleaded with him, that a double Portion of that Spirit, which was
given to Elijah, might rest on me. And that which was divinely refreshing and
strengthening to my Soul, was, I saw that GOD is the same that he was in the
Days of Elijah. -- Was enabled to wrestle with God by Prayer, in a more
affectionate, fervent, humble, intense, and importunate Manner, than I have for
many Months past. Nothing seemed too hard for God to perform; nothing too great
for me to hope for from Him. -- I had for many Months entirely lost all Hopes
of being made instrumental of doing any special Service for God in the World:
It has appeared entirely impossible, that one so black and vile should be thus
improved for God! But at this Time God was pleased to revive this Hope. --
Afterward read the iiid Chap. of Exodus and on to the xxth, and saw more of the
Glory and Majesty of GOD discovered in those Chapters, than ever I had seen
before; frequently in the mean Time falling on my Knees and crying to God for
the Faith of Moses, and for a Manifestation of the divine Glory. Especially the
iiid and ivth, and Part of the xivth and xvth Chapters, were unspeakably sweet
to my Soul: My Soul blessed God, that he had shown himself so gracious to his
Servants of old. The xvth Chapter seemed to be the very Language which my Soul
uttered to God in the Season of my first spiritual Comfort, when I had just got
through the Red Sea, by a Way that I had no Expectation of. O how my Soul then
rejoiced in God! And now those Things came fresh and lively to my Mind; now my
Soul blessed God afresh, that he had opened that unthought of Way to deliver me
from the Fear of the Egyptians, when I almost despaired of Life. -- Afterward
read the Story of Abraham's Pilgrimage in the Land of Canaan: My Soul was
melted, in observing his Faith, how he leaned on God; how he communed with GOD,
and what a Stranger he was here in the World. After that, read the Story of
Joseph's Sufferings, and God's Goodness to him: Blessed God for these Examples
of Faith and Patience. My Soul was ardent in Prayer, was enabled to wrestle
ardently for my self, for Christian Friends, and for the Church of God. And
felt more Desire to see the Power of God in the Conversi^n o^ Souls, than I
have done for a long Season. Blessed be God for this Season of Fasting and
Prayer. May his Goodness always abide with me, and draw my Soul to Him.

Thursday, November. 4. Rode to Kinderhook; went quite to Hu^son's-River, about
20 Miles from my House; performed some Business; and returned Home in the
Evening to my own House. I had rather ride hard, and fatigue my self, to get
Home, than to spend the Evening and Night amongst those that have no Regard for
God.

[The two next Days, he was very ill and full of Pain, probably through his
riding in the Night, after a fatiguing Day's Journey on Thursday: But yet seems
to have been diligent in Business.]

Monday, November. 7. This Morning, the Lord afforded me some special Assistance
in Prayer: My Mind was solemn, fixed, affectionate, and ardent in Desires after
Holiness; and felt full of Tenderness and Love; and my Affections seemed to be
dissolved into Kindness and Softness. -- In the Evening, enjoyed the same
comfortable Assistance in Prayer, as in the Morning: My Soul longed after God,
and cried to him with a filial Freedom, Reverence and Boldness. O that I might
be entirely consecrated and devoted to God.

[The two next Days, he complains of bodily Illness and Pain; but much more of
spiritual Barrenness and Unprofitableness.]

Thursday, Nov. 10. Spent this Day in Fasting and Prayer alone. In the Morning,
was very dull and lifeless; was something melancholy and discouraged. But after
some Time, reading 2 Kings xix Chap. my Soul was moved and affected; especially
reading Verse 1^. and onward. I saw there was no other Way for the afflicted
Children of God to take, but to go to GOD with all their Sorrows. Hezekiah, in
his great Distress, went and spread his Complaint before the Lord. I was then
enabled to see the mighty Power of God, and my extreme Need of that Power: Was
enabled to cry to God affectionately and ardently for his divine Power and
Grace to be exercised toward me. -- Afterward, read the Story of David's
Trials, and observed the Course he took under them, how he strengthened his
Hands in GOD; whereby my Soul was carried out after GOD, enabled to cry to Him
and rely upon Him, and felt strong in the Lord. Was afterward refreshed,
observing the blessed Temper that was wrought in David by his Trials: All
Bitterness and Desire of Revenge seemed wholly taken away; so that he mourned
for the Death of his Enemies; 2 Samuel i.17. and iv.9. ad Fin. -- Was enabled to
bless God, that he had given me something of this divine Temper, that my Soul
freely forgives, and heartily loves my Enemies.

[It appears by his Diary for the remaining Part of this Week, and for the two
following Weeks, that great Part of the Time he was very ill and full of Pain;
and yet obliged through his Circumstances, in this ill State of Body, to be at
great Fatigues, in Labor, and traveling Day and Night, and to expose himself,
in stormy and severe Seasons. He from Time to Time, within this Space, speaks
of outgoings of Soul after God; his Heart strengthened in God; Seasons of
divine Sweetness and Comfort; his Heart affected with Gratitude for Mercies,
etc. And yet there are many Complaints of Lifelesness, Weakness of Grace,
Distance from God, and great Unprofitableness. But still there appears a
constant Care, from Day to Day, not to lose Time, but to improve it all for
God.]

Lord's Day, November. 27. In the Evening, was greatly affected in reading an
Account of the very joyful Death of a pious Gentleman; which seemed to
invigorate my Soul in God's Ways: I felt courageously engaged to pursue a Life
of Holiness and Self-denial as long as I live; and poured out my Soul to God
for his Help and Assistance in order thereto. Eternity then seemed near, and my
Soul rejoiced, and longed to meet it. O, I trust, that will be a blessed Day,
that finishes my Toil here!

Monday, November. 28. In the Evening, was obliged to spend Time in Company and
Conversation that was unprofitable. -- Nothing lies heavier upon me, than the
Misimprovement of Time.

Tuesday, November. 29. Began to study the Indian Tongue, with Mr. Sargeant at
Stockbridge The Commissioners that employed him, had directed him to spend much
Time this Win^er with Mr. Sargeant, to learn the Language of the Indians; which
necessitated him very often to ride* backwards and forwards, 20 Miles through
the uninhabited Woods between Stockbridge and Kau^aume^k; which many Times
expo^ed him to extreme Hardship in the severe Seasons of the Winter.
. -- Was perplexed for want of more Retirement. -- I love to live alone in my
own little Cottage, where I can spend much Time in Prayer, etc.

Wednesday, November. 30. Pursued my Study of Indian: But was very weak and
disordered in Body, and was troubled in Mind at the Barrenness of the Day, that
I had done so little for God. I had some Enlargement in Prayer at Night. Oh, a
Barn, or Stable, Hedge, or any other Place, is truly desirable, if God is
there! Sometimes, of late, my Hopes of Zion's Prosperity are more raised, than
they were in the Summer past. My Soul seems to confide in God, that he will yet
show forth his Salvation to his People, and make Zion the Joy of the whole
Earth. O how excellent is the Loving Kindness of the Lord! My Soul sometimes
inwardly exults at the lively Thoughts of what God has already done for his
Church, and what mine Eyes have seen of the Salvation of God. It Is sweet, to
hear nothing but spiritual Discourse from God's Children; and Sinners enquiring
the Way to Zion, saying, What shall we do, etc. O that I may see more of this
blessed Work.

Thursday, December. 1. Both Morning and Evening, I enjoyed some Intenseness of
Soul in Prayer, and longed for the Enlargement of Christ's Kingdom in the
World. My Soul seems, of late, to wait on GOD for his Blessing on Zion. O that
Religion might powerfully revive.

Friday, December. 2. Enjoyed not so much Health of Body, or Fervor of Mind, as
Yesterday. If the Chariot-Wheels move with Ease and Speed at any Time, for a
short Space; yet by and by they drive heavily again. O that I had the Wings of
a Dove, that I might fly away from Sin and Corruption, and be at Rest in GOD.

Saturday, December. 3. Rode Home, to my House and People. Suffered much with the
extreme Cold. -- I trust, I shall, 'ere long, arrive safe to my Journey's End,
where my Toils shall cease.

Lord's Day, December. 4. Had but little Sense of divine and heavenly Things. My
Soul mourns over my Barrenness. Oh how sad is spiritual Deadness!

Monday, December. 5. Rode to Stockbridge. Was almost out done with the extreme
Cold. Had some refreshing Meditations by the Way; but was barren, wandering, and
Lifeless, much of the Day. Thus my Days roll away, with but little done for
God; and this is my Burden.

Tuesday, December. 6. Was perplexed to see the Vanity and Levity of professed
Christians. Spent the Evening with a Christian Friend, that was able in some
Measure to sympathize with me in my spiritual Conflicts. Was a little refreshed
to find one with whom I could converse of inward Trials, etc.

Wednesday, December. 7. Spent the Evening in Perplexity, with a Kind of guilty
Indolence. When I have no Heart or Resolution for God and the Duties incumbent
on me, I feel guilty of Negligence and Misimprovement of Time. Certainly I
ought to be engaged in my Work and Business, to the utmost Extent of my
Strength and Ability.

Thursday, December. 8. My Mind was much distracted with different Affections.
Seemed to be at an amazing Distance from God: and looking round in the World,
to see if there was not some Happiness to be derived from it, GOD, and some
certain Objects in the World, seemed each to invite my Heart and Affections;
and my Soul seemed to be distracted between them. I have not been so much beset
with the World for a long Time; and that with Relation to some particular
Objects which I thought my self most dead to. But even while I was desiring to
please my self with any Thing below, Guilt, Sorrow and Perplexity attended the
first Motions of Desire. Indeed I cannot see the Appearance of Pleasure and
Happiness in the World, as I used to do: And blessed be God for any Habitual
Deadness to the World. -- I found no Peace, or Deliverance from this
Distraction and Perplexity of Mind, 'till I found Access to the Throne of
Grace: And as soon as I had any Sense of God and Things divine, the Allurements
of the World vanished, and my Heart was determined for God. But my Soul mourned
over my Folly, that I should desire any Pleasure, but only in God. God forgive
my spiritual Idolatry.

[The next thirteen Days, he appears to have been continually in deep Concern
about the Improvement of precious Time; and there are many Expressions of
Grief, that he improved Time no better; such as, Oh, what Misery do I feel,
when my Thought (...) after Vanity! I should be happy if always engaged for
God! O wretched Man that I am, etc! Speaks of his being pained with a Sense of
his Barrenness, perplexed with his Wanderings, longing for Deliverance from the
Being of Sin, mourning that Time past away, and so little was done for God,
etc. -- On Tuesday, December. 20. He speaks of his being visited at Kaunaumeek by
some under spiritual Concern.]

Thursday, December. 22. Spent this Day alone in Fasting and Prayer, and Reading
in God's Word the Exercises and Deliverances of God's Children. Had, I trust,
some Exercise of Faith and realizing Apprehension of divine Power, Grace and
Holiness; and also of the Unchangeableness of God, that he is the same as he
was when he delivered his Saints of old out of great Tribulation. My Soul was
sundry Times in Prayer enlarged for God's Church and People. O that Zion might
become the Joy of the Whole Earth. It Is better to wait upon God with Patience,
than to put Confidence in any Thing in this lower World. My Soul, wait Thou on
the Lord; for from him comes thy Salvation.

Friday, December. 23. Felt a little more Courage and Resolution in Religion,
than at some other Times.

Saturday, December. 24. Had some Assistance, and longing Desires after
Sanctification, in Prayer this Day; especially in the Evening: Was sensible of
my own Weakness and spiritual Impotency: Saw plainly, I should fall into Sin,
if God of his abundant Mercy did not uphold my Soul, and withold me from Evil.
O that God would uphold me by his free Spirit, and save me from the Hour of
Temptation.

Lord's Day, December. 25. Prayed much, in the Morning, with a feeling Sense of
my own spiritual Weakness and Insufficiency for any Duty. God gave me some
Assistance in Preaching to the Indians; and especially in the Afternoon, when I
was enabled to speak with uncommon Plainness, Freedom, and Earnestness. Blessed
be God for any Assistance granted to one so unworthy. Afterward felt some
Thankfulness; but still sensible of Barrenness. -- Spent some Time in the
Evening, with one or two Persons under spiritual Concern, and exhorting others
to their Duty, etc.

Monday, December. 26. Rode down to Stockbridge. Was very much fatigued with my
Journey, wherein I underwent great Hardship: Was much exposed and very wet by
falling into a River. Spent the Day and Evening without much Sense of divine
and heavenly Things; But felt guilty, grieved, and perplexed with wandering
careless Thoughts.

Tuesday, December. 27. Had a small Degree of Warmth in secret Prayer, in the
Evening: but, alas, had but little spiritual Life, and consequently but little
Comfort! Oh, the Pressure of a Body of Death! This Day he wrote the 2 d Letter
added at the End of this History.


Wednesday, December. 28. Rode about six Miles to the Ordination of Mr. Hopkins.
In the Season of the Solemnity was somewhat affected with a Sense of the
Greatness and Importance of the Work of a Minister of Christ. Afterward was
grieved to see the Vanity of the Multitude. In the Evening, spent a little Time
with some Christian Friends, with some Degree of Satisfaction; but most of the
Time had rather have been alo^^.

Thursday, December. 29. Spent the Day mainly in conversing with Friends; yet
enjoyed little Satisfaction, because I could find but few disposed to Converse
of divine and h^^^enly Things. Alas, what are Things of this World, to afford
Satisfaction to the Soul! -- Near Night, returned to Stockbridge; in secret
blessed God for Retirement, and that I ben't (...) exposed to the Company and
Conversation of the World. O (...) I could live in the secret of God's Presence.

Friday, December. 30. Was in a solemn devout Frame in the Evening. Wondered that
Earth, with all its Charms, should ever allure me in the least Degree. O that I
could always reali^^ the Being and Holiness of God.

Saturday, December. 31. Rode from Stockbridge home to my House: The Air was
clear and Calm, but as Cold as ever I felt it in the World, or near. I was in
great Danger of perishing by the Extremity of the Season. -- Was enabled to
Meditate much on the Road.

Lord's Day, January 1. 1743, 4. In the Morning, had some small Degree of
Assistance in Prayer. Saw my self so vile and unworthy, that I could not look
my People in the Face, when I came to Preach. Oh, my Meanness, Folly,
Ignorance, and inward Pollution! -- In the Evening, had a little Assistance in
Prayer, so that the Duty was delightsome, rather then burdenso^. Reflected on
the Goodness of God to me in the past Year, etc. Of a Truth God has been kind
and gracious to me, though he has caused me to pass through many Sorrows; he has
provided for me bountifully, so that I have been enabled, in about 15 Months
past, to bestow to charitable Uses about an Hundred Pounds New England Money,
that I can now remember. Which was, I suppose, to the value of about one
Hundred and eighty five Pounds in our Bills of the old Tenor, as they now
pass. -- By this, as well as many other Things, it is manifest, that his
frequent Melancho^y did not arise from the Consideration of any Disadvantage he
was laid under to get a Living in the World, by his Expulsion from the College.
Blessed be the Lord, that has so far used me as his Steward, to distribute a
Portion of his Goods. May I always remember, that all I have comes from God.
Blessed be the Lord, that has carried me through all the Toils, Fatigues, and
Hardships of the Year past, as well as the spiritual Sorrows and Conflicts that
have attended it. O that I could begin this Year with God, and spend the whole
of it to his Glory, either in Life or Death.

Monday, Jan. 2. Had some affecting Sense of my own Impotency and spiritual
Weakness. -- It Is nothing but the Power of God that keeps me from all Manner of
Wickedness. I see, I am nothing, and can do nothing without Help from above.
Oh, for divine Grace! In the Evening, had some Ardour of Soul in Prayer, and
longing Desires to have God for my Guide and Safeguard at all Times. This Day
he wrote the 3 d Letter, published at the End of this Acc^un^ of his Life.


Tuesday, Jan. 3. Was employed much of the Day in Writing; and spent some Time
in other necessary Employment. But my Time passes away so swiftly, that I am
astonished when I reflect on it, and see how little I do in it. My State of
Solitude does not make the Hours hang heavy upon my Hands. O what Reason of
Thankfulness have I, on account of this Retirement! I find, that I don't, and
it seems I cannot, lead a Christian Life, when I am abroad, and cannot spend Time
in Devotion, Christian Conversation, and Serious Meditation, as I should do.
Those Weeks that I am obliged now to be from home, in order to learn the Indian
Tongue, are mostly spent in Perplexity and Barrenness, without much sweet
Relish of divine Things; and I feel my self a Stranger at the Throne of Grace,
for want of more frequent and continued Retirement. When I return Home, and
give my self to Meditation, Prayer, and Fasting, a new Scene opens to my Mind,
and my Soul longs for Mortification, Self-denial, Humility, and Divorcement
from all the Things of the World. This Evening, my Heart was somewhat warm and
fervent in Prayer and Meditation, so that I was loath to indulge Sleep.
Continued in those Duties 'till about Midnight.

Wednesday, Jan. 4. Was in a resigned and mortified Temper of Mind, much of the
Day. Time appeared a Moment, Life a Vapor, and all its Enjoyments as empty
Bubbles, and fleeting Blasts of Wind.

Thursday, Jan 5. Had a humbling and pressing Sense of (...) Unworthiness. My
Sense of the Badness of my own Heart filled my Soul with Bitterness and
Anguish; which was ready to (...) as under the Weight of a heavy Burden. And
thus spent (...) Evening, 'till late. -- Was some what intense and ardent in
Pray^^*

Friday, Jan. 6. Feeling and considering my extreme We^^ness, and Want of
Grace, the Pollution of my Soul, and Dang^^ of Temptations on every side, I set
apart this Day for Fa^^ing and Prayer, neither eating nor drinking from Evening
to Evenin^ beseeching God to have Mercy on me. And (...) Soul intensely longed,
that the dreadful Spots and Stains of Sin might be washed away from it. Saw
something of the Power and Alsufficiency of God. My Soul seemed to rest on his
Power and Grace; longed for Resignation to his Will, and Mortification to all
Things (...) below. My Mind was greatly fixed on divine Things: My Resolutions
for a Life of Mortification, continual Watchfulness, Self-denial, Seriousness,
and Devotion to God, were strong and fixed; my Desires ardent and Intense; my
Conscience tender, and afraid of every Appearance of Evil. My Soul grieved with
the Reflection on past Levity, and Want of Resolution for God. I solemnly
renewed my Dedication of my self to God, and longed for Grace to enable me
always to keep Coven^^t with him. Time appeared very short, Eternity near; and
^ great Name, either in or after Life, together with all earthly Pleasures and
Profits, but an empty Bubble, a deluding Drea^^.

Saturday, Jan. 7. Spent this Day in Seriousness, with steadfast Resolutions for
God and a Life of Mortification. Studied closely, 'till I felt my bodily
Strength fail. Felt some Degree of Resignation to God, with an Acquiescence in
his Dispensation^. Was grieved, that I could do so little for God before my
bodily Strength failed. -- In the Evening, though tired, yet was enabled to
continue instant in Prayer for some Time. Spent the Time in Reading,
Meditation, and Prayer, 'till the Evening was (...) spent: Was grieved, to
think that I could not watch unto Pray^^ the whole Night. -- But blessed be
God, Heaven is a Place of continual and incessant Devotion, though Earth is dull.

[The six Days following, he continued in the same happy Frame of Mind; enjoyed
the same Composure, Calmness, Resignation, ardent Desire and sweet Fervency of
Spirit, in a high Degree, every Day, not one excepted. Thursday, this Week, he
kept as a Day of secret Fasting and Prayer.]

Saturday, Jan. 14. This Morning, enjoyed a most solemn Season in Prayer^ My
Soul seemed enlarged and assisted to pour out it self to God for Grace, and for
every Blessing I wanted, for my self, my dear Christian Friends, and for the
Church of God; and was so enabled to see him who is invisible, that my Soul
rested upon him for the Performance of every Thing I asked agreeable to his
Will. It was then my Happiness, to continue instant in Prayer, and was enabled
to continue in it for near an Hour. My Soul was then strong in the Lord and in
the Power of his Might: Longed exceedingly for angelick Holiness and Purity,
and to have all my Thoughts, at all Times, employed in divine and heavenly
Things. O how blessed is an heavenly Temper! O how unspeakably blessed it is,
to feel a Measure of that Rectitude, in which we were at first created! -- Felt
the same divine Assistance in Prayer sundry Times in the Day. My Soul confided
in God for m^ self, and for his Zion; trusted in divine Power and Grace, that
he would do glorious Things in his Church, on Earth, for his own Glory.

[The next Day he speaks of some Glimpses he had of the divine Glories, and of
his being enabled to maintain his Resolutions in some Measure; but complains,
that he could not draw near to God: Seems to be filled with trembling Fears
lest he should return to a Life of Vanity, to please himself with some of the
Enjoyments of this lower World; and speaks of his being much troubled, and
feeling guilty, that he should address immortal Souls with no more Ardency and
Desire of their Salvation. -- On Monday, he rod^ down to Stockbridge, was
distressed with the extreme Cold: But notwithstanding, his Mind was in a devout
and solemn Frame in his Journey. The four next Days, he was very ill, probably
by his suffering from the Cold in his Journey; yet he says he spent the Time in
a more solemn Manner than he feared. On Friday-Evening, he rode down and
visited Mr. Hopkins; and on Saturday, rode 18 Miles to Solsbury, where he kept
Sabbath, and enjoyed considerable Degrees of God's gracious Presence,
Assistance in Duty, and divine Comfort and Refreshment, longing to give himself
wholly to God, to be his forever.]

Monday, Jan. 23. I think I never felt more resigned to God, nor so much dead
to the World, in every Respect, as now: Was dead to all Desire of Reputation
and Greatness, either in Life or after Death: All I longed for, was to be holy,
humble, crucified to the World etc.

Tuesday, Jan. 24. Near Noon, rode over to Canaan. In the Evening, was
unexpectedly visited by a considerable Number of People, with whom I was
enabled to converse profitably of divine Things: Took Pains to describe the
Difference between ^ regular and irregular Self-love: The one consisting with a
Supreme Love to God, but the other not; The former uniting God's Glory and the
Soul's Happiness, that they become one common Interest, but the latter
disjoyning and separating God's Glory and the Man's Happiness, seeking the
latter with a Neglect of the former. Illustrated this by that genuine Love that
is found between the Sexes; which is diverse from that which is wrought up
toward a Person only by rational Arguments, or Hope of Self-Interest. Love is
a pleasing Passion, it affords Pleasure to the Mind where it is; but yet true
genuine Love is not nor can be placed upon any Object with that Design of
pleasing itself with the feeling of it in a Man's own Breast.

[On Wednesday, he rode to Sheffield; the next Day, to Stockbridge: And on
Saturday, home to Kaunaumeek, though the Season was Cold and Stormy: Which
Journey was followed with Illness and Pain. It appears by his Diary, that he
spent the Time, while riding, in profitable Meditations, and in lifting up his
Heart to God; and he speaks of Assistance, Comfort, and Refreshment; but still
complains of Barrenness, etc. His Diary for the five next Days is full of the
most heavy bitter Complaints; and he expresses himself as full of Shame and
Self-loathing for his lifeless Temper of Mind and Sluggishness of Spirit, and
as being in Perplexity and Extremity, and appearing to himself unspeakably vile
and guilty before God on Account of some inward workings of Corruption he found
in his Heart, etc.]

Thursday, Feb. 2. Spent this Day in Fasting and Prayer, seeking the Presence
and Assistance of God, that he would enable me to overcome all my Corruptions
and spiritual Enemies.

Friday, Feb. 3. Enjoyed more Freedom and Comfort than of late; was intensely
engaged in Meditation upon the different Whispers of the various Powers and
Affections of a pious Mind, exercised with a great variety of Dispensations:
And could not but write as well as meditate on so entertaining a Subject. I
find what he wrote on this Head among his Papers, that were left in my Hand,
and it is here published at the End of this Account of his Li^e.
I hope, the Lord gave me some true Sense of divine Things this Day: But alas,
how great and pressing are the Remains of indwelling Corruption! I am now more
sensible than ever, that God alone is the Author and Finisher of our Faith; i.
e. that the whole and every Part of Sanctification, and every good Word, Work,
or Thought, that is found in me, is the Effect of his Power and Grace; that
without him I can do Nothing, in the strictest Sense; and that he works in us
to will and to do of his own good Pleasure, and from no other Motive. Oh, how
amazing it is that People can talk so much about Men's Power and Goodness;
when, if God did not hold us back every Moment, we should be Devils incarnate!
This my bitter Experience, for several Days last past, has abundantly taught me
concerning my self.

Saturday, Feb. 4. Enjoyed some Degree of Freedom and spiritual Refreshment;
was enabled to pray with some Fervency, and longing Desires of Zion's
Prosperity; and my Faith and Hope seems to take hold of God, for the
Performance of what I was enabled to plead for. Sanctification in my self, and
the Ingathering of God's Elect, was all my Desire; and the Hope of its
Accomplishment, all my Joy.

Lord's Day, Feb. 5. Was enabled in some Measure to rest and confide in God, and
to prize his Presence and some Glimpses of the Light of his Countenance, above
my necessary Food. Thought my self, after the Sea^on of Weakness, Temptation,
and Desertion I endured the last Week, to be somewhat like Samson when his
Locks began to grow again. Was enabled to preach to my People with more Life
and Warmth, than I have for some Weeks past.

Monday, Feb. 6. This Morning, my Soul again was strengthened in God, and found
some sweet Repose in him in Prayer: Longing especially for the complete
Mortification of Sensuality and Pride, and for Resignation to God's
Dispensa^ions, at all Times, as through Grace I felt it at this Time. I did not
desire Deliverance from any Difficulty, that attends my Circumstances, unless
God was willing. O how comfortable is this Temper! -- Spent most of the Day in
reading God's Word, in Writing, and Prayer. Enjoyed repeated and frequent
Comfort, and Intenseness of Soul in Prayer through the Day. In the Evening, spent
some Hours in private Conversation with my People: And afterward, felt some
Warmth in secret Prayer.

Tuesday, Feb. 7. Was much engaged in some sweet Meditations on the Powers and
Affections of the godly Soul in their Pursuit of their beloved Object: Wrote
something of the native Language of spiritual Sensation, in its soft and tender
Whispers; declaring, that it now feels and tastes that the Lord is gracious;
that he is the Supreme Good, the only Soul-satisfying Happiness; that he is a
Complete, Sufficient, and Almighty Portion: saying,

Whom have I in Heaven but Thee? And there is none upon Forth that I desire,
besides this blessed Portion. O, I feel it is Heaven to please him, and to be
just what he would have me to be! O that my Soul were Holy, as he is Holy! O
that it were pure even as Christ is pure; and perfect, as my Father in Heaven
is perfect! These, I feel, are the sweetest Commands in God's Book, comprising
all others. And shall I break them! Must I break 'em! Am I under a Necessity of
it as long as I live in the Wo^ld! O my Soul, Woe, Woe is me that I am a Sinner,
because I now necessarily grieve and offend this blessed God, who is infinite
in Goodness and Grace! Oh, methinks, i^ he would punish me for my Sins, it
would not wound my Heart so deep to offend him: But though I sin continually, yet
he continually repeats his Kindness to me! Oh, Methinks I could bear any
suffering; but how can I bear to grieve and dishonor this blessed God! How
shall I yield ten Thousand Times more Honor to him? What shall I do to glorify
and worship this best of Beings? O that I could consecrate my self, Soul and
Body, to his Service forever. O that I could give up my self to him so as never
more to attempt to be my own, or to have any Will or Affections that are not
perfectly conformed to him. But, alas, alas, I find I cannot be thus entirely
devoted to God: I cannot live and not sin. O ye Angels, do ye glorify him
incessantly; and if possible, prostrate yourselves lower before the blessed
King of Heaven. I long to bear a Part with you; and, if it were possible, to
help you. Oh, when we have done all that we can, to all Eternity, we shall not
be able to offer the ten Thousandth Part of the Homage that the glorious God
deserves!

Felt something spiritual, devout, resigned, and mortified to the World, much
of the Day; and especially toward and in the Evening. Blessed be God, that he
enables me to love him for himself.

Wednesday, Feb. 8. Was in a comfortable Frame of Soul, most of the Day; though
sensible of and restless under spiritual Barrenness. I find that both Mind and
Body are quickly tired with Intenseness and Fervor in the Things of God. O
that I could be as incessant as Angels in Devotion and spiritual Fervor.

Thursday, Feb. 9. Observed this Day as a Day of Fasting and Prayer, entreating
of God to bestow upon me his Blessing and Grace; especially to enable me to
live a Life of Mortification to the World, as well as of Resignation and
Patience. Enjoyed some realizing Sense of divine Power and Goodness in Prayer,
several Times; and was enabled to roll the Burden of my self and Friends, and
of Zion, upon the Goodness and Grace of God: But, in the general, was more dry
and barren than I have usually been of late upon such Occasions.

Friday, Feb. 10. Was exceedingly oppressed, most of the Day, with Shame, Grief
and Fear, under a Sense of my past Folly, as well as present Barrenness and
Coldness. When God sets before me my past Misconduct, especially any Instances
of misguided Zeal, it sinks my Soul into Shame and Confusion, makes me afraid
of a shaking Leaf. My Fear is such as the Prophet Jeremy complains of, Jer.
xx.10. -- I have no Confidence to hold up my Face, even before my Fellow-Worms;
but only when my Soul confides in God, and I find the sweet Temper of Christ,
the Spirit of Humility, Solemnity, and Mortification, and Resignation, alive in
my Soul. -- But, in the Evening, was unexpectedly refreshed in pouring out my
Complaint to God: My Shame and Fear was turned into a sweet Composure and
Acquiescence in God.

Saturday, Feb. 11. Felt much as Yesterday: enjoyed but little sensible
Communion with God.

Lord's Day, Feb. 12. My Soul seemed to confide in God, and to repose itself on
him; and had outgoings of Soul after God in Prayer. Enjoyed some divine
Assistance, in the Forenoon, in Preaching; but in the Afternoon, was more
perplexed with Shame etc. Afterward, found some Relief in Prayer: Loved, as a
feeble afflicted despised Creature, to cast myself on a God of infinite Grace
and Goodness, hoping for no Happiness but from him.

Monday, Feb. 13. Was Calm and Sedate in Morning-Devotions; and my Soul seemed
to rely on God. -- Rode to Stockbridge, and enjoyed some comfortable
Meditations by the Way: Had a more refreshing Taste and Relish of heavenly
Blessedness, than I have enjoyed for many Months past. I have many Times, of
late, felt as ardent Desires of Holiness as ever: But not so much Sense of the
Sweetness and unspeakable Pleasure of the Enjoyments and Employments of Heaven.
My Soul longed to leave Earth, and bear a Part with Angels in their celestial
Employments. My Soul said, Lord, it is good to be here; and it appeared to me
better to die, than to lose the Relish of these heavenly Delights.

[A Sense of divine Things seemed to continue with him, in a lesser Degree,
through the next Day. On Wednesday he was, by some Discourse that he heard, cast
into a melancholy Gloom, that operated much in the same Manner as his
Melancholy had formerly done, when he came first to Kaunaumeek; The Effects of
which seemed to continue in some Degree the six following Days.]

Wednesday, Feb. 22. In the Morning, had as clear a Sense of the exceeding
Pollution of my Nature, as ever I remember to have had in my Life. I then
appeared to my self inexpressibly loathsome, and defiled: Sins of Childhood, of
early Youth, and such Follies as I had not thought of for Years together, (as I
remember) came now fresh to my View, as if committed but Yesterday, and
appeared in the most odious Colors: They appeared more in Number than the
Hairs of my Head: Yea, they w^nt ^ver my Head as an heavy Burden. -- In the
Evening, the Hand of Faith seemed to be strengthened in God: My Soul seemed to
rest and acquiesce in him: Was supported under my Burdens, reading the cxxv.
Psalm: Found that it was sweet and comfortable to lean on God.

Thursday, Feb. 23. Was frequent in Prayer, and enjoyed some Assistance. --
There is a God in Heaven, that overrules all Things for the best; and this is
the Comfort of my Soul: I had fainted, unless I had believed to see the
Goodness of God in the Land of the Living, notwithstanding present Sorrows. --
In the Evening, enjoyed some Freedom in Prayer, for my self, Friends, and the
Church of God.

Friday, Feb. 24. Was exceeding restless and perplexed under a Sense of the
Misimprovement of Time; Mourned to see Time pass away; Felt in the greatest
Hurry; seemed to have every Thing to do: Yet could do Nothing, but only grieve
and groan under my Ignorance, Unprofitableness, Meanness, the Foolishness of my
Actions and Thoughts, the Pride and Bitterness of my past Frames (at some
Times, at least) all which at this Time appeared to me in lively Colors, and
filled me with Shame I could not compose my Mind to any profitable Studies, by
Reason of this Pressure. And the Reason, I judge, why I am not allowed to
Study, a great Part of my Time, is, because I am endeavoring to lay in such a
Stock of Knowledge, as shall be a Self-Sufficiency. -- I know it to be my
indispensable Duty to Study, and qualify my self in the best Manner I can for
public Service: But this is my Misery, I naturally Study and prepare, that I
may consume it upon my Lusts of Pride and Self-Confidence.

[He continued in much the same Frame of Uneasiness at the Misimprovement of
Time, and Pressure of Spirit under a Sense of Vileness, Unprofitableness etc.
for the six next following Days; excepting some Intervals of Calmness and
Composure, in Resignation to and Confidence in God.]

Friday, March 2. Was most of the Day employed in Writing on a divine Subject.
Was frequent in Prayer, and enjoyed some small Degree of Assistance. But in the
Evening, God was pleased to grant me a divine Sweetness in Prayer; especially
in the Duty of Intercession. I think, I never felt so much Kindness and Love to
those who I have Reason to think are my Enemies (though at that Time I found such
a Disposition to think the best of all, that I scarce knew how to think that
any such Thing as Enmity and Hatred lodged in any Soul; it seemed as if all the
World must needs be Friends) and never prayed with more Freedom and Delight,
for my self, or dearest Friend, than I did now for my Enemies.

Saturday, March 3. In the Morning, (...) (I believe) an Hour in Prayer, with
great Intenseness and Freedom, and with the most soft and tender Affection
toward Mankind. I longed that those who I have Reason to think owe me
Ill Will, might be eternally happy: It seemed refreshing, to think of meeting
them in Heaven, how much soever they had injured me on Earth: Had no
Disposition to insist upon any Confession from them, in order to Reconciliation
and the Exercise of Love and Kindness to them. O it is an Emblem of Heaven it
self, to love all the World with a Love of Kindness, Forgiveness, and
Benevolence; To feel our Souls sedate, mild and meek; to be void of all evil
Surmisings and Suspicions, and scarce able to think Evil of any Man upon any
Occasion; To find our Hearts simple, open, and free, to those that look upon us
with a different Eye! -- Prayer was so sweet an Exercise to me, that I knew not
how to cease, lest I should lose the Spirit of Prayer. Felt no Disposition to
eat or drink, for the sake of the Pleasure of it, but only to support my
Nature, and fit me for divine Service. Could not be content without a very
particular mention of a great Number of dear Friends at the Throne of Grace; as
also the particular Circumstances of many, so far as they were known.

Lord's Day, Nov. 4. In the Morning, enjoyed the same Intenseness in Prayer as
Yesterday-Morning; though not in so great a Degree: Felt the same Spirit of Love,
universal Benevolence, Forgiveness, Humility, Resignation, Mortification to the
World, and Composure of M^nd, as then. My Soul rested in GOD; and I found, I
wanted no other Refuge or Friend. While my Soul thus trusts in God, all Things
seem to be at Peace with me, even the Stones of the Earth: But when I cannot
apprehend and confide in God, all Things appear with a different Aspect.

[Through the four next Days, he complains of Barrenness, want of holy
Confidence in God, Stupidity, Wanderings of Mind, etc. and speaks of Oppression
of Mind under a Sense of exceeding Meanness, past Follies, as well as present
Workings of Corruption. -- On Friday, he seems to have been restored to a
considerable Degree of the same excellent Frame that he enjoyed the Saturday
before.]

Saturday, March 10. In the Morning, felt exceeding dead to the World and all
its Enjoyments: I thought, I was ready and willing to give up Life and all its
Comforts, as soon as called to it: And yet then had as much Comfort of Life as
almost ever I had. Life itself now appeared but an empty Bubble: The Riches,
Honors, and common Enjoyments of Life appeared extremely tastless. I longed to
be perpetually and entirely crucified to all Things here below, by the Cross of
Christ. My Soul was sweetly resigned to God's Disposal of me, in every Regard;
and I saw, there had nothing happened to me but what was best for me. I
confided in God, that he would never leave me, though I should walk through the
Valley of the Shadow of Death. It was then my Meat and Drink to be holy, to
live to the Lord, and die to the Lord: And I thought, that I then enjoyed such
a Heaven, as far exceeded the most sublime Conceptions of anunregenerate Soul;
and even unspeakably beyond what I my self could conceive of at another Time. I
did not wonder, that Peter said, Lord, it is good to be here, when thus
refreshed with divine Glories. My Soul was full of Love and Tenderness in the
Duty of Intercession; especially felt a most sweet Affection to some precious
godly Ministers, of my Acquaintance. Prayed earnestly for dear Christians, and
for those I have Reason to fear are my Enemies: And could not have spoken a
Word of Bitterness, or entertained a bitter Thought, against the vilest Man
living. Had a Sense of my own great Unworthiness. My Soul seemed to breath
forth Love and Praise to God afresh, when I thought he would let his Children
love and receive me as one of their Brethren and Fellow-Citizens: And when I
thought of their treating me in that Manner, I longed to lie at their Feet; and
could think of no Way to express the Sincerity and Simplicity of my Love and
Esteem of them, as being much better than my self. -- Toward Night, was very
sorrowful: Seemed to my self the worst Creature living; and could not pray, nor
meditate, nor think of holding up my Face before the World. -- Was a little
relieved in Prayer, in the Evening; but longed to get on my Knees, and ask
Forgiveness of every Body that ever had seen any Thing amiss in my past
Conduct, especially in my religious Zeal. -- Was afterward much perplexed, so
that I could not Sleep quietly.

Lord's Day, March 11. My Soul was in some Measure strengthened in GOD, in
Morning-Devotion; so that I was released from trembling Fear and Distress. --
Preached to my People from the Parable of the Sower, Matthew. xiii. And enjoyed
some Assistance, both Parts of the Day: Had some Freedom, Affection, and
Fervency in addressing my poor People; longed that God should take hold of
their Hearts, and make them spiritually alive. And indeed I had so much to say
to them, that I knew not how to leave off speaking. This was the last Sabbath
that ever he performed public Service at Kaunaumeek, and these the last
Sermons that ever he preached there. It appears by his Diary, that while he
continued with these Indians, ^e took great Pains with them, and did it with
much Discretion; But the particular Manner, how, has been omitted for Brevity's
Sake.


Monday, March 12. In the Morning, was in a devout, tender, and loving Frame of
Mind; and was enabled to cry to God, I hope, with a Child-like Spirit, with
Importunity, and Resignation, and Composure of Mind* My Spirit was full of
Quietness, and Love to Mankind; and longed that Peace should reign on the
Earth: Was grieved at the very Thoughts of a fiery, angry and intemperate Zeal
in Religion; mourned over past Follies in that Regard; and my Soul confided in
God for Strength and Grace sufficient for my future Work and Trials. -- Spent
the Day mainly in hard Labor, making Preparation for my intended Journey.

Tuesday, March 13. Felt my Soul going forth after God sometimes; but not with
such Ardency as I longed for. In the Evening, was enabled to continue instant
in Prayer, for some considerable Time together; and especially had respect to
the Journey I designed to enter upon, with the Leave of divine Providence, on
the Morrow. Enjoyed some Freedom and Fervency, entreating that the divine
Presence might attend me in every Place where my Business might lead me; and
had a particular Reference to the Trials and Temptations that I apprehended I
might be more eminently exposed to in particular Places. Was strengthened and
comforted; although I was before very weary. Truly the Joy of the Lord is
Strength and Life.

Wednesday, March 14. Enjoyed some Intenseness of Soul in Prayer, repeating my
Petitions for God's Presence in every Place where I expected to be in my
Journey. Besought the Lord that I might not be too much pleased and amused with
dear Friends and Acquaintance, in one Place and another. -- Near (...) set out
on my Journey, and near Night came to Stockbridge.

Thursday, March 15. Rode down to Sheffield. Here I met a Messenger from
East-Hampton on Long Island; who, by the unanimous Vote of that large Town, was
sent to invite me thither, in order to settle with that People, where I had
been before frequently invited. Seemed more at a Loss what was my Duty, than
before; when I heard of the great Difficulties of that Place, I was much
concerned and grieved, and felt some Desires to comply with their Request; but
knew not what to do: Endeavored to commit the Case to God.

[The two next Days, he went no further than Salisbury, being much hindered by
the Rain. When he came there, he was much indisposed. -- He speaks of
comfortable and profitable Conversation with Christian Friends, on these Days.]

Lord's Day, March 18. [At Salisbury,] Was exceeding weak and faint, so that I
could scarce walk: But God was pleased to afford me much Freedom, Clearness and
Fervency in Preaching: I have not had the like Assistance in Preaching to
Sinners for many Months past. -- Here another Messenger met me, and informed me
of the Vote of another Congregation, to give me an Invitation to come among
them upon Probation for Settlement. This Congregation was that at Millington,
near Ha^dam. They were very earnestly d^sirous of his coming among them*
Was something exercised in Mind with a Weight and Burden of Care. O that God
would send forth faithful Laborers into his Harvest.

[After this, he went forward on his Journey toward New York and New Jersey:
In which he proceeded slowly; performing his Journey under great Degrees of
bodily Indisposition. However, he preached several Times by the Way, being
urged by Friends; in which he had considerable Assistance. He speaks of Comfort
in Conversation with Christian Friends, from Time to Time, and of various
Things in the Exercises and Frames of his Heart, that show much of a divine
Influence on his Mind in this Journey: But yet complains of the Thing that he
feared, viz. a Decline of his spiritual Life, or Vivacity in Religion, by Means
of his constant Removal from Place to Place, and want of Retirement; and
complains bitterly of his Unworthiness, Deadness, etc. -- He came to New York
on Wednesday, March 28. And to Elizabeth-Town on the Saturday following, where
it seems he waited 'till the Commissioners came together.]

Thursday, April 5. Was again much exercised with Weakness, and with Pain in my
Head. Attended on the Commissioners in their Meeting. The Indians at Kaunaumeek
being but few in Number, and Mr. Brainerd having now been laboring among them
about a Year, and having prevailed upon them to be willing to leave Kaunaumeek,
and remove to Stockbridge, to live constantly under Mr. Sargeant's Ministry; he
thought he might now do more Service for Christ among the Indians elsewhere:
And therefore went this Journey to New Jersey to lay the Matter before the
Commissioners; who met at Elizabeth-Town, on this Occasion, and determined that
he should forthwith leave Kaunaumeek, and go to the Delaware Indians.
Resolved to go on still with the Indian Affair, if divine Providence
permitted; although I had before felt some Inclination to go to East-Hampton,
where I was solicited to go. By the Invitations Mr. Brainerd had la^^ly
received, it appears, that it was not from Necessity, or for want of
Opportunities to settle in the Ministry amongst the English, notwithstanding
the Disgrace he had been laid under at College, that he was determined to
forsake all ^he outward Comforts to be enjoyed in the English Settlements, to
go and spend his Life among the brutish Savages, and endure the Difficulties
and Self-denials of an Indian Mission. He had, just as he was leaving
Kaunaumeek, had an earnest Invitation to a Settlement at East-Hampton on
Long Island, the fairest pleasantest Town on the whole Island* and one of its
largest and most wealthy Parishes. The People there were unanimous in their
Desires to have him for their Pastor, and for a long Time continued in an
earnest Pursuit of what they desired, and were hardly brought to relinquish
their Endeavors and give up their Hopes of obtaining him. Besides the
Invitation he had to Millington; which was near his native Town, and in the
midst of his Friends. Nor did Mr. Brainerd choose the Business of a Missionary
to the Indians, rather than accept of those Invitations, because he was
unacquainted with the Difficulties and Sufferings which attended such a
Service: for he had had Experience of these Difficulties in Summer and Winter;
having spent about a Twelvemonth in a lonely Desert among these Savages, where
he had gone through extreme Hardships, and been the Subject of a Train of
outward and inward Sorrows, which were now fresh in his Mind. Notwithstanding
all these Things, he chose still to go on with this Business; and that although
the Place he was now going to, was at a still much greater Distance from most
of his Friends, Acquaintance, and native Land.


[After this, he continued two or three Days in the Jerseys, very Ill; and then
returned to New York; and from thence into New England; and went to his native
Town of Haddam* where he arrived on Saturday, April 14. -- And he continues
still his bitter Complaints of want of Retirement. While he was in New York, he
says thus, Oh, it is not the Pleasures of the World can Comfort me! If GOD deny
his Presence, what are the Pleasures of the City to me? One Hour of sweet
Retirement where GOD is, is better than the whole World. And he continues to
cry out of his Ignorance, Meanness, and Unworthiness. However, he speaks of
some Seasons of special Assistance and divine Sweetness. -- He spent some Days
among his Friends at East-Hampton and Millington.]

Tuesday* April 17. Rode to Millington again; and felt perplexed when I set
out; Was feeble in Body, and weak in Faith. I was going to preach a Lecture;
and feared I should never have Assistance enough to get through. But contriving
to ride alone, at a Distance from the Company that was going, I spent the Time
in lifting up my Heart to God: Had not go^^ far before my Soul was abundantly
strengthened with those Words, If God be for us, who can be against us? I went
on, confiding in God; and fearing nothing so much as Self-Confidence. In this
Frame I went to the House of God, and enjoyed some Assistance. Afterward felt
the Spirit of Love and Meekness in Conversation with some Friends. Then rode
H^me to my Brother's: And in the Evening, singing Hymns with Friends, my Soul
seemed to melt: And in Prayer afterward, enjoyed the Exercise of Faith, and
was enabled to be fervent in Spirit: Found more of God's Presence, than I have
done any Time in my late wearisom Journey. Eternity appeared very near: My
Nature was very weak, and seemed ready to be dissolved: The Sun declining, and
the Shadows of the Evening drawing on apace. O I longed to fill up the
remaining Moments all for God! Though my Body was so feeble, and wearied with
Preaching, and much private Conversation, yet I wanted to sit up all Night to
do something for God. To God, the Giver of these Refreshments, be Glory forever
and ever; Amen.

Wednesday, April 18. Was very weak, and enjoyed but little spiritual Comfort.
Was exercised with One cavilling against Original Sin. May the Lord open his
Eyes to see the Fountain of Sin in himself.

[After this, he visited several Ministers in Connecticut; and then traveled
toward Kaunaumeek, and came to Mr. Sargeant's at Stockbridge, Thursday, April
26. He performed this Journey in a very weak State of Body. The Things he
speaks of in the mean Time, appertaining to the Frames and Exercises of his
Mind, are at some Times Deadness and a being void of spiritual Comfort, at
other Times resting in God, spiritual Sweetness in Conversation, Engagedness in
Meditation, on the Road, Assistance in Preaching, Rejoicing to think that so
much more of his Work was done, and he so much nearer to the eternal World. And
he once and again speaks of a Sense of great Ignorance, spiritual Pollution
etc.]

Friday and Saturday, April 27, and 28. Spent some Time in visiting Friends,
and discoursing with my People (who were now moved down from their own Place to
Mr. Sargeant's) and found them very glad to see me returned. Was Exercised in
my Mind with a Sense of my own Unworthiness.

Lord's Day, April 29. Preached for Mr. Sargeant, both Parts of the Day, from
Rev. xiv.4. Enjoyed some Freedom in Preaching, though not much Spirituality. In
the Evening, my Heart was in some Measure lifted up in Thankfulness to God for
any Assistance.

Monday, April 30. Rode to Kaunaumeek, but was extremely Ill: Did not enjoy the
Comfort I hoped for in my own House.

Tuesday, May 1. Having received new Orders to go to a Number of Indians on
Delaware River in Pensylvania, and my People here being mostly removed to Mr.
Sargeant's, I this Day took all my Clothes, Books, etc. and disposed of them,
and set out for Delaware River: But made it my Way to return to Mr. Sargeant's:
Which I did this Day, just at Night. Rode several Hours in the Rain through the
howling Wilderness, although I was so disordered in Body, that little or nothing
but Blood came from me.

[He continued at Stockbridge, the next Day; and on Thursday rode a little Way,
to Sheffield, under a great Degree of Illness; but with Encouragement and
Cheerfulness of Mind under his Fatigues. On Friday, he rode to Salisbury, and
continued there 'till after the Sabbath. He speaks of his Soul's being* some
Part of this Time, refreshed in Conversation with some Christian Friends, about
their heavenly Home and their Journey thither. At other Times, he speaks of
himself as exceedingly perplexed with Barrenness and Deadness, and has this
Exclamation, Oh, that Time should pass with so little done for God! -- On
Monday, he rode to Sharon; and speaks of himself as distressed at the
Consideration of the Misimprovement of Time.]

Tuesday, May 8. Set out from Sharon in Connecticut, and traveled about 45
Miles to a Place called the Fish-Kil, A Place so called in New York Government,
near Hudson's River, on the West side of the River.
and lodged there. Spent much of my Time, while riding, in Prayer, that God
would go with me to Delaware. My Heart sometimes was ready to sink with the
Thoughts of my Work, and going alone in the Wilderness, I knew not where: But
still it was comfortable, to think, that others of God's Children had wandered
about in Caves and D^ns of the Earth; and Abraham, when he was called to go
forth, went out not knowing whither he went. O that I might follow after God.

[The next Day, he went forward on his Journey; crossed Hudson's River, and
went to Gosh^n in the Highlands; and so traveled across the Woods, from
Hudson's River to Delaware, about an 100 Miles, through a desolate and hideous
Country, above New Jersey; where were very few Settlements: In which Journey he
suffered much Fatigue and Hardship. He visited some Indians in the Way, See Mr.
Brainerd's Narrative in a Letter to Mr. P^mberton, at the the End of his
Ordination-Sermon, -- Page 32, 33.
and discoursed with them concerning Christianity. Was considerably Melancholy
and Disconsolate, being alone in a strange Wilderness. On Saturday, he came to
a Settlement of Irish and Dutch People, about 12 Miles above the Forks of
Delaware.]

Lord's Day, May 13. Rose early: Felt very poorly after my long Journey, and
after being wet and fatigued. Was very Melancholy; have scarce ever seen such a
gloomy Morning in my Life; there appeared to be no Sabbath; the Children were
all at Play; I a Stranger in the Wilderness, and knew not where to go; and all
Circumstances seemed to conspire to render my Affairs dark and discouraging.
Was disappointed respecting an Interpreter, and heard that the Indians were
much scattered, etc. Oh, I mourned after the Presence of God, and seemed like a
Creature banished from his Sight! Yet he was pleased to support my sinking
Soul, amidst all my Sorrows; so that I never entertained any Thought of
quitting my Business among the poor Indians; but was comforted, to think, that
Death would 'ere long s^t me free from these Distresses. -- Rode about 3 or 4
Miles to the Irish People, where I found some that appeared Sober and concerned
about Religion. My Heart then began to be a little encouraged: Went and
preached, first to the Irish, and then to the Indians: And in the Evening, was
a little comforted; my Soul seemed to rest on God, and take Courage. O that the
Lord would be my Support and Comforter in an Evil World.

Monday, May 14. Was very busy in some necessary Studies. Felt my self very
loose from all the World: All appeared Vanity and Vexation of Spirit. Seemed
something lonesom and disconsolate, as if I was banished from all Mankind, and
bereaved of all that is called pleasurable in the World: But appeared to my
self so vile and unworthy, it seemed fitter for me to be here than any where.

Tuesday, May 15. Still much engaged in my Studies; and enjoyed more Health,
than I have for some Time past: But was something dejected in Spirit with a
Sense of my Meanness* seemed as if I could never do any Thing at all to any
good Purpose by Reason of Ignorance and Folly. O that a Sense of these Things
might work more habitual Humility in my Soul.

[He continued much in the same Frame the next Day.]

Thursday, May 17. Was this Day greatly distressed with a Sense of my Vileness:
Appeared to my self too bad to walk on God's Earth, or to be treated with
Kindness by any of his Creatures. God was pleased to let me see my inward
Pollution and Corruption, to such a Degree, that I almost despaired of being
made holy: Oh! wretched Man that I am! Who shall deliver me from the Body of
this Death? In the Afternoon, met with the Indians according to Appointment,
and preached to them. And while riding to them, my Soul seemed to confide in
God* and afterward had some Relief; and Enlargement of Soul (...) Prayer, and
some Assistance in the Duty of Intercession: Vital Piety and Holiness appeared
sweet to me, and I longed for the Perfection of it.

Friday, May 18. Felt again something of the sweet Spirit of Religion; and my
Soul seemed to confide in God, that he would never leave me. -- But oftentimes
saw my self so mean a Creature, that I knew not how to think of Preaching. O
that I could always live to and upon GOD.

Saturday, May 19. Was, some Part of the Time, greatly oppressed with the
Weight and Burden of my Work: It seemed impossible for me ever to go through with
the Business I had undertaken. -- Toward Night, was very calm and comfortable;
And I think, my Soul trusted in God for Help.

Lord's Day, May 20. Preached twice to the poor Indians, and enjoyed some
Freedom in speaking, while I attempted to remove their Prejudices against
Christianity. My Soul longed for Assistance from above, all the while; for I
saw I had no Strength sufficient for that Work. Afterward, preached to the
Irish People: Was much assisted in the first Prayer, and something in Sermon.
Several Persons seemed much concerned for their Souls, with whom I discoursed
afterward with much Freedom and some Power. Blessed be God for any Assistance
afforded to a^ unworthy Worm. O that I could live to him!

[Thro' the rest of this Week, He was sometimes ready to sink with a Sense of
his unworthiness and (...) for the Work of the Ministry; and sometimes
encouraged (...) above his Fears and Sorrows, and was enabled (...) on God; and
especially on Saturday, t^w^rds Nig^^, ^e enjoyed Calmness and Composure, and
Assistance in Prayer to God. He rejoiced (as he says) That God r^^ains
unchangeably powerful and faithful, a sure and sufficient Portion, and the
Dewlling Place of his Children in all Generations]

Lord's Day, May 27. Visited my Indians, in the Morning, and attended upon a
Funeral among them: Was affected to see their heathenish Practices. O that they
might be turned from Darkness to Light. Afterward, got a considerable Number
of them together, and preached to them; and observed them very attentive. After
this, preached to the White People from H^b. ii.3. Was enabled to speak with
some Freedom and Power: Several People seemed much concerned for their Souls;
especially one who had been educated a Roman Catholic. Blessed be the Lord for
any Help.

Monday, May 28. Set out from the Indians above the Forks of Delaware, on a
Journey toward Newark in New Jersey, according to my Orders. Rode through the
Wilderness; was much fatigued with the Heat; lodged at a Place called
Black-River; was exceedingly tired and worn out.

[On Tuesday, he came to Newark: The next Day, went to Elisabeth-Town: On
Thursday, he went to New York; and on Friday returned to Elisabeth-Town. These
Days were spent in some Perplexity of Mind. He continued at Elisabeth-Town
'till Friday in the Week following. Was enlivened, refreshed and strengthened
on the Sabbath at the Lord's Table. The ensuing Days of the Week were spent
chiefly in Studies preparatory to his Ordination; and on some of them he seemed
to have much of God's gracious Presence, and of the sweet Influences of his
Spirit; but was in a very weak State of Body. On Saturday, he rode to Newark.]

Lord's Day, June 10. [at Newark] In the Morning, was much concerned how I
should perform the Work of the Day; and trembled at the Thoughts of being left
to my self. -- Enjoyed very considerable Assistance in all Parts of the public
Service. Had an Opportunity again to attend on the Ordinance of the
Lord's Supper, and through divine Goodness was refreshed in it: My Soul was full
of Love and Tenderness toward the Children of God, and toward all Men: Felt a
certain Sweetness of Disposition toward every Creature. At Night, I enjoyed
more Spirituality, and sweet Desire of Holiness, than I have felt for some
Time: Was afraid of every Thought and every Motion, left thereby my Heart
should be drawn away from God. O that I might never leave the blessed God.
Lord, in thy Presence is Fullness of Joy. O the Blessedness of living ^o God!

Monday, June 11. This Day the Presbytery met together at Newark, in order to
my Ordination. Was very weak and disordered in Body; yet endeavored to repose
my Confiden^^ in God. Spent most of the Day alone; especially the Forenoon. At
three in the Afternoon preached my Probation-Sermon, from Act. xxvi.17, 18.
being a Text given me for that End. Felt not well, either in Body or Mind;
however, God carried me through comfortably. Afterward, passed an Examination
before the Presbytery. Was much tired, and my Mind burdened with the Greatness
of that Charge, I was in the most solemn Manner about to take upon me: My Mind
was so pressed with the Weight of the W^^k incumbent upon me, that I could not
sleep this Night, though very weary and in great need of Rest.

Tuesday, June 12. Was this Morning further examined, respecting my
Experimental Acquaintance with Christianity. Mr. Pemberton, in a Letter to the
Honorable Society in Scotland that employed Mr. Brainerd, which he wrote
concerning him, (published in Scotland, in the Christian monthly History)
writes thus, We can with Pleasure say, that Mr. Brainerd passed through his
Ordination-Trials, to the universal Approbation of the Presbytery, and appeared
uncommonly qualified for the Work of the Ministry. He seems to be armed with a
great deal of Self-denial, and animated with a noble Zeal to propagate the
Gospel among those barbarous Nations, who have long (...) in the Darkness of
Heathenism.
At ten o'Clock my Ordination was attended: The Sermon preached by the Rev. Mr.
Pemberton. At this Time I was affected with a Sense of the important Trust
committed to me; yet was Composed, and solemn, without Distraction: And I hope,
I then (as many Times before) gave my self up to God, to be for him, and not
for another. O that I might always be engaged in the Service of God, and duly
remember the sole^^ Charge I have received, in the Presence of God, Angels and
Men; Amen: May I be assisted of God for this Purpose. -- Toward Night, rode to
Elisabeth-Town.

PART VI. From his Ordination, 'till he first began to preach to the Indians at
Crosweeksung, among whom he had his most remarkable Success.
WEdnesday, June 13. Spent some considerable Time in writing an Account of the
Indian Affairs to go to Scotland; spent some Time in Conversation with Friends;
But enjoyed not much Sweetness and Satisfaction.

Thursday, June 14. Received some particular Kindness from Friends; and
wondered, that God should open the Hearts of any to treat me with Kindness: Saw
my self to be unworthy of any Favor, from God, or any of my Fellow-Men. Was
much exercised with Pain in my Head; however determined to set out on my
Journey toward Delaware in the Afternoon: But in the Afternoon my Pain
increased exceedingly; so that I was obliged to betake my self to the Bed; and
the Night following, was greatly distressed with Pain and Sickness: Was
sometimes almost bereaved of the Exercise of Reason by the Extremity of Pain.
Continued much Distressed 'till Saturday; when I was something relieved by an
Emetick: But was unable to walk abroad 'till the Monday following, in the
Afternoon; and still remained very feeble. I often admired the Goodness of God,
that he did not suffer me to proceed on my Journey from this Place where I was
so tenderly used, and to be Sick by the Way among Strangers. -- God is very
gracious to me, both in Health and Sickness, and intermingles much Mercy with
all my Afflictions and Toils. Enjoyed some Sweetness in Things divine, in the
midst of my Pain and Weakness. Oh, that I could praise the Lord.

[On Tuesday, June 19. He set out on his Journey Ho^^* and in three Days
reached his Place, near the Forks of Delaware. Performed the Journey under much
Weakness of Body; but had Comfort in his Soul, from Day to Day: And both (...)
Weakness of Body, and Consolation of Mind continued through the Week.]

Lord's Day, June 24. Extremely Feeble; scarce able to walk: However, visited
my Indians, and took much (...) to instruct them: Labored with some that were
much dis^^fected to Christianity. My Mind was much burdened with the Weight and
Difficulty of my Work. My whole Dependence and Hope of Success seemed to be on
God; who alone I (...) could make them willing to receive Instruction. My Heart
was much engaged in Prayer, sending up silent Requests to God, even while I was
speaking to them. O that I could always go in the Strength of the Lord.

Monday, June 25. Was something better in Health (...) of late: Was able to
spend a considerable Part of the Day (...) Prayer and close Studies. Had more
Freedom and Fervency in Prayer than usual of late: Especially longed for the
Presence of God in my Work, and that the poor Heathen might be converted. And
in Evening-Prayer my Faith and Hope in God were much raised. To an Eye of
Reason every Thing that respects the Conversion of the Heathen is as dark as
Midnight; and yet I cannot but hope in God for the Accomplishment of something
glorious among them. My Soul longed much for the Advancement of the Redeemer's
Kingdom on Earth. Was very fearful lest I should admit some vain Thought, and
so lose the Sense I then had of divine Things. O for an abiding heavenly Temper!

Tuesday, June 26. In the Morning, my Desires seemed to rise, and ascend up
freely to God. Was busy most of the Day is translating Prayers into the
Language of the Delaware-Indians: Met with great Difficulty by Reason that my
Interpreter was altogether unacquainted with the Business. But though I was much
discouraged with the extreme Difficulty of that Work, yet God supported me; and
especially in the Evening, gave me sweet Refreshment: In Prayer my Soul was
enlarged, and my Faith drawn into sensible Exercise; was enabled to cry to God
for my poor Indians; and though the Work of their Conversion appeared impossible
with Man, yet with God I saw all Things were possible. My Faith was much
strengthened, by observing the wonderful Assistance God afforded his Servants
Nehemiah and Ezra, in reforming his People, and re-establishing his ancient
Church. I was much assisted in Prayer for dear Christian Friends, and for
others that I apprehended to be Christless; but was more especially concerned
for the poor Heathen, and those of my own Charge: Was enabled to be instant in
Prayer for them; and hoped that God would bow the Heavens and come down for
their Salvation. It seemed to me, there could be no Impediment sufficient to
obstruct that glorious Work, seeing the living God, as I strongly hoped, was
engaged for it. I continued in a solemn Frame, lifting up my Heart to God for
Assistance, and Grace, that I might be more mortified to this present World,
that my whole Soul might be taken up continually in Concern for the Advancement
of Christ's Kingdom: Longed that God would purge me more, that I might be as a
chosen Vessel to bear his Name among the Heathens. Continued in this Frame
'till I dropped asleep.

Wednesday, June 27. Felt something of the same solemn Concern, and Spirit of
Prayer, that I enjoyed last Night, soon after I rose in the Morning. -- In the
Afternoon, rode several Miles to see if I could procure any Lands for the poor
Indians, that they might live together, and be under better Advantages for
Instruction. While I was riding, had a deep Sense of the Greatness and
Difficulty of my Work; and my Soul seemed to rely wholly upon God for Success,
in the diligent and faithful use of Means. Saw, with greatest Certainty, that
the Arm of the Lord must be revealed, for the Help of these poor Heathen, if
ever they were delivered from the Bondage of the Powers of Darkness. Spent most
of the Time, while riding, in lifting up my Heart for Grace and Assistance.

Thursday, June 28. Spent the Morning, in reading several Parts of the Holy
Scripture, and in fervent Prayer for my Indians, that God would set up his
Kingdom among them, and bring them into his Church. -- About nine, I withdrew
to my usual Place of Retirement in the Woods; and there again enjoyed some
Assistance in Prayer. My great Concern was for the Conversion of the Heathen to
God; and the Lord helped me to plead with him for it. Toward Noon, rode up to
the Indians, in order to preach to 'em; and while going, my Heart went up to
God in Prayer for 'em; could freely tell God, He knew that the Cause was not
mine, which I was engaged in; but it was his own Cause, and it would be for his
own Glory to convert the poor Indians: And blessed be God, I felt no Desire of
their Conversion, that I might receive Honor from the World, as being the
Instrument of it. Had some Freedom in speaking to the Indians.

[The next Day, he speaks of some serious Concern for the Kingdom of the
blessed Redeemer; but complains much of Barrenness, Wanderings, Inactivity, etc.]

Saturday, June 30. My Soul was much Solemnized in reading God's Word;
especially the ninth Chapter of Daniel. I saw how God had called out his
Servants to Prayer, and made them wrestle with him, when he designed to bestow
any great Mercy on his Church. And alas, I was ashamed of my self, to think of
my Dullness and Inactivity, when there seemed to be so much to do for the
upbuilding of Zion. Oh, how does Zion lie waste! I longed, that the Church of
God might be enlarged: Was enabled to pray, I think, in Faith: My Soul seemed
sensibly to confide in God, and was enabled to wrestle with him. Afterward,
walked Abroad to a Place of sweet Retirement, and enjoyed some Assistance in
Prayer again: Had a Sense of my great need of divine Help, and felt my Soul
sensibly depend on God. Blessed be God, this has been a comfortable Week to me.

Lord's Day July 1. In the Morning, was perplexed with wandering vain Thoughts:
Was much grieved, judged and condemned my self before God. And Oh, how
miserable did I feel, because I could not live to God! At ten, rode away with a
heavy Heart, to preach to my Indians. Upon the Road, I attempted to lift up my
Heaat to God; but was infested with an unsettled wandering Frame of Mind; and
was exceeding restless and perplexed, and filled with Shame and Confusion
before God. I seemed to my self to be more brutish than any Man; and thought,
none deserved to be cast out of God'^. Presence so much as I. If I attempted to
lift up my Heart to God, as I frequently did by the Way, on a sudden, before I
was aware, my Thoughts were wandering to the Ends of the Earth: And my Soul was
filled with Surprise and Anxiety, to find it thus. Thus also after I came to
the Indians, my Mind was confused; and I felt nothing sensibly of that sweet
Reliance on God, that my Soul has been comforted with in Days past. Spent the
Forenoon in this Posture of Mind, and preached to the Indians without any
Heart. In the Afternoon, I felt still barren, when I began to preach; and after
about half an Hour, I seemed to my self to know nothing, and to have nothing to
say to the Indians; but soon after, I found in my self a Spirit of Love, and
Warmth, and Power to address the poor Indians; and God helped me to plead with
them to turn from all the Vanities of the Heathen, to the living God: And I am
persuaded, the Lord touched their Consciences; for I never saw such Attention
raised in them before. And when I came away from them, I spent the whole Time
while I was riding to my Lodgings, three Miles distant, in Prayer and Praise to
God. And after I had rode more than two Miles, it came into my Mind to dedicate
my self to God again; which I did with great Solemnity, and unspeakable
Satisfaction; especially gave up my self to him renewedly in the Work of the
Ministry. And this I did by divine Grace, I hope, without any Exception or
Reserve; not in the least shrinking back from any Difficulties, that might
attend this great and blessed Work. I seemed to be most free, cheerful, and
full in this Dedication of my self. My whole Soul cried, Lord, to thee I
dedicate my self: O accept of me, and let me be thine forever. Lord, I desire
nothing ^lse; I desire nothing more. O come, come, Lord, accept a poor Worm.
Whom have I in Heaven, but thee; and there is none upon Earth, that I desire
besides thee. After this, was enabled to praise God with my whole Soul, that he
had enabled me to devote and consecrate all my Powers to him in this solemn
Manner. My Heart rejoiced in my particular Work as a Missionary; rejoiced in my
Necessity of Self-denial in many Respects; and still continued to give up my
self to God, and implore Mercy of him; praying incessantly, every Moment, with
sweet Fervency. My Nature being very weak of late, and much spent, was now
considerably overcome: My Fingers grew very feeble, and somewhat numb; so that
I could scarcely stretch them out straight: And when I lighted from my Horse,
could hardly walk: My Joints seemed all to be loosed. But I felt abundant
Strength in the inner Man. Preached to the White People: God helped me much,
especially in Prayer. Sundry of my poor Indians were so moved as to come to
Meeting also; and one appeared much concerned.

Monday, July 2. Had some Relish of the divine Comforts of Yesterday; but could
not get that Warmth and Exercise of Faith, that I desired. Had sometimes a
distressing Sense of my past Follies, and present Ignorance and Barrenness: And
especially in the Afternoon, was sunk down under a L^ad of Sin and Guilt, in
that I had lived so little to God, after his abundant Goodness to me Yesterday.
In the Evening, though very weak, was enabled to pray with Fervency, and to
continue in^stant in Prayer, near an Hour. My Soul mourned over the Power of
its Corruption, and longed exceedingly to be washed and purged as with Hyssop.
Was enabled to pray for my dear absent Friends, Christ's Ministers, and his
Church; and enjoyed much Freedom and Fervency, but not so much Comfort, by
Reason of Guilt and Shame before God. -- Judged and condemned my self for the
Follies of the Day.

Tuesday, July 3. Was still very weak. This Morning, was enabled to pray under
a feeling Sense of my need of Help from God, and, I trust, had some Faith in
Exercise; and, blessed be God, was enabled to plead with God a considerable
Time. Truly God is good to me. But my Soul mourned and was grieved at my
Sinfulness and Barrenness, and longed to be more engaged for God. Near nine,
withdrew again for Prayer; and through divine Goodness, had the blessed Spirit of
Prayer; my Soul loved the Duty, and longed for God in it. O it is sweet to be
the Lord's, to be sensibly devoted to him! What a blessed Portion is God! How
glorious, how lovely in himself! O my Soul longed to improve Time wholly for
God! -- Spent most of the Day in translating Prayers into Indian. -- In the
Evening, was enabled again to wrestle with God in Prayer with Fervency. Was
enabled to maintain a Self-diffident and watchful Frame of Spirit, in the
Evening, and was jealous and afraid lest I should admit Carelessness and
Self-Confidence.

[The next Day, he seems to have had special Assistance and Fervency most of
the Day, but in a less Degree than the preceding Day. Thursday was spent in
great bodily Weakness; yet seems to have been spent in continual and exceeding
Painfulness in Religion; but in great Bitterness of Spirit by Reason of his
Vileness and Corruption; he says thus, I thought there was not one Creature
living so vile as I. Oh, my inward Pollution! Oh, my Guilt and Shame before
God! -- I know not what to do. Oh, I longed ardently to be cleansed and washed
from the Stains of inward Pollution! Oh, to be made like God, or rather to be
made fit for God to own.]

Friday, July 6. Awoke this Morning in the Fear of God: Soon called to Mind my
Sadness in the Evening past; and spent my first waking Minutes in Prayer for
Sanctification, that my Soul might be washed from its exceeding Pollution and
Defilement. After I arose, ^ spent some Time in reading God's Word and Prayer:
I cried to God under a Sense of my great Indigency. -- I am, of late, most of
all concerned for Ministerial Qualifications, and the Conversion of the
Heathen: Last Year, I longed to be prepared for a World of Glory, and speedily
to depart out of this World; but of late all my Concern almost is for the
Conversion of the Heathen; and for that End, I long to live. But blessed be
God, I have less desire to live for any of the Pleasures of the World, than
ever I had: I long and love to be a Pilgrim; and want Grace to imitate the
Life, Labors and Sufferings of St. Paul among the Heathen. And when I long for
Holiness now, it is not so much for my self as formerly; but rather that
thereby I may become an able Minister of the New Testament, especially to the
Heathen. Spent about two Hours this Morning in Reading and Prayer by Turns; and
was in a watchful tender Frame, afraid of every Thing that might cool my
Affections, and draw away my Heart from God. Was something strengthened in my
Studies; but near Night was very weak and weary.

Saturday, July 7. Was very much disordered this Morning, and my Vigor all
spent and exhausted: But was affected and refreshed in reading the sweet Story
of Elijah's Translation, and enjoyed some Affection and Fervency in Prayer;
longed much for Ministerial Gifts and Graces, that I might do something in the
Cause of God. Afterward was refreshed and invigorated, while reading Mr.
Joseph Alleine's first Case of Conscience, etc. and enabled then to pray with
some Ardour of Soul, and was afraid of Carelessness and Self-Confidence, and
longed for Holiness.

Lord's Day, July 8. Was ill last Night, not able to rest quietly. Had some
small Degree of Assistance in preaching to the Indians; and afterward was
enabled to preach to the White People with some Power, especially in the Close
of my Discourse from Jer. iii.23. The Lord also assisted me in some Measure in
the first Prayer: Blessed be his Name. Near Night, though very weary, was enabled
to read God's Word with some sweet Relish of it, and to pray with Affection,
Fervency, and (I trust) Faith: My Soul was more sensibly dependent on God, than
usual. Was watchful, tender, and jealous of my own Heart, lest I should admit
C^^elesness and vain Thoughts, and grieve the blessed Spirit, so that he should
withdraw his sweet, kind, and tender Influences. Longed to depart and be with
Christ, more than at any Time of late. My Soul was exceedingly united to the
Saints of ancient Times, as well as those now living; especially my Soul melted
for the Society of Elijah and Elisha. Was enabled to cry to God with a
Child-like Spirit, and (...) continue instant in Prayer for some Time. Was much
enlarged in the sweet Duty of Intercession: Was enabled to remember great
Numbers of dear Friends, and precious Souls, as well as Christ's Ministers.
Continued in this Frame, afraid of every idle Thought, 'till I dropped asleep.

Monday, July 9. Was under much illness of Body most of the Day, and notable to
sit up the whole Day. Toward Night, felt a little better. Then spent some Time
in reading God's Word and Prayer: Enjoyed some Degree of Fervency and
Affection: Was enabled to plead with God for his Cause and Kingdom: And, through
divine Goodness, It was apparent to me that it was his Cause I pleaded for, and
not my own: And was enabled to make this an Argument with God to answer my
Requests.

Tuesday, July 10. Was very ill and full of Pain, and very dull and spiritless.
-- In the Evening, had an affecting Sense of my Ignorance, etc. and of my need
of God at all Times, to do every Thing for me; and my Soul was humbled before
God.

Wednesday, July 11. Was still exercised with Illness and Pain. Had some Degree
of Affection and Warmth in Prayer and reading God's Word: Longed for Abraham's
Faith and Fellowship with God; and felt some Resolution to spend all my Time
for God, and to exert my self with more Fervency in his Service; but found my
Body weak and feeble. In the Afternoon, though very ill, was enabled to spend
some considerable Time in Prayer; spent indeed most of the Day in that
Exercise; and my Soul was diffident, watchful and tender, lest I should offend
my blessed Friend, in Thought or Behavior. I am persuaded my Soul confided in,
and leaned upon the blessed God. Oh, what need did I see my self to stand in of
God at all Times, to assist me and lead me! -- Found a great want of Strength
and Vigor, both in the outward and inner Man.

[The Exercises and Experiences, that he speaks of in the next nine Days, are
very Similar to those of the preceding Days, of this and the foregoing Week; a
Sense of his own Weakness, Ignorance, Unprofitableness, and Vileness; loathing
and abhorring himself; Self-diffidence; Sense of the Greatness of his Work, and
his great need of divine Help, and the extreme Danger of Self-Confidence;
longing for Holiness and Humility, and ^o be fitted for his Work; and to live
to God; and longing for the Conversion of the Indians; and these Things to a
very great Degree.]

Saturday, July 21. This Morning, was greatly oppressed with Guilt and Shame,
from a Sense of inward Vileness and Pollution. About nine, withdrew to the
Woods for Prayer; but had not much Comfort; I appeared to my self the vilest
meanest Creature upon Earth, and could scarcely live with my self; so mean and
vile I appeared, that I thought I should never be able to hold up my Face in
Heaven, if God of his infinite Grace should bring me thither. Toward Night my
Burden respecting my Work among the Indians began to increase much; and was
aggravated by hearing sundry Things that looked very discouraging, in
particular that they intended to meet together the next Day for an idolatrous
Feast and Dance. Then I began to be in Anguish: I thought I must in Conscience
go and endeavor to break them up; and knew not how to attempt such a Thing.
However I withdrew for Prayer, hoping for Strength from above. And in Prayer I
was exceedingly enlarged, and my Soul was as much drawn out as ever I remember
it to have been in my Life, or near. I was in such Anguish, and pleaded with so
much Earnestness and Importunity, that when I rose from my Knees I felt
extremely weak and overcome, I could scarcely walk strait, my Joints were
loosed, the sweat ran down my Face and Body, and Nature seemed as if it would
dissolve. So far as I could judge, I was wholly free from selfish Ends in my
fervent Supplications for the poor Indians. I knew, they were met together to
worship Devils, and not GOD; and this made me cry earnestly, that God would now
appear, and help me in my Attempts to break up this idolatrous Meeting. My Soul
pleaded long; and I thought, God would hear, and would go with me to vindicate
his own Cause: I seemed to confide in God for his Presence and Assistance. And
thus I spent the Evening, praying incessantly for divine Assistance, and that I
might not be Self-dependent, but still have my whole Dependence upon God. What
I passed through was remarkable, and indeed inexpressible. All Things here below
vanished; and there appeared to be nothing of any considerable Importance to
me, but Holiness of Heart and Life, and the Conversion of the Heathen to God.
All my Cares, Fears and Desires, which might be said to be of a worldly Nature,
disappeared; and were, in my Esteem, of little more Importance than a Puff of
Wind. I exceedingly longed, that God would get to himself a Name among the
Heathen: And I appealed to him with the greatest Freedom, that he knew I
perfer'd HIM above my chief Joy. Indeed, I had no Notion of Joy from this
World: I cared not where or how I lived, or what Hardships I went through; so
that I could but gain Souls to CHRIST. I continued in this Frame all the
Evening and Night. While I was asleep, I dreamed of these Things; and when I
waked (as I frequently did) the first Thing I thought of was this great Work of
pleading for GOD against Satan.

Lord's Day, July 22. When I waked, my Soul was burdened with what seemed to be
before me: I cried to God, before I could get out of my Bed: And as soon as I
was dressed, I withdrew into the Woods, to pour out my burdened Soul to God,
especially for Assistance in ^y great Work; for I could scarcely think of any
Thing else: And enjoyed the same Freedom and Fervency as the last Evening; and
did with unspeakable Freedom give up my self afresh to God, for Life or Death,
for all Hardships he should call me to among the Heathen; and felt as if
nothing could discourage me from this blessed Work. I had a strong Hope, that
God would bow the Heavens and come down, and do some mavelous Work among the
Heathen. And when I was riding to the Indians, three Miles, my Heart was
continually going up to God for his Presence and Assistance; and hoping, and
almost expecting, that God would make this the Day of his Power and Grace
amongst the poor Indians. When I came to them, I found them engaged in their
Frolic; but through divine Goodness I got them to break up, and attend to my
Preaching: Yet still there appeared nothing of the special Power of God among
them. Preached again to them in the Afternoon; and observed, the Indians were
more sober than before: But still saw nothing special among them; from whence
Satan took occasion to tempt and buffet me with these cursed Suggestions, There
i^ no God, or if there be, he is not able to convert the Indians, before they
had more Knowledge, etc. I was very weak and weary, and my Soul born down with
Perplexity: But was mortified to all the World, and was determined still to
wait upon God for the Conversion of the Heathen, though the Devil tempted me to
the contrary.

Monday, July 23. Retained still a deep and pressing Sense of what lay with so
much Weight upon me Yesterday: But was more calm and quiet; enjoyed Freedom and
Composure, after the Temptations of the last Evening: Had sweet Resignation to
the divine Will; and desired nothing so much as the Conversion of the Heathen
to God, and that his Kingdom might come in my own Heart, and the Hearts of
others. Rode to a Settlement of Irish People, about 15 Miles South-Westward;
spent my Time in Prayer and Meditation by the Way. Near Night, preached from
Math. v.3. -- God was pleased to afford me some Degree of Freedom and Fervency.
Blessed be God for any Measure of Assistance.

Tuesday, July 24. Rode about 17 Miles Westward, over a hideous Mountain, to a
Number of Indians. Got together near 30 of 'em: Preached to 'em in the Evening,
and lodged among them See Mr. Brain^rd's Narrative at the End of his Ordination
Sermon, Page 34.
. -- Was weak, and felt something disconsolate: Yet could have no Freedom in
the Thought of any other Circumstances or Business in Life: All my Desire was
the Conversion of the Heathen, and all my Hope was in God: God does not suffer
me to please or comfort my self with Hopes of seeing Friends, returning to my
dear Acquaintance, and enjoying worldly Comforts.

[The next Day, he preached to these Indians again; and then returned to the
Irish Settlement, and there preached to a numerous Congregation: There was a
considerable Appearance of Awakening in the Congregation. Thursday, he returned
home, exceedingly fatigued and spent; still in the same Frame of Mortification
to the World, and solicitous for the Advancement of Christ's Kingdom: And on
this Day he says thus, I have felt, this Week, more of the Spirit of a Pilgrim
on Earth, than perhaps ever before; And yet so desirous to see Zion's
Prosperity, that I was not so willing to leave this Scene of Sorrow as I used
to be. -- The two remaining Days of the Week, he was very ill, and cries out of
Wanderings, Dullness, and want of spiritual Fervency and Sweetness. On the
Sabbath, He was confined by Illness, not able to go out to preach. After this,
his Illness increased upon him, and he continued very ill all the Week; This
Week, on Tuesday, he wrote the 4th Letter added at the End of this Account.
and says, that he thought he never before endured such a Season of distressing
Weakness; and that his Nature was so spent, that he could neither stand, sit,
nor lie with any Quiet; and that he was exercised with extreme Faintness and
Sickness at his Stomach; and that his Mind was as much disordered as his Body,
seeming to be stupid, and without all kind of Affections toward all Objects;
and yet perplexed, to think, that he lived for nothing, that precious Time
rolled away, and he could do nothing but trifle: And speaks of it as a Season
wherein Satan buffeted him with some peculiar Temptations. -- Concerning the
next five Days he writes thus, On Lord's Day Aug. 5. Was still very poor. But,
though very weak, I visited and preached to the poor Indians twice, and was
strengthened vastly beyond my Expectations. And indeed, the Lord gave me some
Freedom and Fervency in addressing them; though I had not Strength enough to
stand, but was obliged to sit down the whole Time; Toward Night, was extremely
weak, faint, sick and full of Pain. And thus I have continued much in the same
State that I was in last Week, through the most of this (it being now Friday;)
unable to engage in any Business; frequently unable to pray in the Family. I am
obliged to let all my Thoughts and Concerns run at Random; for I have neither
Strength to read, meditate, or pray: And this naturally perplexes my Mind. I
seem to my self like a Man that has all his Estate embarked in one small Boat,
unhappily going adrift, down a swift Torrent. The poor Owner stands on the
Shore, and looks, and laments his Loss. -- But alas, though my all seems to be
adrift, and I stand and see it, I dare not lament; for this sinks my Spirits
more, and aggravates my bodil. Disorders! I am forced therefore to divert my
self with Trifles; although at the same Time I am afraid, and after feel as if I
was guilty of the Misimprovement of Time. And oftentimes my Conscience is so
exercised* with this miserable Way of spending Time, that I have no Peace; though
I have no Strength of Mind or Body to improve it to better Purpose. O that God
would pity my distressed State.

The next three Weeks after this, his Illness was not so extreme: He was in
some Degree capable of Business, both public and private; (although he had some
Turns wherein his Indisposition prevailed to a great Degree:) He also in this
Space had, for the most Part, much more inward Assistance, and Strength of
Mind: He often expresses great Longings for the Enlargement of Christ's
Kingdom; especially by the Conversion of the Heathen to God: He speaks of his
Hope of this as all his Delight and Joy. He continues still to express his
usual Longings after Holiness and living to God, and his Sense of his own
Unworthiness: He several Times speaks of his appearing to himself the vilest
Creature on Earth; and once says, that he verily though it there were none of God's
Children who fell so far short of that Holiness, and Perfection in their
Obedience, which God requires, as he. He speaks of his feeling more dead than
^ver to the Enjoyments of the World. He sometimes mentions special Assistance
that he had in this Space of Time, in preaching to the Indians, and of
Appearances of religious Concern among them. He speaks also of Assistance in
Prayer for absent Friends, and especially Ministers and Candidates for the
Ministry; and of much Comfort he enjoyed in the Company of some Ministers that
came to visit him.]

Saturday, Sept. 1. Was so far strengthened, after a Season of great Weakness,
that I was able to spend two or three Hours in writing on a divine Subject.
Enjoyed some Comfort and Sweetness in Things divine and sacred: And as my
bodily Strength was in some Measure restored, so my Soul seemed to be somewhat
vigorous, and engaged in the Things of God.

Lord's Day, Sept. 2. Was enabled to speak to my poor Indians with much Concern
and Fervency; and I am persuaded, God enabled me to exercise Faith in him,
while I was speaking to them. I perceived, that some of them were afraid to
hearken to, and embrace Christianity, lest they should be enchanted and
poisoned by some of the Powows: But I was enabled to plead with them not to
fear these; and confiding in God for Safety and Deliverance, I bid a Challenge
to all these Powers of Darkness, to do their worst upon me first: I told my
People, I was a Christian, and asked them why the Powows did not Bewitch and
Poison me. I scarcely ever felt more sensible of my own Unworthiness, than in
this Action: I saw, that the Honor of God was concerned in the Affair; and I
desired to be preserved, not from selfish Views, but for a Testimony of the
divine Power and Goodness, and of the Truth of Christianity, and that God might
be glorified. Afterward, I found my Soul rejoice in God for his assisting
Grace.

[After this, he went a Journey into New England, and was absent from the Place
of his Abode, at the Forks of Delaware, about three Weeks. He was in a feeble
State the greater Part of the Time. But in the latter Part of the Journey, he
found he gained much in Health and Strength. And as to the State of his Mind,
and his religious and spiritual Exercises, it was much with him as had been
before usual in Journeys; excepting that the Frame of his Mind seemed more
generally to be comfortable. But yet there are Complaints of some uncomfortable
Seasons, want of Fervency, and want of Retirements, and Time alone with God. In
this Journey, he did not forget the Indians; but once and again speaks of his
longing for their Conversion.]

Wednesday, Sept. 26. Rode Home, to the Forks of Delaware. What Reason have I
to bless God, who has preserved me in riding more than 420 Miles, and has kept
all my Bones, that not (...) of them has been broken! My Health likewise is
greatly recovered. O that I could dedicate my all to God: This is all the
Return I can make to him.

Thursday, Sept. 27. Was something melancholy: Had not much Freedom and Comfort
in Prayer: My Soul is disconsolate, when God is withdrawn.

Friday, Sept. 28. Spent the Day in Prayer, Reading, and Writing. Felt some
small Degree of warmth in Prayer, and some Desires of the Enlargement of
Christ's Kingdom by the Conversion of the Heathen, and that God would make me a
chos^^ Vessel, to bear his Name before them: Longed for Grace to enable me to
be faithful.

[The next Day, he speaks of the same Longings for the Advancement of Christ's
Kingdom, and the Conversion of the Indians; but complains greatly of the ill
Effects of the Diversions of his late Journey, as unfixing his Mind from that
Degree of Engagedness, Fervency, Watchfulness, etc. which he enjoyed before.
And the like Complaints are continued the next Day.]

Monday, October. 1. Was engaged this Day in making Preparation for my intended
Journey to Susquahannah: Withdrew s^veral Times to the Woods for secret Duties,
and endeavored to plead for the divine Presence to go with me to the poor
Pag^^^, to whom I was going to preach the Gospel. Toward Night, rode about
four Miles, and met Brother Byr^m; Minister at a Place called Rockciticus,
about 40 Miles from Mr. Brainerd's Lodgings.
who was come, at my Desire, to be my Companion in Travel to the Indians. I
rejoiced to see him; and, I trust, God made his Conversation profitable to me:
I saw him, as I thought, more dead to the World, it is anxious Cares, and
alluring Objects, than I was: and this made me look within my self, and gave me
a greater Sense of my Guilt, Ingratitude, and Misery.

Tuesday, October. 2. Set out on my Journey, in Company with dear Brother Byram,
and my Interpreter, and two chief Indians from the Forks of Delaware. Traveled
about 25 Mil^^ and lodged in one of the last Houses on our Road; after which
there was nothing but a hideous and howling Wilderness.

Wednesday, October. 3. We went on our Way into the Wilderness, and found the
most difficult and dangerous traveling, by far, that ever any of us had seen;
we had scarce any Thing else but lofty Mountains, deep Valleys, and hideous
Rocks, to make our Way through. However, I felt some Sweetness in divine Things,
part of the Day, and had my Mind intensely engaged in Meditation on a divine
Subject. Near Night, my Beast that I rode upon, hung one of her Legs in the
Rocks, and fell down under me; But through divine Goodness, I was not hurt.
However, she broke her Leg; and being in such a hideous Place, and near 30
Miles from any House, I saw nothing that could be done to preserve her Life,
and so was obliged to kill her, and to prosecute my Journey on Foot. This
Accident made me admire the divine Goodness to me, that my Bones were not
broken, and the Multitude of 'em filled with strong Pain. Just at Dark, we
kindled a Fire, cut up a few Bushes, and made a Shelter over our Heads, to save
us from the Frost, which was very hard that Night; and committing our selves to
God by Prayer, we lay down on the Ground, and slept quietly.

[The next Day, they went forward on their Journey, and at Night took up their
Lodging in the Woods in like Manner.]

Friday, October. 5. We arrived at Susquahannah River, at a Place called
Opeholhaupung See his Narrative at the End of his Ord. Sermon Page 35, 36.
: Found there 12 Indian Houses: After I had saluted the King in a friendly
Manner, I told him my Business, and that my Desire was to teach them
Christianity. After some Consultation, the Indians gathered, and I preached to
'em. And when I had done, I asked, if they would hear me again. They replied,
that they would consider of it; and soon after sent me Word, that they would
immediately attend, if I would preach: Which I did, with Freedom, both Times.
When I asked 'em again, whether they would hear me further, they replied, they
would the next Day. I was exceeding sensible of the Impossibility of doing any
Thing for the poor Heathen without special Assistance from above: And my Soul
seemed to rest on God, and leave it to him to do as he pleased in that which I
saw was his own Cause: And indeed, through divine Goodness, I had felt something
of this Frame most of the Time while I was traveling thither; and in some
Measure before I set out.

Saturday, October. 6. Rose early, and besought the Lord for Help in my great
Work. Near Noon, preached again to the Indians: And in the Afternoon, visited
them from House to House, and invited them to come and hear me again the next
Day, and put off their hunting Design, which they were just entering upon, 'till
Monday. This Night, I trust, the Lord stood by me to encourage and strengthen
my Soul: I spent more than an Hour in secret Retirement; was enabled to pour
out my Heart before God, for the Increase of Grace in my Soul, for Ministerial
Endowments, for Success among the poor Indians, for God's Ministers and People,
and for dear Friends vastly distant, etc. Blessed me God.

[The next Day, he complains of great want of Fixedness and Intenseness in
Religion, so that he could not keep any spiritual Thought one Minute without
Distraction; which occasioned Anguish of Spirit. He felt (he says) amazingly
Guilty, and extremely Miserable; and cries out, Oh my Soul, what Death it is,
to have the Affections unable to center in God, by Reason of Darkness, and
consequently roving after that Satisfaction elsewhere, that is only to be found
here! However, he preached twice to the Indians with some Freedom and Power:
But was afterward damped by the Objections they made against Christianity. In
the Evening, in a Sense of his great Defects in Preaching, he entreated God not
to impute to him Blood-Guiltiness; but yet was at the same Time enabled to
rejoice in God.]

Monday, October. 8. Visited the Indians with a Design to take my Leave of them,
supposing they would this Morning go out to Hunting early; but beyond my
Expectation and Hope, they desired to hear me preach again. I gladly complied
with their Request, and afterward endeavored to answer their Objections
against Christianity. Then they went away; and we spent the rest of the
Afternoon in Reading and Prayer, intending to go Home-ward very early the next
Day. My Soul was in some Measure ^^^resh'd in secret Prayer and Meditation.
Blessed be the Lord for all his Goodness.

Tuesday, October. 9. We rose about 4 in the Morning, and commending our selves
to God by Prayer, and asking his special Protection, we let out on our Journey
h^mewards about 5. and traveled with great steadiness 'till past ^ at Night.
And then made us a Fire, and a Shelter or Bark^, and so rested. I had some
clear and comfortable (...) Subject, by the Way, toward Night. -- In the
Night, the Wolves howled around us; but God preserved us.

[The next Day, they rose early, and set forward, and traveled that Day, 'till
they came to an Irish Settlement, where Mr. Brainerd was acquainted, and lodged
there. He speaks of some Sweetness in divine Things, and Thankfulness to God
for his Goodness to him in this Journey, that he felt in his Heart in the
Evening, though attended with Shame for his Barrenness. On Thursday, he continued
in the same Place; and he and Mr. Byram preached there to the People.]

Friday, October. 12. Rode Home to my Lodging; where I poured out my Soul to God
in secret Prayer, and endeavored to bless him for his abundant Goodness to me
in my late Journey. I scarce ever enjoyed more Health; at least, of later
Years; And God marvellously, and almost miraculously, supported me under the
Fatigues of the Way, and Traveling on Foot. Blessed be the Lord, that
continually preserves me in all my Ways.

[On Saturday, he went again to the Irish Settlement, to spend the Sabbath
there, his Indians being gone.]

Lord's Day, October. 14. Was much confused and perplexed in my Thoughts; could
not pray; and was almost discouraged, thinking I should never be able to preach
any more. But afterward, God was pleased to give me some Relief from these
Confusions: But still I was afraid, and even trembled before God. I went to the
Place of public Worship, lifting up my Heart to God for Assistance and Grace,
in my great Work: And God was gracious to me, and helped me to plead with him
for Holiness, and to use the strongest Arguments with him, drawn from the
Incarnation and Sufferings of Christ for this very End, that Men might be made
holy. Afterward, I was much assisted in preaching. I know not that ever God
helped me to preach in a more close and distinguishing Manner for the Trial of
Men's State. Through the infinite Goodness of God, I felt what I spoke; and God
enabled me to treat on divine Truth with uncommon Clearness: And yet I was so
sensible of my Defects in Preaching, that I could not be proud of my
Performance, as at some Times; And blessed be the Lord for this Mercy. In the
Evening, I longed to be entirely alone, to bless God for Help in a Time of
Extremity; and longed for great Degrees of Holiness, that I might show my
Gratitude to God.

[The next Morning, he spent some Time before Sunrise in Prayer, in the same
sweet and grateful Frame of Mind, that he had been in the Evening before: And
afterward went to his Indians, and spent some Time in teaching and exhorting
them.]

Tuesday, October. 16. Felt a Spirit of Solemnity and Watchfulness; was afraid I
should not live to and upon GOD: Longed for more Intenseness and Spirituality.
Spent the Day in Writing; frequently lifting up my Heart to God for more
Heavenly-mindedness. In the Evening, enjoyed sweet Assistance in Prayer, and
thirsted and pleaded to be as holy as the blessed Angels: Longed for
Ministerial Gifts and Graces, and Success in my Work: Was sweetly assisted in
the Duty of Intercession, and enabled to remember and plead for Numbers of dear
Friends, and Christ's Ministers.

[He seemed to have much of the same Frame of Mind, the two next Days.]

Friday, October. 19. Felt an abasing Sense of my own Impurity and Unholiness;
and felt my Soul melt and mourn, that I had abused and grieved a very gracious
God, who was still kind to me, notwithstanding all my Unworthiness. My Soul
enjoyed a sweet Season of bitter Repentance and Sorrow, that I had wronged that
blessed God, who (I was persuaded) was reconciled to me in his dear Son. My
Soul was now tender, devout, and solemn. And I was afraid of nothing, but Sin;
and afraid of that in every Action and Thought.

[The four next Days, were manifestly spent in a most constant Tenderness,
Watchfulness, Diligence and Self-Diffidence. But he complains of Wanderings of
Mind, Languor of Affections etc.]

Wednesday, October. 24. Near Noon, rode to my People; spent some Time, and
prayed with them: Felt the Frame of a Pilgrim on Earth; longed much to leave
this gloomy Mansion; but yet found the Exercise of Patience and Resignation.
And as I returned home from the Indians, spent the whole Time in lifting up my
Heart to God. In the Evening, enjoyed a blessed Season alone in Prayer; was
enabled to cry to God with a Childlike Spirit, for the Space of near an Hour:
Enjoyed a sweet Freedom in supplicating for my self, for dear Friends,
Ministers, and some who are preparing for that Work, and for the Church of God;
and longed to be as lively my self in God's Service as the Angels.

Thursday, October. 25. Was busy in Writing. Was very sensible of my absolute
Dependence on God in all Respects; saw that I could do nothing in those
Affairs, that I have sufficient natural Faculties for, unless God should smile
upon my Attempt. Not that we are sufficient of our selves, to think any Thing,
a^ of ourselves, was a sacred Text that I saw the Truth of.

Friday, October. 26. In the Morning, my Soul was melted with a Sense of divine
Goodness and Mercy to such a vile unworthy Worm as I: Delighted to lean upon
God, and place my whole Trust in him: My Soul was exceedingly grieved for Sin,
and prized and longed after Holiness; it wounded my Heart deeply, yet sweetly,
to think how I had abused a kind God. I longed to be perfectly Holy, that I
might not grieve a gracious God; who will continue to love, notwithstanding his
Love is abused: I longed for Holiness more for this End, than I did for my own
Happiness sake: And yet this was my greatest Happiness, never more to
dishonor, but always to glorify the blessed God. Afterward, rode up to the
Indians, in the Afternoon, etc.

[The four next Days, he was exercised with much Disorder and Pain of Body,
with a Degree of Melancholy and Gloominess of Mind, bitterly complaining of
Deadness and Unprofitableness, yet mourning and longing after God.]

Wednesday, October. 31. Was sensible of my Barrenness, and Decays, (...) the
Things of God: My Soul failed, when I remembered the Fervency I had enjoyed at
the Throne of Grace. Oh (I thought) If I could but be spiritual, warm,
heavenly-minded, and affectionately breathing after God, this would be better
than Life to me! My Soul longed exceedingly for Death, to be loosed from this
Dullness and Barrenness, and made forever active in the Service of God. I
seemed to (...) for nothing, and to do no Good: And Oh, the Burden of such a
Life! Oh, Death, Death, my kind Friend, hasten and deliver me from dull
Mortality, and make me spiritual and vigorous to Eternity.

Thursday, November 1. Had but little Sweetness in divine Things. But
afterward, in the Evening, felt some Life, and Longings after God; I longed to
be always solemn, devout, and heavenly-minded; and was afraid to leave off
praying, lest I should again lose a Sense of the sweet Things of God.

Friday, Nov. 2. Was filled with Sorrow and Confusion, in the Morning, and
could enjoy no sweet Sense of divine Things, nor get any Relief in Prayer. Saw
I deserved, that every one of God's Creatures should be let loose upon me to be
the Executioners of his Wrath against me: And yet therein I saw I deserved what
I did not fear as my Portion. About Noon, rode up to the Indians; and while
going, could feel no Desires for them, and even dreaded to say any Thing to
'em; but God was pleased to give me some Freedom and Enlargement, and made the
Season comfortable to me. In the Evening, had Enlargement in Prayer. But alas,
what Comforts and Enlargements I have felt for these many Weeks past, have been
only transient and short; and the greater Part of my Time has been filled up
with Deadness, or Struggles with Deadness, and bitter Conflicts with
Corruption. I have found my self exercised sorely with some particular Things
that I thought my self most of all freed from. And thus I have ever found it,
when I have though it the Battle was over, and the Conquest gained, and so let down
my Watch, the Enemy has risen up and done me the greatest Injury.

Saturday, Nov. 3. I read the Life and Trials of a godly Man, and was much
warmed by it: I wondered at my past Deadness; and was more convinced of it,
than ever. Was enabled to confess and bewail my Sin before God, with
Self-abhorrence.

Lord's Day, Nov. 4. Had, I think, some Exercise of Faith in Prayer, in the
Morning: Longed to be Spiritual. Had considerable Help in preaching to my poor
Indians: Was encouraged with them, and hoped that God designed Mercy for them.

[The next Day, On this Day he concluded his Narrative, that is at the End of
his Ordination Sermon.
He set out on a Journey to New York, to the Meeting of the Presbytery there;
and was gone from Home more than a Fortnight. He seemed to enter on this
Journey with great Reluctance; fearing, that the Diversions of it would prove a
Means of cooling his religious Affections, as he had found in other Journeys.
But yet, in this Journey he had some special Seasons wherein he enjoyed
extraordinary Evidences and Fruits of God's gracious Presence. He was greatly
fatigued and exposed in this Journey by Cold and Storms: And when he returned
from New York to New Jersey, on Friday, was taken very ill, and was detained by
his Illness some Time.]

Wednesday, Nov. 21. Rode from Newark to Rockciticus in the Cold, and was
almost overcome with it. Enjoyed some Sweetness in Conversation with dear Mr.
Jones, while I dined with him: My Soul loves the People of God, and especially
the Ministers of Jesus Christ, who feel the same Trials that I do.

Thursday, Nov. 22. Came on my Way from Rockciticus to Delaware River. Was very
much disordered with a Cold and Pain in my Head. About 6 at Night, I lost my
Way in the Wilderness, and wandered over Rocks and Mountains, down hideous
Steeps, the Swamps, and most dreadful and dangerous Places: And the Night being
dark, so that few Stars could be seen, I was greatly exposed: Was much pinched
with Cold, and distressed with an extreme Pain in my Head, attended with
Sickness at my Stomach; so that every Step I took was distressing to me. I had
little Hope for several Hours together, but that I must lie out in the Woods
all Night, in this distressed Case. But about 9 o'Clock, I found a House, through
the abundant Goodness of God, and was kindly entertained. Thus I have
frequently been exposed, and sometimes lain out the whole Night: but God has
hitherto preserved me; and blessed be his Name. Such Fatigues and Hardships as
these serve to wean me more from the Earth; and, I trust, will make Heaven the
sweeter. Formerly, when I was thus exposed to Cold, Rain, etc. I was ready to
please my self with the Thoughts of enjoying a comfortable House, a warm Fire,
and other outward Comforts; but now these have less Place in my Heart (through
the Grace of God) and my Eye is more to God for Comfort. In this World I expect
Tribulation; and it does not now, as formerly, appear strange to me; I don't in
such Seasons of Difficulty flatter my self that it will be better hereafter;
but rather think, how much worse it might be; how much greater Trials others of
God's Children have endured; and how much greater are yet perhaps reserved for
me. Blessed be God, that he makes the Thoughts of my Journey's End and of my
Dissolution a great Comfort to me, under my sharpest Trials; and scarce ever
lets these Thoughts be attended with Terror or Melancholy; but they are
attended frequently with great Joy.

Friday, Nov. 23. Visited a sick Man; discoursed and prayed with him. Then
visited another House, where was one dead and laid out; looked on the Corpse,
and longed that my Time might come to depart, that I might be with Christ. Then
went home to my Lodgings, about one o'Clock. Felt poorly; but was able to read,
most of the Afternoon.

[Within the Space of the next twelve Days, he passed under many Changes in the
Frames and Exercises of his Mind. He had many Seasons of the special Influences
of God's Spirit, animating, invigorating, and comforting him in the Ways of God
and Duties of Religion; but had some Turns of great Dejection and Melancholy.
He spent much Time, within this Space, in hard Labor, with others, to make for
himself a little Cottage or Hut, to live in by himself through the Winter. Yet he
frequently preached to the Indians, and speaks of special A^^^^tance he had
from Time to Time, in addressing himself to them; And of his sometimes having
considerable Encouragement, from the Attention they gave. But on Tuesday
December. 4. he was sunk into great Discouragement, to see 'em (most of 'em)
going in Company to an idolatrous Feast and Dance, after he had taken abundant
Pain with them to dissuade 'em from these Things.]

Thursday, December. 6. Having now a happy Opportunity of being retired in a
House of my own, which I have lately procured and moved into, and considering
that it is now a long Time since I have been able, either on Account of bodily
Weakness, or for want of Retirement, or some other Difficulty, to spend any
Time in secret Fasting and Prayer; considering also the greatness of my Work,
and the extreme Difficulties that attend it: And that my poor Indians are now
worshipping Devils, notwithstanding all the Pains I have taken with them, which
almost overwhelms my Spirit: Moreover, considering my extreme Barrenness,
spiritual Deadness and Dejection, of late; as also the Power of some particular
Corruptions; I sat apart this Day for secret Prayer and Fasting, to implore the
Blessing of God on my self, on my poor People, on my Friends, and on the Church
of God. At first, I felt a great Backwardness to the Duties of the Day, on
Account of the seeming Impossibility of performing them: But the Lord helped me
to break through this Difficulty. God was pleased, by the Use of Means, to give
me some clear Conviction of my Sinfulness, and a Discovery of the Plague of my
own Heart, more affecting than what I have of late had. And especially I saw my
Sinfulness in this, that when God had withdrawn himself, then, instead of
living and dying in Pursuit of him, I have been disposed to one of these two
Things; either (first) to yield an unbecoming Respect to some earthly Objects,
as if Happiness were to be derived from them; or (2dly) to be secretly froward
and impatient, and unsuitably desirous of Death, so that I have sometimes though it
I could not bear to think my Life must be lengthened out. And that which often
drove me to this impatient Desire of Death, was a Despair of doing any Good in
Life; and I chose Death, rather than a Life spent for Nothing. But now God made
me sensible of my Sin in these Things, and enabled me to cry to him for
Forgiveness. Yet this was not all I wanted; for my Soul appeared exceedingly
polluted, my Heart seemed like a Nest of Vipers, or a Cage of unclean and
hateful Birds: And therefore I wanted to be purified by the Blood of
Sprinkling, that cleanses from all Sin. And this, I hope, I was enabled to
pray for in Faith. I enjoyed much more Intenseness, Fervency, and Spirituality,
than I expected; God was better to me than my Fears. And toward Night, I felt
my Soul rejoice, that God is unchangeably happy and glorious; that he will be
glorified, whatever becomes of his Creatures. I was enabled to persevere in
Prayer 'till some Time in the Evening: At which Time I saw so much Need of
divine Help, in every Respect, that I knew not how to leave off, and (...)
forgot that I needed Food. This Evening, I was much assisted in meditating on
Isai. lii.3. Blessed be the Lord for any Help in the past Day.

Friday, December. 7. Spent some Time in Prayer, in the Morning; enjoyed some
Freedom and Affection in the Duty, and had longing Desires of being made
faithful to the Death. Sp^nt a little Time in writing on a divine Subject: Then
visited the Indians, and preached to 'em. But under inexpressible Dejection: I
had no Heart to speak to them, and could not do it, but as I forced my self: I
knew, they must hate to hear me, as having but just got Home from their
idolatrous Feast and Devil-Worship. -- In the Evening, had some Freedom in
Prayer and Meditation.

Saturday, December. 8. Have been uncommonly free this Day from Dejection, and
from that distressing Apprehension, that I could do nothing: Was enabled to
pray and study with some Comfort; and especially was assisted in writing on a
divine Subject. In the Evening, my Soul rejoiced in God; and I blessed his Name
for shining on my Soul. O the sweet and blessed Change I then felt, when God
brought me out of Darkness into his mavelous Light!

Lord's Day, December. 9. Preached, both Parts of the Day, at a Place called
Greenwich, in New Jersey, about 10 Miles from my own House. In the first
Discourse I had scarce any Warmth or affectionate Longing for Souls. In the
Intermission-Season I got alone among the Bushes, and cried to God for Pardon
of my Deadness; and was in Anguish and Bitterness, that I could not address
Souls with more Compassion and tender Affection: Judged and condemned my self
for want of this divine Temper: Though I saw I could not get it as of my self,
any more than I could make a World. In the latter Exercise, blessed be the
Lord, I had some Fervency, both in Prayer and Preaching; and especially in the
Application of my Discourse was enabled to address precious Souls with
Affection, Concern, Tenderness and Importunity. The Spirit of God, I think, was
there; as the Effects were apparent, Tears running down many Cheeks.

Monday, December. 10. Near Noon, I preached again: God gave me some Assistance,
and enabled me to be in some Degree faithful; so that I had Peace in my own
Soul, and a very comfortable Composure, although Israel should not be gathered.
Came away from Greenwich, and rode Home; arrived just in the Evening. By the
Way, my Soul blessed God for his Goodness; and I rejoiced, that so much of my
Work was done, and I so much nearer my blessed Reward. Blessed be God for Grace
to be faithful.

Tuesday, December. 11. Felt very poorly in Body, being much tired and worn out
the last Night. Was assisted in some Measure in writing on a divine Subject:
But was so feeble and sore in my Breast, that I had not much Resolution in my
Work. Oh, how I long for that World where the weary are at Rest! And yet through
the Goodness of God I don't now feel impatient.

Wednesday, December. 12. Was again very weak; but somewhat assisted in secret
Prayer, and enabled with Pleasure and Sweetness to cry, Come, Lord Jesus! Come,
Lord Jesus; come quickly. My Soul longed for God, for the living God. O how
delightful it is, to pray under such sweet Influences! Oh how much better is
this, than one's necessary Food! I had at this Time no Disposition to eat (though
late in the Morning;) for earthly Food appeared wholly Tastless. O how much
better is thy Love than Wine, than the sweetest Wine! -- I visited and preached
to the Indians, in the Afternoon; but under much Dejection. Found my
Interpreter under some Concern for his Soul^; which was some Comfort to me; and
yet filled me with new Care. I longed greatly for his Conversion; lifted up my
Heart to God for it, while I was talking to him: Came Home, and poured out my
Soul to God for him: Enjoyed some Freedom in Prayer, and was enabled, I think,
to leave all with God.

Thursday, December. 13. Endeavored to spend the Day in Fasting and Prayer, to
implore the divine Blessing, more especially on my poor People; and in
particular, I sought for converting Grace for my Interpreter, and three or four
more under some Concern for their Souls. I was much disordered in the (...)
when I arose; but having determined to spend the Day in (...) Manner, I
attempted it. Some Freedom I had in pleading for these poor concerned Souls,
several Times; and when interceeding for them, I enjoyed greater Freedom from
wandering and distracting Thoughts, than in any Part of my Supplications: But,
in the general, was greatly exercised with Wanderings; so that in the Evening it
seemed as if I had need to pray for nothing so much as for the Pardon of Sins
committed in the Day past, and the Vileness I then found in my self. The Sins I
had most Sense of, were Pride, and wandering Thoughts, whereby I mocked God. The
former of these cursed Iniquities excited me to think of writing, or preaching,
or converting Heathen, or performing some other great Work, that my Name might
live when I should be dead. My Soul was in Anguish, and ready to drop into
Despair, to find so much of that cursed Temper. With this, and the other Evil I
labored under, viz. wandering Thoughts, I was almost overwhelmed, and even
ready to give over striving after a Spirit of Devotion; and oftentimes sunk
into a considerable Degree of Despondency, and thought I was more brutish than
any Man. Yet after all my Sorrows, I trust through Grace, this Day and the
Exercises of it have been for my Good, and taught me more of my Corruption, and
Weakness without Christ, than I knew before.

Friday, December. 14. Near Noon, went to the Indians; but knew not what to say to
them, and was ashamed to look them in the Face: I felt I had no Power to
address their Consciences, and therefore had no Boldness to say any Thing. Was,
much of the Day, in a great Degree of Despair about ever doing or seeing any
Good in the Land of the Living.

[He continued under the same Dejection the next Day.]

Lord's Day, December. 16. Was so overwhelmed with Dejection, that I knew not how
to live: I longed for Death exceedingly: My Soul was sunk into deep Waters, and
the Floods were ready to drown me: I was so much oppressed, that my Soul was in
a kind of Horror: I could not keep my Thoughts fixed in Prayer, for the Space
of one Minute, without Fluttering and Distraction: I was exceedingly ashamed,
that I did not live to God: I had no distressing Doubt about my own State; but
would have cheerfully ventured (as far as I could possibly know) into Eternity.
While I was going to preach to the Indians, my Soul was in Anguish; I was so
overborn with Discouragement; that I despaired of doing any Good, and was
driven to my Wits End; I knew nothing what to say, nor what Course to take. But
at last I insisted on the Evidence we have of the Truth of Christianity from
the Miracles of Christ; many of which I set before them: And God helped me to
make a close Application to those that refused to believe the Truth of what I
taught them: And indeed I was enabled to speak to the Consciences of all, in
some Measure. I was something encouraged, to find, that God enabled me to be
faithful once more. Then came and preached to another Company of them; but was
very weary and faint. In the Evening, I was something refreshed, and was
enabled to pray and praise God with Composure and Affection: Had some
Enlargement and Courage with Respect to my Work: Was willing to live, and
longed to do more for God, than my weak state of Body would admit of. I can do
all Things through Christ that strengthens me; and by his Grace, I am willing
to spend and be spent in his Service, when I am not thus sunk in Dejection and
a kind of Despair.

Monday, December. 17. Was something comfortable in Mind, most of the Day; and was
enabled to pray with some Freedom, Cheerfulness, Composure, and Devotion; had
also some Assistance in writing on a divine Subject.

Tuesday, December. 18. Went to the Indians, and discoursed to them, near an
Hour, without any Power to come close to their Hearts. But at last, I felt some
Fervency, and God helped me to speak with Warmth. My Interpreter also was
amazingly assisted; and I doubt not but the Spirit of God was upon him (though I
had no Reason to think he had any true and saving Grace, but was only under
Conviction of his lost State;) and presently upon this most of the grown
Persons were much affected, and the Tears ran down their Cheeks; and one old
Man (I suppose, an hundred Years old) was so affected, that he wept, and seemed
convinced of the Importance of what I taught them. I staid with them a
considerable Time, exhorting and directing them; and came away, lifting up my
Heart to God in Prayer and Praise, and encouraged and exhorted my Interpreter
to strive to enter in (...) the strait Gale. Came home, and spent most of the
Evening (...) Prayer and Thanksgiving; and found my self much enlarged and
quickened. Was greatly concerned, that the Lord's Work which seemed to be
begun, might be carried on with Power, to the Conversion of poor Souls, and the
Glory of divine Grace.

Wednesday, December. 19. Spent a great Part of the Day in Prayer to God for the
Out-pouring of his Spirit on my poor People; as also to bless his Name for
awakning my Interpreter, and some others, and giving us some Tokens of his
Presence Yesterday. And blessed be God, I had much Freedom, five or six Times
in the Day, in Prayer and Praise, and felt a weighty Concern upon my Spirit for
the Salvation of those precious Souls, and the Enlargement of the Redeemer's
Kingdom among them. My Soul hoped in God for some Success in my Ministry: And
blessed be his Name for so much Hope.

Thursday, December. 20. Was enabled to visit the Throne of Grace frequently,
this Day; and through divine Goodness enjoyed much Freedom and Fervency, sundry
Times: Was much assisted in crying for Mercy for my poor People, and felt
Cheerfulness and Hope in my Requests for them. I spent much of the Day in
Writing; but was enabled to intermix Prayer with my Studies.

Friday, December. 21. Was enabled again to pray with Freedom, Cheerfulness, and
Hope. God was pleased to make the Duty comfortable and pleasant to me; so that
I delighted to persevere, and repeatedly to engage in it. Toward Noon, visited
my People, and spent the whole Time in the Way to them in Prayer, longing to
see the Power of God among them, as there appeared something of it the last
Tuesday; and I found it sweet to rest and hope in God. Preached to them twice,
and at two distinct Places: Had considerable Freedom, each Time, and so had my
Interpreter. Several of 'em followed me from one Place to the other: And I
thought, there was some divine Influence discernable amongst them. In the
Evening, was assisted in Prayer again. Blessed, blessed be the Lord.

[Very much the same Things are expressed concerning his inward Frame,
Exercises, and Assistances on Saturday, as on the preceding Days. He observes,
that this was a comfortable Week to him. But then concludes, Oh! That I had no
Reason to complain of much Barrenness. Oh that there were no vain Tho'ts and
evil Affections lodging within me. The Lord knows how I long for that World,
where they rest not Day nor Night, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord God
Almighty, etc. On the following Sabbath, he speaks of Assistance and Freedom in
his public Work, but as having less of the sensible Presence of God, than
frequently in the Week past: But yet says, his Soul was kept from sinking in
Discouragement. On Monday, again he seemed to enjoy very much the same Liberty
and Fervency, through the Day, that he enjoyed through the greater Part of the
preceding Week. This Day he wrote the fifth Letter added at the End of this
History.
]

Tuesday, December. 25. Enjoyed very little quiet Sleep last Night, by Reason of
bodily Weakness, and the closeness of my Studies Yesterday: Yet my Heart was
somewhat lively in Prayer and Praise: I was delighted with the divine Glory and
Happiness, and rejoiced that God was God, and that he was unchangeably
possessed of Glory and Blessedness. Though God hold my Eyes waking, yet he helped
me to improve my Time profitably amidst my Pain and Weakness, in continued
Meditations on Luke xiii.7. Behold these three Years I come se^^ing Fruit, etc.
My Meditations were sweet; and I wanted to set before Sinners their Sin and
Danger.

[He continued in a very low State, as to his bodily (...), for some Days:
Which seems to have been a great Hindrance to him in his religious Exercises
and Pursuits. But yet he expresses some Degree of divine Assistance, from Day
to Day, through the remaining Part of this Week. He preached several Times this
Week to his Indians; and there appeared still (...) Concern amongst them for
their Souls. On Saturday, he rode to the Irish Settlement, about 15 Miles from
his Lodgings, in order to spend the Sabbath there.]

Lord's Day, December. 30. Discoursed, both Parts of the Day, from Mark viii.34.
Whosoever will come after me, etc. God gave me very great Freedom and
Clearness, and (in the Afternoon especially) considerable Warmth and Fervency.
In the Evening also, had very great Clearness while conversing with Friends on
divine Things: I don't remember ever to have had more clear Apprehensions of
Religion in my Life: But found a Struggle, in the Evening, with spiritual Pride.

[On Monday, he preached again in the same Place with Freedom and Fervency; and
rode home to his Lodging; and arrived in the Evening, under a considerable
Degree of bodily Illness, which continued the two next Days. And he complains
much of spiritual Emptiness and Barrenness on those Days.]

Thursday, January 3.1744, 5. Being sensible of the great want of divine
Influences, and the out-pouring of God's Spirit, I spent this Day in Fasting
and Prayer, to seek so great a Mercy for my self, and my poor People in
particular, and for the Church of God in general. In the Morning, was very
Lifeless in Prayer, and could get scarce any Sense of God. Near Noon, enjoyed
some sweet Freedom to pray that the Will of God might in ever^ Respect become
mine: And I am persuaded, it was so at that Time in some good Degree. In the
Afternoon, I was exceeding work, and could not enjoy much Fervency in Prayer;
but felt a great Degree of Dejection; which, I believe, was very much ^wing to
my bodily Weakness and Disorder.

Friday, Jan. 4. Rode up to the Indians, near Noon; spent some Time there under
great Disorder: My Soul was sunk down into deep Waters, and I was almost
overwhelmed with Melancholy.

Saturday, Jan. 5. Was able to do something at Writing; but was much disordered
with Pain in my Head. At Night, was distressed with a Sense of my spiritual
Pollution, and ten Thousand youthful, yea, and childish Follies, that no Body
but my self had any Thought about; all which appeared to me now (...), and in a
lively View, as if committed Yesterday, and made (...) Soul ashamed before God,
and caused me to hate my self.

Lord's Day, Jan. 6. Was still distressed with vapoury Disorders. Preached to
my poor Indians; but had little Heart or Life. Toward Night, my Soul was
pressed under a Sense of my Unfaithfulness. O the Joy and Peace that arises
from a Sense of having obtained Mercy of God to be faithful! And Oh, the Misery
and Anguish that spring from an Apprehension of the contrary!

[His Dejection continued the two next Days; but not to so great a Degree on
Tuesday, when he enjoyed some Freedom and Fervency in preaching to the Indians.]

Wednesday, Jan. 9. In the Morning, God was pleased to remove that Gloom which
has of late oppressed my Mind, and gave me Freedom and Sweetness in Prayer. I
was encouraged and strengthe'd, and enabled to plead for Grace for my sel^ and
Mercy for my poor Indians; and was sweetly assisted in my Intercessions with
God for others. Blessed be his holy Name forever and ever; Amen, and Amen.
Those Things that of late have appeared most difficult and almost impossible,
now appeared not only possible, but easy. My Soul so much delighted to continue
instant in Prayer, at this blessed Season, that I had no Desire for my
necessary Food: even dreaded leaving off praying at all, lest I should lose
this Spirituality, and this blessed Thankfulness to God which I then felt. I
felt now quite willing to live, and undergo all Trials that might remain for me
in a World ^f Sorrow; but still longed for Heaven, that I might glorify God in
a perfect Manner. O come, Lord Jesus, come quickly. Spent the Day in Reading a
little; and in some Diversions, which I was necessitated to take by Reason of
much Weakness and Disorder. In the Evening, enjoyed some Freedom and
Intenseness in Prayer.

[The three remaining Days of the Week, he was very (...) and feeble in Body;
but nevertheless continued constantly in (...) same comfortable sweet Frame of
Mind, as is expressed on Wednesday. On the Sabbath, this Sweetness and
spiritual Alacrity began to abate: But still he enjoyed some Degree of (...),
and had Assistance in preaching to the Indians.]

Monday, Jan. 14. Spent this Day under a great Degree of bodily Weakness and
Disorder; and had very little Freedom, either in my Studies or Devotions: And
in the Evening, I was much dejected and melancholy. It pains and distresses
(...), that I live so much of my Time for nothing. I long to do much in a
little Time, and if it might be the Lord's will, to finish my Work speedily in
this tiresom World. I Am sure, I don't (...) to live for any Thing in this
World; and through Grace I am not afraid to look the King of Terrors in the Face:
I know, I shall be afraid, if God leaves me; and therefore I think it always
Duty to lay in for that solemn Hour. But for a very considerable Time past, my
Soul has rejoiced to think of Death in its nearest Approaches; and even when I
have been very weak, and seemed nearest Eternity. Not unto me, not unto me, but
to God be the Glory. I feel that which convinces me, that if God don't enable
me to maintain a holy Dependence upon him, Death will easily be a Terror to
me; but at present, I must say, I long to depart and to be with Christ, which
is best of all. When I am in a sweet resigned Frame of Soul, I am willing to
tarry a while in a World of Sorrow, I am willing to be from Home as long as God
sees fit it should be so: But when I want the Influence of this Temper, I am
then apt to be impatient to be gone. -- Oh when will the Day appear, that I
shall be perfect in Holiness, and in the Enjoyment of God!

[The next Day was spent under a great Degree of Dejection and Melancholy;
which (as he himself says, he was persuaded) was owing partly to bodily
Weakness, and vapoury Disorders.]

Wednesday, and Thursday, Jan. 16 and 17. I spent most of the Time in writing
on a sweet divine Subject, and enjoyed some Freedom and Assistance. Was
likewise enabled to pray more frequently and fervently than usual: and my Soul,
I think, rejoiced in God; especially on the Evening of the last of these Days:
Praise then seemed comely, and I delighted to bless the Lord. O what Reason
have I to be thankful, that God ever helps me to Labor and Study for him! He
does but receive his own, when I am enabled in any Measure to praise him,
labor for him, and live to him. Oh, how comfortable and sweet it is, to feel
the Assistance of divine Grace in the Performance of the Duties God has
enjoined us! Bless the Lord, O my Soul.

[The same Enlargement of Heart and joyful Frame of Soul continued through the
next Day. But on the Day following it began to decline; which Decay seems to
have continued the whole of the next Week: Yet he enjoyed some Seasons of
special and sweet Assistance.]

Lord's Day, Jan. 27. Had the greatest Degree of inward Anguish, that almost
ever I endured: I was perfectly overwhelmed, and so confused, that after I
began to discourse to the Indians, before I could finish a Sentence, sometimes
I forgot enti^ely what I was aiming at; or if, with much difficulty, I had
recollected what I had before designed, still it appeared strange, and like
something I had long forgotten, and had now but an imperfect Remembrance of. I
know, it was a Degree of Distraction, occasioned by vapoury Disorders,
Melancholy, spiritual Desertion, and some other Things that particularly
pressed upon me, this Morning, with an uncommon Weight, the principal of which
respected my Indians. This distressing Gloom never went off the whole Day; but
was so far removed, that I was enabled to speak with some Freedom and Concern
to the Indians, at two of their Settlements; and I think, there was some
Appearance of the Presence of God with us, some Seriousness, and seeming
Concern among the Indians, at least a few of them. In the Evening, this Gloom
continued still, 'till Family Prayer, Though Mr. Brainerd now dwelt by himself in
the forementioned little Cottage, which he had built for his own Use, yet that
was near to a Family of white People with whom he had lived before, and with
whom he still attended Family Prayer.
about nine o'Clock, and almost through this, until I came near the Close, when I
was praying (as I usually do) for the Illumination and Conversion of my poor
People; and then the Cloud was scattered, so that I enjoyed Sweetness and
Freedom, and conceived Hopes, that God designed Mercy for some of them. The
same I enjoyed afterward in secret Prayer; in which precious Duty I had for a
considerable Time Sweetness and Freedom, and (I hope) Faith, in praying for my
self, my poor Indians, and dear Friends and Acquaintance in New England and
elsewhere, and for the dear Interest of Zion in general. Bless the Lord, O my
Soul, and forget not all his Benefits.

[He spent the rest of this Week, or at least the most of it, under Dejection
and Melancholy: Which on Friday rose to an extreme Height; he being then, as he
himself observes, much exercised with vapoury Disorders. This exceeding
Gloominess continued on Saturday, 'till the Evening, when he was again relieved
in Family Prayer; and after it, was refreshed in secret, and felt willing to
live, and endure Hardships in the Cause of God; and found his Hopes of the
Advancement of Christ's Kingdom, as also his Hopes to see the Power of God
among the poor Indians, considerably raised.]

Lord's Day, Feb. ^. In the Morning, I was somewhat relieved of that Gloom and
Confusion, that my Mind has of (...) been greatly exercised with: Was enabled
to pray with some Composure, and Comfort. But however, went to my Indians
trembling; for my Soul remembered the Wormwood and the God (I might almost say
the Hell) of Friday last; and I was greatly afraid I should be obliged again to
drink of that Cup of Trembling, which was inconceivably more bitter than Death,
and made me long for the Grave more, unspeakably more, than for hid Treasures,
yea, inconceivably more than the Men of this World long for such Treasures. But
God was pleased to hear my Cries, and to afford me great Assistance; so that I
felt Peace in my own Soul; and was satisfied that if not one of the Indians
should be profited by my Preaching, but should all be damned, yet I should be
accepted and rewarded as faithful; for I am persuaded, God enabled me to be so.
-- Had some good Degree of Help afterward, at another Place; and much longed
for the Conversion of the poor Indians. Was somewhat refreshed, and
comfortable, toward Night, and in the Evening. O that my Soul might praise the
Lord for his Goodness. -- Enjoyed some Freedom, in the Evening, in Meditation
on Luke xiii.24.

[In the three next Days, he was the Subject of much Dejection: But the three
remaining Days of the Week seem to have been spent with much Composure and
Comfort. On the next Sabbath, he preached at Greenwich in New Jersey. In the
Evening, he rode eight Miles to visit a sick Man at the Point of Death, and
sound him Speechless and Senseless.]

Monday, Feb. 11. About Break-of-Day, the sick Man died. I was affected at the
Sight: Spent the Morning with the Mourners; and after Prayer, and some
Discourse with them, I returned to Greenwich, and preached again from Psalm.
lxxxix 15. And the Lord gave me Assistance: I felt a sweet Love to Souls, and
to the Kingdom of Christ; and longed that poor Sinners might know the joyful
Sound. Several Persons were much affected. And after Meeting, I was enabled to
discourse, (...) Freedom and Concern, to some Persons that applied to me under
spiritual Trouble. Left the Place, sweetly composed, and rode home to my House
about 8 Miles distant. Discoursed to Friends, and inculcated divine Truths upon
some. In the Evening, was in the most solemn Frame that almost ever I remember
to have experienced: I know not that ever Death appeared more real to me, or
that ever I saw my self in the Condition of a dead Corpse, laid out, and
dressed for a Lodging in the silent Grave, so evidently as at this Time. And
yet I felt exceeding comfortably: My Mind was composed and calm, and Death
appeared without a Sting. I think, I never felt such an universal Mortification
to all created Objects as now. Oh, how great and solemn a Thing it appeared to
die! Oh, how it lays the greatest Honor in the Dust! And Oh, how vain and
trifling did the Riches, Honors, and Pleasures of the World appear! I could
not, I dare not, so much as think of any of them: for Death, Death, solemn
(though not frightful) Death appeared at the Door. Oh, I could see my self dead,
and laid out, and enclosed in my Coffin, and put down into the cold Grave, with
greatest Solemnity, but without Terror! I spent most of the Evening, in
conversing with a dear Christian Friend: And, blessed be God, it was a
comfortable Evening to us both. -- What are Friends? What are Comforts? What
are Sorrows? What are Distresses? -- The Time is short: It remains, that they
which weep, be as though they wept not; and they which rejoice, as though they
rejoiced not: for the Fashion of this World passes away. O come, Lord Jesus,
come quickly; Amen. -- Blessed be God for the Comforts of the past Day.

Tuesday, Feb. 12. Was exceeding weak; but in a sweet resigned, composed Frame,
most of the Day: Felt my Heart freely go forth after God in Prayer.

Wednesday, Feb. 13. Was much exercised with vapoury Disorders; but still
enabled to maintain Solemnity, and I think, Spirituality.

Thursday, Feb. 14. Spent the Day in writing on a divine Subject: Enjoyed
Health, and Freedom in my Work: Had a solemn Sense of Death; as I have indeed
had every Day this Week, in some Measure: What I felt on Monday last, has been
abiding, in some considerable Degree, ever since.

Friday, Feb. 15. Was engaged in writing again almost the whole Day. In the
Evening, was much assisted in meditating on that precious Text, John vii.37.
Jesus stood and cried etc. I had then a sweet Sense of the free Grace of the
Gospel: My Soul was encouraged, warmed and quickened, and my Desires drawn out
after God in Prayer: My Soul was watchful, and afraid of losing so sweet a
Guest as I then entertained. I continued long in Prayer and Meditation,
intermixing one with the other; and was unwilling to be diverted by any Thing
at all from so sweet an Exercise. I longed to proclaim the Grace I then
meditated upon, to the World of Sinners. -- O how quick and powerful is the
Word of the blessed God!

[The next Day, he complains of great Conflicts with Corruption, and much
Discomposure of Mind.]

Lord's Day, Feb. 17. Preached to the white People (my Interpreter being
absent) in the Wilderness upon the sunny side of a Hill: Had a cosinderable
Assembly, consisting of People that lived (at least many of them) not less than
30 Miles asunder; some of them came near 20 Miles. I discoursed to 'em, all
Day, from John vii.37. Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any Man thirst, etc.
In the Afternoon, it pleased God to grant me great Freedom and Fervency in my
Discourse; and I was enabled to imitate the Example of Christ in the Text, who
stood and cried. -- I think, I was scarce ever enabled to offer the free Grace
of God to perishing Sinners with more Freedom and Plainness in my Life. And
afterward, I was enabled earnestly to invite the Children of God to come
renewedly, and drink of this Fountain of Water of Life, from whence they have
heretofore derived unspeakable Satisfaction. It was a very comfortable Time to
me: There were many Tears in the Assembly; and I doubt not but that the Spirit
of God was there, convincing poor Sinners of their need of Christ. -- In the
Evening, I felt composed, and comfortable, though much tired: I had some sweet
Sense of the Excellency and Glory of God; and my Soul re^^^ced, that he was God
over all, blessed forever; but was too much (...) with Company and
Conversation, and longed to be more alone with God. Oh that I could forever
bless God for the Mercy of this Day, who answered me in the Joy of my Heart.

[The rest of this Week seems to have been spent under a Decay of this Life and
Joy, and in distressing Conflicts with Corruption; but not without some Seasons
of Refreshment and Comfort.]

Lord's Day, Feb. 24. In the Morning, was much perplexed: My Interpreter being
absent, I knew not how to perform my Work among the Indians. However, I rode to
the Indians, got a Dutchman to Interpret for me, though he was but poorly
qualified for the Business. Afterward, I came and preached to a few white
People from John vi.67. Here the Lord seemed to unburden me in some Measure;
especially toward the close of my Discourse: I felt Freedom to open the Love
of Christ to his own dear Disciples: When the rest of the World forsakes him,
and are forsaken by him, that he calls them no more, he then turns to his own,
and says, Will ye also go away! I had a Sense of the free Grace of Christ to
his own People, in such Seasons of general Apostasy, and when they themselves
in some Measure backslide with the World. O the free Grace of Christ, that he
seasonably minds his People of their Danger of Backsliding, and invites them to
persevere in their Adherence to himself! I saw that backsliding Souls, who
seemed to be about to go away with the World, might return, and welcome ^o him
immediately; without any Thing to recommend th^^ notwithstanding all their
former Backslidings. And thus my Discourse was suited to my own Soul's Case:
For, of late, I have found a great want of this Sense and Apprehension of
divine Grace; and have often been greatly distressed in my own Soul, because I
did not suitably apprehend this Fountain opened to purge away Sin; and so have
been too much laboring for spiritual Life, Peace of Conscience, and
progressive Holiness, in my own Strength: But now God showed me, in some
Measure, the Arm of all Strength, and the Fountain of all Grace. -- In the
Evening, I felt solemn, devout, and sweet, resting on free Grace for
Assistance, Acceptance, and Peace of Conscience.

[Within the Space of the next nine Days, he had frequent refreshing,
invigorating Influences of God's Spirit; attended with Complaint of Dullness,
and with Longings after spiritual Life and holy Fervency.]

Wednesday, March 6. Spent most of the Day in preparing for a Journey to
New England. Spent some Time in Prayer, with a special Reference to my intended
Journey. Was afraid I should forsake the Fountain of living Waters, and attempt
to derive Satisfaction from broken Cisterns, my dear Friends and Acquaintance,
with whom I might meet in my Journey. I looked to God to keep me from this
Vanity in special, as well as others. Toward Night, and in the Evening, was
visited by some Friends, some of whom, I trust, were real Christians; who
discovered an affectiona^^ Regard to me, and seemed grieved that I was about to
leave them; especially seeing I did not expect to make any considerable Stay
among them, if I should live to return from New England. It seems, he had a
Design, by what afterward appears, to remove and live among the Indians at
Susquahannah-River.
O how kind has God been to me! How has he raised up Friends in every Place,
where his Providence has called me! Friends are a great Comfort; and it is GOD
that gives them; it is he makes them friendly to me. Bless the Lord, O my Soul,
and forget not all his Benefits.

[The next Day, he set out on his Journey: And it was about five Weeks before
he returned. -- The special Design of this Journey, he himself declares
afterward, in his Diary for March 21. Where, speaking of his conversing with a
certain Minister in New England, he says thus, Contrived with him how to raise
some Money among Christian Friends, in order to support a Colleague with me in
the Wilderness, (I having now spent two Years in a very solitary Manner) that
we might be together; as Christ sent out his Disciples, two and two: And as
this was the principal Concern I had in View, in taking this Journey, so I took
Pains in it, and hope God will succeed it, if for his Glory. He first went into
various Parts of New Jersey, and visited several Ministers there: And then went
to New York; and from thence into New England, going to various Parts of
Connecticut: And then returned into New Jersey: He met a Number of Ministers at
Woodbridge, who (he says) met there to consult about the Affairs of Christ's
Kingdom, in some important Articles. He seems, for the most Part, to have been
free from Melancholy in this Journey; and many Times to have had extraordinary
Assistance in public Ministrations, and his preaching sometimes attended with
very hopeful Appearances of a good Effect on the Auditory. He also had many
Seasons of special Comfort and spiritual Refreshment, in Conversation with
Ministers and other Christian Friends, and also in Meditation and Prayer by
himself alone.]

Saturday, April 13. Rode Home to my own House at the Forks of Delaware: Was
enabled to remember the Goodness of the Lord, who has now preserved me while
riding full 600 Miles in this Journey; has kept me that none of my Bones have
been broken. Blessed be the Lord, who has preserved me in this tedious Journey,
and returned me in Safety to my own House. Verily it is God that has upheld me,
and guarded my Goings.

Lord's Day, April 14. Was disordered in Body with the Fatigues of my late
Journey; but was enabled however to preach to a considerable Assembly of white
People, gathered from all Parts round about, with some Freedom, from Eze^.
xxxiii.11. As I live, says the Lord God, etc. had much more Assistance than I
expected.

[This Week, he went a Journey to Philadelphia, in order to engage the
Governor there to use his Interest with the Chief Man of the Six Nations,
(with whom he maintained a strict Friendship) that he would give him Leave to
live at Susquahannah, and instruct the Indians that are within their
Territories. The Indians at Susquahannah are a mixed Company of many Nations,
speaking various Languages, and few of 'em properly of the Six Nations. But yet
the Country having formerly been conquered by the Six Nations, they claim the
Land; and the Susquahannah-Indians are a kind of Vassals to them.
In his Way to and from thence, he lodged with Mr. Beaty, a young Presbyterian
Minister. He speaks of Seasons of sweet spiritual Refreshment, that he enjoyed
at his Lodgings.]

Saturday, April 20. Rode with Mr. Beaty to Abington, to attend Mr. Treat's
Administration of the Sacrament, according to the Method of the Church of
Scotland. When we arrived, we found Mr. Treat preaching: Afterward I preached
a Sermon from Matthew. v.3. Blessed are the Poor in Spirit, etc. God was pleased
to give me great Freedom and Tenderness, both in Prayer and Sermon: The
Assembly was sweetly melted, and Scores were all in Tears. It was, as I then
hoped and was afterward abundantly satisfied by conversing with them, a Word
spoken i^ Season to many weary Souls. I was extremely tired, and my Spirits
much exhausted, so that I could scarcely speak loud; yet I could not help
rejoicing in God.

Lord's Day, April 21. In the Morning, was calm and composed, and had some
outgoings of Soul after God in secret Duties, and longing Desires of his
Presence in the Sanctuary and at his Table; that his Presence might be in the
Assembly; and that his Children might be entertained with a Feast of fat
Things. -- In the Forenoon, Mr. Treat preached. I felt some Affection and
Tenderness in the Season of the Administration of the Ordinance. Mr. Beaty
preached to the Multitude abroad, who could not half have crowded into the
Meeting House. In the Season of the Communion, I had comfortable and sweet
Apprehensions of the blissful Communion of God's People, when they shall meet
at their Father's Table in his Kingdom, in a State of Perfection. -- In the
Afternoon, I preached abroad to the whole Assembly, from Rev. xiv.4. These are
they that follow the Lamb, etc. God was pleased again to give me very great
Freedom and Clearness, but not so much Warmth as before. However, there was a
most amazing Attention in the whole Assembly; and, as I was informed
afterward, this was a sweet Season to many.

Monday, Apr. 22. I enjoyed some Sweetness in Retirement, in the Morning. At
eleven o'Clock, Mr. Beaty preached, with Freedom and Life. Then I preached from
Joh. vii.37. and concluded the Solemnity. Had some Freedom; but not equal to
what I had enjoyed before: Yet in the Prayer, the Lord enabled me to cry (I
hope) with a Child-like Temper, with Tenderness and Brokenness of Heart. --
Came Home with Mr. Beaty (...) Lodgings; and spent the Time, while riding, and
afterward, very agreably on divine Things.

Tuesday, April 23. Left Mr. Beaty's, and returned Home to the Forks of
Delaware: Enjoyed some sweet Meditations, on the Road, and was enabled to lift
up my Heart to God in Prayer and Praise.

[The two next Days, he speaks of much bodily Disorder, but of some Degrees of
spiritual Assistance and Freedom.]

Friday, April 26. Conversed with a Christian Friend with some Warmth; and felt
a Spirit of Mortification to the World, in a very great Degree. Afterward, was
enabled to pray fervently, and to rely on God sweetly, for all Things
pertaining to Life and Godliness. Just in the Evening, was visited by a dear
Christian Friend, with whom I spent an Hour or two in Conversation, on the very
Soul of Religion. There are many with whom I can talk about Religion: But alas,
I find few with whom I can talk Religion it self: But, blessed be the Lord,
there are some that love to feed on the Kernel, rather than the Shell.

[The next Day, he went to the Irish Settlement, often before mentioned, about
15 Miles distant; where he spent the Sabbath, and preached with some
considerable Assistance. On Monday, he returned, in a very weak State, to his
own Lodgings.]

Tuesday, April 30. Was scarce able to walk about, and was obliged to betake my
self to the Bed, much of the Day; and spent away the Time in a very solitary
Manner; being neither able to read, meditate, nor pray, and had none to
converse with in that Wilderness. Oh, how heavily does Time pass away, when I
can do nothing to any good Purpose; but seem obliged to trifle away precious
Time! But of late, I have seen it my Duty to divert my self by all lawful
Means, that I may be fit, at least some small Part of my Time, to labor for
God. And here is the Difference between my present Diversions, and those I once
pursued, when in a natural State. Then I made a god of Diversions, delighted in
them with a Neglect of GOD, and drew my highest Satisfaction from them: Now I
use them as Means to help me in living to God; fixedly delighting in Him, and
not in them, drawing my highest Satisfaction from Him. Then they were my All;
now they are only Means leading to my All. And those Things that are the
greatest Diversion, when pursued with this View, don't tend to hinder, but
promote my Spirituality; and I see now, more than ever, that they are
absolutely necessary.

Wednesday, May 1. Was not able to sit up more than half the Day; and yet had
such Recruits of Strength sometimes, that I was able to write a little on a
divine Subject. Was grieved that I could no more live to God. In the Evening,
had some Sweetness and Intenseness in secret Prayer.

Thursday, May 2. In the Evening, being a little better in Health, I walked
into the Woods, and enjoyed a sweet Season of Meditation and Prayer. My
Thoughts run upon Psalm. xvii.15. I shall be satisfied, when I awake with thy
Likeness. And it was indeed a precious Text to me. I longed to preach to the
whole World: And it seemed to me, they must needs all be (...) in hearing such
precious divine Truths, as I had then a View and Relish of. My Thoughts were
exceeding clear, and my Soul was refreshed. -- Blessed be the Lord, that in my
late and present Weakness, now for many Days together, my Mind is not gloomy,
as at some other Times.

Friday, May 3. Felt a little Vigor of Body and Mind, in the Morning* Had some
Freedom, Strength, and Sweetness in Prayer. Rode to and spent some Time with my
Indians. In the Evening, again retiring into the Woods, I enjoyed some sweet
Meditations on Isaiah liii.1. Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, etc.

[The three next Days were spent in much weakness of Body: But yet he enjoyed
some Assistance in public and private Duties: and seems to have remained free
from Melancholy.]

Tuesday, May 7. Spent the Day mainly in making Preparation for a Journey into
the Wilderness. Was still weak, and concerned how I should perform so difficult
a Journey. Spent some Time in Prayer for the divine Blessing, Direction and
Protection in my intended Journey; but wanted bodily Strength to spend the Day
in Fasting and Prayer.

[The next Day, he set out on his Journey to Susquahannah, with his
Interpreter. He endured great Hardships and Fatigues in his Way thither through a
hideous Wilderness; where, after having lodged one Night in the open Woods, he
was overtaken with a North-Easterly Storm, in which he was almost ready to
perish. Having no Manner of Shelter, and not being able to make a Fire in so
great a Rain, he could have no Comfort if he stopped; therefore determined to go
forward, in Hopes of meeting with some Shelter, without which he though it it
impossible he should live the Night through: But their Horses hap'ning to have
eat Poison (for want of other Food) at a Place where they lodged the Night
before, were so sick that they could neither ride nor lead 'em, but were
obliged to drive 'em before them, and travel on Foot; until through the Mercy of
God (just at Dusk) they came to a Bark-Hutt, where they lodged that Night.
After he came to Susquahannah, he traveled about the Length of an 100 Miles on
the River, and visited many Towns and Settlements of the Indians; saw some of 7
or 8 distinct Tribes; and preached to different Nations, by different
Interpreters. He was sometimes much discouraged, and sunk in his Spirits, through
the Opposition that appeared in the Indians (...) Christianity. At other Times,
he was encouraged by the Disposition that some of these People manifested to
hear, and Willingness to be instructed. He here met with some that had formerly
been his Hearers at Kaun^umeek, and had removed hither; who saw and heard him
again with great Joy. He spent a Fortnight among the Indians on this River; and
passed through considerable Labors and Hardships, frequently lodging on the
Ground, and sometimes in the open Air; And at length he fell extremely Ill, as
he was Riding in the Wilderness, being seized with an Ague, followed with a
burning Fever, and extreme Pains in his Head and Bowels, attended with a great
Evacuation of Blood; so that he though it he must have perished in the Wilderness:
But at last coming to an Indian Trader's Hutt, he got Leave to stay there; and
though without Physic or Food proper for him, it pleased God, after about a
Week's Distress, to relieve him so far that he was able to ride. He returned
homewards from (...), an Island far down the River* where was a considerable
Number of Indians, who appeared more free from Prejudices against Christianity,
than most of the other Indians. He arrived at the Forks of Delaware on Thursday
May 30, after having rode in (...) Journey about 340 Miles. This is the Journey
which he occasionally mentions in his printed Journal, Page 53, -- 56.
He came Home in a very weak State, and under Dejection of Mind; which was a
great Hindrance to him in religious Exercises. However, on the Sabbath, after
having preached to the Indians, he preached to the white People, with some
Success, from Isai. liii.10. Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, etc. some
being awakened by his preaching. The next Day, he was much exercised for want
of spiritual Life and Fervency.]

Tuesday, June 4. Toward Evening, was in Distress for God's Presence and a
Sense of divine Things: Withdrew my self to the Woods, and spent near an Hour
in Prayer and Meditation; and I think, the Lord had Compassion on me, and gave
me some Sense of divine Things; which was indeed refreshing and quickening to
me: My Soul enjoyed Intenseness and Freedom in Prayer, so that it grieved me to
leave the Place.

Wednesday, June 5. Felt thirsting Desires after God, in the Morning. In the
Evening, enjoyed a precious Season of Retirement: Was favored with some clear
and sweet Meditations upon a sacred Text: Divine Things opened with Clearness
and Certainty, and had a divine Stamp upon them: My Soul was also enlarged and
refreshed in Prayer; and I delighted to continue in the Duty; and was sweetly
assisted in praying for Fellow Christians, and my dear Brethren in the
Ministry. Blessed be the dear Lord for such Enjoyments. O how sweet and
precious it is, to have a clear Apprehension and tender Sense of the Mystery of
Godliness, of true Holiness, and Likeness to the best of Beings! O what a
Blessedness it is, to be as much like God, as it is possible for a Creature to
be like his great Creator! Lord, give me more of thy Likeness: I shall be
satisfied, when I awake with it.

Thursday, June 6. Was engaged, a considerable Part of (...) Day, in Meditation
and Study on divine Subjects. Enjoyed some special Freedom, Clearness, and
Sweetness in Meditation. O how refreshing it is, to be enabled to improve Time
well!

[The next Day, he went a Journey of near fifty Miles to Noshaming, to assist
at a Sacramental Occasion, to be attended at Mr. Beaty's Meeting House; being
invited thither by him and his People.]

Saturday, June 8. Was exceeding weak and fatigued with Riding in the Heat
Yesterday: But being desired, I preached in the Afternoon, to a crowded
Audience, from Isai. xl.1. Comfort ye, Comfort ye my People, says your God.
God was pleased to give me great Freedom, in opening the Sorrows of God's
People, and in setting before them comforting Considerations. And, blessed be
the Lord, it was a sweet melting Season in the Assembly.

Lord's Day, June 9. Felt some longing Desires of the Presence of God to be
with his People on the solemn Occasion of the Day. In the Forenoon, Br. Beaty
preached; and there appeared some Warmth in the Assembly. Afterward, I
assisted in the Administration of the Lord's Supper: And toward the close of
it, I discoursed to the Multitude extempore, with some Reference to that sacred
Passage Isai. liii.10. Yet it pleased the Lord to br^is^ Him. Here God gave me
great Assistance in addressing Sinners: And the Word was attended with amazing
Power; many Scores, if not Hundreds, in that great Assembly, consisting of
three or four Thousand, were much affected; so that there was a very great
Mourning, like the Mourning of Hadadrimmon. -- In the Evening, I could hardly
look any Body in the Face, because of the Imperfections I saw in my
Performances in the Day past.

Monday, June 10. Preached with a good Degree of Clearness and some sweet
Warmth, from Psalm. xvii.15. I shall be satisfied, when I awake with thy
Likeness. And blessed be God, there was a great Solemnity, and Attention in the
Assembly, and sweet Refreshment among God's People; as was evident then, and
afterward.

Tuesday, June 11. Spent the Day mainly in Conversation with dear Christian
Friends; and enjoyed some sweet Sense of divine Things. O how desirable it is,
to keep Company with God's dear Children! These are the excellent Ones of the
Earth, is whom, I can truly say, is all my Delight. O what Delight will it
afford, to meet them all in a State of Perfection! Lord, prepare me for that
State.

[The next Day, he left Mr. Beaty's, and went to Maidenhead in New Jersey; and
spent the next seven Days in a comfortable State of Mind, visiting several
Ministers in those Parts.]

Tuesday, June 18. Set out from New-Brunswick with a Design to visit some
Indians at a Place called Crosweeksung in New Jersey, toward the Sea. Mr.
Brainerd having, when at Boston, wrote and left with a Friend a brief Relation
of Facts touching his Labors with the Indians and Reception among them, during
the Space of Time between Nov. 5. 1744, and June 19. 1745. (with a View to
connect his Narrative, at the End of Mr. Pemberton's Ordination-Sermon, and his
Journal, in Case they should ever be reprinted) concludes the same with this
Passage: As my Body was very feeble, so my Mind was scarce ever so much damped
and discouraged about the Conversion of the Indians, as at this Time. And in
this State of Body and Mind I made my first Visit to the Indians in New Jersey,
where God was pleased to display his Power and Grace in the remarkable Manner
that I have represented in my printed Journal.
In the Afternoon, came to a Place called Cr^nberry, and meeting with a serious
Minister, Mr. Mc Night, I lodged there with him. Had some Enlargement and
Freedom in Prayer with a Number of People.

PART VII. From his first Beginning to preach to the Indians at Crosweeksung,
'till he returned from his last Journey to Susquahannah ill with the
Consumption, whereof he died.
[WE are now come to that Part of Mr. Brainerd's Life, wherein he had his
greatest Success, in his Labors for the good of Souls, and in his particular
Business as a Missionary to the Indians. An Account of which, if here
published, would doubtless be very entertaining to the Reader, after he has
seen by the preceding Parts of this Account of his Life, how great and
long-continued his Desires for the spiritual Good of this Sort of People were,
how he prayed, labored, and wrestled, and how much he denied himself and
suffered, to this End. After all Mr. Brainerd's agonizing in Prayer, and
travailing in Birth, for the Conversion of Indians, and all the Interchanges of
his raised Hopes and Expectations, and then Disappointments and
Discouragements; and after waiting in a Way of persevering Prayer, Labor and
Suffering, as it were through a long Night; at length the Day dawns: Weeping
continues for a Night, but Joy comes in the Morning. He went forth weeping,
bearing precious Seed, and now he comes with Rejoicing, bringing his Sh^^v^s
with him. The desired Event is bro't to pass at last; but at a Time, in a
Place, and upon Subjects, that scarce ever entered into his Heart. An Account
of this would undoubtedly now much gratify the Christian Reader: And it should
have been here inserted, as it stands in his Diary, had it not been, that a
particular Account of this glorious and wonderful Success was drawn up b^ Mr.
Brainerd himself, pursuant to the Order of the honorable Society in Scotland,
and published by him in his Lifetime; which Account many have in their Hands;
and the inserting it here would too much swell this Book, as was said before in
the Preface. However, I look upon the want of this Account here, as a real
Defect in this History of Mr. Brainerd's Life; which, I would hope, those of my
Readers, who are not already possessed of his public Journal, will supply, by
procuring one of those Books, that they may not be without that which in some
Respects is the most remarkable, and to a Christian Mind would be the most
pleasant Part of the whole Story. That the Reader who is furnished with one of
those Books, may know the Place where the Defects of this History are to be
supplied from thence, I shall either expressly observe it as I go along, or
else make a dash or stroke thus -- Which when the Reader finds in this 7th Part
of this History, he is to understand by it, that in that Place something in Mr.
Brainerd's Diary, worth observing, is l^ft out, because the same for Substance
was published before in his printed Journal.]

Wednesday June 19. 1745. Rode to the Indians at Crosweeksung: Found few at
Home: Discoursed to them however; and observed them very serious and attentive.
At Night I was extremely worn out, and scarce able to walk or sit up. Oh, how
tiresome is Earth! How dull the Body!

Thursday, June 20. Toward Night, preached to the Indians again; and had more
Hearers than before. In the Evening, enjoyed some Peace and Serenity of Mind,
some Composure and Comfort in Prayer alone; and was enabled to lift up my Head
with some Degree of Joy, under an Apprehension that my Redemption draws nigh.
Oh, blessed be God, that there remains a Rest to his poor weary People!

Friday, June 21. Rode to Freehold, to see Mr. William Tennent; and spent the
Day comfortably with him. My sinking Spirits were a little raised and
encouraged; and I felt my Soul breathing after God, in the midst of Christian
Conversation. And in the Evening, was refreshed in secret Prayer: Saw my self a
poor worthless Creature, without Wisdom to direct, or Strength to help my self.
Oh, blessed be God, that lays me under a happy, a blessed Necessity of living
upon himself!

Saturday, June 22. About Noon, rode to the Indians again; and near Night,
preached to 'em. Found my Body much strengthened, and was enabled to speak with
abundant Plainness and Warmth. And the Power of God evidently attended the
Word; so that sundry Persons were brought under great Concern for their Souls,
and made to shed many Tears, and to wish for Christ to save them. My Soul was
much refreshed, and quickened in my Work* and I could not but spend much Time
with them, in order (...) open both their Misery and Remedy. This was indeed a
sweet Afternoon to me. While riding, before I came to the Indians, my Spirits
were refreshed, and my Soul enabled to cry to God almost incessantly, for many
Miles together. In the Evening also I found the Consolations of God were not
small: I was then willing to live, and in some Respects desirous of it, that I
might do something for the dear Kingdom of Christ; and yet Death appeared
pleasant: So that I was in some Measure in a Strait between two, having a
desire to depart. I am often weary of this World, and want to leave it on that
Account: But '(...) desirable to be drawn, rather than driven out of it.

[In the four next Days is nothing remarkable in his Diary* but what is in his
public Journal.]

Thursday, June 27. -- My Soul rejoiced, to find, that God ^^^bled me to be
faithful, and that he was pleased to awaken these poor Indians by my Means. O
how Heart-reviving, and Soul-refreshing is it to me to see the Fruit of my
Labors!

Friday, June 28. -- In the Evening, my Soul was revived, and my Heart lifted
up to God in Prayer, for my poor Indians, my Self and Friends, and the dear
Church of God. And O how refreshing, how sweet was this! Bless the Lord, O my
Soul, and forget not his Goodness and tender Mercy.

Saturday, June 29. Preached twice to the Indians; and could not but wonder at
their Seriousness, and the Strictness of their Attention. -- Blessed be God,
that has inclined their Hear^^ to hear. And O how refreshing it is to me, to
see them attend with such uncommon Diligence and Affection, with Tears in their
Eyes, and Concern in their Hearts! In the Evening, could not but lift up my
(...) to God in Prayer, while riding to my Lodgings: And blessed be his Name,
had Assistance and Freedom. O how much better than Life is the Presence of God!

[His Diary gives an Account of nothing remarkable on the two next Days,
besides what is in his public Journal; excepting his Heart's being lifted up
with Thankfulness, rejoicing in God, etc.]

Tuesday, July 2. Rode from the Indians to Brunswick, near 40 Miles, and lodged
there. Felt my Heart drawn out after God in Prayer, almost all the Forenoon;
especially while riding. And in the Evening, could not help crying to God for
those poor Indians; and after I went to Bed, my Heart continued to go out to
God for them, 'till I dropped asleep. O blessed be God that I may pray!

[He was so beat out by constant preaching to these Indians, yielding to their
earnest and importunate Desires, that he found it necessary to give himself
some Relaxation. He spent therefore about a Week in New Jersey, after he left
these Indians, visiting several Ministers, and performing some necessary
Business, before he went to the Forks of Delaware. And though he was very weak i^
Body, yet he seems to have been strong in Spirit. On Friday, July 12. he
arrived at his own House in the Forks of Delaware; continuing still free from
Melancholy; from Day to Day, enjoying Freedom, Assistance and Refreshment in
the inner Man. ^ut on Wednesday, the next Week, he seems to have had some
melancholy Thoughts about his doing so little for God; being so much hindered
by weakness of Body.]

Thursday, July 18. Longed to spend the little Inch of Time I have in the World
more for God. Felt a Spirit of Seriousness, Tenderness, Sweetness, and
Devotion, and wished to spend the whole Night in Prayer and Communion with God.

Friday, July 19. In the Evening, walked abroad for Prayer and Meditation, and
enjoyed Composure and Freedom in these sweet Exercises; especially in
Meditation on Rev. iii.12. Him that overcomes, will I make a Pillar in the
Temple of my God etc. This was then a delightful Theme to me, and it refreshed
my Soul to dwell upon it. Oh, when shall I go no more out from the Service and
Enjoyment of the dear Lord? Lord, hasten the Blessed Day.

[Within the Space of the next six Days, he speaks of much inward Refreshment
and Enlargement, from Time to Time.]

Friday, July 26. In the Evening, God was pleased to help me in Prayer, beyond
what I have experienced for some Time; especially my Soul was drawn out for the
Enlargement of Christ's Kingdom, and for the Conversion of my poor People: and
my Soul relied on God for the Accomplishment of that great Work. Oh, how sweet
were the Thoughts of Death to me at this Time! Oh, how I longed to be with
Christ, to be employed in the glorious Work of Angels, and with an Angel's
Freedom, Vigor and Delight! And yet how willing was I to stay a while on
Earth, that I might do something, if the Lord pleased, for his Interest in the
World! My Soul, my very Soul, longed for the Ingathering of the poor Heathen;
and I cried to God for them most willingly and heartily; and yet because I
could not but cry. This was a sweet Season; for I had some lively Taste of
Heaven, and a Temper of Mind suited in some Measure to the Employments and
Entertainments of it. My Soul was grieved to leave the Place; but my Body was
weak and worn out, and it was near nine o'Clock. Oh, I longed that the
remaining Part of my Life might be filled up with more Fervency and Activity in
the Things of God! Oh the inward Peace, Composure, and God-like Serenity of
such a Frame! Heaven must needs differ from this only in Degree, and not in
Kind. Lord, ever give me this Bread of Life.

[Much of this Frame seemed to continue the next Day.]

Lord's Day, July 28. In the Evening, my Soul was melted, and my Heart broken,
with a Sense of past Barrenness and Deadness: And Oh, how I then longed to live
to God, and bring forth much Fruit to his Glory!

Monday, July 29. Was much exercised with a Sense of Vileness, with Guilt and
Shame before God.

[For other Things remarkable, while he was this Time at the Forks of Delaware,
the Reader must be referred to his public Journal. As particularly for his
Labors and Success there among the Indians.

On Wednesday, July 31. He set out on his Return to Crosweeksung, and arrived
there the next Day. In his Way thither, he had longing Desires that he might
come to the Indians there, in the fullness of the Blessing of the Gospel of
Christ; attended with a (...) of his own great Weakness, Dependence and
Worthlesness.]

Friday, August 2. In the Evening, I retired, and my Soul was drawn out in
Prayer to God; especially for my poor People, to whom I had sent Word that they
might gather together, that I might preach to 'em the next Day. I was much
enlarged in Praying for their saving Conversion; and scarce ever found my
Desires of any Thing of this Nature so sensibly and clearly (to my own
Satisfaction) disinterested, and free from selfish Views. It seemed to me, I
had no Care, or hardly any Desire to be the Instrument of so glorious a Work,
as I wished and prayed for among the Indians: If the blessed Work might be
accomplished to the Honor of God, and ^he Enlargement of the dear Redeemer's
Kingdom, this was all my Desire and Care; and for this Mercy I hoped, but with
Trembling; for I felt what Job expresses, Chapter ix.16. My rising Hopes,
respecting the Conversion of the Indians, have been so often dashed, that my
Spirit is as it were broken, and Courage wasted, and I hardly dare hope.

[Concerning his Labors and mavelous Success amongst the Indians, for the
following 16 Days, let the Reader see his public Journal. The Things worthy of
Note in his Diary, not there published, are his earnest and importunate Prayers
for the Indians, and the Travail of his Soul for them from Day to Day; and his
great Refreshment and Joy in beholding the wonderful Mercy of God, and the
glorious Manifestations of his Power and Grace in his Work among them; and his
ardent Thanksgivings to God; his Heart's rejoicing in Christ, as King of his
Church, and King of his Soul; in particular, at the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, at Mr. McNight's Meeting House; a Sense of his own exceeding
Unworthiness; which sometimes was attended with Dejection and Melancholy.]

Monday, Aug. 19. -- Near Noon, I rode to Freehold, and preached to a
considerable Assembly, from Matthew. v.3. It pleased God to leave me to be very
dry and barren; so that I don't remember to have been so straightened for a whole
twelve Month past. God is just, and he has made my Soul acquiesce in his Will
in this Regard. It Is contrary to Flesh and Blood to be cut off from all
Freedom, in a large Auditory, where their Expectations are much raised; but so
it was with me: And God helped me to say Amen to it; Good is the Will of the
Lord. In the Evening, I felt quiet and composed, and had Freedom and Comfort in
secret Prayer.

Tuesday, Aug. 20. Was composed and comfortable, still in a resigned Frame.
Traveled from Mr. Tennent's in Freehold to Elisabeth-Town. Was refreshed to
see Friends, and relate to them what God had done, and was still doing among my
poor People.

Wednesday, Aug. 21. Spent the Forenoon in Conversation with Mr. Dickinson,
contriving something for the Settlement of the Indians together in a Body, that
they might be under better Advantages for Instruction. In the Afternoon, spent
Time agreably with other Friends; wrote to my Brother at College: But was
grieved that Time slid away, while I did so little for God.

Friday, Aug. 23. In the Morning, was very weak; but favored with some Freedom
and Sweetness in Prayer: Was composed and comfortable in Mind. After Noon, rode
to Crosweeksung to my poor People. --

Saturday, Aug. 24. -- Had Composure and Peace, while riding from the Indians
to my Lodgings: Was enabled to pour out my Soul to God for dear Friends in
New England. Felt a sweet tender Frame of Spirit: My Soul was composed and
refreshed in God. Had likewise Freedom and Earnestness in praying for my dear
People: Blessed be God. O the Peace of God that passes all Understanding! It Is
impossible to describe the sweet Peace of Conscience, and Tenderness of Soul, I
then enjoyed. O the blessed Foretastes of Heaven!

Lord's Day, Aug. 25. -- I rode to my Lodgings in the Evening, blessing the
Lord for his gracious Visitation of the Indians, and the Soul-refreshing Things
I had seen the Day past amongst them, and praying that God would still carry on
his divine Work among them.

Monday, Aug. 26. -- I went from the Indians to my Lodgings, rejoicing for the
Goodness of God to my poor People; and enjoyed Freedom of Soul in Prayer, and
other Duties, in the Evening. Bless the Lord, O my Soul.

[The next Day, he set out on a Journey toward the Forks of Delaware,
designing to go from thence to Susquahannah, before he returned to
Crosweeksung. It was five Days from his Departure from Crosweeksung, before he
reached the Forks, going round by the Way of Philadelphia, and waiting on the
Governor of Pensylvania, to get a Recommendation from him to the Chiefs of the
Indians; which he obtained. He speaks of much Comfort and spiritual Refreshment
in this Journey; and also a Sense of his exceeding Unworthiness, thinking
himself the meanest Creature that ever lived.]

Lord's Day, September 1. [At the Forks of Delaware] -- God gave me the Spirit
of Prayer, and it was a blessed Season in that Respect. My Soul cried to God
for Mercy, in an affectionate Manner. In the Evening also my Soul rejoiced in
God.

[His private Diary has nothing remarkable, for the two next Days, but what is
in his public Journal.]

Wednesday, Sept. 4. Rode 15 Miles to an Irish Settlement, and preached there
from Luke xiv 22. -- And yet there is Room. God was pleased to afford me some
Tenderness and Enlargement in the first Prayer, and much Freedom, as well as
Warmth, in Sermon. There were many Tears in the Assembly: The People of God
seemed to melt, and others to be in some Measure awakened. Blessed be the Lord,
that lets me see his Work going on in one Place and another.

[The Account for Thursday is the same for Substance as in his public Journal.]

Friday, Sept. 6. Enjoyed some Freedom and Intenseness of Mind in Prayer alone;
and longed to have my Soul more warmed with divine and heavenly Things. Was
somewhat melancholy, toward Night, and longed to die and quit a Scene of Sin
and Darkness; but was a little supported in Prayer.

[This Melancholy continued the next Day.]

Lord's Day, Sept. 8. -- In the Evening, God was pleased to enlarge me in
Prayer, and give me Freedom at the Throne of Grace: I cried to God for the
Enlargement of his Kingdom in the World, and in particular among my dear
People; was also enabled to pray for many dear Ministers of my Acquaintance,
both in these Parts, and in New England; and also for other dear Friends in
New England. And my Soul was so engaged and enlarged in that sweet Exercise,
that I spent near an Hour in it, and knew not how to leave the Mercy-Seat. Oh,
how I delighted to pray and cry to God? I saw, God was both able and willing to
do all that I desired, for my self and Friends, and his Church in general. I
was likewise much enlarged and assisted in Family Prayer. And afterward, when
I was just going to Bed, God helped me to renew my Petitions with Ardency and
Freedom. Oh, 'twas to me a blessed Evening of Prayer! Bless the Lord, O my Soul.

[The next Day, he set out from the Forks of Delaware to go to Susquahannah.
And on the fifth Day of his Journey, he arrived at Shaumoking, a large Indian
Town on Susquahannah-River. He performed the Journey under a considerable
Degree of Melancholy, occasioned at first by his hearing that the M^ravians
were gone before him to the Susquahannah-Indians.]

Saturday, Sept. 14. [At Shaumoking] -- In the Evening, my Soul was enlarged
and sweetly engaged in Prayer; especially, that GOD would set up his Kingdom in
this Place, where the Devil now reigns in the most eminent Manner. And I was
enabled to ask this for God, for his Glory, and because I longed for the
Enlargement of his Kingdom, to the Honor of his dear Name. I could appeal to
God with the greatest Freedom, that he knew it was his dear Cause, and not my
own, that engaged my Heart: And my Soul cried, Lord, set up thy Kingdom, for
thine own Glory. Glorify thyself; and I shall rejoice. Get Honor to thy
blessed Name: And this is all I desire. Do with me just what thou will. Blessed
be thy Name forever, that thou art God, and that thou will glorify thy self. O
that the whole World might glorify thee. O let th^se poor People be brought to
know thee, and love thee, for the Glory of thy dear ever-blessed Name. I could
not but hope, that God would bring in these miserable, wicked Indians: Though
there appeared little human Probability of it; for they were then dancing and
revelling, as if possessed by the Devil. But yet I hoped, though against Hope,
that God would be glorified, that God's Name would be glorified by these poor
Indians. I continued long in Prayer and Praise to God; and had great Freedom,
Enlargement and Sweetness, remembering dear Friends in New England, as well as
the People of my Charge. Was entirely free from that Dejection of Spirit, with
which I am frequently exercised: Blessed be God.

[His Diary from this Time to Sept. 22. (the last Day of his Continuance among
the Indians at Susquahannah) is not legible, by Reason of the Badness of the
Ink. It was probably written with the Juice of some Berries found in the Woods,
having no other Ink in that Wilderness. So that for this Space of Time the
Reader must be wholly referred to his public Journal.

On Monday, Sept. 23. He left the Indians, in order to his Return to the Forks
of Delaware, in a very weak State of Body, and under Dejection of Mind, which
continued the two first Days of his Journey.]

Wednesday, Sept. 25. Rode still homeward. In the Forenoon, enjoyed Freedom and
Intenseness of Mind in Meditation on Job xlii.5, 6. I have heard of Thee by the
hearing of the Ear; but now mine Eye sees thee: Wherefore I abhor my self, and
repent in Dust and Ashes. The Lord gave me Clearness to penetrate into the
sweet Truths contained in that Text. It was a comfortable and sweet Season to
me.

Thursday, Sept. 26. Was still much disordered in Body, and able to ride but
slowly. Continued my Journey however. Near Night, arrived at the Irish
Settlement, about 15 Miles from mine own House. This Day, while riding, I was
much exercised with a Sense of my Barrenness; and verily thought, there was no
Creature that had any true Grace, but what was more spiritual and fruitful than
I; I could not think that any of God's Children made so poor a Hand of living
to God as I.

Friday, Sept. 27. Spent considerable Time, in the Morning, in Prayer and
Praise to God. My Mind was somewhat intense in the Duty, and my Heart in some
Degree warmed with a Sense of divine Things: My Soul was melted, to think, that
God had accounted me faithful, putting me into the Ministry, notwithstanding
all my Barrenness and Deadness. My Soul was also in some Measure enlarged in
Prayer for the dear People of my Charge, as well as for other dear Friends. In
the Afternoon, visited some Christian Friends, and spent the Time, I think,
profitably: My Heart was warmed, and more engaged in the Things of God. In the
Evening, I enjoyed Enlargement, Warmth, and Comfort in Prayer: My Soul relied
on God for Assistance and Grace to enable me to do something in his Cause: My
Heart was drawn out in Thankfulness to God for what he had done for his own
Glory among my poor People of late: And I felt encouraged to proceed in his
Work, being persuaded of his Power, and hoping his Arm might be further
revealed, for the Enlargement of his dear Kingdom: And my Soul rejoiced in hope
of the Glory of God, in Hope of the Advancement of his declarative Glory in the
World, as well as of enjoying him in a World of Glory. Oh, blessed be God, the
living God, forever!

[He continued in this comfortable, sweet Frame of Mind, the two next Days. On
the Day following, he went to his own House, in the Forks of Delaware, and
continued still in the same Frame. The next Day, which was Tuesday, he visited
his Indians. -- Wednesday he spent mostly in writing the Meditations he had had
in his late Journey to Susquahannah. On Thursday, he left the Forks of
Delaware, and traveled toward Crosweeksung, where he arrived on Saturday (
October. 5.) and continued from Day to Day in a comfortable State of Mind. There
is nothing material in his Diary for this Day and the next, but what is in his
printed Journal.]

Monday, October. 7. Being called by the Church and People of Easthampton on
Long Island, as a Member of a Council, to assist and advise in Affairs of
Difficulty in that Church, I set out on my Journey this Morning, before it was
well Light, and traveled to Elisabeth-Town, and there lodged. Enjoyed some
Comfort on the Road, in Conversation with Mr. William Tennent, who was sent for
on the same Business.

[He prosecuted his Journey with the other Ministers that were sent for; and
did not return till October. 24. While he was at East-Hampton, the Importance of
the Business that the Council were come upon, lay with such Weight on his Mind,
and he was so concerned for the Interest of Religion in that Place, that he
slept but little for several Nights successively. In his Way to and from
East-Hampton, he had several Seasons of sweet Refreshment, wherein his Soul was
enlarged and comforted with divine Consolations, in secret Retirement; and he
had special Assistance in public ministerial Performances in the House of God;
and yet, at the same Time, a Sense of extreme Vileness and Unprofitableness. He
from Time to Time speaks of Soul-refreshment and Comfort in Conversation with
the Ministers that traveled with him; and seems to have little or nothing of
Melancholy, 'till he came to the West End of Long Island, in his Return. After
that, he was oppressed with Dejection and Gloc^^ness of Mind, for several Days
together. -- For an Account of the four first Days after his return from his
Journey, I refer ^he Reader to his public Journal.

Monday, October. 28. -- Had an Evening of sweet Refreshing; my Thoughts were
raised to a blessed Eternity; my Soul was melted with Desires of perfect
Holiness, and perfectly glorifying God.

Tuesday, October. 29. About Noon, rode and viewed the Indian Lands at Cranberry:
Was much dejected, and greatly perplexed in Mind: Knew not how to see any Body
again, my Soul was so sunk within me. Oh that these Trials might make me more
humble and holy. Oh that God would keep me from giving Way to sinful Dejection,
which may hinder my Usefulness.

Wednesday, October. 30. My Soul was refreshed with a View of the Continuance of
God's blessed Work among the Indians.

Thursday, October. 31. Spent most of the Day in Writing: Enjoyed not much
spiritual Comfort; but was not so much (...) with Melancholy as at some other
Times.

Friday, Nov. 1. [See the public Journal.]

Saturday, Nov. 2. Spent the Day with the Indians, and wrote some Things of
Importance; and longed to do more for God, than I did, or could do in this
present feeble and imperfect State.

[ Nov. 3. and 4. [See the public Journal.]

Tuesday, Nov. 5. He left the Indians, and spent the remaining Part of this
Week in traveling to various Parts of New Jersey, in order to get a Collection
for the Use of the Indians, and to obtain a Schoolmaster to instruct them. And
in the mean Time, he speaks of very sweet Refreshment and Entertainment with
Christian Friends, and of his being sweetly employed, while riding, in
Meditation on divine Subjects; his Heart's being enlarged, his Mind clear, his
Spirit refreshed with divine Truths, and his Heart's burning within him, while
he went by the Way, and the Lord opened to him the Scriptures.]

Lord's Day, Nov. 10. [At Elizabeth-Town.] Was comfortable in the Morning, both
in Body and Mind; preached in the Forenoon from 2 Cor. v.20. God was pleased to
give me Freedom and Fervency in my Discourse; and the Presence of God seemed to
be in the Assembly: Numbers were affected, and there were many Tears among
them. In the Afternoon, preached from Luke xiv.22. And yet there is Room. Was
favored with divine Assistance in the first Prayer, and poured out my Soul to
God with a filial Temper of Mind; the living God also assisted me in Sermon.

[The next Day, he went to New-Town on Long Island, to a Meeting of the
Presbytery. He speaks of some sweet Meditations he had while there, on Christ's
delivering up the Kingdom to the Father, and of his Soul's being much refreshed
and warmed with the Consideration of that blissful Day.]

Friday, Nov. 15. Could not cross the Ferry by Reason of the Violence of the
Wind; nor could I enjoy any Place of Retirement at the Ferry-House: So that I
was in Perplexity. Yet God gave me some Satisfaction and Sweetness in
Meditation, and lifting up my Heart to God in the midst of Company. And although
some were drinking and talking profanely* which was indeed a Grief to me, yet
my Mind was calm and composed. And I could not but bless God, that I was not
like to spend an Eternity in such Company. In the Evening, I sat down and wrote
with Composure and Freedom; and can say (through pure Grace) it was a
comfortable Evening to my Soul, an Evening I was enabled to spend in the
Service of God.

Saturday, Nov. 16. Crossed the Ferry about ten o'Clock; arrived at
Elizabeth-Town near Night. Was in a calm composed Frame of Mind, and felt an
entire Resignation with Respect to a Loss I had lately sustained, in having my
Horse stolen from me the last Wednesday Night, at New-Town. Had some Longings
of Soul for the dear People of Elizabeth-Town, that God would pour out his
Spirit upon them, and revive his Work amongst them.

[He spent the four next Days at Elizabeth-Town; for the most Part, in a Free
and Comfortable State of Mind, intensely engaged in the Service of God, and
enjoying, at some Times, the special Assistances of his Spirit. On Thursday,
this Week, he rode to Freehold, and spent the Day under considerable Dejection.]

Friday, Nov. 22. Rode to Mr. Tennent's, and from thence to Crosweeksung. Had
little Freedom in Meditation, while riding; which was a Grief and Burden to my
Soul. Oh that I could fill up all my Time, whether in the House or by the Way,
for God! I was enabled, I think, this Day to give up my Soul to God, and put
over all my Concerns into his Hands; and found some real Consolation in the
Thought of being entirely at the divine Disposal, and having no Will or
Interest of my own. I have received my all from God; Oh that I could return my
all to God. Surely God is worthy of my highest Affection, and most devout
Adoration: He is infinitely worthy, that I should make him my last End, and
live forever to him: Oh that I might never more, in any one Instance, live to
my self.

Saturday, Nov. 23. Visited my People; spent the Day with them: Wrote some
Things of Importance. But was pretty much dejected, most of the Day.

[There is nothing very material in his Diary for the four next Days, but what
is also in his public Journal.]

Thursday, Nov. 28. -- I enjoyed some divine Comfort, and Fervency in the
public Exercise, and afterward. And while riding to my Lodgings, was favored
with some sweet Meditations on Luke ix.31. Who appeared in Glory, and spa^^ of
his Decease, which he should accomp^ish at Jerusalem. My Tho'ts ran with
Freedom, and I saw and felt what a glorious Subject the Death of CHRIST is for
glorified Souls to dwell upon in their Conversation. Oh, the Death of CHRIST!
How infinitely precious!

[For the three next Days, see the public Journal.]

Monday* December. 2. Was much affected with Grief, that I had not lived (...) to
God; and felt strong Resolutions to (...) Master's Service.

[After this, he went to a Meeting of the Presbytery, at a Place in New Jersey,
called Connecticut-Farms; which occasioned his Absence from his People the rest
of this Week. He speaks of some Seasons of Sweetness, Solemnity and spiritual
Affection in his Absence.

Lord's Day, December. 8. See his public Journal.]

Monday, December. 9. Spent most of the Day in procuring Provisions, in Order to
my setting up Housekeeping among the Indians. Enjoyed little Satisfaction
through the Day, being very much out of my Element.

Tuesday, December. 1^. Was engaged in the same Business as Yesterday. Toward
^ight, got into my own House. This is the third House that he built to dwell in
by himself among the Indians: The first at Kaunaume^k in the County of Albany;
the second at the Forks of Delaware in Pensylvania: And now this at
Crosweeksung in New Jersey.


Wednesday, December. 11. Spent the Forenoon in necessary Labor about my House.
In the Afternoon, rode out upon Business, and spent the Evening with some
Satisfaction among Friends in Conversation on a serious and profitable Subject.

[Thursday, December. 12. See his public Journal.]

Friday, December. 13. Spent the Day mainly in Labor about my House. In the
Evening, spent some Time in writing; but was very weary, and much outdone with
the Labor of the Day.

Saturday, December. 14. Rose early, and wrote by Candlelight some considerable
Time; spent most of the Day in writing: But was somewhat dejected. In the
Evening, was exercised with a Pain in my Head.

[For the two next Days, see his public Journal. The remainder of this Week he
spent chiefly in writing: Some part of the Time under a Degree of Melancholy;
but some Part of it with a sweet Ardency in Religion.]

Saturday, December. 21. -- After my Labors with the Indians, I spent some Time
in writing some Things divine and solemn; and was much wearied with the Labors
of the Day; found that my Spirits were extremely spent, and that I could do no
more. I am conscious to my self that my Labors are as great and constant as my
Nature will bear, and that ordinarily I go to the Extent of my Strength; So
that I do all I can: But the Misery is, I don't labor with that heavenly
Temper, that single Eye to the Glory of GOD, that I long for.

[Lord's-Day, December. 22. See the public Journal.]

Monday, and Tuesday, December. 23 and 24. Spent these Days in Writing, with the
utmost Diligence. Felt in the main a sweet Mortification to the World, and a
Desire to live and labor only for God; but wanted more Warmth and
Spirituality, a more sensible and affectionate Regard to the Glory of God.

[Wednesday, Dec. 25. See the public Journal.]

Thursday, and Friday, December. 26, and 27 Labored in my Studies, to the utmost
of my Strength: And though I felt a steady Disposition of Mind to live to God,
and that I had nothing in this World to live for; yet I did not find that
sensible Affection in the Service of God, that I wanted to have; my Heart
seemed barren, though my Head and Hands were full of Labor.

[For the four nex^ Days, see his public Journal. On the first of these Days
he wrote the 6th Letter here published at the End.
]

Wednesday, January 1 1745, 6. -- I am this Day beginning a New Year; and God
has carried me through numerous Trials and Labors in the past. He has amazingly
supported m^ feeble Frame; for having obtained Help of GOD, I conti^^^ to this
Day O that I might live nearer to God, this Year, than I did the last. The
Business I have been called to, and enabled to go through, I know, has been as
great as Nature could bear up under, and what would have sunk and overcome me
quite, without special Support. But Alas, Alas! Though I have done the Labors,
and endured the Trials, with what Spirit have I done the one, and b^rn the
other? How cold has been the Frame of my Heart oftentimes! And how little have
I sensibly eyed the Glory of God, in all my Doings and Sufferings! I have
found, that I could have no P^ace without filling up all my Time with Labors;
and thus Necessity has been laid upon me; yea, in that Respect, I have loved to
labor: But the Misery is, I could not sensibly labor for God, as I would have
done. May I for the future be enabled more sensibly to make the Glory of God my
all.

[For the Space from this Time 'till the next Monday, see the public Journal.]

Monday, Jan. 6 Being very weak in Body, I rode for my Health. While riding, my
Thoughts were sweetly engaged, for a Time, upon the Stone cut out of the
Mountain without Hands, which brake in Pieces all before it, and waxed great,
and became a great Mountain, and filled the whole Earth: And I longed that
JESUS should take to himself his great Power, and reign to the Ends of the
Earth. And Oh, how sweet were the Moments, wherein I felt my Soul warm with
Hopes of the Enlargement of the Redeemer's Kingdom! I wanted nothing else but
that CHRIST should reign, to the Glory of his blessed Name.

[The next Day he complains of want of Fervency.]

Wednesday, Jan. 8. In the Evening, my Heart was drawn out after God in secret:
My Soul was refreshed and quickened; and I trust, Faith was in Exercise. I had
great Hopes of the ^ngathering of precious Souls to Christ; not only among my
own People, but others also. I was sweetly resigned and composed under my
bodily Weakness; and was willing to live or die, and desirous to labor for God
to the utmost of my strength.

Thursday, Jan. 9. Was still very weak, and much exercised with vapoury
Disorders. In the Evening, enjoyed some Enlargement and Spirituality in Prayer.
Oh that I could always spend my Time profitably, both in Health and Weakness.

Friday, Jan. 10. My Soul was in a sweet, calm, composed Frame, and my Heart
filled with Love to all the World; and Christian Simplicity and Tenderness
seemed then to prevail and reign within me. Near Night, visited a serious
Baptist-Minister, and had some agreeable Conversation with him; and found that I
could taste God in Friends.

[For the four next Days, see the public Journal.]

Wednesday, Jan. 15. My Spirits were very low and flat, and I could not but
think I was a Burden to God's Earth; and could scarcely look any Body in the
Face, through Shame and Sense of Barrenness. God pity a poor unprofitable
Creature.

[The two next Days, he had some Comfort and Refreshment. For the two following
Days, see the public Journal.

The next Day, he set out on a Journey to Elisabeth-Town, to confer with the
Correspondents at their Meeting there; and enjoyed much spiritual Refreshment
from Day to Day, through this Week. The Things expressed in this Space of Time,
are such as these; Serenity, Composure, Sweetness and Tenderness of Soul,
Thanksgiving to God for his Success among the Indians, Delight in Prayer and
Praise, sweet and profitable Meditations on various divine Subjects, Longing
for more Love, for more Vigor to live to God, for a Life more entirely devoted
to God, that he might spend all his Time profitably for God, and in his Cause;
conversing on spiritual Subjects with Affection; and Lamentation for
unprofitableness.

Lord's Day, Jan. 26 [At Connecticut-Farms.] Was calm and composed. Was made
sensible of my utter Inability to preach, without divine Help; and was in some
good Measure willing to leave it with God, to give or withold Assistance, as
he saw would be most for his own Glory. Was favored with a considerable Degree
of Assistance in my public Work. After public Worship, I was in a sweet and
solemn Frame of Mind, thankful to God that he had made me in some Measure
faithful in addressing precious Souls, but grieved that I had been no more
fervent in my Work; and was tenderly affected toward all the World, longing
that every Sinner might be saved; and could not have entertained any Bitterness
toward the worst Enemy living. In the Evening, rode to Elisabeth-Town: while
riding, was almost constantly engaged in lifting up my Heart to God, lest I
should lose that sweet heavenly Solemnity and Composure of Soul I then enjoyed.
Afterward, was pleased, to think, that GOD reigns; and thought, I could
never be uneasy with any of his Dispensations; but must be entirely Satisfied,
what ever Trials he should cause me or his Church to encounter. Never felt more
Sedateness, divine Serenity and Composure of Mind: Could freely have left the
dearest earthly Friend, for the Society of Angels and Spirits of just Men made
perfect: My Affections soared aloft to the blessed Author of every dear
Enjoyment: I viewed the Emptiness and Unsatisfactory Nature of the most
desirable earthly Objects, any further than GOD is seen in them: and longed for
a Life of Spirituality and inward Purity; without which, I saw, there could be
no true Pleasure.

[He retained a great Degree of this excellent Frame of Mind, the four next
Days. As to his public Services for and among the Indians, and his Success in
this Time, see the public Journal.]

Saturday, Feb. 1. Toward Night, enjoyed some of the clearest Thoughts on a
divine Subject ( viz. that treated of 1 Cor. xv.13, -- 16.) that ever I
remember to have had upon any Subject whatsoever; and spent two or three Hours
in writing them. I was refreshed with this Intenseness: My Mind was so engaged
in these Meditations, I could scarcely turn it to any Thing else; and indeed I
could not be willing to part with so sweet an Entertainment. --

Lord's Day, Feb. 2. -- After public Worship, my bodily Strength being much
spent, my Spirits sunk amazingly; and especially on hearing that I was so
generally taken to be a Roman Catholic, sent by the Papists to draw the
Indians into an Insurrection against the English, that some were in Fear of me,
and others were for having me taken up by Authority and punished. Alas, what
will not the Devil do to bring a Slur and Disgrace on the Work of God! Oh, how
holy and circumspect had I need to be! Through divine Goodness, I have been
enabled to mind my own Business, in these Parts, as well as elsewhere; and to
let all Men and all Denominations of Men alone, as to their Party-Notions; and
only preached the plain and necessary Truths of Christianity, neither inviting
to nor excluding from my meeting Any, of any Sort or Persuasion whatsoever.
Toward Night, the Lord gave me Freedom at the Throne of Grace, in my first
Prayer before my Catechetical Lecture: And in opening the xlvi. Psalm to my
People, my Soul confided in God, although the wicked World should slander and
persecute me, or even condemn and execute me as a Traitor to my King and
Country. Truly GOD is a present Help in Time of Trouble. In the Evening, my
Soul was in some Measure comforted, having some Hope that one poor Soul was
brought Home to God this Day; though the Case did by no Means appear clear. Oh
that I could fill up every Moment of Time, during my Abode here below, in the
Service of my God and King.

Monday, Feb. 3. My Spirits were still much sunk with what I heard the Day
before, of my being suspected to be engaged in the Pretender's Interest: It
grieved me, that after there had been so much Evidence of a glorious Work of
Grace among these poor Indians, as that the most carnal Men could not but take
Notice of the great Change made among them, so many poor Souls should still
suspect the whole to be only a Popish Plot, and so cast an awful Reproach on
this blessed Work of the divine SPIRIT; and at the same Time wholly exclude
themselves from receiving any Benefit by this divine Influence. This put me
upon searching whether I had ever dropped any Thing inadvertently, that might
give Occasion to any to suspect that I was stirring up the Indians against the
English: And could think of Nothing, unless it was my attempting sometimes to
vindicate the Rights of the Indians, and complaining of the horrid Practice of
making the Indians drunk, and then cheating them out of their Lands and other
Properties: And once, I remembered, I had done this with too much Warmth of
Spirit. And this much distressed me; thinking that this might possibly
prejudice them against this Work of Grace, to their everlasting Destruction.
God, I believe, did me good by this Trial; which served to humble me, and show
me the Necessity of Watchfulness, and of being wise as a Serpent, as well as
harmless as a Dove. This Exercise led me often to the Throne of Grace; and
there I found some Support: Though I could not get the Burden wholly removed. Was
assisted in Prayer, especially in the Evening.

[He remained still under a Degree of Exercise of Mind about this Affair; which
continued to have the same Effect upon him, to cause him to reflect upon, and
humble himself, and frequent the Throne of Grace: But soon found himself much
more relieved and supported. He was, this Week, in an extremely weak State, and
obliged (as he expresses it) to consume considerable Time in Diversion^ for his
Health.

For Saturday, Feb. 7. And the Sabbath following, see his public Journal.

The Monday after, he set out on a Journey to the Forks of Delaware, to visit
the Indians there. He performed the Journey under great Weakness, and sometimes
was exercised with much Pain; but says nothing of Dejection and Melancholy. He
arrived at his own House at the Forks, on Friday. The Things appertaining to
his inward Frames and Exercises, expressed within this Week, are sweet
Composure of Mind, Thankfulness to God for his Mercies to him and others,
Resignation to the divine Will, Comfort in Prayer and religious Conversation,
his Heart drawn out after God, and affected with a Sense of his own Barrenness,
as well as the Fullness and Freeness of divine Grace.]

Lord's Day, Feb. 16. -- In the Evening, was in a sweet composed Frame of Mind.
It was exceeding refreshing and comfortable, to think, that God had been with
me, affording me some good Measure of Assistance. I then found Freedom and
Sweetness in Prayer and Thanksgiving to God; and found my Soul sweetly engaged
and enlarged in Prayer for dear Friends and Acquaintance. Blessed be the Name
of the Lord, that ever I am enabled to do any Thing for his dear Interest and
Kingdom. Blessed be God who enables me to be faithful. Enjoyed more Resolution
and Courage for God, and more Refreshment of Spirit, than I have been favored
with for many Weeks past.

Monday, Feb. 17. -- I was refreshed and encouraged: Found a Spirit of Prayer,
in the Evening, and earnest Longings for the Illumination and Conversion of
these poor Indians.

[Tuesday Feb. 18. See the public Journal.]

Wednesday, Feb. 19. -- My Heart was comforted and refreshed, and my Soul
filled with Longings for the Conversion of the Indians here.

Thursday, Feb. 20. -- God was pleased to support and refresh my Spirits, by
affording me Assistance, this Day, and so hopeful a Prospect of Success; and I
returned home rejoicing, and blessing the Name of the Lord; and found Freedom
and Sweetness afterward in secret Prayer, and had my Soul drawn out for dear
Friends. Oh, how blessed a Thing is it, to labor for God faithfully, and with
Encouragement of Success! Blessed be the Lord forever and ever, for the
Assistance and Comfort granted this Day.

Friday, Feb. 21. -- My Soul was refreshed and comforted, and I could not but
bless God, who had enabled me in some good Measure to be faithful in the Day
past. Oh, how sweet it is to be spent and worn out for God!

Saturday, Feb. 22. -- My Spirits were much supported, though my bodily Strength
was much wasted. Oh that God would be gracious to the Souls of these poor
Indians.

God has been very gracious to me this Week: He has enabled me to preach every
Day; and has given me some Assistance, and encouraging Prospect of Success, in
almost every Sermon. Blessed be his Name. Diverse of the white People have been
awakened this Week, and sundry of the Indians much cured of their Prejudices
and Jealousies they had conceived against Christianity, and some seem to be
really awakened.

[Lord's-Day, Feb. 23. See the public Journal.

The next Day, he left the Forks of Delaware, to return to Crosweeksung; and
spent tho whole Week 'till Saturday, before he arrived there; but preached by
the Way every Day, excepting one; and was several Times greatly assisted; and
had much inward Comfort, and earnest Longings to fill up all his Time with the
Service of God. He utters such Expressions as these, after Preacing: Oh that I
may be enabled to plead the Cause of God faithfully, to my dying Moment. Oh how
sweet it would be to spend my self wholly for God, and in his Cause, and to be
freed from selfish Motives in my Labors!

[For Saturday and Lord's Day, March 1 and 2. See the public Journal. The four
next Days were spent in great bodily Weakness; but he speaks of some Seasons of
considerable inward Comfort.]

Thursday, March 6. I walked alone in the Evening, and enjoyed Sweetness and
Comfort in Prayer, beyond what I have of late enjoyed: My Soul rejoiced in my
Pilgrimage-State, and I was delighted with the Thoughts of laboring and
enduring Hardness for GOD: Felt some longing Desires to preach the Gospel to
dear immortal Souls; and con^ided in GOD, that HE would be with me in my Work,
and that he never would leave nor forsake me, to the End of my Race. Oh, may I
obtain Mercy of God to be faithful, to my dying Moment.

Friday, March 7. In the Afternoon, went on in my Work with Freedom and
Cheerfulness, God assisting me; and enjoyed Comfort in the Evening.

[For the two next Days, see the public Journal.]

Monday, March 10. -- My Soul was refreshed with Freedom and Enlargement, and
(I hope) the lively Exercise of Faith, in secret Prayer, this Night: My Will
was sweetly resigned to the divine Will, and my Hopes respecting the
Enlargement of the dea^ Kingdom of Christ somewhat raised, and could commit
Zion's Cause to God as his own.

[On Tuesday he speaks of some Sweetness and Spirituality in Christian
Conversation. On Wednesday, complains that he enjoyed not much Comfort and
Satisfaction, through the Day, because he did but little for God. On Thursday,
spent considerable Time in Company, on a special Occasion; but in Perplexity,
because without ^avory religious Conversation. For Friday, Saturday and
Lord's Day, see the public Journal.

In the former Part of the Week following he was very ill; and also under great
Dejection; being, as he apprehended, rendered unserviceable by his Illness, and
fearing that he should never be Serviceable any more; and therefore exceedingly
longed for Death. But afterward was more encouraged, and Life appeared more
desirable; because (as he says) he had a little D^wn of Hope, that he might be
useful in the World. In the latter Part of the Week, he was in some Measure
relieved of his Illness, in the Use of Means prescribed by a Physician.

For Saturday, and Lord's Day, March 22, and 23. See his public Journal.]

Monday, March 24. -- After the Indians were gone to their Work, to clear their
Lands, I got alone and poured out my Soul to God, that he would smile upon
these feeble Beginnings, and that he would settle an Indian Town, that might be
a Mount^i^ of Holiness; and found my Soul much refreshed in these Petitions,
and much enlarged for Zion's Interest, and for Numbers of dear Friends in
particular. My sinking Spirits were revived and raised, and I felt animated in
the Service God has called me to. This was the dearest Hour I have enjoyed for
many Days, if not Weeks. I found an encouraging Hope, that something would be
done for God, and that God would use and help me in his Work. And Oh, how sweet
were the Thoughts of laboring for God, when I felt any Spirit and Courage, and
had any Hope that ever I should be succeeded!

[The next Day, his Schoolmaster was taken Sick with a Pleurisy; and he spent
great Part of the Remainder of this Week in tending him: which in his weak
State was almost an overbearing Burden to him; he being obliged constantly to
wait upon him, all Day, from Day to Day, and to lie on the Floor at Night. His
Spirits sunk in a considerable Degree, with his bodily Strength, under this
Burden.

For Saturday, and Lord's Day, March 29, and 30. See the public Journal.]

Monday, March 31. Toward Night, enjoyed some sweet Meditations on those Word*
It is good for me to draw near to God. My Soul, I think, had some sweet Sense
of what is intended in those Words.

[The next Day, he was extremely busy in tending the Schoolmaster, and in some
other necessary Affairs, that greatly diverted him from what he looked upon as
his proper Business: But yet speaks of Comfort and Refreshment, at some Times
of the Day.]

Wednesday, April 2. Was somewhat exercised with a spiritless Frame of Mind.
Was a little relieved and refreshed in the Evening, with Meditation alone in
the Woods. But alas, my Days pass away as the Chaff! It Is but little I do, or
can do, that turns to any Account; and it is my constant Misery and Burden, that
I am so Fruitless in the Vineyard of the Lord. Oh that I were Spirit, that I
might be active for GOD. This (I think) more than any Thing else, makes me
long, that this corruptible might put on Incorruption, and this mortal put on
Immortality. God deliver me from Clogs, Fetters, and a Body of Death, that
impede my Service for him.

[The next Day, he complains bitterly of some Exercises by Corruption he found
in his own Heart.]

Friday, April 4. Spent most of the Day in writing on Rev. xxii.17. And
whosoever will, etc. Enjoyed some Freedom and Encouragement in my Work; and
found some Comfort and Composure in Prayer.

Saturday, April 5. -- After public Worship, a Number of my dear Christian
India^s come to my House; with wh^^ I felt a sweet Union of Soul: My Heart was
knit to them; and I cannot say, I have felt such a sweet and fervent Love to the
Brethren, for some Time past: And I saw in them Appearances of the same Love.
This gave me something of a View of the heavenly State; and particularly that
Part of the Happiness of Heaven, which consists in the Communion of Saints: and
this was aff^cting to me.

[For the two next Days, see the public Journal.

On Tuesday, he went to a Meeting of the Presbytery appointed at
Elisabeth-Town. In his Way thither, he enjoyed some sweet Meditations: But
after he came there, he was (as he expresse^ it) very ^apoury and melancholy,
and under an awful Gloom, that oppressed his Mind. And this continued 'till
Saturday-Evening, when he began to have some Relief and Encouragement. He spent
the Sabbath at Staten-Island; where he preached to an Assembly of Dutch and
English, and enjoyed considerable Refreshment and Comfort, both in public and
private. In the Evening he returned to Elisabeth-Town.]

Monday, April 14. My Spirits this Day were raised and refreshed* and my Mind
composed, so that I was in a comfortable Frame of Soul, most of the Day. In the
Evening my Head was clear, my Mind serene; I enjoyed Sweetness in secret
Prayer, and Meditation on Psalm. lxxiii.28. Oh, how free, how comfortable,
cheerful, and yet solemn do I feel when I am in a good Measure freed from those
Damps and melancholy Glooms, that I often labor under! And blessed be the
Lord, I find my self relieved in this Respect.

Tuesday, April 15. My Soul longed for more Spirituality; and it was my Burden,
that I could do no more for God. Oh, my Barrenness is my daily Affliction and
heavy Load! Oh, how precious is Time: and how it pains me, to see it slide
away, while I do so very little to any good Purpose! Oh that God would make me
more fruitful and spiritual.

[The next Day, he speaks of his being almost overwhelmed with vapoury
Disorders; but yet not so as wholly to destroy the Composure of his Mind.]

Thursday, April 17. Enjoyed some Comfort in Prayer, some Freedom in
Meditation, and Composure in my Studies. Spent some Time in writing, in the
Forenoon. In the Afternoon, spent some Time in Conversation with several dear
Ministers. In the Evening, preached from Psalm. lxxiii. 28. But it is good for
me to draw near to God. God helped me to feel the Truth of my Text, both in the
first Prayer and in Sermon. I was enabled to pour out my Soul to God, with
great Freedom, Fervency, and Affection: And, blessed be the Lord, it was a
comfortable Season to me. I was enabled to speak with Tenderness, and yet with
Faithfulness: And divine Truths seemed to fall with Weight and Influence upon
the Hearers. My Heart was melted for the dear Assembly, and I loved every Body
in it; and scarce ever felt more Love to immortal Souls in my Life; my Soul
cried, Oh that the dear Creatures might be saved! O that God would have Mercy
on them!

[He seems to have been in a very comfortable Frame of Mind the two next Days.]

Lord's Day, April 20. This Day he entered into the 29 th Year of his Age.
Enjoyed some Freedom, and, I hope, Exercise of Faith in Prayer, in the
Morning; especially when I came to pray for Zion. I was free from that gloomy
Discouragement, that so often oppresses my Mind; and my Soul rejoiced in the
Hopes of Zion's Prosperity, and the Enlargement of the dear Kingdom of the
great Redeemer. O that his Kingdom might come. --

Monday, April 21. Was composed and comfortable in Mind, most of the Day: Was
mercifully freed from those gloomy Damps that I am frequently exercised with:
Had Freedom and Comfort in Prayer, several Times; especially had some rising
Hopes of Zion's Enlargement and Prosperity. And Oh, how refreshing were these
Hopes to my Soul! Oh that the Kingdom of the dear Lord might come. Oh that the
poor Indians might quickly be gathered in, in great Numbers.

Tuesday, April 22. My Mind was remarkably free, this Day, from melancholy
Damps and Glooms, and animated in my Work. I found such fresh Vigor and
Resolution in the Service of God, that the Mountains seemed to become a Plain
before me. Oh, blessed be God for an Interval of Refreshment, and fervent
Resolution in my Lord's Work! In the Evening, my Soul was refreshed in secret
Prayer, and my Heart drawn out for divine Blessings; especially for the Church
of God, and his Interest among my own People, and for dear Friends in remote
Places. Oh that Zion might prosper, and precious Souls be brought home to God!

[In this comfortable fervent Frame of Mind he remained the two next Days.

For the four Days next following, viz. Friday, Saturday, Lord's Day, and
Monday, see his public Journal. -- On Tuesday he went to Elisabeth-Town, to
attend the meeting of the Presbytery there: And seemed to spend the Time, while
absent from his People on this Occasion, in a free and comfortable State of
Mind.]

Saturday, May 3. Rode from Elisabeth-Town home to my People, at or near
Cranberry; whither they are now removed, and where, I hope, God will settle
them as a Christian Congregation. Was refreshed in lifting up my Heart to God,
while riding; and enjoyed a thankful Frame of Spirit, for divine Favors
received the Week past. Was somewhat uneasy and dejected, in the Evening;
having no House of my own to go into in this Place: But God was my Support.

[For Lord's Day and Monday, See the public Journal.]

Tuesday, May 6. Enjoyed some Spirit and Courage in my Work; was in a good
Measure free from Melancholy: Blessed be God for Freedom from this Death.

Wednesday, May 7. Spent most of the Day in writing, as usual. Enjoyed some
Freedom in my Work. Was favored with some comfortable Meditations, this Day.
In the Evening, was in a sweet composed Frame of Mind: Was pleased and
delighted to leave all with God, respecting my self, for Time and Eternity, and
respecting the People of my Charge, and dear Friends: Had no Doubt but that God
would take Care of me, and of his own Interest among my People: And was enabled
to use Freedom in Prayer, as a Child with a tender Father. Oh, how sweet in
such a Frame.

Thursday, May 8. In the Evening, was somewhat refreshed with divine Things,
and enjoyed a tender melting Frame in secret Prayer, wherein my Soul was drawn
out for the Interest of Zion, and comforted with the lively Hope of the
appearing of the Kingdom of the great Redeemer. These were sweet Moments: I
felt almost loath to go to Bed, and grieved that Sleep was necessary. However, I
lay down with a tender reverential Fear of God, sensible that his Favor is
Life, and his Smiles better than all that Earth can boast of, infinitely better
than Life it self.

[Friday May 9. See the public Journal.]

Saturday, May 10. Rode to Allen's-Town, to assist in the Administration of the
Lord's Supper. In the Afternoon, preached from Tit. ii.14. Who gave himself for
us, etc. God was pleased to carry me through with some Competency of Freedom; and
yet to deny me that Enlargement and Power I longed for. In the Evening, my Soul
mourned, and could not but mourn, that I had treated so excellent a Subject in
so defective a Manner, that I had born so broken a Testimony for so worthy and
glorious a Redeemer. And if my Discourse had met with the utmost Applause from
all the World (as I accidentally heard it applauded by some Persons of
Judgment) it would not have given me any Satisfaction: Oh, it grieved me, to
think, that I had had no more holy Warmth and Fervency, that I had been no more
melted in discoursing of Christ's Death, and the End and Design of it!
Afterward, enjoyed some Freedom and Fervency in secret and Family Prayer, and
longed much for the Presence of God to attend his Word and Ordinances the next
Day.

Lord's Day, May 11. Assisted in the Administration of the Lord's Supper; but
enjoyed little Enlargement: Was grieved and sunk with some Things I thought
undesirable, etc. In the Afternoon, went to the House of God weak and sick in
Soul, as well as feeble in Body: And longed, that the People might be
entertained and edified with divine Truths, and that an honest fervent
Testimony might be born for God; but knew not how it was possible for me to do
any Thing of that Kind, to any good Purpose. Yet God, who is rich in Mercy, was
pleased to give me Assistance, both in Prayer and preaching: God helped me to
wrestle for his Presence, in Prayer* and to tell him, that he had promised,
Where two or three are met together in his Name, there he would be in the midst
of them; and that we were, at least some of us, so met; and pleaded, that for
his Truth's sake he would be with us. And blessed be God, it was sweet to my
Soul, thus to plead, and rely on God's Promises. Discoursed upon Luke ix.30,
31. And behold there talked with him two Men, which were Moses and Elias; who
appeared in Glory, and spoke of his Decease, which he should accomplish at
Jerusalem. Enjoyed special Freedom, from the Beginning to the End of my
Discourse, without interruption. Things pertinent to the Subject were
abundantly presented to my View, and such a Fullness of Matter, that I scarce
knew how to dismiss the various Heads and Particulars I had Occasion to touch
upon. And, blessed be the Lord, I was favored with some Fervency and Power, as
well as Freedom; so that the Word of God seemed to awaken the Attention of a
stupid Audience, to a considerab^e Degree. I was inwardly refreshed with the
Consolations of God; and could with my whole Heart say, Though there be no Fruit
in the Vine, etc. yet will I rejoice in the Lord. After public Service, was
refreshed with the sweet Conversation of some Christian Friends.

[The four next Days seem to have been mostly spent with spiritual Comfort and
Profit.]

Friday, May 16. Near Night, enjoyed some agreeable and sweet Conversation with
a dear Minister, which, I trust, was blessed to my Soul: My Heart was warmed,
and my Soul engaged to live to God; so that I longed to exert my self with more
Vigor, than ever I had done, in his Cause: And those Words were quickening to
me, Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bring forth much Fruit. Oh, my Soul
longed, and wished, and prayed, to be enabled to live to God with utmost
Constancy and Ardour! In the Evening, God was pleased to shine upon me in
secret Prayer, and draw out my Soul after himself; and I had Freedom in
Supplication for my self, but much more in Intercession for others* So that I
wa^ sweetly constrained to say, Lord, use me as thou will; do as thou will with
me: But Oh, promote thine own Cause. Zion is thine; Oh visit thine Heritage; Oh
let thy Kingdom come; Oh let thy blessed Interest be advanced in the World.
When I attempted to look to God, respecting my worldly Circumstances, and his
providential Dealings with me, in Regard of my settling down in my
Congregation, which seems to be necessary, and ^et very ^ifficult, and contrary
to my fixed Intention for Years past, as well as my Disposition, which has
been, and still is, at Times especially, to go forth, and spend my Life in
preaching the Gospel from Place to Place, and gathering Souls afar off to JESUS
the great Redeemer; when I attempted to look to God with Regard to these
Things, and his Designs concerning me, I could only say, The Will of the Lord
be done: It Is no Matter for me. The same Frame of Mind I felt with Respect to
another important Affair I have lately had some serious Tho'ts of: I could say,
with utmost Calmness and Composure, Lord, if it be most for thy Glory, let me
proceed in it; but if thou see that it will in any wise hinder my Usefulness
in thy Cause, Oh prevent my proceeding: For all I want, respecting this World,
is such Circumstances as may best capacitate me to do Service for God in the
Worl^. But blessed be God, I enjoyed Liberty in Prayer for my dear Flock, and
was enabled to pour out my Soul into the Bosom of a tender Father: My Heart
within me was melted, when I came to plead for my dear People, and for the
Kingdom of Christ in general. Oh, how sweet was this Evening to my Soul! I knew
not how to go to Bed; and when got to Bed, longed for some Way to improve Time
for God, to some excellent Purpose. Bless the Lord, O my Soul.

Saturday, May 17. Walked out in the Morning, and felt much of the same Frame I
enjoyed the Evening before: Had my Heart enlarged in praying for the
Advancement of the Kingdom of Christ, and found utmost Freedom in leaving all
my Concerns with God.

I find Discouragement to be an exceeding Hindrance to my spiritual Fervency
and Affection: But when God enables me sensibly to find that I have done
something for him, this refreshes and animates me, so that I could break through
all Hardships, undergo any Labors, and nothing seems too much either to do or
to suffer. But Oh, what a Death it is, to strive, and strive; to be always in a
Hurry, and yet do Nothing, or at least nothing for GOD! Alas, Alas, that Times
(...) away, and I do so little for God!

Lord's Day, May 18. I felt my own utter Insufficiency for my Work: God made me
to see, that I was a Child; yea, that I was a Fool. I discoursed, both Parts of
the Day, from Rev. iii.20. Behold, I stand at the Door, and knock. God gave me
Freedom and Power in the latter Part of my (Forenoon's) Discourse; although, in
the former Part of it, I felt peevish and provoked with the unmannerly
Behavior of the white People, who crowded in between my People and me; which
proved a great Temptation to me. But blessed be God, I got these Shackles off
before the middle of my Discourse, and was favored with a sweet Frame of
Spirit in the latter Part of the Exercise; was full of Love, Warmth, and
Tenderness, in addressing my dear People. -- In the Intermission-Season, could
not but discourse to my People on the Kindness and Patience of Christ in
standing and knocking at the Door, etc. -- In the Evening, I was grieved, that
I had done so little for God. Oh that I could be a Flame of Fire in the Service
of my God.

[Mondoy, May 19. See the public Journal.

On Tuesday he complains of Want of Freedom and Comfort; but had some Return of
these on Wednesday.]

Thursday, May 22. In the Evening, was in a Frame somewhat remarkable: Had
apprehended for several Days before, that it was the Design of Providence I
should settle among my People here; and had in my own Mind begun to make
Provision for it, and to contrive Means to hasten it; and found my Heart
something engaged in it, hoping I might then enjoy more agreeable Circumstances
of Life, in several Respects: And yet was never fully determined, never quite
pleased with the Thoughts of being settled and confined to one Place.
Nevertheless I seemed to have some Freedom in that Respect, because the
Congregation I thought of settling with, was one that God had enabled me to
gather from amongst Pagans. For I never since I began to preach, could feel any
Freedom to enter into other Men'^ Labors, and settle down in the Ministry
where the Gospel was preache^ before; I never could make that appear to be my
Providence: When I felt any Disposition to consult my E^se and worldly Comfort,
God has never given me any Liberty in that Respect, either since, or for some
Years before I began to preach. But God having succeeded my Labors, and made
me instrumental of gathering a Church for him among these Indians, I was ready
to think, it might be his Design to give me a quiet Settlement and a stated
Home of my own. And this, considering the late frequent sinking and Failure of
my Spirits, and the Need I stood in of some agreeable Society, and my great
Desire of enjoying Conveniences and Opportunities for profitable Studies, was
not altogether disagreeable to me: Although I still wanted to go about far and
wide, in order to spread the blessed Gospel among benighted Souls, far remote;
yet I never had been so willing to settle in any one Place, for more than five
Years past, as I was in the foregoing Part of this Week. But now these Thoughts
seemed to be wholly dashed to Pieces; not by Necessity, but of Choice: For it
appeared to me, that God's Dealings toward me had fitted me for a Life of
Solitariness and Hardship; it appeared to me I had nothing to lose, nothing to
do with Earth, and consequently nothing to lose by a total Renunciation of it:
And it appeared just right, that I should be destitute of House and Home, and
many Comforts of Life, which I rejoiced to see others of God's People enjoy.
And at the same Time, I saw so much of the Excellency of Christ's Kingdom, and
the infinite Desirableness of it is Advancement in the World, that it swallowed
up all my other Thoughts; and made me willing, yea, even rejoice, to be made a
Pilgrim or Hermet in the Wilderness, to my dying Moment, if I might thereby
promote the blessed Interest of the great Redeemer. And if ever my Soul
presented it self to God for his Service, without any Reserve of any Kind, it
did so now. The Language of my Thoughts and Disposition (although I spoke no
Words) now were, Here I am, LORD, send me; send me to the Ends of the Earth;
send me to the rough, the savage Pagans of the Wilderness; send me from all
that is called Comfort in Earth, or earthly Comfort; send me even to Death it
self, if it be but in thy Service, and to promote thy Kingdom. And at the same
Time I had as quick and lively a Sense of the Value of worldly Comforts, as
ever I had; but only saw them infinitely overmatch'd by the Worth of Christ's
Kingdom, and the Propagation of his blessed Gospel. The quiet Settlement, the
certain Place of Abode, the tender Friendship, which I thought I might be
likely to enjoy in Consequence of such Circumstances, appeared as valuable to
me, considered absolutely and in themselves, as ever before; but considered
comparatively, they appeared nothing: Compared with the Value and Preciousness
of an Enlargement of Christ's Kingdom, they vanished like the Stars before the
rising Sun. And sure I am, that although the comfortable Accommodations of Life
appeared valuable and dear to me, yet I did surrender and resign my self, Soul
and Body, to the Service of God, and Promotion of Christ's Kingdom; though it
should be in the Loss of them all. And I could not do any other, because I
could not will or choose any other. I was constrained, and yet chose, to say,
Farewell, Friends and earthly Comforts, the dearest of them all, the very
dearest, if the Lord calls for it; Adieu, Adieu; I Will spend my Life, to my
latest Moments, in Caves and Dens of the Earth, if the Kingdom of Christ may
thereby be advanced. I found extraordinary Freedom at this Time in pouring out
my Soul to God, for his Cause; and especially that his Kingdom might be
extended among the Indians, far remote; and I had a great and strong Hope, that
God would do it. I continued wrestling with God in Prayer for my dear little
Flock here; and more especially for the Indians elsewhere; as well as for dear
Friends in one Place and another; 'till it was Bedtime, and I feared I should
hinder the Family, etc. But Oh, with what Reluctance did I find my self obliged
to consume Time in Sleep! I longed to be as a Flame of Fire, continually
glowing in the divine Service, preaching and building up Christ's Kingdom, to
my latest, my dying Moment.

Friday, May 23. In the Morning, was in the same Frame of Mind, as in the
Evening before. The Glory of Christ's Kingdom so much out-shone the Pleasure of
earthly Accommodations and Enjoyments, that they appeared comparatively
Nothing, though in themselves good and desirable. My Soul was melted in secret
Meditation and Prayer, and I found my self divorced from any Part in this
World; so that in those Affairs that seemed of the greatest Importance to me,
in respect of the present Life, and those wherein the tender Powers of the Mind
are most sensibly touched, I could only say, The Will of the Lord be done. But
just the same Things that I felt the Evening before. I felt now; and found the
same Freedom in Prayer for the People of my Charge, for the Propagation of the
Gospel among the Indians, and for the Enlargement and spiritual Welfare of Zion
in general, and my dear Friends in particular, now, as I did then; and longed
to burn out in one continued Flame for God. Retained much of the same Frame
through the Day. In the Evening, was visited by my Brother John Brainerd: The
first Visit I have ever received from any near Relative, since I have been a
Missionary. Felt the same Frame of Spirit in the Even^^^ as in the Morning; and
found that it was good for me to (...) God, and leave all my Concerns and
Burdens with him. Was enlarged and refreshed in pouring out my Soul for the
Propagation of the Gospel of the Redeemer among the distant Tribes of Indians.
Blessed be God. If ever I filled up a Day with Studies and Devotion. I was
enabled so to fill up this Day.

Saturday, May 24. -- Enjoyed this Day something of the same Frame of Mind as I
felt the Day before.

[Lord's-Day, May 25. See the public Journal.

This Week, at least the former Part of it, he was in a very weak State: but
yet seems to have been free from Melancholy, which often had attended the
failing of his bodily Strength. He from Time to Time speaks of Comfort and
inward Refreshment, this Week.

Lord's Day, June 1. See the public Journal.]

Monday, June 2. In the Evening, enjoyed some Freedom in secret Prayer and
Meditation.

Tuesday, June 3. My Soul rejoiced, early in the Morning, to think, that all
Things were at God's Disposal. Oh, it pleased me to leave 'em there! Felt
afterward much as I did, on Thursday Evening, May 22. last; and continued in
this Frame for several Hours. Walked out into the Wilderness, and enjoyed
Freedom, Fervency, and Comfort, in Prayer: And again ^^joyed the same in the
Evening.

Wednesday, June 4. Spent the Day in Writing, and enjoyed some Comfort,
Satisfaction, and Freedom in my Work. In the Evening, I was favored with a
sweet refreshing Frame of Soul in secret Prayer and Meditation. Prayer was now
wholly turned into Praise, and I could do little else but try to adore and
bless the living God: The Wonders of his Grace displayed in gathering to
himself a Church among the poor Indians here, were the Subject Matter of my
Meditation, and the Occasion of exciting my Soul to praise and bless his Name.
My Soul was scarce ever more disposed to inquire, What I should render to God
for all his Benefits, than at this Time. Oh, I was brought into a Strait, a
sweet and happy Strait, to know what to do! I longed to make some Returns to
God; but found I had nothing to return: I could only rejoice, that GOD had done
the Work himself; and that none in Heaven or Earth might pretend to share the
Honor of it with him; I could only be glad, that God's declarative Glory was
advanced by the Conversion of these Souls, and that it was to the Enlargement
of his Kingdom in the World: But saw I was so poor, that I had nothing to offer
to him. My Soul and Body, through Grace, I could cheerfully surrender to him: But
it appeared to me, this was rather a Cumber* than a Gift: And nothing could I
do to glorify his dear and blessed Name. Yet I was glad at Heart, that he was
unchangeably possessed of Glory and Blessedness. Oh that he might be adored and
praised by all his intelligent Creatures, to the utmost of their Power and
Capacities. My Soul would have rejoiced to see others praise him, though I could
do nothing toward it my self.

[The next Day, he speaks of his being subject to some Degree of Melancholy;
but of being something relieved in the Evening.

Friday, June 6. See the public Journal.]

Saturday, June 7. -- Rode to Freehold to assist Mr. Tennent in the
Administration of the Lord's Supper. In the Afternoon, preached from Psalm.
lxxiii. 28. God gave me some Freedom and Warmth in my Discourse; and I trust,
his Presence was in the Assembly. Was comfortably composed, and enjoyed a
thankful Frame of Spirit; and my Soul was grieved that I could not render
something to God for his Benefits bestowed. Oh that I could be swallowed up in
his Praise!

Lord's Day, June 8. Spent much Time, in the Morning, in secret Duties; but
between Hope and Fear, respecting the Enjoyment of God in the Business of the
Day then before us. Was agreeably entertained, in the Forenoon, by a Discourse
from Mr. Tennent, and felt somewhat melted and refreshed. In the Season of
Communion, enjoyed some Comfort; and especially in serving one of the Tables.
Blessed be the Lord, it was a Time of Refreshing to me, and I trust, to many
others. A Number of my dear People sat down by themselves at the last Table; at
which Time God seemed to be in the midst of them. -- And the Thoughts of what
God had done among them were refreshing and melting to me. In the Afternoon*
God enabled me to preach with uncommon Freedom, from 2 Cor. v.20. Through the
great Goodness of God, I was favored with a constant Flow of pertinent Matter,
and proper Expressions, from the Beginning to the End of my Discourse. In the
Evening, I could not but rejoice in God, and bless him for the Manifestations
of Grace in the Day past. Oh, it was a sweet and solemn Day and Evening! A
Season of Comfort to the Godly, and of Awakening to some Souls. Oh that I could
praise the Lord.

Monday, June 9. Enjoyed some Sweetness in secret Duties. -- Preached the
concluding Sermon from Genesis v.24. And Enoch walked with God, etc. God gave me
Enlargement and Fervency in my Discourse; so that I was enabled to speak with
Plainness and Power; and God's Presence seemed to be in the Assembly. Praised
be the Lord, it was a sweet Meeting, a desirable Assembly. I found my Strength
renewed, and lengthened out, even to a Wonder; so that I felt much stronger at
the Conclusion, than in the Beginning of this Sacramental Solemnity. I have
great Reason to bless God for this Solemnity, wherein I have found Assistance
in addressing others, and Sweetness in my own Soul.

[On Tuesday, he found himself spent, and his Spirits exhausted by his late
Labors; and on Wednesday, complains of vapoury Disorders, and Dejection of
Spirit, and of enjoying but little Comfort or Spirituality.]

Thursday, June 12. In the Evening, enjoyed Freedom of Mind, and some Sweetness
in secret Prayer: It was a desirable Season to me; my Soul was enlarged in
Prayer for my own dear People, and for the Enlargement of Christ's Kingdom, and
especially for the Propagation of the Gospel among the Indians, back in the
Wilderness. Was refreshed in Prayer for dear Friends in New England, and
elsewhere: I found it sweet to pray at this Time; and could with all my Heart
say, It is good for me to draw near to God.

Friday, June 13. -- I came away from the Meeting of the Indians, this Day,
rejoicing and blessing God for his Grace manifested at this Season.

Saturday, June 14. Rode to Kingston, to assist the Rev. Mr. Wales in the
Administration of the Lord's Supper. In the Afternoon, preached; but almost
fainted in the Pulpit: Yet God strengthened me when I was just gone, and
enabled me to speak his Word with Freedom, Fervency and Application to the
Conscience. And praised be the Lord; Out of weakness I was made strong. I
enjoyed some Sweetness, in and after public Worship; but was extremely tired.
Oh, how many are the Mercies of the Lord! To them that have no Might, he
increases Strength.

Lord's Day, June 15. Was in a dejected spiritless Frame, that I could not hold
up my Head, nor look any Body in the Face. Administered the Lord's Supper at Mr.
Wales's De^ir^* And found my self in a good Measure unburden'd and reliev^d of
my pressing Load, when I came to ask a Blessing on the Elements; Here God gave
me Enlargement, and a tender affectionate Sense of spiritual Things; so that it
was a Season of Comfort, in some Measure, to me, and I trust, more so to
others. In the Afternoon, preached to a vast Multitude, from Rev. xxii.17. And
whosoever will, etc. God h^^ped me to offer a Testimony for himself, and to
leave Sinners ^excuseable in neglecting his Grace. I was enabled to speak with
such Freedom, Flu^ncy, and Clearness, as commanded the A^^ention of the Great*
Was extremely tired, in the Evening, but enjoyed Composure and Sweetness.

Monday, June 16. Preached again; and God helped me amazingly, so that this was
a sweet refreshing Season to my Soul and others. Oh, forever blessed be God for
Help afforded at this Time, when my Body was so weak, and while there was so
large an Assembly to hear. Spent the Afternoon in a comfortable agreeable Manner.

[The next Day was spent comfortably.

On Wednesday, he went to a meeting of Ministers at Hopewell.

Thursday, June 19. See his public Journal. The public Journal that has been
so often referred to, concludes with the Account of this Day.


On Friday and Saturday, he was very much amiss; but yet preached to his People
on Saturday. His Illness continued on the Sabbath; but he preached,
notwithstanding, to his People, both Parts of the Day: And after the public
Worship was ended, he endeavored to apply divine Truths to the Consciences of
some, and addressed them personally for that End: Several were in Tears, and
some appeared much affected. But he was extremely wearied with the Services of
the Day, and was so ill at Night, that he could have no bodily Rest; but
remarks, that God was his Support, and that he was not left destitute of
Comfort in him. On Monday, he continued very Ill; but speaks of his Mind's
being calm and composed, resigned to the divine Dispensations, and content with
his feeble State. And by the Account he gives of himself, the remaining Part of
this Week, he continued very feeble, and for ^he most Part dejected in Mind,
and enjoyed no great Freedom nor Sweetness in spiritual Things; excepting that
for some very short Spaces of Time he had Refreshment and Encouragement, which
engaged his Heart on divine Things; and sometimes his Heart was melted with
spiritual Affection.]

Lord's Day, June 29. Preached, both Parts of the Day, from Jo^. xiv.19. Yet a
little while, and the World sees me no more, etc. God was pleased to assist
me, to afford me both Freedom and Power; especially toward the close of my
Discourses, both Forenoon, and Afternoon. God's Power appeared in the Assembly,
in both Exercises. Numbers of God's People were refreshed and melted with
divine Things; one or two comforted, who had been long under Distress:
Convictions, in diverse Instances, powerfully revived; and one Man in Years much
awakened, who had not long frequented our Meeting, and appeared before as
stupid as a Stock. God amazingly renewed and lengthened out my Strength. I was
so spent at Noon, that I could scarce walk, and all my Joints trembled; so that
I could not fit, nor so much as hold my Hand still: And yet God strengthened me
to preach with Power in the Afternoon; although I had given out Word to my
People, that I did not expect to be able to do it. Spent some Time afterward
in conversing, particularly, with several Persons, about their spiritual State;
and had some Satisfaction concerning one or two. Prayed afterward with a sick
Child, and gave a Word of Exhortation. Was assisted in all my Work. Blessed be
God. Returned home with more Health, than I went out with; although my Linen was
wringing wet upon me, from a little after ten in the Morning, 'till past five
in the Afternoon. My Spirits also were considerably refreshed; and my Soul
rejoiced in Hope, that I had through Grace done something for God. In the
Evening, walked out, and enjoyed a sweet Season in secret Prayer and Praise.
But Oh, I found the Truth of the Psalmist's Words, My Goodness extends not to
Thee! I could not make any Returns to God: I longed to live only to Him, and to
be in Tune for his Praise and Service for ever. Oh, for Spirituality and holy
Fervency, that I might spend and be spent for God, to my latest Moment!

Monday, June 30. Spent the Day in writing; but under much Weakness and
Disorder. Felt the Labors of the preceding Day; although my Spirits were so
refreshed the Evening before, that I was not then sensible of my being spent.

Tuesday, July 1. In the Afternoon, visited, and preached to my People, from
Heb. ix.27. on Occasion of some Persons lying at the Point of Death, in my
Congregation. God gave me some Assistance; and his Word made some Impressions
on the Audience, in general. This was an agreeable and comfortable Evening to
my oul: My Spirits were somewhat refreshed, with a small Degree of Freedom and
Help enjoyed in my Work.

[On Wednesday, he went to Newark, to a Meeting of the Presbytery* Complains of
lowness of Spirits; and greatly laments his spending his Time so unfruitfully.
The remaining Part of the Week he spent there, and at Elisabeth-Town; and
speaks of Comfort and divine Assistance, from Day to Day: But yet greatly (...)
for want of more Spirituality.]

Lord's Day, July 6. [At Elisabeth-Town] Enjoyed some Composure and Serenity of
Mind, in the Morning: Heard Mr. Dickinson preach, in the Forenoon, and was
refreshed with his Discourse; was in a melting Frame, some Part of the Time of
Sermon: Partook of the Lord's Supper, and enjoyed some Sense of divine Things
in that Ordinance. In the Afternoon, I preached from Ezekiel. xxxiii.11. As I
live, says the Lord God, etc. God favored me with Freedom and Fervency; and
helped me to plead his Cause, beyond my own Power.

Monday, July 7. My Spirits were considerably refreshed and raised, in the
Morning. There is no Comfort, I find, in any Enjoyment, without enjoying GOD
and being engaged in his Service. In the Evening, had the most agreeable
Conversation that ever I remember in all my Life, upon GOD's being all in all,
and all Enjoyments being just that to us which GOD makes them, and no more.
It Is good to begin and end with GOD. Oh, how does a sweet Solemnity lay a
Foundation for true Pleasure and Happiness!

Tuesday, July 8. Rode home, and enjoyed some agreeable Meditations by the Way.

Wednesday, July 9. Spent the Day in writing* enjoyed some Comfort and
Refreshment of Spirit in my Evening-Retirement.

Thursday, July 10. Spent most of the Day in writing. Toward Night, rode to
Mr. Tennent's; enjoyed some agreeable Conversation: Went home, in the Evening,
in a solemn sweet Frame of Mind; was refreshed in secret Duties, longed to live
wholly and only for GOD, and saw plainly, there was nothing in the World worthy
of my Affection; so that my Heart was dead to all below; yet not through
Dejection, as at some Times, but from Views of a better Inheritance.

Friday, July 11. Was in a calm composed Frame, in the Morning, especially in
the Season of my secret Retirement: I think, I was well pleased with the Will
of God, whatever it was, or should be, in all Respects I had then any Thought
o^. Intending to administer the Lord's Supper the next Lord's Day, I looked to
God for his Presence and Assistance upon that Occasion; but felt a Disposition
to say, The Will of the Lord be done, whether it be to give me Assistance, or
not. Spent some little Time in writing: Visited the Indians, and spent some
Time in serious Conversation with them; thinking it not best to preach, by
Reason that many of them were absent.

Saturday, July 12. This Day was spent in Fasting and Prayer by my
Congregation, as preparatory to the Sacrament. I discoursed, both Parts of the
Day, from Romans iv.25. Who was delivered for our Offenses, etc. God gave me some
Assistance in my Discourses, and something of divine Power attended the Word;
so that this was an agreeable Season. Afterward led them to a solemn Renewal
of their Covenant, and fresh Dedication of themselves to God. This was a Season
both of Solemnity and Sweetness, and GOD seemed to be in the midst of us.
Returned to my Lodgings, in the Evening, in a comfortable Frame of Mind.

Lord's Day, July 13. In the Forenoon, discoursed on the Bread of Life, from
Joh. vi.35. God gave me some Assistance, in Part of my Discourse especially;
and there appeared some tender Affection in the Assembly under divine Truths;
my Soul also was somewhat refreshed. Administered the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper to thirty-one Persons of the Indians. God seemed to be present in this
Ordinance; the Communicants were sweetly melted and refreshed, most of them.
Oh, how they melted, even when the Elements were first uncovered! There was
scarcely a dry Eye among them, when I took off the Linen, and showed them the
Symbols of CHRIST's broken Body. -- Having rested a little, after the
Administration of the Sacrament, I visited the Communicants, and found them
generally in a sweet loving Frame; not unlike what appeared among them on the
former Sacramental Occasion, on April 27. In the Afternoon, discoursed upon
coming to CHRIST, and the Satisfaction of those who do so, from the same Verse
I insisted on in the Forenoon. This was likewise an agreeable Season, a Season
of much Tenderness, Affection and Enlargement in divine Service: And God, I am
persuaded, crowned our Assembly with his divine Presence. I returned home much
spent, yet rejoicing in the Goodness of God.

Monday, July 14. Went to my People, and discoursed to them from Psalm.
cxix.106. I have sworn, and I will perform it, etc. Observed, 1. That all God's
Judgments or Commandments are righteous. 2. That God's People have sworn to
keep them; and this they do especially at the Lord's Table. There appeared to
be a powerful divine Influence on the Assembly, and considerable melting under
the Word. Afterward, I led them to a Renewal of their Covenant before God
(that they would watch over themselves and one another, lest they should fall
into Sin and dishonor the Name of Christ) just as I did on Monday April 28.
This Transaction was attended with great Solemnity: And God seemed to own it by
exciting in them a Fear and Jealousy of themselves, lest they should Sin
against God; so that the Presence of God seemed to be amongst us in this
Conclusion of the Sacramental Solemnity.

[The next Day, he set out on a Journey toward Philadelphia; from whence he
did not return 'till Saturday. He went this Journey, and spent the Week, under
a great Degree of Illness of Body, and Dejection of Mind.]

Lord's Day, July 20. Preached twice to my People, from Joh. xvii.24. Father, I
will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me* where I am, that they
may behold my Glory, which thou have given me. Was helped to discourse with
great Clearness and Plainness in the Forenoon. In the Afternoon, enjoyed some
Tenderness, and spoke with some Influence. Diverse were in Tears; and some, to
Appearance, in Distress.

Monday, July 21. Preached to the Indians, chiefly for the sake of some
Strangers. Then proposed my Design of taking a Journey speedily to
Sasquahannah: Exhorted my People to pray for me, that God would be with me in
that Journey, etc. Then chose diverse Persons of the Congregation to travel with
me. Afterward, spent Time in discoursing to the Strangers, and was somewhat
encouraged with them. Took Care of my People's secular Business, and was not a
little exercised with it. Had some Degree of Composure and Comfort in secret
Retirement.

Tuesday, July 22. Was in a dejected Frame, most of the Day: Wanted to wear out
Life, and have it at an End; but had some Desires of living to GOD, and wearing
out Life for him. Oh that I could indeed do so!

[The next Day, he went to Elisabeth-Town, to a Meeting of the Presbytery; and
spent this, and Thursday, and the former Part of Friday, under a very great
Degree of Melancholy, and exceeding Gloominess of Mind; not through any Fear of
future Punishment, but as being distressed with a Senselesness of all Good, so
that the whole World appeared empty and gloomy to him. But, in the latter Part
of Friday, he was greatly relieved and comforted.]

Saturday, July 26. Was comfortable in the Morning; my Countenance and Heart
were not sad, as in Days past; enjoyed some Sweetness in lifting up my Heart to
God. Rode Home to my People, and was in a comfortable pleasant Frame by the
Way; my Spirits were much relieved of their Burden, and I felt free to go
through all Difficulties and Labors in my Master's Service.

Lord's Day, July 27. Discoursed to my People, in the Forenoon, from Luke
xii.37. on the Duty and Benefit of watching: God helped me in the latter Part
of my Discourse, and the Power of God appeared in the Assembly. In the
Afternoon, discoursed from Luke xiii.25. Here also I enjoyed some Assistance,
and the Spirit of God seemed to attend what was spoken, so that there was a
gr^^t Solemnity, and some Tears among Indians and others.

Monday, July 28. Was very weak, and scarce able to perform any Business at
all; but enjoyed Sweetness and Comfort in Prayer, both Morning and Evening; and
was composed and comfortably through the Day: My Mind was intense, and my Heart
fervent, at least in some Degree, in secret Duties; and I longed to spend and
be spent for GOD.

Tuesday, July 29. My Mind was cheerful, and free from those melancholy Damps,
that I am often exercised with: Had Freedom in looking up to God, at sundry
Times in the Day. In the Evening, I enjoyed a comfortable Season in secret
Prayer; was helped to plead with God for my own dear People, that he would
carry on his own blessed Work among them; was assisted also in praying for the
divine Presence to attend me in my intended Journey to Susquahannah; was also
helped to remember dear Brethren and Friends in New England: scarce knew how to
leave the Throne of Grace, and it grieved me that I was obliged to go to Bed; I
longed to do something for God, but knew not how. Blessed be God for th^^
Freedom from Deject^on.

Wednesday, July 30. Was uncommonly comfortable, both in Body and Mind; in the
Forenoon especially: My Mind was solemn, I was assisted in my Work, and God
seemed to be nea^ to me; so that the Day was as comfortable as most I have
enjoyed for some Time. In the Evening, was favored with Assistance in secret
Prayer, and felt much as I did the Evening before. Blessed be God for that
Freedom I then enjoyed at the Throne of Grace, for my self, my People and my
dear Friends, It is good for me to draw near to God.

[He seems to have continued very much in the same free, comfortable State of
Mind the next Day.]

Friday, August 1. In the Evening, enjoyed a sweet Season in secret Prayer;
Clouds of Darkness and perplexing Care were sweetly scattered, and nothing
anxious remained. Oh* how serene was my Mind at this Season! How free from that
distracting Concern I have often felt! Thy Will be done, was a Petition sweet
to my Soul; and if God had bidden me choose for my self in any Affair; I should
have chosen rather to have referred the Choice to him; for I saw he was
infinitely wise, and could not do any Thing amiss, as I was in Danger of doing.
Was assisted in Prayer, for my dear Flock, that God would promote his own Work
among them, and that God would go with me in my intended Journey to
Sasquahannah; was helped to remember dear Friends in New England, and my dear
Brethren in the Ministry. I found enough in the sweet Duty of Prayer to have
engaged me to continue in it the whole Night, would my bodily State have
admitted of it. Oh, how sweet it is, to be enabled heartily to say, Lord, not
my Will, but thine be done!

Saturday, Aug. 2. Near Night, preached from Matthew. xi.29. Was considerably
helped; and the Presence of God seemed to be somewhat remarkably in the
Assembly; divine Truths made powerful Impressions, both upon Saints and
Sinners. Blessed be God for such a Revival among us. In the Evening, was very
weary, but found my Spirits supported and refreshed.

Lord's Day, Aug. 3. Discoursed to my People, in the Forenoon, from Colos.
iii.4. Observed, that Christ is the Believer's Life. God helped me, and gave me
his Presence in this Discourse; and it was a Season of considerable Power in
the Assembly. In the Afternoon, preached from Luke xix.41, 42. I enjoyed some
Assistance; though not so much as in the Forenoon. In the Evening, I enjoyed
Freedom and Sweetness in secret Prayer; God enlarged my Heart, freed me from
melancholy Damps, and gave me Satisfaction in drawing near to himself. Oh that
my Soul could magnify the Lord, for these Seasons of Composure and Resignation
to his Will.

Monday, Aug. 4. Spent the Day in writing; enjoyed much Freedom and Assistance
in my Work: Was in a composed and comfortable Frame, most of the Day; and in
the Evening enjoyed some Sweetness in Prayer. Blessed be God, my Spirits were
yet up, and I was free from sinking Damps; as I have been in general ever since
I came from Elisabeth-Town last. Oh what a Mercy is this!

Friday, Aug. 5. Toward Night, preached at the Funeral of one of my
Christians, from Isai. lvii.2. Was oppressed with the nervous Headache, and
considerably dejected: However, had a little Freedom, some art of the Time I
was discoursing. Was extremely weary in the Evening; but notwithstanding
enjoyed some Liberty and Cheerfulness of Mind in Prayer; and found the
Dejection that I feared, much removed, and my Spirits considerable refreshed.

[He continued in a very comfortable cheerful Frame of Mind the next Day, with
his Heart enlarged in the Service of God.]

Thursday, Aug. 7. Rode to my House, where I spent the last Winter, in order to
bring some Things I needed for my Susquahannah Journey: Was refreshed to see
that Place, which God so marvellously visited with the Showers of his Grace. Oh
how amazingly did the Power of GOD often appear there! Bless the Lord, O my
Soul, and forget not all his Benefits.

[The next Day, he speaks of Liberty, Enlargement, and Sweetness of Mind, in
Prayer and religious Conversation.]

Saturday, Aug. 9. In the Afternoon, visited my People; set their Affairs in
Order, as much as possible, and contrived for them the Management of their
worldly Business: Discoursed to them in a solemn Manner, and concluded with
Prayer. Was composed, and comfortable in the Evening, and somewhat fervent in
secret Prayer: Had some Sense and View o^ the eternal World, and found a
Serenity of Mind. Oh that I could magnify the Lord for any Freedom he affords
me in Prayer.

Lord's Day, Aug. 10. Discoursed to my People, both Parts of the Day, from Acts
iii.19. In discoursing of Repentance, in the Forenoon, God helped me, so that
my Discourse was searching, some were in Tears, both of the Indians and white
People; and the Word of God was attended with some Power. In the
Intermission-Season, I was engaged in discoursing to some in order to their
Baptism; as well as with One who had then lately met with some Comfort, after
spiritual Trouble and Distress. In the Afternoon, was somewhat assisted again,
though weak and weary. Afterward baptized 6 Persons; 3 Adults, and 3 Children.
Was in a comfortable Frame in the Evening, and enjoyed some Satisfaction in
secret Prayer. I scarce ever in my Life felt my self so full of Tenderness, as
this Day.

Monday, Aug. 11. Being about to set out on a Journey to Susquahannah the next
Day, with Leave of Providence, I spent some Time this Day in Prayer with my
People, that God would bless and succeed my intended Journey, that he would
send forth his blessed Spirit with his Word, and set up his Kingdom among the
poor Indians in the Wilderness. While I was opening and applying Part of the
cxth and iid Psalms, the Power of God seemed to defend on the Assembly in some
Measure; and while I was making the first Prayer, Numbers were melted, and I
found some affectionate Enlargement of Soul my self. Preached from Acts iv.31.
God helped me, and my Interpreter also: There was a shaking and melting among
us; and diverse, I doubt not were in some Measure filled with the Holy Ghost.
Afterward, Mr. Mc Knight prayed: I then opened the two last Stanza's of the
lxxiid Psalm; at which Time God was present with us; especially while I
insisted upon the Promise of all Nations blessing the great REDEEMER: My Soul
was refreshed, to think, that this Day, this blessed glorious Season, should
surely come; and I trust, Numbers of my dear People were also refreshed.
Afterward prayed; had some Freedom, but was almost Spent: Then walked out, and
le^t my People to carry on religious Exercises among themselves: They prayed
repeatedly, and sung, while I rested and refreshed my self. Afterward, went to
the Meeting; prayed with, and dismissed the Assembly. Blessed be God, this has
been a Day of Grace. There were many Tears and affectionate Sobs among us this
Day. In the Evening, my Soul was refreshed in Prayer: Enjoyed Liberty at the
Throne of Grace, in praying for my People and Friends and the Church of God in
general. Bless the Lord, O my Soul.

[The next Day, he set out on his Journey toward Susquahannah, and six of his
Christian Indians with him, whom he had chosen out of his Congregation, as
those that he judged most fit to assist him in the Business he was going upon.
He took his Way through Philadelphia; intending to go to Susquahannah-River,
far down along, where it is settled by the white People* below the Country
inhabited by the Indians; and so to travel up the River to the Indian
Habitations: For although this was much further about, yet hereby he avoided the
huge Mountains, and hideous Wilderness, that must be crossed in the nearer Way;
which in Time past he had found to be extremely difficult and fatiguing. He
rode this Week as far as Charlestown, a Place of that Name about 30 Miles
Westward of Philadelphia; where he arrived on Friday: And in his Way hither,
was for the most Part in a composed comfortable State of Mind.]

Saturday, Aug. 16. [At Charlestown] It being a Day kept by the People of the
Place (...) I now was, as preparatory to the Celebration of the Lord's Supper,
I tarried; heard Mr. Treat preach; and then preached my self. God gave me some
good Degree of Freedom, and helped me to discourse with Warmth, and
Application, to the Conscience. Afterward, I was refreshed in Spirit, though
much tired; and spent the Evening agreeably, having some Freedom in Prayer, as
well as Christian Conversation.

Lord's Day, Aug. 17. Enjoyed Liberty, Composure, and Satisfaction, in the
secret Duties of the Morning: Had my Heart somewhat enlarged in Prayer for dear
Friends, as well as for my self. In the Forenoon, attended Mr. Treat's
Preaching, partook of the Lord's Supper, five of my People also communicating
in this holy Ordinance: I enjoyed some Enlargement and Out-going of Soul in
this Season. In the Afternoon, preached from Ezekiel. xxxiii.11. Enjoyed not so
much sensible Assistance as the Day before; however, was helped to some
Fervency in addressing immortal Souls. Was somewhat confounded in the Evening,
because I thought I had done little or nothing for God; yet enjoyed some
Refreshment of Spirit in Christian Conversation and Prayer. Spent the Evening,
'till near midnight, in religious Exercises; and found my bodily Strength,
which was much spent when I came from the public Worship, something renewed
before I went to Bed.

Monday, Aug. 18. Rode on my Way toward Paxton, upon Susquahannah-River. Felt
my Spirits sink, toward Night, so that I had little Comfort.

Tuesday, Aug. 19. Rode forward still; and at Night lodged by the Side of
Susquahannah. Was weak and disordered both this and the preceding Day, and
found my Spirits considerably damped, meeting with none that I though it godly
People.

Wednesday, Aug. 20. Having lain in a cold Sweat all Night, I cough'd much
bloody Matter this Morning, and was under great Disorder of Body, and not a
little Melancholy; but what gave me some Encouragement, was, I had a secret
Hope that I might speedily get a Dismission from Earth and all it is Toils and
Sorrows. Rode this Day to one Chambers's, upon Susquahannah, and there lodged.
Was much afflicted, in the Evening, with an ungodly Crew, drinking, swearing,
etc. Oh, what a Hell would it be, to be numbered with the Ungodly! Enjoyed some
agreeable Conversation with a Traveller, who seemed to have some Relish of true
Religion.

Thursday, Aug. 21. Rode up the River about 15 Miles, and there lodged, in a
Family that appeared quite destitute of GOD. Labored to discourse with the Man
about the Life of Religion, but found him very artful in evading such
Conversation. Oh, what a Death it is to some, to hear of the Things of GOD! Was
out of my Element; but was not so dejected as at some Times.

Friday, Aug. 22. Continued my Course up the River; my People now being with
me, who before were parted from me: Traveled above all the English
Settlements; at Night, lodged in the open Woods; and slept with more Comfort,
than while among an ungodly Company of white People. Enjoyed some Liberty in
secret Prayer, this Evening; and was helped to remember dear Friends, as well
as my dear Flock, and the Church of God in general.

Saturday, Aug. 23. Arrived at the Indian Town, called Shaumoking, near Night.
Was not so dejected as formerly; but yet somewhat exercised. Felt somewhat
composed in the Evening; enjoyed some Freedom in leaving my All with GOD: Through
the great Goodness of God, I enjoyed some Liberty of Mind; was not distressed
with a Despondency, as frequently heretofore.

Lord's Day, August 24. Toward Noon, visited some of the Delawares, and
discoursed with them about Christianity. In the Afternoon, discoursed to the
King, and others, upon divine Things* who seemed disposed to hear. Spent most
of the Day in these Exercises. In the Evening, enjoyed some Comfort and
Satisfaction; and especially had some Sweetness in secret Prayer: This Duty was
made so agreeable to me, that I loved to walk abroad and repeatedly engage in
it. Oh, how comfortable is a little Glimpse of God!

Monday, Aug. 25. Spent most of the Day in writing. Sent out my People that
were with me, to talk with the Indians, and contract a Friendship and
Familiarity with them, that I might have a better Opportunity of treating with
them about Christianity. Some Good seemed to be done by their Visits this Day,
diverse appeared willing to hearken to Christianity. My Spirits were a little
refreshed, this Evening; and I found some Liberty and Satisfaction, in Prayer.

Tuesday, Aug. 26. About Noon, discoursed to a considerable Number of Indians:
God helped me, I am persuaded; I was enabled to speak with much Plainness, and
some Warmth and Power. The Discourse had Impression upon some, and made them
appear very serious. I thought* Things now appeared as encouraging, as they did
at Crosweeks. At the Time of my first Visit to those Indians, I was a little
encouraged: I pressed Things with all my Might; and called out my People, who
were then present, to give in their Testimony for God; which they did. Toward
Night, was refreshed; felt a Heart to pray for the setting up of God's Kingdom
here; as well as for my dear Congregation below, and my dear Friends elsewhere.

Wednesday, Aug. 27. There having been a thick Smoke, in the House where I
lodged, all Night before, whereby I was almost chocked, I was this Morming
distressed with Pains in my Head and Neck, and could have no Rest. In the
Morning, the Smoke was still the same; and a cold easterly Storm gathering, I
could neither live within Doors nor without any long Time together; I was
pierced with the Rawness of the Air abroad, in the House distressed with the
Smoke. I was this Day very vapoury, and lived in great Distress, and had not
Health enough to do any Thing to any Purpose.

Thursday, Aug. 28. In the Forenoon, was under great Concern of Mind about my
Work. Was visited by some who desired to hear me preach; discoursed to 'em, in
the Afternoon, with some Fervency, and labored to persuade 'em to turn to God.
Was full of Concern for the Kingdom of Christ, and found some Enlargement of
Soul in Prayer, both in secret and in my Family. Scarce ever saw more clearly,
than this Day, that it is GOD's Work to convert Souls, and especially poor
Heathens: I knew, I could not touch them* I saw, I could only speak to dry
Bones, but could give them no Sense of what I said. My Eyes were up to GOD for
Help: I could say, the Work was his; and if done, the Glory would be his.

Friday, Aug. 29. Felt the same Concern of Mind, as the Day before. Enjoyed
some Freedom in Prayer, and a Satisfaction to leave all with God. Traveled to
the Delawares, found few a^ home: Felt poorly, but was able to spend some Time
alone in reading God's Word and in Prayer, and enjoyed some Sweetness in these
Exercises. In the Evening, was assisted repeatedly in Prayer, and found some
Comfort in coming to the Throne of Grace.

Saturday, Aug. 30. Spent the Forenoon in visiting a Trader, that came down the
River sick; who appeared as ignorant as any Indian. In the Afternoon, spent
some Time in Writing, Reading and Prayer.

Lord's Day, Aug. 31. Spent much Time, in the Morning, in secret Duties: Found
a Weight upon my Spirits, and could not but cry to God with Concern and
Engagement of Soul. Spent some Time also in reading and expounding God's Word
to my dear Family, that was with me, as well as in Singing and Prayer with
them. Afterward, spoke the Word of God, to some few of the
Susquahannah-Indians. In the Afternoon, felt very weak and feeble. Near Night,
was something refreshed in Mind, with some Views of Things relating to my great
Work. Oh, how heavy is my Work, when Faith cannot take hold of an Almighty Arm,
for the Performance of it: Many Times have I been ready to sink in this Case.
Blessed be God, that I may repair to a full Fountain.

Monday, September 1. Set out on a Journey toward a Place called The great
Island, about 50 Miles distant from Shaum^king, in the North-western Branch of
Susquahannah. Traveled some Part of the Way, and at Night lodged in the Woods.
Was exceeding feeble, this Day, and ^weat much the Night following.

Tuesday, Sept. 2. Rode forward; but no faster than my People went on Foot. Was
very weak, on this as well as the preceding Days: Was so feeble and faint,
that I ^ear'^ it would kill me to (...) out in the open Air; and some of our
Company being parted from us, so that we had now no Ax with us, I had no Way
but to climb into a young Pine Tree* and with my Knife to lop the Branches, and
so made a Shelter from the Dew. But the Evening being cloudy and very likely
for Rain, I was still under Fears of being extremely exposed: Sweat much in the
Night* so that my (...) was alm^st wrin^^ng wet all Night. I scarce ever was
more weak and weary, than this Evening, when I was able to sit up at all. This
was a melancholy Situation I was in; but I endeavored to quiet my self with
Considerations of the Possibility of my being in much worse Circumstances,
amongst Enemies, etc.

Wednesday, Sept. 3. Rode to the Delaware-Town; found diverse drinking and
drunken. Discoursed with some of the Indians about Christianity; observed my
Interpreter much engaged and assisted in his Work: Some few Persons seemed to
hear with great Earnestness and Engagement of Soul. About Noon, rode to a small
Town of Shauwaunoes, about 8 Miles distant; spent an Hour or two there, and
returned to the Delaware-Town, and lo^ged there. Was scarce ever more
confounded with a Sense of my own Unfruitfulness and Unfitness for my Work,
than now. Oh, what a dead, heartless, barren, unprofitable Wretch did I now see
my self to be! My Spirits were so low, and my bodily Strength so wasted, that I
could do nothing at all. At Length, being much overdone, lay down on a
Buffalo-Skin; but sweat much, the whole Night.

Thursday, Sept. 4. Discoursed with the Indians, in the Morning, about
Christianity; my Interpreter, afterward, carrying on the Discourse, to a
considerable Length: Some few appeared well-disposed, and somewhat affected.
Left this Place, and returned toward Shaumocking; and at Night lodged in the
Place where I lodged the Monday-Night before: Was in very uncomfortable
Circumstances in the Evening* my People being belated, and not coming to me
'till past 10 at Night; so that I had no Fire to dress any Victuals, or to keep
me Warm, or keep off wild Beasts; and I was scarce ever more weak and worn out
in all my Life. However, I lay down and slept before my People came up,
expecting Nothing else but to spend the whole Night alone and without Fire.

Friday, Sept. 5. Was exceeding weak, so that I could scarcely ride; it seemed
sometimes as if I must fall off from my Horse, and lie in the open Woods:
However, got to Shaumocking, toward Night: Felt something of a Spirit of
Thankfulness, that God had so far returned me: Was refreshed, to see one of my
Christians, whom I left here in my late Excursion.

Saturday, Sept. 6. Spent the Day in a very weak State; Coughing and spitting
Blood, and having little Appetite to any Food I had with me: Was able to do
very little, except discourse a while of divine Things to my own People, and to
some ^ew I met with. Had, by this Time, very little Life or Heart to speak for
God, through Feebleness of Body, and Flatness of Spirits. Was scarcely ever more
ashamed and confounded in my self, than now. I was sensible, that there were
Numbers of God's People, who knew I was then out upon a Design (or at least the
Pretense) of doing something for God, and in his Cause, among the poor Indians;
and they were ready to suppose, that I was fervent in Spirit: But Oh, the
heartless Frame of Mind that I felt, filled we with Confusion! Oh (methought)
if God's People knew me, as God knows, they would not think so highly of my
Zeal and Resolution for God, as perhaps now they do! I could not but desire
they should see how heartless and irresolute I was, that they might be
undeceived, and not think of me above what they ought to think. And yet I
thought, if they saw the utmost of my Flatness and Unfaithfulness, the
Smallness of my Courage and Resolution for God, they would be ready to shut me
out of their Doors, as unworthy of the Company or Friendship of Christians.

Lord's Day, Sept. 7. Was much in the same weak State of Body, and afflicted
Frame of Mind, as in the preceding Day: My Soul was grieved, and mourned that
I could do nothing for God. Read and expounded some Part of God's Word to my
own dear Family, and spent some Time in Prayer with them; discoursed also a
little to the Pagans: But spent the Sabbath with a little Comfort.

Monday, Sept. 8. Spent the Forenoon among the Indians; in the Afternoon, left
Shaumoking, and returned down the River, a few Miles. Had proposed to have
tarried a considerable Time longer among the Indians upon Susquahannah; but was
hindered from pursuing my Purpose by the Sickness that prevailed there, the
weakly Circumstances of my own People that were with me, and especially my own
extraordinary Weakness, having been exercised with great nocturnal Sweats, and
a coughing up of Blood, in almost the whole of the Journey; and was a great
Part of the Time so feeble and faint, that it seemed as though I never should be
able to reach home; and at the same Time very destitute of the Comforts and
even Necessaries of Life; at least, what was necessary for one in so weak a
State. In this Journey I sometimes was enabled to speak the Word of God with
some Power, and divine Truths made some Impressions on diverse that heard me; so
that several, both Men and Women, old and young, seemed to cleave to us, and be
well disposed toward Christianity; but others mocked and shouted, which damped
those who before seemed friendly, at least some of them* Yet God, at Times, was
evidently present, assisting me, my Interpreter, and other dear Friends who
were with me: God gave, sometimes, a good Degree of Freedom in Prayer for the
ingathering of Souls there; and I could not but entertain a strong Hope, that
the Journey should not be wholly fruitless. Whether the Issue of it would be
the setting up Christ's Kingdom there, or only the drawing of some few Persons
down to my Congregation in New Jersey; or whether they were now only preparing
for some further Attempts, that might be made among them, I did not determine:
But I was persuaded, the Journey would not be lost. Blessed be God, that I had
any Encouragement and Hope.

Tuesday, Sept. 9. Rode down the River, near 30 Miles. Was extreme weak, much
fatigued, and wet with a Thunder-Storm. Discoursed with some Warmth and
Closeness to some poor ignorant Souls, on the Life and Power of Religion; what
were and what were not the Evidences of it. They seemed much astonished, when
they saw my Indians ask a Blessing and give Thanks at Dinner; concluding that a
very high Evidence of Grace in them: But were astonished, when I insisted, that
neither that, nor yet secret Prayer, was any sure Evidence of Grace. Oh the
Ignorance of the World! How are some empty outward Forms, that may all be
entirely selfish, mistaken for true Religion, infallible Evidences of it! The
Lord pity a deluded World.

Wednesday, Sept. 10. Rode near twenty Miles homeward. Was much solicited to
preach, but was utterly unable, through bodily Weakness. Was extremely overdone
with the Heat and Showers this Day, and coughed up considerable Blood.

Thursday, Sept. 11. Rode homeward; but was very weak, and sometimes scarce
able to ride. Had a very importunate Invitation to preach at a Meeting^House I
came by, the People being then gathering; but could not, by Reason of Weakness.
Was res^^ned and composed under my Weakness; but was much exercised with
Concern for my Companions in Travel, whom I had left with much Regret, some
lame, and some sick.

Friday, Sept. 12. Rode about fifty Miles; and came just at Night to a
Christian Friend's House, about 25 Miles Westward from Philadelphia. Was
courteously received, and kindly entertained, and found my self much refreshed
in the midst of my Weakness and Fatigues.

Saturday, Sept. 13. Was still agreeably entertained with Christian Friendship,
and all Things necessary for my weak Circumstances; In the Afternoon, heard Mr.
Treat preach; and was refreshed in Conversation with him, in the Evening.

Lord's Day, Sept. 14. At the Desire of Mr. Treat and the People, I preached
both Parts of the Day (but short) from Luke xiv.23. God gave me some Freedom
and Warmth in my Discourse; and I trust, helped me in some Measure to labor in
singleness of Heart. Was much tired in the Evening, but was comforted with the
most tender Treatment I ever met with in my Life. My Mind, through the whole of
this Day, was exceeding calm; and I could ask for nothing in Prayer, with any
Encouragement of Soul, but that the Will of God might be done.

Monday, Sept. 15. Spent the whole Day, in Concert with Mr. Treat, in
Endeavors to compose a Difference, subsisting between certain Persons in the
Congregation where we now were: There seemed to be a Blessing on our
Endeavors. In the Evening, baptized a Child: Was in a calm composed Frame, and
enjoyed (I trust) a spiritual Sense of divine Things, while administering the
Ordinance. Afterward, spent the Time in religious Conversation, 'till late in
the Night. This was indeed a pleasant agreeable Evening.

Tuesday, Sept. 16. Continued still at my Friend's House, about 25 Miles
Westward of Philadelphia. Was very weak, unable to perform any Business, and
scarcely able to sit up.

Wednesday, Sept. 17. Rode into Philadelphia. Still very weak, and my Cough and
spitting of Blood continued. Enjoyed some a^^eeable Conversation with Friends,
but wanted more Spirituality.

Thursday, Sept. 18. Went from Philadelphia to Mr. Treat's: Was agreeably
entertained on the Road; and was in a sweet composed Frame, in the Evening.

Friday, Sept. 19. Rode from Mr. Treat's to Mr. Stockston's at Prince-Town: Was
extreme weak, but kindly received and entertained. Spent the Evening with some
Degree of Satisfaction.

Saturday, Sept. 20. Arrived among my own People, just at Night: Found 'em
praying together: Went in, and gave them some Account of God's Dealings with me
and my Companions in the Journey; which seemed affecting to them. I then prayed
with them, and thought the divine Presence was amongst us; diverse were melted
into Tears, and seemed to have a Sense of divine Things. Being very weak, I was
obliged soon to repair to my Lodgings, and felt much worn out, in the Evening.
Thus God has carried me through the Fatigues and Perils of another Journey to
Sasquahannah, and returned me again in Safety, though under a great Degree of
bodily Indisposition. Oh that my Soul were truly thankful for renewed Instances
of Mercy! Many Hardships and Distresses I endured in this Journey: But the Lord
supported me under them all.

Part VIII. After his Return from his last Journey to Susquahannah, until his
Death.
[ N. B. HITHERTO Mr. Brainerd had kept a constant Diary, given an Account of
what passed from Day to Day, with very little Interruption: But henceforward
his Diary is very much interrupted by his Illness; under which he was often
brought so low, as either not to be capable of writing, or not well able to
bear the Burden of a Care so constant, as was requisite, to recollect, every
Evening, what had passed in the Day, and digest it, and set down an orderly
Account of it in Writing. However, his Diary was not wholly neglected; but he
took Care, from Time to Time, to take some Notice in it of the most material
Things concerning himself and the State of his Mind, even till within a few
Days of his Death; as the Reader will see afterward. Mr. Shepard, in his
Select Cases resolved, under the first Case says as follows. I have lately
known one very able, wise, and godly, put upon the Rack, by him that envying
God's People's Peace, knows how to change himself into an Angel of Light: For
it being his usual Course in the Time of his Health to make a Diary of his
hourly Life, and finding much Benefit by it, he was in Conscience pressed, by
the Power and Delusion of Satan, to make and take the same daily Survey of his
Life in the Time of his Sickness: By Means of which he spent his enfeebled
Spirits, cast on Fuel (...) fire his Sickness. Had not a Friend of his
convinced (...) of his erroneous Conscience misleading him at that Ti^e, he had
murdered his Body, out of Conscience to save his (...) and to preserve his
Grace. And do you think th^se (...) the Motions of God's Spirit, which like
th^se (...), 10. Had Faces like M^n, but had (...), and Stings in their Tails?
]

Lord's Day, Sept. 21. 1746. I was so weak I could not preach, nor pretend to
ride over to my People in the Forenoon. In the Afternoon, rode out; sat in my
Chair, and discoursed to my People from Romans xiv.7, 8. I was strengthened and
helped in my Discourse: And there appeared something agreeable in the Assembly.
I returned to my Lodgings extremely tired; but thankful, that I had been
enabled to speak a Word to my poor People I had been so long absent from. Was
able to sleep very little this Night, through Weariness and Pain. Oh, how blessed
should I be, if the little I do were all done with right Views! Oh that whether
I live, I might live to the Lord, etc.

Saturday, Sept. 27. Spent this Day, as well as the whole Week past, under a
great Degree of bodily Weakness, exercised with a violent Cough, and a
considerable Fever; had no Appetite to any Kind of Food; and frequently brought
up what I eat, as soon as it was down; and oftentimes had little Rest in my
Bed, by Reason of Pains in my Breast and Back: Was able, however, to ride over
to my People, about two Miles, every Day, and take some Care of those who were
then at Work upon a small House for me to reside in amongst the Indians. This
was the fourth House ^e built for his Residence among the Indians. Besides that
at Ka^na^meek, and that at the Forks of Del^ware, and another at Crosweeksung,
he built one now at Cranberry.
I was sometimes scarce able to walk, and never able to fit up the whole Day,
through the Week. Was calm and composed, and but little exercised with melancholy
Damps, as in former Seasons of Weakness: Whether I should ever recover, or no,
seemed very doubtful; but this was many times a Comfort to me, that Life and
Death did not depend upon my Choice, I was pleased, to think, that he who is
infinitely wise, had the Determination of this Matter; and that I had no
Trouble, to consider and weigh Things upon all Sides, in order to make the
Choice, whether I would live or die. Thus my Time was consumed; I had little
Strength to pray, none to write or read, and scarce any to meditate: But through
divine Goodness, I could with great Composure look Death in the Face, and
frequently with sensible Joy. Oh, how blessed it is, to be habitually prepared
for Death. The Lord grant, that I may be actually ready ^lso.

Lord's Day, Sept. 28. Rode to my People; and though under much Weakness,
attempted to preach, from 2 Cor. xiii.5. Discoursed about half an Hour; at
which Season divine Power seemed to attend the Word: But being extreme weak, I
was obliged to desist; and after a Turn of Faintness, with much Difficulty,
rode to my Lodgings; where betaking my self to my Bed, I lay in a burning
Fever, and almost delirious, for several Hours; 'till toward Morning, my Fever
went off with a violent Sweat. I have often been feverish, and unable to rest
quietly after Preaching; but this was the most severe distressing Turn, that
ever Preaching brought upon me. Yet I felt perfectly at Rest in my own Mind,
because I had made my utmost Attempts to speak for God, and knew I could do no
more.

Tuesday, Sept. 30. Yesterday, and to Day, was in the same weak State, or
rather weaker than in Days past; was scarce able to sit up half the Day. Was in
a composed Frame of Mind, remarkably free from Dejection and melancholy Damps;
as God has been pleased, in great Measure, to deliver me from these unhappy
Glooms, in the general Course of my present weakness hitherto, and also from a
peevish froward Spirit: And Oh, how great a Mercy is this! Oh that I might
always be perfectly quiet in Seasons of greatest Weakness, although Nature should
sink and fail. Oh that I may always be able with utmost Sincerity to say, LORD,
not my Will, but thine be done! This, through Grace, I can say at present, with
Regard to Life or Death: The Lord do with me as seems good in his Sight; that
whether I live or die, I may glorify him, who is worthy to receive Blessing,
and Honor, and Dominion for ever. Amen.

Saturday, October. 4. Spent the former Part of this Week under a great Degree of
Infirmity and Disorder, as I had done several Weeks before: Was able however to
ride a little every Day, although unable to sit up half the Day, 'till Thursday.
Took some Care daily of some Persons at work upon my House. On Friday, after
Noon found my self wonderfully revived and strengthened; and having some Time
before given Notice to my People, and those of 'em at the Forks of Delaware in
particular, that I designed with Leave of Providence, to administer the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper upon the first Sabbath in October, the Sabbath
now approaching, on Friday-Afternoon I preached, preparatory to the Sacrament,
from 2 Cor. xiii.5. Finishing what I had proposed to offer upon the Subject the
Sabbath before. The Sermon was blessed of God to the stirring up religious
Affection, and a Spirit of Devotion, in the People of God; and to the greatly
affecting one who had backslidden from God, which caused him to judge and
condemn himself. I was surprizingly strengthened in my Work, while I was
speaking: But was obliged immediately after to repair to Bed, being now removed
into my own House among the Indians; which gave me such speedy Relief and
Refreshment, as I could not well have lived without. Spent some Time on
Friday-Night in conversing with my People about divine Things, as I lay upon my
Bed; and found my Soul refreshed, though my Body was weak. This being Saturday, I
discoursed particularly with diverse of the Communicants; and this Afternoon
preached from Zech. xii.10. There seemed to be a tender Melting, and hearty
mourning for Sin, in Numbers in the Congregation. My Soul was in a comfortable
Frame, and I enjoyed Freedom and Assistance in public Service: Was my self, as
well as most of the Congregation, much affected with the humble Confession, and
apparent Broken-heartedness of the formentioned Backslider; and could not but
rejoice, that God had given him such a Sense of his Sin and Unworthiness. Was
extremely tired in the Evening; but lay on my Bed, and discoursed to my People.

Lord's Day, October. 5. Was still very weak; and in the Morning, considerably
afraid I should not be able to go through the Work of the Day; having much to do,
both in private and public. Discoursed before the Administration of the
Sacrament, from Joh. i.29. Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the Sin of
the World. Where I considered* I. In what Respects Christ is called the Lamb of
God; and observed that he is so called, (1) From the Purity and Innocence of
his Nature. (2) From his Meekness and Patience under Sufferings. (3) From his
being that Atonement, which was pointed out in the Sacrifice of Lambs, and in
particular by the paschal Lamb. II. Considered how and in what Sense he takes
away the Sin of the World: And observed, that the Means and Manner, in and by
which he takes away the Sins of Men, was his giving himself for them, doing and
suffering in their Room and Stead, etc. And he is said to take away the Sin of
the World, not because all the World shall actually be redeemed from Sin by
him, but because, (1) He has done and suffered sufficient to answer for the
Sins of the World, and so to redeem all Mankind; (2) He actually does take away
the Sins of the elect World. And III. Considered how we are to behold him, in
order to have our Sins taken away. (1) Not with our bodily Eyes: Nor (2) By
imagining him on the Cross, etc. But by a spiritual View of his Glory and
Goodness, engaging the Soul to rely on him, etc. -- The divine Presence
attended this Discourse; and the Assembly was considerably melted with divine
Truths. After Sermon baptized two Persons. Then administered the Lord's Supper
to near 40 Communicants, of the Indians, besides diverse dear Christians of the
white People. It seemed to be a Season of divine Power and Grace; and Numbers
seemed to rejoice in God. Oh, the sweet Union and Harmony then appearing among
the religious People! My Soul was refreshed, and my religious Friends, of the
white People, with me. After the Sacrament, could scarcely get home, though it
was not more than 20 Rods; but was supported and led by my Friends, and laid on
my Bed; where I lay in Pain 'till some Time in the Evening; and then was able
to fit up and discourse with Friends. Oh, how was this Day spent in Prayers and
Praises among my dear People! One might hear them, all the Morning, before
public Worship, and in the Evening, 'till near Midnight, praying and singing
Praises to God, in one or other of their Houses. My Soul was refreshed, though my
Body was weak.

[This Week, he went (in a very low State) in two Days, to Elisabeth-Town, to
attend the Meeting of the Synod there: But was disappointed by it is Removal to
New York. He continued in a very composed comfortable Frame of Mind.]

Saturday, October. 11. Toward Night was seized with an Ague, which was followed
with a hard Fever, and considerable Pain: Was treated with great Kindness, and
was ashamed to see so much Concern about so unworthy a Creature, as I knew my
self to be. Was in a comfortable Frame of Mind, wholly submissive, with Regard
to Life or Death. It was indeed a peculiar Satisfaction to me, to think, that
it was not my Concern or Business to determine whether I should live or die. I
likewise felt peculiarly satisfied, while under this uncommon Degree of
Disorder; being now fully convinced of my being really weak, and unable to
perform my Work; whereas at other Times my Mind was perplexed with Fears, that
I was a Misimprover of Time, by conceiting I was sick, when I was not in
Reality so. Oh, how precious is Time! And how guilty it makes me feel, when I
think I have trifled away and misimproved it, or neglected to fill up each Part
of it with Duty, to the utmost of my Ability and Capacity!

Lord's Day, October. 12. Was scarce able to sit up, in the Forenoon: In the
Afternoon, attended public Worship, and was in a composed comfortable Frame.

Lord's Day, October. 19. Was scarcely able to do any Thing at all in the Week
past, except that on Thursday I rode out about four Miles; at which Time I took
Cold. As I was able to do little or nothing, so I enjoyed not much
Spirituality, or lively religious Affection; though at some Times I longed much
to be more fruitful and full of heavenly Affection; and was grieved to see the
Hours slide away, while I could do nothing for God. -- Was able, this Week to
attend public Worship. Was composed and comfortable, willing either to die or
live; but found it hard to be reconciled to the Tho'ts of living Useless. Oh
that I might never live to be a Burden to God's Creation; but that I might be
allowed to repair Home, when my sojourning Work is done.

[This Week, he went back to his Indians at Cranberry, to take some Care of
their spiritual and temporal Concerns: And was much spent with riding; though he
rode but a little Way in a Day.]

Thursday, October. 23. Went to my own House, and set Things in Order. Was very
weak, and somewhat melancholy: Labored to do something, but had no Strength;
and was forced to lie down on my Bed, very solitary.

Friday, October. 24. Spent the Day in overseeing and directing my People, about
mending their Fence, and securing their Wheat. Found, that all their Concerns
of a secular Nature depended upon me. -- Was somewhat refreshed in the Evening,
having been able to do something valuable in the Daytime. Oh, how it pains me,
to see Time pass away, when I can do nothing to any Purpose!

Saturday, October. 25. Visited some of my People; spent some Time in writing*
and felt much better in Body, than usual: When it was near Night, I felt so
well, that I had Tho'ts of expounding: But in the Evening was much disordered
again, and spent the Night in Coughing, and spitting of Blood.

Lord's Day, October. 26. In the Morning, was exceeding weak: Spent the Day,
'till near Night, in Pain to see my poor People, wandering as Sheep not having a
Shepherd, waiting and hoping to see me able to preach to them before Night: It
could not but distress me, to see 'em in this Case, and to find myself unable
to attempt any Thing for their spiritual Benefit. ^ut toward Night, finding my
self a little better, I called them together to my House, and sat down and read
and expounded Matthew. v.1, -- 16. This Discourse, though delivered in much
Weakness, was attended with Power to many of the Hearers; especially what was
spoken upon the last of those Verses; where I insisted on the infinite Wrong
done to Religion, by having our Light become Darkness, instead of shining
before Men. As many in the Congregation were now deeply affected with a Sense
of their Deficiency, in Regard of a spiritual Conversation, that might
recommend Religion to others, and a Spirit of Concern and Watchfulness seemed
to be excited in them; so there was one, in particular, that had fallen into
the Sin of Drunkenness, some Time before, who was now deeply convinced of his
Sin, and the great Dishonor done to Religion by his Misconduct, and discovered
a great Degree of Grief and Concern on that Account. My Soul was refreshed, to
see this. And though I had no Strength to speak so much as I would have done, but
was obliged to lie down on the Bed: Yet I rejoiced to see such an humble
Melting in the Congregation; and that divine Truths, though faintly delivered,
were attended with so much Efficacy upon the Auditory.

Monday, October. 27. Spent the Day in overseeing and directing the Indians,
about mending the Fence round their Wheat: Was able to walk with them, and
contrive their Business, all the Forenoon. In the Afternoon, was visited by two
dear Friends, and spent some Time in Conversation with them; toward Night, was
able to walk out, and take Care of the Indians again. In the Evening, enjoyed a
very peaceful Frame.

Tuesday, October. 28. Rode to Prince-Town, in a very weak State: Had such a
violent Fever, by the Way, that I was forced to alight at a Friends's House;
and lie down for some Time. (...) Night, was visited by Mr. Treat, Mr. Beaty,
and his Wife, and another Friend: My Spirits were refresh^^, to see them; but I
was surprised, and even ashamed, that they had taken so much Pains as to ride
30 or 40 Miles to see me! Was able to sit up most of the Evening; and spent the
Time in a very comfortable Manner with my Friends.

Wednesday, October. 29. Rode about 10 Miles, with my Friends that came Yesterday
to see me; and then parted with them, all but one, who stayed on Purpose to
keep me Company, and cheer my Spirits. Was extreme weak, and very feverish,
especially toward Night; but enjoyed Comfort and Satisfaction.

Thursday, October. 30. Rode 3 or 4 Miles, to visit Mr. Wales: Spent some Time,
in an agreeable Manner, in Conversation; and though extreme weak, enjoyed a
comfortable composed Frame of Mind.

Friday, October. 31. Spent the Day among Friends, in a comfortable Frame of
Mind, though exceeding weak, and under a considerable Fever.

Saturday, November 1. Took Leave of Friends, after having spent the Forenoon
with them, and returned Home to my own House. Was much disordered in the
Evening, and oppressed with my Cough; which has now been constant for, a long
Time, with a hard Pain in my Breast, and Fever.

Lord's Day, Nov. 2. Was unable to preach, and scarcely able to sit up, the
whole Day. Was grieved, and almost sunk, to see my poor People destitute of the
Means of Grace; especially considering they could not read, and so were under
great Disadvantages for spending the Sabbath comfortably. Oh, methought, I
could be contented to be sick, if my poor Flock had a faithful Pastor to feed
them with spiritual Knowledge! A View of their Want of this was more afflictive
to me, than all my bodily Illness.

Monday, Nov. 3. Being now in so weak and low a State, that I was utterly
incapable of performing my Work, and having little Hope of Recovery, unless, by
much Riding, I thought it my Duty to take a lengthy Journey into New England,
and to divert my self among my Friends, whom I had not now seen for a long
Time. And accordingly took Leave of my Congregation this Day. -- Before I left
my People, I visited them all in their respective Houses, and discoursed to
each one, as I thought most proper and suitable for their Circumstances, and
found great Freedom and Assistance in so doing: I scarcely left one House but
some were in Tears; and many were not only affected with my being about to
leave them, but with the solemn Addresses I made them upon divine Things; for I
was helped to be fervent in Spirit, while I discoursed to them. When I had thus
gone through my Congregation (which took me most of the Day) and had taken
Leave of them, and of the School, I left Home, and rode about two Miles, to the
House where I lived in the Summer past, and there lodged. Was refreshed, this
Evening, in that I had left my Congregation so well disposed and affected, and
that I had been so much assisted in making my Farewell Addresses to them.

Tuesday, Nov. 4. Rode to Woodbridge, and lodged with Mr. Pierson; continuing
still in a very weak State.

Wednesday, Nov. 5. Rode to Elisabeth-Town; intending, as soon as possible, to
prosecute my Journey into New England. But was, in an Hour or two after my
Arrival, taken much worse.

After this, for near a Week, was confined to my Chamber, and most of the Time
to my Bed: And then so far revived as to be able to walk about the House; but
was still confined within Doors.

In the Beginning of this extraordinary Turn of Disorder, after my coming to
Elisabeth-Town, I was enabled through Mercy to maintain a calm composed and
patient Spirit, as I had been before from the Beginning of my Weakness. After I
had been in Elisabeth-Town about a Fortnight, and had so far recovered that I
was able to walk about House, upon a Day of Thanksgiving kept in this Place, I
was enabled to recall and recount over the Mercies of God, in such a Manner as
greatly affected me, and filled me (I think) with Thankfulness and Praise to
God: Especially my Soul praised him for his Work of Grace among the Indians,
and the Enlargement of his dear Kingdom: My Soul blessed God for what he is in
himself, and adored him, that he ever would display himself to Creatures: I
rejoiced, that he was God, and longed that all should know it, and feel it, and
rejoice in it. Lord, glorify thy self, was the Desire and Cry of my Soul. Oh
that all People might love and praise the blessed God: That he might have all
possible Honor and Glory from the intelligent World. About this Time he wrote
the 7th Letter, published at the End of this Account of his Life.


After this comfortable Thanksgiving-Season, I frequently enjoyed Freedom and
Enlargement and Engagedness of Soul in Prayer, and was enabled to intercede
with God for my dear Congregation, very often for very Family, and every
Person, in particular; and it was often a great Comfort to me, that I could
pray heartily to God for those, to whom I could not speak, and whom I was not
allowed to see. But at other Times, my Spirits were so flat and low, and my
bodily Vigor so much wasted, that I had scarce any Affections at all.

In December, I had revived so far as to be able to walk abroad, and visit
Friends, and seemed to be on the gaining Hand with Regard to my Health, in the
main, until Lord's Day December. 21. At which Time I went to the public
Worship; and it being Sacrament-Day, I labored much, at the Lord's-Table, to
bring forth a certain Corruption, and have it slain, as being an Enemy to God
and my own Soul; and could not but hope, that I had gained some Strength
against this, as well as other Corruptions; and felt some Brokenness of Heart
for my Sin.

After this, having perhaps taken some Cold, I began to decline as to bodily
Health; and continued to do so, 'till the latter End of January, 1746, 7. And
having a violent Cough, a considerable Fever, and asthmatick Disorder, and no
Appetire for any Manner of Food, nor any Power of Digestion, I was reduced to
so low a State, that my Friends (I believe) generally despaired of my Life; and
some of them, for some Time together, thought I could scarce live a Day to an
End. In this Time, I could think of nothing with any Application of Mind, and
seemed to be in a great Measure void of all Affection, and was exercised with
great Temptations; but yet was not, ordinarily, afraid of Death.

On Lord's Day, Feb. 1. Though in a very weak and low State, I enjoyed a
considerable deal of Comfort and Sweetness in divine Things; and was enabled to
plead and use Arguments with God in Prayer, I think, with a Child-like Spirit.
That Passage of Scripture occurred to my Mind, and gave me great Assistance, If
ye, being Evil, know how to give good Gifts to your Children, how much more
will your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him? This Text
I was helped to plead, and insist upon; and saw the divine Faithfulness engaged
for dealing with me better than any earthly Parent can do with his Child. This
Season so refreshed my Soul, that my Body seemed also to be a Gainer by it. And
from this Time, I began gradually to amend. And as I recovered some Strength,
Vigor and Spirit, I found at Times some Freedom and Life in the Exercises of
Devotion, and some Longing* after Spirituality and a Life of Usefulness to the
Interests of the great Redeemer: Although at other Times, I was awfully barren
and lifeless, and out of Frame for the Things of God; so that I was ready often
to cry out, Oh that it were with me as in Months past! Oh that God had taken me
away in the midst of my Usefulness, with a sudden Stroke, that I might not have
been under a necessity of trifling away Time in Diversions! Oh that I had never
lived to spend so much precious Time, in so poor a Manner, and to so little
Purpose! Thus I often reflected, was grieved, ashamed, and even confounded,
sunk and discouraged.

On Tuesday, Feb. 24. I was able to ride as far as Newark, (having been
confined within Elisabeth-Town almost four Months) and the next Day returned to
Elisabeth-Town. My Spirits were somewhat refreshed with the Ride, though my Body
was weary.

On Saturday, Feb. 28. Was visited by an Indian of my own Congregation; who
brought me Letters, and good News of the sober and good Behavior of my People,
in general: This refreshed my Soul; I could not but soon retire, and bless God
for his Goodness; and sound, I trust, a truly thankful Frame of Spirit, that
God seemed to be building up that Congregation for himself.

On Wednesday, March 4. I met with Reproof from a Friend, which, although I
thought I did not deserve it from him, yet was (I trust) blessed of God to make
me more tenderly afraid of Sin, more jealous over my self, and more concerned
to keep both Heart and Life pure and unblameable: It likewise caused me to
reflect on my past Deadness, and want of Spirituality, and to abhor my self,
and look on my self most unworthy. This Frame of Mind continued the next Day;
and for several Days after, I grieved, to think, that in my necessary
Diversions I had not maintained more Seriousness, Solemnity, heavenly Affection
and Conversation. And thus my Spirits were often depressed and ^unk, and yet, I
trust, that Reproof was made to be beneficial ^o me.

Wednesday, March 11. Being kept in Elisabeth-Town as a Day of Fasting and
Prayer, I was able to attend public Worship; which was the first Time I was
able so to do after Dec. 21. (...), how much Weakness and Distress did God
carry me through in this Space of Time! But having obtained Help from him, I yet
live: Oh that I could live more to his Glory.

Lord's Day, March 15. Was able again to attend the public Worship, and felt
some earnest Desires of being restored to the Ministerial Work: Felt, I think,
some Spirit and Life, to speak for God.

Wednesday, March 18. Rode out with a Design to visit my People: And the next
Day arrived among them: Was under great Dejection in my Journey.

On Friday-Morning, I rose early, walked about among my People, and inquired
into their State and Concerns; and found an additional Weight and Burden on my
Spirits, upon hearing some Things disagreeable. I endeavored to go to God with
my Distresses, and made some kind of lamentable Complaint; and in a broken
Manner spread my Difficulties before God; but notwithstanding, my Mind
continued very gloomy. About ten o'Clock, I called my People together, and
after having explained and sung a Psalm, I prayed with them: There was a
considerable deal of Affection among them; I doubt not, in some Instances, that
which was more than merely natural.

[This was the last Interview, that he ever had with his People. About 11
o'Clock the same Day, he left 'em; and the next Day, came to Elisabeth-Town;
his Melancholy remaining still: And he continued for a considerable Time under
a great Degree of Dejection through vapoury Disorders.]

Saturday, March 28. Was taken this Morning with violent griping Pains. These
Pains were extreme, and constant, for several Hours; so that it seemed
impossible for me, without a Miracle, to live 24 Hours in such Distress. I lay
confined to my Bed, the whole Day, and in distressing Pain, all the former Part
of it: But it pleased God to bless Means for the abatement of my Distress. Was
exceedingly weakened by this Pain, and continued so for several Days following;
being exercised with a Fever, Cough, and nocturnal Sweats. In this distressed
Case so long as my Head was free of vapoury Confusions, Death appeared
agreeable to me; I looked on it as the End of Toils, and an Entrance into a
Place where the weary are at rest; and, I think, I had some Relish of the
Entertainments of the heavenly State; so that by these I was allured and drawn,
as well as driven by the Fatigues of Life. Oh, how happy it is, to be drawn by
Desires of a State of perfect Holiness!

Saturday, April 4. Was sunk and dejected, very restless and uneasy, by Reason
of the Misimprovement of Time; and yet knew not what to do: I longed to spend
Time in Fasting and Prayer, that I might be delivered from Indolence and
Coldness in the Things of God; but alas, I had not bodily Strength for these
Exercises! Oh, how blessed a Thing is it, to enjoy Peace of Conscience! But how
dreadful is a Want of inward Peace and Composure of Soul! It Is impossible, I
find, to enjoy this Happiness without redeeming Time, and maintaining a
spiritual Frame of Mind.

Lord's Day, April 5. It grieved me, to find my self so inconceivably barren.
My Soul thirsted for Grace: But alas, how far was I from obtaining what I saw
so exceeding excellent! I was ready to despair of ever being a holy Creature;
and yet my Soul was desirous of following hard after GOD; but never did I see
my self so far from having apprehended, or being already perfect, as at this
Time. The Lord's Supper being this Day administered, I attended the Ordinance:
And though I saw in my self a dreadful Emptiness, and want of Grace, and saw my
self as it were at an infinite Distance from that Purity, which is becoming the
Gospel; yet in the Season of Communion, especially in the Time of the
Distribution of the Bread, I enjoyed some Warmth of Affection, and felt a
tender Love to the Brethr^n; and, I think, to the glorious Redeemer, the
Firstborn among them. I endeavored then to bring forth mine and his Enemies,
and slay them before him; and found great Freedom in begging Deliverance from
this spiritual Death, as well as in asking divine Favors for my Friends, and
Congregation, and the Church of Christ in general.

Tuesay, April 7. In the Afternoon, rode to Newark, in order to marry the Rev.
Mr. Dickinson The late learned and very excellent Mr. JONATHAN DICKINSON,
Pastor of a Church in Elisabeth-Town, President of the College of New Jersey,
and one of the Correspondents of the honorable Society in Scotland for
propagating Christian Knowledge: Who had a great Esteem for Mr. Brainerd, and
had kindly entertained him in his House during his Sickness in the Winter past;
and who, after a short Illness, died in the next ensuing October, two Days
before Mr. Brainerd.
; and in the Evening, performed that Work. Afterward, rode home to
Elisabeth-Town, in a pleasant Frame, full of Composure and Sweetness.

Thursday, April 9. Attended the Ordination of Mr. Tucker A worthy pious young
Gentleman; who lived in the Ministry but a very short Time: He died at
Stratfield in Connecticut, the December following his Ordination, being a
little while after Mr. Brainerd's Death at Northampton. He was taken ill on a
Journey, returning from a Visit to his Friends at Milton (in the Massachusetts)
which, as I take it, was his native Place, and Harvard-College the Place of his
Education.
and aftewards the Examination of Mr. Smith: Was in a comfortable Frame of Mind
this Day, and felt my Heart, I think, sometimes in a spiritual Frame.

Friday, April 10. Spent the Forenoon in Presbyterial Business: In the
Afternoon, rode to Elisabeth-Town; found my Brother John there; This Brother of
his had been sent for by the Correspondents, to take Care of, and instruct Mr.
Brainerd's Congregation of Indians; he being obliged by his Illness to be
absent from them. And he continued to take Care of them 'till Mr. Brainerd's
Death: and since his Death, has been ord^ined his Successor in his Mission, and
to the Charge of his Congregation; which continues much to flourish under (...)
Care.
Spent some Time in Conversation with him; but was extreme weak and outdone,
my Spirits considerably sunk, and my Mind dejected.

Monday, April 13. Assisted in examining my Brother. In the Evening, was in a
solemn devout Frame; but was much overdone and oppressed with a violent
Headache.

Tuesday, April 14. Was able to do little or nothing: Spent some Time with Mr.
Byram and other Friends. This Day my Brother went to my People.

Wednesday, April 15. Found some Freedom at the Thro^^ of Grace, several Times
this Day. In the Afternoon, was very weak, and spent the Time to very little
Purpose; and yet in the Evening, had (I thought) some religious Warmth and
spiritual Desires in Prayer: My Soul seemed to go forth after God, and take
Complacence in his divine Perfections. But alas, afterward awfully let down my
Watch, and grew careless and secure.

Thursday, April 16. Was in bitter Anguish of Soul, in the Morning, such as I
have scarce ever felt, with a Sense of Sin and Guilt. I continued in Distress
the whole Day, attempting to pray wherever I went; and indeed could not help
so doing* but looked upon my self so vile, I dared not look any Body in the
Face; and was even grieved, that any Body should show (...) any Respect, or at
least, that they should be so deceived as (...) think I deserved it.

Friday, April 17. In the Evening, could not but think, that God helped me to
draw near to the Throne of Grace, though most unworthy, and gave me a Sense of
his Favor; which gave me inexpressible Support and Encouragement; though I
scarcely dared to hope the Mercy was real, it appeared so great: Yet could not
but rejoice, that ever God should discover his reconciled Face to such a vile
Sinner. Shame and Confusion, at Times, covered me; and then Hope and Joy and
Admiration of divine Goodness gained the Ascendant. Sometimes I could not but
admire the divine Goodness, that the Lord had not let me fall into all the
grossest vilest Acts of Sins and open Scandal, that could be thought of; and
felt my self so necessitated to praise God, that this was ready for a little
while to swallow up my Shame and Pressure of Spirit on Account of my Sins.

[After this, his Dejection and Pressure of Spirit returned; and he remained
under it the two next Days.]

Monday, April 20. Was in a very disordered State, and kept my Bed most of the
Day. I enjoyed a little more Comfort, than in several of the preceding Days.
This Day I arrived at the Age of 29 Years.

Tuesday, April 21. I set out on my Journey for New England, in order (if it
might be the Will of God) to recover my Health by riding: Tavelled to New York,
and there lodged.

[This proved his final Departure from New Jersey. -- He traveled slowly, and
arrived among his Friends at East-Haddam, about the beginning of May. There is
very little Account in his Diary, of the Time that passed from his setting out
on this Journey to May 10. He speaks of his sometimes finding his Heart
rejoicing in the glorious Perfections of God, and longing to live to him; but
complains of the Unfixedness of his Tho'ts, and their being easily diverted
from divine Subjects, and cries out of his Leanness, as testifying against him,
in the loudest Manner. And concerning those Diversions he was obliged to use
for his Health, he says, that he sometimes found he could use Diversions with
singleness of Heart, aiming at the Glory of God; but that he also found there
was a necessity of great Care and Watchfulness, lest he should lose that
spiritual Temper of Mind in his Diversion^, and lest they should degenerate
into wha^ was merely selfish, without any supreme Aim at the Glory of God in
them.

Lord's Day, May 10. (At Had-Lime) I could not but feel some Measure of
Gratitude to God at this Time (wherein I was much exercised) that he had always
disposed me, in my Ministry, ^o insist on the great Doctrines of Regeneration,
the New Creature* Faith in Christ, progressive Sanctification, supreme Love to
God, living inti^ely to the Glory of God, being not our own, and the like: God
has helped me to see, in the surest Mann^r, from Time to Time, that these, and
the like Doctrines, necessarily connected with them, are the only Foundation of
Safety and Salvation for perishing Sinners; and that those divine Dispositions,
which are consonant hereto, are that Holiness, without which no Man shall see
the Lord: The Exercise of these God-like Tempers, wherein the Soul acts in a
kind of Concert with God, and would be and do every Thing that is pleasing to
God; This, I saw, would stand by the Soul in a dying Hour; For God must, I
think, deny Himself, if he cast away his own Image, even the Soul that is one
in Desires with himself.

Lord's Day, May 17. (At Millington) Spent the Forenoon at Home, being unable
to attend the public Worship. At this Time, God gave me some affecting Sense
of my own Vileness, and the exceeding Sinfulness of my Heart; that there seemed
to be Nothing but Sin and Corruption within me. Innumerable Evils compassed me
about; my want of Spirituality and holy living, my neglect of God, and living
to my self -- All the Abominations of my Heart and Life seemed to be open to my
View; and I had nothing to say, but, GOD be merciful to me a Sinner. -- Toward
Noon, I saw, that the Grace of God in Christ is infinitely free toward
Sinners, and such Sinners as I was; I also saw, that God is the supreme Good,
that in his Presence is Life; and I began to long to die, that I might be with
him, in a State of Freedom from all Sin. Oh, how a small Glimpse of his
Excellency refreshed my Soul! Oh, how worthy i^ the blessed God to be loved,
adored, and delighted in, for himself, for his own divine Excellencies.

Though I felt much Dullness, and want of a Spirit of Prayer, this Week: Yet I had
some Glimpses of the Excellency of divine Things; and especially one Morning,
in secret Meditation and Prayer, the Excellency and Beauty of Holiness, as a
Likeness to the glorious God, was so discovered to me, that I began to long
earnestly to be in that World where Holiness dwells in Perfection: And I seemed
to long for this perfect Holiness, not so much for the sake of my own Happiness
(although I saw clearly that this was the greatest, yea, the only Happiness of
the Soul) as that I might please God, live entirely to him, and glorify him to
the utmost Stretch of my rational Powers and Capacities.

Lord's Day, May 24. (At Long-Meadow in Springfield) Could not but think, as I
have often remarked to others, that much more of true Religion consists in deep
Humility, Brokenness of Heart, and an abasing Sense of Barrenness and want of
Grace and Holiness, than most who are called Christians, imagine; especially
those who have been esteemed the Converts of the late Day; many of whom seem to
know of no other Religion but elevated Joys and Affections, arising only from
some Flights of Imagination, or some Suggestion made to their Mind, of Christ's
being their's, God's loving them, and the like.

[On Thursday, May 28. He came from Long-Meadow to Northampton; appearing
vastly better than, by his Account, he had been in the Winter; indeed so well,
that he was able to ride 25 Miles in a Day, and to walk half a Mile; and
appeared cheerful, and free from Melancholy: But yet undoubtedly, at that Time,
in a confirmed, incurable Consumption.

I had had much Opportunity, before this, of particular Information concerning
him, from many that were well acquainted with him; and had my self once an
Opportunity of considerable Conversation and some Acquaintance with him, at
New Haven, near four Years before, in the Time of the Commencement when he
offered that Confession to the Rector of the College, that has been already
mentioned in this History; I being one he was pleased then several Times to
consult on that Affair: But now I had Opportunity for a more full Acquaintance
with him. I found him remarkably sociable, pleasant, and entertaining in his
Conversation; yet solid, savoury, spiritual, and very profitable; appearing
me^k, modest, and humble, far from any Stiffness, Moroseness, superstitious
Demureness, or affected Singularity in Speech or Behavior, and seeming to
nauseate all such Things. We enjoyed not only the Benefit of his Conversation,
but had the Comfort and Advantage of hearing him pray in the Family, from Time
to Time. His Manner of praying was very agreeable; most becoming a Worm of the
Dust, and a Disciple of Christ, addressing to an infinitely great and holy God,
and Father of Mercies; not with florid Expressions, or a studied Eloquence; not
with any intemperate Vehemence, or indecent Boldness; at the greatest Distance
from any Appearance of Ostentation, and from every Thing that might look as
though be meant to recommend himself to those that were about him, or set himself
off to their Acceptance; free too from vain Repetitions, without impertinent
Excursions, or needless multiplying of Words. He expressed himself with the
strictest Propriety, with Weight, and Pungency; and yet what his Lips uttered
seemed to flow from the fullness of his Heart, as deeply impressed with a gr^^t
and solemn Sense of our Necessities, Unworthiness, and Dependence, and of God's
infinite Greatness* Excellency and Sufficiency, rather than merely from a warm
and fruitful Brain, pouring out good Expressions. And I know not, that ever I
heard him so much as ask a Blessing or return Thanks at Table, but there was
something remarkable, to be observed both in the Matter and Manner of the
Performance. In his Prayers, he insisted much on the Prosperity of Zion, the
Advancement of Christ's Kingdom in the World, and the Flourishing and
Propagation of Religion among the Indians. And he generally made it one
Petition in his Prayer, that we might not outlive our Usefulness.]

Lord's Day, May 31. [At Northampton,] I had little inward Sweetness in
Religion, most of the Week past; not realising and beholding spiritually the
Glory of God, and the blessed Redeemer; from whence always arise my Comforts
and Joys in Religion, if I have any at all: And if I cannot so behold the
Excellencies and Perfections of God, as to cause me to rejoice in him for what
he is in himself, I have no solid Foundation for Joy. To rejoice, only because
I apprehend I have an Interest in Christ, and shall be finally saved, is a poor
mean Business indeed.

[This Week, he consulted Dr. Mather, at my House, concerning his Illness; who
plainly told him, that there were great Evidences of his being in a confirmed
Consumption, and that he could give him no Encouragement, that he should ever
recover. But it seemed not to occasion the least Discomposure in him, nor to
make any Manner of Alteration as to the Cheerfulness and Serenity of his Mind,
or the Freedom or Pleasantness of his Conversation.]

Lord's Day, June 7. My Attention was greatly engaged, and my Soul so drawn
forth, this Day, by what I heard of the exceeding Preciousness of the saving
Grace of God's Spirit, that it almost overcame my Body, in my weak State: I
saw, that true Grace is exceeding precious indeed; that it is very rare; and
that there is but a very small Degree of it, even where the Reality of it is to
be found; at least, I saw this to be my Case.

In the preceding Week, I enjoyed some comfortable Seasons of Meditation. One
Morning, the Cause of God appeared exceeding precious to me: The Redeemer's
Kingdom is all that is valuable in the Earth, and I could not but long for the
Promotion of it in the World: I ^aw also, that this Cause is God's, that he has
an infinitely greater Regard and Conc^rn for it, than I could possibly have;
that if I have any true Love to this blessed Interest, it is only a Drop
derived from that Ocean. Hence, I was ready to lift up my Head with Joy; and
conclude, Well, if God's Cause be so dear and precious to him, he will pr^^^nts
it. And thus I did as it were rest on God, that surely he would promote that
which was so agreeable to his own Will; though the Time, when, must still be left
to his sovereign Pleasure.

[He was advised by Physicians still to continue Riding, as what would tend,
above any other Means, to prolong his Life. He was at a Loss, for some Time,
which Way to bend his Course next; but finally determined to ride from hence to
Boston; we having concluded that One of this Family should go with him, and be
helpful to him in his weak and low State.]

Tuesday, June 9. I set out on a Journey from Northampton to Boston: Traveled
slowly, and got some Acquaintance with diverse Ministers on the Road.

I having now continued to ride for some considerable Time together, felt my
self much better than I had formerly done; and I found, that in Proportion to
the Prospect I had of being restored to a State of Usefulness, so I desired the
Continuance of Life: But Death appeared inconceivably more desirable to me,
than a useless Life; yet blessed be God, I found my Heart, at Times, fully
resigned and reconciled to this greatest of Afflictions, if God saw fit thus to
deal with me.

Friday, July 12. I arrived in Boston this Day, somewhat fatigued with my
Journey. Observed, that there is no Rest, but in GOD: Fatigues of Body, and
Anxieties of Mind attend us, both in Town and Country; no Place is exempted.

Lord's Day, June 14. I enjoyed some Enlargement and Sweetness in
Family Prayer, as well as in secret Exercises; God appeared excellent, his Ways
full of Pleasure and Peace, and all I wanted was a Spirit of holy Fervency, to
live to him.

Wednesday, June 17. This, and the two preceding Days, I spent mainly in
visiting the Ministers of the Town, and was treated with great Respect by them.

On Thursday, June 18. I was taking exceeding ill, and bro't to the Gates of
Death, by the breaking of small Ulcers in my Lungs, as my Physician supposed.
In this extreme weak State I continued for several Weeks, and was frequently
reduced so low, as to be utterly Speechless, and not able so much as to whisper
a Word; and even after I had so far revived, as to walk about House, and to
step out of Doors, I was exercised every Day with a faint Turn, which continued
usually four or five Hours; at which Times, though I was not utterly Speechless,
so but that I could say Yes or No, yet I could not converse at all, nor speak
one Sentence without making Stops for Breath; and diverse Times in this Season,
my Friends gathered round my Bed, to see me breathe my last, which they looked
for every Moment, as I my self also did.

How I was, the first Day or two of my illness, with Regard to the Exercise of
Reason, I scarcely know; but I believe I was something shattered with the
Violence of the Fever, at Times: But the third Day of my Illness, and
constantly afterward, for four or five Weeks together, I enjoyed as much
Serenity of Mind, and Clearness of Thought, as perhaps I ever did in my Life;
and I think, my Mind never penetrated with so much Ease and Freedom into divine
Things, as at this Time; and I never fel^ so capable of demonstrating the Truth
of many important Doctrines of the Gospel as now. And as I saw clearly the
Truth of those great Doctrines, which are justly styled the DOCTRINES of GRACE;
so I saw with no less Clearness, that the Essence of Religion consisted in the
Soul's Conformity to GOD, and acting above all selfish Views, for his Glory,
longing to be for him, to live to him, and please and honor him in all Things;
and this from a clear View of his infinite Excellency and Worthiness in
himself, to be loved, adored, worshipped, and served by all intelligent
Creatures. Thus I saw, that when a Soul loves God with a supreme Love, he
therein acts like the blessed God himself, who most Justly loves himself in
that Manner: So when God's Interest and his are become one, and he longs that
God should be glorified, and rejoices to think that he is unchangeably
possessed of the highest Glory and Blessedness, herein also he acts in
Conformity to God: In like Manner, when the Soul is fully resigned to, and
rests satisfied and contented with the divine Will, here it is also conformed
to God.

I saw further, that as this divine Temper, whereby the Soul exalts God, and
treads Self in the Dust, is wrought in the Soul by God's discovering his own
glorious Perfections in the Face of Jesus Christ to it, by the special
Influences of the holy Spirit, so he cannot but have Regard to it, as his own
Work; and as it is his Image in the Soul, he cannot but take Delight in it.
Then I saw again, that if God should slight and reject his own moral Image, he
must needs deny himself; which he cannot do. And thus I saw the Stability and
Infallibility of this Religion, and that those who are truly possessed of it,
have the most complete and satisfying Evidence of their being interested in all
the Benefits of Christ's Redemption, having their Hearts conformed to him; and
that these and these only are qualified for the Employments and Entertainments
of God's Kingdom of Glory; as none but these have any Relish for the Business
of Heaven, which is to ascribe Glory to God, and not to themselves; and that
God (though I would speak it with great Reverence of his Name and Perfections)
cannot, without denying himself, finally cast such away.

The next Thing I had then to do, was to enquire, whether this was my Religion:
And here God was pleased to help me to the most easy Remembrance and critical
Review of what had passed in Course, of a religious Nature, through several of
the latter Years of my Life: And although I could discover much Corruption
attending my best Duties, many selfish Views and carnal Ends, much spiritual
Pride and Self-Exaltation* and innumerable other Evils which compassed me
about; I say, although I now discerned the Sins of my holy Things, as well as
other Actions, yet God was pleased, as I was reviewing, quickly to put this
Question out of Doubt, by showing me, that I had, from Time to Time, acted
above the utmost Influence of mere Self-Love; that I had longed to please and
glorify him, as my highest Happiness, etc. And this Review was through Grace
attended with a present Feeling of the same divine Temper of Mind; I felt now
pleased, to think of the Glory of God, and longed for Heaven, as a State
wherein I might glorify God perfectly, rather than a Place of Happiness for my
self: And this Feeling of the Love of God in my Heart, which I trust the Spirit
of God excited in me afresh, was sufficient to give me full Satisfaction, and
make me long, as I had many Times before done, to be with Christ: I did not now
want any of the sudden Suggestions, which many are so pleased with, That Christ
and his Benefits are MINE, That God loves ME, etc. in order to give me
Satisfaction about my State: No, my Soul now abhorred those Delusions of Satan,
which are thought to be the immediate Witness of the Spirit, while there is
nothing but an empty Suggestion of a certain Fact, without any gracious
Discovery of the divine Glory, or of the Spirit's Work in their own Hearts: I
saw the awful Delusion of this Kind of Confidences, as well as of the whole of
that Religion, which they usually spring from, or at least are the Attendants
of; the false Religion of the late Day (though a Day of wondrous Grace) the
Imaginations, and Impressions made only on the animal Affections, together with
the sudden Suggestions, made to the Mind by Satan, transformed into an Angel of
Light, of certain Facts not revealed in Scripture: These, and many like Things,
I fear, have made up the greater Part of the religious Appearance in many
Places.

These Things I saw with great Clearness, when I was though it to be dying. And God
gave me great Concern for his Church and Interest in the World, at this Time:
Not so much because the late remarkable Influence upon the Minds of People was
abated, and almost wholly gone, as because that false Religion, those Heats of
Imagination, and wild and selfish Commotions of the animal Affections, which
attended the Work of Grace, had prevailed so far. This was that which my Mind
dwelt upon, almost Day and Night: And this, to me, was the darkest Appearance,
respecting Religion, in the Land; for 'twas this chiefly, that had prejudiced
the World against inward Religion. And I saw, the great Misery of all was, that
so few saw any Manner of Difference between those Exercises that were spiritual
and holy, and those which have Self-Love only for their Beginning, Center, and
End.

As God was pleased to afford me Clearness of Thought, and Composure of Mind,
almost continually, for several Weeks together, under my great Weakness; so he
enabled me, in some Measure, to improve my Time (as I hope) to valuable
Purposes. I was enabled to write a Number of important Letters, to Friends in
remote Places Among these are the eighth, ninth, and tenth Letters, at the End
of this History.
: And sometimes I wrote when I was Speechless; i. e. unable to maintain
Conversation with any Body; though perhaps I was able to speak a Word or two so
as to be heard. -- At this Season also, while I was confined at Boston, I read
with Care and Attention some Papers of old Mr. Shepard's, lately come to Light,
and designed for the Press: And as I was desired, and greatly urged, made some
Corrections, where the Sense was left dark, for want of a Word or two. --
Besides this, I had many Visitants; with whom, when I was able to speak, I
always conversed of the Things of Religion; and was peculiarly disposed and
assisted in distinguishing between the true and false Religion of the Times:
There was scarce any Subject, that has been Matter of Debate in the late Day,
but what I was at one Time or other brought to a Sort of Necessity to discourse
upon, and show my Opinion in; and that frequently before Numbers of People; and
especially, I discoursed repeatedly on the Nature and Necessity of that
Humiliation, Self-Emptiness, or full Conviction of a Person's being utterly
undone in himself, which is necessary in order to a saving Faith, and the
extreme Difficulty of being brought to this, and the great Danger there is of
Persons taking up with some Self-righteous Appearances of it: The Danger of
this I especially dwelt upon, being persuaded that Multitudes perish in this
hidden Way; and because so little is said from most Pulpits to discover any
Danger here: So that Persons being never effectually brought to die in
themselves* are never truly united to Christ, and so perish. I also discoursed
much on what I take to be the Essence of true Religion, endeavoring plainly to
describe that God-like Temper and Disposition of Soul, and that holy
Conversation and Behavior, that may justly claim the Honor of having God for
its Original and Patron. And I have Reason to hope God blessed my Way of
discoursing and distinguishing, to some, both Ministers and People; so that my
Time was not wholly lost.

[He was much visited, while in Boston, by many Persons of considerable Note
and Figure, and of the best Character, and by some of the first Rank: Who
showed him uncommon Respect, and appeared highly pleased and entertained with
his Conversation. And besides his being honored with the Company and Respect
of Ministers of the Town, he was visited by several Ministers from various
Parts of the Country. And as he took all Opportunities to discourse of the
peculiar Nature, and distinguishing Characters of true spiritual and vital
Re^igion, and to bear his Testimony against the various false (...) consisting
in, or arising from Impressions on the Imagination, and sudden and supposed
immediate Suggestions of Truths, not contained in the Scripture, and that Faith
which consists primarily in a Person's believing that Christ died for him in
particular, etc. So what he said was for the most Part heard with uncommon
Attention and Regard; and his Discourses and Reasonings appeared manifestly to
have great Weight and Influence, with many that he conversed with, both
Ministers and others. I have had Advantage for the more full Information of his
Conduct and Conversation, the Entertainment he met with, and what passed
relating to him while in Boston; as he was constantly attended, during his
Continuance there, by one of my Children, in order to his Assistance in his
Illness.


Also the honorable Commissioners in Boston, of the incorporated Society in
London for propagating the Gospel in New England and Parts adjacent, having
newly had committed to 'em a Legacy of the late Rev. and famous Dr. Daniel
Williams of London, for the Suport of two Missionaries to the Heathen, were
pleased, while he was in Boston, to consult him about a Mission to those
Indians called the Six Nations, particularly about the Qualifications requisite
in a Missionary to those Indians; and were so satisfied with his Sentiments on
this Head, and had that Confidence in his Faithfulness and his Judgment and
Discretion in Things of this Nature, that they destred him to undertake to find
and recommend a couple of Persons fit to be employed in this Business; and very
much left the Matter with him.

Likewise certain pious and generously disposed Gentlemen in Boston, being
moved by the wonderful Narrative of his Labors and Success among the Indians,
in New Jersey, and more especially by their Conversation with him on the same
Subject, took Opportunity to enquire more particularly into the State and
Necessities of his Congregation, and the School among the Indians, with a
charitable Intention of contributing something of their Substance to promote
the excellent Design of the Advancement of the Interests of Christianity among
the Indians; and understanding that there was a want of Bibles for the School,
three Dozen of Bibles were immediately procured, and 14 L. in Bills (of the old
Tenor) given over and above, besides more large Benefactions made afterward,
which I shall have Occasion to mention in their proper Place.

Mr. Brainerd's Restoration from his extremely low State in Boston, so as to go
abroad again and to travel, was very unexpected ^o him and his Friends. My
Daughter who was with hi^* writes thus concerning him, in a Letter dated June
23. -- On Thursday, he was very ill with a violent Fever, and extreme Pain in
his Head and Breast, and, at Turns, delirious. So he remained 'till Saturday
Evening, when he seemed to be in the Agonies of Death: The Family was up with
him 'till one or two o'Clock, expecting every Hour would be his last. On
Sabbath Day he was a little revived, his Head was better, but very full of
Pain, and exceeding sore at his Brea^^, much put to it for Breath etc.
Yesterday he was better upon all Accounts. Last Night he slept but little. This
Morning he is much worse. -- Doctor Pynchon says, he has no Hopes of his Life;
nor does he think it likely he will ever come out of the Chamber; though he says,
he may be able to come to Northampton. --

In another Letter dated June 29. She says as follows. Mr. Brainerd has not so
much Pain nor Fever, since I last wrote, as before: Yet he is extremely weak
and low, and very faint, expecting every Day will be his last. He says, it is
impossible for him to live, for want of Life. He has hardly Vigor enough to
draw his Breath. I went this Morning into Town, and when I came Home, Mr.
Bromfield said, he never expected I should see him alive; for he lay two Hours,
as they thou^ht, dying; One could scarcely tell, whether he was alive, or not;
he was not able to speak, for some Time: But now is much as he was before. The
Doctor thinks, he will drop away in such a Turn. Mr. Brainerd says, he never
felt any Thing so much like Dissolution, as what he felt to Day; and says* he
never had any Conception of its being possible for any Creature to be alive,
and yet so weak as he is from Day to Day* -- Doctor Pynchon says, he should not
be surprised, if he should so recover as to live half a Year; nor would it
surprise him, if he should die in half a Day. Since I began to write, he is not
so well; having had a faint Turn again: Yet patient and resigned, having no
distressing Fears, but the contrary.

His Physician, the honorable Joseph ^ynchon, Esquire when he visited him in his
extreme Illness in Boston, attributed his si^king so suddenly into a State so
extremely low, and high unto Death, to the breaking of Ulcers, that had been
long gathering in his Lungs (as Mr. Brainerd himself in^^mate^ in a
forementioned Passage in his Diary) and there discharging and diffusing their
purulent Matter; which, while Nature was laboring and struggling to through off
(that could be done no otherwise, than by a gradual straining of it through the
small Vessels of those vital Parts) This occasioned an high Fever, and violent
Coughing, and threw the whole Frame of Nature into the utmost Disorder, and
brought it near to a Dissolution. But supposed, if the Strength of Nature held
'till the Lungs had this Way gradually cleared themselves of this putid Matter,
he might revive, and continue better, 'till new Ulcers gathered and broke; but
then would surely sink again; and that there was no Hope of his Recovery; but
(as he expressed himself to one of my Neighbors, who at that Time saw him in
Boston) he was as certainly a dead Man, as if he was shot through the Heart.

But so it was ordered in divine Providence, that the Strength of Nature held
out through this great Conflict, so as just to escape the Grave at that Turn;
and then he revived, to the Astonishment of all that knew his Case.

After he began to revive, he was visited by his youngest Brother, Mr. Israel
Brainerd, a Student at Yale-College; who having heard of his extreme Illness,
went from thence to Boston, in order to see him, if he might find him alive,
which he but little expected.

This Visit was attended with a mixture of Joy and Sorrow to Mr. Brainerd. He
greatly rejoiced to see his Brother, especially because he had desired an
Opportunity of some religious Conversation with him before he died. But this
Meeting was attended with Sorrow, as his Brother brought to him the sorrowful
Tidings of his Sister Spencer's Death at Haddam; a Sister, between whom and him
had long subsisted a peculiarly dear Affection, and much Intimacy in spiritual
Matters, and whose House he used to make his Home, when he went to Haddam, his
native Place. He had heard nothing of her Sickness 'till this Report of her
Death. But he had these Comforts, together with the Tidings, viz. a Confidence
of her being gone to Heaven, and an Expectation of his soon meeting her there.
-- His Brother continued with him 'till he left the Town, and came with him
from thence to Northampton.

Concerning the last Sabbath Mr. Brainerd spent in Boston, he writes in his
Diary as follows.]

Lord's Day, July 19. I was just able to attend public Worship, being carried
to the House of God in a Chaise. Heard Dr. Sewall preach, in the Forenoon:
Partook of the Lord's Supper at this Time. In this Sacrament, I saw astonishing
divine Wisdom displayed; such Wisdom as I saw required the Tongues of Angels
and glorified Saints to celebrate: It seemed to me, I never should do any Thing
at adoring the infinite Wisdom of God discovered in the Contrivance of Man's
Redemption, until I arrived at a World of Perfection; yet I could not help
striving to call upon my Soul and all within me to bless the Name of God. -- In
the Afternoon, heard Mr. Prince preach. -- I saw more of God in the Wisdom
discovered in the Plan of Man's Redemption, than I saw of any other of his
Perfections, through the whole Day.

[He left Boston the next Day. But before he came away, he had Occasion to bear
a very full plain and open Testimony against that Opinion, that the Essence of
saving Faith lies in believing that Christ died for me in particular, and that
this is the first Act of Faith in a true Believer's closing with Christ. He did
it in a long Conference he had with a Gentleman, that has very publicly and
strenuously appeared to defend that Tenet. He had this Discourse with him in
the Presence of a Number of considerable Persons, who came to visit Mr.
Brainerd before he left the Town, and to take their Leave of him. In which
Debate, he made this plain Declaration (at the same Time confirming what he
said, by many Arguments) That the Essence of saving Faith was wholly left out
of that Definition of saving Faith which that Gentleman has published; and that
the Faith which he had defined, had nothing of GOD in it, nothing above Nature,
nor indeed above the Power of the Devils; and that all such as had this Faith,
and had no better, though they might have this to never so high a Degree, would
surely perish. And he declared also, that he never had greater Assurance of the
Falseness of the Principles of those that maintained such a Faith, and of their
dangerous and destructive Tendency, or a more affecting Sense of the great
Delusion and Misery of those that depended on getting to Heaven by such a Faith
(while they had no better) than he lately had when he was supposed to be at the
Point to die, and expected every Minute to pass into Eternity. -- Mr.
Brainerd's Discourse at this Time, and the forceable Reasonings, by which he
confirmed what he asserted, appeared to be greatly to the Satisfaction of those
present; as several of them took Occasion expressly to manifest to him, before
they took Leave of him.

When this Conversation was ended, having bid an affectionate Farewell to his
Friends, he set out in the Cool of the Afternoon, on his Journey to
Northampton, attended by his Brother, and my Daughter that went with him to
Boston; and would have been accompanied out of the Town by a Number of
Gentlemen, besides that honorable Person who gave him his Company for some
Miles on that Occasion, as a Testimony of their Esteem and Respect, had not his
Aversion to any Thing of Pomp and Show prevented it.]

Saturday July 25. I arrived here at Northampton; having set out from Boston on
Monday, about 4 o'Clock P. M. In this Journey, I rode about 16 Miles a Day, one
Day with another. Was sometimes extremely tired and faint on the Road, so that
it seemed impossible for me to proceed any further: At other Times I was
considerably better, and felt some Freedom both of Body and Mind.

Lord's Day, July 26. This Day, I saw clearly, that I should never be happy;
yea, that God himself could not make me happy unless I could be in a Capacity
to please and glorify him for ever: Take away this, and admit me into all the
fine Heavens that can be conceived of by Men or Angels, and I should still be
miserable forever.

[Tho' he had so far revived, as to be able to travel thus far, yet he
manifested no Expectation of Recovery: He supposed, as his Physician did, that
his being brought so near to Death at Boston, was owing to the breaking of
Ulcers in his Lungs: He told me, that he had had several such ill Turns before,
only not to so high a Degree, but as he supposed, owing to the same Cause, viz.
the breaking of Ulcers; and that he was brought lower and lower every Time; and
it appeared to him, that in his last Sickness (in Boston) he was brought as low
as it was possible and yet live; and that he had not the least Expectation of
surviving the next Return of this breaking of Ulcers: But still appeared
perfectly calm in the Prospect of Death.

On Wednesday-Morning, the Week after he came to Northampton, he took Leave of
his Brother Israel, and never expecting to see him again in this World* he now
setting out from hence on his Journey to New Haven.

When Mr. Brainerd came hither, he had so much Strength as to be able, from Day
to Day, to ride out two or three Miles, and to return* and sometimes to pray in
the Family; but from this Time he gradually, but sensibly, decayed, and became
weaker and weak^^

While he was here, his Conversation from first to last was much on the same
Subjects as it had been when in Boston: He was much in speaking of the Nature
of true Religion of Heart and Practice, as distinguished from it is various
Counterfeits; expressing his great Concern, that the latter did so much prevail
in many Places. He often manifested his great Abhorrence of all such Doctrines
and Principles in Religion, as in any wise favored of, and had any (though but a
remote) Tendency to Autinomianism; of all such Notions, as seemed to diminish
the Necessity of Holiness of Life, or to abate Men's Regard to the Commands of
God, and a strict diligent and universal Practice of Virtue and Piety, under a
Pretense of depreciating our Works, and magnifying God's free Grace. He spoke
often, with much Detestation, of such Experiences and pretended Discoveries and
Joys, as have nothing of the Nature of Sanctification in them, and don't tend
to Strictness, Tenderness, and Diligence in Religion, and Meekness and
Benevolence toward Mankind, and an humble Behavior: And he also declared,
that he looked on such pretended Humility as worthy of no Regard, that was not
manifested by Modesty of Conduct and Conversation. He spoke often, with
Abhorrence, of the Spirit and Practice that appears among the greater Part of
Separatists at this Day in the Land, particularly, those in the eastern Parts
of Connecticut; in their condemning and separating from the standing Ministry
and Churches, their crying down Learning and a Learned Ministry, their Notion
of an immediate Call to the Work of the Ministry, and the Forwardness of Lay
men to set up themselves as public Teachers. He had been much conversant in
the Eastern Part of Connecticut (his native Place being near to it) when the
same Principles, Notion and Spirit began to operate, which have since prevailed
to a greater Height; and had Acquaintance with some of those Persons who are
become Heads and Leaders of the Separatists; he had also been conversant with
Persons of the same Way elsewhere: And I heeard him say, once and again, he
knew by his Acquaintance with this Sort of People, that what was chiefly and
most generally in Repute among them as the Power of Godliness, was an entirely
different Thing from that true vital Piety recommended in the Scriptures, and
had nothing in it of that Nature. He manifested a great Dislike of a
Disposition in Persons to much Noise and Show in Religion, and affecting to be
abundant in proclaiming and publishing their own Experience^: Though at the same
Time he did not condemn, but approved of Christians speaking of their own
Experiences on some Occasions, and to some sons, with due Modesty and
Discretion. He himself sometimes, while at my House, spoke of his own
Experiences: But it was always with apparent Reserve, and in the Exercise of
Care and Judgment with Respect to Occasions, Persons, and Circumstances. He
mentioned some remarkable Things of his own religious Experience to two young
Gentlemen, Candidates for the Ministry, who watched with him (each at a
different Time) when he was very low and not far from his End; But he desired
both of them not to speak of what he had told them 'till after his Death.

The Things which were the Subject of that Debate I mentioned before, that he
had with a certain Gentleman* the Day he left Boston, seemed to lie with much
Weight on his Mind after he came hither; and he began to write a Letter to that
Gentleman; expressing his Sentiments concerning the dangerous Tendency of some
of the Tenets he had expressed in Conversation, and in the Writings he had
published; with the Considerations by which the exceeding hurtful Nature of
those Notions is evident; but he had not Strength to finish his Letter.

After he came hither, as long as he lived, he was much in speaking of that
future Prosperity of Zion that is so often foretold and promised in the
Scripture: It was a Theme he delighted to dwell upon; and his Mind seemed to be
carried forth with earnest Concern about it, and intense Desires, that Religion
might speedily and abundantly revive and flourish; though he had not the least
Expectation of Recovery; yea, the n^^rer Death advanced, and the more the
Symptoms of it is Approach increased, still the more did his Mind seem to be
taken up with this Subject. He told me, when near his End, that he never in all
his Life had his Mind so led forth in Desires and earnest Prayers for the
flourishing of CHRIST'S Kingdom on Earth, as since he was brought so exceeding
low at Boston. He seemed much to wonder, that there appeared no more of a
Disposition in Ministers and People to pray for the flourishing of Religion
through the World; that so little a Part of their Prayers was generally taken up
about it, in their Families, and elsewhere; and particularly, he several Times
expressed his Wonder, that there appeared no more Forwardness to comply with
the Proposal lately made, in a Memoral from a Number of Ministers in Scotland,
and sent over into America, for united extraordinary Prayer, among Christ's
Ministers and People, for the (...)* And he sent it as his dying Advice to his
own Congregation, that they should practice agreably to that Proposal. His
Congregation, since this, have with great Cheerfulness and Unanimity fallen in
with this Advice, and have practiced agreably to the Proposal from Scotland;
and have at Times appeared with uncommon Engagedness and Fervency of Spirit in
their Meetings and united Devotions, pursuant to that Proposal: Also the
Presbyteries of New York, and New-Brunswick, since this, have with one Consent,
fallen in with the Proposal, as likewise some others of God's People in those
Parts.


Though he was constantly exceeding weak, yet there appeared in him a continual
Care well to improve Time, and fill it up with something that might be
profitable, and in some Respect for the Glory of God or the Good of Men; either
profitable Conversation, or writing Letters to absent Friends, or noting
something in his Diary, or looking over his former Writings, correcting them,
and preparing them to be left in the Hands of others at his Death, or giving
some Directions concerning a future Conducting and Management of his People, or
Employment in secret Devotions. He seemed never to be easy, however Ill, if he
was not doing something for God, or in his Service.

After he came hither, he wrote a Preface to a Diary of the famous Mr.
Shepard's (in those Papers beforementioned, lately found) having been much
urged to it by those Gentlemen in Boston who had the Care of the Publication:
Which Diary, with his Preface, has since been published. A Part of this Preface
is inserted in the Appendix to this History.


In his Diary for Lord's Day, August 9. He speaks of longing Desires after
Death, through a Sense of the Excellency of a State of Perfection.

In his Diary for Lord's Day Aug. 16. He speaks of his having so much
Refreshment of Soul in the House of God, that it seemed also to refresh his
Body. And this is not only noted in his Diary, but was very observable to
others; it was very apparent, not only, that his Mind was exhilerated with
inward Consolation, but also that his animal Spirits and bodily Strength seemed
to be remarkably restored, as though he had forgot his Illness. -- But this was
the last Time that ever he attended public Worship on the Sabbath.

On Tuesday-Morning that Week (I being absent on a Journey) he prayed with my
Family; but not without much Difficulty, for want of bodily Strength: And this
was the last Family Prayer that ever he made.

He had been wont, 'till now, frequently to ride out, two or three Miles; But
this Week, on Thursday, was the last Time he ever did so]

Lord's Day, Aug. 23. This Morning, I was considerably refreshed with the
Thought, yea, the Hope and Expectation of the Enlargement of CHRIST'S Kingdom;
and I could not but hope, the Time was at Hand, when Babylon the great would
fall, and rise no more: This led me to some spiritual Meditations, that were
very refreshing to me. I was unable to attend public Worship, either Part of
the Day; but God was pleased to afford me Fixedness and Satisfaction in divine
Thoughts. Nothing so refreshes my Soul, as when I can go to GOD, yea, to GOD my
exceeding Joy. When he is so, sensibly, to my Soul, Oh, how unspeakably
delightful is this!

In the Week past, I had diverse Turns of inward Refreshing; though my Body was
inexpressibly weak, followed con^^^ually with Agues and Fevers. Sometimes my
Soul centered in GOD, as my only Portion; and I felt that I should be forever
unhappy, if he did not reign: I saw the Sweetness and Happiness of being his
Subject, at his Disposal: This made all my Difficulties quickly vanish.

From this Lord's Day, vix. Aug. 23. I was troubled very much with vapoury
Disorders, and could neither write nor read, and could scarcely live; although
through Mercy, was not so much oppressed with heavy Melancholy and Gloominess, as
at many other Times.

['Till this Week he had been wont to lodge in a Room above Stairs; but he now
grew so weak, that he was no longer able to go up Stairs and down; Friday Aug.
28. was the last Time he ever went above Stairs, henceforward be betook himself
to a lower Room.

On Wednesday, September 2. Being the Day of our public Lecture, he seemed to
be refreshed with seeing the Neighboring Ministers that came hither to the
Lecture, and expressed a great Desire once more to go to the House of God on
that Day: And accordingly rode to the Meeting* and attended divine Service,
(...) Rev. M. Woodbridge of Hatfield preached. He signified that he supposed it
to be the last Time that ever he should attend the public Worship; as it
proved. And indeed it was the last Time that ever he went out at our Gate alive.

On the Saturday-Evening next following, he was unexpectedly visited by his
Brother Mr. John Brainerd, who came to see him from New Jersey. He was much
refreshed by this unexpected Visit, this Brother being peculiarly dear to him;
and he seemed to rejoice in a devout and solemn Manner, to see him, and to hear
the comfortable Tidings he brought concerning the State of his dear
Congregation of Christian Indians: And a Circumstance of this Visit, that he
was exceeding glad of, was, that his Brother brought him some of his private
Writings from New Jersey, and particularly his Diary that he had kept for many
Years past.]

Lord's Day, Sept. 6. I began to read some of my private Writings, which my
Brother brought me; and was considerably refreshed, with what I met with in
them.

Monday, Sept. 7. I proceeded further in reading my old private Writings, and
found they had the same Effect upon me as before: I could not but rejoice and
bless God for what passed long ago, which without Writing had been entirely
lost.

This Evening, when I was in great Distress of Body, my Soul longed that God
should be glorified: I saw there was no Heaven but this. I could not but speak
to the Bystanders then of the only Happiness, viz. Pleasing GOD. Oh that I
could for ever live to God! The Day, I trust, is at Hand, the perfect Day: Oh,
the Day of Deliverance from all Sin!

Lord's Day, Sept. 13. I was much refreshed and engaged in Meditation and
Writing, and found a Heart to act for God. My Spirits were refreshed, and my
Soul delighted to do something for God.

[On the Evening following that Lord's Day, his Feet began to appear sensibly
swelled; which thenceforward swelled more and more. A Symptom of his
Dissolution coming on.

The next Day, his Brother John left him, being obliged to return to New Jersey
on some Business of great Importance and Necessity; intending to return again
with all possible Speed, hoping to see his Brrother yet once more in the Land
of the Living.

Mr Brainerd having now with much Deliberation considered of the important
Affair forementioned, left with him by the honorable Commissioners in Boston,
of the Corporation in London for the Propagation of the Gospel in New England
and Parts adjacent, viz. the fixing upon and recommending two Persons proper to
be improved as Missionaries to the Six Nations, he about this Time wrote a
Letter, recommending two young Gentlemen of his Acquaintance to those
Commissioners, viz. Mr. Elihu Spencer of East-Haddam, and Mr. Job Strong of
Northampton. The Commissioners on the Receipt of this Letter, cheerfully and
unanimously agreed to accept of and employ the Persons he had recommended: Who
accordingly have since waited on the Commissioners to receive their
Instructions; and pursuant to their Instructions, have applied themselves to a
Preparation for the Business of their Mission, in the Manner to which they
directed them; and one of them, viz. Mr. Spencer, has been solemnly ordained to
that Work, by several of the Ministers of Boston, in the Presence of an
Ecclesiastical Council convened for that Purpose; and is now gone forth to the
Nation of the Oncid^^s, about 170 Miles beyond Albany.

He also this Week, viz. on Wednesday, September. 16. wrote a Letter to a
particular Gentleman in Boston (one of those charitable Persons forementioned,
who appeared so forward to contribute of their Substance for the promoting
Christianity among the Indians) relating to the Growth of the Indian School,
and the Need of another Schoolmaster or some Person to (...) the Schoolmaster
in instructing the Indian Children. These Gentlemen, on the Receipt of this
Letter, had a Meeting, and agreed with great Cheerfulness to give 200 Pounds
(in Bills, of the old Tenor) for the Support of another Schoolmaster; and
desired the Rev. Mr. Pemberton of New York (who was then at Boston, and was
also, at their Desire, present at their Meeting) as soon as possible to procure
a suitable Person for that Service; and also agreed to allow 75 Pounds to
defrey some special Charges, that were requisite to encourage the Mission to
the Six Nations (besides the Salary allowed by the Commissioners) which was
also done on some Intimations given by Mr. Brainerd.

Mr. Brainerd spent himself much in writing those Letters, being exceeding
weak: But it seemed to be much to his Satisfaction, that he had been enabled to
do it; hoping that it was something done for GOD, and which might be for the
advancement of CHRIST'S Kingdom and Glory. In writing the last of these
Letters, he was obliged to use the Hand of another, not being able to write
himself.

On the Thursday of this Week ( September. 17.) was the last Time that ever he
went out of his Lodging Room. That Day, he was again visited by his Brother
Israel, who continued with him thence-forward 'till his Death On that Evening,
he was taken with something of a Diarrhea; which he looked upon as another Sign
of his approaching Death: Whereupon he expressed himself thus; Oh, the glorious
Time is now coming! I have longed to serve God perfectly: Now God will gratify
those Desires! And from Time to Time, at the several Steps and new Symptoms of
the sensible Approach of his Dissolution, he was so far from being sunk or
damped, that he seemed to be animated, and made more cheerful; as being glad at
the Appearances of Death's Approach. He often used the Epithet, glorious, when
speaking of the Day of his Death, calling it that glorious Day. And as he saw
his Dissolution gradually approaching, he was much in talking about it, with
perfect Calmness speaking of a future State; and also settling all his Affairs,
very particularly and minutely giving Directions concerning what he would have
done in one Respect and another after he was dead. And the nearer Death
approached, the more desirous he seemed to be of it. He several Times spoke of
the different Kinds of Willingness to die; and spoke of it as an ignoble mean
Kind of Willingness to die, to be willing to leave the Body, only to get rid of
Pain; or to go to Heaven, only to get Honor and Advancement there.]

Saturday, Sept. 19. Near Night, while I attempted to walk a little, my Thot's
turned thus; How infinitely sweet it is, to love God, and be all for him! Upon
which it was suggested to me, You are not an Angel, not lively and active. To
which my whole Soul immediately replied, I as sincerely desire to love and
glorify God, as any Angel in Heaven. Upon which it was suggested again, But you
are filthy, not fit for Heaven. Hereupon instantly appeared the blessed Robes
of CHRIST'S Righteousness, which I could not but exult and triumph in; and I
viewed the infinite Excellency of God, and my Soul even broke with Longings,
that God should be glorified. I thought of Dignity in Heaven; but instantly the
Though It returned, I don't go to Heaven to get Honor, but to give all possible
Glory and Praise. Oh, how I longed, that God should be glorified on Earth also!
Oh, I was made, for Eternity, if God might be glorified! Bodily Pains I cared
not for: Though I was then in Extremity, I never felt easier; I felt willing to
glorify God in that State of bodily Distress, as long as he pleased I should
continue in it. The Grave appeared really sweet, and I longed to lodge my weary
Bones in it: But Oh, that God might be glorified! this was the Burden of all my
Cry. Oh, I knew, I should be active as an Angel, in Heaven; and that I should
be stripped of my filthy Garments! So that there was no Objection. -- But Oh, to
love and praise God more, to please him for ever! This my Soul panted after,
and even now pants for while I write. Oh, that God might be glorified in the
whole Earth. Lord, let thy Kingdom come. I longed for a Spirit of Preaching to
descend and rest on Ministers, that they might address the Consciences of Men
with Closeness and Power. I saw, God had the residue of the Spirit; and my Soul
longed it should be poured from on high. I could not but plead with God for my
dear Congregation, that he would preserve it, and not suffer his great Name to
lose it is Glory in that Work; My Soul still longing, that God might be
glorified.

[The extraordinary Frame, that he was in, that Evening, could not be hid; his
Mouth spoke out of the Abundance of his Heart, expressing in a very affecting
Manner much the sa^^ Things as are written in his Diary: And among very many
other extraordinary Expressions, which he then uttered, were such as these; My
Heaven is to please GOD, and glorify him, and to give all to him, and to be
wholly devoted to his Glory; that is the Heaven I long for; that is my
Religion, and that is my Happiness; and always was ever since I suppose I had
any true Religion; and all those that are of that Religion shall meet me in
Heaven. -- I don't go to Heaven to be advanced, but to give Honor to God. It Is
no Matter where I shall be station'd in Heaven, whether I have a high or low
Seat there; but to love and please and glorify God is all: Had I a Thousand
Souls, if they were worth any Thing, I would give 'em all to God; but I have
nothing to give, when all is done. -- It is impossible for any rational
Creature to be happy without acting all for God: God himself could not make him
happy any other Way -- I long to be in Heaven, praising and glorifying GOD with
the holy Angels: All my Desire is to glorify God. -- My Heart goes out to the
Burying Place; it seems to me a desirable Place: but Oh to glorify GOD; that is
it; that is above all. -- It Is a great Comfort to me, to think, that I have
done a little for GOD in the World: Oh! it is but a very small Matter; yet I
have done a little; and I lament it, that I have not done more for him. --
There is nothing in the World worth living for, but doing Good, and finishing
God's Work, doing the Work that Christ did. I see nothing else in the World,
that can yield any Satisfaction, besides living to GOD, pleasing him, and doing
his whole Will. -- My greatest Joy and Comfort has been, to do something for
promoting the Interest of Religion, and the Souls of particular Persons: And
now, in my Illness, while I am full of Pain and Distress, from Day to Day, all
the Comfort I have, is in being able to do some little Char^ [or sma^l Piece of
Work for GOD; either by something that I say, or by writing, or some other Way.

He intermingled with these and other like Expressions, many pathetical
Counsels to those that were about him; particularly to my Children and
Servants. He applied himself to some of my younger Children at this Time;
calling them to him, and speaking to 'em one by one; setting before them, in a
very plain Manner, the Nature and Essence of true Piety, and its great
Importance and Necessity; earnestly warning them not to rest in any Thing short
of that true and thorough Change of Heart, and a Life devoted to God;
counselling them not to be ^lack in the great Business of Religion, nor in the
least to delay it; enforcing his Counsels with this, that his Words were the
Words of a dying Man: Said he, I shall die here, and here I shall be buried,
and here you will see my Grave, and do you remember what I have said to you. I
am going into Eternity: And it is sweet to me to think of Eternity; the
Endlesness of it makes it sweet: But Oh, what shall I say to the Eternity of
the Wicked! I cannot mention it, nor think of it: The Thought is too dreadful.
When you see my Grave, then remember what I said to you while I was alive: then
think with your self, how that Man, that lies in that Grave, counseled and
warned me to prepare for Death.

His Body seemed to be marvellously strengthened, through the inward Vigor and
Refreshment of his Mind; so that, although before he was so weak that he could
hardly utter a Sentence, yet now he continued his most affecting and profitable
Discourse to us for more than an Hour, with scarce any Intermission; and said
of it, when he had done, it was the last Sermon that ever he should preach.

This extraordinary Frame of Mind continued the next Day; of which he says in
his Diary as follow^.]

Lord's Day Sept. 20. Was still in a sweet and comfortable Frame* and was again
melte^ with Desires that GOD might be glorified, and with Longings to love and
live to him. Longed for the Influences of the divine Spirit to descend on
Ministers, in a special Manner. And Oh, I longed to be with GOD, to behold his
Glory, and to bow in his Presence!

[It appears by what is noted in his Diary, both of this Day, and the Evening
preceding, that his Mind at this Time was much impressed with a Sense of the
Importance of the Work of the Ministry, and the Need of the Grace of God, and
his special spiritual Assistance in this Work: And it also appeared in what he
expressed in Conversation; particularly in his Discourse to his Brother Israel,
who was then a Member of Yale-College at New Haven, and had been prosecuting
his Studies, and academical Exercises there, to that End, that he might be
fitted for the Work of the Ministry, and was now with him. This young Gentlemen
was an ingenious, serious, studious and hopefully truly pious Person: There
appeared in him many Qualities giving Hope of his being a great Blessing in his
Day. But it has pleased God, since the Death of his Brother, to take him away
also. He died that Winter, at New Haven, on Jan. 6. 1747, 8. of a nervous
Fever, after about a Fornigh't^ Illness.
He now, and from Time to Time, in this his dying State, recommended to his
Brother, a Life of Self-denial, of Weanedness from the World, and Devotedness
to God, and an earnest Endeavor to obtain much of the Grace of God's Spirit,
and God's gracious Influences on his Heart; representing the great Need which
Ministers stand in of them, and the unspeakable Benefit of them from his own
Experience. Among many other Expressions, he said thus; When Ministers feel
these special gracious Influences on their Hearts, it wonderfully assists them
to come at the Consciences of Men, and as it were to handle them with Hands;
whereas, without them, whatever Reason and Oratory we make use of, we do but
make use of Stamps, instead of Hands.

Monday, Sept. 21. I began to correct a little Volume of my private Writings:
GOD, I believe, remarkably helped me in it; my Strength was surprizingly
lengthened out, and my Thoughts quick and lively, and my Soul refreshed, hoping
it might be a Work for GOD. Oh, how good, how sweet it is, to labor for GOD!

Tuesday, Sept. 22. Was again employed in reading and correcting, and had the
same Success, as the Day before. I was exceeding weak; but it seemed to refresh
my Soul, thus to spend Time.

Wednesday, Sept. 23. I finished my Corrections of the little Piece
formention'd, and felt uncommonly peaceful: It seemed as if I had now done all
my Work in this World, and stood ready for my Call to a better. As long as I
see any Thing to be done for GOD, Life is worth having: But Oh, how vain and
unworthy it is, to live for any lower End! -- This Day, I indicted a Letter, I
think, of great Importance, to the Rev. Mr. Byram in New Jersey: Oh that God
would bless and succeed that Letter, which was written for the Benefit of his
Church! It was concerning the Qualifications of Ministers, and the Examination
and Licensing of Candidates for the Work of the Ministry.
Oh that God would purify the Sons of Levi, that his Glory may be advanced! --
This Night, I endured a dreadful Turn, wherein my Life was expected scarce an
Hour or Minute together. But blessed be God, I have enjoyed considerable
Sweetness in divine Things, this Week, both by Night and Day.

Thursday, Sept. 24. My Strength began to fail exceedingly; which looked
further as if I had done all my Work: However I had Strength to fold and
superscribe my Letter. About two I went to Bed, being weak and (...), and lay
in a burning Fever 'till Night, without any proper Rest. In the Evening, I got
up, having lain down in some of my Clothes; but was in the greatest Distress,
that ever I endured, having an uncommon Kind of Hiccough; which either
strangled me, or threw me into a Straining to vomit; and at the same Time was
distressed with griping Pains. Oh, the Distress of this Evening! I had little
Expectation of my living the Night through, nor indeed had any about me: and I
longed for the finishing Moment! -- I was obliged to repair to Bed by 6
o'Clock; and through Mercy enjoyed some Rest; but was grievously distressed at
Turns with the Hiccough. -- My Soul breathed after GOD, while the Watcher was
with me: -- When shall I come to God, even to God, my exceeding Joy? Oh for his
blessed Likeness!

Friday, Sept. 25. This Day, I was unspeakably weak, and little better than
Speechless all the Day: However, I was able to write a little, and felt
comfortably in some Part of the Day. Oh, it refreshed my Soul, to think of
former Things, of Desires to glorify God, of the Pleasures of living to him! Oh
my dear God, I am speedily coming to thee, I hope! Hasten the Day* O Lord, if
it be thy blessed Will: Oh come, Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen. This was the
last that ever he wrote in his Diary with his own Hand: Though it is continued a
little farther, in a broken Manner; written by his Brother Israel, but indicted
by his Mouth in this his weak and dying State.


Saturday, Sept. 26. I felt the Sweetness of divine Things, this Forenoon; and
had the Consolation of a Consciousness that I was doing something for God.

Lord's Day, Sept. 27. This was a very comfortable Day to my Soul; I think, I
aw^ke with God. I was enabled to lift up my Soul to God, early this Morning;
and while I had little bodily Strength, I found Freedom to lift up my Heart to
God for my self and others. Afterward, was pleased with the Thoughts of
speedily entering into the unseen World.

[Early this Morning, as one of the Family came into the Room, he expressed
himself thus: I have had more Pleasure this Morning, than all the Drunkards in
the World enjoy, if it were all extracted! -- So much did he esteem the Joy of
Faith above the Pleasures of Sin.

He felt, that Morning, an unusual Appetite to Food; with which his Mind seemed
to be exhilarated, as looking on it a Sign of the very near Approach of Death;
and said upon it, I was born on a Sabbath Day; and I have Reason to think I was
newborn on a Sabbath Day; and I hope I shall die on this Sabbath Day: I shall
look upon it as a Favor, if it may be the Will of God that it should be so: I
long for the Time. Oh, why is his Chariot so long in coming? Why tarry the
Wheels of his Chariots? I am very willing to part with all: I am willing to
part with my dear Brother John, and never to see him again, to go to be forever
with the Lord. He had, before this, expressed a Desire, if it might be the Will
of God, to live 'till his Brother returned from New Jersey: Who, when he went
away, intended, if possible, to perform his Journey and return in a Fortnight;
hoping once more to meet his Brother in the Land of the Living. The Fortnight
was now near expired, it ended the next Day.
Oh, when I go there, how will God's dear Church on Earth be upon my Mind!

Afterward, the same Morning, being asked, how he did, he answered, I am
almost in Eternity: I long to be there. My Work, is done: I have done with all
my Friends: All the World is nothing to me. I long to be in Heaven, praising
and glorifying GOD with the holy Angels: All my Desire is to glorify God.

During the whole of these last two Weeks of his Life, he seemed to continue in
this Frame of Heart, loose from all the World, as having done his Work, and
done with all Things here below, having nothing to do but to die, and abiding
in an earnest Desire and Expectation of the happy Moment, when his Soul should
take it is Flight, and go to a State of Perfection of Holiness and perfect
glorifying and enjoying God, manifested in a variety of Expressions. He said,
That the Consideration of the Day of Death, and the Day of Judgment, had a long
Time been peculiarly sweet to him. He from Time to Time spoke of his being
willing to leave the Body and the World immediately, that Day, that Night, and
that Moment, if it was the Will of God. He also was much in expressing his
Longings that the Church of Christ on Earth might flourish, and Christ's
Kingdom here might be advanced, notwithstanding he was about to leave the
Earth, and should not with his Eyes behold the desirable Event, nor be
instrumental in promoting it. He said to me, one Morning, as I came into the
Room, My Thoughts have been employed (...) the old dear Theme, The Prosperity
of God's Church on Earth. As I waked out of Sleep, I was led to cry for the
pouring out of God's Spirit, and the Advancement of Christ's Kingdom, which the
dear Redeemer did and suffered so much for. It Is that especially makes me long
for it. -- He expressed much Hope that a glorious Advancement of Christ's
Kingdom, was near at Hand.

He once told me, that he had formerly longed for the Outpouring of the Spirit
of God, and the glorious Times of the Church, and hoped they were coming; and
should have been willing to have lived to promote Religion at that Time, if
that had been the Will of God; But (says he) I am willing it should be as it
is; I would not have the Choice to make for my self, for ten Thousand Worlds.
He expressed on his Deathbed a full Persuasion, that he should in Heaven see
the Prosperity of the Church on Earth, and should rejoice with Christ therein;
And the Consideration of it seemed to be highly pleasing and satisfying to his
Mind.

He also still dwelt much on the great Importance of the Work of Ministers of
the Gospel; and expressed his Longings, that they might be filled with the
Spirit of God; and manifested much Desire to see some of the Ne^ghbouring
Minist^rs, whom he had some Acquaintance with, and whose sincere Friendship he
was confident of, that he might converse freely with them on that Subject,
before he died. And it so happened, that he had Opportunity with some of them,
according to his Desire.

Another Thing that lay much on his Heart, and that he spoke of, from Time to
Time, in these near Approaches of Death, was the spiritual Prosperity of his
own Congregation of Christian Indians in New Jersey: and when he spoke of them,
it was with peculiar Tenderness; so that his Speech would be presently
^nterrupted and drowned with Tears.

He also expressed much Satisfaction in the Disposals of Providence, with
Regard to the Circumstance of his Death; particularly that God had before his
Death given him the Opportunity he had had in Boston, with so many considerable
Persons, Ministers and others, to give in his Testimony for God, and against
false Religion, and many Mistakes that lead to it, and promote it; and there to
lay before pious and charitable Gentlemen, the State of the Indians, and their
Necessities, to so good Effect; and that God had since given him Opportunity to
write to them further concerning these Affairs; and to write other Letters of
Importance, that he hoped might be of good Influence with Regard to the State
of Religion among the Indians, and elsewhere, after his Death. He expressed
great Thankfulness to God for his Mercy in these Things. He also mentioned it
as what he accounted a merciful Circumstances of his Death, that he should die
here The Editor takes Leave to make the Remark, that when Mr. Brainerd was at
Boston, sick nigh unto Death, it was with Reluctance he thought of dying in a
Place where Funerals are often attended with a Pomp and (...), which
(especially on Occasion of his own) he was very averse to any Appearance of:
And though it was with some Difficulty he got his Mind reconciled to the Prospect
then before him, yet at last he was bro't to acquiesce in the Divine Will, with
Respect to this Circumstance of his Departure. However, it pleased God to order
the Event so as to gratify his Desire, which he had expressed, of getting back
to Northampton, with a View particularly to a more silent and private Burial.
. And speaking of these Things, he said, God had granted him all his Desire;
and signified, that now he could with the greater Alacrity leave the World.]

Monday, Sept. 28. I was able to read, and make some few Corrections in my
private Writings; but found I could not write, as I had done; I found my self
sensibly declined in all Respects. It has been only from a little while before
Noon, 'till about one or two o'Clock, that I have been able to do any Thing for
some Time past: yet this refreshed my Heart, that I could do any Thing, either
public or private, that I hoped was for GOD.

[This Evening, he was supposed to be dying: He though it so himself, and was though it
so by those who were about him. He seemed glad at the Appearance of the near
Approach of Death. He was almost Speechless, but his Lips appeared to move; and
One that sat very near him, heard him utter such Expressions as these, Come,
Lord Jesus, come quickly. -- Oh, why is his Chariot so long in coming! -- After
he revived, he blamed himself for having been too eager to be gone. And in
expressing what he found in the Frame of his Mind at that Time, he said, he
then found an inexpressibly sweet Love to those that he looked upon as
belonging to Christ, beyond almost all that ever he felt before; so that it
seemed (to use his own Words) like a little Piece of Heaven to have one of them
near him. And being asked, whether he heard the Prayer that was (at his Desire)
made with him; he said, Yes, he heard every Word, and had an uncommon Sense of
the Things that were uttered in that Prayer, and that every Word reached his
Heart.

On the Evening of the next next, viz. Tuesday, September* 29. As he lay in his
Bed, he seemed to be in an extraordinary Frame; his Mind greatly engaged in
sweet Meditations concerning the Prosperity of Zion: There being present here
at that Time two young Gentlemen of his Acquaintance, that were Candidates for
the Ministry, he desired us all to unite in singing a Psalm on that Subject,
even Zion's Prosperity. And on his Desire we sung a Part of the CII Psalm. This
seemed much to refresh and revive him, and gave him new Strength; so that, though
before he could scarcely speak at all, now he proceeded, with some Freedom of
Speech, to give his dying Counsels to those two young Gentlemen forementioned,
relating to their Preparation for, and Prosecution of that great Work of the
Ministry they were designed for; and in particular, earnestly recommended to
'em frequent secret Fasting and Prayer: And enforced his Counsel with Regard to
this, from his own Experience of the great Comfort and Benefit of it* which
(said he) I should not mention, were it not that I am a dying Person. And after
he had finished his Counsel, he made a Prayer, in the Audience of us all;
wherein, besides praying for this Family, for his Brethren, and those
Candidates for the Ministry, and for his own Congregation, he earnestly prayed
for the reviving and flourishing of Religion in the World.

'Till now, he had every Day set up Part of the Day; but after this he never
rose from his Bed.]

Wednesday, Sept. 30. I was obliged to keep my Bed the whole Day, through
Weakness. However, redeemed a little Time, and with the Help of my Brother,
read and corrected about a Dozen Pages in my M.S. giving an Account of my
Conversion.

Thursday, October. 1. I endeavored again to do something by Way of writing, but
soon found my Powers of Body and Mind utterly fail. Felt not so sweetly, as
when I was able to do something that I hoped would do some Good. In the
Evening, was discomposed and wholly delirious; but it was not long before God
was pleased to give me some Sleep, and fully composed my Mind. From this Time
forward, he had the free Use of his Reason 'till the Day before his Death;
excepting that at some times he appeared a little lost for a Moment, at first
waking out of Sleep.
Oh, blessed be God for his great Goodness to me, since I was so low at Mr.
Bromfield's, on Thursday June 18 last past. He has, except those few Minutes,
given me the cle^r Exercise of my Reason, and enabled me to labor much for
him, in Things both of a public and private Nature; and perhaps to do more
Good, than I should have done if I had been well; besides the comfortable
Influences of his blessed Spirit, with which he has been pleased to refresh my
Soul. May his Name have all the Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Friday, October. 2. My Soul was this Day, at Turns, sweetly set on GOD: I longed
to be with him, that I might behold his Glory: I felt sweetly disposed to
commit all to him, even my dearest Friends, my dearest Flock, and my absent
Brother, and all my Concerns for Time and Eternity. Oh that his Kingdom might
come in the World; that they might all love and glorify him, for what he is in
himself; and that the blessed Redeemer might se^ of the Travail of his Soul,
and be satisfied. Oh, come, Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen. Here ends his
Diary: These are the last Words, that are written in it, either by his own
Hand, or by any other from his Mouth.


[The next Evening, we very much expected his Brother John from New Jersey; it
being about a Week after the Time that he proposed for his Return, when he went
away. And though our Expectations were still disappointed; yet Mr. Brainerd
seemed to continue unmoved, in the same calm and peaceful Frame, that he had
before manifested; as having resigned all to God, and having done with his
Friends, and with all Things here below.

On the Morning of the next Day, being Lord's Day, Oct. 4. as my Daughter
Jerusha (who chiefly tended him) came into the Room, he looked on her very
pleasantly and said, Dear Jerusha, are you willing to part with me? -- I am
quite willing to part with you: I am willing to part with all my Friends: I
(...) willing to part with my dear Brother John; although I love him the best of
any Creature living: I have committed him and all my Friends to God, and can
leave them with God. Though, if I thought I should not see you, and be happy with
you in another World, I could not bear to part with you. But we shall spend an
happy Eternity together! Since this, it has pleased a holy and sovereign God to
take away this my dear Child by Death, on the 14 of February, next following;
after a short Illness of five Days; in the eighteenth Year of her Age. She was
a Person of much the same Spirit with Mr. Brainerd. She had constantly taken
Care of, and attended him in his Sickness, for 19 Weeks before his Death;
devoting herself to it with great Delight, because she looked on him as an
eminent Servant of Jesus Christ. In this Time, he had much Conversation with
her on Things of Religion; and in his dying State, often expressed to us, her
Parents, his great Satisfaction concerning her true Piety, and his Confidence
that he should meet her in Heaven; and his high Opinion of her, not only as a
true Christian, but a very eminent Saint; One whose Soul was uncommonly sed and
entertained with Things that appertain to the most spiritual experimental and
distinguishing Parts of Religion; and one who by the Temper of her Mind was
fitted to deny her self for God, and to do Good, beyond any young Women
whatsoever that he knew of. She had manifested a Heart uncommonly devoted to
God, in the Course of her Life, many Years before her Death; and said on her
Deathbed, that she had not seen one Minute for several Years, wherein she
desired to live one Minute longer, for the sake of any other Good in Life, but
doing Good, living to God, and doing what might be for his Glory.
In the Evening, as one came into Room with a Bible in her Hand, he expressed
himself thus; Oh, that dear Book! that lovely Book! I shall s^^n (...) it
opened! The Mysteries that are in it, and the Mysteries of God's Providence,
will be all unfolded!

His Distemper now very apparently preyed on his Vitals in an extraordinary
Manner: Not by a sudden breaking of Ulcers in his Lungs, as at Boston, but by a
constant Discharge of purulent Matter, in great Quantities: So that what he
bro't up by Expectoration, seemed to be as it were Mout^^u^s of almost clear
Pus; which was attended with very great inward Pain and Distress.

On Thursday, October. 6. He lay, for a considerable Time, as if he were dying.
At which Time, he was heard to utter, in broken Whispers, such Expressions as
these; He will come, he will not tarry. -- I shall s^^n be in Glory. -- I shall
s^^n glorify God with the Angels. -- But after some Time he revived.

The next Day, viz. Wednesday, October. 7. His Brother John arrived, being
returned from New Jersey; where he had been detained much longer than he
intended, by a mortal Sickness prevailing among the Christian Indians, and by
some other Things in their Circumstances that made his Stay with them
necessary. Mr. Brainerd was ^ffected and refreshed with seeing him, and
appeared fully satisfied with the Reasons of his Delay; seeing the Interest of
Religion and of the Souls of his People required it.

The next Day, Thursday, October. 8. He was in great Distress and Agonies of
Body; and for the bigger Part of the Day, was much disordered as to the
Exercise of his Reason. In the Evening, he was more composed, and had the Use
of his Reason well; but the Pain of his Body continued and increased. He told
me, it was impossible for any to concei^e of the Distress he felt in his
Breast. He manifested much Concern left he should dishonor God by Impatience,
under his extreme Agony; which was such, that he said, the Thought of enduring
it one Minute longer was almost insupportable. He desired, that others would be
much in lifting up their Hearts continually to God for him, that God would
support him, and give him Patience. He signified, that he expected to die that
Night; but seemed to fear a longer Delay: and the Disposition of his Mind with
Regard to Death appeared still the same that it had been all along. And
notwithstanding his bodily Agonies, yet the Interest of Zion lay still with
great Weight on his Mind; as appeared by some considerable Discourse he had
that Evening with the Rev. Mr. Bi^^ing, one of the neighboring Ministers (who
was then present) concerning the great Importance of the Work of the Ministry,
etc. And afterward, when it was very late in the Night, he had much very
proper and profitable Discourse with his Brother John, concerning his
Congregation in New Jersey, and the Interest of Religion among the Indians. In
the latter Part of the Night, his bodily Distress seemed to rise to a greater
Height than ever; and he said to those then about him, that it was another
Thing to die, than People imagined; explaining himself to mean that they were
not aware what bodily Pain and Anguish is undergone before Death. Toward Day,
his Eyes fixed; and he continued lying immovable, 'till about 6 o'Clock in the
Morning, and then expired, on Friday, October. 9. 1747. when his Soul, as we may
well conclude, was received by his dear Lord and Matter, as an eminently
faithful Servant, into that State of Perfection of Holiness, and Fruition of
God, which he had so often and so ardently longed for; and was welcomed by the
glorious Assembly in the upper World, as one peculiarly fitted to join them in
their blessed Employments and Enjoyments.

Much Respect was shown to his Memory at his Funeral; which was on the Monday
following, after a Sermon preached the same Day, on that solemn Occasion. His
Funeral was attended by eight of the neighboring Ministers, and seventeen
other Gentlemen of liberal Education, and a great Concourse of People.

Some further REMAINS of the Rev. Mr. DAVID BRAINERD.
[I] A SCHEME of a Dialogue between the various Powers and Affections of the
Mind, as they are found alternately whispering in the godly Soul. [Mention'd in
his Diary, Feb. 3. 1744.]
1. THE Understanding introduced, (1) As discovering it is own Excellency, and
Capacity of enjoying the most sublime Pleasure and Happiness. (2) As observing
it is Desire equal to it is Capacity, and incapable of being satisfied with any
Thing that will not fill it in the utmost Extent of it is Exercise. (3) As
finding it self a dependant Thing, not Self-sufficient; and consequently unable
to spin Happiness (as the Spider spins it is Web) out of it is own Bowels. This
Self-sufficiency observed to be the Property and Prerogative of GOD alone, and
not belonging to any created Being. (4) As in vain seeking sublime Pleasure,
Satisfaction, and Happiness adequate to it is Nature, amongst created Beings.
The Search and Knowledge of the Truth in the natural World allowed indeed to be
refreshing to the Mind; but still failing to afford complete Happiness. (5) As
discovering the Excellency and Glory of GOD, that he is the Fountain of
Goodness, and Wellspring of Happiness, and every Way fit to answer the
enlarged Desires and Cravings of our immortal Souls.

2. The Will introduced, as necessarily, yet freely choosing this GOD for it is
supreme Happiness and only Portion, fully complying with the Understanding's
Dictates, acquiescing in GOD as the best Good, his Will as the best Rule for
intelligent Creatures, and rejoicing that GOD is in every Respect just what he
is; and withal choosing and delighting to be a dependent Creature, always
subject to this GOD, not aspiring after Self-suffic^ency and Supremacy, but
acquiescing in the contrary.

3. Ardent Love or Desire introduced, as passionately longing to please and
glorify the Divine Being, to be in every Respect conformed to him, and in that
Way to enjoy him. This Love or Desire represented as most genuine; not induced
by mean and mercenary Views; not primarily springing from selfish Hopes of
Salvation, whereby the divine Glories would be Sacrificed to the Idol Self; not
arising from a slavish Fear of Divine Anger in Case of Neglect, nor yet from
Hopes of feeling the Sweetness of that tender and pleasant Passion of Love in
one's own Breast; but from a just Esteem of the beauteous Object beloved. This
Love further represented, as attended with vehement Longings after the
Enjoyment of it is Object, but unable to find by what Means.

4. The Understanding again introduced, as informing (1.) How God might have
been enjoyed, yea, how he must necessarily have been enjoyed, had not Man sinned
against him; that as there was Knowledge, Likeness, and Love, so there must
needs be Enjoyment, while there was no Impediment. (2.) How he may be enjoyed
in some Measure now, viz. by the same Knowledge begetting Likeness and Love,
which will be answered with Returns of Love, and the Smiles of God's
Countenance, which are better than Life. (3.) How Go'd may be perfectly
enjoyed, viz. by the Soul's perfect Freedom from Sin. This perfect Freedom
never obtained 'till Death; and then not by any unaccountable Means, or in any
unheard of Manner; but the same by which it has obtained some Likeness to and
Fruition of God in this World, viz. a clear Manifestation of him.

5. Holy Desire appears, and enquires why the Soul may not be perfectly holy;
and so perfect in the Enjoyment of God here; and expresses most insatiable
Thirstings after such a Temper, and such Fruition, and most consummate
Blessedness.

6. Understanding again appears, and informs, that God designs that those whom
he sanctifies in Part here, and intends for immortal Glory, shall tarry a while
in this present evil World, that their own Experience of Temptations etc. may
teach 'em how great the Deliverance is, which God has wrought for 'em, that
they may be swallowed up in Thankfulness and Admiration to Eternity; as also
that they may be instrumental of doing Good to their Fellow-Men. Now if they
were perfectly holy etc. a World of Sin would not be a fit Habitation for them:
and further, such Manifestations of God as are necessary completely to sanctify
the Soul, would be insupportable to the Body, so that we cannot see God and live.

7. Holy Impatience is next introduced, complaining of the Sins and Sorrows of
Life, and almost repining at the Distance of a State of Perfection, uneasy to
see and feel the Hours hang so dull and heavy, and almost concluding that the
Temptations, Hardships, Disappointments, Imperfections, and tedious Employments
of Life will never come to a happy Period.

8. Tender Conscience comes in, and meekly reproves the Complaints of
Impatience; urging how careful and watchful we ought to be, left we should
offend the divine Being with Complaints; alleging also the Fitness of our
waiting patiently upon God for all we want, and that in a Way of doing and
suffering; and at the same Time mentioning the Barrenness of the Soul, how much
precious Time is misimproved, and how little it has enjoyed of God, compared
with what it might have done; as also suggesting how frequently impatient
Complaints spring from nothing better than Self-love, want of Resignation, and
a greater Reverence of the Divine Being.

9. Judgment or sound Mind next appears, and duly weigh^ the Complaints of
Impatience, and the gentle Admonitions of tender Conscience, and impartially
determines between 'em. On the one hand, it concludes, that we may always be
impatient with Sin; and supposes, that we may also with such Sorrow, Pain, and
Discouragement, as hinder our Pursuit of Holiness, though they arise from the
weakness of Nature. It allows us to be impatient of the Distance at which we
stand from a State of Perfection and Blessedness. It further indulges
Impatience at the Delay of Time, when we desire the Period of it for no other
End than that we may with Angels be employed in the most lively spiritual Acts
of Devotion, and in giving all possible Glory to him that lives forever.
Temptations and sinful Imperfections, it thinks we may justly be uneasy with;
and Disappointments, at least those that relate to our Hopes of Communion with
God, and growing Conformity to him. And as to the tedious Employments and
Hardships of Life, it supposes some Longing for the End of 'em not inconsistent
with a Spirit of Faithfulness, and a cheerful Disposition to perform the one
and endure the other: It supposes, that a faithful Servant, who fully designs
to do all he possibly can, may still justly long for the Evening; and that no
rational Man would blame his kind and tender Spouse, if he perceived her
longing to be with him, while yet Faithfulness and Duty to him might still
induce her to yield, for the present, to remain at a painful Distance from him.
-- On the other Hand, it approves of the Caution, Care and Watchfulness of
tender Conscience, left the Divine Being should be offended with impatient
Complaints: It acknowledges the Fitness of our waiting upon God, in a Way of
patient doing and suffering; But supposes this very consistent with ardent
Desires to depart and to be with Christ. It owns it fit that we should always
remember our own Barrenness, and thinks also that we should be impatient of it,
and consequently long for a State of Freedom from it; and this, not so much
that we may feel the Happiness of it, but that God may have the Glory. It
grants, that impatient Complains often spring from Self-love, and Want of
Resignation and Humility. Such as these it disapproves; and determines, we
should be impatient only of Absence from God, and Distance from that State and
Temper wherein we may most glorify him.

10. Godly Sorrow introduced, as making her said Moan, not so much that she is
kept from the free Possession and full Enjoyment of Happiness, but that God
must be dishonored; the Soul being still in a World of Sin, and itself
imperfect. She here, with Grief, counts over past Faults, present Temptations,
and Fears for the future.

11. Hope or holy Confidence appears, and seems persuaded that nothing shall
ever separate the Soul from the Love of God in Christ Jesus. It expects divine
Assistance and Grace sufficient for all the doing and suffering-Work of Time,
and that Death will ere long put a happy Period to all Sin and Sorrow; and so
takes Occasion to rejoice.

12. Godly Fear, or holy Jealousy here steps in, and suggests some timorous
Apprehensions of the Danger of Deception; mentions the Deceitfulness of the
Heart, the great Influence of irregular Self-Love in a fallen Creature;
enquires whether it self is not likely to have fallen in with Delusion, since
the Mind is so dark, and so little of GOD appears to the Soul; and queries
whether all it is Hopes of persevering Grace may not be Presumption, and whether
it is confident Expectations of meeting Death as a Friend, may not issue in
Disappointment.

13. Hereupon, Reflection appears, and minds the Person of his past
Experiences; as to the preparatory Work of Conviction and Humiliation; The View
he then had of the Impossibility of Salvation, from himself, or any created
Arm: The Manifestation he has likewise had of the Glory of GOD in Jesus Christ:
How he then admired that Glory, and chose that GOD for his only Portion,
because of the Excellency and Amiableness he discovered in him; not from
slavish Fear of being damned, if he did not, nor from base and mercenary Hopes
of saving himself; but from a just Esteem of that beauteous and glorious
Object: As also how he had from Time to Time rejoiced and acquiesced in GOD,
for what he is in himself; being delighted, that he is infinite in Holiness,
Justice, Power, Sovereignty, as well as in Mercy, Goodness and Love: How he has
likewise, Scores of Times, felt his Soul mourn for Sin, for this very Reason,
because it is contrary and grievous to GOD; yes, how he has mourned over one
vain and impertinent Thought, when he has been so far from Fear of the divine
vindictive Wrath for it, that on the contrary he has enjoyed the highest
Assurance of the divine everlasting Love: How he has, from Time to Time,
delighted in the Commands of God, for their own Purity and Perfection, and
longed exceedingly to be conformed to 'em, and even to be holy as GOD is holy;
and counted it present Heaven, to be of a heavenly Temper: How he has
frequently rejoiced, to think of being for ever subject to, and dependent on
GOD; accounting it infinitely greater Happiness to glorify GOD in a State of
Subjection to, and Dependence on him, than to be a god himself; and how Heaven
it self would be no Heaven to him, if he could not there be every Thing that
GOD would have him be.

14. Upon this, Spiritual Sensation being awaked, comes in, and declares that
She now feels and tastes that the Lord is gracious; that he is the only supreme
Good, the only Soul-satisfying Happiness; that he is a complete,
self-sufficient, and almighty Portion. She whispers, Whom have I in Heaven but
this GOD, this dear and blessed Portion; and there is none upon Earth I desire
besides him. Oh, it is Heaven, to please him and to be just what he would have
me be! O that my Soul were holy, as God is holy: O that it was pure, as Christ
is pure; and perfect as my Father in Heaven is perfect. These are the sweetest
Commands in God's Book, comprizing all others; and shall I break 'em? Must I
break 'em? Am I under a fatal necessity of it, as long as I live in this World?
Oh my Soul! Woe, Woe is me, that I am a Sinner! Because I now necessarily grieve
and offend this blessed GOD, who is infinite in Goodness and Grace. Oh,
methinks, should he punish me for my Sins, it would not wound my Heart so deep
to offend him; But, though I sin continually, he continually repeats his Kindness
toward me! Oh, methinks I could bear any Suffering; but how can I bear to
grieve and dishonor this blessed God! How shall I give ten Thousand Times more
Honor to him? What shall I do, to glorify and worship this best of Beings? O
that I could consecrate my self, Soul and Body, to his Service for ever. O that
I could give up my self to him, so as never more to attempt to be my own, or to
have any Will or Affections that are not perfectly conformed to his. But Oh,
Alas, Alas! I cannot, I feel I cannot, be thus entirely devoted to GOD: I cannot
live and sin not. O ye Angels, do ye glorify him incessantly: If possible,
exert your selves still more, in more lively and ardent Devotion: If possible,
prostrate your selves still lower before the Throne of the blessed King of
Heaven: I long to bear a Part with you, and if it were possible, to help you.
Yet when we have done, we shall not be able to offer the ten Thousandth Part of
the Homage he is worthy of. While spiritual Sensation whispered these Things,
Fear and Jealousy were greatly overcome; and the Soul replied, Now I know, and
am assured, etc. and again it welcomed Death as a Friend, saying, O Death where
is thy Sting, etc.

15. Finally, Holy Resolution concludes the Discourse, fixedly determining to
follow hard after GOD, and continually to pursue a Life of Conformity to him.
And the better to pursue this, enjoining it on the Soul always to remember,
that GOD is the only source of Happiness, that his Will is the only Rule of
Rectitude to an intelligent Creature, that Earth has nothing in it desirable
for it self, or any further than GOD is seen in it; and that the Knowledge of
God in Christ, begetting and maintaining Love, and mortifying sensual and
fleshly Appetites, is the Way to be holy on Earth, and so to be attempered to
the complete Holiness of the heavenly World.

[II] Some gloomy and desponding Thoughts of a Soul under Convictions of Sin,
and Concern for it is eternal Salvation.
1. I Believe, my Case is singular, that none ever had so many strange and
different Thoughts and Feelings as I.

2. I have been concerned much longer than many others, that I have known or
read of, who have been savingly converted, and yet I am left.

3. I have withstood the Power of Convictions a long Time, and therefore I
fear, I shall be finally left of GOD.

4. I never shall be converted, without stronger Convictions, and greater
Terrors of Conscience.

5. I don't aim at the Glory of GOD in any Thing I do, and therefore I cannot
hope for Mercy.

6. I don't see the Evil Nature of Sin, nor the Sin of my Nature; and therefore
I am discouraged.

7. The more I strive, the more blind and hard my Heart is, and the worse I
grow continually.

8. I fear, GOD never showed Mercy to one so vile as I.

9. I fear, I am not elected, and therefore must perish.

10. I fear, the Day of Grace is past with me.

11. I fear, I have committed the unpardonable Sin.

12. I am an old Sinner; and if God had designed Mercy for me, he would have
called me Home to himself before now.

[III] Some Signs of Godliness.
The distinguishing Marks of a true Christian, taken from one of my old
Manuscripts; where I wrote as I felt and experienced, and not from any
considerable Degree of doctrinal Knowledge, or Acquaintance with the Sentiments
of others in this Point.

1. HE has a true Knowledge of the Glory and Excellency of GOD, that he is most
worthy to be loved and praised for his own divine Perfections. Psalm. CXLV.3.

2. GOD is his Portion. Psalm. LXXIII.25. And GOD'S Glory, his great Concern.
Matthew. VI.22.

3. Holiness is his Delight; nothing he so much longs for, as to be holy, as
God is holy. Phil. III.9, -- 12.

4. Sin is his greatest Enemy. This he hates, for it is own Nature, for what it
is in it self, being contrary to a holy GOD. Jer. II.1. And consequently he
hates all Sin. Romans VII.24. 1 Jo^. III.9.

5. The Laws of GOD also are his Delight. Psalm. CXIX.97. Romans VII.22. These he
observes, not out of Constraint, from a servile Fear of Hell; but they are his
Choice. Psalm. CXIX.30. The strict Observance of them is not his Bondage, but
his greatest Liberty. ver. 45.

[IV.] LETTERS, written by Mr. Brainerd to his Friends.
ADVERTISEMENT.
MR. Brainerd had a large Acquaintance and Correspondence, especially in the
latter Part of his Life, and he did much at writing Letters to his absent
Friends; but the most of his Acquaintance living at a great Distance from me, I
have not been able to obtain Copies of many that he wrote: However, the greater
Part of those which I have seen, are such as appear to me of profitable
Tendency, and worthy of the public View: I have therefore here added a few of
his Letters.

N. B. Several of these which follow, are not published at large, because some
Parts of them were concerning particular Affairs of a private Nature.

No. 1. To his Brother John, than a Student at Yale-College in New Haven.

Kaunaumeek, April 30. 1743. Dear Brother,
I Should tell you, I long to see you, but that my own Experience has taught
me, there is no Happiness, and plenary Satisfaction to be enjoyed, in earthly
Friends, though ever so near and dear, or in any other Enjoyment, that is not GOD
himself. Therefore, if the God of all Grace would be pleased graciously to
afford us ^^ch his Presence and Grace, that me may perform the Work, and endure
the Trials he calls us to, in a most distressing tiresome Wilderness, 'till we
arrive at our Journey's End; the local Distance, at which we are held from each
other at the present, is a Matter of no great Moment or Importance to either of
us. But Alas! The Presence of GOD is what I want. -- I live in the most lonely
melancholy Desert, about 18 Miles from Albany (for it was not thought best that
I should go to Delaware-River, as I believe I hinted to you in a Letter from
New York.) I board with a poor Scotch-Man: His Wife can talk scarce any
English. My Diet consists mostly of Hasty-Pudding, boiled Corn, and Bread baked
in the Ashes, and sometimes a little Meat and Butter. My Lodging is a little
Heap of Straw, laid upon some Boards, a little Way from the Ground* (...)
Log-Room, without any Floor, that I lodge in. My Work is exceeding hard and
difficult: I travel on Foot a Mile and half, the worst of Way, almost daily,
and back again; for I live so far from my Indians. -- I have not seen an
English Person this Month. -- These and many other Circumstances, as
uncomfortable, attend me; and yet my spiritual Conflicts and Distresses so far
exceed all these, that I scarce think of them, or hardly mind but that I am
entertained in the most sumptuous Manner. The Lord grant that I may learn to
endure Hardness, as a good Soldier of JESUS CHRIST. As to my Success here, I
cannot say much as yet: The Indians seem generally kind, and well disposed
toward me, and are mostly very attentive to my Instructions, and seem willing
to be taught further: Two or three, I hope, are under some Convictions; But
there seems to be little of the special workings of the divine Spirit among
them yet; which gives me many a Heart-sinking Hour. Sometimes I hope, God has
abundant Blessings in Store for them and me; but at other Times I am so
overwhelmed with Distress, that I cannot see how his Dealings with me are
consistent with Covenant Love and Faithfulness, and I say, Surely his tender
Mercies are clean gone for ever. -- But however, I see, I needed all this
Chastisement already: It Is good for me, that I have endured these Trials, and
have hitherto little or no apparent Success. Don't be discouraged by my
Distresses: I was under great Distress, at Mr. Pomr^y's, when I saw you last;
but God has been with me of a Truth, since that: He helped me sometimes sweetly
at Long Island, and elsewhere. But let us always remember, that we must through
much Tribulation enter into God's eternal Kingdom of Rest and Peace. The
Righteous are scarcely saved: It Is an infinite Wonder, that we have
well-grounded Hopes of being saved at all. For my Part, I feel the most vile of
any Creature living; and I am sure sometimes, there is not such another
existing on this Side Hell. -- Now all you can do for me, is, to pray
incessantly, that God would make me humble, holy, resigned and heavenly-minded,
by all my Trials. -- Be strong in the Lord and in the Power of his Might. Let
us run, wrestle and fight, that we may win the Prize, and obtain that complete
Happiness, to be Holy as God is Holy. So, wishing and praying that you may
advance in Learning and Grace, and be fit for special Service for God, I remain

Your affectionate Brother. D. Brainerd.


No. 2. To his Brother John, at Yale-College in New Haven.

Kaunaumeek, December 27. 1743. Dear Brother,
I Long to see you, and know how you fare in your Journey through a World of
inexpressible Sorrow, where we are compassed about with Vanity, Confusion and
Vexation of Spirit. I am more weary of Life, I think, than ever I was. The
whole World appears to me like a huge Vacuum, a vast empty space, whence
nothing desirable, or at least satisfactory, can possibly be derived; and I
long, daily to die more and more to it; even though I obtain not that Comfort
from spiritual Things, which I earnestly desire. Worldly Pleasures, such as
flow from Greatness, Riches, Honors, and sensual Gratifications, are infinitey
worse than none. May the Lord deliver us more and more from these Vanities. I
have spent most of the Fall and Winter hitherto in a very weak State of Body;
and sometimes under pressing inward Trials and spiritual Conflic^^: but having
obtained Help from GOD, I (...) to this Day; and am now something better in
Health, than I was sometime ago. I find nothing more conducive to a Life of
Christinity, than a diligent, ind^strious and faithful Improvement of precious
Time. Let us then faithfully perform that Business, which is allotted to us by
divine Providence, to the utmost of our bodily Strength, and mental Vigor, Why
should we sink, and grow discouraged, with any particular Trials, and
Perplexities, we are called to encounter in the World? Death and Eternity are
just before us; a few tossing ^illow^ more will wast us into the World of
Spirits, and w^ hope (through infinite Grace) into endless Pleasures, and
uninterrupted Rest and Peace. Let us then run with Patience the Race set before
us. Heb. xii.1, 2. And O^ that we could depend more upon the living GOD, and
less upon our own Wisdom and Strength. -- Dear Brother, may the GOD of all
Grace comfort your Heart, and succeed your Studies, and make you an Instrument
of Good to his People in your Day. This is the constant Prayer of

Your affectionate Brother: David Brainerd.


No. 3. To his Brother Israel, at Haddam.

Kaunaumeek, ^an. 21. 1743, 4. My Dear Brother,
-- THere is ^ut one Thing, that deserves our highest Ca^e and most ardent
Desires; and that is, that we may answer the great End, (...) which we were
made; viz. to glorify that GOD, who has given us our (...) and all our
Comforts, and do all the Good, we possibly can, to or Fellow-Men, while we live
in the World. And verily Life is not worth the having, if it be not improved
for this noble End and Purpose* Yet, alas, how little is this thought of among
Mankind! Most Men seem to dive to themselves, without much Regard to the Glory
of God, or the Good of their Fellow Creatures: they earnestly desire, and
eagerly pursue after the (...), the Honors, and the Pleasures of Life, as if
they really supposed, that Wealth, or Greatness, or (...), could make their
immortal Soul^ happy. But, alas, what (...) and delusive Dreams are th^se! And
how Miserable will these ere long be, who are not (...) out of them, to see,
that all their Happiness (...) in living to GOD, and becoming holy as he is
holy! Oh, may you never fall (...) the Tempers and Vanities, the (...) and
Folly of the present (...). You are, by divine Providence, (...) as it were
(...) in a wide World, to act for your self: Be usre than to remember, it is a
World of Temptation. You have no (...) to be the (...) your Youth to (...) and
Virtue, by their pious (...), and seasonable Counsels; Let this then excite you
with greater Diligence and Fervency to look up to the Father of Mercies for
Grace and Assist^nce against all the Vanities of the World. And if you would
glorify God, answer his just Expectations from you, and make your own Soul
happy in (...) and the coming World, observe these few Directions; though not
from a Father, yet from a Brother who is touched with a tender Concern for your
present and future Happiness. And,

First, Resolve upon, and daily endeavor to practice a Life of Seriousness and
strict Sobriety. The wise Man will tell you the great Advantage of such a Life,
Eccles. vii.3. Think of the Life of CHRIST; and when you can find that (...)
was pleased with Jesting and vain Merriment, then you may indulge it in your
self.

Again, Be careful to make a good Improvement of precious Time. When you cease
from Labor, fill up your Time in Reading, Meditation, and Prayer: And while
your Hands are laboring, let your Heart be employed, as much as possible, in
divine Thoughts.

Further, Take Heed that you faithfully perform the Business you have to do in
the World, from a Regard to the Commands of GOD; and not from an ambitious
desire of being esteemed better than others. We should always look upon our
selves as (...) And Oh, how divinely sweet and entertaining is it, to look into
our own Souls, when we can find all our Powers and Passions united and engaged
in Pursuit after GOD, our whole Souls longing and passionately breathing after
a Conformity to him, and the full Enjoyment of him! Verily there are no Hours
pass away with so much divine Pleasure, as those that are spent in Communing
with GOD and our own Hearts. Oh, how sweet is a Spirit of Devotion, a Spirit of
Seriousness and divine Solemnity, a Spirit of Gospel-Simplicity, Love,
Tenderness! Oh, how desirable, and how profitable to the Christian Life, is a
Spirit of holy Watchfulness, and godly Jealousy over our selves; when our Souls
are afraid of nothing so much as that we shall grieve and offend the blessed
GOD, whom at such Times we apprehend, or at least hope, to be a Father and
Friend; whom we then love and long to please, rather than to be happy our
selves, or at least we delight to derive our Happiness (...) pleasing and
glorifying him! Surely this is ^ pious Temper, worthy of the highest Ambition
and closest Pursuit of intelligent Creatures and holy Christians. Oh, how
vastly superior is the Pleasure, Peace, and Satisfaction derived from these
divine Frames, to that which we (alas) sometimes pursue in Things imper^ment
and trifling! Our own bitter Experience ^^^ches us; that in the midst of such
Laughter the Heart is sorrowful, and there is no true Satisfaction but in GOD.
But, alas! How shall we obtain and retain this sweet Spirit of Religion and
Devotion? Let us follow the Apostle's Direction, Phil. ii 12. and labor upon
the Encouragement he there mentions ver. 13. For it is GOD only can afford us
this Favor; and he will be sought to, and it is fit we should wait upon him for
so rich a Mercy. Oh, may the GOD of all Grace afford us the Grace and
Influences of his divine Spirit; and help us that we may from our Hearts esteem
it our greatest Liberty and Happiness, that whether we live, we may live to the
LORD, or whether we die, we may die to the LORD; that in Life and Death, we may
be his.

I am in a very poor State of Health; I think, scarce ever poorer: But, through
divine Goodness; I am not discontented under my Weakness, and Confinement to
this Wilderness: I bless GOD for this Retirement: I never was more thankful for
any Thing, than I have been of late for the Necessity I am under of Self-denial
in many Respects: I love to be a Pilgrim and Stranger in this Wilderness: It
seems most fit for such a poor ignorant, worthless, despised Creature as I. I
would not change my present Mission for any other Business in the whole World.
I may tell you freely, without Vanity and Ostentation, GOD has of late give^ me
great Freedom and Fervency in Prayer, when I have been so weak and feeble, my
Nature seemed as if it would speedily dissolve. I feel as if my all was lost,
and I was undone for this World, if the poor Heathen may not be converted. I
feel, in general, different from what I did, when I saw you last, at least more
crucified to all the Enjoyments of Life. It would be very refreshing to me, to
see you here in this Desert; especially in my weak disconsolate Hours: But, I
think, I could be content never ^o (...) you, or any of my Friends again in
this World, if GOD would bless my Labors he^e to the Conversion of the poor
Indians.

I have much that I could willingly communicate to you, which I must omit,
'till Providence gives us Leave to see each other. In the mean Time, I rest

You^ obliged Friend and Servant, David Brainerd.


No. 5. To a special Friend, a Minister of the Gospel in New Jersey.

The Forks of Deleware, December. 24. 1744^ Rev. and dear Brother,
-- I Have little to say to you, about spiritual Joys, and those blessed
Refreshments, and divine Consolations, with which I have been much favored in
Times past: But this I can tell you, that if I gain Experience in no other
Point, yet I am sure I do in this; viz. That the present World has nothing in
it to satisfy an immortal Soul; and hence, that it is not to be desired for it
self, but only because GOD may be seen and served in it: And I wish I could be
more patient and willing to live in it for this End, than I can usually find my
self to be. It Is no Virtue, I know, to desire Death, only to be freed from the
Miseries of Life: But I want that divine HOPE, which you observed, when I saw
you last, was the very Sinews of vital Religion. Earth can do us no Good, and
if there be no HOPE of our doing Good on Earth, how can we desire to live in
it? And yet we ought to desire, or at least to be resigned, to tarry in it;
because it is the Will of our alwise Sovereign. But perhaps these Thoughts will
appear melancholy and gloomy, and consequently will be very undesirable to you;
and therefore I forbear to add. I wish, you may not read them in the same
Circumstances in which I write them. I have a little more to do and suffer in a
dark disconsolate World; and then I hope to be as happy as you are. -- I should
ask you to pray for me, were I worth your Concern. May the Lord enable us both
to endure Hardness as good Soldiers of JESUS CHRIST; and may we obtain Mercy of
God to be faithful, to the Death, in the Discharge of our respective Trusts.

I am your very unworthy Brother, and humble Servant, D^v. Brainerd.


No. 6. To his Brother John, at College.

Crosweeksung, in New Jersey, December. 28. 1745. Very dear Brother,
-- I Am in one continued, perpetual, and uninterrupted Hurry; and divine
Providence throw^ so much upon me, that I don't see it will ever be otherwise.
May I obtain Mercy of GOD to be faithful to the Death. I cannot say, I am weary
of my Hurry; I only want Strength and Grace to do more for GOD, than I have
ever yet done.

My dear Brother; The LORD of Heaven, that has carried me through many Trials,
bless you; bless you for Time, and Eternity; and fit you to do Service for him
in his Church below, and to enjoy his blissful Presence in his Church
triumphant. My Brother, the Time is short: Oh let us fill it up for God: Let us
count the Sufferings of this present Time as nothing, if we can but run our
Race, and finish our Course with Joy. Oh, let us strive to live to GOD. I bless
the Lord, I have nothing to do with Earth, but only to labor honestly in it
for God, 'till I shall ^ccomplish as an Hireling my Day. I think, I don't
desire to live one Minute for any Thing that Earth can afford. Oh, that I could
live for none but GOD, 'till my dying Moment.

I am your affectionate Brother, D. Brainerd.


No. 7. To his Brother Israel, then a Student at Yal^-College in New Haven.

Elisabeth-Town, New Jersey, Nov. 24. 1746. Dear Brother,
I Had determined to make you and my other Friends in New England a Visit, this
Fall; partly from an earnest Desire I had to see you and them, and partly with
a View to the Recovery of my Health; which has, for more than three Months
past, been much impaired. And in order to prosecute this Design, I set out from
my own People about three Weeks ago, and came as far as to this Place; where,
my Disorder greatly increasing, I have been obliged to keep House ever since,
until the Day before Yesterday; at which Time, I was able to ride about half a
Mile, but found my self much tired with the Journey. I have now no Hopes of
prosecuting my Journey into N. England this Winter, supposing, my present State
of Health will by no Means admit of it: Although I am through divine Goodness much
better than I was some Days ago, yet I have not Strength now to ride more than ten
Miles a Day, if the Season were warm, and fit for me to travel in. My Disorder
has been attended with several Symptoms of a Consumption; and I have been at
Times apprehensive, that my great Change was at Hand: Yet blessed be GOD, I
have never been affrighted; but on the contrary, at some Times much delighted
with a View of it is Approach. Oh, the Blessedness of being delivered from the
Clogs of Flesh and Sense, from a Body of Sin and spiritual Death! Oh, the
unspeakable Sweetness of being translated into a State of complete Purity and
Perfection! Believe me, my Brother, a lively View and Hope of these Things,
will make the King of Serrors himself appear agreeable. -- Dear Brother, let me
entreat you, to keep Eternity in your View, and behave your self as becomes one
that must shortly give an Account of all Things done in the Body. That GOD may
be your GOD, and prepare you for his Service here, and his Kingdom of Glory
hereafter, is the Desire and daily Prayer of

Your affectionate loving Brother, D. Brainerd.


No. 8. To his Brother Israel, at College; written in the Time of his extreme
Illness in Boston, a few Months before his Death.

Boston, June 30. 1747. My dear Brother,
IT is from the Sides of Eternity I now address you. I am heartily sorry, that
I have so little Strength to write what I long so much to communicate to you.
But let me tell you, my Brother, Eternity is another Thing than we ordinarily
take it to be in a healthful State. Oh, how vast and boundless! Oh, how fixed
and unalterable! Oh, of what infinite Importance is it, that we be prepared for
Eternity! I have been just a dying, now for more than a Week; and all around me
have thought me so: But in this Time I have had clear Views of Eternity; have
seen the Blessedness of the Godly, in some Measure; and have longed to share
their happy State; as well as been comfortably satisfied, that through Grace, I
shall do so: But Oh, what Anguish is raised in my Mind, to think of an Eternity
for those who are Christless, for those who are mistaken, and who bring their
false Hopes to the Grave with them! The Sight was so dreadful, I could by no
Means bear it: My Thoughts recoiled, and I said (but under a more affecting
Sense than ever before) Who can dwell with everlasting Burnings! Oh, methought,
that I could now see my Friends* that I might warn them, to see to it, they lay
their Foundation for Eternity sure. And you, my dear Brother, I have been
particularly concerned for* and have wondered, I so much neglected conversing
with you about your spiritual State at our last Meeting. Oh* my Brother, let me
then beseech you now to examine, whether you are indeed a new Creature? Whether
you have ever acted above Self? Whether the Glory of GOD has ever been the
sweetest highest Concern with you? Whether you have ever been reconciled to all
the Perfections of GOD; in a Word, whether God has been you^ Portion* and a
holy Conformity to him your chief Delight (...) cannot answer positively,
consider seriously the frequent (...) of your Soul: But don't however put your
self off with a sl^ght Answer. If you slave Reason to think you are G^aceless,
Oh give your self and the Throne of Grace no Rest, ^ull GOD arise and save. But
if the Case should be otherwise, bless GOD for his Grace, and press after
Holiness. Mr. Brainerd afterward had greater Satisfaction concerning the State
of his Brother's Soul, by much Opportunity (...) with him before his Death.


My Soul longs* that you should be fitted for, and in due Time go into the Work
of the Ministry. I cannot bear to think of your going into any other Business in
Life. Don't be discouraged, because you see your elder Brothers in the Ministry
die early, one after another: I declare, now I am dying, I would not have spent
my Li^e otherwise for the whole World. But I must leave this with GO^.

If this Line should come to your Hands soon after the Date, ^ should be almost
desirous you should set out on a Journey to me: ^t may be you may see me alive;
which I should much ^ejoyce in. But if you cannot come, I must commit you to the
Grace of GOD, where you are. May he be your Guide and Councellor, your
Sanctifier and eternal Portion.

Oh, my dear Brother, flee fleshly Lusts, and the enchanting Amasements, as
well as corrupt Doctrines of the present Day; and strive to live to GOD.

Take this as the last Line from

Your affectionate dying Brother, D. Brainerd.


No. 9. To a young Gentleman, a Candidate for the Work of the Ministry, for
whom he had a special Friendship; also written at the same Time of his great
Illness and nearness to Death in Boston.

Very dear Sir,
HOw amazing it is, that the Living, who know they must die, should
notwithstanding put far away the evil Day, in a Season of Health and
Prosperity; and live at such an awful Distance from a Familiarity with the
Grave, and the great Concerns beyond it! And especially it may justly fill us
with Surprise, that any whose Minds have been divinely enlightened, to behold
the important Things of Eternity as they are, I say, that such should live in
this Manner. And yet Sir, how frequently is this the Case! How rare are the
Instances of those who live and act, from Day to Day, as on the Verge of
Eternity* striving to fill up all their remaining Moments, in the Service, and
to the Honor of their great Master? We insensibly trifle* away Time, while we
seem to have enough of it; and are so strangely amused, as in a great Measure
to lose a Sense of the Holiness and blessed Qualifications necessary to prepare
us to be Inhabitants of the heavenly Paradise. But Oh, dear Sir, a dying Bed,
if we enjoy our Reason clearly, will give another View of Things. I have now,
for more than three Weeks, lain under the greatest Degree of Weakness; the
greater Part of the Time, expecting daily and hourly to enter into the eternal
World: sometimes have been so far gone, as to be wholly Speechless, for some
Hours together. And Oh, of what vast Importance has a holy spiritual Life
appeared to me to be in this Season! I have longed to call upon all my Friends,
to make it their Business to live to GOD; and especially all that are designed
for, or engaged in the Service of the Sanctuary. O dear Sir, don't think it
enough, to live at the Rate of common Christians. Alas, to how little Purpose
do they often converse, when they meet together! The Visits, even of those who
are called Christians indeed, are frequently extreme barren: And Conscience
cannot but condemn us for the Misimprovement of Time, while we have been
conversant with them. But the Way to enjoy the divine Presence, and be fitted
for distinguishing Service for GOD, is to live a Life of great Devotion and
constant Self-Dedication to him; observing the Motions and Dispositions of our
own Hearts, whence we may learn the Corruptions that lodge there, and our
constant Need of Help from GOD for the Performance of the least Duty. And Oh,
dear Sir, let me beseech you frequently to attend the great and precious Duties
of secret Fasting and Prayer.

I have a secret Thought, from some Things I have observed, that GOD may
perhaps design you for some singular Service in the World. Oh then labor to be
prepared and qualified to do much for GOD. Read Mr. Edwards's Piece on the
Affections, again and again; and labor to distinguish clearly upon Experiences
and Affections in Religion, that you may make a Difference between the Gold and
the shining Dress; I say, labor here, as ever you would be an useful Minister
of Christ: For nothing has put such a Stop to the Work of God in the late Day
as the false Religion, the wild Affections that attend it. Suffer me therefore,
finally, to entreat you earnestly to give your self to Prayer, to Reading and
Meditation on divine Truths: Strive to penetrate to the Bottom of them, and
never be content with a superficial Knowledge. By this Means, your Thoughts
will gradually grow weighty and judicious; and you hereby will be possessed of
a valuable Treasure, out of which you may produce Things new and old, to the
Glory of GOD.

And now, I commend you to the Grace of GOD; earnestly desiring, that a
plentiful Portion of the divine Spirit may rest upon you; that you may live to
GOD in every Capacity of Life, and do abundant Service for him in a public, if
it be his Will; and that you may be richly qualified for the Inheritance of the
Saints in Light.

I scarce expect to see your Face any more in the Body; and therefore entreat
you to accept this as the last Token of Love, from

Your sincerely affectionate dying Friend, David Brainerd.
P. S. I am now, at the dating of this Letter, considerably recovered from what
I was when I wrote it; it having lain by me some Time, for want of an
Opportunity of Conveyance; it was written in Boston -- I am now able to ride a
little, and so am removed into the Country: But I have no more Expectation of
recovering, than when I wrote, though I am a little better for the present; and
therefore I still subscribe my self,

Your dying Friend, etc. D. B.




No. 10. To his Brother John, at Bethel, the Town of Christian India^s in
New Jersey; written likewise at Boston, when he was there on the Brink of the
Grave, in the Summer before his Death.

Dear Brother,
I Am now just on the Verge of Eternity, expecting very speedily to appear in
the unseen World. I feel my self no more an Inhabitant of Earth, and sometimes
earnestly long to depart and be with Christ. I bless God, he has for some Years
given me an abiding Conviction, that it is impossible for any rational Creature
to enjoy true Happiness without being entirely devoted to Him. Under the
Influence of this Conviction I have in some Measure acted: Oh that I had done
more so! I saw both the Excellency and Necessity of Holiness in Life; but never
in such a Manner a^ now, when I am just brought to the Sides of the Grave. Oh,
my Brother, pursue after Holiness; press toward this blessed Mark; and let
your thirsty Soul continuually say, I shall never be Satisfied 'till I awake in
^y Likeness. Although there has been a great deal of Selfishness in any Views; of
which I am ashamed, and for which my Soul is humbled at every View: Yet blessed
be God, I find I have really had, for the most part, such a Concern for his
Glory, and the Advancement of his Kingdom in the World, that it is a
Satisfaction to me to reflect upon these Years.

And now, my dear Brother, as I must press you to pursue after personal
Holiness, to be as much in Fasting and Prayer as your Health will allow, and to
live above the Rate of common Christians; so I must entreat you solemnly to
attend to your public Work: Labor to distinguish between true and false
Religion: And to that End, watch the Motions of God's Spirit upon your own
Heart; look to him for Help; and impartially compare your Experiences with his
Word. Read Mr. Edwards on the Affections, where the Essence and Soul of
Religion is clearly distinguished from false Affections. I had at first fully
intended, in publishing this and the foregoing Letters, to have suppressed
those Passages wherein my Name is mentioned, and my Discourse on religious
Affections recommended: And am sensible, that by my doing otherwise, I shall
bring upon me the Reproach of some. But how much soever I may be pleased with
the Commendation of any Performance of mine (and I confess, I esteem the
Judgment and Approbation of such a Person as Mr. Brainerd, worthy to be valued,
and look on my self at highly honored by it) Yet I can truly say, the Things
that governed me in altering my forementioned Determination, with Respect to
these Passages, were these two. (1.) What M^ Brainerd here says of that
Discourse, shows very fully and particularly what his Notions were of
experimental Religion, and the Nature of true Piety, and now far he was from
placing it in Impressions on the Imagination, or any enthusiastical Impulses,
and how essential in Religion he esteemed holy Practice, etc. etc. For all that
have read that Discourse, know what Sentiments are there expressed concerning
these Things, (2.) I judged, that the Approbation of so apparent and eminent a
Friend and Example of inward vital Religion, and evangelical Piety in the
Height of it, would probably tend to make that Book more Serviceable;
especially among some Kinds of zealous Persons, whose Benefit was especially
aimed at in the Book; some of which are prejudiced against it, as written in
too legal a Strain, and opposing some Things wherein the Height of Christian
Experience consists, and tending to build Men up on their own Works.
Value religious Joys according to the Subject Matter of them: There are many
that rejoice in their supposed Justification; but what do these Joys argue, but
only that they love themselves? Whereas, in true spiritual Joys, the Soul
rejoices in GOD for what he is in himself; blesses God for his Holiness,
Sovereignty, Power, Faithfulness, and all his Perfections; adores God, that he
is what he is, that he is unchangeably possessed of Infinite Glory and
Happiness. Now, when Men thus rejoice in the Perfections of God, and in the
infinite Excellency of the Way of Salvation by Christ, and in the holy Commands
of God, which are a Transcript of his holy Nature, these Joys are divine and
spiritual. Our Joys will stand by us at the Hour of Death, if we can be then
satisfied, that we have thus acted above self, and in a disinterested Manner
(if I may so express it) rejoiced ^^ the Glory of the blessed GOD. -- I fear,
you are not sufficiently aware how much false Religion there is in the World:
Many serious Christians and valuable Ministers are too easily imposed upon by
this false Blaz^^. I likewise f^ar, you are not sensible of the (...) Effects
and Consequences o^ this false Religion. Let me tell you, it is the Devil
transformed into an Angel of Light; it is a Brat of Hell, that always springs up
with every Revival of Religion, and stabs and murders the Cause of God, while
it passes Current with Multitudes of well-meaning People for the Height of
Religion. Set yourselves, my Brother, to crush all Appearances of this Nature,
among the Indians, and never encourage any Degrees of Heat without Light.
Charge my People in the Name of their dying Minister, yea, in the Name of Him
who was dead and is alive, to live and walk as becom^^ the Gospel. Tell them,
how great the Expectations of God and his People are from them, and how awfully
they will wound God's Cause, if they fall into Vice; as well as fatally
prejudice other poor Indians. Always insist, that their Experiences are rotten,
that their Joys are delusive, although they may have been rapt up into the third
Heavens in their own Conceit by them, unless the main Tenor of their Lives be
spiritual, watchful, and holy. In pressing these Things, Thou shall both save
thy self, and those that hear thee? --

GOD knows, I was heartily willing to have served him longer in the Work of the
Ministry, although it had still been attended with all the Labors and Hardships
of past Years, if he had seen fit that it should be so: but as his Will now
appears otherwise, I am fully content, and can with utmost Freedom say, The
Will of the Lord be done. It affects me, to think of leaving you in a World of
Sin: My Heart pities you, that those Storms and Tempests are yet before you,
which I trust, through Grace I am almost delivered from. But God lives, and
blessed be my Rock: He is the same almighty Friend; and will, I trust, be your
Guide and Helper, as he has been mine.

And now, my dea^ Brother, I commend you to GOD and to the Word of HIS Grace,
which is able to build you up, and give you Inheritance among all them that are
sanctified May you enjoy the divine Presence, both in private and public; and
may the Arms of your Hands be made strong, by the right Hand of the mighty God
of Jacob. Which are the passionate Desires and Prayers of

Your affectionate, dying Brother, David Brainerd.


AN APPENDIX. Containing some REFLECTIONS and OBSERVATIONS on the preceding
Memoirs of Mr. BRAINERD.
1. WE have here Opportunity, as I apprehended, in a very lively Instance, to
see the Nature of true Religion; and the Manner of it is Operation when
exemplified in a high Degree and powerful Exercise. Particularly it may be
worthy to be observed:

1. How greatly Mr. Brainerd's Religion differed from that of some Pretenders
to the Experience of a clear Work of saving Conversion wro't on their Hearts;
who depending and living on that, settle in a cold, careless and carnal Frame
of Mind, and in a Neglect of thorough, earnest Religion, in the stated Practice
of it. Although his Convictions and Conversion were in all Respects exceeding
clear, and very remarkable; yet how far was he from acting as though he thought
he had got through his Work, when once he had obtained Comfort, and
Satisfaction of his Interest in Christ, and Title to Heaven. On the contrary,
that Work on his Heart, by which he was brought to this, was with him evidently
but the Beginning of his Work, his first entering on the great Business of
Religion and the Service of GOD, his first setting out in his Race. His
obtaining Rest of Soul in Christ, after earnest striving to enter in at the
strait Gate, and being violent to take the Kingdom of Heaven, he did not look
upon as putting an End to any further Occasion for striving and Violence in
Religion; but these were continued still, and maintained constantly, through
all Changes, to the very End of Life. His Work was not finished, nor his Race
ended, 'till Life was ended; agreeable to frequent Scripture Representations of
the Christian Life. He continued pressing forward in a constant Manner,
forgetting the Things that were behind, and teaching forth toward the Things
that were before. His Pains and Earnestnes^ in the Business of Religion were
rather increased, than diminished, after he had received Comfort and
Satisfaction concerning the safety of his State. Those divine Principles, which
after this he was actuated by, of Love to GOD, and Longings and Thirstings
after Holiness, seem to be more effectual to engage him to Pains and Activity
in Religion, than Fear of Hell had been before.

And as his Conversion was not the End of his Work, or of the Course of his
Diligence and Strivings in Religion; so neither was it the End of the Work of
the Spirit of GOD on his Heart: But on the contrary, the Beginning of that
Work; the Beginning of his spiritual Discoveries, and holy Views; the first
Dawning of the Light, which thenceforward increased more and more; the
Beginning of his holy Affections, his Sorrow for Sin, his Love to GOD, his
Rejoicing in Christ Jesus, his Longings after Holiness. And the powerful
Operations of the Spirit of God in these Things, were carried on, from the Day
of his Conversion, in a continued Course, to his dying Day. His religious
Experiences, his Admiration, his Joy, and Praise, and flowing Affections, did
not only hold up to a considerable Height for a few Days, Weeks or Months, at
first, while Hope and Comfort were new Things with him; and then gradually
dwindle and die away, 'till they came to almost nothing, and so leave him
without any sensible or remarkable Experience of spiritual Discoveries, or holy
and divine Affections, for Months together; as it is with many, who after the
Newness of Things is over, soon come to that pass, that it is again with 'em
very much as it is used to be before their supposed Conversion, with Respect to
any present Views of GOD's Glory, of Christ's Excellency, or of the Beauty of
divine Things; and with Respect to any present Thirstings for GOD, or ardent
Outgoings of their Souls after divine Objects: But only now and then they have
a comfortable Reflection on Things they have met with in Times past, and are
something affected with them; and so rest easy, thinking all Things are well;
they have had a good clear Work, and their State is safe, and they doubt not
but they shall go to Heaven when they die. How far otherwise was it with Mr.
Brainerd, than it is with such Persons* His Experiences, instead of dying away,
were evidently of an increasing Nature. His first Love and other holy
Affection^, even at the Beginning were very great; but after Months and Yea^^*
became much greater, and more remarkable; and the Spiritual Exercises (...) his
Mind continued exceeding great (though not equally so at all Times, yet usually
so) without indu^ged (...) habitual dwindling and dying away, even 'till his
Decease. They began in a Time of general Deadness all over the Land, and were
greatly increased in a Time of general Reviving of Religion. And when Religion
decayed again, and a general Deadness returned, his Experiences were still kept
up in their Height, and his holy Exercises maintained in their Life and Vigor;
and so continued to be, in a general Course, wherever he was, and whatever his
Circumstances were, among English and Indians, in Company and alone, in Towns
and Cities, and in the howling Wilderness, in Sickness and in Health, living
and dying. This is agreeable to Scripture-Descriptions of true and right
Religion, and of the Christian Life. The Change, that was wrought in him at his
Conversion, was agreeable to Scripture-Representations of that Change which is
wrought in true Conversion; a great Change and an abiding Change, rendering him
a new Man, a new Creature: Not only a Change as to Hope and Comfort, and an
Apprehension of his own good Estate; and a transient Change, consisting in high
Flights, of passing Affections; but a Change of Nature, a Change of the abiding
Habit and Temper of his Mind. Nor a partial Change, merely in Poin^ of Opinion,
or outward Reformation; much less a Change from one Error to another, or from
one Sin to another: but an univer^al Change, both internal and external; as
from corrupt and dangerous Principles in Religion, unto the Belief of the
Truth, so from both the Habits and Ways of Sin, unto universal Holiness of
Heart and Practice; from the Power and Service of Satan unto GOD.

2. His Religion did apparently and greatly differ from that of many high
Pretenders to Religion, who are frequently actuated by vehement Emotions of
Mind, and are carried on in a Course of sudden and strong Impressions, and
supposed high Illuminations and immediate Discoveries, and at the same Time are
Persons of a virulent Zeal, not according to Knowledge.

His Convictions, proceeding his Conversion, did not arise from any frightful
Impressions on his Imagination, or any external Images and Ideas of Fire and
Brimstone, a Sword of Vengeance drawn, a dark Pit open, Devils in terrible
Shapes, etc. strongly fixed in his Mind. His Sight of his own Sinfulness did
not consist in any Imagination of a heap of loathsome material Filthines^ within
him* nor did his Sense of the Hardness of his Heart consist in any bodily
feeling in his Breast something hard and heavy like a Stone, nor in any
Imaginations whatever of such a Nature.

His first Discovery of God or Christ, at his Conversion, was not any strong
Idea of any external Glory or Brightness, or Majesty and Beauty of Countenance,
or pleasant Voice; nor was it any supposed immediate Manifestation of God's
Love to him in particular; nor any Imagination of Christ's smiling Face, Arms
open, or Words immediately spoken to him, as by Name, revealing Christ's Love
to him; either Words of Scripture, or any other: But a Manifestation of God's
Glory, and the Beauty of his Nature, as supremely excellent in it self;
powerfully drawing* and sweetly captivating his Heart; bringing him to a hearty
Desire to exalt God, set him on the Throne, and give him supreme Honor and
Glory, as the King and Sovereign of the Universe; and also a new Sense of the
infinite Wisdom, Suitableness and Excellency of the Way of Salvation by Christ;
powerfully engaging his whole Soul to embrace this Way of Salvation, and to
delight in it. His first Faith did not consist in believing that Christ loved
him, and died for him, in particular. His first Comfort was not from any secret
Suggestion of God's Eternal Love to him, or that God was reconciled to him or
intended great Mercy for him; by any such Texts as those, Son, be of good
Cheer, thy Sins are forgiven thee* Fear not, I am thy God, etc. or in any such
Way. On the contrary, when GOD's Glory was first discovered to him, it was
without any Thought of Salvation as his own. His first Experience of the
sanctifying and comforting Power of GOD's Spirit did not begin in some bodily
Sensation, any pleasant warm Feeling in his Breast, that he (as some others)
called the Feeling the Love of Christ in him, and being full of the Spirit. How
exceeding far were his Experiences at his first Conversion from Things of such
a Nature!

And if we look through the whole Series of his Experiences, from his Conversion
to his Death, we shall find none of this Kind. I have had Occasion to read his
Diary over and over, and very particularly and critically to review every
Passage in it; and I find no one Instance of a strong Impression on his
Imagination, through his whole Life: No Instance of a strongly impressed Idea
of any external Glory and Brightness, of any bodily Form or Shape, any
beautiful Majestic Countenance: No imaginary Sight of Christ hanging on the
Cross, with his Blood streaming from his Wounds; or seated in Heaven on a
bright Throne, with Angels and Saints bowing before him; or with a Countenance
smiling on him; or Arms open to embrace him: No Sight of Heaven, in his
Imagination, with Gates of Pearl, and Golden Streets, and vast Multitudes of
glorious Inhabitants, with shining Garments; No Sight of the Book of Life
opened, with his Name written in it: No hearing of the sweet Music made by the
Songs of heavenly Hosts; No hearing God or Christ immediately speaking to him;
nor any sudden Suggestions of Words or Sentences, either Words of Scripture, or
any other, as then immediately spoken or sent to him: No new objective
Revelations, no sudden strong Suggestions of secret Facts. Nor do I find any
one Instance in all the Records he has left of his own Life, from Beginning to
End, of Joy excited from a supposed immediate Witness of the Spirit; or inward
immediate Suggestion, that his State was surely good, that God loved him with
an everlasting Love, that Christ died for him in particular, and that Heaven
was his; either with or without a Text of Scripture: No Instance of Comfort by
a sudden bearing in upon his Mind, as though at that very Time directed by God to
him in particular, any such kind of Texts as those; Fear not, I am with thee;
-- It is your Father's good Pleasure to give you the Kingdom; -- You have not
chosen me, but I have chosen you; -- I have called thee by thy Name, thou art
mine; -- Before thou wast formed in the Belly, I knew thee, etc. No supposed
Communion and Conversation with GOD carried on in this Way; no such supposed
Tasting of the Love of Christ. But the Way ^e was satisfied of his own good
Estate, even to the entire abolishing of Fear, was by Feeling within himself
the lively actings of a holy Temper and heavenly Disposition, the vigorous
Exercises of that divine Love, which casts out Fear: This was the Way he had
full Satisfaction soon after his Conversion (see his Diary on October. 18 and 19.
1740.) And we find no other Way of Satisfaction through his whole Life
afterward: And this he abundantly declared to be the Way, the only Way, that
he had complete Satisfaction, when he looked Death in the Face, in it is near
Approaches.

Some of the Pretenders to an immediate Witness by Suggestion, and Defenders of
it, with an assuming Confidence, would bear us in Hand, that there is no full
Assurance without it; and that the Way of being satisfied by Signs, and arguing
an Inter^st in Christ from Sanctification, if it will keep Men quiet in Life
and Health, yet will never do when they come to die: Then (they say) Men must
have immediate Witness, or else be in a dreadful Uncertainty. But Mr.
Brainerd's Experience is a Confutation of this; for in him we have an Instance
of one that possessed as constant and unshaken an Assurance, through the Course
of his Life, after Conversion, as perhaps can be produced in this Age; which
yet he obtained and enjoyed without any such Sort of Testimony, and without all
Manner of Appearance of it, or Pretense to it; yea, while utterly disclaiming
any such Thing, and declaring against it: And one whose Assurance, we need not
scruple to affirm, has as fair a Claim, and as just a Pretension to Truth and
Genuineness, as any that the Pretenders to immediate Witness can produce: And
not only an Instance of one that had such Assurance in Life, but had it in a
constant Manner in his last Illness; and particularly in the latter Stages of
it, through those last Months of his Life, wherein Death was more sensibly
approaching, without the least Hope of Life: And had it too in it is Fullness,
and in the Height of it'^ Exercise, under those repeated Trials, that he had in
this Space of Time; when brought from Time to Time to the very Brink of the
Grave, expecting in a few Minutes to be in Eternity. He had the full Assurance
of Hope, unto the End. When on the Verge of Eternity, he then declares his
Assurance to be such as perfectly secluded all Fear; and not only so, but it
manifestly filled his Soul with exceeding Joy: He declaring at the same Time,
that this his Consolation and good Hope through Grace arose wholly from the
Evidence he had of his good Estate, by what he found of his Sanctification, or
the Exercise of a holy heavenly Temper of Mind, supreme Love to God, etc. and
not in the least from any immediate Witness by Suggestion: Yea, he declares
that at these very Times he saw the awful Delusion of that Confidence which is
built on such a Foundation, as well as of the whole of that Religion which it
usually springs from, or at least is the Attendant of; and that his Soul
abhorred those Delusions: And he continued in this Mind, often expressing it
with much Solemnity, even 'till Death.

Mr. Brainerd's Religion was not selfish and mercenary: His Love to God was
primarily and principally for the supreme Excellency of his own Nature, and not
built on a preconceived Notion that God loved him, had received him into
Favor, and had done great Things for him, or promised great Things to him: So
his Joy was Joy in God, and not in himself. We see by his Diary how, from Time
to Time, through the Course of his Life, his Soul was filled with ineffable
Sweetness and Comfort. But what was the Spring of this strong and abiding
Consolation? Not so much the Consideration of the sure Grounds he had to think
that his State was good, that God had delivered him from Hell, and that Heaven
was his; or any Thoughts concerning his own distinguished happy and exalted
Circumstances, as a high Favorite of Heaven: But the sweet Meditations and
entertaining Views he had of divine Things without himself; the affecting
Considerations and lively Ideas of God's infinite Glory, his unchangeable
Blessedness, his Sovereignty and universal Dominion; together with the sweet
Exercises of Love to GOD, giving himself up to him, abasing himself before him,
denying himself for him, depending upon him, acting for his Glory, diligently
serving him; and the pleasing Prospects or Hopes he had of a future Advancement
of the Kingdom of Christ, etc.

It appears plainly and abundantly all along, from his Conversion to his Death,
that that Beauty, that Sort of Good, which was the great Object of the new
Sense of his Mind, the new Relish and Appetite given him in Conversion, and
thenceforward maintained and increased in his Heart, was HOLINESS, Conform^ty
to God, living to God, and glorifying Him. This was what drew his Heart; this
was the Center of his Soul; this was the Ocean to which all the Streams of his
religious Affections tended: This was the Object that engaged his eager
thirsting Desires and earnest Pursuits: He knew no true Excellency or
Happiness, but this: This was what he longed for most vehemently and constantly
on Earth; and this was with him the Beauty and Blessedness of Heaven; which
made him so much and so often to long for that World of Glory; it was to be
perfectly holy, and perfectly exercised in the holy Employments of Heaven; thus
to glorify God and enjoy him forever.

His religious Illuminations, Affections and Comfort seemed, to a great Degree,
to be attended with Evangelical Humiliation; consisting in a Sense of his own
utter Insufficiency, Despicableness and Odiousness; with an answerable
Disposition and Frame of Heart. How deeply affected was he almost continually
with his great Defects in Religion; with his vast Distance from that
Spirituality and holy Frame of Mind that became him; with his Ignorance, Pride,
Deadness, Unsteadiness, Barrenness? He was not only affected with the
Remembrance of his former Sinfulness, before his Conversion, but with the Sense
of his pres^^t Vileness and Po^lution. He was not only disposed to think meanly
of himself as before God, and in Comparison of him; but amongst Men, and as
compared with them: He was (...) to think other Saints better than he; yea, to
look on himself as the meanest and cast of Saints; yea, very often, as the
vilest and worst of Mankind. And notwithstanding his great Seize in
spiritual Knowledge, yet we find there is scarce any Thing that he is more
frequently affected and abased with a Sense of, than his Ignorance.

How eminently did he appear to be of a meek and quiet Spirit, resembling the
Lamb-like, Dove-like Spirit of Jesus Christ! How full of Love, Meekness,
Quietness, Forgiveness and Mercy! His Love was not merely a Fondness and Zeal
for a Party, but an universal Benevolence; very often exercised in the most
sensible and ardent Love to his greatest Opposers and Enemies. His Love and
Meekness were not a mere Pretense, and outward Profession and Show; but they
were effectual Things, manifested in expensive and painful Deeds of Love and
Kindness; and in a meek Behavior; readily confessing Faults under the greatest
Trials, and humbling himself even at the Feet of those from whom he supposed he
had suffered most; and from Time to Time, very frequently praying for his
Enemies, abhorring the Thoughts of Bitterness or Resentment toward them. I
scarcely know where to look for any parallel Instance of Self-denial, in these
Respects, in the present Age. He was a Person of great Zeal; but how did he
abhor a bitter Zeal, and lament it where he saw it! And though he was once drawn
into some Degrees of it, by the Force of prevailing Example, as it were in his
Childhood; yet how did he go about with a Heart bruised and broken in Pieces
for it all his Life after!

Of how soft and tender a Spirit was he! How far were his Experiences, Hopes,
and Joys from a Tendency finally to stupify and harden him, to lessen
Convictions and Tenderness of Conscience, to cause him to be less affected with
present and past Sins, and less conscientious with Respect to future Sins, more
easy in the Neglect of Duties that are troublesome and inconvenient, more slow
and partial in complying with difficult Commands, less apt to be alarmed at the
Appearance of his own Defects and Transgressions, more easily induced to a
Compliance with carnal Appetites! On the contrary, how tender was his
Conscience! How apt was his Heart to smite him! How easily and greatly was he
alarmed at the Appearance of moral Evil! How great and constant was his
Jealousy over his own (...)! How strict his Care and Watchfulness against Sin!
How deep and sensible were the Wounds that Sin made in his Conscience! Those
Evils that are generally accounted small, were almost an insupportable Burden
to him; such as his inward Deficiencies, his having no more Love to GOD,
finding within himself any slackness or dullness in Religion, any Unsteadiness,
or wandering Frame of Mind, etc. How did the Consideration of such Things as
these oppress and abase him, and fill him with inward Shame and Confusion! His
Love and Hope, though they were such as cast out a servile Fear of Hell, yet they
were such as were attended with, and abundantly cherished and promoted a
reverential filial Fear of GOD, a Dread of Sin and of God's holy Displeasure.
His Joy seemed truly to be a rejoicing with Trembling. His Assurance and
Comfort differed greatly from a false enthusiastic Confidence and Joy, in that
it promoted and maintained Mourning for Sin: holy mourning, with him, was not
only the Work of an Hour or a Day, at his first Conversion; but Sorrow for Sin
was like a Wound constantly running: He was a Mourner for Sin all his Days. He
did not, after he received Comfort and full Satisfaction of the Forgiveness of
all his Sins, and the Safety of his State, forget his past Sins, the Sins of
his Youth, that were committed before his Conversion; but the Remembrance of
them, from Time to Time, revived in his Heart, with renewed Grief. That in Ezekiel
xvi.63. was evidently fulfilled in him, That thou may remember, and be
confounded, and never open thy Mouth any more, because of thy Shame; when I am
pacified toward thee for all that thou have done. And how lastingly did the
Sins that he committed after his Conversion, affect and break his Heart! If he
did any Thing whereby he thought he had in any Respect dishonored GOD, and
wounded the Interest of Religion, he had never done with calling it to Mind
with Sorrow and Bitterness: Though he was assured that GOD had forgiven it, yet
he never forgave himself: His past Sorrows and Fears made no Satisfaction, with
him; but still the Wound renews and bleeds afresh, again and again. And his
present Sins, that he daily found in himself, were an Occasion of daily
sensible and deep Sorrow of Heart.

His Religion did not consist in una^countable Flights and vehement Pangs;
suddenly rising, and suddenly falling; at some Turns exalted almost to the
third Heavens, and then at other Turns negligent, vain, carnal, and swallowed
up with the World; for Days and Weeks, if not Months together. His Religion was
not like a blazing Meteor, or like a flaming Comet, (or a wandering Star, as the
Apostle Jude calls it, ver. 13.) flying through the Firmament with a bright
Train; and then quickly going out in perfect Darkness: But more like the steady
Lights of Heaven; that are constant Principles of Light, though sometimes hid
with Clouds. Nor like a Land-Flood, which flows far and wide, with a rapid
Stream, bearing down all before it, and then dried up; but more like a Stream
fed by living Springs; which though sometimes increased by Showers, and at other
Times diminished by Drought, yet is a constant Stream.

His religious Affections and Joys were not like those of some, who have
Rapture and mighty Emotions from Time to Time in Company; but have very little
Affection in Retirement and secret Places. Though he was of a very sociable
Temper, and loved the Company of Saints, and delighted very much in religious
Conversation and in social Worship; yet his warmest Affections and their
greatest Effects on animal Nature, and his sweetest Joys, were in his
Closet-Devotions, and solitary Transactions between GOD and his own Soul; as is
very observable through his whole Course, from his Conversion to his Death. He
delighted greatly in sacred Retirements; and loved to get quite away from all
the World, to converse with GOD alone, in secret Duties.

Mr. Brainerd's Experiences and Comforts were very far from being like those of
some Persons, which are attended with a spiritual Satiety, and put an End to
their religious Desires and Longings, at least to the (...) and Ardency of
them; resting sati^fied in their own Seize and Comforts, as having
obtained their chief End, which is to extinguish their Fears of Hell, and give
'em Confidence of the Favor of GOD. How far were his religious Affections,
Refreshments, and Satisfactions, from such an Operation and Influence as this!
On the contrary, how were they always attended with Longings and Thirstings
after greater Degrees of Conformity to GOD! And the greater and sweeter his
Comforts were, the more vehement were his Desires after Holiness. For it is to
be observed, that his Longings were not so much after joyful Discoveries of
God's Love and clear Views of his Title to future Advancement and eternal
Honors in Heaven; as after more of present Holiness, greater Spirituality, an
Heart more engaged for GOD, to love and exalt and depend on him, an Ability
better to serve him, to do more for his Glory, and to do all that he did with
more of a Regard to Christ as his Righteousness and Strength; and after the
Enlargement and Advancement of Christ's Kingdom in the Earth. And his Desires
were not idle wishings and wouldings, but such as were powerful and effectual,
to animate him to the earnest, eager pursuit of these Things, with utmost
Diligence and unfainting Labor and Self-denial. His Comforts never put an End
to his seeking after GOD, and striving to obtain his Grace; but on the
contrary, greatly engaged and enlarged him therein.

His Religion did not consist only in Experience, without Practice. All his
inward Illuminations, Affections and Comforts seemed to have a direct Tendency
to Practice, and to issue in it: And this, not merely a Practice negatively
good, free from gross Acts of Irreligion and Immorality: But a Practice
positively Holy and Christian, in a serious, devout, humble, meek, merciful,
charitable, and beneficent Conversation; making the Service of GOD, and our
Lord Jesus Christ, the great Business of Life, which he was devoted to, and
pursued with the greatest Earnestness and Diligence to the End of his Days,
through all Trials. In him was to be seen the right Way of being lively in
Religion: His Liveliness in Religion did not consist merely or mainly in his
being lively with the Tongue, but in Deed; not in being forward in Profession
and outward Show, and abundant in declaring his own Experiences; but chiefly in
being active and abundant in the Labors and Duties of Religion; not slothful
in Business, but fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord, and serving his
Generation, according to the Will of God.

By these Things, many high Pretenders to Religion, and Professors of
extraordinary spiritual Experience, may be sensible, that Mr. Brainerd did
greatly condemn their kind of Religion; and that not only in Word, but by
Example, both living and dying; as the whole Series of his Christian Experience
and Practice, from his Conversion to his Death, appears a constant Condemnation
of it.

It cannot be objected, that the Reason why he so much disliked the Religion of
these Pretenders, and why his own so much differed from it, was, that his
Experiences were not clear. There is no Room to say, they were otherwise, in
any Respect, in which Clearness of Experience has been wont to be insisted on;
whether it be the Clearness of their Nature, or of their Order, and the Method
his Soul was at first brought to Rest and Comfort in his Conversion. I am far
from thinking (and so was he) that Clearness of the Order of Experience is, in
any Measure, of equal Importance with the Clearness of their Nature: I have
sufficiently declared in my Discourse on Religious Affections (which he
expressly approved of and recommended) that I don't suppose, a sensible
Distinctness of the Steps of the Spirit's Operation and Method of successive
Convictions and Illuminations, is a necessary Requisite to Persons being
received in full Charity, as true Saints; provided the Nature of the Things
they profess, be right, and their Practice agreeable. Nevertheless, it is
observable, (which cuts off all Objection from such as would be most
unreasonably disposed to object and ^avil in the present Case) So it was, that
Mr. Brainerd's Experiences were not only clear in the latter Respect, but
remarkably so in the former: So that there is not perhaps one Instance in five
Hundred true Converts, that on this Account can be paralleled with him.

It cannot be pretended, that the Reason why he so much abhorred and condemned
the Notions and Experiences of those whose first Faith consists in believing
that Christ is theirs, and that Christ died for them; without any previous
Experience of Union of Heart to him, for his Excellency, as he is in himself,
and not for his supposed Love to them; and who judge of their Interest in
Christ, their Justification, and GOD's Love to them, not by their
Sanctification and the Exercises and Fruits of Grace, but by a supposed
immediate Witness of the Spirit, by inward Suggestion; I say, it cannot be
pretended, that the Reason why he so much detested and condemned such Opinions
and Experiences, was, that he was of a too legal Spirit; either that he never
was dead to the Law, never experienced a thoro' Work of Conviction, was never
fully brought off from his own Righteousness, and weaned from the old Covenant,
by a thorough legal Humiliation; or that afterward, he had no great Degree of
evangelical Humiliation, not living in a deep Sense of his own Emptiness,
Wretchedness, Poverty, and absolute Dependence on the mere Grace of GOD through
Christ. For his Convictions of Sin, preceding his first Consolations in
Christ, were exceeding deep and thorough; his Trouble and Exercise of Mind, by
a Sense of Sin and Misery, very great and long continued; and the Light let
into his Mind at his Conversion and in progressive Sanctification, appears to
have had its genuine humbling Influence upon him, to have kept him low in his
own Eyes, not confiding in himself, but in Christ, living by the Faith of the
Son of GOD, and looking for the Mercy of the Lord Jesus to eternal Life.

Nor can it be pretended, that the Reason why he condemned those, and other
Things, which this Sort of People call the very Height of vital Religion and
the Power of Godliness, was, that he was a dead Christian, and lived in the
Dark (as they express themselves) that his Experiences, though they might be
true, were not great; that he did not live near to GOD, had but a small
Acquaintance with him, and had but a dim Sight of spiritual Things. If any,
after they have read the preceding Account of Mr. Brainerd's Life, will
venture to pretend thus, they will only show that they themselves are in the
Dark, and do indeed put Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness.

It Is common with this Sort of People, if there is any one whom they cannot deny
to exhibit good Evidences of true Godliness, who yet appears to dislike their
Notions, and condemn those Things wherein they place the Height of Religion, to
insinuate, that they are afraid of the Cross, and have a Mind to curry Favor
with the World, and the like. But I presume, this will not be pretended
concerning Mr. Brainerd, by any one Person that has read the preceding Account
of his Life. It must needs appear a Thing notorious to such, that he was an
extraordinary, and almost unparalled Instance (in these Times and these Parts
of the World) of the contrary Disposition: and th^^, whether we consider what
he has recorded of his inward Experience, from Time to Time; or his Practice,
how he in Fact took up and embraced the Cross, and bore it constantly, in his
great Self-Denials, Labors, and Sufferings for the Name of Jesus, and went on
without fainting, without repenting, or repining, to his dying Illness: How he
did not only, from Time to Time, relinquish and renounce the World secretly, in
his Heart, with the full and fervent Consent of all the Powers of his Soul; but
openly and actually forsook the World, with it is Possessions, Delights, and
common Comforts, to dwell as it were with wild Beasts, in a howling Wilderness;
with constant Cheerfulness, complying with the numerous Hardships of a Life of
Toil and Travel there, to promote the Kingdom of his dear Redeemer. And
besides, it appears by the preceding History, that he never did more condemn
the Things forementioned, never had a greater Sense of their Delusion,
pernicious Nature, and ill Tendency, and never was more full of Pity to those
that are led away with them, than in his last Illness, and at Times when he had
the nearest Prospect of Death, supposed himself to be on the very Brink of
Eternity, and looked on all this lower World as what he never should have any
Thing more to do with. Surely he did not condemn those Things at these Seasons,
only to curry Favor with the World.

Besides what has been already related of Mr. Brainerd's Sentiments in his
dying State concerning true and false Religion, we have his deliberate and
solemn Tho'ts on this Subject, further appearing by his Preface to Mr.
Shepard's Diary, before mentioned; which, when he wrote it, he supposed to be
(as it proved) one of the last Things he should ever write. I shall here insert
a Part of that Preface, as follows.

How much Stress is laid by many upon some Things as being Effects and
Evidences of exalted Degrees of Religion, when they are so far from being of
any Importance in it, that they are really irreligious, a Mixture of Self-Love,
Imagination, and spiritual Pride, or perhaps the Influence of Satan transformed
into an Angel of Light; I say, how much Stress is laid on these Things by many,
I shall not determine: But it is much to be feared, that while GOD was carrying
on a glorious Work of Grace, and undoubtedly gathering a Harvest of Souls to
himself (which we should always remember with Thankfulness) Numbers of others
have at the same Time been fatally deluded by the Devices of the Devil, and
their own corrupt Hearts. It is to be feared, that the Conversions of some have
no better Foundation than this; viz. That after they have been under some
Concern for their Souls for a while, and it may be manifested some very great
and uncommon Distress and Agonies, they have on a sudden imagined they saw
CHRIST, in some Posture or other; perhaps on the Cross, bleeding and dying for
their Sins; or it may be, smiling on them, and thereby signifying his Love to
them: And that these and the like Things, though mere Imaginations, which have
nothing Spiritual in them, have instantly removed all their Fears and
Distresses, filled them with Raptures of Joy, and made them imagine, that they
loved Christ with all their Hearts; when the Bottom of all was Nothing but
Self-(...). For when they imagined that Christ had been so good to them as to
save them, and as it were to single them out of all the World, they could not
but feel some kind of natural Gratitude to him; although they never had any
spiritual View of his divine Glory, Excellency and Beauty, and consequently
never had any Love to him for himself. Or that instead of having some such
imaginary View of Christ as has been mentioned, in order to remove their
Distress and give them Joy, some having had a Passage, or perhaps many Passages
of Scripture brought to their Minds with Power (as they express it) such as
that, Son, be of good Cheer, thy Sins are forgiven thee, and the like, they
have immediately applied these Passages to themselves, supposing that God
hereby manifested his peculiar Favor to them, as if mentioned by Name: Never
considering, that they are now giving H^^d to new Revelations; there being no
such Thing revealed in the Word of God, as that this or that particular Person
has, or ever shall have his Sins forgiven; nor yet remembering, that Satan can,
with a great deal of seeming Pertinency (and perhaps also with considerable
Power) bring Scripture to the Minds of Men, as he did to Christ himself. And
thus th^se rejoice upon having some Scripture suddenly suggested to them, or
impressed upon their Minds, supposing they are now the Children of God, just as
did the other upon their imaginary Views of Christ. And it is said, that some
speak of seeing a great Light, which filled all the Place where they were, and
dispel'd all their Darkness, Fears and Distresses, and almost ravished their
Souls. While others have had it warmly suggested to their Minds, not by any
Passage of Scripture, but as it were by a Whisper or Voice from Heaven, That
God loves them, that Christ is theirs, etc. which groundless Imaginations and
Suggestion^ of (...) have had the same Effect upon them, that the Delusions
before mentioned had on the others. -- And (...) is the Conversion of this Sort
of Persons, so are their After-Experience^; the whole being built upon
Imagination, strong Impression, and sudden Suggestions made to their Minds:
Whence they are usually extreme confident (as if immediately informed from God)
not only of the Goodness of their own State, but of their infallible Knowledge,
and absolute Certainty, of the Truth of every Thing they pretend to, under the
Notion of Religion; and thus all Reasoning with some of them is utterly
excluded.

But it is remarkable of these, that they are extremely deficient in Regard of
true Poverty of Spirit, Sense of exceeding Vileness in themselves, such as
frequently makes truly gracious Souls to gr^^n, being burdened; as also in
Regard of Meekness, Love and Gentleness toward Mankind, Tenderness of
Conscience in their ordinary Affairs and Dealings in the World. And it is rare
to see 'em deeply concerned about the Principles and Ends of their Actions, and
under Fears lest they should not eye the Glory of God chiefly, but live to
themselves; or this at least is the Case in their ordinary Conduct, whether
civil or religious. But if any one of their particular N^tion^, which their
Zeal has espoused, ^e attacked, they are then so conscientious, they must born,
if called to it, for the Defense of it. Yet, at the same Time, when they are so
extremely def^cient in Regard of th^se precious divine Tempers which have been
mentioned, they are usually full of Zeal, Concern and Fervency in the Things of
Religion, and often discourse of them with much Warmth and Engagement: And to
those who don't know, or don't consider, wherein the Essence of true Religion
consists, viz. in being conformed to the Image of Christ, not in Point of Zeal
and Fervency only, but in all divine Tempers and Practices; I say, to those who
don't duly observe and distinguish, they often appear like the best of Men.

It Is common with this Sort of People to say, that God is (...) them, his
Spirit accompanies their Exhortations and other Administrations, and they are
sealed by the holy Ghost, in the remarkable Success they have, in the great
Affections that are stirred up in God's People etc. but to insinuate, on the
contrary* that he is not with their Oppone^^^; and particularly, that God has
(...) Ministry; and that the Time is come, when i^ is the Will of God that they
should be put down, and that God's People should forsake (...); and that (...)
more Success is to be (...) to attend their Administration^. -- But where can
they find an instance, among all their most flaming Ex^^rters, who has been
sealed with so uncon^^stible and wonderful Success of his Labors, as Mr.
Brainerd, not only in quickening and comforting God's Children, but also in a
Work of Conviction and Conversion (which they own has in a great Measure ceased
for a long Time among themselves) with a most visible and astonishing
Manifestation of God's Power, on Subjects so unprepared, and that had been
brought up and lived, some of them to old Age, in the deepest Prejudices
against the very first Principles of Christianity; the divine Power
accompanying his Labors, producing the most remarkable and abiding Change,
turning the Wilderness into a fruitful Field, and causing that which was a
D^sart indeed to bud and blossom as the Rose* And this although he was not only
one of their greatest Opponents in their Errors; but also one of those they
call the standing Ministry; first examined and licensed to preach by such
Ministers, and sent forth among the Heathen by such Ministers; and afterward
ordained by such Ministers; always directed by them, and united with them in
their Consistories, and Administrations; and even abhorring the Practice of
those who give out, that they ought to be renounced and separated from, and
that Teachers may be ordained by Laymen.

It cannot be pretended by these Men, that Mr. Brainerd condemned their
Religion, only because he was not acquainted with them, and had not Opportunity
for full Observation of the Nature, Operation and Tendency of their
Experiences: For he had abundant and peculiar Opportunities of such Observation
and Acquaintance: He lived through the late extraordinary Time of religious
Commotion, and saw the Beginning and End, the Good and the Bad of it: He had
Opportunity to see the various Operations and Effects, that were wrought in
this Season, more extensively, than any Person I know of: His native Place was
about the middle of Connecticut; and he was much conversant in all Parts of
that Colony: He was conversant in the Eastern Parts of it, after the Religion,
which he condemned, began much to prevail there: He was conversant with the
zealous People on Long Island, from one End of the Island to the other; and
also in New Jersey, and Pennsylvania; with People of various Nations: He had
some special Opportunities in some Places in this Province ( Massachusetts Bay)
where has been very much of this Sort of Religion, and at a Time when it
gre^tly prevailed: He had conversed and disputed with Abundance of this Kind of
People in various Parts, as he told me; and also informed me, that he had seen
something of the same Appearances in some of the Indians, whom he had preached
to, and had Opportunity to see the Beginning and End of them. And besides, Mr.
Brainerd could speak more feelingly and understandingly concerning these
Things, because there was once a Time when he was drawn away into an Esteem of
them, and for a short Season had united himself to this Kind of People, and
partook, in some Respects, of their Spirit and Behavior.

But I proceed to another Observation on the foregoing Memoirs.

II. This History of Mr. Brainerd's may help us to make Distinctions among the
high religious Affections, and remarkable Impressions made on the Minds of
Persons, in a Time of great Awakening, and Revival of Religion; and may
convince us, that there are not only Distinctions in Theory, invented to save
the Credit of pretended Revivals of Religion, and what is called the Experience
of the Operations of the Spirit; but Distinctions that do actually take Place
in the Course of Events, and have a real and evident Foundation in Fact.

Many do and will confound Things, blend all together, and say, It Is all alike;
it is all of the same Sort. So there are many that say concerning the Religion
most generally prevailing among the Separatists, and the Affections they
manifest, It Is the same that was all over the Land seven Years ago. And some
that have read Mr. Brainerd's Journal, giving an Account of the extraordinary
Things that have come to pass among the Indians in New Jersey, say, It Is
evidently the same Thing that appeared in many Places amongst the English,
which has now proved naught, and come to that which is worse than nothing. And
all the Reason they have thus to determine all to be the same Work, and the
same Spirit, is, that the one manifested high Affections, and so do the other;
the great Affections of the one had some Influence on their Bodies, and so have
the other; the one use the Terms Conviction, Conversion, Humiliation, Coming to
Christ, Discoveries, Experiences, etc. and so do the other; the Impressions on
the one are attended with a great deal of Zeal, and so it in with the other;
the Affections of the one dispose 'em to speak much about Things of Religion,
and so do the other; the one delight much in religious Meetings, and so do the
other. -- The Agreement, that appears in these, and such like Things, make 'em
conclude, that surely all is alike, all is the same Work. Whereas, on a closer
Inspection and critical Examination, it would appear, that notwithstanding an
Agreement in such Circumstances, yet indeed there is a vast Difference, both in
Essence and Fruits. A considerable Part of the religious Operations, that were
six or seven Years ago, especially toward the latter Part of that
extraordinary Season, was doubtless of the same Sort with the Religion of the
Separatists; but not all: There were many, whose Experiences were, like Mr.
Brainerd's, in a Judgment of Charity, genuine and incontestible.

Not only do the Opposers of all Religion consisting in powerful Operations and
Affections, thus confound Things; but many of the Pretenders to such Religion
do so. They that have been the Subjects of some sort of vehement, but vain
Operations on their Mind, when they hear the Relation of the Experiences of
some real and eminent Christians, they say, Their Experiences are of the same
sort: So they say, they are just like the Experiences of eminent Christians in
former Times, which we have printed Accounts of. So, I doubt not, but there are
many deluded People, if they should read the preceding Account of Mr.
Brainerd's Life, who reading without much Understanding, or careful
Observati^^, would say, without Hesitation, that some Things which they have
met with, are of the very same Kind with what he expresses: When the Agreement
is only in some general Circumstances, or some particular Things that are
superficial, and belonging as it were to the Profession and Outside of
Religion; but the inward Temper of Mind and the Fruits in Practice, are as
opposite and distant as East and West.

Many honest good People also, and true Christians, don't very well know how to
make a Difference. The glistering Appearance and glaring Show of false Religion
dazzles their Eyes; and they sometimes are so deluded by it, that they look on
some of these Impressions, which Hypocrites tell of, as the brightest
Experiences. And though they have experienced no such Things themselves, they
think, it is because they are vastly lower in Seize, and but Babes, in
Comparison of these flaming Christians. Yes, sometimes from their differing so
much from those who make so great a Show, they doubt whether they have any
Grace at all. And it is a hard Thing, to bring many well-meaning People to make
proper Distinctions in this Case; and especially to maintain and stand by 'em;
through a certain Weakness they unhapply labor of, whereby they are liable to
be overcome with the Glare of outward Appearances. Thus, if in a sedate Hour
they are by Reasoning brought to allow such and such Distinctions, yet the next
Time they come in the Way of the great Show of false Religion, the dazzling
Appearance swallows them up, and they are carried away. Thus the Devil, by his
cunning Artifices, easily dazzles the feeble Sight of Men, and puts 'em beyond
a Capacity of a proper Exercise of Consideration, or harkening to the Dictates
of calm Thought and cool Understanding. When they perceive the great Affection,
earnest Talk, strong Voice, assured Looks, vast Confidence, and bold
Assertions, of these empty assuming Pretenders, they are overborn, lose the
Possession of their Judgment, and say, Surely these Men are in the Right, God
is with 'em of a Truth: and so they are carried away, not with Light and
Reason, but (like Children) as it were with a strong Wind.

This confounding all Things together, that have a fair Show, is but acting the
Part of a Child, that going into a Shop, where a variety of Wares are exposed
to Sale (all of a shining Appearance; some Vessels of Gold and Silver, and some
Diamonds and other precious Stones; and other Things that are Toys of little
Value; which are of some base Metal gilt, or Glass polished, and painted with
curious Colors, or cut like Diamonds) should esteem all alike, and give as
great a Price for the vile as for the precious: Or it is like the Conduct of
some unskilful rash Person, who finding himself deceived by some of the Wares
he had bought at that Shop, should at once conclude, all he there saw was of no
Value; and pursuant to such a Conclusion, when afterward he has true Gold and
Diamonds offered him, enough to enrich him and enable him to live like a Prince
all his Days, he should throw it all into the Sea.

But we must get into another Way. The want of distinguishing in Things that
appertain to experimental Religion, is one of the chief Miseries of the
professing World. It Is attended with very many most dismal Consequences:
Multitudes of Souls are fatally deluded about themselves, and their own State;
and so are eternally undone: Hypocrites are confirmed in their Delusions, and
exceedingly puffed up with Pride: Many sincere Christians are dreadfully
perplexed, darkened, tempted, and drawn aside from the Way of Duty; and
sometimes sadly tainted with false Religion, to the great Dishonor of
Christianity, and Hurt of their own Souls: some of the most dangerous and
pernicious Enemies of Religion in the World (though called bright Christians) are
encouraged and honored; who ought to be discountenanced and shunned by every
Body: And Prejudices are begotten and confirmed in vast Multitudes, against
every Thing wherein the Power and Essence of Godliness consists; and in the End
Deism and Atheism are promoted.

III. The foregoing Account of Mr. Brainerd's Life may afford Matter of
Conviction, that there is indeed such a Thing as true experimental Religion,
arising from immediate divine Influences, supernaturally enlightening and
convincing the Mind, and powerfully impressing, quickening, sanctifying, and
governing the Heart; which Religion is indeed an amiable Thing, of happy
Tendency, and of no hurtful Consequence to human Society; notwithstanding there
having been so many Pretenses and Appearances of what is called experimental
vital Religion, that have proved to be nothing but vain, pernicious Enthusiasm.

If any insist, that Mr. Brainerd's Religion was Enthusiasm, and nothing but a
strange Heat and blind Fervor of Mind, arising from the strong Fancies and
Dreams of a notional whimsical Brain; I would ask, if it be so, that such
Things as these are the Fruits of Enthusiasm, viz. a great Degree of Honesty
and Simplicity, sincere and earnest Desires and Endeavors, to know and do
whatever is right, and to avoid every Thing that is wrong; an high Degree of
Love to God, Delight in the Perfections of his Nature, placing the Happiness of
Life in him; not only in contemplating him, but in being active in pleasing and
serving him; a firm and undoubting Belief in the Messiah, as the Savior of the
World, the great Prophet of God, and King of God's Church; together with great
Love to him, Delight and Complacence in the Way of Salvation by him, and
longing for the Enlargement of his Kingdom; earnest Desires that GOD may be
glorified and the Messiah's Kingdom advanced, whatever Instruments are made use
of; uncommon Resignation to the Will of God, and that under vast Trials; great
and universal Benevolence to Mankind, reaching all Sorts of Persons without
Distinction, manifested in Sweetness of Speech and Behavior, kind Treatment,
Mercy, Liberality, and earnest seeking the Good of the Souls and Bodies of Men;
attended with extraordinary Humility, Meekness, Forgiveness of Injuries, and
Love to Enemies; and a great Abhorrence of a contrary Spirit and Practice; not
only as appearing in others, but whereinsoever it had appeared in himself;
causing the most bitter Repentance, and Brokenness of Heart on Account of any
past Instances of such a Conduct: A modest, discreet and decent Deportment,
among Superiors, Inferiors and Equals; a most diligent Improvement of Time,
and earnest Care to lose no Part of it; great Watchfulness against all Sorts of
Sin, of Heart, Speech, and Action: And this Example and these Endeavors
attended with most happy Fruits, and blessed Effects on others, in humanizing,
civilizing, and wonderfully reforming and transforming some of the most brutish
Savages; Idle, Immoral, Drunkards, Murderers, gross Idolaters, and Wizards;
bringing them to permanent Sobriety, Diligence, Devotion, Honesty,
Conscientiousness, and Charity: And the foregoing amiable Virtues and
successful Labors all ending at last in a mavelous Peace, unmovable
Stability, Calmness, and Resignation, in the sensible Approaches of Death; with
Longing for the Heavenly State; not only for the Honors and circumstantial
Advantages of it, but above all for the moral Perfection, and holy and blessed
Employments of it: And these Things in a Person indisputably of good
Understanding and Judgment: I say, if all these Things are the Fruits of
Enthusiasm, why should not Enthusiasm be thought a desirable and excellent
Thing? For what can true Religion, what can the best Philosophy do more? If
Vapors and Whimsy will bring Men to the most thorough Virtue, to the most
benign and fruitful Morality; and will maintain it through a Course of Life
(attended with many Trials) without Affectation or Self-Exaltation, and with an
earnest constant bearing Testimony against the Wildness, the Extravagances, the
bitter Zeal, assuming Behavior, and separating Spirit of Enthusiasts; and will
do all this more effectually, than any Thing else has ever done in any plain
known Instance that can be produced; if it be so, I say, what Cause then has
the World to prize and pray for this blessed Whimsicalness, and these benign
Sort of Vapors?

It would perhaps be a Prejudice with some against the whole of Mr. Brainerd's
Religion, if it had begun in the Time of the late religious Commotion; being
ready to conclude (however unreasonably) that nothing Good could take it is Rise
from those Times. But it was not so; his Conversion was before those Times, in
a Time of general Deadness (as has been before observed) and therefore at a
Season when it was impossible, that he should receive a Taint from any corrupt
Notions, E^^mples, or Customs, that had Birth in those Times.

And whereas there are many who are not professed Opposers of what is called
experimental Religion, who yet doubt of the Reality of it, from the bad Lives
of some Professors; and are ready to determine that there is nothing in all the
Talk about being born again, being emptied of Self, brought to a saving Close
with Christ, etc. because many that pretend to these Things, and are thought by
others to have been the Subjects of 'em, manifest no abiding Alteration in
their moral Disposition and Behavior; are as careless, carnal, coveteous, etc.
as ever; yea, some much worse than ever: It is to be acknowledged and lamented,
that this is the Case with some; but by the preceding Account they may be
sensible, that it is not so with all. There are some indisputable Instances of
such a Change, as the Scripture speaks of; an abiding great Change, a
Renovation of the Spirit of the Mind, and a Walking in Newness of Life. In the
foregoing Instance particularly, they may see the abiding Influence of such a
Work of Conversion, as they have heard of from the Word of GOD; the Fruits of
such Experiences through a Course of Years; under a great Variety of
Circumstances, many Changes of State, Place, and Company; and may see the
blessed Issue and Event of it in Life and Death.

IV. The preceding History serves to confirm those Doctrines usually called
the Doctrines of Grace. For if it be allowed that there is Truth, Substance, or
Value in the main of Mr. Brainerd's Religion, it will undoubtedly follow, that
those Doctrines are divine: Since it is evident, that the whole of it, from
Beginning to End, is according to that Scheme of Things; all built on those
Apprehensions, Notions, and Views, that are produced and established in the
Mind by those Doctrines. He was brought by Doctrines of this Kind, to his
Awakening, and deep Concern about Things of a spiritual and eternal Nature; and
by these Doctrines his Convictions were maintained and carried on; and his
Conversion was evidently altogether agreeable to this Scheme, but by no Means
agreeing with the contrary; and utterly inconsistent with the Arminian Notion
of Conversion or Repentance. His Conversion was plainly founded in a clear
strong Conviction, and undoubting Persuasion of the Truth of those Things
appertaining to these Doctrines, which Arminians most object against, and which
his own Mind had contended most about. And his Conversion was no confirming and
perfecting of moral Principles and Habits, by Use and Practice, and his own
Labor in an industrious disciplining himself, together with the concurring
Suggestions and conspiring Aids of GOD's Spirit: But entirely a supernatural
Work, at once turning him from Darkness to mavelous Light, and from the Power
of Sin to the Dominion of divine and holy Principles; an Effect, in no Regard
produced by his Strength or Labor, or obtained by his Virtue; and not
accomplished 'till he was first brought to a full Conviction that all his own
Virtue, Strength, Labors, and Endeavors could never avail any Thing to the
producing or procuring this Effect.

A very little while before, his Mind was full of the same Cavils against the
Doctrines of GOD's Sovereign Grace, which are made by Arminians; And his Heart
full even of a raging Opposition to 'em. And GOD was pleased to perform this
good Work in him just after a full End had been put to this Cavilling and
Opposition; after he was entirely convinced, that he was dead in Sin, and was
in the Hands of GOD, as the absolutely sovereign, unobliged, sole Disposer and
Author of true Holiness. GOD's showing him Mercy at such a Time, is a
Confirmation, that this was a Preparation for Mercy; and consequently, that
these Things which he was convinced of, were true: While he opposed these
Things, he was the Subject of no such Mercy; though he so earnestly sought it,
and prayed for it with so much Painfulness, Care and Strictness in Religion:
But when once his Opposition is fully subdued, and he is brought to submit to
the Truths, which he before had opposed, with full Conviction, then the Mercy
he sought for is granted, with abundant Light, great Evidence and exceeding
Joy, and he reaps the sweet Fruit of it all his Life after, and in the Valley
of the Shadow of Death.

In his Conversion, he was brought to see the Glory of that Way of Salvation by
Christ, that is taught in what are called the Doctrines of Grace; and
thence-forward, with unspeakable Joy and Complacence, to embrace and acquiesce
in that Way of Salvation. He was in his Conversion, in all Respects, bro't to
those Views, and that State of Mind, which these Doctrines show to be
necessary. And if his Conversion was any real Conversion, or any Thing besides
a mere Whim, and if the Religion of his Life was any Thing else but a Series of
Freaks of a whimsical Mind, then this one grand Principle, on which depends the
whole Difference between Calvinists and Arminians, is undeniable, viz. That the
Grace or Virtue of truly good Men, not only differs from the Virtue of others
in Degree, but even in Nature and Kind. If ever Mr. Brainerd was truly turned
from Sin to GOD at all, or ever became truly Religious, none can reasonably
doubt but that his Conversion was at the Time when he supposed it to be: The
Change he then experienced, was evidently the greatest moral Change, that ever
he passed under; and he was then apparently first brought to that Kind of
Religion, that remarkable new Habit and Temper of Mind, which he held all his
Life after. The Narration shows it to be different, in Nature and Kind, from
all that ever he was the Subject of before. It was evidently wrought at once,
without fitting and preparing his Mind, by gradually convincing it more and
more of the same Truths, and bringing it nearer and nearer to such a Temper:
For it was soon after his Mind had been remarkably full of Blasphemy, and a
vehement Exercise of sensible Enmity against God, and great Opposition to those
Truths, which he was now brought with his whole Soul to embrace, and rest in,
as divine and glorious, and to place his Happiness in the Contemplation and
Improvement of. And he himself (who was surely best able to judge) declares,
that the Dispositions and Affections, which were then given him, and
thence-forward maintained in him, were most sensibly and certainly, perfectly
different, in their Nature, from all that ever he was the Subject of before, or
that he ever had any Conception of. This he ever stood to and was peremptory in
(as what he certainly knew) even to his Death. He must be looked upon as
capable of judging; he had Opportunity to know: He had practiced a great deal
of Religion before, was exceeding strict and conscientious, and had continued
so for a long Time; had various religious Affections, with which he often
flattered himself, and sometimes pleased himself as being now in a good Estate:
And after he had those new Experiences, that began in his Conversion, they were
continued to the End of his Life; long enough for him thoroughly to observe
their Nature, and compare 'em with what had been before. Doubtless he was
compos mentis; and was at least one of so good an Understanding and Judgment,
as to be pretty well capable of discerning and comparing the Things that passed
in his own Mind.

It Is further observable, that his Religion all along operated in such a Manner
as tended to confirm his Mind in the Doctrines of God's absolute Sovereignty,
Man's universal and entire Dependence on God's Power and Grace, etc. The more
his Religion prevailed in his Heart, and the fuller he was of divine Love, and
of clear and delightful Views of spiritual Things, and the more his Heart was
engaged in God's Service; the more sensible he was of the Certainty and the
Excellency and Importance of these Truths, and the more he was affected with
them and rejoiced in them. And he declares particularly, that when he lay for a
long while on the Verge of the eternal World, often expecting to be in that
World in a few Minutes, yet at the same Time enjoying great Serenity of Mind,
and Clearness of Thought, and being most apparently in a peculiar Manner at a
Distance from an enthusiastical Frame, he at that Time saw clearly the Truth of
those great Doctrines of the Gospel, which are justly styled the Doctrines of
Grace, and never felt himself so capable of demonstrating the Truth of them.

So that it is very evident, Mr. Brainerd's Religion was wholly correspondent to
what is called the Calvinistical Scheme, and was the Effect of those Doctrines
applied to his Heart: And certainly it cannot be denied, that the Effect was
good, unless we turn Atheists, or Deists. -- I would ask, whether there be any
such Thing, in Reality, as Christian Devotion? -- If there be, what is it? What
is its Nature? And what its just Measure? Should it not be in a great Degree?
We read abundantly in Scripture, of loving God with all the Heart, with all the
Soul, with all the Mind, and with all the Strength, of Delighting in God, of
Rejoicing in the Lord, Rejoicing with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory, the
Soul's Magnifying the Lord, Thirsting for God, Hungring and Thirsting after
Righteousness, the Soul's breaking for the Longing it has to God's Judgments,
Praying to God with Gr^anings that cannot be uttered, Mourning for Sin with a
broken Heart and contrite Spirit, etc. How full is the Book of Psalms, and
other Parts of Scripture, of such Things as these! Now wherein do these Things,
as expressed by and appearing in Mr. Brainerd, either the Things themselves, or
their Effects and Fruits, differ from the Scripture-Representations? These
Things he was brought to by that strange and wonderful Transformation of the
Man, which he called his Conversion. And don't this well agree with what is so
often said, in Old Testament and New, concerning the giving of a new Heart,
creating a right Spirit, a being renewed in the Spirit of the Mind, a being
sanctified throughout, becoming a new Creature, etc? Now where is there to be
found an Arminian Conversion or Repentance, consisting in so great and
admirable a Change? Can the Arminians produce an Instance, within this Age, and
so, plainly, within our Reach and View, of such a Reformation, such a
Transformation of a Man, to Scriptural Devotion, Heavenly-Mindedness, and true
Christian Morality, in one that before lived without these Things, on the Foot
of their Principles, and through the Influence of their Doctrines?

And here, is worthy to be considered, not only the Effect of Calvinistical
Doctrines (as they are called) on Mr. Brainerd himself, but also the Effect of
the same Doctrines, as taught and inculcated by him, on others. It Is abundantly
pretended and asserted of late, that these Doctrines tend to undermine the very
Foundations of all Religion and Morality, and to enervate and vacate all
reasonable Motives to the Exercise and Practice of them, and lay invincible
Stumbling Blocks before Infidels, to hinder their embracing Christianity; and
that the contrary Doctrines are the fruitful Principles of Virtue and Goodness,
set Religion on it is right Basis, represent it in an amiable Light, give it is
Motives their full Force, and recommend it to the Reason and common Sense of
Mankind. -- But where can they find an Instance of so great and signal an
Effect of their Doctrines, in bringing Infidels, who were at such a Distance
from all that is Civil, Human, Sober, Rational, and Christian, and so full of
inveterate Prejudices against these Things, to such a Degree of Humanity,
Civility, Exercise of Reason, Self-denial, and Christian Virtue? Arminians
place Religion in Morality: Let them bring an Instance of their Doctrines
producing such a Transformation of a People in Point of Morality. It Is strange,
if the Alwise God so orders Things in his Providence, that reasonable and
proper Means, and his own Means, which he himself has appointed, should in no
known remarkable Instance be instrumental to produce so good an Effect; an
Effect so agreeable to his own Word and Mind, and that very Effect for which he
appointed these excellent Means; that they should not be so Successful, as
those Means which are not his own, but very contrary to 'em, and of a contrary
Tendency; Means that are in themselves very absurd, and tend to root all
Religion and Virtue out of the World, to promote and establish Infidelity, and
to lay an insuperable Stumbling Block before Pagans, to hinder their embracing
the Gospel: I say, if this be the true State of the Case, it is certainly pretty
wonderful, and an Event worthy of some Attention.

I know, that many will be ready to say, It is too soon yet, to glory in the
Work, that has been wro't among Mr. Brainerd's Indians; It Is best to wait and
see the final Event; It may be, all will come to nothing by and by; To which I
answer (not to insist, that it will not follow, according to Arminian
Principles, they are not now true Christians, really pious and godly, though they
should fall away and come to nothing) that I never supposed, every one of those
Indians, who in Profession renounced their Heathenism and visibly embraced
Christianity, and have had some Appearance of Piety, will finally prove true
Converts: If two thirds, or indeed one half of 'em (as great a Proportion as
there is in the Parable of the Ten Virgins) should persevere; it will be
sufficient to show the Work, wrought among them, to have been truly admirable
and glorious. But so much of Permanence of their Religion has already appeared,
as shows it to be something else besides an Indian Humor or good Mood, or any
transient Effect in the Conceits, Notions, and Affections of these ignorant
People, excited at a particular Turn, by artful Management. For it is now more
than three Years ago, that this Work began among them, and a remarkable Change
appeared in many of them; since which Time the Number of visible Converts has
greatly increased: And by repeated Accounts, from several Hands, they still
generally persevere in diligent Religion and strict Virtue. I think worthy to
be here inserted, a Letter from a young Gentleman, a Candidate for the
Ministry, one of those before mentioned, appointed by the honorable
Commissioners in Boston, as Missionaries to the Heathen of the Six Nations, so
called; who, by their Order, dwelt with Mr. John Brainerd, among these
Christian Indians, in order to their being prepared for the Business of their
Mission. The Letter was written from thence, to his Parents here in
Northampton, (...) as follows.

Bethel, in New Jersey, Jan. 14. 1747, 8. Honored and dear Parents,
AFter a long and uncomfortable Journey, by Reason of bad Weather, I arrived at
Mr. Brainerd's, the 6th of this Instant; where I design to stay this Winter:
And as yet, upon many Accounts, am well satisfied with my coming hither. The
State and Circumstances of the Indians, spiritual and temporal, much exceed
what I expected. I have endeavored to acquaint my self with the State of the
Indians in general, with particular Persons, and with the School; as much as
the short Time I have been here would admit of. And notwithstanding my
Expectations were very much raised, from Mr. David Brainerd's Journal, and from
particular Informations from him; yet I must confess, that in many Respects,
they are not equal to that which now appears to me to be true, concerning the
glorious Work of divine Grace amongst the Indians.

The Evening after I came to Town, I had Opportunity to see the Indians
together, whilst the Rev. Mr. Arthur preached to them: At which Time there
appeared a very general and uncommon Seriousness and Solemnity in the
Congregation: And this appeared to me to be the Effect of an inward Sense of
the Importance of divine Truths, and not because they were hearing a Stranger:
Which was abundantly confirmed to me the next Sabbath, when there was the same
devout Attendance on divine Service, and a surprising Solemnity appearing in
the Performance of each Part of divine Worship. And some, who are hopefully
true Christians, appear to have been at that Time much enlivened and comforted;
not from any observable Commotions then, but from Conversation afterward: And
others seemed to be under pressing Concern for their Souls. I have endeavored
to acquaint my self with particular Persons; many of whom seem to be very
humble and growing Christians; although some of them (as I am informed) were
before their Conversion most monstrously Wicked.

Religious Conversation seems to be very pleasing and delightful to many, and
especially that which relates to the Exercises of the Heart. And many here
don't seem to be real Christians only, but growing Christians also; as well in
doctrinal, as experimental Knowledge. Besides my Conversation with particular
Persons, I have had Opportunity to attend upon one of Mr. Brainerd's
catechetical Lectures; where I was surprised at their Readiness in answering
Questions which they had not been used to: Although Mr. Brainerd complained much
of their uncommon Deficiency. It is surprising, to see this People, w^o not
long since were led Captive by Satan at his Will, and living in the Practice of
all manner of Abominations, without the least Sense even of moral Honesty, yet
now living soberly and regularly, and not seeking every Man his own, but every
Man, in some Sense, his Neighbor's Good; and to see those, who but a little
while past, knew nothing of the true GOD, now worshipping Him in a solemn and
devout Manner; not only in public, but in their Families and in Secret; which
is manifestly the Case; it being a difficult Thing to walk out in the Woods in
the Morning, without disturbing Persons at their secret Devotion. And it seems
wonderful, that this should be the Case, not only with adult Persons, but with
Children also. It is observable here, that many Children (if not the Children
in general) retire into secret Places to pray. And, as far as at present I can
judge, this is not the Effect of Custom and Fashion, but of real Seriousness
and Thoughtfulness about their Souls.

I have frequently gone into the School, and have spent considerable Time there
amongst the Children; and have been surprised to see, not only their diligent
Attendance upon the Business of the School, but also the Proficiency they have
made in it, in Reading and Writing, and in their Catechisms of diverse Sorts. It
seems to be as pleasing and as natural to these Children, to have their Books
in their Hands, as it does for many others to be at Play. I have gone into an
House where there has been a Number of Children accidentally gathered together;
and observed, that every one had his Book in his Hand, and was diligently
studying of it. There is to the Number of about thirty of these Children, who
can answer to all the Questions in the Assembly's Catechism; and the bigger
Part of them are able to do it with the Proofs, to the fourth Commandment. I
wish there were many such Schools: I confess, that I never was acquainted with
such an one, in many Respects. Oh that what God has done here, may prove to be
the Beginning of a far more glorious and extensive Work of Grace among the
Heathen.

I am your obedient and dutiful Son, Job Strong.
P. S. Since the Date of this, I have had Opportunity to attend upon another of
Mr. Brainerd's catechetical Lectures: and truly I was convinced, that Mr.
Brainerd did not complain before of his People's Defects in answering (...)
Questions proposed, without Reason: For although their Answers at that Time
exceeded my Expectations very much; yet their Performances at this Lecture very
much exceeded them.




Since this, we have had Accounts from Time to T^me, and some very late, which
show that Religion still continues in prosperous and most desirable
Circumstances among these Indians.

V. Is there not much in the preceding Memoirs of Mr. Brainerd to teach, and
excite to Duty, us who are called to the Work of the Ministry, and all that are
Candidates for that great Work? What a deep Sense did he seem to have of the
Greatness and Importance of that Work, and with what Weight did it lie on his
Mind! How sensible was he of his own Insufficiency for this Work; and how great
was his Dependence on God's Sufficiency! How solicitous, that he might be
fitted for it! And to this End, how much Time did he spend in Prayer and
Fasting, as well as Reading and Meditation; giving himself to these Things! How
did he dedicate his whole Life, all his Powers and Talents to GOD; and forsake
and renounce the World, with all it is pleasing and ^nsnaring Enjoyments, that
he might be wholly at Liberty, to serve Christ in this Work; and to please him
who had chosen him to be a Soldier, under the Captain of our Salvation! With
what Solicitude, Solemnity, and Diligence did he devote himself to God our
Savior, and seek his Presence and Blessing in secret, at the Time of his
Ordination! And how did his whole Heart appear to be constantly engaged, his
whole Time employed, and his whole Strength spent in the Business he then
solemnly undertook and was publicly set apart to! -- And his History shows us
the right Way to Success in the Work of the Ministry. He fought it, as a
resolute Soldier seeks Victory, in a Siege or Battle; or as a Man that runs a
Race, for a great Prize. Animated with Love to Christ and Souls, how did he
labor always fervently, not only in Word and Doctrine, in public and private,
but in Prayers Day and Night, wrestling with God in secret, and travailing in
Birth, with unutterable Groans and Agonies, until Christ were formed in the
Hearts of the People to whom he was sent! How did he thirst for a Blessing on
his Ministry; and watch for Souls, as one that must give Account! How did he go
forth in the Strength of the Lord God; seeking and depending on a special
Influence of the Spirit to assist and succeed him! And what was the happy Fruit
at last, though after long waiting, and many dark and discouraging Appearances!
Like a true Son of Jacob, he persevered in wrestling, through all the Darkness
of the Night, until the breaking of the Day.

And his Example of laboring, praying, denying himself, and enduring Hardness,
with unfainting Resolution and Patience, and his faithful, vigilent, and
prudent Conduct in many other Respects (which it would be too long now
particularly to recite) may afford Instruction to Missionaries in particular.

VI. The foregoing Account of Mr. Brainerd's Life may afford Instruction to
Christians in general; as it shows, in many Respects, the right Way of
practicing Religion, in order to obtainin^ the Ends of it, and receiving the
Benefits of it; or how Christians should run the Race, set before them, if they
would no^ r^n in vain, or run as uncertainly, but would honor God in the
World, adorn their Profession, be Serviceable to Mankind, have the Comforts of
Religion while they live, be free from disquieting Doubts and dark
Appre^ensions about the State of their Souls; enjoy Peace in the Approaches of
Death, and finish their Course with Joy. -- In general, he much recommended,
for this Purpose, the Redemption of Time, great Diligence in the Business of
the Christian Life, Watchfulness, etc. And he very remarkably exemplified these
Things.

But particularly, his Example and Success with Regard to one Duty in special,
may be of great Use to both Ministers and private Christians; I mean, the Duty
of secret Fasting. The Reader has seen, how much Mr. Brainerd recommends this
Duty, and how frequently he exercised himself in it; Nor can it well have
escaped Observation, how much he was owned and blessed in it, and of what great
Benefit it evidently was to his Soul. Among all the (...) Days he spent in
secret Fasting and Prayer, that he gives an Account of in his Diary, there is
scarce an Instance (...) one (...) either attended or soon followed with (...)
and a remarkable Blessing, in special Incomes and Consolations of God's Spirit;
and very often, before the Day was ended. -- But it must be observed. ^^at when
he se^ about this Duty, he did it in good Earnest; stirring up himself to take
hold of God, and continuing instant in Prayer, with much of the Spirit of
Jacob, who said to the Angel, I will not let thee go, except th^^ bless me.

VII. There is much in the preceding Account to excite and encourage God's
People to earnest Prayers and Endeavors for the Advancement and Enlargement of
the Kingdom of CHRIST in the World. Mr. Brainerd sat us an excellent Example in
this Respect: He sought the Prosperity of Zion with all his Might: He preferred
Jerusalem above his chief Joy. How did his Soul long for it, and pant after it!
And how earnestly and often did he wrestle with God for it! And how far did he,
in these Desires and Prayers, seem to be carried beyond all private and selfish
Views! being animated by a pure Love to Christ, an earnest Desire of his Glory,
and a disinterested Affection to the Souls of Mankind.

The Consideration of this, not only ought to be an Incitement to the People of
God, but may also be a just Encouragement to 'em, to be much in seeking and
praying for a general Outpouring of the Spirit of God, and extensive Revival of
Religion. I confess, that God's giving so much of a Spirit of Prayer for this
Mercy to so eminent a Servant of his, and exciting him, in so extraordinary a
Manner, and with such vehement Thirstings of Soul, to agonize in Prayer for it,
from Time to Time, through the Course of his Life, is one Thing, among others,
which gives me great Hope, that God has a Design of accomplishing something
very glorious for the Interest of his Church before long. One such Instance as
this, I conceive, gives more Encouragement, than the common, cold, formal
Prayers of Thousands. As Mr. Brainerd's Desires and Prayers for the coming of
Christ's Kingdom, were very special and extraordinary; so, I think, we may
reasonably hope, that the God, who excited those Desires and Prayers, will
answer them with something special and extraordinary. And in a particular
Manner, do I think it worthy to be taken Notice of for our Encouragement, that
he had his Heart (as he declared) unusually, and beyond what had been before,
drawn out in Longings and Prayers for the Flourishing of Christ's Kingdom on
Earth, when he was in the Approaches of Death; and that with his dying Breath
he did as it were breathe out his departing Soul into the Bosom of his
Redeemer, in Prayers and Pantings after this glorious Event* expiring in a very
great Hope that it would soon begin to be fulfiled. And I wish, that the Tho'ts
which he in his dying State expressed of that explicit Agreement, and visible
Union of God's People, in extraordinary Prayer for a general Revival of
Religion, lately proposed in a Memorial from Scotland, which has been dispersed
among us, may be well considered by those that hitherto have not seen fit to
fall in with that Proposal. -- But I forbear to say any more on this Head,
having already largely published my Thoughts upon it, in a Discourse written on
Purpose to promote that Affair; which, I confess, I wish that every one of my
Readers might be supplied with; not that my Honor, but that this excellent
Design might be promoted.

As there is much in Mr. Brainerd's Life to encourage Christians to seek the
Advancement of Christ's Kingdom, in general; so there is, in particular, to
pray for the Conversion of the Indians on this Continent, and to exert
themselves in the Use of proper Means for it is Accomplishment. For it appears,
that he in his unutterable Longings and Wrestlings of Soul for the Flourishing
of Religion, had his Mind peculiarly intent on the Conversion and Salvation of
these People, and his Heart more especially engaged in Prayer for them. And if
we consider the Degree and Manner in which he from Time to Time, sought and
hoped for an extensive Work of Grace among them, I think, we have Reason to
hope, that the wonderful Things, which God wrought among them by him, are but a
Forerunner of something yet much more glorious and extensive of that Kind; and
this may justly be an Encouragement, to well-disposed charitable Persons, to
honor the Lord with their Substance, by contributing, as they are able, to
promote the spreading of the Gospel among them; and this also may incite and
encourage Gentlemen who are incorporated, and entrusted with the Care and
Disposal of those liberal Benefactions, which have already been made by pious
Persons, to that End; and likewise the Missionaries themselves, that are or may
be employed; and it may be of Direction unto both, as to the proper
Qualifications of Missionaries, and the proper Measures to be taken in order to
their Success.

One Thing in particular, I would take Occasion from the foregoing History to
mention and propose to the Consideration of such as have the Care of providing
and sending Missionaries among Savages; viz. Whether it would not ordinarily be
best to send two together? It is pretty manifest, that Mr. Brainerd's going, as
he did, alone into the howling Wilderness, was one great Occasion of such a
prevailing of Melancholy on his Mind; which was his greatest Disadvantage. He
was much in speaking of it himself, when he was here in his dying State; and
expressed himself, to this Purpose, that none could conceive of the
Disadvantage a Missionary in such Circumstances was under, by being alone;
especially as it exposed him to Discouragement and Melancholy: And spoke of the
Wisdom of Christ in sending forth his Disciples by Two and Two; and left it as
his dying Advice to his Brother, never to go to Susquahannah, to travel about
in that remote Wilderness, to preach to the Indians there, as he had often
done, without the Company of a Fellow-Missionary.

VIII. One Thing more may not be unprofitably observed in the preceding
Account of Mr. Brainerd; and that is the special and remarkable Disposal of
divine Pro^^dence, with Regard to the Circumstances of his last Sickness and
Death.

Though he had been long infirm, his Constitution being much broken by his
Fatigues and Hardships; and though ^e was often brought very low by Illness,
before he left Kaunaumeek, and also while he lived at the Forks of Delaware:
Yet his Life was preserved, 'till he had seen that which he had so long and
greatly desired and sought, a glorious Work of Grace among the Indians, and had
received the wished for Blessing of God on his Labors. Though as it were in
Deaths often, yet he lived to behold the happy Fruits of the long continued
Travail of his Soul and Labor of his Body, in the wonderful Conversion of many
of the Heathen, and the happy Effect of it in the great Change of their
Conversation, with many Circumstances which afforded a fair Prospect of the
Continuance of God's Blessing upon them; as may appear by what I shall
presently further observe. -- Thus he did not depart, 'till his Eyes had seen
God's Salvation.

Though it was the Pleasure of God, that he should be taken off from his Labors
among that People whom God had made him a spiritual Father to, who were so dear
to him, and whose spiritual Welfare he was so greatly concerned for; yet this
was not before they were well initiated and instructed in the Christian
Religion, thoroughly weaned from their old heathenish and brutish Notions and
Practices, and all their Prejudices and Jealousies, which tended to keep their
Minds unsettled, were fully removed; and they were confirmed and fixed in the
Christian Faith and Manners, were formed into a Church, had ecclesiastical
Ordinances and Discip^ine introduced and settled; were brought into a good Way
with Respect to the Education of Children, had a School Master sent to them in
Providence, excellently qualified for the Business, and had a School set up and
established, in good Order, among them; had been well brought off from their
former Idle, strolling, sottish Way of Living; had removed from their former
scattered uncertain Habitations; and were collected in a Town by themselves, on
a good Piece of Land of their own; were introduced into the Way of living by
Husbandry, and begun to experience the Benefits of it, etc. These Things were
but just brought to pass by his indefatigable Application and Care, and then he
was taken off from his Work by Illness. If this had been but a little sooner,
they would by no Means have been so well pr^pared for such a Dispensation; and
it probably would have been unspeakably more to the Hurt of their spiritual
Interest, and of the Cause of Christianity among them.

The Time and Circumstances of his Illness were so ordered, that he had just
Opportunity to finish his Journal, and prepare it for the Press; giving an
Account of the mavelous Display of divine Power and Grace among the Indians
in New Jersey, and at the Forks of Delaware: His doing which was a Thing of
great Consequence, and therefore urged upon him by the Correspondents, who have
honored his Journal with a Preface. The World being particularly and justly
informed of that Affair by Mr. Brainerd, before his Death, a Foundation was
hereby laid for a Concern in others for that Cause, and proper Care and
Measures to be taken for the maintaining it after his Death. As it has actually
proved to be of great Influence and Benefit in this Respect; it having excited
and engaged many in those Parts, and also more distant Parts of America, to
exert themselves for the upholding and promoting so good and glorious a Work,
remarkably opening their Hearts and Hands to that End: And not only in America,
but in Great Britain, where that Journal (which is the same that I have
earnestly recommended to my Readers to possess themselves of) has been an
Occasion of some large Benefactions, made for the promoting the Interest of
Christianity among the Indians. -- If Mr. Brainerd had been taken Ill but a
little sooner, he had not been able to complete this his Journal, and prepare a
Copy for the Press.

He was not taken off from the Work of the Ministry among his People, 'till his
Brother was in a Capacity and Circumstances to succeed him in his Care of them:
Who succeeds him in the like Spirit, and under whose prudent and faithful Care
his Congregation has flourished, and been very happy, since he left them; and
probably could not have been so well provided for, otherwise. If Mr. Brainerd
had been disabled sooner, his Brother would by no Means have been ready to
stand up in his Place; having taken his first Degree at College but about that
very Time that he was seized with his fatal Consumption.

Though in that Winter that he lay sick at Mr. Dickinson's in Elisabeth-Town, he
continued for a long Time in an extremely low State, so that his Life was
almost despaired of, and his State was sometimes ^uch that it was hardly
expected he would live a Day to an End; yet his Life was spared a while longer;
he lived to see his Brother arrived in New Jersey, being come to succeed him in
the Care of his Indians; and he himself had Opportunity to assist in his
Examination and Introduction into his Business; and to commit the Conduct of
his dear People to One whom he well knew, and could put Confidence in, and use
Freedom with in giving him particular Instructions and Charges, and under whose
Care he could leave his Congregation with great Cheerfulness.

The Providence of God was remarkable in so ordering of it, that before his
Death he should take a Journey into New England, and go to Boston: Which was,
in many Respects, of very great and happy Consequence to the Interest of
Religion, and especially among his own People. By this Means, as has been
observed, he was brought into Acquaintance with many Persons of Note and
Influence, Ministers and others, belonging both to the Town and various Parts
of the Country; and had Opportunity, under the best Advantages, to bear a
Testimony for God and true Religion, and against those false Appearances of it
that have proved most pernicious to the Interests of Christ's Kingdom in the
Land. And the Providence of God is particularly observable in this Circumstance
of the Testimony he there bore for true Religion; viz. That he there was
brought so near the Grave, and continued for so long a Time on the very Brink
of Eternity; and from Time to Time, looked on himself, and was looked on by
others, as just leaving the World; and that in these Circumstances he should be
so particularly directed and assisted in his Tho'ts and Views of Religion, to
distinguish between the true and the false, with such Clearness and Evidence;
and that after this he should be unexpectedly and surprizingly restored and
strengthened, so far as to be able to converse freely; and have such
Opportunity, and special Occasions to declare the Sentiments he had in these,
which were, to human Apprehension, his dying Circumstances; and to bear his
Testimony concerning the Nature of true Religion, and concerning the
mischievous Tendency of it is most prevalent Counterfeits and false Appearances;
as Things he had a special, clear, distinct View of at that Time, when he
expected in a few Minutes to be in Eternity; and the Certainty and Importance
of which were then, in a peculiar Manner, impressed on his Mind.

Among the happy Consequences of his going to Boston, were those liberal
Benefactions that have been mentioned, which were made by pious disposed
Persons, for the maintaining and promoting the Interest of Religion among his
People: And also the meeting of a Number of Gentlemen in Boston, of Note and
Ability, to consult upon Measures for that Purpose; who were excited by their
Acquaintance and Conversation with Mr. Brainerd, and by the Account of the
great Things God had wrought by his Ministry, to unite themselves, that by
their joint Endeavors and Contributions they might promote the Kingdom of
Christ, and the spiritual Good of their Fellow Creatures, among the Indians in
New Jersey, and elsewhere.

It was also remarkable, that Mr. Brainerd should go to Boston, at that Time;
after the honorable Commissioners there, of the Corporation in London for
propagating the Gospel in New England and Parts adjacent, had received Dr.
William's Legacy for the maintaining of two Missionaries among the Heathen; and
at a Time when they having concluded on a Mission to the Indians of the
Six-Nations (so called) were looking out for fit Persons to be employed in that
Important Service. This proved an Occasion of their committing to him the
Affair of finding and recommending suitable Persons: Which has proved a
succesful Means of two Persons being found and actually appointed to that
Business; who seem to be well qualified for it, and to have their Hearts
greatly engaged in it: One of which has been solemnly ordained to that Work in
Boston, and is now gone forth to one of those Tribes, who have appeared
well-disposed to his Reception: It being judged not convenient for the other to
go 'till the next Spring, by Reason of his bodily Infirmity. The Appointment of
these Gentlemen to this Mission has been hitherto much smiled on in Providence;
as in other Respects, so particularly in the wonderful opening of the Hearts of
many to contribute liberally to so excellent a Design; besides the Benefactions
in Boston, a Number of Persons at Northampton with much Cheerfulness have given
about L. 160 (old Tenor); and a particular Person in Springfield has devoted a
considerable Part of his Estate to this Interest.


These happy Consequences of Mr. Brainerd's Journey to Boston would have been
prevented, in Case he had died, when he was brought so near to Death in
New Jersey. Or if after he came first to Northampton (where he was much at a
Loss and long deliberating which Way to bend his Course) he had determined not
to go to Boston.

The Providence of God was observable in his going to Boston at a Time when not
only the honorable Commissioners were seeking Missionaries to the Six Nations;
but just after his Journal, which gives an Account of his Labors and Success
among the Indians, had been received and spread in Boston: Whereby his Name was
known, and the Minds of serious People were well prepared to receive his
Person, and the Testimony he there gave for God; to exert themselves for the
upholding and promoting the Interest of Religion in his Congregation, and
amongst the Indians elsewhere; and to regard his Judgment concerning the
Qualifications of Missionaries, etc. If he had gone there the Fall before (when
he had intended to have made his Journey into New England, but was prevented by
a sudden great Increase of his Illness) it would not have been likely to have
been in any Measure to so good Effect: And also if he had not been unexpectedly
detained in Boston; For when he went from my House, he intended to make but a
very short Stay there; But divine Providence by his being brought so low there,
detained him long; thereby to make Way for the fulfilling it is own gracious
Designs.

The Providence of God was remarkable in so ordering, that although he was
brought so very near the Grave in Boston, that it was not in the least expected
he would ever come alive out of his Chamber; yet he wonderfully revived, and
was preserved several Months longer: So that he had Opportunity to see, and
fully to converse with both his younger Brethren before he died; which was a
Thing he greatly desired; and especially to see his Brother John, with whom was
left the Care of his Congregation; that he might by him be fully informed of
their State, and might leave with him such Instructions and Directions as were
requisite in order to their spiritual Welfare, and to send to them his dying
Charges and Counsels. And he had also Opportunity, by Means of this Suspension
of his Death, to find and recommend a Couple of Persons fit to be employed as
Missionaries to the Six Nations, as had been desired of him.

Thus, although it was the Pleasure of a sovereign God, that he should be taken
away from his Congregation, the People that he had begotten through the Gospel,
who were so dear to him; yet it was granted to him, that before he died he
should see them well provided for, every^ Way: He saw them provided for with
One to instruct them, and take Care of their Souls; his own Brother, whom he
could confide in: He saw a good Foundation laid for the Support of the School
among them; those Things that before were wanting in order to it, b^ing
supplied: And he had the Prospect of a charitable Society being established, of
able and well-disposed Persons, who seem to make the spiritual Interest of his
Congregation their own; whereby he had a comfortable View of their being
well-provided for, for the future: And he had also Opportunity to leave all his
dying Charges with his Successor in the Pastoral Care of his People, and by him
to send his dying Counsels to them. Thus God granted him to see all Things
happily settled, or in a hopeful Way of being so, before his Death, with
Respect to his dear People -- And whereas not only his own Congregation, but
the Souls of the Indians in North America in general, were very dear to him,
and he had greatly set his Heart on the propagating and extending the Kingdom
of Christ among 'em; God was pleased to grant to him (however it was his Will,
that he should be taken away, and so should not be the immediate Instrument of
their Instruction and Conversion, yet) that before his Death, he should see
unexpected extraordinary Provision made for this also. And it is remarkable,
(...) God not only allowed him to see such Provision made for the maintaining
the Interest of Religion among his own People, and the Propagation of it
elsewhere; but honored him by making him the Means or Occ^sion of it. So that
it is very probable, however Mr. Brainerd, during the last four Months of his
Life, was ordinarily in an extremely weak and low State, very often scarcely
able to speak; yet that he was made the Instrument or Means of much more Good
in that Space of Time, than he would have been if he had been well, and in full
Strength of Body. Thus God's Power was manife^^ed in his Weakness, and the Life
of Christ was manifested in his mortal Flesh.

Another Thing, wherein appears the merciful Disposal of Providence with
Respect to his Death, was, that he did not die in the Wilderness, among the
Savages, at Kaunaumeek, or the Forks of Delaware, or at Susqua^annah; but in a
Place where his dying Behavior and Speeches might be observed and remembered,
and some Account given of them for the Benefit of Survivors; and also where
Care might be taken of him in his Sickness, and proper Honors done him at his
Death.

The Providence of God is also worthy of Remark* in so overruling and ordering
the Matter, that he did not finally leave absolute Orders for the entire
suppressing of his private Papers; as he had intended and fully resolved,
insomuch that all the Importunity of his Friends could scarce restrain him from
doing it, when sick at Boston. And one Thing relating to this is peculiarly
remarkable, viz. that his Brother, a little before his Death, should come from
the Jerseys unexpected, and bring his Diary to him, though he had received no
such Order. So that he had Opportunity of Access to these his reserved Papers,
and for reviewing the same; without which, it appears, he would at last have
ordered them to be wholly suppressed: But after this, he the more readily
yielded to the Desires of his Friends, and was willing to leave them in their
Hands to be disposed of as they thought might be most for God's Glory: By which
Means, he being dead, yet speaks, in these Memoirs of his Life, taken from
those private Writings: Whereby it is to be hoped he may still be ^as it were
the Instrument of much promoting the Interest of Religion in this World; the
Advancement of which he so much desired, and hoped would be accomplished after
his Death.

If these Circumstances of Mr. Brainerd's Death be duly considered, I doubt not
but they will be acknowledged as a notable Instance of God's Fatherly Care, and
Covenant-Faithfulness toward them that are devoted to him, and faithfully
serve him while they live; whereby he never fails nor forsakes them, but is
with them living and dying; so that whether they live, they live to the LORD;
or ^^^hether they die, they die to the LORD; and both in Life and Death they
are owned and taken Care of as His. -- Mr. Brainerd himself as was before
observed, was much in taking Notice (when near his End) of the merciful
Circumstances of his Death; and said, from Time to Time, that God had granted
him all his Desire.

And I would not conclude my Observations on the merciful Circumstances of Mr.
Brainerd's Death without acknowledging with Thankfulness, the gracious
Dispensation of Providence to me and my Family, in so ordering, that he (though
the ordinary Place of his Abode was more than 200 Miles distant) should be cast
hither, to my House, in his last Sickness, and should die here: So that we had
Opportunity for much Acquaintance and Conversation with him, and to show him
Kindness in such Circumstances, and to see his dying Behavior, to hear his
dying Speeches, to receive his dying Counsels, and to have the Benefit of his
dying Prayers. May God in infinite Mercy grant, that we may ever retain a
proper Remembrance of these Things, and make a due Improvement of the
Advantages we have had, in these Respects! The Lord grant also, that the
foregoing Account of Mr. Brainerd's Life and Death may be for the great
spiritual Benefit of all that shall read it, and prove a happy Means of
promoting the Revival of true Religion in these Parts of the World. AMEN.

FINIS.
ERRATA. Page 57. l. 24. r. refreshed. Page 219. Marg. Not. Lin. ult. r. Days
before.

BOOKS printed for and sold by D. Henchman at his Shop over against the Old
Brick Meeting House in Cornhill.
SToddard's Safety of appearing in the Righteousness of Christ. -- His Guide to
Christ. Shepard's Sincere Convert. -- Sound Believer. Appleton's Wisdom of GOD
in the Redemption of fallen Man. -- Discourses from Romans viii.14. Setting forth
the clearest and surest Marks of our being so led by the SPIRIT of GOD as to
demonstrate that we are the Children of GOD. Pemberton's Practical Discourses,
I. The Dignity and Glory of Man's Primitive State. II. The Nature and Necessity
of Conversion. III. The Reasonableness of striving to obtain Salvation. IV. The
Method of Divine Grace in Conversion. V. The Nature and Obligation of Receiving
Christ by Faith. VI. The Duty of imitating the Example of CHRIST. VII. The
Folly of losing the Soul for the Gain of the World. Dr. Watt's Guide to Prayer.
An Account of the Life and Death of Mr^. Elizabeth Bury. The Marrow of Modern
Divinity. Touching the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace. In a
Dialogue between a Minister of the Gospel -- a Legalist -- an Antinomian -- and
a young Christian. Dr. Colman's Discourses on the Incomprehensibleness of GOD.
Spiritual Songs -- Or Songs of Praise, with Penitential Cries to Almighty GOD
upon several Occasions. Together with the SONG of SONGS which is SOLOMON'S.
Hooker's Doubting Christian drawn to CHRIST. L^ring's Nature and Necessity of
the New-Bi^th. Edwards's Humble Attempt to promote explicit Agreyment and
visible Union of GOD'S People in extraordina^-Prayer for the Revival of
Religion etc. Holmes's Good Government of Christian Families recommended. With
a Discourse of secret Prayer. Wright's Treatise of being born again, without
which no Man can be saved. Alleine's Alarm to the Unconverted. Fox on Time and
the End of Time. Russel's Seven Sermons. Moody (Joshua) Practical Discourse
concerning the Benefit of Communion with GOD in his House. Mather's Apology for
the Liberty of the Churches in New England. To which is prefixed a Discourse
concerning Congregational Churches. Barnard's Sermons on several Subjects, viz.
A Confirmation of the Truth of the Christian Religion. Compel them to come in.
The Christian Hero, or the Saints Victory and Reward. Williams (Solomon) CHRIST
the King and Witness of TRUTH, and the Nature Excellency and Extent of his
Kingdom as founded in TRUTH and only promoted by it. Some Remarkable Passages
in the Life of the Hon. Col. JAMES GARDNER, who was Slain at Preston-Pans. With
a Sermon by P. DODRIDGE, D. D. Meditations on several divine Subjects. I. The
Humanity of CHRIST. II. The Extensiveness of GOD'S good Design in selling
Joseph into Egypt. III. CHRIST the King sitting at his Table. IV. Of the Love
of CHRIST and saving Knowledge of it. With a Letter to a Friend.

