MORE Fruits of Solitude: BEING The Second PART OF REFLECTIONS AND MAXIMS,
Relating to the CONDUCT OF Human Life.

NEWPORT, Rhode Island:

Printed by James Franklin, at the Town-School-House, 1749.

THE INTRODUCTION TO THE READER.
THE Title of this Treatise shows, there was a former of the same Nature; and
the Author hopes he runs no Hazard in Recommending Both to his Reader's
Perusal. He is well aware of the low Reckoning the Labors of Indifferent
Authors are under, at a Time when hardly any Thing passes for Current, that is
not Calculated to Flatter the Sharpness of Contending Parties. He is also
sensible, that Books grow a very Drug, where they cannot Raise and Support
their Credit, by their own Usefulness; and how far this will be able to do it,
he knows not; yet he thinks himself tolerably safe in making it Public, in
three Respects.

First, That the Purchase is small, and the Time but little, that is requisite
to read It.

Next, Though some Men should not find it relished High Enough for their finer
Wits, or warmer Pallats, it may not perhaps be Useless to those of lower
Flights, and who are Less Engaged in public Heats.

Lastly, The Author honestly aims at as General a Benefit as the Thing will
bear; to YOUTH especially, whether he hits the Mark or not: And that without
the least Ostentation, or any private Regards.

Let not Envy mis-interpret his Intention, and he will be accountable for all
other Faults.

Vale.
More Fruits of Solitude: BEING The SECOND PART OF REFLECTIONS AND MAXIMS.
The RIGHT MORALIST.
1. A Right Moralist, is a Great and Good Man, but for that Reason he is rarely
to be found.

2. There are a sort of People, that are fond of the Character, who, in my
Opinion, have but little Title to it.

3. They think it enough, not to defraud a Man of his Pay, or betray his
Friend; but never consider, That the Law forbids the one at his Peril, and that
Virtue is seldom the Reason of the other.

4. But certainly he that Covets, can no more be a Moral Man, than he that
Steals; since he does so in his Mind. Nor can he be one that Robs his Neighbor
of his Credit, or that craftily undermines him of his Trade or Office.

5. If a Man pays his Tailor, but Debauches his Wife; Is he a current Moralist?

6. But what shall we say of the Man that Rebels against his Father, is an ill
Husband, or an Abusive Neighbor; one that is Lavish of his Time; of his Health,
and of his Estate, in which his Family is so nearly concerned? Must he go for a
Right Moralist, because he pays his Rent well?

7. I would ask some of those Men of Morals, Whether he that Robs God and
Himself too, though he should not defraud his Neighbor, be the Moral Man?

8. Do I owe myself Nothing? And do I not owe All to God? And if paying what we
owe makes the Moral Man, Is it not sit we should begin to render our Dues,
where we owe our very Beginning; ay, our All.

9. The Complete Moralist begins with God; he gives him his Due, his Heart, his
Love, his Service; the Bountiful Giver of his Well-Being, as well as Being.

10. He that lives without a Sense of this Dependency and Obligation, cannot be
a Moral Man, because he does not make his Returns of Love and Obedience, as
becomes an honest and a sensible Creature: Which very Term implies he is not
his own; and it cannot be very honest to misimploy another's Goods.

11. But can there be no Debt, but to a fellow Creature? Or, will our Exactness
in paying those (...) once, while we neglect our weightier Obligations, Cancel
the Bonds we lie under, and render us right and thorough Moralists?

12. As Judgments are paid before Bonds, and Bonds before Bills or Book-Debts,
so the Moralist considers his Obligations according to their several Dignities.

In the first Place, Him to whom he owes himself. Next himself, in his Health
and Livelihood. Lastly, His other Obligations, whether Rational or Pecuniary;
doing to others, to the Extents of his Ability, as he would have them do unto
him.

13. In short, The Moral Man is he that Loves God above All, and his Neighbor
as himself, which fulfils both Tables at once.

The WORLD'S ABLE MAN.
14. It is by some thought, the Character of an Able Man, to be Dark, and not
Understood. But I am sure that is not fair Play.

15. If he be so by Silence, it is better; but if by Disguises, it is insincere
and hateful.

16. Secrecy is one Thing, false Lights is another.

17. The honest Man, that is rather free, than open, is ever to be preferred,
especially when Sense is at Helm.

18. The Glorying of the other Humor is in a Vice: For it is not Humane to be
Cold, Dark, and Unconversable. I was going to say, they are like Pick-Pockets
in a Crowd, where a Man must ever have his Hand on his Purse; or as Spies in a
Garrison, that if not prevented betrays it.

19. They are the Reverse of Human Nature, and yet this is the present World's
Wise Man and Politician: Excellent Qualities for (...), where they say,
Witches, though not many Cunjurors, dwell.

20. Like Highway-Men, that rarely rob without Vizards, or in the same Wigs and
Clothes, but have a Dress for every Enterprise.

21. At best, he may be a Cunning Man, which is a sort of Lurcher in the
Politics.

22. He is never too hard for the Wise Man upon the Square, for that is out of
his Element, and puts him quite by his Skill. Nor are Wise Men ever caught by
him, but when they trust him.

23. But as Cold and Close as he seems, he can and will please all, if he gets
by it, though it should neither please God nor himself at bottom.

24. He is for every Cause that brings him Gain, but Implacable if disappointed
of Success.

25. And what he cannot hinder, he will be sure to spoil, by over-doing it.

26. None so Zealous then as he, for that which he cannot abide.

27. What is it he will not, or cannot do, to hide his true Sentiments.

28. For his Interest, he refuses no Side or Party; and will take the Wrong by
the Hand, when the other wont do, with as good a Grace as the Right.

29. Nay, he commonly chooses the Worst, because that brings the best Bribe: His
Cause being ever Money.

30. He sails with all Winds, and is never out of his Way, where any Thing is
to be had.

31. A Privateer indeed, and everywhere a very Bird of Prey.

32. True to nothing but himself, and false to all Persons and Parties, to
serve his own Turn.

33. Talk with him as often as you please, he will never pay you in good Coin;
for it is either False or Clipped.

34. But to give a False Reason for any Thing, let my Reader never learn of
him, no more than to give a Brass half Crown for a good one: Not only because
it is not true, but because it Deceives the Person to whom it is given; which I
take to be an Immorality.

35. Silence is much more preferable, for it saves the Secret, as well as the
Person's Honor.

36. Such as give themselves the Latitude of saying what they do not mean, come
to be errant Jockeys at more Things than one; but in Religion and Politics,
it is most pernicious.

37. To hear two Men talk the Reverse of their own Sentiments, with all the
good Breeding and Appearance of Friendship imaginable, on Purpose to Cozen or
Pump each other, is to a Man of Virtue and Honor, one of the Melancholiest, as
well as most Nauseous Thing in the World.

38. But that it should be the Character of an Able Man, is to Disinherit
Wisdom, and Paint out our Degeneracy to the Life, by setting up Fraud, an
errant Impostor, in her room.

39. The Trial of Skill between these two is, who shall believe least of what
the other says; and he that has the Weakness, or good Nature, to give (...)
first, ( viz. to believe any Thing the other says) is looked upon to be Tricked.

40. I cannot see the Policy, any more than the Necessity, of a Man's Mind
always giving the Lie to his Mouth, or his Mouth ever giving the false Alarms
of his Mind: For no Man can be long believed, that teaches all Men to distrust
him; and since the Ablest have sometimes need of Credit, where lies the
Advantage of their Politic Cant or Banter upon Mankind?

41. I remember a Passage of one of Queen Elizabeth's Great Men, as Advice to
his Friend; The Advantage, says he, I had upon others at Court, was, that I
always spoke as I thought, which being not be lieved by them, I has preserved
a good Conscience, and suffered no Damage from that Freedom; which, as it shows
the Vice to be Older than our Times, so that gallant Man's Integrity, to be the
best Way of avoiding it.

42. To be sure it is wise, as well as honest, neither to flatter other Men's
Sentiments, nor Dissemble and less Contradict our own.

43. To hold ones Tongue, or speak Truth, or talk only of indifferent Things,
is the Fairest Conversation.

44. Women that rarely go abroad without Vizard-Masks, have none of the best
Reputation. But when we consider what all this Art and Disguise are for, it
equally hightens the Wise Man's Wonder and Aversion: Perhaps it is to betray a
Father, a Brother, a Master, a Friend, a Neighbor, or ones own Party.

45. A fine Conquest! what Noble Grecians and Romans abhorred: As if Government
could not subsist without Knavery, and that Knaves were the Usefullest Props to
it; though the basest, as well as greatest, Perversion of the Ends of it.

46. But that it should become a Maxim, shows but too grossly the Corruption of
the Times.

47. I confess I have heard the Style of a Useful Knave, but ever took it to be
a silly or a knavish Saying; at least an Excuse for Knavery.

48. It is as reasonable to think a Whore makes the best Wife, as a Knave the
best Officer.

49. Besides, Employing Knaves, Encourages Knavery instead of Punishing it; and
Alienates the Reward of Virtue. Or, at least, must make the World believe, the
Country yields not honest Men enough, able to serve her.

50. Art thou a Magistrate? Prefer such as have clean Characters where they
live, and of Estates to secure a just Discharge of their Trusts; that are under
no Temptation to strain Points, for a Fortune: For sometimes such may be sound,
sooner than they are Employed.

51. Art thou a Private Man? Contract thy Acquaintance in a narrow Compass, and
choose those for the Subjects of it, that are Men of Principles; such as will
make full Stops where Honor will not lead them on; and that had rather bear
the Disgrace of not being thorough (...) Men, than forfeit their Peace and
Reputation by a base Compliance.

The WISE MAN.
52. The Wise Man Governs himself by the Reason of his Case, and because what
he does is Best: Best, in a Moral and Prudent, not a Sinister Sense.

53. He proposes just Ends, and employs the fairest and probablest Means and
Methods to attain them.

54. Though you cannot always penetrate his Design, or his Reasons for it, yet
you shall ever see his Actions of a Piece, and his Performances like a Workman:
They will bear the Touch of Wisdom and Honor, as often as they are tried.

55. He scorns to serve himself by Indirect Means, or be an Interloper in
Government, since Just Enterprises never want any Just Ways to succeed them.

56. To do Evil that Good may come of it, is for Bunglers in Politics, as well
as Morals.

57. Like those Surgeons, that will cut off an Arm they cannot Cure, to hide
their Ignorance and save their Credit.

58. The Wise Man is Cautious, but not Cunning; Judicious, but not Crafty;
making Virtue the Measure of using his Excellent Understanding in the Conduct
of his Life.

59. The Wise Man is equal, ready, but not officious; has in every Thing an Eye
to Sare Footing: He offends no Body, nor easily is offended, and always willing
to Compound for Wrongs, if not forgive them.

60. He is never Captious, nor Critical; hates Banter and Jests: He may be
Pleasant, but not Light; he never deals but in Substantial Ware, and leaves the
rest for the Toy Pates (or Shops) of the World; which are so far from being his
Business, that they are not so much as his Diversion.

61. He is always for some solid Good, Civil or Moral; as, to make his Country
more Virtuous, Preserve her Peace and Liberty, Employ her Poor, Improve Land,
Advance Trade, Suppress Vice, Encourage Industry, and all Mechanic Knowledge;
and that they should be the Care of the Government, and the Blessing and Praise
of the People.

62. To conclude, He is Just, and fears God, hates Covetousness, and eschews
Evil, and loves his Neighbor as himself.

Of the GOVERNMENT of THOUGHTS.
63. Man being made a Reasonable, and so a Thinking Creature, there is nothing
more Worthy of his Being, than the Right Direction and Employment of his
Thoughts; since upon This, depends both his Usefulness to the Public, and his
own present and future Benefit in all Respects.

64. The Consideration of this, has often obliged me to Lament the Unhappiness
of Mankind, that through too great a Mixture and Confusion of Thoughts, have been
hardly able to make a Right or Mature Judgment of Things.

65. To this is owing the various Uncertainty and Confusion we see in the
World, and the Intemperate Zeal that occasions them.

66. To this also is to be attributed the imperfect Knowledge we have of
Things, and the slow Progress we make in attaining to a Better; like the
Children of Israel that were forty Years upon their Journey, from Egypt to
Canaan, which might have been performed in Less than One.

67. In fine, it is to this that we ought to ascribe, if not all, at least most
of the Infelicities we Labor under.

68. Clear therefore thy Head, and Rall^, and Manage thy Thoughts Rightly, and
thou will Save Time, and See and Do thy Business Well; for thy Judgment will be
Distinct, thy Mind Free, and the Faculties Strong and Regular.

69. Always remember to bound thy Thoughts to the present Occasion.

70. If it be thy Religious Duty, suffer nothing else to Share in them. And if
any Civil or Temporal Affair, observe the same Caution, and thou will be a
whole Man to every Thing, and do twice the Business in the same Time.

71. If any Point over-labours thy Mind, divert and relieve it, by some other
Subject, of a more Sensible, or Manual Nature, rather than what may affect the
Understanding; for this were to write one Thing upon another, which blots out
our former Impressions, and renders them Illegible.

72. They that are least (...) in their Care, always give the best Account of
their Business.

73. As therefore thou art always to pursue the present Subject, till thou have
mastered it, so if it fall out that thou have more Affairs than one upon thy
Hand, be sure to prefer that which is of most Moment, and will least wait thy
Leisure.

74. He that Judges not well of the Importance of his Affairs, though he may be
always Busy, he must make but a small Progress.

75. But make not more Business necessary than is so; and rather lessen than
augment Work for thyself.

76. Nor yet be overeager in Pursuit of any Thing; for the Mercurial too often
happen to leave Judgment behind them, and sometimes make Work for Repentance.

77. He that over-runs his Business, leaves it for him that follows more
leisurely, to take it up; which has often proved a profitable Harvest to them
that never Sowed.

78. It Is the Advantage that slower Tempets have upon the Men of lively Parts,
that though they don't lead, they will Follow well, and Glean Clean.

79. Upon the whole Matter, Employ thy Thoughts as thy Business requires, and
let that have Place according to Merit and Urgency; giving every Thing a Review
and due Digestion, and thou will prevent many Errors and Vexations, as well as
save much Time to thy self in the Course of thy Life.

Of ENVY.
80. It is the Mark of an ill Nature, to lessen good Actions, and aggravate ill
Ones.

81. Some Men do as much begrudge others a good Name, as they want one
themselves; and perhaps that is the Reason of it.

82. But certainly they are in the Wrong, that can think they are lessened,
because others have their Due.

83. Such People generally have less Merit than Ambition, that Covet the Reward
of other Men's; and to be sure a very ill Nature, that will rather Rob others
of their Due, than allow them their Praise.

84. It is more an Error of our Will, than our Judgment: For we know it to be
an Effect of our Passion, not our Reason; and therefore we are the more
culpable in our Partial Estimates.

85. It is as Envious as Unjust, to under-rate another's Actions where their
intrinsic Worth recommends them to disengaged Minds.

86. Nothing shows more the Folly, as well as Fraud of Man, than Clipping of
Merit and Reputation.

87. And as some Men think it an Allay to themselves, that others have their
Right; so they know no End of Pilfering to raise their own Credit.

88. This Envy is the Child of Pride, and Misgives, rather than Mistakes.

89. It will have Charity, to be Ostentation; Sobriety, Covetousness; Humility,
Craft; Bounty, Popularity. In short, Virtue must be Design, and Religion, only
Interest. Nay, the best of Qualities must not pass without a BUT to allay their
Merit, and abate their Praise. Basest of Tempers! and they that have them, the
Worst of Men!

90. But Just and Noble Minds rejoice in other Men's Success, and help to
augment their Praise.

91. And indeed they are not without a Love to Virtue, that take a Satisfaction
in seeing her Rewarded, and such deserve to share her Character that do abhor
to lessen it.

Of MAN'S LIFE.
92. Why is Man less durable than the Works of his Hands, but because This is
not the Place of his Rest?

93. And it is a Great and Just Reproach upon him, that he should fix his Mind
where he cannot stay himself.

94. Were it not more his Wisdom to be concerned about those Works that will go
with him, and erect a Mansion for him, where Time has Power neither over him
nor it?

95. It Is a sad Thing for Man so often to miss his Way to his Best, as well as
most Lasting Home.

Of AMBITION.
96. They that soar too high, often fall hard; which makes a low and level
Dwelling preferable.

97. The tallest Trees are most in the Power of the Winds, and ambitious Men of
the Blasts of Fortune.

98. They are most seen and observed, and most envyed: Least Quiet, but most
Talked of, and not often to their Advantage.

99. Those Builders had need of a good Foundation, that lie so much exposed to
Weather.

100. Good Works are a Rock that will support their Credit; but ill Ones a
Sandy Foundation that Yields to Calamities.

101. And truly (...) ought to expect no Pity in their Fall, that when in
Power, had no Bowels for the Unhappy.

102. The worst of Distempers; always Craving and Thirsty, Restless and Hated:
A perfect Delirium in the Mind: Insufferable in Success, and in Disappointments
most Revengeful.

Of PRAISE or APPLAUSE.
103. We are too apt to love Praise, but not to Deserve it.

104. But if we would Deserve it, we must love Virtue more than That.

105. As there is no Passion in us sooner moved, or more deceivable, so for
that Reason there is none over which we ought to be more Watchful, whether we
give or receive it: For if we give it, we must be sure to mean it, and measure
it too.

106. If we are Penurious, it shows Emulation; if we exceed, Flattery.

107. Good Measure belongs to good Actions; more looks Nauseous, as well as
insincere; besides, it is a Persecuting of the Meritorious, who are out of
Countenance to hear what they deserve.

108. It is much easier for him to merit Applause, than hear of it: And he
never doubts himself more, or the Person that gives it, than when he hears so
much of it.

109. But to say true, there needs not many Cautions on this Hand, since the
World is rarely just enough to the Deserving.

110. However, we cannot be too Circumspect how we receive Praise: For if we
Contemplate our selves in a false Glass, we are sure to be mistaken about our
Dues; and because we are too apt to believe what is Pleasing, rather than what
is True, we may be too easily swelled, beyond our just Proportion, by the Windy
Complements of Men.

111. Make ever therefore Allowances for what is said on such Occasions, or
thou Exposest, as well as Deceivest thyself.

112. For an overvalue of ourselves, gives us but a dangerous Security in many
Respects.

113. We expect more than belongs to us; take all that is given us, though never
meant us; and fall out with those that are not as full of us, as we are of our
selves.

114. In short, it is a Passion that abuses our Judgment, and makes us both
Unsafe and Ridiculous.

115. Be not fond therefore of Praise, but seek Virtue that leads to it.

116. And yet no more lessen or dissemble thy Merit, than over-rate it: For
though Humility be a Virtue, an affected one is none.

Of CONDUCT in SPEECH.
117. Enquire often, but Judge rarely, and thou will not often be mistaken.

118. It is safer to learn, than teach; and who conceals his Opinion, has
nothing to answer for.

119. Vanity or Resentment often engage us, and it is two to one but welcome off
Losses; for one shows a Want of Judgment and Humility, as the other does of
Temper and Discretion.

120. Not that I admire the Reserved; for they are next to Unnatural that are
not Communicable. But if Reservedness be at any Time a Virtue, it is in Throngs
or ill Company.

121. Beware also of Affectation in Speech; it often wrongs Matter, and ever
shows a blind Side.

122. Speak properly, and in as few Words as you can, but always plainly; for
the End of Speech is not Ostentation, but to be understood.

123. They that affect Words more than Matter, will dry up that little they
have.

124. Sense never fails to give them that have it, Words enough to make them
understood.

125. But it too often happens in some Conversations, as in Apothecary-Shops,
that those Pots that are Empty, or have Things of small Value in them, are as
gaudily Dressed and Flourished, as those that are full of precious Drugs.

126. This Laboring of slight Matter with flourished Turns of Expression, is
fulsome, and worse than the Modern Imitation of Tapestry, and East India Goods,
in Stuffs and Linnens. In short, it is but Taudry Talk, and next to very Trash.

UNION of FRIENDS.
127. They that love beyond the World, cannot be separated by it.

128. Death cannot kill, what never dies.

129. Nor can Spirits ever be divided, that love and live in the same Divine
Principle; the Root and Record of their Friendship.

130. If Absence be not Death, neither is theirs.

131. Death is but Crossing the World, as Friends do the Seas: They live in one
another still.

132. For they must needs be present, that love and live in that which is
Omnipresent.

133. In this Divine Glass, they see Face to Face; and their Converse is Free,
as well as Pure.

134. This is the Comfort of Friends, that though they may be said to Die, yet
their Friendship and Society are, in the best Sense, ever present, because
Immortal.

Of being EASY in LIVING.
135. It Is a Happiness to be delivered from a Curious Mind, as well as from a
Dainty Palate.

136. For it is not only a troublesome but slavish Thing to be Nice.

137. They narrow their own Freedom and Comforts, that make so much requisite
to enjoy them.

138. To be Easy in Living, is much of the Pleasure of Life: But difficult
Tempers will always want it.

139. A Careless and Homely Breeding is therefore preferable to one Nice and
Delicate.

140. And he that is taught to live upon a little, owes more to his Father's
Wisdom, than he that has a great deal lest him, does to his Father's Care.

141. Children cannot well be too hardly Bred: For besides that it fits them to
bear the Roughest Providence, it is more Masculine, Active and Healthy.

142. Nay, it is certain, that the Liberty of the Mind is mightily preserved by
it: For so it is served, instead of being a Servant, indeed a Slave to sensual
Delicacies.

143. As Nature is soon answered, so are such satisfied.

144. The Memory of the Ancients is hardly in any Thing more to be celebrated,
than in a Strict and Youthful Institution of Youth.

145. By Labor they prevented Luxury in their young People, till Wisdom and
Philosophy had taught them to Resist and Despise it.

146. It must be therefore a gross Fault to strive so hard for the Pleasure of
our Bodies, and be so insensible and careless of the Freedom of our Souls.

Of MAN'S INCONSIDERATENESS and PARTIALITY.
147. It Is very observaable, if our Civil Rights are invaded or incroach'd
upon, we are mightily touched, and fill every Place with our Resentment and
Complaint: while we suffer our selves, our Better and Nobler Selves, to be the
Property and Vassals of Sin, the worst of Invaders.

148. In vain do we expect to be delivered from such Troubles, till we are
delivered from the Cause of them, our Disobedience to God.

149. When he has his Dues from us, it will be Time enough for Him to give us
ours out of one another.

150. It Is our great Happiness, if we could understand it, that we meet with
such Checks in the Career of our worldly Enjoyments, lest we should Forget the
Giver, adore the Gift, and terminate our Felicity here, which is not Man's
ultimate Bliss.

151. Our Losses are often made Judgments by our Guilt, and Mercies by our
Repentance.

152. Besides, it argues great Folly in Men, to let their Satisfaction exceed
the true Value of any Temporal Matter: For Disappointments are not always to be
measured by the Loss of the Thing, but the overvalue we put upon it.

153. And thus Men improve their own Miseries, for want of an Equal and Just
Estimate of what they Enjoy or Lose.

154. There lies a Proviso upon every Thing in this World, and we (...) observe
it at our own Peril, viz. To love God above all, and Act for Judgment, the Last
I mean.

Of the RULE of JUDGING.
155. In all Things, Reason should prevail: It Is quite another Thing to be
stiff than steady in an Opinion.

156. This may be Reasonable, but that is ever Wilful.

157. In such Cases it always happens, that the clearer the Argument, the
greater the Obstinacy, where the Design is not to be convinced.

158. This is to value Humor more than Truth, and prefer a sullen Pride to a
reasonable Submission.

159. It Is the Glory of a Man to vail to Truth; as it is the Mark of a good
Nature to be Easily entreated.

160. Beasts act by Sense, Man should by Reason; else he is a greater Beast
than ever God made: And the Proverb is verified, The Corruption of the best
Things is the worst and most ofsensive.

161. A reasonable Opinion must ever be in Danger, where Reason is not Judge.

162. Though there is a Regard due to Education, and the Tradition of our
Fathers, Truth will ever deserve as well as claim the Preference.

163. If like Theophilus and Timothy, we have been brought up in the Knowledge
of the best Things, it is our Advantage: But neither they nor we lose by trying
their Truth; for so we learn their, as well as its intrinsic Worth.

164. Truth never lost Ground by Enquiry, because she is most of all Reasonable.

165. Nor can that need another Authority, that is Self-evident.

166. If my own Reason be on the Side of a Principle, with what can I Dispute
or withstand it?

167. And if Men would once consider one another reasonably, they would either
reconcile their Differences, or more Amicably maintain them.

168. Let That therefore be the Standard, that has most to say for it self;
though of that let every Man be Judge for himself.

169. Reason, like the Sun, is Common to All; And it is for want of examining
all by the same Light and Measure, that we are not all of the same Mind: For
all have it to that End, though all do not use it So.

Of FORMALITY.
170. Form is Good, but not Formality.

171. In the Use of the best of Forms, there is too much of that I fear.

172. It Is absolutely necessary, that this Distinction should go along with
People in their Devotion; for too many are apter to rest upon What they do,
than How they do their Duty.

173. If it were considered, that it is the Frame of the Mind that gives our
Performances Acceptance, we would lay more Stress on our Inward Preparation,
than our outward Action.

Of the MEAN NOTION we have of GOD.
174. Nothing more shows the low Condition Man is fallen into, than the
unsuitable Notion we must have of God, by the Ways we take to please him.

175. As if it availed any thing to him, that we performed so many Ceremonies
and external Forms of Devotion, who never meant more by them, than to try our
Obedience, and through them, to show us something more Excellent and Durable
beyond them.

176. Doing, while we are Undoing, is good for nothing.

177. Of what Benefit is it to say our Prayers regularly, go to Church, receive
the Sacraments, and may be go to Confessions too; ay, Feast the Priest, and
give Alms to the Poor, and yet Lie, Swear, Curse, be Drunk, Covetous, Unclean,
Proud, Revengeful, Vain and Idle, at the same Time?

178. Can one excuse or balance the other? Or will God think himself well
served, where his Law is Violated? Or well used, where there is so much more
Show than Substance.

179. It Is a most dangerous Error, for a Man to think to excuse himself in the
Breach of a Moral Duty, by a Formal Performance of Positive Worship; and less
when of Human Invention.

180. Our Blessed Savior most rightly and clearly distinguished and determined
this Case, when he told the Jews, that they were his Mother, his Brethren, and
Sisters, who did the Will of his Father.

Of the BENEFIT of JUSTICE.
181. Justice is a great Support of Society, because an Insurance to all Men of
their Property: This violated, there is no Security, which throws all into
Confusion to recover it.

182. An Honest Man is a fast Pledge in Dealing. A Man is Sure to have it, if
it be to be had.

183. Many are so, merely of Necessity: Others not so only for the same Reason:
But such an honest Man is not to be thanked, and such a dishonest Man is to be
pitied.

184. But he that is dishonest for Gain, is next to a Robber, and to be
punished for Example.

185. And indeed there are few Dealers, but what are Faulty; which makes Trade
Difficult, and a great Temptation to Men of Virtue.

186. It Is not what they should, but what they can get: Faults or Decays must
be concealed: Big Words given, where they are not deserved, and the Ignorance
or Necessity of the Buyer imposed upon for unjust Profit.

187. These are the Men that keep their Words for their own Ends, and are only
Just for Fear of the Magistrate.

188. A Politic rather than a Moral Honesty; a constrained, not a chosen
Justice: According to the Proverb, Patience per Force, and thank you for
nothing.

189. But of all Justice, that is the greatest, that passes under the Name of
Law. A Cutpurse in Westminster Hall exceeds; for that advances Injustice to
Oppression, where Law is alleged for that which it should punish.

Of JEALOUSY,
190. The Jealous are Troublesome to others, but a Torment to themselves.

191. Jealousy is a kind of Civil War in the Soul, where Judgment and
Imagination are at perpetual Jars.

192. This Civil Dissension in the Mind, like that of the Body Politic,
commits great Disorders, and lays all waste.

193. Nothing stands safe in its Way: Nature, Interest, Religion, must Yield to
its Fury.

194. It Violates Contracts, Dissolves Society, Breaks Wedlock, Betrays Friends
and Neighbors. No Body is Good, and every one is either doing or designing
them a Mischief.

195. It has a Venom that more or less rankles wherever it Bites: And as it
reports Fancies for Facts, so it disturbs its own House as often as other Folks.

196. It Is Rise is Guilt or Ill Nature, and by Reflection, thinks it is own
Faults to be other Men's; as he that is overrun with the Jaundice takes others
to be Yellow.

197. A Jealous Man only sees his own Spectrum, when he looks upon other Men,
and gives his Character in theirs.

Of STATE.
198. I love Service, but not State: One is Useful, the other Superfluous.

199. The Trouble of this, as well as Charge, is Real; but the Advantage only
Imaginary.

200. Besides, it helps to set us up above ourselves, and Augments our
Temptation to Disorder.

201. The Least Thing out of Joint, or omitted, makes us uneasy, and we are
ready to think our selves ill served, about that which is of no real Service at
all: Or so much better then other Men, as we have the Means of greater State.

202. Put this is all for want of Wisdom, which carries the truest and most
forceable State along with it.

203. He that makes not himself Cheap by indiscreet Conversation, puts Value
enough upon himself every where.

204. The other is rather Pageantry than State.

Of a GOOD SERVANT.
205. A True, and a Good Servant, are the same Thing.

206. But no Servant is True to his Master, that Defrauds him.

207. Now there are many Ways of defrauding a Master, as, of Time, Care, Pains,
Respect, and Reputation, as well as Money.

208. He that Neglects his Work, Robs his Master, since he is Fed and Paid as
if he did his Best; and he that is not as Diligent in the Absence, as in the
Presence of his Master, cannot be a true Servant.

209. Nor is he a true Servant, that buys dear to share in the Profit with the
Seller.

210. Nor yet he that tells Tales without Doors; or deals basely in his
Master's Name with other People; or connives at others Loiterings, Wastings, or
dishonorable Reflections.

211. So that a true Servant is Diligent, Secret, and Respectful: More Tender
of his Master's Honor and Interest, than of his own Profit.

212. Such a Servant deserves well, and if Modest under his Merit, should
liberally feel it at his Master's Hand.

Of an IMMEDIATE PURSUIT of the WORLD.
213. It shows a Depraved State of Mind, to Cark and Care for that which one
does not need.

214. Some are as eager to be Rich, as ever they were to Live: For Superfluity,
as for Subsistence.

215. But that Plenty should augment Covetousness, is a Perversion of
Providence; and yet the Generality are the worse for their Riches.

216. But it is strange, that Old Men should excel: For generally Money lies
nearest them that are nearest their Graves: As if they would augment their Love
in Proportion to the little Time they have left to enjoy it: And yet their
Pleasure is without Enjoyment, since none enjoy what they do not use.

217. So that instead of learning to leave their great Wealth easily, they hold
the Faster, because they must leave it: So Sordid is the Temper of some Men.

218. Where Charity keeps Pace with Gain, Industry is blessed: But to slave to
get, and keep it Sordidly, is a Sin against Providence, a Vice in Government,
and an Injury to their Neighbors.

219. Such are they as spend not one Fifth of their Income, and, it may be,
give not one Tenth of what they spend, to the Needy.

220. This is the worst sort of Idolatry, because there can be no Religion in
it, nor Ignorance pleaded in Excuse of it; and that it wrongs other Folks that
ought to have a Share therein.

Of the INTEREST of the PUBLIC in our ESTATES.
221. Hardly any Thing is given us for our Selves, but the Public may claim a
Share with us. But of all we call ours, we are most accountable to God and the
Public for our Estates: In this we are but Stewards, and to Hord up all to our
selves, is great Injustice, as well as Ingratitude.

222. If all Men were so far Tenants to the Public, that the Supersluities of
Gain and Expense were applied to the Exigencies thereof, it would put an End to
Taxes, leave never a Beggar, and make the greatest Bank for National Trade in
Europe.

223. It is a Judgment upon us, as well as Weakness, though we wont see it, to
begin at the wrong End.

224. If the Taxes we give, are not to maintain Pride, I am sure there would be
less, if Pride were made a Tax to the Government.

225. I confess I have wondered that so many Lawful and Useful Things are
Excised by Laws, and Pride lest to Reign Free over them and the Public.

226. But since People are more afraid of the Laws of Man than of God, because
their Punishment seems to be nearest: I know not how Magistrates can be excused
in their suffering such Excess with Impunity.

227. Our Noble English Patriarchs as well as Patriots, were so sensible of
this Evil, that they made several excellent Laws, commonly called Sumptuary, to
Forbid, at least Limit the Pride of the People; which because the Execution of
them would be our Interest and Honor, their Neglect must be our just Reproach
and Loss.

228. It Is but Reasonable, that the Punishment of Pride and Excess, should help
to support the Government, since it must otherwise inevitably be ruined by them.

229. But some say, It ruins Trade, and will make the Poor Burdensome to the
Public: But is such Trade in Consequence ruins the Kingdom, is it not Time to
ruin that Trade? Is Moderation no Part of our Duty, and Temperance an Enemy to
Government?

230. He is a Judas, that will get Money by any Thing.

231. To wink at a Trade that effeminates the People, and invades the Ancient
Discipline of the Kingdom, is a Crime Capital, and to be severely punished,
instead of being excused by the Magistrate.

232. Is there no better Employment for the Poor than Luxury? Miserable Nation!

233. What did they before they fell into these forbidden Methods? Is there not
Land enough in England to Cultivate, and more and better Manufactures to be
Made?

234. Have we no room for them in our Plantations, about Things that may
augment Trade, without Luxury?

235. In short, let Pride pay, and Excess be well Excised: And if that will not
Cure the People, it will help to Keep the Kingdom.

The VAIN MAN.
236. But a Vain Man is a Nauseous Creature: He is so full of himself, that he
has no Room for any Thing else, be it never so Good or Deserving.

237. It Is I at every Turn that does this, or can do that. And as he abounds in
his Comparisons, so he is sure to give himself the better of every Body else;
according to the Proverb, All his Geese are Swans.

238. They are certainly to be pitied, that can be so much mistaken at Home.

239. And yet I have sometimes thought that such People are in a sort Happy,
that nothing can put out of Countenance with themselves, though they neither
have nor merit other People's.

240. But at the same time one would wonder they should not feel the Blows they
give themselves, or get from others, for this intolerable and ridiculous
Temper; nor show any Concern at that which makes others blush for, as well as
at them ( viz.) their unreasonable Assurance.

241. To be a Man's own Fool is bad enough, but the Vain Man is Every Body's.

242. This silly Disposition comes of a Mixture of Ignorance, Confidence, and
Pride; and as there is more or less of the last, so it is more or less
offensive or entertaining.

243. And yet perhaps the worst Part of this Vanity, is its Unteachableness.
Tell it any Thing, and it has known it long ago; and out-runs Information and
Instruction, or else proudly puffs at it.

244. Whereas the greatest Understandings doubt most, are readiest to learn,
and least pleased with themselves; this, with no Body else.

245. For though they stand on higher Ground, and so see further than their
Neighbors, they are yet humbled by their Prospect, since it shows them
something, so much higher, and above their Reach.

246. And truly then it is, that Sense shines with the greatest Beauty, when it
is set in Humility.

247. An humble able Man, is a Jewel worth a Kingdom: It is often saved by him,
as Solomon's Poor Wise Man did the City.

248. May we have more of them, or less Need of them.

The CONFORMIST.
249. It is reasonable to concur, where Conscience does not forbid a
Compliance; for Conformity is at least a Civil Virtue.

250. But we should only press it in Necessaries, the rest may prove a Snare
and Temptation to break Society.

251. But above all, it is a Weakness in Religion and Government, where it is
carried to Things of an Indifferent Nature, since besides that it makes Way for
Scruples, Liberty is always the Price of it.

252. Such Conformists have little to boast of, and therefore the less Reason
to Reproach others that have more Latitude.

253. And yet the Latitudinarian that I love, is one that is only so in
Charity, for the Freedom I recommend, is no Septicism in Judgment, and much
less so in Practice.

The OBLIGATIONS of GREAT MEN to ALMIGHTY GOD.
254. It seems but reasonable, that those whom God has Distinguished from
others, by his Goodness, should Distinguish themselves to him by their
Gratitude.

255. For though he has made of One Blood all Nations, he has not ranged or
dignified them upon the Level, but in a sort of Subordination and Dependency.

256. If we look upwards, we find it in the Heavens, where the Planets have
their several Degrees of Glory, and so the other Stars of Magnitude and Luster.

257. If we look upon the Earth, we see it among the Trees of the Wood, from
the Cedar to the Bramble; in the Waters among the Fish, from the Leviathan to
the Sprat; in the Air among the Birds, from the Eagle to the Sparrow; among the
Beasts, from the Lion to the Cat; and among Mankind itself, from the King to
the Scavenger.

158. Our Great Men, doubtless, were designed by the Wise Framer of the World,
for our Religious, Moral, and Politic Planets; for Lights and Directions to
the lower Ranks of the numerous Company of their own Kind, both in Precepts and
Examples; and they are well paid for their Pains too, who have the Honor and
Service of their fellow Creatures, and the Marrow and Fat of the Earth for
their Share.

259. But is it not a most unaccountable Folly, that Men should be Proud of the
Providence that should Humble them? Or think the Better of themselves, instead
of Him that raised them so much above the Level; or in being so in their Lives,
in return of his Extraordinary Favors.

260. But it is but too near akin to us, to think no farther than our selves,
either in the Acquisition, or Use of our Wealth and Greatness; when, alas, they
are the Preferments of Heaven, to try our Wisdom, Bounty, and Gratitude.

261. It Is a dangerous Perversion of the End of Providence, to Consume the
Time, Power, and Wealth he has given us above other Men, to gratify our Sordid
Passions, instead of playing the good Stewards, to the Honor of our great
Benefactor, and the Good of our Fellow Creatures.

262. But it is an Injustice too; since those Higher Ranks of Men are but the
Trustees of Heaven for the Benefit of lesser Mortals, who, as Minors, are
entitled to all their Care and Provision.

263. For though God has dignified some Men above their Brethren, it never was to
serve their Pleasures, but that they might take Pleasure to serve the Public.

264. For this Cause doubtless it was, that they were raised above Necessity,
or any Trouble to Live, that they might have more Time and Ability to Care for
Others: And it is certain, where that Use is not made of the Bounties of
Providence, they are Imbezzell'd and Wasted.

265. It has often struck me with a serious Reflection, when I have observed
the great Inequality of the World; that one Man should have such Numbers of his
fellow Creatures, to Wait upon him, who have Souls to be saved as well as he;
and this not for Business, but State. Certainly, a poor Employment of his
Money, and a worse of their Time.

266. But that any one Man should make work for so many; or rather keep them
from Work, to make up a Train, has a Levity and Luxury in it very reprovable,
both in Religion and Government.

267. But even in all wable Services, it has an humbling Consideration, and
what should raise the Thankfulness of the Great Men to him that has so much
bettered their Circumstances, and Moderated the Use of their Dominion over
those of their own Kind.

268. When the poor Indians hear us call any of our Family by the Name of
Servants, they cry out, What, call Brethren Servants! We call our Dogs,
Servants, but never Men. The Moral certainly can do us no Harm, but may
instruct us, to abate our Hight, and narrow our State and Attendance.

269. And what has been said of their Excess, may in some measure be applied to
other Branches of Luxury, that set ill Examples to the lesser World, and Rob
the Needy of their Pensions.

270. GOD Almighty Touch the Hearts of our Grandees with a Sense of his
Distinguished Goodness, and that true End of it; that they may better
distinguish themselves in their Conduct, to the Glory of Him that has thus
liberally Preserr'd them, and the Benefit of their fellow Creatures.

Of REFINING upon other Men's ACTIONS or INTERESTS.
271. This seems to be the Masterpiece of our Politicians: But no Body shoots
more at Random, than those Refiners.

272. A perfect Lottery, and mere Hap-hazard. Since the true Spring of the
Actions of Men is as Invisible as their Hearts; and so are their Thoughts too
of their several Interests.

273. He that judges of other Men by himself, does not always hit the Mark,
because all Men have not the same Capacity, nor Passions in Interest.

274. If an able Man refines upon the Proceedings of an ordinary Capacity,
according to his own, he must ever miss it: But much more the ordinary Man,
when he shall pretend to speculate the Motives to the Able Man's Actions: For
the Able Man deceives himself, by making the other wiser than he is in the Reason
of his Conduct; and the ordinary Man makes himself so, in presuming to judge of
the Reasons of the Abler Man's Actions.

275. It Is in short, a Wood, a Maze; and of nothing are we more uncertain, nor
in any thing do we oftener befool ourselves.

276. The Mischiefs are many that follow this Humor, and dangerous: For Men
Misguide themselves, act upon false Measures, and meet frequently with
mischievous Disappointments.

277. It excludes all Confidence in Commerce; allows of no such Thing as a
Principle in Practice; supposes every Man to act upon other Reasons than what
appears, and that there is no such Thing as a Straightness or Sincerity among
Mankind: A Trick instead of Truth.

278. Neither, allowing Nature or Religion; but some worldly Fetch or
Advantage: The true, the hidden Motive to all Men to act or do.

279. It Is hard to express it is Uncharitableness, as well as Uncertainty; and
has more of Vanity than Benefit in it.

280. This foolish Quality gives a large Field, but let what I have said serve
for this Time.

Of CHARITY.
281. Charity has various Senses, but is Excellent in all of them.

282. It imports; first, the Commiseration of the Poor, and Unhappy of Mankind,
and extends an HelpingHand to mend their Condition.

283. They that feel nothing of this, are at best not above half of Kin to
Human Race; since they must have no Bowels, which makes such an Essential Part
thereof, who have no more Nature.

284. A Man, and yet not have the Feeling of the Wants or Needs of his own
Flesh and Blood! A Monster rather! And may he never be suffered to propagate
such an unnatural Stock in the World.

285. Such an Uncharitableness spoils the best Gains, and two to one but it
entails a Curse upon (...) Possessors.

286. Nor can we expect to be heard of God in our Prayers, that turn the deaf
Ear to the Petitions of the Distressed amongst our fellow Creatures.

287. God sends the Poor to try us, as well as he tries them by being such: And
he that refuses them a little out of the great deal that God has given him,
Lays up Poverty in Store for his own Posterity.

288. I will not say these Works are Meritorious, but dare say they are
Acceptable, and go not without their Reward: Though to Humble us in our Fullness
and Liberality too, we only Give but what is given us to Give as well as use;
for if we are not our own, less is that so which God has entrusted us with.

289. Next, CHARITY makes the best Construction of Things and Persons, and is
so far from being an evil Spy, a Back-biter, or a Detractor, that it excuses
Weakness, extenuates Miscarriages, makes the best of every Thing; forgives
every Body, serves All, and hopes to the End.

290. It moderates Extremes, is always for Expediences, labors to accommodate
Differences, and had rather Suffer than Revenge: And so far from Exacting the
utmost Farthing, that it had rather lose than seek her Own Violently.

291. As it acts Freely, so Zealously too; but it is always to do Good, for it
hurts no Body.

292. An Universal Remedy against Discord, and an Holy Cement for Mankind.

293. And lastly, It Is Love to God and the Brethren, which raises the Soul
above all worldly Considerations; and, as it gives a Taste of Heaven upon
Earth, so it is Heaven in the Fullness of it hereafter, to the truly Charitable
here.

294. This is the Noblest Sense Charity has, after which all should press, as
that more Excellent Way.

295. Nay, most Excellent; for as Faith, Hope, and Charity were the more
Excellent Way, that Great Apostle discovered to the Christians (too apt to
stick in Outward Gifts and Church Performances) so of that better Way he
preferred Charity as the best Part, because it would out-last the rest, and
abide for ever.

296. Wherefore a Man can never be a true and good Christian without Charity,
even in the lowest Sense of it: And yet he may have that Part thereof, and
still be none of the Apostle's true Christian, since he tells us, That though we
should give all our Goods to the Poor, and want Charity (in her other and
higher Senses) it would profit us nothing.

297. Nay, though we had All Tongues, All Knowledge and even Gifts of Prophesy
and were Preachers to others; ay, and had Zeal enough to give our Bodies to be
burned, yet if we wanted Charity it would not avail us for Salvation.

298. It seems it was his, (and indeed ought to be our) Unum Necessarium, or
the One Thing Needful, which our Savior attributed to Mary in Preferrence to
her Sister Martha, that seems not to have wanted the lesser Parts of Charity.

299. Would God this Divine Virtue were more implanted and diffused among
Mankind, the Pretenders to Christianity especially, and we should certainly
mind Piety more than Controversy, and Exercise Love and Compassion, instead of
Censuring and Persecuting one another in any manner whatsoever.

FINIS.
THE INDEX.
THE Right Moralist, Page 1 The World's Able Man, P. 7. The Wise Man, P. 19. Of
the Government of Thoughts, P. 24. Of Envy, P. 30. Of Man's Life, P. 34. Of
Ambition, P. 35. Of Praise or Applause, P. 38. Of Conduct in Speech, P. 42.
Union of Friends, P. 46. Of being Easy in Living, P. 48. Of Man's
Inconsiderateness and Partiality, P. 51. Of the Rule of Judging, P. 54. Of
Formality, P. 59. Of the mean Notion we have of God, P. 60. Of the Benefit of
Justice, P. 63. Of Jealousy, P. 66. Of State, P. 69. Of a good Servant, P. 71.
Of an Immoderate Pursuit of the World, P. 73. Of the Interest of the Public in
our Estates, P. 76. The Vain Man, P. 82. The Conformist, P. 86. The Obligations
of Great Men to Almighty God, P. 88. Of Refining upon other Men's Actions or
Interests, P. 27. Of Charity, P. 101.

