LETTER From the REVEREND Mr. WHITEFIELD, TO A Reverend DIVINE in BOSTON;
Giving a Short Account of his late Visit to BERMUDA.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by B. FRANKLIN and D. HALL. MDCCXLVIII.

A LETTER From the REVEREND Mr. WHITEFIELD, TO A Reverend DIVINE in BOSTON.
Bermuda, May 17. 1748. Reverend Sir,
NINE Weeks ago I arrived here from from Charlestown, and ere now I thought to
have had the Pleasure of seeing you and my other dear Friends in New England.
This was the Reason why you have not heard from me before: But as Providence
seems to point out to me another Course* I cannot omit this Opportunity of
sending you a short Account of my late Excursion to Bermuda. I suppose you have
heard of our safe and pleasant Passage: We were but nine Days I think on board,
and I do not remember that I heard one single Oath from Land to Land. As we
went round the West Part of the Island, in order to come into the Harbor, I
was very much struck with the Variety of agreeable Prospects of Landskips it
afforded. The Scene was quite new, and quite different from any I had ever
beheld before; and though I have been here so long, yet it appears very
delightful to me still. Immediately upon my Arrival several received me in a
plain, artless, free Manner, and desired me to expound the very first Evening.
I readily complied, and continued so doing for several Days; and was so pleased
with the Heartiness and Attention of the People, and Pleasantness of the
Island, that I could not help thinking I was got among my Friends in some Part
of South Wales, or the Clothiers Country in Gloucestershire in England. -- One
Mr. Holyday, a Clergyman of the Church of England, received me with open Heart
and Arms. The first Lord's Day after my Arrival, I read Prayers, and preached
in two of his Parish Churches, and the longer I staid, the more kindly he
behaved to me. The two other Church-Clergy chose to keep at a Distance: But one
Mr. Paul, an aged Presbyterian Minister, was very free to let me have the Use
of his Meeting House, which being pretty large, and lying in a central Part of
the Island, I preached in it to very large Auditories for eight Sundays
successively. His Excellency the Governor was pleased to come and hear me when
I preached in Town, and though he thought proper (I suppose for fear of
disobliging at Home) to prohibit my preaching any more in the Churches; yet,
with most of the Council, and principal Gentlemen of the Island, he treated me
with great Respect, and invited me more than once to dine with him. I have now
preached near seventy times in all. On the Week Days chiefly at private Houses
up and down, in different Parts of the Island, sometimes within, sometimes
without Doors, to larger Assemblies (as they tell me) than were ever seen upon
any Occasion on this Island before. The longer I continued here, the larger the
Auditories grew. The Word was frequently attended with a divine Power, and many
have been brought under promsing Convictions, which I trust will issue in sound
and saving Conversions. When I preached my Farewell Sermon last Lord's Day in
the Meeting House, we had a most solemn Season. It much resembled the
Appearances that we had sometimes at Mr. Webb's, and the other Meeting Houses,
seven or eight Years ago at Boston. Tho I have been used to such frequent
Partings, yet the People's Weeping almost unmann'd me. Since then I have
received many Tokens of their Love, and am furnished with a Variety of Stock
for my Sea Store. God willing, I have promised to visit them once more. For
indeed Bermuda's People are dear to me. I have spent nine happy Weeks among
them, and was never so little opposed during so long a Stay in any one fresh
Place where I have been since my first coming out into the World. Indeed many I
hear were prejudiced against me before I came. But what cannot God do? He has
the Hearts of all in his Hands, and when our Ways please Him, can make our
Enemies be at Peace with us. My being at Bermuda has been also blessed in some
Measure to the restoring my bodily Health. The Air, particularly to a Stranger,
is quite salubrious, at least I have found it to be so. You know in what a weak
State I was when I left Boston. Blessed be God I can preach daily; and though I
think when I lay my Hand upon my Stomach, I can say, Hic haeret lethalis
arundo; yet I am as well as a worn-out Pilgrim can expect to be on this Side
Eternity. In a few Days I hope to embark in the Brigantine Betsy, Captain
Esteen, bound for England. Letters from thence inform me of the Spread of the
Gospel. Thither I think the Providence of God calls me, though I hope to return
in a short Season to my beloved America again. Till then Farewell, dear Bermuda;
Farewell all my dear Friends on the different Parts of the Continent! Follow me,
Oh follow me with your Prayers. Hold up your Hands in my Behalf, and by the
Grace of God I will go on fighting. Oh that I may die in the Field! At present
this is the Language of my heart;

A cheerful and submissive Mind,
That Life and all Things casts behind,
Springs forth obedient at thy Call;
A Heart that no Desire can move,
But still to adore, obey and love,
Give me, my Lord, my Life, my All.
You, Rev. Sir, I am persuaded, will not be unmindful of me. As the Lord
enables, you, and all my dear Friends, shall ever be remembered by,

Reverend and dear Sir, Your most affectionate, though unworthy younger Brother,
and Fellow Labourer, in our common Lord, G. WHITEFIELD.


