THE Life and Character Of the late Reverend Dr. COLMAN.

THE LIFE and CHARACTER OF THE Reverend Benjamin Colman, D. D. Late Pastor of a
Church in BOSTON NEW ENGLAND. Who Deceased August 29th 1747.

By EBENEZER TURELL, A. M. Pastor of Medford.

Rev. ii. 19. I know thy -- SERVICE.
-- Non Nobis nati sumus --
BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND, Printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in Queen Street, and
by J. EDWARDS in Cornhill.

MDCCXLIX.

PREFACE.
AS the Rev. Dr. COLMAN stood among the first Ornaments and Benefactors to his
Country, it seems but a becoming Gratitude to him, and Honor to ourselves, to
raise a Monument to his Memory. His polite and generous Pen was always ready to
do the same for others; and seized every Opportunity to charm the Living, by
the Virtues and Examples of the Dead: Though few Characters and Actions would
bear to be transmitted down to Posterity with equal Advantage to his own.

The following Sheets present us with his entertaining and useful History,
which will convey to the Reader some Idea of the Man of God taken from our
Head; in which the Reverend Author has been at great Labor, under a tender
State of Health, and the constant Avocations of his Ministry, to search into
Letters, and other Manuscripts, in order to compile and digest what is here
given to the Reader. Those who are acquainted with the Fatigue and Difficulty
attending Disquisitions of this Kind, will read a Life principally composed of
such inconnected Materials with a reasonable Candor. And it cannot but be
regretted, that the Doctor himself, either neglected the Records of a more
regular Diary, or that he destroyed such valuable Memorials. As he certainly
did from a diffident Modesty, Numbers of his own Sermons, and in the Judgment
of his former Colleague, the Rev. Mr. William Cooper, some of his most useful
and shining Performances.

It will not be wondered at, that no written Accounts will convey to Strangers
an Idea of Dr. COLMAN, equal to what we had raised of him, who have been happy
in his Conversation, and seen him in all the Decorum of Pulpit-Oratory. Nor can
the illustrious Senate at GLASGOW fully know how gracefully he wore, and how
well he adorned their Honors.

His Conversation was admirably polisht and courtly, and all his Behavior was
that of the most elegant Gentleman, and benevolent Christian.

But he principally shone in the Desk: Here his Air was composed and grave, his
Action just and delicate, and his Voice inimitably soft and tuneful, managed
with the greatest Propriety, and exquisite Sweetness of Modulation. His Diction
was animated and lofty, but easy and plain, like his Models, the inspired
Classicks: And the Arrangement of his Style, and the Turn of his Periods
exactly adapted to the Elevations and Cadences of his own musical
Pronunciation. He had a fine Taste for the sublimer Improvements of modern
Philosophy. On these Themes how would he take Fire, and with uncommon Beauties
of Imagination, a Dignity of Sentiment, and an Ardor of Divine Eloquence
transport and Audience, with a Devotion near to angelical! Witness, among
others, his second Discourse on the Incomprehensibleness of GOD.

Though the finest of his Productions have never been printed -- some of which
might have appeared upon this Occasion, if the Appendix to this Essay had not
been suppressed.

If the Reverend Author of this History had not expressed his Disinclination to
any Encomium from us, yet it had been impertinent in itself, and perhaps
assuming in us to attempt one, as he is our elder Brother, and has been long
known to the World, and respected for his Learning and Piety, and his Praise is
in the Churches for his Usefulness, Courage and Fidelity.

It may rather seem that we ourselves need an Apology, for our Names appearing
in this Place, unless the Desire of our valuable Friend, the Relation we stood
in to Dr. COLMAN, the Regards he was pleased to show us in his Lifetime, and
in his last Will leaving to some of us the Care of his Papers, be our Excuse.

May the glowing Examples here exhibited, inspire Survivors to an Imitation:
May the Mantle of the ascended Prophet fall upon his Sons in the Ministry, and
particularly may our worthy Brother the Writer of the ensuing Narrative, high
in his Father's Affection and Esteem, inherit a double Portion of his Spirit.

These are the Wishes and Prayers of

Boston, Feb. 3. 1748, 9. M. Byles, Ellis Gray, Samuel Cooper.


THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
DR. Colman's Birth and Parentage Page 1 His Education under Mr. Ezekiel
Cheever Page 2 Genius for Learning and Advances in it ibid Early Devotion and
Piety ibid Behavior at Harvard-College Page 3 Beginning to preach at Medford
ibid An early Instance of his catholic Spirit Page 4 His Desire to see
England, and imbarking for it ibid
CHAP. II
A large Narration of his Voyage Page 5 Danger of being foundered Page 6
Meeting with a French Ship of War ibid Behavior in the Fight ibid An Account
of a young Rake on Board ibid Taken and stripped Page 7 Madam Allaire's Kindness
to him Page 8 His Bible found and sent him ibid
CHAP. III.
Of what he met with in France Page 10 His Imprisonment Page 11 Kindly
succored and supplied by Mr. Welsh ibid Accosted by a young Priest at Rennes
Page 12 Set at Liberty, and embarking for Portsmouth Page 13 Again in Danger of
being foundered ibid Charity to his Fellow Prisoners ill-requited Page 13, 14,
15 His Discourse with a Quaker on New England Affairs Page 14 In Danger of
being robbed and murdered Page 16
CHAP. IV.
His Reception at London by Mr. and Madam Ives Page 17 His Brother's Kindness
to him ibid Acquaintance with the Rev. Mr. John Quick Page 18 A dangerous
Sickness, and Recovery from it ibid Invited by Mr. and Mad. Parkhurst to take
Lodgings at their House ibid Attended the Ministry of the Rev. Mr. How ibid
Invited by him to go to Rotterdam, in Order to settle in a Church there Page
19, 20 Waited on King William with Dr. Bates, etc. Page 20 Acquaintance with
Dr. Daniel Williams and Dr. Edmund Calamy Page 21 An Account of a Dispute
between Dr. Williams and Mr. How Page 21, 22 The Manner of Dr. Annesley's
Death ibid The Rev. Mr. Beverley's Prophecy and Character Page 23 An Account of
the Rev. Mr. Fleming ibid Visits to the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge
Page 23 and 26 Acquainted with Sir Henry Ashurst, Baronet, etc. Page 24 Verses
on his Daughter ibid A Robber taken, and Mr. Colman's Speech to him Page 25, 26
Chosen by the Presbyterian Board at London to go down to Cambridge to preach,
and went ibid Invited to preach for a Time at the great Town of Ipswich in
Suffolk, and went Page 27 His Chastity assaulted by three lewd Women ibid
Acquaintance with the Rev. Mr. Burkit of Dedham Page 28 Character of Mr. Gale
Page 29 An Account of his Land Tortoise Page 30 Again in Danger of being robbed
ibid Attended the Sessions at Bury -- My Lord chief Justice Holt's Speech ibid
Chosen by the Presbyterian Board to go down to Bath and preach there and went
Page 31 Some Remarks on private Baptisms Page 32 An Account of a profane Wretch
at Bath ibid A remarkable Story of an Apparition there Page 33 Another of the
Rev. Mr. Cummin^'s killing a Robber Page 35 Acquaintance with Philomela, Mrs.
Elizabeth Singer Several entertaining Particulars of that Family Page 36, 37,
38 Character of Mrs. Elizabeth Singer Page 39
CHAP. V.
Invitations given him to return to New England, by a Number of Gentlemen and
Divines Page 41, 42, 43 An Account of his Ordination at London ibid Character
of the Persons assisting Page 45 Imbarking for Boston -- his Arrival and
Settlement here Page 46 Letters sent to him before and soon after by the Rev.
Messirs. Quick, White, Chandler, Standen, and Mr. Walter Singer, and Mrs.
Elizabeth Singer Page 47, 48, 49
CHAP. VI.
Many eminent Services done by him after his Settlement. A general Account of
his discharging the Pastoral Office Page 50 Mr. William Cooper settled with him
and Circumstances ibid Mr. Samuel Cooper settled with him and Circumstances
Page 52 His serving Harvard-College as an Overseer and Fellow of the
Corporation Page 53 Instances of his Zeal for the Good of that House ibid
Character of Dr. Edward Wiggl^sworth, Hollisian Professor of Divinity Page 54,
55 His Election to the Presidency over the College ibid Two Letters, wherein he
excuses himself from that Honor and Trust Page 56, 57 Service to, and Zeal for
Yale College, and three Letters about it Page 59 to 63 Care^ and Labors for
the Indians Page 64 Two Letters (in Latin) to Mons. Levergiat Page 65 to 69 His
Concern for poor Places within our Governments, destitute of the Gospel Page
69, 70 A Projection for setting up Charity-Schools in Boston Page 70, 71, 72 A
Proposal for a Fund in the Churches Page 73 to 77 His Visits to Schools,
Prisons, etc. ibid Encouraging the Market in Boston Page 78 -- Inoculation,
etc. ibid Employed by the Great and General Courts in many Services Writes to
Governors, Agents, etc. Page 79 His Conduct with Regard to intermedling with
Civil and Secular Matters vindicated Page 80 Highly honored and much employed
by his Brethren in the Ministry ibid Copies of several Addresses draughted by
their Desire Page 81 to 94 Some Instances of his ardent Love to the Churches
and Care of them Page 94, 95 His catholic and pacifick Spirit -- Instances of
it Page 95, 96, 97 Sentiments on Councils and their Efficacy Page 97 to 108 On
the third Way of Communion Page 109, 110 On the Right of choosing a Minister
Page 111, 112, 113
CHAP. VII.
Great Benefits arising from his early Travels abroad, and Sagacity at Home, to
the Country, Colleges, and Churches A particular Account of the Honorable
Samuel Holden's Benefactions Page 113 to 115 Of the Honored Thomas Hollis's
Bounties to Page 117 Of the Re^^ Mr. Isaac Hollis's Charities to Page 121 His
useful and pleasant Correspondence with the Rev. Dr. White Kennett, Bishop of
Peterborough Page 121 to 141 Letter to the Lord-Bishop of London Page 142, 143
To Dr. Hoadly Bishop of Bangor Page 143, 144 To Rt. Hon. Earl of Egmont Page
144, 145, 146 To Sir Richard Ellis, Bart. Page 147, 148 His Acquaintance and
Correspondence with Henry Newman, Esquire Page 146 With Mr. Shower, Drs. Harris,
Watts, Calamy, Evans, Hunt, Guise, Mr. Neal, etc. etc. etc -- Sir William
Ashurst, Lord Barrington Shute, etc. Friendship with Rev. Mr. Standen Page 149,
150 Letter (in Latin) to the Rev. Samuel Urlsperger, and his Answer Page 152 to
157 His Diploma from the University of Glasgow Page 157 Address in Return Page
158 Letter to the Vice Chancellor and Principal of the University Page 160 To
the Honorable and Reverend Society for propagating Christian Knowledge in
Edinburgh Page 161, 162 The Doctor's Publick-Spiritedness, Fidelity, Liberality
and Charity Page 163, 164
CHAP. VIII.
His Manner of Studying, writing Sermons and Letters, Diligence, Application
and Dispatch Page 165, 166 (...) Character as a Preacher Page 167 to 170
^^comiums on some of his Writings by learned Men Page 171 to 173 His Manner of
Praying Page 174 Thoughts on Psalmody Page 175 to 177 On reading the Scriptures
in public Page 178, 179 On using the Lord's-Prayer Page 180 Catechizing and
Renewals of Covenant Page 181, 182 His Civil and Pastoral Visits Page 182
Homiletical Virtues Page 183, 184 Twelve Letters of Consolation Page 184 -- 207
CHAP. IX.
Of the Doctor's private Life Page 207 His Marriages ibid With Mrs. Jane Clark
and Circumstances Page 208, 209 Madam Sarah Clark and Circumstances Page 208,
209 Madam Mary Frost and Circumstances Page 208, 209 (...) Account of the
Doctor's Children Page 209 His Behavior in the Relation of a Son Page 210 In
the Relation of an Husband ibid In the Relation of a Father ibid Manner of
educating his Children Page 211 Solemn Charges and Blessings given to his
Grandson Page 213, 214 Love and Kindness to other Relatives Page 215 His
Character as a Friend ibid As a Master Page 216 Family Religion Page 217 Closet
Devotion, etc. ibid His Behavior under Trials and Afflictions, particularly
sore Bereavements Page 220, 221, 222 Death of Mr. William Cooper Page 223
CHAP. X.
His constant Mindfulness of Death, and Preparations for it Page 224 Last
Letter wrote to Dr. Avery Page 226 The Time and Manner of his Departure Page
228 A short Description of his Person Page 230 Sir Richard Blackmore's Lines on
his Orator Tylon applied Page 231 A Paragraph from Mr. President Holyoke's
Oration ibid Complete Catalogue of his Publications Page 233
A List of the Subscribers.
A.
HON. John Alford, Esquire Six Books Rev. Mr. Nath. Appleton Rev. Mr. Hull Abbot
Mr. Thomas Allen three Books Mr. Samuel Adams Mr. Benjamin Andrews Mrs. Rebecca
Amory two Books
B.
RObert Brown, Esquire Rev. Mr. John Barnard Rev. Mr. Edward Barnard Rev. Mr. Jacob
Bacon Rev. Mr. Simon Bradstreet Rev. Mr. Thomas Balch Rev. Mr. John Ballantine
Rev. Mr. John Burt Mr. James Bowdoin three Books Mr. Thomas Bulfinch two Books
Mr. Josias Byles, jun. two Books Mr. Edward Bromfield Mr. Thomas Boutineau Mr.
Andrew Boardman Mr. William Bant Mrs. Mary Bennett Mr. Daniel Boyer Mr. John
Bridge Mr. Nicholas Boylston Mr. Thomas Baxter Mr. Ebenezer Bacon Mr. William
Baker Mr. Aaron Boardman
C.
JOhn Colman Esquire six Books Jonas Clarke, Esquire two Books Roland Cotton, Esquire
Thomas Clap, Esquire Mr. Peter Chardon six Books Rev. Mr. Peter Clarke Rev. Mr.
Samuel Checkley Rev. Mr. John Cotton Rev. Mr. Ward Cotton Rev. Mr. Samuel Cook
Rev. Mr. Marston Cabot Rev. Mr. John Cushing Rev. Mr. Samuel Cooper four Books
Rev. Mr. Samuel Checkley, jun. Rev. Mr. John Chandler Mr. Richard Carry three
Books Mr. William Cooper two Books Mr. Richard Cranch two Books Mr. Seth Coburn
Mr. Jonathan Cushing Mr. Ebenezer Coburn Mr. Samuel Curtis Mr. John Coburn Mr.
William Chesebrough
D.
COl. William Down, 3 Books Rev. Mr. Samuel Dexter Mr. Benjamin Dearborn six
Books Rev. Mr. Josiah Dennis Mr. Jacob Davis six Books Mr. John Dixwell six
Books Mrs. Hannah Davis two Books Mr. William Davis two Books Mr. Wiliam Down,
jun. Mr. Richard Draper Mr. Thomas Down Mr. Jonathan Dorby
E.
REV. Mr. Daniel Emerson Rev. Mr. Joseph Emerson Rev. Mr. Andrew Eliot Mr.
Samuel Edwards Mr. Moses Emerson
F.
JOhn Fayerweather, Esquire four Books Charles Frost, Esquire six Books Mr. Thomas
Flucker three Books Mr. James Foster two Books Mr. Samuel Franklin, jun. Mr.
Eleazer Fisher
G.
REV. Mr. Ellis Gray two Books Mr. Daniel Greenleaf six Books Mr. John Gardner
Mr. John Gore two Books Mr. Robert Gould Mr. John Glen Mr. Thomas Gray Mr. John
Gerrish Mr. William Greenleaf Mr. Edward Glover Mr. Hannah Glover Mr. Daniel
Gookin Capt. Benjamin Goldthwait
H.
THomas Hancock, Esquire six Books Rev. Mr. Edward Holyoke, President of Harvard
College Rev. Mr. Timothy Harrington Mr. Joseph How Mr. William Holden Mr.
Phineas Holden
J.
REV. Mr. Jedidiah Jewett Mr. Edward Jackson three Books Mr. Joseph Jackson
Mrs. Mary Johnston
K.
MR. John Knight Mr. John Kneeland 2 Books Mr. Jonathan Kimball Mr. Jonathan
Kimball, jun. Mr. John Kneeland, jun. Mr. Bartholomew Kneeland
L.
HON. Benjamin Lynde, Esquire Col. Benjamin Lincoln Rev. Mr. Israel Loring Rev. Mr.
John Lowell two Books Mr. John Langdon two Books Mr. Jonathan Lewis Mr.
Jonathan Louder
M.
MR. Edward Marion six Books Rev. Mr. John Morehead Rev. Mr. Thaddeus Maccarty
Rev. Mr. Jonathan Mayhew Mr. Richard Manson two Books Mr. Thomas Marshall Mr.
Daniel Marsh
N.
REV. Mr. Samuel Niles two Books Mr. Timothy Newell six Books Mr. Belcher Noyes
O.
MR. William Owen two Books Mr. Daniel Oliver two Books
P.
JOhn Phillips, Esquire six Books Jeremiah Powell, Esquire Rev. Mr. Thomas Prince Mr.
James Pitts six Books Rev. Mr. Ebenezer Parkman six Books Rev. Mr. Jonathan
Parsons Mrs. Prudence Prentice six Books Mr. William Phillips Mr. Edward Pain
Mr. Samuel Parkman Mr. Joseph Palmer Mr. William Pratt Mr. Benjamin Pickman
Q.
MR. Edmund Quincy, jun. two Books Mr. Henry Quincy two Books
R.
JAcob Royal, Esquire two Books Isaac Royal, Esquire two Books Mr. David Rowland Mr.
Joseph Roby Mr. Ebenezer Rice
S.
REV. Joseph Sewall, D. D. Rev. Mr. Thomas Smith Rev. Mr. Nathan Stone Rev. Mr.
Joseph Seccomb Rev. Mr. William Smith Rev. Mr. John Seccomb Major Samuel Sewall
Capt. Ebenezer Storer four Books Mr. John Staniford six Books Mr. Thomas Savage
six Books Capt. Arthur Savage Mr. Samuel Phillips Savage 2 Books Mr. Isaac
Smith two Books Mr. Joseph Sherburne Mr. John Scollay Mr. Malachy Salter, jun.
Mr. Edward Ladd Sanders Mr. William Skinner
T.
WIlliam Tyler, Esquire six Books Rev. Mr. William Tompson Mr. John Tanner six
Books Mr. Thomas Tyler Mr. John Tudor Mr. Thomas Townsend Mr. Benjamin Toppan
Mr. Royal Tyler two Books Mr. William Thomas Mr. Simon Tufts Mr. Samuel
Torrey, jun. Mr. Cornelius Thayer
V.
REV. Mr. James Varney six Books Rev. Mr. William Vinal
W.
HON. Jacob Wendell, Esquire six Books Major Ephraim Williams six Books Edward
Wigglesworth, D. D. and Hollisian Professor of Harvard-College two Books Rev.
Mr. William Williams Rev. Mr. William Welsted three Books Mr. William White six
Books Mr. Jonathan Whitney six Books Messirs. Willis and Fitch six Books Mr.
Jacob Wendell, jun. two Books Mr. Timothy White Mr. William Whitwell three
Books Mr. Thomas Wade Mr. John Mico Wendell Mr. John Williams
INTRODUCTION.
IT is an Observation of one of the greatest Men, and finest Writers of the
last Age, concerning Persons eminent for Learning, Piety and Usefulness
deceased, "That either not a little, or nothing at all ought to be said --
Their splendid Works and Services publicly known are thought (by some)
abundantly sufficient to supply the Want of an History of their Lives, hence it
has been said,

Dicta et Facta Eorum sunt Memoriae Eorum
-- scripta loquuntur. --
But I rather think, That the truly Great and Good should have their Speeches
and Actions at large narrated and faithfully transmitted to Posterity for their
Excitation and Imitation. -- That such ought not to be laid in the Grave with
Silence and Disregard seems to have been the common Sense of Mankind from the
Beginning of Time -- Accordingly Heathens, Jews and Christians have endeavored
by all the various Methods that Art could invent to perpetuate the Names and
Memories of their respective Heroes and Patrons, and as far as possible to
confer a Kind of Immortality upon them.

It must be confessed that few are qualified to draw a superior Character; and
do Justice to the Memories of some excellent Persons. It is an agreeable Rule
and Caution I have lately met with, scil. "That as the Lives of good and great
Men, require skilful Pens; so the Writer should be animated with a Portion of
that Genius that formed the Character whose Person he draws" Nelson in his Life
of Bishop Bull.
which agrees very well with the famous Saying of Livy on the Roman Orator,
"That to give CICERO his due Praises demands a Ciceronian Eloquence.

It will doubtless then be Matter of just Wonder to many to find me engaging in
a Work of this Nature so every Way unequal to the Subject, and therefore very
unfit to set it in its proper Points of Light. But since no one has appeared on
the important Occasion to write and print (not so much as a Funeral Discourse
published) One short Eclogue has been printed since I began the Narrative. And
a brief Character given in the public Prints.
neither my want of mental Powers, nor my present broken State of Health shall
discourage me from making an humble Attempt to pay some Honors to the Memory
of so great a Benefactor of his Country and to Mankind, who might justly lay
Claim to that Encomium in Pliny's Account of True Glory, He did what deserves
to be written, and wrote what deserves to the read. And I readily own I have
one Advantage which I shall endeavor to improve to the utmost from the near
and happy Relation In the Relation of a Son-in-Law for 21 Years.
I so long stood in to God's deceased Servant, whereby I came to know more
fully his Doctrine, manner of Life, Purpose, Faith, Long-suffering, Charity,
Patience etc -- than most others -- My Aims and Ends (I trust) are high and
worthy, scil. "That the great God may be glorified for his Gifts and Graces,
Image and Perfections which shone so illustriously in his Servant; and that all
who read this amiable and useful Life may be sweetly constrained Suadet Lingua,
Jubet Vita.
to an Imitation of it so far as it shall be found comformable to the Gospel of
God our Savior. --

I hope I have been preserved in a good Measure from that Error which many
Biographers and Eulogists insensibly slide into in Narratives of this kind,
scil. Making their Subject to excel in every Thing, by drawing a perfect
Character (as of a good Magistrate, Minister, etc.) without showing us the Man,
scil. those particular excelling Qualities which distinguish him from others --
which is as if a Painter or Limner should draw a perfect Beauty for every
agreeable Person that sits for their Picture; not regarding their peculiar
Lineaments, and more striking Features.

I have been at much Pains and Labor in Compiling and Methodizing the
Narrative, all excepting some Parts of the first short Chapters being collated
from vast Numbers of scattered Papers etc. The most of that which is properly
the Doctor's own (particularly his Letters) are taken from first rough Draughts
and printed off without any material Alteration, and therefore cannot be
supposed to be so correct as they are in the Hands of his corresponding Friends.

If the Work, imperfect as it is, be kindly accepted, and answers the high and
noble Ends I had in View, I shall rejoice and think myself well rewarded

E. T.

THE LIFE and CHARACTER Of the Reverend Benjamin Colman, D.D.
CHAP. I. The Subject of the Narrative, his Birth, Parentage, Genius for
Learning, early Piety, catholic Spirit, Desire to see England, and embarking
for it.
DR. BENJAMIN COLMAN, was born in Boston New England, October 19th 1673, of
reputable Parents, being second Son of William and Elizabeth Colman, who came
from London and settled there not long before William Colmam was Son of Matthew
and Grace Colmam of Satterly, near Beckles, in the Country of Suffolk, and
baptized there August 31st 1643. This is all I can find concerning his Family.
-- But the Name Colman is happy and honored in the Christian British Church,
from Time to Time -- Colman a Scotch Monk succeeded Finan, in the Reign of
Oswig King of the Northumbrians, and was at the Head of the Scotch Priests and
Monks in Opposition to the Romish Church Anno Dom. 661, and 664. Vid. Bid and
Rapin.
.

He was of a tender Constitution from his Birth, and very backward in his
Speech and Reading 'till he arrived to the Age of five Years; when at once he
grew forward in both, and entered young and small into the Grammar School under
the Tuition of the venerable and learned Mr. Ezekiel Cheever. His sprightly
Genius and Advances in Learning were soon (with Pleasure) observed by his
Preceptor, insomuch that in his first and second Years he was several Times
called upon by him to reprove and shame some dull Boys of upper Forms when they
grossly failed in their Catechism, and some low Exercises. He was fired with a
laudable Ambition of excelling at his Book, and a Fear of being outdone. By
his Industry at Home, he always kept foremost, or equal to the best of the Form
at School; and a great Advantage he had (which at that Time gave him no little
Pain) in the Promptness, Diligence and Brightness of his intimate Companion
Prout, who used to spend his Hours out of School generally in Studies with him,
the two or three last Years of his Life; and their Preceptor used openly to
compare their Exercises, and sometimes declare he knew not which were best, and
bid Colman take heed, for the first Time he was outdone Prout should have his
Place. -- But alas! a violent Fever seized the lovely, shining, ambitious Boy,
and suddenly carried him to an higher Form, to the great Grief as well as Hurt
of Colman, who was now left without a Rival, and so without a Spur to daily
Care and Labor. However, he followed his Studies so well that he was qualified
for an Admission into Harvard College in the Year 1688.

His early Peity was equal to his Learning. His pious Mother (as he records it
to her eternal Honor) like Lemuel,'s travailed in Pain through his Infancy and
Childhood for the New Birth, and to her Instructions and Corrections added her
Commands and Admonitions respecting every Thing that was religious and holy;
and in a particular Manner about the Duty of praying to God in secret, and also
caused him and her other Children to retire and pray together, and for one
another on the Lord's Days at Noon.

While a Schoolboy for a Course of Years he and some of his Companions, by
their own Proposal to each other, under the Encouragement of their Parents, and
with the Consent of their Preceptor used to spend a Part of Saturdays in the
Afternoon, in Prayer together at the House of Mr. Colman, which continued until
their leaving the School and going to College; Mather, Baker, Prout, Pool,
Townsend were of this Number; and for the most part behaved decently and
seriously in these early Exercises of Piety and Devotion.

After his Admission into College he grew in Piety and Learning, and in Favor
with God and Man. He performed all his Exercises to good Acceptance, many of
them had the Applauses of his learned Tutor, Mr. John Leverett. -- He was much
animated to the Study of the liberal Sciences, and to make the utmost
Improvement in them from the shining Example of the excellent Pemberton who was
a Year before him in Standing: To be next to him seems to bound his Ambition
until he passed his Degrees Sequor licet non aequis passibus.
of Bachelor and Master of Arts, which he did in the Years 1692 and 95, under
the Presidentship of the memorable Dr. Increase Mather. When he pronounced the
public Oration on taking his Master's Degree, his thin and slender Appearance,
his soft and delicate Voice, and the red Spots in his Cheeks, caused the
Audience in general to conclude him bordering on a Consumption, and to be
designed but for a few Weeks of Life.


Mr. Colman had before this Time come into Church Fellowship with the second
Church of Christ in Boston, under the pastoral Care of Dr. Increase and Cotton
Mather.

And being devoted to the Work of the evangelical Ministry by his Parents, and
inclining to it from his Childhood, diligently applied himself to the Study of
Divinity, and began (too soon as he was often pleased to say) to preach in the
Year 1693, first privately and then publicly; the Excuse for which was the
Decline of his Father's worldly Estate, after the Death of his Mother, whom God
took from his Head about three Years after his Admission into the College.

He began his stated preaching at Medford (then a small Village, now a
flourishing Town) about four or five Miles from Boston, for half a Year, to the
general Acceptance of the People there, who would have settled him had they
been able; and then returned to his Chamber in the College, to perfect his
Studies till he took his second Degree; and within three Weeks after he had
commenced Master of Arts, he embarked for London in the Heat of King William's
War with the French King, having a strong Desire to see England, and make
Improvement by what he could see and learn there.

Just before his Voyage the reverend Ministers of the North-Church in Boston
sent him to Newport on Rhode Island, at the Church's Expense, to preach there a
Sabbath, which was his first public Appearance and Display of his catholic
Temper, Modesty and Constancy, which his Tutors much praised him for on his
Return.

The Government there had given the Townhouse for the Missionaries from the
Bay to preach in; who had used it for that Purpose some Months before; but a
Minister of the Church of England happened to overtake Mr. Colman and Company
on the Road, on Saturday in the Afternoon and went into Newport with them. --
On the Lord's Day Moring Notice was brought to him that this Minister had got
the Governor's Leave to preach in the Townhouse the Forenoon, and that in the
Afternoon he might take his Turn. -- Mr. Colman told the Gentlemen he would go
and join with the Minister, and prayed them all to accompany him, that they
might disappoint the Quakers who officiously and openly played this Gentleman
against them, and give them an Example of Charity and Accord in worshipping
together, and of Unity in keeping the Sabbath: Which accordingly they did, and
dined together at a Gentleman's House, Col. S -- d. But when the Minister saw
Mr. Colman take out his Bible after Dinner, he civilly told him that he
supposed he had no Intention of preaching in the Afternoon, for the Governor
had given him the Use of the Townhouse for that Day. The Governor was
immediately sent to and owned it, saying, That the Gentleman had told him he
was the King's Minister etc. -- Upon which Col. S -- d, Mr. B -- y, Mr. C -- n
etc. told Mr. Colman that he should preach for them at Mr. B -- y's House,
where they would throw open the Windows about which the People might gather to
hear, which was consented to, provided it could be done without Noise or
Confusion; which being intimated to the People, the whole Morning Audience in a
Manner resorted to the private House in the gravest Manner imaginable, and
heard him to their great Satisfaction. An early Instance this of his Piety and
Discretion, Charity and Peaceableness, Resolution and Steadiness: and shows the
Meaness and Shame of a contrary Temper and Management. --

CHAP. II. A Voyage to England, Dangers and Hardships undergone in it, -- taken
Prisoner and carried into France.
IT was after the Twentieth Day of July in the Year 1695 that Mr. Colman
embarked for London (by the Will of God) on board the Ship Swan Capt. Thomas
Gilbert Commander -- For the whole three first Days he was on Shipboard he
endured the Extremity of Sea Sickness, and at times through the Voyage. On the
fourth Day the Vessel sprang a Leek, and the Water was heard to pour in on the
Star-board Tack, which alarmed the Sailors, and made some of them remark his
Eveness and Calmness when they expected he should have been much affrighted.
When the Winds blew a Storm afterward, he governed his Fears by looking on the
Captain, Mate, and Sailors to discover what he saw in their Faces. When they
came into the warm Seas, a Dolphin which they had marked with a Scar on his
shining Back, kept Company with the Ship for Ten or Twelve Days together,
feeding on her Bottom.

At the End of seven Weeks a Seeker made after them, and soon came up with
them. She was a Privateer of 20 Guns and an 100 Men, a light and fleet Ship;
The Swan was heavy laden, twelve Guns and 24 Men, Sailors and Passengers
together. The Swan's Company bore their Broad-sides and Vollies of small Arms
six or seven Times that Afternoon, defending themselves and annoying the Enemy;
but were taken the next Morning, having their Boltsprit shot away, and the
Mast, and Rigging so torn and cut, that the Masts fell all together an Hour
after; by which means the Ship became a perfect Wreck, and the Company were
much looked at by the French when they came into Port. The French had a great
Number of Men killed, for they were so full that if a shot entered it must do
Execution.

God graciously preserved Mr. Colman in the Fight, exposed all the while on the
Quarter Deck, where four out of seven were wounded, and one mortally. He was
much praised for his Courage when the Fight was over; but though he charged and
discharged like the rest, yet he declared he was sensible of no Courage but of
a great deal of Fear; and when they had reecived two or three Broadsides he
wondered when his Courage would come, as he had heard others talk. In short, he
fought like a Philosopher and a Christian. He looked Death in the Face, and
prayed all the while he charged and fired, -- while the Boatswain and others
made a Frolic and Sport of it.

There was a young Rake, a Passenger on board, that lisped at Atheism, and spit
at Religion every Day of the Voyage, who was now in the Terrors of Death, --
when he saw Mr. Colman take a Musket, he was ashamed to leave the Deck; but the
first Volley of small Arms laid him flat on his Belly without being touched:
when the great Guns roared he would have crept through the Boards to hide
himself; he lay as one Dead, and let the Men tread on him or kick him as they
pleased. At last he peeped up when the firing ceased for a Minute, and asked
where they were? Mr. Colman told him they lay by to charge again; and in a
Moment he flew down into the Doctor's Room, and was seen no more till the Ship
was taken. Yet this Spark when safe in France was ridiculing Religion again,
and scorning the Ministers of it as much as ever.

When the Ship struck the French Boat came on Board, and the Lieutenant took
all the Crews Moneys and put them into the Boat. The Sea ran so high that Mr.
Colman was in great Danger of falling beside the Boat, and when he was between
the two Ships could see neither, no not a Times the Masts of either. This was a
new Scene of Danger to him, but the Approach to the Privateer seemed greatest
of all. As he got up the Side he found his Hat and Wigg gone; and as he looked
over the Side there stood the young Atheist naked on the Deck. -- His turn came
next; but as they were haling off his Clothes, he saw a compassionate Man
lifting up his Eyes and Hands to Heaven. -- He cried to him immediately
Miserere mei Domine! and he answered him, Are you a Minister? And though he had
often entreated the Company not to call him so, he immediately owned himself;
to be one, and down he came to seize him for himself; But his Shirt was off
before he could get down; and he carried him to his Room, and took away
Stockings, Shoes and Breeches; and told him, that if he left them upon him some
body else would presently have them. At last he obtained of him his under Pair
of Stockings, by showing him eighteen Pistoles in the Rollers of the Breeches,
but as soon as he came on the Deck a Fellow would have the Stockings.

They then dressed him up in a few Rags of the Sailors, which so changed him
that none of the Ship's Crew knew him, but would turn from him till he spoke to
them, and then looked at him with Astonishment. The Captain spoke English well,
to whom he addressed for some Clothing, but he turned from him with Disdain;
and the Priest afterward told him that he hated him as much.

Providence suffered him to be spoiled of all that he had thought to save in
case he were taken, but that which he never meant to save was preserved for
him. There was an ingenious French Gentlewoman on Board, Mad. Allaire, with
four Children, going to her Husband at London. Mr. Colman's chief Delight in
the Voyage was her little Son of two Years old -- whom he made to love him for
his Cakes and Sweetmeats. Madam Allaire seeing a piece of Gold in his Hand as
the Privateers Boat was coming on Board, asked him to let her save it for him,
which she did, and it brought him nineteen Pounds at Nants which made him rich;
so that what he had no thought of saving was preserved for him, and all that he
had projected to save for himself was lost.

He was put down into the Hold of the Ship among his ragged Companions, which
was at first grievous to him; but he found afterward the singular Care of
Providence in it: for there he was warm, now his Clothes were taken away; and
there he felt no more any Sickness, the Motion of the Ship being nothing
sensible there, to affect the Head or Stomach.

He had been in the Hold but half a Day, when Madam Allaire came on Board. The
Captain and Officers of the Ship treated her well. She soon enquired after Mr.
Colman, and hearing he was in the Hold, she entreated the Captain's Favor to
him that he might be with them in the great Cabin. When he refused that, she
asked leave for him to come up and see them. This was granted. But when Madam
first saw him at the Door, she shrieked out as if it had been a Ghost, ran to
him and wept upon his Neck: and he wept with her. Capt. Gilbert burst out into
Tears, and so did Capt. Anderson and his Lieutenant, Passengers. He was naked
from his Ears to his Shoulders, and Madam covered him with some of her
Childrens Linen to keep him warm. He sat an Hour with them, eat and drank and
returned comforted to his Hold.

Presently away came a Lieutenant to him, to ask him if Madam were not his
Wife? He told him, No! He said he wondered he would ^eny it, when he saw the
Captain treated her so well; and they all knew that the English Ministers had
Wives. He told him if Madam were his Wife he should have no reason but to be
proud of her and own her. Why then, said he, did she run to you shrieking, and
fall on your Neck? He told him, because she honored and loved him as a
Gentleman and a Minister, and was frighted to see him ^used so barbarously.

When Mr. Grant the Mate of the Ship, first saw him put down into the Hold with
them, he turned to those that sat nigh him, and said, We shall bury Mr. Colman
in three Days Time: But the next Day Mr. Colman seeing that his Presence and
Company restrained the Sailors from a necessary Cheerfulness in their
melancholy Condition; bid them be innocently cheerful and divert themselves;
upon which Mr. Grant (a very grave, prudent and pious Man, 50 Years old)
answered with Joy; What Mr. Colman do you call upon us to be cheerful? What
made us sad was to think you would die here of Sorrow: if we do but see you
cheerful we shall all be merry.

Among the Plunder Mr. Colman's Bible was found, and the Captain was so civil
as to send it to him, with a strict Prohibition of not showing it to any of his
Men. This was a singular Favor of God to him, the Ten Days he was with them,
and all the Days of his Captivity. -- One of the wounded Men was dying in the
Hold, and he had leave also to pray with him.

CHAP. III. What he met with in France, his Sufferings and Succors, embarking
for Portsmouth, Danger of being lost, with other Remarbables occurring before
he reached London.
AT length they cast Anchor before Bell Isle, and from thence went up the
River, toward the City of Nants. In the Way they were put on Board a great
Hulk, but because it was the King's Store-Ship were not permitted to lie so
much as under the Quarter Deck; it rained and they threw a Sail over them, and
Mr. Colman slept comfortably till the Morning and took no cold.

In the Morning they traveled to Nants.

The Vineyards were very pleasant on the Banks of the River, and the Fruit
delicious to him, especially after a tedious sick Voyage. But he could get
little of them.

Madam Allaire wrote to her Husband's Mother at Rochel, and to her great
Surprise down came her Husband himself in a very rich Dress: He had lost all at
London and so went over to France, conformed to the Romish Church and so
enjoyed his Estate.

Madam understood her Religion very well, and was a confirmed Protestant, and
had Popery in infinite Contempt and Scorn. Her Grief was unutterable afterward,
when she saw her Children in Danger of being Papists, and her Infants baptized
in the Romish Way. The Priest teased her continually, and she sent Word to Mr.
Colman by Mr. Middlecot, that she would be glad to be a Beggar in England, if
Mr. Allaire would have staid there. She nev^^ was easy till she got out of May
12. 1734. This Gentlewoman paid a Visit to Boston from St. Christophers and was
received by Mr. Colman with a surprising Joy after so melancholy a parting 38
Years before. And after mutual Expressions of the most sincere Joy she gave him
a large and particular Account of her Sufferings in France, and Deliverance
from them, after a wonderful Trial of Constancy and Experience of Divine
Support and Assistance in Times of Need till she arrived safely in Holland;
which Mr Colman penned down and left among his Papers. A most entertaining
History, but too long to be here inserted. He Concludes it with these Words,
"Thus in old Age Mrs. Allaire and I have renewed the Acquaintance we contracted
in our Voyage, with only this Difference that Time has wrinkled and made us
unknown in Face to one another, but improved our Souls, and made them more
amiable and pleasant to each other. She is an excellent Christian, waiting for
the Consolation of her Translation from a World of Evils and Trials, which the
Grace of God has gloriously carried her through to whose free Grace be all the
Glory. May we meet and and live for ever in the Rest that belongs to the People
o^ God above.

This Gentlewoman may be still living a Letter of Hers to Mr. Colman being
found in his Study, dated London, May 1747. wrote with her own Hand in the
French Tongue, Aet. 81. --


France, into Holland, at the End of fifteen Years.

The first Night in the Jayl was a very shocking Scene to Mr. Colman, but he
took a Wisp of Straw like the Rest to lay under his Head, and slept soundly on
the Floor till Morning, when the Door was unlocked to let the Prisoners into
the Yard. But God gave him and two or three others Favor in the Eyes of the
Captain of the Prison, and he allotted them a better Room by themselves, one
Corner of which they filled with Straw and slept there at Ease.

Now he clothed himself from Head to Foot with about Three Pounds Ten
Shillings. His Wigg cost him half a Crown, and the rest was in proportion. But
it made him so fine, after what he had worn, that when he came into the Yard
thus arrayed, his Company did not know him again till he spoke, which made them
very merry.

While he was in Jayl he and his Company were visited by one Mr. Welsh, whom
God sent to comfort and cherish them. Whether he were a Protestant or n^ he
would not discover; but when Mr. Colman said to him, that he had never before
seen such Charity; he answered it was one of the seven Acts of Mercy to visit
an relieve Prisoners. He said nothing about Religion, which a Papist so
compassionate as he was, would in all Probability have done. From Day to Day at
Noon in came a Joint of Meat dressed, and by that Time the Company had eat half
their Meat he came with a Bottle of Wine hid under his Coat. He sent also a
Blanket or two to cover them. And when at seven Days End they were going out of
Town, he saluted the Provost that went with them, asked him to drink, and
treated the Company. So they took each of them a Penny Loaf from his Hand, and
bid him farewell: pouring out their Prayers for the charitable Samaritan that
had bound up their Wounds.

Late at Night they came to an House and Barn to lodge in, but the Barn was all
Mire without a Wisp of Straw. Mr. Colman with two or three turned back to the
House, took up the Candle and went up Stairs. The good Woman screamed out, and
up came the Provost in great Wrath; but being showed an handful of Money the
Woman made a low Courtesy and so all was well. Mr. Colman traveled Ninety
Miles on Foot in Four or Five Days and had the best of the Inn wherever he came.

At Rennes he was accosted by a young Priest with a Crucifix in his Hands, and
a few Rabble at his Heels, asking him in Latin what he thought of the Crucifix.
Mr. Colman suddenly answered him, That it was not an Object of religious
Worship. He would prove (he said) that it was, so the Rabble got about them.
The Provost told him he was a Minister. O Diabole! cried one of them. He bid
the Priest reprove him. He said, no it was too true; for all Heretics are out
of the holy Church, and therefore belong to the Devil, and are going to the
Devil, and are Devils. Mr. Colman told him he would not have him so far to
undervalue himself as to hold Conversation with the Devil, and bid him farewell.
-- The next Morning he came very humble and fawning, telling him that the
Fathers had great Esteem of him, and Compassion to him, upon the Report he had
made to them; and would not have a Man of his Parts and Learning perish through
Ignorance and Prejudice. Mr. Colman prayed him to give his Thanks to their
Reverences. --

When he came near the Walls of Dinan it was a sorrowful Spectacle to see that
Part of them covered with Prisoners; but when they entered the Town as many of
them as had Money had Liberty to take up Lodgings, for three Pence a Night.
Provisions were exceeding cheap, but the French had no Money to buy. The whole
Country was poor that they passed through, and as for this Town it seemed
perfectly to live upon them. Their Stay was long in it; two Months at least;
the Cause of which was the floating Prisons that King James had set up which
were two great Hulks, one at St.Malo, the other at Dunkirk; where he put the
Prisoners that were taken by Ships bearing his Commission. This the Court of
England resented, and would exchange no more Prisoners till these Floats were
laid down.

At last the Paquets arrived at St. Malo, and there Mr. Colman and others
embarked, near a Thousand of them on board three Boats. He was put on Board the
largest, about 90 Tuns, and had 400 Men on board. They set Sail toward
Evening, and set their Course to steer clear of a Ledge of Rocks a few Leagues
off in their Way; But before Midnight they were upon them, and in the midst of
Breakers. A timorous Fellow upon the Deck screamed out, and alarmed the living
Lading between Decks, and in the Hold. At once they all rose, and the Masters
with the Men, though they called to them not to stir for their Lives, lest the
Vessel upon such a Motion within should not feel her Helm. But they had as good
have spoke to the Wind; every one were for running to see themselves die in the
Dark; and Mr. Colman was left alone in the Cabin, with a poor trembling
Gentlewoman and her two Daughters from Barbados.

He had eight Pistoles left of his Money when the Paquets arrived. He kept two
to carry him to London, and the other six God gave him an Heart to give among
his poor Countrymen to redeem a few of them from remaining Prisoners for Debt.
God wonderfully repaid him this his Charity to his Companions in Tribulation
soon after his Arrival at London as you will hear.

They landed at Portsmouth before the End of two Days, but what with Sickness
and Cold his Throat seemed to be closed up: But a warm Supping and Bed, by the
Blessing of God, made him well the next Morning.

He had lent 30 s. to a young Spark from New York. He told him of a rich Uncle
he had half Way to London, and prayed him to lend him one of his Pistoles, to
be repaid there. He hired Horses presently and they mounted, but he had also
bought himself Bootlashes, etc. So that before they reached his Uncles their
Moneys were gone, and their Horses had done their Stage.

His Uncle was a wealthy Quaker and received them gravely. But no Credit would
he give to this his Nephew, he knew him too well he said. Mr. Colman told him
what Credit he had given to him, and saved him from the Expenses of Portsmouth
-- At Table the good Man talked over the sad Story of New-England's persecuting
and hanging the Quakers. Mr. Colman informed him what a strange Sort of People
the Quakers were then, and what Provocations they gave our Fathers; how they
disturbed our worshipping Assemblies, and sometimes appeared in an indecent and
terrifying Manner to our timorous Mothers: But after all he confessed to him it
was wrong in us to return their Persecutions of us in the Manner we did, and
that the People of New England all thought so now. Vid. Dr. Cotton Mather's
Account of them in his History of New England, Book VII Page 22, 23. etc. They
opposed the good Order both Civil and Sacred, erected in the Colony. -- They
broached innumerable Heresies, and committed innumerable Disorders. -- The Warm
Zeal of our Fathers hereupon moved them to make many sharp Laws against them
hoping by the Terror of them to prevent the Mischiefs threatened -- And the
Government unhappily proceeded to the Execution of some of these Laws in
scourging and then banishing, and upon their Return hanging Three or Four of
the chief Offenders. -- But all these Laws have been disclaimed, renounced and
repealed for Threescore Years past, and therefore Mr. Colman could say that the
People of New England were of another Spirit and Temper in his Day. At present
the Quakers are not so much as obliged by any Law of the Province to pay Rates
for the Support of the Standing Ministry in the Towns where they live. And it
is found that they have decreased, as our good Treatment of them, and Mildness
toward them has increased. -- What a Divine of our own Writes is now almost
universally consented to, Viz. A Man who is a good Neighbor, and a good
Subject, has a Right unto his Life and the Comforts of it; And it is not his
being of This or That Opinion in Religion, but his doing of something which
directly tends to the Hurt of Human Society by which this Right can be
forfeited. --

God grant the Monster Persecution may never more appear in any Shape among us.
--




Mr. Colman then prayed him to advise him how to get to London. He told him he
would lend him Money to carry him thither. Lodge here to Night, said he, and I
will have an Horse and Guide for Thee in the Morning. The good Family entreated
him courteously in the Evening, and in the Morning his good Host lent him
Twenty Shillings: which he called for a Fortnight after and received, with most
hearty Acknowledgments. But his Kinsman never repayed a Farthing of the Moneys
he borrowed. --

There was another young Gentleman, a Rake with a sober Face, from Barbados. He
traveled with the Company from Nants to Dinan, and was lodged in the same
Chamber with Mr. Colman. For him he paid Fifty Shillings in France, and in the
End had like to have had his Throat cut for it. When this Spark came of London
he found Sir -- a Barbados Knight; an old gaming Companion of his, and won an
handful or two of Guineas of him. The Moneys bought him two or three fine
Suits, and Linen agreeable. Which was no sooner in his Lodgings but he and his
Clothes were out of them, and he shipped off to Barbados again without paying a
Penny.

He bragged how generous he had been to good Mr. Colman and given him Five
Pounds for his Fifty Shillings. A Friend of Mr. Colman's was saying in the
Coffee-House he wondered at L -- for abusing him after this Manner, and a
Sharper that stood by took up the Argument in L -- Favor; said he was well
acquainted with him, and would show him his Lodgings. -- He said he had Money
to spare, and he would pay him.

Mr. Colman was so overseen as to go with the Man upon his Friend's Advice.
Accordingly they took Boat and rowed up to Chelsea. He led him to an Alehouse
over against the Knight's Lodgings. The Servants of the House, and the Master
of the Alehouse told him that L -- was returned to Barbados above a Week
before. By their looking on his Companion, they saw that he had known it. So
Mr. Colman found himself kidnapt; and what remained was to get out of his Hands
as well as he could.

He dined him handsomely at the Ale House, and was for returning by Water, but
finding no Boat and the Sun hastening down they walked over the Fields to St.
James's. On the Way Mr. Colman saw his cutthroat Companion on the Look-out at
every By-place, and expected to be robbed, if not worse. But he showed no Fear,
and Heaven (to which he cried) protected him. Somebody or other always
appeared on the Way.

When they had passed by Whitehall it grew dark, and Mr. Colman found himself
pushed in an Instant into a blind Alehouse, and his Companion caught him by
the Hand and said, we must drink one Mug more at parting. Mr. Colman saw the
Servitor's giggle, paying great Respect to this his Gentleman as a Man of
Figure, and ready to assist him. So he put the best Face he could on it, and
while the Ale was drawing he told him that he was a Sollicito^, that he knew
where L -- y was and would have him next Morning, but he must have Six
Shillings for a Writ and Charges. Mr. Colman was glad to give him the Money had
it been six times as much to get rid of him; and they both laughed at parting
for very different Reasons.

Hitherto his Charity and Compassion was but ill requited by Men, but within a
little time it was abundantly recompensed by God, as you will see in the next
Chapter.

CHAP. IV. The Reception he met with at London, his Acquaintance with Divines
and other Learned Men, Characters of diverse of them, Preaching at London,
Cambridge, Ipswich, Dedham, and at Bath, -- his Visits to the two famous
Universities Oxford and Cambridge, -- the Honor and Pleasure he had in the
Acquaintance and Friendship of Philomela, Mrs. Elizabeth Singer, etc. etc.
HIS first Night at London was very melancholy. He had lost all his Letters
from New England, and in them his Directions to his Friends: With Difficulty he
found out the House of a Reverend Minister, but he could not be seen: It grew
dark, and he prayed Madam to direct him to some sober House where he might
lodge that Night. She did him the Favor, and it looked darker to him now than
when the French turned him into the Hold.

But in the Morning the pious Mr. Ives made him full Amends. -- A Man full of
Grace, Humility Meekness and Charity. He took him into his Arms with the
Tenderness of a Father, and Madam chose him good Lodgings.

His dear Brother Mr. John Colman, though but a young Man and beginning the
World himself, yet like a Father to him gave him a Bill of Exchange upon Mr.
Ives for Thirty Pounds Sterling; and what was yet a far greater Piece of
Generosity, he gave him Credit with him without any Limit. He did not trespass
on this his Goodness further then one Ten Pounds. This made Forty Pounds which
he never asked him to repay. --

The Rev. Mr. Quick of London was the first Minister he was acquainted with. He
loved the Stranger, and was a very affectionate Gentleman: but extremely sudden
and quick in his Temper. His Arms and House were always open to him.

It pleased God (about this time) to visit Mr. Colman with a dangerous Fever,
but Madam Ives had provided him with a good Nurse. Dr. Moreton visited him, and
God healed him. Mr. Quick was often with him in his Sickness and cheered him by
saying to him, "That he was as near Heaven at London as at Boston. It pleased
God soon to recover him. --

Before he got abroad he was surprised with an Invitation from Mr. and Madam
Parkhurst in Cheap Side, to accept of half a Year's Board at their House. God
made her a kind and loving Mother to him, and a generous Friend afterward to
some of his Friends from New England, in their Straits.

This happy Lodging at one of the most known and frequented Booksellers among
the Dissenters, brought him soon into an Acquaintance with the City Ministers,
which was a singular Advantage and Pleasure. And so it has been to his Country
and the Churches thereof since, as will be seen in the Sequel of this Narrative.

The Family attended the Ministry of the Reverend and learned Mr. How and Mr.
Colman with them. This brought him to the Lord's-Table with him and into his
Pulpit. Mr. How was pleased to embrace him as soon as the Exercise was over,
and told him that his Church had lately chosen the Reverend Mr. Spademan of
Roterdam to be his Assistant and Successor in the Pastoral Care, and he had
accepted their Call. He asked Mr. Colman if he was inclined to see Holland, and
said his Church would bear his Charges over; and also back again if the People
of Roterdam did not choose him to be their Minister, or if he did not like the
Place. Mr. Colman answered him, he greatly desired to see Holland, and no Terms
could be more agreeable than these he proposed. The Support then was an Hundred
and Forty Pounds a Year, paid by the States, and he was to be Colleague with
the Reverend Aged and Learned Mr. Joseph Hill, by whom the Greek Lexicon was
corrected and amended.

He was much pleased with this Offer of Providence, and spoke openly of it, by
which means it came to Mr. Hill's Ears. For he was then in the City, and averse
to Mr. Spademan's coming over; of which Mr. How said nothing when he proposed
the Matter. Mr. Hill had wrote a Book of the Dominion of England over the
Narrow Seas, for which K. Charles the II. had given him an Hundred a Year for
Life. It had been withheld, and he was now suing for it. He came to Mr.
Colman's Lodgings, and asked him if he was the young Man that was going to
Roterdam? And told him he did ill to act in Concert with Mr. How to get his
Kinsman away from him who had now been his Assistant for seventeen Years in the
Work of the Ministry. Mr. Colman asked him with much Surprise, if he were the
Reverend Mr. Hill? And told him that Mr. How had never let him know that he was
in the City, or that he was not consenting to Mr. Spademan's coming away. He
told him it was the Hope of being under his Ministry, Inspection and Wing that
was one great Inducement to him to go to Roterdam: But since he had the
Opportunity now of seeing him, and of asking his Consent, he should not go
without it. He changed his Face upon this and said, "You speak like an
ingenious and modest Youth, and have already made good Mr. How Is Words to me
concerning you, and you deserve a better Settlement than Roterdam." But he
neither would nor could part with his Kinsman.

Mr. Colman went to Mr. How and told him what had happened. He seemed much
surprised at his sudden Promise, not to go without Mr. Hill's Consent. He told
him there were enough ready to go: and so Mr. Colman found it; for before the
Week was out one went, without saying a Word of it to Mr. Hill. He told him Mr.
Spademan was resolved to return to London, and that Mr. Hill had nothing to do
to hinder it: If the People chose, the States paid; and in fine, that he had
hurt himself by not using the Understanding God had given him.

At which Words Mr. Colman's Head turned, and he let him know it, and told him
"That he began to question his own Understanding since he was pleased to tax
his Conduct as he did." -- He left him in some Amazement, and meeting Mr.
Timothy Rogers told him the Story, and prayed him to set him right if he had
erred. He smiled on him and said, No; However he questioned whether many in his
Circumstances would have acted with like Honesty and Simplicity. -- Mr. Colman
asked the Opinion of another Minister or two, who praised him for what he had
done. But by this Means he lost the Favor of Mr. How for two or three Months,
who would scarce look upon him as he bowed to him among the younger Ministers.

Soon after the Ministers waited on the King at Kensington, and Dr. Bates made
one of his finest Speeches to him, upon the Discovery of the Assassination
Plot. It happened the Coach Mr. Colman was in came first to the Park-Gate which
led to the Palace, and there stood the Reverend Dr. Bates with his Chair that
had carried him over the Stones, through the City; so he had the Honor to give
him his Place in the Coach, and walk on Foot to the Palace. -- The Courtiers
closed about the loved King William, and the Ministers about the Doctor, in a
Circle; and then the Doctor delivered his Speech with an Easiness and Gravity
that were peculiar to him, and charming to all. My Lord Chamberlain led the
Ministers down to a Treat in the Buttery, where they eat a Bit of the King's
Bread and drank a Glass of his Wine.

The Reverend Mr. Daniel Williams (afterward Dr. Williams) being out of the
City, Mr. Colman was asked to preach for him, and by that means became known to
the Reverend Mr. Calamy (afterward Dr. Calamy) his Assistant. Mr. Calamy fell
into an endearing Love to Mr. Colman, so far as to tell him he hoped they
should spend their Lives in one Church. And soon after being in Dr. Bray's
Lodgings at Whitehall the Doctor enquired after Mr. Calamy with great Respect,
and run out in Praises of his Book concerning Vows; saying, that he had bought
up thirty of them for the Libraries in the Plantations, which were then
forming. Mr. Colman let the Doctor know that he should inform Mr. Calamy of the
Honor he did him, which he presently did.

Mr. Williams was gone to Bath, to pass a Month there for the Benefit of the
Waters: And Mr. How who had much at Heart a Reconciliation between the leading
Brethren of the two Boards, Presbyterian and Congregational, drew up a short
Paper on the Head of Justification, and got it signed by Dr. Bates and others
on one side, and by Mr. Mead, and Mr. Mather and others on the other side. Mr.
Calamy sent down an Account of this to Mr. Williams, with a Copy of Mr. How Is
Paper, and up he came full of Resentment, that the Opportunity of his Absence
should be taken for this, as if he were not for Peace, with Truth, as much as
any of them.

He drew up twenty Objections against Mr. How Is Paper, and finding none but Mr.
Colman in the Bookseller's Shop, he showed him (young as he was) his Paper of
Remonstrance; and talked over (...) Objections for an Hour together.

Mr. Colman thought the Reasons against Mr. How Is Procedure were just, though
his End was good, scil. Peace and Unity. But Displeasure had found false
Doctrine also on the Paper, and dangerous Phrases, which showed, that too ^arm
Zeal for Peace, led wise Gentlemen into a Quarrel, and that the most guarded
Words could not escape Objections when once we are angry.

Mr. Williams carried his Complaint to the Board the next Monday. It was a full
House in Expectation of it, for the Thing made a great Noise. The Care of the
Board was not to split if self again in two. Accordingly, they only chose a
Committee to take the two Papers, and draw up a third in which all might agree.
Dr. Bates, Dr. --, Mr. Hammond, Mr. Alsop, Mr. Burgess, Mr. -- were the
Committee. Mr. How and Mr. Williams were to be present, to offer what they had
to say.

The next thing was where to meet: Mr. -- told them, "That as he came along Mr.
Parkhurst had kindly offered his House, if they would meet there. It was
agreed, and Mr. Colman by this means heard all that passed between them, there
being nothing but a Glass-Door and Curtain between the Gentlemen and him. The
Points to be disputed were nice, and the Gentlemen of a superior Character,
which rendered the Hearing a most grateful Entertainment.

They were all very pleasant. Not an angry Word passed between Mr. Williams and
Mr. How. A third Paper was produced, and readily assented to by all the eight.
So every thing was in Statu quo, and a great Flame stifled.

There was scarce any Difference between this third Paper and Mr. How Is only
the Phrase of Commutation of Persons between Christ and Believers was left out;
as obscure and needing Explanation. If Mr. Williams had not been pacified, by
the personal Aspect of Mr. How Is Paper on him being taken away, he might have
raised as many Objections against this also. --

Mr. Colman had the Pleasure of dining with all these reverend Gentlemen
together, after this Meeting and Labor of Love, and heard their Wisdom on
several abstruse Points, wherein he was confirmed by their serious and calm
Judgments.

Dr. Annesly's Death was after this, but the Part Mr. Colman saw of it was most
pleasant. Yet by the Funeral Sermon upon him, he passed some Weeks in great
Pain.
He seemed at that Time perfectly at Ease in Body as well as Mind, with his
wonted Cheerfulness and Smiles. "Yesterday, said he, I lost the use of this
Finger, and the Day before of that, and tomorrow I look this will be gone.
Brother Beverly, added he, your Faith has outran mine; but now I shall know
before you: I leave you all in the Dark about the Times and Seasons.

Mr. Beverly had in Print fixed on the Year 1697 for the Accomplishment of all
the great Expectanda, the Fall of Antichrist, etc. He was one of the most
humble and modest Men living, and yet was so bold as to write his Thoughts, and
set his Time, as is before said. When his Year came and produced nothing
extraordinary, the good Man did in the most humble and public Manner confess
his Error and Presumption; asking Pardon of God and his People.

In like manner the learned Mr. Fleming was a most modest Gentleman in
Conversation, but in writing bold and daring. His Motto was Libere sed Modeste:
The Modeste he wore abroad, the Libere he kept at Home, used it freely, and
sent it abroad in Print.

Providence now invited Mr. Colman to see the two Universities. Sir Henry
Ashurst; then our Agent for New England, carried him with him to his
Country-Seat near Oxford. He rode twice with him thither in his Coach, and had
the Honor to dine with Dr. Hall, Bp. of Bristol, a venerable humble, grave
Divine. He waited also on Dr. Hough, Bp. of Oxford, and Master of Magdalen
College, a bright and lofry Gentleman, polite in Dress and Behavior. Also the
Rev. Dr. Gastrell, since Bp. of Chester, did him the Honor to show him the
several Colleges, and what was rare and curious in them. He told Mr. Colman
that he wished the Dissenters might have a College in each University for the
educating their Children; He was persuaded the Church would then prevail, and
the Schism soon cease. -- Mr. Colman agreed with him that it might be a
probable Means of putting an End to the Schism, the Essence whereof lay (as he
judged) very much in Uncharitableness, and that proceeded from the Ignorance we
are in of each other. -- These noble Persons also spent a Day with Sir Henry at
his Seat. The Bishop of Oxford passed a Complement or two to Mrs. Ashurst, one
of the loveliest Persons then in the Kingdom, and Mr. Colman turned them upon
her again when they were gone: But she answered, "That was a likely Way to
starve indeed, for what signified Eight Hundred Pounds per Annum only for
Life"; she afterward married a Baronet with three thousand a Year in Land.

It was a vast Pleasure to Mr. Colman to know the Piety and Humility of the
Lady Ashurst, Daughter to Ld. Paget, and who inherited the high Devotion of her
noble Mother. The Lady Paget being taxed once for marrying her Daughters to
Gentlemen of the fanatic Character, replied, I take Notice, Madam, that the
Gentlemen of that sort commonly make the best Husbands.

Mr. Colman was so happy as to gain the perfect Esteem of the Lady and her
Family. He lived one Fortnight alone with her in the Country, and Sir Henry
would long after rally him upon his Lady's Fondness for him.

Afterward at London she would not suffer him to avoid her most public
Respects in the Congregation. And the honorable Mr. Bromfield came charged the
last Time from London with highest Expressions of Love from her to him. The
Daughter with Mr. Colman used to range over the Manor in the Afternoons. She
asked a Poem from him: He told her it would lead into a Quarrel. She promised
it should not on her Part. So the next Day he wrote one with this Title, A
Quarrel with For^^ne: Because (forsooth) he was not equal to her in Rank and
Riches -- In it was the following Simile, So have I seen a little silly Fly
Upon a blazing Taper dart and die.
The foolish Insect ravished with so bright
And fair a Glory, would devour the Light.
At first he wheels about the threatening Fire,
With a Career as fleet as his Desire:
This Ceremony past, he joins the same
In Hopes to be transformed himself to Flame.
The fiery, circumambient Sparkles glow,
And vainly warn him of his Overthrow,
But resolute he will to Destruction go.
So mean-born Mortals, such as I, aspire,
And injure with unhallowed Desire,
The Glory we ought only to admire.
We little think of the intense fierce Flame,
That Gold alone is Proof against the same;
And that such Trash as we like drossy Lead,
Consume before it, and it strikes us dead.


One Afternoon as he came from Oxford, whether the Steward of Sir Henry had
attended him, he saw a Numbe^^ of People before him on the Down, and was soon
told that a Robber was just taken and carried to the next Village. He had the
Curiosity to go into the Tavern and see him. He was a young Fellow of nineteen
Years old, and one of the Company was telling after a boorish Manner, how he
rode after him, came up with and took him. -- But said the miserable Wretch, "I
yielded honorably. "Yes, yes, said the other, that you did. -- Well, it is but
a Swing, cried the Robber very impudently. This turned Mr. Colman's Compassion
into Indignation, and he said, -- But vile Wretch consider, "whither that Swing
is? Is it not into Eternity? And an Eternity of Misery if you die without
Repentance; as you seem willing and likely to do? Do you like and can you bear
to think of, A Swing into Hell, into unquenchable Fire and everlasting Burnings?

A shivering Horror fell upon the Villain, and all the Room turned and stared
on the Preacher; as if they had never heard a serious Discourse before. This
animated Mr. Colman to go on, and he found himself helped to speak very much to
his own Satisfaction, on the Occasion for a Quarter of an Hour.

As soon as he mounted again, the Steward said to him, "Sir, you have preached
a surprising Sermon to one of the most ignorant and wicked Villages in England.

While Mr. Colman was at Sir Henry's pleasant Seat he received a kind Letter
from a Gentleman in London, with one enclosed to the Right Reverend the Bishop
of London; written as his Friend informed him by his Lordship's Order, upon the
Recommendation he had received of him: But Mr. Colman did not see meet to wait
upon him with it. At the same Time Providence was honoring him with an
Invitation to see the other University: for he was called back to London by a
Letter which informed him, that the Ministers of the Presbyterian Board had
chosen him to go down to Cambridge; the aged Pastor of a Church there being
struck with a Palsy. -- Mr. How seeing him at his Meeting on the Lord's Day,
came to his Lodgings on Monday, and in a most obliging Manner welcomed him to
Town, telling him he had been absent himself three Sabbaths, while he was in
Oxfordshire; and if he had been in the City he should have asked Nobody but him
to have supplied his Place. Mr. Colman was glad to see himself forgiven by Mr.
How, and believed he was indebted principally to him and the Rev. Messirs.
Quick, Williams and Calamy, For the Honor the Board had done him in naming him
(a Stranger) for the Congregation at Cambridge.

He took Coach on Christmas Day, and found in it a Gentlewoman of very good
Fashion and Sense, with her little Daughter, and was much delighted in the
Journey with the agreeable Conversation of the Lady and Prattle of Miss.

At Cambridge Mr. Colman found a small Congregation of inferior People, the
Shadow of the University, like that of all Cathedrals, stunting the Growth of
the Dissenters.

They liked illiterate Preachers, and when Davis and others of that Sort came
to Town, he was left by one half of his Hearers. They were also sadly tinged
with Antinomian Principles, and his Texts were too legal for them. Like as at
this Day in some Places of New England.
-- So he was ashamed of his Post, and wrote earnestly to London to be released
from it. -- He saw all the Colleges there after a Sort, but had none of those
honorary Advantages for doing it as he had at Oxford.

At twelve Weeks End he returned to London, and some of the City Ministers
resolved to take a Turn down themselves. The Reverend and zealous Mr. Pomfret
went first for a Month, and others followed him.

But at length they got a handsome Subscription at London to the ingenious and
learned Mr. Pearse, an excellent Preacher, to fix him at Cambridge for two or
three Years. He went; and being already well entered into the Mathematics, soon
made himself known to the learned Mr. Whiston, and became his most esteemed
Friend. A fatal Friendship! for then he also drank in Mr. Whiston's Arrian
Principles, which has since been the Spring of so much Strife and Confusion and
every evil Work among the Dissenters.

Within a few Weeks after Mr. Colman was invited to the great Town of Ipswich
in Suffolk. -- In his Way thither God graciously preserved him from a very
dangerous Snare, which three ill Women laid for him. He found them in the
Stage-Coach, supped with them in the Evening, and was retired to his Chamber:
But as he was going to Bed one of them knocked at his Door, and told him that
they had mulled a Glass of Wine, chiefly because of the Cold that was upon him,
and he must needs take Part of it with them. In their Chamber were two Beds,
and he heard one of them gigling behind the Curtains of the furthermost Bed. He
began now to suspect them, when one of them told him, that truly they were
afraid to lie in the Chamber alone; that the furthest Bed would hold them
three; and they begged of him to lodge in the nearest Bed. He told them he was
greatly surprised at their Motion, and ashamed of it, that their Fear was
groundless; no Danger would happen to them in the Inn; if there were any he
should make a poor Defense; and that in short, they utterly forgot what they
owed to their Reputation and Virtue, or to his. So they begged his Pardon, and
he suddenly stepped into his own Chamber.

At Ipswich he spent eleven Weeks very pleasantly, and with much Satisfaction;
but they needed a Preacher only every other Lord's Day. The excellent Mr.
Fairfax divided his Time with them and some neighboring Congregations, as the
Bishop of them all. Being now got to a plentiful Fish-market, and near to the
Oyster-Banks, he began to think himself again in New England. He visited
Yarmouth and Beckles, and saw his Father's Relations. He lodged at one Mr.
Steward's, where he was most generously entertained.

More especially he there became known to the venerable Mr. Burkit of Debham,
which is eight Miles from Ipswich. Mr. Burkit held a Lecture which he attended.
He was pleased to call him the best Hearer that he ever had. Every other
Lord's Day almost Mr. Colman preached at Dedham, and the People spoke of
calling him to be their Minister. When Mr. Burkit heard of it he was so good as
to bespeak a Lodging for him at the best House in the Town. There was a
Gentlewoman, a Widow, that had six hundred a Year, a Dissenter in Principle,
but a Conformist for Mr. Burkit's Sake, sitting under his excellent Ministry
with great Delight. Madam, said he to her, I hear that our Congregation of
Dissenters are about to choose that young Man of Ipswich, of whom I told you; if
they do, invite him to take his Board with you: It will be a Comfort to you for
him to pray in your Family, and I am sure it will be so to him to be in your
House, for that little People can do but little for him. -- A teaching Instance
of Moderation, Charity and Brotherly-love this, in a Churchman to a Dissenter,
worthy to be told and imitated. -- This is but agreeable to what the Rev. Mr.
Nathaniel Parkhurst (who writes his Life and seems to be of the same Spirit)
records of this great and good Man, Page 49. -- As he was a Member "of the
Church universal, he had a good Respect and Esteem for many of our dissenting
Brethren that are sound in the Faith, and holy and exemplary in their Lives,
though they had different Sentiments from him in Matters of lesser Moment; and
as he met with any of them, conversed with them freely; and I doubt not but he
has given an acceptable Account of his Practice in this Matter to our Lord
Jesus Christ, of whom the whole Family in Heaven and Earth is named. But there
happened at this Time to pass by an itinerant, powerful, illiterate Preacher,
who had been a Tailor; and he cut Mr. Colman out of the whole Cloth, as he used
pleasantly to relate it, and left him but three Votes.

Mr. Gale was the chief Gentleman of the Congregation at Ipswich: Venerable for
his Age, Gravity, Wisdom and true Piety. When King James the II. had took away
their Charter, as he did others, he named Mr. Gale Bailiff in his new one. The
Day came for it to take Place, and the new Commission was read in the
Courthouse. Mr. Gale stood up and with great Modesty and Respect asked, if
there were any Objection to be made against the new Corporation taking Place
and Authority upon them? -- When all being silent, He to the great Surprise of
the whole Assembly told them, "That if no one else had ought to object he must
do it himself. So in an handsome Speech he showed the Illegality of the present
Commission; that the Town had done nothing he knew of to forfeit their former
Charter; and that it stood good till tried and condemned in a legal Process;
and that therefore he was under a Necessity to refuse the great Honor which
his Majesty was pleased to do him, how ambitious soever he was to serve his
King and the Town. While he spoke to this Effect, the People gazed and bowed,
and were ready to worship him for his Honor, Honesty and Courage. --

Mr. Gale had a Land Tortoise in his Garden, that for the five warm Months ran
up and down his Walks, and eat of a kind of Plantain which he set every where
for it. In September the Creature took into the Ground, and from Year to Year
continued there for about seven Months. While Mr. Colman resided there it came
up in April, but mistook its way, and was found in the Churchyard, which was
parted from the ^^rden by a Wall.

There were Companies of Soldiers that Winter billeted in Ipswich, and some
other neighboring Towns; and several Robberies were committed by them. One Day
he was himself dogged out of Town by a Soldier, and had straggled into a little
Thicket of small Trees or Brush, by the Side of a Field adjoining to the Lord
-- Park, there he happily turned to gaze about, and look down upon the Town:
When the Soldier within a few Rods of him stopped short and looked round him: At
the same Instant he jumpt over the Fence, and his Lordship's Coach appearing in
Sight, he made toward it as fast as he could, and returned into Town.

At Bury he attended the Sessions, my Lord chief Justice Holt being the Judge.
-- He was astonished at the Powers and Sagacity of that great Man and the
Dispatch he made of Business well as his Integrity and Justice. Several
Wretches received Sentence of Death (at that Time) for Robberies committed by
them; the greatest Rogue of the Gang commonly hanged the rest.

But O the Shreiks at the Bar when the Sentence was pronounced upon them,
"Mercy, my Lord, Mercy! Transportation, my Lord, Transportation! A most
affecting Representation truly (as he has observed in his Record) of the
Agonies of the Condemned at the great Day.

My Lord had the following fine and awful Passage in his Speech before he gave
Sentence. "There are some indeed that are innocent and virtuous, who have been
unjustly put to Death; and some have been hurled down to Destruction for their
Piety and worthy Deeds: Virtue was gray Hairs to them, and an unspotted Life
was length of Days. -- But such Wretches as these (said he) we are forced to
cut off as we do Wolves and Beasts of Prey, etc.

Soon after Mr. Colman's return to London Mr. Christopher Tailor, Minister of
Bath was chosen by a Church in the City to be their Pastor. And now the Rev.
Presbyterian Ministers did hi^ a second Honor altogether without his seeking
it, or knowing of it. They named him to succeed in Mr. Taylor's Place at Bath,
and told him because it was the Resort of the Gentry of England, both the
religious and profane. The Rev. Mr. Showers and Mr. Calamy appeared most to him
in the Motion. They said, it was the best Stirrup in England, whereby to mount
the best Pulpits that might be vacant. They promised him, that if he would
serve the dissenting Interest there a few Years, they would get him settled at
London.

He readily came into this Motion, for he wanted to see the Waters which he had
heard so much of, and he found more than he had heard. He desired also to see
the West Country and Bristol.

He had the Pleasure to ride down in Company with the Rev. and learned Mr.
Nathaniel Tailor, and Mr. Timothy Rogers, with whom ^e visited several worthy
Gentlemen on the Road; Mr. Tailor of Newbury, Mr. Doolittle of Reading, and
others. -- At Bath he spent five Weeks with them in the same House, and Mr.
Tailor seeing him sad at their going away, gave him his Hand and cheered him
with these Words, "Well, Colman, you are an ingenious Youth, and we will have
you with us at London within a few Years.

With them he visited Bristol, and became acquainted with the venerable Mr.
Weeks, Mr. Noble, Mr. Kentish, Mr. Pope etc.

Mr. Rogers had once been in the Depth of religious Melancholy, and he wrote a
valuable Book on the Subject upon his Recovery. But now he was in the other
Extreme, the merriest Man in the World. Mr. Colman was called by him all the
dull Things that Wit could invent, but from an Heart full of Love. He was now
Assistant to Mr. Showers in London.

One Day Mr. Colman spoke his Mind to him freely about their private Baptisms.
He suddenly replied, why our People give me but eighty Pounds a Year, and my
Baptisms are worth fifty Guineas to me. He saw by this the wretched Snare and
Temptation that had banished the Ordinance of Baptism out of their public
Worship. --

Indeed he saw but one public Baptism all the while he was in England. It was
at Mr. How Is Church; the People got up over one another Shoulders to gaze. Mr.
How looked round about with an awful Pause that drew the Attention and Eye of
all present upon him, and then began, "I am sorry it is such a Rarity! That
there should be such a gazing at it! etc.

In the City of Bristol, the Gentlemen of Mr. Weekes's Congregation went in a
Body to the Pastors, and prayed they might have the Baptisms in public,
promising to make the same Presents as they did in private. By this Means they
immediately prevailed.

While Mr. Colman sojourned at Bath, a Gentleman came thither to drink the
Waters, who was tormented in a dreadful Degree with the Gout. The Wretch lay
swearing and cursing, instead of repenting and praying; wondering what he had
done that God should lay such Pains on him more than on others. At last sending
his Man down to warm him some Broth, he fell on his Sword and died. And went
without doubt, to blaspheme on for ever; Curse the Author of his Plagues, and
gnaw his Tongue for Pain. They brought him in Mad as indeed all Self-Murderers
are: But such Juries are worse than Mad, and deserve to be buried under the
Gallows.

Mr. Colman spent two Years at Bath, and found good Acceptance with the People
and with the Strangers there. Before he had lived among them two Months he
became acquainted with more Families of Fashion in London than he had done by
living there two Years.

The People at Bath had been used to a different Sort of Preaching from his,
and did not seem to relish his Way at first. So he proposed to them to think of
some other, more agreeable to their Taste, and that might better please and
edify them. They blushed, and prayed him to continue his Services among them:
And within a Quarter of a Year were satisfied and delighted with them.

Among the Physicians that ply at Bath the Summer Season was Dr. Baynard. -- He
was a Gentleman of great Wit, and gave himself a great License in it, more
especially against the Conformist Clergy. -- Mr. Fleetwood Shepard, and Mr.
Pocock (Mayor of the City that Year) were Gentlemen of the same Character for
Wit and Mirth. No wonder if they were very great and intimate Friends. -- Mr.
Pocock fell ill of a Fever, and Mr. Baynard was his Doctor.

One Morning after drinking the Waters the Doctor went to see his Patient, and
Shepard with him. Baynard found him dying by his Pulse, and looked sad upon it;
but Shepard, ignorant of his Danger, said to him with wonted Pleasancy and
Droll, -- "You lie here Pocock while we want you daily at the Bear: There is
the best Red come to Town you ever tasted." -- Pocock cast a dying Look on him
and said, "I shall never be with you again. -- No, answered Shepard loosly,
"Why then come and see us, Pocock, for we always loved you dearly.

Upon this he turned on his Heel, and went down, and Baynard after him. They
went to the Coffee-House which was but three Doors off from Mr. Pocock's, and
at Eleven it was Time to go Home and dress. But as Shepard stepped out of the
Door, he fell a trembling and cried out, "Hold me Baynard, hold me"! The Doctor
caught him in his Arms, and all the Gentlemen (who were many) in the Room ran
to the Door, where they saw Mr. Shepard frighted and staring, and heard him
saying, "Don't you see Pocock there? in the Middle of the Street! Why there he
goes, -- two Men lead him along! and now he is got up to the Gate," -- (which
was but the Length of a Street from the Coffee-House.)

When Mr. Colman's Landlord, who was Sergeant of the Bath (Mr. Shelston) told
him this wonderful Story, as a certain Matter of Fact, that happened but two
Years before, he resolved to enquire of Dr. Baynard about it, for he was well
acquainted with the Doctor, and he sometimes came to hear him preach.

The Doctor assured him of the Truth of the whole Account, and when he asked
him what Effect it had on Mr. Shepard, he said, He was sick upon it for two
Days, but when he got out again he was as merry and wild as ever. He saw
nothing himself (he said) but heard what Shepard said to their dying Friend,
and he had no Doubt but that Shepard saw an Appearance of him. -- They ran to
the Mayor's House, and were told, he was just now dead.

Well, Doctor, said Mr. Colman upon it, Too well are our Savior's Words
verified, "Neither will they be persuaded though one come from the Dead." No
Sir, replied the Doctor, "These Things were never meant to convert us: It is
the good Word which you preach to us, must do that, if it ever be done."

This Story is so remarkable and well attested, as few (if any, in all its
Circumstances) are like unto it.

And doubtless the good Providence of God orders such Things every now and
then, as superadded Testimonies to revealed Religion, in the great Doctrine of
the Soul's Immortality, a separate State, and the Judgment to come. -- This was
a Testimony to all England, and more especially to the Nobility and Gentry
through the Kingdom, who all heard of it, and little heeded it. -- No Doubt but
the Fame of it went immediately to the King's Court. This Sir Fleetwood Shepard
was afterward Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod, and well known by a Poem in
Prior to him.


If Mr. Glanvill, Archdeacon of Bath in his Day, had been living he would hae
triumphed in this evident Testimony to an invisible World at his own Door: For
there is scarce the like open incontestible Account in his Sadducismus
Triumphatus. But none have been so good and just to the Public as to publish
this to the World.

While Mr. Colman was at Bath he preached for Mr. Cummins of Shepton-Mallet. He
was a worthy Minister and a strong, stout Man. Within a few Years after he met
with a Robber on the Highway that bid him deliver, with his Pistol in his
Hand. Mr. Cummins told him he must give him Leave to dismount, which he did,
the Robber being on his left Hand. In an Instant Mr. Cummins took the Wretch by
the Foot, and canted him over his Horse, and as he came to the Ground his heavy
and strong Foot was upon him, and lighting upon his Breast, struck the Breath
out of his Body. Mr. Cummins was amazed to find him dead, and ready to repent
of what he had done. Instead of praising him for his Courage, or excusing him
from the Suddenness with which a Man acts at such a Time, some were ready to
censure him as a cruel Man, and that he had not the Pity which becomes a
Minister for a poor Soul. Mr. Cummins was forced to pass his Trial.

One of the first Pleasures Mr. Colman had at Bath was his coming into an
Acquaintance with the lovely Philomela, Mrs. Elizabeth Singer of Agford near
From. She had a Volume of Poems then in Print, being about her twenty-fourth
Year. Mr. Rogers had made her an high Complement, in a Book he dedicated to the
virtuous and good-humoured Ladies. Mr. Singer invited him to come and see his
Daughter, that she might thank him. Mr. Colman invited himself to go with him,
having read her Poems. They found her comely in Body, lowly in Dress, with a
Soul fair and bright as an Angel.

Mr. Singer led them out to see his Daughter's Walk or Lodge near his House,
where she used to meditate and compose. It was a retired and shady Path; a
Rivulet on one Side, and tall spreading Trees on the other. Mr. Rogers required
Mr. Colman to make a Compliment on the Place: Her Father join^d his Request;
when they returned he sent her a Poem which began thus, So Paradise was
brightned, so 'twas blessed,
When Innocence and Beauty it possessed.
Such was it is more retired Path and Seat,
For Eve and musing Angels a Retreat.
Such Eden's Streams, and Banks, and towering Groves;
Such Eve her self, and such her Muse and Lover*
Only there wants and Adam on the Green,
Or else all Paradise might here be seen.
Mr. Singer was highly pleased with Mr. Colman, and prayed him to enter into a
Friendship and Correspondence with his Daughter, and that he would often come
and see them.

Mr. Singer called himself Argos, having an hundred Eyes upon his Daughter, but
he seemed to shut them all in Mr. Colman's favor. Both Father and Daughter
treated him with utmost Freedom and Affection. Before Company especially, Mrs.
Singer behaved as though he had been her Brother. Mr. Colman loved her without
the least Intention of ever saying so to her. She saw it, and it pleased her
greatly. They wrote to one another often: Mr. Colman made long Visits,
sometimes for Days together: And they were always unwilling to part.

Once he visited her at my Lady Weymouth's, who much esteemed and honored her.
So did Bishop Kenn who then resided at that noble House. Mr. Roberts of London
was then with Mr. Colman. They carried a Note from her Father without which
they could not have seen her. She let the Family see how much she regarded him.
The Bishop gave him his Blessing. And at a Mile from the Seat they met Mr.
Phillips of From, a very aged gracious Minister, and he blessed Mr. Roberts.
Upon which he turned and said to Mr. Colman, Now, Sir, I am even with you.

Mr. Singer told Mr. Colman that Philomela's Mother was every way her
Superior, in Knowledge, Wisdom and Grace. And that he had buried a younger
Daughter, her equal in Knowledge, and Superior in Grace. Philomela her self
told him it was very true. The Discourse of that Afternoon was upon this dead
charming Sister, the Father being gone out to his Work. She told him the
following most entertaining Story.

"My Sister, said she, was a Year or two younger than I, and her Affection as
well as Wit was quicker. I seemed however to my self to think more thoroughly.
She desired ever to be with me, and I wanted to be more by my self. We often
retired by Consent, each to her Chamber, to compose and then to compare what we
wrote. She always exceeded me in the Number of Lines, but mine I think were
more correct. She exceeded me much in the Fondness of Love, but never in the
Truth and Strength of it. She was jealous of me that my Love was not equal to
here is, and invented an hundred Ways to try me; many of which I thought childish
and weak, and therefore sometimes rather reproved then complied with. This gave
her Grief, and I should find her in Tears, which I could not put a stop to but
by the tenderest Words and Embraces.

"We lived Years together as happy as Children could be in one another; We
lived religiously together; took Care of one another's Souls, and had our
constant Hours for Retirement and Devotion. We were daily speaking to one
another of the Things of God, his Being, Perfections, Works; the Wonders of
Creation and Providence, the Mysteries of Redemption and Grace. -- My Father in
his Widowhood took great Delight in us, cherished our Love to God and one
another, but like good Jacob was fondest of the youngest, admiring all that she
said or did. And in her Death he was to be tried. --

"But it was I that was taken sick, to a very dangerous Degree. And when the
Physicians were giving me over, my dear Sister came to me drowned in Tears; and
earnestly kissing me, besought me to tell her whether I was (through Grace)
prepared to die? Whether my Interest in Christ and Title to Heaven were
comfortable and clear to me? For she was afraid I would die; and she could not
part with me only to go to Christ, which was far the better.

"I looked earnestly upon her and said, "Why Sister, do you think me dangerous?
I must confess to you my Distress would be great on the Account of my Soul, if
I thought my dying Hour were now coming on: For I have not that full Assurance
of my Interest in Christ, which I have not always begged of God I might have,
before he would call me hence.

"No sooner had she heard me say this, but she fell as in an Agony on her Knees
by my Bed, and in a manner inexpressible for Fervor and Humility, she begged
of God, "That if her Father must have the Grief of burying one of his Children,
it might be her: For through his free Grace, and to the Glory of it, she could
humbly profess before him her assured Hope of her Interest in his everlasting
Mercy through Jesus Christ. Wherefore she could gladly and joyfully surrender
her self to dye, if it might please God to grant her Sister a further Space
wherein to make her Calling and Election sure.

"Having prayed thus in a Transport which was surprising and astonishing to me,
she kissed me and left the Room, without giving me Time or Power to answer her
a Word. And, what is almost incredible to relate, from that Minute I grew
better and recovered, but she took her Bed and died within a few Days. She was
about twenty Years old, as the Author of Mrs. Rowe's Life reports.


"Conceive if you can Mr. Colman how I was astonished at this Event of
Providence, and overwhelmed with Sorrow; and my Father with me. Yet I
recovered Health: but the Load of Grief upon me confined me to my Chamber for
more than six Weeks. My chief Work was to consider the Mind of God, in this his
Mercy to me, that I might make it evident to my self, that indeed in Love to my
Soul he delivered me from the Pit of Corruption. I set my self to comfort my
Father, what I could, and that was his Care for me. We durst not be
inconsolable under a Bereavement so circumstanced: Yet my mourning is always
returning with the Remembrance of a Love stronger than Death, and bright like
the Seraphims, those Flames of Love and Devotion.

How exalted a Conversation was this which Mr. Colman had with Mrs. Singer. He
told her upon it he was more in Love with the Dead than the Living: And that
she must yield her Sister the Victory; and confess her Love to excel in
Strength as well as Fervor.

After many such happy Conversations the Day arrived when he was obliged to pay
a parting Visit, being earnestly invited to New England and to a Settlement in
Boston, which he informed the Family of -- when Mrs. Singer poured out a
thousand Wishes for his Prosperity* his Serviceableness in the Church of Christ
on Earth, and his Happiness with her in that above for ever. Her Father added a
thousand Prayers and Blessings to here is, with Tears and the most tender
Embraces. Mr. Colman believed God called him to return Home to his dear
Relations and loved Country. --

His Character of Mrs. Singer in his Manuscripts follows, -- "She was an
heavenly Maid of sublime Devotion and Piety, as well as Ingenuity and Wit. How
she had collected such a Stock of Knowledge and Literature, by reading and
Conversation, without a learned Tutor The Author of her Life tells us that the
honorable Mr. Thynne, Son to the Lord Viscount Weymouth, instructed her in the
French and Italian Languages. I suppose this was after Mr. Colman's return to
New England.
was wonderful. But her Wisdom and Discretion outshone her Knowledge. She had
only her Mother Tongue, but had made all the Improvement of an Academical
Education. She was a Poet, a Philosopher and a Divine. And above all, a most
devout Worshippe^ of God in Secret and in Public. She hid her self in the
public Worship in an obscure Place, where she could neither see others nor be
seen by them.

"Music, Poetry and Painting were her three Beauties and Delights. She used
her Pencil almost as well as her Pen. She never was idle, but either her Needle
or her Pencil was going in all Conversations. And what she drew she gave to the
Company. -- She used to declare the great Assistance she had sometimes found in
her Devotions by the Organs, and Anthems well sung to them. The ingenious and
learned Mr. Grove, Author of the first Part of Mrs. Rowe's Life (then Mrs.
Singer) takes some Pains to inform the World, That Part of the above Story is
entirely without Foundation in the following Words, (and then makes some
Reflection on it.) There is a Story (says he) which because it has been
confidently "reported by some, and credited by a great many others, I shall for
the Sake of the Reflection it will afford me, and the Opportunity of assuring
the World, after inquiring of the Persons best able to inform me, that it is
entirely without Foundation; though were it ever so true, it could not be made
an Argument against Mrs. Rowe's early Piety, as it has been thought by some to
be. "The Story is this; Mrs. Row, then Mrs. Singer, being dangerously ill, and
under visible Distress at the Apprehension of her approaching Change, her
Sister who observed it, asked her tenderly, whether she was not willing to die?
And Mrs. Row frankly confessing she was not, the other said, she would retire
then, and pray to God that she might be taken in her Room; being as willing to
leave the World as the other could be to continue in it, which accordingly she
did; and the Consequence was, that Mrs. Row recovered, and her Sister sickned
and died, etc. etc.

It is readily owned this Story has been confidently reported by some,
particularly Mr. Colman who in his Life Time related it to many, and also left
it (as it has been now given) in Writing among his Papers, and moreover it
appears by Letters in his Study, that he sent it over to England, soon after
Mrs. Rowe's Death. -- Yet this ingenious Gentleman is pleased to dispute the
Fact. But on what Ground? Because he had inquired of Persons (in his
Apprehension) best able to inform him of the Circumstances of this Matter, and
it seems they were ignorant of them, and hence he assures the World, that it is
entirely without Foundation.

The Gentleman himself is said by the Editor of Mrs. Rowe's Life to have had a
long It is not said how long -- A few Years -- Ten or Twelve is sometimes
called so.
Acquaintance with her," and yet had never heard her mention it on any
Occasion, which no Doubt served to strengthen his Diffidence.

But why should it be thought incredible or even improbable after such a Number
of Years were past, "That Mrs. Row from whom Mr. Colman positively asserts he
had it, should omit to relate these Circumstances to every new Acquaintance.
However, this Gentleman's Denial of a Fact on the Ground mentioned, is not
sufficient to invalidate the Testimony of any good Man and true, much less the
positive Declaration of a Person of Mr. Colman's Character.

I cannot but observe how this same Gentleman in his eighteenth Page seems
plunged, and at a Loss about another Thing, viz. speaking of Mrs. Row, The
Occasion (says he) of her Poetical Name Philomela, which from this Time she was
known by to the World, whether she assumed it to her self, or was complimented
with it by her Friends I have not been able to learn.

Now if after enquiring of the Persons best able to inform him, and by his long
Acquaintance he did not arrive to any Certainty about this Fact (which by the
Way, was about the same Time of her Life with the other) why need he to have
been so confident of the Story's being entirely without Foundation?

I join with him in the Reflections he makes on the Story, which was the other
End of his mentioning it, viz. They must be very weak Persons indeed who make
any Part of the Story an Argument against Mrs. Rowe's early Piety. The Relation
of it ought not, need not be construed in the least to her Disadvantage. Many
excellent Persons have all their Lifetime been in Bondage through Fear of
Death -- We have known Doubts and Darknesses sometimes arise in the Minds of
Christians of the highest Form among us in such a trying Hour.

The Reasons the Gentleman is pleased to add upon a Supposition of the Truth of
the Story, are also passable and may serve to clear Mrs. Row from any
Indecency of Expression.

Upon the whole, I must be allowed to think that the Story in all its
Circumstances as related by Dr. Colman is truly wonderful and worthy to be
published to the World. --

N. B. Since I wrote these Remarks I find a Letter of Dr. Colman to a Gentleman
of Distinction after he had read Mr. Grove's Account in which are the following
Words:

"Her Picture is exactly true, and so is the Account of her excellent Father,
and he once told me, that his Daughter was in no wise to be compared with her
Mother. What a glorious humble Family has it been! like that at Bethany which
JESUS loved, and where he was wont to lodge! It is now extinct in Mrs. Row,
who has carried it to the Height that human Nature has arrived to, since the
Days of Inspiration; and has left a Blaze on the Name of Singer, which shall
never be extinguished -- Exalted and ascended Spirits neither need nor value a
Name cut in Marble over their Bones, (she and her Father lie in an obscure
Village without a Stone by her Order over them) but indeed such a Monument as
Mrs. Singer and her righteous Friends have here raised for the Instruction,
Admiration and Aspiration of Survivors, is a Name and Praise and Glory. Give
her of the Fruit of her Hands, and let her own Works praise her in the Gate.

But I am sorry for the Diffidence and Lameness with which the Story I had from
her own Mouth is here told, and am persuaded there is an Error in the Date of
the Sister's Life.


--

CHAP. V. Invitations to return to New England -- His Ordination at London --
Arrival at Boston and Settlement there -- Letters sent to him before his
Embarkation and soon after.
MR. Colman as I hinted in the foregoing Chapter received kind Letters from a
Number of Gentlemen in Boston the Place of his Nativity, who had built an
handsome House there, informing, "That they had chosen him to be their
Minister, and urging him to make what Haste he could to them. These Letters
were subscribed by Messirs. Thomas Brattle, Benjamin Davis, John Mico, Thomas
Cooper, and John Colman in the Name of the rest, and in them they only propose
to him that the holy Scriptures might be publicly read every Sabbath in the
Worship of GOD, which was not practiced in other Churches of New England at
that Time, and that they might lay aside the Relation of Experiences which were
imposed in other Churches, in Order to the Admission of Persons to the
Lord's-Table.

This Invitation was very acceptable and pleasing to him, for his Heart was
always very much in his native Country, and to the Churches of Christ here, and
the more acceptable it was by Reason of the kind and encouraging Letters which
accompanied it from his excellent Friends the Honorable John Leverett, the
Rev. Messirs. William Brattle, Ebenezer Pemberton, and others. A few Passages
out of some of these are presented unto the Reader.

Mr. Leverett writes,
-- "I shall exceedingly rejoice at your Return to your Country. We want
Persons of your Character. The Affair offered to your Consideration is of the
greatest Moment. I pray Almighty God to be your Director in it. Your Return is
heartily desired by all that I have heard speak of it, but it cannot be more
agreeable to any Body than it is to,

Sir, Your sincere Friend, etc.


Mr. Brattle writes,
-- "This waits on you with my Desires and Hopes, that your Circumstances will
allow you to entertain and accept the Invitation.

The good Respect the Boston Ministers have for you (as well as others) should
methinks encourage your embracing the Motion now made to you. -- As for my own
Part I shall account it a Smile from Heaven upon the good Design of these
Gentlemen, if you can send them an Answer of Peace, and would hope that your so
doing will result to your mutual Rejoicing. -- May God direct you in the Matter.

Your real Friend and Servant, etc.


Mr. Pemberton writes,
-- "With this you will receive a kind Invitation to return to your own
Country, which you cannot but have a great Tenderness for, and your Affection
will I trust, constrain you to comply, and hope it will not be to your
Disadvantage. -- The Gentlemen who solicit your Return are mostly known to you
-- Men of Repute and Figure, from whom you may expect generous Treatment; and
among them, I doubt not, but you may be peculiarly serviceable to the Lord
Jesus Christ -- which is the highest of your Ambition. I believe your Return
will be pleasing to all that know you, I am sure it will be inexpressibly so to
your unfeigned Friend and Servant, etc.

The like strong Expressions of Respect and Esteem are to be read in the
Epistles of diverse others.

When he took leave of his Brethren at Bath, he told them he knew not how to do
it better than by subscribing with them, to pay off the Debt of Fifty Pounds,
which they yet owed for their Meeting House; which he did and so left them.

When he came to London ( August 1. 1699) he found most of the City Ministers,
to whom he was best known out of Town, viz. the Rev. Messirs. How, Quick,
Nathaniel Tailor, etc. etc. etc.

He waited on the humble and heavenly Mr. Sylvester, and found him mounting his
Horse: He told him "he should have been proud to have laid his Hand on him at
his Ordination;" which was a great deal for him to say who never said any Thing
but from his Heart in his Life.

His Letters from Boston desired him to ask Ordination at London. He knew not
then the Reason of his Friends Desire, but it was agreeable enough to his
Principles and Inclinations. Accordingly he immediately applied himself to the
Presbytery there, and on the fourth Day of said Month the Solemnity was
attended, after a public Lecture at the Meeting House of the Rev. Mr.
Christopher Tailor.

He was ordained by Prayer with the Imposition of the Hands of the Rev.
Messirs. Richard Stretton, John Spademan, Robert Flemming, and Christopher
Tailor. -- Mr. Stretton prayed, and Mr. Spademan made the Exhortation: And
after the Solemnity was over, all the Rev. Ministers then present came out of
their Seats, and in a grave and hearty Manner gave him their Right Hands. With
us in New England one does it in the Name not of their Brethren in the Ministry
only, but of those particular Churches also, whom they represent, making a
Speech on the Occasion. -- Our Usage is at large related in Dr. Cotton Mather's
Ratio Disciplinae, Page 32, 33, etc.


Mr. Stretton was an aged and eminent Pastor in the City, much reverenced and
honored for his Learning, Gravity, Piety and Wisdom.

Mr. Spademan was a very judicious and learned Man, and so was Mr. Tailor; Mr.
Colman was going to succeed the one at Rotterdam (as before related) and was
Successor to the other at Bath.

Mr. Fleming was Pastor of a Scotch Church in London, and had been or was
afterward chosen Principal of one of the Colleges in Scotland.

Mr. Quick was highly displeased that he was not sent for out of the Country,
that he might have done him some more public Honors at the Ordination.

Dr. Bates died a few Days before Mr. Colman left Bath. The Day before he took
Coach he received a Letter from the Rev. Mr. John Shower informing him of the
Decease of that glorious Man.

Mr. Colman received ample Testimonials of his good Conversation while in
England from many other Rev. Ministers, viz. the Rev. Dr. Daniel Williams, John
Quick, Matthew Sylvester, John Shower, Timothy Rogers, Edmund Calamy, Thomas
Cotton, Isaac Mauditt, etc. etc.

Mr. Parkhurst and Wife who had been so good as to visit him at Bath, did most
heartily open their Doors to him again when he arrived at London.

Mr. Samuel Holden the Son and only Child of Madam Parkhurst was then at Riga,
so that he never had the Pleasure of seeing his Face, but his Mother spoke so
much to him of Mr. Colman as gave him a lasting Interest in his good Opinion
and generous Friendship, to the great Benefit of New England, as will be seen
before our Narrative is finished.

His dear Brother Mr. John Colman of Boston, Merchant was one of the Committee
of the Proprietors of the new-built Church who invited his Return; and kindly
sent an Order upon Sir James Eaton for what Moneys he wanted. Mr. Colman took
up Twenty Pounds Sterling. and laid it out in Books. But when he came Home and the
Gentlemen presented him with fifty Pounds on his Arrival, his Brother would not
be repaid a Farthing, but boarded him gratis, until he married. This he makes a
grateful Record of, that his Posterity may know his Obligations to his Brother.

About the 20th of August 1699, he embarked at Gravesend, and by the Favor of
Heaven, after a Fortnights Delay in the Downs, and a long eight Weeks sick
Voyage, he arrived at Boston the first Day of November, where he was received
by his Relations, Acquaintance, and the Brethren who sent for him, with a great
deal of Love and Joy unfeigned, after an Absence of four Years and three Months.

The next Day the Undertakers presented him with Fifty Pounds. -- Soon after
they kept a Day of Thanksgiving in private to Almighty God, for his safe
Arrival and the many Smiles of his gracious Providence on their Undertaking
unto that Day. And he preached to them from 1 Chronicles. xxix. 13, 14 Verses. Now
therefore, our God we thank thee, and praise thy glorious Name. But who am I
and what is my People, that we should be able to offer so willingly after this
Sort? For all Things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee.

On Tuesday December the twelfth, At a private Meeting after solemn calling
upon God, the Brethren declared their Consent and Agreement to walk in all the
Ordinances of our LORD JESUS CHRIST.

The twenty-fourth being Lord's Day they opened their New-built House for
public Worship and Mr. Colman preached to them from 2 Chronicles. ^ith Chapter 18
Verse. But will God in very Deed dwell with Men upon Earth? Behold, Heaven, and
the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee; how much less this House which I
have Built? The most pertinent and well chosen Subject. --


As he designedly omits the Mention of the Differences and Troubles they had
with any Neighbors (Ministers and others) about their Proceedings, and only
records in the Church Book an Acknowlegment of their great Obligations to the
Honorable William Stoughton Esquire Lieutenant Governor of the Province, the Rev.
Mr. William Brattle of Cambridge, the Rev. Mr. Clark of Chelmsford and the Rev.
Mr. John Danforth of Dorchester for their good and kind Endeavors for their
peaceable Settlement, it would be neither modest not just in me to publish the
History of them --

Wednesday the 31st of January, was separated by the Undertakers for publicly
imploring the Presence of God with them, his Pardon and Blessing and
accordingly solemnised. -- The Rev. Mr. James Allen began the Morning Exercise
with Prayer, and Mr. Colman preached. In the Afternoon the Rev. Mr. Willard
began, Dr. Increase Mather preached and Mr. Cotton Mather concluded. --

Mr. Colman received Letters from diverse worthy Ministers and others before he
embarked, and soon after his Arrival, in all which are found Expressions of
their high Esteem and Honor for him, and of their great Unwillingness to part
with him. -- I shall offer but a few of the many, that present themselves. --

The Rev. and aged Mr. John Quick who constantly wrote to him to his Death
says, 'No one in England loves you more or wishes you better.' --

The Rev. Mr. Jeremiah White writes, "If I had never so much Time, I could not
by Words tell you how much you are steemed and loved by me. GOD has reserved
your Manna for more skilful and judicious Palates than those at Bath.

The Rev. Henry Chandler writes, 'We look upon your hasty Departure as a double
Affliction. May you be (what you are very like to be) a Blessing and Honor in
Boston.

The Rev. Samuel Mather writes, "May your Encouragement be great and your
Success large. I doubt not you have prepared your self with a Sword as well as
a Buckler, with a Spear as well as an Headpiece, and are able to make your Way
through all Difficulties.

The Rev. Mr. Joseph Standen writes, And must we lose you: With what Violence
and Regret I let you go. -- I should be glad a thousand Times could England
have afforded you so happy a Station. -- I wish some kind Providence would
bring you here again. -- Ah could I once see you before I die, but it is an
Happiness too great to hope for in this World. O my God let me have it in the
next.

I shall add no more to this Chapter, but a few surprising Passages of a Letter
from the venerable Mr. Singer, the happy Father of Philomela, and a short
Script or two of Here Is.


Mr. Walter Singer's Letter.
June 15. 1709.
"O why has Providence denied me so great a Blessing as the Enjoyment of thy
dear Relation and Society! This often makes me, with a melancholy Sigh, wish
Agford at Boston, or Boston here -- But infinite Wisdom and Goodness cannot
err, -- or the Thought would make too deep an Impression.

Methinks there is one Place vacant in my Affections, which Nobody can fill
besides you. But this Blessing was too great for me, and God has reserved it
for those that more deserved it. -- I cannot but hope sometimes that Providence
has yet in Store so much Happiness for me, that I shall yet see you. If not I
have missed the greatest temporal Good my Mind was ever set on; and did not my
Age forbid my Removal hence; and your happy Circumstances forbid my Request, I
should not be easily persuaded to forbear tiring you with Requests, till I had
prevailed with you to return hither with the dear Companion of your Joys.

My dear Philomela improves daily in Knowledge and Piety, in the Love of God,
and all that is good; lives above the Fears of Death, or rather under the
strong Desires of it.

Your real, passionate Friend, Walter Singer.


Philomela's Letters.
Sir, 1708.
Your Sense and Virtue has made a lasting Impression on my Heart, and when
Death has extinguished the Flame of Life, my Friendship for you shall commence
a more exalted Ardor -- But till we meet in the Regions of Immortality I hope I
shall have your Prayers; for I know they will bring down a thousand weighty
Blessings on my Head. -- Such prevailing Piety as yours cannot fail of Success
above. Adieu; it is but a little Interval, and we shall converse in the Walks of
Paradise, and sing in the heavenly Bowers.


Sir, July 12. 1709.
I received your last, and find I am still happy in your Esteem, and the
invaluable Blessing of your Prayers: It Is a Privilege, I hope, I shall never
forfeit, nor fail to express my highest Gratitude for.

But I must correct my self: For it is not possible for me to express my
Gratitude; and I could not be more at a Loss if I was making my Acknowledgments
to my Guardian Angel for his Care. -- Methinks my Sentiments for you have
something in them too nice to be described in the Dialect of Mortals, and the
Language of Heaven would better become a Friendship so noble. Adieu! and may
the Light of his Countenance whose Benignity is better than Life, conduct you
safe to everlasting Joys.

E. Singer.


CHAP. VI. Many eminent Services done by him for the Churches, Colleges and
Country; some of his Projections and Essays to do good -- Thoughts on
Church Government -- Honors done him.
MR. Colman (thus settled) was animated with a sincere and ardent Love to his
Country; and laid himself out to the utmost Stretch of his Power, as
Opportunities offered, to serve its best Interests.

H^s first and greatest Care, and most arduous Labors were bestowed on his own
Church and Congregation. -- But as I shall have Occasion hereafter to consider
and write more particularly of some of his Ministerial Qualifications and
Excellencies, I shall here only say in general what all his Congregation have
been Witnesses of, and God more, viz. "That he approved himself a wise,
diligent, zealous, faithful, tender and condescending Minister of JESUS CHRIST;
in studying, watching, visiting, counselling, earnest Praying and Preaching,
exhorting, charging and comforting them as a Father his Children: And this he
did through a long and shining Course, even for Forty-seven Years; for so long
it pleased a gracious God to continue his precious Life and Usefulness to them.

About fifteen Years he ministered to them without a settled Assistant or
Colleague, His People afforded him transient Help as he needed it; and for two
Years and an half, viz. from the Year 1701, they employed the Rev. Mr.
Eliphalet Adams (who is now the aged, venerable Pastor of a Church in
New London) in a more stated Way.
viz. to May 23. 1716, when Mr. William Cooper (who with great Peace and Union
of Hearts was chosen by the Congregation, Aug. 16. 1715) was most happily
joined in the Pastoral Care, and continued laboring with him in Word and
Doctrine, as a Son with a Father, for Twenty-seven Years. August 2d, Mr. Colman
preached a Sermon upon the Day of Prayer kept by his Congregation to implore
the Divine Conduct and Blessing with them in their Election of another into the
Pastoral Office among them, from Ephesians. iv. 8, 11 Verses. Wherefore he says,
when he ascended up on high, he led Captivity captive, and gave Gifts unto Men,
-- And he gave some Apostles: And some Prophets: And some Evangelists: And some
Pastors and Teachers. -- Mr. Colman also preached at Mr. Cooper's Ordination
from 2d of Tim. iid Chap. 1st Ver. Thou therefore my Son be strong in the Grace
that is in Christ Jesus. Both these Sermons are in Print, and to the latter of
them is annexed Mr. Cooper's Confession of Faith, and his Answers to several
important Questions proposed to him upon that Occasion.
It pleased God to remove him by Death on December the 13th. 1743. Of this
excellent Person more will be said in another Chapter of our Narrative.

After Mr. William Cooper's Decease, viz. on December 31st. 1744, Mr. Samuel
Cooper second Son of the Deceased, was with great Unanimity chosen Co-Pastor
and Colleague; at a Meeting of the Congregation, after Dr. Colman had made a
moving, pathetick Speech to them, in which among other Things, he said, I thank
God for the Opportunity "of seeing you together; with an happy Prospect of
Unity and Comfort in the great and important Point that we are met upon. -- The
Year of our Mourning, under the holy bereaving Hand of God upon us, is now
finished. -- We have from one Lord's Day to another, as well as on our set and
solemn Days of Humiliation and Prayer On May 15th 1744, the Church and
Congregation kept a Day of Fasting and Prayer, for renewed Humiliation and
Direction in the Choice of another Minister, in God's Time and Way, in the
Place of Mr. Cooper, when Dr. Colman preached an excellent Sermon from Numb.
xxvii. 15, 16. And Moses spoke unto the Lord, saying -- Let the Lord, the God
of the Spirits of all Flesh, set a Man over the Congregation. -- Toward the
Close of the Sermon are found such Passages as these. "God forbid that I should
cease to pray to God for you; that another Cooper (I mean one like the
Deceased) not a Novice, but one able and apt to teach you; be set over you in
the Lord; a Man of Understanding, Prudence and Wisdom; a Man of Learning, Parts
and Powers, such as this Place so much wants and calls for; a Man of Prayer and
Power with God, a Man of God (like Moses, Elias or Elisha) exhibiting before
you (in his Life and Ministry) much of the Image and Spirit of the holy God: A
Man habitually with God, in secret and in public, who shall be able truly to
say to you, I love my Master, and my Work, and my People's Souls! A Man greatly
for God in his Generation, laying out himself for the Salvation of Souls; and
owned of God in such his Desires, Aims and Labors.


, been supplicating the great Head of the Church to repair the Breath, in his
own Time and Way, and give us another Pastor after his own Heart, gifted and
spirited like the doer Deceased; and I hope the gracious Savior has such an
One in Store for you and your Children, your Families and Households.

"Through the Patience of God I continue with you to this Day, under the
growing Infirmities of Age; nevertheless having obtained Help of God I have not
failed, in one Administration or other, I think, to minister every Lord's Day;
and I thank God, to your kind Acceptance.

"And if I may now live to see you united in your Choice of another Pastor, as
I once saw your Predecessors with not a few of your selves here present, I
shall rejoice and give Thanks with you all: Yea, might this be the Day, it will
be a gladsome one to me. --

"Show, Lord, which thou have chosen! And lead us in thy Truth and teach us! --
in Paths of Righteousness for thy Name Sake; in the Determinations of this
Morning. Amen.

Accordingly Mr. Cooper was peaceably and happily settled in his Father's Room
Vid. Psalm xlv. 16. and Psalm cii. 28 Verse. -- Uno avulso non defecit Alter.
May 21. 1746, The Reason why the Ordination of Father and Son was so long
deferred after the Choice made of them by the Congregation, was their own
earnest Motion, pleading their Youth; and that they might have more Time to
study and gain Experience. -- The Congregation also consented to another
Request of theirs, "That they might preach but once in a Fortnight 'till their
solemn Separation.
on which Occasion Dr. Colman preached and printed an excellent Sermon on Isa.
vith Chap. and 8th Ver. Also I heard the Voice of the Lord saying, Whom shall I
send? And who will go for us? Then said I, Here am I, send me. In which among
other Things, he uttered this Wish, May "his Days be more than his Father's
were, in the Work of the Ministry, and as well filled up with Study and
Fidelity; and crowned even with more Success, from the Fullness that is in
Christ. -- To which I doubt not the whole Assembly said Amen.

Dr. Colman Faithfully served the College as an Overseer to his Death; and as a
Fellow of the Rev. Corporation for a great Number of Years, until by reason of
Age and bodily Infirmities he thought himself called to resign that important
Office and Trust: This he did with many Declarations of his Readiness further
to serve, and promote the Prosperity and Flourishing of that loved and honored
Society, to his utmost Ability. Upon his repeated Motions to resign I find a
Vote of the Corporation dated February 5. 1727 8 earnestly desiring his
Continuance in that Station.


While he had a Place in the Corporation he was much employed in draughting
Letters and Addresses about the Affairs of the House, such especially as were
sent Abroad to Persons of Distinction and Benefactors, were mostly done by him,
as appears by the Votes of the honorable and reverend Overseers, and
Corporation, and many rough Copies found in his Study. Two Addresses of his
Draughting are found -- one to his Majesty King GEORGE the First, 1723. Another
to his Majesty King GEORGE the Second, 1727. --


His warm and well governed Zeal for the just Rights and Privileges of the
College showed it self on various Occasions. -- I will hint at one or two.

When above twenty Years ago, some reverend episcopal Gentlemen endeavored to
push themselves into the Oversight and Government of it, he strenuously opposed
them, and wrote a judicious and nervous Answer to the Memorial presented by
them, which is found among his Papers. In a Letter to a Friend 1747 he writes,
"The most remote Step to sap and undermine our College, I would carefully
observe, and instantly and openly oppose, and have made it the Business of my
life to do so with Caution and Courage.


There is also a large Bundle of Writings left, containing Addresses, Letters
and Arguments about the Regulation of the Corporation (a Matter in Dispute
about the Year 1721) wherein he earnestly pleads for what appeared to him the
good of the Society at that Time, and in all Times to come.

He took indefatigable Pains with the honored and worthy Mr. Thomas Hollis,
and the Rev. Mr. Daniel Neal and others, concerned in forming Rules and Orders
relating to the Settlement of the Hollisian Professor of Divinity (to the
obtaining which great Benefit to the College he had been by God's Favor very
Instrumental) And he had no small Success in finishing that Matter to the
Satisfaction of all concerned. -- But the History of his procuring Benefactions
will be particularly related in another Chapter -- wherefore I shall conclude
this Section with Part of a Letter draughted by Mr. Colman, written to Mr.
Hollis in the Name of the Corporation, recommending one to him for his first
Professor.

"There is but one thing more, Sir, which I have now to add, but it is a very
great one; "The Nomination of a Person to you to be your first Professor. There
is lately returned to, and is now residing in the College, a very accomplished
Person for the Office in our joint Opinion and Judgment; Mr. Edward
Wigglesworth, who in the Year 1710, passed his first Degree with us, and has
ever since diligently applied himself to the learned Studies, and to the Study
of Divinity more especially: He is a Person of known and exemplary Virtue,
Piety, Literature, Modesty, Meekness, and other Christian Ornaments: His
public Exercises in the Pulpit discovers a solid Judgment, a clean Style, a
clear Method, a bright and strong Thought, and a Facility or Aptness to teach:
And it now appears to us, as if Providence may have reserved him for such a
Service as this now before us; which we apprehend may suit him in all Respects;
excepting his low Opinion of himself: yet neither is he wanting his Gravity,
Wisdom, and a Spirit of Government and Authority, which may be necessary to
command the Reverence of others to him in any Office he may be called to.

We do therefore heartily and earnestly recommend him to your Favor, to be
nominated by you your first Professor; and the sooner you please to name him
the better, that he may be ready to enter on the Work as soon as we can be
ready to install him; or that being apprized of his Nomination he may be
preparing himself for his Entrance thereon. B. COLMAN."

After the Decease of the Rev. and Hon. John Leverett, President, viz. on
November 18. 1724. The Rev. Corporation met and chose Mr. Colman Successor N.
B. The Rev. Mr. Joseph Sewall of Boston, (now Dr. Sewall) was first chosen and
excused himself. -- August the 11th. 1724.
to that great and excellent Man. -- And on November 24th following, the Hon.
and Rev. the Overseers of the College unanimously approved of, and confirmed
the said Election; and on the 30th by their Committee invited him to accept of
the Office: But the Great and General Court of the Province not willing (at
that Time) to settle an Honorable Stipend or Salary, until his Inclination to
accept, and his Church's to part with him were known, he excused himself from
accepting the Honor and Charge, though with repeated and earnest Solicitations
and Arguments he was urged to it -- here and from Abroad.

The Answers he returned were in these Words -- As I find in a Paper entitled,
"A Minute or Record of that troublesome Affair, my Election to the Presidency
over Harvard-College."

"To the Hon. Samuel Sewall Esquire and the other Hon. and Rev. Gentlemen the
Committee of the Hon. and Rev. the Overseers of Harvard-College.

Gentlemen,

When you did me the Honor to inform me in the Name of the Hon. and Rev. the
Overseers of Harvard-College, of their approving the Choice, made of me by the
Rev. Corporation to be President of said College, I did then express to you my
grateful Acknowledgment of the Regards shown me by so Hon. and Rev. a Body, and
my humble Sense of my own Unworthiness thereof. Since which I have privately
seen a Copy of the Vote of the Hon. House of Representatives of December 3.
sent up for Concurrence, which Vote I am informed has been non-concurred by the
Honorable his Majesty's Council, and hereupon fearing lest on my Account there
may be like to ensue any Difficulty to the honorable Government, or Detriment
to the College for Want of an honorable Allowance or Salary to the President;
-- I do therefore willingly lay before the honorable and reverend Overseers,
or before the General Court if it be thought meet, my humble Apprehensions
relating unto what so nearly concerns the College and my self; and as I judge,
its just Interests and Welfare in all Times to come. I crave Leave therefore to
say,

That I never sought or desired, but modestly shunned the Election that has
been made of me to be the President of Harvard-College.

That I hope I have always shown my self very inclinable, to the utmost of my
Power, every Way I can, to serve the College, and have had great Pleasure
therein, and I thank God sometimes no small Success.

That I must readily own, I am very much disinclined to leave my Church, or to
undertake an Office so much above me, as that of President of the College.

That I truly esteem it a Matter of great Importance to the Establishment of
the Churches in the Province, as well as to the College, that ordinarily some
grave and learned Person, who has been a considerable Time in the Pastoral
Office, and is in some eminent Degree, gifted for preaching and expounding the
holy Scriptures to the Students, be chosen President of the College.

That as I wish the President in all Times to come, may especially give himself
unto these sacred Studies and Exercises, so I would humbly supplicate the
General Court for any one who shall do so, to grant him a very sufficient and
honorable Support.

But for the honorable Court to insist on their Vote of knowing my Mind,
whether I am willing to accept of the Choice, and to undertake the Office of
President, to which I am chosen, and also of knowing my Church's Mind, whether
they can part from me before they will fix any Salary for me in said Office,
must determine me to give my Answer in the Negative to the honorable and
reverend the Overseers of Harvard College, which in that Ca^e I now do.

Finally, As it highly becomes me to acquiesce in the Pleasure and Wisdom of
the honorable Court; so I hold my self now called in Providence with new
Ardours to recommend the College to their wise and tender Care.

I ask the Prayers of the honorable and reverend Board and am --

Boston, Dec. 10th. 1724."

A Second Answer upon further Application.

"Gentlemen,

Beseeching the God of the Spirits of all Flesh to provide graciously for the
College, and to set a much worthier Person over it, and to make it in all Times
to come more and more a Blessing both to Church and State, I do humbly think it
my Duty to return my Answer to the honorable and reverend Overseers of
Harvard-College in the Negative, praying you in Time convenient to inform them
that I do not see my way clear to accept of the Choice made of me to be the
President of said College.

I am Honored and Reverend, your obliged humble Servant." --

Although Dr. Colman excused himself from this high Honor and Trust, yet no
one showed a greater Solicitude, nor took more Pains, to have the College well
supplied, -- His moving Speech to the Old South Church in Boston, September the
30th 1724 to part with their Reverend and Honored Pastor, Dr. Joseph Sewall
for that Service, which lies before me, is a Demonstration of it. -- With many
other Essays afterward for its Good.

Dr. Colman writes down at large his Opinion, What President Harvard-College
needed at that Day. -- His Words are,

"A Man of God should be set at the Head of it, of conspicuous Godliness,
Faith, Love, Patience, Meekness. -- An upright and faithful Man, in whom all
that are any ways related unto, and concerned for the College, may put an
entire Confidence.

One that will not only be a kind and tender Father to our Sons, as well as a
careful Governor of them; but will also desire to be found a spiritual Father
to them, by the Will of God.

A Man of Prayer, one who will be fervent in Supplication for, and over our
Children, Night and Day; as well as one apt to teach, and expound the Word of
God to them, and to preach occasionally and frequently to them.

A President, who will be an Affectionate Brother to the resident Fellows, the
Tutors; from whom they will never be like to suspect any Unkindness or Evil;
but in whom they may always find much Good. -- A Man in whom Gravity, Humility
and the Meekness of Wisdom is joined with a good Degree of Constancy and
Resolution, which happy Conjunction will afford a wise and steady Conduct, the
best Spirit of Government for such a Society, and most commanding the Reverence
of the Students, their Love and Fear together.

A President, who is like to be a fast Friend to these Churches of our Lord
Jesus; in whom they may always find (through Grace) a zealous Servant and a
dutiful Son. -- One who is like to be diligent and industrious in the Discharge
of the Duties of his Station, and who will give himself wholly to them. But
there is one Thing more which meeting with all the rest of these
Accomplishments as much to be desired, -- viz. That he be one in the middle Age
of Life, which as it may invite him into a Return to academical Studies so will
give us an agreeable Prospect of many Years Service from him, if it please God
to prolong his Life.

Dr. Colman greatly served Yale College in the Colony of Connecticut, by
procuring for it many valuable Books, whereby its Library has been enriched;
and on many Occasions showed his Zeal for the Purity and Welfare of that
Society.

Three Letters, showing Dr. Colman's Zeal for the Good of Yale College, which
he served many Ways, as well as Harvard his Mother.

"To the Rev. Elisha Williams, Rector of Yale College, New Haven.
Reverend Sir,
The Fame of the Reverend Dean Berkley's Generosity to your College, has
sometime since surprised and pleased us. We could hardly believe the Report at
first, the Thing being so rare and singular. But I hear the Governor has
actually received the Dean's Packet, and delivered it to Dr. C -- to transmit
to you. If the Gift comes to you, as the honored Mr. Hollis his Donations did
to us (and as we hope it does) with a truly catholic Spirit, for the Support
and Propagation of Religion and Learning among you, without any Conditions or
Limitations which are inconsistent with or may be subversive of the known and
true Intent and Foundation of your College; nothing can be more noble and
generous than this Act of the Rev. Dean's, nor can we enough praise and admire
it; and we shall be ready to join with you in our most hearty Thanks to God and
his Servant, for so great and unexpected a Favor to you. But give me Leave to
say to you on the other Hand, and I am very free to say it to all the World,
and I doubt not, but it would honor me to the Dean himself, That if the Gift
comes to you clogged with any Conditions that directly or indirectly tend to
the Introduction of Episcopacy, and consequently to the Subversion of the true
Intent and Foundation of your College, then were it ten Times as much as it is,
and your Poverty much more than it is, I trust neither your self, nor any of
the Reverend Trustees will be under the least Temptation to accept the
Benefaction on such a Condition: Your Wisdom, Integrity and Fidelity will
forbid it, while Prudence, Humanity and true Christianity will allow and direct
you to make your Excuses to the Reverend Donor with great Respect and just
Acknowledgment.

I pray you, Sir, to put a candid Interpretation on my present Writing. I do it
not without the Advice, and at the Motion of wiser and better Friends to you,
than I may pretend to be; though you know my approved Friendship to your
College, for the Sake of these Churches of Christ.

I write Letters to Day of the same Import with this, to the Rev. Mr. Adams of
New London, and to the Rev. Mr. Williams of Pomfret, who I hope will concur
with you in the same Sentiments that are here expressed, and that all the
Reverend Trustees will be inspired with a just Zeal for the Preservation of the
known Principles of the New-English Churches, and to transmit them down to our
Posterity pure and entire by the Will of God.

Sir, I wish you always the divine Blessing, Influence and Conduct in all that
concerns the College, its Instruction and Government, and am,

Your affectionate Brother, And very humble Servant, B. C.
Boston, Dec. 2. 1732.

To the Rev. Mr. Eliphalet Adams of New London.
Rev. Sir,
As you are one of the Trustees for Yale-College, and I know you have the
Welfare of that Society much at Heart, as well as the Doctrines and Laws of the
Kingdom of Christ as received in these Churches; so at the Desire of some of
your sincere and esteemed Friends here I take upon me to write to you at this
Time, upon the Fame of the noble Gift to your College, from the reverend and
learned Dean Berkley.

I hope it comes to you without the Clog of any Condition that is inconsistent
with or subversive of the known and true Intent of Honorable Founders of your
College; and that the Reverend Trustees will carefully see that it does so
before they accept of that or any other Donation, from whatever Person of
Honor and Distinction, or of whatsoever Value it may be.

If the Reverend Dean has from a Catholic Spirit, without any private and
particular Views to the Introduction of Episcopacy into your College and the
Churches of your Province, made the Gift of his Estate here to you, it is an
Act worthy of our highest Esteem, Emulation and Gratitude, and his Praise ought
to be in our Churches. I shall long to hear it is so, and entreat you to let us
know it as soon as may be, that we may join your Acknowledgments to him.

And yet if the Donation should be so limited, as that it will not be safe nor
just in you to accept of it, I shall however think honorably of the Dean's
noble Offer to you upon his known Principles in Favor of Episcopacy; and with
all possible Respect to him you may let him know you cannot accept of it.

Forgive me, dear Sir, that I should trouble you on so plain a Matter, which
yet is of great Importance in Point of Prejudice to our Churches, and the
professed Interests of Religion in them, if a due C^ution be not used in it.
The Danger is of acting suddenly, without a deliberate Consideration of the
Matter by the Reverend Trustees; whose united Thanks are the least, I think,
that so great and frank a Donation calls for.

I have just wrote my Thoughts on this Head to the Rev. Mr. Williams, the
learned and faithful Rector of the College, to which I refer you when you see
him: And to Mr. Williams of Pomfret.

Give me Leave to add one Word more concerning the Bruit of the Prevalence of
Arminianism in the College. I am told that you were your self in such
Apprehensions and Fears on that Head, that you enquired earnestly of your Son
concerning it; and that the deceased aged Mr. Woodbridge of Hartford a little
before his Death was under great Concern on that Account. It would be
acceptable to some superior Friends here, if you would freely write upon that
Head; more especially if you can vindicate the College from the Aspersion. We
hope and believe the Reverend Trustees and Rector have made a faithful Enquiry
into that Matter.

I thought to have wrote but a Line or two, and yet have got to this Length.
Forgive it, and accept of what is sincerely meant for the public and common
Interest of Religion among us. May God be with you in all your private and
public Labors, in the Service of it. And pray for

Your Brother and Servant, B. C.
Dec. 2. 1732.

"To the Rev. Mr. Ebenezer Williams of Pomfret.
Rev. Sir,
I am almost too much a Stranger to you, to take the Freedom I now do to write
on a very rare and important Occurrence; but some Friends here to whom you are
more known, move me to do it. I take you to be one of the Reverend Trustees of
Yale College, and a hearty Friend to the religious Principles and Intention of
its Founders. The reverend and learned Dean Berkley, has (we hear) made a Gift
of his Estate in New England to your College; a great and noble Donation truly,
and what challenges your and our most grateful Acknowledgment, if it be not
attended with any Limitation or Conditions prejudicial to the original Design
and Foundation of the College. I entreat, Sir, your faithful Enquiry into this
Matter, and I do it in the Name of your Friends here, who have a great
Dependence on your Fidelity in the Cause of Christ and these Churches. I hope
the Dean's Gift comes clear and open to you, and not to introduce Episcopacy,
notwithstanding his known Sentiments in Favor of it. I suppose the Trustees
must meet, and will deliberately consider of the Gift, before an Answer be
returned to the generous and learned Donor. If it can with Safety, Honor and
Justice be accepted, I am sure it ought with the utmost Readiness and
Acknowledgment, as a singular Instance in our Day of a large and catholic
Spirit. But if the Meaning of the Gift be plainly the Propagation of Episcopacy
instead of simple Christianity, Heu! timeo! It is better to excuse our selves
from such Gifts, and remain in our primitive Poverty and Simplicity. I should
not be unwilling the Dean himself should know what and why I now write. The
Case is plain and open, and yet I know I expose my self to gross
Misrepresentations. I hope I shall stand right and justified in your sober
Thoughts; and if I do, you will doubtless think your self concerned to act as
you think God will approve in this Matter. That you may always have his
Presence and Guidance, is the hearty Prayer of

Sir, Your Brother and humble Servant, B. C."
Dec. 2. 1732.

He served much and long in the religious Affairs of the Indians being
commissioned and employed by the Indian Corporation in London. This Society,
was founded by the English Parliament, on July 27. 1649; established by King
Charles Second 1661, and styled the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel
in New England, and the Parts adjacent in America. And as the Design is for the
Propagation of the Gospel among the Indians only: This Society have all along
had their Commissioners for the Indian Affairs at Boston.


Sept. 4th 1730, He was appointed one of the Commissioners by the honorable
and reverend Society for propagating Christian Knowledge at Edinburgh, and by
many Letters sent to and received from the worthy Members thereof it appears
that he was indefatigable in managing that important Trust which he resigned
about the Year 1740.

He wrote once and again to Monsieur Levergiat a Jesuit among our Eastern
Tribes of Indians on Occasion of one of his Letters to one of our worthy
Missionaries on Georges River. For diverse good Reasons they are here inserted.

"R. Domine, Pax et Gratia Christi!
Dignissimus D. Secomb, Juvenus Emissarius, praecellius Gravitate, Pietate, et
Zelo erga Deum et Homines, me Literis benignis vestris, ei transcriptis,
obligavit. Valde gratum mihi est, Vir Reverende, observare fraternam vestram
est vere Christianam Temperiem, Animumque placidum, in Epistolis tuis
resplendentem. Omnino hoc respondet Narrationi Reverendi D. Rutherford, de
Humana tua Visitatione nuper ab illo accepta. Molestum mihi et offensum esset,
si D. Secomb non promptus fuisset Urbanitates tuas reddere, omni cum
Observantia et Reverentia, muneri et Eruditioni Vestra debita. Sed de Amore,
Humilitate, et Mansuetudine, D. Secomb scribere non opus est. Divinae hae
Gratiae devinciunt illum Tibi, si ex Literis tuis Conjecturam faciam. Tentate
Vos simul, quis Gratia Christi in his superabit. Magis estimamus Benevolentiam
Domini Lauvariat erga nos, propter Ordinem suum. Generosi (dicam?) e Societate
Jesu solent nos Haereticos (falso vocatos) Distantia cum summa et Aversione
tractare. TU, Domine, multo magis Christianus et Generosus, Tu non ita Dominum
Jesum "didicisti. "Ira Hominis Justitiam Dei non operatur."

Gaudeo, Domine, et vehementer laetor, de Zelo Vestro, et Sollicitudine pro
Moribus Barbarorum, cogitans: Speciatim adversus perniciosas illorum
Compotationes et Ebrietates. Dignissima Laud haec tua Cura est, et Zelus. Hos
Mores illorum aegre fers, et iniquo Animo, ut oportet. Barbari sane satis isti
sunt, et stupidi, sine Potationibus, quibus fiunt tanquam Bruta Animalia, et in
sua Corruptione peribunt. Sed plane faalleris, et nobis quidem inferres
Injurias, si male sentires de Praefectu summo, vel Magistratibus Nostris, vel
etiam de Ducibus Arcium nostrarum; quasi ullo modo tolerarint Venditionem
inebriantis Potus, sine Mensura, Indis. Attamen semper erunt in impio Mundo,
Negotiatores impii, qui Lucri turpis Causa, non haerebunt in Flagitio ullo
perpetrando, vel nequissimo. Quid non Mortalia Pectora cogis, Auri "Sacra
Fames? Non alli nobis videntur isti Clandestini Venditores, quam
Inimici^truculenti, et Indorum, et suae illorum etiam Patriae. Vae illis qui
inebriant hos stupidos Barbaros, ut super nuditates eorum aspiciant. Fundetur
super eos Calix Dextrae Jehovae, sin minus in hoc mundo, at certe in Futur^,
sine Resipiscentia.

Indignatione nostra ita dicta contra iniquos Homines, simus conjucti Precibus
nostris Patri Luminum et Misericordiae, in Nomine Unici Mediatoris inter Deum
et Homines, Jesu nempe Christi, pro miserrimis hisce Barbaris; ut convertantur
a Tenebris ad Lucem, et a Potestate Satanae ad Deum. Hoc enim bonum et acceptum
est coram Salvatore Nostro Deo, qui omnes vult Salvos fieri, et ad Agnitionem
Veritatis venire.

Torum igitur Dei Verbum in Manibus eorum committere, et coram Oculis
proponere, volumus; quo Voluntatem Dei legere poss^^, et assertam Viam Salutis
^^^nere -- Scil; Sanctificationem Spiritus, et Justificationem Peccatoris per
Solam Justitiam Christi, Fide acceptam, ex Operibus bonis perfecta.

Hoc magnum est Depositum Christi, concraditum Tibi, Vir Dei! si eo Nomine
Glorioso Te dignum velis prebere. Avertat Deus a Nobis Verba illa terribilia
Christi Legis peritis, "Vae Vobis, quia tu^istis Clavem Scientiae."

Nos, fateor, decet invicem non parvum concedere propter Praejudicium
Educationis; sed Exemplar habemus et Arbitrum Unicum, scil; Sincerum Verbum
Dei. Ex Cord opto, et Tibi et mihi, Illuminationem Salvi^icam a Beato spiritu,
qui inspiravit Scriptores Sanctos. "Testis enim est mihi Deus (si licet uti
Verbis Apostoli ad Philippenses) ut desiderem Vos omnes in Visceribus Jesu
Christi; et hoc precor ut Charitas nostra ad^^c magis et magis abundet, cum
Agnitione et omni Intelligentia; ut probemus quae sunt utilia, et simus impleti
Fructibus Justitiae, qui sunt per Jesum Christum in Gloriam et Laudem Dei.

Vale, Vir Humanissime! Gratia Christi tecum, et Afflatus Divini Spiritus. In
Precibus tuis in Mentem, veniat Amicus et Frater Omnibus qui diligunt Dominum
nostrum Jesum Christum in Sinceritate,

B. C. S. S. Theol. Doct. Apud Bostonienses. Domino Stephano Lau^eriat, E
Societate Jesu, Paunabscot.
Boston. Augusti. Die. 16. 1732.

"Domine, et Frater Charissime, Pa^ Christi!
Literas Vestras amicas et pias, sine Tempore scribendi, ^uper accepi, Cura D.
Secomb; et tibi maxim devinctum me habeo, propter fraternam Sollicitudinem
quam exprimis, ^t Zelum -- Verbis ^ere divinis, pro anima mea immortali,
ejusque Aeterna Salute. Nec minori Benevolentia Christiana erga Te ardeo, quod
Grantiam Dei in Veritate cognoscere possis, et impleri Cognitione Voluntatis
ipsius, in omni Sapientia, et Prudentia Spirituali. In Hoc unum sumus, sicut
decet Ministros Verbi Christi -- Sed (proh Dolor!) quam sejuncti Sumus et
distantes, sub glorioso Nomine Christiano, in Dogmate et Communione. Ita
praedixit Dominus Noster Jesus, non sine fancta Ira et Dolor Summo, "Vae
Mundo. Matthew. xiii. 7. Necesse est enim ut veniant Offendicula; veruntamen vae
Homini per quem venit Offendiculum." Quaestio ergo est, Unde veniunt? Utru a
nobis Reformatis, an ab Ecclesia Romanorum, quae falso sibi arrogat Nomen
Catholicae.

Commiseratione multa me prosecutus es (charissime Amice!) quia non natus et
educatus intra Parietes Ecclesiae Vestrae, extra maneo: Ego autem (quae
Educationis felicis est Vis et Efficacia, una et Scripturae Notitia ab
Infantia^ jam usque prima) non cesso Gratias agere Deo, quod Lineae mea et mea
Temporae prolapsa sunt inter Reformatos. Video satis, non tantum ex Scriptis
Theologorum Nostrorum, sed ex Sincero Verbo Dei, Manibus non solum Pastorum,
sed et Populi, tractato, Superstitiones et Idololatriam Papisticae Ecclesiae
Romanae. Attamen Meipsum non tali Pretio et Honor habeo, quasi ulla mea
Sapientia vel Sagacitate Errores illos fatales investigare potuissem, si Divina
Providentia Natale meum assignasset, in Regionibus Pontificiis. Heu! quantum
debe^ liberae Gratiae Dei, quod Sortem, meam designaverit, sub Radiis solaribus
praedicati Evangelii, in Linqua materna, et purioris Cultus, a Portis Romae
remotum -- Exite Poluli "mei, dixit Dominus noster Salvator, ne Participes
sitis Delictorum ejus, et de Plagis ejus. Heu! quantum est Prejudicium
Educationis, quod non cernis Ecclesiam Romanam hodiernam non posse dici veram
Ecclesiam Christi. Non superstructa est Fundamento Prophetarum "et Apostolorum.
Multa addit Scripturis Canonicis, et multa subtrahit ab illis, sine Timore
divinae Prohibitionis, Deuteronomy. iv. 2. vel tremendae Imprecationis, Apo^. xxii.
10, 19. "Defecit a Fide semel Sanctis tradita, et varias Haereses exitiales
docet, sub Paena Anathematis. Exempli Gratia Sanctorum Merita, Satisfactiones
humanas, Indulgentias, Transubstantiationem, Sacrificum Missaticum, Primatum
Papae, Ecclesiae Infallibilitatem, etc. Cum Primis, Idolatricus Cultus et
Superstitiosus flagrans est et horrendus. Ratione Objecti, praeter Deum. Opt.
Max. unicum Cultus et Invocationis Objectum, Creaturas etiam (quae non sunt
Dii) veneramini et adoratis, Beatam nempe Virginem, Angelos, Sanctos defunctos,
Hostiam, Crucem, et Reliquias. Ratione Modi, Simulacra et Imagines veneramini,
in Contemptu Secundi Praecepti, ejusque Comminationis. Non facies tibi
Sculptile, neque ullam Imaginem, "etc. non adorabis ea, neque coals -- Ego enim
Jehova Deus tuus, Deus Zelotes, etc. Transeo Superbiam Papae, ejusque
Dominationem super Reges Terrae, qui Coronas ei suas dederunt, quia necesse est
ut Scriptura impleatur. Transeo majorem Arrogantiam, in Dispensationibus Legum
Divinarum, et in Usurpationibus super Conscientiam, Dominium Solius Dei. Ita se
extollit "adversus Omne quod dicitur Deus aut Numen, et in Templo Dei sedet
tanquam Deus; oftendens Seipsum quasi sit Deus. 2 Thessalonians. ii. 4. Transeo
immanes Persecutiones, quibus fuit Oceanus Sanguinis effusus, etc. Excusatum me
habeas (Domine, Amice) si nunquam fuero Membrum illius Ecclesiae, cujus caput
est Papa Iniquus ille quem Dominus in suo Tempore Destruet Spiritu Oris Sui.
Mysterium est Iniquitatis.

Iterum atque iterum Spiritus clare praedixit Regnum et Tempora Magni
Antichristi, quod multi desciscent a Fide, attendentes Spiritibus Impostoribus,
et Doctrinis Daemonum, prohibentium Matrimonium contrahere, et jubentium
abstinere a Cibis quos Deus creavit ut exciperentur cum Gratiarum Action. Hoc
etiam in Ecclesia Vestra impletum vides; et Populi Vestri Simplices vidissent,
si Usus Scripturae conceffus illis fuisset.

Profecto, Domine, quum Controversias inter Pontificios et quum Triginta abhinc
Annis Peregrinus fui trimestris in nobili et amaeno Regno Franciae, stupefactus
fui prodigiosam Corruptionem Religionis Christi, Ignorantiam Plebis, et
Facilitatem Digniorum, observans.

Te Domine, Admiratione in maxima habeo, et Fratres tuos Emissarios, qui Vitam
consumunt inter Barbaros, eorum Salutis Gratia. Maximum erit Praemium Vestrum
in Caelis, si veram Doctrinam et purum Cultum Christi doces his Barbaris, et si
vero Amore Christi et Animarum agis. Sed, cavete (Viri singulares!) ne,
deceptis Vobis ipsis, Seductores sitis, et ambo in Foviam cadatis. Heu! timeo
ne Ignorantia Barbarorum precantium in Lingua ignota, sine Contritione
precantium, retentura sit eos procul a Regno Dei, etiam si ad Sobrietatem et
Mansuetudinem reclamare posses. Regnum Dei est Spirituale et Gaudium in Spiritu
Sancto. Nimis Augusti sumus Nos Reformati in his divinis Fructibus S. S.
Spiritus; ex Animo opto, multo largiores fieri in iisem Pontificios.

Fratres Christiani! Nos ipsos judicemus, et alii pro aliis precemur, ut
sinceri et fideles in Christo reperiamur! Speciatim Te Humanissime Domine et
Frater, commendo Deo et Sermoni Gratiae ipsius, qui potens est superstruere, et
dare probis Haereditatem inter Omnes Sanctificatos!

Sum Tui Observantissimus et addictissimus, etc. B. C.
Bost. Julii 30. 1733.

As his Heart was much set upon serving this and other Missions to the Tribes
of Indians on our Borders, of which you will hear hereafter, and his Mind and
Pen employed in the good Work going on among them: So he was no less
solicitously concerned to have the pure Gospel sent into Places within our
several Governments, where the Inhabitants were either under strange Prejudices
against it; or so poor that they could not honorably support it. Accordingly,
he laid out himself to the uttermost to collect Moneys for the Maintenance of
suitable Missionaries, and always gave liberally of his own Estate. -- This
appears from many Papers encouraging Subscriptions for Block-Island, Nantucket,
Providence, etc. etc. etc. Also South Carolina -- The Island of Bermuda -- Cape
May were greatly served by his Care, Correspondence and Endeavors to settle
the Gospel among them.
-- He also for a long Time stood Treasurer for some of them which cost him
much Pains and Labor. -- In his younger Times he has gone himself in Person to
preach among them. The Letters he has been called to write on such Occasions
would make a Volume.

He projected and essayed to do good many other Ways. -- I find two Papers, on
the Outside of which is written, My own, the one about setting up
Charity-Schools, the other a Proposal of a Fund for pious Uses, both highly
worthy to be published to the World, and are therefore here inserted.

Boston, New England, Feb. 1713.

"Whereas it has of late Years pleased God by his Grace, wonderfully to incline
and spirit many piously disposed People in the several Parts of our Nation, to
set up and support many Charity-Schools, for the Maintenance and Education of
poor Children of either Sex; and in his Providence to smile on those their good
Endeavors; the Fame whereof reaching us in these distant Regions has provoked
a Zeal to a like Undertaking, for the Glory of God, and the Good of this Place.

And as we justly apprehend there can be no Sort of Charity more acceptable to
God, and beneficial to our Country than this; nothing being more likely under
the Blessing of God, to serve unto the Reformation of Manners, the preventing
the Growth of Profaness and Debauchery among us, and to promote Virtue and true
Godliness, than an early and pious Education of Youth: We do therefore propose,
under the Favor and Direction of God, to endeavor the setting up and
supporting two Charity-Schools or Hospitals, in the Town of Boston in
New England, the One for the entire Maintenance, Instruction and godly
Education of poor Boys, the other of poor Girls.

In Order whereunto it is proposed, 1. That there be some convenient Place and
Habitation provided: And particularly that the Town be moved at their next
Town-Meeting, to appropriate the long House upon Fort-Hill, with some Addition
of Land for a Garden, and some adjoining Spot for a Pasture, if it might be
obtained; to be given for this Use for so long a Time as the Charity proposed
shall continue to make this Improvement of it. 2. That the Children entertained
in the said Schools shall be such as are the proper Objects of Charity, by
Reason of Poverty; so that all such in the Town without Distinction or Respect,
be meant equally to be provided for in this Charity; so far as the Fund
designed shall be found sufficient. 3. That where poor People are seen visibly
to neglect their Children, and by such their Neglect to abandon them to Vice
and Idleness; and are yet unwilling to have their Children maintained and
educated in a Way of public Charity; the Help of the Laws provided, or that
shall be provided in that Case shall be sought and taken. 4. That the
Maintenance proposed for the Children is the whole Provision of Lodging, Food,
Physic, Clothing, Firing, Washing, Tendance, and every Thing necessary to
their decent and confortable Subsistence: And that the Children be clothed
alike in some Livery, whereby they may be known; and kept neat, clean and
wholesome. 5. That from six Years old and upward, Children shall be received
into these Schools or Hospitals, there to be supported and instructed till
Twelve or Fourteen Years of Age: And then as they shall be found fit to be
disposed of by the Care of the Overseers, consulting the Children's Capacity
and Inclinations, to Services and Trades. 6. That the Children be instructed
carefully in the Principles and Duties of Religion; taught to read well, to
write and cipher: The Girls to knit, sew, spin, and whatsoever may be proper to
keep them employed, and fit them for Services, and to get their Living in the
World. 7. That there be strict Rules of Discipline and Government observed, to
restrain the Children from Idleness, and for the Punishment of every Thing that
is vicious; to form them into good Manners and virtuous Behavior, and that
particular Care be taken for their reverent Behavior in God's Worship, and the
Sanctification of the Lord's Day. 8. That there be daily Prayers, Morning and
Evening, with the reading the holy Scriptures, attended with suitable Solemnity,
and none allowed to be absent. 9. That the Master and Mistress of the Schools
be Persons of good Life, and Repute for Knowledge, Prudence and a Spirit of
Government: Capable of so great a Trust and Service; who shall be honorably
supported. 10. That there be three or five Trustees chosen annually by the
Subscribers, one of which to be the Treasurer; to whom the Care, Inspection and
Supply of the two Houses shall belong; who shall keep and render an exact
Account of all Payments made, or Gifts received, or of Expenses and
Disbursements, and make up their Accounts once a Year. 11. That there be a
Number of Overseers chosen, among whom the Ministers of the Town shall be
always reputed, and the Trustees for the Time being; to visit the Schools once
a Month, and catechize the Children; when also there shall be an Account taken
of their Faults noted down by the Master or Mistress, and suitable Admonitions
or Corrections administered. 12. That there be a Quarterly Meeting of the
Subscribers and Benefactors, when any further Rules and Methods from Time to
Time found necessary or convenient shall be propounded and agreed unto, and a
public Sermon shall be preached suitable to the Occasion; the Children walking
in Form to Church, and there sitting together in the Front-Gallery when they
shall be publicly catechized, and a Collection shall be made of the Charity of
the Congregation. 13. That for the more easy gathering, and Payment of the Sums
subscribed, it be agreed by the Subscribers to pay the same in, at their
Quarterly Meetings, to the Treasurer. 14. Finally, That all Persons be assured
on the Faith of said Society, that whatever Sums be subscribed and paid, or
whatever Gifts and Contributions be made, or Legacies left by Will or
Testament, for the Support and Benefit of the said Schools, shall be by them
faithfully and without Fraud, applied and improved to the said Use and no other.


Wherefore in Pursuit of this Christian Design, we whose Names are
underwritten, do hereby agree to pay yearly at four equal quarterly Payments,
during Pleasure, the several respective Sums of Money over against our Names
subscribed. Humbly commending this our poor Endeavor and Offering, to the
Blessing and Acceptance of God, and ourselves to his gracious Direction with
Respect unto any further Methods of Wisdom and Piety, which may best answer the
Intentions above proposed.

The Proposal for a Fund.

A Proposal humbly offered to the Consideration of the Ministers and Churches
of Christ, through this and the neighboring Provinces, for the collecting and
keeping a small Fund of Moneys in every Church, to be disposed of from Time to
Time in such pious Uses, and in such Proportions, as the particular Churches to
which it belongs shall see meet.

As we are directed and commanded by God our Savior to be ready unto every
good Work, and to be rich in good Works, Titus iii. 1. 1 Timothy vi. 18. 1 Pet.
iv. 11.
according to the Ability which he has given us, and his Blessing on us in our
worldly Estate; so we are particularly encouraged to be devising liberal Things
with this Promise, That by liberal Things we shall stand. Isa. xxxii. 8.


This Promise obviates and removes the Objection, that may be ready to rise in
the Minds of some at the first Sight of the present Proposal, from our present
difficult Circumstances.

For as one Reason of these may be, that we have done and do no more in a free
Expense from Year to Year as a People, for the Support of Religion among our
selves, and the carrying it unto others in our Neighborhood; so one of the
shortest and most direct Ways that a People can take to obtain of God the
Return of their Prosperity, and their future Establishment, may be to come into
some Methods of this Nature which we now propose; with a pure Aim at the Honor
of God, and the Good of Souls. Prove. iii. 9, 10. Isa. lviii. 8, 9, 10.


Let us prove a gracious and bountiful Providence, if it may not pour out a
Blessing, Mal. iii. 10. Prove. (...) 22.
and add no Sorrow with it: But what is of much greater Weight, and what we may
more assuredly expect, by this Means we may reap more abundantly in the
spiritual Blessing, Isa. xliv. 3, 4. Gal. vi. 8, 9.
-- The Spirit of God with his Word and Ordinances among us, and on our
Offspring.

It is proposed then, I. That every particular Church do furnish themselves
with a greater or smaller Stock, that may be a constant and ready Fund for Uses
of Piety and Charity, as they may see Occasion. II. That to this End there may
be in every Congregation a Collection made on our Days of General Fasting and
Thanksgiving, appointed by the Government over us from Year to Year. III. These
Stocks may also be from Time to Time increased by private Communications, as
any Persons on particular Occasions may find themselves inclined. IV. This
Evangelical Treasury may be lodged in the Hands of the Deacons of each of the
Churches where it is gathered, or whomsoever the Church shall appoint to that
Trust; and a true and fair Account shall be kept by them, to be on all
Occasions produced, of all that is brought in, or laid out. V. Nothing shall be
at any Time, or for any Occasion drawn out, without the Knowledge and Consent
of the Church to which it belongs. VI. It is proposed that the first and main
Intention of these Funds shall be the Propagation of Religion in ungospelized
Places; and the dispersing Bibles, Catechisms, and other Instruments of Piety
among the Poor, as any particular Churches may see Occasion.


We have observed with Thankfulness to God for it, that of late Years the
Hearts of many good Men among us, have been much upon this great and good Work
here proposed, Namely, the Mission of the Gospel into such Places as have been
hitherto negligent or averse to the Settlement of it among them, and also the
giving Bibles, Catechisms, and other good Books among the Ignorant, the
Prejudiced and the Profane, as well as unto poor and pious People. An Odor we
trust it is of a sweet Smell, a Sacrifice acceptable and well pleasing to God.
Phil. iv. 18. Heb. xiii. 16.


A more compendious Way to do Good to Souls, and bring much Glory to God, can
scarce be thought of. The Wisdom which is from above, full of Mercy and of good
Fruits, Jam. iii. 16.
we think, has scarce projected a more comprehensive and effectual Piece of
Charity and Beneficence than this is. -- What can we think of more likely to be
owned, accepted, prospered and rewarded by God.

And as to the Method we propose for the raising these Funds, scil. by
Collections in our Congregations every public Fast and Thanksgiving Day; what
can be more agreeable to both those Solemnities?

It is very fit, if not indeed a Duty, that our Fasts both private and public,
should be accompanied with pious Distributions and Communications in Ways of
Charity and Mercy. Such were the Prayers and Fasts of the devout Cornelius, who
also gave much Alms to the People; Acts x. 2 -- 30.
and how well accepted of God and rewarded, none need to be told. And such is
the public Fast which God has chosen: Is it not to deal thy Bread to the
Hungry, and that thou bring the Poor that are cast out to thy House? When thou
see the Naked that thou cover him, etc. Then shall thy Light break forth as
the Morning, and thine Health shall spring forth speedily. Isa. lviii. 6, 7, 8.
Now from God's Promises, on Account of these private Exercises of Bounty and
Mercy to the Bodies of Men on our Days of solemn Fasting and Prayer, we may
well argue that an Alms on such Occasions, designed for the Salvation of their
immortal Souls, cannot but be a Sacrifice with which God in well-pleased.

Nor do we at all mean by proposing this Offering to the Souls of Men, to put
by the other to their Bodies; God forbid: But as we would hereby intimate to
our People, how necessary an Attendant of a religious Fast Alms to the Poor is,
and what ought to be preached to them and observed by them on such an Occasion;
so we only propose to them the adding a Mite to be cast into a Treasury of the
Lord for the pious Uses abovesaid.

And then as to our Days of public Thanksgiving; as we cannot but praise (and
bless God for) the excellent Usage (which has obtained among us from the Days
of our Fathers, and we pray God may never cease among us) of making Gifts to
the Poor, and sending them Portions from our Tables: So we hope, that the
adding these Contributions for the Services of Piety above proposed, will be
grievous to none, but may be a vast Benefit to us both on temporal and
spiritual Accounts. Phil. iv. 17. 1 Cor. x. 33.


To be sure, on our Thanksgiving Days we should remember both the laudable
Practice of the pious Jews on their Days of Gladness and Feasting; a good Day
and of sending Portions one to another, and of Gifts to the Poor; Esther ix.
19, 22.
and also the Law given to Israel by the Hand of Moses, That on their three
yearly Feasts none of them should appear before the Lord empty, but every one
(says the Text) shall give as he is able, according to the Blessing of the Lord
thy God which he has given thee. Deuteronomy. xvi. 16, 17. Exodus xxiii. 15.


We need add no more to justify and press the Proposal here made. We give our
Judgment to the Churches for public Collections to be made in our Assemblies
for the Poor, or for other pious Uses, as every Church and Congregation may
think best, on every Day of General Fasting, or Thanksgiving observed by us. We
wish that by mutual Consent it may universally come into Practice. We hope that
what we here offer, will be seriously weighed, heartily construed, and be
cordially entertained by the beloved Churches of Christ and their Rev. Pastors,
whom we salute in the Lord, and ask their Prayers for us."

As he ever expressed high an Regard for the Town of Boston the Place of his
Nativity and Residence, he accordingly sought its Welfare and Flourishing
continually.

He used his best Endeavors that Peace with Truth and Holiness might be and
abide in the Churches; and an happy Union subsist among the Pastors; and in his
Turn visited the Schools, and encouraged the Youth in Piety and Learning both
by Word and Writing. Some of his moving Speeches to the Scholars are found by
us. He often gave them Hymns of his own composing to translate into Latin. The
Prison and the Alms House he also frequently ministered unto, by his Charities
and Preaching.
He bore an open Testimony against such Things in the Weekly Prints as had a
Tendency to mock Religion, and bring it into Contempt, particularly a vile
Paper called the Courant. He also showed his Concern for what he esteemed the
Temporal Interest of the Inhabitants.

There is an Essay of his printed in the Year 1719, for the setting up and
establishing a Market, fairly representing the Conveniences and Advantages
thereof.

He greatly encouraged by private Conversation the receiving the Smallpox by
the safe and easy Way of Inoculation; and by a printed Composure in the Year
1721 entitled, Some Observations on the new Method of receiving the Small Pox
by ingrafting or inoculating, which was well accepted by many, and did much
Good both here and in Great Britain, where it had a second Impression. Dr.
Juven the learned Secretary of the Royal Society, gives his Opinion of it in a
Letter to H. Newman, Esquire in these Words, "One may, I think, in that little
Tract, see the Philosopher and Physician, as well as the modest and humble
Divine.


He also wrote and published a Letter in Vindication of his Friend Z. Boylston
F. R. S. who was the first and chief Surgeon that performed the Operation, and
had suffered much from the Tongues and Pens of some good as well as many bad
Men that opposed the Practice.

I come now to write largely of Dr. Colman's serving the Public, his Country,
and the Churches.

He was employed in his younger as well as later Times by the Great and General
Court of the Province, and the several distinct Branches of it on diverse
weighty Affairs. At their Desire he not only preached and printed once and
again on grand Occasions Viz. A Sermon entitled Imprecation against the Enemies
of God, Psalm lxviii. 1. 1707. A Sermon on the UNION of the two Kingdoms,
England and Scotland 1708, from Psalm cxxii. 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th Verses. Two
Election Sermons, in the Year 1718 -- from Neh. v. 19. -- And in the Year 1723
another from 1 Chronicles xxviii. 8.

1719 -- The Blessing of Zebulon and Issachar, Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 18, 19 Verses.

A Fast Sermon preached in the Council Chamber 1736 from Zech. vii. 8, 9.

A Sermon entitled, The Lord shall rejoice in his Works 1741 from Psalm civ. 31.

Also, Sermons on Thomas Hollis, Esquire and Hon. Samuel Holden, Esquire which will be
taken Notice of in the next Chapter.


but also draughted Letters and Addresses for them relating to public Matters
which were highly approved. Sometimes he has been engaged for them in secret
Services on the most momentous Concerns, and succeeded in them. We have no
Minister now left, that has that Interest and Influence here or at Home which
he seemed to have.

I find by many Copies left that he wrote freely (but always with greatest
Complaisance and Humility to our excellent Governors, and Agents He held a long
and useful Correspondence with Mr. Agent Dummer, Wilks, etc. -- And wrote many
a Letter which he never sent fearing lest he should intermeddle too far in some
Affairs: So he has written on the Outside of them. He exercised a Jealousy over
himself, and was a great Master of Prudence, if that be a true Definition of
it, which some have given, viz. Prudentia est dicendorum, faciendorumque, in
suo Loco et tempore scientia.
for the Province; and to the leading Members in both Houses, of our Great and
General Court, from Time to Time, which were generally well accepted, and
sometimes did eminent Service. The Governors DUDLEY, SHUTE, BERNETT, BELCHER
expressed the highest Value for him, and his Excellency our present Governor will
not be offended if I say he has shown him as great Regards.

I own he has been blamed by some (who have not turned out the best Friends to
their Country) for intermeddling at all with civil and secular Matters. But
must a Person who knows well the Interest of his Country, and is capable of
serving it, and saving it too when sinking, be silent only because he is a
Minister? Is he nothing else? Is he not a Subject of his Prince, and a Member
of the Commonwealth? -- Mr. Colman was full in the Sentiments of the Rev. Drs.
Increase and Cotton Mather, his Pastors and Predecessors on this Head. Dr.
Increase Mather's Life, wrote by his Son Dr. Cotton Mather. Page 151, 152.
-- Viz. That Opportunities to do good not only legitimate "the Application of
our Capacities to do it, but also oblige and require us do it. That upon
public and pressing Emergencies Ministers may apply their superior Talents to
some Things of secular Importance. The great Seldom is quoted by them in
Vindication of such a Practice -- It Is a foolish Thing (says he) to say, A
Minister must not meddle with secular Matters because his own Profession will
take up his whole Man. The Meaning is only, that he must attend his Calling.

I hope the Country will be so just, now he is Dead, as to own that by his
unwearied Pains and Essays of this Kind, we have been generally and greatly
served. --

His Fathers and Brethren in the sacred Ministry as they highly and justly
valued Him on Account of his many excellent Endowments, so they particularly
discerned and distinguished his shining Talent in draughting Letters and
Addresses by employing it on various Occasions. -- So long ago as in the Year
1715 there is found his Draught of an Address to our Great and General Court
about calling a Synod. -- In the same Year an Address to his Majesty King
GEORGE the First. -- Two more in the Year 1716. -- Another in the Year 1717. --
Another in the Year 1727 -- Another in the Year 1734. -- Another in the Year
1737. --

The Address to the King in the Year 1716 was accompanied with Addresses to
diverse Lords, Nobles, Gentlemen, and some eminent Dissenting Ministers in
London, viz. To my Lord Chancellor Cooper, Lord Chief Justice King, Sir William
Ashurst, John Barrington Shute Esquire The Rev. Messirs. Calamy, Bradbury,
Reynolds, Tongue, etc. etc. To which Addresses, several kind and gracious Answers
were returned; and a useful Correspondence entered into by him with some of
these great Men.

The Address sent in the Year 1737 was also attended with like Applications to
Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Divines pleading Favors to the Province. The Right
Honorable Sir Robert Walpole, His Grace the Duke of Newcastle, the Right
Honorable the Earl of Harrington, the Honorable Samuel Holden Esquire the Rev.
Messirs. Harris, Watts, Neal and Guise, were written unto. --

A few of these Draughts are here inserted, viz.

"To His Excellency Joseph Dudley, Esquire Captain General and Governor in Chief.
And to the Great and General Court or Assembly of His Majesty's Province of the
Massachusetts Bay; begun and held at Boston upon Wednesday the 25th of May,
1715.

The Ministers of the Gospel and Pastors of the Churches in this Province,
convened in Boston on the 25th and 26th Days of this Instant May, having taken
into their serious Consideration the State of Religion among us, and of the
Churches under their Pastoral Care and Watch, are humbly of Opinion that it is
a Thing hightly expedient and necessary, speedily to convene a General Synod,
to consider what Remedies may be applied unto these Evils and Distempers,
whereby our Churches and the Power of Godliness, among us, may seem Enfeebled
and Endangered.

It is a Thing well known that our pious Fathers and venerable Predecessors
held their Synodical Meetings, in laying the Foundation of their Churches, in
the happy Fruits whereof we rejoice to this Day: And we cannot but apprehend it
to have been a great Omission and faulty Neglect among us of the present
Generation, the Blame whereof we the Ministers of Religion must very much take
upon ourselves, that we have for so long a Time been without one such Assembly
of Charity by their Pastors and Delegates in a General Synod: Though it has
been the acknowledged Principle as well as Practice of these Churches from the
beginning, and might ever be their Beauty, Strength and Safety.

That we may therefore, however late, answer our Obligations to God and to
these dear Churches of our Lord Jesus Christ, over which the Holy Ghost has
made us Overseers; and in the most effectual manner we can now propose to do
our Part to promote a godly Reformation, and the Revival of true Piety through
the Land; and being desirous to enjoy the fullest Opportunity of bearing our
Testimony to the Faith and Order of the Gospel; knowing that we owe, and are
accountable to God and to the World how we discharge the same Pastoral Care and
Duty in these Respects to the People of our own Generation, which our Fathers
did in their Day to a Generation of far less abounding Disorders, Irreligion
and Immorality; And finally, esteeming ourselves called of God hereunto, and
relying humbly on the same Presence of the Divine Spirit to be with us which
was with them:

We do therefore in the Name of the Ministers lately here convened, and as they
have directed us to do, lay before your Excellency and the General Assembly
their Humble Desire and Petition, that if in your Wisdom you shall think fit,
you would please to give your Countenance and Assistance in all the proper and
needful Ways to the speedy meeting of such a Synod, and to favor it with that
paternal Protection which our Churches have enjoyed upon such Occasions in
former Times from their pious Rulers.

We pray God to fill you with heavenly Wisdom, and grant you at all Times his
gracious Guidance and Leading, and are among the most Dutiful and Obedient of
your People,

Boston, May 27. 1715."

"To the King's most Excellent Majesty.

The Humble Memorial of his Majesty's Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, the Pastors
of the Churches of Christ in New England, humbly Shows,

That having had the Honor lately to approach the Throne with our most humble
and dutiful Congratulation of your Majesty's happy Accession thereto, to
implore your Majesty's gracious Protection of us in our Religious Liberties; We
do now in all Humility beg leave to represent to your sacred Majesty the
Constitution of our Churches, their Rise, Growth and present State.

We are in Denomination, and so in Principle and Practice, Discipline and
Worship, Congregational and Presbyterian; of one Body with the Protestant
Dissenters from the Church of England as by Law established in Great Britain,
commonly known by the Name of United Brethren; and like them we have signalized
our Zeal for and Adherence to the Protestant Succession in your most serene and
illustrious House.

Our Fathers were some of the Old Puritans, so called from their purer Church
State, and Way of Worship and Manner of godly Discipline, which in their
Apprehension they sought and practiced. --

They were People of exemplary Devotion toward God, Loyalty to their Prince,
and of conspicuous Sobriety, Virtue and true Goodness in the Sight of all Men.

Uneasy as they were made at Home, under the Imposition of some Things which
they esteemed sinful to comply with; the Spirit and Providence of God directed
them to seek and find some quiet Seat for themselves and their Posterity in the
Deserts of America.

Religion was their Motive and their Support in the sorrowful Leave they took
of their pleasant Native Country, -- they parted with high Expressions of
Affection and Esteem to the Church of England.

They cheerfully planted and subdued a vast Wilderness at their own Expense,
and not without many Hardships and Hazards.

They obtained Royal Charters to encourage their Undertakings, and to remain
the everlasting Testimonials of their Allegiance to the British Crown, as well
as Bonds thereto.

They were animated with a Prospect of enlarging the Empire of Great Britain,
in Regions not known to former Ages.

But to their immortal Honor it must be ever remembered and recorded, that
Religion was their first and chief Care, and in order to that Learning.

In this they have been singular and eminent among the Plantations, and we
their Posterity reap the Honor and happy Fruits thereof.

At this Day through the Blessing of Heaven on us, we are become a great
People, spreading upwards of three hundred Miles along the Seacoasts, and from
thirty to fifty Miles up into the inland Parts of the Country to the Number of
-- Towns, and many more Worshipping Congregations and Churches.

At the same Time we have but one single Congregation among us of the Worship
of the Church of England; who are treated by us with all that christian
Respect, and brotherly Esteem and Regard they can reasonably expect and desire.

Besides inferior Schools of Literature by Law enjoined in every Town, for
Reading, Writing or Grammar, we have two Colleges for Academical Learning,
where the Languages and literal Arts and Sciences are taught; and whereby our
many Churches have been hitherto more than supplied with Pastors, and the
highest Chairs of Honor have been laudably filled, to the Service of the
Prince and the good of the Country.

In these Academies for Liberal Education, nothing but Learning and good Morals
are required to qualify any Person for the Privileges there to be attained, but
they are equally dispensed unto Persons of all Perswa^ions.

The Principles of Loyalty, as well as Religion in all other Instances of it,
are instilled in our Colleges into our Youth, as well as taught in our Pulpits;
where we never omit to pray also for the King in Supreme, and for Governors as
sent by Him.

Nor have we been without many Endeavors, laborious and expensive for the
Conversion of the Natives to Christianity. The Bible has been translated into
their Language and twice printed; besides other good Books of Piety and
Religion. There are at this Day above thirty Worshipping Congregations of the
Indians among us: who are partly taught by English Ministers that have learned
their Language, but more statedly by Indian Preachers of their own. Some
Schools also there are among them for the teaching of their Children to Read
and Write.

To add no more, our Churches are famous for their Zeal for the true Protestant
Religion, according to the Doctrinal Articles and Homilies of the Church of
England; and have been excelled by none in the Joy of seeing these Divine
Truths secured to us (as we trust) in your Majesty's Possession of the Thrones
of your Ancestors.

Moreover, we ought gratefully to acknowledge to God and the King,

That we have been distinguished among the Plantations by diverse Acts of the
Royal Favor and Grace to us; particularly in the Royal Charter granted to us
by the late glorious Princes of immortal Memory, King WILLIAM and Queen MARY:
In diverse of which civil Rights and Privileges therein granted, the Virtue and
Morals of our People are greatly consulted and guarded; as also in many
subsequent Laws which have received the Royal Sanction; and by which we enjoy
many valuable religious Liberties as well as civil; Namely,

The Settlement and Support of Schools in our Towns, and of Orthodox Ministers
in our Churches; the People's Right of electing their own Ministers, the strict
Sanctification of the Sabbath, and the planting Religion in such Places, where
People profanely despise to seek it for themselves.

Our Prayer therefore is unto the King's most excellent Majesty.

That this our Country and these Churches may ever find Grace and Favor in
your Royal Eyes, and in the Sight of his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales,
and of all your illustrious Race; whom God continue on the Throne of your
Majesty down to the latest Posterity.

That we may have both our religious Rights and Privileges, as well as civil
now enjoyed by us, continued and secured to us and to our Posterity.

That his Majesty would graciously please to believe concerning us, that he has
no where any Subjects more true and faithful, dutiful and loyal, and who will
more desire to deserve his Royal Favor than his New-English Churches.

That is would please his Majesty of his mere Grace, and as his Princely Wisdom
and Paternal Tenderness to us shall ever direct him, to vouchsafe to consider
the Constitution of our Churches in the Commissions from the Throne: And that
from Time to Time we may have Men of Virtue and Justice, set over us in chief
Command; and who may be of a Spirit of Moderation, and friendly to our Churches.

And in an especial Manner, we pray that our Colleges which God has made the
singular Honor and Blessing of our Country, may ever have your Royal Favor
and Protection."

"To my Lord Chancellor Cooper.
May it please your Lordship,
The Fame of your Lordship's Justice and Humanity has long since reached these
distant Dominions of his Majesty in America. The Wisdom and Moderation of that
glorious Ministry, and of those noble Patriots, among whom your Lordship has
shone so bright in the happy Part of the former Reign, as well as since his
Majesty's Accession to the Throne, has rendered your Names illustrious to us,
as they are like to be transmitted down to Posterity, and make some of the
brightest Pages in History. No Wonder therefore that we are ambitious to be
known to your Lordship, and to commend our dear Country to your good Opinion
and Patronage upon all Occasions.

We are some of the Ministers and Pastors of the Churches in New England, and
as in Duty bound to God and our People, we are careful to preserve as far as in
us lies our Liberties and Privileges civil and religious, which by the Royal
Charter to us granted, and many subsequent Laws we do enjoy. Wherefore we
presume to enclose to your Lordship a true and faithful Account of the State of
our Country, beseeching your Lordship to bestow a generous Thought, and express
a kind Concern for a loyal and dutiful Province, whenever it shall appear yo
you in your great Wisdom and Justice to need your Regards.

To deserve so great a Favor of your Lordship, we can only plead, that like
our United Brethren the Dissenters in Great Britain, we have steadily expressed
a most dutiful Zeal and Affection to the Protestant Succession, and to those
wise and faithful Councils which your Lordship and the present Ministry pursue,
with so much Glory to the King, themselves, and their Country. If Duty, Loyalty
and Affection can ever merit the Soverign's Favor to a poor People, and the
Regards of his Ministers, truly we are bold to say, that New England is not
unworthy of that Interest in your Lordship's noble Heart which we ask for.

We pray God to have your Lordship always in his gracious Keeping, and to
prolong your Life to his own Glory, and to the Honor and Safety of the
Kingdom, and of all the British Dominions. And as we shall never cease to pray
for the Life of the King, so neither to be

Your Lordships, Most humble, Most obliged, and obedient Servants, Benjamin
Wadsworth, Ebenezer Pemberton, Benjamin Colman, Peter Thacher, Joseph Sewall,
Increase Mather, Cotton Mather, John Leverett, William Brattle, Nehemiah Walter.

Boston May 25. 1716.

" To Sir William Ashurst.
Sir,
The noble and generous Affection with which you have always honored
New England, is not to be enough acknowledged by the best Words that we can
choose, and we trust that a grateful Sense of them will always remain with us.

This emboldens us to ask your continued Favors at all Times, as the Interests
of our Country do all for your Help.

Those Interests are well known unto your Honor, and particularly our Charter
that invaluable Privilege of the Province, whereby the Morals of our People, as
well as all our Ease and Quietness are (under God) best secured to us.

We cannot but acknowledge the kind Assistances which your Honor afforded unto
Mr. Dummer our Agent, when our Charter was in Danger the last Year; and we pray
God to reward it both in temporal and spiritual Blessings, not only to
yourself, but also to your flourishing House.

We do therefore presume to enclose to yourself, as we do also by this
Opportunity to some other Persons of Honor, a true and faithful Account of the
State of our Country, which if it may further engage your Friendship to us, we
shall hold our selves greatly obliged.

May you long live the Ornament and Delight of the City, and a Blessing to the
Kingdom.

Your Honor's Most obliged, Most humble and obedient Servants, Benjamin
Wadsworth, Ebenezer Pemberton, Benjamin Colman, Peter Thacher, Joseph Sewall.
Increase Mather, Cotton Mather, John Leverett, William Brattle, Nehemiah Walter,



" To John Barrington Shute, Esquire
Hon. Sir,
Our worthy Friends and Countrymen now at London, have informed some of us, of
the particular Regards with which you are pleased to honor and ready to serve
New England.

We esteem it Sir, a great Favor of God unto us that he has raised up such a
Friend in the British Parliament, more especially in such a critical Juncture
as the Sessions of the last Year, when a Bil was brought in to take away our
Charters. Whatever Kindness and Justice you then did us, believe it, Sir, that
God will reward it to you; and you have the Prayers and Blessing of a pious and
grateful People in Return for the Goodness shown to them.

We are some of the Ministers of Christ in and about Boston in New England, and
have presumed as to tender you our Acknowledgments of the great Benefits you
have so generously done us, so to enclose to you a true and faithful Account of
the State of our Country, and to entreat the Continuance of your Favor to us;
which will engage our utmost Esteem and Gratitude, and together with our
Thanksgivings to God, the most fervent Prayers of,

Sir, Your most obliged, Most humble, and obedient Servants, Benjamin
Wadsworth, Ebenezer Pemberton, Benjamin Colman, Peter Thacher, Joseph Sewall.
Increase Mather, Cotton Mather, John Leverett, William Brattle, Nehemiah Walter,

Boston, May 25. 1716.

"To my Lord Chief Justice King.
May it please your Lordship,
We are led by the Fame of your Lordship's Justice and Goodness, to address you
in Behalf of our dear Country, which we may humbly say is worthy of that
Interest we ask for it in your Lordship's generous and noble Heart, if Loyalty,
Zeal and Affection to his Majesty's Reign can render any People so.

We are far from the Throne, and need to stand right in the good Opinion of
those noble Patriots, and high Ministers who have the Honor to be near it,
that if our Charter Privileges should be in Danger as they lately were to our
great Surprise, we might have some kind and powerful Protector, to do us
Justice with the Government, and obtain the Continuance of the Royal Favor and
Grace to us.

Indeed the Goodness and Humanity which may be thus shown to a poor People upon
our humble Intercession, may be never recompensed by them on Earth; but there
is a God in Heaven who sees it, and will reward it to your Lordship. He raises
up noble Persons to be Benefactors to Mankind, and like the superior Orbs of
Light to dispense their benign Influences to the most distant Regions.

We humbly therefore beg Leave to enclose unto your Lordship, a true and
faithful Account of the State of our Country, and beseech you so far to give it
a Place in your Mind, as that we may always enjoy your Lordship's Favor, in
all that appears just to you.

We pray God your Lordship may long live to adorn the high Seat of Justice
which you fill, to advance the Honor of the Reign of the best of Kings, and at
last that you may receive that Crown of Life, which God the righteous Judge
will give. We are,

My Lord, Your Lordships, Most humble, and most obedient Servants, Benjamin
Wadsworth, Ebenezer Pemberton, Benjamin Colman, Peter Thacher, Joseph Sewall.
Increase Mather, Cotton Mather, John Leverett, William Brattle, Nehemiah Walter,

Boston, May 25. 1716.

Minister of Christ in and about Boston in New England."

A Letter which in several Copies was sent to Dr. Calamy, Mr. Bradbury, Mr.
Reynolds, Mr. Tongue, etc.

"Rev. Sir,
We have a great deal of Reason to believe that you will be ready to serve the
Churches of our Lord Jesus here in New England: They have many Enemies who are
continually striking at our civil and religious Liberties. Very lately the
Charter of our Province was threatened by a Bill in Parliament, and in great
Danger of being taken away. This Attempt has made us sensible, that we need
some standing Friends in and about London, who will naturally care for us on
like Emergencies, and generously use their Interest on our Behalf.

Sir, the Character we have of yourself puts you among the Number of those, in
whom we may find Ability as well as Inclination to serve us. Wherefore we have
taken Leave to enclose to you a true and faithful Account of the State of our
Country, and do entreat together with your continual Prayers for us, that you
will use your best Endeavors to serve us as there may be Occasion.

We have by this Opportunity written to the Lord Chancellor Cooper, Sir Peter
King, Sir William Ashurst, and John Barrington Shute, Esquire to entreat their
Favor and Interest for us. In any of our Necessities, we hope our Friends may
apply to those Noblemen and Gentlemen with Success in our Behalf.

Sir, We are your Brethren in the Ministry of the Lord Jesus, a few of the
Pastors in and about Boston. We ever remember you in our Prayers, sympathize
with you in all that is grievous and afflictive to you, and joy in all your
Comforts. We deeply condole with you on the Death of the Rev. Dr. Williams, Mr.
Henry, and Mr. Shower and last Year; but we cannot but rejoice to see the
worthy Labors of so many in the rising Ministry with you. Also we rejoice that
in this Time of open Mutiny and Tumult, Treason and Rebellion, the Meekness and
Patience of the Dissenters have been as exemplary in the one Case, as their
Loyalty and Zeal for the Protestant Succession, has been illustrious on the
other. We hope the Government will be inclined and able to acknowledge so
conspicuous Merit.

Sir, We pray God to prosper your Ministry, and spare you long to serve to his
Glory, and are

Your Brethren in the Faith, and Fellowship of the Gospel, Ebenezer Pemberton,
Benjamin Colman, Peter Thacher, Joseph Sewall. Increase Mather, Cotton Mather,
John Leverett, William Brattle, Nehemiah Walter, Benjamin Wadsworth,

Boston, May 25. 1716.

An additional Letter affixed to the several Copies of that foregoing.

"Rev. Sir,
Having seen the Above, written from the Rev. Ministers unto you, we are glad
to see their prudent and faithful Care, under the Favor of Providence to
procure the Friendship and Patronage of worthy Persons for our Churches; and we
do heartily join with them in requesting your Favor and good Offices for
New England.

Some of us have the Honor to be of his Majesty's Council for the Province,
but all of us we hope have a greater Honor to value our selves on, Namely,
That we are true Lovers of our Country, and have a sincere Zeal for its best
Interests Civil and Religious.

So far, Sir, as you can serve these, we hope our blessed Savior, the great
Head of the Church, will accept it as a Service of Love to his Name, and the
Prayers of an obliged, grateful People will come upon you.

Sir, We ask an Interest in your Prayers, and are

Your most humble Servants, John Higginson, Andrew Belcher, Nathaniel Norden,
Samuel Brown, Thomas Hutchinson. Wait Winthrop, Elisha Hutchinson, Samuel
Sewall, Eliakim Hutchinson, Penn Townsend,

Boston, May 25. 1716.

"To His Most Excellent Majesty King GEORGE the Second.

The humble Address of his Majesty's loyal and dutiful Subjects, the Ministers
of Christ and Pastors of the Churches in his Majesty's Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England, at their Convention in Boston, May the 29th,
1734.

Most Gracious Sovereign,
The Fame of the happy Nuptials of the Princess-Royal of Great Britain, with
his Serene Highness the Prince of Orange, together with the universal Joy of
the Nation, testified in their Addresses to the Throne on this Occasion; as
also the very gracious Acceptance which the Addresses of the Protestant
Dissenting Ministers, our united Brethren, have found with your Majesty, with
your Royal Consort the Queen, and with their Serene Highnesses the Prince and
Princess of Orange, encourages us also in these distant Parts of your Majesty's
Dominions, to make the most early Representation we can, of our Share in the
common Joys of the Royal Family, and of all your faithful Subjects in every
Part of the British Empire. It gives us a most pleasing Remembrance of the
inexpressible Joy of our Fathers, in the Day of the Nation's Deliverance from
Popery and Slavery, by the ever glorious Prince of Orange, afterward our
rightful and gracious Sovereign, King William the Third; which was never
equalled among us, but only in the Day of the Accession of your Majesty's most
Illustrious Protestant House to the Throne over us, and now in the numerous
Progeny of Princes, with which it has pleased God to bless your Majesty and
your Dominions, and that we see the Princess Royal wedded to another Prince of
Orange.

That the most Serene House of Nassau may for ever shine in the Persons and
Posterity of their present Highnesses, as it has always done in their glorious
Ancestors, from the first Reformation from Popery; and that the Life of your
Majesty and the Queen may be prolonged to see the Childrens Children of this,
and other like happy Marriages of all the Royal Issue, to protestant Princes,
to the equal Joy of all your Dominions, is our ardent Prayer, and our pleasing
Hope.

We also beseech your Majesty to permit us to lay at your Royal Feet, our
humble Acknowledgments of the many Blessings which your Majesty's Subjects of
this Province enjoy under your auspicious Reign; and in a very particular
Manner we crave Leave to mention this one distinguishing Act of the Royal
Favor and Grace to us, that it has pleased your Majesty to fill the reserved
Posts of Government, with Gentlemen the Sons of the Province, who have at Heart
all the Rights of your Majesty's Honor, and those also of your happy Subjects
here, both Religious and Civil: This, if it were possible, would add to our
sacred Bonds, and fervent Inclinations, ever to approve ourselves,

May it please your Majesty, Your Majesty's most dutiful and loyal Subjects.


In the Name of the Pastors or Teaching Elders present, Peter Thacher,
Moderator."

It will I think be granted, that he was equal to any of the Sons of
New England in his ardent Love and Affection to, and his assiduous Care for,
these Churches of our Lord Jesus Christ. No one served them with greater
Pleasure. He did his utmost to render them beautiful as Tirza, comely as
Jerusalem, and terrible as an Army with Banners. Cant. vi. 4.


It appears by many rough Copies of Letters left, and the Answers to them, how
indefatigable and successful an Instrument he was in the Hand of the great Lord
of the Church in compromising Differences, healing Divisions, and quenching
Fires kindling and flaming among Parties, Pastors and Brethren. For the
Maintenance and Restoration of Peace with Truth and Holiness, he wrote and sent
vast Numbers of Letters to New York and the Jersies, to Connecticut,
Rhode Island, Piscataqua, and to many Churches and Pastors in the Massachusetts
Bay, all truly Apostolic, pleading for and breathing forth Love and Charity.
-- A Collection of them should be here published to render his Character
illustrious if it could be done without exposing opposite Characters; and
reviving the Memory of such Strifes and Animosities which had better be buried
and forgotten, and are therefore omitted.

Notwithstanding his tender Constitution and often Infirmities, he went abroad
to Councils or Synods, to set Things in Order in the Churches: And in his
latter Days (in some Respects) the Care of all the Churches came upon him as
you will see anon.

And as he early showed a catholic and pacifick Spirit (as has been already
noted) it increased in him as he grew in Years and Experience. -- He ever
expressed an utter Dislike of that narrow Spirit of Bigotry, which he saw
prevailing in two many of the greatest and best Men of all Sects and
Persuasions in past Ages and the present. -- He was for extending his Charity
and holding Communion with all that held the Foundation. He loved and honored
good Men of every Denomination how much soever they differed from him in some
peculiar Sentiments, Circumstantials and Modalities.

His Moderation and Readiness to sacrifice every Thing but Truth and Duty for
Peace, was manifested by many Instances, both in his younger and later Times.
-- Indeed he had such an Aversion to Disputing and Jangling that he declined
engaging in Controversy as much as possible.

I have often heard that when a Seventh Day Baptist Preacher (a noisy Creature)
came from a neighboring Colony to dispute with him about the Sabbath; after
Dr. Colman had heard all his Objections patiently, and answered them mildly,
and the Blade would go on fiercely disputing he told him he had no more to say
to him, but if he was minded further to indulge his disputacious Humor, he
would direct him to a Person in Town that would be a Match for him, which he
accordingly did, and so dismissed him.

Here it may be remarked, "That Dr. Colman's Notions of Church Government and
Discipline were larger than many of his Brethren's; neither had he any Opinion
of an exacted Uniformity in religious Administrations. See the Preface to his
Sermon at the Rev. Mr. William Cooper's Ordination.


And while he entertained (and on all Occasions expressed) the highest Esteem and
Veneration for the primitive Fathers of New England and their Writings, he
would pleasantly say, That the Bible was his Platform." By this he did not mean
to condemn Platforms of Church Discipline -- or to strain that excellent Saying
too far, Scriptura est Adequatae Ageudorum Regul^.
No particular Constitution hitherto published (by whatever Authority or
Pretense) appeared to him to be Jure Divino. The best were in his Eye either
deficient or redundant. He could join with him, who wrote thus on a Blank Leaf
of his Bible, ^nus Apex Verbi, Ratione Valentior omni,
Mil^^que Decretis, Conciliisque prior.

In one of his late Letters to a Reverend Association, he says, I have always
openly "owned my self something of a Presbyterian under our Congregational
Form, and my People freely allowed me my Latitude, and sometimes pleasantly
told me that they thought me the most cautious of any Pastor in the Town or
Land, not to break in upon the Rights of the Brethren.

A few of his Sentiments concerning Councils or Synods and other Ecclesiastical
Affairs and Transactions are here offered to the public View, not with the
least Design to reflect on our excellent Constitution (which yet I humbly
apprehend may in many Particulars be mended) nor to manifest the Publisher's
Concurrence, who does not adopt every Article or Paragraph in them, but to show
the Author, and his distinguishing Lineaments As I proposed in the Introduction.
.

On Councils and their Efficacy. Wrote in his younger Times:


The Efficacy of our Councils depends much on their having a due Constitution;
if we complain of the Want of their Efficacy, we had best search into their
Constitution, if that be weak and defective, how should Government be built
upon it?

Councils, or somewhat equivalent to that Name, are necessary to the
Preservation of Peace, Order, and Purity in the Churches. Experience shows us,
that the Corruptions of Men will be breaking out, and that it is a Thing of
great Difficulty to heal the Wounds given to particular Churches by them. We
have found also both the Confusion and Impossibility of every particular
Congregation's governing all Things within it self, independently on other
Churches. So that there must be something of the Nature of a Council of
Churches for private Christians, or particular Churches to refer themselves to
for Advice, or Appeal unto for their Judgment.

It was soon seen in the Church, that such Cases and Occasions were and would
be, and we read in the xvth of Acts, That the Apostles and Elders came together
to consider of the Matter referred to them, and disputed and determined it.
This is a sufficient Warrant for the Thing, that there should be Councils
convened upon Difficulties arising in Churches; but I cannot find any
particular Direction here given, or designed to be here given by the Holy
Ghost, just how Councils should be constituted for ever after in all the
Churches, and no otherwise. For I do not exactly see how this was: Yet the
Thing it self is of Apostolical Practice; and as it is consonant to our Reason,
so surely it should be looked upon as Scripture-Warrant and Direction to us in
like Cases.

And now I shall write my poor Thoughts about the due Constitution of Councils,
that they may have the desired Efficacy; and I freely confess I do not see what
much short of the Practice of the French and Scotch Churches will be
sufficient, nor what beyond them is necessary.

1. I think there should in every particular Church be former and fixed, a
Consistory, as the French Churches had, or a Kirk Session as the Churches of
Scotland, to have the Government of it in all Things. This is to consist of the
Pastor, the perpetual President, ex Officio, and therefore not censurable here,
and with him a select Number of Elders, Men of the greatest Piety, Gravity,
Wisdom, and Authority in the Congregation. We find something equivalent to this
necessary in our popular Form of Government, commonly having a kind of Church
within a Church, leading Men whom we privately consult, before we offer any
Thing to a public Debate and Vote. Which shows it to be our common Sense, that
the whole Government would be better there.

2. Out of these Sessions or Consistories I think Councils should be always
gathered.

The Reason is, Because that the Government of particular Churches is lodged
here, which supposes them to be the most accomplished to advise or judge in any
Ecclesiastical Case.

3. The Pastors are ex Officio of these Councils, and of the Seniors only one
should be delegated from the Consistory to accompany the Pastor: And if the
Elders of the several Consistories should not attend, though their Neglect^^s
censurable, yet then the Ministers alone may warrantably proceed without them.

The Reasons why I am for only one Elder to be deputed with a Pastor to the
Council, are, (1) Or else the Ministry there have not an equal Vote, though
Government is confessedly first lodged in them, and they may be modestly
supposed to be their Superiors in Knowledge and Grace. (2) A Multitude of
Messengers may be used as Creatures by a designing leading Person. (3) One rich
and large Church may else send a Majority to all the rest, if the Number of
Messengers be not limited. (4) It was expressly the very first Canon of the
French Churches, respecting their fixed Councils, or Colloquies, "That
Ministers should be accompanied each of them with an Elder from every Church.
The Scotch also require only the Attendance of one ruling Elder from each
Congregation at their Presbyteries. I heartily wish this Presbyterian Article,
i. e. so far as it respects the sending of but one Messenger to Councils, with
the Reasons under it, might be duly considered and weighed by my Rev. Brethren,
and the honored Churches through the Land. Is it not high Time that our
Congregational Scheme was mended in this Point: And that the Liberty given in
the Letters Missive, and taken by the Churches called to assist in
Ecclesiastical Councils should be somewhat bounded? I have observed for more
than Twenty Years (and who has not?) the Confusions and Mischiefs arising from
our present Practice: Some Churches send One, others Five, others Ten or more,
to the same Council, and the Vote of every Member is of equal Weight. All I
move for with any Zeal is -- "That there be some Regulation of this Matter --
Let all be limited to the same Number -- If the Brethren are jealous of their
Pastors, why may not two Brethren be thought enough to send with one Pastor? It
cannot be taken amiss by any for the Pastors to agree at their annual
Convention to propose something on this Head to their Churches. I humbly move
it may be done.





4. These Councils I would have to be know, stated, and fixed in the Nature of
the French Colloquies and Classes, or the Scotch Presby^e^^es; nor matters it
which Name be given to them: Consisting of Ten on Twelve neighboring Churches,
to meet so many Times a Year at a certain Place, where they may be applied to
if Need be: Or on extraordinary Occasions may be called together at a Week's
Warning by the Moderator; which Call all the Members shall be obliged to obey
and attend.

The Reasons why they should be standing and fixed are, (1) That all the
Churches may know whither to repair for Advice or Judgment, and who are their
Judges if they transgress. (2) It may redeem much Time, and stifle many a Fire
which would not break out, if it did not lie so long a glowing. (3) It will
give all Ministers and Churches an equal Honor, and not undue Pre-eminence to
any. (4) It will prevent the Confusion and Disorder of Party-making and
Prejudices, against one Church, and for another.


5. These standing Councils, Classes or Presbyteries should be divided by
Authority of a provincial Synod; and then (if it might be) confirmed by the
Civil Authority.

The Reasons are, (1) Councils will act with the more Freedom, Boldness and
Authority, and command the more Reverence and Regard among the People. (2) The
bare Agreement of Churches among themselves is an uncertain and weak Bottom to
go on, and more easily broken in upon by him that lists. (3) The Countenance of
Civil Authority honors the Ministry and Discipline of the Church to the World,
and is (humanely speaking) greatly for the Security of both.


6. The several Consistories shall be accountable to their respective Classes
or Council, and Ministers themselves are censurable here; and Processes against
them to begin here. Cases which the Consistory cannot end, or which fall not
under their Decision, shall be brought hither by Way of Reference, Appeal, or
Complaint: And if the Classes please they may send for and examine the Register
of every Consistory.

7. But it shall not be left to the Choice of any Church, Consistory or
aggrieved Party to have a particular special Council of Churches of their own
picking here and there; but every Classes or Presbytery shall have the
Inspection and judging of all and every particular Church within their own
District: And it shall be disorderly to leave one of those Churches uncalled,
or to call in another of a neighboring Presbytery.

The Reasons are, (1) The Honor of the particular Presbyteries forbid it, for
they are not to assume one over another. (2) The Honor of particular Churches
forbid it also, it being a Disrespect to skip over neighbor Churches, and send
to another afar off, as if this only had Wisdom and Integrity to judge in their
Case.


8. These Councils or Presbyteries are accountable to a Provincial Synod,
whither Appeals from them, and References by them, are to be made: But by no
means from one Presbytery to another, or to have Councils upon Councils --
Unless instead of a Provincial Synod there be rather fixed a Superior Council
or Councils in every Province which may consist of two Presbyteries or more
united into one.

The Reasons of this are many, (1) To keep Councils themselves in Fear, and awe
them to Faithfulness. (2) To correct their Errors, or to vindicate and confirm
their Decisions. (3) That a Man may have the Liberty of Appeal and a
Possibility of being righted when his good Name and Enjoyment of spiritual
Privileges lie at Stake, as well as in lighter secular Matters. (4) That
Differences may not be endless, but there be some Judgment by which every one
shall be determined and submit unto.


Thus I think Councils should be constituted if we desire to see them have
their Efficacy in supporting, preserving and well ordering the Interests of the
Churches in the Country.

(1) I think that standing Councils are not only warrantable, but are also the
best and wisest Constitution. (2) Their Power should be binding, saving only
Appeals to be from them to Synods, or Superior Councils. (3) The Matters to be
handled in them are whatever concerns the Peace, Order and Purity of the
Churches within their District, which their own Consistories cannot come at
effectual Measures about: as directing in doubtful Cases, healing Differences,
rebuking, correcting and purging out Errors and Scandals, etc. (4) I think
there should be no such thing as calling of Councils, save only the Moderators
doing so upon extraordinary Occasions: for I would suppose them always in
Being; and they are to be applied to as need is by particular Churches or
Persons. (5) As for the Right of Voting in Councils, I incline to think that
every Member has a Suffrage; nor do I see through the Opinion of some, that
Persons should be present to advise that are not however allowed to Vote. (6)
Excepting such an extraordinary Case should happen as I hope never to see, I
think some senior Pastor should ever preside: And a Clerk or Scribe should be
chosen and fixed as much as a Moderator. (7) In judging of Cases and censuring
Persons there must appear great Integrity, Impartiality, Tenderness, Goodness,
Gentleness and a particular Regard had to the sacred Office entreating a
Minister as a Father: If there be Appearance of Craft, Prejudices, Cruelty or
Disrespect it will hinder the good Effect of our Councils. -- The Efficacy of
our Councils will also much depend on the Candor and mutual Respects of the
Members to each other in their Debates and Carriages. A Deference and Honor to
be paid by all to the Chair; An equal Regard given by the Moderator to every
Member: The Freedom of speaking being preserved to each; that Offense be not
taken at Difference of Thought; and as on the one Hand the Moderator to be
submitted to respectfully, when he goes to convince of Error in Opinion, or
Indecency of Speech and Behavior; so the blamed Action or Words or Opinion,
never to be heard out of those Walls to his Prejudice, either as bold or
erroneous in him.

(8) The keeping Errors and Faults secret, unless Duty and Necessity forbid it,
may be a means to give our Councils Efficacy, and constrain Men's Honor and
Reverence for them, when they see we aim not to expose Faults, but to recover
from them and so bury them. --
N. B. The two last Rules more proper and necessary in Consistories than
Councils or Synods. --

Some of the Doctor's Thoughts on the Third Way of Communion, dated July 23.
1733.

(1) Although our Fathers in the Synod of -- proposed it, yet they did not see
cause afterward to practice upon it, not for want of Occasion and Opportunity,
or from Inconsideration of the Matter, and Unfaithfulness to the Churches but
in point of Prudence. They were as wise and faithful as we are now, but they
threw it by as not so proper a Method, or at least fearing the Event of it, and
it may be scrupling it from the Nature of the Thing. -- By so long a Disuse,
even from the Beginning, like a Law or Rule made and never put in practice, it
is grown Obsolete and become as a Thing dead and buried, and not to be revived
and put in force at the Will of a private Person, nor on a particular Occasion
here and there: for as much as we are sure in this Case the Parties concerned
will cry out of it as an Hardship and Singularity, a Novelty and Imposition, as
the Rev. Mr. G -- of W -- did in the Day when he was surprised with the Rev.
Mr. W -- Visitation, and almost all the Ministers and Churches round about him
joined in the Surprise and Resentment which he showed on that Occasion.

(2) Our Fathers fled from the Visitation of private Persons, Archdeacons and
Bishops, and their authoritative Inquisitions; and though I will not compare
the Enquiry proposed in the third Way of Communion, with these Episcopal
Visitations, which were imperious, trivial and cruel in that Day to an
intolerable Degree: yet neither will I consent to be subject as a Pastor, and
my Church with me, to the Visitation of every Neighbor Pastor and his Church,
when they shall please to come and make Inquisition how Things stand among us;
upon the Complaint or at the Desire of some uneasy, or aggrieved Person or
Persons belonging to us: For I think it too much Authority for any private
Neighbor Minister and Church to assume to themselves; And though we are bid
all of us to be subject one to another in a private Capacity, and all things
are lawful for me, yet all things are not expedient, and I will not be brought
under the Power of any, in such a manner and to such a Degree: scil, 'That it
shall be accounted a Fault, and just Matter of Complaint to other Churches,
that the Visitation of one has not been submitted to; so that other Churches
upon the hearing thereof shall then join with the first Visitors and come and
challenge our Submission, and if refused withdraw Communion from us, which is a
very grievous Sentence, but a Brutum Fulmen if a Curse causeless.

No private Pastor, in this State of Infirmity, wherein all Men are of like
Passions, is fit to be trusted with this Power of Visitation and Inquisition,
and much less all and every Pastor through the Land; and if one is, all and
every one must be so. -- No single Person is another's Peer to enquire and
judge concerning his Conduct; But the Right of Men (and the Claim of
Englishmen especially) is to be judged by their Peer's, and by a sufficient
Number of them; and these disinterested and unprejudiced; against others he has
a Right to make Exception in all Cases whatsoever.

We Ministers know our own and the Infirmities of others: How apt a Pastor
sometimes is to be prepossessed by the Applications of a Brother to him, with a
long formal Story of his Grievances: We know too of one another, how apt we may
be to be partial in our Opinion of one Man and another, our Esteem of one Man
and not of another; our Affection and Disaffection: This alone renders the
Visitation of this or that Pastor, unfit in the Case of such or such an one;
and so it does of his Delegates with him, who perhaps are of his own
Nomination, and very much under his Influence. -- And he again upon his not
being hearkened to, has the Nomination of other Churches to return with him, and
to be sure he will pick out such Pastors as will be like to be of his Mind, and
act with or under him. -- But let me have a free and chosen Jury, a competent
Number of unexceptionable Persons, to make Enquiry and pass Judgment in my
Case; but let me not have any Visitor or Inquisitor set over me, who is no more
or better than my self; and least of all let me have every Neighbor made that
inquisitor to come upon me when he will, and call me to Account. This may
possibly, be even a greater Hardship, and more intolerable Yoke of Bondage,
than that which our Fathers fled from.

(3) Is it expedient at this Day to go into this Method? Perhaps the Principles
of many of the Pastors through the Land are in Favor of a more Classical and
Presbyterial Order in our Churches: To be sure the Episcopal Gentlemen will be
like to make Advantages of our going into this Method.

(1) Would it be prudent to set Pastor upon Pastor, as we lie mixed through the
Land, of a different Opinion on this Head? Will one be like to submit to the
Visitation of another? Will you withdraw communion with all that will not? What
say you? Will it not run us presently into a kind of civil War? Will it not
produce Jealousies, and Envyings, and Strifes, and every evil Work? Can you
bear down, and turn out those that will oppose this Method? Or is their
Character from Place to Place, from County to County, such as shall deserve it?
Can the Pastors of these Churches, upon any rational Prospect, remain united
Brethren under this Conduct?

(2) What Advantage then shall we give to the Episcopal Gentlemen by our
Divisions on this Head? Men will be ready to prefer the Power of Visitation in
a single eminent Bishop or Archdeacon, to that of every private Pastor that
shall please to set up himself? And our own Pastors may be tempted and driven
to submit to the Visitation of two or three, rather than that of every one. And
if one and another has a Mind to go over to the Church, or find themselves
forced to take Refuge there, they will do it with far the more Grace, and
plausible Show of flying from an Imposition or Inquisition, less tolerable
(they will say) than that of Episcopacy. -- At the same Time the Protestant
Churches through the World, both the Episcopal, Presbyterian, and Independent,
will look upon the odd Representation and Face that will be given of the
Matter, as a new and strange Sort of Creature, in the other Extreme of
Discipline; "Every Pastor vested with the Right and Power of visiting the
other! They may gaze at this Phenomenon, but will never wander after it. --
They that go off from us will catch at it as a Pretense for doing so, and
Nobody but ourselves will see into the Reason of this new Method, nor say a
Word in Justification of it.

(4) That which gives me a particular Offense and scandalizes me against it, is
the Pretense 'That this is the only Way wherein to admonish a faulty Pastor or
Church, or to withdraw from Communion with them. -- So that if there be a
Council of Ten Churches, that have met in the second Way of Communion (as it is
called) and having heard the Case, and find Things very much amiss, and that
the Pastor and the Majority of a Church are very injurious to the Aggrieved,
yet this large Council may not presume, and have no Call or Right to dispense a
Word of Admonition to them, or to certify to them, that if the Offense given be
not removed, they must lay it before their respective Churches, and be in the
Advice to them to withdraw Communion from them. Yet at the same Time, a single
Church in the third Way of Communion, taking with them one or two, or a few
more shall have Authority to admonish and withdraw Communion.

Now what Reason can there be for a Council of three or four Churches in one
Way to have that Power which is denied to a Council of ten Churches in the
other? If it be said, this is our Constitution by Platform, it only shows the
Imperfection and Unreasonableness of the Platform, in denying to the Council in
the second Way, the Rights that belong to them as Christian Men, Pastors and
Messengers met together to hear, judge, advise, admonish as there may be
Occasion. As a private Christian I may lawfully reprove and admonish my
Brother; but ten Churches met together in Council, may not do the like to an
offending Church. Why, who can say? How come we to lose the Rights of Men and
Christians by coming together into a Council? Is not the Judgment, Admonition,
and Advice, the more reverend and weighty, by its coming from many, than from
one or a few? If the bare human Constitution must debar one Council and
authorize another, where both have equal Right in the Nature of Things, I
desire to be free from such imposing and abridging Canons of Men. I would never
go to Council, with my Tongue and Hands tied, no more than with my Eyes and
Ears stopped.

That Dr. Colman retained like Sentiments on these Heads the following Extract
from a Letter, wrote to one of his Brethren, Nov. 17. 1735, shows,

"Rev. Sir,

-- In short, the Consociation of Churches, is the very Soul and Life of the
Congregational Scheme, necessary to the very Esse as well as Been of it;
without which we must be Independent, and with which all the Good of
Presbyterianism is attainable.

But the consociated Churches of every Neighborhood must have their stated
Meetings, the Pastor with a Delegate from each Church, and whatever Case may
occur in said Churches, comes naturally and by Consent first under the
Cognizance and Counsel of this Assembly, whether it be by Way of Enquiry, or by
Applications made to them.

Our present Way of going on Enquiry, or sending for Counsel whither we list,
picking and choosing, with open Partiality and manifest Selfishness, here and
there, in Contempt of Neighbors, who best know and should most care for us, is
manifestly not of GOD and Order, nor for Righteousness and Peace, or
efficacious Influence.

So neither is the Pastor's going like a common Brother, without Character, or
ex Officio; when the Scripture every where gives him a distinguishing Character
(and so does the Platform too in many Places) and considers him always in his
Office.

Nor is it just or orderly for one Church to send a greater Number of Delegates
than another, and every Delegate with a Voice equal to his Pastors, by which
Means the Brotherhood becomes vastly superior to the Eldership in our Councils.
This is all Confusion, without Reason, and contrary to the Current of
Scripture, respecting the Eldership, in my Opinion.

If the Churches come into such an Act of Consociation through the Land, it may
make them strong; but for any or every Church to take upon them to visit
another, when and as they please, and whom they please to forbear, making
Enquiries into their State, Peace and Purity, must needs be a Source of endless
Animosity, and is a Yoke which neither our Fathers before us were able to bear,
nor will any that shall come after us.

By these Hints, Sir, you may see my Thoughts; for which End I suppose you put
the Essay into my Hand, and I am your weak unworthy Brother and Servant,

On the Right of choosing a Minister.

He was not for confining the Right of choosing a Minister to the Communicants
alone, but thought that every baptized adult Person, of sober and good
Conversation, who contributed to the Maintenance of one should have a Vote in
electing. It appeared to him that this Order was right and good, founded in
Nature, and confirmed by Apostolic Practice, and through the first 300 Years
of the Primitive Church. Accordingly when his People were about choosing him a
Colleague 1715 -- He uttered the following Words, in a Speech to them.

"As to the Apostolical Times and Records there are but two Elections that
occur to my Remembrance, and they were both made by the free Vote of all the
Disciples together, in the Presence of the Apostles.

The first was the Nomination of two Persons one of whom should by Lot (and not
by Vote of Election which of the two) succeed to the Apostleship from which
Judas by Transgression fell; of which you read Acts i. from 15th Ver. etc. that
Peter stood up in the Midst of the Disciples (now the Number of the Names
together were about an Hundred and twenty) and proposed to them to choose two
Persons; and they ( i. e. the Hundred and twenty, the Apostles not assuming
this Nomination to themselves, which was certainly by the special Direction of
the Holy Ghost, as a Rule to Christian Societies in future Elections) they, I
say, the whole Hundred and twenty Brethren appointed two, and so referred the
Lot to Providence; and it fell upon Matthias, and he was numbered with the
eleven Apostles.

The other Scripture Instance we have in the sixth Chapter of Acts, where the
Apostles found it necessary to have seven Men chosen, of honest Report,
Sanctity and Wisdom, to minister as Deacons in the Church; whereupon they
called the Multitude of the Disciples together, and said -- Brethren, look ye
out among you seven Men whom we may appoint over this Business: and the Saying
pleased the whole Multitude, and they chose the seven Persons, and set them
before the Apostles, who ordained them by Prayer and Imposition of Hands.

There has been a great deal of Dispute about the Office to which these Seven
were ordained, but whatever it was, more or less, you see that the whole
Multitude of the Believers chose them, and then the Apostles ordained them.

And now Brethren, shall I go into the History of the Primitive Church, and
show you that this was the Practice of the next Ages after the Apostles in the
Election of their Bishops and Pastors: Their Parishes which were their
Diocesses chose them. And I am glad, Brethren, to see among you so many Persons
of liberal Education, while I lay before the whole Society, a brief Collection
of Instances in the Christian Church of the first 300 Years after our Savior's
Ascension, to countenance and confirm us in our present Method.

In the first Place I observe, That the Bishop or Pastor's Cure was in the
primitive Times denominated by the Word Parish, paraike, which Word to this Day
keeps the same Sense among us which it did then: scil. the Bounds of a
particular Church or Congregation of Worshippers: For indeed the proper Sense
of the Word paraike, is -- dwelling one by another, as Neighbors do.

Accordingly the Epistle of Clemens Romanus, is to the Church of God parishing
at Corinth: paraikoese korinthon And this Name had so obtained by long Use,
before Eusebius's Time, that through his Ecclesiastical History, there is
nothing more common than to read of the Bishop of the Parish of Alexandria, the
Parish of Ephesus, the Parish of Corinth, the Parish of Athens, the Parish of
Carthage, etc.

The Word Diocese is of modern Use, and not to be found in its present Sense
among the Ancients: Diocesan Episcopacy is of a later Institution and human
only; but the Pastoral Care and Charge of a Parish or particular Flock is from
the Beginning.

But that which concerns us at this Time, is only this, that when the Bishop or
Pastor of a Church was dead, all the People of that Church met together in one
Place to choose a new Bishop.

Agreeably Cyprian tells us that Sabinus was elected Bishop of Emerita, by the
Suffrage of all the Brotherhood: ( Universae Fraternitatis suffragio) and that
it was the Custom through all Africa, Episcopus deligatur plebe present.

Eusebius tells us, that Fabianus was chosen Bishop of Rome by all the Brethren
met together for that End.

And Cyprian tells us, that after the Death of Fabianus, Cornelius was chosen
Bishop ( Cleri ac Plebis Suffragio) by the Suffrage of the Clergy and People.

Clement in his Epistle to the Corinthians says, that none were ordained but
with the Approbation of the whole Church: sunenotokesases tes ekklesias pases.

And by Ignatius in his Epistle to the Philadelphians, it appears that when
they were to send a Messenger to any foreign Church, the People met together to
choose him. -- And in his Epistle to Polycarp, there are two Things observed to
our present Purpose.

(1) That the Bishop is there supposed to know his whole Flock personally by
their Names: ek, onomatos pantas zetei. (2) That he advises Polycarp to convene
his People to choose a faithful Man to send into Syria.
In the Life of Cyprian, the Author tells us, that he was chosen Bishop (
Plebis Favore) by the Favor of the People; and Cyprian himself in one of his
Epistles owns that he was chosen ( Populi universi Suffragio) by the Suffrage
of all his People.

Only it needs to be noted upon what has been said; that these Elections were
not made by the People without the Notice and Approbation of the neighboring
Bishops or Pastors; and it seems to me that they sometimes commended the Person
to the Flock to be chosen by them; and at other Times that they were present
and chose with or for them: We find by Cyprian, Episcoporum Judicium (the
Judgment of the neighboring Bishops) for just before it is said ( Episcopi
ejusdem Provinciae proximi quique conveniant, plebe present, the neighboring
Bishops of the Province being present) We find I say, the Judgment of the
Bishops joined with the Suffragium universae Fraternitatis: with the Vote and
Election of the Brotherhood; which is agreeable to our own Practice, for we
choose none but whom the neighboring Pastors consent and agree in; to whom we
present them for Ordination.

Now, Brethren, by these and many more Examples which might be brought, as well
as by the Rights of Nature, it appears to me that we are upon a right Foot of
Election, all the Brethren of the Congregation joining together therein.

If you ask me what makes a Brother and Member of a particular Church? I
answer, Baptism into the Name of Christ, and a public Profession of the Faith
of Christ together with a Christian Conversation agreeable thereunto, and
attending the Worship of God in this or that particular Congregation,
submitting to the Orders of Christ therein, and contributing to the Support of
the Worship of God there.

When I say this, I don't excuse those that neglect the Table of Christ, which
the primitive Church knew nothing of: No, it is a strange and blameable Defect
and Fault among us, which should not be found among Christians: But under this
Defect, God forbid, that therefore these our sober and virtuous Brethren, whom
we should be glad to see at the Lord's Table with us, should be therefore
denied their Right to act with us in the Choice of a Minister.

I take it to be a Privilege equally purchased by Christ for all that profess
his Name; whose Souls are equally precious, and who must judge every one for
himself, and if any thing calls for a free and serious Choice for ones own
Comfort and Benefit, that of our Minister does so.

CHAP. VII. Great Benefits arising from his Travels Abroad in his Youth, and
his Sagacity and Diligence at Home, more particularly in the Matter of
Benefactions, -- Honors done him from Scotland etc.
THE wise and gracious Providence of God which orders all Things well, and for
Ends that lie far out of his Creatures View, suffered Dr. Colman (as has been
before largely related) to be stripped naked in the Way to London, and there
presented him in his destitute Condition to the Charity and Generosity of Madam
Parkhurst, where his Lodgings immediately brought him into the Knowledge of the
London Ministers, and afterward into a most happy Correspondence with her
worthy Son the honorable Samuel Holden Esquire whom God enriched and raised to the
Head of the Bank of England, and set also at the Head of the Dissenters in
London; and withal gave him an Heart to use both his Estate and his great
Interest at Court for the doing Good in his Generation.

From his Hand, (of his own mere Motion,) Dr. Colman received no less than
Thirty-nine Sets of the practical Works of the late venerable Mr. Richard
Baxter, about the Year 1730. -- to destribute among our Churches, which amounts
to more then Five Hundred Pounds in our Money; And afterward at Dr. Colman's
Request to him undertook the Cause of the Infant-Church at South-Kingston in
the Naraganset Country, and sent us an Order of the King and Council for
putting the Rev. Mr. Torry A Congregational Minister.
in Possession of the Ministry Lands there (near 300 Acres) Which were granted
by the Proprietors of Petaquamscut Purchase, now in South Kingston in
Narraganset, to be laid out and forever set apart for the Use of an Orthodox
Person, that should be obtained to preach God's Word, to the Inhabitants. These
Grantors were five, who all brought up their Children in the Congregational
Way, and Three of them were Members in full Communion in our Churches. To these
Lands, the Episcopalians unjustly laid Claim. In this Matter Dr. Colman not
only wrote, and labored much, but expended very considerable Sums of his own
Moneys. I find him offering Ten Pounds Sterling at one Time, without any
Security of being repaid.




In his Letter to Dr. Colman which enclosed the King's Order, he writes, All I
have to desire in Life, unworthy "of any Thing, is to fill up the Remainder in
Thankfulness to God, Usefulness to Men, and a growing Meetness for a better
State. -- Would to God this golden Passage might be considered and weighed by
the great Ones of our Nation and Land!

Other eminent Services for the Country and Churches were undertaken and
performed by him relating to unhappy Lawsuits commenced between Churchmen and
Dissenters with Respect to Ministry Rates, and the Province Laws about them,
all through Dr. Colman's Influence who wrote to him by desire of the Government.

Great and numerous were his Bounties to us as appears by the Receipts: In
Books and Bills of Exchange to the amount of no less than 4847 L. New England
Currency to be distributed by Dr. Colman in works of Piety and Charity.

And after his Death from the Honorable Madam Holden and her virtuous
Daughters (the Chapel in Cambridge included For which he in Conjunction with
the Honorable Messirs Thomas Hutchinson and -- received an Order for 400 L.
Sterling. -- N. B. This was given at the Motion of Thomas Hutchinson.
) no less than 5585 L. which makes 10,432 L. in all. -- Now it was Dr. Colman's
early Travels and Sufferings and Recommendations happily laid the Foundation of
all these great Benefactions and Exhibitions to the Churches and Poor among us.

Upon the sorrowful News of this great and good Man's Decease Dr. Colman
preached a Sermon From Matthew. xxv. 21, 22. -- Enter thou into the Joy of the
Lord.
at the Public Lecture in Boston, Sept. 4. 1740, in the Audience of his
Excellency the Governor, and the Great and General Court of the Province,
wherein he embalms the Memory of this our great Benefactor, and bestows, due
Honors upon him, which was printed at the Desire, and by Order of the General
Assembly. In that Sermon may be seen Transcripts of many Letters, which show
the Gentleman, the Philosopher, and the Christian.

"Such a Man (says Dr. Colman) God raised up for us, our Friend for his Name's
Sake. He loved our Country, and served our Churches, with his rich Estate, and
with all his great Interest at Court, for the Name of pure Religion among us --
This was the Servant who like his SAVIOR was not to be tempted by the World in
all its Glories! They could not move off his Eye and Heart from the heavenly
Glory. -- In more like grateful Strains of Eloquence did the Dr. celebrate and
commemorate him. --

I pass now to mention and record Dr. Colman's great and happy Services to the
College, and in that to the Country, and all the Churches in the Matter of the
honored Mr. Thomas Hollis's Bounties which he ever spoke of as the great
Honor and first Pleasure of his Life -- When he saw the Father of this good
Man in his Darkness at Bath Eight and Forty Years ago, he little thought of the
happy Correspondence he was to go into with this his Son, which was altogether
providential and not at all of his seeking; but while he was pursuing the
Recovery of a Legacy of 160 L. Sterling, for two poor Orphans (in the Years
1717 and 18) his Letters fell into this Gentleman's Hands, whose Heart was
devising liberal Things, and fixed it on us, and the Interests of Learning among
us, by the Will of God, to that Degree as has produced all the Profusion of
Bounties for a Course of Years together, the Fruit whereof we trust will remain
to all Posterity, to the Glory of God for ever!

There are found no less than Fifty-three Letters from Mr. Thomas Hollis to Mr.
Colman (all relating to the College) put in Order, in which are to be seen the
Particulars of the great and good Things intended and done by him for
New England, besides a Multitude of others on various Occasions.

He founded a Professorship of Divinity allowing Eighty Pounds per Annum; and
ten Scholars to receive annually forever Ten Pounds; he sent us the Hebrew and
Greek Types; and Books to a great Value. -- Then he proceeded and founded a
Professorship of the Mathematics and Experimental Philosophy, allowing Eighty
Pounds per Annum: And age a rich Apparatus for his Professor's Use of One
Hundred and Fifty Pounds Sterling; so that his Bounties amount to several
Thousand Pounds our Money. I find the Sum Total set down in one of Dr. Colman's
Papers to be 5,400 L. To the procuring all which he was singularly instrumental.

When Dr. Colman received the sad Tidings of the Decrease of this his dear and
honored Friend, he preached a Sermon From John xi. 11. -- Our Friend Lazarus
sleeps.
on the Occasion at the public Lecture in Boston, April 1. 1731. before the
Great and General Court, wherein he celebrates Mr. Hollis as a most generous
and noble Patron of Learning and Religion in the Churches of New England. This
Sermon was also printed by Desire and Order of the General Assembly and
dedicated to them. "He was (says he) one of those righteous Men who should be
had in everlasting Remembrance. Like Araunnah he gave as a Prince. -- Of his
own mere Motion he poured in upon us, and upon other Places also, from Time to
Time, as a living Spring whose Waters fail not. -- That which is singular in
the Piety and Benefits of Mr. Hollis unto these Churches was, that he was not
strictly of our Way; nor in Judgment with us in Point of Infant Baptism; yet
his Heart and Hand was the same to us -- as if we had been one in Opinion and
Practice with him. -- And in this let him stand a teaching Pattern and Example
to us of a noble, christian and catholic apostolic Spirit of Love," etc.

"It was some Account he received from us of the free and catholic Air we
breathe at out Cambridge, where Protestants of every Denomination may have
their Children educated, and graduated in our College, if they behave with
Sobriety and Virtue; that took his generous Heart and fixed it on us, and
enlarged it to us. -- And this shall be with me among his distinguishing
Praises, while we rise up and bless his Memory; i. e. bless God in Remembrance
of all the undeserved Favors done us by him I have several good Reasons for
publishing these Passages, as well as the former Ones concerning Mr. Holden;
and one of them is, That I am well satisfied, that if Dr. Colman had wrote his
own Life, he would have digressed in this Manner, and said much more.


Soon after the Death of this pious and charitable Gentleman, Dr. Colman
received Letters from Another at London, a near Relation of Mr. Hollis's, and a
joyful Witness of their long and happy Correspondence, with a Bill of Exchange
for 340. L. New England Currency to distribute among the Poor in our Churches.

This same Gentleman offered the Settlement of Twenty Pounds Sterling per Annum
for a Fourth Missionary among the Indians on our Borders.

When he first wrote to Dr. Colman, he desired to have his Name secreted: And I
doubt not (by the Temper and Spirit discovered in his many Letters that now lie
before me) he would be glad to do all his Charities according to our Lord's
Direction ( Mat. vi. 1, 2, 3.) in the most secret Manner. -- But this was
impracticable as to some of those Exhibitions and Uses proposed by him.
Therefore his Name is now known to us -- Isaac Hollis Nephew to Mr. Thomas
Hollis -- A Reverend Minister of the Antipedobaptist Persuasion.
April 6. 1736, He wrote again, and added another Bounty, and a great One for
the Support of some Indian Children at Housatonnoc, Food, Clothing and
Lodging, the entire Charge of which he would defray; and accordingly gave Order
to draw immediately for Two Hundred Pounds our Money for a Beginning. -- In
November the same Year he sent 56 L. Sterling more, to be applied to the Use
aforesaid, which was accordingly sent to the Rev. Mr. John Sergeant Minister of
the Gospel at Stockbridge, to whom the Education of the Children was committed
-- And from Year to Year ever since he has supported them I think the Number of
Children is Twelve.
there.

It is set down on a loose Paper, dated Feb. 1745, 6, Six Hundred and
thirty-four Pounds has been already sent and applied to said Use. -- But I
forbear enlarging on this Head, lest I should offer Violence to the Modesty of
this good and rising Benefactor to Mankind.

Dr. Colman's Heart was as much set on the civilizing and gospelizing these our
Heathen Neighbors (as the others mentioned Chap. 6th) and he embraced every
Occasion and happy Incident for this Purpose -- There is one Instance of his
Care and Zeal for them, which the World has been already made acquainted
withal, viz. The Publication of a Letter wrote to him from a worthy Gentleman,
in Answer to one of his in our Weekly Journal of Feb. 7. 1744, which is worthy
of a Place here. -- A warm Provocation to good Works!

"Reverend and dear Sir,
You did me the Favor some Weeks ago, (from which Time I have not been able to
write 'till 'now) to send me the Rev. Mr. Sergeant's Scheme Vid. Mr. Sergeant's
Scheme, and the Letter annexed, referred to.
(with your Letter annexed to it) for promoting Christian Knowledge among the
Indians at Houssatonnoc, by civilizing, and bringing them to a good Opinion of
Industry and Frugality, etc which I very much approve of, and the more so,
because it appears to me, as if he had truly no private, or personal Interest
in View; but only the Honor of his great Master, and the best Welfare of the
poor Heathen, whom the FATHER gave him, for his Inheritance, and therefore I
heartily wish it Success, and hope the Difficulties in raising Money to carry
on such an Affair, may be surmounted.

I have been expecting every Day since you sent it to me, to hear of some
Subscriptions going forward on that Account, but hear nothing of any such Thing
at present.

I would therefore humbly propose that a Sheet of Paper, or two, may be
stitched up at the End of one, or more of those printed Letters, and a generous
Subscription began, by a few well disposed Gentlemen of Boston, and handed
about from one to another, to try what may be done that Way; and there every
Subscriber at one View may see the honest Design, and judge of its Necessity,
and act accordingly.

I cannot help thinking the generous Benefactions of the Rev. Mr. Hollis, and
his just Observation of the Inactivity of a People of such Name for Religion as
we in New England, in such an Affair, will put many to the blush, and perhaps
spur them on to a bountiful Liberality in this Scheme.

I am no ways qualified for a Leader my self, but would willingly follow a few
Gentlemen, who would be more likely to give it a Reputation and Currency, with
my Subscription of -- Pounds, and would use my small Ability to promote it, but
it must be some how or other set a going, which when once well done, may be
easily kept alive and in Motion: I have a great deal of Faith that something of
this Nature may be attended with Success, if put into such Hands, as shall be
spirited for it, and will not be weary in Well doing; but stir up themselves
and others, with a well tempered Zeal, mixed with Prudence, so as to give no
Offense to any that do not think exactly as they do; and by such a Behavior,
some who may not be so well inclined at one Time, may be very well disposed at
another, to an handsome Subscription.

But this Method notwithstanding, I hope it will not be thought amiss to have a
Brief from Authority (if Need be) procured, and promoted in every Church in
this Province, to collect what well disposed People would be ready to give to
encourage an Affair of this Importance; and if before the Collection, those two
Letters should be read, I am humbly of Opinion, it would not be impertinent.

If we really believe, the admirable Charms you mention at the Close of you
Letter, have any Reality in them, as I am apt to think they have, viz. "That a
right liberal Heart and Hand, no Tongue can fully speak it! or enough celebrate
it! Unspeakable is the Good done to the World by it! Unspeakable is the Glory
redounding to the Name of CHRIST from it! And also the Good to ourselves in it,
and from it, is unspeakable, both through the Life that now is, and in that
which is to come! Only the Day of CHRIST can reveal the Glories and Joys
awaiting it through a blessed Eternity." -- I say, if these wonderful Truths
are duly thought of, this pious Scheme of Mr. Sergeant's, will not, cannot fall
to the Ground for want of Money to carry it on, and support it from Time to
Time: I pray God to strengthen our Faith in them. -- I entreat an Interest in
your Prayers, and do assure you I am with great Esteem and Respect,

Dear Sir, Your very much obliged, humble Servant,
-- C -- Jan. 26. 1744. N. B. "I think it my Duty to make the most public
Excuse, for the Freedom I have taken with my honorable Friend, in publishing
his Letter, excellent as it is in it self, without his Leave; and also to
inform him and the Public, that a Book will lie ready at my House, and at the
Shops of Major Henchman, Capt. John Phillips, and Mr. Joseph Edwards, with
Blank Leaves annexed, for taking in Subscriptions, or if it be desired, by
Persons in other Towns, any where through the Province, that like Books be sent
to them for the same End, they shall be sent.

Benj. Colman.




Part of a Letter from the Rev. Mr. Sergeant to Dr. Colman.

"Rev. Sir,
-- Your Care and Pains under the Decays and Feebleness of Age, to promote the
Design of my Letter, I accept with all Thankfulness.

Yesterday, we of the English Families, with he Assistance of two Strangers
happening to be here, collected by Subscription One Hundred and Fifteen Pounds
Ten Shillings toward our proposed School.

I then gave the Indians some Account of what was doing for them, and they
appeared very thankful: And this Morning sent a Messenger to me to know where
the House was to be erected, with the Offer of their Assistance in clearing a
Spot of Land for forwarding the Design.

May He that is the Staff and Stay of the Aged, be still your Support etc.

Stockbridge, Nov. 25. 1743."

Many more Letters and some of a great Length, were written by him to the Rev.
Mr. Hollis, and to Mr. Sergeant, and others, to promote this benevolent and
christian Design, and I would hope that this Record may greatly serve it by the
Will of God.

He held a long and most agreeable Correspondence with the Rev. and learned Dr.
White Kennett, Bishop of Peterborough, which was begun and ended with an entire
View to the Services of Truth and Relig^on; and his Letters were sometimes
carried to the Lord Bishop of London who discoursed with Dr. Kennett upon them
(as he informed him) to the frustrating some Attempts of the High Church
Missionaries here --

A Copy of his first Letter to the Rev. Dr. White Kennett, Dean of
Peterborough, afterward Lord Bishop, About this Time some of the Clergy in
England made the most moving Discourses to excite the abused People's Charity,
by telling them what vast Numbers of poor Heathen, have been brought by their
Missionaries, from worshipping the Devil to the Knowledge of God. -- So a
Gentleman wrote to Mr. Colman.
which introduced him into a happy, pleasant and profitable Correspondence with
him to the Day of his Death.

"Rev. Sir, Boston November 1712.
I am altogether a Stranger to you, and must needs be unknown, for my Name is
much too little to have been heard of by Persons of your Dignity in the
Established Church:

But meeting with your excellent Sermon preached before the Honorable and most
Reverend Society for the propagating of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, on Friday,
Febr. 15. 1711, 12. I cannot forbear asking your Leave to write you my Thoughts
upon an admirable Passage I find therein, p. 22.

"Neither our own People in those Parts, nor their Affrican Slaves, nor their
Indian Neighbors have ought to accuse us of. At least we have given no just
Offense to the Gentiles there, nor to the Church of God. We trust we have not
sinned against the Brethren, and have walked honestly toward them that are
without. We give our Money, our Attendance, our Correspondence, our several
Sorts of Care, Pains and Trouble: Forgive us this Wrong: If we have done any
other; God do so to us and more also.

Sir, there is such Air of Sincerity in these Words, that I cannot but have a
perfect Esteem of the good and truly noble Spirit breathed in them. I doubt not
but you fully believe as you speak, and are accepted by God in your pious
Desires of serving the Interests of Religion in these remote Parts of the
Earth. I greatly honor the Intentions of your most honorable Society, their
abundant. Labors and Expense.

A more noble Charity never was projected than your sending the Gospel among
the Heathen here, and into Heathenish Places, where the Settlements have been
made void of the Form of Religion: The Harvest of this Nature is too plenteous
through Virginia, Maryland, the Jersies, our Eastern Country also, and the
Narraganset, and some Places about Rhode Island, which have been too long
neglected and suffered to run wild into Sectaries, and Prejudices against any
Ministry of the Word at all.

This vast and waste Space, desolate and perishing, cries aloud to you for your
charitable Care; and verily the Fund which the Society has contributed and
gathered is but too little yet by far for these necessitous Places; while at
the same Time many of your Missions into our Parts are unto Places where the
Gospel is received and preached, and Churches gathered in very good Order and
Manner.

I had my Birth in Boston, my Education at our Cambridge; yet I have seen your
Oxford and Cambridge, and spent twelve Weeks together at the latter; near two
Years also at London, and two more at Bath, sent thither by the Presbyterian
Board at London. And I bless God that in this my Absence from my own Country, I
did but grow in the natural Inclination I had to, and in the generous
Principles of an enlarged catholic Spirit cherished in me by my Tutor, Mr.
Leverett; now President of Harvard-College: -- And if I am able to judge, no
Place of Education can well boast a more free Air than our little College may.
This I say, to let you see I would pretend to be as impartial and without
Prejudice, as is possible in this our imperfect State. -- Nevertheless I cannot
but let you know my Thoughts, that the Reverend and Honorable Society have
been once and again misled, and even imposed on by Misinformations, and private
Designs and Interests, of Persons and Parties here, to mispend (and so
necessarily pervert) great Portions of their noble Charity, to such Ends and in
such Manner as do not at all answer the Propagation of the Gospel among us, but
which do really break in upon and hinder the spreading and Success of it. To
evince which, I will fairly put the Case and offer an Instance or two.

You must give me Leave, Sir, to suppose a Town and Towns here wherein Religion
is settled, Ministers legally fixed, the Word of God faithfully preached, and
the Sacraments of Christ administered; and yet there happen a discontented
Person or two in the Place; or some Difference about the placing a new House
for public Worship, or about paying their little Rate to the Ministry, or the
like: Immediately they are advised, or of their own Mind they propose to
themselves, "Let us send over to the Lord Bishop of London, or to the
honorable Society for propagating the Gospel, for a Minister of the Church of
England! he will bring a Salary of Fifty Pounds Sterling, which is as good as a
120 L. our Currency; a Maintenance far superior to any Ones, if not every One,
in any Country-Town in New England." -- Now suppose, Sir they actually send and
obtain; I demand -- Whether it be not a real Injury and Abuse of the Society
and their Charity; their declared End, and the proper Use of so great a Gift as
Fifty Pounds per Annum is?

-- Yet are there several such notorious Instances in our New-English
Provinces. One was lately in the Town of Braintree, within ten Miles of Boston,
which Application to you the Rev. Mr. Miles of Boston refused to countenance;
and was free to say, that were the Circumstances of the Place known, my Lord of
London and the Society would never approve of it: For it is a notorious Matter
of Fact, that setting aside two Families in that Party at Braintree, the Rest
neither know why they sought the Church-Worship there, nor could be any Credit
to it: Their Number was so very minute, and their Character so very mean, that
when a Minister was sent to them, he was ashamed of his Errand, and diverted to
some other Place of Service.

This last Year a Difference happened in the Town of Newbury about placing
their Meeting House: The Matter was brought before our General Court, who
determined it according to the free Vote and Act of the Precinct, whereby they
had obliged themselves to each other: Whereupon a Number of them declare
themselves for the Church of England; many of them I will suppose Persons of
Sobriety and Virtue, only in a Pett, and to save their Rate to their aged and
worthy Minister Mr. Belcher; utterly ignorant of the Church they declare for,
nor offended in the least with the Form of Worship or Discipline which they
turn from; and as wide herein from their Old Pastor's Spirit and Principles,
which are as catholic as can well be found among Ministers of any
Denomination; being till now among the most narrow and rigid Dissenters, who
would before this have disowned me in particular, for the Use of the
Lord's-Prayer, reading the Scriptures and a freer Admission to the Lord's
Table, than has been generally practiced in these Churches.

To name no more, -- Your Mission to the Town of Jamaica upon Long Island near
New York, was really a great Breach on the Law of Justice and Charity; if your
Honorable Society could have seen into the Rise and Spring of it. Mr. Hubbard
and the People there were unrighteously dispossessed of the Church and Ministry
House and Lands; which the Town had built and given for the Worship of God
after the Way of the Dissenters from the Church of England: When therefore the
Rev. Mr. Gordon (the Glory of the Mission hitherto that we have seen) in 1702
came thither, he was greatly surprised instead of some Place to gospelize, to
find a worthy Minister on the Place ejected, and the greater Part of the
grieved Inhabitants cleaving to him: Mr. Hubbard and he lived a few Months in
perfect Harmony and Esteem of each other, and then God called for the precious
Life of Mr. Gordon, whom Mr. Hubbard visited and prayed with dying, and mourned
when dead, and did not long survive him.

In short, Sir, there is one sordid Motive which will find you Beggars enough
for your Charity in our Country Towns! if you will free them from Rates to any
Ministry and maintain it for them. But I am sure your Honorable Society never
meant to minister to such a Disposition in any.

-- In this Confidence I have freely written to you, and entreat your Candor.
I have been ever wishing for a Comprehension, and do but grow these last Years
in my Opinion of Occasional Conformity, the more it has been branded for
Hypocrisy. I cannot think the Churches Unity lies in Uniformity in every Mode
of Worship or Discipline, but in hearty Charity and Esteem, testified by
Occasional Communion, under a small Diversity of Administration and Discipline.

-- But I forget my self, -- I preach, -- and, to Whom? Sir, improve not what I
write to any Hurt, if it can serve to no Good. I have no Quarrel with any, nor
am willing to be brought into a Controversy. -- I accuse not your Society, far
be it from me; but mean only a private Information. You will best judge, Sir,
if there be no Offense to the Church of God, in the Steps taken by too many,
here and there. I perfectly believe you would not willingly sin against us.
Your Money, Time, Cares, Pains are a mighty Charity which God will reward. The
Lord recompense it to you in his Grace, Mercy and Peace.

I am Sir, Your most humble, And obedient Servant, Benj. Colman."


The Rev. Dean was so good and just as to answer to the foregoing Letter, and
many others wrote to him by Mr. Colman, expressing in them all the highest
Esteem for him, and often subscribes himself your affectionate Friend and
Brother.

The ANSWER.
"Rev. Sir, Sept. 15. 1713.
Though I seem negligent in my due Acknowledgment for yours of November 1712,
yet among private Friends, I have often expressed my Satisfaction in the Sense,
Style and Temper of it; and I now heartily accept such a Correspondence, and
wish the Continuance of it, for the Sake of our common Cause of Charity to
Souls, and of Zeal to our Christian Religion.

I was under a great Temptation of communicating your Letter to a General
Meeting of our Society; that I might have had their Instructions for an Answer
to the Particulars contained in (...) -- But then I thought my self restrained
by some prudent Intimations of your own; and I was very unwilling to draw you
into any Controversy or Envy that too often attend us for speaking plain
Truths: For such indeed I believe are the kind Informations you give me
relating to the Places you mention: and I know you meant only to inform us, not
to upbraid or accuse us. -- For I perceive you are very sensible, as the wiser
Part of Mankind must be, under what Disadvantages we labor, as a Society
holding Commerce with another World, for no Gain but that of Godliness, and for
pure Conscience Sake. -- It is possible we are not so intent upon our Business,
as if it were for filthy Lucre. We are not so constant in our Attendance as
secular Companies and trading Bodies of Men would be. -- We are less exact in
our Correspondence and Accounts, than if the dear Liberty and Property of this
World depended on it. -- However our general Aim is to pursue our general
Commission of planting Christianity according to the Church of England in those
Parts of our English Plantations where there is no settled Ministry: or for the
Benefit of good Numbers who cannot in Conscience conform to the Ways of Worship
different from our Established Church. -- We think that these two Provinces are
committed to us: The first chiefly and primarily as our original Design, the
second as an ordinary. Consequence of it. -- In the former we labor of our own
Accord; in the latter we have never put our Hand but upon the Call and
Importunity of People on your Side the Water. If they call when they have no
Need, it is our Charity as well as Credulity to believe them. If they
misrepresent Things to us, we must still take them for granted for Want of
better Information. Nay, and if different Accounts be given, we are apt to be
partial in our receiving or rejecting, for some Respect or other.

I dare assure you the Case was thus in all those particular Places you
mention. We were not forward to obtrude our Charity, and had no Ambition to
extend our Power and Care beyond our Line; but the Motions began from the
respective Places; we only yielded to the Requests of others; and if they
impose upon our Ignorance at so great a Distance, they are to Blame; and much
the more if they gratify their own Passions and act to serve their own
Interests by it.

If we proceed upon Mistake in such Cases, Sincerity and good Intention is a
Plea and Defense, which we hope God will accept; and our Neighbors forgive us,
if we have done them any Harm.

To You dear Sir, if I can judge by the Spirit of one single Letter, I need
make no other Apology: You have Sense and Largeness of Soul to make Allowances
for greater Faults: And if God by his Grace do not prevent us, upon our
constant Prayers to him; and if he do not continually direct and preserve us,
we must needs fall into them.

It is our being misinformed and misguided in some Ways, that increases our
Desires of having Bishops settled in those foreign Parts committed to our Care;
that they may judge better of Things and Persons within their own View: One on
the Islands, and another on the Continent. -- But alas, there is so much of an
Ecclesiastical and of a Civil Nature in this Affair, and such a Concurrency
required here at Home and Abroad, that what Issue it may come to we are yet
uncertain, -- And whether at this Juncture we should make a fit Choice of
discreet Men for this Office; I dare not pretend to guess. -- I hope your
Churches would not be jealous of it, they being out of our Line, and therefore
beyond the Cognizance of any Overseers to be sent from hence. What Time may do,
with the Spirit of Knowledge and Charity to make the English in America all of
one Heart, and of one Way of Discipline and Worship, I recommend to your
Prayers, and add my own.

I can answer for my own Conscience, that from the Beginning of our Society, I
have acted as a Member of it upon the Principle of doing Good. I have been at
some Labor, and have not grudged some little Expense, in picking up the
Beginning of a Library for the Use of our Corporation, etc. -- And I am very
glad to hear from our very sensible Friend Mr. Dummer that a Library is going
on in Boston, to which I send by his Care some Tracts, etc.

Our exchanging (Sir) the good Offices of common Charity and a public Spirit,
will help much under God's Blessing to enlarge our Understandings and our
Affections also to each other; and so to meet nearer upon Earth, and
inseparably in Heaven. Let these be our mutual Prayers and Endeavors.

I am, dear Sir, Your affectionate Friend and Brother, White Kennett."
London Sept. 15. 1712.

Part of another Letter dated July 28. 1716, is printed in the Life Bishop
Kennett, of which the Compiler says, it is Pity it should be buried with him.
And as he has given it a Place in the Bishop's Life for an Entertainment to his
Readers, it is here also inserted -- To which I shall take the Liberty to add
some Passages out of others that are now before me.

"Dear Sir,
My Thoughts reprove me often for not being more civil to a Stranger, rather to
a Friend and Correspondent, whom, by all that I have read and heard of him, I
have good Reason to value and esteem. My Thanks have been long due for the
Books you sent over to improve our American Library, which is not yet disposed
in a proper Place, for Want of some special Benefactor, but I am adding what I
can to the Number of Tracts suitable to the Arguments of Navigation, etc. and
doubt not (if God spare a few Years) to make it a Collection not unworthy the
good Design. This relates to an Affair, which is mentioned more fully
afterward in the Bishop's Life.
-- That good Design of propagating Christianity in your Parts, has lost the
wisest Director and President of it, the late Archbishop of Canterbury, (Dr.
Tenison) whose Aim and Care in those Matters (as in all others) were guided by
a truly Christian Spirit for the public Good of the Protestant Religion, he
put a Stop to many indirect Motions and Steps made to put us out of the Way,
and prevented a great deal of Interruption, and Embarrassment that would have
been otherwise given us. He was a wise and honest Prelate, truly sensible, that
at Home and Abroad, we were in great Danger of losing Christianity in the Name
of the Church.

The two great Difficulties that lie hard upon our Society for Propagation of
the Gospel are, (1) The Want of sober and religious Missionaries; few offering
themselves to that Service for the Glory of God, and the Good of Souls; but
chiefly to find a Refuge from Poverty and Scandal. (2) Such Men when they come
to the Places allotted them, forget their Mission; and instead of propagating
Christianity, are only contending for Rites and Ceremonies, or for Powers and
Privileges, and are disputing with the Vestries of every Parish, and even with
the civil Government of every Province.
-- These two Mischiefs can hardly be redressed, but by fixing Schools and
Universities in those Parts, and settling we hope two Bishops; one for the
Continent, another for the Islands, with Advice and Assistance of Presbyters to
ordain fit Persons, especially Natives, to take Care of all the Churches. Which
needful Provisions will not break in upon your national ^ites and Customs, at
least no other Way than by laying a Foundation ( we will hope, and you will
agree) for the Union of all Protestants in some future Age, when Charity and
Peace shall prevail above Interest and Passion.

We have no great Prospect, I confess, of such Happiness in our Old England,
where the Spirit of Dissension and Faction, nay, of the utmost Infatuation, has
raged horribly, and is not yet cast out. I think I saw long since, that the
Beginnings of this Sorrow were the Seeds of Popery scattered in the Minds of
common People, with strange Industry and Art, to smooth the Way for a Popish
Pretender. Noise and Nonsense were very prevailing, and at last the Word given
out was, I had rather be a Papist than a Presbyterian; and under this delirious
Cant, the poor Souls were prepared to cry out, The Church, the Church, as loud
as if they had been in the Streets of Rome, and to idolize a seditious, not to
say ignorant Doctor; as much as if he had been a Pope of this other World.

The People in this Ferment were disposed to read and admire the daily
Pamphlets, thrown about to reconcile them more and more to Popery, under
Pretenses of divine and hereditary Rights, uninterrupted Succession,
independent State of the Church, the Expediency and even Necessity of private
Confession, the immediate Effects of sacerdotal Absolution, the Invalidity of
Baptism out of Episcopal Communion, a Priest, an Altar, a real Sacrifice in the
Lord's Supper, a middle State of Souls, no Harm, at least, in Prayers for the
Dead, and many other Devises, approaching as near to Rome as present Shame and
Safety would admit.

All these Conceits you well know, sprung as Tares of the Enemy, long after our
blessed Reformation, and I think never appeared 'till a little before the
Beginning of the Civil Wars, under the Influence of a Court that had too much
of the Popish Queen in it, and were now revived to serve no other Purpose but
that of the Interest of a Popish Impostor. Only there was some Difference in
the Times; for before those Civil Wars, none ran into those Notions but some of
the warmer and ambitious Clergy; whereas now the common People and the very
Women had their Heads full of them.

Under these Delusions a Multitude have been given up to believe the Idol at
Avignon to be something, and worthy to be set up; given up, alas! to any Lies,
and to the Practice of many Popish Superstitions. Some would not go to their
Seats in the Church 'till they had kneeled and prayed at the Rails of the
Communion Table; they would not be content to receive the Sacrament there
kneeling, but with Prostration and striking of the Breast, and kissing of the
Ground, as if there were an Host to be adored; they began to think the
Common Prayer without a Sermon (at least Afternoon) to be the best way of
serving God; and Churches without Organs had the thinner Congregations; bidding
of Prayer, was thought better than praying to God, and even Pictures about the
Altar began to be the Books of the Vulgar; the Meeting Houses of Protestant
Dissenters were thought to be more defiled Places than Popish Chapels: In
short, the Herd of People were running toward Rome without any Foresight, or
Power of looking backward.

To this Madness of the People was the Rebellion owing; now one is quelled, the
other will abate; and our greatest Deliverance under King George, will be that
of our being delivered from our selves, and being restored not only to our
Religion and Liberties but to our Senses --

My Respects and best Services to you and your Brethren, and especially to the
worthy President of Harvard-College -- Let us join our Prayers for the King's
safe Return and long Life, and for the Progress of Christianity, and an
Increase of the Protestant Religion.

I am, dear Sir, your affectionate Friend, White Kennett."
March 13. 1716, 17.

-- After having wrote largely of the Fooleries (as he styles them) of the
High-Church -- He adds "And you have Sense enough to let me tell you as a very
charitable Friend that there is somewhat of a like wrong Spirit among our
Dissenting Brethren or the Body of them. The good old Tenderness of Conscience
is visibly abated, the strict Regard to Sobriety and Temperance is very much
altered; the keeping up Family Prayers and Fear of God in Children and Servants
is wearing off apace, Bibles are less read, and Sabbaths less observed, etc. In
short, they are very soon gone off from the good old Puritans who has certainly
a more sober Deportment, and a more serious Sense of Religion and Devoutness in
them.

And this Degeneracy at a Time when they have been in greatest Danger and ought
to have been most upon their Guard of Piety and Prudence. For whereas the good
old Puritans were all along popular and well-belov'd upon the just Reputation
of being a sober godly Party, who spoke better and lived better than most of
their Neighbors: It so happens on the contrary (God knows how) that our
Dissenters of late have had the common Cry against them: the Laws could hardly
protect them, the Government almost afraid to defend them, and if the Bishops
and Clergy whom they call the Low-Church, would have fell into that Stream of
Prejudice against them they had been driven (as the Wind and Tide have long
sat) into a State of Persecution and the utmost Desertion; wherein the Body of
the Clergy and People would have thought they had done God good Service.

And yet the Dissenters (perhaps to a Man) have had one of the greatest Merits,
that of being true to their Country, and to the Balance of Europe, always well
affected to the Protestant Succession, and very faithful Subjects of King
George, and firm Adherents to his Royal Family: An Advantage that one would
think might before this Time have been improved to their Security and Honor:
And so undoubtedly it would have been if they had followed the Steps of the
good old Puritans, and had once more the Esteem of a peaceable and religious
People; if they had been really ready to join with the moderate Bishops and
Clergy, and had complained only of Innovations unknown to the first Reformers,
requiring only some few Concessions to be made to them, showing themselves
truly tender of the Peace and Unity of the Church and State, and always more
zealous for a good Life and good Works than for any other Matter of Contention.
-- Such a Spirit of God in a still Voice will at some Providential Time or
other heal all our Breaches, and frustrate the Hopes of the Common Enemy.

You see how freely and heartily I set down my own present Thoughts and Wishes,
and I have that Opinion of your Understanding and good Conscience that I cannot
but think we could talk over these Matters without any ill Resentments and at
least with good Will and Charity. -- But I cannot answer for the different
Impressions upon other Minds, indisposed with Prejudice and Passion. --

I thought to add somewhat of our present State of Affairs, but I reserve this
to another Letter.

I pray God preserve us and amend us all, for the Continuance of his good
Providence to us, and am

Dear Sir, your very affectionate Friend and Brother, W. K.
P. S. I thank you for your very right good Sermon. I send you the last of my
public Exercises."

There is another very long Letter dated June 5th 1718. relating to
Controversies on Foot in Church and State at that Day, which begins and ends
with such friendly Passages as these,

-- "I gladly take this Opportunity of expressing my hearty Thanks for your
last, and my Willingness to keep up a Correspondence with one whom I know so
well by his own Writings and by others good Report, that I should be glad if
Providence would allow us a nearer Conversation. --

You see I am going out of my Depth, by writing in a familiar Way to a private
Friend, secure that neither of us mean any Harm. Pray we God to preserve our
Peace and Prosperity, and dear Sir, your Health and Happiness. I am your
affectionate Friend and Brother,

W. K."




After he was promoted to the Sea of Peterborough He was consecrated Bishop of
Peterborough, November 9. 1718. he succeeded Dr. Cumberland, and died December
19th 1728. --
he was the same good and kind Friend and Correspondent. They wrote their
Sentiments to one another on all Points Civil and Ecclesiastical with all
Freedom, and sent their Publications from Time to Time. --


In a Letter dated Feb. 27th 1722, 3. He writes,

-- "I have often accused my self of Negligence (which I beg you would not
think a Disrespect) in not writing to you. It is not for any Change of Station,
and much less for any Alteration of christian charitable Sentiments, but out of
pure Hurry of Life, and necessary Application to Men, and Things and Books. --
I thank you for your very good Sermon A Discourse had in the College Hall at
Cambridge, March 27. 1722. before the Baptism of R. Judah Monis -- The present
Instructor of the Students in the Hebrew Language there. Mr. Colman sent him
afterward Mr. Monis's three Discourses entitled, the Truth, the whole Truth,
and nothing but the Truth.
on Occasion of the Jewish Convert to Christianity. I wish you would repubblish
it with some Declaration of Motives and Reasons given by the Person himself:
and a Catalogue of such eminent Converts from Judaism to our Reformed Religion,
as have been publicly baptized. -- Here many of them publish very sound
Testimonies of their real Conversion and Sincerity in our Faith and Worship. I
think I could furnish you with near an Hundred Instances out of my poor
Collections if you will make the seasonable Use and Application of them.

I was sent to this Moment by my good Neighbor Chamberlain to write a Line to
you, and have put up a little Parcel for your Amusement, and desire you to
Esteem me, and to pray for me as your very affectionate Friend and Brother,
White Peterborough."

Thus writes this excellent Bishop who for his Moderation and good Works was
very ill treated by the Jacobite Party in the Nation -- of whom the Writer of
his Life says, Page 193. "He was a Man of great Probity, Courage, and
Resolution in the Discharge of his Duty. He lived (especially since the
Revolution) in Times of great Trial and Discrimination; and in all of them, he
approved his steady, inflexible and fearless Temper. The Frowns of great Men in
Power, could no more awe him, than popular Clamours could shake his
Stedfastness." --

I shall close the Account of this happy Correspondence with a long and fine
Letter of Mr. Colman's to the good Bishop dated December 17th 1725.

"Sir,
Mr. Dummer in his last informs me that your Lordship is pleased to express
your self sorry that I have declined the Presidentship of our College, to which
the Fellows chose me the last Year; But while I am obliged to your Lordship's
Goodness toward me in that Concern, I have to plead my long Disuse of
Academical Studies and Exercises, and also that I am not well in the Opinion of
our House of Representatives of late Years, on whom the President depends for
his Subsistence; and they could not have pinched me without the Chair's
suffering with me, which I could by no means consent it should do for my Sake.

As for the catholic Spirit, which makes your Lordship wish to see me in that
honorable Station, I hope I may have some Pretense to it, and I acknowledge it
a very good Gift and Ornament to a Person otherwise qualified: But then (my
Lord) it is the very Spirit of our College and has been so these forty Years
past, and if I have ever shone in your Lordship's Eyes on that Account, here I
learnt it thirty Years since, and when I visited the famous Universities and
private Academies in England, I was proud of my own humble Education here in
our Cambridge, because of the Catholic Air I had there breathed in. And such
it has continued till of late a Parcel of High flyers have poisoned and
stagnated it, by leading us into a Course of angry Controversy which has
alarmed and narrowed us, who before received the Writings and Gentlemen of the
Church of England with the most open Reverence and Affection. -- And (My Lord)
I am afraid that now the Paper-War here is a little over between some Gentlemen
of the Church and others on our Part, the Alienation is like to increase by the
Measures lately taken by Dr. C -- and others, who upon a Memorial of our
Ministers to our General Court the last May for the convening of a Synod, which
we also moved for more than ten Years past, put in a counter Memorial and have
since made some Representation on this Head, (we know not what) to the present
excellent Bishop of London; who (as our Agent in a public Letter has informed
our Court) laid before the Lords Justices a Copy of our Memorial consented to
by our Lieutenant Governor, at whose Conduct herein (he says) their
Excellencies are very much displeased.

It is thought, he tells us, that our Clergy should not meet in so public
authoritative a Manner without the King's Consent as Head of the Church; and
that it would be a bad Precedent for our Dissenting Brethren at Home to ask the
same Privilege; which if granted, would be a sort of vying with the Established
Church. It has also been insinuated that this Synod would have come to some
Resolutions to the Prejudice of the Church of England.

Upon the reading of this Letter from Mr. Agent, our General Court immediately
dismissed our Memorial: But if your Lordship will give me Leave I would humbly
plead our Innocence and Right in making the aforesaid Memorial to our General
Court, and asking their Countenance in the convening of a Synod of our
Churches. And I have seen so much of the excellent Candor and Equity of the
Lord Bishop of London in a private Letter to one of the Clergy here the last
Year, as well as known a great while the like excellent Spirit and Temper of
your Lordship, that I think I would not desire to stand before better Judges.

And first, let me plead before your Lordship in behalf of the Churches of
New England their Usage in Times past, from the Beginning of the Country to
meet occasionally in Synods, under the Countenance of our civil Rulers, for the
preserving and promoting of Godliness, Peace and good Order in them. -- This
Right and Liberty our Fathers have dearly purchased for us, and the Government
then seem to have thought so, when it gave them a Patent so ample for all
religious Liberties and Privileges to them and their Posterity upon their
settling and subduing this waste and howling Wilderness, and making so great
and good an Addition to the English Dominions. And although the oppressive
Powers in the End of King Charles, and the first of King James the Second, had
no Consideration hereof, but vacated our first Charter, yet we have to plead in
the Second Place,

That by our present Charter, granted by King William and Queen Mary, our
Churches are here the Legal Establishment, and our Ministers both in respect of
their Induction and Maintenance are the King's Ministers, as much as even the
Church of England Ministers are in any of the other Provinces; who did not
settle as we did on the declared Principles of Nonconformity, and without the
least Charge or Expense to the Crown as we have done. But when I say that our
Churches and Ministers here are established by the King's Laws, I would pray
your Lordship not to understand me in Opposition to the Church of England, for
so they are not; but if any Town will choose a Gentleman of the Church of
England for their Pastor or Rector they are at their Liberty, and he is their
Minister by the Laws of our Province, as much as any Congregational Minister
among us is so. So far is our Establishment from excluding others from the
common Rights of Men and Christians, and I hope ever will remain so.

And then thirdly, our Churches here being founded and formed on the
Congregational Scheme, our Synods whether greater or less do not pretend to
Authority or Jurisdiction, but only to counsel and advise the Churches, who are
at Liberty after all to judge for themselves, although it is to be hoped they
will always pay a reverential Regard to the deliberate and solemn Advices of a
venerable Assembly of their Pastors and Elders. -- Your Lordship will from
hence easily judge how far such a Synod can be in any sort vying with the
Church of England, or a bad Precedent to other Dissenters from it.

For as to our Brethren in Ireland, they meet in Synods when they please by the
Act of Toleration, and our Brethren in the Provinces of New York and
New-Jersies have their stated annual Synods, Nobody forbidding them or taking
Umbrage at their so doing. -- But we in the Province of the Massachusetts,
really the Churches established by Law, and having been used to ask the
Countenance of our Rulers in our Meetings in a Provincial Synod, we now
observed the same Rule and kept to our old Practice; expecting no more from
them than the Publick's bearing the Charge of the Convention, and if the
Results of the Synod were approved by the Government, that they would recommend
the fame to the reverent Regards of our Churches.

This (my Lord) is the Foot that the Churches of New England have hitherto
stood on, increased and flourished on; leading quiet and peaceable Lives in all
Godliness and Honesty, maintaining an exemplary Loyalty to the King, and
Brotherly Love to their Neighbors; excepting some Errors of a persecuting
Spirit toward the Baptist and Quakers for sometime in their Beginning, which we
have heartily repented of.

And whereas it is insinuated that this Synod would have come to some
Resolutions to the Prejudice of the Church of England; it is only Surmise, and
without any Grounds, save what the Objectors may apprehend from the Principles
of Non conformity which we openly profess, and from the late Disputes which
they have raised among us about Episcopacy. -- The utmost that the Synod was
like to have done, about Church Order and Government was their confirming or
rather amending some Things in our Platform of Church Discipline the Results of
former Synods, which would have done nothing more against the Church of England
than stands professed already among us, nor have set us at any more Distance
from her. And if your Lordship will please to read the Memorial it self, a Copy
whereof I enclose to you, you will see that the Reason and Cause of our
desiring a Synod at this Time was to enquire into the Causes of the present
growing Corruption of Manners among us, and the Means of the Reformation of
these; the same noble and pious Cause wherein your Lordship has borne so good
and great a Part for many Years past. -- This is not the Cause of a Sect or
Party, but too many in every Sect among us have an Aversion to it, and no
wonder if it be everywhere spoken against. -- Or if our reforming Synod could
not escape the Suspicion of some, that something ungrateful to Episcopacy or
Liturgies might be done there, yet I must seriously profess to your Lordship
that in all the Debates among the Ministers, whether this Year or in Years
past, upon this Head of calling a Synod, I remember not a Word that has dropped
among us to give Occasion for such a Suspicion. -- Or if it be that our
Churches are now envied the Reputation of holding Synods as in Times past by
Gentlemen lately come among us, and who have been treated by us with all due
Respects, they are neither courteous nor just; for it ought in Righteousness
and Honor to content them that they receive all kind and brotherly Treatment
from us, and enjoy their own Opi^ion and Persuasion with the greatest Freedom;
and they ought not to use Means to grieve and trouble us among whom they are
come to sojourn, and where they find a Country filled with Churches, wherein
Knowledge, Devotion and Piety flourish at least equally as in their own
Communions.

My Lord, It may be I am too free and pathetical in this my Address to you; And
I would not take too much Liberty in the Cause of Liberty. I know Sir, you can
forgive my Zeal in this tender and generous Point. And if your Lordship think
with me that this plain Argument and Representation will not offend My Lord of
London, or may do us any Service with his Lordship, I would then entreat the
Favor of him to read what I have here wrote, and let it have its just Weight
in his noble and righteous Heart.

It is enough, My Lord, to grieve us to the Heart, conscious as we are of the
utmost Zeal and Loyalty to King George, that we should seem to the Lords
Justices to have trespassed upon his just Prerogative: We had no Thoughts of
offending the King's Majesty, nor the Governors of the Church, which like the
King's Throne is established by Moderation. -- I shall trouble your Lordship no
further than by asking you Blessing and leave to subscribe my self, etc."


On the Account of apprehended Abuses and Misapplications of the Moneys of the
Honorable and Reverend Society for Propagating the Gospel in foreign Parts,
Dr. Colman (in his old Age) wrote once and again to my Lord of London by the
Desire of the Reverend Association of the County of Hampshire, who made their
humble Representation to his Lordship and the said Society, to which Answers
were returned.

Dr. Colman's first Letter follows.
"Sir, Boston, September 13. 1734.
I am desired to forward and cover the enclosed to your Lordship, from my
Reverend and Honored Brethren, the associated Pastors of the County of
Hampshire, partly because I am now the senior Pastor in this Seaport Town, and
partly because they suppose my worthless Name may be a little known at London,
though not to Persons of your Lordship's Dignity.

It is now thirty five Years since I left the City, where I was not unknown to
the venerable Dr. Bray, that Man of God for Apostolic Love and Zeal, since
which I have had the Honor of a long and most free Intercourse of Letters with
the late excellent Bishop of Peterborough, Dr. Kennet, now with God.

Your Lordship's three Pastoral Letters, occasioned by the late surprising
Writings of some in Favor of Infidelity, have justly honored your Name to the
Churches of New England, and we have heard of your Character for Moderation and
Righteousness with high Esteem and Pleasure.

I do the more willingly therefore join my Brethren, who live remote from
Boston, and hitherto quite out of the Way of the Missions whereof they write in
their Address to your Lordship; being fully persuaded of the Integrity and
Uprightness of their Hearts in it, and that they aim at nothing but what is
just and right in the Sight of God.

The Harvest, My Lord, is plenteous from North Carolina to New York, and
Multitudes are perishing within that long Spread of Virginia, Maryland,
Pensylvania and the Jersies; But from New York Northward, Dr. Bray found very
little need of Missionaries for the Propagation of Christianity, the
Narraganset Country excepted, and in the Colonies of Connecticut and the
Massachusett's none at all, as at the Time I was informed.

Were your Lordship and the pious Trustees here on the Spot, I am sure you
could not think the professed End of your Charter, and the Design of the Donors
answered, in your supporting Missionaries at Boston, Braintree, Newbury,
Stratford, Bristol, Salem, Groton, etc. Or if the Seaports of great Trade such
as Boston, Newport, Marblehead need to have Ministers of the Church of England
for the sake of some Inhabitants and Strangers, yet also are they well able to
support their own Worship; or did they want some Assistance, there can be no
Pretense for it out of a Fund sacred to God for sending the Gospel into dark
and ignorant Places of the Earth. They ought to be provided for some other Way,
and not by alienating a devoted confined Charity, which were to run the Danger
of Sacrilege and great Unfaithfulness.

This, My Lord, is our View of the Case now laid before you, and is humbly
submitted to your righteous and impartial Judgment. -- Yet I fear that I have
not preserved all the Humility and great Modesty which adorns the enclosed from
my Brethren, I am ready therefore to humble my self, and beseech your
Lordship's Candor, while I doubt not your own Heart will make some Excuse for a
little Zeal and Resentment, from an apprehended Injury to one of the most noble
Charitys to Souls, and one of the most extensive Services to the Name of
Christ, that has been proposed to the World for Ages past. A Concern on this
Principle must be justified, and have your Lordship's Approbation.

I entreat, My Lord, your most candid Construction, and beg leave to subscribe

Your Lordship's Most humble and obedient Servant, etc.


May the 6th 1719, Mr. Colman wrote to Dr. Ho^dley Bishop of Bangor (since
Bishop of Winchester)

"My Lord,
Having had the Pleasure of reading your Book, entitled the Common-Rights of
Subjects, My grateful Heart and a Soul full of Esteem and Reverence to your
Lordship urges me to utter if I could my Sense of your righteous and generous
Performance. Had you been a Sufferer in Person by the unrighteous and cruel
Test-Act, and deprived by it of those Emoluments and Opportunities of doing
good in the World which your very superior Powers and Place in it now give
your Lordship the Advantage of; you could not more feelingly have appeared
against the injurious and impious Abuse of Religion and Invasion of Men's
natural Rights than you have done. -- But, My Lord, this righteous and honest
Zeal for Truth and Justice from one in your Station and Circumstances, gives
your Argument a Beauty and a Power, which it would not have, had it come from
the Hand of a suffering Dissenter. I confess I know no one among my Brethren
that could have hoped to succeed in the Argument as your Lordship has to the
utter Confusion of the Adversary. But supposing a Bates or a Calamy could have
done it, something of self, or Party, or Prejudice might be suspected to
influence in it, while from your Lordship's noble Pen, what but the most open
Regards to Truth and Justice and the common Rights of Men can be imagined. --
And now Sir, I beseech the God of Heaven, the Patron of the Injured and
Oppressed, and who raises up and inspires Patrons to them from among their
Brethren to reward abundantly to your Lordship the Service you have done, after
many others, to the Kingdom of your Savior and your Country, and to continue
you long a singular Ornament and Defense of it both in Church and State.

Your Goodness will pardon a poor Dissenting Minister in America, the
Presumption that may appear in his troubling your Lordship with the Knowlegde
of that Satisfaction he has received from your beneficent Hands. This Letter
shows how the Doctor watched for and took every Opportunity to serve Mankind
and encouraged Liberty.
-- I bow to you for your Blessing and am

Your Lordship's very humble and obedient Servant.


Dr. Colman wrote a Letter to the Earl of Egmont, who was at the Head of the
Associates of Dr. Bray, July 8th 1734, which obtained a Number of Books for
each of or three Missionaries at the Forts George, Richmond and Dummer.

"My Lord,
Mr. Coram, who has the Honor to be one of the late Rev. Dr. Bray's
Associates, having informed me of his communicating my Letter to him of
September 1733, and that the Honorable and Reverend Associates had shown that
Regard to it as to order it on their File; and that he had asked for a small
Parcel of Books for the three Missionaries and their Successors, Mr. Stephen
Parker at Richmond Fort, Mr. Ebenezer Hinsdel at Fort-Dummer, and Mr. Joseph
Secomb at St. Georges River, all on the Borders of his Majesty's Province of
the Massachusetts Bay in New England, and that the Honorable Associates had
declared their Will to give some Books as desired, provided a proper
Application were made for them; I am therefore directed by his Excellency
Jonathan Belcher Esquire our Governor, who is ever ready unto every good Work, and
first in the pious Care for the Missions aforesaid, to give your Lordship the
Trouble of this Line, and let the Honorable Gentlemen Associates know in what
need of proper Books the Missionaries aforesaid are, and how acceptable your
Charity and Bounty to them would be to the Commissioners here who have the
Oversight of these Missions.

It is now thirty-eight Years ago, that the Rev. Dr. Bray himself informed me,
at his Chamber in White Hall, that he was projecting his extensive Charity of
Parochial Libraries, when I could little have thought of addressing your
Lordship on this Occasion at such a Distance of Time and Place. The Dr. like a
true Minister of Jesus Christ, went about doing good, and his Works follow him,
his Praise remains in all the Churches. Mr. Colman thought it but grateful and
just to the Memory of that venerable Man of God, Dr. Bray, to inform in our
public Prints such as know it not, that he was the Father of three the most
noble and grand Projections of Piety and Charity that this last Age, or indeed
Ages past have produced; and all three in special Favor of the Protestant
America, the first and second were those of the Society for Propagating the
Gospel in foreign Parts, and of Parochial Libraries for the Ministers in one
Place and another. The third is the late Charter for incorporating a Number of
Gentlemen by the Name of the Trustees for establishing the Colony of Georgia.
This last the Doctor finished with his aged dying Hand, and he could not expire
more gloriously than with this his last and vast Project of Charity for the
useless Poor in England, and distressed Protestants in Europe. It calls to mind
what we read of Solomon, 1 Kings 4.29. And God gave Solomon Wisdom and
Understanding exceeding much, and Largeness of Heart even as the Sand on the
Seashore. -- God grant that the Management of these truly noble Trusts and
good Designs may ever answer the Intention, Hope and Prayers of their excellent
Author.


In particular I would ask by your Lordship's Favor, for each Missionary a
Copy of the Rev. Mr. Smith's most worthy Sermon preached to the Trustees and
Associates Anno 1730, 1, it being wonderfully calculated to instruct and
animate Persons employed in such a Service.

It only remains now to ask your Lordship's Pardon for the Freedom I have
taken, to add my hearty Prayers for the best of Blessings on the Gentlemen
Associates, and to do my self the Honor of subscribing, My Lord,

Your very obedient Humble Servant."


To this Letter the Right Honorable the Earl returned a kind Answer.

Upon his dear and ancient Friend and constant Correspondent, Henry Newman, Esquire
He was Son of the excellent Mr. Samuel Newman, who came over to New England in
the Year 1638, and was Minister of our Reh^both, Author of a most elaborate
Concordance of the Bible in Folio. This being enlarged by some ingenious Men in
England, now goes by the Name of Cambridge Concordance. -- This his worthy Son
went over and settled in England many Years since, and saw cause to conform to
the Established Church. -- But he ever cherished and expressed a warm and
generous Love and Regard for his Country, the Churches and Colleges here, and
sought their Prosperity and flourishing. This appears by Scores of Letters to
Mr. Colman and others. --
informing him of Sir Richard Ellis Baronet, his Intention, to give his great
and noble Library to the Dissenters; He immediately wrote to Sir Richard and
acquainted him of the State of our Colleges and the Churches in these
Provinces, and sent him his Sermon on Mr. Hollis and Mr. Holden's Death's that
he might see the Gratitude of the Government and People here to their
Benefactors. He also wrote at the same Time to Dr. Watts, Dr. Guise, Mr. Neal,
Mr. Bradbury, and other of favor us in that Matter.

Part of his Letter to Sir Richard Ellis follows.
"Honorable Sir,
The Manner of my Address to you, and the Matter of my humble Request, from one
at such a Distance from you, and altogether a Stranger and unknown may well be
not a little surprising to you. I had need therefore introduce my self into
some Knowledge with you, and if it might be Esteem, which I know not how better
to do if the enclosed Sermons will not in some Measure serve to this Eng. --
You will see by them two Things, that is has pleased God to use me in
ministering to my Country, in the great Bounties to Mr. Hollis to our College,
and of Mr. Holden to the poor Members of Christ in our Churches; nor has their
Almoner benefited himself in his temporal Estate at all hereby, nor desired it.
-- You will also see, Sir, that my Country, I mean the Government over it, know
how to acknowledge with due Gratitude and Honor their pious and generous
Benefactors, and also their own Sons that minister to the public Interest of
Learning and Piety.

And now, Sir, providentially hearing Yesterday of Sir Richard Ellis Bart,
formerly a Member of Parliament for Boston in Lincolnshire, that he has a noble
Library which it is thought he will incline to leave to some learned Seminaries
amongst the Dissenters; my Heart commands me to salute you on the Behalf of my
dear Mother, "Harvard College in Cambridge New England, where I had my
Education, and whom I have been honored by God to serve in obtaining for said
Academy the Hollisian Professor of Divinity, and also of natural and
experimental Philosophy, beside sundry annual Exhibitions for the Education of
poor Scholars, with an Addition of many valuable Books to the Library of said
College.

And now, Honored Sir, If I may be permitted by the divine Providence, which
has hitherto smiled on said Seminary of Learning, to close and crown my Life
and Love to it (for I am now within three Years of Seventy) by obtaining your
kind Regards to it whenever it pleases God to incline you to dispose of any
Part of your rich Library, is the whole generous End on my Part of this my
humble and most respectful Address to you; which I cover to my dear Countryman
and once Fellow-Student in said College Henry Newman Esquire Secretary to the
Honorable Society for Propagating Christian Knowledge, with whom I have had
the Pleasure of a free and lasting Friendship these forty-five Years past,
entreating him to wait upon your Honor with it, of whom you may enquire
concerning our College, as also of the Reverend Doctor's, Watts and Guise, and
Mr. Neal of London; who will also wish us a Part in your good Will I persuade
my self how much soever Dr. Williams's Library may reasonably stand fair in
their Eye and your own: Nor would I say a Word to divert your Bounty from that
Foundation.

If my Request finds Favor with you, I hope Sir, you will in granting it serve
the Interest of Christ among the Dissenters for many Generations; for we are a
very flourishing Province, and our Towns and Churches multiply, for which
hitherto our College has been made a rich Supply, as to worthy Persons raised
up in Church and State; which that it may more and more be in Times to come
when we are dead, is the sole Aim of my present Writing; and that I also may
reap with you in the Rewards of a better Life, attending such pious Projections
and Foundations.

Sir, my humble Prayer is that all the Blessings of Providence and Grace may
attend you to your Grave in Peace; and may be multiplied to your Honorable
Lady, for I hear God has denied you Children -- But that God may please to
raise up to you, among our Benefactors, Sons from our College, a spiritual Seed
to serve Christ and Souls, while you reap in the Visions of his Glory among the
Spirits of the Just made perfect, is the Prayers of, etc."

By his Acquaintance with the Rev. Dr. William Harris of London, he had the
Distribution of Five Hundred Pounds Sterling to the worthy Family of the
Buckley's in New England to the equal Benefit and general content of all
concerned -- A Labor which demanded much Time.

From his long, endearing and intimate Friendship and Correspondence with Dr.
Isaac Watts, our Country and Churches have reaped many Advantages. -- I find
him giving timely Notices, of rising Dangers to our Civil and Ecclesiastical
State; and pointing out happy Methods of Safety. He greatly enriched our
Colleges and Schools by his generous Bestowment of many valuable Books. Mr.
Colman at one Time received from him Seventy Pounds Charity chiefly collected
from his Friends (as the Letter says) for the School at Housatonick. The
numerous ingenious and useful Letters, that pass between these two Divines for
a long Course of Years would afford a most grateful Entertainment to all
benevolent and pious Readers. Souls alike formed to please and profit Mankind!

He also held and maintained an agreeable and useful Correspondence with the
Rev. Mr. John Shower, Dr. Edmund Calamy, Dr. John Evans, Dr. Jeremiah Hunt, Dr.
Guise, Mr. Daniel Mayo, and many other Dissenting Divines in London, etc. by
whom he had Informations to the Service of his Country and the Churches.

Dr. Henry Winder of Liverpool (Author of a learned critical and chronological
History) sought his Correspondence and was highly delighted with it for several
Years past.

Twenty two of the Rev. Mr. Daniel Neal's Letters are found in Order (besides
many others) in the Service of the Country and Harvard College, and by the
Contents of them it appears how precious our Civil and religious Interest were
to them; and how much they sought the best Good of New England. -- I also find
Mr. Colman assisting this Gentleman with some useful Materials for his History
of our Country.

Sir William Ashurst -- and Lord Viscount Barrington Shute and other Gentlemen
of Figure and Learning wrote frequently to him, and freely offered to do all
the Services they could for us upon his Motions. They often assure him "that
his Correspondence is perfectly agreeable, and desire him constantly to
communicate his Sentiments to them of such Matters as occur to his Observation."

I find Sir Richard Blackmore taking Notice of him, and his Writings, and
making a Present of some of his Poems to him. I might mention his large
Correspondence with the Honorable Dr. Nicholas Trot, Chief Judge of
South Carolina, respecting a learned Work he was about, entitled Clavis Linguae
Sanctae.

To Governor Nicholson and most of the Governors in the Plantations he wrote
frequently.

Many Letters of greatest Importance passed between him and the Honored Dr.
Avery This Gentleman is Doctor of Laws, and Treasurer of Guy's Hospital
Southwark.
(of late Years) who is at the Head of the Dissenters which have greatly served
these Churches, and our Civil Interests.

Also by his long corresponding with the worthy Mr. Thomas Coram one of the
late Rev. Dr. Bray's Associates (a Gentleman zealous and indefatigable in doing
good on all Occasions) much Benefit has accrued to Mankind.

He held a pleasant and useful Correspondence and Friendship with sundry
eminent Divines of the renowned Church of Scotland, particularly with Mr. R.
Woodrow of Eastwood, Author of the Sufferings of that Church, (vast Numbers of
his Letters are found) and his worthy Son after his Father's Death continued
it, and speaks of the great Advantage he had by it. Mr. Willison of Dundee,
frequently wrote, and of late Mr. Robe of Kilsyth, etc. etc. etc.

Mr. Colman wrote unto and corresponded with diverse Gentlemen Divines of the
Established Church in England (besides those already named) Wrote to the
Reverend and learned Dr. Thomas Burnet, Author of many useful Works, with
Observations on some of them. Wrote to Dr. Henry Maule, Bishop of Cloyne, near
the City of Cork in Ireland, about an Affair of Justice and Charity, to which a
kind Answer was made.

Wrote to Dr. Wilson of London, Son of Bishop Wilson of the Isle of Man, who
answered him once and again with great Complaisance and Affection.

To the Rev. Mr. Samuel Smith of Aldgate Church London, who answered him with
Expressions of his high Esteem for him, and, etc. etc.


.

Among these I may not omit a particular Mention of the Reverend and learned
Mr. Joseph Standen, formerly a Dissenting Minister at Luckington -- but for
many Years past a Minister of the Established Church at Speen near Newbury
Berks.

This Gentleman entered into a sincere and most passionate Friendship with Mr.
Colman soon after his Arrival at London, and no Changes in Opinion or Station
could ever make the least Breach upon it. Their Loves seem to equal those of
David and Jonathan, if we may judge by their Expressions. They omitted no
Opportunity of Writing and sending every curious Piece they could light of to
one another. And as both of them had a good Taste and Gift for Poetry, scarce a
Letter passed without something of that kind enclosed for Amusement. A large
and beautiful Pile is now before me full of fine Sense, true Eloquence and
manly Christianity. -- They communicated the minutest as well as most important
Circumstances of their Families and Affairs, and made each others Griefs and
Joys their own. In the reading them over, I have had great Pleasure and
Improvement. Aristotle's Description of Friendship often occurred to my Mind --
viz. One Soul in two Bodies -- This Gentleman I suppose to be still living in
an advanced Age. After 70 His Letters begins, My dear dear Friend -- My dear
and constant Friend, --
-- He is Author of several Sermons and many ingenious Pieces in Prose and
Verse. One of his early Poems is to be seen before Dr. Watts's Horae Lyricae.
-- He was a most intimate Friend and Acquaintance of Philomela, the
incomparable Mrs. Row, and corresponded with her constantly to her Death. --

Feb. 1735. I find him Writing to the Rev. Samuel Urlsperger Senior in the
Evangelical Ministry, and Pastor to the Church of St. Ann in Augsburgh -- And
to Monsieur Van Breck in Latin, which discover much of his excellent Spirit and
Temper -- His Letter to the former is here inserted with one of that Reverend
Gentleman's in Return.

"Reverendissimo Dom. D. Samueli Urlsperger, in Ministerio Evangelico Seniori,
et Pastori Ecclesiae St. Ann, Augsburg, Literatissimo et Fidelissimo.


Vir vere Reverende!
Eximius noster Gubernator Summus, D. D. Belcher, qui postremo Anno Literis
Vestris pus maximee gaudebat, misit eas Mihi, Seniori Pastori in Urbe hac
frequentissima, et Suo Jussu Honorem habeo tibi Salutem dicere. Heu! quali
Gaudio et Dolor simul afficior, dum Verba Paterna Pastoris vere Evangelici
perlego, et Dispersionem Gregis dilectissimi contemplor! Sint Animis vestris
Consolationes summae Divini PARACLETI, dum Passiones Christi abundant. Vobis
conceditur Supplicatio Beati Pauli pro seipso in Epistola ad Philippenses, Ut
cognoscam Comminicationem "Passionum ejus, dum configuror ejus mortis. Ita
perveniunt Martyrum Exercitus ad Resurrectionem mortuorum.

Amicus Vester et Filius amabilis Dom. de Beck, inter nos Nomen reliquit vere
magnum pro Prudentia, sincera Pietate, et Zelo erga Deum, Fratresque et
Sessores, et Emigrantes. Literae Praefectus nostri accedere Tibi non potuerunt
Manu magis accepta. Eodem Tempore Voluptatem nobis maximam fecit, Notatio
Nominis Tui, et Meriti praesignis. Interim, Tu, Domine, merito existimas
Civitatem nostram et Provinciam admodum felicem sub Regimine Viri Literis et
Religione, Humanitate et Probitate, Candore et Benignitate praecellentis.
Videris loqui de Residentia Excellentiae suae in his nostris Regionibus,
Diplomate Regio -- sed Notum tibi facio, Domine, non sine aliqua Superbia, quod
Natal^ Solum ille possidet, et inter nos liberaliter instructus fuit, et
educatus.

Charissimam habemus, Cantabrigia nostra, et amoenam Academiam, Nomine Collegii
Harvardini gaudentem, quam fecit hucusque Deus almam Matrem et faecumdam on
modo Pastorum fidelium et doctissimorum, sed etiam Gubernatorum et Judicum
Literatorum; inter quos nunc numeramus dignissimum Belcher, qui nobis et
^eregrinis idem est Pater et Amicus; inservire Christo et suis, in Vita publica
et privata, Cupiditate inflammatus. O utinam tales essent Imperatores omnes per
totum Terrarum Orbem, ut placidam et quietam Vitam degerent ubique omnes, omni
cum Pietate et Honestate; unoquoque e Vite sua, et e Ficu sua comedente! Tunc
nullus, ne unus quidem, emigrans e felici Germania videretur in extremis Terrae
quaerens Perfugium. Si vero sit in nostra Potestate inter has Colonias aliquid
contribuere, quo emigrantes vestri charissimi Solamen accipiant, confide,
Domine, Benevolentiae Magistratus et Sacerdotii nostri; quibus Praecepta illa
Evangelica (Gratia Christi) sunt conjuctissima "Fraterna Charitas maneat!
"Hospitii ne sitis immemores! per hoc enim quidam acceperunt Angelos." Memores
estote Vinctorum, tanquam una vincti, et eorum qui affliguntur, tanquam ipsi
quoque sitis in Corpore. Hoc Christo debemus, et plura in Infinitum, qui dixit,
Peregrinus fui, et accepistis me; nudus, et vestivistis "me; infirmus, et
visitastis: Quatenus enim fecistis uni de his Fratribus meis minimis, mihi
fecistis. -- Cord vere paterno, paterna Commiseratione et Amore, Emigrantes
vestros dicis Filios tuos, et tibi dixit Pater Coelistis, Relinque Pupillos
tuos, Ego vivificabo, et "viduae tuae in me sperabunt. -- Ego quoque,
quadraginta Annis elapsis, Captivus fui in Gallia, et Promissum suum sanctum
praestavit Deus incarcere.

Vere dicis, Domine, vere dicis, Dominus Deus est ille, Dominus Deus est ille
-- Et semper idem est in omnibus Locis, Deus Omnipotens, Fidelibus suis qui ei
confidunt. Vehementer optamus perlegere magnalia illa Dei, quorum Volumina
scribere possis -- Transcriptum unius eorum Thesaurus esset Aestimatione
nostra. Nuperrime Deus aperuit Corda Tribus Indorum [Housatonoc] in Finitimis
nostris, accipere Evangelium, et per idem Tempus inspiravit Egregium quendam
adolescentem D. Johannem Sargent, Literis et Pietate insignem, se totum
devovere summo cum Gaudio ad inserviendas Animas Barbarorum istorum, a quibus
jam acceptus est sicut Angelus Dei. In Praesentia Gubernatoris et Senatorum,
praesentibus quoque Indis et Anglorum Congregatione, Die Dominico consecratus
fuit, August: 31 1735. Jamdudum quadraginta baptizavit, Peccata confitentes et
deserentes. Ignari illi et rudes Mutationem in seipsis admirantur, potissimum
quoad Cupidinem Potus et Ebrietatis, quae fuit dilectissima illorum Destruction.
"Vere Opus est Dei, et mirabile in Oculis nostris.

Benedictus sit Amabilis D. de Reck, in Transportatione secunda, et
Salizburgienses tuos charissimos conservet Deus super altum Mare ad Portum
usque Desideratum, et sedem Stabilem et Quietam. Tecum, Domine, semper resideat
Spiritus Sanctus; Gratiis suis et Donis pretiocissimis, per totam Vitam
privatam et publicam, ad "absolvendum cursum tuum cum Gaudio, et Ministerium
quod accepisti a Domino Jesu, ad testificandum Evangelium Gratiae Dei! Nec
unquam obliviscaris, in Precibus vestris ardentissimis, Ecclesiarum
Nov-Anglorum, Excellentiae suae, nostri Gubernatoris, Pastorum denique
humilium, inter quos speciatim numerabis

D. D. Reverentiae vestrae addictissimum Fratrem in Ministerio Christi,
Benjamin Colman."

"Reverendissimo Domino D. Benjamin Colman, Servo Jesu Christi apud
Bostonienses dexterrimo, et S. Theologiae Doctori meritissimo Salutem ex Cruce
Jesu plurimam dicit Samuel Ulsperger.

Ave, Vir Reverendissime in centro Misericordiae divinae, persuasumque habe,
Literas tuas d. 22 Martii Anno elapso ad me exaratas mihi fuisse quam
jucundissimas. Veneror enim Excellentissimum Dn. Belcher, cujus Notitiam
ampliorem mihi dedisti; Veneror tuam, quam mihi demonstrasti Amicitiam; Laetor
eximiis Gratiae divinae Operibus, quae inter vos et vicinos Indos Houssatonnoc
in maximam Jesu Christi Gloriam statuta hucusque sunt, et laetissimam futurorum
maximorum Eventuum Spem faciunt. Nec minori laetitia perfusus fui, dum legebam,
quanto desiderio feraris, ipsemet feratur amplissimus Magistratus, ferantur
etiam Sacerdotes vestri dignissimi ad commoda Salisburgensium Fratrum
promovenda, Eben Ezeranosque illos multa open adjuvandos. Servet vobis Deus
Animum istum benevolentissimum in Ecclesiam Christi vobis concreditam, in
finitimos Paganos ad Fidem Christi adducendos, inque Exules Salisburgenses, et
in me, illorum quasi Patrem, ut quos ob Evangelium Christi in Cord meo gestare
soleo quotidie. Remuneretur vobis largissima Benedictione in coelestibus ea
omnia, quae ex Amore Jesu Christi, inque dulcissimi ejus Nominis Gloriam
suscepistis hactenus, et post hac quoque conaturi estis. Floreat sub Regimine
perillustris Domini Belcheri vestri Res publica crescat tuo Ministerio
Ecclesia, vireat amoenissima Academia vestra, ut ex Collegio Harvardino posthac
quoque prodeant Viri omni Charismatum spendore coruscantes atque ad omne Opus
bonum tum in Politia, tum in Ecclesia atque Schola efficiendum instructissimi.
Pergat Deus, Open sua Reverendo D. Sargent adsistere, ut Indorum Apostolus
factus totam Nationem istam Christo lucrifaciat. Vere enim magnum est, quod de
illis scribebas, quadraginta eorum jam baptisatos esse, non tantum confitentes
peccata sua, sed etiam deserentes. Hoc illi modo non minus ad Salutis a Christo
partae Fruitionem, quam Agnitionem perducuntur. Faveat Deus huic Instituto
saluberrimo! Forsan etiam aliquando Eben Ezerana Ecclesia socias Manus in
convertendis Indis ad Fidem Salvificam praebere poterit, dummodo illa externis
prius Vitae Subsidiis sufficienter instructa fuerit. Vere enim jam lucent
tanquam Stellulae in Tenebris Indorum, non tantum Doctrinae Puritate, quam
Disciplinae et Vitae Integritate, inde est ut been illis cupiam, illosque adeo
hac quoque vice tibi de meliori propter Christum, cujus Nomen digne profitentur
commendem. Quae de Magnalibus Dei inter nos scire desideras, eorum aliquot
peculiari Scriptione, hisce Literis annexa, consignavi. Pergite Viri optimi,
precibus vestris adjuvare Ecclesiam Christi Bohemicam, certe non contemnendis
Ausibus ex Papatu enitentem. Magnos adhuc speramus Regni Christi Successus, tum
inter hos, eorumque Fratres Carinthios, Moravos, Stiri^s, imo et in
Salisburgensium vallibus Superstites; quemadmodum et majori quam superioribus
Seculis nisu atque Fructu Christus Judaeorum Genti cum viva Voce annunciatur
per duos Theologiae studiosos, qui Judaeorum Conversioni totos sese dederunt,
omnesque Regiones peregrare student, tum Scriptis huic operi inservientibus
quae Typis publicata sunt, atque in Judaeorum Manus tradunt, cui Operae
clarissimus Callenbergius, Hallensium Professor egregiae studet, et jam
plurimos Libros Novi Testamenti in Judaeorum Idioma Germanicum conversos
divulgavit; ex quo Tempore non pauci Judaeorum excitati sunt de Adventu Christi
jam facto magis serio quam antea cogitare, et alii revera Christum amplexi
sunt. Ecclesia Patria Wurtembergica, nobis vicina variis antea Procellis satis
jactata, et propediem tantum non extinguenda, mirabili Dei Auxilio faucibus
Papaeis, quae illi inhiabant, praerepta, et pessima quaevis Concilia inopinata
prorsus Principis Morte sufflaminata sunt. Digna profecto Res, quae ad extremos
Mundi Fines in Gloriam Dei personet; qui et hanc gregis sui Partem porro
defendat et servare velit usque ad Consummationem Seculi! Perge, si placet,
Nova Regni Christi inter vos florentis nobis perscribere; pergam et ego
recensere quaenam incrementa Res christiana inter nos capiat. Pergemus invicem
afflictam Jesu Christi Ecclesiam ejusdem Tutelae Regimini et Solatio,
Amplificationi et Conservationi Precibus commendare ardentissimis. Servet vos,
servet nos, tandemque salvet gratiosissime in aeternum ut Meriti pro nobis
praestiti. In hoc vale Vir Reverendissime, valeat, perillustris Dominus
Belcher, valiant quoque Reverendus Dominus Sargent, omnesque Jesum incorrupte
inter vos amantes. Id quod precor

Reverendissimi Nominis Tui Studiosissimus Samuel Urlsperger."
Aug. Vindelicorum d 10. Apr. 1737.

And here it may be as proper as any where in this Narrative to record the
Favor done Mr. Colman by the ancient and learned University of Glasgow, in
conferring on him the highest Academical Honors -- the Degree of Doctor in
Divinity, and sending him a Diploma signed and sealed according to the Customs
of that illustrious Senate, which was delivered to him by his Excellency
Governor Belcher, Nov. 1. 1731. -- It is here inserted for the Sake of some
among our selves.

"Senatus Academiae Glasgoviensis Christiano Lectori Salutem.

Viri admodum Reverendi Benjamini Colman apud Novae Angliae Bostonienses Verbi
Divini Ministri tum morum Sanctimonium et Pietatem vere Christianam, tum
Ingenium, Eruditionem ac Literarum sacrarum Peritiam, adeo nobis compertae
dederunt et probatae gravissimae Laudationes, et nobis commendantium testimonia
fide dignissima, ut dignum omnino censeamus Virum Reverendum quem summis
afficiamus Honoribus Academicis.

Dictum propteria Virum Reverendum Benjaminum Colman Doctorali in Sacro Sancta
Theologia Dignitate ornandum decrevimus: Eumque Theologiae Doctorem creavimus,
declaravimus, et renunciavimus: et ^is eum Literis Doctorem Theologiae creamus,
declaramus, et renunciamus: Eumque cuncta Privilegia et jura Theologiae
Doctoribus usquam Gentium concessa vel concedi solita concedimus nos et
tribuimus Lubentissime.

In quorum fidem Literas hasce majore Academiae nostrae Sigillo munitas Dabamus
Glasguae, 28 Maij. MDCCXXXI."

This Character and Dignity (which his eminent Endowments and Services had long
merited) he ever studied and endeavored to act up unto and adorn; and was
happily assisted so to answer its Obligations, as neither to be envied, or
despised by any.

Here follows the humble Record he makes of it; and the Letters it occasioned
him to write.

Boston, Nov. 10. 1731.

On the first Instant, His Excellency Governor Belcher delivered me a Diploma
from the University of Glasgow, asked by the Honorable and Reverend Society
for the propagating Christian Knowledge, at Edinburgh; upon the Receipt whereof
I wrote the following Letters,

"Boston. Nov. Angl. Nov. 2. 1731.

Doctissimo et Reverendissimo Senatui Academiae Glasguensis.

Cum illustri Universitati vestrae placuit, Me prorsus indignum unanimi
suffragio Doctorem in S. S. Theologia constituisse et renunciasse, sicut ex
Diplomate heri accepto constat, grata mea Agnitio pro tanto Honor et Favore
humilime se praebet.

Fateor me, Divina Providentia et Patientia, Ministrum et Pastorem inauguratum
fuisse apud Bostonienses, natali Oppido, per Annos triginta duos; et quatuor
novissimos Natu maximum: Et inde necessario in me venit Nimium Cura Ecclesiarum
hujus florentissimae Provinciae. Statio heu quanta! Animo tam debili et infirmo.

Attamen praeter Officia Curae Pastoralis, evocavit me Divina Benignitas ad
Ministeria singularia in Commodum et Emolumentum Academiae nostrae, charissimae
meae Matris, Collegii Harvardini. Nec ingrati fuerunt Senatus Collegii, et
Academiae Curatores, quum Annis sex jam elapsis in Cathedram Praesidis me
eligerunt. Et nune, quamobrem nescio, Academia Glasguensis, multo magis nobilis
et insignis, sponte reddit Honores adaequales iis, quos consia mente diu
recusavi.

Certe Academia nostra humilis non sibi arrogat Potestatem conferendi Gradum
Doctoralem, vel Theologiae, vel Medicinae, vel Juris Civilis. Dignitates igitur
hujusce Generis sunt apud nos majoris Pretii, quum ex Longinquo, nec quaesitae,
libere transmittuntur.

Medium, seu Via vestrae Communicationis, mihi et Fratri meo charissimo D. D.
Sewallo, Existimatione nostra Accessio est Honoribus transmis;sis; s^il,
Nominatio honoratissimae et Reverendissimae Societatis Scoticanae. ad
propagandum Cognitionem Christi Ejusque Evangelii, sub sigillo Regali
delegatae; Una et Literae Commendatitiae Excellentissimi Dom. nostri
Gubernatoris Belcher; Cujus Pietas erga Deum et Integritas coram Hominibus,
aeque ac Praecellentia in omni liberali Doctrina et politissima Art, sellam
Curulem apud nos abunde promereant et adornant.

Debemus igitur existimare nos ipsos magis magisque devinctos, alacriter et
toto Pectore Operam dare (Deo adjuvante) in Ministerio Evangelii, et in
Missione illa speciatim ad Indos Aborigines in his Regionibus dispersos; quorum
Illuminatio in Doctrina Christi salvifica, et Conversio a Tenebris ad Lucem, et
a Potestate Satanae ad Deum, est Supplicatio et Cura Venerandae Societatis, et
Depositum (Grande quidem) nobis Concreditum.

Per multos Annos jamdudum ministravi, Delegatione sodalitii Honoratissimi
Londinensis, Indis convertis in his Regionibus; quorum nonnulli regulariter in
Ecclesias colliguntur sub Indis Pastoribus; Caeteri colunt Deum in Nomine
Christi Conventibus multo minoribus: Omnes sub Cura Inspectione et Doctrina
Pastorum Anglicorum vicinalium: Et etiam usque ad Senectutem et Canitiem, Deus
ne deferas me! ut libenter progrediar omni studio persequi pia Proposita a
Scotia jam nobis mandata; longius extender ^otitiam et verum Cultum Unici Dei,
et Domini nostri Salvatoris, Ethnicis Orientalibus finitimis.

Adjuvate nos Precibus vestris, Reverendi Fratres; Patri Luminum et
Misericordiae; et libenter solvetis nullus dubito: quod Inflatu Spiritus
Sancti, Animosius et Eventu prospero ministrare possimus, ad Incrementum Regni
Jesu Christi in his nuperrime sedibus Tenebrarum.

Deus O. M. diu conservet et benedicat felici vestrae Universitati, et
dilectissimis Ecclesiis Scotiae; et semper adsit Ministris suis fidelibus, et
Missionariis in omni Terra, usque ad Extremitates Orbis.

Valete Viri Doctissimi et Reverendissimi. Sum Vestrum Observantissimus et
Addictissimus, Benjamin Colman."

"To the very Reverend and Honorable the Vice Chancellor and Principal of the
University of Glasgow.
The Enclosed waits upon your illustrious Senate, to acknowledge the the
unmerited Honor they have done me, in the Diploma lately received from them.
As Providence has sat me here in the Place of the late Rev. and learned Dr.
Cotton Mather, the senior Pastor of this City; so you have been pleased to
grace me with like Favors, which you first honored him with. It will be mine
and my Brother Sewall's Ambition, to tread in the Steps of so worthy a
Predecessor, and by our Services to the Interest of Religion and Learning, to
render our selves worthy of the Regards you have shown us.

Nor will it be a small Service, I judge, to the Churches of this flourishing
City and Province, if your renowned University please from Age to Age to select
and dignify an eminent Pastor or two with your highest academical Honors; That
in Character and Style they may appear equal to the assuming Gentlemen of the
Episcopal Profession who are growing on us, while in Labors and Humility as
well as Learning I trust they will not be content to be merely Equal.

As our very trading Town is like through all Times to keep a constant
Correspondence with Glasgow in the Way of Commerce, so if it be agreeable to
any or your learned Body to honor us with the like, in Re Literaria et
Sacro-Sancta, we shall esteem it a great Favor.

If I fail, Sir, in the Direction or Style proper to the Principal of your
illustrious Academy, I shall be obliged by your candid Correction.

Please to let the Hon. and Rev. Society at Edinburgh know our Sense of the
super-added Obligation they have laid us under, by asking these Honors for us,
to be their diligent and faithful Servants, in promoting the Missions committed
to us, for the propagating christian Knowledge in our Borders: Although we
should not at all have needed any such Incitement to so good a Service. The
Love of Christ and Souls (I hope) constrains us hereto.

I have heretofore by the Hand of my Rev. correspending Friend and Brother, Mr.
Woodrow of Eastwood, asked a Place for some of my poor Writings in your
Library; Wherein I own I have presumed to do my self too much Honor; But since
it has pleased the University to inrol me now among her Sons, I shall not
repent of it, but only ask the Prayers and Blessing of your Rev. Body, and your
Leave always to subscribe my self among,

Sir, your most obliged, grateful and obedient Servants, Benjamin Colman.
Boston, Nov. 5. 1731.

I take Leave to cover a Copy of some of my last Writings to each of the
learned Gentlemen, who have honored me with their Names to the Diploma."

"To the Honorable and Reverend Society for the Propagating christian
Knowledge, at Edinburgh.
Honorable and Reverend,
Your Letter dated April 29, which accompanied your Commission to his
Excellency our Governor, constituting a Number of worthy Gentlemen here your
Commissioners and corresponding Members, to assist in your truly pious and
noble Design (by the Will of God) to propagate Religion among the Salvages
bordering on the Provinces of New England, lays me under a particular
Obligation to make this separate Answer and grateful Acknowledgment of the
Honor which the illustrious Society have been pleased to do me in their naming
me to the most Reverend and Learned Senate of the Academy at Glasgow, who have
sent me their Diploma, creating me Doctor of Divinity. Some Letters are found
in the Doctor's Study which show that before this Motion was made he was upon
the List for the next Pre^erment -- Dr. Calamy and others in London thought him
actually doctorated and Congratulate him upon it.


How unworthy soever I must hold my self of this Style and Character, yet am I
the more obliged to pursue with all my Power the truly pious and christian
Intention of the honorable Society; to which the should have found me equally
inclined and ready without the Motive of so distinguishing a Respect.

The Recommendation of so excellent a Person as our present Governor Belcher,
who merits the Chair over us by his Humanity, Politeness and Literature, but
much more by his Virtue, Integrity and Piety, adds not a little to the Honor
done us.

I have been many Years past Ministering to the Natives here, by Commission from
the honorable Indian Corporation at London; And still shall gladly go on in
old Age to minister by the Will of God under this new Commission to us from
Scotland; Whose Church Order, Worship and Discipline is glorious in our Eyes;
for the more extensive Propagation of Religion in our Eastern or Western
Borders, among the Aborigines, Strangers or Enemies to our Faith and Worship.

Our chosen Secretary and Treasurer, Anthony Stoddard, Esquire will inform the Hon.
and Rev. Society of our first Meeting, the Reading of your Commission to us,
and that some of us are appointed to look out for suitable Persons to serve in
the three chosen Stations for the proposed Mission, to whom I refer. Help us,
most Rev. Brethren, with your Prayers, while you excite us by your Favors. And
may the special Presence of God ever attend your Counsels, and his Blessing all
your Endeavors; as well as all his Ministers and Missionaries at Home and
Abroad.

I am, Reverend and Honorable, your obliged obedient humble Servant, Benjamin
Colman."
Boston, Nov. 6. 1731.

For a Close of this Chapter I shall hint at, and remark upon Dr. Colman's
Character for Publick-Spiritedness, Fidelity, Liberality and Charity.

By the foregoing Pages it appears that the Doctor had a large and generous
Soul, and made his Life as significant to the World, and to his won Nation and
Country in particular as he possibly could. He might perhaps with as Apostle
for his Motto, Romans xiv. 7. None of us lives to himself.

In every Stage of Life there are some notable Discoveries of his acting
agreeable to it -- He could say with the Stoics, Agenerous Action is a Reward
to it self. Through all his costly and painful (to him pleasant and delightful)
Correspondence with Mr. Holden and Messirs. Hollis's etc. etc. etc. he never
asked any Thing for himself. And when he was offered and pressed to accept of a
Set of valuable Books by Mr. Thomas Hollis, he refused taking them on any other
Condition than their going to the College at his Death, where he ordered them
by his Will. Therefore in the Dedication of his Twenty Sacramental Sermons he
could say, "I had no private Interest in View. Nor have I ever had any private
or oblique Respect to my self in the long Course of Letters that have passed
between us for more than sever Years past. -- I appeal to you, Sir, if I have
not acted toward you and my Country a sincere, open and disinterested Part."

"He was singularly Faithful in the numerous Trusts reposed in him. Although
there was a large Liberty sometimes given him to dispose of many Hundred Pounds
in Books and Moneys (as he saw Cause) yet he endeavored with the exactest Care
and most diligent Study to find out the Mind of the Donor from his general
Directions: And ever kept and sent a particular Account of every Farthing
distributed (to what Use, etc.) to his Employers: He was anxiously fearful,
least any Moneys in his keeping should at his Death be thought his own, and
therefore not only told his Friends from Time to Time what he had, but also
wrote upon it, and gave special Orders about it in his Will.

I shall add no more here -- As the Doctor devised liberal Things, and warmly
and prudently provoked others to Love and good Works; so according to his
Ability and sometimes beyond it ^e freely gave of his own proper Goods. Early
Instances of his Charity and Generosity in some of the first Chapters of this
Narrative.
When Subscriptions for pious and charitable Uses were set on Foot among us,
his Name is generally seen among the first Subscribers. The Poor repaired to
him as their Father with a filial Confidence in their Wants. He was also
singularly liberal and generous in rewarding such as he employed in any Affairs
whatsoever.

CHAP. VIII. His Manner of Studying -- Writing Sermons and Letters -- His
Diligence, Application and Dispatch -- Character of some of his Writings -- His
Manner of Preaching, Praying -- Thoughts on Psalmody -- Reading the Scriptures,
-- Using the Lord's Prayer -- Catechizing -- Visiting -- Letters of
Consolation, etc. --
AFTER having observed and given so many Instances of the Doctor's catholic
Charity, disinterested Generosity, and inviolable Fidelity in the many
important Trusts reposed in him (in the preceding Chapters) I come now to
delineate some other Parts of his Character, which also distinguished him; and
for which he was justly admired, as an extraordinary Person among us.

Reading, and close Application of Mind to Study was early, and ever his
Delight -- He read much, and digested well the various Authors he perused; and
often collected from them what was curious and useful, as appears by many
Sheets left, and numerous Quotations in his Sermons. He had a good Library, not
large, but wisely collected of the best Authors ancient and modern. -- He
retained considerable of his School-Learning to the last -- I find him to have
read over Horace in his Old Age, by his Collections of some of the most
beautiful Lines and Sentiments from it.


In his younger Times he was a Night-Student, by which his Health was greatly
impaired, and he experienced the Truth of that Saying in Erasmus, 'Nocturnae
Lucubrationes long periculosissimae habentur. In his latter Years he plied his
Studies chiefly in the Forenoon, and ordinarily spent the whole of it in them.
And he has been heard to say on the Verge of Seventy, "That he found himself
best in Health and Spirit, at his Table with a Book or Pen in his Hand. -- All
must be hushed and still when he was there employed either in Reading, writing
Letters or composing Sermons -- He wrote many Hundred Epistles in a Year --
(Nulla Dies sine Epistolis) to all Ranks of Persons; on all Occasions and
Businesses, and with greatest Ease imaginable, to the vast Pleasure and Profit
of his Friends, the Benefit of his Country and the Churches in it; and the Good
of Mankind. -- His Letters to his Correspondents abroad being seen and admired,
created him new Friends and were a happy Means of raising up new Benefactors to
these Provinces (as appears from what has been already written) -- I need not
therefore here observe to my Readers, how good a Master he was of the
Epistolary Style -- The Letters already inserted and others to be published in
our Narrative shall speak for themselves. And yet as I observed in my
Introduction, all or the most of them are printed off from the first rough
Draught.


When he was about making a Sermon, after he had first looked up to Heaven for
Assistance, he chose a Text, and consulted the best Expositors upon it
(particularly the Rev. Mr. Matthew Henry, for whose Writings he seems to have
had the greatest Value next to the sacred Scriptures) and drew the Scheme of it
on loose Papers, and noted down not only general Heads and Subdivisions, but
also some of the leading Thoughts and brightest Quotations from Authors (around
him) with many Passages of Scripture for Proof and Illustration. -- Thus
prepared he proceeded to write his Sermon on a Sheet of Paper neatly folded and
stitched, which he sometimes finished with a Celerity and Exactness incredible.
I have known him begin and complete a Discourse that would last an Hour at one
Sitting in a Forenoon. One of his Twenty Sacramental Sermons in Print.
Few Interlines or Emendations were afterward inserted or needed. And yet he
saw Cause to destroy many of his Sermons. On one and another of them he has
wrote -- The first three or five Sermons on this Text, are burnt.


Many of the Sermons he wrote and delivered at Bath in England forty-eight
Years ago, are yet to be seen in his Study (all fair and clean) some of them in
a Volume in the Bulk and Form of a Preaching Bible, and others in distinct
Sheets. How pleasant a Sight if it were only for the Orthography of them! These
elaborate Sermons are wrote in a fine Character fairer than Print; but so small
that only young Eyes can read them -- The Doctor would sometimes show them to
Candidates for the Ministry, and warn them to write their Notes in a larger
Hand.
Besides vast Numbers since made and delivered to his People here; many of
which he took Pains to prepare for the Press.

Some of the Discourses he has favored the World with were printed from the
first rough draught His excellent Sermon preached at a Fast before the Choice
of Mr. William Cooper is one of them.
and not a few have been honored with diverse Impressions. Scil. His Discourses
on the Parable of the Ten Virgins -- On the Incomprehensibleness of God -- With
many single Sermons.


And here although (as we hinted in the Introduction) I am every way unfit to
give the Doctor and his Writings their just Praises yet I will venture to say a
few Things more of him and them.

As a Preacher he was emulous to excel, and second to none among the bright
Sons of New England either living or deceased. He always brought Light and Heat
into the Pulpit with him, to improve the Minds and affect the Hearts of his
Hearers, and appeared to be in his proper Element there. His exact and
exquisite Judgment as well as his lively Fancy and Imagination were employed in
every Discourse. -- The choicest Matter presented in elegant Language and
flowing Eloquence.

His Wisdom and Ingenuity was seen in the Choice and Variety of the Subjects
handled by him: He gave every Truth and Duty in the wide Circle of Divinity its
proper Place and Inculcation. He was particularly noted and commended for a
nice and careful Observation of the Face of divine Providence, toward the
World in general, and toward our Nation and Land, and for improving every
Merciful, Afflictive and judicial Dispensation, for the Benefit of his Hearers
in his public Discourses as well as private Conversation -- The special Cases
and Circumstances of his own Flock and Friends were in a very singular Manner
regarded as appears by many Sermons in print and Manuscripts left by him About
Twenty-four Funeral Sermons were published by him. He never preached Politics
but when he saw his Country in Danger and Distress -- as is said of his Friend
Bp. Kennet.


But above all JESUS CHRIST and the Covenant of Salvation through him was his
grand and favorite Subject, and most usual Topic, as appears from his Notes
and his repeated Declarations to the World.

"He preached Jesus Christ in his Person, Natures, Offices, Benefits; Christ in
his eternal Godhead, in the Covenant of Redemption and Grace; in the Promises,
Prophecies and Types of him; In his Birth, Life, Doctrines, Laws, Miracles,
Sufferings and Death; In his Resurrection, Ascension to, and Session at the
Right Hand of God, his Intercession and second coming to judge the World; In
short the Covenant of Salvation through him: And every Doctrine and Law of
natural Religion with a direct Reference unto him as revealed and enjoined by
him, as performed only by his Grace, and acceptable only for his Sake, who is
the End of the Law for Righteousness, and as enforced upon us by his Promises
and Threatenings; that he in all may be glorified, and the Grace of God through
him. -- So it is noted in the Life of Mr. Philip Henry, that whenever he
preached "of moral Duties, he would always bring Christ into his Sermon, his
Life as the Pattern of the Duty, his Love as the grand Motive to it, his Merits
as the great Atonement for our Defects in it. This primitive and apostolic
Preaching was the Manner of Dr. Colman's preaching the Gospel of the Grace of
God.

Accordingly he has declared once and again, See his Sermon, entitled, -- The
Grace given us in the preached Gospel. --
This "has been the Favorite Subject in the Course of my Studies for the
Pulpit, I have ever determined to know Jesus Christ and him crucified." "My
Speech and Preaching among you has been an Exhibition of the Glories of
redeeming Grace and Mercy, from the Beginning of the Bible to the End thereof.
See the Dedication to his Twenty Sacramental Sermon -- Also his Sermon at the
Ordination of Mr. Samuel Cooper, etc. etc.
And I doubt not but he was often favored with most ravishing Views of his
Savior's Glory, while he was composing and preaching on these Heads.

The Doctor had a most beautiful Way of introducing large Paragraphs of
Scripture to enrich his Discourses; and was singularly famous for the frequent
apposite Use he made of the historical Parts of the Bible whereby he
surprisingly embellished them, and threw new Light on almost every Subject he
handled. He sought to find acceptable Words, or Words of Delight, as the Margin
reads it, Eccl. 12.10.
He often made Use of Scripture, not for Proof and Illustration only, but for
the Sake of the inspired Language. See the Preface to his Parable of the Ten
Virgins printed in, London, 1707. There is one Liberty so natural to me, that I
never "steer clear of it, which is the a^^^^ing to Passages and Expressions of
Scripture, the which an unwary Reader may mistake me to intend for Proof or
direct Explication, and so think th^^ impertinent, as then indeed they would be.


And as the Matter of his Sermons were weighty, and the Language and Style
grand and polite; so the Manner of his Delivery, added Beauty and Force to
them, which was grave yet lively, with a Voice sweet and harmonious, and an
Action singularly delightful and inimitable. His Countenance taught, and his
Face shone as with a divine Ray on it like Moses reflecting on the Assembly,
and constraining Attention, Reverence and Affection. The eloquent Orator, is a
just Stroke in his Character. He evidently and eminently answered that Part of
the Description of the Prophet Ezekiel, And lo, thou art unto them as a very
lovely Song, of one that has a pleasant Voice, and can play well on an
Instrument. Ezekiel. xxxiii. 32.
And I doubt not but many while hanging on his Lips have thought of that
amiable Description of Christ's prophetic Office given us in the Canticle,
"His Mouth is most sweet." Cant. i. 16.
But although in general his Voice might be said to be soft and still, and that
his Speech and Doctrine dropped as the Dew, and distilled as the small Rain upon
the tender Herb, 1 Kings xix. 12. De^. xxxii. 2.
yet when occasions for it occurred he could notably imitate a Boanerges, and
play the Artillery of Heaven against the hardy Sons of Vice, and uncover the
dreadful Pit. -- With what Light, and Flame, and Power have we sometimes known
him dispense the Word, and by the Terrors of the Lord persuade Men in the
Applications of his Discourse? Vid. Sermon to Pirates from Heb. x. 3^. and from
Job x. 22. the Parable etc. etc.
Yet he was ever careful to observe a just Decorum and Behavior, and spoke as
became the Oracles of God. Chrysostom excellently observes, That the Prophets
of God and Satan, were differenced by this notoriously, that they which gave
Oracles by the Motion of the Devil, did it with much Impatience and confusion,
with a kind of Fury and Madness; but they which gave Oracles from God by divi^^
Inspiration gave them with all Mildness and Temper: If it be the Cause of God
which we handle, then let us handle it like the Prophets of God, with Quietness
and Moderation, and not with the Violence of Passion, as if we were possessed
rather than inspired. HALE'S Golden Remains. Page 64. So it is said of the
Soothsayers of old that they delivered their Speeches,

Non Vultus, non color unus, non comptae mansere Comae,
Sed Pectus Anhelum, et rabie Corda tument etc.
I find his worthy Colleague in a Sermon preached the Sabbath after his
Funeral, taking a proper Notice of his agreeable Manner of Preaching in these
Words, "How solid and elegant, how judicious and persuasive, how scriptural and
pungent were his Sermons? and yet how distant his Manner from the b^isterous
and violent. -- He never delivered a Sermon but we saw how perfectly he
understood the Decorum of the Pulpit; and the Gravity and Sweetness at once
expressed in his Countenance, the Music of his Voice, the Propriety of his
Accent, and the Decency of his Gesture showed him one of the most graceful
Speakers of the Age."

He was indeed our New England Chrysostom on many Accounts.

The following Lines of Dr. Watts in his Elegy on the Rev. Mr. Thomas Gouge are
also borrowed to make up for the Defects in our Description.

-- While from his Tongue
A Stream of Harmony ran soft along.
And every Ear drank in the flowing Good:
Softly it ran its Silver Way,
'Till warm Devotion raised the Current strong,
Then fervid Zeal on the sweet Deluge rode,
Life, Love and Glory, Grace and Joy,
Divinely rolled promiscuous on the Torrent Flood
And bore our raptured Sense, and Thoughts and Souls to God.



I shall now add the Character of some of the Doctor's Publications which the
World has been blessed withal [a complete Catalogue of which will be annexed to
this Narrative] from some very good Judges -- These have been all along justly
admired and valued by Persons of Taste for the Vein of fine Sense, Language and
that Seriousness of Spirit that runs through them. They are mostly occasional,
and printed at the Desire of the Hearers.

On some of his early Works a Reverend and learned Person in England writes to
him, --

"Sir, I am sorry so many of your Works are cast away upon France. I wish
however they were translated into their Language, and dispersed among the
People. Such a Vein of Sense and Piety, such a smooth and yet strong Torrent of
divine Eloquence must certainly (by God's Assistance) carry all before it, and
find a Way into the most hardened Souls. -- I am not afraid to say, that I think
the Sermons of America may be a Pattern for the politest, the most nervous, and
affectionate Preachers of Europe." The Doctor had then only printed about seven
Sermons besides his large Volume on the Parable of the Ten Virgins.


The Reverend and venerable Solomon Stoddard of our Northampton, upon reading
the Discourses on the Parable writes thus to the Author, "If such Books will
not work on the Consciences of Men I know not what will, the Hopes of your
living to do Service when I am Dead is a Comfort to me. 1709." Dr. Watts and
other eminent Ministers in England upon receiving and reading his Treatises and
Sermons in their Letters often observe with Pleasure "the Variety of useful and
beautiful Thoughts, just Sentiments and fine Address in them. --

I find by a Letter from an eminent Person "that a Lady of Quality of the
greatest Wit in the Nation (but of the High Church) upon reading his Sermon on
the Death of Governor Dudley was so pleased with it as to say "She should be
for ever hereafter in Love with the short Cloak."

But it would be endless (as it is needless) to record the Encomiums and
Panegyricks of worthy Persons at Home and Abroad on this Head; I shall only
offer the Reader two more which are printed, -- scil.

The great and learned Mr. Pemberton in his Preface to the Doctor's Sermons on
the Incomprehensibleness of God, published in the Year 1715 says, "in these
Discourses we have the sublime Subject of God's Incomprehensibleness treated
with a becoming Modesty and Reverence, with an agreeable Life, Judgment and
Perspicuity. The Character of the Reverend Author and his Performance are too
bright to receive any Luster from my Recommendation.

However, I must be allowed to rejoice in, and to bless the great Head of the
Church for, those uncommon Gifts his Servant is endowed with; which appear
observably in these Discourses. -- And sure I am it is not Partiality to a
Friend, but Justice to the Merit of the Performance, which compels me to
believe, that every impartial, judicious Reader will esteem these Meditations,
every Way fitted to entertain, and improve the Understanding of the most
Intelligent; and to quicken the Devotion of the most devout Christian."

The other is from diverse eminent Ministers of London, in their Preface to his
Twenty Sacramental Sermons.

"These Discourses are excellently suited to the Taste of serious Christians,
and to the special Purposes they were designed to serve. The Reader will find
some of the most spiritual and evangelical Subjects, treated with a Vein of
good Sense, and true Piety; sacred Truth agreeably represented, animated with a
truly Christian Spirit, and every where, made subservient to practical
Godliness, the great Design of the Gospel-Revelation.

The worthy Author needs not any Commendation from others, to whom a long
Course of eminent Services to Church and State, in his own Country, and the
highest Honors and Respects paid him there, are the truest Praise. We think
our Reverend Brother has been so remarkably circumstanced as to be in different
Parts of his Life, the youngest and eldest Pastor in the Town of Boston; and by
his own Labors and his Interest in others, has perhaps been an Instrument in
the Hand of God of as great Service to Religion and Learning, to the Church,
and the College, as any Man of his Time. His Wisdom and Moderation, his Zeal
and Integrity, in his whole Conduct, so amiable and illustrious in a degenerate
Age, must needs render him dear to all the sincere Friends of both.

-- We recommend this Volume of his Sermons, as well as his excellent Discourse
on the Parable of the Virgins, long since printed at London, to the serious
Perusal of the Christian Reader, and to the divine Blessing.

Signed, Edm. Calamy, Jer. Hunt, I. Watts, W. Harris, Dan. Neal, John Evans.

To proceed on this Head of the Doctor's Pulpit Performance. -- When he was the
People's Mouth to God in Prayer, his Adorations, Confession, Supplications,
Thanksgivings and Intercessions were profoundly reverend, solemn, copious and
pathetick -- On new and grand Occasions when he had Time, and took Pains to
meditate and prepare himself, his Ideas and Expressions were sublime -- He
soared on high and led those that joined (with Hearts melted and filled with
Devotion) even to the Seat and Throne of God, as far as Example, and the Power
of Words could do it. -- Sometimes we have known him on the most sudden Calls,
occasioned by extraordinary Providence, so animated and elevated with the
Spirit of Devotion, as to exceed himself and his most studied Addresses. And
although in his ordinary Course he confined himself to a form of Words as
little as most of his Brethren, yet he ever had an high Value for Helps
Particularly Mr. Matthew Henry's Method for Prayer and Dr. Isaac Watt's Guide
to Prayer. --
to Devotion, which he ever strongly recommended to younger Ministers, as well
as private Christians; and his Spirit was moved with a just Disdain and
Indignation upon hearing them so much preached against and vilified by some
warm Itinerants in the late Times.

As he looked on the whole Canon of Scripture, and particularly the Psalms the
best Common Prayer Book for the Church of God, so for the most part he kept to
inspired Language in his Devotions. -- In short, he prayed with the Spirit and
with the Understanding also, and with the greatest Fervor and Earnestness of
his own Spirit -- what Life what Ardour did he discover? how lavish of his
Strength and animal Spirits? more especially in his Prayers at the
Administration of the Sacraments of the New Testament, he did spend and was
spent even to Faintness. To use some of the Words of his dear Colleague in the
forecited Manuscript Sermon, "How often have we heard him when "it seeemed to
us as if his Active Spirit would have pierced through "his trembling Body,
which was scarce able to sustain the Vehemence with which he spoke and the warm
Engagement of his devout Soul. -- We were sometimes ready to think, that with
the Gospel of Christ, he would have imparted to us his own Soul, and actually
have expired himself, while he was preaching to us the Word of Life.


As singing of Psalms is a Part of the public Worship which the Doctor highly
delighted in, and was greatly concerned to have performed to Edification, it
may not seem improper to give our Readers the Result of his Thot's about the
Introduction of some other Version of the Psalms and select Portions of
Scripture in the Room of that which has been so long in Use among us; and which
he laid before his People sometime in the Year 1738. He apprehended this
heavenly Exercise might be carried on with more Understanding and Spirit, and
with better Melody of Voice and Heart by making an Alteration and Change of our
Version (though he was far from despising it and speaking reproachfully of it
as some have) -- provided it could be done with Peace, and a general Agreement.
--

He wrote thus, 1. My Opinion is, That in the Book of Psalms, and in several
other Parts of holy Scripture, there is full Provision made for the Collection
of a Body of Psalmody, for the Use of the Churches through all Ages in the
public and private Worship of God. 2. That more especially and eminently the
Book of Psalms, though not singly and alone, nor yet equally in every Part of
it, is prepared and given by the Holy Ghost, as this Fund of Devotion for the
Use of the Church. 3. That therefore a Collection ought to be made with the
best Care and Judgment, of such Parts of the Book of Psalms, with other
Portions of the Old and New Testament, for the Use of particular Churches and
Congregations. 4. That in the Versions made in one Language and another through
the Christian World there ought not to be affected a keeping to the Letter of
the original Languages; but the true Sense, Scope, Spirit and Life of the
Portions chosen, ought to be given in the proper poetic Style and Diction of
the Language and Age wherein the Version is made: the Gravity and Majesty of
the sacred Subject and Exercise being duly attended to and preserved. 5. That
the best Collections of this Nature, that our Age and Nation have seen, or I
think are like to see, may be easily made from Dr. Watts his Imitation of the
Psalms of David, in the Language of the New Testament, and from his Book of
Hymns. His Poetry is grave and solemn, full of Light and Heat, and the
Evangelical Turn he gives in many Places is wonderfully adapted, in my Opinion,
for the Service of Souls. I cannot but think it to be the Intention of the
Spirit in leaving us these inspired Psalms, that we should make some such Use
of them, and accordingly it is the Practice of the Christian Church universal
(a very few Instances excepted) to select a Portion here or there from Time to
Time. 6. That therefore it be recommended to the Church and Congregation that
such a Collection be made and laid before them when prepared for their
Approbation and Acceptance, and thereupon to be printed, and the Congregation
being therewith supplied, thenceforth used in the public Worship of God among
us. 7. That particular Care be taken not to make the Collection too large, or
the Book too bulky and dear for the poorer Families or Persons, and that out of
the public Stock a competent Number of Books be provided for the Supply of
such as are not able to furnish themselves. 8. That with respect unto such
Psalm as Dr. Watts has adapted only to a Tune which our Congregation cannot
sing, either we resolve upon learning and bringing into Use among us said Tune,
or that a new Metr^ of such Psalms, or part of them, be attempted as near as we
can turn them to his Style and Manner. 9. That where he has omitted whole
Psalms, like Provision be made, for I judge it best for us to have the whole
Book of Psalms in its Order as we now have it.and


Enclosed in the above Proposal (which was not complied with) the Doctor has
set down on a Paper a Number of select Hymns from Dr. Watts, which if added to
our Psalm Book might possibly answer his pious Design and be much for
Edification, viz.

Hymn 1 -- 3 last Verses Hymn 2 -- Ver. 1, 4, 5, 7 Hymn 7 -- 5 first Verses
Hymn 10 -- the ^hole of it Hymn 12 -- Hymn 14 -- Hymn 16 -- Hymn 17 -- Hymn 18
-- Hymn 19 -- Ver. 1, 2, 3, 4 Hymn 28 -- Hymn 45 -- Ver. 1, 2, 7, 8 Hymn 52 --
Hymn 56 -- 1, 2, 3, 4 Hymn 57 -- Hymn 58 -- 4, 5, 6, Hymn 59 -- Hymn 61 -- Hymn
62 -- Hymn 63 -- Hymn 64 -- Hymn 66 -- V. 6, 7, 8, Hymn 67 -- Hymn 68 -- Hymn
69 -- Hymn 70 -- Hymn 71 -- Hymn 72 -- Hymn 73 -- Hymn 74 -- Hymn 75 -- Hymn 76
-- Hymn 77 -- Hymn 78 -- Hymn 101 -- Hymn 106 -- Hymn 113 -- Hymn 116 -- Hymn
121 --
Book 3d Lord-Supper.
Hymn 1 -- 3 and 7 Hymn 2 -- 3, 6 Hymn 6 -- 1, 4 Hymn 11 -- 1, 2, 3, 7 Hymn 14
-- 1, 2, 3, 5 Hymn 17 -- 1, 2, 3, 8 Hymn 19 -- Hymn 23 -- 2, 3, 4 Hymn 24 --
Hymn 25 -- Hymn 26 -- Common Meter Hymn 42 -- Long Meter
It is recorded in the 42 Page of our Narrative that the Gentlemen who invited
Dr. Colman's Return to New England proposed to him in their Letter "That the
Holy Scriptures might be read every i. e. in Course and without Exposition, as
being plain and clear (a Lamp and Light) to the meanest in all Matters of
Salvation Detestabilis est in Deum contumelia, quod Papistae scripturam
obscuram esse et ambiguum infimulant Quorsum enim loquutus est Deus, nisi
liquida invictaque in ejus Verbis so proferret Veritas. CALVIN. Yet People in
some Places still object against it as introducing something new in the Worship
of God. I knew a Minister who proposed this Matter to the Consideration of his
Church some Years ago, and had so many Objections brought by them thereupon
that he was obliged to spend two long Sermons in Order to obviate them, and
after all could not prevail. --
Sabbath in the public Worship of God among them, which was not practiced in
other Churches (in the Town) at that Day. -- He readily concurred with their
Proposal, and practiced accordingly to his Death. -- For he ever looked upon
this Public Reading as but a due Reverence and Honor done to them, and a
suitable Acknowledgment made to the glorious Author Jehovah, who in infinite
Mercy has given his Word to us, and by which he will judge the World at the
great Day. -- His Custom was to begin the Religious Exercises of God's House
with a short Prayer for a Blessing on that Portion of the Word that was then to
be read to the Congregation -- And herein he humbly apprehended he followed the
Footsteps of the Flock. -- He found both the Jewish and Christian Churches in
their best and purest Times paying such a Regard to it, -- The Reverend
Assembly of Divines at Westminster advising to it -- Our New England Confession
of Faith (in Chapter 22d Sect. 5. which treats of religious Worship and the
Sabbath Day) according with them -- the Words are scil: "The Reading of the
Scripture, Preaching and Hearing the Word of God, singing of Psalms, and also
the Administration of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper are all Parts of the
religious Worship of God, to be performed in Obedience unto God with
Understanding, Faith, Reverence, and godly Fear. But what weighed infinitely
more with him than all such Authorities was "That he plainly discerned
sufficient Grounds for the Practice in the sacred Oracles. He doubtless
considered such Scripture-Passages as the following, and I wish the Reader
would turn to them, see Deuteronomy. xxxi. 11. Deuteronomy. xxx. 11 -- 14. Josh. viii. 35. 2 Chronicles. xxxiv. 29. N^h. viii. 2, 3. Psalm. cxix. 105. Prove. vi. 23. Luke iv. 16.
Acts xiii. 14. 2 Cor. iv. 3. Col. iv. 16. 1 Thessalonians. v. 7. 1 Timothy iv. 13. 2 Timothy
iii. 15. 2 Pet. i. 19. Rev. i. 3.
--

And he had soon the Pleasure of hearing the Testimonies and Thanks of many for
the Benefit and Advantage they received by it. -- And of some too who came at
first with strange Prejudices against it. He lived to see this laudable Custom
prevail in and spread through many Churches of the Land; and so the Reproaches
we had long lain under for this Omission in some Measure taken away. So long
ago as in ^726 Dr. Cotton Mather in his Rati^ Disciplinae, etc. P. 67, informs,
"That this Practice obtains in many Churches among us, and that no Offense is
taken at it." -- Would to God it might universally obtain throughout the
Christian Church!


Yet I would by no means be thought to represent the Doctor as censuring his
Brethren that did not see with his Eyes, but were for having some Exposition
accompanying the Word publicly read; for he has been often heard to say "That
if the Scripture were but read in our Assemblies, either with or without an
Exposition the Institution and Ordinance of God was in a good Measure answered
-- And therefore although he vastly preferred the Method above mentioned; yet
he readily complied with the Customs of Neighbour-Churches, when he
occasionally ministered unto them. -- One Instance of his Condescension, and
becoming all Things to all Men for their spiritual Edification may be here
told. -- Upon the Old Meeting House (so called) in Boston, being consumed by
Fire in the Year 1711, about one half of the Congregation that used to meet in
it attended his Ministry for many Months; in which Time after he had read his
Chapter as usual, he made short expository Notes upon it to gratify his new
Hearers. He was then reading in Course the Prophecy of the Prophet ^^chariah.
--


Another Thing which the Doctor and his People approved of was the Use of the
Lord's-Prayer, i. e. all the Words of it together as it stands in the
New Testament, in the Close of his first short Prayer before reading the
Scriptures -- a Custom which many took Offense at in the Beginning, although
the Lawfulness of it was denied by none.

As the Doctor was entirely of Mr. Philip Henry's Mind about it, I cannot
represent his Sentiments, better than in those Words in the 110th Page of the
Life of that excellent Man of God -- Which were sometimes quoted by him, viz.
"He looked upon the Lord's-Prayer, to be "not only a Directory or Pattern for
Prayer, but (according to the Advice of the Assembly of Divines) proper to be
used as a Form, and accordingly he often used it both in Public and in his
Family. And as he thought it was an Error on the one Hand, to lay so much
Stress upon it as some do, who think no solemn Prayer accepted, nor any solemn
Ordinance or Administration of Worship complete without it, and so repeat it
five or six Times, and perhaps oftener at one Meeting; so he thought it an Error
on the other Hand not to use it at all; since it is a Prayer, a compendious and
comprehensive Prayer, and may be of Use to us, at least as other Scripture
Prayers, but he thought it a much greater Error, to be angry at those who do
use it, to judge and censure them, and for no other Reason to conceive
Prejudices against them and their Ministry.

A great Strait (says he) poor Ministers are in, when some will not hear them,
if they do not use the Lord's Prayer, and others will not hear them if they do;
what is to be done in this Case? We must walk according to the Light we have,
and approve our selves to God, either in using or not using it, and wait for
the Day when God will mend the Matter; which I hope he will do in his own due
Time."

He was constant (in his Turn) in catechizing the Children of his Congregation,
and speaking to them concerning their Souls from their early Days, putting them
in Mind of their Baptism, and the holy Bonds they are under thereby to be the
Lord's, and in this Way to bring them on to an early Recognition of these
Bonds, if it might please God to impress their tender Hearts betimes. -- At
these Exercises he used his singular Gift of insinuating and inculcating the
Truths and Duties of Christianity by putting Questions and laying hold on the
Children's Answers, and giving such Advices and Warnings as he thought needful.

As soon as they were grown up to Years of Discretion, he urged upon them the
public Renewal of their Baptismal Covenant -- When any of them entered into the
Marriage-State, he failed not to visit and counsel them on this Head; and it
has been thought by some that he exceeded in his Compulsions to fill the House
and Table of the Lord.

It must be owned, the Doctor was for a freer Admission to the Lord's Supper
than some of his Brethren, but far, very far from approving general Admissions,
or even of thinking that all that is necessary thereunto, is a Competency of
Knowledge, and Orderliness of Conversation. I find some of his Thoughts on this
Head, in a private Letter to a Friend, "I think more is necessary both in Foro
Ecclesiae et Conscientiae; before Man there should be a credible Profession of
Repentance and Faith, with serious Purposes and Promises by the Grace of God of
New Obedience: To all which the Person should have the Answer of a good
Conscience, his Heart not condemning him -- So in the Beginning of the Gospel
they came confessing their Sins, sorrowing for them, and promising to forsake
them -- I very much question whether there would be nigh so much Holiness in
our Churches, were our Admissions to be general as there now is. The Table of
the Lord should, and does indeed lie open to all, the People are earnestly
invited to it, as well as exhorted to prepare for it, no Inquisition is or
should be set up over their Consciences, though they are admonished to look to
their Sincerity before God, and the best Signs of that are laid before them,
for their Assistance; only the Scandalous are restrained from coming: Others
are encouraged, if they can but profess in private to their Pastors a serious
Thoughtfulness and Concern for their Souls, and a better Life, and a Resolution
by the Grace of God for a Life of Obedience to God in secret and in public. --
As to public Relations in the Churches of Experiences it is an human
Invention." Yet I would observe, the Doctor was a great Friend to Confessions
of Faith, and the Publication of them too on special Occasions, but then he
would always have Men at Liberty to draught their own, and not be obliged to
subscribe the Words of others.

The Doctor as became a vigilant Overseer made frequent Visits to the several
Families of his Charge, not only common and civil to cultivate Friendship and
Good Will, but proper Pastoral Ones to enquire into and know their State and
Circumstances in Order to treat them agreably, wisely and faithfully, and that
he might the better adapt his public Exercises, and give to every one their
Portion in due Season.

He made Conscience of visiting the Poor as well as the Rich (especially in
their Afflictions) instructing, advising, admonishing and comforting as he saw
Occasion: And this he did Night and Day as long as his Strength lasted, and
oftentimes to the no small Hazard of his Health and Life.

And when he gave Visits to any of his Congregation or received Visits from
them (or other his Friends) he generally and generously bestowed Books of Piety
on them, either his own Sermons, or the Publications of others. -- When he was
called to minister to the Souls of the Poor at their own Dwellings, he
ordinarily enquired of their bodily Wants, which were soon supplied either by
himself, or charitable Friends to whom he instantly applied on their Behalf.

His Prayers over sick and dying Ones, were not only very affectionate and
fervent, but also most instructive and edifying -- By a Train of excellent
Thoughts he led them into the Knowledge of Sin and Duty, of God and Christ, and
from Earth to Heaven. Some of the Members (I might say Ministers) of the Church
of England have declared themselves more raised and edified by them than by all
the devout and pious Forms of their own Church.


When he could not conveniently visit his People or other his Friends in
distant Places, he sent his Thoughts to them in Writing, suited to the various
Providence he heard they were under -- A few Alas, that so few are found; for
he seldom kept Copies of his familiar Letters. A large and valuable Collection
of them might be obtained if sought for, equally entertaining with those that
follow.
of the Copies which are found, and which are found, and which exhibit the
bright Image of his Mind, the Reader shall be entertained withal after I have
just added a Word or two (for a Close to this Chapter) on his gentlemanly
Carriage and Behavior, and other Homiletical Virtues which adorned him, and
were so conspicuous to all he conversed with. -- He was a good Master of
Address, and carried all the Politeness of a Court about him. -- And as he
treated Mankind of various Degrees and Ranks with a Civility, Courtesy,
Affability, Complaisance and Candor scarce to be equalled. So all but the Base
and Mean showed him an high Degree of Respect and Reverence, Love and
Affection. -- Particularly Men of Figure and Parts of our own Nation and
Foreigners, whom he failed not to visit upon their coming among us, greatly
valued and admired him.

It has been said (perhaps not without some seeming Grounds for it) that he
sometimes went too far in complemental Strains both in Word and Writing -- but
if he did, I am persuaded such Flights took their Rise rather from an
Exuberance or Excrescence (if the Phrase be allowable) of the beforementioned
homiletical Virtues, and a too high Complacency in the appearing Excellencies
of others, than from faulty Insincerity and designed Flattery in the Time of
it. -- As he took a sincere Pleasure in the Gifts of others, and had a natural
Proneness to think favorably of all Men, and construed every Thing in the most
candid Sense, it is not much to be wondered at if he sometimes exceeded in his
Expressions. -- And it is to be lamented that some have swollen with Pride, and
made an ill Use of the Doctor's high Esteem and good Opinion of them.

Letters of Consolation.

"To Madam S -- of N -- L --.
Madam,
With what Pain I take my Pen in Hand, in Obedience to Mrs. C -- Desire, to
inform you (if you have not already heard) of the bitter Cup which God has
given her to drink in Mr. C -- Death; you will easily believe from that
unfeigned Pleasure with which I lately wrote to you on her Recovery.

So it pleases the holy and wise God to mix his Dispensations to us, and call
us to sing of Mercy and Judgment. It has put the Town into Mourning, and the
general Sorrow shows how greatly and universally Mr. C -- was esteemed in it.

But your Part is very great in the Bereavement, to whom he was a wise and good
Son, and high in your Esteem and Love. Dear Mrs. C -- is one of the greatest
and most gracious Mourners you ever saw. It remembers me of past Sorrows, and
where and of whom she learned; under the great Favor of Providence to her, and
the Teachings of God's Holy Spirit.

And you will be able now, I trust to comfort her, with those Comforts with
which you have your self been comforted of God. Any may those Comforts now and
always abide with you, and ever abound and increase in you; with which God has
relieved your Soul in Times of Trouble. -- The divine Comforter will never
depart from you, I am persuaded, but lead you on in the Path of Life to the
Fullness of Joys above. -- May you enjoy his peculiar Presence with you under
the present Providence.

But I remember where you are, in whose Arms, and under whose Ministry, and how
little you can need my poor Sympathy. -- His Honor will be able to minister
more than all the World besides, to your Support; and the more for his own
great Part in your Affliction.

May you long live together the Heirs of the Grace of Life, under the Favors
and Changes of Providence.

So prays, Madam, Your most obedient, and humble Servant, B. C --."
Boston, Aug. 28. 1721.

"To Madam G -- on the Death of her Husband.
Madam,
Since I have not the Opportunity of seeing you in your great Sorrows, I take
Leave this Way to express my deep Sympathy with you in them.

It must needs be a very extraordinary Distress you have been under, and still
are, in the Death of an Husband, who was one of the loveliest and best of Men;
and the uncommon Circumstances you have been under in his Sickness, and still
are in since his Decease; denied the Presence and Assistance of your Friends
and Conveniences of your own House, looks very desolate to us, and doubtless
feels so to you.

But I trust you have the gracious Presence of a good God with you, who is
all-sufficient and abundantly able to support and comfort you. If you seek to
him, and trust in him, though you are desolate you shall not be forsaken. I am
not alone, said our Savior, when he bare our Sorrows and carried our Griefs,
for the Father is with me. -- If God be with you, and you keep with him,
humbling your Soul before him, and crying to him for Grace to help you in this
Time of Need; you will not need the poor Help your Friends might minister to
you. O may he take you near to himself, into a happy Communion with him, in
this dark Hour, and give you Light in the comforting Sense of his Peace and
pardoning Mercy, and your Interest in his Love through Christ.

The Town is put into Mourning with you. No Man was more universally esteemed
and loved than Mr. G -- was, and very deservedly; and no one has died among us
more lamented. If it might ease you to have many share with you in your
Bereavement, your Burden would be lightened.

The Will of God is done; and we are taught to say and pray, Father in Heaven,
thy Will be done. -- God made him all that he was to you and his Friends; and
what he gave he has taken away; and we must fall down and worship him, and
bless his Name.

It is rare to find a Man so knowing and humble, wise and modest, meek and
good, grave and pleasant, upright and faithful, pious and devout: But let us
think of all those Things that were lovely in him, every Virtue and every
Praise, and desire to live such ourselves, the few Days that remain unto us
here on Earth, and to follow him to a better Life.

No Wonder he died in Peace and Calm, who ever lived in it, from the ruling
Principles, not of Philosophy only, but of pure Religion. His silent, even,
steady Walk with God, is much to be emulated and imitated. I only wish your
Soul may be formed more and more, by what you have seen of his, and so your
Manner of Life; and that the like Peace of God, which ruled and kept his Heart,
may keep yours through Jesus Christ. -- Let your Grief too be now moderated
and governed by the Rules of Christianity, as you may think he would mourn,
were he in your Case; and may his Death quicken you so in living to God, and
getting ready for your own; that you may have an happy Meeting again, and an
endless Life of Love and Joy, in the Presence of Christ, and in the Glory of
his Holiness.

I am, Madam, Your affectionate Friend and Servant, B. C."


"To Madam H -- upon the Death of C -- W --
Madam,
Permit me under so singular an Exercise of the divine Providence, to express
my deep Sympathy in your Affliction, and to endeavor with a friendly Freedom
and Tenderness, your Comfort and Direction. -- I know how much Prudence and
Constancy, Wisdom and Grace you need under so uncommon a Trial. -- Your Soul is
too great and just I know, to count it any Indecency to be seen to mourn; you
owe this Honor to the Dead, this Justice to your self. -- Yet I know too, how
much more retired and hidden, your Grief will be, than if it had been delayed
by Providence, until after the Consummation of your Espousals -- Let me
therefore advise you, of the Danger of Grief when too much suppressed, and of
the Advantage you have of Mother and Sister with you, to whom you may freely
give Vent to your Thoughts, and who are able and ready to mourn with, and
comfort you. -- But above all; let your Care be to bear and improve aright they
very melancholy Dispensation of Providence. Do not suffer any rising or hard
Thought of the blessed God, nor any Distrust of his Care and Tenderness for you.

You must not only adore God as righteous and holy; but also believe him most
wise and good in all his Dealing: And if you fear and love him, choose him and
his holy Ways, and desire to commend your self to his Favor and Grace, you may
be sure that he is gracious and faithful, tender and kind to you in all that he
allots for you -- O that you could now leave and commit your self to his Care,
believing that he care for you, with a full Acquiescence and Rest of Soul in
his holy Will; and while you resign to his Sovereignty, renew your Trust also
in this Mercy, consecrate your self to his Service and Glory, and leave it to
his Wisdom and Faithfulness to choose your Inheritance for you -- your State and
Condition of Life. O seek for your Soul, an Espousal to Christ, as a chaste
Virgin; submit to his Proposals of Grace, his Tender of himself to you in an
everlasting Covenant: Seek the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, for your
Comfort and Support, the Spirit of Prayer and Communion with God therein, will
make up abundantly for any worldly Loss; God knows how to turn these into our
best Gains; our Afflictions sanctified are in the End among our choicest
Mercies. -- God grant you therefore this Mercy, to be Matter of everlasting
Praise and Thanksgiving from you in the Conclusion.

So prays your assured Friend, and humble Servant, B. C."


To Urania On the Death of her first and only Child.
WHY mourns my beauteous Friend, bereft?
Her Savior and her Heaven are left:
Her lovely Babe is there at Rest,
In Jesus' Arms embraced and blessed.
Would you, Urania, wish it down
From yon bright Throne, and shining Crown?
To your cold Arms, and empty Breast,
Could Heaven indulge you the Request;
Your Bosom's neither warm nor fair,
Compared with Abraham's: leave it there.
He, the famed Father of the Just,
Beheld himself but Earth and Dust,
Before the Will of God most High,
And bid his Darling Isaac die.
When Heaven required in Sacrifice
The dear Desire of his Eyes;
And more to prove his Love commands
The Offering from the Father's Hands;
See how the illustrious Parent yields,
And seeks Moriah's mournful Fields.
He bound his lovely only Child
For Death; his Soul serene and mild:
He reached his Hand, and grasped the Knife,
To give up the devoted Life.
Less Heaven demands of thee, my Friend;
And less thy Faith shall recommend.
All it requires, is to resign,
To Heaven's own Act, and make it thine
By Silence under Discipline.
The least we to our Maker owe!
The least, Urania, you did vow!
When over your Babe his glorious Name
Was called in awful Baptism! The^
You gave it back to Heaven again.
You freely owned that happy Hour,
Heaven's Right, Propriety and Power,
The Loan at Pleasure to resume,
And call the pretty Stranger Home.
A Witness likewise at its Birth
I stood, that Hour of Joy and Mirth:
I saw your thankful Praises rise,
And flow from pleased, uplifted Eyes:
With raised Devotion, one Accord,
We gave the Infant to its Lord.
And think, Urania, 'ere that Day,
While the fair Fruit in secret lay,
Unseen, yet loved within the Womb,
(Which also might have been its Tomb)
How often, before it blessed your Sight,
In secret Prayers with great Delight,
You did recognize Heaven's Right.
Now stand to these blessed Acts, my Friend:
Stand firmly by them to the End:
Now you are tried, repeat the Act;
Too just, too glorious to retract.
Think, dear Urania, how for thee,
God gave his only Son to be,
An Offering on the cursed Tree.
Think, how the Son of God on Earth;
(The spotless Virgins blessed Birth)
Our lovely Babes took up, and blessed;
And them high Heirs of Heaven confessed!
Think, how the Blessed of Women stood,
While impious Hands, to the cursed Wood
Nailed down her only Son and God!
Learn hence, Urania, to be dumb!
Learn thou the Praise that may become
Thy lighter Grief; which Heaven does please
To take such wondrous Ways to ease.
Adore the God, who from thee takes,
No more than what he gives and makes:
And means in tenderest Love, the Rod
To serve to thy eternal Good.
Another to Urania, etc.
ATTEND, ye mournful Parents, while
I sing, a Mother in Israel;
The famed, the gracious Shunamite,
Whose beauteous Story would invite
A Saint to yield her only one,
Almost without a Tear or Groan.
A wondrous Son she did embrace,
Heaven's signal Work, and special Grace;
Nor long embraced, but on her Knees
Arrested by a fierce Disease,
Scarce could he cry, My Head, My Head!
Ever the dear Parent saw him dead:
She laid him breathless on the Bed.
Deep was her Anguish, yet her Peace
She held, and went to God for Ease.
No Signs of Grief distort her Face,
Nor cloud its wonted Beams of Grace.
No Moans, no Shrieks, no piercing Cries;
No wringed Hands, or flowing Eyes
Distressed the House in that Surprise.
She hastes her to the Man of God,
Hastes to the Place of his Abode:
Mildly denies the Cause to tell
To her dear Spouse; all would be well
She trusts: So did her Faith excel.
Elisha, with a tender Fear,
Saw his illustrious Friend draw near:
'Twas not one of the Holy Days
Sacred to public Prayer and Praise;
Why then the Shunamite from Home?
On what great Errand was she come?
Her Speed bespoke some weighty Care,
Which generous Friendship longed to share.
It struck him, something had befell
The Husband, Child, -- All was not well --
Go, run Gehazi, said the Seer,
Enquire, with Earnestness sincere;
"Say, generous Host, if all be well? --
"All Is well; my Lord! she said, and fell
At her great Intercessor's Feet:
There vents her Grief in Accents sweet,
Mild in her Anguish, in her Plaints discreet.
Such dear Urania, you to me!
O might I be but such to thee!
Mind, gracious Friend, the Word she said,
All well, and yet the Child was dead.
What God ordains is well and best.
Well it is with ours, when gone to Rest.
It Is well with us, who stay behind,
If more from Earth and Sense refined,
W' are patient, pray'rful, meek, resigned.
On receiving a Letter from a Person of Distinction, wherein a Mourning-Book
was enclosed, the Doctor writes on the Backside of it these Words,

Received late in the Evening, put my Sermon in Order for the Sabbath in the
Morning; and before Noon returned the Answer following, to his E -- y.

Sir, Will your E -- y prolong your Grief forever? And at the End of Years call
us still to mourn on with you? And can you think any one but your J -- n will
keep Pace and Length with you? -- How much do you honor some of us to think we
can and will? How kind and righteous the Supposal of this sacred constant
Friendship and Duty in us. --

THE generous Thought awakes my youthful Fire,
Cold as I am, and stiff, I take my Lyre;
My Fingers tremble on the sounding Strings,
Tremors my Voice returns; and gravely sings.
So faithful Abram mourned his beauteous Dead,
Tender and princely all the Tears he shed;
Afflicted Princes at his Levee meet,
The Saint and Consort in his Sorrows greet,
And bow together at his reverend Feet.
Courtly the Mourning, nor have Princes known,
Bmdash;h -- r a generous Grief more like thy own.
Like Faith with godly Reverence did we see,
Thou Son of weeping Abraham rule in thee,
And like thy Son did princely Joseph prove,
The Truth and Ardors of a filial Love,
When Israel ceased his Blessing, welcomed Death,
Stretched his cold Feet, and joyful gave his Breath;
Down on the closing Lips, the Hero fell,
And bid his Tears and burning Kisses tell,
A Love and Grief too big for Words to speak
And vent a bursting Heart, which else would break.
Happy the Patriarchs in their princely Son,
The Youth by Grace eternal Glories won.
A sovereign Providence sat him near the Throne.
But there is a heavenly Throne within the Sky,
Jacob and Joseph triumph there on high,
Eternal reign! The Crown of Piety!
B -- h -- r, we pray, thou and thy Sons may meet
Where the most Pious, finds the highest Seat,
We call it Abram's Bosom; at his Knees,
All Israel's Seed, the shining Patriarch sees.
Accept Sir, with all the Candor of your proved Love, this feeble Effort of an
aged Friend, firm from my Youth I loved you; joyed to see your rising Honors!
may they lasting be, be everlasting! Such thy growing Joys to everlasting! When
all Tears shall cease, and Death shall be no more. Yours, etc.

"To His E -- y W -- S --.
Most honored, excellent and dear Sir,
The Tears of the Town are flowing with those of your E -- y and your House,
under your present Bereavement; and so would those of the whole Land had they
the Opportunity of knowing so much of the Beauties of the Deceased, and of your
House as some of us who live nearer to your Door, and theirs, have. -- In
particular, I am so near a Neighbor to your lovely Dead, now lying by the Wall
that strikes my Eye; and have been at Times so much an Admirer of the Beauties
of her Mind, Form and Manner; that I must be very insensible indeed, and my
professed, dutiful Affection to your E -- y on the Account of your tender,
faithful paternal Care of us all, might justly be called in Question; if I did
not share your Grief; and bear you upon my Heart, as becomes my Character, to
the God of all Grace and Mercy, that his sovereign Hand may be religiously
submitted to by your E -- y and your House, and sanctified by you in the Sight
of all his People.

O may the divine Supports, and all the Consolations of God be given in
abundantly to Madam, your happy Consort; happy in your E -- y as you in her,
and happy in her lovely Offspring; whom, God adorn and spare long to us, with
every conspicuous Virtue and Praise, whereof she has given them so teaching an
Example; and not to them only, but to the Town: That while your daily Cares of
the Public threaten to wear you out before your Time (I speak it without
Flattery, for the Court and Town cannot but see it) their Times may be for
ever, in a shining Succession of virtuous and pious Families.

But the grand Lesson, Sir, that we have to learn from such Breaches upon our
Families, is to live mindful of the Day of our own Dying, and giving up our
Account, that it may be with a Joy beyond that of the Day of our Birth, a
blessed Birth Day into a glorious Immortality. -- And O that the Dignity which
the God of Heaven has allotted you -- may be but an happy Presage to you, and
a Means of a superior Degree of Glory and Blessedness to your self and yours,
in the coming eternal World. -- May your Lot then be among the Righteous, who
shall shine as the Brightness of the Firmament, and as the Stars for ever and
ever. -- O may the Sable and the Purple concur in the Production of this
glorious Event to you.

I presume to cover to you another Copy on the Death of Mr. Holden, which you
once read with Pleasure, and let your Eye and Heart six, Sir, on that excellent
Line of his on the Death of his Daughter, "I have now one less Attachment to
Earth, one more Argument for Heaven.

If your Lady also will cast her Eye on the Silence of Aaron, and the wise Word
of David, "I shall go to my Child," I venture to cover it to her Daughter. --
So, entreating your kind Interpretation of my dutiful Zeal for your E -- y's
Comfort, and the strengthening your Hands in God, I remain,

Sir, your most dutiful, and obedient, humble Servant, B. C."
Feb. 18. 1745.

"To Thomas Burnet, Esquire in London.
Sir,
It having pleased God to spare me to be the eldest Minister in Boston, I think
it but a decent Thing in me, however unknown to you, and unworthy of the Honor
I presume to do my self; to condole with you on the Death of your dear Brother,
our late excellent Governor. Your most reverend Father was the Man whom I have
honored and reverenced from my Youth above any one of our own Times,
whomsoever. It was therefore a great Pleasure to me, when I heard his Son was
appointed by the King to be our Governor. The Fame of his Learning and
Moderation raised our Expectations very high. But the unhappy Controversy about
the Twenty-third Instruction deprived us of the Happiness we had promised our
selves in him. -- I heartily wish that the next Governor may not insist on his
Instructions, to the Length that Governor Burnet did. It hurt his generous Soul
to live in such a Wrangle and Opposition, and his great Heart felt what it
would not own. O might he have condescended a little to have made himself and
us easy in a Point or two! What might he not have had from us, and we found in
him! He thought he could have bowed or broken us with his Resolution, but found
it not to be done. The same Men that once ran the Risque of our Charter (to me
invaluable) were ready as we see, to run it again. What the Court will do with
us, the next Session of the Parliament, I know not. Might I hope to prevail
with the late Governor's Friends, I would supplicate them not to appear
against our Charter. I have no Right, Sir, to ask this Favor from you, neither
know I your Interest or Resentments, yet I cannot forbear laying before you my
Prayers and Fears. It may look vain in me, it may be, to say, how much I
honored and loved your Brother, and wished the best of Blessings on his
Children; I wish the same to all the Posterity of the admirable Man, your
Father. The few that know me, know it. The enclosed Account of your Brother's
Death, done at the Request of Mr. Secretary, will testify it. You will suffer
me therefore to condole with you, and subscribe my self,

Sir, your very humble, and obedient Servant, B. C."
Sept. 25. 1729.

Boston, Sept. 8. 1729.

The Town was exceedingly surprised this Morning, with the sad News of the
Death of his Excellency our Governor, WILLIAM BURNETT, Esquire

He had been very ill all the Week past, but on Friday the Symptoms grew
threatening; after which he very little recovered any Use of his Understanding.

He expired about eleven of the Clock, the Lord's Day Night; a teaching and
monitory Instance to us of the Vanity of human Life and Greatness. For it is
but a few Months since he was received here with all possible Demonstrations of
public Joy; in the Meridian of Life, and in his full Strength; and now we are
suddenly called to attend him with public and solemn Mourning to his Grave.

He was the eldest Son of the late right reverend and learned GILBERT BERNETT,
Lord Bishop of Sarum; among the Divines, States Men, and Patriots of the last
Age, a most shining Character. In Body, he was very much the Image of his noble
Father, and in Soul, he was Heir of his Learning, Justice and Moderation.

He was born at the Hague in Holland, in March preceding the Revolution 1688,
and named William, after the illustrious PRINCE OF ORANGE, who condescended to
stand his God Father.

The great Part which his Father had in the Accession of that PRINCE to the
British Throne, and afterward in the Succession of the illustrious House of
Hanover, was rewarded to this worthy Son by King GEORGE the First, who named
him Governor of New York and Jersies; and by his present MAJESTY, who appointed
him over the Provinces of the Massachusetts Bay and New Hampshire.

It was pleasant to see a Gentleman in the Chair over us, who was allowed by
all to be chief for Knowledge and Learning, for bright and quick Parts, for
Discerning and Judgment, for true Eloquence, both in speaking and writing, with
the greatest Facility; for a noble Generosity and Largeness of Heart, for
hating Covetousness and disdaining a Bribe, for Temperance, and for Humanity,
Courtesy and Affability.

At the same Time his invincible Constancy and Resolution, in what he judged
due to the KING'S Instruction and his own Honor, surmounted all Regards to his
own private Interest and Gain.

He has left three Children, two Sons and a Daughter; for whom we can wish
nothing better, than that they may all inherit the Powers of their Father, the
Virtues of their Grandfather, and the high Favor of a gracious GOD and King.

His Library, which was his chief Delight and Pride, is one of the noblest and
richest Collections that America has seen.

We are very happy in the Presence of the Honorable WILLIAM DUMMER, Esquire our
Lieut. Governor; to resume the Chair which he so lately resigned to Governor
BURNETT; in whose wise and just Administration we have been already happy, and
from whom we are sure of all the Good that is within the Compass of his Power."

A Letter to a pious and Ingenious Gentlewoman under Affliction. -- Madam G --
of C -- This Letter was printed after the Death of the Gentlewoman in the Year
1736. --

"Madam,
I was visiting my good Neighbor, Mrs. A -- n in her Mourning, when your
friendly, most christian and consolatory Letter to her was just come to Hand,
and so I became a Sharer in the Consolation in my Mourning, which is not yet
put off, and in the Pleasure which every one must have that reads what you
write. There is no School, I see like that of Affliction for the brightning as
well as sanctifying our Powers, and it is the Way of Heaven to sublimate Souls
by passing them often through the Fire. Leaving therefore the happy Buildings
for Science and Religion on the Left of your humbler Roof, give me leave to
come to you for true Learning and Instruction.

You have been taught of God in a course of long fiery Trial, which yet has
been but his fatherly Chastisement, and under the kind Constraint of his Love
and Grace have willingly learnt of him how to endure and improve Afflictions.
And why has God taught you, but that you should teach others? or why has he
comforted you in all your Tribulations, but that you may comfort them that are
in Trouble, by the Comfort wherewith you are comforted of God? -- You certainly
do well not to neglect the Gift you have received by the Hand of God laid on
you, which no other laying on of Hands could give. Are we not bound, if God has
made us spiritually rich, to distribute of his Treasures to the Souls of our
dear Friends, and his Children in their Necessities? Freely you have received,
and you freely give. So God has enriched you to all Bountifulness, and given
you an Heart and Hand, in a singular and eminent Way to disperse abroad; -- and
your Righteousness endures for ever. God multiply your Seed sown, and increase
these Fruits of your Righteousness, which are abundant also by many
Thanksgivings to God; and by their Prayers for you who love and honor you for
the exceeding Grace of God in you.

"After ye were illuminated, says the Apostle to the Hebrews, ye endured a
great Fight of Afflictions. O what a Mercy is it to have first a Principle of
heavenly Grace and Wisdom rooted in our Hearts, before we are exercised with
sore Afflictions, and of long Continuance! How is such a Soul honored of God
and called forth like another Job or Paul, in their Weakness and in the
Infirmity of their Flesh to display the Power of the Grace of God, before the
Eyes of admiring Angels and Saints, and to the Confusion of the Enemy and
Avenger! "Have thou considered by Servant Job that there is none like him in
all the Earth? Go smite his Body as thou will, and see if it be not thus. --
And why was the thorn stuck deep into St. Paul's Flesh, but for the same
Reason? And therefore it was not removed at his Prayer, but he received that
Answer from the Lord "My Grace is sufficient for you for my Strength is made
perfect in Weakness. Well might he glory in his Infirmities, when the Power of
Christ thus rested on him, and that it might do so more and more; For when we
are Weak then are we Strong, and even Women out of Weakness are made stronger
than Men, when God pleases.

"If ye endure Chastning, God deals with you as with Sons. See Madam, the
clear Evidence of your Adoption in Christ, in your Conformity to Him, the
Captain of your Salvation, made perfect through Sufferings; God helps you to
endure his Chastnings with a filial Spirit: And it is a certain Proof of a
Father's Heart in God toward you, that he has given you the Heart of a Child
toward him. So God dealt with his own Son, and so with what Child he pleases,
and most delights in. He helps them to endure with Faith and Love which is in
Christ Jesus; such as was in him when he prayed, " Father not as I will, but as
thou will: And such as he required of us when we pray, " Father, thy Will be
done. -- Our Duty and Felicity are put together in three short, " Rejoicing in
Hope, patient in Tribulation, continuing instant in Prayer. This Frame and
Exercise of Soul, is the Earnest of the heavenly Inheritance. As Jesus having
gone through his Life of Sorrows, and those of his Death approaching, lift up
his Eyes to Heaven, and said, "Father, the Hour is come, Glorify thy Son, that
thy Son also may glorify thee.

I am persuaded, Madam, that as God has glorified his Grace in you in the past
Hours of your great Pains, so he will again, and more and more help you to
glorify him, unto the finishing your Course with Joy. "He is able to make all
Grace to abound to you, and to give you an Alsufficiency in all Things; even to
strengthen you with Might, by his Spirit, in your inward Man, unto all Patience
and Long-suffering with Joyfulness. O what a Promise is that! which who can
take the Height or Length of! but he is faithful who has said it, and able to
perform it in you. You have found him both able and ready, when you have been
pressed out of Measure, above Strength. You do well to communicate to your dear
afflicted Friends, your own blessed Experiences, for their Direction and
Consolation. You have more Understanding than all your Teachers; for none
teaches like God, and there is no Learning like that by Experiment: And may
your Consolations abound with your Sufferings, while you are afflicted for the
Consolation and Salvation of others!

My dear Spouse is often speaking of you, and always with the highest Esteem --
Pray for us, who have lately had the Sorrow of burying a dear Child, that bore
some Image and faint Ray of that shining Grace, and those superior Gifts which
irradiate You, and scatter all your Darknesses. -- May Grace, Mercy and Peace
be multiplied to you, and to him who is your other own Soul, from God the
Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.

I am, Madam, Your very humble Servant, B. C."
Boston Aug. 2. 1735.

Another Letter to Madam G -- of C --.
"Madam,
Your charming Letter of the 16th Instant, full of Grace and Gratitude, gave me
such Delight, and I persuade my self will give the pious Mr. H -- n as much,
that I have ventured without your Leave to send him the Original, taking a Copy
for my self. -- What Return could be made him like this First-fruit of his
Bounty to us? and give me leave to add, from what End of the Earth could he
have had the like? or where can either his Piety or good Sense more have found
its Match? -- He is paid in his own Coin, Sterling. You have paid for me as
well as for your self, and if your superior holy Lines rival me in his Heart,
and give you the highest Seat in his Esteem and Love, as they well may, I shall
heartily rejoice in your Conquest. -- You merit from the Lovers of Christ and
Holiness (though from him to you all is free and undeserved Grace) the flow of
their Affections and Benignity.

I am sorry you seem so struck with Wonder at the late, too late, Testimonies
of a great Esteem and Regard, on the account of your Worth and Wants. It is
because I am so late in my particular Knowledge of them, though a general
Knowledge I might have before.

You know it was your Letter to my good Neighbor, on the Death of her Brother,
that gave me my first and full Intelligence. -- It is your own Humility, and
former low thoughts of me, that must account for your present Surprise. -- This
Humility let us cherish in one another, and cease our Compliments, however well
meant. -- Forgive therefore and guard against what I have already written, as I
forgive those in your last, and if we can any way minister to one another's
Consolation, let it suffice. -- The Blush which naturally belongs to your Sex,
must now belong to me, a Scholar and Minister, fifteen Years Older than you
are, and yet not able to out-teach or out-write you! But I have not been kept
in School like you, and under the Rod, and Truant like have lost many a Day. --
You have more Understanding than your Teachers, for God's Commandments are ever
with you. Unless his Law had been your Delight you had perished in Your
Affliction. This is your Comfort under them that his Word is quickening to you.
You remember it Night and Day, therefore you have Hope. -- And may you always
abound more and more in all Joy and Peace in Believing, through the Power of
the Holy Ghost. -- Out of Weakness may you be made stronger and stronger
through the Power of Faith, as the Holy Women have been who belonged to the
noble Army of Martyrs.

It is indeed more Blessed to give than to receive, but not than to receive as
you do, through Grace. -- The Blessedness lies in the Manner of giving and
receiving, not in the Thing. There are who receive in a more holy spiritual
Manner than the Giver gives, and then the Blessedness belongs to the Receiver.
Mr. H -- n and you are one, I hope in the true Blessedness, give and receive
with the same Spirit of Grace, which is calculated and given for a like amiable
Exercise in a very different outward Condition. I speak to encourage and
animate you to go on in your Part of the holy Exercise. When he receives yours
to me he will be animated too, to abound more and more.

I have given to Mr. H -- n the Reasons of my sending you over Sea. He will see
one Reason in your own Inclinations to have wrote to him. -- I have saved you
from the Blame of Forwardness which you say restrained you, and I hope shall
have displeased neither of you. I have parted with the Pleasure of what I
valued under your own Hand. I have let him know the Days of your Youth, your
honorable Descent, and your later Afflictions. I have told him that I mean
also to honor my Country, and the Daughters of my People to him, but at the
same Time that he must not think these Nightingale Notes are common in our
Woods. I have begged his Pardon for transcribing to you a Part of his gracious
Letter, and pleaded it to be for your Consolation and Edification; and that it
became me thus to make him minister more to your Soul than his Charity could to
the Needs of the Body. -- I have prayed him to forgive your Anti-Prayer, in
wishing his Life prolonged 'till he be dim with Age: And I have dared to join
with you in it, with a little Correction, from the useful Old Age of Moses,
whose Eyes were not dim, nor was he kept a Day too long out of Heaven.

But as you say of your self, I transgress the Limits of a Letter. I must
entreat you not to answer me, lest I write as long again, and be hindered in my
Sermons and other Letters. --

God give you Respite from Pain if he see it best, and strengthen you with all
Might unto all Patience if Pains return. "The God of all Grace, who has called
you to his Eternal Glory by Jesus Christ, after you have suffered a while, make
you perfect; stablish, strengthen, settle you! To him be Glory for ever.

We all again salute Mr. G -- And I am, Madam, Your affectionate Friend and
Servant, B.C --."


"To Mr. P -- F --
Sir,
The Respect shown me by your deceased Uncle was altogether unexpected and
surprising to me, when your Messengers one and another came to me to put me
into Mourning. I cannot but wish he had let me know in his Sickness, that any
Visits or Ministrations of mine to him would have been acceptable. -- My
Gratitude waits on you, Sir, his Heir, and on the Ladies your Sisters to whom
he has left so great an Earthly Inheritance, I wish from my Heart I might have
named too my good Friend -- but I leave that to your own kind and generous
Heart.

I am sorry, Sir, I am so much a Stranger to you, since I am so much obliged.
But you will consider the Character I sustain, which has obtained the Respect
shown me, and allow me to lead you off this Evening, from a transitory dying
World, the Riches and Fashion whereof is passing away, as you see in the
Funeral and Mourning before you, to the Rest and Work of the holy Sabbath,
which leads us every Lord's Day to the Sepulcher of the risen Savior, to the
Means and Desire of a happy Resurrection among the Just at his second Coming.

I pray God, Sir, that the great Estate you are come into, may be so far from
hindering you in your Way to Heaven, as our Lord has warned us to fear, that on
the contrary, it may greatly help you on in your Way thither, as he has told us
how to make a Friend to our Souls of our earthly Riches, that when we also fail
(as we certainly must within a very little Time, like our Friend before us) we
may be received into everlasting Habitations, and be recompensed at the
Resurrection of the Just.

I am sure, Sir, I am my self this Week a most teaching Instance of the Vanity
and Vexation of Spirit from a small Prospect of worldly Inheritance to my only
Child, and it brings Home to me the Wisdom and Goodness of our Savior's Words,
"Lay not up for your selves Treasures on Earth, where Moth and Rust corrupt,
and where Thieves break through and steal. I may be supposed therefore the more
feelingly and affectionately to wish to your self and the Ladies your Sisters a
most easy, happy and religious Improvement of the Riches which Providence sees
Good to honor you with; and O that it may be in great Mercy and Favor to you!
that you may not trust in uncertain Riches, but in the living God who gives
all Things richly to enjoy; that you may be rich in good Works, ready to
distribute, willing to communicate, laying up in Store a good Foundation
against the Time to come, that you may lay hold on eternal Life.

Believe me, Sir, if God please to give you a Heart in the Midst of worldly
Affluence, to live above the Things below, and set your Affections on Things
above, where Christ is at the Right Hand of God, you will taste a Thousand-fold
more the Comforts and Pleasures of the present Life, in your Way to a better:
You will receive, as well as do the more Good in Life, find Ease in the
Troubles of Life, and Peace in the End of it, which can never else be found
though a Man would give all his Substance for it.

Accept, Sir, this small Return of Love for the mournful Bounties of the Day,
and give me leave at your leisure to enlarge on these Things, when I shall have
the Pleasure to wait on you. The mean while as you are preparing for the Visit
to the Grave before us; and when you shall lead us in the Mourning thither, let
our Hearts be suitably affected with the Consideration of our own Frailty and
Mortality, and of our everlasting Poverty and Misery without an Interest in
Christ, and the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. -- This Blessed Portion I
heartily wish you and my own Soul, and to all that are related to us, and
remain, Sir,

Your obliged Friend, and humble Servant, B. C --."
Feb. 18. 1737, 8.

To a Friend in Adversity.
"My dear Friend,
If I were not my self shut up by Age and Snow, I could not excuse my not
having seen you in the Sorrows of the last Week. -- Yet have you not wanted
much better Visiters and Comforters from among your numerous Friends, who like
Job's, in the Day of his Loss of Estate and Bereavement, came together to mourn
with and comfort him -- They came every one with an Earring of Gold, and if
mine may be welcome to you now it shall be gladly offered. --

If a Man would give all the Substance of his House for Love it would be
utterly contemned. The Love of Heaven to us, and its tender Care over us, is
the first Invaluable, and beyond all Account; and next to that the ruling Love
of God in us, with entire Submission to his Sovereignty and Dependence on his
Grace; and then comes in the poor Love of good Men to us, their Esteem, Concern
and Assistances, superadded to their more precious Prayers to God for us. --
The two first I wish you with all my Heart, in a more abundant Experience than
you have ever had through your whole Life; and then I congratulate you upon
what you do or may enjoy of the other, by the Favor of God to you.

I thank God for the Serenity and Calm with which (I hear) you possess your
Soul, and Madam with you, a Smile of Heaven denied to Job in the Day of his
Adversity: And may you both continue to bless and trust and resign with one
Heart and Voice, and mutually strengthen each others Hands in God. -- "The
reigning Love of God in a Soul (says Mr. Henry) is constant and firm, and will
neither be drawn off from him by fair Means or foul, by Life or Death -- it
enables us to repel and triumph over Temptations from the Smiles of the World,
and also from its F^owns: The Gifts of Providence cannot content a Believer
without the Assurances of the Love of Christ in them, and in the Assurance of
that the Loss of these common Things can create no Discontent."

How, well therefore, do the Ten Words from Sinai close, and show that the
Finger of God, wrote the two Tables, who knew the whole of Man's Duty and
Happiness "Thou shall not covet, or as it is given us in the New Testament, "Be
content with such Things as ye have, for he has said, I will never leave thee
nor forsake thee.

May my dear Friends be under the Consolations of that unspeakable Promise,
enough to live upon in the Want of all Things; as God knew it to be enough for
Abraham, and that his Servant would account so, when he appeared to him and
said, Fear not Abraham, I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great Reward: And
again I am God Almighty, walk before me and be thou perfect.

Let Patience have its perfect Work -- is one of the Glo^ies of the Christian
Law: the Lord himself was made perfect in bearing so divinely the Things which
he deprecated: In Conformity to the Son of God we must needs be perfect and
entire, wanting nothing! And how rich must he be that wants nothing! has all
Things in God, by one Will with him! So it is that Angels themselves have all
Things and are full; and so was St. Paul too on Earth. But how shall we attain
it? -- the Way is plain and easy, by going to Christ for it; of whose Fullness
we all may receive and Grace upon Grace! as it is written, " strengthened with
all Might, according to his glorious Power, unto all Patience, etc.

I am Yours, B. C"


CHAP. IX. The Doctor's private Life -- Marriages and Children -- Education of
them -- His Character in several Relations -- Family-Religion -- Ejaculations
-- Closet-Devotions -- Sabbath-Sanctification -- Trials, etc.
I COME now to write more particularly of the Doctor's private Life, and the
Circumstances of i^ -- his Behavior and Carriages.

. 1. Of his Marriages.

Soon after his Return to New England, and Settlement in Boston, viz. on June
the 5th 1700, he was married to Mrs. Janes Clark (Daughter of Mr. Thomas and
Mrs. Jane Clark) with whom he lived for more than thirty Years. -- She died
suddenly October 26. 1731 -- On the Lord's Day after her Funeral he preached
from those Words in Lev. 10.3. And Aaron held his Peace. The same Sermon he
afterward preached at Medford, upon the Decease of his Daughter Turell, and
printed it, 1735. With another from 2 Samuel xii. 23. I shall go to him, but he
shall not return to me.
She was a pious, diligent, prudent, humble and prayerful Gentlewoman, a most
tender and dutiful Wife, a loving and careful Mother, and a shining Example of
Patience and Submission to the Will of God under a Variety of sore Trials,
strong Pains and long Weaknesses.

It having pleased God to bring him into a State of Widowhood, I find a Paper
whereon he wrote these Words: "It soon appeared to me that among the many
virtuous single Gentlewomen of the Town, Madam Sarah Clark, Relict of the Hon.
John Clark, Esquire must be the Person to make me and my Children most happy, if I
married again. Her Piety, Gravity, Humility, Diligence, Cheerfulness, natural
Love, (long since) to my Children, and theirs to her; After the Death of a
former Husband, the Hon. and Rev. John Leverett, she boarded some Time in the
Doctor's House.
besides her retired Way of living, and a small worldly Estate free from all
Encumbrance; all concurred, after Prayer to God for his Counsel, and the Advice
of my nearest Relations, to incline and move me to make my Addresses to her.

"God gave me a kind Welcome, and I hope, I have much to acknowledge of a
gracious Providence presiding over the Beginning of this important Step. And I
humbly implore the Government and Guidance of Heaven in all that is to come,
submitting this great Affair to his Will, Glory and Blessing, and our mutual
Comfort here, and Happiness for ever. -- "Now that I begin to look upon her as
the destined Companion of my Life, and Sharer in all my Joys and Sorrows; a
Meet-help to me (I hope) the few last Days of my Pilgrimage; I would set my
self daily to remember her in my Prayers and Thanksgivings to God; blessing him
for her, for a prudent Wife is of the Lord; and begging him to bless her to me,
and make me a Blessing to her, etc. etc.

The Doctor was married to her, May the 6th, 1732, and she lived with him till
April 24. 1744, when she died after a long Languishment, and State of Infancy
for most of the Year past, Aet. 72 -- On the Lord's Day after her Funeral, he
preached a Sermon from those Words in 1 Thessalonians. iv. 14. For if we believe that
Jesus died, and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God
bring with him.

August the 12th 1745, it pleased God in his most gracious Providence to lead
him into a third and happy Marriage with Madam Mary Frost of New Castle,
New Hampshire, Relict of the Hon. John Frost, Esquire who was a great Comfort and
Support to him the two last Years of his Life. She survives -- a Gentlewoman of
many amiable Qualities -- But I may not offend her Modesty, by enlarging on her
Character here --

. The Doctor had Issue by the first of these Gentlewomen only, viz. a Son born
Sept. 1. 1704, who was baptized on the 3d, and named Benjamin after his Father.
-- The Child died on the 18th. -- He had two Daughters who lived to be married
and have Children, viz. Jane named after her Mother, who was born Feb. 25.
1708. She was married to the Compiler of this Narrative August the 11th 1726,
and died March 26. 1735 -- She had four Children, but only one of them survived
her, viz. a Son Samuel, who died in about a Year and half after her, scil.
October 8. 1736. Of this virtuous and ingenious Person the Public has had a
large Account in some Memoirs that were printed after her Death in New England,
and also in London, (chiefly collected from her Manuscripts) by her Husband,
which were well accepted by the Pious and Learned at Home and Abroad.

The other Daughter named Abigail, was born Jan. 14. 1714, 15, and married to
Mr. Albert Dennie of Boston Merchant, Sept. 1737.

She died after a long Languishment, May 17. 1745. She had three Children, but
only one of them survived her, viz, -- a Son John, and this is the only Lamp
the Doctor left burning in his House, at his Decease.

And now I shall attempt some Hints of the Doctor's Character in the several
Relations of a Son, an Husband, a Father, a Friend, a Master, etc. in all which
he exhibited a Pattern worthy Imitation.

. His filial Piety, Affection and Duty was eminent and known to all his
Acquaintance. As he obeyed the Law of his Mother, whom God took from his Head
(as has been before noted) about three Years after his Admission into the
College; so he ever paid all Respect and Reverence to his honored Father,
whose Life was continued down to the Year 1712. After the Decline of his
Father's wordly Estate, he cheerfully afforded him all needed Assistance, and
did every Thing that lay in his Power, to render his Age easy and agreeable. He
expressed this his filial Duty not only in kind Words, and transient good Deeds,
but willingly bound himself, with his kind Brother in written Obligations for
his comfortable Support; praying a gracious God to prolong his Life in the
Increase of his Graces and Consolations to him. Thus he was the very Reverse of
those Scribes and Pharisees, whom our Lord taxes and faults for saying, It is
Corban. Mark 7.11. -- Corban is a Syriac Word, and signifies a Gift given to
God. Expositors observe, "That although the Pharisees did not deny it in plain
Terms that Children ought to relieve their Parents, " yet they made a vile
Exception from it, which if Children pleased, might render it void. -- A good
round Gift to the Temple answered all filial Obligations for ever -- Hence
covetous and graceless Children oftimes denied their aged and reduced Parents
the Assistances they needed. Vid. Burkit in Loc.


In the Relation of an Husband, he was most complaisant, tender and
affectionate.

Consider him as a Father, he was wise and indulgent. I dare not say, he did
not exceed sometimes in Point of Fondness and Solicitude for his Children.
Their Welfare and Happiness lay on his Mind continually: But then his first and
chief Study and Care was to form them to Virtue, and train them up in the Love
and Fear of the great God: For this he prayed, wrestled, and agonized, and used
all suitable Means that a glorious Christ might take an early Possession of them.

From mere Infants, he endeavored to train them up in the Way they should go:
Prove. 22.6. -- Expositors have given us various Translations and Senses of this
Text, more particularly of this Phrase, In the Way he should go. If it be
literally translated, it is, Upon the Mouth of his Way. In the Mouth, i. e. in
the Beginning of his Way, as soon as the Child is capable of Instruction. Some
understand it of the Genius and Inclination of the Child, which ought to be
consulted by those who have the Care of its Education. Vatabulus paraphraseth
the Expression, in the double and doubtful Part of his Ways. Mercer, According
to the Measure of his Way, assuring us that the same Word in the Original,
signifies both a Mouth and a Measure. And he makes this to be Solomon's
Meaning; that a Child must be instructed according to the Measure of his
Capacity. -- Vid. Dr. William Hopkins's Sermon on the Text. Dr. Colman paid a
due Regard to all these Translations and Senses put upon the Words.
And for this End he was daily relating to them (as they could bear it) in the
most familiar and artful Manner, the entertaining Histories and Stories in the
Old and New Testaments, together with the Doctrines and Precepts of our holy
Religion, and he soon saw the good Effect of such his Essays in the laudable
Proficiency they made in Knowledge and Wisdom.

As his Daughters grew in Years and Understanding, he would some Times write
and send Letters to them from his Study of the Things of God, and of the common
Businesses of Life, of Learning, Wit, etc. in Prose or Verse, to these he
expected Answers, and by them he soon discovered their Genius and Disposition.
In a Postscript to the Memoirs of his Daughter Turell's Life, he humbly informs
the World of his Care of her Education. He first talked into her all he could,
in the most free and indearing Manner, and then supplied her with the best
Books of every Kind, suited to her Years and Inclinations, without making them a
Task and Burden. His next Car was to teach her to read his Hand, and then by
writing to her, in a Manner becoming him, and proper for her, he insinuated
himself more and more into her Affections, and increased her Reverence of him,
and Desire of his Esteem. The Way to merit and obtain that, he let her see was
by a prudent, humble, virtuous and religious Conduct, upon the Principles of
Christianity, and the Fear of God, and Desire to please her heavenly Father.


And he lived (as he thought) to perceive the Grace of God in them both -- in
his eldest Daughter early and evidently -- and in his youngest many Months, if
not Years, before she died. And "although (as he remarks upon the Success and
Fruit of these happy Methods) it cannot be pretended, that the like Endeavors
will always be attended with the like Success, yet it may be supposed they
would very often, if Parents, with an humble Reliance on the Blessing of God,
and Prayers for it, would go into them."

I find among other Particulars recorded by him, concerning his youngest
Daughter Abigail, the following, viz. "She gave her self to Reading from her
Childhood, and soon to Writing. She wanted not a Taste for what was excellent
in Books, more especially of a Poetical Turn or Relish, which soon appeared to
be her favorite Turn. This run her too soon and too far into the reading
Novels, etc. for which God in his righteous Providence afterward punished her
by suffering her to leave her Father's House, to the Grief of her Friends and
the Surprise of the Town.

But a gracious God was pleased some Years after, to set this her Misconduct in
such a glaring Light, as threw her at the Foot of sovereign Grace and Mercy,
for Humiliation and deep Repentance, Renovation and Forgiveness.

And long before her Death she was apparently altered and changed by the Spirit
of God, and increased in Grace, manifesting great Humility and Resignedness to
the Will of God. Her Death had all the Calm and Peace in it one would desire.

I was present, and prayed with her while dying, and well remember when her
Father spoke to her (a few Moments before she breathed out her Soul) of the
holy Angels being the Convoy of happy Spirits -- She made an Effort to utter
some Lines of one of Dr. Watts's Hymns (most, if not all of them were long
before treasured in her Memory) Take me Uriel on thy Wings,
And stretch and soar away, --
The two last Words seemed to die on her Lips, and after a few easy Gasps she
expired.

His paternal Care descended to his Grandchildren. He wrote to his Daughter
Turell's little Son of six Years old. -- Upon her Decease, he has these Words
in a Letter to me --

April 14. 1735.

"God Almighty, the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, bless my dear Grand Child
-- I charge you my dear Son, to govern my dear Grandson, with a strict and
tender Care for his spiritual and everlasting Good.

I leave him this my dying Charge and Blessing, "Lord! may he live in thy
sight! and know thee the God of his Fathers, and serve thee with a perfect
Heart! and to this End seek thee early and with his whole Desire."

He also sealed up two Copies of the printed Remains of his Daughter in which
are found the following Charges and Counsels.

" My dear Child, Boston, June 8, 1735.

Your Grandfather Colman, who loved your excellent Mother, and now loves you
the only Branch from her, like his own Soul, seals up these two Copies of the
Memoirs of her Piety and Ingenuity, for your use when you come to Years of
Understanding, for you carefully to keep for your Children if you live to have
any, to preserve the Memory of your Mother to you and them

Your Grandfather does not expect to live to see you grown up, and therefore
now leaves with you this his dying Charge, to know and love the Lord God of
your Father and Mother, and to fear and serve him with all your Heart and Soul,
all the Days of your Life; and like your dear Mother to give your self up to
God in the Days of your Youth.

My Prayer for you is that a double Portion of that good Spirit which adorned
and sanctified your gracious Mother and has rested on your -- Father and his
Father, may be your Inheritance.

Often read over these her living Remains, and beg of God his Holy Spirit to
make you a Son worthy of such Parents and Ancestors.

You will find that your Mother's Desire was to dedicate you to the Service of
Christ in the Work of the Ministry; and my Hearts desire and Prayer to God is
to incline you to, furnish you for, and use you in that blessed Service. But if
God otherwise incline and dispose you, yet I charge you to devote your self to
be his only for evermore, to serve him in your Generation according to his
Will, to desire to be a Blessing in your Place, and to take Care of your own
Soul, and of the Souls of yours.

And now, my Son, the Lord be with thee and prosper thou! God Almighty bless
thee and keep thee! the Blessing of Abraham be to thee and thy Seed! and the
God of Abraham be thy Shield and exceeding great Reward; and the Fear of thy
Father and Mother, be thy God and Fear forever and ever. Amen.

So prays your mourning, dying, loving Grandfather for you and blesses you, now
in the Day when your Mother is taken up from you; of whose Virtues and Graces,
may you always be seen a true and worthy Heir.

B. C -- "

His dear Grandson John Dennie (spes sola) he daily instructed, charged and
prayed over in like Manner, and committed to the Care of God's kind Providence
and to the keeping of his special Grace. --

To others, his Relations by Consanguinity and Affinity he was singularly
affectionate and kind; ready to lay himself out on all Occasions for promoting
their spiritual and temporal Interests, oftentimes he straightened himself in
serving such of them as were reduced to a State of Indigence; and next to the
Consolations of God's Spirit and Grace he was their greatest Pleasure, Support
and Comfort both in his Youth and Age.

He was also a sincere and useful Friend to all such as he professed any
Friendship to; and extended his Benevolence and Beneficence to their Friends.
-- The numerous Persons recommended to him by his Friends here and from abroad
were ever kindly and generously received, entertained counseled and advised
etc. -- In Return for which good Offices there are many Letters of Thanks
found. -- And if the Number of Persons whom he served by Letters of
Recommendation and other-ways was to be told it would surprise the Reader. --
Few Persons of Figure of later Years have traveled to Europe without seeking
and obtaining Favors from him -- And those who have gone from us in Forma
Pauperis were with an equal Forwardness commended to his Friends and
Correspondents. And yet it must be confessed that he was sometimes too sudden
in contracting Friendship with Persons and trusted them too far without
sufficient Trial, being struck with their plausible Addresses in Word and
Writing who after they had answered their own Ends, soon treated him with a
criminal Indifference etc. Ah! It Is an ungrateful World we live in! The
Ancients had a most excellent Emblem whereby they used to express a true and
sincere Friendship, they pictured it in the Shape of a young Man, very fair,
bare-headed, meanly attired; on the outside of his Garment was written VIVERE
ET MORI, and in his Forehead AESTATE ET HYEME: his Breast was open so that his
Heart might be seen, and with his Finger he pointed to his Heart where was
written PROPE LONG. But such faithful Friends (says Bishop Morton) are in
this Age all (or for the most part) gone in Pilgrimage, and their Return is
uncertain. CAMER, oper.

WANLEY Page 168 --




The Doctor was a gentle and compassionate Master to all his Servants, whether
they were bought Slaves or hired into his Employ -- He carefully saw to it that
they had every Thing necessary for their Comfort and even for Delight. -- Such
as lived with him any considerable Time are Witnesses of his wise Instructions,
Counsels, Admonitions, Reproofs etc. He condescended to teach his Negroes in
Person (dull and ignorant as they came) to read; and catechized them; and was
ever dropping some good Sentence to instruct and help them. -- And with a most
distinguished Humanity ministered to the meanest of his Household when sick.

And this leads me to write of other his Excellencies as Head of a Family See
his Treatise on Family Worship printed in 1728.
--

He did all that lay in his Power that all that belonged to his House might be
also of the Household of Faith. He ordinarily had his set Hours for Family
Devotion and Instruction. -- For the last Twenty Years of his Life (and I
suppose before) it was his Practice to read the sacred Scriptures Morning and
Evening with large Paragraphs of Mr. Henry's or Burkett's Annotations on them
before Prayer: And his Prayers (the Matter of them) was chiefly taken from the
Portions read. -- Yet he never forgot the special Condition and Circumstances
of his own Family and Flock or of his absent Friends and Relations, the Town,
Country, Nation and the Protestant Interest abroad in the World. He was very
particular on the Face of divine Providence toward all and each of these. --
And sometimes he would discourse largely to us on the Chapter read after
Prayer. -- He seemed greatly affected in the Time of reading, and made his
Pauses and often found something new and striking in the Oracles of God. --

I shall give but one Instance of many, and that is mentioned by himself in his
Funeral Sermon on the Honorable Mrs. Fances Shirley 1746.

"I can never (says he) forget, how as I was once reading the 6th Chapter of
the Prophet Zechariah's Prophecy in my Family, those Words in the 8th Verse The
Doctor soon after reading this Chapter in his Family, preached some excellent
Sermons on the Text and Context.
struck me with a mavelous Light and Force, " Behold these have quieted my
Spirit: representing to me the perfect infinite Complacency which the Soul of
God has in all Events of his Providence, which are all and every one of them
altogether such as they should be; the full Accomplishment of the everlasting
Purposes of his own Wisdom, Holiness and Grace; wherein therefore the Hole
Spirit of the Lord must have everlasting Rest and Quiet, Pleasure and
Satisfaction. Can there be a more calming, quieting Consideration than this to
the Spirit which God has made and sanctified! has made to govern, and to be in
Subjection unto his own holy, perfect and blessed Will: " Behold these have
quieted my Spirit: And what quiets the Spirit of the Lord should quiet ours;
and will do so, if we desire to be holy, wise and good as He is."

Such Persons who have been much in the Doctor's Company have often seen and
known (if any external Signs can indicate it) "That he was abundant in
Ejaculatory Prayer: How would his Eyes and Hands be lifted up to Heaven, on
hearing of the Dispensations of God's Grace and Providence? And in his latter
Years, his devout Thoughts and inward Breathings were frequently vented in
pathetic Expressions of Humiliation and Praise on one Occasion and another.

There are not indeed so many Particulars recorded of his Closet and secret
Devotions and Communion with God, as is wished for; and those that are found
have such a Relation to Family-Circumstances and other Grievances, as the
Public is but little concerned in, and therefore must be omitted:
Nevertheless, on just Grounds we may assert, "That he spent much Time in
Self-Examination, Supplications, Intercessions, and Renewals of Covenant --
Such important Duties he pressed with all Earnestness on his Children and
others, not only from the sacred Desk (as what he preached and printed
abundantly proves) but also in his private Letters and Visits and Applications
to Souls. -- It Is probable, he designed, as is said of the Rev. Mr. John
Shower, "That the chief Transactions between God and his own Soul should remain
a Secret."

However, I find him ordinarily taking a religious Notice of the Return of his
Birth-Days, and composing and preaching Sermons suitable to the Occasion.

I shall offer the Reader two or three Records, made of Incidents and
Occurrences, by which you may judge of his good Spirit and Frame of Mind, under
Providence.

Upon his Removal from his House in King Street to his new-built House in
Brattle-Street, May 1715, he wrote this Meditation, "It was a very pleasing and
instructive Sight once to me in a far distant Land, where a Person of Honor
and Riches was building a stately House for himself and his Family, but at once
he took off the Workmen to build himself a Vault or Tomb to be buried in. It
becomes us ever to keep in Mind, and lay to Heart, the Remove that we must soon
make to our Grave. -- A convenient House, and easy Bed, and agreeable
Relatives, are among the valuable Comforts of this Life. When we are building
to our selves pleasant Houses to live in, we should all the while be thinking
of the darksome House or Place, where our Bodies will shortly be laid: And when
we enter into our new Habitations, or after we are settled in them, the same
Thought must still abide with us. We must not entertain a Thought of living
long; and must be willing and ready to go, and to leave our new-built Houses as
soon as God calls us away. They are only to be used as Accommodations for us in
the Way unto an everlasting Habitation and House eternal. -- We may not set too
much by an House on Earth, but ought to raise our Affections to Things above,
etc. -- We ought to serve God in our Houses -- This was Joshua's holy
Resolution, As for me and my House, we will serve the Lord! And this was
David's, Psalm. 101. I will walk within my House with a perfect Heart, etc.
Surely we ought, under the outward Smiles of Providence upon us, to be renewing
the Consecration of our selves and all that we have to the Service of God; we
ought like Abraham, to charge our Households and our Children after us to keep
the Way of the Lord. We ought to worship God in secret, in our Closets, and we
ought every Day to pray to, and praise him in our Families: We ought to read
his holy Word, and meditate on his Law, and teach it diligently to our
Children, and talk of it when we set in our House, when we lay down, etc. Thus
we must write as it were upon the Posts of our House, and our Gates, Deuteronomy. 6.7,
9. -- Our Houses should be Bethels, little Churches for the Practice of Piety,
and the Exercises of Devotion therein, that the Apostle's Salutation may reach
us, Romans 16.5. Greet the Church in their House. With these and such like
Meditations, I can truly say, I have been building, and would now enter into my
new and pleasant Habitation: May they abide and dwell always in my Soul, that
thus I may there dwell the few remaining Days of my frail Life."

As he wrote and printed Sermons, Meditations and Letters on the great
Earthquake in the Year 1727, so I find him making the following Record of that
which happened on June 3d. 1744.

"In the Midst of Singing, in the Morning Exercise, being the Lord's Day of our
holy Communion, a great Shock of an Earthquake terrified the Congregation, and
broke off the Worship; all rose up, many ran out of the House, Women and
Children cried out, etc. -- But it pleased God to enable me to rise up and take
the Pulpit, and with great Composure and Sedateness, and an unexpected Flow of
ready Words to still and quiet the Assembly; who all earnestly listened to me,
and I went on and finished the Exercises, and administered the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper with the greatest Solemnity, Propriety, Fullness and Brevity I had
ever experienced. -- Laus Deo.

On Dec. 31st 1743. He writes in his Almanac,

"I thank God, I have been enabled to go through a World of Work since Mr.
Cooper's Death; and now am preparing for a sorrowful New-Year's-Day; and if it
be my dying, Year, I commit my Soul, and the Flock, to the great Shepherd --
the everlasting Father."

Before I finish these Sections, I cannot but in Justice mention the high
Regard, the Doctor paid to the Christian Sabbath Sint Occuli, manusque Vestrae
Toto illo die ad Deum expansae.

-- He mentioned it oftener in his Prayers and Sermons, and pressed the due
Sanctification of the Lord's Day, beyond any Divine I have ever known. Vid. His
Sermons entitled, the Doctrine and Law of the Christian Sabbath -- His large
Preface to the Rev. Mr. Homes's Treatise on the Sabbath -- His Manuscript
Sermons are full of the Sabbath.


He ever manifested his Mindfulness of it, and Joy at its Approaches, in his
Morning-Prayer on Saturday, began it in the Evening, According to the laudable
Practice of some of the most eminent Fathers of New England.
and was truly in the Spirit in his own House, as well as God's. -- And
although he preached in the Forenoon to Weariness, he not only soon retired to
his beloved Study for Devotion, but also sometimes read and instructed his
Family in the Time of Intermission -- And in the Evening did often repeat his
Sermon; and with great Fervor and Enlargement, lead in the religious Duties of
the Family, as he has directed others in his Treatise of Family Worship.

Most Company gave him Uneasiness and Disturbance on the Lord's Day. -- He used
to invite and admit Persons (for Conference in the Evening) when he first
settled in Boston, but found such Inconveniences attending it, that he was
obliged to desire his Friends to visit him at other Times.

. He passed through many fore Trials and Temptations in the several Stages of
Life (some of which have been already recorded in this Narrative) I shall only
cursorily mention a few more of them. He sometimes suffered by the Tongues and
Pens of angry and unreasonable Men for his zealous Essays to serve the best
Interests of his Country, and the Churches of Christ. Many Libels (fraught with
Scorn, Contempt, and Reproach of Lies) were thrown into his Yard and Garden
from Time to Time.
Good Men also of narrow and contracted Spirits, ill treated him on Account of
his Catholicism. Under such petty Persecutions he was an Example of Patience,
and instead of revenging Injuries (when it was in his Power) he laid himself
out to do all the Kindnesses he could to his Adversaries. This might be shown
in numerous Instances. I mean not to insinuate here, that the Doctor was not
sometimes sudden and high in his Resentments of real and apprehended Injuries
-- for his natural Temper was quick and hasty, and he had the Infirmities as
well as Sanctity of an Elijah.


There have been Times wherein he has been in strait Circumstances, and met
with most grievous Disappointments in worldly Matters, and this too after his
Expectation had been long rising; and some peculiar Family-Afflictions lay
heavy upon him, and bruised the Heel of his Life. But all that seems further
needful to be added under this Head, is a Record of his Behavior under God's
Visitations of him by Sickness, and calling for the precious Lives of such as
were dear to him.

Since my Acquaintance with him, he was diverse Times visited with acute and
threatening Maladies, and had the Sentence of Death within himself -- But with
what Constancy and Serenity, Tranquillity and Peace, profound Resignations to
the divine Will, and Humiliation under the Hand of God, and unshaken Hope and
Trust in his great Savior, were they all entertained? -- He spoke to his
Friends that visited him in the Language and Spirit of David, "I have seen an
End of all Perfection. Psalm. 119.96.
-- I go the Way of all the Earth. 1 Kings 2.2.
And when (by his Desire) we have been praying with him, and committing him to
God, a Ray of the excellent Glory has appeared on him, and his inward
Satisfaction and Joy has discovered it self by a loud Amen.

. His Graces were also tried in the often Sicknesses and Deaths of his loved
Wives, Children, Grandchildren, etc. -- of which the Reader has had some
Notices already. His Behavior, and writing on these Occasions follows.

All may see and read his truly Christian Deportment under the Death of his
Daughter Turell in the Sermons, etc. published to the World.

On the Sickness and Death of a dear Grandson, he writes,

"The Lord prepare us for his holy Will, and the Child for his everlasting
Mercies. Help us by Faith to resign and commit it, Amen; and yet spare it to
us, if it may be for his Glory.

I am your Father and Brother in Tribulation, and in the Kingdom and Patience
of Jesus Christ. Your Love and Affection, will I think, be my highest and only
Consolation, under the past breaking Bereavements, after the Consolations of
the Grace and Spirit of Christ, which are internal and sanctifying. I am going
from you very soon. O might I no more be called to bury Children, but as God
will, if it may be for his Glory. Pray for me, for I am weak! Lord, help me,
for I am broken! So commending you to the Love, Grace and Consolation of your
Father in Heaven, I remain your second unworthy earthly Father etc."

Immediately after the Death of his Daughter Dennie, he wrote these Words.

"Father thy Will be done! Thy Name be sanctified. Glorify thy Grace in me,
that I may glorify thee. -- Who am I Lord, and what is my Father's House, that
thou have brought me hitherto. -- My Turell died in Fear, who never offended
any one, and if she knew her own Heart, had a Thousand Times given herself to
God. My Dennie dies in Peace and Transports, that had made the greatest
Breaches on me, and had given Scandal and Offense to all in Point of filial
Duty. The Reason of my recording these and other Things of Mrs. Dennie here,
is, her Father's known Desire, that the World should know something of her and
them.
-- The Grace of God is free and sovereign. He has Mercy because he will have
Mercy.

Scarce any Thing touched the Doctor's Soul more nearly than the sudden Death
of his dear Colleague, the Rev. Mr. William Cooper.

When he was lying under the deadly Symptoms of a Lethargy, the Doctor made and
wrote his Supplications to Heaven for his precious Life, in the Close of a
Sermon preached From Acts 9.34. Eneas Jesus Christ makes thee whole. It has
been observed to me, by some or the most intelligent of his Congregation "that
under, and after the heavy and repeated Calamities and Sorrows laid upon him in
later Times, he appeared more animated, enlivened and brightned in his Public
Exercises.


on Monday Morning to a reverend and sorrowful Assembly, who early and
earnestly came together, to humble themselves and cry to God to spare and heal
him.

After Mr. Cooper's Death (which was the next Morning) I find sorrowful Mention
made of it in diverse Papers of Addresses to the Church, and Supplications to
Heaven; all showing how deeply his Spirit was affected by this sore Stroke of
Providence, and also the holy and wise Improvement he made upon it.

The good and just Character of this excellent and valuable Servant of God may
be seen published in a Sermon preached by Dr. Colman, the Lord's Day after his
Funeral, from those Words, John xi. 35. Jesus wept; and dedicated to the
honored Committee of the Congregation. This Character I purposed to have
inserted at large in this Narrative, according to my Promise of a more
particular Account, in Page 51; but lest this Work should exceed the proposed
Limits, it must be omitted.


CHAP. X. The Doctor's Mindfulness of Death -- The Time and Manner of his
Withdraw and Departure.
DR. Colman, like his great Master Christ Jesus, was ever mindful of the Hour
of his Death; and often spoke of it in his Prayers, Preaching, Vid. His Sermon
from John 9.4. on the Rev. Messirs. Brattle and Pemberton's Death, printed
1717. -- Also his Sermon before the General Court 1736, from Zech. 7.8, 9.
Wherein he has these Words, "I suppose this may be the last Exercise on a
public Occasion I may dare to undertake. I have stirred up the Gift that is in
me, as a Candle in the Socket will now and then flash up. Regard what I have
said as some of the last Words of a true and faithful Friend to the civil and
religious Interest of this People. In a Sermon from Psalm 138.2. printed 1732,
he gives his dying Charges to Ministers and People.
Conversation and Letters It would be endless to quote Passages from his
Sermons or Letters.
to his Friends.

His tender Constitution and often Infirmities from his Youth In which Respect
it might be said, Anima Galbae male habitat. A Phrase the Doctor often used.
up, together with many sudden and threatening Shocks on his Health by acute
Diseases, were earnest and quickening Memento's to him of his Frailty and
Mortality; and these he wisely improved to a most serious and diligent
Preparation for his great Change; and also as powerful Incitements to
Faithfulness and Industry in his ministerial Work.

A Saying of the renowned Baxter, was often in his Mouth, and sometimes quoted
by him in his Sermons, scil. "I often reflect with Pleasure on the Goodness of
God through my Life, that by a weak and dying State of Body, I have been kept
studying, praying and preaching like a dying Man for Thirty Years together." A
constant inwrought Sense of our standing on the Borders of Eternity, is one of
the most effectual Motives to our Zeal and Diligence in the sacred Work, and it
is also of eminent Use to direct us what Studies and what Labors to pursue,
and which to neglect.

About the Time of his preaching Funeral Sermons on the Deaths of the Rev. Dr.
Cotton Mather, and the venerable Mr. Solomon Stoddard The Sermons are both
printed in the Years 1728, and 1729.
of Northampton, at the public Lecture in Boston, he found himself so languid
and spent that he expected daily to depart -- When he was helped home from one
of those Exercises, he fainted in his Study, and spoke to us of soon following
those Worthies of our Israel, to the eternal World -- And agreeably to such
Apprehensions and Impressions, he took Care to set and keep his Heart and House
in Order and died daily He ever kept a Will by him that he might not have the
Trouble and Anxiety of transacting worldly Matters on a dying Bed.
-- But a gracious God had more Work for him to do, some great and special
Services for his Name and Churches, and Poor among us, which have been at large
related in the preceding Chapters. After this his Health grew firmer for a
considerable Number of Years, and he was brought to his End by a mere gradual
Decay. As it has been observed of the great Mr. Lock, "That by a constant
Temperance, he preserved a very weak Constitution to an Age very few attain
unto" So under Providence, the Age of Dr. Colman may be ascribed to a nice Care
about, and a discreet Use of those Things which Physcians call Non-Naturals.
"Things that enter not into the Nature of Diseases, though they are Causes of
them, viz. Air, Meat, Drink, Sleep and Watching, Motion and Rest, Retention and
Excretion, and the Passions of the Mind. -- Bailey.


He had that great Favor of God granted to him, which some eminent Lights of
the Church have earnestly desired, scil. "Not to outlive his Work and
Usefulness." God highly honored him, by enabling him to preach constancy on
Lord's-Days to his Seventy-fourth Year with very little Abatement of his former
Vigor and Agreeableness -- Thus his Day and his Work ended together. The
Doctor preached the very Sabbath before he died, from Psalm lxvi. 3. Say unto
God, How terrible art thou in thy Works! In the Year 1737. He desired to be
excused from frequent Visiting the Sick and the Administration of the
Sacraments. -- But he often performed both these Services afterward, in
particular after the Death of his Colleague.
-- A long and bright Course! and that Promise was eminently made good to him,
" Those that are planted in the House of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts
of our God: -- They shall still bring forth Fruit in old Age, they shall be fat
and flourishing; to show that the Lord is upright. Although he often complained
both in public and to his Correspondents of his Memory and other Mental Powers
failing, yet but very few Traces of such a Debilitation were discernable in any
of his Performances. -- Nec tarda Senectus --
Debilitat Vires Animi mutatve Vigore.
^s good a Judge as most in the Nation writes thus to him March 18. 1745.

"Notwithstanding your Compla^^ts, I see no Marks of your declining Strength in
your Letters. Your Imagination seems still very lively, your Judgment solid,
and your Manner of expressing your Sentiments quite clear, distinct, methodical
and sprightly.

May your Health, your Talents and Capacity for extended distinguished and
uncommon Usefulness be long indulged to you, and particularly may your
Ministerial Labor be crowned with the most desirable and abundant Success. --

B. A.


-- "He was brought slowly and safely to Heaven" as Dr. Bates says of Mr.
Ba^ter -- Serus in C^^lum --

No remarkable Symptoms appeared of his Di^^^^ution being at Hand, until a few
Days before he died -- He mentions one in a Letter (the very last I suppose h^
ever wro^e, whether sent or not, is uncertain) to his honored Friend and
Correspondent Dr. Benjamin Avery, the rough Draught of which is found dated,
August 26. 1747 (three Days before his Death) wherein are these Passages, scil.

"Most honored Sir,

I once more salute you before I die. The Humors long resting in my Feet, have
taken a sudden Turn upward to my Breast; and whether I shall be able on the
Verge of Seventy-four, tender and asthmatick from my Youth up, to serve the
Flock to whom I have not failed yet in my weekly Ministrations; or to serve my
Country again by my late failing Correspondence with you and others, is with
the God of my Life.

The last Effort I have made for the Service of my Country and Nation, and the
Churches here, and with you, and we are one in CHRIST; is in the enclosed
Letter to the Honorable Sir PETER WARREN, which I have lately forwarded to
him, and if he have not received it, I leave it open for your Reading, and
putting a Seal to it; and if you think it of Importance enough to discourse
with him upon it, and strengthen his Hand in God, by your generous christian
Manner of Address, I hope it may be of public Advantage to the British Kingdom
and Provinces, the Religion of JESUS which you have been ever and highly
serving; and may you live on to serve by the Will of God.

Salute from me our honored Friend Mr. Palmer, to whom I even wish to have
communicated every worthy Endeavor for public Benefit to State or Church: And
when you see Dr. Watts or Dr. Guise, salute them from me; to whom I have not
failed to write, if the Enemy do not intercept, etc. etc. The Letter referred
unto -- To the Right Honorable Sir Peter Warren should have been inserted if a
Copy of it could have been found.


Thus this Friend, Ornament and Glory of New England expiring wrote.

And while such evident Symptoms of Death were upon him, he visited and took
leave of some of his near Relatives and spoke to them of his Decease.

Even the Day before he died he received Company at Home. -- Mrs. Colman's Son,
Charles Frost Esquire with his Spouse arrived from the Eastward to pay a Visit,
whom he welcomed with his usual Complaisance: But told them withal (after the
first Salutations were over) "That they were come to see him die." He also
spoke to his Colleague (in the Evening) with a Countenance that showed how
perfectly reconciled he was to the Thoughts of Death; "whether any Thing can
remove the Disorder I am under I know not. I leave it with God."
He spent the Evening religiously and pleasantly with them, and about the Hour
of Eleven waited on them to their Chamber, blessing them and wishing them a
good Repose. Then returning to his own, he endeavored to compose himself to
Rest, but had little Sleep. However, he rose in the Morning as usual, but
rather more feeble than on the preceding Day, and about the Hour of Nine or
Ten A. M. after a little faint Turn or two expired in an happy Euthanasia. God
kissed away his Soul (as the Jews express it.) Sicce detur nobis Vivere, sicq^e
Mori.
Thus he was favored with a kind of Translation, and his Spirit conveyed on
the Pinions of Angels to the Paradise of God, the Hades of the Blessed to adorn
the Heavenly World. When all Things are in readiness for our Removal our of the
World, it is a Privilege to be spared the sad Ceremony of parting, and all the
Pains and Struggles of feeble Nature Mrs. Rowe's Life.


Hereby our Glory is thinned, and a splendid Part of the Beauty of our Israel
fallen, or rather ascended!

His surviving Brethren with the Sons of the Prophets will be looking up and
crying after him as Elisha after Elijah, My Father, My Father, etc. 2 Kings
2.12.


All New England is called to mourning on this solemn Occasion, as Israel was
for their Moses, their Aaron, their Samuel, etc. and should pay all due Honors
to his Remains and Memory, as to a Jehoiada of whom it is said -- He had done
good in Israel, both toward God, and toward his House. 2 Chronicles. 24.16.


We have often (of late Years) been called to utter our Sorrows, upon seeing
the Execution of that divine Threatening, " For behold the Lord, the Lord of
Hosts, does take away -- The Prophet, and the Prudent, and the Ancient -- and
the eloquent Orator. Isa. iii. 1, 2. Several aged and excellent Ministers have
lately died, and several younger Ones also.
-- Which brings to my Mind a Saying of the great Mr. How (in a Dedication of
a Sermon upon the Decease of the Rev. Mr. Matthew Mead) "Such excellent Persons
leave this World so fast, that it grows a more difficult Choice, with whom to
live, than with whom to die!"

May a double Portion of the Spirit of Piety, Industry, Fidelity, Candor,
Catholicism, Generosity, Charity, etc. which eminently dwelt in, and was
exercised by this deceased Servant of God rest upon, and be increased to all
surviving Ministers through the Land, and Christian World: -- And particularly
on the dear young Pastor of that Flock of Christ, to whom our Reverend Father
so long ministered.

And may this Breach (wide as the Sea) be soon repaired by our glorious
Mediator, JESUS, with whom is the Residue of the Spirit (and all needful
precious Gifts for his Church) by fixing some eminent Man of God over the
Congregation, in whose Light, Influence and Usefulness, they and all
New England may again and long rejoice.

May the God of all Consolations abound in his divine Supports and reviving
Comforts to all bereaved Relatives and Friends: And in special Favor take up
in the Arms of his Providence and Grace, the dear and only remaining Branch,
and so form, and furnish, and spirit him for Service, in his Generation, that
he may adorn the Memory of his great and good Grandfather.

May the honored and bereaved Church and Congregation in Brattle-Street (for
whom the Deceased ever expressed the highest Esteem and Honor, the tenderest
Love and Affection, both in his Youth and Age, and to whom by his Will, he
bequeathed a select valuable Number of Books out of his Library, for the Use of
their Pastors in all Times to come, besides a Sum of Money for their Poor,)
Remember them which have had the Rule over them, who have spoken to them the
World of the Lord, and follow their Faith, considering the End of their
Conversation.

It is not my Province here to exhort, counsel and direct you -- Yet permit me
to say, your excellent Pastors (now with God) speak unto you in their many
useful Publications (left in your Hands) with all Wisdom and Pungency.

Some Paragraphs, especially in the late Dedication and Address made to you
before the Sermon on the Death of your first honored and beloved Cooper, which
is in your Hands, are recommended to your serious Review.

If any should enquire concerning the Person of Dr. Colman, in what Kind of
Body, this bright and holy Soul was lodged;

His Form was spare and slender, but of a Stature tall, and erect above the
common Height; his Complexion fair and delicate; his Aspect and Mien benign
and graceful; Vultu et Sermon benigna.
and his whole Appearance amiable and venerable. There was a peculiar Flame and
Dignity in his Eye; which he could soften and manage with all the Beauty and
Force of Oratory; but still natural, and without the least Affectation. Wisdom
and Grace made his Face to shine; especially while praying or preaching, when
we beheld him, like another Stephen, his Face as it had been the Face of an
Angel. A reverend and worthy Brother, who was so kind as to send me several
fair Lines toward perfecting the above Description of the Doctor's Person,
writes, "I have seldom seen or heard him in the Charms of his Pulpit Attitude
and Utterance, without raising in my Mind Sir Richard Blackmore's fine Lines on
his Orator Tylon which seem made on Purpose for the Doctor. -- Whose charming
Tongue was never matched, A sacred Man, a venerable Priest,
Who never spoke and Admiration mist.
He seemed express on Heaven's high Errand sent,
As Moses meek, as Aaron eloquent.
Nectar divine flows from his heavenly Tongue,
And on his Lips charming Persuasion hung.
When he the sacred Oracles revealed,
Our ravished Souls, in blessed Enchantments held,
Seemed lost in Transports of immortal Bliss;
No simple Man could ever speak like this!
He triumphed over our Souls, and at his Will,
Bid this touched Passion rise, and that be still.
Lord of our Passions, he with wondrous Art,
Could strike the secret Movements of our Heart,
Release our Souls and make them soar above,
Winged with divine Desires, and Flames of heavenly Love.

And his neat and clean Manner of Dress, and genteel, complaisant Behavior,
Politeness and Elegance in Conversation, set off his Person to the best
Advantage.

His Picture drawn in the Year 1734, by the greatest Master our Country has
seen, Mr. John Smibert, shows both his Face and Air to Perfection: And a very
considerable Resemblance is given us in the Metsotinto done from it by Mr. P.
Pelham, which is in many of our Houses.

To finish this lovely and sublime Character, we shall conclude with the
public Honors done him before the Fathers of his Country, on the Commencement
after his Departure, in the Oration of Mr. HOLYOKE, the Reverend and Learned
President of Harvard College, at the Close of the Academical Acts.

-- "Finem ideo facerem, nisi quod Morem juxta Societatis nostrae solennem,
Viros illos praestantes, Quorum Obitu, et Populus et Ecclesiae, Societasque
nostra, Damnum lethale proximo Anno sustinuere (Pastorum nempe Ecclesiarum
quarundam Nov-Anglicarum) Meum commemorare foret; Viros scil. Reverendos Dom.
Josephum Lord Chathamensem, Dom. Samuelem Moody Eboracensem, Dom. Johannem
Prentice Lancastriensem, Dom. Thomam Cheney de Brookfield, Dom. Joshuam Gee
Bostoniensem, Dom. Theophilum Pickering Ipsuicensem et Dom. S. Clap de Woburn,
Quorum nonnullos Ecclesiae praecipue lugent, de Caeteris Ecclesiae non tantum,
Nov-Anglia autem universa, Societasque nostra potissimum, Luctibus indulgent;
Quibus Omnibus, egregie licet ornatis, Virum vere Reverendum BENJAMINEM COLMAN
long praecellere, Nemo non facile confitebitur, Societatis Qui nostrae, per
Annos quamplurimos Socius fuit, Deinde Praeses electus, apud Glascuenses nec
non S. S. Theologiae Doctor, per Annos denique quinquaginta fere Minister Jesu
Christi fidelissimus, Cujus Mortem, Nobis infelicem, satis quomodo flebimus!
Perelegantis etenim fuit, mollisque Ingenii Vir, Suavitate Morum eximia
Eruditione pariter ac ornatissima praeditus: Concionator fuit vere millifluus,
Generosus consummatus, cum primis autem Christianus candidus and apertus, unde
Morte cum sua congredi, optime paratus fuit; Morre sua, non dico repentina,
ejusmodi quippe, semper paratis evenire nequit.

Quod vero ad Societatem nostram; Damnum est gravissimum, etiam Fide majus;
Nobis etenim fuit Amicus vere indefessus, etiam Benefactor maximus propemodum
dixeram; Ex Officiis etenim civilibus Sibi propriis, Beneficia illa egregia
FAMILIA ex HOLLISSIANA Londinensi nobilissima, in Nos collate fuere, ut ex
abundanti testatur, Gener ejus Reverendus, Qui Vitae ejus amabilis Historiam,
Typis mandaturus est. Open quinetiam ejus assidua, Eruditorum multi, Atlanticum
ultera, Opera sua inaestimabilia, in Nos contulerunt. Ne Multa; Vita ejus
utilissima, in Rebus Charitatis, Humanitatis, Benignitatis et Beneficentiae,
nunquam non occupata fuit. Prae Detrimento jamusque hoc ingenti, Solamen Nobis
nullum est, nisi quod Servi fidelis Praemium, in Caelis, jampridem acceperit,
Nomen et ejus memorabile, Odorem optime redolentem, per Secula diffunder.

A Catalogue of Dr. COLMAN'S Works.
1702. Faith victorious. An Artillery Sermon, from Heb. xi. 33. 1707. The
Government and Improvement of Mirth, 3 Sermon. from Jam. v. 13. Imprecation
against the Enemies of God lawful and a Duty: A Sermon from Psalm lxviii. 1.
Practical Discourses on the Parable of the Ten Virgins. Elijah's Mantle: A Poem
on the Death of the Rev. Mr. S. Willard. 1708. The Rulers Piety and Duty: A
Sermon from 2 Chronicles. xxx. 22. On the Union of the two Kingdoms England and
Scotland: A Sermon from Psalm cxxii. 6, 7, 8, 9. 1711. The Duty and Honor of
aged Women, from Titus ii. 3. A Funeral Sermon on Madam Abigail Foster. 1713. A
Discourse of seeking God early, from Prove. viii. 17. The heinous Nature of the
Sin of Murder, from Psalm. li. 14. 1714. A devout Contemplation on the Meaning
of divine Providence in the early Deaths of pious and lovely Children, from
Jer. ix. 21. A Funeral Sermon on Mrs. Elizabeth Wainwright. 1715. A humble
Discourse of the Incomprehensibleness of God, in four Sermons from Job xi. 7,
8, 9. The precious Gifts of the ascended Savior. A Sermon from Ephesians. iv. ^ --
11. The Blessing and Honor of fruitful Mothers. A Sermon from Genesis xxxiii. 5.
preached at the Baptism of his Daughter. The happy End of a holy and useful
Life. A Sermon upon the Death of te Hon. Isaac Addington, Esquire from Acts xiii.
36. Divine Compassions magnified. A Sermon. An Enquiry into the Death of good
Men, a Funeral Sermon on the Death of the Rev. Mr. Thomas Bridge, from Number.
xxxiii. 38. 1716. The Warnings of God unto young People from Prove. i. 10. The
Honor and Happiness of the virtuous Woman. A Funeral Sermon on the Death of
Mrs. Elizabeth Hirst, from Prove. xxxi. 28. A Sermon for the Reformation of
Manners, from Psalm. li. 13. Our Father's Sins confessed with our own. A Sermon
from Psalm. cvi. 6. A Thanksgiving Sermon for the Suppression of the late vile
and traitorous Rebellion in Great Britain, from 1 Kings x. 9. 1717. A Sermon at
the Rev. Mr. William Cooper's Ordination, from 2 Timothy ii. 1 A Funeral Sermon on
the Deaths of the Rev. Messir^. Brattle and Pemberton, from John ix. 4. A holy
Walk before God in Truth. A Funeral Sermon upon the Death of Grove Hirst, Esquire
with his Remains annexed. The Rending of the Vail of the Temple. A Sermon from
Mark xi. 38. Five Sermons on the strong Man armed, from Luke xi. 21, 22. A
Discourse of the Pleasure of religious Worship in our public Assemblies. A
Sermon from Psalm cxxii. 1. 1718. An Election Sermon, from Ne^. v. 19. 1719.
The Blessing of Zebulun and Issachar. A Sermon from Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 18, 19.
Reasons for a Market in Boston. 1720. Ossa Josephi: A Funeral Sermon on
Governor Dudley, from Heb. xi. 22. Early Piety inculcated, from Eccl. xii. 1.
1721. The Hope of the Righteous in their Death. A Funeral Sermon on William
Harris, Esquire from Prove. xiv. 32. Early Peity toward Men. A Sermon from Ephesians. vi.
2. Some Observations on Inoculation. 1722. Jacob's Vow. A Sermon from Genesis
xxxiii. 20, 21. Moses a Witness to Christ. A Sermon at the Baptism of Mr.
Monis. A converted Jew, and now Hebrew Professor at Harvard-College.
1723. An Election Sermon, from 1 Chronicles. xxxiii. 8. God deals with us as
Rational Creatures; a Sermon from Isa. i. 10. The Duty of Parents to pray for
their Children. A Sermon from 1 Chronicles. xxix. 19. The Death of Saints precious
in God's Sight. A Sermon on Madam Steel, from Psalm. cxvi. 15. A blameless and
inoffensive Life; a Sermon on the Death of Mr. David Stoddard, from Phil. i.
10. The Prophet's Death lamented and improved. A Funeral Sermon on Dr. Increase
Mather, from Isa. iii. 1, 2. 1724. The Master taken up from the Sons of the
Prophets. A Sermon on the Death of President Leverett, from 2 Kings ii. 3.
1725. The Doctrine and Law of the holy Sabbath, two Sermons from Exodus xxxi.
12, 13. 1726. It is a fearful Thing to fall into the Hands of the living God. A
Sermon preached to Pirates, from Heb. x. 31. 1727. Parents and Children at the
Table of Christ. A Sacramental Discourse from Luke ii. 41, 42. Prayer to the
Lord of the Harvest. A Sermon from Matthew. ix. 38. at the Ordination of Mr.
Pemberton of New York. Fidelity of Christ, and the Protestant Succession. On
King GEORGE the Second's Accession. Five Sermons on the great Earthquake, from
Ezekiel. x. 2 and Isa. xxiv. 6. 1728. Enoch's holy Walk, and glorious Translation.
A Funeral Sermon on Dr. Cotton Mather, from Genesis v. 24. Twenty Sacramental
Sermons on the Glories of Christ. The Duty of young People to give their Hearts
to God -- because they are his Offspring. Four Sermons from Prove. xxiii. 26.
and Acts xvii. 28. Death and the Grave without any Order. A Sermon from Job x.
22. A Treatise on Family Worship. 1729. The faithful Ministers of Christ
mindful of their own Death. A Funeral Sermon on the Death of the venerable Mr.
Solomon Stoddard, from 2 Pet. i. 13, 14. The Credibility of the Christian
Doctrine of the Resurrection; a Sermon on the Death of William Welsted, Esquire
from Acts xxvi. 8. 1730. Government the Pillars of the Earth. A Sermon from 1 Samuel ii. 8. on Governor Belcher's Accession. A Peaceful Doath in a good old
Age. A Sermon on the Death of the Hon. Simeon Stoddard, Esquire from Genesis xv. 15.
1731. The Friend of Christ, and of his People. A Funeral Sermon on Thomas
Hollis, Esquire from John xi. 11. 1732. The Grace given us in the preached Gospel.
A Sermon from Ephesians. iii. 8. 1733. God is a great King. A Sermon from Mal. i. 14.
1734. The Fast which God has chosen. A Sermon from Isa. lviii. 5. 1735.
Reliquiae Turellae: Two Funeral Sermons from Lev. x. 3. and 2 Samuel xii. 23. on
the Death of his eldest Daughter. A Dissertation on the three first Chapters of
Genesis. 1736. Peace the happy End of a perfect and upright Life. A Funeral
Sermon on Thomas Steel, Esquire from Psalm. xxxvii. 37. A Dissertation on the Image
of God, wherein Man was created, from Genesis i. 27. Merchandise and Hire Holiness
to the Lord: A Sermon from Isa. xxiii. 18. Righteousness and Compassion the
Ruler's Duty and Character: A Sermon from Zech. vii. 8, 9. 1737. The divine
Compassions new every Morning. A Sermon from Lam. iii. 23. Waiting on God in
our Straits and Difficulties. A Sermon from Jer. xiv. 22. 1738. Christ standing
a^ Ensign of the People; And Artillery Election Sermon from Isa. xi. 10. 1739.
The Unspeakable Gift. A Sermon from 2 Cor. ix. 15. Faithful Pastors, Angels of
the Churches: A Funeral Sermon on the Rev. Mr. Peter Thacher, from Rev. i. 20.
The withered Hand stretched forth and restored: A Sermon from Mark iii. 5.
1740. The faithful Servant in the Joy of his Lord. A Funeral Sermon on the Hon.
Samuel Holden, Esquire from Mat. xxv. 21, 22. Pleasant to see Souls flying to
Christ: A Sermon from Isa. lx. 8. 1741. The Lord shall rejoice in his Works. A
Sermon on Governor Shirley's Accession, from Psalm. civ. 31. 1742. The World of
God magnified by him: A Sermon from Psa. cxxxviii. 2. The Glory of God's Power
in the Firmament: A Sermon from Psalm cl. 1. 1743. JESUS weeping over his dead
Friend: A Funeral Sermon on the Death of the Rev. Mr. William Cooper, from John
xi. 35. 1744. Satan's fiery Darts in hellish Suggestions, in several Sermons
from Job ii. 9, 10. 1746. One chosen of God and called to the Work of the
Ministry, willingly offering himself: A Sermon at the Ordination of the Rev.
Mr. Samuel Cooper, from Isa. vi. 8. The Vanity of Man as mortal: A Funeral
Sermon on the Hon. Mrs. Frances Shirley, from Psalm. lxxxix. 47.
FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
I Had (with no small Labor) prepared a large Appendix to the foregoing
Narrative, containing many curious and entertaining Pieces in Prose and Verse
(which I laid by in my Searches and Researches, among the Doctor's Papers) some
of which I found would not stand well under either of the Ten Chapters -- And
others came too late to Hand to be inserted in their proper Places. But --
These must not lie buried for Want of sufficient Subscriptions and
Encouragement to the Undertakers; and by Reason the Book's already swelling to
a Bulk beyond the Expectation and DESIRE OF SOME of the Subscribers.

I would add concerning the Narrative it self "That upon a Review, I have
discerned a few Mistakes and seeming Inconsistences (and doubtless my Readers
will see more) scil. In the Doctor's Character of Mrs. Row, P. 40. he says,
"She had only her Mother Tongue," I am inclined to think, that even when the
Doctor was acquainted with her, she had Knowledge in the French and Italian
Languages, although he was ignorant of it to the Day of her Death, For in like
Words he gives her Character in a public Print of April 28. 1737, upon the
News of her Decease.
not only from what the worthy Author of her Life says, P. 20. but also from
what we read in Dr. Watts's Preface to his Horae Lyricae written 1709, wherein
he mentions his Obligations to her for directing him to some foreign Authors.
-- And this (by the Way) shows that one may be intimately acquainted with a
Person, and yet remain ignorant of some of their Accomplishments and
Circumstances of Life, as I hint in my Marginal Note, Page ibid: -- My short
Note on Mr. Henry Groves's Acquaintance with Mrs. Row, might have been spared;
for if it be the same Gentleman whose Poem stands before Dr. Watts's Horae
Lyricae, dated 1706, it is highly probable he might have had a long
Acquaintance with the Lady; but be it ever so long my Remarks on his denying
the Story stand good.

In Page 59, Part of the 21st and 22d Lines should have been omitted, (being
mere Repetitions) viz. which he served and and an Abstract of the Rev. Dean's
Deed, so far as relates to the Use he has directed the Estate to, should have
been inserted, which I have since seen and find the Gift made in a more
catholic Manner than was feared, and yet attended with some undesirable
Conditions. In Page 78 Margin read Dr. Jurin -- Page 114 Margin next to Thomas
Hutchinson, Andrew Oliver, Esquire should have been named -- Page 183 Margin first
Line, read a Minister instead of Ministers -- Among the Inaccuracies, is Dr.
Colman's being too often styled Doctor, before he had received his Diploma --
All other lesser Mistakes may be mended by the candid intelligent Reader --

E. T.

Now in the Press, Dr. WATTS's Book ^^titled, Orthodoxy and Charity united: In
several Reconciling ESSAYS ON THE Law and Gospel, Faith and Works; VIZ.

ESSAY I. The Substance or Matter of the Gospel. II. The Form of the Gospel.
III. The Use of the Law under the Gospel. IV. Mistaken Ways of coming to God
without Christ. V. A plain and easy Account of Saving Faith, or coming to God
by Jesus Christ. VI. A Reco^ciling Thought on various Controversies about Faith
and Salvation. VII. Against Uncharitableness. VIII. The Difficulties in
Scripture, and the different Opinions of Christians. IX. A^ Apology for
Christians of ^^fferent Sentiments.
Subscriptions are taken in by Ro^^rs and Foul in Queen Street, Boston.

The Price to Subscribers will be ^^^rty Shillings, Old Tenor, bound and gilt.

Those who subscribe for six Books shall have a seventh gratis.

To be Sold by Rogers and Foul in Queen Street, and J. Edwards in Corubi^^.
Practical Discourses on the Parable of the Ten Virgins. Being a serious Call
^^d Admonitions to Watchfulness and Diligence in preparing for Dea^^ ^^d
Judgment. By BENJAMIN COLMAN, D. D. late Pastor of a Church in Boston,
New England.

To be Sold by Rogers and Foul in Queen Street. A SUMMARY, H^storical and
Political, Of the first Planting, Progressive ^mprovements, and Present State
of the British Settlements in North America; with some transient Accounts of
the Bordering French and Spanish Settlements. By WILLIAM DOU^LASS, M. D.

Thirty Numbers of this History are already published, and will be continued in
like N^mbers (at 2 s Old Tenor each) till the History is completed.


