Massachusetts in Agony: OR, Important Hints To the Inhabitants of the
PROVINCE: Calling aloud for Justice to be done to the Oppressed; and avert the
Impending Wrath over the Oppressors.

By Vincent Sentinel.

Pleraque eorum quae homines (...) ARISTOT. 2. Pol. Cap. 7. When Accusations
proceed, NOT from MALICE, but a just and kind Zeal for the Honor and Safety of
our Country, it is by all Means requisite to Hear, to well Examine them, (...)
them as Informations ^^solutely (...) for (...) the State, for good (...)
Rewards to those who would accuse his (...) Crime. D. D. S. Fax^rdo's (...) --
Sure some Ill approaches,
And some kind Spright knocks softly at my Soul,
To tell me Fate's at Hand. --
Don Sebastian. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by D FOUL in Queen Street. 1750.

JUST PUBLISHED. And Sold by D. FOUL in Queen street, Price 4s. O. Ten. each
Number,
Memoirs of the Remarkable Life and Surprising Adventures of Miss JENNY
CAMERON, a Lady, who by her Attachment to the Person and Cause of the young
Pretender, has rendered herself famous by her Exploits in his Service; and for
whose Sake she underwent all the Severities of a Winter's Campaign. By the Rev.
Archibald Arbuthnot.

The Author of this entertaining HISTORY says, "I am encouraged to undertake
the above WORK, as I am intimately acquainted with Miss (...) and her Family,
and have known the Manner of her Life and (...) Junction with the PRETENDER;
and therefore the Facts I shall relate of her may be depended upon as true.

Massachusetts in Agony.
What-e'er Assistance I have Power to bring,
TO oblige my Country or to serve my King,
When-e'er they call, I Will readily afford,
My Tongue, my Pen, my Counsel, or my Sword.
BUT,
Whoever thinks a perfect Piece to see --
Thinks what never was, nor is, nor ever shall be.

THAT this Province is in a deplorable Situation, none can justly deny. How it
came to be in such dreadful Circumstances, is an important Inquiry; and how to
REMEDY the Evils we now suffer, is Matter of the highest Concernment, of the
utmost Consequence. Poverty and Discontent appear in every Face, (except the
Countenances of the Rich,) and dwell upon every Tongue. Trade and Business, (as
Birds leave an inclement Climate) are flying away. -- Children leave their aged
Parents and go off among Strangers, Provision (...) scarce, few Inhabitants,
Taxes high, (...) Clothing dear, Fuel dear, CREDITORS (...) is our Condition
that the Hand cannot feed the (...) and what is so Rebellious as the Belly!
Hunger (...) break through Brick Walls -- As in the Body Natural there is a
Sickness unto Death, so in the Political Body, there may be a Distemper of
equal Malignity -- But before Application is made, the Nature of the Disease
must be inquired into, and known, and then the most likely Medicines must be
duly administered, whether in a chyrurgical or physical Manner: For some
Distempers are not to be cured by Mercurial Preparations, but by the Saw, and
the Knife. --

WE are greatly Disordered, whatever Name you give the Disorder, our Right
Hands, and our Right Eyes offend us, and in such a Case the GREATEST PHYSICIAN,
ordered that the one should be cut off, and the other plucked out, for we had
Infinitely better do so, than that our whole Body should perish forever. --

EVERY one must know in a political Sense, what is here meant by the right
Hand, and right Eye, and what they denote in a figurative Sense. --

As our Distemper is not only Violent but Malignant, it therefore requires
Means, and Application accordingly.

IF we examine closely into the Nature of our Difficulties, from what Cause and
Source they Spring, trace them up to the Beginning; We shall find that they are
not naturally brought upon ourselves, but absolutely forced upon us, by
Cunning, and by Power; through Lust of Power, Lust of Fame, Lust of Money;
through Envy, Pride, Covetousness, and violent Ambition. The Bite of a mad Dog
is not more dangerous or incurable, than Ambition. Whenever you see any Set,
or Party of Men (...) Rich and Powerful, they immediately grow (...), and spurn
at all beneath them, that (...) their immediate Slaves. Hence it is that (...),
the Liberty and Happiness of the People of New England which they have for so
long a Time enjoyed, is so powerfully struck at. -- It is unquenchable Torment,
to an ambitious Man, who is pretty Rich, to behold his Neighbor happy, and
free in the Enjoyment of a few Acres of Land, with his Cow, his Horse, and his
Cart, -- He actually wants this very Man on his own Farm, working very hard
indeed, for just his daily Bread; except he allows him one single Moment to
(...) one Glance of his Eye upon this Great Lord of the Manor; his gilded
Equipage, Party-colored Attendants, and himself besmeared with Gold -- If such
Men had their Wills, there should no common Man own a Canoe, Fishing Boat,
Sloop, or the like; but they should Fish, go a Coasting, cross the Seas as
their Servants; nor should any Countryman own one Inch of improved Land between
Boston and the Blue Hills -- This Spirit has been reigning some Years; and as
there was no way better to bring this Scheme about, than to deceive the People
into Debt over Head and Ears, so they have contrived a Scheme, to have no Money
amongst Us, but such as they can send away as fast they please; they frighten
our Spinners and Weavers away; We cannot make our own Cloths, and they Import
all Sorts of Goods to get us into their Debts, then we must sell our Lands to
pay them; then go, and Work upon their Farms, or Starve, or go to Sea as their
Slaves, or go to -- Jail. --

Such Humanity, such Generosity, such Brotherly Love may many soon expect to
have conferred upon them from such Patrons of this Country. -- When such Men by
striving to be very Great, and despise being Good, -- do they not commit a most
sacrilegious Breach of Trust! Such Men (says a noble Author) appear like
Ministers of Divine Vengeance, and their Course through the World is marked by
Desolation, Oppression (...) Poverty and Servitude.

There has been a Time, when the People of New England were sober, frugal and
honest, when there was actually the Power, as well as the Form of Godliness, --
Brotherly Kindness, and real Charity, when the Produce, the Trade and Commerce
of this Country were equal to all the Imports from foreign Parts: But in
Proportion as any grew Rich, they grew Ambitious, and as Persons in a Dropsy,
the more they drink, the greater their Thirst, so the more Money they got, the
more they coveted, Covetousness being the Root of all Evils, brought on
Hypocrisy, for they could not serve two Masters; but they actually served
Mammon, and pretended to serve God -- The bad Examples of these Demas's were
very Infectious; and soon spread through the Country, so that by and by, the
Pride and Extravagance of the People increased with their Numbers, and the more
Pride and Extravagance the more Idleness; and when Peoples Ambition is greater
than their Purses, they soon get into Debt, and when in Debt, they are actually
Servants to their Creditors, being then under their Power, and the more
Servants, the greater the Lords.

The most critical Conjuncture, that ever happened in Favor of this Scheme
was, the great Expedition against Louisbourg -- the Covetous and Ambitious
Sharpers had two Whip Rows in this Game! First, they knew that a great Sum of
Money must be Emitted to Negotiate this important Affair; Money is the Sinews
of War, the Blood in the Body of Trade, the Merchants Tools; in a Word, it
answers all Things; Money must be paid for all the Baggage, Clothing,
Transportation, and the like -- These material Articles were all in these Men's
Hands, and these Men knew the Committee of War must purchase these Stores of
them; and for fear the Expedition should not succeed, and the Parliament at
home in such Case Reimburse the Government, and so these Men put to some (...)
make their Remittance in any thing -- save (...) of the Country, which they
sometimes loose by; to prevent these Things, they demanded a most exorbitant
astonishing Price for their Commodities; and as a Salvo, violently exclaimed
against the Government's Money, as good for nothing, that it would soon take a
Cart Load of it, to buy a Cart Load of Hay! -- But then Secondly, in Case the
Expedition should succeed, then it was certain, or more than probable, the
Government would be Reimbursed the greatest Part of the vast Expense they had
been at in carrying on so prodigious an Affair, and as these Men had the
Government's Bills chiefly in their Hands, consequently the Sterling Money
would mostly center with them: and just so it has most fatally happened. They
divided the Skin before they had caught the Beast, so that as bad as Old Tenor
was in their Mouths, it is the best Money that ever was made for them; and we
wish they themselves were one half as good as the worst of our Currency.
Thirdly, We shall now show how these Men improved this Paper-stuff. They
immediately bought up all the Silver, Gold, Bills of Exchange, and every kind
of Article that would possibly sell in England, etc, to lodge Money there, to
pay their Sterling Debts, in order to Enhance and Establish their Credit; so
that they might the more freely import larger Quantities of Goods, to Entice
and Cajole the more vain and silly part of the People, (which generally are the
greatest part of all Communities,) out of their Old Tenor, which would be
somewhat plenty for a little while -- this they Effected, by Importing
prodigious Quantities of English Goods, so that you saw no Body now, but what
was topingly dressed in Velvet, rich Race, Scarlet, Crimson, etc. etc. --
Strange! that they should part with such things for Paper that was of such
little Value. But it must be so. -- Now, they had collected vast Sums of this
Old Tenor, (as it was called through very great Cunning and Subtilty,) what
should they do with it? I Will tell you -- they let it be well known, that as
they had a pretty deal of Money, they would lend it out to any Body, that would
hire it, giving Security for the interest; away come the Borrowers, take up
many Score thousand Pounds of the New Tenor Money, which was Emitted, upon a
better Promise than Old Ten, because they promised so many Ounces of Silver,
wherefore they took Bonds for as many Ounces of real Coined Silver absolutely,
full Security, and Interest enough -- What is next to be done? why the next
thing was, to settle all Accounts -- they did so; and all those that were not
immediately able to pay -- them their Balances, gave them their Bonds, for so
many Ounces of real Silver Sterling Alloy, etc. -- And what is next: Why, the
next thing was all of a sudden, they stopped all CREDIT. As Bad, as Old, or
Middle Tenor, or New Tenor, (or what Tenor you please,) as bad as these Tenors
were, these SHARPERS, would not part with their Commodities without the Money
down in hand ******* that it was not very long, before they Scrabled, Graspt,
and Collected this D -- d Paper Money into their own Possession. --

They had sold their Goods for two or three Hundred per Ct. Profit, and then
let out their Money for good Silver, with stout Security, and so got all the
Old Tenor quite clear in their Pockets! -- [Sed Caput est in Omnia Rep. ut
Legibus and Alia omnia Oratione provisum sit, ne qua facultas quoestus faciendi
Magistratibus relinquatur, says ARISTOT.]

No Wonder such Men can build Ships, Houses, buy Farms, set up their Coaches,
Chariots, live very splendidly, purchase Fame, Posts of Honor, (if any besides
themselves think there is any Honor in it,) no wonder such People want all to
themselves; for generally speaking, the more Riches, the less Wisdom, and often
the heavier the Purse, the lighter the Head; and when People are lightheaded,
they make a queer Figure --

But to proceed.

^^ay did not these Things open Peoples Eyes? Yes they did: and they opened
them so wide, that the first Things they saw were Fetters, that they were bound
Hand and Foot, utterly undone, both they, and their Children forever: and they
cannot now close their Eyes, for weeping bitterly, now they feel, they feel as
well as see!

We might now go on, and tell you, who are the Men, that carried on this deep
Plot, and what were the Methods they used to bring it to such Perfection -- As
to the Men, we shall give no other Description of them, than by saying, they
are all the Men in the P -- v -- ce of the Massachusetts that have grown very
remarkably Rich and Great, High, and Proud, since the Year 1742.

As to the Methods they used, we shall just hint at them and so leave them --
First, they frightened the G -- C -- by always telling them that their
Predecessors were D -- d, and gone to H -- for not promising Silver at so much
an Ounce in their first Paper Money (commonly called Old Tenor,) they made them
repent of this Sin of Omission, they sat the Clergy to Work to preach
Repentance to the G -- C -- so that they might for the future make a Silver
Promise instead of a Paper one, or rather no Promise at all; if the Clergy did
this, then the Clergy would have their Salaries, and Stipends fixed, and for
this Reason, they preached, and preached about it, and about it, till at last,
it was actually done -- And this was the very first Step toward our UNDOING:
So that now, we need Repent of our Repentings. -- Pray what do you mean by
Undoings? Is it the Undoing of a People to make them Honest? to oblige them to
perform their Promises, and fulfill their Obligations? to oblige them to conform
to the Laws of their own enacting and publishing? To oblige them to return back
again what they actually Borrowed; and obliged themselves to pay? -- Is it
undoing a People when they have so much Liberty, (as the People in this Country
have) to confine them within narrower Bounds, to keep them under, to make them
Labor, etc.? No: But it is the undoing of a People, if clandestine, unjust,
false, and fraudulent Ways and Means have always been made use of, under the
Disguise of Hypocrisy, Cant, Craft, to bring a People into all imaginable
Distress, Tribulation and Want! Pray is not this undoing a People? Do you call
your Ways of Management the Ways of Honesty! to deceive People into such a
Trap, to give their Obligations for what they never had, and what you knew in
your own Souls they could not possibly get, nor even you yourselves, with all
your Cunning, could not get it, where it is not to be had. This is your
Artifice of Returning back again what they actually Borrowed. -- Have you the I
-- ce to say you actually lent Silver? and if you never lent any Silver, nor
had any to lend, and yet took Bonds for Silver, although you paid down only
Paper, Old Tenor -- pray how is your private Credit better than the public
Faith and Credit! The Go -- rn -- nt promise Silver, but have none, (but
expected to buy it of the Merchants, who should Import Silver and Gold) --
these Men take Bonds for Silver but lend none, nor is there any for a Medium of
Trade --

Is it Honest and Fair, to oblige me to get Silver, and pay it to you let it
cost me ever so dear, when you did not lend me any, nor take of me the very
Individual Bills I borrowed of you, although I pay you a great Interest! If
there is a Trick in all this, we hope the GOV -- NM -- T will do THEMSELVES
JUSTICE; and in so doing, Justice will be done to many who are now under
Bondage, Imprisonment, Servitude, and every Calamity -- And that there is an
abominable TRICK in this Management, none can now dispute, seeing these very
Men have got almost all the Money; I mean the Silver Money, the Hard Dollars,
they have got almost all these very Dollars, for the D -- d PAPER MONEY! -- Is
there no Trick in all this! -- When the Sun shines out bright and clear, at
Twelve o'Clock, Is it then Day! -- O LIBERTY! O VIRTUE! O MY COUNTRY! A
Thousand secret Terrors rise in my Soul:
How shall I save my Friends. --
When Vice prevails, and Impious Men bear Sway,
The Post of Honor is a private Station.
O my Countrymen! wont you believe when you Feel! What fine Stories were told
you about Liberty, Property, Money, Riches, and the like; how much of all these
you were to have, and enjoy in case you would venture against Cape Br -- n; you
did venture, you did succeed, and there has been much Money paid for it -- But
who has got it! Have you got it! Have any of your Officers got it, that were
upon the Spot, and underwent the intolerable Fatigue, the tremendous
Difficulties to accomplish such an amazing Affair, an Action that has set all
the World agape! -- Pray out of the one hundred and eighty three thousand
Pounds Sterling, out of above 733,000 Dollars, I say of all this Cape Br -- n
Money, that you freely spilt, your Fathers, Childrens, Brothers Blood for, and
for what you did, they were granted, and here sent by his sacred M -- sty King
GE -- GE! How many, I say again, how many have you received! -- You Run, you
Fought, you Bled, -- you Conquered -- Now -- of all the Riches, Plunder,
Stores, Armament, etc, etc. that by the Laws of Nature, Nations, and War were
yours, have you received Plunder enough, to buy you a Gun, or a Sword, or even
a Knapsack! -- And, are you to have no Satisfaction -- Does the half Pay that
is granted to a few Officers, amply reward and satisfy every one of you, so as
that you are now ready to go to War again? If you yourselves have not yet
received Benefit and Satisfaction, Do you think the Pr -- v -- ce, as a Pr -- v
-- ce, has received any Advantage? If the Pr -- v -- ce, as such, nor the Men
of the Army, our Soldiers, Captains, and fighting Men, have not received any --
where is it, who has got, what is become of it! Is it Sunk, Burnt, Lost, or
what is become of it -- Speak, what do you say! out with it. --

Oppressors, Oppressors! who are they! where do they live!

Satisfaction, Satisfaction --

[Deditque jura quis pace and principe Uteremur, Acriora ex eo Vincula inditi
Custodes -- Tac. Ann. 3. Such is the shocking Language of People in Agony, and
great Distress -- such alas is our fatal Case! -- We know our Distemper; We
know the dreadful Causes of it; And we now immediately want some able
Physicians, faithfully to prescribe and administer the only proper and
effectual MEDICINES, so that we may be healed, and recover our usual State of
Health again before we go hence.

This kind of Plague of a Distemper, is Imported here, and spread amongst us,
the Causes, and Instruments that have brought it amongst us, are Political and
Commercial, through Covetousness and insatiable Ambition, from a love of Power,
love of Prerogative, love of Money. And as these are the killing Causes of our
CONSTITUTION, we never again can possibly be made whole, until these
Instruments and Causes are finally removed, and we absolutely betake ourselves
to a proper Regimen, by living regularly, temperately, frugally, use suitable
Exercise, avoid bad Company, and bad Examples.

The first Thing then to be done, is immediately to cut off, and remove every
one, from any Share, from any Hand or Assistance in the Rule and Management of
our p -- k A -- s, that are greedy of Gain; for we may absolutely, and forever
depend upon it, as an unerring Rule, and Axiom in Politics, that the Sons of
Lucre will forever strenuously oppose all Methods, Schemes and Laws of the G --
ern -- t, that in any manner of way tends to interfere and clash with their
Views of INTEREST: and on the contrary, they will in the most eager, cunning
and indefatigable Manner endeavor to bring about and effect all such Schemes
and Laws, as will in any Shape have a tendency to augment and aggrandize their
own Fortunes, for they little regard who sinks, if they swim. Every Stone they
can turn, they certainly will turn, in order to gain their Point, and build
themselves up, so as none can throw them down: and they are such Birds of prey,
if they at last cannot find Carrion enough in one place, they will remove to
another -- Such Men are Enemies to all Communities -- wherever they live; such
Men therefore should not be suffered to both L -- e, and Rule too, wherefore it
is infinitely necessary to remove such out of Posts in the G -- ern -- t, and
never more suffer any such to Rule over others.

In an Election in the Roman State for a Governor of Spain, the Dispute lay
between Sulpicius Galba and Aurelius Cotta: SCIPIO being asked his Opinion,
Replied, he liked neither -- One for having NOTHING, the other, for that he had
NEVER ENOUGH.

Interest will not Lie, and those who are Sanguine, in the pursuit of Gain,
Riches, and Power, are dangerous Enemies in public Councils, and Affairs of
Government; GOD Almighty himself, who made the Heart of Man, and who alone
knows it, solemnly cautioned and warned Moses to choose only such Men, into
places of Government and public Trust, who HATED COVETOUSNESS.

How is it possible for him who seeks, and takes all Methods direct and
indirect, to plunder every Body he can; how can such an one, ever administer
Justice? Can the Ethiopian change his Skin?

Whoever Examines closely into our shocking Misfortunes, trace the Causes of
our dying Condition, will be at the Pains to separate, and untwist the Net we
are cau't in, whoever does this, will find, that Ambition and Avarice, were the
Grounds, and Foundation of bringing about the A -- of the G -- C -- with regard
to the Importation of the Money granted the G -- ern -- t, to Reimburse the G
-- ern -- t in part, for the Expense it was at in negotiating that vastly
important Affair -- They will actually see, as they now too sensibly feel, that
this very A -- and this very Money was the Means of bringing us into the
dreadful Calamities we now, so miserably (...) under, and so justly complain
of: They will be convinced, severely convinced, that this very A -- and all the
Miseries consequent upon it, were effected and brought to pass by Men in TRADE
and TRAFFIC, Sons of Ambition, Sons of Plutus, who sacrifice only to MAMMON:
-- This is the Truth, and this Truth we dare speak, we speak it to those, but
only to those, who were actually in the -- C -- l, actually in the H -- of R
--, who then were, and who still are seeking their own Interest only -- Who
love Money, and Power, and Prerogative; who are strong and violent Promoters of
a Silver Medium, in a Country in Debt, where Silver is as much a Commodity and
Merchandise, as Cattle, as Fish, as Iron, Hemp, Corn, and Pork; and as these
necessary Articles of the Life of the Body, and of Trade, rise and fall
according to Quantity, and Demand; so they are fluctuating higher and lower, as
they are wanted; so it will be forever in this Country, while Silver is only as
a Commodity in Trade; and this will be OUR CASE, till we have more Produce than
we can spend, and the Overplus we part with, to pay for such things as we do
want, from other Countries -- Whoever says any thing directly contrary to this
is a -- and the Truth is not in him -- Such Men cannot be said ever to die
before THEIR TIME, for it is high Time they were already D -- d.

" When by just Vengeance guilty Mortals perish,
" The Gods behold their Punishment with Pleasure.
The next Thing we humbly Propose, is, That whatever Quantity of Silver there
is now remaining in the Treasury i. e. If it can be done, either with, or
without petitioning Home.
, should be so ORDERED by the Go -- n -- nt, as to be kept still in the
Treasury, for the sole Use of the Pro -- ce, for a Fund, or Bank: And whatever
Sum in any Year, should be taken out of the Treasury, for the Go -- n -- nt's
Charges and Expenses, should be taxed upon the Pr -- nce to be paid into the
Treasury in real Silver: That every Custom, Duty, and all and every kind of
Shipping Charges whatsoever, should be always paid down in real Silver or Gold:
That all Cattle, Sheep, Oxen, Horses, Poultry, and all and every kind of LIVE
STOCK, That were Shipped off and Exported, should pay such a Duty to the
Government in Silver; as also the Price they are sold for by the Farmers,
should be paid by the Purchasers to the Farmers in Silver: That all Taxes upon
Chaise, Coaches, Chairs, etc. Should be paid in Silver: That every Ton of
English HAY that was Sold in the whole Province for Consumption in the
Province, should pay a Drawback of 5 per Cent in Silver; and every Ton of
English Hay that was exported out of the Government, to pay 10 per Cent, by the
Purchasers for the Use of the Government: To so effectually promote and
encourage our own Wheels and Looms, as to grant a handsome Bounty, to the
Makers of the first finest Piece of Yard wide Linen, the first finest Piece of
Yard wide Woolen Cloth; the first finest Dozen of Worsted, Thread, and Cotton
Stockings; the first finest Piece of Ozenbrigs, and Sail Cloth: To grant a
handsome Bounty, for every Ton of good Hemp, and good Flax, raised in the
Province: To grant a suitable Bounty, to every stout able Bodied Tradesman, and
Labourer, that will come and settle in this Province: To grant a suitable
Bounty to every young Couple that shall lawfully marry, and settle in this
Province; and give them a Reward of Twenty Pounds for their first Male Child,
to be paid them the Day after he is christened.

To permit the Money of our Neighboring Governments to pass as a Currency with
a just Discount.

To very greatly encourage our Commerce, and our most valuable FISHERY.

To levy a Tax of at least one per Cent on every Acre of good unimproved Land,
throughout the Province.

These are important Things: We do therefore most seriously propose, these, and
such like Things, for the real GOOD, Safety, Strength, and future PROSPERITY of
this our sinking P -- v -- ce. These Means will procure most happy Ends: Then
we shall have Silver and Gold, and Peace, and Industry.

" He, who a wandering Man his Way has shown,
" Lights to others Candle, and never hurt his own."
But, now, as Truth, Justice and Honor, are most sacred Things; and as this G
-- ern -- t is fast Bound under these strong Holds, with Regard to the
immediate paying and delivering all the Silver Money ( now in it --) out of the
Treasury, to the Possessors of the Bills of this Province; as this is actually
the Truth of the Case, the Govern -- t ought therefore in all Justice and
Honor, to perform their Promise; lest they stab their Honor, and greatly
Injure the Possessors of these Bills. -- But then, in Case this is actually
done immediately, -- as these very Gentlemen, who have now already got by them
these Bills, are perhaps principally trading Men, who most likely are in Debt
abroad for foreign Commodities, as soon as ever they do receive the Dollars out
of the Treasury, they will no doubt directly, (as they have a right, they
think, to do as they please with their own Cash,) send it out of the Country:
And then, as we are not yet in a good Way of IMPORTING of Silver and Gold from
other Countries, for the actual Produce of our own Country, being the only
right Means to procure a Silver Medium; And moreover, as this G -- ern -- t is
obliged to burn up all the Paper Currency of the Massachusetts now extant, and
not emit any more Paper Money; We shall then be in a very bad Situation, by
Means of having no Medium for Trade; Being most solemnly Sworn, not upon any
Consideration, (a prodigious Temptation to Perjury!) to touch any Bills emitted
by any of our Neighboring Provinces and Colonies, (a vast Damage to our own
Trade;) and (in fine --) as Nothing in Trade and Business is, or can be done,
without some Medium, some sort of Money. -- Shall we not then, and in this
Case, think ye, be in a most shocking, starving, and tu -- m -- l -- tu -- s
Condition! Ponder these Things well; think of them again; they are of the
weightiest Concernment, of the last Consequence.

But being under these Evils, being under such a perplexing Dilemma -- What is,
what can be done -- WISDOM and PRUDENCE teaches -- that of two Evils, choose
the least. Now the least of these Evils we humbly conceive, is, To absolutely
Stop, and for the present Keep the Silver Money still in the Province Treasury
-- and pay and deliver out but one Fifth Part to each Possessor of said Bills
YEARLY; -- So that by Duties, Taxes, Imposts, etc. -- our Treasury may be
always kept supplied, with a real Silver Fund or Bank FOR THE CREDIT OF THE GO
-- MT. And then, the Go -- nt, by an Act of Ge -- ral As -- bly, to allow, and
pay to each Possessor of the said Massachusetts Bills, lawful Interest for the
DELAY of PAYMENT, and then lay a Tax upon the whole Pro -- ce, for this very
Interest. -- This is just and right; it is Equity, and Judgment.

We shall then have suitable Time, by our Industry and Frugality, to provide
Things thus Honest, and of good Report. -- -- Thou now begin'st to speak thy
Self --
Numidia's grown a Scorn among the Nations
For Breach of P bl c V -- ws. Our Punic Faith
Is Infamous, and branded to a Proverb.
-- We'll join our Cares, to Purge away
Our Country's Crimes, and clear her Reputation.
Happy the People that preserve their Honor.


It Is wisely noted by a very great Statesman, -- That Casualities, which
cannot be foreseen, accuse not the Action; and to blame a Man for doing his
Endeavor, is Impudence. And though there are palpable Errors in some Resolves,
and Executions, yet we ought to bear it Calmly; for what is once done, cannot be
undone, -- We ought to reflect upon past Actions for Instruction. -- There is
no Government free from Faults: The greatest Prudence cannot give Counsel, which
will be proper at all Times, which makes it so absolutely necessary, to alter
RESOLUTIONS, REPEAL LAWS, STATUTES, etc. Thus He --

Another most celebrated and eminent Author, in the most pointed and nervous
Language, says -- It indeed is amazing, who thinks at all of the PUBLIC, should
be indifferent about it; it is more amazing, that any Man who has a Stake in
it, can avoid thinking of it, or be without Zeal for it: But it is most
amazing, that great Men, Men of Dignity and Fortune, of Splendour and Title, all
which can only be secure while the PUBLIC is so -- that they should not always,
in all Countries, be upon perpetual Guard against their own Ruin and
Debasement, and continually studying to support public Liberty, which only must
support them.

What a severe Reprehension is this, to all those who have neglected their Duty
in this Regard -- As the Eyes of a Servant are unto the Hands of his Master,
and as the Eyes of a Maiden are unto the Hands of her Mistress -- So our Eyes
are unto our Rep -- s, our G -- ar -- ans, our Ru -- s -- But how can our Eyes
be unto them, when they are not to be seen! --

If it is our Duty to serve God, and our Country, and if we know this to be our
Duty, and know that those who do not their Duty, when they know it, and are
called to it, ought to be beaten with many Stripes -- then the Consequence is
clear -- If in the Multitude of Co -- s -- rs there is Safety; what Condition
must those be in who cannot get the Co -- s -- rs together! -- Ita Stulti, sunt
ut amissa -- Republica, piseinas suas saluas videntur. -- They were such Fools,
(says the immortal CICERO,) to conclude, that though the Republic were LOST,
their Fish Ponds would remain secure -- How nearly it Imports all Men to Love
their Country! Our Duty abundantly increases, as our Difficulties increase. Oh!
Save my Country! were the dying Words of a true PATRIOT. But good Thoughts,
(said that second MOSES, Lord Bacon) with regard to Men, are little better than
good DREAMS, unless reduced to Action: Merit and good Works are the true End of
Man's Labor, and Consciousness of the same, is the perfection of Rest. And the
Lord looked, and beheld the Work of his Hands, and saw that all was Good: And
then follows the Sabbath. Thus, if a Man, can be a partaker of GOD's Work, he
shall also be a partaker of his Rest.

Thus did Hezekiah, throughout all Judah, and Wrote that which was Good, and
Right, and Truth, before the Lord his God -- And in every Work that he began,
in the Service of the House -- and in the LAW, and in the Commandments, to seek
his GOD -- He did it with all his Heart. --

[Oh! Wise Men! "Is there not some chosen Curse,
"Some hidden Thunder in the Stores of Heaven,
"Red with uncommon Wrath, to BLAST the Man,
Who Owes his Greatness, to his Country's Ruin!]
FINIS.
JUST PUBLISHED, And Sold by D. FOUL in Queen street, and D. GOOKIN in
Marlboro street, a Book entitled,
Janua Coelestis: Or, the Mystery of the GOSPEL in the SALVATION of a SINNER,
opened and explained; wherein the Nature of the Gospel Salvation is stated, the
Possibility of the Sinner's being (...) illustrated, and the great (...) of
every Soul is excited and enforced: In several DISCOURSES on ACTS 16. 30. By
JOHN BARNARD, A. M. Pastor of the first Church in Marblehead.

JUST PUBLISHED And Sold by D. FOUL in Queen street,
Some Observations relating to the present Circumstances of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay; Humbly offered to the Consideration of the GENERAL ASSEMBLY.


