Anno Regni GEORGII II. REGIS Magnae Britanniae, Franciae, and Hiberniae,
SECUNDO.

At the Parliament begun and holden at Westminster, Anno Dom. 1728. In the
Second Year of the Reign of Our Sovereign Lord GEORGE the Second, by the Grace
of God, of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc.



LONDON, Printed by John Basket, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty,
1728.

NEW LONDON, Reprinted by Timothy Green, Printer to the Governor and Company
of His Majesty's English Colony of Connecticut in New England, 1751.

Anno secundo Georgii II. Regis.
An Act for better Regulation of His Majesty's Woods in America; and for the
Encouragement of the Importation of Masts, Yards, and Bowsprits, from that Part
of Great Britain called Scotland.

By the King's Most Excellent Majesty, be it Enacted, by, After the 29 th of
September next, No Person within the Colony of Connecticut, etc. to cut, or
destroy any Pine Tree, except, etc.
and with the Advice, and Consent of the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and
Commons, in this Present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the
same, That from and after the Twenty ninth Day of September next, no Person or
Persons within the Colony of Connecticut, etc. do or shall Presume to Cut, Fell
or Destroy any White Pine Trees; except only such as are the Property of
Private Persons, notwithstanding the said Trees do grow within the Limits of
any Township laid out, or to be laid out hereafter in the said Colony, without
His Majesty's Royal License for so doing, first had and obtained.

And those who shall be Aiding or Assisting therein, On Penalty provided in an
Act made in the 8th Year of K. George I.
or in Drawing away the said Pine Trees, after the same shall be Cut and Fell,
shall be all subject to the like Penalties and Forfeitures as are Provided in
an Act in the Eighth Year of His Late Majesty, Entitled, An Act giving further
Encouragement for the Importation of Naval Stores, and for other Purposes
therein mentioned.


