Anno Regni GEORGII II. REGIS Magnae Britanniae, Franciae, and Hiberniae,
QUINTO.

At the Parliament begun and holden at Westminster, Anno Dom. 1732. In the
Fifth Year of the Reign of Our Sovereign Lord GEORGE the Second, by the Grace
of GOD, of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith,
etc..



LONDON, Printed by John Basket, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty,
1732.

NEW LONDON, Reprinted by Timothy Green, Printer to the Governor and Company
of His Majesty's English Colony of Connecticut in New England, 1751.

Anno quinto Georgii II. Regis.
An Act for the more Easy Recovery of Debts in His Majesty's Plantations, and
Colonies in America.
WHEREAS His Majesty's Subjects Trading to the British Plantations in America
lie under great difficulties, Preamble.
for want of more easy Method of Proving, Recovering, and Levying Debts due to
them, than are now used in some of the said Plantations. And whereas it will
tend very much to the Retrieving of the Credit formerly given by the Trading
Subjects of Great Britain, to the Natives, and Inhabitants of the said
Plantations, and to the advancing of the Trade of this Kingdom thither, if such
Inconveniences were Remedied.

May it therefore Please Your MAJESTY that it may be Enacted,

And be it Enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
Advice, and Consent of the Lord's Spiritual, After the 29th of Sept. 1732, in
any Action depending in a Court of Judicature in any of the Plantations, when
one Party resides in G. Brit. Proof may be bro't by Affidavits in Writing, upon
Oath, or Affirmation.
and Temporal, and Commons, in this Present Parliament Assembled, and by the
Authority of the same, That from, and after the Twenty-ninth Day of September,
which shall be in the Year of our Lord One thousand Seven hundred, and thirty
two, in any Action, or Suit then depending, or thereafter to be brought in any
Court of Law, or Equity in any of the said Plantations, for, or relating to any
Debt, or Account, wherein any person Residing in Great Britain shall be a
Party, it shall, and may be lawful to, and for the Plaintiff, or Defendant, and
also to, and for any Witness to be Examined, or made Use of in such Action, or
Suit to Verify, or Prove any Matter, or Thing by Affidavit, or Affidavits in
Writing upon Oath: Or in case the Person making such Affidavit be one of the
People called Quakers, then upon his, or her solemn Affirmation made before any
Mayor, or other chief Magistrate of the City, Borough, or Town Corporate in
Great Britain, where, or near to which the person making such Affidavit, or
Affirmation shall Reside, and Certified, and Transmitted under the Common Seal
of such City, Borough, or Town Corporate; or the Seal of the Office of such
Mayor, or other chief Magistrate: Which Oath, and solemn Affirmation every such
Mayor, and chief Magistrate shall be, and is hereby Authorized, and Empowered to
administer. And every Affirmative, or Affirmation so made, certified, and
transmitted, shall in all such Actions, and Suits be allowed to be of the same
Force, and Effect, as if the Person, or Persons making the same upon Oath, or
solemn Affirmation, as aforesaid, had Appeared, and Sworn, or Affirmed the
Matters contained in such Affidavit, or Affirmation ( viva voce) in Open Court,
or upon a Commission issued for the Examination of Witnesses, or of any Party
in any such Action, or Suit respectively: Provided, That in every such
Affidavit, and Affirmation, there shall be expressed the addition of the Party
making such Affidavit, or Affirmation, and the particular Place of his, or her
Abode.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in all Suits now
depending, Also all Suits by or in behalf of His Majesty. His Heirs and
Successors.
or hereafter to be brought in any Court of Law, or Equity, by, or in behalf of
His Majesty, His Heirs, and Successors, in any of the said Plantations, for, or
relating to any Debt, or Account that His Majesty, His Heirs, and Successors
shall, and may Prove His, and Their Debts, and Accounts, and Examine His, or
Their Witness, or Witnesses by Affidavit, or Affirmation, in like manner as any
Subject, or Subjects is, or are Empowered, or may do by this present Act.

Provided Always, And it is hereby further Enacted, That if any Person making
such Affidavit upon Oath, or solemn Affirmation, as aforesaid, Proviso.
shall be guilty of falsely, and wilfully Swearing, or Affirming any matter, or
thing in such Affidavit, or Affirmation, which if the same had been Sworn upon
an Examination in the usual Form would have amounted to wilful, and corrupt
Perjury: Every Person so Offending, being thereof Lawfully Convicted, shall
incur the same Penalties, and Forfeitures as by the Laws, and Statutes of this
Realm are provided against Persons Convicted of wilful, and corrupt Perjury.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the
said Twenty-ninth Day of September, One Thousand seven Hundred, After the said
29th of Sept. Houses Lands Negroes, and other Heriditaments, and Real Estate,
liable to answer Debts.
and Thirty two, the Houses, Lands, Negroes, and other Hereditaments, and Real
Estates, situate or being within any of the said Plantations, belonging to any
Persons Indebted, shall be Liable to, and Chargeable with all just Debts,
Duties, and Demands of what Nature, or Kind soever, Owing by any such Person to
His Majesty, or any of His Subjects; and shall, and may be Affects for the
satisfaction thereof, in like manner as Real Estates are by the Law of England
liable to the satisfaction of Debts due by Bond, or other Specialty, and shall
be subject to the like Remedies, Proceedings, and Process in any Court of Law,
or Equity, in any of the said Plantations respectively, for Seizing, Extending,
Selling, and Disposing of any such Houses, Lands, Negroes, and other
Hereditaments, and Real Estates, toward the satisfaction of such Debts,
Duties, and Demands, and in like manner as Personal Estates, in any of the said
Plantations respectively are Seized, Extended, Sold, or Disposed of for the
satisfaction of Debts.


