Anno Regni ANNAE REGINAE Magnae Britanniae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, SEXTO.

At the Parliament begun and holden at Westminster, Anno Dom. 1706, in the
sixth Year of the Reign of Our Sovereign Lady ANNE, by the Grace of God, of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Queen, Defender of the Faith, etc.

DIEU ET MON DROIT


LONDON, Printed by John Basket, Printer to the Queens most Excellent Majesty,
1706.

NEW LONDON, Reprinted by Timothy Green, Printer to the Governor and Company
of His Majesty's English Colony of Connecticut in New England, 1751.

Anno sexto Annae Reginae.
An Act for Ascertaining the Rates of Foreign Coins in Her Majesty's Plantations
in America.

WHEREAS for Remedying the Inconveniences which had arisen from the different
Rates at which the same Species of Foreign Silver Coins did Pass in Her
Majesty's several Colonies and Plantations in America, Preamble.
Her Most Excellent Majesty has thought fit by Her Royal Proclamation, bearing
Date the Eighteenth Day of June, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Four, and in
the Third Year of Her Reign, to Settle and Ascertain the Currency of Foreign
Coins in Her said Colonies and Plantations, in the Manner and Words following.

We having had under Our Consideration the different Rates at which the same
Species of Foreign Coins do pass in Our several Colonies, Foreign Coin passing in
He^ Majesty's Plantations in America.
and Plantations in America, and the Inconveniences thereof, by the indirect
Practice of Drawing the Money from one Plantation to another; to the great
prejudice of the Trade of our Subjects: And being sensible, That the same
cannot be otherwise Remedied, than by Reducing of all Foreign Coins to the same
Current Rate within all Our Dominions in America: And the principal Officers of
Our Mint having laid before Us a Table of the Value of the several Foreign Coins
which usually pass in Payments in Our said Plantations, according to their
Weight; and the Assays made of them in Our Mint, thereby showing the just
Proportion which each Coin ought to have to the other.

Which is as follows, Viz.

Sevill Pieces of Eight, Old Plate, Seventeen-peny Weight Twelve Grains, The
several sorts of Foreign Coins Stated
Four Shillings and Sixpence; Sevill Pieces of Eight, New Plate, Fourteen-peny
Weight, Three Shillings Seven-pence One-farthing; Mexico Pieces of Eight,
Seventeen-peny Weight Twelve Grains, Four Shillings and Sixpence; Pillar
Pieces of Eight, Seventeen-peny Weight Twelve Grains, Four Shillings and
Sixpence Three-farthings; Peru Pieces of Eight, Old Plate, Seventeen-peny
Weight Twelve Grains, Four Shillings and Five-pence, or thereabouts; Cross
Dollars, Eighteen-peny Weight, Four Shillings and Four-pence Three-farthings;
Ducatoons of Flanders, Twenty-peny Weight and Twenty One Grains, Five Shillings
and Sixpence; Ecu's of France, or Silver Lewis, Seventeen-peny Weight Twelve
Grains, Four Shillings and Sixpence; Crusadoes of Portugal, Eleven-peny Weight
Four Grains, Two Shillings and Ten-pence One-farthing; Three Gilder Pieces of
Holland, Twenty-peny Weight and Seven Grains, Five Shillings and Twopence One
Farthing; Old Rix Dollars of the Empire, Eighteen-peny Weight and Ten Grains,
Four Shillings and Sixpence: The Halfs, Quarters, and other Parts in
proportion to their Denominations; and Light Pieces in proportion to their
Weight.

Time Affixed to the Colonies as Plantations how to Receive or Pay said Foreign
Coins.
We have therefore thought fit for Remedying the said Inconveniences, by the
Advice of Our Council, to Publish and Declare, That from, and after the First
Day of January next Ensuing the Date hereof, no Sevill, Pillar, or Mexico
Pieces of Eight, though of the full Weight of Seventeen-peny Weight, and an
Half, shall be Accounted, Received, Taken, or Paid within any of Our said
Colonies, or Plantations; as well those under Proprietors, and Charters as
under Our Immediate Commission, and Government at above the Rate of Six
Shillings per Piece, Current Money, for the Discharge of any Contracts, or
Bargains to be made after the said First Day of January next; the Halfs,
Quarters, and other lesser Pieces of the Coins, to be Accounted, Received,
Taken, or Paid in the same Proportion.

And the Currency of all Pieces of Eight of Peru, Dollars, and other Foreign
Species of Silver Coin, To be Regulated according to their Fineness and Weight.
whether of the same, or baser Alloy, shall, after the said First Day of
January next, stand Regulated according to their Weight, and Fineness
according, and in proportion to the Rate before Limited, and Set for the Pieces
of Eight of Sevill, Pillar and Mexico; So that no Foreign Silver Coin of any
sort be permitted to exceed the same proportion upon any account whatsoever.

And We do hereby Require and Command all Our Governors,
Lieutenant-Governours, A Command to Governors etc.
Magistrates, Officers, and all other Our good Subjects, within Our said
Colonies and Plantations to Observe and Obey Our Directions herein, as they
Tender Our Displeasure.

And whereas notwithstanding the said Proclamation, the same indirect Practices
as are therein mentioned, are still Carried on with some of the said Colonies
or Plantations, and the Money thereby drawn from one Plantation to another, in
Prejudice of the Trade of Her Majesty's Subjects: wherefore for the better
Enforcing the due Execution of Her Majesty's said Proclamation throughout all
the said Colonies and Plantations; and for the more Effectual Remedying the
said Inconveniences thereby intended to be Remedied.

Be it Enacted by the Queen's Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice,
and Consent of the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and Commons, in this Present
Parliament Assembled, Penalty for accounting, receiving, taking or paying any
of the several Species of Foreign Silver Coins herein mentioned, at any greater
or higher Rate after the First of May, 1709.
and by the Authority of the same, That if any Person within any of the said
Colonies, or Plantations, as well those under Proprietors, and Charters, as
under Her Majesty's immediate Commission, and Government, shall after the First
Day of May, which shall be in the Year of Our Lord, One Thousand Seven Hundred,
and Nine, for the Discharge of any Contracts or Bargains to be thereafter made,
Account, Receive, Take, or Pay, any of the several Species of Foreign Silver
Coins mentioned in the before-recited Proclamation, at any greater or higher
Rate than at which the same is thereby Regulated, Settled, and Allowed, to be
Accounted, Received, Taken, or Paid, every such Person so Accounting,
Receiving, Taking, or Paying the same contrary to the Directions therein
contained, shall suffer Six Months Imprisonment, without Bail or Mainprize: Any
Law, Custom, or Usage in any of the said Colonies, or Plantations to the
contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding: And shall likewise forfeit the Sum
of Ten Pounds for every such Offense; One moiety thereof to Her Majesty, Her
Heirs, and Successors; the other moiety to such Person or Persons as shall Sue
for the same, to be Recovered with full Costs of Suit, by Action of Debt, Bill,
Plaint, or Information, in any of Her Majesty's Courts of Justice within any of
the said Plantations, or in any of the Courts of Justice of the Charter, or
Proprietary Governments where such Offense shall be committed.

Provided nevertheless, and it is hereby Declared, That nothing in the before
recited Proclamation, or in this Act contained, Proviso.
shall Extend, or be Construed to Compel any Person to Receive any of the said
Species of Foreign Silver Coins, at the Respective Rates in the said
Proclamation mentioned.

Provided also, and it is hereby further Declared, That nothing in this Act
contained, shall Extend, or be Construed to Restrain Her Majesty from
Regulating, and Settling the several Rates of the said Species of Foreign Silver
Coins within any of the said Colonies, or Plantations, in such other Manner,
Provided also.
and according to such other Rates, and Proportions as Her Majesty by Her Royal
Poclamation for that purpose to be Issued, shall from time to time judge
proper, and necessary; Or from giving Her Royal Assent to any Law hereafter to
be made in any of the said Colonies, or Plantations, for the Settling, and
Ascertaining the current Rates of such Coins within the said Colonies, or
Plantations; but that such further Regulations may be made, and such Assent
given, in as full, and ample manner, to all intents, and purposes as the same
might have been done in case this Act had not been made, and no otherwise; Any
thing herein before contained to the contrary hereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

Instruction to the Governor, etc. By the Lords Justices,
Jo Cant. Wilmington P. Hervy C. P. S. Dorset Grafton Richmond Lenox and
Aubigny Bolton.

INSTRUCTION to the Governor and Company of His Majesty's Colony of
Connecticut in New England in America; for the better Observation of the Act of
the 6 th of Queen Anne; For ascertaining the Rates of Foreign Coins in America.



Given at Whitehall the 21 st Day of August, 1740, In the Fourteenth Year of
His Majesty's Reign.

Preamble.
WHEREAS an Act of Parliament was Passed in the sixth Year of Her Late Majesty
Queen ANNAE, Entitled, An Act for Ascertaining the Rates of Foreign Coins in
Her Majesty's Plantations in America; And whereas Complaints have been made
that the said has not been Observed as it ought to have been, in many of His
Majesty's Colonies, and Plantations in America, by means whereof many indirect
Practices have grown up; and various, and illegal Currences have been
introduced in several of the said Colonies, and Plantations, contrary to the
true Intent, and Meaning of the said Act, and to the Prejudice of the Trade of
His Majesty's Subjects: In Consequence of which Complaints, an Humble Address
was Presented the Last Sessions by the House of Commons to His Majesty, That He
would be graciously Pleased to Require, and Command the respective Governors
of His Colonies, and Plantations in America, Effectually to Observe the said
Act of the sixth of Queen ANNE.

The Gov. and Company Required to take effectual care the aforesaid Act be
Observed.
It is therefore His Majesty's Royal Will, and Pleasure, and you are hereby
strictly Required, and Commanded to take the most Effectual Care for the future
that the said Act be Punctually, and Bona Fide Observed and put in Execution,
according to the true Intent, and Meaning thereof.

And to the End that His Majesty's Commands herein may be fully made Known to
all His Subjects within your Government, And to publish this Instruction in the
best manner to answer the King's Intention herein.
and that none of them may pretend Ignorance thereof;

You are hereby further Required, and Commanded, to Publish this Instruction in
such Manner as may best answer His Majesty's Gracious Intentions herein
signified.

J. C. W. P. D. B. H. C. P. S.


