MISCELLANEOUS POEMS, CHIEFLY ON Divine Subjects. IN TWO BOOKS. Published for
the Religious ENTERTAINMENT of CHRISTIANS in general.

By SAMUEL DAVIES, V.D.M. in Hanover, Virginia.

Aethere dum vesci datur, et vitalibus Auris,
Hic Scil. Deus.
mihi Materies Carminis unus erit.
JONST. (...)
(...)
HESIOD imitat. Thus translated by Dr. Watts,

Pierian Muses, famed for heavenly Lays,
Descend, and sing the GOD your Father's Praise.
WILLIAMSBURG: Printed and Sold by WILLIAM HUNTER, M,DCC,LI.

THE PREFACE.
IT IS a Piece of fashionable Modesty for an Author to speak meanly of his own
Performance; and commonly looked upon as a mere complimental Formality, or an
Artifice to gain Applause. Humility is an amiable Virtue in the Eyes of All;
and Self-Discommendation, with a View to that Character, is an agreeable Piece
of Self-Denial, even to an ambitious Mind. But the critical and impartial
Reader will soon discover so many Imperfections in the following Poems, that he
can hardly suspect my Sincerity when I assure him, That it is not without
Blushing and Diffidence I yield to the Importunity of some of my Friends, to
present them to public View. And as to those whose friendly Partiality may
cover, or whose Want of Taste may render them insensible of these
Imperfections; all Apology is needless.

Sundry of these Poems were fortuitous Productions, formed without any previous
Design, and upon no special Occasions. Some of them were intended only as
private Memorials of some Meditations or Occurrences that appeared to me worthy
to be retained; and I could think of no more agreeable Method to secure them
from Oblivion. Others were written at the Impulse of some sprightly Thought,
that perhaps was accidently suggested to my Mind, and allured me to pursue it.
Others to improve a vacant Hour on Saturday Evening after Study; and to give me
a more lively Impression of the Subject of Discourse for the ensuing Day.
Others as profitable Amusements, and Relaxations from severer Studies. And
others to gratify a natural Poetic Taste, or (that I may not give it too high a
Name) a versifying Humor: And probably this was the origional Spring of my
improving the other Occasion, in this Manner.

I was at length determined, though not without some remaining Diffidence, to
select the following out of sundry others which will probably lie by we in
perpetual Oblivion, and consent to their Publication; and my Reasons may be
collected from what follows.

There is in almost all Mankind an innate Love of Harmony, which gives those
Things that are conveyed to their Minds in a poetical Vehicle a peculiar
Relish. This harmonious Turn of Mind is the Stamp of Heaven, the Image of the
eternal Author of Order; and it is He that teaches us to feel the Charms of
Poetry: "From Harmony to Harmony we rise,
"To that superior Skill which turned the Spheres;
"Gave Melody to Gabriel 's heavenly Lyre,
"And every moving Grace to Milton 's Song.
"Whatever facred Force in Music lies,
"The dying Strain that calms the wildest Care,
"Or loftier Note that prompts to glorious Deeds,
"The inspiring GOD dwells in the mystic Sound,
"And charms and captivates the listening Soul,
"Through all her soft Capacities of Joy. See Letters moral and entertaining, by
that admirable female Writer, Mrs. E. Row, Vol. I. P. 125 -- I have changed
"Rolli's Song" into Milton's Song, as more familiar to my Readers; and no doubt
the Remark is as true with Respect to the Original, as the Translator.



Something correspondent to this appears in the Order and Adjustment of the
inanimate Creation; and hence proceeds much of out Pleasure in the
Contemplation of the Works of God.

"'It Is HARMONY, that World-attuning Power,
"By which all Beings are adjusted, each
"To all around, impelling, and impelled,
"In endless Circulation, that inspires
"This universal Smile. Thus the glad Skies,
"The wide-rejoicing Earth, the Woods, the Streams,
"With every LIFE they hold, down to the Flower
"That paints the lowly Vale, or Insect-Wing
"Waved over the Shepherd's Slumber, touch the Mind
"To Nature tuned, with a light-flying Hand,
"Invisible" -- Mr. Thompson 's Seasons, Pape 60, 61.

And no doubt this, as well as the other Powers and natural Gusts of the human
Mind, was given for valuable Purposes; and ought to be improven as an agreeable
Avenue for the Introduction of Divine Things:

It Is true, it is not equally vigorous in Persons of different Constitutions
and Education. It admits of Improvement, as well as the other Faculties of the
Soul; and the Disparity will appear according to the Strength of the innate
Principle, and the Degrees of Cultivation: Mr. Thompson 's Seasons, Pape 60, 61.


"Yet if we look more closely, we shall find
"Most have the Seeds" implanted "in their Mind:
"Nature affords at least a glimmering Light;
"The Lines, though touched but faintly, are drawn right." Pope' s Essay on
Criticism.

Persons of a refined and judicious Taste are conscious of peculiar Sensations,
when they meet with Entertainment suitable to them. They take but little Notice
of those trifling Appendages of Poetry, which are the most agreeable to Persons
of a coarse Relish; as the Jingling of Syllables, the Equality of Numbers, the
ambiguous Punn, or witty Turn: But they are captivated with the lively Images
of Fancy, the Grandeur of Ideas, the Flowers of Language, the Pomp of Style,
and the proper Arangement of well-disposed Periods. Such Readers are imaginary
Actors of all the Scenes of the Poet's Imagination; and a Genius that can write
as well as they can read, has an entire Dominion over their Passions. So Dr.
Evans addresses Mr. Pope on his Translation of Homer: "At Will the Master with
our Passions plays,
"Our Hopes, our Fears, our Joy, our Grief can raise;
"Chases, retrieves, with Ease their Force controuls
"Through all the secret Windings of our Souls.
"Now we attack, and now we routed fly;
"And in thy Song by turns we live and die. --
"The direful Tumult of the Slaught'ring Fight
"So well you image, and record so right,
"My Fury kindles while the Verse I read,
"And Fancy acts each bold heroic Deed."


Sublime Poetry is to such a Series of Transports; and flat and dull, is
utterly intolerable; they sicken at the Sight: As nice Palates have a more
lively Relish of an agreeable Dish, and a stronger Disgust to what is nauseous,
than Persons of a coarser Taste. And as their Pleasure is more refined; so it
is more rare; they are offended where others are pleased, and nauseate what
others relish. None but an Homer or Virgil, a Milton or Pope, can furnish them
with proper Entertainment. And may there always be some exalted Genius to
profit and please such delicate Minds, and refine them for celestial Pleasures,
which alone can satisfy their sublime Aspirations! -- But I am convinced by a
Consciousness of my Incapacity, that this does not belong to my Province. If
any such should be so curious as to look into the following Poems, and receive
them with but cold Approbation; I shall gratefully acknowledge it as an
Instance of a generous Candor of Taste. Or if they lay them aside, I hope they
will do it with that Disposition which we discover toward the over-officious
Attempts of impotent Benevolence; or with that Calmness and Indifferency with
which we reject Things that were not intended for our Entertainment or
Molestation, but belong wholly to Others.

But there are few among us of this Character; as there are but few that can
write for their Entertainment. And to consult the Advantage of such only, is as
unreasonable as if the English Legislature should tolerate none but silken
Manufactures. The Generality of Mankind have neither Opportunity nor perhaps
Capacity for these Refinements; and yet are capable of a glorious Immortality,
and the purer Joys of Paradise. -- For the Sake of such I write; and to some of
them my Essays will not be unacceptable. They may not accurately discern the
fairest Charms of Poetry; yet they generally are pleased with the Consonance of
final Syllables, proportioned Numbers, etc. So that they are more ready to
receive and retain those Things which are conveyed into their Minds in this
Form than in heavy and tiresome Prose: For (if the modern Taste will pardon a
Citation out of that antiquated divine Wit, Herbert.)

"A Verse may hit him whom a Sermon flies,
"And turn Delight into a Sacrifice."
On this Account I have frequently thought the Divine Art of Poetry might be
made peculiarly subservient to the Interests of Religion and Virtue; and
lamented the common Prostitution of the heavenly muse to the meanest and most
wicked Purposes: It Is certainly a Sacrilege that Heaven will avenge; and which
lascivious Wits will at last regret. Many of the Conquests of Vice have been
owing to this Abuse. This has clothed her in the most fallacious Charms; and
given the Monster a Syren's Voice, to enchant the Unthinking into Ruin. And if
we can make Reprizals, and allure Men to the amiable Glories of Holiness, by
the proper Use of that Art, which so successfully allured them to embrace even
the horrid Charms of Sin; it will be a glorious Enterprise. And may Almighty
Grace dispose those whom Nature has animated with this sacred Fire, to kindle
it on the Divine Altar! There it glows with the brightest Luster; and it is a
Pity it should waste itself away in pestiserous Fumes in the Temple of Vice and
Impiety.

There are thousands to attempt the Reformation of Mankind in other more
common, and therefore less pleasing Ways; while there are but few qualified to
attempt it in this; and therefore those that are blessed with the least Spark of
poetic Fire ought not to suffocate it.

This is the more necessary, since among the numberless poetical Preductions
obtruded on the present Age, there is not, in my Opinion, a becoming Proportion
of Sacred Poetry. Many indeed have done much Service to the World, and embalmed
their Names to Posterity, by their valuable Performances of this Kind. Mr. Pope
has given us a Specimen of his Genius for it in his Sacred Eclogue, entitled
MESSIAH, and in sundry Parts of his Essay on Man. A very agreeable Spirit of
Devotion breathes through Mr. Thomson's Seasons, and the Night-Thoughts.
Commonly attributed to Dr. Young.
Dr. Watts has been of singular Service by his many Divine Composures; and I
think Sir R. Blackmore may be here mentioned with Respect, notwithstanding the
Insults of some superior Wits -- Many others might be added to the List: But
after all, (not to observe that some of these soar above the Populace) Any One
that is versant in modern Poetry will find Reason to complain, that it is too
commonly sunk to trivial, and sometimes profane Subjects; and but seldom
assumes those Glories with which it shines, when employed on Sacred Themes. --
When shall the Divine Fires of Poetry and Devotion flame unitedly to Heaven,
and diffuse celestial Fervor through the World!

I do not mean that the Muse should be wholly confined to sacred Things. It Is
only for a Proportion I plead. She might recreate herself in a thousand
Excursions through the Credtions of Fancy; but let her seasonably return to the
more important Themes she left. War might still thunder in awful Numbers; and
Kings and Horbes be immortalized in Song. Wit may exert herself in the various
Forms of Ridicule and Satyr, to expose Vice, or the lesser Foibles of Mankind;
and the tender Passions may sigh their Sorrows, or breathe their Joys, in the
most harmonious Lays. -- But shall Mortals live forever in poetical Monuments,
and THE KING OF KINGS be unsung? When even a Heathen could say, Quid prius
dicam solitis Parentis
Laudious; qui res hominum ac Deorum
Qui mare et terras, va^iisque Mundum
Temperat horis?
Hor. Lib. G. 1. Od. 12. "Whom shall I first, but Parent Jove,
"With pious Duty gladly sing;
"That guides below, and rules above,
"The great Disposer, and the mighty King"?
Mr. Creech. Shall the Muse impiously refuse to grace her Strains with the
Condescension, the Love, the Groans, the Blood of JESUS? -- JESUS! the dear,
exalted Name,
Whence burning Seraphs catch their Flame,
And all the Hopes of Mortals came.
Shall she refuse to lament, in doleful Numbers, the destructive Follies of
Sinners; or paint the Deformity of Vice, in its proper infernal Colors? Or can
she deny her Commiseration to the Perplenities of doubting Saints? Or refuse to
congratulate their shining Moments, and heavenly Prelibations?

How are we charmed to see this pious Imprecation in that smooth, sublime Poet
Mr. Thomson! -- An Imprecation harmless to him; but full of vengeful Thunder,
were it adopted by some.

"Let -- the Poet's Lyre
"Still sing the GOD OF SEASONS, as they roll.
"For me, when I forget the darling Theme,
"Whether the BLOSSOM BLOWS, the SUMMER-RAY
"Russets the Plain, delicious AUTUMN gleams;
"Or WINTER rises in the redd'ning East; It may be proper to observe, for the
Information of such as have not read his Poem. That by this Periphrasis he
intends the four Seasons of the Year, which he had been painting

"Be my Tongue mute, my Fancy paint no more,
"And, dead to Joy, forget my Heart to beat! See Thomson 's Hymn annexed to his
Poem on the Seasons P. 310.

But to return. -- Of those valuable Tracts of sacred Verse which are extant,
there are but very few in this Colony in the Hands of common People; and in
such a Famine, perhaps these coarse Provisions may not be disagreeable.

I may add, as another Reason of this Publication, that there are but few
perhaps of a public Character but what are of some Importance in the Circle of
their Friends or Parishoners; who would therefore read their Writings with more
Attention and Regard than those of Others that are much more valuable. As this
favorable Prepossession furnishes such with particular Opportunities of doing
Good in their respective Spheres; they should improve it for that Purpose. It Is
under this Conviction, and with this grateful Intention, I permit this
Publication; and may Divine Grace make it subservient for that Purpose!

Yet, that the Advantage may not be limited to my own Denomination, I have
formed these Poems upon the Footing of catholic Christianity; and avoided all
the little angry Peculiarities of a Party: And indeed this was easy, even
without explicitly designing it, while I was sitting peaceful in my Study,
benevolent to all Mankind, wishing the richest Blessings to the Church of
CHRIST in every Denomination, unruffled with the Irritations, and unmindful of
the Bigotry and Party-Contests of the jangling World. I therefore promise
myself None will incur the Character given by a celebrated Poet to partial
Readers; Pope 's Essay on Criticism.
"Some judge of Authors Names, not Works, and then
"Nor praise nor blame the Writings, but the Men!"
And that I shall meet with some generous Readers, "Who to a Friend his Faults
can freely show,
"And gladly praise the Merit of a Foe:
"Un-byass'd, or by Favor, or by Spite;
"Not dully prepossest, nor blindly right. Pope 's Essay on Criticism.



It may be expedient to premise these few Remarks to reflect Light on the
Poems, and prepare the Reader for their Perusal.

They are a Collection of Miscellanies; not digested into Order according to
the Nature of the Subjects: For I was apprehensive a confused Variety would be
more entertaining.

Though the Date of a Poem be generally an insignificant Circumstance to the
Reader; yet I thought it expedient to annex That and the Text to the Title of
the Poems connected with my public Discourses; that they might be a Hint to my
Hearers to help them to recollect the Discourses themselves; and when it is
done in some other Cases, I think it needs no Apology.

I have generally used that Meter which is most familiar and plain to common
Capacities: And where I have indulged myself to imitate the Heroic Numbers of
Milton, or the noble License of Pindar (the last of which is perhaps most
natural to me) it was for the most Part before I had any Intention of
publishing them.

I have scrupulously avoided those Invocations of fabulous Deitles, so common
in many of our modern Poets. Nor can the Veneration I have for sundry of those
that embellish their Poems with them, convince me that it is an irrational
Scrupuosity. I suppose they would not desire to be counted sincere in their
Devotions; and I think hypocritical Devotion, even to a ficticious Deity, is
odious. It seems at least an Affectation of Idolatry, without the least
Temptation. Who, that knew it not before, would suspect those Poets to be
professed Christians, who begin, and end, and intermix their Poems with so many
warm Petitions, or rapturous Ejaculations to Apollo, to Jove, to Venus, to
Bacchus, and the whole Rabble of Heathenish Gods? Especially when their
Devotion to these seems to flame out more frequently than to the GOD that made
the Heavens. The Ground of their Error, I conceive, is this, That they cannot
imitate or equallize the Ancients without adopting their superstitious,
nonsensical and impious Theology (for such that of the Poets generally was.)
But (not to insist further on the moral Nature of it) does not the Beauly and
Propriety of poetical Descriptions, and partilulatly of Invocations, consist in
their Correspondence to the Sentiments, Manners and Customs of those for whom
we write? But sure, these are not now the same in Great Britain, as in Greece
or Italy, when Homer, or Virgil wrote. The Observation of a noted Critic
Guardian No. 30.
concerning the English Pastoral-Writers, is equally pertinent to this -- Our
Countryman (says he) have so good an Opinion of the Ancients, and think so
modestly of themselves, that the Generality of Pastoral-Writers have -- so
servilely imitated the Manner, and Customs of the Greeks and Romans, as makes
them very ridiculous. In looking over some English Pastorals a few Days ago, I
-- reckoned up at least an hundred lefthanded Ravens, blasted Oaks, withering
Meadows, and weeping Deities -- The same Author No.
blames Mr. Pope for borrowing his Names, in his English Pastorals, from
Theacritus, and Virgil; and introducing Daplmis, Alexis and Thyrsis on British
Plains. -- But I humbly conceive, it is a greater Impropriety to introduce
foreign Deities into English Devotion, than foreign Shepherds into English
Pastorals. -- In Translations indeed, it is not only tolerable, but sometimes
necessary; but in Original Poems, it appears to me a very offensive
Impropriety. See Milton's beautiful Hint at this Impropriety, Par. Lost. B. 7
at the Beginning; where he scruples the very Name of U^ania, but absolutely
renounces the Meaning.


To conclude. Shall I seriously request my Reader to peruse these Poems as it
becomes a Mortal? a Candidate for Eternity! -- I would not maliciously rob any
Man of the seasonable Pleasures of Imagination, or the moderate Gratification
of a refined Taste; for no doubt the God that formed us with an innate Relish
of these Pleasures, allows us to enjoy them: But we must be temperate in all
Things; and we are in Danger of falling into luxurious Indulgences of this, as
well as of other natural Apetites. These little Delicacies do not charm Time to
slack his Pace; and Oh! -- What solemn Scenes open at the Close of it! Scenes,
too awful to be turned into Amusements! Ere long, "Our Souls must leave these
Tenements of Clay,
"And to an unknown SOMEWHERE wing their Way." Mr. Norris!

Ere long, we shall be advanced to Entertainments infinitely superior to these;
or bunished from these and all other Joys. And these Things demand our most
serious Thoughts. -- To die in Song, is a pleasing Amusement; but Oh! -- to die
well in Reality! -- it is an important, an arduous Business! It Is easy for a
sprightly Imagination to entertain itself with lively and moving
Representations of the Exercises of a Christian in this World, and the
substantial Realities of the next; but actually to habituate ourselves to the
one, and enter upon the other, is a more serious and difficult Thing. To ascend
to Heaven in poetical Flights, is much easier than to fix our Affections
steadily there; and One may paint the Vanity of all Things below, in the most
lively Colors; and in the mean Time place his supreme Happiness in them. How
much more difficult to adopt the noble Declaration of the sweet Singer of
Israel, with his Sincerity and Fervor; Whom have I in Heaven but Thee? and
there is none upon Earth I desire besides Thee. -- Thou art the Strength of my
Heart, and my Portion forever!

May we therefore make Religion our principal Business in this Infancy of our
Existence! May our Hearts be attempered here, for the heavenly State! that when
the solemn Hour of our Exit from these Regions of Mortality comes, we may join
the celestial Chair, and spend a happy Eternity in singing the Song of Moses
and the Lamb! And may that sovereign GOD, who can perfect Praise to Himself
from the feeble Hosannahs of Babes and Sucklings, make these rude Essays at
least of some small Service for these important Ends!

The Reader is desired to correct the following ERRORS, and to over look
others, which, as they cannot mislead him, need not be particularly noticed.
TITLE Page line 17. for framed read famed. p. 4. l. 14. for trun'd read tuned.
p. 8. l. 6. for in read on.

Page 1. line 7. for ought read aught. p. 9. l. 8. for Friends r. Fiends. p.
18. l. 28. for early r. earthly. p. 24. for Joys r. Toys. p. 28. l. 24. for me
r. an. p. 32. l. 23. for Isai. LXIX r. XLIX. p. 40. l. 30. for Where r. There.
p. 42. l. 10. for Joying r. Toying. p. 52. l. 13. for their r. the. p. 53. l.
28. for warms r. warm. p. 64. l. 18. after cannot r. cannot. p. 69. l. 8, for
this r. his. p. 84. l. 30. for unstrung r. unstung. p. 88. l. 7. for vanc'd r.
vanid. p. 89. l. 4. for Man r. Men. p. 97. l. 12. for through r. though. p. 107. l.
6. for O r. Or. p. 112. l. 13. for Wood r. Woods. p. 113. l. 11. for Bonds r.
Bounds. p. 126. l. 6. for No r. Nor. l. 11. after may r. or. p. 128. l. 13.
for Dust r. Dusk.

MISCELLANEOUS POEMS, CHIEFLY ON DIVINE SUBJECTS.
BOOK I.
I. LORD Thou know all Things, Thou know that I love Thee. Joh. xxi. 17.
MY GOD! the Wretch that does not love Thy Name
To Life and Being forfeits all his Claim,
And may he sink to nothing whence he came.
Or let the Yawn of the dire Mouth of Hell,
Receive him with his Fellow-Fiends to dwell. 1 Cor. xvi. 22.

Oh! if my Heart does not to Thee aspire,
If ought with equal Fervor I desire,
I Am self-condemned, and doom myself to Fire.
Let not my guilty Breath profane Thy Air,
Nor groaning Earth the monstrous Burden bear.
Let Clouds with Vengeance big, burst over my Head,
And Vollies of red Thunder strike me dead.
The Sun convert his gentle Rays to Flames,
And blast the Miscreant with his vengeful Beams.
The whole Creation rise in Arms for Thee,
To vindicate the Rights of Thy Divinity.
Vile Wretch! that dare refuse to love a GOD,
Who formed me Man out of my native Clod;
Whose Breath the Faculty of Love inspired,
And with the heavenly Spark my Bosom sir'd:
Whose uncreated Beauties charm the Sight
Of gazing Angels, in the Realms of Light:
Whose Glories, faintly copied, round me shine,
And mildly beam through all these Works of Thine,
Proclaiming Thee their Origin Divine:
Whose Grace, diffused around in thousand Rills,
Arrays a thousand Worlds in cheerful Smiles:
Thou too, when Man to dreadful Ruin fell,
Helpless, unpitied on the Brink of Hell;
When Justice frowning did the Prey demand,
And None could rescue from his vengeful Hand;
Thou, touched with Pity, did avert his Doom,
And gav'st Thy Son a Victim in his Room.
Nailed to the Cross the bleeding Savior hangs,
And courts my Love with Groans and dying Pangs.
Oh! I must love! -- Or can the Groans and Blood
Of an incarnate Godhead be withstood!
Yet ah! in some dark Hours I hardly know
Whether I love my gracious GOD or no.
Gloomy Suspicions, twinging Jealousies,
And anxious Doubts in all their Horrors rise.
I hear the Whisperings of misgiving Fear,
"Thy Love is feigned, thy Ardour insincere"
Too true! too true! my trembling Soul replies,
Else whence so often could this Languor rise?
Ah! these unruly Passions would not rove
Thus wildly, were they fixed with sacred Love.
Nor would the Flame of pure Devotion die
Thus frequent, and my Powers so stupid lie.
And yet methinks in some bright Moments too,
I feel the heavenly Flame divinely glow.
To Thee so ardent all my Passions move,
That if I love Thee not, I know not what I love.
If I Am deceived in this with empty Show,
Then my Existence is uncertain too:
An universal Skeptic I commence,
Beneath the Glare of brightest Evidence,
In spite of Reason, and in spite of Sense.
Oh! if I love Thee not, as Fears suggest,
Why am I, in Thine Absence, thus distressed?
Whence this strange Tumult, this uneasy Pain,
'Til Thy sweet Smiles compose my Soul again?
Whence these wild Pantings of immense Desire?
Why should poor breathing Dust so high aspire?
I see my busy Fellow-Worms pursue
Created Bliss, and nothing nobler view;
Content they waste their Life, estranged from Thee,
In undisturbed, serene Stupidity.
And why, like them, cannot I contented play,
And eat, and drink, and sleep my Life away?
Whence this immense Ambition in my Mind,
That scorns all Joys but those of heavenly Kind?
Why should a Worm, an animated Clod;
Disdain all Bliss beneath a boundless GOD?
Oh! what but the attractive Force of Love,
Could raise my grovelling Spirit thus above?
Say, Great OMNISCIENT! (for Thou know my Heart)
Can Nature ease my Soul, if Thou depart?
Can Riches, Pleasures, Honors, Empires, Crowns,
Or Friends, content me, when I feel Thy Frowns?
No! all Creation dwindles to a Toy,
And Heaven itself could not excite my Joy.
The cheerful Sun glares hateful to my Eyes,
And every blooming Beauty round me dies.
Thou great INVISIBLE! Thou dear UNKNOWN!
Why thus to Thee should my soft Passions run?
Thus through the Objects of my Senses break,
And Charms unknown and hidden Glories seek?
Deep in Recesses of approachless Light
Thou dwell, far beyond my feeble Sight;
Yet drawn by some strange mystic Influence,
I love Thee more than all that strikes my Sense;
Than all my Ears have heard, or Eyes have seen,
Or lively Fancy's gayest Powers can feign.
O! if Thy Love does not my Heart inflame,
Why do I thus delight in JESUS' Name?
His Name is Music to my ravished Ears,
Sweeter than that which charms the heavenly Spheres:
A cheering Cordial to my fainting Breast;
My Hope, my Joy, my Peace, my Heaven, my Rest.
I spring from Earth, and Heaven is my Abode,
When I can say those charming Words, MY GOD;
MY GOD! -- Infinite Joys lie in the Sound:
Be Thou but mine; and all the Sun goes round
Without reluctant Murmuring I resign;
I have enough, if I can call Thee MINE.
O! if I love Thee not, why do I thus
Love the dear Mansion of Thy earthly House?
The sacred Morning shines with heavenly Rays.
More bright, more charming than ten thousand Days,
That bids me visit that delightful Place.
There would I dwell, and pass my Life away,
'Til Death convey me up to brighter Day.
In all the Institutions of Thy Grace,
For Thee I look; and if Thou hide Thy Face,
The sacred Rites would dull and tiresome seem,
Did I not hope to find my GOD in them.
When at Thy Throne I bow my suppliant Knee,
Is Prayer a stupid cold Formality!
Oh! can my Prayers content me without Thee?
No! these are but the Channels of thy Grace,
Transparent Glasses where I see Thy Face:
I thirst for living Water all in vain,
If Thou Thy gracious Influence restrain:
The radiant Glasses show me nothing fair,
Unless I see Thy Charms reflected there.
Then Peace, my restless and suspicious Heart;
And ye dire-boding Jealousies, depart.
I love my GOD, or else I nothing love;
And the pure Flame ever long shall burn above,
And from its native El'ment never remove.
II. Early Piety recommended. (Sent originally in a Letter to two young Ladies.)
YE lovely Flowers, that just begin to bloom,
And raise our Hope of glorious Fruit to come;
That just begin to open all your Charms,
While vigorous Youth your tender Bosoms warms:
Indulge a Muse, that is anxious for your Good,
Lest some rude Storm should blast the opening Bud;
Indulge the Muse, that would the Blossoms shield,
'Till they mature, and Fruit immortal yield,
And bloom forever gay in Heaven's fair azure Field.
Now you begin to tread Youth's slippery Path,
Where Thousands stumble, and sink down to Death.
Wherever you walk, it is all enchanted Ground,
And Snares in dangerous Ambush lurk around.
The flattering World presents her fairest Charms,
And Vice would tempt you to her horrid Arms.
The Crowd of fashionable Sinners aim
To form you to the Mode, to walk with them;
Spread false enchanting Scenes before your Eyes,
And promise Bliss from empty Vanities:
While sanguine, forward Youth is still intent
To make the terrible Experiment;
And will not, 'til by dear Experience taught,
Indulge the true, though melancholy Though It,
That all beneath the Sun is Vanity and Naught.
The dangerous Path of Youth my Feet have trod,
And lately left the smooth enchanting Road:
Now safe advanced to a more solid Age,
Let me conduct, you over the slippery Stage.
Trembling I wait the Event of every Step,
And shudder left you make a fatal Slip.
O! cautious tread: Let Virtue be your Guard:
Virtue alone can keep you un-ensnar'd.
O! choose your Maker for your early Friend,
And on His gracious Patronage depend:
He can obscure Temptation's brightest Charms,
And shelter feeble Youth from threatening Harms;
Steel the weak Breast with Grace invincible,
And baffle all the Stratagems of Hell.
O! heave the Sigh, waft up the weeping Prayer
To HIM who loves that Harmony to hear:
He looks and smiles and sheds His richest Grace
On Virgin-Souls that early seek His Face.
O! let not Earth your tender Hearts ensnare;
Give your first Love to THE ETERNAL FAIR.
'Twas HE, 'twas HE that formed your mortal Frame,
Inspired the living Soul, that heavenly Flame:
Taught senseless Dust to see and hear and move,
And kindled in the Breast the gentle Power of Love:
But lately, from His all-creating Hand
You came, and sprung to Life at His Command;
'Til then, you lay in native Nothing's Shade;
And but for Him, had still remained unmade;
A FATHER's tender Name He bears to you;
And is not your first Love a Father's Due?
O! can your grateful Souls so soon forget
The gracious Power from whence they came so late?
Should not your Bosoms with His Love be fired,
Whose Breath the tender Passions all inspired?
He too, when Man to deepest Ruin fell,
Helpless, forlorn on the dire Brink of Hell;
He, touched with Pity, and impelled by Grace,
Sent his own Son to save a guilty Race,
And yield His sacred Soul a Ransom in their Place.
The Infant-GOD did soon begin for you
To bear the Vengeance to your Follies due.
For you the heavenly Mansions He forsook,
And a vile Stable for His Chamber took.
His Robes of Light Divine aside he threw,
And wrapped Himself in swaddling Clothes for you.
Just as He entered on the Stage of Life,
He felt the painful circumcising Knife.
In His weak Mother's Arms the young Exile,
From Herod's Rage fled to the Land of Nile. Egypt.

His Load of Sorrow grew still as He grew;
At length, see! on the Cross He bleeds for you!
There racked and tortured your Redeemer hangs,
And courts your Love with Groans and dying Pangs.
See how He agonizes! see His Blood!
And say, Can such Allurements be withstood?
Oh no! you melt! you yield! I hear you say,
"See, JESUS! here we give our Hearts away!
"Our earliest Love, Dear Lord! unrivaled take;
"'It Is all the poor Requital we can make."
See how in youthful Prime, the smiling Year
Now blooms, and all her flowery Charms appear: This Letter was written in
Spring.

The tuneful Birds, that hail the welcome Spring,
Grateful at Nature's Restoration sing,
And all the Groves with charming Music ring:
A living Green arrays the Woods and Fields,
And the sweet Vale a thousand Pleasures yields:
The lovely Family of Flowers appear,
And breathe Perfumes through all the balmy Air:
The Sun shines bright and mild; the gentle Breeze
Regales our Sense, and whispers through the Trees:
The wide Creation smiles; Earth, Sky and Air
In vernal Robes and blooming Youth appear.
But ah! ever long will surly Winter come,
Strip the gay Year of all her youthful Bloom,
And spread over all a cheerless sullen Gloom;
Snow, Rain and Frost commixt, and savage Storms
Ravage and bluster in a thousand Forms;
The smiling World with baleful Influence blast,
And turn these charming Scenes to a rueful Waste.
Here see your mournful Fate, ye blooming FAIRS;
Stern Death nor Youth nor Strength nor Beauty spares.
The Young, the Old, the Wise, the Fair, the Gay,
All fall a common undistinguished Prey.
The Tyrant, senseless of the Power of Charms,
Hurries the Beauty to reside with Worms;
Covers with mortal Pale the rosy Cheeks,
And dooms the Dust with Fellow-Dust to mix:
Hurries the Soul at once to Worlds unknown,
Doomed by the Sentence of the Eternal Throne
To shine with Angels, or with Friends to groan.
Then catch the fleeting Hour before it is past;
The present Now perhaps may be your last.
For barren Winter early lay up Store,
That joyful you may meet the fatal Hour.
Survey the Garden, where the fragrant Rose,
In all the Pride of youthful Beauty glows;
Go, pluck the tempting Flower, and pensive say,
"So cruel Death may cut me off today."
And when the Sun withdraws his quickening Ray,
And Evening Shades shut up the cheerful Day;
See! how the flowery Tribes their Beauties hide,
And fade and languish in their gayest Pride;
Shrivel their Leaves, and bend the drooping Head;
"So (let your Heart suggest) so I may fade,
"And sudden sink among the mouldering Dead."
O! may the Luster of your Minds surpass
The withering Beauties of the fairest Face:
May every shining Virtue deck your Youth,
And every heavenly Grace grow with your Growth;
Life's fleeting Moments glide delightful by,
With every Grace adorned, and every Joy;
Till Death, far distant, finding you mature
for Heaven, convey you up to Joys more pure.
III. Philosophic Devotion. (Occasioned by reading The Religious Philosopher.)
1.
WITH Rapture winged, my eager Soul
Through Thy unbounded Empire roves,
Great Author of this Glorious ALL!
And lost in Wonder, still approves.
2.
Thy Works with Pleasure and Surprise
Overwhelm this weak enquiring Mind;
Wonders in long Succession rise,
Yet more and greater lie behind.
3.
Fixed in Astonishment, my Eyes,
Intense, attempt the vast Survey;
But Glories too transparent rise,
And dim them with excessive Day.
4.
The Rays of Wisdom, Goodness, Power,
So sweetly blend and brightly shine,
My Soul, overcome, can but adore,
And own the Workmanship Divine.
5.
Struck with the Sight, I shrink away,
Conscious how weak and blind I am:
Despair to finish the Survey,
And silent dread Thy awful Name.
6.
Mean though I am, (not wholly so,
Since wisely framed by Skill Divine)
Permit me at Thy Throne to bow,
While round me all Thy Glories shine.
IV. SOLOMON. A Paraphrastical Poem on sundry Passages in the Book of
Ecclesiastes.
WHY should I, anxious after Happiness,
Pursue wrong Ways, or right without Success?
Why fret and toil in Searches long and vain,
Since a Director I with Ease may gain?
A skillful Guide, made by Experience wise,
That costly Medicine for mis-judging Eyes.
The Traveller bewildered asks the Way,
And cautious shuns the Path where others stray:
Come then, My Soul, exempt from every Care,
Come, to the Royal Preacher lend an Ear;
Attend the Monarch, whose unbounded Mind
Made one Experiment for all Mankind,
Past through the Lab'rinths that ensnare the Wise,
Tried all that is charming in the Miser's Eyes,
Undaunted climbed bright Honor's steep Ascent,
And through the Round of sensual Pleasures went;
Listen, while gray Experience tells the Truth;
Nor fear Deception from her faithful Mouth.
In happy CANAAN, the World's Paradise,
Where constant Harvests of rich Plenty rise;
Where candid Milk and pleasant Honey flows
In luscious Streams, and every Pleasure grows:
In sacred SALEM, the beloved and great,
Where Canaan's Blessings all collected meet;
Where HE who Empires crushes and sustains,
Tremendous in His awful Temple reigns,
And Clouds of sacred Incense early rise,
Breathing Perfumes to the propitious Skies;
Where foreign Merchants vend their richest Store,
And Ophir-Ships import their golden Oar;
The Fear and Wonder of the Nations round,
Profuse in Wealth with endless Honors crowned;
Where, yearly, tributary Princes meet,
To pay their Homage at their Sov'reign's Feet;
There first my Lungs the vital Either drew,
And there the Light of Life first blessed my View.
Sprung from a Royal Sire, a Glorious Crown
By heavenly Designation was my own;
Millions of loyal Heroes through the Land
Confirmed my Throne, and stoopt to my Command;
The Sons of Jacob, Favorites of the Skies!
At whose dread Name each Tyrant shrinks and dies,
Moved at my Nod, their Sovereign Law, my Will,
The Dictates of my Tongue, their Oracle:
While neighboring Sceptres yielded to my Sway,
Ambitious of the Honor to obey;
And gentle Peace her downy Pinions spread,
Shadowing the Throne, and hovering round my Head,
Nature and Art with Emulation strove,
TO advance my Bliss, and every Grief remove. Chapter 1. v. 12.

My Mind enlightened with a heavenly Ray,
Was calm as midnight Hours, and bright as Day,
Deep as the vast Abyss, and vigorous as May;
Freed from the Freaks of young Impertinence,
And ripened by Experience into Sense.
Thrice happy State! below but seldom found!
A Heavenly Paradise on earthly Ground! v. 16.

Come then, My Soul, this Season sure was lent
To qualify me for Experiment;
That Men from my Experience may discern,
Where lies their Bliss, and what to follow learn:
Come, in this happy Juncture, let us try
Wherein the Happiness of Man does lie;
Pursue that unknown Something, whether hid
She in the Bosom of the Wise abide,
Or lie concealed in the enchanting Stream
Of sensual Joys, where the Luxurious swim:
Extend thy Searches wheresoe'er the Ray
Of yon' bright Sun extends, and kindles Day:
The dear, coy Nymph, which Mortals never saw,
Wherever she lurks, from her Retirements draw. Chapter 1. v. 13.16. Chapter 2. v. 3.

I said -- And as an Eagle, Hunger-smit,
Pours all his nimble Vigor into Flight,
And through aerial Fields pursues his Prey,
Swift as a Sunbeam in the Blaze of Day:
So flew my curious Mind through all the Plains,
Where, in alluring Glory, SCIENCE reigns;
With contemplative Eyes the Works explored,
With which this spacious Universe is stored;
The hidden Causes and the Ends of Things,
And Order which from their Contexture springs;
The Powers of immaterial Essences,
And puzzling intellectual Mysteries;
The Properties of Matter and its Laws,
And each Phenomenon from unseen Cause;
The Wonders of the Planetary World,
The Rules by which their ample Orbs are hurled;
The boundless Regions of the fixed Stars,
And Comets scattering Pestilence and Wars.
Descending thence, I took a wide Survey
Of this vast Earth, and the unbounded Sea;
From the tall Cedars that luxuriant spread
Their stately Branches on Libanus' Head,
To the small Hyssop blooming on the Wall
Mouldering to Dust, and nodding to its Fall,
My Search extended: 1 Kings 4. v. 33.
-- While each studious Sage
As my Assistant gladly did engage;
To their learned Lectures eager I attend,
Embrace what is right; what is corrigible, mend;
Hypotheses upon Hypotheses
They raise, and the well-fram'd Illusions please. 1 Kings 4. v. 13, 17.

My Enquiries thus finished I begun
To view the extensive Circuit I had run;
If happily in the Maze of studious Thought
True Happiness may with Success be sought:
When struck, amazed, I called my Mind aside,
And pausing deep -- thus cried;
In tiresome Labors of the busy Brain
I seek for Bliss; but ah! I seek in vain.
Insinuating Sorrows still pervade
The knowing Heart, and contemplative Head. v. 18.

This curious Itch is never satisfied
With what is known, if aught continues hid,
But eager pants and reaches after more,
Pronouncing all in vain it knew before.
Alas! what Glooms still hover over my Soul!
And blended Clouds in close Succession roll!
The clea est of my vast Discoveries lie
Involved in Doubts and dark Uncertainty;
And most of Things are wrapped in solid Glooms,
Where a bright Beam of Knowledge never comes,
Concealed forever from the enquiring Sight
In Caverns of imperviable Night. v. 15.

The anxious Mind intense in the Pursuit,
Faints with the Toil, but never tastes the Fruit;
Perplexing Thoughts still ravage through the Brain,
And twinge the Spirit with acutest Pain;
And Melancholy, nursed with studious Care,
Often erects her sooty Banner there;
Hollow and sunk the poring Eye appears,
And the dull Image of her Sorrows wears. Chapter 12. v. 12.

In Parts superior, then, what Profit lies?
Alas! how small the Pleasure to be wise?
It Is but to know how little can be known, These three Lines are borrowed, with
small Alteration, from Mr. POPE's ingenious Essay on Man.

To see our Ignorance and Weakness shown;
To chase a Phantom, which our Chase outflies,
And leaves us lagging, distant from the Prize.
This failed; I tried one more Experiment,
Still in Pursuit of Happiness intent.
Delicate Mirth arrayed in tempting Smiles,
Pleasures surrounding in delicious Rills,
Facetious Jests, and Laughter opening wide
Her sprightly Jaws, with Hands on every Side,
Present themselves, and promise perfect Bliss: Chapter 2. v. 1.

(...) tried, -- but found them lying Vanities.
This empty Mirth tends but to make me sad,
And thou, unthinking Laughter! too, art mad. v. 2.

Her Vigor next the generous Grape bestowed,
And sprightly Wine in liberal Glasses glowed:
My Palate I indulged; yet, lest Excess
Should cloy my Taste, and make the Pleasure less,
Or Wisdom with intemperate Vapors blind,
And in luxurious Puddles drown the Mind,
My Reason still her Government maintained,
And the bold License of the Taste restrained. v. 3.

But Happiness in Luxury and Wine
I seek in vain, and Bliss is too Divine
To lurk in Grapes: the Pleasures of the Taste
Degrade the Man, and only suit the Beast.
To Architecture next I turned my Mind,
And Palaces magnificent designed.
Columns were raised, which spacious Rooss overspread;
Sculpture and Paint their various Charms displayed:
Marble was taught to live, and Shade and Light
With fair Illusions pleased the ravished Sight.
And shining Gold its yellow Radiance spread
Through all the Buildings: Burnished Brass displayed
Its rougher Glories: All the Charms of Art
Blazed on my Eye, and sought to win my Heart. Chapter 2. v. 4.

But all the Pomp of glittering Roofs and Walls,
Of stately Chambers and embellished Halls
Is naught but Vanity and empty Show,
And never free from rude, intrusive Woe.
Shy Happiness abhors this useless State,
And shuns the gaudy Buildings of the Great.
Wood, Brass and Gold, by all the Powers of Art
However formed, can never ease the Heart.
Then in the sylvan Scene I sought for Bliss;
I made me Vineyards, and I planted Trees.
Unwithering Verdure, and eternal Blooms
Formed lovely Prospects, and diffused Perfumes.
Perpetual Spring her numerous Beauties strewn
Through all my Groves, and blessed the waving Wood.
Refreshing Rills, through various Pipes conveyed,
Their chearing Moisture through the Forest spread,
And, murmuring, soothed the Ear; while Zephyrs mild
Panted and breathed through all the pleasant Wild. v. 4, 5, 6.

Here often I walked in sacred Solitude,
And, unmolested, Happiness pursued; --
In vain; for Happiness could not be found
Among the Groves in this delightful Ground.
I tried the Pomp and Equipage of State.
Obsequious Crowds did in long Order wait
Around my sumptuous Table, and abroad
When Pleasure called me, dazzled all the Road:
Domestics home-born, and from every Clime,
Of either Sex the Beauty and the Prime,
Formed my illustrious Retinue, and stood
Waiting my Will, observant of my Nod. Chapter 2. v. 7.

But ah! this proud Magnificence of State
Can never make my Happiness complete.
But Music, sure, that calms the boisterous Breast,
And sooths tumultuous Passions into Rest;
That charms deep-fixt Anxieties away,
Makes even moping Melancholy gay;
The Hero's Breast with martial Ardour fires,
And dire Despair herself with Ease inspires:
Music will breathe refined, exalted Bliss
Into my Soul, and lull me into Peace:
I said. The Masters of the tuneful Art v. 8.

The utmost Powers of Harmony exert.
In sweetly-varying Strains the Music floats,
While various Instruments try various Notes.
But all these Strains are useless; I despair
To find true Bliss in modulated Air.
Hitherto disappointed, I Will behold
My vast Possessions, and unnumber'd Gold.
The Riches of the World are in my Hand;
Surrounding Monarchs, awed at my Command,
With Wealth immense my spacious Treasures fill,
And yield their choicest Blessings to my Will.
My Cattle graze upon a thousand Hills,
And feed unnumber'd in the fertile Vales.
So various, so unbounded is my Store,
The greediest Wish can comprehend no more.
But still unsatisfied, from the Survey
Scornful I turned my weary Eyes away,
And cried, Bliss is not made of Dust and glittering Clay.
Thus freely I indulged my Eyes to roll,
And gave unbridl'd License to my Soul.
Whatever insatiate Appetite could crave,
With liberal Hand, without Restraint, I gave. Chapter 2. v. 10.

Not to indulge a Lust, was my Design,
But act the Philosophic Libertine:
I paused, I reasoned, and with Eye intense
Observed the Issue of the Experiments.
But when the tedious Circuit I reviewed,
And all the anxious Labors I pursued, v. 11.

In which my restless Spirit toiled with Pain,
Seeking for Bliss with eager Wish in vain;
I saw that all beneath the lower Skies
Is abstract Vanity of Vanities.
Oppressive Sorrows and Vexations grow
In every State, in every Clime below.
Nor for themselves need future Ages try v. 12.

The Experiment; for all is Vanity.
Anxieties in all Things earthly dwell,
Which All alas! can feel, but none can tell. Chapter 1. v. 8.

No Novelties present themselves to View,
To tempt succeeding Ages to renew
The Experiment, or Bliss below pursue. v. 9, 10.

In dull Succession early Pleasures run v. 9.

In the same tedious Circle ever on.
The Ear with antiquated Harmonies v. 8.

Is cloyed, and with accustomed Sights the Eyes.
The ever-moving Wheels of Nature run
In the same Tract; in the same Tract the Sun v. 4, 5.

Rolls on his tiresome, everlasting Round;
And still we tread the same old-fashioned Ground.
Besides; the Intervals of Bliss we find
Are short, uncertain, varying as the Wind.
Death unsuspected in close Ambush lurks,
And undermining still, our Ruin works. Chapter ix. 12.

Whether we laugh or weep, or wake or sleep,
He haunts us, ready on his Prey to leap.
So the unthinking Rovers of the Air,
Caught unexpected, flutter in the Snare.
So finny Shoals rush heedless into Death,
Dragged to the Land, and gasp in vain for Breath.
But see! above the Earth, beyond the Skies,
What charming Scenes, what brighter Prospects rise!
There the Paternal Mind, the Source of Good,
Feeds His own Offspring with immortal Food.
There Happiness in full Perfection grows;
And restless Souls enjoy a calm Repose;
A Bliss proportioned to the widest Wish;
Ever enjoyed, yet ever new and fresh.
Hail happy Realms! the Bliss we seek below
In vain, is only to be found in you.
Soon (welcome Prospect!) the bright Hour will come
That wafts us to our blessed celestial Home:
Soon into Dust this brittle Frame will fall;
The Soul return to her Original; xii. 7

Return exulting from her long Exile
In this dark Dungeon, and laborious Toil:
There dwell forever with her Father-GOD,
And find the Bliss before not understood.
Then since the Happiness of Mortals lies
Beyond the Bounds of these inferior Skies,
The only Happiness they here can share,
Is for those blissful Regions to prepare.
Through various Mazes then at length we come Chapter xii. v. 13.

To this Conclusion as the total Sum.
Fear thy Creator God with filial Awe,
And all thy Life observe His holy Law. v. 13.

Choose as thy constant Path this heavenly Plan;
It Is the whole Duty, the whole Bliss of Man; They that are acquainted with the
Hebrew need not be informed, that in this Sentence, -- This is the whole Duty
of Man, -- The Word Duty is not in the Original; and I humbly conceive it is
causelessly inserted by our Translators. It seems more correspondent to the
Design of this Book to take it in the Latitude I have given it, -- To fear GOD,
and keep His Commandments, is the WHOLE of Man, his most important, his only
Concern in Point of Duty, and in Point of Happiness.

The only Point where Happiness is fixed,
Pleasures in this World, greater in the next.
Tired of my fruitless Scarches, here I rest,
With this Discovery pleased, content and blessed.
IV. I said, I will be wise: but it was far from me. (Composed when a Student,
Nov. 12. 1744.)
HOW rough, how steep, and intricate the Way
To Knowledge, and the Worlds of mental Day!
How thick the Gloom, how dark the dismal Night
That stops the Dawn of Intellectual Light!
Through what vast Labyrinths my Feet must rove,
Ere I obtain the shining Pearl I love!
At first it seems at Hand, just in Embrace;
And thus allures me to the endless Chase:
But as I run, new Wonders strike my Eyes;
"Hills peep over Hills, and Alps on Alps arise." Pope.

As Knowledge, so new Objects still increase;
The more I know, I seem to know the less.
One Thing presents another quite unknown;
A third starts up in View, ere that be gone;
'Till endless Crowds in long Succession rise,
And spread Amazement over my gazing Eyes.
So the etherial Bow, of various Dye,
Immensely distant, shows its Colors nigh:
The witless Trav'ler, fond of rearer Views,
With fruitless Steps the illusive Shade pursues,
'Till tired, bewildered, hopeless of his Aim,
He rests, and blushes with ignoble Shame.
While one Idea dances in my Brain,
Another rising drives it out again.
I loose the Treasures of Conceptions past:
The Gain is lost, but studious Labors last.
So while on Sand a Man his Footsteps guides,
One Foot makes Way, the other backward slides.
Wasted in fruitless Toils, thus pass my Hours;
And sacred Truth o'ercomes these feeble Powers.
Long last the Glooms of native Ignorance,
And by slow Steps to Knowledge we advance.
But this dark State will not forever last,
This Infancy of Being soon is past:
The Soul matur'd, and freed from cumbrous Clay,
Shall then rejoice in everlasting Day:
Serene employ her clevated Powers
On Truths too dazzling for this World of ours.
If Darkness, then, must still surround my Head,
'Till heavenly Light succeed to Death's dark Shade;
Be it my Study and my constant Care
For that important Moment to prepare,
Lest then, secluded from the Realms of Light,
I sink forever in more dismal Night.
O may the Sun of Righteousness arise,
On a bewildered Wretch! Then shall my Eyes
Discern the happy Path that leads to Bliss,
Where perfect Knowledge, and where JESUS is.
VI. Of Him, and through Him, and to Him are all Things. Romans 11. ult.
THOU only Good! Eternal ALL!
What am I when compared with THEE!
A Piece of animated Clay;
An Atom sporting in thy Ray --
The Loss would be but small,
Should I again to Nonexistence fall:
Nay, if thy Glory might but rise,
Cheerful my Being I Would resign,
And fall a willing Sacrifice
To gain a Purpose so divine,
So much more worthy than this little Life of Mine!
VII. ANOTHER.
I.
WHAT IS great God! and what IS NOT,
Should BE, and NOT BE, to thy Praise:
Then, if my Nonexistence should but raise,
Thy Glory, I Am content thy Hand should blot
Me from the Rank of Being, and conclude my Days.
It Is owing to thy Glory that I AM,
And fit I should NOT BE, if that might raise thy Name.
Should I relapse to Nothing, scarce
Would it appear a Blank in thy vast Universe.
II.
Thou art the eternal Source and Spring
Of Being and of Possibility:
Thy wise omnific Hand can bring
Nonentity TO BE:
Then with a Sovereign Nod Thou can remand
The vast Productions of thy Hand,
To dreary Nothing whence they came, --
And be it so, if that might glorify thy Name!
III.
Ah! what are Worlds compared with Thee,
Great everlasting ALL!
But Atoms hovering in the Air,
Bubbles and Vanity,
That at thy great Command appear,
And at thy Word to nothing fall,
Whose Pleasure gives them Leave TO BE.
Thou viewest, independent, from on high,
A Sparrow or a Hero die,
Atoms or Systems moulder into Dust,
And now a World, and now a Bubble burst. Mr. Pope, in his Essay on Man,
expresses this Thought with inimitable Sublimity. -- " Who sees with equal Eye,
as God of all,
A Hero perish, or a Sparrow fall;
Atoms or Systems into Ruin hurled,
And now a Bubble burst, and now a World."


IV.
Yet since Thy Hand did build my Frame
With Power and Skill Divine,
And in my Life Thy glorious Name
Does more illustrious shine;
O! let me still exist, -- But to Thy Praise,
That out of Nothing did me raise.
VIII. Sinful Immortality worse than Nonexistence.
1.
THOU only HOLY! To Thy Name
It Is fit eternal Praise be given,
By all the Things Thy Hands did frame,
Through the wide Earth, and wider Heaven.
2.
Being itself becomes a Curse,
When not employed, Great GOD! for Thee:
And Life estranged from Thee is worse
Ten thousand Times than not to Be.
3.
Better to Nonexistence sink,
Or turn to elemental Clay,
Than sleep and laugh, and eat and drink
My precious Hours in vain away.
4.
Were there no Ground to hope and plead
Thy Grace may form my Soul a new,
How should I wish to be unmade,
And drop to Nothing from Thy View!
5.
For Oh! the dire Disease of Sin
Has cankered all my active Powers;
Corrodes my languid Soul within,
And all her vital Strength devours.
6.
The Vigor of my Soul is spent
On low Pursuits and empty Joys:
But ah! how feeble, cold and faint,
When to my GOD I try to rise!
7.
Sin chills Devotion's sacred Fire,
Makes Wisdom's Path a tiresome Road;
Cumbers the Pinions of Desire,
That flutter to ascend to GOD.
8.
If, contemplative, I retire
With Things eternal to converse;
My Heart, that restless Wanderer,
Rambles through the wide Universe.
9.
Or if before Thy Gracious Throne,
I humbly bend the suppliant Knee,
Languors oppress my Spirit down,
I cannot, cannot rise to Thee!
10.
And when in some celestial Song,
I pay my Homage to Thy Name;
The Anthem dies upon my Tongue;
Nor feels my Breast the heavenly Flame.
11.
So when I view the sacred Page,
Where Love and Light united shine,
Cold Criticisms my Thoughts engage,
Quite blind to Beauties more Divine.
12.
Almighty GOD! With pitying Eye,
Behold these useless Faculties!
Restore Thy fallen Progeny,
That deep immersed in Ruin lies.
13.
Say, shall my Being still be vain!
Oh! shall I never serve my GOD!
Then Life itself's a tedious Pain;
And gladly I Would lay down the Load.
14.
Oh! shall my Immortality
Be spent to offend Thy dearest Name!
No! Rather let me cease to Be,
And sink to Nothing whence I came.
15.
But if Thy Grace renew my Soul,
'Twill be my Privilege to Be;
And while eternal Ages roll,
Joyful I Will live and act for Thee.
16.
When Nature dies, and Day and Night
Measure the Flux of Time no more,
In brighter Worlds, with long Delight,
The Hands that made me I Will adore.
IX. A Clergyman's Reflections on hearing of the Death of one of his pious
Parishoners. Dec. 5. 1750.
I.
ONE more of my Dear Flock is gone
TO appear before the Eternal Throne,
And pass the grand decisive Test:
"Ashes to Ashes, Dust to Dust."
Surviving Friends with Tears entrust,
There 'til the General Doom to rest.
II.
The Soul, dismissed from cumb'rous Clay,
Expatiates in eternal Day,
And with the Great Immortals dwells:
The Dawn of Immortality
With Scenes unknown surprise the Eye,
And Wonders vast and new reveals.
III.
Thus while I Am dreaming Life away,
Or Books and Study fill the Day,
My Flock is dying one by one;
Conveyed beyond my warning Voice,
To endless Pains, or endless Joys,
For ever happy, or undone!
IV.
I too 'ere long must yield my Breath;
My Mouth for ever shut in Death;
Nor sound the Gospel Trumpet more:
Then may I, while they are in my Reach,
With Fervuor pray, with Fervor preach,
And eager eatch the flying Hour!
V.
Almighty Grace! my Zeal inflame;
Oh! free me from this sluggish Frame;
And fire my Breast with vigorous Love.
Oh! teach me that divinest Art,
To reach the Conscience, warm the Heart,
And all the tender Passions move.
VI.
Then when I must resign my Trust,
And at Thy Word relapse to Dust,
Undaunted I shall meet Thy Throne;
Joyful present, without a Spot,
The Children by Thy Word begot,
And hear Thy Voice pronounce, "WELL DONE."
X. The Soul released by Death. The Han of the first Part of this Poem, and one
or two of the Lines, were borrowed from Mr. Pope's little charming Ode,
entitled The dying Christian to his Soul.

I.
ACTIVE Spark of heavenly Fire,
In a Clod of Earth confined,
Ever fluttering to aspire
To the Great PATERNAL MIND;
Struggling still with upward Aim
To mingle with thy native Flame!
Death soon will break this Pris'n of Clay,
And give thee Leave to spring away;
Then to thy native Regions go,
There with the Etherial Flames to glow.
II.
Come, thou shining Hour, appear!
Happy Moment, Oh draw near! --
It Is come! -- I feel the purple Stream
Stagnate; in misty Darkness swim
My dizzy Eyes confused and dim;
Bedewed with could and clammy Sweat;
The dancing Pulses cease to beat;
In vain I gasp for Breath --
Strange! Can this be Death?
III.
Hark! The Angelic Envoy say,
"Sister Spirit, come away,
"Drop the Cumber of the Clay,
"And with thy Kindred join" --
Angels, I come; conduct me on:
Instruct me in a World unknown,
In Mysteries Divine:
Instruct me unexperienced Stranger how
To act as the Immortals do;
To think, and speak, and move like you:
Teach me the Senses to supply,
To see without the Optics of an Eye;
The Music of your Songs to hear
Without the Organ of an Ear.
IV.
Yes! now Blessed Angels, now I find
The Powers of an unfettered Mind!
How active and how Strange!
O happy Place! O blissful State!
Welcome Felicity complete!
Welcome amazing, happy Change!
V.
And is this then Eternity!
And am I safely landed here!
No more to Sin, no more to die,
No more to sigh, or shed a Tear! --
My Soul! can this be I?
I, who just now imprisoned dwelt
In yonder World of Woe and Guilt!
Just now shudd'ring, trembling, sighing,
Startled at the Thought of dying!
Am I indeed the same?
Or is it all a pleasing Dream? --
The very same! -- Ye heavenly Choirs!
Cherubic and Seraphic Fires!
Come, assist my laboring Tongue;
Sound aloud the grateful Song;
Assist a Stranger to express
His Thanks to rich unbounded Grace --
JESUS! the unbounded Grace was thine,
Who bled and languished on the Tree,
And bore infinite Pains for me,
To raise me thus to Joys Divine.
And do I see Thy Face at last,
O my Dear, incarnate GOD!
And has Thy Love Thy Servant placed
In this Thy shining, blessed Abode!
Enough! -- Thy Bounty gives me more
Than I could think or wish before.
XI. Gratitude and Impote^^^
NOT all the shining Saints on high
Owe so much Gratitude as I;
Not all the mourning Saints below
A Deot so vast and boundless owe.
From me the highest Praise should rise,
Obliged by such unequalled Ties.
My Breast with warmer Zeal should burn,
With deeper tend'rer Sorrows mourn,
Than Gabriel that surrounds the Throne,
Than any Wretch beneath the Sun.
For I of all the Race that fell,
Deserve the lowest Place in Hell;
And I of all the ransomed Race,
Am most in Debt to Sovereign Grace.
Ye Saints, no more yourselves abase,
But yield to me the lowest Place:
No more my rightful Claim contest
To offer Praise above the Rest.
Yet, Oh my GOD! there is not a Saint,
That sobs in secret his Complaint,
That calls himself the very First
Of Sinners, and his Case the worst;
There Is not a Saint, but (to my Shame)
Presents more Glory to Thy Name,
But serves Thee with a warmer Zeal,
And with more Fervor does Thy Will.
Kind Angels! Will You raise on high
His Praise, and my Defects supply!
Oh! will You pay, in nobler Song,
The Debt of my unskilful Tongue!
And you, Dear Saints! Will you below,
Help me to pay the Debt I owe!
No doubt the Blessings You receive,
Exceed the highest Thanks you give;
Yet sure, You cannot refuse to join
To pay a Debt so vast as mine.
All-gracious GOD! the Thanks receive,
From others, which these Lips should give.
And Oh! forgive a Worm that mourns,
Because he can make no Returns.
XII. The universal Lamentation. Though I freely own, it requires a more
exalted Muse than mine to manage this tender Subject with suitable Pathos and
Energy; yet I hope None will censure the Matter and Scope of the Poem, as
savouring of fanatical Affectation. -- That the human Soul, though the immediate
Progeny of the uncreated Paternal Mind, (as even a Heathen could style Him) is
now surprizingly alienated from its Divine Parent; indisposed for the exalted
Purposes of its Existence; and under the Tyranny of ignoble Appetites, and
criminal Passions; is a lamentable Truth we must assent to, unless we deny our
own quickest and most deep-felt mental Sensations. -- And that Many indulge
themselves in this Depravity, without any eager Aspiration for the Reparation
of their noble Nature, now in Ruins; and make it the main Business of this
mortal Life, to obey the grovelling Dictates, and gratify the impetuous Lusts,
of a degenerate Soul; we are ungratefully constrained to believe, by the odious
Scenes of Impiety and Profaneness, that open round us, and importunately
intrude upon our Observation, however willingly we would shun them. -- And can
there be any Thing so moving, any Thing so just an Object for manly Sorrow, as
this? It cannot be justly looked upon as an Instance of effeminate Softness,
for the most exalted and dispassionate Mind, to dissolve into the tenderest
Sorrows, when it is our common Humanity that demands the sympathising Fear, and
prompts the lamenting Groan. The Dignity of the human Soul, -- the expensive
and Endearing Measures a gracious GOD has been pleased to take for its
Recovery, -- the ineffable Glories forfeited, and the intolerable Miseries
incurred, by an obstinate Continuance in Sin, -- and a thousand other
Considerations, render this Degeneracy peculiarly lamentable. -- And may it not
therefore be pertinently improven, as the Occasion for an Universal
Lamentation? It Is natural for a Mind full of tender and vigorous Passions to
fall into Prosopopaeia's, and to call the inanimate Creation to share its
Sensations. Nothing is more common in Passions of Joy and Gratitude; both in
sacred and profane Writers. Of this the 148 Psalm, the Mattin-Song of our
first Parents, according to Milton, Thomson's Hymn annexed to the Seasons, and
that surprising Apostrophe in Isai. lxix. 13. are very noble Instances. Thus
also the mournful Passions frequently vent themselves, upon various Occasions;
and why may they not on this, the most Mournful of all? -- St. Paul (Romans viii.
19, 22.) forms a moving Prosopopaeia on the Subject of this Poem, with Energy
of Language which no Translation can reach. -- The whole Creation burfts into
an united Groan, and labors with travailing Pangs, ever since Sin reduced it
into Slavery, and subjected it to Vanity; and will continue to do so, 'til it
partake of the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God. -- And this Instance, not
to mention a Variety of others, is a sufficient Precedent to vindicate the
Scope of this Poem. -- It Is certain, if Sin were more lamented, it would be
less indulged and practiced in the World. And if Cicero, considering the
physical Evils of Life could say, (Hoec quidem Vita Mors est, quam lamentari
possem. (Tusc. Disput. L. I.) "This Life is truly Death, which I could lament";
sure, when we survey the moral Evils that ruin the immortal Mind, we may
breathe out Jeremiah's passionate Wish, Oh that mike Head were Waters! and mine
Eyes Fountains of Tears! (Jer. ix. 1.)

I.
WHEN Heaven with a vindictive Frown
Throws an aspiring Monarch down,
The trembling Nation takes the Alarm.
And when we view the wide Champaign
Soaked with the Blood of Heroes slain,
The softest Passions wake, and every Bosom warm.
II.
The softest Passions wake and mourn,
When Sons of Honor, nobly born,
Are sold for Slaves in barbarous Climes.
'The Wretch that on the Gibbet hangs
Moves in us sympathethic Pangs,
Though self-destroy'd he dies for his own scarlet Crimes.
III.
The importunate and helpless Poor,
Naked and famished at our Door;
The Widow and the Fatherless;
The melancholy House where Pain,
Sickness and Death and Sorrows reign,
Dissolve the generous Heart to softest Tenderness.
IV.
But from our Hearts if Death should rend
Some darling Relative or Friend,
How we bewall the mouldering Dust!
Our Life is Grief, our Breath is Sighs,
Our Days are Glooms, and from our Eyes
Torrents of ever-flowing Sorrows burst.
V.
But what are Thrones or Monarchs sunk,
Or Fields with Blood of Heroes drunk,
Or Lords in barbarous Climes confined!
Ah! what are Lumps of breathing Clay,
That into Ruin pine away,
What, when compared with one immortal Mind!
VI.
The immortal Mind! a heavenly Spark,
Lost and extinguished in the Dark!
By Sin seduced, by Sin undone! --
Let all superfluous Sorrows cease;
And Deluges of Tears, for this,
For this alone! gush forth and unremitted run!
VII.
Souls formed for Immortality,
The Eternal Father's Progeny,
Forgetful of their noble Birth,
Despise the Great PATERNAL MIND,
So bright, so fair, so good, so kind,
And loose their heavenly Essence in ignoble Earth!
VIII.
Souls ransomed by the vital Blood
And Death of an incarnate GOD,
Insult his dying Groans and Cries;
And still, remorseless, dare commit
The Sins that pierced His Hands and Feet,
And racked his tortured Soul with twinging Agonies!
IX.
The mild, propitious, heavenly Dove
Desends from his own Realms of Love,
To strive with unrelenting Souls:
In vain; -- the Rebels love their Chains,
And Sin, the Tyrant, Sovereign reigns,
And every heavenly Tendency controuls.
X.
The Voice of Mercy sounds aloud,
And offers a Redeemer's Blood,
Eternal Joys, and heavenly Crowns:
But still, with stiff unyielding Neck,
The gracious Offer they reject,
And rather perish of their mortal Wounds.
XI.
Eager with full Career they run
In Chase of Pleasures, 'til undone,
Nor pause at Mercy's loudest Call:
Dancing with inadvertent Feet
Round the dire Borders of the Pit,
'Til helpless, unexpected, down they fall.
XII.
There are (delightful Thought!) a Fow
Who the unbeaten Path pursue,
That leads to purer Joys on high:
Transporting Sight! but Oh! how rare!
While mournful Prospects every where
Glare on our Eyes, and Thousands round us die!
XIII.
And shall they unlamented die! --
Come every tender Heart and Eye,
Join in the Lamentation, join!
Fr(...)th my Eyes let Rivers flow,
And Floods of sympathetic Woe
Gush from this adamantine Heart of mine.
XIV.
Ye Sons of Levi! Sacred Train!
That spend your Breath and Strength in vain,
That toil and sow, but seldom reap;
See thoughtless Mortals, in your Eye,
Deaf to your loudest Warnings, die!
Behold the mournful Scene, ye sacred Tribe! and weep!
XV.
See your dear Fellow-Men undone,
While shocked, astonished, you look on,
But can, alas, yield no Relief!
Yet sure you may indulge your Tears,
And even over those that stop their Ears,
Vent your full Hearts in Streams of useless Grief.
XVI.
Come every tenderhearted Saint,
Give all the mournful Passions vent,
Or are your Bowels formed of Stone?
See how ungrateful Worms despise
JESUS the Darling of your Eyes!
See the dear Souls you love by their own Hands undone!
XVII.
Ye generous Souls! whose Bosoms bleed
Over some dear Creature cold and dead,
Some dearer Self torn from your Heart;
Forbear your useless Tears, and turn
The Stream from them, and only mourn
The cruel Hands that kill their own immortal Part.
XVIII.
Come all ye Sons of Adam, join;
Mingle your flowing Griefs with mine;
Let Groans tumultuous heave your Lungs.
But you alas! refuse your Tears;
And waste them on inferior Cares;
Or lull yourselves to Ease with Luxury and Song.
XIX.
Angels! that charm the listening Skies
With everlasting Harmonies,
Say, Have Ye never a mourning String?
O! while your Songs transport the Poles,
Raise one sad Note for Kindred-Souls,
Your Kindred lost to you, revolted from your King!
XX.
Fountain of Day and cheerful Light
Why should the Gloomy Sons of Night,
The Radiance of thy Beams abuse?
The Mourner's sable Dress assume,
And wrap the Globe in Midnight Gloom;
Why should they see the Light who Works of Darkness choose?
XXI.
Ye Lamps of Heaven that nightly burn,
Over brighter Flames extinguished mourn,
As wakeful you survey the World.
Regent of Night! Resplendent Moon!
Bewail the Scenes of Lewdness done,
While through the silver Shades thy ample Orb is whirled.
XXII.
Ye Winds that gently fan the Air,
Or ravage in fierce Tempests there,
Expend your Breath in Groans and Sighs:
Disgusting Joys of heavenly Kind,
Immortal Spirits feed on Wind,
And eager pant for airy Vanities.
XXIII.
Ye Thunders groan from Cloud to Cloud,
Roar your majestic Sorrows loud,
Over Worms that scorn JEHOVAH's Voice.
Tempests, and Hurricanes and Storms,
Bewail in all your dreadful Forms,
The more pernicious Storm that Human Kind destroys.
XXIV.
Ye Clouds that lightly float in Air,
Or roll in heavy Oceans there,
Weep on a wretched World below.
Soft Dews and fruitful Showers, bewail
The ungrateful Plants, that constant feel
The Showers of Grace distill, but never fruitful grow.
XXV.
Ye Rivers rapid, rough and strong,
And Streams that gently glide along,
And in Meandrine Circuits flow;
Exhaust in Tears your liquid Store,
And murmur Grief; or swell and pour
Your useless Channels dry in Deluges of Woe.
XXVI.
And thou immense, majestic Main,
Let not thy Billows roll in vain;
But swell each Billow to a Tear;
Mortals the Pleasures disesteem
That roll their plenteous Crystal Stream
In Paradise; and thirst for sordid Pleasures here.
XXVII.
Sweet Mourner! melancholy Dove,
And all ye Songsters of the Grove,
Let tuneful Sorrows swell your Throats;
You warble gratest Songs of Praise,
And join with heavenly Choirs to raise
Your Maker's Name; but Mortals will not join the Notes.
XXVIII.
Ye fierce, rapacious Beasts of Prey,
That in the horrid Desert stray,
Through the rough Wild your Sorrows roar:
Men put your Savage Natures on,
Renounce the Mildness of their own,
And Tyger-like, their Fellow-Men devour.
XXIX.
Ye Cattle that on Mountains feed,
Or graze in the luxuriant Mead,
Low sorth your Sorrows as you roam:
Lament the wretched Animal,
Fashioned by Nature rational,
Degraded by himself, and one of you become.
XXX.
Let all Things mourn: Let Rocks and Stones
Learn Sympathy, and burst to Groans,
And senseless Marble learn to melt:
Marble will weep, and Rocks relent
Sooner than stubborn Hearts repent,
And contrite wail their own oppressive Guilt.
XXXI.
O Thou All-Good, Paternal Mind!
Pity the Crowds of Human Kind,
Whose Hearts are hearden'd from Thy Fear.
The Madness of the Wretch control,
Who ruins his immortal Soul,
Without acute Remorse, without a pitying Tear.
XXXII.
JESUS! Thy tender Griefs did stream
Over Obstinate Jerusalem,
Thy dying Breath implored "FORGIVE:"
O! may Thy soft Compassions move,
And Thy unconquerable Love
Constrain a dying World to turn and live!
XXXIII.
Then shall the glad Creation smile,
New Pleasures every Bosom fill,
And Sin and Death and Sorrow die:
Angels with sevenfold Ardours flame,
And sound new Praises to Thy Name,
While Mortals join below, and to their Song reply.
XIII. The Aspiration.
I.
EAGER, craving, hungry Soul,
All thy loose Desires control:
Anxious, restless Spirit, cease
To search inferior Skies for Bliss:
Fluttering, panting, wild Desires,
Recall, abate your sprightly Fires:
Upward guide the quivering Flame,
There unremitted let it glow:
There purer Joys than Wealth or Fame,
Lasting, satisfying, grow.
II.
Sparks with natural upward Aim,
Wheeling, quivering, still aspire,
To mix with elemental Fire:
Come then, active heaven-born Flame,
Hovering, trembling, restless Spark,
Still twinkling, sparkling in the Dark,
Heav'nward, Homeward active tend,
And to thy Kindred Flames ascend.
Conscious of thy superior Birth
Generous spurn ignoble Earth;
Exert thy Vigor, spring away
To Regions of eternal Day:
No more obscured in Glooms below,
Soar with thy kindred Flames to glow.
III.
Where the blessed Immortals shine,
Brightened with Luster all divine,
Fired with heavenly Life within,
Active, vigorous, never tired:
Once they were struggling here below,
Fainting, oppressed, as thou art now;
Yet to their native Element aspired.
O! the Bliss, the Joy they feel!
Raptures succeed to Raptures still,
And in their Bosoms ever burn:
Then my Soul with soaring Wing,
To thy great Companions spring;
Nor linger here to weep and mourn.
XIV. The Soul early estranged from its Divine Parent.
FATHER of Spirits! why, ah! why
Should thy own Offspring be so shy?
This Soul inspired by thee so late,
Her bright Original forget?
So soon forget her heavenly Birth,
And basely grovel in the Earth?
But a few Years their Rounds have run,
Since first my Infant-Life begun:
'Till then, in native Nothing's Shade
I lay infinite Years unmade;
And but for thy creating Will,
Had slept in dreary Nothing still.
"Let Nothing spring to Life," Thy Tongue
Pronounced, and straight to Life it sprung.
Thou only art my Father, Thou
My Author and Preserver too.
Yet, Father! Thy own Progeny
Was soon, alas! estranged from Thee:
Cast forth to Earth's remote Abode,
Forgot her Father, lost her GOD:
Enslaved to Flesh, and Lust and Sense,
Reluctant to aspire from thence:
With gilded Toys familiar grown,
Her Father lost, unsought, unknown.
Not so my Child: His Infant Tongue,
Owns me the Parent whence he sprung:
His little fondling Actions show
What grateful Passions inward glow:
Joying he rests in my Embrace,
Or fondling round me smiles and plays:
From real or imagined Harms,
Flies for Protection to my Arms;
And thus, with undesigning Tongue,
Upbraids me of ungrateful Wrong.
Ah! shall this Child return to me,
A warmer Love than I to Thee!
To Thee the universal Cause,
Whence Nature her Existence draws.
Thou gracious Author of my Frame,
A wandering Prodigal reclaim.
From glittering Toys my Soul recall,
To Thee her bright Original.
Allure me to my Father's Arms
By Thy own uncreated Charms.
XV. A Survey of human Nature.
The INTRODUCTION.
WHILE inconsiderate here I play
The uncertain Trifle, Life, away,
Let me indulge a solemn Hour,
And view the Race of Adam over;
On Contemplation's Pinions rove
To Worlds below and Worlds above.
What different Scenes around me rise!
What different Prospects strike mine I (...)!
What strange, what various Characters
The self-same human Nature wears!
I. PART. HEAVEN.
See in the fair celestial Plains,
Released from Sin, and Death, and Pains,
How, clad in Robes of Light Divine,
Human Immortals glorious shine!
The mean, inglorious Sons of Earth,
With Angels of celestial Birth,
On Ever-Green, in blissful Bowers,
Pass their eternal social Hours.
No more exposed to lurking Snares,
No more perplexed with trifling Cares,
No more the eager starving Mind
Would feed on Vanity and Wind;
But Crystal Springs of Pleasure burst,
And gently flow, and quench the Thirst.
The Tree of Life luxuriant spreads
Its fragrant Shade above their Heads;
And shook with gentle Breezes, pours
Its Fruits around in golden Showers.
Still eager, still uncloy'd, the Blessed
The immortalizing Apples taste.
Grim Death with all his ghastly Train
Attempts to enter there in vain,
Heart-bursting Groans and heaving Sighs
No more attempt to swell and rise.
But Oh! the higher Joys they feel!
Immortal, pure, ineffable!
While the bright DEITY displays
The unveiled Glories of his Face:
While, lost in Wonder still, they see
The GOD that bled upon the Tree?
Fired with immortal Transports rove
Over all the Wonders of his Love:
Unwearied the dear Theme pursue;
Still viewed, yet still beyond their View:
From Wonders still to Wonders rise,
'Til lost in vast Infinities:
Dazzled with sweet Excess of Light,
For strong Seraphic Eyes too bright.
Their Knowledge brightens more and more;
And what they know not, they adore.
The high celestial Arches ring
With Hallelujahs while they sing;
The Hills, the Dales, the Fountains round
With sweetest Harmony resound.
Say, my bright kindred Spirits, say,
Dare an Inhabitant of Clay,
Direct his Hope and wishful Eye,
To share with you in Joys on high?
Hope in some humble Place to sit
Amongst your Thrones, or at your Feet?
Or does his stagrant Guilt deny
The Ambition of a Wish so high?
Once You, in dull Mortality,
Were struggling and oppressed, like me;
Allured with tempting Vanities,
And the false World's ensnaring Lies:
Unruly Passions in your Hearts;
Wounded with Satan's fiery Darts:
Through thousand Dangers fought your Way;
Trembling to fall a helpless Prey:
Trembling to lose the glorious Prize,
You now enjoy above the Skies.
Say, Human Angels! by what Art
Did you subdue the unruly Heart?
Over the ensnaring World prevail,
And all the Stratagems of Hell?
O! tell me whence your Victory came? --
And was it from the bleeding Lamb! -- Rev. xii. 11.

Blessed JESUS! be my Guide, my Strength;
And I shall triumph too at length.
O! did the Sons of Men below,
The perfect Bliss above but know;
O could they dart a piercing Eye
Through the blue Curtains of the Sky;
And view in what Perfection there
Some of their Family All Mankind are represented in this Poem as one great
Family; and Heaven, Earth, and the infernal Regions as so many Colonies,
peopled by its wide Dispersions.
appear;
To what Degrees an human Mind,
May be exalted and refined;
How would they nobly soar, and spurn
This Earth, and all its Trifles scorn;
With brave Ambition Heav'nward aim,
And all inferior Joys disclaim;
Generous break through the narrow Rounds
Of Time and all created Bounds;
Break through, and winged with strong Desire,
To pure celestial Joys aspire!
But they, alas! with sordid Aim,
All Kindred with the Skies disclaim:
Ignobly sink the heaven-born Mind
To Pleasures of the brutal Kind.
Eternal GOD! erect our Souls;
Nor let them grovel here like Moles.
O! teach a downward World to rise;
And seek to gain their native Skies.
II. PART. HELL.
But Oh! -- what dismal Scenes of Woe
Open in yonder Gulf below!
See! how the fiery Surges swell,
And dash against the Cope of Hell.
The sulfurous undulating Flames
Through the thick Gloom shed awful Gleams;
Pale Gleams that but expose to Sight
The Horrors of eternal Night. A Dungeon horrible, on all Sides round, As one
great Furnace slam'd; yet from those Flames No Light, but rather Darkness
visible Served only to discover Sights of Woe. -- Par. Lost B. 1. l. 60.

Ah! there, forever, ever lost,
On these dire Billows ever tossed,
Some of my wretched Kindred roar,
Feeling the Flames they scorned before.
When Mercy called, they would not turn;
Now Mercy frowns, and they must burn.
Now Justice makes the Rebels feel
The Tortures of the restless Wheel.
Now nailed to Racks of endless Pain,
They cry for some Relief in vain.
Deep Groans and Screams torment the Air,
The horrid Language of Despair.
The Vulture, Conscience, preys within;
Once charming, now tormenting Sin
In all her hellish Colors glares,
And pays her Slaves the long Arrears
For all the painful Drudgery done --
Sad Wages! worse by far than none.
Ah! how 'ey writhe, and agonize!
How wildly stare their flaming Eyes!
No Heart can think, no Language tell,
No Fancy paint the Pains they feel.
Yet in their greatest Pains they own
The Justice of the Eternal Throne.
"Justice! all Justice! still they cry;
"By our own Folly here we lie.
"Where should we lie but in this Pit,
"Who made ourselves for Heaven unfit?
"Alas! should Heaven her Gates display,
"And take us to the Realms of Day;
"We Sons of Darkness, back to Night
"Would shrink, confounded with the Sight.
"And in these Glooms make our Abode,
"Rather than see a holy GOD.
"While sinful Passions rule our Breast,
"Not Heaven itself can make us blessed.
"Impossible we should be saved,
"While thus corrupted and depraved.
"Nor do these raging Flames refine
"Our Spirits from the Dross of Sin;
"But still we harden in the Fire,
"And still our Lusts new Strength acquire,
"The Bliss we would not have, we lose;
"And have the Portion that we chose."
O! did surviving Mortals know
The Pains their Kindred feel below;
O! did they know the dire Reward
For all the Slaves of Sin prepared;
How would they shrink from Vice's Charms,
And thrust the Monster from their Arms!
The smooth broad Road with Trembling shun,
Where Thousands walked, and were undone!
At the loud Call of Mercy stop,
And eager catch the offered Hope!
But all these real Terrors seem
But frightful Tales and Dreams to them.
Their Fellow-Sinners die around;
They lay their Relics in the Ground:
The ghastly Corpse they only view,
But Oh! could they the Soul pursue;
Pursue her the other Side of Death,
To her eternal Home beneath;
What Terrors would alarm the Heart!
How would the thoughtless Sinner start!
What Fear the Hypocrite surprise,
And tear away his base Disguise!
Or might abandoned Ghosts again
Visit the Earth, and talk with Men:
Might they in human Ears proclaim
The Torture of infernal Flame:
In Characters majestic draw
The Honors of the insulted Law:
Sin and its heavy Punishment
In their infernal Colors paint:
With flaming Tongues aloud expose,
The crying scarlet Guilt of those
Who dare neglect a dying GOD,
And trifle with redeeming Blood:
How would a sleeping World awake,
And conscious Guilt confounded quake!
Security should take the Alarm,
And shudder at the impending Harm.
Hardy Profaneness learn to shrink;
And thoughtless Luxury to think.
Misers no more with Gold bewitched,
Should damn themselves to be enriched.
No more the Proud for empty Fame,
Should sink in everlasting Shame.
No more the insulted Heavens should hear
The dull Formality of Prayer;
But flaming high, Devotion's Fire
In Zeal importunate aspire.
Spiritless Breath and languid Zeal
No more eternal Truths reveal;
Nor cold Harangues, or Trifles vain,
The solemn Pulpit more profane.
The Thunders of the Law should sound,
And hardy Sinners tremble round:
JESUS allure with winning Charms
Despairing Sinners to his Arms.
So Fancy dreams. -- But if the Law
Fails to inspire a pious Awe,
And even the Gospel cannot draw;
In vain Apostles from the Dead
Might Thunder Wrath, and urge and plead
In vain infernal Messengers
Would try to alarm presumptuous Ears.
The trembling Fright would soon be over,
And all ascribed to Fancy's Power.
Or frequent Apparitions grow
Familiar, and be treated so.
III. PART. EARTH.
Now to the Earth I turn my Eyes:
And strange! what different Prospects rise!
Here Honor glitters, Riches shine,
And Pleasure's various Forms combine:
There meagre Poverty, Disgrace,
And sullen Griefs usurp the Place.
Here Health her blooming Visage shows,
Clad in the Lilly and the Rose:
There Sickness groans and pines in Bed,
And scarcely lifts his fainting Head.
Here the unthinking jovial Crowd
Dissolve in Mirth, and laugh aloud;
While Music all her Charms employs
To lull their Cares, and wake their Joys:
But hark! how Melancholy moans,
And solitary Sorrow groans,
Here Luxury her Table spreads,
And, squeamish, on her Dainties feeds:
There Hunger gnaws, and starving Want
Unpitied vents his vain Complaint.
Profaneness lifts her impious Eyes,
And mocks the Thunder of the Skies;
Presumes with daring Tongue invoke
The Vengeance of the lingering Stroke
While here and there a pious Sigh,
And humble Prayer ascend the Sky;
JEHOVAH hears, and with a Smile
Lays the dread Thunder by awhile.
The Ways of Vice are still pursued
By the triumphant Multitude;
Sin high-applauded walks the Street,
And tramples Virtue with his Feet:
Yet an unfashionable Few
Virtue's untrodden Path pursue.
These are the Pillars of the Land,
And by their Prayers whole Nations stand;
When they are gone, Wrath shall be hurled
To blast and burn a guilty World.
Some now receive the vital Breath;
Some gasping in the Pangs of Death.
Some landing on the eternal Shore,
The Dangers of Life's Ocean over;
While others entering on the Stage
Of Life, begin their youthful Age.
The CONCLUSION.
But who can tell the various Views,
The various Projects Man pursues?
The States, Conditions, Characters,
In which Humanity appears?
O! were our narrow Views more wide,
Did human Race our Cares divide;
The tender social Tear would rise;
The social Bosom sympathize.
The Heart of Charity would bleed,
And round her gentle Influence shed.
Benevolence would open wide
The generous Wish, to none denied.
Nay, Vice appal'd in her Career,
Should feel Remorse and drop a Tear.
Oppression break her Rod of Steel,
And senseless Tyrants Pity feel.
XVI. Whom have I in Heaven but Thee? And there is none upon Earth I desire
besides Thee. My Flesh and my Heart fails; but Thou art the Strength of my
Heart, and my Portion forever. Ps. lxxiii. 25, 26.
FOUNTAIN of Good! from Thee incessant flow
The Streams of Bliss that cheer the World below.
The Charms of Nature in her fairest Dress
Are but faint Copies of Thy fairer Face.
As some sweet Flower, when vernal Suns infuse
The vegetative Soul, and fertile Dews,
Impearl the Grass, its painted Foliage spreads,
Blooms fair and gay, and fragrant Odours sheds;
But when the Sun withdraws his genial Ray,
Contracts its Beauties, droops and pines away:
So at Thy Smiles, the wide Creation blooms;
But should Thou frown, Horrors and dismal Glooms
Would cover All; Deformity would reign;
All Nature die, and Chaos come again.
Unnumber'd Worlds, through boundless Ether lost,
Are clad by Thee in all their Charms they boast.
Impelled by Thee, the mighty Spheres roll on,
And Nature's ample Wheels harmonious run.
Thy Glory twinkles through the Midnight Sky,
From thousand Golden Lamps suspended high
In azure Vaults. Yon' boundless Source of Day,
That flames from Age to Age without Decay,
That cheers surrounding Worlds with vital Rays,
Is but a Gleam from Thee; whose brighter Face,
Dazzles the Eyes of Angels as they gaze:
Who sit'st enthroned, insufferably bright,
In the Recesses of eternal Light.
Thy Goodness in the vernal Seasons blooms;
From Thee the Rose derives its rich Perfumes.
By Thee the Groves are in their Verdure clad,
And Plains and Vales with flowery Carpets spread.
Eternal All! what is this lovely Frame
But a faint Transcript of Thy glorious Name?
The soft enchanting Smile, the sparkling Eye,
The charming Voice, the Strains of Harmony,
The graceful Conduct, the unbounded Aim
Of noble Minds, the Patriot's generous Flame,
The exalted Genius, the celestial Fire
Of Piety, Thy Spirit did inspire.
'Twas thou Fidelio formed in Friendship's Mould,
And stamped the social Virtues on his Soul;
The candid Temper, and the Heart sincere,
Thee their divine Original declare.
When Chara, the Companion of my Life,
The chastest, mildest, tenderest, kindest Wife;
The Honor and the Beauty of her Sex;
Whom every Grace and every Virtue decks:
When she blooms on my Sight in all her Charms,
And every correspondent Passion warms;
I farther look; and through this radiant Glass
Gaze on the brighter Beauties of thy Face.
Thus Mortals read some Letter of thy Name,
On every Pin in this amazing Frame:
View some reflected Beams of Charms Divine
Break through Thy Works, and with bright Radiance shine
But O! how far the loveliest Creatures fall
Beneath the immensely bright Original!
Thou Excellence unknown, divinely fair!
Show us what uncreated Beauties are.
Reveal THYSELF! Let trembling Mortals see
The unrivaled Glories that beam forth in Thee.
The borrowed Beauties of Thy Works but raise
The restless Pant to view Thy brighter Face;
But warms the eager Wish, that breaks through all
The Ranks of Creatures to the Original:
But O! it is Thou, it is Thou alone can fill
The boundless Wish, and bid the Pant be still.
Without Thee, every Charm insipid grows,
And the aspiring Soul finds no Repose.
In Quest of Thee she flies; in Quest of Thee
Roves through the Mazes of Immensity,
Restless, bewildered. O my only Joy!
Reveal Thyself; these Cravings satisfy:
Fill this unbounded Void; nor let me more
For solid Bliss created Bounds explore
Oh! if Thy Goodness will not satisfy
These boundless Aims, why were they raised so high?
Why was I cursed with this immortal Mind,
This Dignity of Thought, these Powers refined;
O! why, if Thou will ever, ever hide
Thyself, and leave them still unsatisfied?
Far better had I flourished for a Day
A fading Flower beneath the quickening Ray
Of vernal Suns; or with my Fellow-Brutes
Roam'd over the trackless Waste in low Pursuits,
Grazed the green Mead, or unmolested lain,
And stretched my careless Bulk in some wild Den,
Sleeping dull Life away; nor feared my Doom
From Evil past, or present or to come.
O envied Lot to mine! if I must pass
My Immortality far from Thy Face;
Whether on Earth, in Air, or Heaven I dwell,
If Thou art absent, every Place is Hell.
Advance me to the Grandeur of a Throne,
And let me call the Universe my own;
Let Planetary Worlds my Nod obey,
And Earth and Ocean reverence my Sway:
Yet, if deprived of Thy auspicious Smile,
I shall be cursed, abandoned, wretched still.
Let Heaven her sparkling Portals wide display,
And take me to the Realms of endless Day;
Angelic Harps their sweetest Notes employ,
And round me Rivers flow of heavenly Joy;
My Soul would sicken at the hateful Sight,
If hid from Thee, sole Spring of my Delight!
The Light offensive to my Eyes would glare,
And heavenly Notes grate harsh upon my Ear.
But if refreshed with Thy propitious Face,
My Soul would find a Heaven in ev'rv Place.
Thy Presence would eternal Pains beguile,
And cause the Realms of Desolation smile.
A Beam from Thee would kindle into Light
The solid Glooms of everlasting Night;
Not even infernal Horrors could affright.
O! then, where ever Thou fix my last Abode,
Be it in Reach of Thy sweet Smiles, my GOD!
Be Thou my Portion, Thou my Bliss, my ALL;
I care not to whose Share the Creatures fall;
I have enough in Thee, the immense Original.
XVII. Conjugal Love and Happiness. February 27, 1750-1.
COnjugal Love my joyful Heart inspires,
And warms a languid Muse with active Fires.
The pleasing Impulse the glad Muse obeys;
And as a pious Monument of Praise,
Grateful she consecrates these humble Lays.
Nor can she stray in trackless Wilds unknown;
Since to describe the Bliss, I need but tell my own.
But hence! far hence! ye wild lascivious Fires:
To purer Themes the modest Muse aspires,
Hencebanish'd, to your native Hell return!
There with your loose degenerate Bards to mourn;
There with your kindred Flames to rage and burn.
Hail, gentle Love! thou sacred Heaven-born Flame!
Pure Spark, that from the eternal GODHEAD came!
Who clad in Glories infinitely bright,
Does in this mild Perfection most delight;
In Love rejoices as this darling Name, 1 John, iv. 8. Psalm clxv. 9.

And breathes through Nature the celestial Flame.
It Is Love adjusts this fair harmonious World;
On Wheels of Love the heavenly Spheres are whirled,
Ten Thousand Systems round Ten Thousand Suns,
Impelled by Love, each in its Orbit runs.
What Is the Attractive or Projectile Force,
But Love well-ballanc'd, to direct their Course?
Love, the great Cement of the Universe,
That hinders Worlds to conflict and disperse.
It Is Love that tunes the harmonious Harps above;
And the blessed Voices sing immortal Love.
There in its native Element it glows;
There from the uncreated Fountain flows,
Diffusing Heaven where ever its Current goes.
Of firm Societies Love formed the Plan,
"And Creature linkt to Creature, Man to Man."
Blessed the rude World with Friendship, downy Peace,
And humaniz'd a wild, barbarian Race.
The kindest Gift indulgent Heaven bestowed,
To sweeten Life, and ease the crushing Load;
To sooth Anxieties, to lull to Rest
The Hurricanes that ravage through the Breast;
To double scanty Bliss, and multiply
The rare celestial Plants of Peace and Joy,
So apt in this unnat'ral Soil to die.
Could Hell extinguish this celestial Spark,
The Universe would sall, the Sun grow dark;
Infernal Horrors through the World prevail:
And Heaven itself would sadden into Hell:
Men changed to Savages, forsake their Home,
And with fell Tigers, the wild Desert roam:
The screaming Infant die as soon as born,
By his own Father's Rage to Pieces torn.
But Thou, All-gracious Maker! have impressed
This heavenly Stamp upon the human Breast;
Mixed in the tender Embryo of our Frame,
Some gentle Sparks of Thy essential Flame.
O! early may the sacred Fire return
To Thee its Source, and there divinely burn!
Every soft Passion to Thy Name aspire,
And Love to Thee the whole Creation fire!
But chiefly, may thy Praises be expressed,
By those whom gentle Love has rendered blessed!
Ye Parents, whose kind Bowels melt and move
With all the Endearments of paternal Love;
Who feel the silken Bands of Nature tie
Your yearning Souls to your fond Progeny;
O! praise Him, who a feeble Spark imparts
Of his paternal Kindness to your Hearts.
Ye grateful Infants, whose young Souls begin
To feel the soft Emotions work within;
In thousand little fondling Actions show
The filial Duty that begins to glow;
O! while you toy in your fond Mother's Arms,
^isp to his Honor who your Bosom warms:
O! consecrate the imperfect rude Essays
Of your first Language, to your Maker's Praise.
Ye Youths and Nymphs, who feel the pleasing Flame
Pant in your Breast, and throb through all your Frame;
Who lost in anxious, pleasing Transports prove
The charming wild Extravagance of Love;
Let human Beauties claim their proper Share,
But Oh! supremely love THE EVERLASTING FAIR!
Friendship, thou sacred Name! may every Mind
Whom thy soft Fetters in sweet Bondage bind;
Who melted into Union coalesce,
And but one Joy, one Grief, one Life possess;
O may their warmest Gratitude ascend
In Ecstasies to their celestial Friend!
Praise Him, ye happy Pairs, who no more sigh
For absent Bliss, but all your Wish enjoy:
Your Hands conjoined, cogenial Souls commixt;
And not a jealous Thought intrudes betwixt;
While mutual Confidence, and Peace serene
Smile in your Looks, and still the Storms within:
Your mutual Virtues mutual Wants supply;
Your Burden shared, and multiplied your Joy;
Adore His Name who joined two kindred Souls,
And fashioned you in correspondent Moulds.
CONNUBIAL LOVE! thrice happy was the Hour
I fell a willing Captive to thy Power.
Oppressed I panted underneath my Load,
While I a single Individual stood:
But, Chara, since with thee I coalesc'd,
And joined thee to my maimed imperfect Breast,
I grew into a finished Man, complete,
And hardly feel the huge unwieldy Weight --
So when a marble Pillar singly tries
To bear the Weight of some vast Edifice,
The Pillar trembles, and the tottering Wall
Horrendous nods, and threats a thundering Fall.
But if the prudent Architect bestows
A Set of Columns in proportioned Rows,
The Building stands indissolubly firm,
And mocks the blustering Hurricane and Storm.
Nor will my OTHER SELF refuse to own
She finds her Soul to perfect Stature grown,
And two conjoined but make a finished ONE
The rougher Virtues of a manly Mind
With her more tender female Virtues joined,
Form a well-tempered Compound. -- So unite
The Glooms of Black, and the mild Streaks of White,
And form a well-mix'd Picture, pleasing to the Sight.
The Mildness of her Temper seemed to court
Masculine Boldness for its kind Support;
Unfit, alone, to avert impending Harms,
And face Life's Terrors and outrageous Storms. --
So creeps the noble Vine along the Ground,
When no supporting Elm is near her found:
No generous Clusters her rich Boughs adorn,
Smothered with noxious Weeds and overborn.
But place some kind Support within her Reach,
Her marriageable Arms you will see her stretch;
Round the rough Trunk with loving Tendrils twine,
And bloom on high, a fair prolific Vine.
Chara, beneath thy Influence I felt
The charming Flame; my Soul was taught to melt
In Ecstasies unknown, and soon began
To put the Stoic off, and soften into Man.
The Veil of Modesty, in vain confined
The alluring Beauties of thy lovely Mind:
The shining Charms beamed through the fair Disguise;
Blushed in thy Aspect, dazzled in thy Eyes;
In every Word, in all thy Conduct known,
And in thy artless Face, well-copy'd, shone --
So through refulgent Clouds breaks the bright Morning Sun.
I saw, I loved, I sought to gain,
The blooming Fair; nor sought in vain.
Thy yielding Bosom soon began to glow
With the same Flame thy Charms taught me to know.
Thy Soul, unskilled in those inhumane Arts,
Thy Sex affect to torture captive Hearts,
A constant Lover did disdain to vex,
Or with unkind Delays and treacherous Wiles perplex.
Thy Soul, that knew not what dissembling meant,
With modest soft Reluctance, blushed Consent.
In Transport lost the joyful News I heard;
And vowed my Life the Favor to reward.
A solemn Rite the willing Contract sealed,
To stand, 'til Death divide us, unrepeal'd.
'Twas gracious Heaven presided o'or our Choice --
Come, Chara, then, assist my grateful Voice.
To Thee, Great GOD! to Thee alone we owe
This mutual Bliss, this Paradise below.
And do THOU, Sovereign Ruler of the Spheres!
Stoop down to Worms, and manage our Affairs!
THOU, in Whose Sight Archangels are but Naught,
And highest Heaven beneath Thy meanest Thought!
Compared with Whom, ten thousand Worlds appear
But Vanity, unworthy of Thy Care!
Oh! what are we, or what our Father's House,
That THOU should condescend so low to us,
And with peculiar Favors crown us thus! 2 Samuel vll. 18.

O! never, never be Thy Grace forgot
That destined for us a distinguished Lot.
While wretched Thousands, formed of different Clay,
In nuptial Fetters fret their Days away;
Jangle and murmur in eternal Strife,
And gnawed with Jealousies consume their Life;
In mutual Love, in mutual Confidence,
Unconscious of Suspicion or Offense,
In Fondness, Peace and melting Tenderness,
The calm unclouded Day of Life we pass:
Pitying survey the angry jarring World,
Contentious, loud, in boisterous Passions whirled:
Then into sweet Society retire,
And find the peaceful Calm our Souls desire.
Love charms the Heart, and in the Aspect smiles,
Our anxious Griefs and fretting Cares beguiles;
Doubles our Pleasures, while the impartial Scale
Of Sympathy divides the Woes we feel.
Thus over Life's tempestous Sea we sail,
When Storms blow fierce, and the rough Surges swell;
With equal Hands ply the tough yielding Oar,
And fly triumphant to the wished for Shore.
O! may our Days, Eternal GOD! be Thine;
And every Passion yield to Love Divine.
Oh! in our Hearts still do Thou reign supreme;
Nor let us steal the Love thy Glories claim.
But here, ah! here a guilty Scene appears! --
Oh! break my senseless Heart, and flow my Tears!
How manifold and strange my Frailties be!
Chara, I find Temptations even in thee!
When fondly in thy loving Arms I rest,
And thy resistless Charms inflame my Breast,
The pleasing Tempter seizes all my Heart,
Or leaves my GOD but the inferior Part.
Almighty Grace the Extravagance control
Of this unruly Power that captivates my Soul.
From all created charms my Heart recall,
To the ALL-PERFECT FAIR, THE ETERNAL ALL!
My lovely Chara! help me to restrain
The wild Excesses of the Love you gain.
With Horror, shun the sacrilegious Thest,
And though I give, yet Oh! refuse the Gift.
Far from my Breast expel each human Fair;
But Oh! let JESUS reign unrivaled there:
JESUS! Thou sacred and unrivaled Name!
My warmest Love thy matchless Glories claim.
Ah! shall this Spark Thy Spirit did inspire,
From Thee, its Origin, my Heart ensnare!
No! Claim my tenderest Passions for Thy own;
Or tear them from my Heart, and change me into Stone.
Another pleasing Scene, my Muse, disclose --
Love multiplied in blooming Branches grows.
These smiling Infants with a thousand Arts
To fond parental Love dissolve our Hearts.
In our fond Arms the pretty Triflers toy,
And overwhelm us with oppressive Joy.
Young Reason blooms, and shows its tender Flowers,
And importunes INSTRUCTION's gentle Showers.
Delightful Task! to rear the tender Thought;
To teach the young Idea how to shoot;
To form the pliant Mind in Virtue's Mould,
Before it hardens, and stiff Vice grows old.
Eternal GOD! to whom ourselves we owe,
To Thee we dedicate our Offspring too.
O! may Thy Conduct guide them over the Stage
Of slippery Youth to Manhood's sob'rer Age;
And if Thou crown their Heads with hoary Hairs,
May they devote to Thee their aged Years;
Proclaim Thy Praise, when we resign our Breath,
And lie forgotten in the Dust of Death.
Then in Thy kind Embraces let them die,
And people the celestial Colony.
Chara, thou dear Partaker of my Heart,
The Hour approaches, when even we must part:
We though in strongest Bonds of Union joined,
Must feel the painful Rupture of the Mind.
When on the Bridal Day I took thy Hand,
And clasped thee to me in the nuptial Band,
This Thought did moderate my Excess of Joy.
" Resistless Death this Union will destroy:
" This spendid Jewel must not still be mine;
"But cruel Fate will force me to resign."
I shudder at the Prospect! -- Ah! my Dear,
How could I leave you solitary here!
Leave you, like the poor widowed Dove, to mourn!
Oppressed with Cares, in the wide World forlorn!
With all the Mother yearning in your Breast,
To see your helpless Orphan-Babes distressed!
Methinks I see you weeping over my Clay,
And drowned in Sorrow, my pale Corpse survey:
"There all my Comfort, all my Joy lies dead,
(You cry) "Each smiling Prospect now is fled.
"My Love, alas! was impotent to save
"The Man I loved from the all-conquering Grave.
"To Thee, Great GOD! the Widow's Friend, I flee;
"I Have no Support, no Refuge now, but Thee."
Methinks I see you sad and solemn tread
The Place where I lie mouldering among the Dead
"Here the dear Relics lie, the Dust lies here,"
You say, and sob, and drop a tender Tear,
"The Dust of that dear Man, who once possessed
"My Soul, whom these fond Arms have often embraced.
"Here silent, senseless, now he lies; nor hears
"His Chara's Sighs, nor minds her flowing Tears."
O Chara! could the iron Bands of Death
Be bursted, and its Slaves resume their Breath;
Thy Sorrows would revive my mouldering Clay,
And Death's eternal Stupor drive away.
My senseless Dust with thee would sympathize,
And spring to Life to wipe thy streaming Eyes.
But ah! the Tyrant Death will not dismiss
His Captives, nor grant one poor Hour's Release.
Yet now at least my pitying Tears can flow,
In Prospect of the approaching Scenes of Woe,
And now anticipate the Sympathy I owe.
Your Grief at my own Funeral I share,
And since I cannot then, now drop a Tear.
But Oh! the Prospect overwhelms my Minds --
I cannot, leave my Fair behind.
No! -- Hear, Indulgent Heaven! this humble Prayer;
" Let her not mourn for me, but me for her!
" Doom me to live to close her dying Eyes,
" And see her struggling in Death's Agonies.
" The pale cold Clay with last Embraces clasp,
" And from her Lips receive the expiring Gasp.
" Attend her Relics to her clay-cold Bed,
" And over her Grave my dewy Sorrows shed.
" In pensive Solitude often thither rove,
" To view the Mansion of the Dust I love.
" In melancholy Crape myself array,
" And darken with the Pomp of Grief the Day.
" Thus mourn away the sad Remains of Life,
"'Til friendly Death restore me to my Wife." --
Ah no! ah no! Kind Heaven! refuse to hear;
Nor curse me with the Answer of my Prayer.
My Heart would break, my Spirit faint away,
To see my Chara pallid lifeless Clay.
To hear the Clods with hollow murmuring Sound
Fall on thy Coffin, would my Soul confound.
And when the important, solemn Hour draws nigh,
When I must bow my fainting Head and die,
How could I face the Terrors, if thou were not by?
May I expire in thy kind Arms embraced,
And Guardian Angels take me from thy Breast,
And guide my Soul to everlasting Rest!
May thy dear Voice some cheering Thought suggest,
And teach me on my Savior's Arm to rest;
Whisper some Promise from the sacred Writ,
That through Death's Glooms may dart a cheerful Light.
Above for thee I Will wait, 'til gentle Fate
Waft up thy Soul, and make our Bliss complete.
But here again the dismal Views return, --
I see my Chara pine and weep and mourn.
The moving Sight my Spirit cannot bear;
And here again I must retract my Prayer.
Straightened, perplexed, I know not what to crave;
A longer Life than she, or earlier Grave.
Propitious Heaven! direct my doubtful Vow,
And what is best, asked or unasked, bestow.
Thus the best Blessing does perplexing prove;
These are the wild Anxieties of Love.
The senseless Stoic seeks the Bliss in vain,
It Is true -- but then, he pines not with the Pain,
His little Self is all his narrow Care,
And all his Fears and Wishes center there.
But this fond Soul with various Passions tossed,
Is in a Maze of Contradictions loft.
Now could I almost wish from Love to flee,
And harden into quiet Apathy.
But Oh! is there no Cure, no heavenly Art
To case this twinging Anguish of my Heart?
To arm this coward Soul, and make her smile
At all the Terrors of approaching Ill?
To teach these Specter no more to affright,
That stalk in future Time's impenetrable Night?
O yes there is! -- My anxious Soul be still;
Calmly submit to Heaven's all-ruling Will.
His Will be done! Refuse to choose thy Lot;
And leave that Trust to His unerring Thought.
He rules unnumber'd Worlds with Skill Divine;
And cannot He rule these mean Affairs of thine?
What Is best for us, His Wisdom only knows;
And what is best, His boundless Grace bestows.
Here will I rest: And here, my Chara too,
Appears a Rock in every Storm for you.
But Nature, perverse Nature, will rebel,
And over my calm and settled Thoughts prevail.
The rising Waves will dash me from my Rock;
And all my firmest Resolutions shock.
Father! forgive these Ravings of my Love;
These lawless Passions that rebellious rove.
O! to this Fondness proper Limits set,
And its Extravagancies regulate.
If my wild Pen one guilty Word has writ,
Pity my Weakness, and that Word remit.
Be Thou my Bliss, be Thou my All, in Life;
My Strength, my Comfort, in the dying Strife.
If it is Thy Will that I should pine alone,
Bereft of Chara, may Thy Will be done!
Or if I first relapse to native Dust,
And leave her here to mourn, Thy Will is just.
Thy Right it is, the Knot Thy Hands have tied
When, where, and as Thou please, to divide.
Yet O! forgive Thy Servant if he speaks,
And Dust and Ashes this one Prayer makes:
If Thou consent, thankful before Thy Feet
I fall! if not, I Am silent and submit.
"O! may we both at once resign our Breath,
"And sink together in the Arms of Death.
"One humble Tomb preserve our mingling Dust,
"'Til the all-rousing Trump demand the Trust.
"Conducted by one heavenly Convoy rise,
"And soar together to the upper Skies.
"There in eternal Union praise Thy Name,
"And Love Divine our mingled Souls inflame."
Chara, this humble Monument I raise
Of our fond Passion, in my youthful Days;
That if you're doomed the mournful Day to view,
When I shall cease to speak or write to you;
When my dull Muse shall silent lie in Death,
Or in celestial Strains employ her tuneful Breath;
To still, or rather vent your Griefs, you may
With gushing Eyes these tender Lines survey,
And as you pore upon them, sigh and say,
"Well; once I had a Friend, whose loving Soul
"Did antedate these Sorrows to condole;
"That early wail'd my then uncertain Doom,
"And mourned in Prospect what I mourn as come.
Or if grim Death first tear you from my Breast;
And waft you earlier to eternal Rest;
I may at least enjoy that poor Relief,
To find a Help to vent my bursting Grief;
To raise the Sluices of o'erwhelming Woe,
That Deluges of easing Tears may flow.
But Oh! why does the cruel Muse repose
So early, Treasures for our future Woes?
Nor you nor I can then endure to view
These sad Predictions then so sadly true.
Again perplexed, I wish my Work undone;
But the resistless Passion pushed me on.
I doom these dire Predictions to the Fire;
Yet would the sad Accomplishment appear;
Therefore I check my Ravings, and forbear.
XVIII. The MESSIAH 's KINGDOM. Extracted out of the Prophet Isaiah This Poem
is intended as a Supplement to Mr. Pope's Divine Eclogue, entitled MESSIAH:
and therefore I have frequently borrowed his Lines with the usual Marks of
Quotation, on such Verses as he has touched upon, though sometimes with small
Variation or Addition.

DEscend, Celestial Dove! my Voice inspire
O thou that tipped Isaiah's Tongue with Fire! Isai. vi. 6, 7.

Teach me like him to feel the extatic Flame,
And raise my Numbers equal to my Theme.
"Rapt into future Times, the Bard begun, --
"A Virgin shall conceive, a Virgin bear a Son." Chapter vii. 4.

His Names Divine His Dignity declare!
Immanuel, the wondrous Counselor:
The eternal Father, the pacific Prince,
The GOD armed with His own Omnipotence. Chapter ix. 6.

The eternal Spirit shall profusely shed
His richest Unction on his sacred Head:
Wisdom and Knowledge, Piety and Might
Descend, and on His sacred Temples light. Chapter xi. 2.

The radiant Beam of His all-piercing Eyes
Shall dart through lurking Frauds obstruse Disguise.
Sly Hypocrites with all their artful Shows
On His Omniscience try in vain t'impose. Coll. xi. 3.

His Shoulders shall the Government sustain,
And He triumphant over the Nations reign:
His growing Empire over the World extend,
And know no Bounds but Nature's utmost End. C. ix. 7.

To this illustrious Ensign, high in Air,
The numerous Tribes of Adam shall repair:
Thither the Gentiles with unwearied Feet
Shall tend, and there in endless Armies meet;
With the MESSIAH's peaceful Conduct blessed,
Shall, undisturbed enjoy eternal Rest. C. xi. 10.

The scatt'red Remnant of the sacred Stock,
Shall to their own MESSIAH's Standard flock;
With eager Haste in endless Orders crowd
From foreign Climes and barbarous Servitude. v. 11.

Impartial Justice shall erect her Scale,
And weak, insulted Innocence prevail:
The Meek, the Poor defy impending Harm,
And smile secure beneath His Guardian Arm. v. 4.

Eternal Righteousness shall rule the Globe,
The glorious Girdle of His royal Robe. v 5. and Chapter ix. 7.

Confusion, Anarchy, with wild Dismay,
Shall fly afar from his well ordered Sway:
Serene and steady his Affairs shall run
In calm, harmonious Order ever on. ibid.

Nor shall His Reign those Revolutions know
That toss the petty Monarchies below;
But while eternal Years their Circuits run,
Triumphant He shall sit on David's Throne. ibid.

Soft Peace shall bloom in His auspicious Reign;
The Olive flourish in eternal Green. Chapter ix. 7.

He into Peace the jarring World shall look,
And still their Contests with his dread Rebuke:
The jarring World, obedient to His Eye,
Shall lay their useless martial Weapons by.
The bloody Sword new formed shall learn to plow,
And mortal Spears to Pruning Hooks shall bow:
No more shall Fields drink in heroic Gore,
Nor brazen Trumpets kindle Fury more,
Nor deadly War with usual Thunder roar. Chapter ii. 4.

The Tribes that savage and rapacious rove
In Quest of Prey, shall soften into Love;
And weary of their former sullen Joy,
Shall in the sacred Mount no more destroy,
"The Lambs with Wolves shall graze the verdant Mead.
"And Boys in flowery Bands the Tiger lead.
"The Steer and Lion at one Crib shall meet,
"And harmless Serpents lick the Pilgrim's Feet.
"The smiling Infant in his Hand shall take,
"The erected Basilisk, and speckled Snake;
"Pleased the green Luster of the Scales survey,
"And with their forky Tongue and pointless Sting shall play." xi. 6, 7, 8, 9.

The proud Rebuke, the big insulting Frown
Shall on the smiling Earth no more be known.
"No Sigh, no Murmur the wide World shall hear;
"From every Face He wipes off every Tear." C. xxv. 8.

Then shall the Earth, the Air, the Sea, the Sky
Echo with Praise and grateful Harmony.
To Thee JEHOVAH! every Tongue shall sing;
And with loud Praise the wide Creation ring.
Though late Thy Wrath did with dread Fury glow,
The Flame is quenched, and now Thy Mercies flow.
The Hand that wounded, now affords Relief,
And endless Joy succeeds to transient Grief. C. xii. 1.

Behold a GOD vouchsafes to be my Aid!
Why should I, thus protected, be afraid?
The Omnipotent becomes my Strength and Guard,
And His Salvation my immense Reward.
Therefore my Tongue, the Glory of my Frame,
Exulting shall His grateful Praise proclaim. Chapter xii. 2.

My Soul with liberal Draughts be satisfied,
Where living Streams of pure Salvation glide:
In parched Deserts copious Streams shall burst,
And flow, and quench the Pilgrim's raging Thirst. v. 3.

Then various Tongues shall say with one Accord,
Come jointly let us praise the Almighty Lord;
With reverent Lips invoke His awful Name,
And round the astonished World His wondrous Works proclaim.
Let thousand Tongues with glad Submission own,
JEHOVAH reigns exalted on his Throne; v. 4.

Let thousand Voices in loud Accents sing
The vast Exploits of the eternal King;
Exploits to Earth's remotest Limits known,
Vast as his Power, and boundless as his Throne. v. 5.

As some besieged City, when they spy
Their kind Deliverer's welcome Flag draw nigh,
With Shouts triumphant stun the ecchoing Skies,
And shock the Courage of their Enemies:
So sacred Zion! with exulting Voice,
Shout loud through Heaven and Earth thy boisterous Joys;
For great in Majesty, and great in Arms,
Clad in fair Holiness with all its Charms,
Great in the Midst of thee JEHOVAH reigns,
And the fierce Rage of hostile Power restrains. v. 6.

Thy Arm, Great GOD! has levelled to the Ground
Proud Cities that proclaimed Defiance round;
Laid in rude Heaps the strong aspiring Tower,
And Palaces to be repaired no more. C. xxv. 2.

These mighty Works conveyed on Wings of Fame,
Shall teach the World to reverence Thy Name.
Conqu'rors shall lay their Laurels at Thy Feet,
And savage Nations tremble and submit. v. 3.

Tyrants shall feel the Terror of his Rod,
And own, reluctant, a superior GOD.
Oppression, blasted with his vengeful Breath,
Wither and sink in everlasting Death;
Through Rebel Crowds the Terror of his Word
Shall pierce resistless like a griding Sword. C. xi. v. 4.

Aspiring-Mortals! hide you in the Rock
From the majestic Terror of His Look:
Into the Dust, abas'd, confounded sink,
And struck with Awe from his dread Presence shrink. C. ii. 10.

The supercilious Look, the lofty Brow,
The stubborn Haughtiness of Man shall bow;
And in that Day the UNNUTTERABLE NAME,
Shall reign unrivaled on His Throne supreme. v. 11.

The proud, aspiring Monarchs of the World
Shall from their fancied Dignity be hurled. v. 12.

His vengeful Thunder with destructive Strokes
Shall rend and blast proud Bashan's sturdy Oaks,
The stately Cedars of Libanus scathe,
And blend their Fragments with the Shrubs beneath. v. 13.

The towering Mountains and aspiring Hills
Adoring fall and sink to humble Vales. v. 14.

The Tower impregnable, the fenced Wall
Crumble to Dust, and with loud Ruin fall v. 15.

The Ships of Tarshish, fraught with golden Store,
Founder in the rough Deep and float no more. v. 16.

Struck with the Terror of JEHOVAH's Look,
Aspiring Worms shall creep into the Rock;
To gloomy Clefts and Caves, with wild Dismay,
From His majestic Presence shrink away,
When He with Terror shall Himself enrobe,
And rises to affright the trembling Globe. Chapter ii. 17.

With pious Boasts then shall the insulted Just
Proclaim the Issue of their patient Trust.
Ye impious Scoffers of our Patience, see!
Our GOD appears! the Incarnate Deity!
Our GOD appears! for Him, for Him we sought;
And lo! our patient Tears are not forgot.
This is our GOD! and lo! the GOD appears!
Exult our Hearts! and flow no more our Tears!
Salvation on this glad Approach attends,
And grants the largest Wishes of his Friends. Chapter 25. 9.

Here shall Omnipotence itself exert,
And His right Hand shall never hence depart:
With wrathful Majesty His Feet shall tread
On Zion's Foes, and Heaps of hostile Dead;
Insult the Rebels prostrate struck with Awe;
So heavy Oxen tread the rotting Straw. v. 10.

Then shall He scatter the dark Glooms of Hell,
And from benighted Nations tear the Veil,
The universal Veil that now excludes
The cheerful Light from groping Multitudes. v. 7.

So bright a Glory shall He dart around,
The dazzling Deluge shall the Sun confound,
Absorpt and lost in the superior Light,
The Sun shall hide his Face, in everlasting Night:
The Moon confounded, through the midnight Shade
Shall gleam no more, nor feeble Radiance spread. v. 23.

For as the accumulated Waters crowd
The unbounded Deep, old Ocean's vast Abode;
The unbottom'd Cavity compactly fill
With Waves on Waves, Billows on Billows still:
So shall the Dawn of bright celestial Light
Overflow the World, and banish ancient Night;
Through thickest Glooms of Ignorance shall pierce,
And dart its Luster round the Universe. Chapter xi. ^.

The wretched Tribes that walk in Death's dark Shade,
With Clouds of Ignorance and Guilt overspread,
Observe the heavenly Ray, with glad Surprise,
Dart through the hideous Gloom and bless their Eyes. Chapter ix. 2.

(Not so the Tribes beneath the Artic Bear,
Immured in Ice and Darkness half the Year,
Rejoice to see the Stranger-Sun appear.)
With brighter Splendors fired, the languid Moon
Shall shine the Rival of the Noonday Sun;
The Noonday Sun with sevenfold Luster glow,
And seven Days Light at once the World overflow. Chapter ix. 2.

The heavenly Branch from Jesse's sacred Root,
To bless the World shall germinate and shoot;
See clad in vernal Beauty, how it blooms!
And breathes among the Nations rich Perfumes:
Blessed with its Fruit the expiring World revives,
And Death avoids the Fragrance of its Leaves. Chapter xi. 1.

Overcome with sultry Heat, the fainting Head,
Reclined beneath its fragrant cooling Shade,
Shall fresh returning Life and Vigor feel,
And in the Blaze of Noon himself regale.
When ruptur'd Clouds in rapid Torrents burst,
And rush o'erwhelming with outrageous Gust,
The verdant Shelter guards the Tempest off,
That raves in vain around the arb'rous Roof. Chapter iv. 6.

As with a Cloud Thou do the Earth regale,
When Noonday Beams and scorching Suns prevail; Chapter vxv. 5.

As cooling Streams in barren parched Lands
Refresh the Trav'ler on the burning Sands;
As some great Rock with its propitious Shade
Protects from piercing Beams the drooping Head; Chapter xxxii. 2.

So shall Thy Grace relieve the helpless Poor,
When round them Crowds of hostile Strangers roar; Chapter xxv. 5.

Their fiercest Rage shall ineffectual fall,
Like Blasts that ravage round a brazen Wall.
The Lord of Armies shall his Table spread
On Zion Mount, and famished Nations feed;
With heavenly Dainties form the sumptuous Feast,
Where luscious Marrow shall delight the Taste;
The generous Grape her vigorous Juice bestow
And vet'ran Wine in copious Rivers flow;
Wine well refined, extracted from the Lees,
Seasoned by Time, and ripened fit to please.
The expiring World shall take what He prepares,
Appease their Hunger and renew their Years. v. 6.

On barren Wastes the eternal Spirit pours
His sacred Influence in prolific Showers;
The Desert flourishes a fruitful Field,
And verdant Groves adorn the horrid Wild. Chapter xxxii. 15

The Desert blossoms like the fragrant Rose,
And there sweet Leb'non's flowery Beauty glows. Chapter xxxv. 1.

There a new Sharon breathes its sweet Perfumes,
Fresh Lilies spring, and sudden Verdure blooms. v. 2.

"The Trav'ler starts amidst the Wilds to hear
"New Falls of Water murmuring in his Ear." v. 6, 7.

Through the wide Wastes eternal Justice reigns,
And Judgment blooms through all the dismal Plains; Chapter xxxii. 16.

Celestial Splendors from the Source Divine
Through the sad Realms of Desolation shine. Chapter xxxv. 2.

The barren Rocks, the bleak unwater'd Hills
Shall with irriguous Streams refresh the Vales;
From parched Mountains copious Rivers flow,
And on their barren Peaks eternal Verdure grow! Chapter xxx. 24, 25.

Surprising Event! yet we rest assured;
A GOD, a GOD has spoke the solemn Word;
Even jealous Unbelief shall own it true,
For what his Lips declare His Power can do.
XIX. (...), Or, The invisible World.
PROUD Mortal! to what narrow Bounds confined
Are the most ample Prospects of his Mind!
Impenetrable Mists and Clouds surround
His Reason, and its boasted Powers confound.
He roves, though fixed to this contracted Spot,
In all the Extravagance of boundless Thought.
Behind, Before, from the precarious Now,
(His only Time) he turns his eager View.
Behind, Eternity's unbounded Main
Extends infinite Lengths beyond his Ken,
Before, the same valt Ocean swells again.
Our Time is but a little floating Isle;
For wide Discoveries we look round and toil,
In vain; the Isle lies wrapped in thickest Glooms,
Where scarce a Gleam of shining Knowledge comes.
If back we turn our Eyes, we only see
'Twas some Almighty Power gave us To Be;
Some bright INVISIBLE, some great UNKNOWN
Spoke us to Life But a few Years agone.
Whatever Thou art, Thou Dear UNKNOWN! receive
The humble Praise and Love Thy Offspring aims to give:
For O! Thy innate Glories must outshine
Their fairest Copies in these Works of Thine.
Duration, ere that Hour, a Blank appears;
We Are lost in Mazes of unbounded Years.
A thousand Contradictions press us round,
And our unequal Faculties confound
Yet through the vast Obscure, we see and own
The Maker reigned on His eternal Throne,
Self-happy, self-sufficient, Ages unbegun:
Rich in unmoved Benev'lence, planning Schemes
To vent His Goodness in overflowing Streams
To Worlds unborn; or then perhaps employed
In new Creations through the boundless Void
In long Succession; Worlds beyond our Ken,
Or to their native Nothing turned again.
Before me, What unbounded Prospects lie
Wrapped in the Darkness of Futurity!
I feel the Pulse of Immortality
Beat, and assure me I must ever Be;
But where! or how! -- Here feeble Reason fails,
The Gospel too but glimmering Rights reveals;
Assures the good of Joys in Paradise,
And thunders Vengeance to the Slaves of Vice;
Enough to give fair Virtue winning Charms,
And shock the Libertine with dire Alarms:
Yet hides those Scenes, in which with humble Eye
A Philosophic Mind aspires to pry.
Eternity! We daily walk upon
Its slippery Brink, and yet it lies unknown;
Seems an unbounded Void, a dismal Waste,
With Shadows, Clouds, and Darkness overcast.
Fain would we plunge into the vast Abyss,
And trace ourselves these boundless Mysteries;
But dark Suspicion gives a sudden Check,
And strait the Soul recoils and startles back.
Some daily make the Experiment around,
But none return to inform us what they have found:
They leap impetuous from this mortal Shore,
And dive; and we behold them rise no more;
As though absorpt in the unbounded Deep,
Or sunk and lost in everlasting Sleep.
Some, whose dear Mem'ries now dissolve my Mind,
Once to my Heart in closest Friendship joined,
Have gone before, and left me here behind.
Now in the immortal Colonies they dwell,
And people Worlds to us invisible;
Hold Converse with the Tennants of the Sky,
The various Nations of Eternity;
The various Tribes with which Omnipotence
Has peopled Regions through the vast Immense.
ROBINSON! The Reverend Mr. William Robinson, a pious Christian; a zealous,
laborious and successful Minister of the Gospel; an accomplished Scholar, and a
noble Orator: Who rested from his Labors, Aug. 3. 1746, in the Bloom of Life;
and has left behind him so many Seals of his Mistry in various Parts, that this
humble Monument is needless to perpetuate his Memory.
Once my Father, Patron, Friend,
Thy painful Labors now the Prize have gained.
Now in a happy SOMEWHERE dwells thy Soul,
Where Rivers of immortal Pleasures roll.
Though Heaven no doubt is thy blessed Residence
Yet, where, O! where, through the unknown Immense,
Do thou reside? how live, and act, and move?
And through what blissful Regions do thou rove,
Transported still? -- O could I soar to thee,
My ROBINSON! how happy should I be!
Is JESUS still the Matter of thy Song?
The Theme below of thy harmonious Tongue.
O yes! His Name diffuses Heaven to thee
Through all the Apartments of Immensity.
Thy Voice on Earth to Mortals taught His Name;
Now Angels listen to the glorious Theme.
Or does thy Soul delight, as when below,
TO attend as Guardian to conduct us through
This dangerous Wild? With Fellow-Angels wait
To guide departing Saints to the heavenly Gate?
Then in thy Turn the generous Care resign,
And hymn the eternal Throne with Songs Divine?
Converse with Seraphs, and in equal Lays
And equal Zeal, proclaim thy Maker's Praise?
There CARNWATH Mr. Thomas Carnwath, a pious Student intended for (...), who
died much lamented June -- 1747.
shines, who won the rich Reward
Ere for the sacred Service quite prepared;
Obtained the Prize before he felt the Toil,
And reaped his Harvest ere he tilled the Soil.
He left the Theologic Subtilties
Of Schoolmen, He died while engaged in the Study of (...) his Course of
introductory Learning;
to be taught above the Skies;
Blessed Change! where one bright Hour instructs him more
Than all his painful Studies could before.
O! could, thou now thy Thoughts to me relate,
As often thou did, while in this mortal State;
What wondrous Lessons would my Ears surprise,
What unexpected Scenes before me rise,
And in one shining Moment make me wise!
Or were the Curtains of the Flesh withdrawn,
That Immortality might round me dawn;
What Prospects wonderful, immense and new
Would instantaneous crowd into my View!
Beings, and Worlds, and Regions hid before,
And the Great Author, whom those Worlds adore!
Well; I ere long the Experiment must try,
And launch into unknown Eternity.
The mouldering Bank that now supports my Weight,
Ere long must fall, and sink beneath my Feet:
Then though I catch and hold and strive to stay,
My Doom is fixed, my Soul! thou must away;
Thou must away, some distant Worlds t'explore,
And see the Vanities of Earth no more;
Must howl with Fiends, or with blessed Angels shine,
In endless Torments, or in Joys Divine.
The Interval, at most, is short between
The present fleeting NOW, and Worlds unseen.
Forty or fifty Years, perhaps a Day,
Or Hour, will break this tottering House of Clay.
Alarming Thought! Almighty Grace prepare
My shudd'ring Soul to fly she knows not where.
All-gracious GOD! be Thou my Resting Place;
Heaven flows exuberant from Thy smiling Face
Through the Immensity of unknown Space.
O! be Thou mine; and wheresoe'er I dwell
All will be Heaven, though in the Glooms of Hell.
XX. The Triumphs of CHRIST's dying Love. This Poem is a Translation, at least
an Imitation of a Latin Ode of Dr. Watts's, inscribed Ad Dominum nostrum and
Servatorem JESUM CHRISTUM. Lyric Poems B. 1. P. 94. In which that divine Poet
has excelled himself; but like most other Originals, its Beauty shines but
faintly through the Medium of Translation.

I.
THEE, Great Incarnate Godhead, Thee
The Almighty Father's equal Progeny,
Thee, JESUS! dear and venerable Name,
Partaker of our frail Humanity,
Thee shall my Voice, my Harp, my Muse and Quill proclaim.
II.
Wake my Harp! melodious sing
On each sweetly-sounding String
The illustrious Conquests of the Saviour-King:
In loud majestic Accents sound
His Triumphs over the Powers below,
When He gave Death his everlasting-Wound,
'Led the infernal Monsters bound,
And crushed the direst Terrors of His Foe.
III.
While Ages unbegun
Their vast, their boundless Circuits run,
On His eternal Father's loving Breast,
Self-happy, infinitely blessed,
Lay the coeval Son;
In the immense JEHOVAH satisfied,
And the entire Divinity enjoyed.
IV.
There lay the filial Godhead, till He saw
From the superior Sky,
Adam trangress his Maker's Law,
Hell yawn with greedy Jaws to draw
Into one Ruin all his wretched Progeny.
He saw the Flashes of vindictive Fire
Break out impatient from the Throne,
And the Angelic Messenger
Wave his dread Weapons, that high-brandish'd shone,
Thirsting for human Blood; while Hell grew proud
With Hopes of Prey, and laughed profanely loud.
V.
He saw, and (O amazing Grace!) He loved,
With Pity all his inmost Bowels moved,
And Love omnipotent began to glow:
"Shall all the human Race, He cries,
"Fall an eternal Sacrifice,
"And grace the Triumphs of the insulting Foe?
"What! shall Hell's Tyranny destroy
"My Father's Image, Work and Boast,
"And riot in malicious Joy
"To see His favorite Creature lost?
"No! rather confounded,
"With Chaos surrounded,
"Be Heaven, Earth, Ocean and all!
"The Wheels of Nature break,
"The Universe to horrid Wreck,
"Blended, disjointed, fall!
"I will overcome, or be overcome,
"Wrench from the Tyrant's Hand his royal Rod,
"Or yield him mine, and own him God:
"My chosen Race shall live, or I will share their Doom.
"By the dread Life of the Divinity,
"Possessed by the eternal THREE,
"I swear and ratify the firm Decree."
VI.
He said; He rose, and bowed
The crystal Heavens, and down he came:
Aside He threw the Grandeur of a GOD,
In mortal Regions fixed his low Abode,
And clothed Himself in feeble human Frame.
VII.
He gave His Heart to the vindictive Sword
Without a murmuring Word;
Patient, His sacred Breath
At the Arrest of Death
Resigned -- O! the dire Terrors of the THUND'RER'S Wrath!
O! the immense Severity
Of the dread Law! the dire Reward
Of Sin! the Vengeance of the flaming Sword
Of Justice! O! dire Fruits of the forbidden Tree!
VIII.
Come, Sinners, see your Savior dead,
And weep around His Tomb:
Your Hope, your Joy, your All is fled;
For Oh! your Champion's overcome.
For you in Conflict with the Powers of Hell
He nobly fought, but ah! He fell.
IX.
But whither, raving Muse? refrain;
Nor with ignoble Tears profane
The Triumphs of the GOD.
The Dying Champion overthrows
The united Force of all His Foes; --
In louder Strains proclaim His Victories abroad:
X.
Sing how through the Shades of Death
He entered the dark Realms beneath,
Where Hell and Horror rage:
The infernal Powers perceived the GOD,
And the grim Monsters roared aloud,
Nor durst the well-known Arm engage.
XI.
Old Chaos trembled, Satan fled,
And in Hell's deepest Pit sought to conceal his Head.
"In vain thou fleest, the Conqu'ror cries,
"Fly to the Bottom of the Abyss,
"This vengeful Thunderbolt shall dart thee through,
"And to the lowest Deep pursue."
He said, and strait the glowing Bolt He threw:
New Horror seized the trembling Host,
Blasted with vengeful Flame;
For well they mind the Day when Heaven they lost,
And Thunder drove them to the infernal Coast,
To Darkness, Pain and Shame.
XII.
He broke the Instruments of Pain,
Engines to torture, guilty Ghosts;
And strewn them over the gloomy Coasts;
The Rack, the Wheel, the adamantine Chain
He tore and scattered over the infernal Plain,
Unstrung the Monster Death, and bid him hiss in vain In allusion to Serpents,
which can only hiss when deprived of their Stings.

XIII.
But see! the Conqu'ror leaves the Glooms
Of Hell, and climbs His native Sky:
Around His Head victorious Laurel blooms,
And Triumph sparkles in His Eye:
He drags the Tyrant of the Gulf profound
At His triumphant Chariot bound.
XIV.
Heaven celebrates a Jubilee,
And shouts aloud His glad Return;
The heavenly Choirs proclaim His Victory,
And with unusual Rapture burn.
His TRIUMPHS all the Harps on high,
His TRIUMPHS Mortals grateful sing;
The Universe joins in the Harmony,
And Stars, and Earth, and Seas, with His loud TRIUMPHS ring.
MISCELLANEOUS POEMS, CHIEFLY ON DIVINE SUBJECTS.
BOOK II.
(It has been my usual Method for some Time, after studying a Sermon, to cast a
few Thoughts into a poetical Form, either containing the Substance of the
Sermon, or expressive of my Disposition in composing it. The following Poems
were written on such Occasions.)

I. The obstinate Security of Sinners lamented (annexed to a Sermon on Matt.
iii. 10. April 15, 1750.)
I.
UNHAPPY Man, allured by Sin,
Still drinks the deadly Poison in;
And though exposed to endless Woes
Still lolls secure in dull Repose.
Though Thousands daily from his Side
Are snatched by Death's resistless Hand,
And hurried to the infernal Land;
Yet still he lets his fleeting Moments glide
Unheeded by; still busily employed
In Chase of Toys; and while bright Prospects rise
Through false Futurity, and charm his Eyes,
Death unexpected comes; the Prospects fly
Like vanc'd Smoke that once allured his Eye,
And all his flattering Expectations die. --
Not so the deathless Soul; but torn
Reluctant, from her ancient Seat,
She sinks tormented and forlorn
Into the Flames she once could scorn,
But now bewails, alas, too late!
II.
What Eye can view the mournful Scene,
And not dissolve in Tears!
Ah! who shall warn unthinking Man,
And fill his Breast with useful Tears?
Warn him! -- It Is all in vain;
He scorns the Tears that human Pity sheds;
Nay, laughs at all the m^lting Arguments
Which Love Divine itself invents;
Nor loves the Savior though for him he bleeds,
And dies in Tortures, Agonies and Pain!
III.
Ah! what can Thy poor Servant do?
See, here he sits in fruitless Grief!
While thoughtless Mortals all around
Perish with Mercy's charming Sound
Loud in their Ears; perish just in his View,
And he looks on, but can give no Relief!
A feeble Mortal's Breath
Cannot speak Life to them that sleep in Death.
IV.
Then since I cannot prevail
To snatch my Fellow-Man from Hell!
Since heedless of Disuasives, down
The dread Descent with full Career they run,
Nor pause at Mercy's loudest Call;
Let me retire, and over them weep
As down they sink into the fiery Deep,
And my poor Tears pursue them as they fall!
V.
MAKER OF SOULS! to Thee, once more to Thee
I turn my interceeding Cry!
See how Thy wretched Progeny
Madly destroy themselves and die
By Thousands in Thy Sight!
O! let Thy Sovereign Grace appear,
And stop them in their mad Career;
Turn them from the frequented Path
That leads unerring down to Death
And everlasting Night.
II. Penitential Sorrows. (annexed to a Sermon on Luke xiii. 3.)
I.
WITH bleeding Hearts, and gushing Eyes,
With deep Repentance and Surprise,
We take a tedious, sad Survey
Of Sins of Heart and Lip and Way.
2.
Early we lest the sacred Road
That leads to Bliss, prescribed by GOD;
And rashly run a long Career
Toward the dark Regions of Despair,
3.
Our very Nature's all unclean,
All ruined and defiled by Sin:
And filthy Currents from that Source
Have flowed with an incessant Course.
4.
The God that taught our Lungs to heave,
And still gives Rebels Leave to live;
Whose Bounties have perpetual flowed;
Ah! we have grieved that Gracious GOD.
5.
The Terrors of the fiery Law
Could not alarm our Hearts with Awe:
Nor would these stubborn Hearts be won
Even by the Gospel of the SON.
6.
Our guilty Ears heard all around
His melting Invitations sound;
And JESUS too, with Groans and Blood,
Such unrelenting Rebels wooed.
7.
And yet we live! amazing Grace!
Nor yet quite desperate in our Case;
The Savior still, with heavenly Charms,
Stands calling Sinners to his Arms.
8.
JESUS! we yield! no more, no more
Will we offend Thee, as before,
Here, LORD! submissive at Thy Feet,
We for Thy sovereign Pleasure wait.
9.
O Thou Almighty, injured Name!
Overwhelmed with Grief, and flushed with Shame,
Prostrate before Thee, see we lie!
Frown us not from Thee, lest we die.
10.
O may that Blood we once could slight
Wash our polluted Spirits white!
Then shall Thy Praise sound loud in Heaven
For guilty Worms on Earth forgiven.
III. SELF-DEDICATION. (annexed to a Sermon on Romans vi. 13. June 15, 1750.)
1.
TO HIM that formed this mortal Frame,
And still inspires my Lungs to heave,
From whom my nobler Spirit came,
My Flesh, my Soul, my All I give.
2.
When Heaven, and Life, and All were lost,
JESUS redeemed them, with his Blood;
Great was the Ransom, vast the Cost,
The Blood of an incarnate GOD!
3.
And can my stubborn Heart withstand
The Invitations of His Love!
No; I resign me to His Hand,
And to His soft Embraces move.
4.
Yes, my dear JESUS, here I give
All that I am and have to Thee;
To Thee I Will die, to Thee I Will live;
No other Lord shall govern me.
5.
Let not a Motion of my Heart,
From Thee once venture to depart;
But bound with lasting Bands of Love,
O! let me, let me never remove.
IV. Sight through a Glass, and Face to Face. (annexed to a Sermon on Matt. v. 6.
March 18, 1750. before the Lord's Supper.)
THE Channel of Thy Word conveys
The sweet Instructions of thy Grace;
And sacred Emblems, through the Sense,
Strengthen our Faith with Evidence.
My infant Days were wholly Thine,
Devoted by an early Sign Baptism.
;
And at Thy holy Table still
I bind myself to do Thy Will.
Once more I purpose to renew
The Tie, and promise to be true.
Once more beneath Thy Cross I Will sit
Weeping, and gladly dedicate
My Soul, my Days, my All to Thee,
Who groaned away Thy Life for me.
Through various Types and Shadows dart
Thy Glories on my ravished Heart;
While far above created Sight,
Thou sit'st enthroned on Hills of Light.
But say, shall Types and Figures still
The Glories of Thy Face conceal?
While these thick Shades Thy Beauty shroud,
It breaks but faintly through the Cloud.
I love Thine Image in a Glass;
But Oh! to see Thy naked Face!
THYSELF I long, I pant to see;
I turn mine Eyes in Quest of Thee.
Where is that dear, incarnate GOD,
That once on Earth made His Abode?
That JESUS, who upon the Tree
Languish'd, and bled, and died for me?
Ah! will my Savior now be shy,
Whose Love excited Him to die?
He found me when I sought him not;
And will he not be found, when sought?
The Glories of Thy Face display,
Though Life should for the Vision pay.
O! let me die, oppressed with Light,
Rather than live without the Sight.
V. The Law and Gospel. (annexed to a Sermon on Gal. iii. 9, 10. Aug. 19, 1750.)
1.
WITH conscious Fear and humble Awe,
I view the Terrors of the Law;
Condemned at that tremendous Bar,
I shrink, I tremble, and Despair.
2.
But hark! Salvation in my Ears
Sounds sweetly, and dispells my Fears:
JESUS appears, and by His Cross
Fulfils His Father's broken Laws.
3.
JESUS! a SAVIOR! dearest Name!
By Him alone Salvation came;
Terror, Destruction and Despair,
Where ever I look besides, appear.
4.
Adam, my Head and Father fell,
And sunk his Offspring down to Hell:
And the dread Sword of Justice waits,
To guard me from the heavenly Gates.
5.
Unnumber'd Crimes of dreadful Names
Call loud for everlasting Flames;
And all the Duties I have done
Can neither merit, nor atone.
6.
Yet weak and guilty as I am,
I fix my trust on JESUS' Name.
JESUS, whose Righteousness alone
Can for the deepest Crimes atone.
7.
On HIM, my Soul, on HIM rely;
The Terms are fixed -- BELIEVE, or DIE.
Thee let the Glorious Gospel draw,
Or perish by the fiery Law.
VI. CHRIST the Beloved and Friend of His Church. (annexed to a Sermon on Cant.
v. 16. Oct. -- 1748.)
1.
LET Others let their Passions rove
Round all the Earth, from Shore to Shore;
Since JESUS is my Friend and Love,
My utmost Wish can grasp no more.
2.
His Glories have allured my Eye
And into Love transformed my Heart;
To Him my tender'st Passions fly;
JESUS! nor shall they ever depart.
3
Upon His Friendship I rely,
Still of His tender Care secure;
My Wants are all before His Eye!
Nor can they overcome His Power.
4
His Presence fills unbounded Space;
My heavenly Friend is always nigh:
Full of Compassion, rich in Grace;
Touched with the tenderest Sympathy.
5
Faithful and constant is His Love,
And my ungrateful Conduct hides:
Safe to the happy World above
The meanest of His Friends He guides.
6
Amid the Agonies of Death,
And Terrors of the Final Doom,
He saves them from Almighty Wrath,
And leads the helpless Pilgrims home.
7
O may an everlasting Flame
Of Love possess my gratful Mind!
And my last Breath adore His Name
Who condescends to be my Friend!
VII. The Spiritual Warfare. (annexed to a Sermon on Rev. xxi. 7.)
1.
ARM thee in Panoply Divine,
My Soul, and fired with Courage rise;
A Thousand Enemies combine
TO obstruct thy Progress to the Skies.
2.
Infernal Darts perpetual Fly,
And scatter various Deaths around;
Around thee Thousands daily die,
And none escape without a Wound.
3.
The World presents her tempting Charms,
And wears the Aspect of a Friend,
Yet ah! She carries deadly Arms,
And all her Smiles in Ruin end.
4.
But Oh! the Flesh! that latent Foe!
That treacherous En'my in my Breast!
It Is hence proceeds my Overthrow,
And hence I Am conquered by the rest.
5.
Through Troops of potent Enemies,
Through hostile Snares, and Fields of Blood,
If I expect the Glorious Prize,
I must pursue my dangerous Road.
6.
But ah! how can a feeble Worm
Obtain so hard a Victory?
Alas! I perish in the Storm,
And helpless fall, and bleed, and die.
7.
The glorious Prize stands full in View,
But Deaths and Dangers stop my Way:
Thou glorious Prize! Adieu, adieu!
Here, Cruel Foes! Come, seize your Prey.
8.
But hark! an animating Voice
Majestic breaks from the upper Sky:
"Courage, frail Worm! Live and rejoice;
"I have procured the Victory.
9.
"Suspended on the accursed Tree,
"I crushed the Might of all thy Foes:
"Dying, I spoiled their Tyranny,
"And triumphed over them when I rose.
10.
"This Arm that props the Universe,
"And holds up Nature's tottering Frame,
"Can all surrounding Harms disperse,
"And safe protect the feeblest Name.
11.
"The CAPTAIN OF SALVATION deigns
"To lead the Van, and guard thy Way:
"And since thy conquering Leader reigns,
"The infernal Powers shall miss their Prey.
12.
"In ME confide; from ME derive
"Courage and Strength to keep the Field:
"In Crowds of Death then Thou shall live,
"And all thy stubborn Foes shall yield.
13.
"The Spirit's Sword victorious wield,
"And steel thy Breast with Righteousness;
"Let Faith be thy Triumphant Shield; Ephesians. vi. 15, 16.

"Thy Helmet, Hope of heavenly Bliss.
14.
"See in my Hands the glorious Prize;
"This Crown the Conqueror shall wear:
"Rise then with dauntless Courage rise,
"And bid adeiu to every Fear.
15.
Though sharp the Combat, it is but short;
Victory with active Wing draws nigh:
"And my brave Soldiers, all unhurt,
"Ere long shall triumph in the Sky."
16.
Blessed JESUS! fired with martial Zeal
I arm, and rush into the Fight;
And through my Weakness still I feel,
I am Almighty in Thy Might.
17.
Thy gracious Words my Heart inspire
With generous Zeal for noble Deeds;
Let Hell and all her Hosts appear,
My Soul, undaunted, now proceeds.
18.
Satan, affrighted at thy Frown,
Retreats, despairing of his Prey;
And all the Flatt'ries Earth has shown,
In vain their treacherous Charms display.
19.
The Flesh, subdued by Grace Divine,
No more shall triumph over the Man.
Now, Glorious Prize! I call thee mine,
Though Earth and Hell do all they can.
VIII. A guilty Conscience. (annexed to a Sermon on 1 John iii. 20. Nov. 25.
1750.)
1.
AH! who can bear this twinging Smart,
That tortures and corrodes my Heart!
These guilty Horrors, that molest
This self-condemned, self-tort'ring Breast!
2.
Tremendous Prospects strike mine Eye,
Through vast, unknown Futurity:
Grim Death a thousand Terrors wears,
And ready to arrest appears.
3.
I view with a distracted Stare,
The dread eternal Regions near;
Tortures, and Racks, and quenchless Fire,
And Shrieks, and Groans, and Torments dire!
4.
The wrathful Heavens vindictive frown,
And Thunders murmur to be down,
To blast a Worm that durst provoke
Omnipotence to give the Stroke.
5.
Surmises, Fears and Jealousies
In this self-conscious Bosom rise;
And pressed with Guilt my Spirits sink,
When I allow myself to think.
6.
But ah! this giddy rambling Soul,
Ere a few fleeting Moments roll,
Some vain enchanting Toy admits,
And her unhappy Case forgets.
7.
Amusements or the intrusive Care
Of this vain World, my Thoughts ensnare:
My solemn Resolutions fly,
All lost in thoughtless Levity.
8.
But ah! the Agony returns;
Again my Spirit pines and mourns;
Again dire-boding Fears surround
My shudd'ring Soul, and deeply wound.
9.
A frightful Thought will sudden dart,
And, unexpected, pierce the Heart.
Fain would I shun these shocking Views,
But Conscience restless still pursues.
10.
A cheerful Aspect I assume,
But all within is dismal Gloom:
Or if I lose the inward Pain
A Moment, ah! it gnaws again.
11.
I leave this gloomy Solitude,
And mingle with the unthinking Crowd;
There trifle, talk, and laugh awhile;
But ah! the Anguish will recoil.
12.
In Crowds and Noise the guilty Mind
Some anxious Intervals will find:
Guilt whispers Terror in the Breast,
And interrupts the transient Rest.
13.
Oh! Misery 'til now unknown!
I am a Self-Tormenter grown:
Nor can I my Accuser shun,
Unless I from myself could run.
14.
Oh Sin! is this the dire Reward
For all thy wretched Slaves prepared!
Are these, alas! are these the Fruits
Of all my pleasing vain Pursuits!
15.
Ah! had I kept the narrow Road,
Where the blessed FEW enjoy their GOD:
Then all serene, unmoved with Guilt,
These Horrors I had never felt.
16.
Oh! can a guilty Wretch obtain
A Balm to ease this twinging Pain?
Or must he always feel the Rod
Of Conscience, and an angry GOD?
17.
JESUS! if any Help remains,
It flows from Thy dear bleeding Veins:
Nothing can please an angry GOD,
Or angry Conscience, but Thy Blood. I do not mean that presumptuous Libertines
ought to ease their Consciences by an imaginary Dependence on Christ: But that
humble conscious Penitents should place their only Trust in His Righteousness,
both to relieve them from the Horrors of Guilt, and deliver them from their
former Slavery to Sin.

18.
Oh! dare I yet with wishful Eyes,
Look for Salvation from the Skies?
Oh! will that Blood my Sins have spilt,
Relieve my Mind, and wash my Guilt?
19.
All gracious Savior! Oh! remit
A Rebel prostrate at Thy Feet:
He has no other Place to fly;
If die he must, here let him die!
20.
Say, shall that Hand that patient bore
To be by Nails and Torments tore, --
Oh! will Thou now, vindictive stretch
That Hand to crush an humble Wretch!
21.
No! Blessed JESUS! rather slay
These Sins that led my Soul astray:
O make my Heart and Conscience clean,
And give me Heaven and Peace within!
IX. Love to God for His Holiness. (annexed to a Sermon on 1 John iv. 16. Dec.
2, 1750.)
1.
COME, Holy Spirit! Come, inflame
Our lukewarm Hearts with sacred Fire:
May all our Passions, to Thy Name,
In Transports most refined, aspire.
2.
May Love sublime our Hearts possess,
From every selfish Mixture free,
Fired with the Charms of Holiness,
The Beauty of Divinity.
3.
We see the Beauty of Thy Grace,
That saves rebellious Worms from Hell:
But ah! the Charms of Holiness
We dimly see, and faintly feel.
4.
Selfish and mercenary Views
Are with our purest Passions mixed:
A nobler Passion, Oh! infuse,
On Holiness supremely fixed.
5.
Thus in the glorious Worlds on high,
Where Holiness is most adored,
The Angelic Choirs incessant cry,
"Thrice HOLY, HOLY, HOLY LORD!"
6.
Refine our Hearts, inspire our Tongue,
And We in humble Notes below
Will imitate the heavenly Song,
And echo "HOLY, HOLY," too.
X. Brotherly Love. (annexed to a Sermon on 1 John iii. 14. Dec. 9, 1750.)
1.
DESCEND, Thou mild, pacific DOVE!
Thine Image on our Hearts impress;
Transform our Passions all to Love,
And sooth our Discords into Peace.
2.
In Arms of warm Benevolence,
Teach us to embrace all Human Kind;
And like the Sun, around dispense
The Wishes of a generous Mind.
3.
We are but Parts of one great Whole,
And may our Hearts, enlarged, exult
To scatter Bliss from Pole to Pole,
And still the General Good consult!
4.
But may the beauteous Sons of Grace,
Attract a more peculiar Love;
And the fair Charms of Holiness
A more exalted Passion move.
5.
Where over our Father's Image shines,
And his dear Lineaments appear,
May we approve the heavenly Lines,
And our Affections center there.
6.
May sympathetic Sorrows fill
Our Hearts, to view another's Grief;
And may our Hands be open still
To bless the Needy with Relief.
7.
May we our Brother's Fault conceal,
And mild and inoffensive live;
And may our Bosoms ever feel
That God-like Pleasure, to forgive.
8.
O gentle Love! Celestial Guest!
Visit a jarring World again;
Come dwell forever in our Breast,
And there triumphant ever reign.
9.
Then while the noisy Sons of Strife
Are with tumultous Passions whirled,
We shall enjoy a peaceful Life,
Amid a murmuring, jangling World.
XI. The doubting Christian. (annexed to a Sermon adapted for Self-Examination,
on 1 John iii. 7, 8. December 16, 1750.)
1.
HAPPY the Man whose peaceful Breast
A smiling Conscience charms to rest;
Whose pious Heart and Life express
The living Characters of Grace!
2.
He humbly claims the Promises,
And calls their richest Blessings his:
In Peace he lives, and dies in Peace,
And peaceful soars to heavenly Bliss.
3.
Thrice happy he! But ah! I feel
The Twinges of Suspicions still;
Dark boding Fears and wild Surmise,
And Jealousies perpetual rise.
4.
Perplexed with various Characters,
My Mind is tossed 'twixt Hopes and Fears:
Here some kind Tokens rise, but there
The dismal Counter-Tokens glare.
5.
I humbly hope, in some bright Hour,
My State is safe, my Heaven secure:
But soon the shining Moment flies,
And soon tremendous Glooms arise.
6.
Thus in a dubious Twilight lost,
With various Waves, alternate, tossed,
Over Life's tempestuous Sea I roam,
Uncertain where shall be my Home:
7.
Uncertain where my Soul must go,
To Fields of Joy, or Lakes of Woe:
Before me the vast Prospect lies,
But covered with Uncertainties.
8.
I view the Ocean vast and wide,
Where Time unites its ebbing Tide;
Now, hoping, would the Adventure make,
Now trembling, shudd'ring startle back.
9.
Confounded, now back shrinks my Soul,
To see the fiery Billows roll:
Now Rivers of immense Delight
Glide copious by, and tempt her Flight.
10.
O! if these Doubts were chased away,
How calmly then, without Dismay,
I Would launch into the boundless Deep,
And fearless take the final Leap!
11.
But what if in some dark Abode,
Banished forever from my GOD,
My Soul should pine in endless Pain! --
Ah me! This Fear returns again.
12.
Say, my dear GOD, and ease my Heart,
O will Thou frown, and say Depart!
Depart! -- ah! where, LORD! shall I flee?
I have no other Bliss but Thee.
13.
Thou see my Passions to Thy Name
Kindle, though with a feeble Flame
And shall a Spark of heavenly Love
From its own native Regions move?
14.
O! shall the meanest of Thy Friends,
Forever dwell with hateful Fiends?
No! let me claim the humblest Place
In the bright Mansions of Thy Grace.
XII. CHRIST's Agony in the Garden. Luke xxii. 41, 44.
SEE there, overwhelmed with Agonies,
Prostrate, forlorn, my JESUS lies!
Panting, moaning, groaning there,
On the cold Ground, in midnight Air:
No Friend, no kind Assistant near;
No sympathizing Comforter;
But all alone, unheard, unknown,
To the dark Night He makes His Moan.
Malignant Spirits glare around,
And with their fiery Arrows wound:
Trying to add, with spiteful Power,
New Horrors to the dismal Hour;
And in his tortured Soul to rear
The gloomy Standard of Despair.
The frowning Heavens tremendous lower,
And murmuring Thunders dreadful roar;
Then shot by sudden Vengeance dart,
And tear and ravage through His Heart.
To his own Heavens He lifts his Eyes,
Father, remove this Cup, he cries,
This deadly Cup of bitter Dregs,
Mingled with Wrath and Pains and Plagues;
Dear Father, O! remove this Cup;
Or some kind Cordial in it drop:
Yet if thy Will decree it just,
That drink it I, or Sinners must,
Rather than they should taste the Gall,
See, Father; here I drink it all:
Thy Will it is I should atone,
And, Father! let Thy Will be done!
The Father hides his wonted Smiles,
And all his Soul with Horror fills,
Transferring on his darling Son
The heavy Crimes by Mortals done.
See! (...) beneath the dismal Load,
He sinks, he falls, although a GOD!
A mortal Sweat bedews His Limbs,
And down his sacred Body streams;
See! how it bursts through every Pore,
Mingled with Lumps of clotted Gore!
His hollow Groans with mournful Sound,
Echo through all the Garden round.
While thus I view, with gushing Eyes,
My dear Redeemer agonize,
With crushing Sorrows overborn,
Methinks I see him wishful turn
His Face, where Love and Anguish mix,
And full on me His Aspect fix;
And from His Tongue methinks I hear,
These moving Accents strike my Ear.
"See, Sinner! see the cruel Load
"With which thy Sins oppress thy GOD!
"Thy Sins extort these hollow Groans;
"For thee, for thee thy JESUS moans!
"Thee so ungrateful, so unkind!
"So prone to cast Me from thy Mind!
"And can thy stubborn Heart endure
"To grieve, forget and slight Me more!
"Oh! can thou hear these Groans and Cries,
"And thy kind Savior still despise!
"Come, Sinner, view these Clots of Gore,
"And say, Will thou forget me more!
"Say, Can thou view this mournful Scene,
"And strait return to Sin again!
"What! Leave thy Savior bleeding here,
"And go" --
-- Forbear! my LORD, forbear!
Thy Words overcome me! JESUS, stay!
O here I faint and die away.
It kills me, LORD! but to suppose
That ever I should treat Thee thus!
No! rather stop my guilty Breath!
To treat Thee thus is worse than Death.
If I such Love as this forget,
Then let my Heart forget to beat:
If ever I slight Thine Agony,
In that cursed Moment let me die;
Or if I cease to love Thy Name,
Relapse to nothing whence I came:
If Sin be any more my Joy,
Me, with my own Consent, destroy.
Sin! -- When I hear the hated Name,
With keen Revenge my Passions flame.
Ah me! that ever my foolish Breast
Indulged the Monster as a Guest!
Caressed him in my dearest Part!
Ah, this Reflection tears my Heart!
What, blessed LORD! what shall I do?
I own I have indulged Thy Foe;
With my own Life the Monster fed,
That made Thee groan, and sweat, and bleed,
O could my Actions be undone!
O were the Race of Life to run!
Ye misimproven Hours! return,
Which now with flowing Tears I mourn,
Vain, fruitless Wish! the restless Wheel
Of Time moves onward, onward still;
Nor can Entreaties bring it back
To roll again its former Track.
Blessed JESUS! take each future Hour;
It Is all the Amends within my Power:
O may Thy Praise in grateful Song,
Forever echo from my Tongue!
O may Thy Love inflame my Soul,
While everlasting Ages roll!
XIII. Spiritual Inactivity lamented.
1.
JESUS! What eager Zeal inspired
Thy Heart to die for me!
O that my languid Breast were fired
With equal Flame to Thee!
2.
But how has Sin benumbed my Soul!
My Heart how hard and dead!
My softest Passions, ah how dull!
Heavy and cold as Lead.
3.
Mean Time inferior Toys can charm,
And all my Passions move:
A Friend or Relative can warm,
And melt my Heart to Love.
4.
My Thoughts refuse to soar to Thee,
But full of Vigor spring
To chase some gilded Vanity,
Some useless trifling Thing.
5.
Blessed JESUS! I would rather lose
My thinking Faculty,
Than waste my Thoughts on Trifles thus,
And never think of Thee.
6.
If my soft Passions be not Thine,
My Passions are a Pain;
Let me the Power of Love resign,
Rather than love in vain.
7.
LORD, it is a Curse to live and breathe,
Unless I live to Thee;
If I must lie thus stupid, Death
Is better than to Be.
8.
Thy quickening Energy exert,
Blessed JESUS! and bestow
A living Soul, a tender Heart
To serve my GOD below.
XIV. On a sudden Death. (annexed to a funeral Sermon on Eccles. ix. 12. Jan. 5.
1750-1.)
1.
HOW thin the separating Wall
'Twixt Time and vast Eternity!
How sudden thoughtless Mortals fall
Into that dark unbounded Sea!
2.
The Soul, this Moment vain and gay,
Eager pursues the Trifles here;
The next, reluctant torn away,
In a dark SOMEWHERE to appear.
3.
Death still pursues us everywhere,
And unsuspected haunts our Steps;
And while we think no Danger near,
Sudden upon his Prey he leaps.
4.
The Monster in close Ambush lurks,
And steals upon us unawares:
Still undermining ceaseless works;
Still near, yet distant still appears.
5.
My sudden Fate perhaps may seal
The melancholy Truth I write;
And ever I farther move my Quill,
The vital Pulse may cease to beat.
6.
How strange, how solemn the Surprise!
Hurried at once to Worlds unknown!
Snatched from this Scene of Vanities,
And placed before the Eternal Throne!
7.
The lower Skies, the Earth and Men
All in a Moment out of Sight!
While Wonders of the World unseen
In endless Prospects rush to Light!
8.
Great GOD! and do I heedless step
On this tremendous Precipice,
Perhaps to take the final Leap,
Unwarn'd, ere this short Moment flies!
9.
And does Eternity depend,
And all its infinite Affairs,
On every fleeting Hour I spend,
And waste upon inferior Cares!
10.
Alarming Thought! My Soul, awake!
Prepare, prepare to meet thy GOD!
These mortal Regions soon forsake,
And often view thy last Abode.
11.
Almighty Grace! in youthful Prime
Teach me t'improve my fleeting Time;
That whensoe'er the Summons come,
I may receive a joyful Doom.
12.
Then if perhaps a sudden Death
Should unexpected stop my Breath,
My Soul at once, with glad Surprise,
Shall find herself in upper Skies.
13.
Thrice happy Death! to drop the Chain
Of Life, without a lingering Pain!
To spring at once to endless Life!
Without a tedious dying Strife!
XV. The Conflagration. (annexed to a Sermon on 2 Pet. iii. 11. Jan. 27, 1750-1.)
1.
NOW Harmony adjusts the World,
And charming Order round me smiles:
Ere long Confusion shall be hurled,
And break and shatter Nature's Wheels.
2.
The Day approaches, (dreadful Day!)
When Chaos shall resume his Place?
This mighty Frame of Things decay,
And vanish in the general Blaze.
3.
Ye azure Arches, lost in Smoke,
Shall shrink, affrighted, to a Scroll:
The Pillars of high Heaven be broke,
While Lightnings glare from Pole to Pole.
4.
Thou too, accursed terrestial Ball,
That saw the Son of GOD expire;
Thou and thy Works shall perish all,
And sink in universal Fire.
5.
Horrendous Sight! A World in Flames!
Thunders loud rumbling through the Air!
Dire Lightnings flashing fiery Streams,
And glating red and vengeful there!
6.
Mountains wide-bursting! liquid Fire
In glowing Torrents rushing down!
Rocks, Stones, fierce Min'rals, Sulphur dire
Melting, the Plains and Valleys drown!
7.
Old Ocean of its Moisture dried,
Receives the fierce descending Tide:
Thither dissolving Worlds retire,
And form a boundless Lake of Fire.
8.
With loud Aetnean Thunders roars
The Globe, with Earthquakes tossed and torn;
Palaces, Cities, Castles, Towers,
Towns, Wood and Plains united burn.
9.
And where! O where shall Sinners then
Flee from the universal Wreck!
Aghast they view the burning Main,
And plunge into the sulfurous Lake.
10.
There overwhelmed, the rebel Worms
Lie ever, ever, ever lost!
Beaten with everlasting Storms,
On fiery Eddies whirled and tossed.
11.
But ye dear Saints, ye pious Few,
JESUS shall screen your feeble Souls:
Safe from on high your Eyes shall view
The burning Earth and melting Poles.
12.
JESUS shall live when Nature dies;
And while he lives, you must be blessed:
Behold he forms new Earth and Skies,
Where you eternal Years shall rest.
13.
Let Earth and Skies, convulsed and torn,
To common Desolation fall;
Mountains dissolve, and Oceans burn,
GOD is your Bliss, your Heaven, your ALL. There is no Theme, perhaps, in the
Compass of Nature, that so far exceeds human Language and Imagination, as the
Conflagration. The Terrors of Aetna and Vesuvius, in their most outrageous
Eruptions, are but low and trifling Emblems of a burning World. But perhaps
nothing can give us a more lively and striking Prospect of that tremendous
Scene, 'til we ourselves are Spectators of it, than the elegant Dr. Burnet's
Description, in his sacred Theory of the Earth. Pook III. Chapter 12. from whence I
have borrowed most of these Thoughts.

XVI. Separation from GOD the most intolerable Punishment. (annexed to a Sermon
on Genesis iv. 13, 14. Jan. 13, 1750-1.)
FOUNTAIN of Good! 'twas thy creating Breath
Inspired the boundless Wish, the immense Desire,
That gasps for perfect Bliss. The panting Soul,
That still unsatisfied, still restless, breaks
Through Nature's Bonds, with dark implicit Aim
Unconscious points to Thee, the unbounded Source
Of all Perfection? So young Ravens cry,
And gape to catch the Bounty from Thy Hand,
By Instinct taught, unconscious what they ask,
And whence the Blessing comes. So the parched Earth,
When brazen Skies deny the timely Rain,
With silent Importunity implores,
Unknowing, the soft Shower: her gaping Chinks
Her withering Verdure, and dejected Flowers
Mourning present the silent Prayer to Thee.
These innate Wishes, that impatient break
Through all the Limits of created Joys,
Direct their Flight to Thee: the Extravagance
Of these immense Desires, proclaim aloud
My Soul can never be happy but in Thee.
In Thee alone her Faculties find Room,
In Thee alone expatiate unconfined.
Through all the Affluence that Earth can yield,
Through all the Canopy of Heaven contains,
Through all the Ranks of heavenly Forms, she breaks
In Quest of Thee. In Quest of Thee she roves
In all the Anxieties of Discontent,
In all the distant Prospects Hope can show,
And all the wild Excursions of Desire.
For Thee she heaves the Sigh; for Thee dilates
The boundless Wish; Thee under some Disguise,
Though often deluded with fallacious Views,
Restless pursues; and short of Thee despairs
To find true Bliss, proportioned to her Wish.
Let all the richest Blessings Nature yields
Diffuse themselves around me, with Disdain
My Soul would all the insip'd Trifles spurn:
Through all the gay Temptations still look out
For some superior Bliss; look out to Thee,
My only Happiness, with wishful Eyes,
And find my Heaven in Thy propitious Smiles.
O! may I hope, when the long Drudgery
Of Life is past, to rise and soar to Thee?
There all my boundless Cravings satisfy,
And fill my vast Capacities of Bliss?
But gloomy Guilt obscures the glimmering Hope;
Whispers a thousand Horrors, and forebodes
Eternal Separation from Thy Face,
In the waste Realms where Desolation frowns,
Unconscious of Thy Smiles. Tremendous Thought!
Oh! Horrors! Horrors! -- An immortal Soul,
With ever gnawing and immense Desires,
Torn off from all the Pleasures Sense can yield,
Without a GOD! Without a Drop of Bliss
To quench her raging Thirst! Cursed from the Earth,
A restless Fugitive through the dark Voids
Of boundless Space, and the thick Glooms of Hell!
Haunted with horrid Furies! Racked and torn
With guilty, dire Reflections! Not an Eye
To pity! Pining, panting, gasping still
For Bliss in vain, with hungry wild Desires! --
I sink beneath the Prospect! Horrors chill
The vital Stream, and palpipate around
My agonizing Heart! -- My Maker GOD!
My Father! Savior! every dearest Name!
Oh! will Thou doom me to a long Exile
From thy propitious Face, my only Bliss!
See! LORD, a Supplicant before Thy Throne
Importunate I bow; for Grace I cry!
For Grace to fit my Spirit to enjoy
Thee as my final Portion and my All.
THE APPENDIX Devout EJACULATIONS and SOLILOQUIES.
No. I.
NO! never, never can this Heart
From Thee her GOD, her All, depart.
Indulge my Boldness; I protest
In Thee alone I must be blessed;
I Am fixed, resolv'dly fixed, in this
Thyself, or naught shall be my Bliss:
I swear by the eternal THREE,
I will accept no Bliss but Thee.
Put me not off with golden Toys,
With empty Honors, sensual Joys.
O! do not thy poor Servant doom
To Crowns and Empires in Thy Room.
I loath the Happiness that springs
From these and all created Things,
Sooner may Gold or Dust assuage
The parched Pilgrim's thirsty Rage,
When under torrid Lybian Skies,
On burning Sands, he faints and dies:
Sooner, than these inferior Toys
Can fill me with substantial Joys.
Since of Thy Love I tasted first,
All other Pleasures I disgust:
Since first Thy Beauties charmed my Sight,
Created Charms yield no Delight.
O! if I Am doomed Thy Frowns to feel,
Why did Thou ever Thy Smiles reveal?
Why with Thy Glories (...) my Eye,
If I must (...) and (...) enjoy.
O! why torment me with the Views
Of Bliss I must for ever lose?
O! if I must for ever dwell
Absent from Thee, why did not Hell
Devour me, ever I felt this Flame?
This ardent Passion to Thy Name?
Then had my Soul never understood
The Loss of an infinite Good;
Nor languish'd in eternal Pain,
Pleasures once tasted to regain;
Nor in tormenting Anguish pined
To call Thy once felt Smiles to Mind.
But hence each dire Surmise! away I
My gracious God would not display
His Glories to inflame my Heart,
If I were destined to depart.
He would not cruelly deride
My Soul with Bliss to be denied;
Nor kindle Love to pant in vain,
And rack me with augmented Pain.
No! His own Self will satisfy
The Wishes He has raised so high.
No II.
AND (...) Passions mine
(...) Charms divine?
And (...) Soul,
To Thee (...) dull?
I would, (...)
Out (...)
No. III.
LIFE's but a Load, a tedious Pain,
A Curse, if I must live in vain.
Shall I my Hours inactive spend?
Or thus be active to no End?
O Thou who did these Powers infuse,
Exalt them to a noble Use.
Direct my Thinking Familty
No more to rove, but fix on Thee:
Allure my Will Thyself to choose,
And all inferior Good refuse!
O! teach my Passions to aspire
To Thee, and burn with heavenly Fire?
My Conscience to perform its Part
On Thy Tribunal in my Heart
My Tongue to celebrate Thy Grace,
And every Breath to utter Praise;
My Eyes to see Thy Glories shine
Through this fair Universe of Thine;
My Ears to hear with rapturous Joys,
The charming Music of Thy Voice:
This Spark of weak poetic Fire
Refine, and teach it to aspire:
Let all I have, and all I am
Be sacred to Thy glorious Name,
Thus train me to the Employ above,
Ere to these Regions I remove.
No. IV.
MY GOD! I Am pleased that Thou art All in All,
Should Nature totter, and to Nothing fall.
My Being sprung from thy creative Breath,
And on Thy Will depend my Life and Death.
Let Heaven, Earth, Men and Angels cease to Be,
I Have Bliss enough, I Have all I wish in Thee;
Thy single Self's complete Felicity.
I Am happy, since my GOD must always live,
Though Vanity is my Prerogative.
This Spark of Being Homage pays to Thee,
Thou boundless Fountain of all Entity;
Rejoices in the unbounded Plenitude
Of Thy Perfections, Thou infinite Good!
No. V.
OH! be Thy glorious Name exalted high,
Through all the Spaces of Immensity.
Let the wide World, let Heaven and Earth and Hell,
In various Ways, Thy wondrous Glory tell,
And thy unbounded Excellence reveal.
O! raise me to the blissful Realms on high,
Not to be glorified, but glorify;
Not to be honored, but to honor Thee,
Not there to reign, but bow the adoring Knee.
Give me a Crown, to cast before Thy Feet,
Raise me, to bow the lower at Thy Seat.
Exalt and dignify a grovelling Worm,
An humbler Adoration to perform;
For while my Situation is so low,
I cannot with profound Prostration bow.
No. VI.
THAT I Am the vilest Sinner, LORD! I own
In penitent Prostration at Thy Throne;
Worthy an endless Monument to be
To thousand Worlds not to revolt from Thee:
But did not JESUS die? This is my Plea;
And has that charming Name no Force with Thee?
Insult my Groans, reject my loudest Cries;
But Oh! can Thou the Savior's Blood despise?
Say, are my Crimes to such a Vastness grown,
That even the Blood of JESUS cannot atone?
O no! then let Thy boundless Mercy shine
With Splendors equal to these Crimes of mine.
But if Thou doom me from Thy blissful Sight,
And frowning say, " I Have in him no Delight;
"Lo, here I am!" Sam. xv. 26.
-- But oh! the most undone
And wretched Thing Omniscience ever has known.
The Thought is Death! it is Hell! my Spirits break!
I Am overwhelmed! -- I Am lost! -- I cannot speak!
No. VII.
REpulse me not; for whither shall I flee?
The Words of Life are found alone with Thee.
Here slay me at Thy Feet, if die I must;
Dying, in Thee I Will fix my humble Trust: Job xiii. 15.

Dying, erect my Eyes to Thee in Prayer,
And in a suppliant Agony expire.
Repulse me not; it is in my Savior's Name,
Not in my own, Thy Grace I humbly claim:
And when in that prevailing Name I pray,
Thou art obliged, Thou can not say me nay.
Have Thou not bound Thyself with Thy own Mouth,
In the Engagements of eternal Truth?
And shall Hell's Powers have Umbrage to blaspheme
Thy sacred Truth, and charge Thy spotless Name
With Breach of Faith? No! Thy Veracity
Shall shine from all infernal Censure free,
Exemplified, in Thy good Time, in me.
Thou will not let me seek Thy Face in vain,
Sigh to the Rocks, and to the Winds complain.
The Blessings Grace does ^^^ely now deny,
Thou will in the most proper Hour supply.
No VIII.
AH! what avail these warm poetic Strains,
These feigned Raptures of the fawning Muse
If cold and languid still my Heart remains,
And my soft Passions to concur refuse?
O! if I love Thee not, I Am self-condemned,
This Hand the Sentence has transcribed and sealed;
Thee Greatest, Loveliest, Best, I Have often proclaimed,
And Thy unrivaled Glories often revealed.
And am I still a Stranger to Thy Face?
Are these extatic Flights affected Zeal?
Forbid it Heaven! or mine is the direst Case
Of any perjured Wretch on this Side Hell.
O! let the Flame of pure Devotion rise
Above the Muse's most exalted Flight;
And mingle with the Ardors of the Skies;
While my poor Lays in vain attempt the Height.
No. IX.
WHY should I, in the Rage of wild Despair Job xiii. 14.

And Agony, my Flesh thus gnaw and tear?
Why sink desponding under hopeless Grief,
And in my trembling Hand repose my doubtful Life?
O say, my God, may not a Sinner dare Job xiii. 15.

Confide in Thee, and sooth his wild Despair?
O yes! Though Thou should crush me in the Dust
Like some vile Poison, still in Thee I Will trust, v. 25.

In Thee I Will trust, hope in Thy gracious Word,
Though Thou should slay me with Thy vengeful Sword.
But oh! so mean a Worm's beneath Thy Wrath; v. 25.

Unworthy by Thy Hands to suffer Death;
Beneath a Look of Thy avenging Eye,
Of Thy immense, exalted Majesty.
Ah! will Thy God like Vengeance condescend
A fleeting Leaf, the Sport of Winds, to rend?
Or will the Majesty of Justice claim
A wretched Victim of so mean a Name;
And of dry Stubble form a feeble Flame?
No. X.
THOUGH Juscious Figs no more shall bloom and grow, Hab. iii. 17.

Nor bending Vines with juicy Clusters glow;
Though the fat Olive should our Hopes beguile,
And burst no more with usual Floods of Oil;
Though Barrenness should blast the fertile Field,
And Earth no more her vital Fatness yield;
Though Death should plunder every crowded Stall,
And Flocks and Herds in common Ruin fall;
Though meager Famine stalk across the Land,
And tear our Blessing from our grasping Hand:
In Thee, my GOD, I Am blessed, I Am happy still; v. 18.

Nor should the Loss of these vain Trifles feel,
But at the general Devastation smile.
Abstract from these, Thou art sufficient Bliss,
But without Thee, how poor a Portion these!
No. XI.
1.
YES! soon the iron Hand of Death
Must seize my Frame, and stop my Breath,
And snatch my Soul away.
Methinks I feel its Agonies --
Anhelant, panting, struggling lies
The agonizing Clay.
2.
Suffus'd with mortal clammy Sweat;
Irregular the Pulses beat;
The Lips hang quivering down;
The Eyes, depressed and hollow, swim
In dizzy Mists; the vital Stream
Laggs in its mazy Round.
3.
A deadly Cold from every Part
Benumbs my Limbs, invades my Heart;
I feel it creeping on!
A ghastly Pale deforms my Cheeks;
And now my falling Jaws relax;
And now I Am gone! I Am gone!
4.
In a deep Groan the Spirit flies,
Unfettered by the former Ties
Of cumb'rous Flesh and Blood --
But, oh! my Soul, what unknown Place
Through the Immensity of Space
Shall be thy last Abode?
5.
'Till thi^ important Doubt is solved,
My Soul in anxious Fears involved,
No solid Rest can know:
Ah! what is the World and all its Toys
Compared to everlasting Joys,
Or everlasting Woe?
6.
Oh, when I bid the World adieu,
Should Guilt, the Fury, still pursue --
Shocking, o'erwhelming Thought!
Or should the infernal Tyrant, Sin,
Forever reign and rage within --
Intolerable Lot!
7.
Great GOD, though one continued Cloud
My fleeting Day of Life should shroud,
Yet be my Evening clear!
Horror my shudd'ring Soul invades
To enter Death's tremendous Shades,
If Thou be absent there.
8.
Be Witness Heaven; I here protest
My Mind shall never, never rest
'Till I Thy Presence gain.
I Will pray away my vital Breath,
Begging Thy gracious Smiles in Death;
Nor cease 'til I obtain.
No. XII.
OH! while eternal Ages roll,
Be Thou supreme, above Control!
Be absolute! Thy sovereign Will
Be done! for oh! it is righteous still.
Thy Favors where thou will, dispense;
With calm, implicit Confidence,
I own Thy Reasons just and good,
Even where they are not understood
By cavilling Wit. Oh! be Thy Will
The Rule of Thy Procedure still.
Though perverse Mortals, blind and vain,
Thy Dispensations dare arraign;
Yet self-approv'd, self-guided, rule
The Affairs of this dependent WHOLE:
No do Thou stoop to satisfy
The haughty Worms that ask Thee why.
For me, behold! helpless stand
At the Disposal of Thy Hand:
A Piece of mean polluted Clay,
Thou may choose or cast away:
Thou may absolve my flagrant Guilt,
Or bind it on me, as Thou will.
Though Thou should blast me with Thy Frown,
Thy sovereign Justice I must own;
Thy Justice I must still acquit,
Against myself Thine Advocate.
But (Oh! how shall I praise Thy Name!)
Submission here Thou do not claim:
The Wheels of Duty and Self-Love
In the same Tract harmonious move.
Thy dread Authority requires
Me to escape eternal Fires:
Thy Law commands me to be blessed;
My Duty is my Interest.
My Misery is my wilful Sin,
Forbid by that kind Will of Thine.
Accomplish then Thy sovereign Will,
For oh! it is good and righteous still.
You Are just, whatever become of me,
And all Thy Ways from Censure free.
XIII. A Description of a Storm, May 9, 1751.
I.
NOW when the War of Elements is over,
And Heaven's Artill'ry cease to flash and roar;
Calmed by His sovereign Nod, who bids
The etherial Forces rage or fall;
Who in dread Majesty serenely rides
On wild unruly Hurricanes and Storms;
While all their most outrageous Forms
Tamely obey His mighty Call,
To purge the Air, or shake this guilty Ball,
To scathe the sturdy Oak, or blast audacious Worms:
Now recollect my Muse, the solemn Scene,
And rouse the sleeping Tempest up again.
II.
The solemn Scene appears! My Eyes
Behold the glomerating Deluge rise,
And heavy Oceans floating up the Skies:
First, distant Murm'rings from the West
With rumbling Sound break through the Air,
And bid the World, Prepare;
Strait anxious Expectation heaves the Breast,
Presaging Horror stares intense,
And, shuddering, through the Window looks from whence
The vapoury Magazines advance:
When lo! the aerial Oceans roll,
Lour deeper still, and gain upon the Sky;
And on the West-Wind's Wings, above Control,
Draw nearer still, and nearer as they fly.
Now Fear begins to palpipate,
And looks, and looks with doubtful Eye,
If happily the collecting Tempest yet
May dissipate, or pass obliquely by.
III.
But faster still the thick'ning Clouds advance,
And cast a darker Frown;
With fiercer Glare the livid Lightnings glance,
And blustering Winds rush on with hollow, solemn Sound;
Now through the bending Forests sweep,
And rock the trembling Dome;
Blend Rows of stately Trees in one long shattered Heap,
Whirl Clouds of Dust on high, and wrap
All Ether in a wide deep-louring Gloom.
A dismal Twilight frowns; the Sun
Through the thick Dust in vain emits his Ray;
Absorpt in all-surrounding Clouds, the Day
Sickens and faints at Noon.
IV.
And now above and all around
Majestic Thunders roll with murmuring Sound,
Convulse the Air, and rock the Ground.
Now rumbling in the dark aerial Hall,
Till scattering far away
The horrid Murmurings decay,
And die away and fall.
Now quick as Thought, to the keen Flash
Sudden succeeds the horrid Crash
Crushed terrible, shocking the Heart;
Amazed, aghast, and stunned we start,
Entranced, and doubtful if we live,
And the oppressive Shock survive.
V.
Still the dire Lightning with malignant Glare
In flaming Curves wheels through the Air;
Here a fierce Streak of angry Fire
Sudden in various Windings cuts the Cloud;
Another here, another there
Darts on the winking Eye, till all the Hemisphere
One wide-expanded Sheet of flashing Flame appear;
While Peals on Peals still undistinguished crowd,
And Heaven's eternal Cannons roar aloud.
VI.
Now conscious Guilt the sudden Bolt awaits,
And hardly hopes to 'scape;
Struck with dire-boding Horror, palpitates,
And startles at each bursting Clap.
The Sword of Justice brandished high
Draws fiery Circles through the Air;
And as the curving Lightnings fly,
And threatening Thunder murmurs through the Sky.
The hardy Bosom pants, and thinks Destruction (...)
Ye hardy Sinners, yield and bow;
Nor dare Omnipotence to strike the Blow;
Heavy, but O! divinely slow!
Say, are you able to withstand
The almighty Vengeance of that Hand
Which whirls the Bolt, and guides it where
The flaming Embassy to bear,
To rive the stately Pine, or burn and tear
The aspiring Fabric, or with sulfurous Breath
Blast the audacious Wretch with sudden Death.
VII.
Happy the guiltless Conscience now!
Serene he hears his Father's thundering Voice;
Amid the Terrors calm, he dare rejoice,
When loudest Thunders rear, and fiercest Tempests blow;
His smiling Eyes with solemn Joy survey
The harmless Lightnings flash along and play,
And his Almighty Guardian's Power display.
Should angry Fire and Thunder rend
Heaven's Unequal, and in one Confusion blend
Heaven, Earth, and Sea and Air:
Should all the Wheels of Nature break,
He undisturbed would view the general Wreck,
Still safe and happy in the Thund'rer's Care.
VIII.
Now towered the South the pregnant Clouds
Retire and leave the middle Sky,
Discharging still prolific Floods
On Hills and Valleys, Fields and Woods,
And drop down Fatness as they fly.
The winding Curves worm through the distant Cloud,
And Sheets of Flame expand abroad;
Now shut and open, open still and shut,
And an immense Effulgence flash about.
IX.
Now safe from Harm, Presumption hears
The distant Vengeance roar;
Pale Guilt renounces all her Fears,
And palpitates no more:
Mistaken Guilt! to erect thy Crest,
And proudly boast the Danger past;
Behold a blacker Tempest gathering last,
The Skies with deeper Horrors overcast,
And louder Thunder roar in the last Trumpet's Blast;
Behold the Judge! He comes! He comes
In vengeful Flames and stormy Glooms!
The Clouds His Chariot, and the Winds His Wheels;
See! how before him Lightnings flash and play!
Hark! Thunders loud proclaim, PREPARE THE WAY!
As down He rides from the eternal Hills.
X.
Supreme, almighty, venerable Name!
Proprietor of Earth and Sea and Sky,
Commander of the Magazines of Flame,
That in the aerial Regions lie;
With Awe profound Thy Greatness I adore,
Who wings the Storm, and bids the Thunder roar,
And keeps the unruly El'ments subject to Thy Power.
XXVII. On hearing of the Rev. Mr. Samuel Blair' s desperate Illness by common
Fame, and Letter from Correspondents in Pennsylvania, June 9. 1751.
WHAT melancholy News does distant Fame
To anxious Crowds and my shocked Ears proclaim!
With what strange Panic is each Bosom struck,
As though some Pillar of the Heaven's were broke!
Alas! is Blair, the great, unrivaled Blair,
Most dear to All, but oh! to me more dear;
My Father! Tutor! Friend! each tender Name
That can the softest, warmest Passions claim!
My faithful Guide to Science and to Truth,
In the raw Years of unexperienced Youth:
Ah! is the heavenly Man just on the Wing,
And to his native Skies about to spring?
About to leave us mourning here below,
And among us share the Remnant of his Woe?
Ah! does he pine away in hectic Fire,
Anhelant, panting, ready to expire?
Oh! cruel Fame! why did thou haste thy Flight,
To bring the inauspicious News to Light?
Ah! cruel Correspondents! to reveal
The dismal Tidings Love would fain conceal.
Why did not Tears blot out the Intelligence?
Or your sad Hands tremble to guide your Pens?
Oh! had you not the dismal News divulged,
My Mind had still the pleasing Dream indulged;
Still seign'd my Blair with Health and Vigor blessed,
With some grand Purpose laboring in his Breast;
In studious Thought pursuing Truth divine,
'Til the full Demonstration round him shine;
Or from the sacred Desk, proclaiming loud
His Master's Message to the attentive Crowd;
While dubious Truth with bright Conviction glares,
And coward Error shrinks and disappears;
While Quick Remorse the hardy Sinner feels,
And Calvary's Balm the bleeding Conscience heals.
But now alas! the sweet Delusion's fled;
My Blair is dying, or perhaps is dead;
Or hastening to the calm celestial Shore,
Or safe arrived, and all the Dangers over.
Even now perhaps, released from cumb'rous Clay,
His Soul expatiates in immortal Day;
Serenely basking in the Smiles of God,
With Fellow-Angels in their blessed Abode.
Pardon, Blessed Shade! the Ravings of my Love,
That would recall thee from the Bliss above;
Would wish thee down in these sad Realms again,
From Choirs of Angels to converse with Men;
Ungrateful Men, who broke thy Heart, and long
Withstood the strong Persuasion of thy Tongue;
(...) Love, and Vanity pursued,
(...) Calls, deaf to a Savior's Blood!
Oh! might thou from the Dead return again.
And that strange unknown World disclose to Men!
Apostles from the Dead sure could not preach in vain.
Superfluous Wish! What could thou teach us more,
Than thy divine Discourses did before?
But if in mortal Climes be still thy Stay,
O! can our Prayers the fatal Hour delay?
Prevail with Heaven to spare thy sacred Breath,
And snatch thee from the impending Hand of Death?
Come, Saints, your Importunities renew;
Try what the united Force of fervent Prayer can do.
Believing Prayer, eternal Truth has sworn,
Sha'n't pant in vain, but bring a rich Return:
'Twill gain this Blessing from propitious Heaven;
Or greater, if a greater can be given.
"Thou sovereign Arbiter of Life and Death,
"At whose almighty Nod we catch and yield our Breath;
"Whose fiat organized our mortal Clay,
"And can repair it in its last Decay,
"And from the greedy Grave snatch the expected Prey:
"Oh! hear the bursting, deep, united Groan,
"That from ten thousand Hearts arises to Thy Throne;
" Restore our Prophet! -- Best for him, it is true,
"To die; but oh! what shall poor Zion do?
" Zion whose Foes are many, Friends are few!
"See! how she languishes in plaintive Grief;
"By Blair's Recovery only hopes Relief.
"Where shall the wounded, tortured Conscience find
"A healing Hand so skilful and so kind?
"Where heavenly Truth so firm an Advocate?
"Or dubious Minds so certain Conduct get?
" Restore our Prophet, and his Health renew;
"For oh! we need him more than Heaven can do.
"There Myriads of Thy Ministers of Flame
"Perform Thy Orders and adore Thy Name.
"But here, alas! how few prepared like Blair
"Thy sacred Message to the World to bear?
"With equal Skill eternal Things to show?
"And guide Thy Churches militant below?
" Restore our Prophet, Lord! and in his Stead
"Let worthless me be to the Skies conveyed.
"Thy earthly House such useless Lumber may
"Resign; but oh! snatch not our Blair away."
But even his Worth now bids us to despair,
And threatens the Denial of our Prayer;
His Worth that makes his sacred Life so dear.
So great, so heavenly, so divine a Mind
Demands Employment of a nobler Kind.
What Earth could teach, he learned, and now must rise
To a superior Class above the Skies.
Too much refined, in this dark World to bear
The humble Place of Zion's Minister;
Heaven calls him to sustain some nobler Function there:
With Gabriel to perform the Orders given,
And bear JEHOVAH's Errands through the Vast of Heaven;
Prompt as the angelic Armies to obey,
Fervent and bright and vigorous as they.
Heaven kind to him, will not consent to hear,
Nor curse him with the Answer of our Prayer.
Oh! did my cruel Distance but allow,
I Would pay the last sad Offices I owe:
With tender Hand support thy fainting Head,
Wipe off thy mortal Sweat, and weep around thy Bed;
I Would view thee struggling in the Grasp of Death,
And share the Anguish of thy parting Breath;
Thy languishing Francisca's Grief allay,
As drowned in Tears, she hovers over thy Clay;
Thy sacred Relics to the Grave attend,
And cry, "There softly rest, my Father, Brother, Friend!"
But ah! these Eyes shall see my Blair no more,
'Till my poor Pilgrimage, like his, is over,
And we both meet on the eternal Shore.
Yet though this cruel Distance lies between,
Officious Fancy paints the dismal Scene;
Even now the mournful Images arise,
And various shapes of Sorrow stalk before mine Eyes.
There lies my Blair, suffus'd with clammy Sweat,
Ghastly and pale; the Pulses cease to beat;
The Springs of Life relax; the purple Stream
Stagnates; his Eyes in misty Darkness swim;
A deadly Cold creeps on from every Part,
Benumbs his Limbs, and steals upon his Heart:
And see at length in a long deep-fetch'd Groan
The Soul's dismissed, and flies to Worlds unknown.
Deluged in Sorrow, there Francisca stands,
And twing'd with parting Anguish, wrings her Hands;
Like the poor widowed Turtle, vents her Grief,
Her Tears indulges, and despairs Relief;
Surveys the World, but sees no Refuge there,
Her only Confidence in Heaven and Prayer.
Thy infant Train, whose little Tongues had scarce
Learned to pronounce thee Father, at thy Hearse,
Or round thy Bed, burst their full Hearts in Sighs,
While the big Tear sincere swells in their Eyes,
And their loud filial Griefs break out in piteous Cries.
Through thy once favored Flock the Sorrow spreads,
And desperate Grief a thousand Hearts invades:
Each fears lest 'twas his Guilt that did provoke
Incensed Heaven to give the dreadful Stroke.
Now among the Remnant of the sacred Train
They search for one to fill his Place in vain.
Compared with him, the most exalted Tongue,
But mangles Truth, and does the Subject Wrong.
From others heavenly Truths insipid seem
To them whose Relish was refined by him.
Still farther spreads the extensive Grief around
Each Bosom feels the Anguish of the Wound,
And bursting Groans from Breast to Breast rebound
Zion her Loss through all her Temples wails,
And spreads the dismal Echo round her Hills.
To this far Clime the mournful Sound shall roll,
And with fresh Anguish twinge my bleeding Soul.
His dear sad Memory on my Heart shall rest,
While vital Breath inspires my heaving Breast;
Mix with my tender'st Thoughts, and often move
The doleful Anguish of bereaved Love,
'Till our Reunion heals the Wound Above.
Since the Writing of this, I have received the melancholy News of the Reverend
Mr. Blair's triumphant and joyful Transition through the Valley of the Shadow
of Death -- My Father! my Father! the Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen
thereof!

THE INDEX.
BOOK I.
Poem. Page. LORD Thou know all Things, Thou know that I love Thee. John
xxi. 17. I. 1. Early Piety recommended in a Letter to two young Ladies. II. 5.
Philosophic Devotion, occasioned by reading The Religious Philosopher. III. 10.
SOLOMON. A paraphrastic Poem on sundry Passages in Ecclesiastes. IV. 11. I
said, I will be wise; but it was far from me. V. 20. Of Him, and through Him,
and to Him are all Things. Romans xi. 16. VI. 22. Another. VII. 22. A sinful
Immortality worse than Nonexistence. VIII. 24. A Clergyman's Reflection on the
Death of one of his pious Parishoners. IX. 26. The Soul released by Death. X.
27. Gratitude and Impotence. XI. 30. The universal Lamentation. XII. 31. The
Aspiration. XIII. 40. The Soul's early Alienation from its Divine Parent. XIV.
41. A Survey of humane Nature. XV. 42. Whom have I in Heaven but Thee? etc.
XVI. 51. Coujugal Love and Happiness. XVII. 55. The Messiah's Kingdom. XVIII.
68. (...), Or, The invisible World. XIX. 76. The Triumphs of Christ's dying
Love. XX. 81. BOOK II.
Poem. Page. THE Security of Sinners lamented. I. 87. Penitential Sorrows. II.
89. Self-Dedication. III. 9^ Sight through a Glass, and Face to Face. IV. 91.
The Law and Gospel. V. 93. Christ the Beloved and Friend of his People. VI. 94.
The Spiritual Warfare^ VII. 95. A guilty Conscience. VIII. 97. Love to God for
his Holiness. IX. 100. Brotherly Love. X. 101. The doubting Christian. XI. 103.
Christ's Agony in the Garden. XII. 105. Spiritual Inactivity lamented. XIII.
108. On a sudden Death. XIV. 109. The Conflagration. XV. 111. Separation from
God the most intolerable Punishment. XVI. 113.

APPENDIX.
DEVOUT Ejaculations and Soliloquies, No. I. Page 117. No. II. P. 118. No. III.
P. 119. No. IV. P. 119. No. V. P. 120. No. VI. P. 120. No. VII. P. 121. No.
VIII. and IX. P. 122. No. X. P. 123. No. XI. P. 124. No. XII. P. 125.

XIII A Description of a Storm, Page 127.

On hearing of the Rev. Mr. S. Blair 's Illness, etc. Page 131.


