Mr. Bridge's Artillery Election SERMO June 1st. 1752.

A SERMON Preached to the Ancient and Honorable, ARTILLERY COMPANY In BOSTON,
June 1st. 1752. Being the Anniversary of their Election of Officers. And now
published at their Request.

By Ebenezer Bridge, A. M. Pastor of the Church in Chelmsford.

BOSTON: N. E. Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND, over against the Prison in
Queen Street. 1752.

An Artillery Election SERMON.
Acts X. 1, 2. -- Cornelius, a Centurion of the Band called the Italian Band --
A devout Man, and one that feared GOD with all his House, --
Although the Person here spoken of, is not mentioned by Name in any other Parts
of the holy Scripture, yet in this Chapter the Holy Ghost does him abundant
Honor, in recording his Name, and Character, and Conversion to the Christian
Faith, to the Glory of divine Grace, and for the sufficient Encouragement of
the Gentile Nations in all Ages of the World.

It would be needless at this Time and foreign to my present Business, if I
should take any further particular Notice of him, than what I am led to, by the
Words read as our Text, yet I may in the Process of my Discourse have some Eye
to some other Passages in the Context, which relate to him.

And if I am not mistaken, these will afford us proper Matter for our
Meditation and Instruction, at such a Time, and upon such an Occasion a this.

Here then, he is exhibited to our View, 1. As a Man of a Military Character,
an Officer upon the Roman Establishment. Cornelius, a Centurion of the Band,
called the Italian Band. i.e. The Captain of a Hundred, or a Company of chosen
Men, who were engaged and employed in the Military Life and Business, who were
furnishing themselves with Martial Skill, and fitting themselves for, or rather
had fitted themselves for (for they were now upon Duty) the Service of their
Prince, in that Employment.

Caesarea is the Place in which this Company of Soldiers, under the Command of
Cornelius was posted -- A Place rebuilt by Herod with great Cost and Charge,
and beautified with rich and stately Buildings, Ports and Temples, and many the
most agreeable Accommodations, -- He changed the ancient Name of it, which was
Straton's Tower, for that of Caesarea, in Honor to the Roman Emperor -- And it
became the usual Residence of the Roman Governor.

It was situate upon the Seashore, and of great Importance to the Romans, to
be well Garrisoned, that so there might be a Communication between Rome and the
Places in those Parts already conquered by them. --

Cornelius and his Company were quartered here, and we may justly argue, That
he was a Man honorable and faithful in his Profession and Business, or else he
had not had such an important Post assigned him.

His Company were all chosen Men, Italians or Romans by Birth -- Watching and
Warding -- All holding Swords, being expert in War, every Man having his Sword
upon his Thigh, because of Fear in the Night. Cant. 3. 8.

2. He is exhibited to our View, as a devout Man and one that feared God.
Indeed the Chapter before us, gives us an Account of his miraculous Conversion
to the Christian Faith, by the Ministry of the Apostle Peter -- But we are to
consider him before this remarkable Event took Place.

And before this, he is said to have been a devout Man, and one that feared
God. i. e. he was a religious Man -- One that had come to the Knowledge of the
true God; One that had just Conceptions of the supreme Lord and Governor of
the Universe -- And one that yielded a reverential Regard to him, both, as to
Worship and Practice, according to the Light he had received from the Writings
of Moses and the Prophets -- It matters not how he stood in the Esteem of the
bigoted Jews -- nor how he came to this Knowledge and Fear of God, whether by
his former Education, when Young, which is not in the least probable; or by his
quartering among the Jews, which is more than probable -- so it is -- He is
termed, and he was, a pious religious Man -- And herein he was accepted of God
-- And upon his Account is it primarily, that the Apostle of the Circumcision
utters himself as in the Context, v. 34, 35. Of a Truth I perceive that God is
no Respecter of Persons: But in every Nation he that fears him and works
Righteousness is accepted with him. But,

3. He appears to have been a pious Head of a Family, a devout Man, and one
that feared God with all his House, says the Text -- Though, in an elevated
Station of Life, and used to manly Exercises Abroad, yet having his Heart
possessed of the Fear of God, he is desirous that his House or Family should be
well instructed and religiously educated -- He was careful to exhibit a good
Example to his Household, and to instruct them, and train them up in the
Knowledge and Service of the true God. He disdained the sordid Practices of
Vice, and walked himself, and aimed at the bringing his Family to walk in the
Paths of Virtue and Religion.

What an illustrious Example is here! worthy the Imitation of Men in the most
exalted Stations, whether of the Civil or Military Order -- Truly such Examples
have a commanding Influence upon Persons in lower Ranks and Orders, especially
such as are more immediately in the View of them.

No doubt some of his Company were by his Example and Influence won over to the
Practice of Virtue and Piety -- To be sure we find One at least, to be devout
as well as he -- Thus we read in the Context, v 7. A devout Soldier of them
(...). And in Regard of his private Family, (...) of the Expression in our
Text, One that feared God (...) his House, puts the Matter beyond Doubt, that
the Fear of God was rooted in the Hearts of the several Branches of it, and was
discoverable in the Tenor of their Lives and Conversations.

And (...) all these Things together, with several other (...) in the
succeeding Parts of the Chapter (...) behold him in the Fourth Place, As a
truly valuable (...) Person, and a Man of distinguished Honor. (...) was
honorable in his Office and Station -- It is not likely that a Person of a
mean Extract, of small Power and Capacities, or of a slender Estate, would have
filled such a Place as this. --

(...) was valued by his Superiors, respected by such as knew him, and loved by
such as were under his Command -- We may justly think that he was prized for
those Things which he was possessed of in common with other good Officers; but
more for his manly, his pious, religious Conduct toward God and Men.

Such a Man could not but behave with an agreeable Air and Mein -- He was full
of true Magnanimity, and therefore void of Pride and Haughtiness -- He was
Affable and Courteous, Just and Charitable -- He was honored by Men in
general, cheerfully obeyed by his Soldiers, reverenced by his Family and
Neighbors, and much respected even by the Jews themselves. It is said in the
Context, v. 22. He was of good Report, among all the Nation of the Jews. But
above all, he was highly honored of God; having a Testimony of his Integrity,
his Sincerity, his Acceptance with God, given him by an Angel, a Messenger from
God.

Honored of God, in being made the first Fruit of the Gentiles Conversion to
the Faith of Jesus.

He lived up to the Light which he had before, and God vouchsafed to cause the
Light of the glorious Gospel of the blessed God to shine into his Soul, and
brought him to believe in the Lord Jesus with all his Heart -- Thus, the Man so
piously disposed, so faithful in his Place and Station, has a more abundant
Honor put upon him, and his Name stands enrolled in the sacred Pages, among
the Worthies of Faith, and wherever the Gospel comes his Memory will be revered
and honored.

Not that he by his personal Merit, swayed and influenced the divine Conduct,
in thus choosing him to the first Rank in the Gentile Conversion, or to the
Faith of Jesus. --

But for great and important Ends, the sovereign God was pleased thus to call
him by his Grace; and being thus called, and chosen, and dignified, his
Character is worthy our Notice and Imitation.

Wherefore in farther discoursing, I shall attempt these Things following.

I. To show, That the Military Life and Employment consists with Christianity.
II. That Piety and Religion conspicuous in the Lives and Deportment of Men, of
the Military Order, render their Character the more bright and illustrious.
III. That although the Business of the Soldier leads him Abroad in the World, and
in the Field, yet it is not beneath him, but a bounden Duty to manage and
discipline his own House or Family. IV. That a good Soldier is much to be
valued and honored, especially if he not only excels in Military
Accomplishments, but demonstrates a reverential Regard to God, and the
practical Duties of Religion.
I shall be as brief in speaking to each of these Particulars as I possibly
can, and then proceed to some suitable Application.

I. That the Military Life and Employment consists with Christianity. However
the Case was with Cornelius before he attained to the Knowledge of the true
God, and whatever his Notions and Principles were then, with Respect to his
Employment in Life, is not material in the Point before us.

It is plain, that he has this Testimony, and is denominated a good Man, though
a Soldier.

None can or will pretend to plead or argue, that Fightings and Warrings were
not tolerated in and under the Old Testament Dispensation, for abundant are the
Instances to be produced not only of Wars and Fightings, of the People of the
Jews, or God's People, both on the offensive and defensive Part, under the
particular Direction of God.

But such Instances are so well known, that I need not mention them -- Now
Cornelius living among the Jews, and attaining to the Knowledge of the true
God, and really worshipping him to the divine Acceptance -- and yet not laying
down his Arms, or quiting his carnal Weapons, is an Evidence that his Business
consisted with his Religion; which was the true Religion, and the same with the
true Religion now, only his Advantages and the Advantages of the Jews
themselves, were vastly less than were afterward and are now enjoyed under the
Christian Dispensation -- And here lies the Stress of the Argument, whether
Wars and Fightings, whether a military Life and Employment, are countenanced
and encouraged in and under the Christian Dispensation? And it must be
affirmed, that although the pure Precepts of Christianity enjoin Peace with all
Men; and where they have a true and genuine Influence in and upon the Hearts of
Men, such Men are disposed to Peace; yet the Design of those Precepts is not to
eradicate the Principles of SelfPreservation, but to regulate the Temper and
Conduct of the World, and to make Men keep within the justest Bounds and
Limits, in all their Conduct and Behavior toward one another.

A voracious, Blood thirsty, quarrelsom Disposition, is utterly condemned by
the Gospel.

To take up Arms, or to wield the Sword out of an avaritious and insatiable
Desire to possess that which another Person or People are possessed of, and
have a good Right to, is unjustifiable -- But then, if Life is dear and
valuable, if the Lives of our Families are precious in our Esteem, and if
civil, and religious Privileges are sacred, and much to be prized by a People,
then are Men called now as much as ever they were, to secure and defend
themselves, and their valuable Enjoyments of one Sort and another.

And in Order to this, considering the present Situation of Affairs in the
World, in all Parts of it; considering the Customs and Usages in War through the
World -- It appears necessary, that Men who profess Christianity should addict
themselves to the military Business and Employment, that so they may be in a
Readiness to go forth to War; and that they really should go forth, when called
in the Providence of God so to do -- And being suitably furnished with Martial
Skill and Weapons, relying upon the God of the Armies of Israel. 1 Samuel 17. 45
They should be of good Courage and play the Men, for their People and the
Cities of their God, the Lord doing that which seems him good. 2 Samuel 10. 12.


Let me add -- When the Apostle Peter was sent for by, and came to Cornelius,
and was to teach him all Things commanded him of God; Context ver. 33.
Did he at all inform him that his military Profession was inconsistent with
Christianity? He certainly preached Christ unto him, and was instrumental of
bringing him to the Faith of Jesus -- But not a Word did he say to condemn his
Calling as a Soldier, which he would have done, exhorting and enjoining him, to
throw down his Arms and quit his Post, if it were inconsistent with
Christianity -- Moreover, when another Centurion addressed himself to our Lord
Jesus, and obtained that Testimony of his Faith from Christ -- I have not found
so great Faith, no not in Israel. Matt 8. 10
-- Christ himself does not condemn him for, or on Account of his Employment.

And one would think that He would not have avoided it, if he had disapproved
of it, since the Centurion acquaints him with his Situation and Employment in
Life -- I am a Man under Authority (says he) having Soldiers under me, etc.
Matt. 8. 9.
From which Silence of our blessed Lord in this Matter, we may conclude, that
he has lest Men to some prudent Methods of defending themselves and their
invaluable Liberties and Privileges, by the Use of the Sword; though the
Precepts of his Religion are of Force enough, if rightly regarded, to reach
them when, and how to do the same in a just and lawful Manner -- Finally here
-- When the Soldiers came o John the Baptist with that Question -- And what
shall we do? Lult. 3. 14.
It is most likely he would have taught them saying, Repent of your past
Misconduct, quit your Profession, and betake your selves to another Course of
Life, if it had been Wrong: Instead of saying, Be content with your Wages, for
this supposes that Wages were due to them while they continued in the Service
-- and that they were yet to continue in their Employment; or else he would
have cautition'd and counseled them against it -- But indeed when we have
mentioned the Case with Respect to our Lord himself, and his countenancing, or
at least not prohibiting, the Life and Practice of a Soldier, it is needless to
mention any other Instances, either in his Servants before or after Him -- And
it is needless for me to dwell any longer upon this Head, since so many Things
have been so well said, and so many Arguments so wisely adapted and managed by
those who have before spoken upon such an Occasion as this -- And since the
Point is not disputed by any among us, except those who are of an Enthusiastic
Turn of Mind, upon whom all scriptural and rational Arguments are for the most
Part lost and thrown away -- The present Appearance and the Exercises of this
Day, as well as the constant Practice of the People in this Land, are
Evidences, that military Accomplishments and the military Employment, are
looked upon as consistent with our Christian Profession. --

Therefore,

II. I am to show, that Piety and Religion conspicuous in the Lives and
Deportment of Men of the military Order, render their Characters the more
bright and illustrious.

To be good Officers or Soldiers, or Adepts in the military Profession, is no
small Thing in itself -- Such Men, as they have a peculiar Talent and
Betrustment, so are they raised to, and placed in honorable Stations.

Their being well versed and skilled in the Art of War, and their Atchievments
in their Warlike Enterprises, their Courage and Fortitude, their Bravery and
Hardiness, raise them above the common Level of Mankind.

But vastly brighter do their Characters shine, if they demonstrate a true Fear
of God, and a conscientious Re^^^^ to his Laws (...) ^ommands.

As the military Employment consists with Christianity, so the Soldier and
Christian may unite in the same Person; the Grace of God is sufficient to
subdue the Lusts of all Sorts of Men, and where it is wro't, it makes the Man,
of whatever Character in Life, the more glorious -- Yea the Christian Soldier,
is the Christian Hero.

But here I would observe -- How or in what Respects a Soldier may and ought to
demonstrate his Piety and Religion -- And then, if he does so, it will secure
his Character, and raise his Honor much in the World.

1. I would in the first Place, Observe how a Soldier may and ought to
demonstrate his Piety and Religion in his Place and Station. And here,

1. In his Conduct and Behavior toward God. He should not take his sacred Name
in vain -- But should speak of the great God, and use his Name with the utmost
Reverence and Submission -- So should he also honor the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

He should be grave and solid in his Speech as well as Behavior; not Light and
frothy -- He should keep a Watch and Guard upon the Door of his Lips -- His
Tongue should be under a good Regimen, and under the Restraints of Reason and
Religion; And as he has Opportunity he should speak of the Things which
pertain unto Godliness -- He should be conscientious in yielding to God that
Worship which is his Due; he should thus acknowledge God's Lordship in the
World, and exalt the Name of God and the divine Honor as much as in him lies
-- He should pay a just Regard to all divine Institutions (not to keep his
military Post, and to save his Pay) but out of a pure Regard to God and our
Lord Jesus -- He should be much in Prayer to God for his Blessing upon him, and
upon his just and lawful Enterprises.

Cornelius was a Man of Prayer -- He prayed to God always Context, latter Part
of Ver. second.
-- So should every Officer and Soldier be and do -- But,

2. In his Conduct and Behavior toward Men. He should first of all approve
himself loyal to his Prince, and faithful in his Place and Station, whether he
is in Office, or a private Sentinel.

He should consider himself as under Authority, as the Centurion before
mentioned did -- as under the Authority of God, and the Authority of Kings and
Governors -- Having taken the Oath of Allegiance to his Sovereign, he should
perform unto the Lord his Oath Matthew 5 33.
. Not deserting his Post, not flying from his Colors, not giving up the Cause
through Carelessness or Cowardice, and to be sure not through Treachery or Bribery.

He should make it evident that the public Good lies near his Heart, and that
he will defend and secure it, under God, and by his Help, in the Danger of his
Life, and at the Expense of his very Blood if called to it -- Again, he should
approve himself Just and Righteous in his Conduct toward his Fellow Soldiers.
If he is an Officer, he should be as tender of the Lives of his Men, as is
consistent with the common Safety -- Not thrusting them into needless Dangers,
not being lavish and prodigal of their Blood, not throwing away their Lives to
gratify his own Pride and Ambition, or Rancour and Revenge.

He should consider them as Men, and as Men highly deserving their peculiar
Rights and Privileges at his Hands.

He should have a just Regard to the personal Merit and Bravery of his
Soldiers, and fill up his Commissions with the Names of such as distinguish
themselves most by their Loyalty, Bravery, and good moral Deportment.

And not with the Names of such as can crouch, and cringe, and fawn and
flatter, and give a good Sum of Money to purchase the same, when perhaps they
may have nothing else to lay in as a Claim thereto.

He should see that the Rules of Justice and Righteousness are regarded and
practiced upon, by and among his Men, putting some Marks of Favor upon them
that are honest and just, and punishing with Discretion, such as are Dishonest
and Wicked.

And then to be sure, he should do all in his Power, that his Soldiers should
have their just Wages,and should not allow himself upon any Consideration
whatever, fraudulently to pocket that which is their Due.

If he is a private Sentinel, He should be obedient to his proper Officers,
diligent and faithful, just and honest in his Place and Station, should be
ready to go or to come; to do this or that, at the Word of Command -- He should
do to his utmost, and be content with his just Allowance.

But,

3. In his Conduct and Behavior with Respect to himself. He should be sober,
chaste and temperate in all Things, keeping under his own Body; 1 Cor. 9. 27.
Mortifying his Lusts and Corruptions, and practicing Virtue and Godliness, in
all the Branches of it toward all Men.

If he in any Combat with an Enemy should come off Conqueror, he should show
forth a generous, courteous and noble Spirit; and thereby show, that he is
Master of himself, and knows how to be merciful to the unhappy who lie at his
Mercy.

And if at any Time the Success of the Engagement should turn against him, and
he should be conquered, then he should acquiesce in the Disposal of Providence,
and quietly and patiently bear his Misfortunes. -- These are some few Hints how
a Soldier may and ought to demonstrate his Piety and Religion, in his Place and
Station. And now,

2. If the Soldier does thus demonstrate his Piety and Religion, his Character
is hereby served, and his Honor raised much in the World.

Truly such a Character appears in quite agreeable and beautiful Colors in the
Eye of every Man, who thinks and judges right of Men and Things -- Multitudes
of Men in the World, and I may say not a few of the Gentlemen of the Sword,
being too much wanting in the suitable Expressions of a true Regard to their
Maker, yet cannot but reverence and respect an Officer or Fellow-Soldier, whose
martial Accomplishments are accompanied with the Marks and Evidences of true
and undissembled Piety and Virtue.

To be sure such as are Friends to Religion and Holiness, as they love to see
Religion prevailing in the Hearts and Lives of all Sorts of Persons; and
respect them who appear to be under the Influence of its Doctrines and
Precepts; so they look upon such a Man's Character to be peculiarly bright and
illustrious, and the more so, because of its being so rare.

If a Man in his military Post, enterprises some bold and daring Action, and
performs some noble Exploit, and is crowned with Success, he generally attains
to the Character of a good Soldier. -- But if it appear that his Courage is
rational, the Effect of Faith and Trust in God, and his Deportment is agreeable
to the Precepts of Religion; his Character shines with a peculiar Luster.

The Courage of a bold and daring Soldier, who is as irreligious, as he is
bold, is no better, and deserves no higher Encomium than the Courage of the
Horse which rusheth into the Battle. Jer. 8. 6.
But to be valiant, and to do Exploits, and to demonstrate a Regard to God, who
is the Lord of Hosts, and to show forth a Subjection to the Laws of God and
Christ; this is truly noble and Magnanimous. -- Such a Soldier cannot fail of
obtaining a bright and excellent Character, so long as there are Men in the
World capable of distinguishing such a Merit from a mere vain and empty Show of
Greatness.

But I may say something further to this Point under the last Head.

I proceed now to the third Thing proposed,

III. Although the Business of a Soldier leads him Abroad in the World, and in
the Field of Action, yet it is not beneath him, but his bounden Duty, piously
to discipline his own House or Family.

Cornelius was one engaged in a military Life, and yet the holy Ghost takes a
special Notice of his Piety and the Extent of it -- His Religion operated
toward and discovered it self in the Family -- He was upon military Duty, and
had the Care and Command of his Company, but yet was conscientious as to other
Duties.

All with whom he had to do, shared in the Advantages to be derived from so
good an Officer, and so good a Man -- No Doubt it is designed for Imitation, or
else there had not been such a Notice taken of this Part of his Character as
there is -- Yea and if the Soldier is now inquisitive, and saying, What shall I
do? The Answer founded upon this Warrant shall be, Go and do likewise; Consider
the Duty you owe to God and the King, in your public Capacity -- And don't
neglect, but discharge the Duties also which are incumbent on you, in your more
private Life and Station -- And to be sure, let your Families lie near your
Hearts, and share in your best Endeavors of Happiness and Welfare to Mankind
-- There are Times indeed, in which the Soldier is called off from his own
Family, and though ever so near and dear to him, he must march to his Post and
Station, and jeopard his own Life unto the Death in the high Places of the
Field; Judge. 5. 18.
nor all the tenderest Embraces, nor all the most pitiful Accents of those as
dear to him as Life itself, must stop him in his Pursuits after the common
Safety, and the Destruction or Conquest of the common Enemy -- In this Case the
best he can do, will be to leave them in the Hands, and to commit them and
himself, to the Care of a faithful Creator.

But how unprepared for this, and in how poor a Manner can he commit either
himself or the dearest Objects of his Love, to the keeping of a faithful God,
if he has been living in Carelessness and Irreligion at Home?

If his House or Family which should be as a well disciplined Company, is
nothing more than a Cage of unclean Birds, and his Conscience flies in his Face
and upbraids him for the Neglect of his own Soul, and the Souls of them, whom
he ought naturally to have cared for; it is not likely that his Courage will
stand the Shock of a furious Battle; or that he will resolutely fight for his
Country, when he has already been unfaithful in his own more immediate and most
important Betrustments.

But there are Times also in which the Soldier returns from the Field or the
Camp, and lives quietly at Home; and though he should not even in those Times,
suffer himself to grow Effeminate, or suffer his Sword to rust in its Scabbard,
and he himself careless as to military Exercises; yet in such Seasons he has
an Opportunity of minding and regarding his own Soul, and of training up his
Household in the Way in which they should go, i.e. in the Paths of Virtue and
Godliness.

This is not beneath the Soldier, it is his bounden Duty -- That Man's Notions
of Honor must be very false, which cause him to think lightly of any Duty of
the Christian Life.

That the Care of one's Family, and the religious Instruction and Education of
the several Branches of it, is a Duty incumbent on all Heads of Families,
whether in higher or lower Spheres of Action in the World, is as plain as that
there are any Duties of Religion at all incumbent on us -- Yea the most high
God puts Honor upon religious Heads of Families, let them be in what Stations
they will -- For I know him (says God of Abraham) that he will command his
Children and his Household after him, and they shall keep the Way of the Lord,
to do Justice and Judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he
has spoken of him*

Joshua the valiant Leader of God's People, did not think it beneath him; but
it is mentioned to his Honor, that he resolved to be religious himself, and
that his Household should be so too; But as for me and my House, we will serve
the Lord. And as I have diverse Times said, Cornelius the Centurion, as he has
an honorable mention made of him in the Chapter before us, so in particular,
this is spoken to his Honor in our Text, That he feared God with all his House.

I come now to the fourth and last Thing proposed, which is,

IV. That a good Soldier is highly to be valued and honored, especially if he
not only excells in military Accomplishments, but demonstrates a reverential
Regard to God, and the practical Duties of Religion.

It may be remembered that I said, but just now, that the religious Soldier
could not fail of obtaining a bright and excellent Character, so long as there
were those in the World, who could distinguish between real Merit, and a mere
Show of Greatness -- And so it is -- But it must be acknowledged, that though he
shall assuredly be respected by the un prejudiced, and Men of Noble, Christian
Spirits and Tempers -- Yet too often, it is the Case, that through Envy, ill
Will, and personal Prejudice, the fairest Character is slur'd, and the Man that
has done worthily for his Country in his Place and Station, and has exposed
his Life, and all Things dear, for the common Safety, in Dangers Abroad, and in
Tumults at Home, shall be reviled and abused, defamed and slandered, and
poorly, requited for his Services -- But this should not be.

Good Patriots and Warriors, deserve the highest Honors that a People can
bestow upon them.

They deserve more than empty Words of Praise, they deserve suitable Rewards,
Rewards proportionable to their Services -- And it is an Argument, of
Insensibility in a People, or of ill timed Parsimony not to recompense Men
according to their Merit and public Ability, let them be in what Stations they
will -- To be sure the Men who go forth to War, and do valiantly, and return
with Success, deserve, from the highest Officer to the lowest Sentinel to be
honorably and suitably rewarded, more especially if they have voluntarily,
kept their Hands from, or in Obedience to lawful Commands in the Camp, have not
divided the Spoil and enriched themselves with their Enemies Goods and Estates;
the common Usage and Custom in War.

Indeed it may prove poor Policy in the End, when such Men and such Services
are not suitably rewarded -- Men may grow discouraged, and a Remembrance of
former ill Usage, may prove of bad Consequence in any new designed Enterprise.

But it is also Ingratitude in a People not to honor and reward such as have
done worthily, and been instrumental of acquiring new Glory, and great
Interests, to a Nation or Country -- And Ingratitude is a Crime as black and
odious in a People, as it is in a particular Person.

And however the Case may be, sometimes, that public Honors and Rewards are
by unreasonable Lets and Hindrances, withheld -- Yet every Person in his own
Heart and Mind should value the Man that has acted his Part well, or gives
sufficient Grounds in and by his martial Accomplishments, to hope that he would
do so if called to Action; and is withal a Man of Piety and Religion.

As War is sometimes unavoidable, so Soldiers are absolutely necessary -- And
if there are those that give their Minds to the Study of the Art of War, and
are pious toward God, just and righteous toward Men, chaste, temperate and
virtuous toward themselves -- And ruling well their own Houses, and not only
yielding a good Example, but giving good Instruction, and maintaining Family
Religion, Order and Government -- Doing their Duty to such as are immediately
under their Care -- This as it encourages our Hopes as to their future Valor
and Serviceableness, so it calls for our present Esteem and Respect, and all
suitable Acknowledgments -- Such Men will be valued by the judicious and
unprejudiced Part of the World -- They will live in Credit and Reputation; they
will die regreted and lamented, and their Memory will be honored by all sober
good Men.

It now remains that I say something by Way of Improvement or Application.

And though I might deduce many Things from what has been said, more than the
Time will now allow of -- yet shall only say as follows --

1. Is the military Life and Employment consistent with Christianity? Then let
Men of the military Order see to it, that they engage, and go on in their
Business, under the Influence of the Principles and Motives of Christianity. I
mean such Men as are favored with the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and profess to
be governed by it -- For as it is known that Multitudes are destitute of the
Gospel, so it is not so much to be wondered at, that they should be under the
Influence of their own Hearts Lusts; and that they should be in continual Wars
and Fightings, to gratify their own corrupt Inclinations -- Indeed this is the
Source (i.e. the Lust of Men) from whence all Wars and Contentions do proceed
-- Thus the Apostle, From whence come Wars and Fightings among you? Come they
not hence, even of your Lusts, that war in your Members? Jam. 4. 1.
The Gospel is the most pure and excellent in it self, and teaches Men how to
deny Ungodliness and worldly Lusts. Ti^. 2 12.
Yet it is not to be expected, so long as Men are clothed with Mortality and
compassed about with manifold Infirmities, that their Lusts will be perfectly
subdued and conquered -- And hence will arise many Debates of one Sort and
another, even in the Christian World.

In the Gospel there are the best Maxims and Principles laid down, the best
Motives suggested, the best Examples exhibited, and a sufficiency of Grace
offered, whereby Men may come to be evangelically perfect and complete in the
whole Will of God -- And in the Article of War, either with a Heathenish or
Christian People (which is sometimes as unavoidable, as it is undesirable) Men
should engage in the Warfare with a suitable Regard to the Gospel, as they
would avoid the Imputation of Inconsistency in their Tempers and Conduct, with
the Orders of Heaven; though warring it self is consistent with Christianity.

They should see to it that their Ends and Aims be Right -- That they are not
elated with Pride and lawless Ambition -- That they are not flushed with an
eager Desire after vain Glory, that they are not avaritious and insatiable.

The advancing the Honor of God, the Interest of the Redeemer's Kingdom, and
securing the Safety of themselves and their People, and their Families, should
be their End and Aim in their Undertakings -- And they should steadily observe
and practice the Rules of the Gospel.

Having an Eye constantly to Jesus their Leader and Commander, Isa. 55. 4.
and endeavoring to imitate and copy after him, in all his righteous Conduct
and Behavior when he was in the World. But,

2. Let the Soldier learn, that however dignified he is by his Commission, or
in his Post and Station; yet his real Character is but mean and contemptible,
if he is impious and irreligious. Vice and irreligion are odious in Persons of
low Life. How much more so, in Men raised above the common Level of Mankind;
who are apt to make great Pretensions to, and Professions of Heroism? To see or
hear of a military Man off his Watch and Guard, vain and profane in his Speech,
immoral in his Life, unjust and unrighteous in his Post and Station, and
irreligious in his own House, this sullies his Character; and though he might
have done many worthy Actions as a Warrior, yet hereby he loses all his
substantial Glory -- Such an one perhaps may have some external Respects paid
him by some -- But yet most Men are void of any real cordial Regard to, and
Esteem of him.

To be sure he has no Share in the Value and Esteem of Men of Piety and
Religion.

3. Let what has been said, serve to excite in Men of the military Order, a
real Desire, and earnest Endeavor after those Qualifications and
Accomplishments which will render them truly excellent and honorable.

The Soldiers Employment is in no wise ignoble in it self. -- He therefore that
would be a good Soldier, an Honor to his Profession, and an Ornament to his
Country -- should endeavor to get his Mind well furnished with military Skill,
and the best Maxims for the Direction of his Conduct.

In Times of Peace he should acquaint himself with the Use and Exercise of Arms
and Weapons. He should not wait for the Sound of the Trumpet or the Alarm of
War, (...)
but should beforehand see to it, that he is well instructed in military Duty,
that so he might not go a Novice into the Field, or to his Post and Station.

While he is calm and cool he should furnish himself with such Principles and
Motives, and use himself to such a Behavior and Conduct, as are exhibited and
injoined in and by the Gospel, that so he may reasonably hope for, and expect
the Blessing of God upon his Enterprises, and that he may be useful in his Day
and Generation.

It is with Pleasure, that we behold so many Gentlemen of good Education and
Christian Deportment at the Heads of the several Regiments through the Province.

It would also be a Pleasure to see them exerting themselves in their several
Posts to advance the Credit and Reputation of the Militia in every suitable Way.

Their Care to fill up their Commissions with the Names of such as are known in
our several Towns, to be Men of a military Genius, Men of honest and righteous
Principles, Men of Sobriety and Temperance, and of a moral and Christian
Behavior, would have a good influence -- And in Case of a War, it is probable
such would be faithful in their Places and Stations, just and honest in their
Betrustments, and prevent any future Complaints of poor Soldiers, with Respect
to their Subsistence and Wages.

Activity and Diligence in superior Officers with respect to military
Exercises, would be serviceable to revive the martial Spirit; and would put
lower Officers and common Soldiers upon some Efforts to excel in their several
Posts and Ranks.

Exemplary Piety and true Religion in such, would have a mighty Influence upon
them who are rather more apt to observe and imitate what is laudible in their
Superiors, than to obey their bare Words of Command.

But Gentlemen of the ARTILLERY:

You need not to be urged to the Study of Arms, or to accustom your selves to
military Exercises -- Your constant Practice and your laudible Endeavor forbid
this.

Yet you may, consistently enough, and without any Reflection upon your Honor,
be cautioned against any Levity or Carelessness in these Matters -- Likewise
also may you with Propriety be put in Mind of the great Duties of Religion
incumbent on you, and of what is expected from you by God and his People.

You will therefore, I persuade my self, regard what has been said in: the
several Parts of this Discourse -- And endeavor yet further by your constant
military Exercises, and that upon the Principles and from the Motives of
Christianity to be prepared for special Service, as God in his Providence shall
call you to it.

Your Company is Ancient and Honorable, this is justly your Style -- But we
shall esteem you more honorable for your Profession of Christianity, and your
practical Regards to the Duties of Religion, than even for your Age, or your
military Accomplishments -- Not that these latter Things are disregarded by us,
but because they are and will be rendered the more agreeable and beautiful by
the former.

Nor yet, Gentlemen, do I design to flatter; but must exhort you to
Watchfulness. This is your Duty as Soldiers, and as Christian Professors -- As
you would watch against your worldly Enemies; so you are to watch against your
spiritual ones -- Watch against the Corruptions of your own Hearts -- Against
the Influence of bad Examples in the World, and against the Deceivings of
Satan. Prove your own selves, and see that you are approved of God in your
Profession and Practice. For not be that commends himself, or is commended of
others, is approved, but whom the Lord commends. 2 Cor. 10. 18.
There is one Thing farther in particular, which be speaks you, Gentlemen, with
Propriety, from the Character opened in the foregoing Discourse, and that is
relating to your Family Piety and Religion -- Through the Indulgence of God, you
are not called at this Time, to go forth to the Battle -- Will you therefore
improve your Time and Opportunities for the well instructing and disciplining
your Houses -- It is not beneath you, it is what God expects of you -- In this
Way you will not only have Comfort your selves, in the various Dispensations of
divine Providence, with Respect to you and yours, but will do Service for the
Public, and give us Hope of your future Fidelity and Serviceableness in your
more public Posts and Stations -- Look upon your selves and your Families in
Relation to another World -- See to it, that you and yours are Partakers of the
Grace of God, and that you and they are living in the Fear of God daily. Then
may you commit your selves and them into the Hands of your Covenant God.

Then may you expect to be respected while you live. Then may you quit the
present Field of Action, when called to it, with Peace and Comfort. And then
shall it be said of each one of you, as it was of Cornelius, and to your
Honor, as it was to his -- He was a devout Man, and one that feared God with
all his House.

4. From what has been said, let People in general learn their Duty toward such
as are engaged in the military Life, or endeavoring to acquire military Skill,
and are Men of true Piety and Religion.

We should give Honor to whom Honor is due. Romans 13. 7.
And who ought to share more in our Respects and Esteem, than the Men who have
hazarded their Lives, or stand ready so to do, in the Defense of all that is
valuable and precious to us?

Let us ever guard against Envy, Prejudice and Detraction -- Let the Soldier be
respected by us in his Station -- Let us commend his Bravery -- Honor him for
his Piety, and as far as our Power and Influence reach, reward his Services.

Let us respect and honor the Gentlemen in Commission in the several Regiments
-- The honorable Company now in Arms; and the other The honorable Company of
CADETS under the Command of Benjamin Pollard, Esquire
Company of chosen Men in this Town, who though not dignified with a Charter, yet
respectable and commendable for their military Accomplishments.

We shall be glad at all Times, I trust, to see their good Order and Conduct as
Soldiers, we shall rejoice to see them, both Officers and Soldiers, growing and
increasing in every manly Virtue, and in every Duty of the Christian Life, both
personal and relative.

But Finally,

Let it be remembered by all of us here present, in whatever Stations we be,
that there is a War to be engaged in and prosecuted by every one of us, which
is not only consistent with Christianity, but which the Gospel even obliges and
animates unto. Ephesians. 6 12.
For we wrestle not against Flesh and Blood only, but against Principalities
and Powers, against the Rulers of the Darkness of this World, against spiritual
Wickedness in high Places.

By Reason of Sin, all Men are in Danger of being led Captive by Satan at his
Will and Pleasure, and of being ruined and undone forever.

The Devil is our constant and inveterate Enemy -- By his Temptation and
Solicitation we at first revolted from God, our rightful Lord and Sovereign;
and so long as Lust and Corruptions remain unmortified in us, we are in the
Service of this accursed Foe -- If then we would return Home to God, and secure
and save our selves from eternal Ruin, we must resist the Devil, and gain a
Victory over our Hearts Lusts.

This is the most difficult Warfare; but yet not so difficult, but that we may,
and shall (through the Help of divine Grace) manage it with Success, and come off
in the End more than Conquerers.

The Gospel obliges all Men to this. The Gospel gives us all suitable
Directions and Motives, and exhibits the best Example to animate us to, and to
encourage us in the Combat.

Christ has undertaken for us, has waded through a Sea of Blood, has fought
for us and overcome. -- Who is this that comes from Edom, with died Garments
from Bozrah? This that is glorious in his Apparel, and traveling in the
Greatness of his Strength? I that speak in Righteousness, mighty to save, etc.
Isa. 63. 1.
And has overcome, and by his Grace and Strength so may, and so shall we.

Let us therefore List under his Banner -- Let us be Volunteers in his Service,
and the Service of our Souls. And Oh that God would make us willing in the Day
of his Power. Psalm. 110. 3.
We have many Excitements to our Duty as Christian Warriors. The Calls of God
to us in his Gospel are many and constant -- His Calls in his Providence are at
this Day and Time peculiarly loud and alarming -- To you of this great Town
especially, who have been and are yet visited with a sore and grievous Sickness
The Smallpox.
-- An awful Blast of Heaven upon the Pride and Beauty of Man.

Not but that it should be esteemed a loud Call also in the Providence of God,
to other Towns and People, who are as yet kept and preserved from it.

And we trust, that those who have not as yet shared in the same Troubles,
either Personally or in their Families, have had you in their Hearts, in their
Prayers to God, begging that your Faith and Patience might not fail.

And that God would hereby awaken you and all, to Repentance and a thoro'
Reformation.

A sovereign God has many Ways to punish a People revolting from him, and
living in the Service of Sin and Satan -- And if his present Rebukes are not
suitably regarded by us, we have Reason to fear what will yet in Judgment be
bro't upon us.

Will you therefore, my Hearers, suffer the Word of Exhortation -- Will you
engage, or go on, in your Christian Warfare with Life and Spirit.

Will you each one labor in the Way of the Gospel, to deny Ungodliness and
every worldly Lust, and to live soberly righteously and godly in the World,
adorning the Doctrine of God our Savior in all Things. Tit. 2. 10, 12.


Have any experienced the Mercy of God in their Persons or Families? Let this
draw and lead them to Repentance, and new Obedience.

Let such as have been called to endure Sorrows and Griefs, and to mourn the
Loss of near and dear Relatives, in this Time of more than common Mortality,
see to it that they quietly submit to the Will of God, and that they be hereby
quickened, in the Duties of the Christian Life, that so they may reap the Good
of such Chastisements and Corrections, of a just and holy God.

Let all labor more than ever, to exhibit a shining Example of Piety and
Religion in their Lives and Conversations -- And let every Head of a Family, he
stirred up to a holy Walk with God in his House.

It is much desired by them that wish well to the Interest of Religion, That
Family Religion, Instruction, Order and Government, may be revived and
flourishing.

And indeed it is vain to talk of a Revival of Religion, or of a general
Reformation, while Men in general continue immoral in their Lives, and
irreligious in their Houses.

If the Hand of God upon you, is sanctified to you; and if you of this Town are
bro't to be exemplary in your Piety -- If you show a good Regard to the Day and
House of the Lord, if you walk in the Paths of Truth and Righteousness, and
your Families appear to be under the Influence of Religion -- Then your Example
will, we hope, be of happy Influence upon all our Towns -- But if you should
continue in Vice and Wickedness, in Pride and Extravagance, in Irreligion and
Licenciousness, notwithstanding the superior Advantages you enjoy, with
Respect to the preached Gospel and other Means of Grace, and notwithstanding
the awful Rebukes of God -- Then it is to be feared that your Example will have
a very bad Influence upon all Parts of the Land; and that God will justly leave
us to fill up the Measure of our Sins, and to ripen for Destruction.

Will the Sinner be awakned to see his deplorable Condition, while a Slave to
his Lusts and Warring against the God that made him.

Will the true Christian stir up himself, and exercise new Courage in his holy
Combat -- Will he gird up the Loins of his Mind, and watch and be sober. 1 Pet.
1. 13.
Be not dejected holy Soul, in and under present Troubles and Conflicts.
Remember Jesus, the Captain of thy Salvation was made perfect through Sufferings.
Heb. 2. 10.
Consider him lest ye be weary and faint in your Minds. 12. 3.


Your Life must be a continued Warfare, you must consider your self in your
Enemies Country while in this World -- Your remaining Sin, and the Temptations
of Satan, you must continually labor and strive to subdue and conquer. --
Wherefore take unto you the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to
withstand in the evil Day, and having done all, to stand: Stand therefore,
having your Loins girt about with Truth, and having on the Breastplate of
Righteousness: And your Feet shod with the Preparation of the Gospel of Peace.
Above all, taking the Shield of Faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all
the fiery Darts of the Wicked. And take the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword
of the Spirit, which is the Word of God: Praying always with all Prayer and
Supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all Perseverance. Ephesians.
6. 13, to 18.


And remember for your further Comfort, that immortal Honors await you; by the
Grace of the Spirit of Christ, you shall finally conquer and overcome every
Enemy, even Death the last Enemy. -- And at last sit down with Jesus in his
Throne, as he overcame and is set down with the Father in his Throne. Rev. 3.
21.


AMEN.

