THE IMPORTANCE OF Gaining and Preserving THE Friendship of the INDIANS.

THE IMPORTANCE OF Gaining and Preserving THE FRIENDSHIP OF THE INDIANS TO THE
British Interest, CONSIDERED.

NEW YORK: Printed and Sold by JAMES PARKER, at the New Printing-Office, in
Beaver-Street, 1751.

THE IMPORTANCE, etc.
IT is agreed, I think, on all Hands, that the gaining and preserving the
Friendship of the Indians to the British Interest, is of no small Importance to
the Trade of Great Britain, as well as to the Peace and Prosperity of these
Colonies: And, as I have not heard of any Body, that has, as yet, attempted to
put this Matter in a proper Light, I shall, with great Submission, humbly offer
my Sentiments, in Hopes they may induce some abler Hand to undertake the Task.

When the first Ship arrived here from Europe, the Indians it is said, were so
well-pleased, that they would have her tied to a Tree, in order the better to
secure her; but as Cables were subject to rot, they would have it an Iron
Chain, and this to be continued into the Indian Countries, that they might be
the better able to keep their Part of it clear from Rust, as we were to keep
our Part. If the Indians were in Distress or Want, the Call was, as it is at
this Day, to come and make clean, or renew the Covenant Chain; and the
Christians on their Part, were to do the like: And accordingly we have assisted
them in their Wars and Wants, and they have assisted us in our Wars, and we
have their Furs.

This is the original Contract and Treaty of Commerce with the Five Nations.
And thus Things went on tolerably well for some Years, 'till the due Execution
of this Treaty was committed to the Care of a Number of Commissioners, mostly
Anglo-Dutch Traders in Indian Goods; who, together with a Tribe of Harpies or
Handlers, their Relations, and Understrappers, have so abused, defrauded, and
deceived those poor, innocent, well-meaning People, that this Treaty has
well-nigh executed itself; so that at present we have very few Indians left
that are sincerely in our Interest, or that can be depended upon. The fatal
Consequences of this Management were severely felt in many Instances last War,
particularly in the Case of Saraghtoga, Schenectady, etc. which could not
possibly have happened had our Indians been sincerely our Friends. And what
fatal Consequences must attend a continued Neglect of Indian Affairs; more
especially as the French, our natural Enemies and Competitors in every Corner
of the World where we have any Concern, are indefatigable in cultivating the
Friendship of their own Indians, and by all Means and Arts in their Power, per
fas and ne fas, endeavoring to seduce those in the British Interest; is
apparent to the meanest Capacity. Murders and Desolation, upon the first
Breach, is one certain Consequence; and I wish I could think this was all.

What to me is most surprising, that, though there is hardly a Colony upon the
Continent, but what is a Match for all Canada; yet, by a proper Management of
their Indians, they keep us all, both in Time of Peace and War, in a constant
Dread and Terror.

As the British Parliament seems at this Time disposed to take these Colonies
under Consideration, it is the Duty, I conceive, of every Member of the
Community to throw in such Hints as he conceives may be of Use upon this
Occasion; and it is to be hoped there are those amongst us, of Capacity,
Leisure and public Spirit, sufficient to model them into a proper Shape, for
the Perusal of that august Assembly. An honest Detail of Facts, and a fair View
of the Importance of the Subject, is all that I shall endeavor at, at present.
It cannot be doubted, but that the Government at Home would assist us
effectually, were our Situation and Circumstances but perfectly known to them,
and proper Methods proposed; because it is really their Interest.

I do not mean here to put the Crown and the People of England to any great
Expense about us, further than that of one single Officer, as Super-intendant
of the Whole, who may have no Connection either with the Trade or People of the
Country; and some Artillery. The Crown already has expended many and great Sums
to make us what we are; and the People of England are already sufficiently
loaded with Taxes; whereas we hardly know what they mean. The Colonies
therefore, jointly, it is to be hoped, will willingly contribute toward
whatever Expense may attend a proper Regulation of our Trade and Frontiers; if
not willingly, let us not despair but that a British Parliament will oblige
them. It is high Time we should look to our own Security, and most unnatural to
expect, that we should hang forever upon the Breasts of our Mother Country: We
are sufficiently able, and must be made, some of us I doubt, at least, willing.
Whatever Pretenses may be made, it is absolutely true, that the Preservation of
the whole Continent, depends upon a proper Regulation of the Six Nations; and
the Security of the Frontiers of New York, both to the Northward and Southward.
I therefore, with great Submission, propose,

That a good strong Fort be built at the Wood-Creek, or near it; it ought to be
a regular Fortification; because it is not impossible to bring great Guns
against it, from Crown-Point, from whence they pour in their Parties upon us,
in Time of War. Here let there be a Magazine of all Kinds of warlike Stores,
both offensive and defensive, with Snow-Shoes, small Hatchets, etc. This will
in a great Measure protect the Country; and from thence a Descent upon Canada
may be very practicable.

That this Fort be able to contain Five Hundred Men in Time of War, and in Time
of Peace never less than One Hundred.

That there be an Addition of two Independent Companies, to the four already
established here, from the Highlands of Scotland; the wilder, the better for a
common Garrison there.

That all the Lands from Fort-Nicholson, to Fort-Anne, that is, all the Lands
upon the Carrying-Place, and those adjacent, be set apart for the Use of such
Highlanders only, as will settle there, and to be properly assisted in their
settling for the first two or three Years. To each Man and his Wife One Hundred
Acres; and to each single Person, Man, Woman, or Child, Fifty Acres, without
Fee or Reward, to them and their Heirs for ever.

That near this Fort, at a proper Distance, there be erected a small
Block-House, sufficient for thirty Indians, to be kept there on constant Pay,
during a War; five, viz. from each Nation, to be relieved and regulated in such
Manner as the Six Nations themselves think most proper.

That a Number of Commissioners from all the Colonies, be appointed to meet
yearly, at New York or Albany, in order to fix their respective Quotas for the
general Expense, and for erecting such other Forts and Block-Houses as may be
thought necessary.

That those Gentlemen jointly, be fully empowered to lay out Lands, (not
already granted) most conveniently situated for a Frontier. And as it seems
very probable, that we shall very soon have a Run of Germans this Way, I should
advise the laying-out of those Lands after the New England Manner, in Townships
sufficient for Sixty Families at least; to be granted to them and their Heirs,
without Fee or Reward, and clear of all Taxes and Quit-Rents, for ten Years at
least.

That in each Township there be erected a good strong Church, with Loop-Holes,
and a few Field Pieces, which may serve for a Retreat upon Occasion. Or rather,
let public Notices, in the most authentic Manner, be sent abroad to the
Highlands of Scotland, Ireland and Holland, where those emigrant Germans have
their Agents; that upon the Arrival in this Province of a Number of Families,
not under Thirty; which Number, supposing five to a Family, is sufficient to
begin any Settlement, and as many as any one Ship should be allowed to import
at a Time; each Person, young or old, shall be entitled to One Hundred Acres of
good Land, granted to them and their Heirs, without Fee, or any other
Encumbrance of Taxes, or Quit-Rent, for the first ten Years. Their Passages,
and some small additional Helps toward their first settling, to be paid by the
Colonies jointly; or let each Colony have its particular Colony or Township, in
that Country; Provided always, that those Lands be laid out so as to form a
Barrier. I would not have these Townships altogether Germans, but alternate.
Philadelphia may one Day repent the vast Importation of those People amongst
them; they are most of them old Soldiers. I have Reason to know something of
their Spirit, having had some Hand in disarming 600 of them upon Account of a
Mutiny in this Province; and it was my Fortune to command some of them upon the
Expedition against Canada, in 1711. A Society of Freemen, absolutely
disclaiming the Use of Arms, and at the same Time encouraging the Introduction
of vast Numbers of old Soldiers, and foreign too, who hardly know what the Word
LIBERTY means; is a Contrast which they only can account for.

That a String of Block-Houses be erected, so as to make the Communication, or
an Alarm, from one Garrison, or Block-House, to another, easy, by Smoaks
properly disposed in the Day Time, or by throwing up a Number of Rockets, or
firing Great Guns in the Night Time. Such an Expedient would be of great Use
during the War, as the Indians never attack but by Surprise, and would greatly
discourage Indian Enemy Parties, as it would keep our own Garrisons upon the
Watch, and our Out Scouts to their Duty. I do not think it at all
impracticable, to convey an Alarm from Albany to New York, in one Night, if
Rockets or Great Guns were properly disposed and attended. Let us suppose, for
Example, a Party of French and Indians abroad, which seldom happens without
being discovered by some Out-Scout or other; upon Discovery, if in the Day
Time, let there be one great Smoke, and one Great Gun fired; which, if taken up
by the other Garrisons, I am confident that Party would hardly proceed. In
order to discover what Course the Party may take, let there be three Smoaks,
two pretty near to one another, and the third at a proper Distance, either to
the Eastward or Westward, etc. which will point out the Course taken. This may
be improved.

That in each of the Six Nations there be built a Fort of some Kind or other,
where, and in what Manner that particular Nation best approves of.

That in the Onondago Country, where their general Councils are held, and the
Archives of the Six Nations are kept, something more than common be erected;
this will do Honor to the British Nation, and greatly encourage the Indians,
especially in Time of War, while their old Men, Women, and Children are secure
in a Fort, with a small Party of Christians, their Excursions will be more
free, and frequent: But, this Security ought to be left altogether to their own
Choice; whether, by erecting one single Fortification for the Retreat of the
Whole; (the Senecas I should choose, being a fine Country, where great
Encouragement ought to be given to Settlers, and where the Indians are less
tainted with Christian Vices); or whether each Nation should have their proper
Retreat or Security.

What has hitherto prevented our Indians, in their Excursions against the
Enemy, is, in my humble Opinion, in a great Measure, owing to the Apprehensions
of having their Castles cut off in their Absence; they have been often
threatened, and indeed at present they have Nothing to trust to but their
Heels: And Nothing, in my humble Opinion, has prevented the Attempt, but the
Resolutions of the Cachnawagas, their principal Fighters, (but Deserters from
our Mohawks) not to spill the Blood of their Relations and Countrymen: And the
same natural Affection has prevented our Indians from doing, what I am
confident they would have done, had they been sure not to have met with their
Friends and Countrymen, the Cachnawagas. Proper Methods, therefore, ought to
be taken to recover those Indians; which I conceive, is very far from
impracticable.

The villainous Treatment those poor People have met with at Albany, from the
Handlers, was the original Cause of that Desertion; and undoubtedly for the
same Reasons, many more do, and will desert, if proper Remedies are not
speedily applied.

For this Purpose, I am to observe, that without a proper Regulation of the
Trade, all other Endeavors to gain and preserve the Friendship of the Indians,
will avail but little. I shall not enter further into a Discussion of the
Methods hitherto taken; but that those poor Indians have for many Years been
under the Direction of the People of Albany, whose Interest it was to deceive
and defraud them, and that they have been deceived and defrauded accordingly,
is notorious; Instances in Abundance might be produced, but they are really too
shocking to relate. But that I may not be thought to talk without Book, I shall
here beg Leave to insert the Preamble to an Act of the Legislature here, to
encourage the Indian Trade at Albany, 13th Anne. I have not heard of an Act of
the kind since, though the Mischief has been daily increasing.

Whereas great Endeavors have from Time to Time been used by her Majesty's
Governors, and Commanders in Chief of this Colony, to settle a Trade, and to
have Commerce with such Indian Nations as live beyond our five confederated
Natitions; which in Process of Time, might not only be very advantageous, but
also of great Security to the Frontiers of this Colony, at or near Albany, in
Time of War; and several of the said Indians being lately come to the City of
Albany, in order to trade with the Inhabitants thereof; but several private
Persons, not regarding the Safety of this Colony, but only designing their own
private Lucre, have, and do daily, use many indirect Means to engross the Trade
into their Hands, by their Contrivance with those who are employed by the said
Indians to carry them in their Wagons to Albany; and having once gotten the
Peltry, Beavers, or other Furs, of the said Indians, in their Possession,
hinder them to make the best of their Market, to the Ruin of the said Trade,
and the Alienation of the Affections of the said Indians from this Colony; and
instead of securing the Friendship of the said Indians, will, if not prevented,
cause them to be our Enemies, etc. This Act to continue for two Years.

The Principles to be laid down in the Management of our Indians, are, first,
by all Means to endeavor to under-sell the French; and the next is, to do
Justice to the Indians in those Sales. For which Reason I should advise, that
this Trade, instead of being under the Direction of the People of Albany, who
are most of them, if not altogether, Traders, or Handlers, and whose Interest
it is, to take all Advantages of those poor People, and that with Impunity, as
they have no Body to complain to, the principal Directors being all Traders,
and of Course Socii Criminis.

That it be put under the Direction of one single Person of Capacity and
Integrity, of his Majesty's Appointment, during good Behavior, with a handsome
Allowance, in the Nature of a Superintendant of Indian Affairs, with full
Powers to do summary Justice upon all Occasions.

That he be debarred trading directly or indirectly, upon the severest
Penalties.

That he take his Instructions from the Governor and Council; and report to
them, at least twice a Year, a State of Indian Affairs, in order to be laid
before his Majesty, or the Board of Trade.

That he be obliged to make a Tour through the Six Nations, once a Year at
least, with a proper Equipage, and some small Presents for the chief Men; when
and where he may receive Complaints, and redress Grievances.

In order to save the Crown the Expense of such an Officer, I should advise,
that as there are two Surveyor Generals of the Customs upon this Continent, at
an Allowance of a Guinea a Day, and Sixty Pounds Sterling. yearly each of them for
a Clerk; that upon the Demise of either, that Officer be set apart for this
Use, one Surveyor General is sufficient for all the Purposes of the Customs
upon this Continent; the Officers being rather in the Nature of preventive
Officers, that is, their chief Business is to prevent any European Goods being
imported from any Part but from Great Britain and Ireland, and to prevent the
Exportation of any of the enumerated Commodities, to any Parts, but to
Great Britain; this, I say, is the chief Business of the Officers upon this
Continent; and the several Governors, upon their Admission to their
Governments, are obliged by Act of Parliament, to take an Oath, to see this
duly executed. There are no Revenues collected by the Offices here, nor no
Accounts worth mentioning to comptrole. From hence I conclude, that one of
those Officers at least, may be very well spared for the above Purpose, and
much better employed.

That there be a handsome Allowance made for two Interpreters at least; one
indeed for each Nation I should not think too much: One of them always to
attend the principal Officer.

That there be a Smith appointed by the principal Officer, with a proper
Allowance, in each Nation, with two Apprentices, in order to multiply
Interpreters; for want of which, I doubt we have often been misled; and if
those Smiths were obliged to teach one or two Indian Youths of the best
Capacities, to read and write English, it might be of great Use, as nothing is
so much wanted as honest Interpreters.

That every Person employed by the Public in this Service, be prohibited
Trading, directly or indirectly, under severe Penalties, and give Security for
the due Execution of his Duty; and to be on Oath obliged to represent every
Grievance he conceives the Indians meet with from the Traders. As all
Monopolies are the Bane of Trade, I would have this open and free for all his
Majesty's Subjects; by this Means a Number of Bush-Lopers, as the Dutch call
them, and the French, who are indefatigable in this Point, Coureurs Debois, are
created; a Set of Men, who, from their Acquaintance with the Woods and Indians,
are very useful upon many Occasions, especially in Time of War.

That there be lodged in the Hands of every Smith, or Agent for that Purpose,
Indian Goods, to the Value of L. -- always by them; which they are to dispose
of for the Use of the Public, according to Invoices from New York, fixing the
Prices of the Goods, as well as of the Furs and Skins, and by no Means to exact
further: This is the Method, and the only Method, I humbly conceive, by which
we can undersell the French; and will be a Means to regulate the whole Indian
Trade: And this is the Method taken in the Government of New England, in the
following Manner, viz.

By an Act of the 12th Geo. it is enacted, That Provisions, Clothing, etc.
suitable for carrying on a Trade with the Indians not exceeding the Value of L.
4000, be procured at the Cost and Charge of the Province, and the Produce
applied for supplying the Indians, by such Persons as shall be annually chosen,
etc. and likewise annually produce fair Accounts of their Proceedings; which
Supplies shall be lodged to the Eastward, at, etc.

That a suitable Person be chosen annually at each of the Places where any of
the Goods, etc. are lodged; which Truck-Masters shall be under Oath, and give
sufficient Security for the faithful Discharge of that Trust, and such
Instructions as they shall receive from Time to Time: And shall keep fair
Accounts of their Trade and Dealings with the Indians; and shall return the
same, together with the Produce, to the Person or Persons who shall be
appointed to supply them with Goods. And they shall not Trade with the Indians,
directly or indirectly. That the Truck-Masters sell to the Indians at the Price
set in the Invoices sent them from Time to Time, without any Advance thereon;
and shall allow the Indians for their Furs, and other Goods, as the Markets
shall be at Boston, according to the latest Advices from the Person or Persons,
that shall supply them for the same Commodities of equal Goodness.

Rum to be given to the Indians in moderate Quantities by the Truck-Masters
only.

No Person whatsoever other than the Truck-Masters, and they only as such,
shall or may presume by themselves, or any other for them, directly or
indirectly to sell, truck, barter, or exchange to any Indian or Indians, any
Wares, Merchandises, or Provisions, within six Miles of any Truck-House, etc.
on Penalty of forfeiting L. 50, or six Months Imprisonment.

From this I have only to observe, That had our Indian Trade been under such a
Regulation, or indeed any Regulation at all, we should have less to apprehend
at this Day: And, that it is high Time to make a Beginning.

A grand Fair yearly established in the Six Nations, to be kept alternately; to
begin first in the Onondage Country, the next Year in the Seneca Country, etc.
of which all the Nations, far and near, may have due Notice; and where the
Super-intendant, or Inspector-General, should always attend; might be of great
Use: And the Prices of Goods being fixed from the latest Invoices from
New York, it would be a great Inducement to the far Nations of Indians, as well
as our own, to purchase, and would at the same Time be a Check upon the
Handlers at Oswego, as well as elsewhere. One essential Article in our Trade
with the Indians, and upon which, in a great Measure, their All depends, has
been hitherto much neglected on our Part; and that is, from us they have the
cheapest English Arms and Ammunition, and of Course the worst upon the Face of
the Earth: The French take Care to supply them with what is really good; and I
believe at a cheaper Rate than we can afford the best of ours; by which Means I
doubt, they will ever be able to undersell us in that essential Article, unless
some effectual Methods are fallen upon to prevent it; such as allowing us the
Importation of a Quantity of Powder for that Purpose only from Holland; the
Traders have attempted this, to their Cost. The French purchase Indian Goods'
both in Holland and England for those very Indians. Why might not we be allowed
the Importation of Powder and Arms from Holland or France? or why might we not
manufacture our own Powder in the Mohawks Country, where Saltpetre may be had
in Abundance, from those vast Beds of Pidgeon-Dung? In short, the Indians must
have good Powder and Arms; and where the best is, there they will go; and
according to the present Situation of Things, they will depend upon the French
for it. Could we get the better of this one Article, all that Attachment and
Intercourse our Indians have at present with Canada, would, I am confident,
soon be at an End.

That instead of supporting this Trade by Way of License, which has hitherto
been but oddly managed, that there be a Duty, applicable only to Indian
Affairs, and thrown into the joint Stock, upon all Indian Goods, exported
either by Land or Water; and likewise upon all Furs and Skins imported, under
the Direction of the Officers of his Majesty's Customs: Those appointed by the
Country, have generally more Regard to their Friends than their Duty. This has
been formerly practiced here, and I humbly conceive will answer every Purpose
much better. As this Affair will create a yearly Expense, such as no one Colony
can well bear; let there be a Scheme prepared, for each Colony's paying their
Proportion. Most certain it is, as I have before observed, that if ever
New York, Albany, and Hudson's River, should get into other Hands, every other
Colony would soon follow; and while that is secure, every other Colony is
secure. If this is true, is it possible to doubt, but that they will readily
comply! In answer to that trite Objection, viz. As we have all the Trade, we
ought to be at all the Expense: In God's Name let each contributing Colony have
it is Township upon the Frontiers, with proper Magazines, and one or more
Trading-Houses, and a Sloop, and make the most of it.

The Names of the Provinces that form the Republic of Holland with their
several Rates, toward the yearly Expense of the Government, according to the
Proportion of 100 Guilders; and the Order in which their Deputies to the
States General vote, are as follows: Guil. Sti. Den. Guelderland, with the Co.
of Zutphen, 5 12 3 Holland with West-Friesland, or North-Holland, 58 6 2
Zealand, 9 3 8 Utrecht, 5 16 5 Friesland, 11 13 2 Overysel, 3 11 5 Groningen
with the Omlands 5 16 7 100 00 0

[ This may serve for a Model.]

We have been at an infinite Expense from the Beginning of Times, in
fortifying, and in Presents to the Indians, with very little Assistance from
our neighbor Colonies; a Charge which we are hardly able to bear, and most
unreasonable, as every other Colony upon the Continent, is in some Degree or
other, concerned in the Preservation of the Friendship of the Indians, and the
Security of our Frontiers. This, however, has been but paliating Matters; and
doing Things by Halves: Whenever the Colonies think fit to join, Indian Affairs
will wear quite another Aspect. The very Name of such a Confederacy will
greatly encourage our Indians, and strike Terror into the (...); and be a Means
to prevent their unsupportable Encroachments, which they daily make with
Impunity and Insult; And this is what they have long dreaded.

A long Series of Ill-usage from the Traders, has given the Indians but a very
indifferent Opinion of our Morals; and of late, from the several abortive
Expeditions, they begin, I doubt, to suspect our Courage; than which, Nothing
can more affect our Interest with them* They of themselves are honest, such at
least as have not been debauched by the Christians; and brave in their Way; and
despise Knaves and Cowards. It will, therefore, require some Address, and not a
little Expense to recover our Character.

If all this is to no Purpose, and that they will still stand out; let us not,
I say, despair, but that upon a proper Representation to his Majesty, of the
absolute Impossibility, for this Colony alone, to be at the Expense of putting
and keeping Indian Affairs upon such a Footing as they really ought to be, his
Majesty, from his wonted Goodness, will undoubtedly, not only assist us
himself, but oblige the other Colonies to assist us; in Proof of which paternal
Care, give me Leave here to insert some of his Instructions to our late
Governor Montgomerie, in 1727, upon this very Point.

Instruction 83, Whereas it has been thought requisite, that the general
Security of our Plantations upon the Continent of America, be provided for by a
Contribution, in Proportion to the respective Abilities of each Plantation: And
whereas the northern Frontiers of the Province of New York, being most exposed
to an Enemy; do require an extraordinary Charge, for the erecting and
maintaining of Forts, necessary for the Defense thereof. And whereas Orders
were given by King William the Third, for the advancing L. 500 Sterling,
toward a Fort in the Onondago Country, and of L. 2000 Sterling toward
building the Forts at Albany and Schenectady; and likewise by Letters under his
Royal Sign Manual, directed to the Governors of diverse of the Plantations, to
recommend to the Councils and General Assemblies of said Plantations, that they
respectively furnish a proportionable Sum toward the Fortifications on the
Northern Frontiers of our said Province of New York, viz.

R. Island and Providence Plantations, L. 150 0 0 Connecticut, 450 0 0
Pennsylvania, 350 0 0 Maryland, 650 0 0 Virginia, 900 0 0 Making together L.
2500 0 0

And whereas we have thought fit to direct, that you also signify to our
Province of Nova-Caesaria, or New Jersey, that the Sums which we have at
present thought fit to be contributed by them, if not already done, in
Proportion to what has been directed, to be supplied by our other Plantations,
as aforesaid, are L. 250 Sterling for the Division of East-New-Jersey, and L.
250 Sterling for the Division of West-New-Jersey: You are, therefore, to inform
yourself what has been done therein, and what remains further to be done, and
to send an Account thereof to us, and to our Commissioners for Trade and
Plantations, as aforesaid.

84th, And you are also, in our Name, instantly to recommend to our Council,
and the General-Assembly of our said Province of New York, that they exert the
utmost of their Power, in providing, without Delay, what further shall be
requisite for preparing, erecting, and maintaining of such Forts in all Parts
of that Province, as you and they shall agree upon.

85th, And you are likewise to signify to our said Council, and the said
General-Assembly, that for further Encouragement, That besides the
Contributions to be made toward the raising and maintaining of Forts and
Fortifications on that Frontier, as abovementioned; it is our Will and
Pleasure, in Case the said Frontier be at any Time invaded by an Enemy, the
neighboring Colonies and Plantations upon the Continent, shall make good in
Men, or Money in lieu thereof, their Quota of Assistance, according to the
following Repartitions, viz.

Men. Massachusetts Bay, 350 New Hampshire, 40 Rhode Island, 48 Connecticut,
120 New York, 200 East-Jersey, 60 West-New-Jersey, 60 Pennsylvania, 80
Maryland, 160 Virginia, 240 Making together 1358

Pursuant whereunto you are, as Occasion requires, to call for the same; and in
Case of any Invasion upon the neighboring Plantations, you are, upon
Application of the respective Governors thereof, to be aiding and assisting to
them, in the best Manner you can; and as the Condition of your Government will
permit.

As to this Instruction, his Majesty, I doubt, has not been thoroughly
informed: Because, upon an Invasion, considering the Distance and Dilatoriness
of Assemblies, the Mischief, in all Probability, would be over before we could
have any Assistance: I should, therefore, think it advisable, that those
Proportions be immediately detached to the Frontiers, upon the first News of a
War; there to remain, and to be recruited during the War, at the Expense of the
said Colonies. I shudder to think what would have been the Fate of Albany, had
not those Troops, designed against Canada, been accidentally there; more
especially as the People of Albany, at that Time, were afflicted with an
epidemical Distemper, which carried off great Numbers.

From hence his Majesty's Care is apparent; and why those Instructions have not
been hitherto duly observed, is what I shall not take upon me to determine: I
cannot, however, help thinking, that, from upwards of forty Years Observations
upon the Conduct of our Colony Assemblies, and the little Regard paid by them
to Instructions, if it is left altogether to them, the Whole will end in
Altercation and Words. By the above Instructions it appears, that his Majesty
is fully apprized of the Consequences of leaving this Colony unguarded; as well
as of its Inability to answer his most gracious Intentions.

I should therefore advise, That the Quotas be doubled, which they can now very
well bear; and both the Carolinas added, and the Whole enforced by an Act of
the British Legislature.

In that Case, if this present Scheme, or something like it, as I am very far
from thinking, but that it will admit of many Improvements, and for that
Purpose it is offered, is duly executed, I will venture to prophecy, that in
twenty Years the whole Fur Trade will be in British Hands, and that the Fur
Trade Company in Canada, will sink, upon which the very Being of that Country
depends.

I have only further, with great Submission, to advise, that the Meeting of the
Indians be alternate; one Year at New York, which will add but very little to
the Expense, and where the Commissioners from those contributing Colonies, may
more conveniently attend, and where, it is to be hoped, the Indians may receive
some better Impressions of our People, than they have hitherto done at Albany;
the next Year any where, but at Albany or Schenectady. That the Presents made
upon those Occasions, as soon as viewed, and divided by the particular Nations,
be packed up again, in such Manner, as may make the Carriage the easiest, of
which they themselves will be the best Judges, and locked up, and the Keys to
be delivered to the principal Sachem of each Nation, and not to be opened 'till
they arrive in their own Country. I believe, I may venture to affirm, that the
greatest Part of those Presents made them upon those solemn Occasions, seldom
go further than Albany or Schenectady, but are bought up by the Handlers, for
Rum, and afterward sold to them when sober, at a dear Rate. I would propose
this Method, being well assured, there is no Law can be contrived, or Oath
framed, to bind a Handler.

[ So much for our Northern Frontiers.]

AS to our Southern Frontiers, the City, etc. I mean, of NewYork, let those be
altogether under the Direction, and at the Expense of the Colony of NewYork;
hoping withal, his Majesty will be graciously pleased, to favor us with a
small Detachment of Gunners, and one Engineer, for some Time at least, together
with some Artillery and Ammunition. Large Sums have been expended, or rather
squandered away upon this Account, by the Country, to very little Purpose.

Let there be two Batteries erected at the Narrows; one on each Side, in proper
Places, and with Breast-Works only; any Fortifications there, may fall into the
Enemy's Hands, and have bad Consequences, These Batteries to be under the Care
of the adjoining Counties; that on the East Side, under the Care of the
Regiment of Kings County; and that on the West Side, under the Care of the
Regiment of Richmond County.

Our utmost Endeavors must be in the first Place, to prevent the Enemy's
Landing; and also in the next Place, to prevent a Bombardment. For this Purpose
it may be necessary, narrowly to view the Coast below the two first Batteries.
Should an Enemy land at or near New-Utrecht, the March is easy, even with
Cannon, from thence to the Ferry, of which we should soon feel the Effects. Low
Batteries, as I would have all those to be, even with the Water if possible, at
Red and Yellow-Hook, will be a Means to prevent a Bombardment, and the Enemy's
Landing upon Long Island. A small Battery upon Kennedy's-Island, may be of Use.
Let there be several small Batteries fixed round Nutten-Island, of heavy
Cannon, and it were to be wished they were all such; and one strong
Entrenchment in the Middle, for a Number of Troops.

At the East End of the Town, a good Battery will be necessary, as well as
several along Hudson's-River.

I would not have any of those Batteries exceed five Guns; but to be placed the
thicker. Ships generally aim at one Battery at a Time. Besides, it is
impossible to know where a Ship may lie. In this Case, it is odds but some of
our Batteries may take her up.

Breast-Works, with Block-Houses instead of Stockadoes, would answer all
Purposes much better, be much less Expense, and last longer.

As to the Fort, and the lower Batteries, they are altogether ill designed, and
as badly executed. But as our late Engineer has reported to his Excellency, the
Failures, and the Improvements that may be made, so as to resist any sudden
Attack, to that I refer.

It is a constant Rule, that every detached Work, however insignificant in
itself, should have its Ammunition at Hand, to be come at without Difficulty or
Danger; One Hundred Weight of Powder to each Gun.

The Regiments of Suffolk, Queens and Kings Counties, Richmond and Westchester,
will be Force sufficient to defend the City, if they can be brought together
with Regularity and Certainty; to which, however, may be added, the Militia of
Connecticut and Essex County. Let all the other Counties bend their Force
toward the Frontiers.

Beacons, or rather Smoaks, in the Day Time, and Rockets or Great Guns in the
Night, for this Purpose, will be absolutely necessary. It will be no great
Difficulty to carry an Alarm to the East End of Long Island, to Richmond County
and Westchester, at the same Time, in a very few Hours; upon which, every Man
that keeps a Horse, ought to make the best of his Way to the City, and not to
wait forming into Companies, 'till they arrive at the City; where I will
suppose the Colonel or Lieut. Colonel to be forming them, whilst the other who
may have full Power to press Horses, is bringing up the Rear; where
Transportation is necessary, the City to take Care to have Boats at the proper
Landings.

During a War, let there be one stout Sloop of War provided at the Expense of
the Governments of Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, and
Pennsylvania; one other at the Expense of North and South-Carolinas, Virginia
and Maryland; and one at the Expense of the Massachusetts, New Hampshire,
Halifax, and Nova Scotia: Which, if under proper Regulations, together with the
Station Ships, will be sufficient to protect our Trade. Give me Leave to
prophecy, that in Case of a War, we shall sorely repent it, if timely Provision
is not made against the Efforts of the People of Cape-Breton, and upon our
Settlements from Crown-Point.

If these Things, or something of this kind, perhaps from an abler Hand, be
duly considered, and executed, during the Calm of a Peace, we shall have little
to apprehend from an Enemy. What I most apprehend is, the old Proverb, What Is
every Body's Business, is no Body's Business. But let those Gentlemen, I mean
our General Assemblies, with whom we have entrusted the Care of our Lives and
Liberties, answer, if they can, either to God or Man, a Neglect of their Duty,
in a Matter of so much Importance to themselves, their Fellow Subjects and
Posterity. Dulce est pro Patria Mori, is an old Roman Maxim; and though I have
not at present any Thoughts of dying for my Country, yet I have a real
Satisfaction, in imagining, whether in Reality, or not, I cannot say, That I
have pointed out some Things, which, if observed, may prevent a good deal of
Bloodshed, etc. of which I wash my Hands clear, and leave it at the Doors of
those whose proper Business it is to look out in Time.

The Author of the foregoing ESSAY, having desired the Printer to communicate
the Manuscript to some of the most judicious of his Friends, it produced the
following LETTER from one of them: The publishing whereof, we think, needs no
other Apology, viz.
Philadelphia, March 20, 1750, 1. Dear Mr. Parker,
I Have, as you desire, read the Manuscript you sent me; and am of Opinion,
with the publick-spirited Author, that securing the Friendship of the Indians
is of the greatest Consequence to these Colonies; and that the surest Means of
doing it, are, to regulate the Indian Trade, so as to convince them, by
Experience, that they may have the best and cheapest Goods, and the fairest
Dealing from the English; and to unite the several Governments, so as to form a
Strength that the Indians may depend on for Protection, in Case of a Rupture
with the French; or apprehend great Danger from, if they should break with us.

This Union of the Colonies, however necessary, I apprehend is not to be
brought about by the Means that have hitherto been used for that Purpose. A
Governor of one Colony, who happens from some Circumstances in his own
Government, to see the Necessity of such an Union, writes his Sentiments of the
Matter to the other Governors, and desires them to recommend it to their
respective Assemblies. They accordingly lay the Letters before those
Assemblies, and perhaps recommend the Proposal in general Words. But Governors
are often on ill Terms with their Assemblies, and seldom are the Men that have
the most Influence among them. And perhaps some Governors, though they openly
recommend the Scheme, may privately throw cold Water on it, as thinking
additional public Charges will make their People less able, or less willing to
give to them. Or perhaps they do not clearly see the Necessity of it, and
therefore do not very earnestly press the Consideration of it: And no one being
present that has the Affair at Heart, to back it, to answer and remove
Objections, etc. it is easily dropped, and nothing is done. -- Such an Union is
certainly necessary to us all, but more immediately so to your Government. Now,
if you were to pick out half a Dozen Men of good Understanding and Address, and
furnish them with a reasonable Scheme and proper Instructions, and send them in
the Nature of Ambassadors to the other Colonies, where they might apply
particularly to all the leading Men, and by proper Management get them to
engage in promoting the Scheme; where, by being present, they would have the
Opportunity of pressing the Affair both in public and private, obviating
Difficulties as they arise, answering Objections as soon as they are made,
before they spread and gather Strength in the Minds of the People, etc. etc. I
imagine such an Union might thereby be made and established: For reasonable
sensible Men, can always make a reasonable Scheme appear such to other
reasonable Men, if they take Pains, and have Time and Opportunity for it;
unless from some Circumstances their Honesty and good Intentions are suspected.
A voluntary Union entered into by the Colonies themselves, I think, would be
preferable to one imposed by Parliament; for it would be perhaps not much more
difficult to procure, and more easy to alter and improve, as Circumstances
should require, and Experience direct. It would be a very strange Thing, if six
Nations of ignorant Savages should be capable of forming a Scheme for such an
Union, and be able to execute it in such a Manner, as that it has subsisted
Ages, and appears indissoluble; and yet that a like Union should be
impracticable for ten or a Dozen English Colonies, to whom it is more
necessary, and must be more advantageous; and who cannot be supposed to want an
equal Understanding of their Interests.

Were there a general Council formed by all the Colonies, and a general
Governor appointed by the Crown to preside in that Council, or in some Manner
to concur with and confirm their Acts, and take Care of the Execution; every
Thing relating to Indian Affairs and the Defense of the Colomes, might be
properly put under their Management. Each Colony should be represented by as
many Members as it pays Sums of Hundred Pounds into the common Treasury for the
common Expense; which Treasury would perhaps be best and most equitably
supplied, by an equal Excise on strong Liquors in all the Colonies, the Produce
never to be applied to the private Use of any Colony, but to the general
Service. Perhaps if the Council were to meet successively at the Capitals of
the several Colonies, they might thereby become better acquainted with the
Circumstances, Interests, Strength or Weakness, etc. of all, and thence be able
to judge better of Measures proposed from time to time. At least it might be
more satisfactory to the Colonies, if this were proposed as a Part of the
Scheme; for a Preference might create Jealousy and Dislike.

I believe the Place mentioned is a very suitable one to build a Fort on. In
Times of Peace, Parties of the Garrisons of all Frontier Forts might be allowed
to go out on Hunting Expeditions, with or without Indians, and have the Profit
to themselves of the Skins they get: By this Means a Number of Wood-Runners
would be formed, well acquainted with the Country, and of great Use in War
Time, as Guides of Parties and Scouts, etc. -- Every Indian is a Hunter; and as
their Manner of making War, viz. by Skulking, Surprising and Killing particular
Persons and Families, is just the same as their Manner of Hunting, only
changing the Object, Every Indian is a disciplined Soldier, Soldiers of this
Kind are always wanted in the Colonies in an Indian War; for the European
Military Discipline is of little Use in these Woods.

Public Trading Houses would certainly have a good Effect toward regulating
the private Trade; and preventing the Impositions of the private Traders; and
therefore such should be established in suitable Places all along the
Frontiers; and the Superintendant of the Trade, proposed by the Author, would,
I think, be a useful Officer.

The Observation concerning the Importation of Germans in too great Numbers
into Pennsylvania, is, I believe, a very just one. This will in a few Years
become a German Colony: Instead of their Learning our Language, we must learn
their's, or live as in a foreign Country. Already the English begin to quit
particular Neighbourhoods surrounded by Dutch, being made uneasy by the
Disagreeableness of disonant Manners; and in Time, Numbers will probably quit
the Province for the same Reason. Besides, the Dutch under-live, and are
thereby enabled to under-work and under-sell the English; who are thereby
extremely incommoded, and consequently disgusted, so that there can be no
cordial Affection or Unity between the two Nations. How good Subjects they may
make, and how faithful to the British Interest, is a Question worth
considering. And in my Opinion, equal Numbers might have been spared from the
British Islands without being missed there, and on proper Encouragement would
have come over. I say without being missed, perhaps I might say without
lessening the Number of People at Home. I question indeed, whether there be a
Man the less in Britain for the Establishment of the Colonies. An Island can
support but a certain Number of People: When all Employments are full,
Multitudes refrain Marriage, 'till they can see how to maintain a Family. The
Number of Englishmen in England, cannot by their present common Increase be
doubled in a Thousand Years; but if half of them were taken away and planted in
America, where there is Room for them to increase, and sufficient Employment
and Subsistence; the Number of Englishmen would be doubled in 100 Years: For
those left at home, would multiply in that Time so as to fill up the Vacancy,
and those here would at least keep Pace with them.

Every one must approve the Proposal of encouraging a Number of sober discreet
Smiths to reside among the Indians. They would doubtless be of great Service.
The whole Subsistence of Indians, depends on keeping their Guns in order; and
if they are obliged to make a Journey of two or three hundred Miles to an
English Settlement to get a Lock mended; it may, besides the Trouble, occasion
the Loss of their Hunting Season. They are People that think much of their
temporal, but little of their spiritual Interests; and therefore, as he would
be a most useful and necessary Man to them, a Smith is more likely to influence
them than a Jesuit; provided he has a good common Understanding, and is from
time to time well instructed.

I wish I could offer any Thing for the Improvement of the Author's Piece, but
I have little Knowledge, and less Experience in these Matters. I think it ought
to be printed; and should be glad there were a more general Communication of
the Sentiments of judicious Men, on Subjects so generally interesting; it would
certainly produce good Effects. Please to present my Respects to the Gentleman,
and thank him for the Perusal of his Manuscript.

I am, Yours affectionately.

FINIS.

