AN ESSAY ON CONDUCT AND EDUCATION. Recommended To the People called QUAKERS,
By J. F.

1 Pet. iv. 18. And if the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the Ungodly
and Sinner appear! The THIRD EDITION, With an Addition of a POSTSCRIPT to
People of all other Persuasions.

LONDON Printed: PHILADELPHIA: Reprinted and Sold by JAMES CHATTIN, at the
PRINTING-OFFICE, next Door to the PIPE, in CHURCH-ALLEY, M,DCC,LII. [Price 6 d]

THE PREFACE.
WHen first I began the following Lines, I was so far from the Lesign of
publishing them, that I only intended them as a private Letter to my Friend J.
C. containing my Sentiments relating to the SOCIETY, from an Apprehension of
the Want of such Examples and Precepts in the Parents and Elders, as rise from
the Experience of the Work of Regeneration, and the total subduing the natural
Will of Man, and its being brought into complete Subjection to the Will of God;
by which, the Desire and Inclination being changed, and they created in Christ
Jesus unto good Works might glorify God, in living new Lives; Lives of Holiness
and Purity; and so might truly exhort the rising Generation, to be "Followers
of them, as they follow Christ;" and, from such a Conduct in the World, as
proceeds from thence, might "adorn the Doctrine of God, our Savior, in all
Things;" and be as "Lights in the World," and an Honor to the high Profession
we make among Men; without which Experience, Endeavors, in Education, are
rendered saint, and very much unprofitable.

But when I considered that the Publishing the ensuing Lines, could not be
injurious to any; but might be of some Advantage to the Religious and
Well-inclined (whether old or young) or at least afford them an innocent, if
not commendable, Amusement, I was induced to publish them, that, as my Friend
J. C. has seasonably called, more especially to the Youth, I might likewise
remind the Elders of their Duty also; that all might answer their Calling,
which is to Holiness, and the End thereof, Eternal Life.

Innumerable are the Advantages enjoyed, even in this Life, by such as take the
Advice of our Savior, viz. "Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness, and all these Things shall be added unto you;" and if Mankind
were so happy, as "to remember their Creator in the Days of their Youth, while
the evil Days come not," and knew their Affections limited, and brought under
proper Restrictions, by the Operation of the Spirit of God, in their own
Hearts, they would, thereby, be fully furnished, unto every good Word and Work.
This would likewise preserve the Youth in an innocent Conversation, and direct
them, even in the Management of the Affairs of this Life, in their first
setting out in the World, particularly in that important Affair of Marriage;
and, afterward, in the Christian and prudent Education of their Children, etc.
the want of which, is the Cause of many Evils and Disadvantages, under which
Mankind labor; that this may be as much as possible avoided, and that Truth
and Righteousness may be propagated, and continued, from one Generation to
another, is the Desire of a Well-wisher to all Mankind, but, more especially,
to the Household of Faith.

J. F.

AN ESSAY ON CONDUCT, etc.
Whoever attempts Men's Morals to reclaim,
Or show wherein their Conduct is to blame;
Or dare remind Professors, more or less,
Wherein they err from what they do profess;
Must, previous to this kind Attempt, expect
It will not always have its wished Effect:
The best Advice is often most despised
By those who want the most to be advised;
The Whole, who think they no Physician need,
Will no Advice receive, nor Caution heed;
The hardened Sinner, being stupid grown,
Will hate Reproof, and no Misconduct own,
And they, who after fading Pleasure run,
And blindly them pursue, will Counsel shun;
The Unbelieving will not always be
Prevailed upon, their Unbelief to see;
Nor will be apt Instruction to receive,
To learn of That, in which they don't believe:
While the Upright, and those who are sincere,
Their Words and Ways review with jealous Fear;
Who doubt their Case, and fear it is not right,
And often bring their Deeds unto the Light;
Whose sole Dependence is upon the Lord,
And cry to Him, that He may Strength afford;
And may from Evil daily them preserve,
That, from his righteous Law, they may not swerve.
Yet for the Sake of those who are but frail,
On whom Temptations easily prevail;
Or being heedless, have no solid Thought
To judge aright of Matters as they ought;
Or being vain, and full of empty Prate,
Have no just Notions of a future State;
Or being young, not much depraved by Sin,
Yet not adhering to the Guide within;
Or being older, just begin to choke
Its close Reprovings, to avoid its Stroke;
Or being older still, and more to blame,
Their Duties know, and yet neglect the same:
In Love, to such, I ventured to disclose
My private Thoughts, and these my Lines expose:
But think it just to let my Reader know,
To what I do this Publication owe:
My first Inducement having only been
A small Performance, which I Have lately seen,
Which, when I saw, I read with some Delight,
To see the Author there the Youth invite
To learn of WISDOM, that they may be wise,
And her Instructions always truly prize;
Whose Ways are Pleasure, and whose Paths are Peace,
And all that walk therein will find Increase.
O may the Youth, of this, their Choice yet make,
May they, betimes, his friendly Counsel take,
And what Advice he there does freely give,
I hope, in Love, they will of him receive;
Who having now himself to them discharged,
I own, I Have wished his Heart again enlarged
To publish more Advice, more Counsel show,
And tell the Elders next what they should do;
The Parents, how themselves they should behave
In Conversation, prudent, wise, and grave;
That they thereby may good Examples give,
And show their Children how they ought to live;
And, by their Care, in every Word and Way,
May good Instructions to their Minds convey:
For Children, when but young, are quick of Sight
To spy their Parents wrong, or find them right;
And soon observe how well their Words agree,
With that Behavior which they daily see.
Here then is Room the Parents to advise,
That they may learn of WISDOM to be wise;
And having learnt completely to deny
The Glory, Pomp, and short-lived Vanity
Of this low World, that lies in Wickedness,
May to their Offspring show the Happiness
Of Self-denial, and the inward Peace,
Which, through Obedience, daily does increase:
Lest, when their childish Ways and Years decline,
With greater Follies their Affections join.
That, from Experience, Children may be taught
To set such low, uncertain Things, at naught;
And in their Minds the Principle instill
Of due Submission to the heavenly Will;
And daily by Example clearly show
The various Duties which to Men are due.
These needful Precepts, frequently impressed
With Warmth and Sweetness, very often are blessed
With good Success, and may in them create
A Love to Truth, and teach 'em how to wait
To know that Power that would their Minds redeem
From every Sin, and gain them good Esteem.
This, to the Youth, would great Advantage prove,
And in the Parents show the Strength of Love,
Which to their Children would more sweetly flow,
Than their endeavoring riches to bestow.
I thought, it is true, how much he might have said,
Had he but then a further Progress made;
Had he reviewed the Church's present State,
So zealous once, so much depraved of late;
So much declined from that godly Fear,
Which in our early Worthies did appear:
Who were influenced by that just Regard,
That rather acts from Duty, than Reward.
These useful Hints, I thought, might aptly
Well recommended to my Friend J -- C --
But when I wrote what first to me accurr'd,
(By Zeal and Love together jointly spurred)
The fruitful Subject much deceived my Quill,
Which, more than Hints, did sundry Pages fill:
Exceeding thus the Bounds I first intended,
I Have done the Work I would have recommended;
That, as the Youth by him admonished were,
The Elders might as justly have a Share
Not solid Elders, grounded well in Truth,
But careless Ones, unmindful of the Youth;
Old in Profession, older yet in Years,
In whom, as yet, no just Concern appears
For Zion's Welfare, or the Church's Good,
Though getting Wealth by them is understood,
Whose earthly Minds, by earthly Tho'ts employed,
Think all is well, if Riches are enjoyed.
In grasping after which, the Apostle says
"Some (then Believers) erred from the Faith,
"And pierced themselves by many Sorrows," which
Men fall into by hastening to be rich;
Whose natural Offspring, by Example swayed,
Are by the pleasing Baits too soon betrayed;
Their Wealth they mix, their Heaps together lay,
The Parents thus their Children often betray
To join in Marriage, not unto the Lord,
Who sundry Causes of Complaint afford:
Thus Parents they become, before they know
The Source from whence all solid Comforts flow;
And, while they know it not, none can expect
They should their Children to the same direct.
Thus, Avarice and Negligence, we see,
Of lasting Hurt, and Consequence, may be.
Though good Advice, and Conduct too, may fail,
Yet, many Times, we see it does prevail:
But no Endeavors, can have no Success;
Where Care is not, there is none for God to bless:
Thus, Want of Zeal and Care, too often brings
An Inlet, first to small, then greater Things;
From small Beginnings great Events proceed,
And early Failings greater Evils breed:
Plainness, as Trifles, first is laid aside,
In Speech, and Clothing, and pursuing Pride;
They next the Customs of the World admire,
Behave like others, others Ways desire;
This leads to join in Company, and then
They love to act, and do, like other Men;
Affect to look like others, high and great,
And not behold the Snare, till it is too late;
Profusely live, with Tables richly spread,
As free from humble Tho'ts, as full of Bread;
Grandly appear expecting to advance
Themselves thereby; and Fortunes to enhance;
Business they love, and crowd themselves with Trade,
Their Rest they break, and Peace of Mind invade;
No inward Check can scarce attend to hear,
Nor too its just Reproof can lend an Ear;
Trade must be minded, Business carried on,
And new contrived Schemes be thought upon:
The Mind, thus hurried, often is sorely vexed,
And the Affairs of Life too much perplexed.
The Mind ambitious, cannot stoop to see
The Danger nigh, or think 'twill ever be;
They trade, they spend, and more they spend than gain.
Till Streights attend, and striving proves in vain;
Their Pride then falls, their Substance being low,
They Have not wherewith to pay those Sums they owe;
Compound, perhaps, and pay the Quarter Part,
Then strive to live by Shifts and Turns of Art:
Perhaps, by Breaking, some Advantage gain,
(Though other Man then (...) great Loss sustain)
And cause Reproach, and Scandal, to be thrown
Upon the People they pretend to own;
This evil Conduct plainly gives the Lie
To their Pretensions, though exceeding high:
For who, that is not moral, can pretend
To own the Truth, and call himself a Friend?
Or say the Christian Doctrine he believes,
Who thus, By Fraud, his Creditor deceives?
Our Actions always louder speak than Words,
And of our Hearts the best Ide' affords:
True saving Faith, by Works is rightly shown;
As Trees, by Fruits, are only truly known.
As ISRAEL was commanded to behold
ABR'AM and SARAH, in the Days of old,
Whose great Uprightness, and Integrity,
Was, doubtless, what the Lord would have them see;
Let us now then our Ancients Conduct view,
And to our Youth the like Advice renew,
That they may see the Zeal and Circumspection
Of our Forefathers, and from due Inspection
Of their good Works, may raise a just Reflection;
And see, if we their Virtues do retain,
With whom the same Profession does remain.
Our Friends, at first, no such Examples gave,
But with the utmost Caution did behave;
And being then with Godly Fear endu'd,
Such Cause of Scandal purposely eschew'd,
And yet with proper Care their Trades pursued;
And as (...) Zeal was great, their Sufferings large,
And Labor much, their Duty to discharge
With Faithfulness; so were they diligent
All just Reproach entirely to prevent,
Had what was meet, and with it were content.
No great Expenses did their Lives attend,
Nor living great and high, their Substance spend.
No needless Dishes did they then provide
Nor no Utensils, merely bought for Pride.
No Promise broke, nor shuffling Contract made,
Were strictly just in every Branch of Trade;
Sincere their Words, as plain their Hearts as Dress,
Which well agreed with what they did profess;
And as the Laws, and Fines, were then severe,
Their Minds were full of Honesty and Care;
Quick Payments made, that what they lost might be
Their own, and not another, Property;
Thus they preserved, with Godliness and Fear,
The Testimony which they had to bear.
I hope 'twill be with very great Regret,
That I shall once be tempted to forget,
That my own Father once a Prisoner was,
With many others, for God's right'ous Cause,
And, though but young in Years, was greatly blessed
With Favors, which his Children since possessed;
Shall we, his Issue, who are left behind,
Those Things enjoy, and yet not call to mind
His early Zeal, on which the Blessing came,
Or should not rather imitate the same?
Shall we, or others, from the Truth decline,
Which, in its Luster, made our Ancients shine?
And shall we not upon that Arm depend,
That gave 'em Strength and Courage to the End:
Preserved 'em truly faithful all their Days,
And made 'em thus a People to His Praise?
Shall Ease and Fullness lead our Minds astray
To take our Flight, as on the Sabbath Day?
And shall we from that Principle depart,
Which only can inform the darkest Heart;
Subdue our Wills, our Passions regulate,
And bring the Soul to a redeemed State?
When Men neglect this true, this inward Guide,
They have no safe nor certain Rule beside:
Their Darling Reason can no Standard be,
Since its Admirers never all agree,
One Set of Men, by Reason, will pretend
Their own peculiar Notions to defend;
While others, having Reason still in view,
As strongly urge its Opposite for true:
But Grace from God, which truly is divine,
Does still the same in every Conscience shine;
Leads all from Sin, and gives them to possess
The Peace of God, the Fruit of Righteousness,
As it is obeyed, and brings them to agree
By joint Experience, forms such Unity
In Faith and Doctrine, as the Learned and Wise
By Forms and Creeds could never yet devise,
And proves more lasting than their strongest Ties.
Though this be still the happy Case of some,
Who to this blessed Fellowship are come;
It must be owned 'twould be a copious Theme,
Was I at large to say to what Extreme
Of Liberty, Professors have run on,
What Lengths advanced, into what Evils gone;
Nay, some, of late, professing Truth, appear
More swift than others, more exempt from Fear,
To run, with Pleasure, into each Excess,
Of varying Fashions and of modish Dress;
Nor can they bear found Language to retain,
Or wear Apparel decent, neat and plain:
Unmindful where they step, or where they tread,
They, by Example, thus their Children lead
Into the Ways of Vanity and Sin,
Which, by Degrees, they are six'd and settled in,
Their tender Minds thus being drawn aside,
Become in Love with Gaity and Pride,
And with the vicious Habits, Ways and Words,
Which this licentious wicked Age affords.
Thus worldly Glory now does captivate,
And Folly rules the Small as well as Great.
Much Need there is, their Danger to lament,
And call upon them timely to repent;
And to convince them that it is in vain,
That they a Form of Godliness retain
(If that they have) while Strangers to the Power,
Which can preserve them in a trying Hour:
For, as by Satan many Snares are laid,
So are the Careless easily betrayed.
As Fruit, unripe, when gathered from the Tree,
Will soon its Relish loose, and withered be;
And as the Building that is upon the Sand,
Can bear no Storm, nor in a Tempest stand,
So when such Men to Trial are exposed,
And their Profession is thereby disclosed,
The Linsey-woolsey Garment will appear,
Which God forbad his People once to wear;
And mingled Seed, which in their Fields is sown,
Whose hated Crop no Sort of Grain will own;
Such BABEL Builders with Confusion show
Their Faith as lasting as the Morning Dew.
Let these consider, if they blindly run
As swiftly forward as they have begun,
Thus to decline from Truth in the Possession,
They, by Degrees, will wholly leave Profession;
And this, I am afraid, will surely be
Too plainly seen in their Posterity;
Who have, of late, so swiftly swerved aside
Into Excess of Liberty, and Pride,
And, more than this, have not refrained the Crimes,
Nor shunned the vainest Follies of the Times,
Sports, Plays and Games, yea, Things too gross to mention,
Are now become the Proofs of their Declension,
But yet we see, the Lord will still delight
To have a People, and will Sons invite
To come from far, and Daughters who shall be
Servants to Him, and shall His Kingdom see;
For greater the Convincement now appears,
Than has been seen before for diverse Years,
As the Declension has come faster on,
And diverse are from our Profession gone:
This plainly shows that God is still the same,
And always will the Hearts of some inflame
With holy Zeal, to propagate his Truth;
And such there are among the rising Youth,
Who will withstand the Breaking of his Laws,
And say, with DAVID, "Is there not a Cause?"
While those unfaithful Sons He will reject,
Nor can the Parents Righteousness protect;
Though NOAH, ABR'AM, DAN'EL, stand before
The Presence of the Lord, and Him implore;
Yet can they not by their own Righteousness,
Save neither Son nor Daughter in Distress.
Though Unbelief may Giant-like arise,
And, like GOLIATH, ISRAEL's God despise,
And Human Nature glory in its Might,
And in its Parts and Faculties delight;
Boast of its Knowledge, its Seize prize,
And to itself ascribe its being wise,
And what it cannot in its Wisdom see,
It will not own; pretend it cannot be.
Hence all Religion's fully laid aside,
And Scripture Evidence by some denied;
So is the Loose to their Affections given,
And Men, by Satan, to Excesses driven;
Yet Truth is Truth, as such it will abide
When Unbelief and Error must subside;
For as its Evidence can never fail,
It always must, and ever will prevail.
When to the Mind this Evidence is clear,
Then Unbelief at once will disappear;
Like as the Sun, when first it does arise,
Does fill with glorious Light the Earth and Skies,
Driving the Darkness, Mists and Fogs away,
And, by its Luster, cause the cheerful Day,
Diffusing Light and Warmth to the Creation,
And, to the Living, yielding Preservation;
Both Plants, and Herbs, and (...) Creatures, are
Partakers of its Warmth, its Succor share:
So when the Truth arises in the Soul,
Nor Death, nor Darkness, can its Force control:
The Mind must then unto its Light give way
And Error yield to its superior Ray:
For he that on the Son of God believes,
An inward Witness has, that never deceives,
Nor never can -- Yea, scarce admits a Donbt,
Which he that don't believe must be without:
For who can have a certain Evidence
Of what he only holds in Suspense?
Faith comes from God, which he that don't receive,
Cannot in God, nor in His Son, believe:
He may, it is true, pretend an outward Faith
In what of God, or Christ, the Scripture says,
And yet to saving Faith a Stranger be,
Nor know the Truth, nor find the Mystery,
Which, having been for Ages past concealed,
Is, by the Gospel Light, again revealed;
Chirst, by his Spirit, in the inward Part,
Subduing Sin, and cleansing of the Heart.
Though Men, by searching curious Things may find,
Yet earnal Men, as such, are always blind;
Since Man, by Wisdom, cannot know the Lord,
Nor his Acquirements Certainty afford:
Though this, from such, has ever been concealed,
And been unto them as a Book that is sealed,
Yet this, to Babes in Christ, is now revealed.
I own, with Grief, our Youth I often view,
As often believe this Observation true,
As what must always be the Consequence
That ever did, and will proceed from thence,
Where Education don't the Judgment reach,
Nor true Conviction thus our Children teach;
These live at large, these no Religion know,
From bare Tradition their Pre^casions flow:
From hence arise the Reproach, that we,
For want of Conduct, now too frequent see.
Men, truly wise, will these Distinctions make,
Nor call them Friends, nor such for Members take,
And not, through them, our Principles despise,
For want of which alone these Things arise.
And if our Youth thus to persist resolve,
They must, of Course, in to the World revolve,
And fall into the same depraved State
Our Friends were in, while unregenerate;
Before they heard the high and holy Call,
Or knew the Power that brought them from the Fall;
Or felt the Quick'nings of the heavenly Word,
Which raised them up from Death to serve the Lord.
And being thus redeemed, they knew their Love
Weaned from this World, and fixed on that above.
O blessed Change! O joyful, happy State!
The Foolish being wise, the Humble great.
O that Professors would be truly wise,
And every fading, trifling Thing despise,
That would their Minds ensnare and captivate,
And give them Rest in a polluted State.
And though, in Things essential, most mistake,
And Forms, and Shows, for true Religion take,
Not apprehend its Work, nor clearly see
What its Design and only End should be;
(Which is our Lusts and Passions to control,
And work complete Conversion in the Soul)
Supposing Christ has full Atonement made,
And for our past and future Sins has paid:
Thus sinning at his Cost, with full Career,
They see no Danger, entertain no Fear,
But hereby vainly think Salvation sure,
Or early to be made, with Ease, secure,
By some Device of Man, some low Attempt,
By which the Careless think themselves exempt
From anxious Care, to know the Work within,
Of being saved, and redeemed from Sin,
By which, too vainly, they expect to gain
A Membership with Christ, and with Him reign,
While Self remains alive, unmortifi'd,
The Will, and vile Affections, not denied.
Although too many thus are much deceived
To (...) what they have not scarce believed,
And call that Faith where Judgment cannot be;
And practice Things whose Use they never see.
Thus Faith and Judgment to their Wills comply
Implicitly to yield, they know not why;
Like Men blind-folded, dare not peep to see
The sad and wretched State in which they be,
Lest when they look about with open Eyes,
They should behold their Case in their Surprise.
Thus they remain in Darkness, and suppose
Their Ignorance a Kind of safe Repose,
And full Exeuse, for what they do not see;
They therefore shut their Eyes, and hope to be
Secure in Danger, easy in a State
Not changed, nor saved, nor yet regenerate:
Thus, through Unsoundness in the Christian Faith,
And not regarding what our Savior says,
They grossly err, and run so great a Length,
As mostly to bestow their Time and Strength
Themselves to please -- Yet these can clearly see
When Conduct and Profession don't agree:
They know that we do higher Things profess,
And therefore they expect of us no less,
Than that we should accordingly behave,
Though they themselves are not so strict and grave;
Nor yet pretend to wait for Power divine
Their Hearts to cleanse, and Consc'ences refine.
But if we act against what we profess,
And run, with them, into the same Excess,
And with them vie, their Customs imitate,
And from our known Opinions deviate;
This mean Compliance they with Scorn ^^^ise,
And call that foolish, which we think is wise:
As Hypocrites, and vain Professors, then
We shall be thought, as such, despised of Men.
Did we like Friends, in all Respects, behave,
Then Men would soon (...) Reflections leave;
Did good Behavior thus deserve Regard,
Our Virtue then would have its own Reward;
And still this Cause would have this good Effect,
Strangers would more our Principles inspect;
Which when they come with Seriousness to see,
And find our Conduct thereunto agree,
They would be just, and from (...) View,
Declare our Conduct good, our (...) true:
So would our Credit and Esteem abound,
The (...) of which, is, by Experience, found.
Where it is not so, we may confess, with Shame,
Our Doctrine true, and we ourselves to blame.
What Conduct does from Principle arise,
Most prudent Men have ceased to despise;
And others will, from long Experience, know
Our Scruples do from true Conviction flow;
A Favor, which, by Sufferings great, was gained,
And, by continued Faithfulness, obtained.
Though some upon our Conduct still reflect,
From whom we may no better Things expect:
Because these Men for Gain are always bent,
And aiming still their Wages to augment
By fresh Demands, which as we do deny,
And still against their Practice testify,
And, when required, assign our Reasons why --
These mostly will our Principles oppose,
And think us too their most avowed Foes;
Whose Frowns and Slights, as they alone proceed
From Interest, not from Judgment, none will heed,
But such whom they deceive, or who have been
Strangers to us, have not our Writings seen.
For though the Strength of Prejudice is great,
We may, with thankful Hearts, observe of late,
They Are few that do the Truth, or us, despise,
But such as mostly do from hence arise.
When I upon these serious Things reflect,
I freely own they do my Heart affect,
Lest He, who to our Fathers did appear,
Taught them his Mind, and led them in his Fear,
The Gospel Tidings in his Name to spread,
And to proclaim them in His holy Dread;
Whose faithful Labors He was pleased to bless
With great Convincement and admired Success,
Should their Descendants utterly forsake,
And from their Offspring His Regard should take,
And call in others, who shall freely share
The Favors which He did for them prepare;
Because His Table will be filled with Guest,
And he that comes, when called, is surely blessed.
The good Advice which DAVID gave his Son,
Is truly worthy to be looked upon;
"If thou, my Son, wilt seek the Lord (said he)
"Then will the Lord thy God be found of thee:
"But if thou seek Him not, but Him forsake,
"He will His Blessing ever from thee take."
As this, to him, was well observed then,
So is it true to all Degrees of Men;
And for a lasting Truth it will remain,
Nor was it then on him bestowed in vain;
He Wisdom asked of God, he Wisdom found,
With what he asked not, he did abound;
And yet, although he was with Wisdom blessed,
And, in Abundance, earthly Things possessed,
We see how unbelieving Wives bewitch,
And certain Snares too often attend the Rich:
His Wives, his Wealth, his Pleasure, and his Pride,
Debased his Wisdom, made his Zeal subside,
And made him from his own Experience know
The bitter End of all the Sweets below:
But yet, it is my Belief, he did repent
The Loss of Time by him so vainly spent.
Let all consider this, who would from hence
Urge his Excesses as a vain Pretense
For such Extremes -- Let these consider then
That he a Preacher did become to Men,
That he might amply show and represent
The small Degree of Pleasure and Content,
That earthly Things to Men afford, which he
Declares to be entirely Vanity:
What could he more have done, than to relent,
And write, that he Examples might prevent
From his Misconduct, that his Sins might be
A lasting Caution to Posterity?
These Things, kind Reader, being wrote in Love,
Will not, I hope, to thee unfruitful prove;
Wherein I Have labored all I could to be
From needless Words, or Flights of Fancy, free;
And purposer; endeavored to express,
The Things intended, in the plainest Dress.
Art thou a YOUTH? The best Companions choose;
The Loose and Airy, with Contempt, refuse:
Believe the Sacred Writings to be true;
Give just Obedience, where the same is due;
Be modest, prudent, careful, wise and just,
In all Things true, and faithful to thy Trust.
Art thou advanced somewhat more in Years?
Reject the poisonous Notion that appears
In such of late, whom Satan does deceive,
Nor question Truths in which thou should believe;
On which no Good, but Evil may attend,
Witness a late and certain Author's E -- ee B -- l, a famous D -- st, who
lately drowned himself in the Thames.
End,
Who did such Notions far too much defend.
Art thou a PARENT? Be concerned to live
So circumspect, that thou Advice may give
To Children, and to Servants, that they may
With due Regard, thy just Commands obey.
Art thou an ELDER? So thyself Conduct,
That thou thereby the Younger may instruct.
Art thou a TEACHER? Let thy Works agree
With thy Advice, do thou a Pattern be.
Art thou a MERCHANT? Venture but thine own;
And if thou loosest, Pity will be shown;
Thy honest Prudence, and industr'ous Care,
Will plead thy Cause, when thou art not aware;
Raise many Friends for thee to interceed,
And help thee also in the Time of Need,
Art thou a TRADER? Act with Caution still,
Let Judgment rule thy Actions and thy Will;
Daily observe thy Profit and Expense,
And thou may soon a Judgment form from thence
What will in Time become the Consequence.
Spend less than what thou get'st, and this will be
A lasting Rule of Safety unto thee:
And then, if unexpected Loss attends,
Thy Case will also raise thee many Friends.
If thou art RICH, trust not at all therein a
Because it is Idolatry and Sin.
Many are guilty of Idolatry,
Who never bow to Images the Knee.
Love first the Living God, and him adore,
Prize all His Gifts, but love the Giver more.
If Wealth increase, help those that are in Need,
Their Burdens ease with Pleasure and with Speed;
Conclude thy self in Debt to Him that gave it,
And always think how quickly thou may leave it,
That He that gave thee this, may also bless
Thy Labor with the Comfort of Success,
And though thou giv'st, thou may not have the less.
If thou art POOR, be honest, just and wise,
And thou shall know thy Friends from hence arise.
Thy Toil and Labor will be also blessed
With Peace of Mind, and, in thy Cottage, Rest.
Much might be said, but Hints may now suffice;
A Word may prove sufficient to the Wise;
Whatever thy Station, or Condition be,
Trust thou in God, and He Will provide for thee;
Serve Him in Truth, be mindful still of this,
Regard what shows thee when thou do amiss;
This gives true Peace and Happiness at last,
When all these low and fading Things are past.
Did we not on a future State depend;
Did with our Lives our Joys and Sorrows end;
The Man that does his Course with Virtue steer,
Has still the most and truest Comfort here:
Because the Conflicts which the Righteous find,
Are not like Horror to a guilty Mind;
Nor can Afflictions here be well too great,
That tend to Glory in a future State.
A POSTSCRIPT, TO People of all other PERSUASIONS.
THus having, Reader, in this short Essay,
Endeavored here (though briefly) to display,
How far a certain Sect of Christians are
Become too much unlike what first they were
In Life, and Conduct, though raised up of late,
And their Beginning of no longer Date
Than yet scarce Ninety Years; if in that Space
Some have declined their Zeal and Love apace,
Yet, to be just, I must the Truth declare,
No other Sect may with them yet compare,
All Things considered, take them every Way;
Their Doctrine and Economy survey:
The prudent Care they generally observe
Over such as from their wonted Practice swerve:
The due Relief they yield unto the Poor:
And Way of Marri'ge, never used before,
Incapable of Stealth (were Men so bent)
Nor to be done without complete Consent:
The great Advances by their Teachers made
In true Religion, though employed in Trade;
Though not in Learning, nor in Science skilled,
Yet with the Knowledge of Salvation filled,
Untainted yet by Lucre; filled with Zeal,
These to the Consciences of Men appeal,
And boldly lash the Vices of Mankind,
Not bound by Hire, from Wages unconfined;
So that from hence true Knowledge does increase,
And often produce the Fruits of Joy and Peace;
Whilst others love the World, and lose their Ground,
And in the Steps of Libertines are found:
If these deserve such just and equal (...),
How much more they, from whom The Example came;
Who having been Professors long before,
And long declining, are declined more:
Was I to say how far such deviate
And leave their pure, their once reformed State,
It would become too great a Work for me,
A Volume fill, which they would not like to see.
If I have spared not those whom most I love,
And cannot Things unjust in them approve;
Nor like to see them vain, like other Men,
Without Rebuke or Caution from my Pen;
Let not the Careless loose Professors be
Puffed vainly up, with these Reproofs from me
On our Professors, but let each Profession
See they be clear of every such Transgression;
And that they also may, in Truth, possess
The Practice of those Tenets they profess:
Preserve the Kernal also with the Shell,
And, in the Temple, at the Altar, dwell;
Not pleased with Forms, and so in Forms resort
To worship God, but in the outward Court,
Whilst they in all the Fopperies engage,
And hug the Vices of a sinful Age;
Lest they be also weighed, and wanting found,
And greater Faults in them than us abound.
SUTTON BENJAR, in WILTSHIRE, 11th of 2d M. 1741.
FINIS.

