A JOURNAL OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF Jacob Wendell, Samuel Watts, Thomas Hubbard
and Chambers Russel, Esqrs; COMMISSIONERS appointed by the HONORABLE SPENCER
PHIPS, Esquire Lieutenant-Governour and Commander in Chief, in and over His
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, to Treat with the
several Tribes OF Eastern Indians, in order to Renew and Confirm a general
PEACE.

BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND:

Printed by John Draper, Printer to the Honorable the Lieutenant-GOVERNOUR and
COUNCIL. 1752.

A JOURNAL OF The Proceedings of Jacob Wendell, Samuel Watts, Thomas Hubbard,
and Chambers Russell, Esqrs; Commissioners appointed by the Honorable SPENCER
PHIPS, Esquire Lieutenant-Governour and Commander in Chief, in and over His
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, to Treat with the
several Tribes of Eastern-Indians, in order to Renew and Confirm a general
PEACE.
Friday, October 13th 1752.
THIS Day the Commissioners being arrived at St. George's, were informed by
Jabez Bradbury, Esquire Commander of the Fort, That there were only Two Indians of
the Penobscott Tribe now in the Fort; but that he understood there was a Number
of the Norridgawock Indians at Richmond who had been waiting sometime for the
Arrival of the Commissioners; whereupon the Commissioners immediately
dispatched an Express to Capt. Lithgow at Richmond Fort, directing him
forthwith to come with as many of the Chiefof the Norridgawock and other Tribes
of Indians as were there; and another Express to the Penobscotts, by one of
that Tribe, informing them of their Arrival here, and that they were now
waiting for them in order to proceed on the Treaty.

In the Evening the Commissioners were informed that Capt. Lithgow was at
Pleasant-Point with a Number of the Norridgawock Indians, and would be at the
Fort in the Morning. The Commissioners then sent a Messenger to recall the
Express dispatched to Capt. Lithgow in the Forenoon.

Saturday, October 14.
THIS Morning Capt. Lithgow, together with the Norridgawock Indians that were
with him, came in; and after the usual Salutations had passed between the
Commissioners and the Indians, the Commissioners told them, that they had sent
an Express to the Penobscott Indians, informing them of their Arrival; and as
they expected in a few Days to see them, should delay the Treaty until they
came in; but in the mean Time had directed Capt. Bradbury to provide for their
Subsistence.

Tuesday, October 17.
A Number of the Penobscotts arriving this Afternoon, with Col. Louis one of
their Chiefs, and after Salutations had passed, Col. Louis desired a Time might
be set to begin the Conference; and proposed Tomorrow at Three o'Clock in the
Afternoon: To which the Commissioners agreed; and told them they would give
them Notice of the Time, by firing a Cannon.

Wednesday, October 18. Post Meridiem.
THE Commissioners being seated in the Parade of the Fort, and a Number of
Indians of the Penobscott and Norridgawock Tribes, as also two of the St.
John's Tribe being present, they were informed, that an Oath would be now
administered to Capt. Joseph Bean, and to Walter Mc'Farland faithfully to
Interpret what should be said at this Conference, both by the English and
Indians; and also to Mr. Ezekiel Price truly to enter all Matters that should
pass between the Commissioners and the Indians at this Conference.

Which Oaths were accordingly administered by Col. Wendell.

Then Col. Wendell, in the Name of the Commissioners, said as follows, viz.

Friends and Brethren,

IN Consequence of a Commission from his Honor Governor PHIPS to us (and Col.
Heath since deceased,) we embarked for St. George's the last Year; and came
hither with full Power to ratify and confirm the Treaty of Peace made at
Falmouth in 1749, (founded on Governor DUMMER'S in 1726,) But as that Treaty
was broke in upon in several Instances, by some of the Tribes ot Indians
included therein, particularly, (as is supposed) by the Norridgawock's killing
and captivating several of the Inhabitants of this Province, as also by
committing other Acts of Hostility; an^ that Tribe not being here, it was then
agreed by us and the Penobscotts to deter the Conference till they could
prevail on the Norridgawocks to come in, which they engaged to use their
Endeavors to do, and give Notice thereof to Capt. Bradbury accordingly.

But the Government hearing nothing of the Norridgawock's Disposition for or
Desires of a Treaty, till the 16th of last Month, by a Letter (which if you
desire shall be n^w read to you) from a Number of that Tri^^ to the Governor,
desiring him to come himself (if he could) or appoint some other Gentlemen for
that Purpose, readily agreed thereto; but as the Affairs of the Province would
not permit the Governor to appear in Person, he has again sent us fully
empowered to treat with you. Now,

Friends and Brethren,

We give Thanks to almighty GOD for the Preservation of you and us, and giving
us this Opportunity of seeing each other in Health.

We hope you appear fully empowered on your Part to go upon the Business we are
met upon.

However, Before we proceed, we cannot but take Notice of the unfriendly
Behavior of the Norridgawocks; who, after some of their Tribe were kindly
received and entertained at Boston, returned and repeatedly came upon our
Frontiers; killed diverse of our People, and carried others into Captivity, and
also destroyed their Cattle: And, besides this, one of their People returned
the Treaty made at Falmouth in 1749, delivered it to Capt. Lithgow at Richmond;
which looks as if they made no Account of it; Therefore we expect they will let
us know, whether this latter was the Act of their Tribe, or done only by a
particular Indian, without their Order and Consent.

The English are disposed for the Continuance of Peace; and as a Proof thereof,
the Government have directed us to assure you, That upon the Renewal of your
Friendship with them, and so long as you (and the other Tribes of Eastern
Indians) shall continue in Amity with the English, and keep firm and inviolable
the Peace made; they may depend upon receiving from the Government, in the
Month of October annually, a suitable Present in Token of the Friendship
subsisting between them and this Government; which we, in the Name of the
Government, accordingly now do.


Col. Louis, Brethren,

I Salute you all: It Is GOD's Pleasure that we are met to Day: The Sun shines
bright: We see your Honors; and we look upon it the same as if the Governor
was present.

There are here a Number of the Norridgawocks and Two of the St. John's Tribe,
who were not here before.


Commissioners. Are the Norridgawocks and the Indians of the St. John's Tribe
fully Empowered by their respective Tribes to treat with us?


Louis. We on the Part of the Penehscotts are fully empowered to treat with
you; our Brethren the Indians knowing of our coming, ever since the last Summer.


Commissi. Are you empowered to appear in behalf of the Norridgawock and St.
John's Tribe?


Louis. They are here, and will answer for themselves.


Commissi. Are you of the Norridgawock, and St. John's Tribe of Indians
empowered to appear, and act at this Treaty, in behalf of your respective
Tribes?

Had you a Meeting in Council before you came away?


Quincius, a Norridgawock. We had a Meeting in great Council some Time ago, and
our Brethren, the Indians of our Tribe, advised us to come here.

All that we do, the Indians will agree to, and like well, as they know of our
coming.


Capt. Ligthow being present, addressed the Commissioners, and informed them,
That a Number of the Norridgawock Tribe of Indians appeared at Richmond Fort
sometime ago; who told him, they would have attended at this Treaty; but it
being the Season for Hunting, they were obliged to go out; and withal said,
that what these Indians, who now appeared in behalf of that Tribe, agreed to,
would be the Act of the whole Tribe.

Commissi. Speaking to the Norridgawocks. Have you seen Toxus lately; does he
know of your coming here?


Quincius. Yes; Some of us have seen him; he knew of our coming here, liked it
well, and advised us to come.


Commissi. We should be glad to know of the St. John's Indians, whether their
Tribe sent them here fully empowered to appear on their behalf.


Joseph, of the St. John's Tribe. The Sagamores of the St. John's Tribe ordered
me to come and attend at this Treaty.


Commissi. Did the Sagamores of your Tribe tell you they would stand to what
you should now agree to?


Joseph. They ordered me to come here to see, to hear, and to carry back what
you said at this Treaty.


Commissi. We are sorry we don't see more of your Tribes: We should be glad
that every one were here, that we might treat them as Friends and Brethren.


Louis. It Is all one; We are here; and it is the same as if all were present.


Commissi. This is all we have to say at present.


Louis. We have done speaking for the present; Tomorrow we will speak again.


The Indians acquainted the Commissioners, after the Business was finished,
some fresh Meat would be very acceptable to them: The Commissioners told them
an Ox should be given them when they had Mind to receive it.

Commissi. What Time Tomorrow shall you be ready to proceed on the Conference?


Louis. When the Sun is up, we will let you know.


Then King GEORGE's Health was drank by the Commissioners and the Indians.

Thursday, October 19.
Commissi. WE are now ready to hear what you have to offer to us.


Louis. YOU were pleased Yesterday to tell us, We were but few in Number, which
was true; but yet, if we were but Four, it is the same, as if all the Tribe was
present.

There is a Number of the Norridgawock Tribe and two of the St. John's Tribe
here; you will hear what they have to say to you.

There has of late Mischief been done among us; but now we are all come to bury
it: In order whereto, we are for proceeding upon Governor DUMMER's Treaty, by
which it was concluded, That the English should inhabit the Lands as far as the
Salt Water flowed, and no further; and that the Indians should possess the
rest. Now,

Brethren,

We desire that both you and we should endeavor, to the best we can, to
observe this Treaty; which if we do will end in Peace.

We again say, That we will follow Mr. DUMMER's Treaty; and either of us that
act contrary to it, let him be punished; and, if either Party have acted
contrary hereunto, let it now be settled, and not go any further, least it lay
the Foundation of a War between us.

All the Tribes of Indians knew that there was to be a Treaty here, and have
consented to it.

Brethren,

As I said before, so I now say, That the Lands we own, let us enjoy; and let
no Body take them from us. We said the same to those of our own Religion, the
French. Although we are a Black People, yet GOD has planted us here: GOD gave us
this Land, and we will keep it. GOD decreed all Things; He decreed this Land to
us; therefore neither shall the French or English possess it, but we will. This
is agreeable both to King GEORGE and the French King; they would have neither
the English or French disturb us in our Right; which if they should, would set
all these Lands on Fire.

What I say, all the Indians now present say.


Quinoius. What Brother Louis has said, We of our Tribe confirm the same.


Sahadis, a St. John's Indian; The Tribe of St. John's say the same.


Joseph, a St. John's Indian; The Tribe of St. John's say and confirm what the
Penchscott's have now said.


Louis. One Word more I have to say to your Honors,

Brethren,

IT is but seldom we can see the Faces of each other in Conferences, which we
are sorry for, and should be glad it was oftener. Therefore, Let me speak to you
as to the Trade.

Although our Beaver fetches a great Sum, it will purchase but a small Matter of
your Goods. The Custom is, Where Persons sell the Cheapest, there we go to
Trade; particularly to Albany, though it is at a great Distance, yet many go
there to Trade, because they sell good Pennyworths, and give a good Price for
Beaver.

Brethren,

Lay these Things up in-your Hearts, and carry them Home with you.

If Goods could be sold as cheap here, as at Albany, and you would give as much
for Beaver as they do; all the Indians would look upon this Place; would come
here and Trade.


Commissi. Upon our return Home we will mention to the Government what you have
now said relating to the Price of Goods supplied you; and Justice shall be done
you therein.


Commissi. Yesterday we mentioned to you that the Treaty made at Falmouth in
the Year 1749, was delivered up to Capt. Lithgow, at Richmond Fort; to which
you have said nothing: We now demand of you an Answer to this Question, Was it
delivered up by Order of the whole Tribe of the Norridgawocks, or was it not?


Louis. That Treaty was not sent in by the whole Tribe of the Norridgawocks,
for they know nothing of it; but, as I am informed, it was only delivered up by
one Man of that Tribe.


Commissi. Pray let the Norridgawocks answer for themselves.


Commissi. (Speaking to the Norridgawocks,) Was that Treaty delivered up by
Order of the whole of your Tribe, or was it not?


Quinoius. It was not sent in by Order of the whole of our Tribe; but only
delivered to Capt. Lithgow by a single Person for him to keep.


Commissi. Where is that Treaty now; have you taken it from Capt. Lithgow, or
has he it with him?


Quinoius. We have it in our Hands.


Commiss. Are you of the Norridgawock and Penobsco't Tribes now ready to
confirm that Treaty?


Indians. Yes: We are all ready to confirm it; we are coming to it, and will
follow it.


Commiss. Col. Wendell holding that Treaty in his Hand, spoke to the Penobscott
and Norridgawock Tribes, and said, This is the Treaty made at Falmouth Three
Years ago; of which Mr. DUMMER's Treaty is the Basis; come and see the Hands
and Marks of such of your Trib^s, and others that signed it. Capt. Bean, one
of the Interpreters, carried said Treaty to said Tribes; they all viewed the
same, and jointly and severally owned and acknowledged it.


Commiss. We will now read this Treaty to you.


Indians. There is no need of it; we remember it well.


Commiss. Notwithstanding, we shall read it, that if any Infringement has been
made by either Party, Notice may be now taken of it.


The Commissioners then read the Treaty made at Falmouth in the Year 1749
Article by Article The said Treaty is herewith reprinted in Page 14, 15
; and upon the first Article observed to the Indians, that they were bound to
deliver the Captives that had been taken by them at their own Cost and Charge;
that they expected it of them; and that they should do it with all possible
speed.

Commiss. By the first Article now read, you are obliged to return the
Captives; and therefore we expect it of you.


Quinious. What can we do, as to the returning them? The little Ones that were
taken, according to our Custom, those who take them, keep them for their own;
others turn to our Religion, and we cannot force them away.


Commiss. We must again insist upon your returning the Captives that have been
taken by you.


Quinious. What you demand we will do: It is the Fall of the Year now; and we
cannot go for them: In the Spring we will go, and they shall be returned.


Commiss. We shall depend upon your Promise of returning them in the Spring,


Quinious. You may depend upon it.


Commiss. Where are the Children that were taken at Swan-Island, are any here
present that took them?


Quinious. I was at Swan-Island when they were taken: One of them is at a Place
called Werenequois, and the other is at St. Francois.


Commiss. Do you know what is become of them that were taken at North-Yarmouth?


Indians. We know nothing of them.


Commiss. Do you know what Indians took said Children from North-Yarmouth?


Quinious. I know nothing but what I have heard: I was informed, that it was
the St. Francois Indians that took them.


Upon the Third Article in the aforesaid Treaty, the Commissioners said, If
there be any Encroachments made upon your Lands by the English, let us know it;
we will inform the Government of it, so that Justice may be done you.

Louis. There are some English who live at Montinicus, that interrupt us in our
killing Seils, and in our Fowling: They have no Right there; the Land is our
own.


Commiss. What are the Names of those Persons who live there?


Louis. One Hall and his Family.


Commiss. We will inform the Government of this your Complaint; and if Hall has
no Right to be there, you may depend upon his being removed.


Louis. I speak at the Desire of the Norridgawocks, and for them: Above
Richmond there are some Things doing, which we believe you know nothing of.


Commiss. What is doing there, is by private Persons who imagine they have an
undoubted Right to those Lands; and that if the Title of those Persons should
be good, it is not agreeable to the Constitution of our Government to dispossess
Men of their Right: However, You may depend upon it, that the Government will
examine into their Title to those Lands, and endeavor to give you Satisfaction
in this Point when you receive your Presents the next Year.


Louis. We dislike your Hunters, hunting on our Ground: They hunt as far as
Norridgawock, and thereby spoil our Game, and hurt us greatly.


Commiss. Who are they; can you tell their Names?


Chebenood. I cannot tell their Names: One of them lives at Sheepscutt. -- They
go in Bands: They stole last Year Beaver out of our Traps; skinned the Beaver
and threw away the Flesh by the Traps.


Commiss. The Government is entirely ignorant of this: We will inform then of
it, and Justice shall be done you.


The Commissioners having read and caused to be interpreted all the Articles of
the aforesaid Treaty made in the Year 1749, said to the Indians, Do you agree
to the Articles now read, and are you ready to renew them for your selves, and
your Tribes?

Louis. We have full Power to agree for our selves, and the others that are
absent; and we do agree to the Articles now read.


Commiss. The Peace then is again renewed; and GOD grant that it may continue
as long as the Sun and Moon endure. We expect that you of the Penobscott Tribe
engage for the Norridgawocks that they keep and maintain this Peace.


Louis. We will be their Bonds-men; you need not fear any more hurt being done
you by them.


Commiss. As to the Article of Trade, we will give you an Answer in the
Afternoon.


Indians. Very well.


Post Meridiem.
Commissioners, Friends and Brethren,

IN the Morning you mentioned to us the Article of Trade; which you desire may
be agreeable to Covernour DUMMER's Treaty, inasmuch as the Beaver you bring in,
(though it sells for a great Sum yet) fetches but little of our Goods. To which
we reply, That if it be more agreeable to you, to six your Furrs at the Prices
they were at in Governor DUMMER's Time; we are ready to agree that you shall
have our Goods at that Price also: But would endeavor to convince you, that as
the Trade is now carried on, it is more to your Advantage; that is, you get
more Profit now, than you did in Governor DUMMER's Day: And here we will give
you one Instance; Then you gave us Five Pounds of Spring Beaver for Eight
Gallons of Rum; but now you give us but Four Pounds for that Quantity; and so
it is as to most of the other Articles, both of Furrs and Goods. We are
persuaded you must be mistaken as to your Furrs selling better at Albany than
here, inasmuch as the Merchants who purchase your Beaver there, send it to
Boston for a Market; which they would never do, if they did not buy it at such
a Rate as to give them some Profit.

However, You may depend on Justice being done you, both as to the Prices of
our Goods, as well as of your Furs.


Louis. You have made no Answer as to the Ground being turned over.


Commiss. Tomorrow we shall sign the Treaty, as agreed to this Morning: The
Hatchet is now buried; every Thing is forgot, as though it never had been;
provided the Norridgawocks perform their Promise with respect to their bringing
in the Captive Children; which we again tell you we absolutely depend upon.


Louis. We pray you would not let our Women have any Rum, nor our young Men too
much least they should do Mischief.


Commiss. Your Motion is quite pleasing to us: Rum destroys the Constitution*
and is the Cause of much Evil.


Louis. We have had great and long Experience of Capt. Bradbury's Fidelity: The
Lieutenant is a good Truck-Master; it would do your Hearts good to see how kind
he is to us, and how justly he treats us.


Commiss. We are glad that the Government has such faithful Officers; and that
they please you so well.

We are informed, your young Men come to Capt. Bradbury for great Quantities of
Rum; if he refuses them, they tell him that he is only a Servant to the
Government, and that they will lay out their Money as they please: Therefore,
We entreat you to give a strict Charge to them not to spend their Money in Rum:
and as you desire your Women should not have any Rum, pray take care not to
send them for it; or if you do, be not offended if Capt. Bradbury refuses them.


Louis. Some of our young Men love Rum too much: They are sometimes drunk by
the Fort in the Wintertime, and almost ready to perish with Cold. We desire
that Care may be taken that they do not perish, and that a Shelter be built for
them.


Commiss. Where would you have a Shelter built?


Louis. By the Mill. We de^^re not only a Shelter, but also a Bridge.


Commiss. Both shall be done; and we will give particular Orders to Capt.
Bradbury, that they may be speedily effected.

Louis. We desire a Causeway over the Long-Meadow which leads to the Mills.


Commiss. We are informed that is impracticable.


Quinious. Capt. Lithgow of Richmond is a good-natured and faithful Men in his
Posts: He takes a tender Care of our young Men when they are drunk, and rude to
him: We desire he may be continued.


Commiss. The Character you give him pleases us much; and we will inform the
Government of it; and will use our Endeavors, that your Desires may be
complied with. Have you any Thing further to say to us?


Louis. We like well the House and Bridge you have given Orders to Capt.
Bradbury to build for our Convenience; and thank you for it.

We have nothing further to say.


Commissioners, speaking to the Norridgawocks; The Parents of the Children in
Captivity are present; and are desirous to know when you will go to Canada for
their Children, that they may go with you.


Quinious. It is now bad Traveling every where; and will daily grow worse and
worse.


Commiss. That is no Answer to our Question: When will you go?


Quinicus. We will go in the Spring.


Commiss. We desire that you would acquaint Capt. Lithgow of it seasonably,
that he may inform the Parents of the captivated Children, that they may go
with you.


Quinious. We will give Capt. Lithgow timely Notice, that so they may go with
with us if they please.


Louis. It is almost Night: We are desirous of returning to our Camp. -- Have
you any Thing more to offer?


Commissioners, speaking to the Penobscotts; Have you bro't with you the Treaty
which was entered into, and executed by your Tribe at Falmouth Three Years ago?


Louis. No, It is at Penobscott?


Commiss. If the Norridgawocks will leave theirs with us to Night, every Thing
shall be ready to execute Tomorrow: And inasinuch as your Treaty is not here,
the same that we write on their Treaty shall be wrote on a distinct Parchment;
which, when executed, you may carry Home and put them together.

Tomorrow we purpose to finish this Treaty; and shall then give you the
Presents sent by the Government.


Commiss. We drink King GEORGE's Health; and Prosperity to your respective
Tribes.


Louis. We drink King GEORGE's Health; and rejoice in the happy Conclusions of
this Day: And as a Testimony of it, after the Indians had all drank the fame
Health, paid the Commissioners a Compliment of Thanks, according to the Custom
of Indians, and sung a Song.


Friday, October 20.
(...) I Have one Thing more to say,

When our Hatchers are out of order or want mending; our young Men throw them
away, because there is no Person here to mend them. We desire that a Smith
might be sent us here for that Purpose.


Commiss. At our Return Home, the Government shall be informed of what you say,
relating to this Matter.


The Parchments containing the Ratification of the Treaty of Peace made at
Falmouth in the Year 1749, laying on the Table before the Commissioners, Col.
Wendell, in their Name, said to the Penobscotts and Norridgawocks;

Here is the Ratification of the Treaty of Peace made at Falmouth by some of
your Tribes three Years ago. One Part of which we will now sign on the Behalf
of the Government: The other Part is for you to sign in behalt of your
respective Tribes. Which Ratification, after having been distinctly interpreted
to the Indians, was executed by the Commissioners and the Indians accordingly.
See the Ratification in the last Page.


After which, the Guns from the Fort, as also those from the Country Sloop,
were discharged, and three loud Huzzas given by the English and the Indians.

Then the Commissioners told the Indians that in the Morning the Presents
ordered them by the Government, should be delivered.

The Commissioners drank King GEORGE's Health, and Prosperity to the Peace now
confirmed; which was pledged by the Indians.

Saturday, October 21.
THE Presents ordered by the Government to be given to the Indians being placed
in the Parade of the Fort, in two separate Parcels, one for the Penobscotts,
the other for the Norridgawocks.

Commissioners, speaking to the Penobscotts; Here is the Present from the
Government for you that now appear; and we shall leave in the Hands of Capt.
Bradbury, something for those of your Tribe that are absent.

Then the Commissioners delivered to the Norridgawocks that Part of the Present
laid out for them; and at the same Time told them, they should leave with Capt.
Lithgow something for those of their Tribe that were not present.

The Commissioners (by Col. Wendell their Chairman) presented to Louis, a Belt
of Wampum; and told him to carry that Belt to Pencbscott, and lodge it with the
Treaty; that It was to bind fast together all that had been agreed upon at this
Conference.

Also a Belt of Wampum was given to Noodagaweramet, for him to carry to the
Norridgaworks, to be kept with the Treaty, in order to bind fast together all
that has been agreed upon at this Conference.

Likewise a String of Wampum was left with Noodagawaremet to draw in all the
Tribes of Indians into a general Peace with the English.

Louis. We of the Penobscotts are very thankful for the Present now made us,
and to those of our Brethren that are absent.

We heartily rejoice in the Peace now concluded upon; and hope it will last as
long as the Sun and Moon endure.


Quinious. We of the Norridgawocks, thank your Honors for the Present you have
now given us, and our Brethren that are absent.

We join with Brother Louis, in hearty desires, that the Peace now made, may
last to the End of Time.


And then the Commissioners ordered an Ox to be given them.

The Conference being now ended; the Indians took leave of the Commissioners
and departed.

Then the Commissioners went on Board in order to proceed Home.

Province of the Massachusetts Bay, THE aforegoing Conference was taken as it
passed by and between the Commissioners within-named, and the respective
Indians within-mentioned. Attes.r.. Ezekiel Price, Cler.

The Treaty referred to in the foregoing Conference, is as follows,
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in NEW ENGLAND. At Falmouth in Casco-Bay,
the sixteenth Day of October, in the twenty third Year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord GEORGE the Second, by the Grace of GOD, of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith, etc. in the Year of our Lord,
1749.
The Submission and Agreement of the Eastern Indians.
WHEREAS a War has for some Years past been made and carried on by the Indians
of the Tribes of Penobscot, Norridgawock, St. Francois, and other Indians,
inhabiting within His Majesty's Territories of New England, against the
Governments of the Massachusetts Bay and New Hampshire, contrary to several
Treaties heretofore solemnly entered into: And the said Indians being now
sensible of the Miseries and Troubles they have involved themselves in, and
being desirous to be restored to His Majesty's Grace and Favor, and to live in
Peace with all His Majesty's Subjects; and that all former Acts of Injury may
be forgotten;

WE the Underwitten, being delegated and empowered to represent and act for and
in behalf of the Indians aforesaid, have concluded to make, and do by these
Presents in their Name make, our Submission unto His most Excellent Majesty
GEORGE, the Second, by the Grace of GOD, of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
KING, Defender of the Faith, etc. in as full and ample a Manner as any of our
Predecessors have heretofore done.

And, We do by these Presents engage with Thomas Hutchinson, John Choate,
Israel Williams and James Otis, Esqrs; commissioned by the Honorable SPENCER
PHIPS, Esquire as He is Lieutenant-Governour and Commander in Chief of the Province
of the Massachusetts Bay, and with the Governors or Commanders in Chief of said
Province for the Time being,

That is to say;

IN the Name and Behalf of the Tribes and Indians aforesaid, We do promise and
engage, THAT at all Times for ever, from and after the Date of these Presents,
We and They will cease and forbeat all Acts of Hostility, Injuries and Discords
toward all the Subjects of the Crown of Great Britain, and not offer the least
Hurt, Violence or Molestation to them or any of them, in their Persons or
Estates; but will henceforward hold and maintain, a firm and constant Amity
with all the English; and will never Confederate or Combine with any other
Nation to their Prejudice.

THAT all the Captives taken in this present War shall forthwith be restored,
without any Ransom or Payment to be made for them or any of them.

THAT His Majesty's Subjects the English, shall and may peaceably and quietly
enter upon, improve and enjoy all and singular their Rights of Land, and former
Settlements, Properties and Possessions within the Eastern Parts of the said
Province of the Massachusetts Bay, together with all Islands, Islets, Shoars,
Beaches and Fishery within the same, without any Molestation or Claims by us or
any other Indians, and be in no ways interrupted or disturbed therein. Saving
to the Tribes of Indians within His Majesty's Province aforesaid, and their
natural Descendants respectively all their Lands, Liberties and Properties, not
by them conveyed or fold to or possessed by any of the English Subjects as
aforesaid; as also the Privilege of Fishery, Hunting and Fowling as formerly.

THAT all Trade and Commerce which hereafter may be allowed between the English
and the Indians, shall be under such Management and Regulation as the
Government of the Massachusetts Province shall direct.

IF any Controversy or Difference at any Time hereafter happen to arise between
any of the English and Indians, for any real or supposed Wrong or Injury done
on either Side, no private Revenge shall be taken for the same; but a proper
Application shall be made to His Majesty's Government upon the Place for Remedy
or Redress thereof in a due Course of Justice: We submitting ourselves to be
ruled and governed by His Majesty's Laws, and desiring to have the Benefit of
the same.

WE do further engage, That if any Indians, shall at any Time hereafter commit
any Act of Hostility against the English, we will join our young Men with the
English in reducing such Indians to Reason.

In the next Place, We the Underwritten do promise and engage with Theodore
Atkinson and John Downing, Esqrs; commissioned by His Excellency BENNING
WENTWORTH, Esquire Governor and Commander in chief of His Majesty's Province of
New Hampshire, and with the Governors and Commanders in chief of said Province
for the Time being: That we, and the Indians we represent and appear for, shall
and will henceforth cease and forbeat all Acts of Hostility, Ihjuries and
Discords, toward all the Subjects of His Majesty KING GEORGE, within the said
Province. And we do understand and take it, That the said Government of
New-Hampshite is also included and comprehended in all and every the Articles
aforegoing, excepting that respecting the Regulation of the Trade with us.

In Testimony whereof, we have signed these Presents, and assured our Seals.
[This Treaty is signed and sealed by Five of the Penobscott., Eight of the
Norridgawocks, and Six of the Arrasaguntatocks and Weewenocks.]

The Ratification of the aforegoing TREATY,
WE whose Names are underwritten, being fully authorized and empowered by our
respective Tribes, having had the within Articles of Peace distinctly and
deliberately read over and interpreted to us; DO by these Presents, in a
public and solemn Manner, as well for ourselves as for the rest of our Tribes,
Ratify, Affirm and Confirm, all and fingular the within Articles of Peace to
His Most Sacred Majesty King GEORGE the Second; and that the same, and each of
them, be, and shall continue and remain to be, in full Force, Efficacy, and
Power, to all Intents and Purposes whatsoever.

DONE and Concluded at the Fort at St. George' s before Jacob Wendell, Samuel
Watts, Thomas Hubbard, and Chambers Russel, Esqrs. COMMISSIONERS appointed by
the Honorable SPENCER PHIPS, Esquire Lieutenant-Governour, and Commander in Chief,
in and over His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England.
Witness Our Hands and Seals this Twentieth Day of October, in the Twenty-sixth
Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord GEORGE the Second, by the Grace of GOD,
of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith, etc. and in
the Year of our LORD 1752. NORRIDGAWOCKS.
Noodagawerramet, and a Seal. Quinious, and a Seal. Pramegon, and a Seal.
Ungewesconunt, and a Seal. Prasawa, and a Seal. Pcarmeset, and a Seal. Natanus,
and a Seal. Bethememe, and a Seal. Warungawando, and a Seal. Sarle, and a Seal.
Franewaxer, and a Seal.
PENOBSCOTTS,
Louis, and a Seal. Espegueunt, and a Seal. Sabadis or nemouwon, and a Seal.
Noodoot, and a Seal. St. Joseph, and a Seal. Chebenood, and a Seal. John Marie,
and a Seal. Sockabcsor, and a Seal. Esawanuit, and a Seal. Sanood, and a Seal.
Sabadi, and a Seal. Joseph, and a Seal. Sarr, and a Seal. Arrexis, and a Seal.
Espegoosaret, and a Seal. John ^endrys, and a Seal. Majewhomboict, and a Seal.
Joseph, and a Seal.

WITNESSES,
Henry Vassal Henry Gibbs William Lawrence David Phips Job Lewis John Wendell,
ter. Rob't Rutherford Wm Skinner James Whidden Joseph Robinson Jabez Bradbury
Tho. Fletcher Tho. Killpatrick William Lithgow Samuel Goodwin John Shibles
Benja. Burton William James Joshua Treat David Kelloch Samuel Boge Moses
Robinson John Ulmer John McIntyer John Howard Samuel Howard Lazarus Noble
Joseph Bean Waltar McFarland John Comrin Ebenezer Rockwell Wm Brattle.



