A COMPASSIONATE CALL, AND HAND REACHED FORTH IN Tender GOSPEL LOVE, To all
such Persons, as having once made Profession of the blessed TRUTH, yet by some
Misconduct or other have unhappily forfeited their UNITY with the Society of
FRIENDS, in what Capacity, Post or Station soever in the CHURCH they may have
been; or in what Circumstance of Life soever they now stand in their present
disunited Situation.

By DAVID HALL.

LONDON: Printed. PHILADELPHA: Reprinted and Sold by James Chattin, in
Church-Alley, 1753.

Errata, p. 12, l. 11, for Laud, r. Land. p. 17. l. 1. for volated, r.
violated: l. 9. for Deniel, r. Denial, p. 20. l. 3. for thcy r. they.

A COMPASSIONATE CALL in tender Gospel Love.
FRIENDS,
WHEN I consider the matchless and inexpressible Love of God, in sending his
Son to save Sinners; when I am helped to contemplate on the gracious Tenor of
the glorious Gospel, clearly and affectingly set forth in the Parables of the
lost Sheep, the prodigal Son Luke xv.
, and the good Samaritan Chapter x. 33.
: When I behold the Father running to meet his returning Son; when I observe
the Kiss with which he welcomed him home, and how he commanded the best Robe to
be brought forth and put on him, and the Ring to be put on his Hand; together
with Shoes for his Feet, weary with his long Vagaries in the far Country: When
I remember our Savior's heart-affecting Saying, The Son of Man is come to seek
and to save that which was lost; Together with the express Charge he gave to
his twelve Apostles, when he sent them forth as Sheep in the midst of Wolves,
to publish the glad Tidings of the Gospel; Go not, says he, into the Way of
the Gentiles, and into any City of the Samaritans enter ye not; but go ye
rather to the lost Sheep of the House of Israel, and as ye go, preach, saying,
The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. Heal the Sick, cleanse the Lepers, raise the
Dead, cast out Devils Matt. x. 7, 8.
. My Heart within me is deeply affected, yea, even my very Bowels are moved
toward you poor, dear Souls, who may have so far missed your Way, as that you
have set yourselves at a Distance from your Brethren; and hereby, in the sweet
Sense and Feeling of the unparalled Love and Mercy of the everlasting Gospel
of Peace and Reconciliation, I salute you, and most cordially invite you in the
Name of the great and good Shepherd of the Sheep, who has laid down his Life
for you, to look homeward, make the best of your Way to your Father's House
again, return to God by true Repentance without Delay, which is the Way to the
Fold of true Rest. The Spirit and the Bride say, come; and let him that is
athirst come: And whoever will, let him take the Water of Life freely, Rev.
xxii. 17. Please to take Notice, that the Sick, the Lepers, the Dead, the
possessed with Devils, were to be the peculiar Objects of Regard, to whom those
early Ambassadors of Christ were first to administer special and suitable
Relief, according to the Directions of Him the blessed MESSIAH, the effectual
Repairer of Breaches, and the merciful Restorer of right Paths to dwell in,
from which Mankind in the Fall has miserably strayed.

O therefore, let the Exhortation of the Prophet Hosea universally obtain and
prevail with all that are out of the Way! Come, and let us return unto the
Lord; for he has torn, and he will heal us; he has smitten, and he will bind
us up. After two Days will he revive us, in the third Day he will raise us up,
and we shall live in his Sight. Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the
Lord: His going forth is prepared as the Morning: and he shall come unto us as
the Rain; as the latter and former Rain unto the Earth. Hosea vi. 1, 2, 3.

O dear Souls! may this be your steady Resolution, and you may yet do well; the
merciful Arms of our most gracious Savior are ever open to receive penitent
Sinners. O remember and practice the Apostle's encouraging Advice, Submit
yourselves to God; resist the Devil and he will fly from you; draw nigh to God,
and he will draw nigh unto you: Cleanse your Hands, ye Sinners, and purify your
Hearts, ye Double-minded; be afflicted, and mourn, and weep; humble yourselves
in the Sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up, James iv. 7, 8, 9, 10.
There is a blessed and open Door, even Faith in Christ, Repentance and
Amendment of Life, whereby all poor Souls, who have missed their Way in any
Respect (the Sin against the Holy Ghost excepted) may re-enter into the
precious Favor of a merciful God, and be reconciled to him through Jesus
Christ. Please to read the royal Psalmist's penitential Prayer, Psalm li. also
Deuteronomy. xxx.

O dear Souls, return unto the Lord* be mindful of his repeated Calls, and
gracious Promises to the Penitent, which runs thus; Go, and proclaim these
Words toward the North, and say, Return thou backsliding Israel, says the
Lord, and I will not cause mine Anger to fall upon you, for I am merciful,
says the Lord, and I will not keep Anger forever. Only acknowledge thine
Iniquity, that thou have transgressed against the Lord thy God, etc. Turn, O
backsliding Children, says the Lord, for I am married unto you: Return ye
backsliding Children, and I will heal your Backslidings. -- We lie down in our
Shame, and our Confusion covers us; for we have sinned against the Lord our
God. -- Repent, and turn yourselves from all your Transgressions; so Iniquity
shall not be your Ruin: Cast away from you all your Transgressions, whereby ye
have transgressed, and make you a new Heart, and a new Spirit; for why will ye
die, O House of Israel! For I have no Pleasure in him that dies, says the
Lord God; wherefore turn yourselves and live ye. Jer. iii. 12, 13, 14, 22, 25.
Ezekiel. xviii. 30, 31, 32. And in Isaiah he says to the degenerate Jews, Wash
ye, make you clean, put away the Evil of your Doings from before mine Eyes,
cease to do Evil, learn to do well, seek Judgment, relieve the Oppressed, judge
the Fatherless, plead for the Widow. Come now and let us reason together, says
the Lord: Though your Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow;
though they be red like Crimson, they shall be as Wool. If ye be willing and
obedient, ye shall eat the Good of the Land: But if ye refuse and rebel, ye
shall be devoured with the Sword. For the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it,
Isaiah i. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.

Moreover, King Solomon, at the Dedication of the Temple, in his most cordial
Intercession to the Lord on Behalf of the People (whereby he gloriously
represents and typifies the sacred Mediation of our blessed Advocate Jesus
Christ) pours out his most fervent Prayers on this wise,

And if thy People Israel be put to the worse before the Enemy, because they
have sinned against thee; and shall return and confess thy Name, and pray, and
make Supplication before thee in this House: Then hear thou from the Heavens,
and forgive the Sin of thy People Israel, and bring them again unto the Land
which thou gave to them and to their Fathers.

When the Heaven is shut up, and there is no Rain, because they have sinned
against thee; yet if they pray toward this Place, and confess thy Name, and
turn from their Sin when thou do afflict them: Then hear thou from Heaven,
and forgive the Sin of thy Servants, and of thy People Israel, when thou have
taught them the good Way, wherein they should walk: And send Rain upon the
Land, which thou have given unto thy People Israel for an Inheritance.

If there be Dearth in the Land, if there be Pestilence, if there be Blasting,
or Mildew, Locusts, or Caterpillars; if their Enemies besiege them in the
Cities of their Land; whatsoever Sore, or whatsoever Sickness there be: Then
what Prayer, or what Supplication soever shall be made of any Man, or of all
thy People Israel, when every one shall know his own Sore, and his own Grief,
and shall spread forth his Hands in this House: Then hear thou from Heaven, thy
Dewlling Place, and forgive, and render unto every Man according unto all his
Ways, whose Heart thou know: (For thou only know the Hearts of the
Children of Men.) That they may fear thee, to walk in thy Ways, so long as they
live in the Land, which thou gave unto our Fathers.

If they sin against thee (for there is no Man which sins not) and thou be
angry with them, and deliver them over before their Enemies, and they carry
them away Captives unto a Land far off or near; yet if they bethink themselves
in the Land whither they are carried captive, and turn, and pray unto thee in
the Land of their Captivity, saying, We have sinned, we have done amiss, and we
have dwelt wickedly: If they return to thee with all their Hearts, and with all
their Soul, in the Land of their Captivity, whither they have carried them
captive, and pray toward their Land which thou gave to their Fathers, and
toward the City which thou have chosen, and toward the House which I have
built for thy Name: Then hear thou from the Heavens, even from thy
Dewlling Place, their Prayer and their Supplications, and maintain their Cause,
and forgive thy People which have sinned against thee, 2 Chronicles. vi. 24, 26, 27,
28, 29, 30, 31, 36, 37, 38, 39.

To which humble Address, the Majesty of Heaven, the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, returned the following most gracious Answer, as his Royal Assent
thereto, viz. If I shut up Heaven that there be no Rain, or if I command the
Locusts to devour the Land, or if I send Pestilence among my People; if my
People, which are called by my Name, shall humble themselves and pray, and seek
my Face, and turn from their wicked Ways; then will I hear from Heaven, and
will forgive their Sin, and will heal their Laud, etc. 2 Chronicles. xxxvii. 13, 14.

Finally, dear Souls, in the Reachings forth of well-wishing Love, I earnestly
entreat you all, that you don't entertain any Hardness or Resentment against
any Friend, or Friends, surmising, That such and such have borne hard upon you
in the Administration of Church Discipline; for, by so doing, you may soon
still more hurt your Conditions, block up your own Way, and still set
yourselves at a farther Distance.

Some who have given just Occasion, by their undue Liberties, for the Censure
of the Church, have nevertheless been so far from that Humility that always
attends true Repentance, that their refractory Deportment to their offended
Friends has height'ned their Offense, yea, even shut close that Door against
themselves, whereby they might in due Time probably have been readmitted into
Unity with the Society. It will, I assure you, dear Souls, be much more
pleasing, and acceptable to all the true in Heart, to receive you again, in at
the Door aforesaid, than it was to exclude you; for, as Christ says, More is
the Joy over one lost Sheep (over one Sinner that repents) than over Ninety
and Nine just Persons which need no Repentance, yea, even in the Presence of
the Angels of God, Luke xv. 7, 10. Let no poor drooping Souls therefore
despair, or despond, for by the Door aforesaid all may be reconciled,
reinstated, and reunited, though far gone astray, as to the Ends of the Earth.

But yet, if it should ever so fall out, where any Person or Persons, in any
Place, should have given their Friends just Occasion to exclude them from the
Unity of the Society, and such Person or Persons should be brought to a Sense
of, and godly Sorrow for their Misconduct, and show forth the same by an
orderly and religious Conversation, and keeping close to Meetings for a
considerable Space of Time, yet notwithstanding all this, if upon their
Application to Friends of the Meeting to which he, she or they did belong, to
be received into Unity with Friends, they may find some Particular or
Particulars strongly to oppose and weigh against them in the Obtaining their
Desire; let such, I earnestly entreat them, keep close to their Exercise, and
humble Walking before the Lord, spreading and committing their Cause unto Him,
patiently waiting for Him to open their Way, and, I verily believe, in His
Time, Way will be made for them: In the mean while, as above, I beg such may
take an especial Care that they let in no Hardness against any Friend or
Friends, nor yet against the honorable and necessary Discipline of the Church,
which we have good Ground to believe, was at first settled and established in
the Wisdom of TRUTH, and is of great Service, where it is managed and
administered in the sweet Spirit of the Gospel, which always breathes out Glory
to God in the highest, Peace on Earth, Good Will toward Men; has Charity to
the Souls of all Men, but to the Sins of none; loves the immortal Soul of every
Man, but the immoral Actions of none.

It has been, and is observed, that sometimes Persons that have given real
Occasion for the Line of Judgment to be stretched over them, have taken such a
Disgust at the just Censure, when past upon them, that they have forsaken
religious Assemblies; who by so doing do evidently demonstrate great Weakness,
and that they give way to the Spirit of the Enemy, who is always seeking
Advantage against us frail Mortals, in order to draw us farther and farther
from the Truth, and nearer and nearer to his own dark Kingdom; Wherefore, I
again most earnestly entreat you, in much Love and Goodwill, that ye who have
taken Offense of this kind, would forthwith endeavor to lay aside all
Resentment, and Dislike, that you may have unwarily let in, and wait to feel
the peaceable Spirit of meek Jesus, our blessed Redeemer, and therein attend
religious Meetings; that in this manner humbling yourselves before the Lord, he
may please, in his tender Mercy, to grant unto you Faith, Repentance, and
Remission of Sins; also, by these Means, your Friends may have a true Sense of
your Conditions, and of the Frame of your Minds. Please to consider, that
neither civil nor religious Society (morally speaking) can subsist, or be
preserved from utterly relapsing and falling away into Confusion, without
proper Rules and Government: And what signify Rules if not observed? And proper
Measures taken with those that knowingly transgress the same? And farther, may
it be calmly and seriously considered, that when those Persons, who owning our
Principles, and professing themselves to be Members of our Society, and were
looked upon as such, while they walked orderly, have wilfully volated the
wholesome Rules agreed upon and established amongst us, have by their own very
Actions, and not submitting to the Means used by the Church for their
Restoration, disunited themselves from Membership with the Body of which they
had been Members; and that the Papers of Deniel, given forth against them are
but Declarations, that such Persons having committed such Things which are
disallowed by the Church, and not truly repenting, and giving Satisfaction, are
thereupon disowned.

So, dear Friends, with the Words of the Prophet I shall draw to a Conclusion,
Seek the Lord while he is to be found; call upon him while he is near: Let the
Wicked forsake his Way, and the unrighteous Man his Thoughts: And let him
return to the Lord, and he will have Mercy upon him, and to our God, for he
will abundantly pardon, Isa. lv. 6, 7.

Having now honestly thus paid the Debt of Love I have long owed you, I bid you
farewell, and subscribe myself, in much Sincerity, your real Friend and
Well-wisher, who can do no less than still pray for you, that you may be
reconciled unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

DAVID HALL.
Skipton, 17th of 4th Mo. 1747.
POSTSCRIPT.
FURTHERMORE, may all humbly wait for Faith, to lay hold on the most gracious
Promises of our merciful God (which are Yea and Amen to all those that truly
believe:) And may all the Puffed-up, the Stout-hearted, Impenitent, and
Obstinate, timely and seriously consider the Threat'nings annexed thereunto,
and justly denounced upon the fat Ones, while the Day of Grace is extended, and
the Door of Mercy is opened unto them, viz. I will seek that which was lost,
and bring again that which was driven away, and will bind up that which was
broken, and will strengthen that which was sick: But I will destroy the Fat and
the Strong, I will feed them with Judgment, Ezekiel. xxxiv. 16.

And again, in Verse 12. As a Shepherd seeks out his Flock in the Day that he
is among his Sheep that are scattered: So will I seek out my Sheep, and will
deliver them out of all Places where thcy have been scattered in the cloudy and
dark Day.

FINIS.

