SOME PRINCIPLES AND PRECEPTS OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION. By Way of Question and
Answer. Recommended to Parents and Tutors for the Use of Children.

By SAMUEL FULLER, one of the People called Quakers, the same read and approved
of by their national Meeting held at Dublin in the 9th Month, 1733.

Train up ( i. e. catechize) a child in the way he should go, and when he is
old, he will not depart from it, Prove. xxii 6. Hold fast the form of sound
words, which thou have heard of me, 2 Timothy i. 13. But sanctify the Lord God in
your hearts and be ready always to give an answer to every man that asks you
a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and fear, 1 Pet. iii. 15.
DUBLIN, printed. PHILADELPHIA: Reprinted and sold by James Chattin. 1753.

To PARENTS and TUTORS.
SEEING next to our own souls our children are, or ought to be, the immediate
objects of our constant care and diligent concern, we ought to omit no
opportunity to instruct them betimes in the principles of Truth, in order to
bring them in their early days to a sense of the unspeakable love, and infinite
wisdom and power of their Almighty Creator.

For good and early impressions on tender minds; often prove lasting means of
preserving them in a religious life even to old age; and as they grow up, let
us watch over them for good, and rule over them in the fear of God, maintaining
our authority in love; and keep them as much as possible under our notice and
observation, lest being left to themselves, they be thereby exposed to the
danger of evil examples and corrupt principles, from which let us labor
fervently in spirit, that the merciful Lord may preserve our offspring, and
favorably grant them an inheritance in the blessed Truth, infinitely
transcending the greatest inheritances in this world, which have oftentimes
proved a snare to many bright young men of excellent endowments.

And whereas the holy scriptures contain a full account of things most surely
to be believed, and divine commands to be faithfully obeyed, and are said to
make us wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy iii.
15. It Is the duty of every Christian to be frequent and diligent in the public
reading of them in their families, and private meditating in those sacred
records.

Likewise that the aged not only propose to the young those pious examples
therein recorded for their imitation: but acquaint them that the same good
experience of the work of sanctification is now to be witnessed, as was in the
first ages of christianity, and therefore earnestly press them betimes to seek
after the same, seeing no unclean thing can enter into heaven; by the way
cautioning them to receive or believe no doctrine, how specious soever,
contrary or contradictory to those holy writings of the inspired prophets, and
apostles of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, which through Divine Providence
have been so wonderfully preserved through so many ages for our edification and
comfort.

Now though we of this generation in these protestant countries, are so signally
favored with the free and undisturbed use of this large and most excellent
volume, which contains a vast variety of remarkable providence and prophecies,
from the beginning of the world, to the end of time.

Yet seeing such incessant labor and pains are taken, both early and late, to
propagate the pernicious doctrines of infidelity, deism, profaneness and
atheism; we esteem it both imprudent and dangerous to delay the first seasoning
of the minds of our dear and tender offspring, with the fundamentals of the
christian doctrine, till they are of a capacity and ability to collect and
extract from thence the same for themselves; nor is it in the power or leisure
of every well-meaning parent, for the help of whom is this brief summary put
into the hands of both parents and children, in the use which, and perusal of
the holy scriptures, as parents find the openings of Truth, they may further
explain and declare to the rising generation, the praises of the Lord, their
own christian experiences, and his wonderful works to the children of men, that
so from generation to generation, his ever worthy name may be extolled,
magnified and adored throout all ages, world without end. Amen.

P. S. As this is intended principally for the use of children, 'twas not
thought convenient to amuse their tender minds, at first, with too many sublime
and controverted points, which, if any hereafter have a desire to understand,
they are referred to the Catechism and Apology of our worthy friend Robert
Barclay, which have been of no small service in collecting the following
queries.

Some PRINCIPLES and PRECEPTS of the Christian Religion.

Q. WHO made thee?

A. God made me, the world, and all things therein, and is Lord of heaven and
earth ( a) Genesis i. 1. Job x. 8. Isa. xiv. 12. Psa. ^. 3 Acts xvii. 24.
.

Q. Is it not the chiefest good to know God?

A. Yes: This is life eternal to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom thou have sent ( b) John xvii. 3.
.

Q. How may one attain to the knowledge of God?

A. By the revelation of the Son; for no man knows who the Son is but the
Father, and who the Father is but the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him (
c) Luke x. 22. Matt. xi. 27.
.

Q. Where is the revelation of the Father and of the Son?

A. In Man. What is to be known of God is manifest in men, for God has showed
it unto them ( d) Romansi. 19.
. God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit, for the Spirit searches all
things, yea the deep things of God ( e) 1 Cor. ii. 10.
.

Q. What is it that makes manifest?

A. Light: whatsoever makes manifest is light ( f) Ephesians. r. 13.
.

Q. Does this light shine in man?

A. Yes: And the light shines in darkness, but the darkness comprehended it
not ( g) John i. 5.
.

Q. Is this light universal, or does it enlighten every man?

A. Yea: This is the true light, which lights every man that comes into the
world ( h) John i. 9.
.

Q. Is this light divine or human?

A. Divine: For in him [Christ the divine word] was life, and the life was the
light of men ( i) John i. 4.
. Then surely the life of Christ, who is the light of men, must needs be divine.

Q. Cannot man be a light to himself?

A. No, can darkness be a light to itself? Man can be no more a light to his
mind than he is to his body: as Cod has provided the sun a glorious light for
the body; so himself is a far more exceeding light to the minds of all men, to
whom the nearer they approach the more they partake of the enlivening beams of
the sun of righteousness.

Q. How do thou prove this?

A. For ye were sometimes darkness, but now ye are light in the Lord. God is
light, and in him is no darkness at all. God who commanded light to shine out
of darkness, has shined in our hearts ( k) Ephesians. v. 8. 1 John i. 5. 2 Cor. iv.
6.
.

Q. Then should not we trust in God, and not lean to our own understanding?

A. The wise man commands to trust in the Lord with all thy heart, and lean not
to thine own understanding. For he that trusts in his own heart, is a fool. We
are are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing of our selves, but our
sufficiency is of God ( l) Prove. ili. 5. xxviii, 26. 2 Cor. iii. 5.
.

Q. Is then whole God, or whole Christ in every man?

A. No: Though the illumination or light comes from God and Christ: yet whole God
and whole Christ is no more in every man, than the whole sun or whole air is in
every chamber: so small a vessel of mortality cannot confine him whom the heaven
of heavens cannot contain, that immense ocean of immortality and light
inaccessible, which is every where present ( m) 1 Timothy vi. 16. Ps. lxviii. 33.
2 Chronicles. ii. 6.
.

Q. For what end does this divine light shine in the dark hearts of the
children of men?

A. God, who commanded light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our
hearts to give us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
his Son Jesus Christ ( n) 2 Cor. iv. 5.
. It gives a true discerning betwixt good and evil, comforting in well-doing,
and reproving for evil.

Q. How is that proved?

A. For every one that does evil, hates the light, neither comes to the
light, lest his deeds should be reproved. All things that are reproved are made
manifest by the light. But he that does truth comes to the light, that his
deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought in God ( n) John iii. 20, 11.
Ephesians. v. 13.


Q. Does Christ our Lord command us to believe in, and take heed to the light?

A. Yes: While ye have the light, believe in the light, that ye may be children
of the light. The lamb is the light thereof, and the nations of them which are
saved shall walk in the light of it ( p) John xil. 36. Rev. xxi. 23, 24.
.

Q. Were the apostles of our Lord directed to turn people to the light.

A. Yes: Delivering thee ( says our Lord to Paul) from the people, and from the
Gentiles, unto whom now I send thee, to open their eyes, and to turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive
forgiveness of sins and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith
that is in me. This then is the message which we have heard of him and declare
unto you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all ( q) Acts xxvi.
17, 18. 1 John i. 5.
.

Q. What benefits have they who walk in the light?

A. Very great and excellent ones; as, If we walk in the light, as he is in the
light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his
Son cleanses us from all fin; and our Lord says, I am the light of the world,
he that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of
life ( r) 1 John i. 7. John viii. 12.
.

Q. Did not the holy ancients call this divine principle of light by many other
names?

A. Yes, it is called the Grace of God which brings salvation. It Is called
Truth, as, The law was given by Moses; but Grace and truth came by Jesus
Christ: Also the Comforter and Spirit of Truth, as said our Lord; I will pray
the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you
forever, even the Spirit of Truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it
sees him not, neither knows him; but ye know him, for he dwells with you,
and shall be in you ( s) Titus ii. 11. John i. 17. xiv. 16, 17.
.

Q. Why has it these different names?

A. To set forth its various manifestations and operations in the soul of man.

Q. As how?

A. Because it enlivens, therefore it is called the Spirit; because it
enlightens, therefore it is called light, and because it renders the Spirit
truly gracious and acceptable in the sight of its Savior, it is called the
Grace of God and Spirit of Truth.

Q. But why are shey the same?

A. Inasmuch as the same divine properties are ascribed to one and all of them,
it is plain it is the same and not another principle, proceeding from the father
and the son, and leading all its followers to God again.

Q. Can thou prove this briefly from the holy scriptures?

A. Yes, David long ago prayed, O! send out thy light and thy truth; let them
lead me, let them bring me unto thy holy hill, and thy tabernacle. And the
spirit of God strove with the old world ( t) Psalm xlii 3. Genesis vi. 3. Neh. ix
20.
. And in the new, a manifestation of the spirit is given to every one to profit
withal. When the spirit of truth (says our Lord) is come, he will guide you
into all truth. He will reprove the world of sin etc. ( v) 1 Cor. xii. 7 John
xvi. 13. John xvi. 8.
. And the apostle to Titus, says, The grace of God that brings salvation,
has appeared to all men, teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly
lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world ( x)
Thus il. 11, 12.
.

Q. If the saving grace of God appears to all, why are not all saved?

A. It Is not because the grace is not sufficient; but because all do not obey
the blessed discoveries of this saving grace, light and truth; but some turn
from them into wantonness, like truants, from this school of grace, they become
neither disciples, nor learned in this heavenly university. Such who rebel
against, and quench the good spirit of God are the cause of their own
destruction ( y) 2 Cor. xii. 9. Jude iv. Neh. ix. 20, 26
.

Q. Then this blessed principle is a divine guide and perfect teacher, seeing
it leads into all truth, moral and divine, in faith and practice, what has it
taught the holy artients?

A. Many wonderful and divine truths, recorded in that best of all books, the
holy scriptures of the old and new testament, which holy men of God spoke as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost ( z) 2 Peter i. 21.
.

Q. For what end were the scriptures writ?

A. From a child thou have known the holy seriptures, which are able to make
thee wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus: all scripture
given by inspiration of God, is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works ( a) 2 Timothy iii. 15, 16, 17.
.

Q. What do these excellent writings teach us concerning God the Father
Almighty?

A. That there is but one God, who is an eternal Spirit, and must be worshipped
in Spirit and in truth, that he is Almighty, the Creator and Supreme Governor
of heaven and earth, and all things therein, and upholds them all by the word
of his power, is every where present, and knows the secrets of all men, of
infinite justice, wisdom, holiness and goodness ( b) John iv. 19. 24. Isa. xl.
12. 26. Ephesians. iv. 6. Heb. i. 1, 2, etc. Jer. xxiii. 24. Amos iv. 13.
.

Q. What in particular do the holy evangelists teach concerning Jesus Christ
his only Son our Lord?

A. That he the eternal word, took our nature upon him, and was like us in all
things, sin excepted, that he was conceived by the holy Ghost in the womb of
the virgin Mary, born in Bethlehem of Judea above 1700 years ago, preached many
heavenly doctrines, which he confirmed by many wonderful miracles, and suffered
a shameful death under Pontius Pilate the Roman governor, being crucified, dead
and buried in the sepulcher of Joseph of Arimathea, rose again on the third
day, and ascended into heaven, where he sits at the right hand of God.

Q. Will not God judge the world by Jesus Christ?

A. Yes, God has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness by him, even that blessed man Christ Jesus, according to their
works; when all nations shall be gathered before him, and he shall separate the
sheep from the goats, to the sheep, he will pronounce the joyful sentence, Come
ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world; but to the goats that dreadful sentence: depart from
me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels ( c)
Acts xvii. 31. Matthew. xxv. 31. and c.
.

Q. What do the scriptures teach concerning the Holy Ghost?

A. That it is the spirit of the Father, and of the Son, the Comforter and
Sanctifier of all God's people, and that which reproves the world of sin, and
that these Three, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are one God, blessed for ever (
d) 1 John v. 7. John xiv.
.

Q. To what end do the scriptures ascribe the death and sufferings of our
blessed Lord?

A. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities,
the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.
Christ also has once suffered for our sins, the just for the unjust. By the
grace of God he has tasted death for every man. Who is a propitiation not for
our sins only, but for the sins of the whole world. Whom God has sent forth to
be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for
the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God. When we were
enemies, we were reconciled to God, by the death of his son ( e) Isa. liii. 5.
1 Pet. iii. 18. Heb. ii. 9. 1 John ii. 1, 2, Romans iii. 23. Romans v. 10.
.

Q. How may we reap the benefit of Christ's death and sufferings?

A. By faith and obedience, for we are saved by grace through faith, and that not
of ourselves, it is the gift of God. He became the author of eternal salvation
unto all them that obey him ( f) Ephesians. ii. 8. Heb. v. 9
.

Q. Which is the true faith?

A. That which works by love and purifies the heart, gives victory over sin,
which separates from God, by which faith we have access to God, and without
which it is impossible to please God ( g) Gal. v. 6. Romans v. 2. Heb. xi. 6
.

Q. Must obedience always accompany true faith?

A. Yes, for faith without works is dead. And they which have believed in God
must be careful to maintain good works ( h) James ii. 26. Tims iii. 8.
.

Q. What will be the end of those that obey not the gospel?

A. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels in
flaming fire, taking vengeance of them that know not God, and that obey not the
gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ ( i) 2 These. i. 7, 8.
.

Q. Then are good works and holiness absolutely necessary?

A. Yes, Because God has commanded them, and without holiness no man shall see
the Lord. The unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God, who will render
to every man according to his works ( k) Ephesians ii. 10. Heb. xii. 14. 1 Cor. vi.
9. Romans ii. 6. 2 Cor. v. 10.
.

Q. What is pure and true religion?

A. Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father, is to visit the
fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from
the world ( l) James i. 27.
.

Q. What are the spots of the world?

A. For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes,
and the pride of life, are not of the Father, but are of the world ( m) 1 John
ii. 16.
.

Q. Who are of the true church?

A. Such as are accepted of God for his Son's sake, i. e. all that fear God and
work righteousness, such as are sanctified in Christ Jesus, by the spirit of
our God ( n) Acts x. 35. 1 Cor. i. 2. 6. 11.
.

Q. What ought a christian to seek after in the first place?

A. Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these
things shall be added, for godliness is profitable to all things, having
promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come ( o) Matt. vi.
33. 1 Timothy iv. 8.
.

Q. What does the Lord require of man?

A. He has showed thee O man, what is good, and what the Lord does require of
thee; to do justly, love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God ( p) Micah vi.
8. Matt. xi. 30.
.

Q. Is it possible to keep the commandments of God?

A. Yes doubtless, for our merciful Lord and lawgiver, would never command
impossibilities, at the same time he declares his yoke is easy, and his burden
light, and his beloved disciple assures us, This is the love of God, that we
keep his commandments, and his commandments are not grievous ( q) Matt. xi. 30.
1 John v. 3.
.

Q. What gracious promises are to them that keep his commands?

A. Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have a right to
the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city. If thou will enter into life keep the commandments ( r) Rev. xxii, 14. Matthew. xix. 17.
.

Q. What is the first and great commandment?

A. Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul, and with all thy mind; this is the first and great commandment, and the
second is like unto it, thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. On these two
commandments, hang all the law and the prophets ( s) Matt. xxii. 37, 38, 39, 40.
.

Q. Why so, is love the fulfiling of the law?

A. Yes, Thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not kill, thou shall not
steal, thou shall not bear false witness, thou shall not covet, and if there be
any other commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self, love works no ill to his neighbor:
therefore love is the fulfilling of the law ( t) Romans xiii. 9, 10.
.

Q. Is not love the peculiar mark and badge of a christian?

A. Yes, By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love
one to another. This is my commandment that ye love one another, as I have
loved you. A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another, as I
have loved you, that ye also love one another ( u) John xiii. 35. xv. 12. xiii.
34.
.

Q. What other general rule has our Lord left, for our conduct toward all men?

A. All things whatsoever, ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to
them, for this is the law and the prophets ( x) Matthew. vii. 12.
.

Q. Why so?

A. Because it is not reasonable, that there should be one law for me, and
another for others; therefore I ought to think, speak of, and act toward
others, as I would desire them to think, speak of, and act toward me.

Q. What enables us to keep the commandments of God?

A. The Grace and good Spirit of God, which leads into all truth; my Grace is
sufficient for thee. I commend you to God, and to the Word of his Grace, which
is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which
are sanctified ( y) 2 Cor. xii. 9. Acts xx. 32,
.

Q. How is an increase of this spirit obtained?

A. By prayer and supplication: ask and it shall be given: seek and ye shall
find. If ye then being evil know how to give good gifts unto your children, how
much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him
( z) Luke xi. 9, 13.
.

Q. What is prayer?

A. It Is the speech or earnest breathing of the soul to the Almighty, whether
expressed in words or not ( a) Isai. xxvi. 9. Romans viii. 26. 1 Samuel 13.
.

Q. Did not our Lord teach his disciples to pray?

A. He gave them before the plentiful effusion of the Holy Ghost, a most
excellent pattern, quite contrary to those of the pharisees, which were long
and abounded with vain repetitions.

After this manner therefore pray ye.

OUR Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name, Thy Kingdom come, thy
Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven, give us this day our daily Bread, and
forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors, and lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil, for thine is the Kingdom, and the Power
and the Glory, for ever. Amen ( b) Matt. vi. 9, to 14.
.

Q. How are Prayers to be performed?

A. They are to be fervent, short and sound, to proceed from the Spirit, and
with a good understanding, in deep humility, in the Name of Our Lord Jesus
Christ, with purity, charity, fervency and constancy ( c) Dan. ix. 3, 19. 1 Timothy ii. 8. Mark xi. 25. James v. 16. John xiv. 13, 14, 16, 23, 24.
.

Q. Are we commanded to pray?

A. Yea. And he spoke a parable unto them to this end, that men ought always to
pray, and not to faint. Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation ( d)
Luke xviii. 1. Mat. xvi. 41.
.

Q. Ought men to run hastily or rash to God in prayer?

A. No. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter
any thing before God: for God is in heaven, and thou upon earth, therefore let
thy words be few ( e) Eccl v. 2.
.

Q. Do we know what to pray for, and what helps us to pray acceptably?

A. No; no more than the apostle Paul, who tells us, notwithstanding our Lord's
excellent prayer aforesaid, that, We know not what we should pray for as we
ought, but the Spirit itself makes intercession for us, with groanings which
cannot be uttered ( f) Romans viii. 26.


Q. Whose prayers does God hear and answer?

A. The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord. But the prayer
of the upright is his delight. God hears not sinners; but if any man be a
worshipper of God, and does his will, him he hears ( g) Prove. xv. 8. John ix.
31.


Q. Seeing sin separates the soul from God, what is the best preservative
against sin?

A. The fear of God, and hiding his Word in my heart, How can I do this
wickedness, and sin against God. Thy Word have I hid in my heart, that I might
not sin against thee ( h) Genesis xxxix. 9. Psalm. cxix. 9, 11, 105.
.

Q. Is Pride an abominable sin?

A. Yes: A high look and a proud heart, and the plowing of the wicked is fin.
Every one that is proud in heart is an abomination to the Lord ( i) Prove. xxi.
4. Prove. xvi. 5.
.

Q. What follows pride?

A. Destruction: Pride goes before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a
fall. The losty looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall
be bowed down ( k) Prove. xvi. 18. Isa. ii. 11.
.

Q. Is there an eminent instance of it?

A. Yes, in Nebuchadnezzar, When his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened
in pride, he was deposed from his kingly throne, and they took his glory from
him, and he was driven from the sons of men, and his heart was made like the
beasts, and his dwelling was with the wild asses, they fed him with grass like
oxen ( l) Dan. v. 20, 21.
.

Q. Do not the men of God pronounce woes and judgments upon the proud?

A. Yes. Woe to the crown of pride and to the drunkards of Ephraim: They shall
be trodden down. God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble.
Behold the day comes that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, and all
that do wickedly shall be stubble, and the day that comes, shall burn them up,
faith the Lord of Hosts, that it shall neither leave them root nor branch ( m)
Isa. xxviii. 1, 3. 1 Pet. v. 5. Mal. iv. 1.
.

Q. Was and is the Lord offended at the proud and wanton dress and behavior of
his people?

A. Yes: a memorable instance is in the 3d of Isa. Moreover the Lord faith,
because the daughters of Zion are haughty and walk with stretched forth necks,
and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with
their feet. Therefore the Lord will smite with a scab the crown of the head of
the daughters of Zion, and the Lord will discover their secret parts in that
day, the Lord will take away the bravery of their tinkling ornaments about
their feet, and their cauls, and their round tires like the moon, the chains,
and the bracelets, and the musslers, the bonnets, and the ornaments of the
Legs, the head-bands, and the tablets, and the earrings, the rings and
nose-jewels, the changeable suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the wimples,
and the crisping-pins, the glasses, and the sine linen, and the hoods, and the
vails.

Q. What further Judgments did that prophet of God denounce against those
haughty sons and daughters of Zion?

A. And it shall come to pass, that instead of sweet smell, there shall be a
stink, and instead of a girdle, a rent, and instead of well-set hair, baldness,
and instead of a stomacher, a girding of sackcloth, and burning instead of
beauty: thy men shall fall by the sword, and thy mighty in the war: and her
gates shall lament and mourn, and she being desolate shall sit upon the ground
( n) Isa. iii. 24, etc.
.

Q. What commands in the New Testament can be produced against the vain, proud
and costly fashions of the times?

A. Many, of which take one from the apostle Paul, In like manner also that
women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamesacedness and sobriety, not
with broidered hair, or gold or pearls, or costly array, but (which becomes
women professing Godliness) with good works ( o) 1 Timothy ii. 10.
.

Q. Is not the aposile Peter of like mind?

A. Yes, While they behold your chaste conversation with fear, whose adorning
let it not be that outward adorning of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of
gold, or of putting on of apparel, but let it be the hidden man of the heart,
in that which is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit,
which is in the sight of God of great price. As obedient children, not
fashioning yourselves according to the former lusts in your ignorance. And be
not conformed to this world, but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind
( p) 1 Pet iii. 2 to 5. i. 14. Romans xii. 2.
.

Q. Gives the apostle any reason for these commands?

A. Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as
silver and gold, from your vain conversation, received by tradition from your
fathers. But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish
and without spot ( q) 1 Pet. i. 18, 19.
.

Q. Will God's children tell lies?

A. No: Surely, they are my people, children that will not lie, so He was their
Savior ( r) Isa. lxiii. 8.
.

Q. Why so?

A. Wherefore putting away lying, speak every man truth with his neighbor, for
we are members one of another. Lie not one to another, seeing that ye have put
off the old man with his deeds ( s) Ephesians. iv. 25, 29. Col. iii. 9.
.

Q. Who is the father of a lie?

A. The Devil. When he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own, for he is a
liar, and the father of it ( t) John vii. 44.
.

Q. What is the end of liars?

A. A false witness shall not be unpunished and he that speaks lie(...) shall
perish. What shall be given unto thee? (...) what shall be done unto thee, thou
false tongue sharp arrows of the mi(...)ty with coals of juni(...) All liars
shall have their part in the lake, which burns with fire and brimstone ( v)
Prove. xix. 9. Psalm. cxx. 3, 4. Rev. 8.
.

Q. Will good men harbor liars?

A. No: he that works deceit shall not dwell within my house. He that tells
lies shall not (...)rry in my sight ( x) Psalm. ci. 7.
.

Q. Why so.

A. Because the Lord hates a lying tongue, and a false witness. Remove far from
me vanity and lies ( y) Prove. viii. 17, 19. Prove. xxx. 8.
.

Q. Is it lawful to give flattering titles to men or to uncover the head, in
way of honor and respect to persons?

A. No, because it is an outward sign of that honor we pay to the Almighty in
our prayers. Every man praying or prophesying, having his head covered,
dishonors his head. Elihu faith, let me not I pray you, accept any man's
person, neither let me give flattering titles unto man: for I know not to give
flattering titles, in so doing, my Maker would soon take me away. With God
there is no respect of persons, and James faith, if you have respect of persons
you commit sin, and are convinced of the law as transgressors. How can you
believe, said our Lord, that receive honor one of another, and seek not the
honor which comes from God only ( z) 1 Cor. xi. 4. Job xxxii. 21, 22. James
ii. 9. John v. 44.
.

Q. But is it not the duty of young people to honor their parents and elders?

A. Yes, the fifth command is, honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days
may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God gives thee, thou shall rise
up before the hoary head, and honor the face of the old man. And let the
elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor. But the eye that
mocketh at his father and despises to obey his mother, the ravens of the
valley shall pick it out, and the young eagles shall eat it ( a) Lev. xix. 32.
1 Timothy v. 17. Prove. 17.
.

Q. Wherein does true honor consist?

A. In obedience from the heart, not in false flattery from the Lips.

Q. Must we not give true honor to whom it (...) due?

A. Yes: Render there(...)e to all their dues, (...)ibute to whom tribute is
due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor. Honor
all men love the brotherhood fear God, honor the king ( b) Romans xiii. 7. 1
Pet. ii. 17.
.

Q. Why do certain christians differ from others, in their speech using only
thee and thou to one, and you to more than one?

A. Because it is evident that thee and thou to a single person is sound,
proper, and grammatical not only in the style of the Holy Scripture throughout,
without one exception, but also the common dialect of the first ages of
christianity, and is still preserved in many countries to this day.

Q. How came in this corruption of speech of saying you to one, and calling the
days of the week and months of the year by such heathenish names as are not to
be found in holy writ?

A. This corruption of speech had an evil original, to wit, to flatter princes
and great men, nay, some have so far degenerated from the scripture form of
sound words, that they have learned the ways and style of the old pagan Saxons,
in naming the months, and days of the week afther them, whereas we are forbid
to learn the way of the heathen, for the customs of the people are vain. Hold
fast the form of sound words, which thou have heard of me ( c) Jer. x. z. 2 Timothy i. 13.
.

Q. Is it lawful to swear, now in this Gospel Dispensation?

A. No: our blessed Lord says, Swear not at all, neither by heaven, for it is
God's throne, nor by the earth, for it is his footstool. And the apostle James
adds, But above all things my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven, neither
by earth, neither by any other oath, lest ye fall into condemnation ( d) Matt.
v. 34, 35. James v. 12.
.

Q. Where does anger rest?

A. In the bosom of fools: Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry, for anger
rests in the bosom of fools. But he that is slow to wrath is of great
understanding ( e) Eccl. vii. 9.
.

Q. Then ought not christians to put it away?

A. Yes: Let all bitterness and wrath, and anger and clamor and evil speaking,
be put away from you, with all malice. For where envying and strise is, there
is consusion and every evil work ( f) Ephesians. iv. 31. James iii. 16.
.

Q. What is the true and saving baptism of a christian?

A. The dipping, washing or cleansing of the soul from the corruptions and
pollutions of sin. Even baptism does now save us, says Peter, not the putting
away of the filth of the flesh; but the answer of a good conscience toward
God, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ ( g) 1 Pet. iii. 21.
.

Q. How many baptisms are to remain in the christian church?

A. One: As, one Lord, one faith, and one baptism ( h) Ephesians. iv. 5.
.

Q. Who is the baptizer?

A. John is decreased, and Christ must increase; Christ then is the baptizer
either mediately or immediately. I (John) indeed baptize you with water, he
(Christ) shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire. And as I ( Peter)
began to speak, the Holy Ghost fell on them, as on us at the beginning ( i)
Matt. iii. 11. Acts xi. 15.
.

Q. Into what does he baptize?

A. Into the Name (or Divine nature) of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. For by
one Spirit, we are all baptized into one Body. That by these, you might be
partakers of the Divine Nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the
world, through lust ( k) Matt. xxviii. 19. 1 Cor. xii. 13. 2 Pet. i. 4.
.

Q. What are the effects of this spiritual baptism?

A. A death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness, they that are
baptized into Christ have put on Christ, do obtain the answer of a good
conscience, become new creatures and pure in heart, whereby they are blessed with
a sight of God, and his holy kingdom into which nothing that is unclean can
enter ( l) Gal. iii. 27. Matt. v. 8. Rev. xxi. 27.
.

Q. Is this new creature essential to salvation?

A. Yes: Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God ( m) John
iii. 3.
.

Q. Of what seed comes this birth?

A. Being born again not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word
of God, which lives and abides forever ( n) 1 Pet. i. 23
.

Q. What is the Lord's supper?

A. The soul's partaking of the bread which comes down from heaven, and the
wine of the kingdom, which Christ our Lord gives to those souls who hunger and
thirst after righteousness ( o) Matt v. 6. Isa. lv. 1. and lxv. 13. John vi.
48, to 52. Mat. xxvi. 29.
.

Q. What preparations must the soul undergo before this heavenly supper?

A. It must be washed and clothed with the wedding garment, the righteousness
of Christ, which he puts on all his disciples who hear his voice and open their
hearts unto him.

Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice and open the
door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him and he with me ( p) Rev.
iii. 20. and xvi. 15. and xix. 8. Matt. xxii. 12.
.

Q. Is it necessary to partake of this blessed supper?

A. Yes: Except ye eat of the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, ye
have no life in you ( q) John vi. 53.
.

Q. What are the blessed effects of this heavenly supper?

A. The strengthening and refreshing of our souls by the body and blood of
Christ spiritually received. If any man eat of this bread, he shall live for
ever, and the bread that I give, is my flesh. Whosoever eats my flesh and
drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day (
r) John vi. 51, 54.
.

Q. After death where are the souls of believers?

A. It is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the judgment. When we
are absent from the body, we are present with the Lord. We have a house not
made with hands, eternal in the heavens ( s) Heb. ix. 27. 2 Cor. v. 1.
.

Q. Is the death of the body a loss or terror to a good christian?

A. No: For to live is Christ, and to die is gain, the righteous has hope in
his death. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints ( t)
Phil. i. 21. Prove. xiv. 32. Psalm. cxvi. 15.
.

Q. What shall they receive who are sanctified through faith?

A. A crown of glory incorruptible, which fades not away: an inheritance
amongst the saints in light with fullness of joy, in the presence of God, angels
and spirits of just men made perfect ( v) (...) Tim. iv. 7, 8. Rev. iii. 21
(...) 7.
.

Q. What shall be the portion of the wicked?

A. An eternal separation from God, and the spirits of the just, to be punished
with hell torments. Where the worm dies not, neither is the fire quenched. Ye
shall die in your sins: whether I go, ye cannot come. Who shall be punished
with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory
of his Power ( x) Mar. ix. 43, 44. John viii. 21. 2 Taes. i. 9. Rev. xxi. 8.
Matt. xxv. 41.
.

Q. What believe thou concerning the day of judgment?

A. At the last day, all men, both just and unjust, shall appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, to receive according to the things done in their
bodies ( y) Ecc. xii. 14. 2 Cor. vi. 10. Rev. xx. 11, 12. Romans xiv. 10.
.

Q. What believe thou concerning the life everlasting?

A. The wicked shall be cast into hellfire, and the godly shall be received
into that glorious kingdom prepared for them from the foundation of the world,
the one shall be eternally miserable, and the other blessed in the perfect
enjoyment of God for ever and ever ( z) Rev. xx. 14, 12. Mat. xxv. 45.
.

The Ten COMMANDMENTS. Exodus xx.
AND God spoke all these Words, saying, I am the Lord thy God, which have
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

I. Thou shall have no other Gods before me.

II. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, or any likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in
the water under the earth.

Thou shall not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them: for I the Lord thy
God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children
unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me: and showing mercy
unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my commandments.

III. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord
will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

IV. Remember the sabbath day to keep it holy: six days shall thou labor, and
do all thy work: but the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it
thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy
manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is
within thy gates: for in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the Sea and
all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed the
sabbath day, and hallowed it.

V. Honor thy father, and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

VI. Thou shall not kill.

VII. Thou shall not commit adultery.

VIII. Thou shall not steal.

IX. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

X. Thou shall not covet thy neighbor's house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbor's wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor
his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbor's.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
Of the Divine Light, wherein are the following Queries.
Who made thee, Page 1 Is it not the chiesest Good to know God, Page 2 How may
one attain such Knowledge, -- Where is the Revelation of the Father and Son,
Page 3 What is it that makes manifest, Page 4 Does this Light shine in all, --
Is this Light divine or human, Page 5 Cannot Man be a Light to himself, Page 6
Should we not trust in God, and not in ourselves, Page 7 (...) whole God or
whole Christ in every Man, Page 9 For what End does this Light shine, Page 10
Did our Lord command to believe in the Light, Page 12 Did the Apostles direct
People to the Light, Page 13 What Benefits have they who walk in the Light,
Page 14 Is it not called by many other Names, Page 15 Why has it these
different Names, Page 17 How can they be proved to be one and the same Divine
Prin. Page 19 If the saving Grace has appeared to all, why are not all saved,
Page 21 What has this Divine Principle taught the holy Ancients, Page 23 Of
the Holy Scriptures and their Doctrine concerning our Lord and Savior. For
what End were the Holy Scriptures writ, Page 24 What do they teach concerning
God the Father Almighty, Page 25 What concerning Jesus Christ his only Son,
Page 27 Will not God judge the World by Jesus Christ, Page 28 What do the
Scriptures teach concerning the Holy Ghost, Page 30 To what End were the Death
and Sufferings of our Savior, Page 31 How may we reap the Benefits of his
Death and Sufferings, Page 33
Of Faith and Good-Works.
Which is true Faith, Page 34 Must obedience accompany Faith, Page 35 What will
be the End of the Disobedient, Page 36 Is Holiness and good Works necessary,
Page 36
Of the True Church.
What is pure and true Religion, Page 37 What are the Spots of the World, Page
38 Who are of the true Church, -- What ought to be a Christian's first Care,
Page 39
Of the Possibility of keeping God's Commandments.
What does the Lord require of Man, Page 40 Is it possible to keep the
Commandments of God, Page 41 What gracious Promises are to such, Page 42 Which
is the first and great Command, Page 43 Is Love the Fulfilling of the
Commandments, Page 44 Is Love the peculiar Mark of a Christian, Page 45 What is
the general Rule of our Conduct to all, Page 46 The Reason of that general
Rule, Page 47 What enables to keep the Commands, -- How is the increase of the
Spirit obtained, Page 49
Of Prayer.
What is Prayer, Page 49 Our Lord's most excellent Pattern, Page 51 How are
Prayers to be performed, Page 52 Are we commanded to pray, Page 53 Ought Men to
run hastily to Prayer, -- Do we know what to pray for, and what helps us, Page
54 Whose Prayers does God hear and Answer, Page 55 What is the best
Preservative against Sin, Page 56
Of Pride.
Is Pride an abominable Sin, Page 57 What follows Pride, Page 58 God's
Judgments on Pride, Page 59 Is the Lord offended at proud and wanton Dresses,
Page 61 What commands are against them, Page 65
Of Lying.
Will God's Children tell Lies, Page 69 Who is the Father of a Lie, Page 70
What is the Portion of Liars, Page 71 Will good Men harbor Liars, Page 72
Of Flattery, and true and false Honor.
Is it lawful to flatter and pull off the Hat out of Respect to Man, Page 73 Is
it not the Duty of the Young to honor their Parents and Elders, Page 75
Wherein consists true Honor, Page 77 Must not Honor be given to whom Honor
is due, Page 76 Why do some Christians use thee and thou to one, Page 78 How
came in you to a single Person, etc. Page 79
Of Oaths and Anger.
Is it lawful to swear, Page 81 Where does Anger rest, Page 82 Ought not
Christians to put it away, Page 83
Of Baptism and the Lord's Supper.
What is the true and saving Baptism, Page 84 How many Baptisms are to remain,
Page 85 Who is the Baptizer, Page 85 Into what does Christ baptize, Page 86
What are the Effects of this Baptism, Page 87 Is the new Creature essential to
Salvation, Page 89 Of what Seed comes this Birth, -- What is the Lord's
Supper, Page 90 What Preparation is necessary, -- Is it necessary to partake of
it, Page 92 What are its blessed Effects, --
Of Death and Judgment, Heaven and Hell.
After Death where are the Souls Page (...) (...) Page (...) (...) Page 95 What
shall be the Portion of the Wicked, Page 96 What believe thou concerning the
Day of Judgment, Page 97 What believe thou concerning the Life everlasting,
Page 98
BOOKS printed and sold at the Printing-Office, in Church-Alley.

THE Youth's Instructor in the English Tongue: Or a Spelling-Book, containing
more Words, and a greater Vatiety of very useful Collections than any other
Book of this Kind and Bigness. First designed for the Author's own Scholars,
and now published for general Benefit. By (...). The 2d Edition. To which (...)

Where may be had, Books, Testaments, Ink-Powder, Writing Paper, Ink,
Lamp-Black, etc. Likewise a Number of different Sorts of Friends Books, and
others, (...) imported.


