A LETTER to a Gentleman, CONTAINING A Plea for the Rights of Conscience, in
Things of a Religious Nature.

By a Dissenting Protestant.

Who claims for himself a Right of private Judgment, and to attend on such a
Ministry, and such Teaching, as appears to himself, to be agreeable to the Holy
Scriptures, and apprehends that this Right belongs to Christians of every
Denomination.

Good Conscience Men allow (they say)
But must be understood,
To say as they themselves do say,
Or else it cannot be Good.
BOSTON: N. E. Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND, opposite the Prison in
Queen Street. 1753.

A LETTER etc.
June 1752. Honored Sir,
AS your Relation to the Legislature of this Province (as an honorable Member
of the Great and General Court or Assembly) gives you an Opportunity; so I am
persuaded, you are very sensible that you are under proportionable Obligations
to study the Welfare of the People of this Province, not only by promoting and
forwarding of such Acts and Laws, as are or may be found necessary for the
Encouragement of Virtue and true Religion, and suppressing of Vice and
Immorality, but also by discountenancing and suppressing such Oppressions as
(under Color of Law) are at any Time exercised, to Infringe the just Rights of
Conscience, in Matters of Religion. And whereas an Opinion seems to have
generally prevailed among the People of this Province, That in every Town and
Precinct (except the Town of Boston) All the Inhabitants, are by the Laws of
this Province, obliged to pay to the Settlement and Support, of such a Minister
as the major Part agree upon, unless a minor Part (dissenting) do profess
themselves to be of the Episcopal, Anabaptist, or Quakers Persuasion; I
persuade my self, you will easily observe, that such an Opinion (fathered on
our Province Laws) carries in it very undue Reflections upon our honorable
Legislature, and represents our Laws, either unjust and partial, or
inconsistent one with another; whereas if the Word All in our Laws, might be
allowed to intend, no more than is commonly intended thereby, in sacred Writ,
there would be no Color for such a Pretense. And must it not be very absurd to
imagine, That our honorable Legislature intended any other by the Word All,
than All who did, or ought to attend that Ministry, exclusive of such as
conscienciously dissent therefrom? Or that when they in very express Terms,
enacted, that each respective gathered Church in any Town or Precinct within
this Province, that at any Time shall be in want of a Minister, such Church
shall have Power, according to the Directions given in the Word of GOD, to
chose their own Minister? That, that honorable Court intended thereby no
greater Liberty to conscientious Dissenters, than the Egyptian Monarch proposed
to grant to the Children of Israel, when he said, Go ye, serve the Lord, only
let your Flocks and your Herds be stayed. Or that they were influenced merely
from politic Motives, and not from a religious Regard to the Rights of
Conscience, and the Rules of commutative Justice, in freeing the Estates of the
Members of Episcopal and Anabaptist Churches, and the People called Quakers,
from supporting a Ministry in which their Consciences do not acquiecs;e?

Surely, such a wise, religious and Protestant Legislature (being also
themselves Dissenters) could neither through Ignorance of the Nature of Religion,
or the Nature and Office of Conscience, be brought to suppose, that true
Religion is to be propagated by external Force or Compulsion; or that
Conscience (even though it be erroneous) is in such a Way, or by such Means, to
be regulated or rectified. Nor could they be so inadvertent as to determine,
That all the Inhabitants of a Town or Precinct, where some are of the
Calvinistical and others of the Arminian or Latitudinarian Persuasion, might
consistent with a good Conscience (that is, without sinfully counteracting the
Dictates of their own Consciences) continue together as one Congregation: Or,
that it can be possible, that any one Minister should so dispense the Word of
God, in such a mixed Assembly, as to Answer (in the Opinion of All) the great
End of the Gospel Dispensation.

I am therefore persuaded, that it never was the Intent of the Law, that all
without Distinction, should be taxed toward the Support of a Ministry in which
the Consciences of some cannot acquiesce; yet I earnestly wish, that our Laws
were rendered more plain and easy to be understood in their genuine Sense and
Meaning.

I covet for my self and mine, the Enjoyment of a learned, as well as pious and
orthodox Ministry; and count it a singular Favor of Heaven, which calls for
great Admiration, as well as Thankfulness, that in our degenerate Age, there
are any, and so many, faithful Gospel Ministers continued in our Land: And I
wish they may ever be duly encouraged and supported; but I am not able to
discover any Scripture-Foundation for any Act or Acts of the Civil Authority to
compel any who conscienciously and on the Account of a different understanding
of the Meaning of the Scriptures, do dissent even from the Ministry of such as
by the major Part are esteemed to be the most eminent, to hear, or pay for,
such Preaching, as they apprehend to be disagreable to the great End of the
Gospel Ministry.

Can such Compulsion be reconciled to the Rules of Equity and Justice? Can it
be founded on, yea, is it not directly contrary to, the Example of Christ and
his Apostles, and to the Practice of the primitive Churches, who neither used
themselves, nor prescribed to succeeding Ages, any compulsive Methods to bring
Men to embrace the Gospel? And are not persuasive and convictive Arguments for
the enlightening of the Mind, the only Scripture Method to promote sincere
Religion?

It is indeed wonderful to me, That notwithstanding the plain Evidence we have
of the Spread of the Gospel over the whole World, without the Assistance of the
Civil Magistrate, that it should now become so general an Opinion. That
Churches must needs be brought into Confusion and Disorder, be crumbled to
Pieces, their Foundation razed etc. unless all the Inhabitants in each Town and
Precinct (though consisting of a mixed Number of People of very different
Persuasions in Points of Doctrine) be compelled to join in supporting such as
Ministry, as is agreeable to the Mind of a major Part.

But since there is a such a Thing as a spiritual, as well as corporeal
Sensation, can there be any Reason assigned, why the Choice of Food for our
Souls, any more than for our Bodies, should be referred to the Judgment (not to
say Humors) of other Men? Yet I am persuaded, that if it were but suspected,
that any Laws of the Province had put it in the Power of a major Part, to
provide a costly Entertainment, for the whole Town, once a Week, and to compel
every one to pay his Part of the Cost, it would raise a grievous Hubbub, and
People would be apt to think it an Infringement upon their natural Rights, as
Men, that other Men should choose their Diet: and that it was unreasonable to
compel them to pay for the Provision, if they found it so unsavory that they
could not eat it; and much more if they were assured that something of a
poisonous Quality, or that had a Tendency to breed Diseases in the Body, was
mixed with it. Now, in as much as the Care of every Man's own Soul is
peculiarly belonging to himself, and is of infinitely greater Importance than
the Concerns of the Body; and we are pathetically cautioned to take Heed both
how, and what we hear. To beware of false Teachers and corrupt Doctrines, and
are expressly required to cease from hearing the Instruction that causes to err
from the Words of Knowledge, it cannot be less reasonable and necessary (but
vastly more so) that every Man be left entirely free, to act according to the
Dictates of his own Understanding, in the Choice of his spiritual Food, and to
put himself under such a Ministry as he apprehends to be agreeable to the Mind
of Christ, and consequently most likely to subserve his own Edification.

And all Attempts to disenable a minor Party in any Town or Precinct for, or
with Respect to the Support of such an agreeable Ministry for themselves (by
wresting their Estates from them toward the Support of a Ministry, in which
their Consciences cannot acquiesce) are far from having a Tendency to promote
Gospel Order, or the Growth of Christianity, and discovers more of an
Antichristian persecuting Spirit and Temper, than a Desire to advance the
Interest of Peace Truth and Holiness.

And whereas some object, That if such a Freedom from Taxations for the Support
of the standing Ministry, be allowed to a minor Party, that this would open a
Door for Men, merely out of Prejudice, yet under a Pretense of Conscience, to
set up separate Assemblies: I would only inquire, Whether that Door be not
already open for such Separations as those, by the Acts formerly made to free
the Members of Episcopal and Anabaptist Churches, and the People called
Quakers; and whether those Acts do any more than only put them into actual
Possession of those Rights of humane Nature, which justly belonged to them
before those Acts were passed, and which cannot be justly denied to any of His
Majesty's Protestant Subjects of this Province.

Another Objection which I have sometimes heard is this, viz. That to oblige
all to pay to the standing Ministry, is agreeable to the Wisdom of the Nation;
Dissenters, notwithstanding the Act of Toleration, are obliged to pay Tithes,
by which the standing Ministry is supported.

I reply to this Objection, That our Predecessors in this Land disclaimed any
Pretense to a National or Provincial Constitution of Churches; and in as much
as our Churches here are Congregational, and with Respect to their
Eccelesiastical Constitution, and Mode of Worship, are very different from that
of the National Church, I can see no Reason why the whole Regimen, Services and
Ceremonies of the National Church, may not be urged for our Imitation, with as
great Force and Strength of Argument, as those National Acts, which oblige
Dissenters there, to bear a Part in the Charge of the Incumbents. And verily,
if I thought (as it seems Multitudes do) that our Laws have vested a Majority
in each Town and Precinct, with a Power of imposing ministerial Rates or Taxes,
at their Pleasure, upon such as dissent from them in their Choice of a
Minister, I could see no Grounds to hope that the Persecution would stop here,
but think that a Door is set open to proceed from this, to the highest Degree
of Persecution, and should be ready to expect that in a short Time Dissenters
will be favored with at least as much Freedom and Liberty of Conscience, under
the Government of LORD DIOCESAN, as under the popular Authority of LORD
MAJORITY.

And now (Honored Sir,) Since our Laws are construed by many to intend such a
Power, I refer to your superior Judgment, whether Reason and Religion, as well
as the just Vindication of the Laws of this Province (relating to the
Settlement and Support of Ministers) from such Aspersions, does not require,
that something be done, in a very explicit Manner, to rescue them from such
Misconstructions, and prevent their being abused to Injustice, Oppression and
spiritual Tyranny? sad Instances whereof, have already been, in several Places
in our Land. So rests,

Honored Sir, Your humble Servant,

POSTSCRIPT.
IN ancient Ages, when the English Realm
And popish Zelots, placed at the Helm
To stablish that Religion: Tithes were fixed
By Cannon Laws, with civil intermixed.
Which formed the English Constitution so,
That After A^^^ cannot the Tithes forgo:
And hence Dissenters, (...) obliged there,
To pay Incumbent whom they never hear.
Which some condemn, as a Prelatick Game,
Who yet, by MAJOR VOTE would play the same;
And LORD Majority would claim the Purse
For his Incumbents: than which nothing worse.
LORDLY Diocesan, himself, can claim:
So these two LORDS do differ, but in Name,
One pleading English Laws, for his Support;
The other feigning Acts of our own Court;
Alleging Law, in a perverted Sense
To render CHARTER Grant, a mere Pretense;
And as if Law and Charter both intend
To crush one Church, Another to befriend:
They Would make them mean, the same that Pharaoh said,
Go serve the Lord, but let your Flocks be stayed.
But if one Church be taxed, to serve another,
No Matter whether, done by this or the other.

