A CONFERENCE

Held at St. George's in the County of York, on the Twentieth Day of September,
Anno Regni Regis GEORGII Secundi, Magnae Britanniae Franciae et Hiberniae,
Vicesimo Septimo. Annoque Domini, 1753.

BETWEEN Sir William Pepperrell, Baronet, Jacob Wendell, Thomas Hubbard, and
John Winslow, Esqrs; and Mr. James Bowdoin.

COMMISSIONERS Appointed by His EXCELLENCY WILLIAM SHIRLEY, Esquire

Captain General and Governor in Chief, in and over His Majesty's Province of
the Massachusetts Bay in New England, to Treat with the Eastern Indians of the
one Part, and the Indians of the Penobscott Tribe of the other Part.

BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND: Printed by Samuel Kneeland, Printer to the Honorable
House of REPRESENTATIVES. 1753.

A CONFERENCE Held at St. George's, in the County of York, on the Twentieth Day
of September, Anno Regni Regis GEORGII Secundi, Magnae Britanniae, Franciae et
Hiberniae, Vicesimo Septimo. Annoque Domini, 1753.
Thursday, September 20th 1753.
THE Commissioners, with sundry other Gentlemen attending them, arrived in the
River St. George's this Day in the Forenoon, on Board the Sloop Massachusetts,
Captain Thomas Saunders Master.

Post Meridiem.
THE Commissioners being seated at a large Table near the Fort, attended by a
Number of Gentlemen and others, Spectators: And some of the Chiefs and other of
the Penobscott Tribe of Indians, being seated over against the Commissioners.
After the usual Salutations had passed.

Captain Joseph Bean was sworn to the faithful Discharge of the Trust of an
Interpreter at this present Conference, And,

Mr. Ezekiel Price was also sworn to the faithful Discharge of the Trust of a
Clerk to the Commissioners.

After which, Sir William Pepperrell, in the Name of the Commissioners, spoke
to the Indians as follows, viz.

Friends and Brethren,

GOvernor SHIRLEY, who is lately returned to his Government, would have met You
in Person at this Conserence; but his Stay Abroad has been so long, that it
would have been a Disservice to Him, as well as the Province, to have been here
himself; but he has done us the Honor of a Commission, and thereby has given
us full Power to appear and act in Behalf of the Government.

Through the Favor of divine Providence we have been preserved in our Voyage
hither, and are very glad of this Opportunity of seeing so great a Number of
you at this Interview, and desire to know what Tribes you represent, and with
what Power you do appear.

The last Treaty with you (we trust) has been kept sacred and inviolate on our
Part, and in some Respects we have exceeded our Engagements, particularly as to
your Trade with us, wherein you have had those Advantages which none before you
have enjoyed; and that your Hunting might be better secured to you, the
Government (on the Return of the Commissioners the last Year) immediately came
into an Act, forbidding any Encroachments on your Game, under very severe
Penalties, and doubt not but you have before now reaped the happy Effects of
it; and besides this, have removed Hall from Montinicus, whom you then
complained of as interrupting you in your Fishing and Fowling.

We rejoice in the happy Effects of the Peace and Friendship subsisting between
us, and hope that any Attemps to violate the same will have no Impression upon
you; but that we may open our Minds freely to each other, shall now proceed to
a Conference with you, in which we have Nothing new to offer, but to renew and
confirm our former Treaty (which is the same as that formerly agreed on between
you and Governor DUMMER) that so the Chain of Peace and Friendship subsisting
between us may become brighter and brighter; and to receive any Proposals from
you for this End, if you have them to (...).

Commissioners. Will you now give an Answer to what we have said to you?


Abenquit, Speaker. We will Answer you presently.


The Commissioners withdrew into the Fort, and in half an Hour after returned.
When,

Abenquit, In the Name of the Rest of the Penobscott Tribe, spoke as follows.

Brethren,

WE are well pleased to see you here, and that GOD has preserved you in your
Voyage, and brought you in safety to this Place.

We like what Governor DUMMER did, and also what was done by Governor SHIRLEY;
and we will stand to what our Sachems then did. I came from Penobscot, and was
empowered to do what was Right. No Man shall prevent the happy Union subsisting
between us; the several Treaties we have now with us we will stand by, and are
ready to Ratify. And,

Then delivered the Commissioners the Treaty of Peace made and renewed in the
Year 1749. And the Ratification thereof made the last Year: Which the
Commissioners ordered to be returned them. Which was done accordingly.

Commissi. How came you by these Treaties; and from whom did you receive them?


Indians. Our Tribe ordered us to bring them to be ratified and confirmed.

We give our Service to Governor SHIRLEY, and to the Great Council of the
Province.

It is very good in them to send you here, what is done we like well; on our
Part we will do every Thing that Peace and Friendship may continue among us.


Commissi. How do you appear, and what Tribes do you represent?


Indians. We are empowered by the Penobscott Tribe; and appear for them only.


Commissi. There are not so many of your Tribe here present as there were two
Years ago: Where are the Rest?


Indians. The Rest are gone to Canada upon their own private Business; but we
are fully empowered to act for them; and it is the same as if they were all
here.


Commissi. Is your whole Tribe satisfied with every Article of the former
Treaty; and are you empowered to agree for them?


Indians. If we were not, we should not have been here; nor have brought the
Treaties with us.

We would say something relating to our Minister: Has not our Priest wrote a
Letter to Governor SHIRLEY? We desire a Copy of it.


Commissi. Has any Body said or done any Thing to you to create Jealousies in
your Mind against the English? If they have, we desire you would freely mention
it.


Indians. He that is a Man will hide Nothing; so we will speak our Minds freely
to you.


Abenquit. I hope all that has been said pleases you; We like it and so will
all the Rest of our Tribe.


Commissi. Why are not the Norridgawocks here as usual?


Indians. Did not the Norridgawocks write to Governor SHIRLEY last Summer, not
to come down yet; but to deter his coming some Time later?


Commissi. Don't the Norridgawocks expect the Commissioners down this Year?


Indians. Yes: They do expect them.


Commissi. Have you seen any of the Norridgawocks lately?


Indians. We have not; but our Priest has.


Commissi. Has your Priest been to Norridgawock?


Indians. Yes: He has; and asked us what we waited for here; he told us you
would not come down, and tried what he could to prevent our waiting any longer
for you, or treating with you.


Commissi. We intend to go to Richmond, to Treat with the Norridgawocks; but
you being the principal Tribe, we came here first.


Then the Commissioners told the Indians, that they had some Tokens of
Friendship from the Government; which according to their Promise made them the
last Year, would be renewed to them Yearly, so long as they kept the PEACE
sacred and inviolate.

Then the Commissioners drank King GEORGE's Health; which was pledged by the
Indians.

And then the Conference was adjourned 'till Tomorrow Morning Nine o'Clock.

Friday, September 21.
The Commissioners and Indians being met.

Commissi. WE are glad to see you this Morning in good Health; and are ready to
hear what you have further to offer.


Indians. We have something to say to you with Respect to the Trade and Beaver.

Beaver is now very good, and will be so two Weeks hence; two Sabbath Days
hence Beaver will be as good as when caught under the ice. The young Men want
to know when Beaver is good.


Commissi. Beaver always speaks for it self: You may be sure to have the full
Worth of your Beaver according to its Goodness, at whatever Time of the Year it
is caught.


Indians. What will Beaver be about two Week's hence?


Commissi. Whatever it will fetch at Boston, We will give you:

Brethren,

The Government are determined to treat you with the strictest Justice, and the
greatest Kindness: And if you will attend to the following Particulars, you
must be convinced of it.

You give no more for what you buy at the Truck House, than the same Articles
be bought for with ready Money at Boston: Strouds last Year were L. 70. a
Piece, now are but L. 60. In Governor DUMMER'S Time, Rum was sold you at ^s a
Gallon; and Beaver was then sold for 8 s. a Pound* Rum is now but 10 s. a
Gallon, but Beaver is 40 s a Pound; so that you gain more than a Quarter Part:
You have more now for four Shillings, than formerly you had for five Shillings;
and this is the Case with almost every Thing else, excepting Wampum. Fall
Beaver in Governor DUMMER'S Time was but 6 s. a Pound, now it is 25 s. Stage
Beaver then was 4 s. a Pound, now it is 15 s. Then you had not a Bushel of Corn
for an Otter, now you have a Bushel and an half.


Indians. We want to have Wampum as it was formerly; it is now dearer.


Commissi. That Article is dearer we acknowledge; but we are so far from making
any Advantage by it, that we send for it to New York, and purchase it with
Dollars: Are at all this Trouble, and yet sell it to you exactly as it cost us,
without the least Advance.


Indians. What was the Price of Spring Beaver formerly? And in what Proportion
to other Things.


Commissi. Spring Beaver was then 8 s. a Pound, and Corn 6 s. a Bushel; Spring
Beaver is now 40 s. a Pound, and Corn but 28 s. a Bushel. In Governor DUMMER'S
Time we gave you but eight Gallons of Rum for five Pound of Spring Beaver; now
for the same Quantity of Beaver we give you upwards of twelve Gallons: You have
Rum at the Truck House twelve Pence a Quart cheaper than you can buy it with
your Money at Boston by Retail.

Brethren,

The Government will supply you with what you want; and have brought every
Thing to the very lowest Price, as cheap by Retail as you could purchase by
Wholesale; and give you for your Beaver and Skins as they are sold at Boston.
The firm Resolution of the Government is to make no Advantage of this Trade
with you; they are determined to supply you cheaper than the French can or will
do: And in every Instance of our Treatment of you, you must be convinced that
we seek your Interest more than the French do, notwithstanding the base Methods
they take to persuade you to the contrary.
Indians. There is sometimes a Scarcity in the Truck-House: We would have it
always supplied.


Commissi. Sometimes there is a Scarcity in Boston; but when that is not the
Case, you may depend upon a full Supply.


Indians. Capt. Bradbury, and Lieut. Fletcher, are very good Men, We like them
well, and desire they may be encouraged.


Commissi. We are glad to hear it; the Government will always take Care to get
the best Men.


Mechias Indians. We live a great Ways from the Truck-House: We would have a
Sloop with Goods sent down to Passamaquody.


Commissi. As some Indians have done Mischief that Way, it will not be safe to
send one there, unless it is covered with a Fort: If you in Behalf of that
Tribe are empowered to make this Proposal, We will upon our Return lay it before
the Government.


Mechias Indians. We will let that Matter drop.


Commissi. The Government has sent us here, to hear any Grievances you may
labor under, that the same may be redressed; and to do every Thing we can for
your best Good and Interest.


Commissi. Have you any Thing at present further to offer?


Indians. We have done.


Commissioners. Friends and Brethren,

WHEN we met you in Conference Yesterday, we were in Expectation of seeing the
Norridgawocks at this Place also; but as they do not appear, we would remind
you of one Article stipulated and confirmed the last Year, which has not been
complied withal; We mean the Return of our Captives.

Although we do not immediately charge YOU of this Tribe with this Neglect, yet
you cannot but remember the Commissioners were assured the last Year, that the
Parents who had their Children then in Captivity might rest satisfied, that
they should be returned them in the Spring following, at furthest; And as this
Promise was made by the Norridgawocks when you were present, you engaged that
you would endeavor that the several Articles of Peace then renewed (of which
this was one) should be complied with by the Norridgawocks, as well as your
selves; yet we must inform you, that after all Attempts for their Redemption,
Nothing is done; but the Children still remain in the Hands of the French,
although their Parents have since been at the Expense and Trouble of making a
tedious Journey to Canada for that Purpose.

You find that the English have faithfully fulfilled all their Promises with
the Indians, and therefore justly expect the like Return from you; and in
Consequence hereof, that you use your best Endeavors that all our Captives may
be forthwith restored, that so there may be no further Reason for Complaint on
this Account.

You informed us Yesterday that your Minister had been attempting to prejudice
you against the English, insinuating that there would soon be a War between the
two Nations; and thereby would (if possible) have prevented your meeting the
Commissioners at this Time; but that you was jealous of him, and believed him
not to be a good Man, because he had wrote to Governor SHIRLEY (as you were
informed) on this Head. To which we reply, That it is absolutely false and
without the least Foundation; for we do assure you, that there is at this Time
a good Harmony subsisting between the King of Great Britain, and the French
King.

The Government of the Massachusetts are fully sensible of the Artifices used
by the French to raise Jealousies and create Misunderstandings between the
English and the Indians, and of the Methods the French use to defeat the
Measures the English take for maintaining Peace and good Friendship: But as a
Proof of our Sincerity, Governor SHIRLEY, from a tender Regard to your Welfare,
and to prevent your being any further imposed upon by them, has sent you a
Letter by us, which we have Orders to have first interpreted, and then
delivered you; as also another Letter which he received from the French Jesuit
( Pierre Gounon) your present Minister; by which you will see, he is not in the
least to be regarded, much less depended upon; and after such clear and evident
Demonstrations of Friendship on our Side to you, in the foregoing Instances,
and our fulfilling our former Engagements of making you an annual Present as
long as you should continue in Amity with us, which we have hitherto done, and
our being present at this Time to destribute the same for this Year: We say,
after so many Instances of Sincerity and Friendship from us, it will discover a
base and disingenuous Spirit in you, not to resent all the Artifices and Tricks
of the French (in whom there is no Trust) and maintain a constant Friendship
with the English, who have always been your steady Friends; in which we
apprehend your real Interest does consist.


Then the Letter from Governor SHIRLEY to the Penobscott Indians, and also the
Letter from the French Jesuit to Governor SHIRLEY were distinctly read,
interpreted and delivered to them.

Commissi. By this Letter it is evident, that your Jesuit makes no more of you
than if you were a Parcel of Misqueters.


Indians. You must mind him no more than Trash.


Commissi. Our Ministers preach Peace, and advise us to live in Peace with you,
and are Men of Truth. Shall the Government send such a One to you?


Commissi. Have you any Thing further to say?


The Indians making no Answer.

Commissi. Are you now ready to confirm the Peace as renewed at Falmouth in
1749. and ratified and confirmed the last Year.


Indians. We are ready to ratify and confirm the same.


Indians. There are some Indians at Mechias and Passamaquody, and what we say
binds them equally with us.


Then the Commissioners informed the Indians, that they would meet them again
in the Afternoon, in order to sign the Ratification of the Articles of PEACE,
and deliver the Presents ordered them by the Government.

The Commissioners then drank King GEORGE's Health, as also Governor SHIRLEY'S;
and a lasting PEACE. Which were pledged by the Indians.

Post Meridiem.
The Commissioners and Indians being again met.

Commissi. HAVE you considered of what we said in the Forenoon, relating to the
Captives? We are sorry the Promise made by the Norridgawocks was not enforced
by you: Such is your Weight and Authority with them, that had you used your
best Endeavors for their Redemption, it would have been effected.


Indians. We wish to do that which is Good and Right, and we will try whatever
we can that they may be returned, but we cannot do any more than we can do:
This we further Promise, that if they are not returned some Time this Fall, we
will go after them, and endeavor to Redeem them: All the Captives WE took have
been returned.


Commissi. According to your Promise we now expect you use your utmost
Endeavors for the Redemption of these unhappy Captives.


Indians. We rejoice; all our young Men rejoice, and the Rest of our Tribe,
when they hear of what we have now done, will also rejoice at it: -- We are
ready to confirm all the Treaties we delivered you to brighten the Chain, and
wish that the Peace may continue forever.

Our Thoughts are much upon our Minister, and his deceiving us; but as we don't
mind him, we hope you will not.


Then upwards of thirty of the Chiefs and others of the Penobscott Tribes,
Signed Sealed and Delivered to the Commissioners the Ratification of the
Articles of Peace made and concluded on at Falmouth in Casco-Bay, in the Year
1749. After which,

The Commissioners acquainted the Indians they were ready to deliver them the
Presents ordered to be given them by the Government. Which was done
accordingly. For which the Indians expressed great Thankfulness, and desired
Liberty that their young Men might express their good Liking to what had been
now done, by having a Dance in Presence of the Commissioners. After their Dance
was finished,

The Commissioners drank King GEORGE's Health, wishing that the Peace now
ratified might continue as long as the Sun and Moon shall endure.

Then the Commissioners went on Board the Sloop in order to proceed to
Richmond, to meet the Norridgawock Tribe of Indians.

Attest. Ezekiel Price, Clerk Commissi.

Tuesday, September 25th 1753.
AT two o'Clock, P.M. The Commissioners arrived at Richmond (on
Kennebeck-River) and in about an Hour after their Arrival, Quaruet, a
Norridgawock Indian, came down the River in a Canoe, and waited on the
Commissioners on Board the Sloop, and informed them, he believed the Indians of
the Norridgawock Tribe were at Norridgawock, and did not expect the Arrival of
the Commissioners so soon; but if they would allow him four Days he would go to
Norridgawock and fetch them in. The Commissioners dispatched him accordingly,
with Orders to bring them in as soon as possible.

Thursday, September 27. Eight o'Clock, P.M.
QUARUET the Indian Messenger returned, and informed the Commissioners that in
his Way to Norridgawock, he met five Canoes with the Chiefs of the Norridgawock
Tribe; and that they were on their Way to Richmond, and would be in Tomorrow
Morning.

Friday, September 28.
THE Chiefs of the Norridgawock Tribe being arrived, came into the Fort, and
after the usual Salutations had passed, The Commissioners asked the Indians, if
they should be ready in an Hour's Time to enter on a Conference. They told the
Commissioners they would be ready. Then the Commissioners ordered Seats to be
prepared without the Fort for that Purpose.

The Commissioners and Indians being met.

The Indians were informed that an Oath would be administered to Mr. Walter
Mc'Farland, truly to interpret what should pass between the Commissioners and
the Indians at this Conference; and also an Oath to Mr. Ezekiel Price,
faithfully to discharge the Trust of Clerk to the Commissioners. Which Oaths
were accordingly administered.

Then Sir William Pepperre^^, in the Name of the Commissioners, spoke as
follows.

Friends and Brethren,

THE Reason of Governor SHIRLEY's not meeting You in Person this Year, is, his
having been so long Absent from his Government; and the Affairs of it at
present not allowing Him to be here; We that are present, appear by his Order
and Commission, and come fully authorized and empowered to treat with you.

We are fully sensible of the Attempts the French by Means of their
Missionaries among you, have been making from Time to Time, in order to create
Jealousies and Misunderstandings between the English and the Indians; and that
Pierre Gounon, the Father of the Penobscotts, has lately been here, and would,
if possible, have prevented your Attendance at this Conference, (...) he would
have done the Penobscotts at St. George's; notwithstanding which, they readily
met the Commissioners there, were pleased with that Interview; and we hope that
you will take the Advice the Penobscotts gave the Commissioners the last Week,
not to mind him; that their Thoughts run much on him, and his deceiving them;
and hoped that we would not regard him any more than they did, which was no
more than Trash: And we are well satisfied that before we Part, we shall
produce such Evidence of his Treachery, as shall convince you that he is a
false Man; and that it will not be for your Credit to regard him, or what he
says: But on the contrary, it will be your Interest to regard the English more
than the French.

If we look into the last Treaty, we shall find, that three Articles were more
especially the Subject of it, namely Trade, our Captives, and our Lands.

As for Trade, we need only observe to you, That the Government have given
Orders to the several Truck-Masters, to supply you with Goods at a cheaper Rate
than they were obliged to do; and as the English can furnish you with them at a
lower Price than the French; We do assure you that it is the Determination of
the Government, that they will.

As for our Friends in Captivity; We must remind you of your solemn Engagements
to the Commissioners, that they should be returned by the last Spring at
furthest; but they still remain in the Hands of the French: This Conduct of
yours, is base and unjust, and as such, deserves the highest Resentments; and
therefore, after all your Promises, We now demand of you the Reason why they
are not returned? And unless you give us some satisfactory Account hereof, we
must plainly tell you, that you have not fulfilled your Engagements; and that
if they are not forthwith restored, we must look upon it as a Violation of the
Ratification of Peace the last Year.

The Government according to their Promise, have considered your Complaints of
the last Year, relating to some English Settlements making on Kennebeck-River,
and were in hopes that what they had wrote you on this Head, would have been to
Satisfaction; but if it is not, we trust that in the Course of this Conference,
we shall offer you such Evidence of our Claim to those Lands, as shall convince
you that we have not done you any Injustice in what we have done; nor so much
as designed it.

When we have gone through these Articles, and renewed the Peace ratified the
last Year, and given you the Presents designed you by the Government; we know
of Nothing that will prevent our speedy return to our several Homes; unless you
have something new to offer, which, if you have, we shall give it its due
Weight and Consideration; but as we have been so long from Home, we must insist
on the greatest Dispatch.

Commissi. Are you ready to Answer what we have now said to you?


Indians. We will answer you presently.


The Commissioners then acquainted the Indians they had a Letter from Governor
SHIRLEY to them, which he had ordered should be interpreted and then delivered
them. Which was done accordingly. And also a Copy of the Letter sent Governor
SHIRLEY by Pierre Gounon, the French Jesuit at Penobscott; which was also
interpreted, and then delivered them. And at the same Time the Jesuits original
Letter to Governor SHIRLEY was shown to the Indians.

Then the Conference was adjourned to Three o'Clock, P.M.

Afternoon, Three o'Clock.
The Commissioners and Indians being met.

Salutations as usual.

Quenois, Speaker. WE have thought of the Words spoken to us in the Morning,
and look upon what you then said as if the Governor was present and spoke
himself.

We thank you for reading and interpreting to us the Jesuit's Letter. We know
the Hearts of all the Indians hereabouts, and of some now present, who are
lately come from Canada, and all our Hearts are good.

We know the Penobscotts love Peace, and we as well as they love Peace, and
will hold fast to it.

All the Gentlemen of the Norridgawock Tribe are here present.

Toxus is an old Man, and we believe will never be here.

Do not mind any Thing the Jesuit says, we know it is Peace all over the World.
We want no Jesuits to meddle with Treaties. All we want of them is to pray with
us, and take Care of our Souls. If any of our Jesuits should write any Thing
concerning us, or Peace or War, if you will inform us of it, we will let you
know whether it is true or false.

What this Penobscott Jesuit wrote is a Lie. We do not want War. We desire to
live in Peace. All that he has said is false.

We have done with that Article.


Commissi. Has not the Jesuit been endeavoring to make Mischief between you
and us, and to prevent your coming to this Conference?


Quenois, Friends and Brethren,

I would speak further to you:

Here is a River belonging to us? You have lately built a new Garrison here: we
with you would be content to go no further up the River than that Fort.

Governor DUMMER's Talk was very good, we like it well.

Governor DUDLEY and Governor DUMMER, both told us that no Settlement should be
made above Richmond Fort: The Fashion is, if the Governor don't like any Thing,
to tell the Indians of it; and for the Indians to do the same to him.

We live wholly by this Land, and live but poorly; the Penobscotts hunt on one
Side of us, and the Canada Indians on the other Side; therefore do not turn us
off this Land. We are willing you should enjoy all the Lands from the New-Fort,
and so downwards.

We are done as to the Lands. We will now speak as to the Captives.

We heard that Mr. Noble, Father of the Children, was gone to Canada to fetch
them.

Here are Passaguerent, and Neudegawaremes, two Indians that went to Canada for
a Friar, and to carry the Belt of Wampum from the Governor to the
Arrasagonticooks.

That Tribe as well we rejoice to hear there is Peace all over the World, and
that the Land is now smooth.

One of the Captives is at the Village of Werenock, the others are at
Arrasagonticook.


Commissi. Why did you not bring in the Captives, agreeable to your solemn
Engagements?


Q^nois. The Reason I did not go was because I broke my Arm; the Journey is
very great, and I could not Paddle. It was not worth while for twenty to go.


Commissi. You promised to notify Capt. Lithgow? Why did not you do it?


Quenois. It was early in the Spring.


Commissi. You are mistaken, it was the middle of Summer. Besides, Mr. Noble
saw Mitchel's Son at Montreal.


Quenois. Why did he not bring him Home when he saw him?


Commissi. The French Governor said, you had sold them to the French* and he
would not let the Fathers of the Children bring them away for Money; nor let
them go to Arrasagonticook, to fetch those that were there.

One of the Articles of the last Treaty, and upon which we greatly relied, was,
the solemn Promises you then made us touching the Return of the Captives.


Indians. You say there is Peace between the two Crowns. How could the French
Governor detain them?


Commissi. Perhaps he expected that you who put them into their Hands, should
take them out.


Indians. If Sebastine was here, we should be glad; he is a Man of Influence,
he belongs to the Arrasagonticook Tribe; we believe he would fetch them in.


Commissi. speaking to Quenois. You promised last Year to go for them.


Quenois. I told you before, I broke my Arm last April.


Commissi. Is it not well?


Quenois. No: It is not well yet.


Commissi. If you was not able to go yourself; why did not some other of your
Tribe go?


Indians. Mr. Noble went, and we thought he would have brought them.


Commissi. Is this complying with your Promise? When the English Promise, they
religiously comply with it; they promised the last Year that your Complaints
should be redressed respecting the English hunting on your Ground, and taking
your Game; immediately upon the Great Courts sitting after their Return, a Law
was made to prevent it.


Indians. It is true, we made a Promise to fetch in the Captives; there is but
little Water now, we though it they were returned. We are now going upon our
Hunting, but in the Spring we will go to Canada, and talk with the French
Governor, and do what we can to bring them in.


Commissi. Did not you sell them to the French?


Indian. We did not sell them; it was the Arrasagonticook's that sold them.


Then the Commissioners read to them the Conference of last Year respecting the
Captives, and Quenois's Answer, wherein he owned that he was at Swan-Island
when Noble's Children were taken.

Quenois. I deny that I said I was at Swan-Island; I said that I was no nearer
than Richmond. If I said that I was there, I did not speak true, I was drunk.


Passaguerent said that he and Quenois were on the other Side the River, at
Richmond, when the Children were taken, and not on the Island.

Commissi. Agreeable to our Promise the last Year, we acquainted the Government
of the three Things you then complained of. The first was with Respect to the
Price of Goods, which you have cheaper now than in Governor DUMMER's Time. The
second was relating to one Hall and his Family, living at Montinicus, who you
complained of as spoiling your Hunting; and he has since been removed by Order
of the Government. The other was, that several Englishmen from the Westward had
frequently hunted on your Lands to the spoiling of your Game: The Government
has since made a Law to forbid any Persons hunting there under very severe
Penalties. So that you see the three Things the Penobscotts and you complained
of are redressed; and as the English have been as good as their Word to you, we
expect the like from you; and that by next Spring, according to your present
Promise, you go after the Captives, and bring them in; otherwise we shall look
upon it that you intend to break the Peace now subsisting between us.


Passaguerent. In the Spring we will go, I myself will go: We will get them in,
if possible? If I can get but one, I will bring him in.


Commissi. You promise fair, and we depend upon your faithful Performance of it.

We will now say something to you concerning the Lands.

By the Treaties made in Governor SHUTE'S and in Governor DUMMER'S Time, the
English were allowed to have all the Lands that they had purchased or possessed.

Then that Part of Governor SHUTE'S Treaty which related to the Lands, was read
and interpreted to the Indians; as also, that in Governor DUMMER'S.


Commissi. You made the same Complaints respecting your Lands at the Treaty
with Governor DUMMER, as you do now.

Are you not sensible that these Lands were sold to the English by your
Ancestors, and fairly purchased by them?


Indians. We have never heard from our old Men, that our Forefathers ever sold
any of these Lands.


Commissi. The Tribes in Governor DUMMER'S Treaty saw the old Deeds, and owned
them.


Indians. We shall be glad to see the Deeds, and to know the Names of the
Indians that sold these Lands.


Then the Commissioners showed the Indians the Deeds from the ancient
Sagamores, and mentioned their Names, many of whom they said they remembered.

Commissi. Have you never heard of, nor seen the Ruins of old Houses built at
Cus^^n^^ and Teco^n^^?


Indians. We have never heard of any more than one at Cu^u^^ock.


Commissi. By ancient trading Houses up this River, by ancient Settlements, and
by the ancient Deeds now produced and shown you, you must be convinced that
these Lands belong to us: And we now hope, that in the Settlement of them, we
shall live like Brethren and Friends.


Indians. We will inform the Relations and Friends to the Owners of these Lands
of what has been said.


Commissi. We should be glad you would enquire into these Facts, particularly
as to ancient Settlements and Trading-Houses up this River, and see whether
Things are not as we relate them.


Two Indians from Arrasagonticook coming in, the Commissioners asked them, if
they were empowered to appear in Behalf of their Tribe; but they told the
Commissioners they were not.

Commissi. Have you any Thing further to say?


Indians. We have nothing further to say.


Commissi. Are you ready and willing to ratify and confirm the Treaty of Peace
made at Falmouth in Casco-Bay, in the Year 1749. and which was ratified and
confirmed the last Year at St. George's.


Indians. Yes: We are ready to do it.


Then the Commissioners acquainted the Indians that they would meet them in the
Morning, in Order to sign the aforesaid Articles of Peace, and at the same Time
would deliver them the Presents ordered by the Government to be given them; and
as a Signal of the Time of Meeting, would fire a great Gun.

Then King GEORGE's Health was drank by the Commissioners; and the same Health
was pledged by the Indians.

Saturday, September 29.
The Commissioners and Indians being met.

Commissi. WE are glad to see you this Morning, and hope you are all well.


Commissi. We told you Yesterday that all the Land on both Sides
Kennebeck-River as high up as Wasserunsick belonged to the English, they having
bought it of the Indians; your Forefathers many Years ago sold them to the
English, as appears by the Deeds we then produced to you, which Deeds you then
appeared fully satisfied with, as you knew by Tradition most of the Names of
the Indians who signed them.

In Consequence of these Purchases, the English took Possession of said Lands,
and made Settlements upon them, and carried on a great Trade, particularly at
Cushnoc and Teconnoc, where are now to be seen the Ruins of the English Houses.

Being convinced of this, and the English Right to said Land, you ceded them to
the English by several Treaties formerly made, particularly by Governor
SHUTE'S, and Governor DUMMER'S; and by other Treaties before their Time, which
you have since confirmed.

The English therefore have an undoubted Right to all the aforesaid Lands, and
consequently have a Right to settle them whenever they think proper: And it is
expected by this Government, after giving you this Satisfaction, that you do
not disturb the English in any Settlements they are now about or may hereafter
undertake on the Lands aforesaid: And we on our Part promise you, that you
shall not be interrupted in your Hunting and Fishing; to which Purpose a Law of
this Government has been made since the last Treaty, at your Desire, forbidding
under a very severe Penalty all the English from Hunting within said Lands, or
giving you the least Interruption in that or any other Regard.

As to the Owners of these Lands, who you say are at Arrasagonticook, and
elsewhere: We wish they were now here, that we might have an Opportunity of
confering with them, and giving them the same Satisfaction we have now given
you: But we desire you to inform them with what we have now told you, and we
make not the least Doubt, but that they will be entirely satisfied; especially
as we have no Design to abridge them of the Liberty of Hunting and Fishing,
which is the only Use, either they or you, make of the said Lands, and of the
Waters.


Quenois. We will say what we know about the Lands*

These Governors, and General NICHOLSON, called the Indians into Piscataqua,
and after a Treaty was made, they talked about the Lands.

General NICHOLSON said, they would bury all that was bad, and make the Land
smooth.

The Indians desired the English might not settle further Eastward than
Brunswick, which was then settled.

We were then bid, that if any Englishmen should settle further Eastward than
they had done, to inform the Governor of it, and they should pay dear for it.

The Penobscotts, and Arrasagonticooks, who were the Owners of the Land that
Way, were at that Treaty, and talked about it.

The Governor then sai^, it would not hurt us if the English settled that Way:
We mean at Brunswick, North-Yarmouth, Casco-Bay and Saco; and the Indians
consented that it might be so.

Governor SHUTE had a Treaty at Arrowsick, and the Indians then told the
English, they might go three Miles up this River.

Governor SHUTE said, it was not far enough. We were willing, and agreed that
the English should go as far up the River as Richmond, and the Governor was
glad of it, and liked it well.

What we have now said is what we have heard of former Times.

Indians, Friends and Neighbors,

We should be glad to be heard upon something further.


Commissi. We are ready to hear any Thing you have to say.


Indians. We have seen Governor PHIPS'S Letter, he ^^ys what is Right.

We have also seen Governor SHIRLEY'S Letter; we take it kindly of him; he
writes in Love, and is for Peace; and we like it well.

There have been a great many Governors at Boston; we believe them to be all
very Good

We have never heard that any of the Governors desired the English might settle
higher up than Richmond; although we have heard it from other People.

It would hurt us for you to settle higher up the River than the New-Fort: We
are not against your going so far up, but are unwilling you should go any
further up.

We have wrote twice upon this Matter to Boston, and now you hear it from our
Mouths.

We hope you will think of what we have said as to the Land; we are willing you
should settle all the Lands below the New-Fort, and hope you will go on in
settling them with Courage and a good Spirit: You have Land enough below the
New-Fort, without going any further up.

We have told you our Hearts; we hope you will not settle any further up the
River; the Indians hunt on both Sides of us; we have but a little Space; we
desire to live as Brothers.


Commissi. We desire to live in Peace with you, and like Brethren: We and you
have always built on Governor DUMMER'S Treaty, and looked upon it as a good
one; by that Treaty, we are allowed to settle, where former Settlements have
been made by the English, and to have all the Lands they have heretofore
purchased of the Indians; and they were then freely given up and confirmed to
the English.


Indians. All the Indians like Governor DUMMER'S Treaty very well.

We freely give Liberty to settle all the Lands below the New-Fort, but we want
the Lands above for to Hunt upon, and get a Living by.


Commissi. As your Forefathers sold these Lands to the English, and they were
paid for by them; why are you against our settling them? The English have no
Design to disturb you in your Hunting and Fishing, but would always be glad to
receive you into their Houses, and live peaceably with you.


Indians. The Reason is, we get our Living on these Lands, and if the English
should settle on them, it would drive away our Game; which has been the Case
with Respect to the Lands between Richmond and the Sea.


Commissi. It will appear plainly to any indifferent Judges, that we have
fairly purchased these Lands from your Forefathers; and as we don't desire to
abridge you of your Rights, so we expect you will not disturb us in ours.

Upon the whole of what you have said; you don't pretend to deny, but that the
Purchases made by the English were fair and honest.


Indians. We don't think these Deeds are false; but we apprehend you got the
Indians drunk, and so took the Advantage of them, when you bought the Lands.


Commissi. It was not so; the English settled before your Eyes, and Nothing was
then said against it, but your Ancestors allowed of it.


Indians. We had no Religion in that Day, and used to buy only Rum and Wampum.


Commissi. There was no Rum at that Time, the whole Trade then carried on was
in Corn, Clothing and Provision.


Indians. We know of a Man that occasionally traded at Teconnock, he built a
Tent there.


Commissi. Above a Hundred Years ago, the Government built a Truck-House at
Teconnock at the Indians Desire; and there was more Trade carried on in that
Day, than there is now in all the Truck-Houses put together.


Indians. There was a Trade then, but we know of no Lands sold at that Time.
There was no Religion in that Day.


Commissi. You saw the Writings Yesterday, and then said, you knew the Names of
many of them that gave the Deeds. Your Forefathers were honest Men, and held
the Religion of Justice.


Indians. We should be glad to know how much Money was paid for these Lands.
You say that you have bought them?


Commissi. No doubt they had the full Value of them, the Deeds say so.


Indians. What is the Reason the Sum they were sold for, was not mentioned in
the Deeds.


Commissi. It was the Custom among the English in that Day not to mention any
Sum; but he that sold the Land acknowledged he was satisfied and contented.


Ongewasgone. I am an old Man, and never heard any of them say these Lands were
sold.


Commissi. We are fully satisfied these Lands were fairly purchased of the
Indians: We desire you will enquire and search into it, and then we doubt not,
but you will be satisfied of the Justice of our Claim; and that we shall live
in Peace and like Brethren.


Indians. We will enquire of our old Men, and make what Enquiry we can
respecting the Lands; and what we hear and see, will inform you of.


Commissi. Are you ready to sign the Ratification of the Articles of Peace made
and concluded on at Casco-Bay, in 1749. and ratified and confirmed by you the
last Year at St. George's.


Indians. We are ready.


Commissi. We expected that the Arrasagonticook Tribe of Indians would have
been here, but as they are not, we would inform you, that if they will come to
Richmond, and sign a Ratification of the aforesaid Articles of Peace, which we
have left with Capt. Lithgow, they shall receive a Present from the Government;
which shall be left with him for them.


Indians. We will inform them of what you say.


Quenois. I would say one World more.

Our young Men are very apt to get drunk: We desire you would give Orders to
Capt. Lithgow, not to let any one of them have any more Rum than one Quart in
two Days.


Commissi. We are well pleased with what you say. We are sensible of the
mischievous Consequence, of your young Men's having too much Rum.

Capt. Lithgow being present.

We now give Orders to Capt. Lithgow before you, not to let your young Men have
any more Rum than you have now desired they should have.


The Conference being now ended; the Present ordered them by the Government was
delivered them accordingly.

Whereupon the Commissioners took Leave of the Indians; embarked on Board the
Sloop, and proceeded for Boston.

Attest. Ezekiel Price, Clerk Commissi.

His Excellency's LETTER to the Penobscott and Norridgawock Tribes of Indians,
referred to in the foregoing Conferences, is as follows.
Brethren of Penobscott and Norridgawock,

AT my Return to my Government, I found Letters from you to Lieutenant Governor
PHIPS, dated the 6th of July last, from St. George's-Fort, and the 13th of the
same Month from Fort-Richmond, in which you desire that the Conference between
this Government and your Tribes may be sooner this Year than it was last Fail,
as that was held in your Hunting Season, when but few of you could attend it,
which created Jealousies and Dissatisfaction among those that were absent: And
in the Letter from St. George's-Fort it is particularly signified, That if I
was returned to Boston, you should be glad you might see me, which would be a
great Satisfaction to you.

In Answer to these Letters, I informed you in mine dated the 11th of August,
of my Arrival at Boston; and that the Business of my Government would not
permit me to meet you in Person this Year; but that I should endeavor to send
Commissioners to you as early as possible, with the Presents which this
Government has agreed to distribute annually among you, so long as you shall
maintain good Faith and Friendship with it. And I have since received Letters
from you in Answer to it, dated August 23d from St. George's, and the 20th from
Richmond, wherein you tell me, you rejoice at my Return from Great Britain,
that you are sorry the Business of my Government will not admit of my meeting
you this Year, that you like the Contents of my Letter very much, and desire
that the Commissioners may be sent to you early in this Month, which Time the
Norridgawock Tribe inform me, will suit the St. Francois Indians well, some of
them sent me at the same Time a Present of a String of Wampum, as a Token of
Friendship from their Tribe, who desire to be admitted to the Conference and
Treaty with us.

According to your Desire, Brethren, and my Promise to you, I now send you
Commissioners to brighten the Covenant Chain between us, and to distribute the
Presents among you, as soon as I possibly could.

I must now, Brethren, acquaint you that I have received a Letter from the
Jesuit Pierre (...), the French Missionary to Penobscott Tribe, dated the 25th
of August just from St. George's Fort, in which he tells me, That he
understands I design to have a Treaty with you, and desires me not to mention
(...) Interview any more; that he had a great Deal of Trouble since the last
Interview, to prevent the Jealousy of those Indians who were not present at it,
from having a very mischievous Effect; and that the most sure Way to maintain
Peace between you and us, would be for to let him know our Will, and that he
would take Care to let me know yours; and he entreats me, that if I write to
him, and think proper to pay any Regard to what he shall write to me in Answer,
that it may be transacted between us as secretly as is possible, for that he
desired nothing so much as to maintain Peace: As you will see by his Letter
under his own Hand.

I must also apprize you, that I have received a Letter from an Englishman,
informing me, that the same Jesuit assured him, a War would soon break out
between the two Nations, and between us and you, and urged him to write to me,
to prevent the Commissioners from coming to treat with you; and that he made
him promise, that he would not let you know what he said, nor that he had wrote
to me.

This Letter and Suggestions of the Jesuit, Brethren, the plain Design of which
is to prevent this Government from having any Treaty with you, and consequently
from making you the Presents which they have promised to give you from Year to
Year; being so contrary to your Desire expressed in your Letter to me, and to
the Friendship which this Government has for you, and is desirous to maintain
with you: I thought proper, though this Priest, desires they may be kept secret
from you, to communicate to you by the Commissioners, that you may judge for
your selves, Whether instead of using his Endeavors to preserve Peace between
us, as he solemnly professes in his Letter, he is not using Artifices to break
it; Whether he is really seeking to promote your Welfare by doing thus, or the
Interest of the French at your Cost, and How far you may confide in the
Sincerity of this holy Father your Confessor.

I can further assure, Brethren, that this Priest's Suggestion, that War will
soon break out between the two Nations, is groundless, and that there was no
Sign of it in France, whilst I was there about a Year ago, nor in England,
which I left a few Months since: I doubt not but the French may be desirous of
involving you and us in a War, if they can, by their Artifices; but I have
Reason to think, that they will not be fond of entering into a War themselves
with us very soon, least they should loose Canada in it, as they did
Cape-Breton in the last.

I have only to add, that if the Business of my Government will permit, I will
endeavor to have the Satisfaction of an Interview with you myself the next
Year, and recommend it to you, to preserve Peace and good Faith with us in the
mean Time, in which Case you may depend upon all reasonable Acts of Kindness
and Friendship on the Part of this Government, for promoting your Welfare and
Prosperity.

I am, Brethren, Your assured Friend, W. SHIRLEY.
Boston, September 18. 1753.
Translation of the French Jesuit's LETTER, to His EXCELLENCY, referred to in
the foregoing Conferences, is as follows.
SIR, Peace and Love from our Lord Jesus Christ,
I Understand, you desire a Treaty with the Indians of Penobscott. Permit me,
Sir, to beg of you, not to mention this Interview any more, because the Indians
being always either Hunting or Traveling, it is difficult for them all to be
present at this Interview, and Jealousy may cause some or other of them to do
Mischief. I had a great deal of Trouble after the last Interview, to prevent
the Jealousy of those who were not present at it, from having a very bad
Effect. The most sure Way to maintain Peace between you and the Indians, would
be to let me know your Will, and I would take Care to let you know that of the
Indians. I pray only, that if you write to me, and if you think fit to pay any
Regard to what I shall Answer, we may do it as secretly as possible, for I
desire nothing so much, as to maintain the Peace now subsisting. I will do all
I can to this End, being no more engaged for the Service of the King of France,
than I am for that of the King of England.

I am with Respect in Christ Jesus, Your most humble, And most obedient
Servant, S. Peter Gounon, Of the Society of Jesus.
Fort St. George, Aug. 25. 1753.

