THE State of the Action Brought by William Fletcher against William Vassal,
For Defaming him: TRIED In the Superior Court at Boston, August Term, A. D.
1752. AND NOW Pending by Appeal TO His Majesty in Council.

BOSTON: Printed in the Year, 1753.

PREFACE.
IN the Examination of the Case, which is published at the Desire of some
Gentlemen that attended the Trial, the Reader will find, that in the Year 1749,
Mr. Vassal seems to have taken a Resolution to be my Ruin; and to accomplish
this vile and wicked End (...) to have made it his Practice for above two Years
following, to say in all Companies such Things of (...) as had a direct
Tendency to blast my Character and Reputation, and is destroy my Trade and
Business, without having even the Shadow of Truth to support what he said, or
any other Provocation th^n my censuring his Conduct in delivering to one Andrew
Hall a promissary Note of considerable Value, which be the said Vassal ought
to have delivered to me, as plainly appears by the Rule of Court in that Case
annexed hereto, and by doing of which I was wronged of the same, besides being
^arr^^ed in the Law with the said Hall for above three Years on Account
^hereof. -- It will also appear that Mr. Vassal could have us other Drift i^
summoning these Evidences which he did, th^n to try to fish out how much I was,
or had been in Debt, and with what Honor I had dealt; how far his End was
answered, or what Effect it could have had in this Case, (...) I been four
Times as much in Debt as I was, the Reader will judge. Every Gentleman in
Business kn^ws, that a Merchant of extensive Trade must of Necessary be in
Debt. The Question is not, how much he is in Debt? but, with what Honor does
be deal? for the more extensive his Trade is, and the more he is in Debt, the
greater Damage is it to him to (...) his good Name taken away; as is very
elligantly set forth in the following Paragraph taken from the SPECTATOR, Vol.
3. N^. 118.

The most unhappy of all Men, and the most exposed to the Malignity or
Wantonness of the common Voice, is the Trader. Credit is undone in Whispers.
The Tradesman's Wound is received from one who is more private and more cruel
than the Ruffian with the Lanthorn and Dagger. The manner of repeating a Man's
Name, As Mr. Cash, Oh! do you leave your Money at his Shop? Why do you know Mr.
Searoom? He is indeed a general Merchant. I say, I have seen, from the
Iteration of a Man's Name, hiding one Thought of him, and explaining what you
hide, by saying something to his Advantage when you speak, a Merchant hurt in
his Credit; and him who every Day he lived, literally added to the Value of his
native Country, undone by one who was only a Burden and a Blemish to it. Since
every Body who knows the World is sensible of this great Evil, how careful
ought a Man to be in his Language of a Merchant? It may possibly be in the
Power of (...) Creature to lay the Ruin of the best Family in the most opulent
City; and the more so, the more highly he deserves of his Country; that is to
say, the farther he places his We^^^^ out of his Hands, to draw home that of
another Climate.

In this Case an ill Word may change Plenty into Want, and by a rash Sentence a
(...) and generous Fortune may in a few Days be reduced to Beggary. How little
(...) imagine, that an idle Phrase to the Disfavour of a Merchant, may be as
pernicious in the Consequence, as the Forgery of a Deed to b^ an In^c^^t^^^
would be to a Gentleman? Land stands where it did before a Gentleman was
calumniated, and the State of a great Action is just as it was before Calumny
was offered to diminish it, and there is Time, Place and Occasion, expected to
unravel all that is contrived against those Characters; but the Trader who is
ready only for probable Demands upon him, can have no Armor against the (...),
the Malici^^s, and the E^^itus, who are prepared to fill the Cry to his
Dishonor. Fire and Sword are slow Engines of Destruction, in Comparison of the
B^^bl^^ in the Case of the Merchant.

For this Reason, I thought it an imitable Piece of Humanity of a Gentleman of
my Acquaintance, who had great Variety of Affairs, and used to talk with Warmth
enough against Gentlemen by whom he thought himself ill dealt with; that he
would never let any thing be urged against a Merchant (with whom he had any
Difference) except in a Court of Justice. He used to say, that to speak ill of
a Merchant, was to begin his Suit with Judgment and Execution. One cannot, I
think, say more on this Occasion, than to repeat, That the Merit of the
Merchant is above that of all other Subjects; for while he is untouched in his
Credit, his Handwriting is a more portable Coin for the Service of his
Fellow-Citizens, and his Word the Gold of Op^r in the Country wherein he
resides.

Boston, February 22 17^3. W: Fletcher.

ERRATA.
In the Marginal Note in the first Page, L1500, should be L6000.

In the Marginal Note in the 12th Page, the Word (...) should be (...)

The CASE of Fletcher and Vassal.
Suffolk, ss. GEORGE the Second, by the Grace of GOD, of Great Britain, France,
and Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To the Sheriff of our County of Suffolk, his Undersheriff or Deputy,
Greeting.
WE Command you to Attach the Goods or Estate of William Vassal of Boston, in
our said County of Suffolk, Gentleman, to the Value of (...)
Eight Thousand Pounds; and for want thereof to take the Body of the said
William Vassal (if he may be found in your Precinct) and him safely keep, so
that you have him before our Justices of our Inferior Court of Common Pleas
next to be holden at Boston, in and for our said County of Suffolk, on the
first Tuesday of January next; then and there in our said Court to answer unto
William Fletcher of Boston aforesaid, Merchant, in a Plea of Trespass upon the
Case, for that whereas the said William Fletcher from his Childhood hitherto,
has been a Person of good Credit, Fame and Reputation, and a Person of
Integrity and Justice in all his Business, Trade and Commerce with all Men; and
for more than Twelve Years last past has been (...) Merchant of extensive
Trade and Commerce with many worthy and great Merchants in diverse Parts beyond
Sea, as well as in this Land, and an usual Underwriter of Policies of Insurance
in Boston aforesaid, whereby he has made great Profit and Gain: Nevertheless
the said William Vassal, not ignorant of the Premises, but m^liciously
contriving and intending to ruin the Plantiff's Reputation and good Character,
and to deprive him of his Commerce and Business aforesaid, and of all Profit
and Gain to be made thereby, did, at Boston aforesaid, on the second Day of
August in the Twenty-third Year of our Reign, in the Presence and Hearing of
many of our (...) Subjects, ^^^^ly, maliciously, and with a loud Voice speak
a^^ utter the following (...) and scandalous Words of and concerning the said
William Fletcher, viz. (...) Fletcher meaning the Plantiff) is a very great
^illain, a Rogue, a S^^^ndrel, a Bankrupt, not worth a Great, not able to pay
his Debts, and is Thousands worse than (...). And the said William Vassal,
continuing his Malice against the said Plantiff, (...) on the third Day of
(...) aforesaid, in the Hearing of diverse good People, (...), and with a loud
Voice, speak and utter the following false and (...) Words concerning the
Plantiff, viz. (...) Fletcher (meaning the Plantiff) (...), not worth a Great,
not able (...) Pounds worse than Nothing. And the said (...), same Day, in the
Presence and Hearing of (...) and (...) the (...) Plaintiff, v^z. (...)
Fletcher (again meaning the Plantiff) is a great Villain, a Rogue, a (...), a
Bankrupt, not worth a Great, his House and Farm (meaning the Plantiff's House
and Farm) will not half pay his Debts, he is not able to pay his Debts, owes
more than he is worth, and is Thousands worse than Nothing. And the said
William Vassal, continuing his Malice aforesaid against the Plantiff did on
the tenth of the same August at Boston aforesaid, in Discourse with diverse
Persons concerning the Plantiff, falsely and maliciously say of him the
Plantiff in their Hearing, these false and scandalous Words, viz. He (speaking
of, and meaning the Plantiff is a vile F^ll^^, a Rogue, a Man of bad
Principles, a ^ase Fellow, a very great Rogue, a Rascal, a Sc^^^dr^^, a vile
Sc^u^drel, a very great Sc^^undrel, a Bankrupt, a ^heat, a c^^ating Knave, a
Fellow of no Honor, owes more than he is worth, is not able to pay his Debts,
and is Thousands worse than nothing. And the said William Vassal
there-afterwards on the same Day continuing his Malice against the Plantiff,
did, in the Presence and Hearing of diverse of our liege Subjects, falsely,
maliciously, and with a loud Voice, speak and utter the following false and
scandalous Words of and concerning the Plantiff, viz. Will. Fletcher (meaning
the Plantiff) is a vile Fellow, a Rogue, a great Rogue, very great Rogue, a
Cheat, a great Cheat, a shuff^ing Rascal, and his (meaning the Plantiff's)
Credit is not worth a Great; he (meaning the Plantiff is a Rascal, a S^^undrel,
a mean pitiful Fellow, a great Cheat, and no Person would give Six Peace for
any De^t he owes (meaning the Plantiff owed) and no one would take any Debt he
^^ed (meaning the Plantiff owed) to give any thing for it; for he (meaning the
Plantiff) is not able to pay his Debts, he (meaning the Plantiff) owes more
than he is worth, and I can prove it: and he (meaning the Plantiff) cannot pay
his Debts, is worse than nothing, is Thousands worse than nothing, and owes
more than he is worth. And the said William Vassal on the seventeenth of
October, in the same Year of our Reign, of his further Malice, in the Hearing
of diverse worthy and good People did at Boston aforesaid, utter and speak of
and concerning the Plantiff these false and scandalous Words, viz. Will.
Fletcher (meaning the Plantiff) is a Rogue, a Bankrupt, a Cheat, and a Villain;
he (meaning the Plantiff) Bottomed a Ship for more than she was worth, and cast
her away on Purpose to cheat the Bottomers. And at another Time, he (still
meaning the Plantiff) bought an old Ship that had been condemned, purely to
send his Brother in (meaning the Plantiff's Brother in) to be cast away, in
order to get his Brother's Interest and Estate then depending in the Family
(meaning his said Brother's Proportion and Share of his Father's Estate then
depending in the Law;) and if his Father (meaning the Plantiff's Father) and
all the Friends he (meaning the Plantiff) had in the World were on board
(meaning (...) board the said Ship) he (meaning the Plantiff) would have cast
her away; H^ (meaning the Plantiff) is a mean spirited (...) Fellow, and loves
Money so well that he never did a generous Action in his Life. And the said
William Vassal there-afterwards on the same Day of his further Malice, did, in
the Hearing of diverse of our liege, Subjects, utter and speak the following
false and scandalous Words of and concerning the Plantiff, viz. Will. Fletcher
(meaning the Plantiff) is a (...), and loves Money so well that he never (...)
a good or generous Action in his Life, he (meaning the Plantiff, is a Rogue, a
(...), a Bankrupt, and a Cheat; he (meaning the Plantiff) (...) a Ship for more
Money than she was worth, and cast her away on Purpose to cheat the Bottomers;
and he (meaning the Plantiff) bought (...) condemned Ship purely to (...) in to
be cast away; that he (meaning the Plantiff) might get by it, because there was
an Estate depending in the Family (meaning the Family of the Plantiff's late
deceased Father) and if his Father (meaning the Plantiff's Father) and all the
Friends he had (meaning the Plantiff had) in the World were on board (meaning
on board the said Ship) he (meaning the Plantiff) would have cast her away. And
the said William Vassal, on the Twenty-first of the same October, at Boston
aforesaid, of his further Malice against the Plantiff, speaking of and
concerning the Plantiff, in the Hearing of many of our liege Subjects, did
speak and utter the following false and scandalous Words concerning the
Plantiff, viz. I hope he (meaning the Plantiff) will recover Money enough out
of the Prize in England to pay his Debts (meaning the Plantiff's Debts;) but if
he (meaning the Plantiff) does recover enough, it must be a very large S^m; he
(meaning the Plantiff) owes more than he is worth, and is not able to pay his
Debts. And the said William Vassal on the fifteenth of July last, at Boston
aforesaid, speaking of the Plantiff's Conduct, in his Trade. Dealings and
Merchandise did of his further Malice, speak and utter the following false and
scandalous Words of and concerning the Plantiff, in the Presence and Hearing of
diverse of our good Subjects, viz. He (meaning the Plantiff) is a vile Fellow,
not fit for Society, a Cheat, a Rogue, and is as great a Rogue and Villain as
lives, he (again meaning the Plantiff) is as great a Rogue and Villain as is in
the World. And the said William Vassal on the last of July last, at Boston
aforesaid, upon a Discourse had and moved concerning the Plantiff's Conduct in
his Trade, Merchandise and Dealings, in the Hearing of diverse of our liege
Subjects, he the said William Vassal, of his further Malice against the
Plantiff, did speak and utter the following false and scandalous Words
concerning the Plantiff, viz. He (meaning the Plantiff) is not fit Company for
any Man; he (meaning the Plantiff) is a Rogue, a Bite, a Cheat, a cheating
dishonest Villain, a Knave, a Scoundrel, and I can prove it. By Reason of the
speaking of which false and scandalous Words, in Manner as aforesaid, the
Plantiff has greatly suffered in his good Name and Reputation, and lost the
Good Will and Esteem of many worthy Persons of great Note, Wealth and Business,
with whom he before had large and very profitable Tradings in Merchandise, who
of late have refused to Entrust the Plantiff with their Affairs and Business,
or to continue or carry on any Commerce with him to the Damage of the said
William Fletcher, as he says, the Sum of Eight Thousand Pounds, which shall
then and there be made to appear, with other due Damages; and have you there
this Writ, with your Doings therein. Witness Edward Hutchinson, Esquire at Boston,
this fifth Day of October, in the Twenty-fifth Year of our Reign, (...), 1751.

Ezekiel Goldth-wait, Cler.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, November 5th. 1751.
I attached the Body of the within-named Defendant William Vassal, and have
taken Bond to Respond the Action.

(...) P^llard, Sheriff.


Copy examined,

Middlecott Cock, Cler.


Copy examined,

by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.


A true Copy examined,

by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.
(...)


Suffolk, ss. AT an Inferior Court of Common Pleas, begun and held at Boston
in and for the County of Suffolk aforesaid, on the first Tuesday of January
1752, in the Twenty-fifth Year of His Majesty's Reign.
WIlliam Fletcher Plantiff, and William Vassal Defendant, in a Plea of
Trespass upon the Case. The Defendant's Plea to the Jurisdiction of the Court.

And the said William Vassal comes and says, That this Honorable Court ought
not to take any further Cognizance of the said Plea; because, he says, that
the said Court is an Inferior Court, and of Inferior Jurisdiction, and yet
the Words in the said Writ, pretended to be spoken by the said William Vassal,
or any of them, are not alleged to be spoken within the Jurisdiction of the
same Court, as by Law they ought to be alleged; and this the said William
Vassal is ready to Verify; wherefore he prays Judgment, whether the same Court
will not take any further Cognizance of the Plea aforesaid,

James Otis, p. D.

And the said William Vassal comes and defends, etc. and, saving the Plea to
the Jurisdiction of this Honorable Court as on File, says, That the
Plantiff's Writ is insufficient, and ought to be abated.

For that the same Writ is not purchased against the said William Vassal
according to the Form of Original Writs in that Case made and provided by the
Law of this Province, because the said Writ is directed in these Words, viz. To
the Sheriff of our County of Suffolk, his Undersheriff or Deputy, Greeting;
Whereas by the Form of Original Writs in that Case made and provided by the Law
of this Province, the same Writ should be directed To the Sheriff or Marshal of
the County of Suffolk, his Undersheriff or Deputy, Greeting, and not To the
Sheriff of the County of Suffolk, his Undersheriff or Deputy, Greeting, only,
as the Plantiff supposes; and the said Writ was not endors'd with the Surname
of the the said William Fletcher, or with the Surname of any Attorney for him,
before it was taken out of the Clerk's Office of said Court, as by Law it ought
to be; nor is it alleged in said Writ, in what Language the said pretended
scandalous Words, or any of them, were spoken.

2dly. For that the said Writ (...) not purchased according to the Form of the
Original Writ in that Case made an^ provided by the Law of this Province,
because the said Writ is directed To the Sheriff of the County of Suffolk, his
Undersheriff or Deputy, Greeting, whereas by the Form of the Original Writ in
that Case made and provided by the Law of this Province, the same Writ should
be directed To the Sheriff or Marshal of the County of Suffolk, his
Undersheriff or Deputy, Greeting, only, as the Plantiff supposes.

3dly. The said Writ was not endors'd with the Surname of the said William
Fletcher, or with the Surname of any Attorney for him, before it was taken out
of the Clerk's Office of the said Court, as by Law it ought to be.

4thly. It is not alleged in said Writ, in what Language the said pretened
scandalous Words, or any of them, were spoken, as by Law it ought to be: All
which Pleas the said William Vassal is ready to Verify; wherefore he prays
Judgment of the said Writ that it be abated and he allowed his Costs.

James Otis, p. D.

And the said William Vassal, saving the Pleas to the Jurisdiction and in
Abatement of the Writ on File, faith, he is not Guilty in Manner and Form as
the Plantiff declares, and thereof puts himself upon the Country.

William Vassal.
Copy examined, Middlec^tt Cock, Cler.
Copy examined, By Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.
A True Copy examined, By Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.
N. B. The Court overruled this Plea, and the Case was committed to the Jury
without any Witnesses being produced.

William Fletcher Plantiff, and William Vassal Defendant, the Jury find for
the Defendant Cost.

Copy examined, Middlecott Cock, Cler.
Copy examined, By Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.
A true Copy examined, By Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.
N. B. Fletcher Appealed from this Judgment to the Superior Court.





Suffolk, ss. AT a Superior Court of Judicature held at Boston, for said
County on the Third Tuesday of February, A. D. 1752.
William Fletcher, And William Vassal, Trespass on the Case for Defamation.
THE said William Vassal says, That he pleaded to this Declaration in the
Court appealed from, that he was not Guilty in Manner and Form as the Plantiff
declared; and thereof put himself upon the Country, as by the Copy of the
Record of the Case produced, appears, and further says, that in the Proceedings
thereupon there was no Replication made thereto, nor any Issue joined; neither
is there any Record of such Representation or Issue; wherefore he prays that
this Court will not proceed to Trial upon his Plea.

Jer. Gridley.
Copy examined,

By Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.


A true Copy examined,

By Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.



N. B. The Plea was again overruled, then Vassal moved for a Continuance of
the Case, alleging, That he had some material Witnesses abroad; but he
refusing to swear to any particular Thing they had to say, -- the Court
overruled this also: And the Case was again committed to the Jury, without any
Witnesses being produced. -- William Fletcher Appellant, William Vassal
Appellee: The Jury find for the Appellee, Confirmation of former Judgment, and
Costs. -- Fletcher reviewed the Case to next Superior Court.

Middlesex, ss. April, 23. 1752.
By Virtue of this Writ, I have taken the Body of the within-named William
Vassal, and for want of Goods or Estate therein unto me shown to attach, or
found within my Precinct, I have taken Bond, with Sureties for his Appearance
at the Court within-mentioned, to make Answer to this Writ o^ Process, and to
abide and perform the Judgment of the said Court thereon.

Richard Foster, Sheriff.

Suffolk, ss. AT a Superior Court of Judicature held on the second Tuesday of
November, A. D. 1752, by Adjournment from the third Tuesday of August
preceding.
William Fletcher, and William Vassal, Trespass on the Case for Defamation.
And the said William Vassal comes and defends, etc. and ^ing ^n himself the
Benefit of all Exceptions on File, says, the last-mention'd Judgment ^^n
nothing Erroneous, and thereof puts himself upon the Country

J. Otis, p. D.
And the Plantiff likewise. Edmund Trowbridge.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

N. B. The Case was opened by Col. Otis of Barnstable, in a very concise,
gent^d and intelligible Manner, to the Approhation of the whole Audience; and
then the Witnesses were produced by Mr. Fletcher, in Manner following, all
being very critically cross-examin'd by Mr. Vassal, viz.

Mr. Joseph Scott, The Rev'd Dr. Jonathan M^y^ew, The Rev'd Dr. L^en^er Miller,
Mr. Beliher Hancock, Mr. Joseph Royal Dr. (...) he could not (...) not
comp^^^d to writing.
Dr. Nathaniel Perkins Mr. Joshua Richardson Mr. John Billings (...) intimate
Companions. (...) Mr. (...) Mr. C^^ing and Mr. Gray's Evidence respecting these
(...) being to often in Company with Mr. (...).

Mr. Harrison Gray, Capt. John Catheart, Capt. Isaac Freeman, Mr. Joseph
Jackson.

I Joseph Scott of Boston, (...) the County of Suffolk, and Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England. Brazier, do declare, That in August 1749,
some few Days after Mr. William Fletcher the Plantiff sailed for England, being
at Messi^. John and Richard Billings's Shop in Boston, about four or five
Gentlemen being present, I heard Mr. William Vassal of Boston aforesaid, the
Defendant, publicly say diverse Things reflecting of said Fletcher,
particularly he said, said William Fletcher was a Rascal, a Scoundrel, a
Villain, a Cheat, a cheating Fellow, a Fellow of no Honor, that he had cheated
him, and he could prove it, and that he was not fit Company for any Man, and
that he never did a generous Action in his Life; that he owed him for some
Tickets he had won of him, and that he could not get the Money, and, as I
understood him, he had a Note of said Fletcher's for the same, and that he had
put it up at Public Sale at a Clubb at Mrs. Austin's, and that no Man would
give any thing for it: This Affair of the Tickets I wondered to hear him
mention, because I well remember some Time before I heard him say in Public
Company, that said Fletcher had paid him with Honor, and that he though it himself
obliged to declare it in all Compa^^es where he had said to the contrary: Some
Time afterward, while the said Fletcher was in England, being again in said
Vassall's Company at Mrs. Burson's opposite to the Brazen-Head, a Number of
Gentlemen being present, the said Vassal, speaking of said Fletcher, said, but
he was a Villain, a Scroundrel, a Knave, a Cheating Fellow, a Fellow of no
Honor, a Man of bad Principles, and had cheated him out of some Money or
Tickets he had won of him; upon which I said to said Vassal; Major is a Title
given to said (...) by the (...). sc.
Major, I am surpised you should reflect so upon Mr. Fletcher, for I have
heard you declare at Billings 's Shop, before a Number of Gentlemen, that he
had paid you that Money with Honor, and that you thought yourself obliged to
declare it wherever you (...): He immediately said, it was false, that he had
not said so; but putting the Matter a little closer to his, he said, if he had
said (...), yet the said Fletcher had not paid him the Depreciation of the
(...); I (...) if he (...) demanded any Depreciation? and to the (...) of my
(...) he said he had not: And both of us at that Time being pretty warm (...)
the Dispute, the Company desired that the Conversation might drop with respect
to Mr. Fletcher, for that they were tired with Hearing these Things. The next
Day meeting the said Vassal at Billings's Shop, he spoke to me (...) that what
had passed between us the Night before might be forgot, and that we might not
hold Anger with each other; I told him with all my Heart; but I thought he
treated Mr. Fletcher's Character too freely: At another Time afterward at said
(...). 2 Number of Gentlemen being present. I heard the said Vassal declare,
that the said Fletcher was a Rogue, a Cheat, a Bite, a Scroundrel, and that he
believed said Fletcher was Thousands worse than Nothing, and blamed Capt.
George Ruggles for taking said Fletcher's Bill on his Brother Thomas Fletcher,
for that he was afraid he should never get the Money; and that he would sell it
to any Body for a considerable Discount; but that he hoped said Fletcher would
receive Money enough in England at least to pay his Debts; and further he said
by way of Question, What a Villain was that Fletcher to send his Brother to Sea
in an old condemned Ship which he bought to drown him in? and if it had been in
his Power, I believe he would have sent the whole Family in her, if he could
have got any Thing by it: And at another Time afterward I heard the said
Vassal say at Billings's, that Will. Fletcher was a vile Rogue, that he was
not worth a Groat, and was not able to pay his Debts, a Fellow of no Honor,
and not fit for Society, and that his Estate was mortagag'd, and that he had
bought a Piece of Land of Mr. Allen, and it was also mortgaged; and being at
diverse other Times at Mrs. Burton's, in Company with a Number of Gentlemen, I
heard the said Vassal say, that the said Will. Fletcher was a vile Rogue, a
Cheat, a base Fellow, a shuffling Fellow, a Fellow of no Honor, and not fit
Company for any Man, and that those who kept Company with him were as bad as
he; that he was not able to pay his Debts, that he owed more than he was Worth,
and was not worth a Gro^t: All which Expressions were uttered by him the said
Vassal in the Year 1749, 1750 and 1751, and almost as often as ever I have
been in said Vassal 's Company from the Time since Mr. Fletcher's Departure,
until his Return, which was very often, he has uttered the same Expressions as
beforementioned, or Words to the same Import, and further I would add, that I
have been acquainted with the said Fletcher for some Years, and have dealt with
him my self, and always found him to deal with Honor and Honesty: All this I
declare to be Truth.

Joseph Scott.

The said Joseph Scott further says, That when he heard the aforesaid
Expressions at Messi^. Billings's Shop, the said John and Richard Billings and
Mr. Joshua Richardson, with others whom he cannot now recollect, were present,
and when he heard the aforesaid Expressions at Mrs. Burton's, Dr. Nathaniel
Perkins, and the said Joshua Richardson, with others, whom he cannot now
remember, were present; and for the rest of the Expressions aforesaid, he don't
remember the particular Time; and he further says, that he did not commit any
of the aforesaid Expressions to Writing within six Months after he had heard
them, but believes he comm^^ed some of them to Writing within twelve Months
after he had heard them; and he further adds, that he heard said Vassal say
some few Days before Fletcher sailed for England in July A. D. 1749, that he,
said Fletcher, owed more than he was worth, or Words to the same Import, which
occasioned him the Depon^nt to join with some other Persons in a Suit against
said Fletcher; and I heard some of the Clubb which Vassal and myself belonged
to, say Words to the same Import, but it was after I heard said Vassal say it,
and the Reason of my Arresting said Fletcher was, as well owing to (...) I
heard others say as above, as what I heard Vassal say.^

Sworn in Court December 8th. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.

The Deponant further (...), that he heard the said Vassal the Defendant say,
some short Time after the said William Fletcher the Plantiff went to England
last, in 1749, (...) he would do the said Fletcher 's Business on the other
Side of the Water: This the said Vassal said at Billings's Shop in Boston,
when he, and to the best of the Depon^nt's Remembrance, Mr. William Merchant
were present; and when he the said Vassal spoke the Words aforesaid, he
appeared very angry with (...) Fletcher; That the Conversation was introduced
by said Vassal about the Notes (...) Tickets.

Sworn in Court December 11th. 1752. Attest. (...), Cler.
A true Copy examined, By Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

I Jonathan Mayhew of Boston, in the County of Suffolk, in the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England, Clerk, do Testify and Declare, That being at
the House of Mr. William Vassal of Boston aforesaid, the Defendant, (which was
to the best of my Remembrance in the Year 1749) the said Mr. Vassal said
diverse Things concerning the Character and Conduct of Mr. William Fletcher of
Boston, Merchant, who was then lately gone to Europe; particularly the said Mr.
Vassal said, that the said Mr. Fletcher had sent one of his own Brothers to
Sea in an old rotten, leaky, or condemned Vessel or Ship, with an Intention
that she should be cast away or lost; whereupon one present intimating his
Doubt concerning the Truth of this Fact, and speaking something in Favor of
said Mr. Fletcher, the said Mr. Vassal declared that said Fletcher never did a
generous Thing or Action in his Life; and that if said Fletcher's own Father,
and every Relation he had in the World, had been on board the said Vessel or
Ship he would not have scrupled to cast her away; provided he could have gotten
any Thing thereby; the said Mr. Vassal did at this Time further declare, what
was the said Mr. Fletcher's End and Design in casting the said Vessel away,
which to the best of my Remembrance was this, that said Mr. Fletcher might get
his Brother's (the Master's) Share of some Money that was likely to come to his
Father's Heirs, or the Family: When the Things abovementioned were spoken
there were about six or seven Persons present. I do moreover testify and
declare, that being another Time afterward at the House of Mr. Vassall's
abovesaid, he again took Occasion to speak concerning the said Mr. Fletcher,
and there being at this Time a Report newly come to Boston to this Purport,
That said Fletcher was like to get little or nothing of the Prize-Money, after
which he was supposed to be then gone to England, the said Mr. Vassal
declared, that he hoped or wished with all his Heart that this might be true;
nevertheless the said Mr. Vassal did immediately add, that he hoped said Mr.
Fletcher would get enough to pay his Debts, and that if he did so, this must be
a very large Sum, because the said Fletcher when he went away was not able to
pay his Debts, and that he owed more than he was worth, that he was not worth a
Groat, or that he was Thousands worse than Nothing; however said Mr. Vassal
did at the same Time express some Compassion to said Mr. Fletcher's Wife and
Children, and said that he should be sorry if they were reduced to Want and
Suffering, but that he should be glad to see said Fletcher himself a Beggar,
nothing being too bad for such a Man; when these Things here mentioned were
spoken, there was at least (...) Person present besides said Mr. Vassal and my
self. I do further Testify and Declare, that being another Time afterward, at
the House of said Mr. Vassal, he spoke diverse Things concerning Mr. Fletcher
abovesaid, which Things I do not very particularly remember, only in general,
that he told two long Stories concerning said Fletcher's abusing him the said
Mr. Vassal, one of which Stories related to some Notes of Hand put into his
Mr. Vassal 's Possession, which were to be again delivered up by him, in
Conformity to the Settlement of some Disputes at that Time subsisting betwixt
said Mr. Fletcher and one Mr. Hall; which Trust said Mr. Vassal declared he
had discharged with the utmost Caution and Fidelity; See the Rule of Court, and
the Report thereon, in this Affair.
but that the said Fletcher was dissatisfied with his Conduct in this Affair,
and treated him in a very injurious Manner, for that Reason. The other Story
related to a Number of Lottery Tickets, which, as the said Mr. Vassal
declared, said Fletcher was to have paid him for in a short Time, but had for a
long while unjustly refused or delayed to do it; which last Narrative said Mr.
Vassal gave as an Argument of said Mr. Fletcher's Unfairness and Dishonesty in
his Dealings, and as a Specimen thereof: When the Things here related were
spoken, there was at least one Person present besides said Mr. Vassal and my
self. I do further Testify and Declare, that I have diverse Times, (...) before
and after Mr. Fletcher went to England, as abovementioned, heard said Mr.
Vassal speak of said Mr. Fletcher as being a great Rogue, a Scoundrel, a
Villian, a Rascal, a tricking shuffling Fellow, a base ungrateful Fellow, a
Fellow of no Honor or Honesty, all which Expressions I have, to the best of my
Remembrance, heard said Mr. Vassal in Company use concerning said Mr.
Fletcher, but not having taken Pains from the first to charge my Memory with
Things of this Nature, nor expecting to be called upon as a Witness to them, I
cannot at present declare any Thing more particularly concerning them. I do
further declare, that I have heard the abovesaid Mr. Vassal say, he had
offered a Note of Hand, Mr. (...)
which he had of said Mr. Fletcher's, to sale in public Company for
considerable less than the Note was given for, but that Mr. Fletcher's Credit
run so low, that no Body would purchase it.

N. B. At the first Time alluded to in the Testimony above, there were present
the Rev'd Dr. Miller, Mr. Belcher Hancock, Dr. Nathaniel Perkins, Mr. Samuel
Holbrook, Mr. Joshua Richardson and Mr. Joseph Royal: At the second Time
alluded to, was present Mr. Joseph Royal: At the third Time alluded to there
was present Jeremiah Gridley, Esquire

Jonathan Mayhew.

I do further Testify, that I have heard said Mr. Vassal declare, that the
said Mr. Fletcher had cheated or designed to Cheat the Bottomers of one of his
Vessels, which Vessel, as I understood Mr. Vassal, was actually cast away or
lost, as said Fletcher designed she should be.

Jonathan Mayhew.
Sworn in Court December 8. 1752. Attest. Samnel Win^^rop, Cler.
N. B. This Testimony was committed to Writing toward the latter end of
February 1752, and not before.

Jonathan Mayhew.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.



EBenezer Miller of Braintree, D. D. testifies and says, That he being at the
House of Mr. William Vassal in Boston, a considerable Time ago, as he the
Deponent thinks several Years ago, there then happened to be some Discourse
about Mr. William Fletcher, and that said Mr. Vassal did utter some Words
reflecting upon the Reputation and Circumstances of the said William Fletcher,
but what they were the Deponent remembers not, save that the said William
Vassal said, that the said William Fletcher sent an old defective Vessel to
Sea, which was not able or not likely to perform the Voyage, or Words to that
Effect, in which he sent or suffered to go his Brother; the Deponent saying it
was impossible he should do so if he knew the Vessel to be in so bad a
Condition; some Persons replied, that he must know it, for that such a Person's
Conscience (naming the Person) would not let him send her to Sea any longer;
which Words the Deponent thinks said Mr. Vassal laughingly repeated; to the
best of the Deponent's Remembrance there were present Dr. Mayhew, Dr. Perkins,
Mr. Joshua Richardson, and Mr. Joseph Royal, and further says not the
Deponent.

Boston, October 7th. 1752. E^en^zer Miller.
Sworn in Court, December 7. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

BElcher Hancock, of lawful Age, testifies, That he has heard Mr. William
Vassal say, that Mr. William Fletcher would be in difficult Circumstances,
provided he did not recover a Share of the Prize that belonged to the Family,
and likewise that Mr. Fletcher was instrumental of his Brother's going to Sea
in a Vessel that was unfit for the Voyage: This the Deponent believes was said
before Doctor Miller, Doctor Mayhew, and others in Mr. Vassall's own House in
the l^tter End of the Year 1749.

Boston, December, 7. 1752. Belcher Han^^^k.
Sworn in Court, December 7. 1752. Attest. (...) Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

JOseph Royal of lawful Age, testifies and faith, That sometime after Mr.
William Fletcher sailed for London, he was in Company with the Rev'd Doctor
Miller, Doctor Mayhew, and others, at Mr. William Vassall's House, the said
Vassal being present, and upon some Discourse had by the Company concerning
the said Mr. Fletcher, the Deponent says, that to the best of his Remembrance
he heard the said Mr. Vassal say, that Fletcher had sent an old Vessel to Sea
that had been condemned, with his Brother in her, and that his Brother was
drowned in her; upon which some of the Company asked, What sort of a Vessel she
was? To which said Vassal said, Such a Vessel as Edmond Quincy would not
venture, or would refuse to send to Sea, or Words to that Effect; and that he
the Deponent has often in diverse Places and at diverse Times heard the said
Vassal say, that the said Fletcher was a damned Rascal, Scoundrel, Villain, a
Rogue, a Fellow of no Honor, and such sort of Language, and that in some
Tickets they were concerned in together he had treated him like a damned
Rascal, and had wronged and cheated him in 'em; and that he has heard the said
Vassal say something concerning the said Fletcher's bottoming a Vessel or
Vessels, the Particulars of which he cannot remember, but apprehends the same
bore hard on Mr. Fletcher's Character, and further says not. Joseph Royal.

Sworn in Court December 7. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

JOshua Richardson of Boston, of lawful Age, testifies and says, That he being
at the House of Mr. William Vassal in Boston, in Company with the Rev'd Dr.
Miller, Dr. Mayhew, Mr. Hancock, and Mr. Joseph Royal, he heard said Vassal
say, That he, meaning Mr. William Fletcher, as this Deponent apprehended, had
bought an old Ship or Vessel that was so bad that Mr. Quincy would not send her
to Sea, and had sent his Brother in her, and that he was lost or drowned; upon
which some Gentleman in Company said, that he though it Mr. Fletcher was a
different sort of a Man, or a better sort of a Man: And further this Deponent
says, That he has heard Mr. Vassal say diverse Times, that Mr. Fletcher owed
him Money for Lottery Tickets, and that he had deceived him, and wronged him by
delaying Payment so long that he had lost Considerable of his Debt by The whole
Amount of the Tickets was about L.10 10. Sterling. See Mr. (...) Evidence
relating to these Tickets.
Depreciation of the Money; and further, that he has heard said Vassal say,
That Mr. Fletcher's House was mortgaged, or that the Deed of it was not in his
Possession, or Words to that Effect; and this Deponent further declares, that
being at Messi^. Billings's Shop, in Company with Mr. Vassal and some other
Gentlemen, about which Time a Vessel arrived from London, and soon after her
Arrival, there was a Report that Mr. Fletcher's Claim for Prize Money was like
to be rejected, or if admitted, he would have but a small Share, upon which
Reports being mentioned, some Gentlemen said, that it had cost Mr. Fletcher a
great deal of Money in pursuing the Affair, and that if he should finally fail
in it, that it would effect his Circumstances very much; upon which Mr Vassal
said, that though there had been a Difference between Mr. Fletcher and him, and
that he though it Mr. Fletcher had used him very ill, yet he should be sorry to see
him and his Family ruined; and that he though it he had as good a Right to a Share
in the Price as any of the Vessels that was concerned in taking of her, in
Proportion to her Men and Guns, or Words to that Effect.

Boston, December 7th. 1752. Josh^a Richardson.
Sworn in Court, December 11th 1752. Attest, Samuel Winthrop,
Cler. A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

HArrison Gray of Boston, Merchant, Testifies and Declares, That sometime in
the Fall of the Year 1749, he was at Mr. Billings's Shop when Mr. Joshua
Richardson came in about Four o'Clock in the Afternoon, and informed him, That
he had just come from Mr. William Vassall's, where he had dined in Company with
Dr. Miller, Mr. Hancock, Mr. Mayhew, and some others, whom the Deponent does
not now remember, and that he was very much pleased with the Conduct of Mr.
Mayhew; I asked him, in what Respect? The said Richardson answered, that the
Major, meaning Mr. Vassal, had said several severe Things to the Prejudice of
Mr. Fletcher, viz. That he had taken Money upon the Bottom of an old Brigantine
for more than she was worth, and cast her away on Purpose; that he had
purchased an old Ship that had been Condemned, and put his Brother in Master,
with a Design to drown him; and the said Richardson told the Deponent ^any
other Things, that the said Vassal that Afternoon said to the Prejudice of Mr.
Fletcher's Character, but the Particulars, at so great a Distance of Time, the
Deponent cannot pretend to charge his Memory with: Mr. Richardson said, (...)
That upon hearing such heavy Charges against Mr. Fletcher, Dr. Miller replied,
that he did not take Mr. Fletcher to be such a Man, or Words to that Effect,
and that Mr. Mayhew opposed Mr. Vassal with some considerable Warmth, and
said, that Mr. Fletcher was his Friend, and that it was not generous to use a
Gentleman so behind his Back, and that he was certain Mr. Fletcher was a Man of
contrary Character, and that he had Reason from the long Acquaintance he had
with him, to esteem him as a Gentleman of Generosity, and as free from the
Crime of Covetousness as any Gentleman he was acquainted with, without
Exception, or Words of a similar Nature: The Deponent further faith, That in a
Day or two after the foregoing Conversation with Mr. Richardson, he was in
Company with Mr. Mayhew, when he with Pleasure informed him of what Mr.
Richardson had said in his Favor, who said he was obliged to Mr. Richardson,
and that he though it he could do no otherwise than he did, when he found Mr.
Fletcher's Character so attacked; and that he though it it was wrong to treat the
Character of an absent Gentleman with so much Freedom; but the Deponent well
remembers that Mr. Mayhew declined giving a particular Account of the
Conversation at Mr. Vassall's Table; and that he the said Mr. Mayhew, either
then, or a few Days after, told the Deponent, to the best of the Deponent's
Memory, that he had never divulged that Conversation to any Person breathing.
The Deponent further declares; That sometime after this he was at Mr.
Fletcher's House in the Evening, in Company with Mrs. Fletcher, who seemed to
be very much dispirited, upon which he asked her, What made her so dull? She
replied, that her Husband's Character suffering so much by the Means of Mr.
Vassal, was enough to make her dull, and that she could not reconcile it how
Mr. Mayhew, consistant with his Pretentions of Friendship to her Husband,
should be so intimate with Mr. Vassal, who took all Opportunities to expose
her said Husband's Character; upon which the Deponent informed her of the
abovementioned Conversation he had with Mr. Richardson, which gave her
considerable Satisfaction to find that she had been mistaken in regard to Mr
Mayhew; the Deponent further declares, he has once or twice since been in
Company with Mr. Richardson, and that he the said Richardson says, he does not
remember his ever having such Conversation as is mentioned above, with the
Deponent; but the Deponent, although he cannot pretend to remember every
particular Expression, has a perfect Remembrance of the Substance of what
passed between them.

Harrison Gray.
Sworn in Court December 8. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

I Hugh McDaniel of Boston, Rope-maker, testify and say, That on or about the
last of June, 1749. Mr. William Fletcher the Plantiff took his Passage on board
of Capt. Fones for England, and as there was an Account between said Fletcher
and myself, he sent for me to settle, wherein the Balance was in my Favor
Nineteen Hundred Pounds old Tenor, Seven Hundred Pounds of said Balance he
paid me down in Cash, and his Note of Hand for Eleven Hundred Pounds more to be
paid in six Months, without Interest, and do solemnly declare, I looked on said
Fletcher's Note at that Time to be as good as any Merchant's in Boston; but
about a Month after said Fletcher's Departure from hence, I heard Mr. William
Vassal the Defendant declare on the Exchange, that said Fletcher the Plantiff
was a damned Scoundrel, and was not worth a Great, and that he would never came
back again: Hearing this on 'Change, I thought to secure myself in the best
Manner I could; accordingly as there was a Ship then bound for England. I drew
a Bill on said Fletcher for a Hundred Pounds Sterling; but the Bill coming to
his Hand two Months before it was due, sent it back again, and ordered his
Brother to pay me, and I do declare I was paid with Honor, and further says
not.

Hugh McDaniel.
Sworn in Court, December 11. 1752. Attest Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

THomas Gray of Boston, Merchant, upon Oath, testifies and declares, That some
Time ago Mr. Mal^chy Salter and he (...) Mr. John Dea^^'s lower Store. (...)
Fletcher, the Plantiff, and that he the said Fletcher read to said Salter, a
Writ said Fletcher had got prepared, to be served upon Mr. Vassal, for a
considerable Sum, as Damages for defaming his Character, upon which said
Deponent told Mr. Salter 'twould be a kind Part in him to inform Mr. Vassal of
it, and while said Salter and the Deponent were together, Mr. Vassal the
Defendant came by, and was stopped by Mr. Salter, who acquainted him with the
Affair; Mr. Vassal said, it was no News to him, that he had been some Days
past expecting the Writ to be served on him, and had appeared daily upon
'Change, that whenever it was served, he would not get Bail but go to Goal, for
he said nothing but what he could prove; the said Vassal then called Mr.
Fletcher several hard Names, whether Rascal or Villain, the said Deponent cannot
determine, but is pretty certain 'twas one, if not both, and other Words to the
like purpose, and said, he would declare the same in open Court; Mr. Vassal
afterward said he understood from some Friends, that Mr. Fletcher had charged
him with saying some Things to his Disadvantage in Regard to sending away an
old Ship he had taken Money upon the Bottom of, but said Vassal said, he knew
nothing about that; the said Deponent further declares, that he then imagined
that the Reason of Mr. Vassall's expressing himself in such Terms was, a
Difference the said Deponent had before been informed was subsisting between
said Fletcher and Vassal, upon Account of some Notes of Hand, and further this
Deponent says not.

Thomas Gray.
P. S. In the midst of the Conversation Mr. John Dennie came down and joined
the Company.

Sworn in Court December 7. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.



The Deponent further declares, that upon Recollection he has not the least
Remembrance of Mr. Vassall's having said any Thing about Mr. Fletcher's
Cheating Mrs. Eunice Willard, nor of hearing her Name mentioned; but he
withdrew and lest said Vassal, Dennie, and Salter together.

Sworn in Court December 9. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch Cler.

I John Catheart of lawful Age, Mariner, declare, That the latter End of March
1751, being in Black-River in Jamaica, in discoursing with Mr. William Vassal
of Boston the Defendant, concerning a Brigt. I was concerned in with Mr.
William Fletcher of said Boston, the Plantiff, which was cast away, said
Vassal asked me if she was insur'd? I told him that I had left Orders with Mr.
Thomas Fletcher, who did his Brother's Business, to write his Brother William
Fletcher, who was then in England, to get Four Hundred and fifty Pounds
Sterling insured on my Account; that he (said Vassal) spoke very diminitively
of said William Fletcher, and said he wou'd-n't give me Six Pence for it if
that was the Case.

ISaac Freeman of lawful Age, testifies and says, That some Time in the Year
1751, he was at Messi^. John and Richard Billings's Shop in Boston, where there
was sundry Gentlemen present, among whom was Mr. William Vassal the Defendant,
and that the said Vassal, then speaking of and meaning the Plantiff, said,
that Will. Fletcher or Bill. Fletcher was as sorry a Scoundrel, a Villain, a
Rascal and scandalous a Fellow as lived, and that he would not take said
Fletcher's Word for a Farthing, and he did not believe he was worth a Groat,
and that he (said Vassal) said, he once had a Note of said Fletcher's, which
he said he offered to sell at Vendue before a Number of Gentlemen, and no body
would give anything for it; and further, that the said Vassal repeated the
Words about the said Fletcher's being a Villain, a Rascal, a scandalous Fellow,
and many other Words to the same Effect several Times, very much to the
Prejudice of the said Fletcher; upon which the Deponent said, he had often
dealt largely with Mr. Fletcher and had always found him a Man of Honor, and
thought it was Pity but some of Mr. Fletcher's Friends should let him know what
the said Vassal said of him said Fletcher, to which the said Vassal replied,
with all his Heart, he should be glad of it for he could prove it, he would say
the same to his Face. And the Deponent further says, that he was Master of the
Ship Sophia the Voyage before she went in said Fletcher's Employ, and that
after said Fletcher purchased the said Ship, he the said Fletcher would have
had this Deponent go the Voyage to Jamaica and the Bay in said Vessel, and that
this Deponent should have been willing to have gone in her the same Voyage the
said Fletcher's Brother went when he was drowned, had he not at that Time been
engaged in other Persons Employ, and further the Deponent says not.

Isaac Freeman.
Sworn in Court, December 11. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.
Boston, December 8th. 1752.
I Joseph Jackson testify and say, That sometime in the Year 1749, I was in
Messi^ John and Richard Billings's Shop, and Mr. William Vassal the Defendant
being present, that said William Vassal expressed himself to this Purport,
that Mr. William Fletcher was not able to pay his Debts, and that the said
William Fletcher sent a Ship to Sea that was not fit to proceed a Voyage; and
that said William Fletcher sent a Ship that was lost with a Design to defraud
some Gentlemen that was concerned; and further adds, that from the Report
spread by said William Vassal, sometime after William Fletcher sailed for
England, I looked upon the Money which said Fletcher owed me to be dubious,
which before he sailed I looked upon to be as good as any Gentleman's in Boston.

Mr. Billings came into Court, and being sworn, was closely examined by Mr.
Fletcher, but he could not remember any Thing the said Vassal was charged
with; at last declared, he did not remember that he ever heard Mr. Vassal say
any Thing against Mr. Fletcher's Character: This surpised the Audience,
because it was evident that Billings's Shop was the constant Resort of Vassal
and his Companions. -- Three Days after this Mr. Billings came into Court, and
said that Mr. Vassall's Lawyers had promiss'd him he should not be sworn, --
that he was very much scared and fluttered when he gave his Evidence before,
and prayed he might have Liberty to bring it in Writing; which was granted, and
he produced his Evidence in Writing, upon which he received a severe Reprimand
from the Court for his former Behavior, and the Court told him, That
notwithstanding his present Evidence, they were still surprised at it. -- His
Evidence is as follows.

JOhn Billings testifies and declares, That being in Company with Mr. Vassal,
the Defendant, he has heard him frequently say, That Mr. William Fletcher the
Plantiff, was a Rogue, Rascal, Villain, and such like Names, and that he had
cheated him in Regard to some Tickets between them, and further says not. --
This was said while the said Fletcher was in England.

John Billings.
Sworn in Court, December 11. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

N. B. The following Evidences were summoned by Mr. Vassal to fish out (as it
was termed) something against Fletcher: After which they were interrogated by
Mr. Fletcher, viz.

THomas Cushing of Boston, Merchant, of lawful Age, testifies, That about a
Fortnight or three Weeks before Mr. William Fletcher's Departure for London, he
the Deponent being in Company with Mr. William Vassal, and others, at Messi^.
John and Richard Billings's Shop, heard Mr. Vassal with some Warmth utter
diverse Expressions concerning Mr. Fletcher, tending greatly to hurt his
Character and Reputation; particularly, That the said Fletcher was a Man of no
Honor, and that he would not trust said Fletcher for a Groat: The Deponent
further says, sometime near Mr. Fletcher's Departure for London, he heard it
hinted as if Mr. Fletcher was in low Circumstances, about which Time he the
Deponent was bound for Mr. Fletcher to Edward Bromfield, Esquire as Trustee to the
Hon. James Allen, and Andrew Oliver, Esqrs for about the Sum of Two Hundred
Pound; Sterling, and that he should have endeavored to have secured himself
with Respect to the same, had he not apprehended the abovementioned Hints or
Reports were groundless, and arose from Mr. Vassall's talking very freely
concerning said Fletcher; of which he was informed by Capt. John Billings, who
often told him the Deponent, upon his going into said Billings 's Shop, that
said Vassal had been saying of Mr. Fletcher every Thing that was had, and that
tended to hurt said Fletcher's Credit.

Thomas Cushing.
Sworn in Court December 9. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

JOhn Dennie of lawful Age, Testifies and says, Some short Time after Mr.
William Fletcher the Plantiff, returned from London, which was in J^ne A. D.
1751, a certain Person mentioned to Mr. William Vassal the Defendant, that he
understood that said Fletcher designed to sue or to take him with a single
Writ, for defaming him the said Fletcher; upon which the said Mr. Vassal asked
the Person, What he heard Mr. Fletcher had charged him with? Upon which the
Person told said Vassal, he charged him with calling him a Rogue, a Rascal, a
Villain, a Cheat; upon which the said Vassal replied, if that is all he
charges me with, of calling him a Rogue, a Rascal, a Villain, a Cheat, I own I
did, and will go into Court, and own or prove it, for he cheated poor Eunice
Willard (...) of a L. 1000 or L. 1500, he took up of her upon the Bottom of a
(...), and further this Deponent says not.

John Dennie.
Sworn in Court, December ^ 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

I William Dennie of Boston, Merchant, declare, That sometime in the Year 1749,
I had an Account open with Mr. William Fletcher, the Balance of which due to
me was between fourteen and fifteen Hundred Pounds old Tenor; that sometime
before he went for London I waited on him, requesting the Payment of said
Balance, when we came to this Agreement, that in his Absence the Money should
be paid by his Brother Mr. Thomas Fletcher, and in the mean Time Security
given, which was accordingly done to my Satisfaction, and am pretty sure that
the giving Security was said Fletcher's own voluntary Offer; that sometime
after the said Fletcher's Departure for London, said Balance was with Honor
paid me by his Brother Mr. Thomas Fletcher, and I think with Interest; that I
have heard Mr. William Vassal more than once, when speaking of Mr. William
Fletcher, say, that he was a Rascal, and Scoundrel, etc.

William Dennie.
Sworn in Court, December 9. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

BEnjamin Parker of Boston, Merchant, of lawful Age, testifies and says, That
in the Month of July 1749, he, together with Mr. Le^nard Jarvis, bought of Mr.
William Fletcher sundry Setts of Bills of Exchange drawn by said Mr. Fletcher
on himself, or in his Absence on Nathaniel Paice, Esquire of London, to the Value
of five Hundred Pounds Sterling, that at the Time of their buying said B^^^
they heard Mr. Fe^wick had bought Bills of Mr. Fletcher, to the Amount of four
or five Hundred Pounds Sterling; that soon after their purchasing said Bills
they heard of Mr. Deblois buying Bills also of Mr. Fletcher, to the Amount of
Eight Hundred Pounds Sterling; upon hearing of these Drafts they were uneasy
about the Payment of their Bills, and acquainted Mr. Fletcher with their
Uneasiness; who replied, the Bills would be paid, for that he expected to have
Effects in London, from the Proceeds of a Vessel he had sent to Carolina,
sufficient to discharge said Bills; but as this was not in our Apprehensions
sufficient to remove our Uneasiness, it was agreed on between the said Mr.
Jarvis and the Deponent, to take such Measures for the Security of the Money
they had paid for said Bills, as they should, upon Consultations with some
Gentlemen of the Law, be advised to; that some short Time after this the
Deponent went to England, that on his Arrival in London, he was acquainted that
Part of the said Mr. Fletcher 's Bills were paid, and that the Remainder as
they became due were honorably paid, and further this Deponent says not.

The Drafts of ours were made the 21^t of July, 1749. Benjamin Parker.
Sworn in Court, December 11th. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

LEonard Jarvis, of lawful Age, testifies and says, That sometime before Mr.
William Fletcher went to London, he this Deponent, together with Mr. Benjamin
Parker, agreed with said Fletcher for Bills of Exchange to be drawn on himself,
or in his Absence on Nathaniel Paice, Esquire for five Hundred Pounds Sterling;
that sometime after they had paid him considerable Part of the Money for said
Bills, they grew very uneasy at some Conversations they had heard relating to
Mr. Fletcher's Circumstances; whereupon this Deponent and Benjamin Parker
hinted the same to Mr. Fletcher, who mentioned some Methods he had taken to
lodge Moneys in England, which gave them Satisfaction; but in two or three
Days, according to this Deponent's best Remembrance, after he had received Mr.
Fletcher's Drafts, he was informed that Messi^. Gilbert and Lewis Deblois had
Bills of Mr. Fletcher's for Eight Hundred Pounds Sterling, which alarmed him in
such a Manner that he made the best Enquiries he could, and of Persons who he
thought could best inform him of Mr. Fletcher's Affairs; which Enquiries
increased his Uneasiness: Upon which he agreed with his Friend Mr. Parker to
take all prudent Precautions both in London, where Mr. Parker was bound, and in
New England; and sometime after, this Deponent advising with a Gentleman of
known Character in the Law, took out Writs and attached Mr. Fletcher's House in
Town, and his Farm at Cambridge; To what Effect was it to attach an Estate
before a Debt became due? Or what Gentleman of Character could think such (...)
would be of any Service? -- Common Sense shows such an Attachment could (...)
be G^^^ --
but upon examining the Records for the County of Suffolk, and by Enquiries
made by Mr. Sheriff Fester in Middlesex, he found there were no Deeds of either
upon Record: This Deponent further says, The Bills of Mr. Fletcher 's were
honorably paid. These Drafts of ours were made the 21^t of July, 1749.

Leonard Jarvis.
Sworn in Court, December 11. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

I Samuel Champny do declare, That in the Year 1747 I sold Mr. William Fletcher
the Farm he now owns in C^^bridge, for Three Thousand Pounds, and took his Bond
for the same in 1748, at which Time I gave the said Fletcher a Deed for the
same; that before he went to England he paid between fifteen and sixteen
Hundred Pounds, as I called for it, and to my Satisfaction; and that since that
the said Fletcher has paid me about five Hundred Pounds more, and has told me
several Times since, that I might have the Remainder whenever I pleased to
demand it: Further, I declare, That about a Fortnight past Mr. William Vassal
of Boston came to me at my House in Cambridge, and told me, he was informed Mr.
William Fletcher owed me, and asked me, What Security I had for it, and if I
had a Mortgage for it? I told him I had not; then he asked me whether I had a
single Bond for it? I told him I had a Bond, and was very easy about it, for
Mr. Fletcher always let me have Money whenever I wanted it, and told me that I
might have a Thousand Pounds at any Time, if I would give him Notice a Week or
ten Days, or a Fortnight at the cut-side, beforehand: Then the said Vassal
asked me, whether I had not taken up Goods of said Fletcher upon that Account,
for fear I shou'dn't get my Money? I told him I had not, and that the Goods I
had were quite upon another Footing; and further I told him that said Fletcher
had always dealt generously and honorably with me.

Samuel Champny.
Sworn in Court December 8. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

Middlesex, ss. Cambridge, November 27th. 1752.
THESE may Certify, That I have not received into my Office the Deed which Mr.
Samuel Champny gave of his Father's Estate in Cambridge to Mr. William Fletcher
of Boston.

Attest. Fra. Foxcrost, Register of Deeds for Middlesex.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

THomas Hubbard, Esquire of lawful Age, testifies and says, That in the Month of
July 1749, Mr. William Fletcher bought of him a Snow and her Cargo of Luraber,
for which he was to give him L. 11,544, and proposed to pay him in the
following Manner, viz. L. 900 Sterling by the first of April 1750, and the
Remainder by a Draft on his Brother Thomas Fletcher, payable in a short Time,
which he did accordingly; and for Security of the Payment of the L. 900
Sterling he proposed to hypothecate the Vessel, to which I objected, as that
would be attended with Trouble and Cost, and without an Insurance would be a
slender Security; a little Time after this Mr. Fletcher met me on the Exchange,
and told me, if it was agreeable to me, he would instead of hypothecating the
Vessel for Security, give me a Deed of Mortgage of his Mansion House at the
westerly Part of the Town, which he said was free from any kind of Encumbrance,
but should be glad it might not be put upon Record, at least for a Time, to
which readily agreed; accordingly on the 24th of July he brought me his
promissary Note of Hand for L. 900 Sterling, payable the first of April 1750,
and a Mortgage-Deed for his House duly executed, and I gave him a Bill of Sale
for Vessel and Carge according to Promise; I also then agreed with him, that in
Case he should not succed in the Business he was then bound to London upon, I
would not protest his Bills in three Months after the Expiration of the Time
therein limited for their Payment, and gave Orders to my Friends not to protest
them till they had Orders from me to do it; but hearing in the Fall of the Year
1750, that Mr. Fletcher's Affairs in England were delayed from Time to Time,
and in case of Mortality of either Side, there might some Difficulty a^^s by my
Deed's not being on Record, I did on the 10th of December 1750, and not before,
offer it to the Register of Deeds for the County of Suffolk, desiring him to
enter it himself, and not let any Body know it if he could conveniently help
it, apprehending it was not prudent in me to keep it by me without it is being
on Record, which was the Reason of my acting as I did. L. 700, Part of the L.
900, was paid me in March 1751, by Mr. Fletcher himself to my Order in London,
the other L 200 remains unpaid.

Thomas Hubbard.
Sworn in Court December 9. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

THE Deposition of Ezekiel Goldthwait, Register of Deeds and Conveyances of
Houses and Lands within the County of Suffolk, in the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England; and the said Deponent declares and says, That
on the 10th Day of December 1750, Thomas Hubbard, Esquire delivered to him a Deed,
bearing Date the first Day of December 1747, which James Allen and Andrew
Oliver of Boston, Esqrs as surviving Executors of the last Will and Testament
of Thomas Fitch, Esquire deceased, for the Sum of Two thousand two hundred and
thirty-two Pounds Bills of Credit of the old Tenor, sold and conveyed unto
William Fletcher of Boston aforesaid, Merchant, a certain Dwelling House and
Land situate at the westerly Part of Boston, and in said Deed bounded as
follows, viz. Southerly on Cambridge-Street, and there measures One hundred
twenty-eight Feet, Westerly on Staniford-Street Eighty Feet, Northerly on Land
of John Staniford, and there measures One hundred twenty-eight Feet, Easterly on
Land of the said James Allen, and there measures eighty Feet; and at the same
Time said Thomas Hubbard, Esquire delivered to the Deponent one other Deed from
said William Fletcher, to him said Hubbard, bearing Date the 24th Day of July
1749, wherein said Fletcher conveyed to said Hubbard the Dwelling House and
Land aforesaid, as a colateral Security for the Payment of the Sum of Nine
Hundred Pounds Sterling, due to him on said Fletcher's Note given to said
Hubbard the same Day, and payable on or before the first Day of April, One
thousand seven hundred and fifty-one, on the Payment of which, said Deed and
Note were to be void; in which last Deed it is mentioned, that the said
Fletcher had put into the Hands of said Thomas Hubbard, Esquire the Deed aforesaid
given to him by said Allen and Oliver, both which Deeds the said Hubbard
desired this Deponent to record; and further, that the Record of the
last-mention'd Deed from Mr. Fletcher to Mr. Hubbard remains uncancel'd and
undischarg'd to this Day; and the Deponent further says, that when said Hubbard
gave him the Deeds aforesaid, he asked said Hubbard, why he had kept 'em so
long without recording? To which he answered, that Mr. Fletcher desired him
that he would not soon record 'em, but, said Mr. Hubbard, the Affairs he is
gone to England upon seem to be delayed, and I don't know how long he may tarry
there, so I think it safest to have them upon Record; but I would have you do
it with as much Secrecy as the Nature of it will admit of, -- when we parted:
The Deponent further says, That upon searching the Records he finds, that said
Mr. William Fletcher on the thirty-first Day of May 1744, for the Sum of Five
Hundred Pounds old Tenor, purchased an Estate in Boston of Benjamin Bagnall,
and which the Deponent cannot find he has since sold or conveyed; and further
the Deponent says not.

Boston, December 11. 1752. Ezekiel Goldthwait.
Sworn in Court, December 11. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

I Thomas Fletcher of Boston, declare, That in October 1746, I entered into my
Brother William Fletcher's Business in the Warehouse, and wrote for him, and
continued in his said Business from that Time until July 1751, during which
Time I never knew any Thing transacted in his Business but what was agreeable
to Justice; but in a very short Time after he was gone for England, in the Year
1749. I was surpised to hear a Number of bad Reports spread abroad concerning
him, such as these, that he was a bad Man, that his Circumstances were bad, and
the like, all which gave me a great deal of Uneasiness and Trouble, as I was
left to transact his Business in his absence; that soon after these Reports
were spread abroad, diverse Persons with whom my Brother (...) Dealings, came
to me and pressed me very much for the Demands they had against my Brother,
which put me to uncommon Inconveniences to (...) their Demands; and in the
Year 17^^, Isaac Hatch and Samuel Tilden, to when my Brother was indebted about
L. 4000 old Tenor, (...) him for the same, and attac'd (...) Effects in my
Hands for Security; the former of which told me, be did not want the Money,
provided I would give him Security; and further, at the Request of my said
Brother, I have lately examined his Books and Papers, and how his Affairs stood
at the Time of going to England in the Year 1749, and find by the best
Computation that I can make, that after all the Demands that any Person had
against him at that Time, he had a Balance in his Favor of about Five
Thousand Pounds old Tenor, exlusive of his Real Estate in Boston and at
Cambridge E^^i^^ed between (...)
.

Thomas Fletcher.
Sworn in Court December 7. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

Memorandum.
THAT in this Case the Council for the Defendant moved, That Thomas Fletcher,
the Plantiff's Book-keeper and a Witness in the Case, might be questioned,
Whether a large Quantity of Goods of the Plantiff's were not once se^^'d by the
Custom-House Officers, as being illegally Imported? To this the Plantiff's
Council objected, as impertinent to the Issue, and tending to charge the
Plantiff with an Offense against which he was not prepared to defend himself:
Upon which the Court was divided, Mr. Justice Saltonstall and Mr. Justice
Russell were of Opinion, that the Question might be put to the Witness; but the
Chief Justice and Mr. Justice Ly^^^ were of a contrary Opinion: Whereupon it
was ruled by the whole Court, That the Witness should not be put to answer that
Question. Allowed to be filled in the Case.

Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

N. B. The following Witnesses were produced by Mr. Fletcher, to support his
Character, and to prove what special Damages he had suffered by Means of Mr.
Vassall's injurious Treatment.

EDmund Quincy, of lawful Age, Testifies and Declares, That at sundry Times
between the latter Part of November 1750, and October 1752, he received sundry
Letters from Messi^, Thomas and Adrian Hope, Merchants in Amsterdam, respecting
a considerable Sum of Money which Mr. William Fletcher of Boston owed the said
Hopes; that in the first of said Letters, dated August 4. 1750. Five Weeks
after Mr. Fletcher became indicted to them. Part of which was not to be paid
for (...) (...) Months; -- is (...) was the D^^^ruction of his Credit, with
these Gentlemen.
the said Messi^. Hopes enclosed an Account of what Mr. Fletcher owed them,
with a Power of Attorney, and Directions to the said Deponent and Son, to
prosecute their Demand against said Fletcher, in same Letter acquainting the
said Deponent, that they apprehended they were in Danger of Suffering, by their
having given said Fletcher a Credit of upwards of Two Thousand Pounds Sterling,
and urging us to obtain Security for the same by some Means or other; that soon
after receipt of the abovementioned Letter, the said Deponent received another
dated August 10th, with Duplicate of said Account and Power, in which Letter
the said Mess^^ Hopes repeat their Request, that we would procure them here
Payment of said Debt, or Security for the same, adding, that they had received
nothing from Mr. Fletcher but Excuses for his non-Complaince with their Demand
made in London Those Gentlemen also demanded Security in (...) le^st then
should (...) of it in New England
; but in their next Letter of August 14th, they advise the said Deponent, that
since their last Mr. Fletcher had given them so satisfactory an Answer to their
Demand, that they desire their Power against him might not be carried into
Execution, and very particularly cautioned the said Deponent and Son against
any Hint of the same; that in their next Letter of October 13th, the said
Mess^^. Hopes urge the said Deponent and Son to prosecute their Demand against
Mr. Fletcher, as the Proposals made were not complied with; that in their next
of March 4th, in Answer to one they had received from the said Deponent and
Son, they write, they were much pleased with the said Deponent and Son, their
having procured Security of Sixteen Hundred Pounds Sterling Value in Goods,
which Mr. Thomas Fletcher had assigned them, for Account of said Hopes, in
Behalt of his Brother Mr. William Fletcher, by an Instrument under his Hand,
and were to remain where they, were deposited, till Advice arrived from Mess^^.
Hopes that their Demand was satisfied; that in their next Letter of July 31st.
1751, they advise said Deponent and Son, that Mr. Fletcher had paid them in
London, Eight Hundred Pounds Sterling, part of his Debt, and that they esteemed
themselves very happy that the Sixteen Hundred Pounds Security in Goods would
prove sufficient to answer their Demand, and that as they had Mr. Fletcher's
Bond for the Sixteen Hundred Pounds, then remaining due, they would forward an
authenticated Copy of the same, in order to prosecute their Demand in the Law,
and in same Letter gave Liberty to deliver up said Security of Goods, for any
other which might be esteemed Equivalent, least the Detention of the Goods
might be detrimental to Mr. Fletcher; that in their next Letter of August 20th,
1751, Mess^. Hopes write, that their said Demand remained unsatisfied, but in
same Letter say, they were advised that Mr. Fletcher's Affairs began to wear a
better Aspect than they had done, on the Prospect of a considerable additional
Sum of Prize Money; that in sundry following Letters, Messi^. Hopes make
mention of Mr. Fletcher's Affairs, but seemingly in general with less Concern,
till their Letter of May 19th, 1752, in which they advise of his having paid
them the full of their Demand: The said Deponent further Testifies, That he had
dealt with Mr. Fletcher some Years before his going for London, in all which he
had no Reason to suspect his Hones^y or Honor, and particularly, about six
Months before his Departure, he was in so good Credit with the said Deponent,
that he took the said Fletcher's single Note of Hand for about there Thousand
Pounds, old Tenor, due to him from another Person, whom the said Deponent
discharged upon Receipt of said Note, which Note he paid about a quarter Part
before his Departure, and the Remainder by his Brother afterward; and the
Deponent further ^^ch, that the principal D^^ when the said Mr. Fletcher owed
said Mess^. Hopes, was per their Account contracted the 29th of J^ne 1750; and
the said Deponent further says not.

Edward Quincy.
Sworn in Court, December 5, 1752. Atte^^. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

THE Deposition of (...), of Boston, Mariner, of lawful Age, terstifies and
says, That on or (...) the fifth of August, A. D. 1752, Old Sti^e, being at the
House of Mass^^ Thomas and (...) Hopes, Merchants in Amsterdam in (...), those
two Gentleman took this Deponent aside from the Compting-House, out of the
Hearing of their Clerks, and asked him, if he know Mr. William Fletcher in
Boston? this Deponent answered, Yes; and that he left him in London the last
Fall; and then they asked him, what Circumstances he was in? This Deponent
answer that he wished that he was in as good, they then asked, how, in what
(...)? this Deponent then said to them, that the Government had granted him Ten
Thousand Pounds Sterling, and that he believed that he would receive Seven
Thousand Pounds more, and that besides, he had got a good Estate in
New England, so that this Circumstances is certainly credible enough; then they
said they were wrong informed; and this Deponent further said, that he would be
bound for Mr. Fletcher's Payment if he owed them any Money; and they further
said, we have sent him away a great deal; then this Deponent answered, that
they had no Occasion to be afraid of their Money if he owed them any; and they
said, they were glad to hear so; and this Deponent then said, that they must
have been misinformed of Mr. Fletcher, and then (...) Thomas and Adrian said,
that they were glad to hear that it was so; then this Deponent asked them, who
the Persons were that gave them such Information? and they said, they were
informed so, then I said by whom, and what is his Name? and they then told me
the Name of the Person, but as he was unknown to this Deponent, he really had
forgot the Name, but well remembers that he was a Master of a Vessel; and this
Deponent further says, that then Messi^. Then as and Adrian Hope locked on each
other and said, that they were sorry that they had had such Information of him;
and further this Deponent says not.

Boston, December 6, 1752. Narrias Vaughan.

Suffolk, ss. Boston, December 6. 1752.
Narrias Vanghan being sick, and not able to attend the Court, personally
appeared and being solemnly cautioned to declare the whole Truth, made Oath to
the afore-written Deposition by him signed, That it contains the Truth, the
whole Truth and nothing but the Truth; the same being taken at the Request of
William Fletcher, to serve in a Cause upon the Review to be heard and tried at
the Superior Court of Judicature now sitting at Boston, within and for the
County of Suffolk, wherein the said William Fletcher was the original Plantiff,
and William Vassal Defendant, the said William Vassal being present at the
Caption of the Minutes of this Depostion being said, and made no Objection.

Coram me, John Steel, Just. PAC.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

SAmuel Tilden of Mars^^^ld, in the County of Plymouth, Yeoman, being of lawful
Age, Testifies and says, That in the Fall of the Year 1750, he settled
Accounts with Mr. Thomas Fletcher of Boston, Merchant, on Account of his
Brother Mr. William Fletcher, then gone for England, and the Balance due to
him the said Tilden and the other Owners, was about Fifteen Hundred Pounds old
Tenor, for which Sum the said Thomas gave his Notes of Hand on Behalf of said
William; and that about eight or ten Months afterward, as near as he can now
recollect, it being at the House of Mr. Isaac Hatch at Pembroke, who had lately
come from Boston, the Deponent having sometime before heard from Israel Hatch,
that Mr Fletcher's House was mortgaged; he thereupon made Enquiry about it of
Mr. Isaac Hatch, who acquainted him, that he was informed in Boston by Deacon
Hill, that Mr. Fletcher's House was mortgaged, and that he the said Fletcher
would never return back again to this Country; See Mr Hatch Evidence as (...).
whereupon this Deponent became somewhat uneasy about his Money, and having
been informed by Mr. Hatch, that Mr. Fletcher was in his Debt, this Deponent
asked him, whether he intended to sue Mr. Fletcher? who answered, that he could
not tell, whether he should sue him or not; but this Deponent observing that
Mr. Hatch did not incline to speak freely about that Matter, he apprehended
that the said Hatch was jealous, that the Deponent would get Security for his
Money before him, whereupon he the Deponent, by the first Opportunity that
presented, sent a single Writ against the said Thomas Fletcher, for about Seven
Hundred and Fifty Pounds (being what was due to him by promissary Note of Hand)
and thereupon he got Security for his Money; and this Deponent farther
declared, the if it had not been for these Reports which he heard, he should
not have sued for his Money.

Suffolk, ss. December 2. 1752.
The above-named Samuel Tilden, being bound to Sea, appeared before me, and
being carefully examined in the Presence of Messi^. William Vassal and William
Fletcher, in whose Cause (now depending by Appeal in the Superior Court of
Judicature, wherein the said Fletcher is Plantiff, and the said Vassal
Defendant, and being cautioned to Testify the whole Truth) he made Oath to the
Truth of the above written Declaration; taken out of Court by Consent of both
the said Parties before me,

S. D^xforth, Jus. Pacis.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

THomas Hill, of Boston, Distiller, of full Age, Testifies and says, That some
Time in the Year 1750, he met with Mr. Isaac Hatch, jun. on the Deponent's
Whart, and Mr. Hatch told him, Mr. William Fletcher owed him a Sum of Money,
and that he (said Hatch) was a going to sue him; upon which I the Deponent made
Answer, that he need not do that, for that Mr. Fletcher had sent a large
Quantity of Goods over to New England; and that Mr. Fletcher was like to
recover his Money in London, and that he would be over to New England in a
short Time; upon which Mr. Hatch asked me the Deponent, if I would be bound for
said Fletcher? to which I made answer, I did not care to be bound for any Man,
but if he would take Ru^, I would pay him the Debt; but as to my saying to said
Hatch, that Mr. Fletcher's House was under a Mortgage, and that Mr. Fletcher
would never return to New England, I the Deponent, do declare, I do not
remember my saying any such Thing; and verily believe I did not say any such
Thing; but it must certainly be a Mistake of said Hatch 's, for I never knew
that Mr. Fletcher 's House was mortgaged, 'till I heard Mr. Speaker Hubbard 's
Evidence read in this Court last Night, and never had any Reason to think be
(said Fletcher) would not return; and further I the Deponent say, that having a
considerable Trade with Mr. Fletcher ever since that Mr. Fletcher has been for
himself, more especially from April 1749 to March 1750, when the Amount of
their Account was upwards of L. 4000 old Tenor, and when he the said Fletcher
settled Accounts with me, I the Deponent was in his Debt upwards of L. 200 old
Tenor, and from May 1750, to January 1752, when the Amount of the Account was
upwards of L. 1000 Lawful Money, upon Settlement of Account, I was in his Debt,
eleven Pounds Lawful Money, in all which Dealings I never found but that Mr.
Fletcher was as honest and fair a Trader as any Man I the Deponent ^ver dealt
with.

Thomas Hill.
Sworn in Court, December 9th. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

JOseph Dowse, of lawful Age, testifies and says, That Mr. William Fletcher
of Boston, Merchant, in the Year 1746, 1747, and 1748, occasionally underwrote
Policies of Insurance in his the Deponent's Office; that the said William
Fletcher as far as the Deponent could apprehend, was in good Credit and Repute;
that no Person (as he knew of) made any Objections to him; that in the Time
abovementioned said Fletcher made considerable Insurance on many of his Vessels
in the Deponent's Office, the Priemiums of which he discharged with Honor; and
before his Departure to England, viz. in June 1749, he settled his Account, and
paid the Deponent the Balance; and that after that, viz. July 10th. 1749, the
Deponent sold said William Fletcher Part of a Vessel, and, according to
Agreement, took his own Bond, payable in Eight Months without Interest, for L.
2122 13 s. 5 d. old Tenor, and if not then paid to carry Interest; and further
says not.

Joseph Dowse.
The Deponent being asked, If the Bond mentioned in the Deposition was now
discharged? answered, it was not: Further was asked, whether it had been
demanded? Answered, No.

Sworn in Court December, 9. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.



STephen Greenleaf of Boston, Merchant, of lawful Age, testifies and says,
That for many Years last past he has dealt in a Mercantile Way with Mr. William
Fletcher, to the Amount of many Thousand Pounds, and that in the whole Course
of Business, he always found the said Fletcher behave in all Respects with
Honor and Honesty, as become a Merchant; this Deponent further says, that
sometime before Mr. Fletcher sailed for England this Deponent sold him the said
Fletcher, one half Part of a Ship for about four Thousand Pounds, and took the
said Fletcher's sole Obligation for the Payment of the same, at a distant
Period, being at that Time under no Suspicion, but that Mr Fletcher's
Circumstances were very good; but that a few Days before the said Fletcher left
New England, this Deponent hearing in a loose and general Way, that Mr.
Fletcher's Circumstances were ^^^ous, thought himself obliged in Faithfulness
to Mr. William Vernon, a Gentleman in Rhode Island, who was partly interested
with this Deponent in the said half Part of the Ship, to desire the Favor of
the said Fletcher, to get some Person to be bound with him the said Fletcher
for so much Money as was due to the said Fernen, but that as to his own Part of
said Ship by wanted no Security, being perfectly satisfied with said Fletcher's
single Bond; upon which Mr. Fletcher replied, that it was disagreable to him to
ask any Gentleman to be bound for him, but that he would pay the Money
punctually at the Time agreed on, or sooner if his Affairs in England could be
soon settled; and added, that it would be agreeable to him if this Deponent
would advise his Correspondent in London, to call upon the said Fletcher for
the Amount of those Bonds, and that if he could conveniently discharge them he
would do it, but this Deponent never made any Demands (for his own Part, Mr.
Vernon's was paid) on the said Fletcher for the same to this Day; and further
says not.

Stephen Greenleaf.
Sworn in Court, December 9. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

JOhn Go^^^, of lawful Age, testifies and says, That some short Time before
Mr. William Fletcher sailed for London, he bought one fourth Part of a Ship of
this Deponent, and gave his Bond for the same, payable the twenty-fifth Day of
March 1752, for the Sum of Two Thousand one Hundred and fifty-eight Pounds,
fifteen Shillings, in Bills of the old Tenor, and before he sailed, he promised
me he would pay unto Mr. Thomas Lane Merchant in London, One Hundred Pounds
Sterling for my Account, being in Part of said Bond, and that if he the said
Fletcher could spare it, he would make it up One Hundred and fifty Pounds
Sterling, and further promised me, that he would send me any Goods that I
should write to him for while in London; I accordingly wrote to Mr. Fletcher
for several Things, all of which he complied with, not only in sending me what
Goods I wrote for, but paying the Money he promised to pay Mr. Lane on my
Account, with the Addition of the last fifty Pounds; and this Deponent further
says, That for several Years before Mr. Fletcher sailed for London, he had
considerable Dealing; with him, and was concerned with him in several Voyages,
and always found him to act with strict Honor and Justice, and never heard
that his Credit was the least suspected, 'till some Time after he sailed for
London; and further this Deponent says not.

John Go^^^.
Sworn in Court, December 9. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

WE Gilbert and Lewis Deblois, of Boston, Braziers, declare, That in July 1749,
we purchased three Setts of Bills of Exchange of Mr. William Fletcher of
Boston, Merchant, who drew the said Bills on himself, to the Value of Eight
Hundred Pounds Sterling, payable by himself at distant Periods, and that at
that Time we had so good an Opinion of Mr. Fletcher's Credit and Circumstances,
that if we had had Occasion of a larger Sum, we should been glad to have taken
said Fletcher's Bills therefore; that soon after we purchased said Bills of Mr
Fletcher, we heard that his Circumstances were bad, which gave us some
Uneasiness, least are should lose the Money we had paid him for said Bills; and
in order to prevent a Loss we immediately sent forward to London, a Power to
two Gentlemen there against the said Fletcher, with Orders to secure our
Interest in Case the said Bills should not meet with Honor; that
notwithstanding what we had heard to the Disadvantage of said Fletcher's
Circumstances, the said Bills were all punctually paid as they became due.

Boston, December 6. 1752. Gilbert and L^^^ Deblois.
And that those Deponents heard three or four People say, That Mr. Fletcher's
Circumstances were bad, and this was two or three Days before said Fletcher
went to England, and that they never heard Mr. Vassal say any Thing of Mr.
Fletcher's Circumstances, nor any Person that they know dealt with Mr. Fletcher.

Sworn in Court December 11. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.



Mr. William Fletcher, Sir,
AS you are now going to settle at Boston in New England, if you are inclined
to undertake the following Commission, it may introduce us to a further
Correspondence, you will please to purchase what Dollars you can of full
Weight, at a Price not exceeding Four Shillings and Six Peace Sterling each,
and consign them on my Account to Thomas Sand, Esquire Deputy-Pay master of the
Forces at Halifax in Nova Scotia; get them on as cheap Freight as possible, and
send me the earliest Advice possible of what you intend to ship, that I may
make the necessary Insurance: You will by the first Opportunity from Time to
Time send me the Duplicates of the Bills of Lading, on the Receipt of which I
will punctually pay your Drafts on me at Thirty Days Sight; for all which I
shall be willing to allow you Two and one half per Cent. Commission.

You Will please to follow Mr. Soul's Direction, in every Thing, as well in
continuing as desisting from sending said Dollars.

London, 5th April, 1751. I am, SIR, Your most humble Servant, William Baker.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

I John Stevens declare and say, That in April 1749, I sailed from Boston to
the West Indies and London, and that in October 1749, I arrived in London,
where I met with Mr. William Fletcher of Boston, with whom I was very intimate
while there, by which Means I became considerably acquainted with said
Fletcher's Trade and Business in London, and that the said Fletcher was in
great Credit with some of the most credible and considerable Merchants in
London, particularly Mr Bonrry^^; and that I was applied to by several
Gentlemen in London, to in^^^eed with Mr. Fletcher for his Favors, by
Gentlemen that were looked upon to be Men of Worth and Reputation in Trade; I
continued in (...) from October 10th 'till February 10th then I embarked for
Boston, where I arrived in April following, where to my great Surprised heard
many ill Reports and bad Things said of said Fletcher, upon which I asked Mr.
Joseph Scott concerning them, as I took him to be a particular Acquaintance of
said Fletcher's; he gave me for Answer, seemingly with Concern, that he really
believed (...) all arose from what he heard Mr. Vassal say in public Company,
that said Fletcher was a Cheat, a Scoundrel, a very great Villain, had no
Honor in him, sent his Brother to Sea in an old Ship on purpose to drown him,
and that he bottomed a Ship for more than she was worth, to cheat the
Bottomers, and that said Fletcher wan't worth a Groat, and not able to pay his
Debts, but Thousands worse than nothing; all which said Scott told me in
private Conversation at my Return from London, after my hearing these ill
Reports of said Fletcher; and said Scott further told me, that he had once or
more Times differed with said Vassal in Vindication of said Fletcher's
Character; and further says not.

John Stevens.
Sworn in Court December 9. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

I Joseph Grant, jun'. of Boston, do declare, That I have dealt with Mr.
William Fletcher of said Boston, to the Amount of Forty-one Thousand Pounds,
old Tenor, within the last six Years past, in the Way of Insurance and
Merchandise, and that I always found him in all his Dealings with me to be a
Man of Honor, and as such, in my Apprehension, he was esteemed by all the
Gentlemen who under-wrote in my Office the same Time Mr. Fletcher did, and that
whenever any Loss or Losses happened on Pollices under-wrote by him, they were
always paid off and discharged with Honor.

About Thirty-eight Thousand Pounds of the above, was for Premiums of Insurance
wrote in my Office, within the Term of Four Years.

Joseph Grant, jun'.
Sworn in Court, December 9. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

JOhn Tudor, of lawful Age, Testifies, That upon looking over his Books he
finds he has been constantly trading with Mr. William Fletcher, ever since the
Year 1740 to 1752, and not only so, but I have several Times lent him large
Sums of Money, in all which he has faithfully and generously paid me; I also
find by my Books, that I have lent him several Sums of Money on the Bottom of
several Vessels, from the Year 1742 to 1748, and not one of them was cast away
while I was concerned, and the Principal and Premium he always justly paid me
according to Agreement; I was also concerned with him as an Under-writer for a
Number of Years in Mr. Grant's Insurance-Office, during which Time I never see
any Thing to the best of my Remembrance in Mr. Fletcher which tended to baffle
or defraud any Gentleman, amongst the many that met with any Loss; and as far
as I could judge, from our Beginning in said Office to the End of the French
War, Mr. Fletcher 's Credit and Character stood as fair as any Member's in the
Office, and through the Course of so many Years, and so many Thousand Pounds
Trade as we have had together, I never saw the least Room to suspect either his
Honor or Honesty, and that at his going to England he owed this Deponent a Sum
of Money, and gave him Security for it to Satisfaction.

Boston, February 27th. 1752. John Tudor.
Sworn in Court, December 7. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

THese are to Certify, That in the Year 1745 and 1746, I the Subscriber of
Boston, Merchant, had considerable Dealings with Mr. William Fletcher of
Boston, Merchant, and have had some Trade with him before and since that Time,
he always dealt with me with Honor and Honesty, as Witness my Hand this 8th of
December 1752.

Charles Apthorp.
Sworn in Court, December 9. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

Province of New Hampshire in New England, November 14. 1752. Portsmouth.
THomas Bell, Esquire of New Castle, in the Province aforesaid, Merchant, being of
lawful Age, Testifies and Declares, That for Twelve Years last past he has
dealt very largely with Mr. William Fletcher of Boston, in the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay, Merchant, and particularly in the Year 1748, sold him ^hree
new Vessels, viz. A Ship and two Brigantines, which amounted to upwards of L.
20,000; that in June 1749, upon the said Fletcher's being bound for England, he
sent and requested of me to come to Boston to settle, and when I came, he said
he was very glad to see me, and likewise said, if I had not come, he was
determined to come to Piscataqua to settle before he sailed; accordingly I
settled Accounts with the said Fletcher to the Value of upwards of L. 22,000,
at which Time the said Fletcher, fell about L. 9,000 in my Debt, L. 8,000
whereof I took his Bond for, payable in twelve Months, which Sum the said
Fletcher's Brother Mr. Thomas Fletcher, who had the Care of his Business, fully
and honorably discharged before the same became due; and I always found the
said William Fletcher, from the first of my Dealings with him to the last, a
Man of Truth, of strict Honor and Honesty, and should have been glad at any
Time to have trusted the said Fletcher with any Sum of Money I was capable of:
The said Thomas Bell further declares, That in the Fall of the Year 1749, I
went down to Boston upon Business, and while I was in Boston, I heard to my
great Surprise many bad Reports spread abroad about the said Fletcher, such as
these, that he was in bad Circumstances; that all his Estate was mortgaged;
that he was not able to pay his Debts; that he never would return to Boston
again; and particularly I was told by sundry Persons, whose Names I do not now
remember, neither do I know from whence such Reports sprang, that I was in
Danger of loosing what the said Fletcher owed me, and the like; all which gave
me great Uneasiness, and obliged me to make considerable Enquiry into the said
Fletcher's Circumstances; but through the whole I never could find there was
any just Grounds for such Reports, but on the contrary found by enquiring of
Persons who dealt with the said Fletcher, and to whom the said Fletcher owed
Money, that they had a quite different Opinion of him, and said they were not
under any Apprehensions of ever suffering by him, and would warrant that I
shoudn't be a Farthing looser by him, the said Fletcher, and that he was a Man
of Honor and Estate; but, notwithstanding these Reports gave me so much
Uneasiness that I should at that Time have refused him the said Fletcher any
further Credit, and that I verily believe that these Reports I had heard very
much disserv'd the said Fletcher's Credit and Interest, and further ^aith not,
excepting, that if upon Enquiry of the Persons the said Fletcher owed, they
had not said what they did in his Favor, I should certainly have sued the said
Fletcher.

Thomas Bell.

Portsmouth, November 14. 1752.
The abovenamed Thomas Bell, Esquire a Person of good Repute, appeared before me,
and after being duly cautioned to testify the whole Truth, relating to an
Action to be tried in the Superior Court of Judicature, now held at Boston,
for the County of Suffolk, between William Fletcher Plantiff, and William
Vassal Defendant, made Oath to the Truth of the above-written Declaration by
him subscribed, he living above thirty Miles distant from Boston aforesaid, and
the said William Vassal, the adverse Party, not dwelling or being within
twenty Miles from Portsmouth, where the above Affidavit was taken, was not
notified to be present at it.

Sworn before me, Thomas Wibird, Jusce. of the Peace.

Province of New Hampshire. (Seal.)
By His Excellency Benning Wentworth, Esquire Captain General and Governor and
Commander in Chief, in and over his Majesty's Province of New Hampshire,
aforesaid.
THese Certify, That Thomas Wibird, Esquire before whom the Oath (of Thomas Bell,
Esquire) on the other Part of this Sheet of Paper was made, and who certifies the
same at the Bottom of the Oath, under his Hand, is a Justice of the Peace for
and within this Province, duly and regularly commissionated and sworn, and is
an Officer before whom such Depositions are usually made and taken, and for
Certifiing the same, and therefore full Faith and Credit is and ought to be
given to such his Attestations, both in Court and without.

In Verity of which, I have caused the Public Seal of the Province to be
hereunto affixed the fourteenth Day of November, and in the Twenty-sixth Year
of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord GEORGE the Second, by the Grace of GOD of
Great Britain, France and Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith, etc. Ann^que
Domini, 1752.

By his Excellency's Command, B. WENTWORTH.
Theodore Atkinson, Sec^.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

I Robert Temple of Neddles Island, in the County of Suffolk, do declare upon
Oath, That I dealt considerably with Mr. William Fletcher, and have ever found
him a Man of Honor and Honesty, and when said Fletcher was going for England,
he desired our Account might be settled, which was done, and as there was a
Balance in my Favor, he ordered his Brother to pay me; with this I was very
well contented, 'till a Month after Mr. Fletcher embarked for London, when a
Friend asked me, if Mr. Fletcher did not go away in my Debt? if he did, says
he, secure yourself, for I Have heard, if all his Debts were paid, he would not be
worth a Groat; this a little surpised me, and I was determined to take the
Balance of my Account in whatever I could get, and accordingly went to Mr.
Thomas Fletcher, who then acted for his Brother, and took the Balance in
Molasses, which Article I had no Occasion for, and per which I lost Money; but
not being acquainted with Mr. Vassal, cannot say I ever heard him say any Thing
concerning Mr. Fletcher, neither did I know there was any Controversy between
them Gentlemen, 'till after Mr. Fletcher's Return from England.

Robert Temple, jun.
Sworn in Court, December 9. 1752.^ Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

JOseph Turell, of lawful Age, declares, That almost these three Years last
past he has been employed in Mr. Fletcher's Business, in all which Time he
never saw any Thing transacted in it, either by his Brother Mr. Thomas
Fletcher, who had the Conduct of it when he was gone to England, or by said
Fletcher himself after he returned, but what was agreeable to Honor and
Honesty; and that after he had been a little Time in this Emplo^, he to his
Surprise heard many bad Reports spread abroad concerning the said William
Fletcher the Plantiff's Character and Circumstances, which to my Knowledge has
been the Means of said Fletcher 's Credit's running very low with a great many
People, particularly sometime in the Summer 1751, a Person I was to pay Three
Hundred Pounds old Tenor to, in Behalf of the said William Fletcher by a Bond,
according to my Agreement with him, I offered him the said Fletcher 's Bond,
but he utterly refused it, and said he would take my Bond, accordingly I gave
it, and took the said Fletcher 's Word for the Payment, who honorably
discharged the same.

Joseph Turell.
Sworn in Court December 11. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

DAvid Vanborne, of full Age, being duly sworn on the Holy Evangelists of
Almighty GOD, declares, That he has for these twelve Years past been
acquainted with Mr. William Fletcher of Boston, and has had large Dealings
with the said Fletcher, in which he the said Fletcher has at all Times
conducted himself with the strictest Integrity and Honor; and the said
Vanhorne does also declare, that he knows several Persons in New York, that
have dealt with the said Fletcher, who generally expressed the greatest
Satisfaction with Mr. Fletcher's Dealings with them, and that he never knew of
suspected the said Fletcher guilty of the least dishonest or dishonorable
Action, and further this Deponent says not.

David Vanborne.
Sworn this 5th Day of December 1752. Before me, J. Johnson, Recorder of the
City and County of New York.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

GIles Brewer of Boston, Housewright, do declare, That I with Benjamin Eustis,
jun^. Housewright, were employed by Mr. William Fletcher, of Boston, in the
Year 1748 and 1749, in our Trade and Business, and that the said Fletcher dealt
with us from first to last with the greatest Honor and Honesty; and upon Mr.
Fletcher's going to England we carried in our Account, which amounted to
upwards of Twenty-eight Hundred Pounds old Tenor, and there being a Balance
due to us, of about One Hundred Pounds old Tenor, the said Fletcher ordered his
Brother to pay it, which was done with Honor, according to Agreement with said
Fletcher; and further I have worked for said Fletcher ever since, and have
always found him to deal with the same Honor and Integrity as before.

Giles Brewer.
Sworn in Court, December 7. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by National Hatch, Cler.

WIlliam Warland of Boston, Mason, being of lawful Age, declares, That he,
together with Jonathan Hill of Cambridge, were employed by Mr. William Fletcher
of Boston aforesaid, in their Trade, in the Years 1748 and 1749, in building
his House, and declare that he dealt with the greatest Honor from first to
last, and fully paid us; I likewise declare, that I have dealt with him largely
since that Time to this Day, and ever found him a Man of Honor and Justice.

William Warland.
Sworn in Court December 8. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

I John Scollay, of Boston, in the County of Suffolk, and Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England, Brazier, Testify and Declare, That I have at
Times dealt with Mr. William Fletcher of said Boston, Merchant, from the Year
1738 to this Time, and I don't remember to have found any Thing in my Trade
with him from first to last, but what was Fair and Honest; that when he went to
England, he then owed me Two Hundred and Forty Pounds old Tenor, which was paid
to me in his Absence by his Brother Mr. Thomas Fletcher, who I understood
transacted his Affairs for him, and I don't remember my being any-ways
concerned but that he would honestly pay me the above Sum.

Boston, December 7. 1752. John Scolley.
Sworn in Court December 7. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

I Samuel Barret, of Boston, Sail-maker, declare, That I have worked for Mr.
William Fletcher of said Boston, for eight Years last past, in which Time I
have made and repaired the Sails of about Forty-five Vessels for him, for which
he paid me about five Thousand Pounds old Tenor; and that the said Fletcher has
always paid me with the greatest punctuallity, and from my first working for
him to this Day, I have found him a Man of strict Honor and Honesty in his
Dealings.

Samuel Barrett.
Sworn in Court, December 8. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

SAmuel Holland, of Boston, Ship-joiner, of lawful Age, declares, That he has
worked for Mr. William Fletcher of Boston aforesaid, Merchant, for nine or ten
Years last past, in which Time he has done the Joyner's Work of Thirty five
Sail of Vessels for him, and that the said Fletcher has always paid him in a
handsome Manner, and from the first of h^ Working for him to the last, has
found him a Man of strict Honor and Honesty.

Samuel Holland.
Sworn in Court, December 8. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

JAcob Emmons of lawful Age, testifies and says, That he has known Mr.
William Fletcher ever since he has been engaged in Merchandise for himself, and
done some Thousands of Pounds Worth of Work for said Fletcher, and always found
him a just, fair and upright Man in his Dealings, always willing to pay
according to Agreement, and no way inclining to Tricking or Cheating his
Workmen, but as willing to pay as to employ them; and further this Deponent
says, that he has been acquainted with almost all his other Workmen, who
manifested or expressed themselves glad to work for Mr. Fletcher, and often said
it was a Pity but what Mr. Fletcher should get Money, because he improved it
for the Good of Mankind; and further, he having had peculiar Opportunity to
observe his Behavior toward them, which was always generous and
Gentleman-like; and as to his private Manner of Life in some Measure I have had
Opportunity to observe, and never found him guilty of Calumny or Detraction, or
any wise speaking Evil of his Neighbor; likewise this Deponent says, he was
acquainted with his Brother Capt. John Fletcher, and worked on beard the Ship
that he went in last, and never observed any Thing wanting for the Safety of
him or Company, and as he was often at work on beard the said Ship, he never
heard the least Suspicion advanced, either by the Master of said Ship, or by
the Sailors or Tradesmen, that she was insufficient, or that it was in any Way
unsafe to go to Sea in her; further this Deponent says, that he, in Company
with others, for a long Time has had an Affair of many Thousand Pounds Sterling
depending in England, and that upon Mr. Fletcher's going for England, he
applied to him, to request him to undertake it for him, but Mr. Fletcher
refused it, and advised him to apply to some Gentleman in England, who he said
was more fit to manage such Affairs than he was, but notwithstanding he should
been very glad to have had said Fletcher to have undertaken it, as he had a
very great Opinion of his Capacity and Integrity; f^rther this Deponent says,
that he never heard any Thing to Mr. Fletcher's Disadvantage before he failed
for England; but that not long after he was gone, he heard i^ noised about that
his Circumstances were bad, and that he was asked in public Company, in a way
reflecting on Mr. Fletcher's Character, whether the said Fletcher was not
considerable in his Debt, as he worked very largely for him? and Hints given to
this Purport, that it was apprehended Mr. Fletcher was not sufficiently able to
answer all his Demands; to which he made Answer, that he believed Mr. Fletcher
had wherewith to pay every Body what he owed them; and further this Deponent
says, from the Acquaintance he had in the Family, and particularly with Mr.
Thomas Fletcher; he was knowing to many Difficulties the said Mr. Thomas
Fletcher was put to, in transacting the said William Fletcher's Business, which
he was informed arose from the bad Reports that had been raised about him; and
further says not.

Jacob Emmons.
Sworn in Court, December 7. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

DAniel Manwarring and Gibbins Sharp, both of Boston, Shipwrights, declare,
That for about thirteen Years last past they have worked for Mr. William
Fletcher of Boston, aforesaid, Merchant, and have done almost all the
Carpenter's-Work he has had done, during which Time we have rebuilt and fitted
to Sea about fifty Sat^ of Vessels; and do declare, that we never worked for
any Man that dealt more with Honor and Honesty in our Lives: we have worked
for most of the Merchants in Town, and always found that his Credit was as good
with almost all People, as any Man we ever dealt with; that we never carried in
a Bill to him, but he was always ready to pay it, and would always let us have
whatever we asked for, with the greatest Cheerfulness, and found that we could
always depend upon what he said; and he never attempted to cut us off a Penny,
or make the least Dispute with us; that we never knew him to cheat, o^ shuffle,
or keep back the least Part of any Man's just Du^* and whenever we told him of
any apprehended Necessaries to be done to any Vessel, he always ^ntreated us to
do every Thing that was necessary for the Vessels Safety, and charged us to be
careful about it, for he never desired any Man to go in a Vessel of his in
which he should not have been willing to trust his own Life in, neither would
we suffer a Vessel to go out of our Hands to go to Sea, without being in our
Opinion sufficient; we further declare, that the Ship Mr. Fletcher 's Brother,
Capt. John Fletcher, went in was a Ship strong enough to go to any Part of the
World, and a good Ship, and had not some uncommon Accident happened to her, for
would have lasted some Years we believe.

Daniel Manwarring.
Gibbins Sharp.
Sworn in Court December 7. 1752. Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

N. B. The Examination of such a Number of Gentlemen, and the Importance of the
Case, caused such a numerous Audience, that the Court was obliged to adjourn in
the Afternoon to Fane^il-Hall, the Witnesses were chiefly examined, and Colonel
Otis as beforementioned, finished for the Plantiff the first Day; on
Friday-Morning young Mr. Otis began to speak for the Defendant; through the
whole Course of his Pleading ^e very strenuously insisted upon it, That there
was not ou^ single Word in the Writ that was actionable in this Country, and
after saying a great Deal of that Nature, he finished what he had to say that
Night, with some indecent Reflections upon the Plantiff, Even L. C. J. Ho^t,
whose Opinion in Actions of Slander seemed to bear hard against the Defendant,
was not spared by him.
which was of no Service to him or his Client, neither had he the least Color
of Evidence to support him in it. --

Saturday and Monday A. M. was taken up in re-examining some of the Witnesses,
and in hearing what the Parties had to say: -- Mr. Vassal began, when he
acquainted the Court that what he had to say in Vindication of his Conduct, he
had committed to Writing at his leisure Hours, that he might not say any Thing
rashly, or that was not agreeable to Truth. -- Accordingly he began to read, the
Substance of which was contained in about eight or ten Quarto Pages, and the
Wh^le of what he had to say was on the three following Heads: First, A Number
of Lottery-Tickets Mr. Fletcher had owed him for: Secondly, A Wager Mr.
Fletcher had laid with Mr. Gray about a Barrel of Pork: Thirdly, A Note put
into his Hands, to be delivered up on the Settlement of some Disputes between
Mr. Fletcher and Mr. Hall.

On the first Head he said, That Mr. Fletcher had wronged him out of some
Tickets he owed him for, at least had detained the Payment of them so long,
that he had lost some Ounces, Pennyweights, and Grains of Silver By this
Calculation, Mr. Vassal is certainly a good Arithmatician.
, in the Depreciation of the Currency, that is, that when the said Fletcher
first owed him for the Tickets he could with the Currency then fluctuating,
purchase so many Ounces, Pennyweights and Grains of Silver more than he could
when the said Fletcher paid him; -- and not only sustained this Loss, but by
his not receiving the Tickets in the Time of it, he was induced to purchase a
Number of Tickets in the Lottery then to be drawn, and met with such bad Luck,
that he sustained still a further Loss therein.

On the second Head he said, in order to prove Mr. Fletcher a Man of bad
Character, That he was informed that he once laid a Wager with Mr. Harrison
Gray, of a Beaver Hat, that he the said Fletcher had got a Barrel of better
Pork than Mr. Gray had, and in order to win the Wager, the said Fletcher
ordered his Cooper in packing the Pork, to put the best Pieces on the Top of
the Barrel, which said Vassal said, he looked upon to be a bad Thing.

On the third and last Head he said, That he had formerly two Notes of Hand put
into his keeping, signed by Mr. Hutchinson and others on the one Part, and by
Andrew Hall on the other, which Note of said Hall's was assigned over to Mr.
Fletcher, who then appeared in the Room of Mr. Hutchinson, etc. The Conditions
of which Notes were, that in Case the said Hall should finally recover of the
said Fletcher L. 8000 old Tenor, upon the Balance of all Actions then
depending in the Law between them, he was to deliver the Notes to Mr. Hall,
otherwise to Mr. Fletcher; that upon the Issue of these Disputes he took
uncommon Pains in advising with a Number of his Friends respecting this Matter;
but as there had been formerly a Dispute between Mr. Fletcher and him about
some Tickets he did not care to determine the Affair, without some other
Persons being joined with him in it, -- which was accordingly done, and finally
they all agreed that the said Hall ought to have the said Notes, and thereupon
he delivered them to said Hall; yet the said Fletcher had treated him very ill,
notwithstanding all the Pains he had taken in it.

After Mr. Vassal had finished as above, which is the Substance of all he
said, -- Mr. Fletcher desired leave to answer him, and to clear himself from
those Aspersions which Mr. Vassal had so unjustly charged upon him:
Accordingly he began with what Mr. Vassal had charged him with, in cheating
some Persons he had taken Money of on the Bottom of a Ship that was lost:
Secondly, With Respect to the Ship his Brother sailed in: And then by answering
all Mr. Vassal had said in Vindication of himself.

As to the First, it appeared that Mr. Fletcher was on his Journey to New York
(where the said Ship was bound for a Freight he had contracted for, on Account
of the Government) at the very Time she was cast ashore on a Reef of Rocks in
Nantasket, by an uncommon Storm, and that by her being so castaway he lost
several Thousands of Pounds, not having made any Insurance upon her; and as to
the Money he had taken upon the Bottom of said Ship, upon a Dispute arising
between him and the Persons he had the Money of, respecting their having any
Right to a Share of what was saved out of said Ship, he produced the following
Agreement between him and those Persons; and notwithstanding he had signed a
Bond to each of them (wrote by themselves) whereby they were wholly excluded
from any Salvage whatever, yet he generously consented to destroy those Bonds,
and leave it upon the Footing of Equity, to three principal Merchants in the
Town, -- whose Award he also produced -- both which are as follows.

To Joshua Winslow, Esquire John Erving, Esquire And, Mr. John Gooch.
Boston, March 24. 1742. Gentlemen,
WE the Subscribers ^^ving let Mr. William Fletcher, jun^. Owner of the Ship
Hond^ras, have the respective Sums of Money fixed to our Names here below, by
Way of Bottomree on the Ship aforesaid, which is since castaway, do hereby
choose and appoint you as Arbitrators to determine this Affair between us, and
accordingly desire the Favor of you to accept of the same; and we do by this
Writing bind ourselves, each one to the other, in the Sum of five Hundred
Pounds, (in case of Refusal) to stand by the Award which you shall see cause to
bring in against either of us, and also to settle our Affairs in this Case
accordingly, as Witness our Hands, Thomas Cushing, L. 300 0 0 Bottomers. Jab^z
Bradbury, L. 195 0 0 Bottomers. George H^lmes, L. 78 10 0 Bottomers. Eunice
Willard, Equal to Thirteen Pounds Sterling -- This is the Sum which Mr. Vassal
represented to be a Thousand or Fifteen Hundred Pounds; and the L. 703 10 s.
was all Mr. Fletcher had insur'd to make good a (...) of several Thousand
Pounds.L. 130
0 0 Bottomers. L. 703 10 0 old Tenor.

William Fletcher, jun^. Owner.


Boston, May 7. 1742.
WE the Subscribers have met and considered of the within-mention'd Affair,
which was left to our Determination, and as there was no Bond produced to us,
and both Parties agreed, that we should judge of the Case as of a common
Bottomry Bond: We are therefore of Opinion, that the Bottomer ought not to
refund any Part of the Money borrowed on the Vessel, and that the Materials
saved do belong wholly to the Owner of the Vessel.

Joshua Winslow, John Erving, John Gooch.
A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.


Secondly, As to the Ship his Brother sailed in, he made it appear by Capt.
Freeman, the former Master of the Ship, and the Tradesmen that fitted her to
Sea, that she was a strong good Ship, and sufficient to perform any Voyage
whatever, and that she was freighted by the most considerable Merchants in the
Town, with a Cargo of Fish, etc. and performed the whole of the Voyage to his
last hearing from her, without any Damage, or Suspicion of Complaint whatever;
and there was no room to suspect but that she met with some uncommon Disaster
at Sea, as thousands of new Ships have done before.

(...) Mr. Fletcher proceeded to answer what Mr. Vassal had been reading;

First, As to the Tickets, Mr. Fletcher acknowledged that he formerly owed Mr.
Vassal about L. 10 Sterling, for some Tickets, and that the Reason of his not
paying Mr. Vassal for them, was owing to the said Vassall's abusing of him on
account thereof, but said, he always declared in the Time of it, he was ready
to do it whenever Mr. Vassal should acknowledge his Fault; and that upon Mr.
Vassall's first Acknowledgment thereof, he instantly paid him to his
Satisfaction; and produced Mr. Scott's Evidence, that Mr. Vassal had made such
Acknowledgments in several Companies. See Mr. Scott's Evidence, Page 7.


Respecting the Barrel of Pork, Mr. Fletcher said he had formerly in the Year
1745, over a Bowl of Punch with Mr. Harrison Gray (who was commending a Barrel
of Pork, which afterward appeared, he had picked out for his own Use^ said a
bantering Wager with him (...) a Bowl of Punch, to his best Remembrance, that
he had got a better Barrel of Pork than said Gray had, upon which Mr. Fletcher
said he ordered his Cooper, who was then packing a large Quantity of Pork, to
pick out a Barrel of the best of it, in order to win Mr. Gray's Punch, which
being done, Mr. Gray acknowledged he had lost, and then Mr. Fletcher laughed at
him about the Manner of his winning the Wager, -- but did not remember the
Punch was ever paid.

Finally, as to what Mr. Vassal had said ab^^e the Notes that were put in
Trust into his Hands, Mr. Fletcher also acknowledged that upon Mr. Vassall's
Determination of the Property of them, he could not help saying, that Mr.
Vassal was a -- ignorant Fellow, and aid not know the Difference between Six
and Eight, and that he should be glad to be satisfied that Ignorance was the
sole Cause of such a Determination; and begged leave to prove what he had
asserted: -- In order to do this, Mr. Fletcher allowed the Conditions, upon
which those Notes were given to be as Mr. Vassal had asserted, viz. that if
said Hall should finally recover against him L. 8000, on the Balance of all
Actions then depending in the Law between them, said Vassal was to deliver
said Notes to said Hall, otherwise to him, and then produced a Certificate
under the Hand of the Clerk of the Court of all the Actions pending in the Law
at the Time when said Notes were given, as also another Certificate under the
Hands of Creen, Avery, and Russell, (to whom all the Disputes between him and
said Hall were referred) that upon the Determination of the Actions aforesaid
there was not a Balance of L. 7000 due to said Hall (a^ is fully set forth in
said Certificate in the Appendix) by all which it plainly appears, that the
Note ought not to have been delivered to Mr. Hall, but to Mr. Fletcher, so that
he had good Reason to blame Mr. Vassal as he did: -- Mr. Fletcher further
said, that he had inquired of one of the Gentlemen that was concerned with Mr.
Vassal in the Determination of those Notes, and was acquainted by him, that
they had left it to Mr. Vassal to get an Account of those Actions, and that
Mr. Vassal had brought them in an Account, which in the Time of it, they though it
was true, but if it was not they were deceived and he hoped they should be
excused on that Account.

As soon as Mr. Fletcher and Mr. Vassal had done speaking, Mr. Gridley for the
Defendant, and the King's-Attorney, Edmond Trowbridge, Esquire for the Plantiff,
closed the Case that Afternoon, and it was committed to the Jury, who bro't in
the following

VERDICT.

William Fletcher, Plantiff, We find for the Plantiff Reversion of the former
Judgment Two Thousand Pounds 1^^0 Sterling.
Money Damage, and Cost of Courts.

William Vassal, Defendant, We find for the Plantiff Reversion of the former
Judgment Two Thousand Pounds 1^^0 Sterling.
Money Damage, and Cost of Courts.

And Judgment was given accordingly. From which both Parties appealed to His
Majesty in Council.

A true Copy examined, by Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

APPENDIX.
Middlesex, ss. AT His Majesty's Superior Court of Judicature, held by
Adjournment at Concord, within and for the County of Middlesex, (...) the first
Tuesday of August, A. D. 1752.
THE Action depending between Foster Hutchinson Appellant, and Col^^
Trowbridge, jun^. Appellee, is referred to Messi^. Hugh McDaniel, Giles
Tidm^rsh, and Thomas Flucker; and it is agreed between William Fletcher and
Andrew Hall, who at their Desire are admitted Parties to this Rule, that the
Note ^^ed on was made and put into the Hands of William Vassal on the
Condition following, viz. that if there was a Balance due from said Fletcher
to said Hall of Eight Thousand Pounds old Tenor on all Actions then depending
in the Law between them, said Hall was to have the Note, otherwise, said
Fletcher was to have it: Now if said Vassal, and all to whom the Affair was
left, were wrong in their Determination, and if said Vassal delivered up said
Note wrongfully and against his Duty and Trust in the Opinion of the above
Referrees, then the said Note is to be void, and the said Trowbridge is to
refund all the Money that has already been paid, and the Costs; but if said
Referees are of Opinion that said Vassal and all were right in their
Determination, and if said Vassal was right in delivering up said Note to said
Hall, said Fletcher is to pay the Remainder of said Note, and Costs: The
Determination of said Referrees, or of any two of them, to be conclusive:
Report to be made to the Court as soon as may be.

Attest. Samuel Winthrop, Cler.

PURSUANT to the before-written Rule of Court, We the Referrees therein^^^'d
having met together and heard the aforesaid Parties and all therein concerned,
and maturely considered all the Matters and Things offered and alleged on each
Side, are of Opinion that there was not a Balance of Eight Thousand Pounds
old* Tenor due from the said William Fletcher to the said Andrew Hall upon all
Actions then depending in the Law between them, and that Mr. William Vassal
and others, to whose Determination that Affair was left and submitted, were
wrong in their Determination, and that said William Vassal ought to have
delivered the Note mentioned in this Rule to Mr. William Fletcher instead of
Mr. Andrew Hall: All which is humbly submitted by,

Hugh McDaniel, Giles Ti^m^rsh, Thomas Flucker.
Attest Samuel Winthrop, Cler.

N. B. In order to explain the above Rule it is to be observed, that the Note
aforesaid was given by Mr. Hutchinson and others in the Behalf of Mr. Fletcher
as beforementioned (...) L. 750* which Note ^eing wrongfully given up by said
Vassal to said Hall as aforesaid, the Condition which was placed at the Bottom
of the Note was t^^e off, and the Note made over by said Hall to said
Trowbridge, who while Mr. Fletcher was in England, ^ued for and recovered the
same; but upon Mr. Fletcher's Return, a new Trial being (...) the Judgment of
Court was reversed; yet Mr. Fletcher being sensible of the injurious Judgment
Mr. Vassal had given against him in this Affair, readily proposed to risque
the Case again upon the Rule aforesaid: And the said Vassal was fully ^eard
therein, by the above Gentlemen.

AT the Superior Court held at Boston, on Thursday the 8th Day of March 1748,
by Adjournment from the third Tuesday of February preceding, there were only
Eight Actions between Fletcher and Hall entered, which, together with all
Demands, were referred to Mess^ Russell, Avery, and Green, who made their
Report thereon, which was accepted by the Court. The Actions abovesaid are
entered in the Minute Book in the following Order.

N^ 76 Fletcher, Ap^. v. Hall, on a Promise that in Consideration of L. 9300
old Tenor received, Fletcher should have the Produce of the Cargoes of three
Vessels: That Hall took R^m and Sugar, being the Produce thereof to his own
Use; and in this Action there was a Verdict in Fletcher's Favor for L. 2439 8
(...). new Tenor, which Verdict was superceeded by the Rule entered into.

77 Fletcher, Apl. v. Hall, on a Policy of Insurance of Le^ch's Brigantine, to
the Amount of L. 2000 old Tenor: In this Action was a Verdict in Hall's Favor
for Costs: Which Verdict was afterward superceeded by the Rule entered into.

78 Fletcher (...) Hall, Review, on Fletcher's Note to pay Hall L. 9300 old
Tenor.

134 Hall Apl. v. Fletcher, on a Policy of Insurance on Hammett's Brigantine to
the Amount of L. 2000.

135 Hall Apl. v. Fletcher, Action of De^amation.

136 Hall Apl. v. Fletcher, Action for Deficiency of Cargoes.

137 Hall Pl. v. Fletcher, Review on a promissary Note to indemnify Hall from
Hire of two Sloops, one for L. 2400 old Tenor, the other for L. 2380.

^33 Hall Pl. v. Fletcher, for L. 465 2 s. 6 d. old Tenor, received by Hall to
Fletcher's Use of Wiltshire, etc.

Province of the Massachusetts Bay. Certified this 18th of January, 1752, by
Nathaniel Hatch, Cler.

Boston, February 1752.
THIS may Certify, That the abovementioned Eight Actions were included in the
Disputes between the aforesaid Fletcher and Hall referred to us by a Rule of
Court, and that the Balance of them, by us awarded in Favor of the said Hall,
did not amount to the Sum of Seven Thousand Pounds old Tenor; and further that
we do not remember that any Person, except the aforesaid Fletcher, has applied
to us to know in what Manner those Actions were settled by us.

Jos. Green, John Avery, James Russell.


