Popish Cruelty displayed: BEING A full and true ACCOUNT Of the Bloody and
Hellish Massacre in Ireland

Perpetrated by the Instigation of the Jesuit Priests and Friars, who were the
chief Promoters of those horrible Murders, unheard of Cruelties, barbarous
Villainies, and inhuman Practices, executed by the Irish Papists upon the
English Protestants, In the Year 1641.

And intended to have been acted over again, on the 9th of December, 1688.
being Sabbath Day; but by the wonderful Providence of God was prevented.

Very proper to be in the Hands of every honest Protestant, of what Country
soever he may be.

BOSTON, New England, Printed and sold by Thomas Fleet, at the Heart and Crown
in Cornhill.

To all haters of POPERY, by what Names or Titles soever dignified or
distinguished.
Fellow Protestants,
THus 'twas of old, when Israel felt the R^d,
When they obeyed their Kings, but not their God:
When they went whoring after other Loves,
To worship Idols in new pla^t^d Gr^^es:
They made their Gods of Silver, Wood and (...),
And ^^w'd and worshipped them when they had (...).
And to complete their Sins in every way,
They made 'em things called Priests, Priests did I say?
A Crew of Villains ^^re prefa^e than they.
Hence sprung that Romish Crew, first sp^^^'d in (...),
Who n^w is Vice their Pedag^gues excel:
Their Church consists of vicious Popes, the rest
Are whoring Nuns and lawly baggering Priests.
A noble Church! (...) with Religious Paint,
Each Priest's a Stallion, every R^g^e's a Saint.
Come you that (...) Br^^d, this Murdering Crew,
Your Pred^essors w^ll their mercies (...).
(...) Courage no^, and be both old and wise;
Stand for your Laws, Religion, Liberties:
You have the Odds, the Law is still your own,
They Are but your Traitors, therefore pull 'em down.
They struck with Fear, seek to destroy your Laws,
They Are raving m^d, you see they fix their Paws;
Because from them they fear their fatal Fall,
And by those Laws, they know you will hang 'em all.
Then keep your Laws, the Penal and the rest,
And give your Lives up, ^'re you give the Test.
And thou great Church of England hold thy own,
Force you they may, otherwise give up none;
Robbers and Thieves must count for what they have done.
Let all thy mighty Pillars new appear
Zealous and brave, void b^t^ of Hate and Fear,
That Popish F^ps may Grin, Li^, Cheat and Whine;
And curse their Faith, while all admire thine.
And thou brave Oxford, Cambridge and the rest,
Great Hough and Fairfax, that durst B^ard the Breast.
Let all the Just with thanks record their Name;
O standing Pillars of Immortal Fame!
Let God arise, and his Enemies Perish.

Popish Cruelty displayed: Being a full and true Account of the bloody Massacre
of the Protestants in Ireland, by the Instigation of the blood-thirsty Jesuits,
Priests, Friars, etc.
WHEN their Plots were ripe for Execution, we find their first Proceeding
against the English various; some of the Irish only stripping and expelling
them, others murdering Men, Women and Children without Mercy; all resolving
universally to root out all the Protestants out of Ireland; so deeply malicious
were they against the English Protestants, that they would not so much as
endure the sound of their Language.

The Priests gave the Sacrament unto diverse of the Irish upon condition they
should neither spare Man, Woman nor Child of the Protestants. One Hilligan a
Priest, read an Excommunication against all those, that from henceforth should
relieve or harbor any English, Scotch or Welsh Man, or give them Alms, whereby
many were famished to death. The Friars exhorted them with Tears, not to spare
any of the English; they boasted, that when they had destroyed them in Ireland,
they would go over into England, and not leave the Memorial of an English Man
under Heaven.

They openly professed, that they held it as lawful to kill a Protestant as to
kill a Dog. One of their Priests said, That it was no more pity to take their
Lives from them, than it is to take a Bone out of a Dogs Mouth.

The Day before this Massacre began, the Priests gave the People a Dismiss at
Mass, with liberty to go out, and to take Possession of all their Lands, as
also to strip, rob and despoil them and their Goods and Cattle; the Protestants
being, as they told them worse than Dogs, for they were Devils, and therefore
the Killing of such was a Meritorious Act, and a rare Preservative against the
Pains of Purgatory; and this caused some of the Murderers to boast, after they
had slain many of the English, that they knew, that if they should die
presently, they should go straight to Heaven.

The Irish, when the Massacre began, persuaded many of their Protestant
Neighbors to bring their Goods to them, and they would secure them, and hereby
they got abundance peaceably into their Hands, whereof they cheated the
Protestants, refusing to restore them again; yet so confident were the
Protestants at first of them, that they gave them Inventories of all they had,
and dug up their best things that were hidden in the Ground, and deposited
them in their Custody. They also got much into their Hands by fair Promises,
deep Oaths and Engagements, that if they would deliver them their Goods, they
would suffer them, with their Wives and Children, quietly to depart the
Country; and when they had got what they could, they afterward murdered them.

Having thus seized upon their Goods and Cattle, ransackt their Houses, got
their Persons, stripped Man, Woman and Child naked, and so turned then out of
doors, strictly prohibiting the Irish under great penalties, not to give them
any relief; by means hereof many miserably perished through cold nakedness and
hunger.

In the Town of Coleraine, many of these poor people that fled thither for
succor, many thousands died in two days, so that the living could not bury the
dead, but laid their Carcasses in ranks in waste and wide holes, speling them
up as if they had been Herrings.

One Magdalen Redman deposes, that she, and diverse other Protestants, among
whom were two and twenty Widows, were first robbed, and then stripped naked, and
when they had covered themselves with straw, the bloody Papists, threw in
burning straw among them, on purpose to burn them; then they drove them out
into the Woods in Frost and Snow, where many of them died with extreme cold,
and those that survived, lived miserably by reason of their many wants.

Yet though these bloody Villains exercised inhuman cruelties toward the poor
Protestants, they would commonly boast, That these were but the beginning of
their sorrows, for indeed they made it good; for having disarmed the English,
robbed them of their goods, stripped them of their Clothes, and having their
Persons in their power, they furiously broke out into all manner of abominable
Cruelties, horrid Massacres, and execrable Murders.

For there were multitudes murdered in cold blood, some as they were at Plough,
others in their Houses, others in the Highways; all without any provocation,
were suddenly destroyed.

In the Castle of Lisgool, were about one hundred and fifty Men, Women and
Children consumed by fire. At the Castle of Tullah, which was delivered to
Mac-Guire, upon composition, and faithful promises of fair quarter, as soon as
he and his entered, they began to strip the people, and most cruelly put them
to the Sword, murdering them without mercy.

At Lissanskeach, they hanged and killed above one hundred of the Scottish
Protestants, in the Counties of Ardmagh and Tyrone, where the Protestants were
more numerous, their murders were more multiplied, and with greater cruelty.

Mac-Guire coming to the Castle of Lissanskeach, desired to speak with Mr.
Middleton, who admitted him in, he first burnt the Records of the County, then
demanded one thousand pounds which was in the custody of Sir William Belfores,
which as soon as he had, he caused Mr. Middleton to hear Mass, and to swear
that he would never alter from it, and then hanged him up with his Wife and
Children; hanging and murdering above one hundred persons besides in that place.

At Portadown Bridge, there were one thousand Men, Women and Children, carried
in several Companies, and all unmercifully drowned in the River. Yea, in that
County there were one thousand persons drowned in several places.

In one place an hundred and forty English were taken and driven like Cattle
for many miles together. Other companies they carried out to a place fit for
execution, and then murdered them. One hundred and fifteen Men, Women and
Children, they sent with Sir Philemy Oneal's pass, till they came to Portadown
Bridge, and there drowned them.

At another time one hundred and forty Protestants, being thrown in at the same
Place, as any of them swam to the Shore, the bloody Villains, with the But-end
of their Muskets knocked out their brains.

At Ardmagh, O Cane got together all the Protestants thereabouts, pretending to
conduct them to Colerane; but before they were a days Journey, they were all
murdered, and so were many others, though they had Protections from Sir
Philemy Oneal. The aged people in Ardmagh were carried to Charlem^nt, and there
murdered.

Presently after the Town of Ardmagh was burnt, and five hundred persons
murdered and drowned. In Killaman, were forty eight families murdered, in one
house twenty two Protestants were burned. In Kilmare all the inhabitants were
stripped and massacred, being two hundred familes: the whole was a common
Butchery; many thousands perished by sword, famine, fire, water, and all other
cruel deaths that rage and malice could invent.

At Casel they put all the Protestants into a loathsome Dungeon, kept them
twelve weeks in great misery. Some they barbarously mangled, and left them
languishing; some they hanged up twice or thrice, others they buried alive.

In Queens County, an English Man, his Wife, five Children and a Maid, were all
hanged together. At Clownies sevent^^n Men were buried alive; some were
wo^^de^, and hanged upon Tenter-hooks.

In Castle Cumber, two Boys wounded, and hung upon Butchers Ter^ers. Some
hanged up, and taken down to con^^ss money, and then murdered. Some had their
^ellies ripped up, and so left with their Guts above their heels.

In Kilkenny an English Woman was beaten into a ditch, where she died; her
Child about six years old, they ^pt up her belly and let out her Guts. One the^
forced to Mass, then they wounded him, ripped up his belly, took out his Guts,
and so left him ^^ive.

A Scottish man they stripped, and hewed to piece^ ripped up his Wifes belly so
that her Child ^^^pt out; many other Women they hung up with Child, ripped up
their bellies, and let their infants fall out; some of the Children they gave
to Dogs.

In the County of Ardmagh, they robbed, stripped, and murdered abundance of
Protestants, whereof some they burned, some they slew with the Sword, some they
hanged, some they starved to death; and meeting Mistress Howard and Mistress
Frankland with six of their Children, and themselves both with Child, they
murdered them all, ripped open the Gentlewomens Bellies, took out their Children
and threw them into a ditch. A young Scottish Woman's Child, they took by the
heels, and dashed out its brains against a Tree; the like they did to many other
Children.

Ann Hill going with a young Child on her back, and four more by her side, they
pulled the Child off her back, trod on it till it died, stripped her and the
other four Children naked, whereby they died of cold.

Some others they met with hanged them up upon a Windmill, and before they were
half dead, cut them in pieces with their Skeins.

Many other Protestants, especially Women and Children, they pricked and
stabbed with Skeins, Forks and Swords, slashing, cutting, and mangling them in
their Heads and left them alive wallowing in their own blood, to languish,
starve and pine to death.

The Castle of Lisgoole, being set on fire by these merciless Papists, a Woman
leapt out at a Window to save her self from burning, whom they presently
murdered; many fled to Vaults and Cellars, where they were all murdered. One
Joan Addit they stabbed, and then put her Child of a quarter old to her Breast,
and bid it, Suck English Bastard, and so left it to perish.

One Mary Barlow had her husband hanged, her self with six Children stripped
naked, in Frost and Snow, after which, sheltering themselves in a Cave, they
had nothing there to eat for three weeks, but two old Calves skins, which they
beat with stones, and so eat them hair and all.

In the cold weather, many thousands of Protestants of all ranks, ages, and
sexes, being turned out naked, perished of cold and hunger; thousands of others
were drowned, cast into Ditches, Bogs and Turf-pits: multitudes miserably burnt
in houses; some that lay sick of Fevers they hanged up; some Men, Women, and
Children they drove into boggy Pits, and knocked them on the head.

Some aged Men and Women these barbarous Papists enforced their own Children to
drown them, yea, some Children were compelied unnaturally to hang their own
Parents, Wives forced to hang their own Husbands, and Mothers to cast their own
Children into the Waters, after which themselves were murdered. In Sligo, they
forced a young man to kill his Father, and then hanged him up. In another place
they forced a Woman to kill her husband, then caused her son to kill her, and
then hanged the Son: yea such was their malice against the English, that they
taught their Children to kill English Children.

The Irish Women that followed the camp, cried out, Kill them all, spare
neither Man, Woman nor Child. They took the Child of Thomas Soratt^n, being
about twelve years old, and boiled him in a Cauldron. One good wife Lin, and
her Daughter, they carried into a Wood, first hanged the Mother, and then the
Daughter in the hair of her Mothers head.

In some places they plucked out the eyes, and cut off the hands of the
Protestants, and turned them into the Fields, where they perished. The Women in
some places, stoned the English Women and Children to death. One man they shot
through his thighs, dug a hole in the ground, set him upon his feet, filled
up the hole, left out only his head, where he languished to death. Another man
they held his feet in the fire till he was burnt to death.

In Munster they hanged up many Ministers in a most barbarous manner. One
Minister they stripped naked and drove him through the Town, pricking him with
Darts and Rapiers, till he fell down dead.

These barbarous Villains vowed, That if any Parents dug Graves to bury
their Children, they should be buried therein themselves. They stripped one
William Loverd^n naked, then killed him before his Wife and Children. Diverse
Ministers bones that had been buried some years before, they dug up, because
they were, as they say, Patrons of Heresy.

Poor Children that went out into the fields to eat weeds and grass, they
killed without pity.

A poor woman whose husband was taken by them, with two Children at her feet,
and one at her breast, hoped to beg her husband, but they slew her and her
sucking Child, brake the neck of another, and the third hardly escaped; and all
this wickedness they exercised upon the English, without any provocation given
them. Alas, who can comprehend the fears, terrors, anguish, bitterness and
perplexity that seized upon the poor Protestants, finding themselves surprised
without remedy, and wrapped up in all kind of outward miseries which could
possibly by man be inflicted on human creatures? what sig^s and groans,
trembling and astonishment, what shrieks, cries, and bitter Lamentations of
wives, children, servants and friends, howling and weeping, finding themselves
without all hope of deliverance from their present miseries. How inexorable
were their barbarous Tormentors, that compassed them on every side, without all
bowels of compassion, or the least commiseration or pity; yea they boasted,
upon their success, That the day was their own, and that e're long they would
not leave one Protestant Rogue living, but would utterly destroy every one that
had but a drop of English Blood in them. Their women crying out, Slay them all,
the English are fit meat for Dogs, and their Children are Bastards.

The merciless Papists having set a Castle on fire, wherein were many
Protestants, they rejoicingly said, O how sweetly do they say!

At Kilkenny, when they had committed many cruel murders, they brought seven
Protestants heads, one, the head of a reverend Minister, all which they set
upon the Market-cross, on a Market day, triumphing, slashing and mangling them;
they put a gag in the Minister's mouth, ^lit his cheeks to his ears, and laid a
leaf of a Bible upon it, and bid him Preach, for his mouth was wide enough.

At Kilmore they put many Protestants, men, women and children, into a thatched
house, and there burnt them. They throw Mrs. Maxwell into the river, when in
labor, the child being half born when the mother was drowned.

In one place they burnt two Protestants Bibles, and then said, It was Hell
Fire they burnt. Other Bibles they took, cut in pieces, and then burnt them,
saying they would do the like to all Puritan Bibles. They took the Bible of a
Minister, called Mr. Edward Slack, and opening it, they laid it in a Puddle of
Water, and then stamped upon it saying, A Plague on it, this Bible has bred
all the Quarrel.

At Glastow, a Priest with some others, drew about forty English and Scottish
Protestants to be reconciled to the Church of Rome, and then told them, They
were in a good Faith, and for fear they should fall from it, and turn
Heretics, he with his Companions presently cut all their Throats.

In the County of Tipperary, near the Silver-Works, some of these barbarous
Papists met with eleven English Men, ten Women and some Children, whom they
first stripped, and then with Stones, Pole-axes, Skeins, Swords, etc. they most
barbarously massacred them all.

In the County of Ma^^, about sixty Protestants, whereof fifteen were
Ministers, were upon covenant to be safely conve^ed to G^^^^^y, by one Edward
Bur^, and his Soldiers; but by the way, this B^rk and his Company began to
massacre these poor Protestants, some they shot to Death, some they stabbed
with Skeins, some they thrust through with their Pikes, some they drowned; the
Women they stripped naked, who lying upon their Husbands to save them, were run
through with Pikes, so that very few of them escaped with Life.

In the Town of Sligo, forty Protestants were stripped and locked up in a Cellar,
and about Midnight, a Butcher provided for the purpose, was seat in among
them, who with his Ax butchered them all.

In Tyrawly, thirty or forty English, who had yielded to go to Mass, were put
to their Choice, whether they would die by the Sword, or be drowned? they chose
the latter; and so being driven to the Seaside, these barbarous Villains, with
their naked Swords, forced them into the Sea; the Mothers, with their Children
in their Arms, wading to the Chin, were overcome by the waves, where they all
perished.

The Son of Mr. Montgomery a Minister, aged about fifteen years, met with his
Schoolmaster, who withdrew his Skein at him, whereupon the Boy said, Good
Master whip me as much as you will, but do not kill me. Yet this merciless
Tiger barbarously murdered him without all pity.

In the Town of Sligo, all the Protestants were first robbed of their Estates,
then cast into Goal, and about Midnight were all stripped naked, and there most
cruelly and barbarously murdered with Swords, Axes, Skeins, etc. some of them
being Women great with Child, their Infants thrust out their Arms and Legs at
their Wounds; after which execrable Murders, these Hell Hounds laid the dead
naked Bodies of the Men upon the naked Bodies of the Women, in a most immodest
Posture, where they left them till the next day to be looked upon by the Irish
who beheld it with great delight. Also Isabel Beard, great with Child, hearing
the lamentable Cries of those that were murdering, ran out into the Streets,
where she was murdered, and the next day was found with the Child's Feet
coming out of the Wounds in her Sides; many others were murdered in the Houses
and Streets.

About Dungannon, were three hundred and sixteen Protestants in the like
barbarous manner murtheren; about Charlemont, above four hundred; about Tyrone
two hundred and six.

One Mac Crew murdered thirty one in one morning.

Two young Villains murdered 140 poor Women and Children that could make no
resistance. An Irish Woman with her own Hands, murdered forty five.

At Portadown Bridge, were drowned above three hundred, at Lawgh were drowned
above two hundred in one day. In the Parish of Killamen, there were murdered
one thousand and two hundred Protestants.

Many young Children they cut in Quarters; eighteen Scottish Infants they
hanged upon a Clothiers Tenter-hooks; one fat Man they murdered and made
Candles of his Grease; another Scottish Man they ripped up his Belly, took one
end of his small guts, tied it to a Tree, and forced him round about it, till
they had drawn them all out of his Body, saying, they would try whether a Dogs
or a Scottish Man's Guts were the longest.

By the Command of Sir Philem O Neal, Mr. James Maxwell was drawn out of his
Bed, being sick of a Fever, and murdered, his Wife being in Childbirth, the
Child being half born, they stripped naked, drove her about a flight shot, and
drowned her in the black-Water; the like, or worse, they did to another English
Woman in the same Town. One Mr. Watson they roasted alive. A Scottish Woman
great with Child, they ripped up her Belly, cut the Child out of her Womb, and so
left it crawling on her Body.

Mr. Starkey Schoolmaster at Ardmagh, being above one hundred years old, they
stripped him naked, then took his daughters, being Virgins, whom they also stripped
naked, and then forced them to lead their aged Father to a Turf-pit, where they
drowned them all three.

To one Henry Cowel a gallant Gentleman, they proffered his life, if he would
marry one of their Trulls, or go to Mass; but he chose death rather than to
consent to either.

Many of the Protestants they buried alive, solacing themselves, whilst they
were digging down old ditches upon them.

They brake the back bone of a Youth, and left him in the Fields; some days
after he was found, having eaten the grass round about him: neither then would
they kill him outright, but removed him to better Pasture, wherein was
fulfilled that saying, The tender mercies of the Wicked are cruelty.

In the County of Antrim, they murdered nine hundred and fifty four
Protestants in one Morning; and afterward about twelve hundred more in that
County near Les^egarvy, they forced twenty four Protestants into an House, and
burnt them all.

Sir Philem O-Neal boasted, that he had slain above six hundred at Garvah, and
that he had left neither (...), woman nor child alive in the Barony of
Munterlong. In other places he murdered above two thousand Persons in their
houses, so that many houses were filled with dead bodies.

Above twelve thousand were slain in the highways, as they fled toward Down.
Many died of Famine, many died for want of Clothes, being stripped naked in a
cold season; some thousands were drowned, so that in the Province of Ulster,
there were about one hundred and fifty thousand murdered by sundry kinds of
torments and deaths.

The Popish English were no whit inferior, yea, rather exceeded the natural
Irish in their cruelty against the Protestants that lived among them, within
the Pale, being not satisfied with their Blood, till they had seen the last
drop thereof.

Ann Kinnard testified, That fifteen Protestants being imprisoned and their
Feet in the Stocks, a Popish Boy being not above fourteen years old, slew them
all in one night with his Skein.

An English Woman, who was newly delivered of two Children, some of these
Villains violently compelled her, in her great pain and sickness, to rise out
of her Bed, and took one of the Infants that was living and dashed his Brains
against the Stones, and then threw him into the River of Barrow; the like they
did to many other Infants. Many others they hanged up without all pity.

The Lord Mont Garret, caused diverse English Soldiers, that he had taken about
Kilkenny, to be hanged, hardly suffering them to pray before their death.

One Fitz Patrick, an Irish Papist, enticed a rich Merchant that was a
Protestant, to bring all his Goods to his House, promising safely to keep them,
and to re-deliver them to him; but when he had gotten them into his possession,
he took the Merchant and his Wife, and hanged them both. The like he did by
diverse others.

Some Englishmen's heads they cut off and carried them to Kilkenny, and on the
Market Day set them on the Cross; where many, especially the Women stabbed, cut
and slashed them.

A poor Protestant Woman with her two Children, going to Kilkenny, these bloody
miscreants baited them with Dogs, stabbed them with Skeins, and pulled out the
Guts of one of the Children, whereby they died; and not far off they took
diverse men, women, and children, and hanged them up; One of the Women being
great with Child, they ripped up her Belly as she hanged, so that the Child
fell out in the Cawl alive. Some after they were hanged, they drew up and down
till their Bowels were torn out.

How many thousands of Protestants were thus inhumanly butchered by sundry
kinds of deaths, we cannot ascertain.

In the Province of Ulster we find about 150,000 murdered as before; what the
number of the slain was in the three other Provinces, I find not upon Record,
but certainly it was very great, for you have these passages in a general
Remonstrance of the distressed Protestants in the Provinee of Munster, We may
(say they) compare our woe to the saddest Parallel of any Story, Our Churches
are profaned by Sacrifices to Idols; Our Habitations are become ruinous heaps;
No quality, Age or Sex, privileged from Massacre and lingering deaths, by
being robbed, stripped naked and so exposed to cold and famine. The famished
Infants of murdered Parents swarm in our Streets, and for want of food, perish
before our faces, etc. And all this cruelty that is exercised upon us, we know
not for what cause, offense, or seeming provocation it is inflicted on us (sin
excepted) saving that we were Protestants, etc. We can make it manifest that
the depopulations in this province of Munster, do well near equal those of the
whole Kingdom, etc.

And thus in part you have heard of the merciless cruelties which the bloody
Papists exercised toward the Protestants: Let us now consider, at least, some
of God's Judgments upon the Irish, whereby he has not left the innocent Blood
of his Servants to be altogether unrevenged.

These bloody Hell Hounds themselves confessed, That the Ghosts of diverse of
the Protestants which they had drowned at Portadown Bridge, were daily seen to
walk upon the River, sometimes singing of Psalms, sometimes brandishing naked
Swords, sometimes shreeking in a most hideous and fearful manner. So that many
of the Popish Irish which dwelt near thereabouts, being affrighted therewith,
were forced to remove their Habitation further off into the Country.

Catheri^^ Cook testifies upon Oath, That when the Irish had barbarously
drowned one hundred and eighty Protestant men, women, and children, at
Portadown Bridge, about nine days after, she saw the apparition of a Man bolt
upright in the River, standing breast high, with his hands lifted up to Heaven;
and continued in that Posture from December to the end of Lent, at which time
some of the English Army passing that way, saw it also, after which it vanished
away.

Elizabeth Price, testified upon Oath, That she, and other Women, whose
Husbands and Children were drowned in that place, hearing of those Apparitions,
went thither one evening, at which time they saw one like a Woman rise out of
the River, breast high, her hair hanging down, which with her Skin, was as
white as Snow, often crying out, Revenge, Revenge, Revenge, which so affrighted
them, that they went their way.

Diverse Protestants were thrown into the River of Belterbet, and when any of
them offered to swim to the Land, they were knoked on the head with Poles,
after which their Bodies were not seen for six weeks; but after the end thereof
the murderers coming again that way, the Bodies came floating up to the very
Bridge where they were.

Sir C^^ Mac-Gennis with his Company slew Mr. Turge Minister of the Newry, with
diverse other Protestants, after which the said Mac-Gennis was so affrighted
with the Apprehensions of the said Mr. Turge, his being continually in his
presence, that he commanded his Soldiers not to slay any more of them, but such
as should be slain in Battle.

A young Woman being stripped almost naked, there came a Rogue to her, bidding
her, Give him her money, or he would run her through with his Sword. Her answer
was, You cannot kill me except God give you ^^ve; Whereupon he ran three times
at her naked body with his drawn Sword, and yet never pierced her Skin, whereat
he being confounded went his way and left her. This was attested by diverse
Women that were present and saw it.

As for the Protestant Ministers whom they surprised, their manner was first to
strip them, and after bind them to a Tree, or Post, where they pleased, and
then to ravish their Wives and Daughters before their faces (in sight of all
their merciless rabble) with the basest Villains they could pick out, after
they hanged up their husbands and parents before their faces, and then cut them
down before they were half dead, and quartered them, after dismembered them,
and stopped their Mouths therewith.

They basely abused one Mr. Trafford, a Minister in the North of Ireland, who
being assaulted by these bloody Wolves of Rome's Brood that knew not God, nor
any Bowels of mercy. This distressed Minister desired but so much time as to
call upon God, before he went out of the World; but these merciless wretches
would admit no time, but instantly fell upon him, hackt and hewed him to pieces.

Sir Barck Dunstan's Wife ravished before him, slew his Servants, spurned his
Children till they died, bound him with Match to a board that his eyes burst
out, cut off his ears and nose, teared off both his cheeks, after cut off his
arms and legs, cut out his tongue, and after run a red hot ^on into him. These
Particulars, with many more, were attested before the Commissioners appointed
for that purpose.

The Hierogliphick, being a short View of the Transactions of the whole Year,
by Way of Conclusion.
COme Painter, take a Prospect from this Hill,
And on a well spread Canvas show thy Skill;
Draw all in Colors as they shall appear,
And as they stand in Merit place 'em there.
Draw as the Heralds do, a spacious Field,
And as directed, so let that be filled.
First, draw a Popish Army brisk and gay;
Fighting, and beat, destroyed and run away.
Then draw a Hearse, and let it stand in view,
The Mourners more, far more than they are in show;
Cursing their Fate, their Stars, and in this Fear,
Show if thou can, how these damned Sots prepare,
To run, or stay, and Sculk in Holes alone,
By them this Motto, Gallows claim thy own.
Now to the Life, let thy brisk Pencil show
Distinctly, who they are, and what is their due.
Now draw a Crowd of Priests prepared to run,
Like broken Merchants when their stocks are gone:
Some howling out their Prayers forget and say,
Save us St. Ketch, are all our Saints away?
Draw 'em in Hurry, running to and fro,
Posting to Dover, Portsmouth, Tyburn too.
Next draw a crowd of Lords, this Label by,
The Great Design is lost, Alas! they cry
Who'd serve a Cause of such cursed Destiny?
Now draw four Priests, show how they Rome adore,
And each Man's Scarf hang to be seen before.
Two brace of Bishops fallen to despair,
Armed Cap-a-pee, but going God knows where.
Now show the Judges, and with them thy Skill,
That all who see it done may say, It Is well,
In Caps and Gowns, as they in order sat,
'Twixt Heaven and Earth do thou 'em elevate,
Their learned Noddles can dispense with that.
Now draw the little Rogues that scoundrel Crew,
Knights, Knaves and Beggars they must have their due,
Gadbury, Butler, ay, and Roger too.
Amidst this Crowd, on a fit Spot of Land,
To crown the Work, let a large Gallows stand;
All trembling by, armed with their Guilt and Fears,
Kneel to this Image and pour out their Prayers.
And then die by Association.

FINIS.

