A POEM On visiting the ACADEMY OF PHILADELPHIA, June 1753.

Inventas qui Vitam excoluere per Arts;
Quique sui memores alios fe^ere merendo;
Omnibus ^is nivea cinguntur Tempora Vitta.
VIRG. PHILADELPHIA: Printed in the YEAR MDCCLIII.

To the TRUSTEES of the PHILADELPHIA ACADEMY.
GENTLEMEN,
HAVING received the utmost Satisfaction in visiting your Academy, and
examining some of its higher Classes, I could not be easy 'till I had testified
that Satisfaction in the most public Manner. The undeserved Notice many of you
were pleased to take of Me during my short Stay in your City, and the Honor the
Academy (when I first went into it) did me, in making one of the Youth speak a
Copy of Verses, which I lately wrote to promote the Interest of Science in a
neighboring Province, might claim my most grateful Acknowlegments. -- But what
I now offer is a Tribute paid to Merit of a more public Nature. A few private
Gentlemen of this City have, in the Space of two or three Years, projected,
begun, and carried to surprising Perfection, a very noble Institution; and an
Institution of that Kind too, which, in other Countries, has scarce made such a
Figure in the Space of some Centuries, though founded by Kings, and supported at
the public Expense.

Prosecute, Gentlemen, yet a little longer prosecute your generous Plan, with
the same Spirit; and your own Reputation, with that of your Academy, shall be
established, in Spite of every Obstacle, on a Bottom immortal, and never to be
shaken. A Succession of good Men and good Citizens shall never be wanting in
Pennsylvania to do Honor to your Memories, and diffuse Spirit and Happiness
through their Country. -- The Virtues to be chiefly inculcated on your Youth in
order to obtain this End, you know better than I. They are however modestly
hinted, in the following Poem, from a Mouth that cannot fail to give them new
Importance:

The Performance is far inferior to the Subject; but an Apology will not mend
it. As I can have no Time to improve it during my Stay in America, I beg your
Acceptance of it, as it is at present; together with my Promise of rendering it
more worthy the Subject, when more Leisure shall enable me so to do. --

That the Success of your Undertaking may still exceed even your own most
sanguine Hopes, is my earnest Prayer; as it is my firm Persuasion that such a
fair Beginning cannot fail of the most lasting good Consequences.

I am, GENTLEMEN, With great Sincerity and Esteem, Your most obliged humble
Servant, WILLIAM SMITH.
Philadelphia, June 5, 1753.
A POEM, etc.
TO follow Nature, and her Source adore;
To raise the Being, and its End explore;
To center every Aim in Common Weal;
In public Deeds to spend all private Zeal;
With social Toils, in every Street, to glow;
In every House, with well-earn'd Wealth to flow;
To plant each Virtue in their Childrens Hearts;
And grace their Infant Land with polished Arts;
If this, O Muse, can win a People Praise,
Thy honest Plaudit give, in hasty Lays.
Heavens! how my Heart beat Rapture, to behold
The little Heroes, decent, graceful, bold,
The Rostrum mount, with British Ardor warmed,
And, by the sacred Soul of Glory charmed,
With Hands out-stretch'd, roll, tingling from their Tongue,
Sage Truths of Justice, Freedom, Right and Wrong,
In numerous Periods, sweeter than my Song!
O how the Sires glowed round, and fed their Eyes
Fixed on their darling Sons in sweet Surprise;
O how the Sons were smit with conscious Fires,
In the animating Presence of their Sires!
Even GOD Himself exults in such a Sight;
And Angels hang, applausive, in Mid-flight.
While those bright Souls, released from earthly Care,
To whom the Affairs of Kindred-men are dear,
Look down triumphant on the lovely Scene;
And for a While suspend their heavenly Strain.
Fired at the Thought, on Fancy's Pinions borne,
More rapid than the eldest Beam of Morn,
I mount, where flows the eternal golden Day,
And all those gracious Patriot-shades survey,
That shone, through every Age, the Lights of Earth,
Patrons of Freedom, trampled Laws, and Worth.
Flaming with Heaven-dipt Rays and downy Gold,
Africane, sic habeto, Omnibus, qui Patriam conservarint, auxerint, certum esse
^n Calo definitum Locum, ubi beati avo sempiterno fruantur. CIC.
Apart the chosen Band, their Mansions hold;
By living Streams, in green ambrosial Vales,
Where spicy Arbors scent the ambient Gales;
And purer Air invests the Dew-pearl'd Fields,
With radiant Light that Spring eternal yields.
Youth's Roses, round their Thrones, immortal blow;
Gems, Amaran^, and Laurel, wreathe their Brow.
With fond Regard they still behold that Land
For which their Bosoms bled, their Wisdom planned;
Or wake, when Fancy prompts, the sounding Lyre,
And with sweet-mingling Sound of Voice conspire
To swell the awful, Air-born Hymn to GOD,
For Mercies on that favored Land bestowed.
And see who yonder, mid the Rest intent,
(His ardent Look on Pennsylvania bent)
In Act to touch the String, majestic stands,
With Sky-ting'd Mantle loose, and lifted Hands!
It Is HE -- the Olive Wreath, and gentler Brow,
That mark the venerable PENN, I know!
Informed with all a Father's holy Fires,
Your Fates, your Acts, your Manners he admires.
And hark! he pours his Raptures on the Lyre!
These Soul-felt Notes fall, trembling, from each Wire;
Sweet as the warbled Voice of infant Spring --
And, in your Ears, sweet let them ever ring!
" It Is nobly done, my SONS! I see with Joy,
'What wise, what manly Toils your Thoughts employ!
'I see my Spirit spread, ennobling, down
'Thro' all your Country, and its GENIUS grown;
'While by your softer Arts, and genuine Worth,
'You rise the Wonder of the circling Earth.
'But, with far higher Transports I behold,
'Your glorious Plan the tender Thought to unfold;
'Where Emulation keens the virtuous Flame,
'And Merit is the only Road to Fame;
'Where, watered by the Applauses of the Wise,
'Each Worth roots deep, and spreads into the Skies.
'Here center still your Zeal, and spend your Rage,
'That down from Sire to Son, through every Age,
'Your Virtues may survive You in your Race,
'And endless Worthies rise, their Country's Grace.
'FIRST, let Devotion to the All-ruling SIRE,
'Young Minds with each inferior Worth inspire.
'O teach them intimately that on This
'Depends all Wisdom, endless Pain, or Bliss!
'So shall their Praise still shut the various Day;
'And still their Praise prevent the Morning Ray.
'Next, on the ductil Heart, my Sons, impress
'The calm unbounded Glow for human Race:
'For next that Homage we to Heaven direct,
'GOD's Image, from GOD's Image, claims Respect.
'To Man, O Man, with Love and Reverence, bow!
'All social Virtues from this Virtue flow.
'This gives, for Sights of Bliss, the Joy sincere;
'And this, for Scenes of Woe, the Heart-shed Tear.
'This gives the modest Air; the winning Grace;
'The ceaseless Aim, the noble Art, -- to Please:
'(For Breeding's but the Body's graceful Part,
'To speak unfeigned BENIGNITY of HEART.)
'Hence too the Patriot-throb, the awakened Zeal,
'The firm Devotion to the Common Weal;
'The soft Regards; the holy Charities;
'And all that sweetens Life -- or dignifies.
'Unless each Act be from this Virtue born,
'Even Knees with Prayer, a Frame with Fasting, worn;
' 1 Corinthians. Chap. xiii.
The Body burning in Religion's Cause;
'The Lifeblood streaming for expiring Laws;
'The whole Estate and Substance thrown away,
'To call the Mourner up to smiling Day;
'All, all would speak no Christian-worth of Mind,
'But show the Hypocrite and Stoic joined.
'Let Temperance next, and Love of active Toil
'Amid the radiant Train of Virtues smile.
'Hence Health, the buxom Dame of vermil Face,
'The vivid Pulse, and rosy-laughing Grace,
'Thro' the young Frame shall Spartan Vigor roll;
'And pour her sprightly Influence on the Soul. --
'Betimes to Justice, Candor, Honor, Truth,
'And faithful Secresy inure your Youth.
'Let them betimes to Whoever considers the Fundamentals of Government, must
soon be convinced of the absolute Necessity of repelling Violence and Insult.
Nor is this inconsistent with the softest Humanity and most pacific
Disposition. --
Government attend,
'Its secret Springs, its Basis, Cause and End.
'So should the insulting Foe again invade
'Your Laws, your Freedom, Properties and Trade; --
'Then -- SAVE THEM, SAVE THEM, every Tongue shall sound,
'And every Street, To ARMS, TO ARMS, rebound.
'But with these Virtues the early Proofs display
'Of future Scenes and providential Sway.
''Tis only It was upon the Persuasion and Hope of some future Reward, that the
great Heroes of Antiquity dared to confront every Death for their Country's
Service. -- But still vastly superior to this, is that Christian Courage, built
on a firm Belief of Providence, and the Soul's Immortality -- The Soul, secured
in her Existence, smiles
At the drawn Dagger, and desies its Point. --

this can fortify brave Souls,
'Whom awful Justice arms, and Reason rules.
'Slow, and forbearing long; but when inflamed,
'Like a devouring Storm, they rush untamed,
'To Death or Conquest: -- Tyrants shrink aghast;
'And Insult flies, like Stubble, in the Blast.
'Yet still, mid all the Terrors of the Day,
' Humanity, with gentler Voice, bears Sway.
'This, in Mid-air, arrests the falling Blow,
'And, in the prostrate Man, forgets the Foe.
'Soft-twining round brave Hearts, this makes them tame
'As is the Houshold-Dove, or Hearth-rear'd Lamb.
'Tho' Conquest all her splendid Laurels brings,
'And over their Heads expands her Eagle-wings;
'This drives them to the downy Arms of Peace,
'With Bridegroom's Joy to meet his Bride's Embrace.
'Hush'd is the Trump; the deadly Sword insheath'd;
'The Lance bent to a Scythe, or hung with Ivy wreathed.
'These Virtues, chiefly, Nature first designed
'T'illumin, soften, elevate Mankind;
'Which, mingling every Neighbor's Bliss or Woe,
'Cement the Globe, and make it Heaven below.
'To these let SCIENCE still a Handmaid stand,
'And spread them blooming through the happy Land.
'From her wide Realms, glean Flowers of every Dye
'To deck them lovely to the searchful Eye.
'But may the Tyranny of Names and Rules;
'Polemic Wranglings; and the Pride of Schools;
'Th' unfeeling Breast; the listless gloomy Brow;
'And each vain curious Search be far from You.
'Let WISDOM's Voice awake the entender'd Soul,
'Eternal-sounding from the Historic-roll;
'The lofty Volumes of the exploring Sage;
'And Heaven-taught Poet's never-dying Page.
'Or be She traced from the unerring Spring;
'The sacred Leaves sent from the ETERNAL KING:
'Or from the Book of Nature, ever-wide;
'To purer Breasts, a sober-pleasing Guide.
'Thus tutored, Youth shall rise, divinely rise,
'O'er each low Aim, over Folly, Pride and Vice;
'And press, Self-pleas'd, still onward to the Goal,
'With Eye fixed full on Heaven, resolved and cool,
'Mid all the Turns of Life; Death's dreadful Frown;
'The Crush of States; or sinking Earth's last Groan.
'And now, my Sons, regard my closing Strains --
'By all the Joys of these etherial Plains;
'By all these glorious Shades that close Me round;
'By all my early Toils your Bliss to found --
'If still you will cultivate these social Arts,
'And pour these Virtues still on youthful Hearts,
'Your State shall ever grow, like Mountain-oak,
'From Strength to Strength, triumphant over each Stroke.
'On all you do propitious Heaven shall smile;
'Direct your Councils, and reward your Toil.
'For you the Seasons, with a gentler Hand,
'Shall shed their various Influence on the Land:
'Along each Field shall golden Harvests sing;
'And each mechanic Tool glad Plenty bring.
'For you, that GOD whom Nature all obeys,
'Who rules over Night and Day, Earth, Air and Seas,
'Shall hold each raging Blast, in straightened Reins,
'That tends to vex the placid watery Plains,
'While your rich Fleets, disdaining Limits, roam
'From distant Pole to Pole, along the unruffled Foam,
'And launch from Shore with every Tide, or bound triumphant Home.
'And while this GOD his ceaseless Mercies pours
'On you, my Sons, like silent vernal Showers;
'Witness, ye Worlds, that through the blue Expanse,
'To his eternal Praise, harmonious, dance;
'And all ye Sons of Reason that reside
'Amid these Worlds that sand the unfathomed Void;
'Whose great Hosanna, ever-warbling clear,
'Rings jubilant from silver Sphere to Sphere;
' Angels, Archangels -- O bear Witness all,
'If, ceaseless as his tender Mercies fall,
'I not as ceaseless breathe my grateful Lays,
'In Praise to HIM, who merits highest Praise!
'And next to this, bear Witness if my Lyre
'Forget to swell your universal Choir,
'With each illustrious Name that shall stand forth,
'Thro' every Age, renowned for every Worth,
'My Pennsylvania's Ornament and Pride,
'Her Hope, her Soul, her Father, and her Guide;
'When gentle HAMILTON shall grace our Skies,
'And with him ALLEN, PETER'S, FRANKLIN rise." --
Thus sings the Chief, methinks, on Harp of Gold;
Nor deem, in such a Cause, my Flight too bold.
If aught on Earth high Heaven's Attention draws,
It must be -- to give Virtue just Applause!
Nor think mean Flattery lurks beneath this Song;
My Soul abhors the Vice -- Cursed be the Tongue,
Whose Poison first these hallowed Walls profanes,
Where simple Truth is taught, and Plainness reigns.
For Me, may I never boast a Poet's Rage,
If all my Joy be not the MORAL PAGE,
Where Sense with Sound, where Zeal with Virtue join,
And honest Purpose dignifies each Line.
Even now my tender Muse, in Wood-born Lays,
Naught but unstudied Joy of Heart displays.
O were the Joy complete! -- But one sad Thought
Depresses half the Raptures of my Note!
For can I celebrate such Wisdom here,
O much-loved YORK, nor drop a duteous Tear?
Rise, nobly rise! dispute the Prize with Those;
As Athens, rivaling Lacedaemon, rose!
The illustrious Sisters, keen alike to seize
The Palm of Empire, and the Reins of Greece,
Each roused by Each, fed high the glorious Fire;
Flamed, bustled, shone -- and bade the World admire!
O Strife far nobler, who shall most excel,
In Knowledge, Arts of Peace, and Living well!
This nobler Strife, ye nobler The Cities of New York, and Philadelphia.
Sisters feed!
Be yours the Contest in each worthy Deed;
Shine Godlike Rivals for the Muses' Palm;
And strive who first shall sway the Laureat-realm.
Hence shall your Honors, in ambrosial Prime,
Spread blooming to the farthest Verge of Time;
Hence with your Names, shall Fame perfume her Wing;
To her eternal Tromp your Glories sing;
And down through every wondering Era hold
Your Virtues forth, like Lamps of beamy Gold;
To light the Pagan World, a living Blaze,
And of your Mother-land, the last best Praise.
Yet ere we close, O Muse, one Labor more
Indulge where I have labored often before.
Dear The Author's Pupils, the three eldest Sons of the Honorable Josiah
Martin, Esquire late of Antigua: They were placed at the Academy of Philadelphia at
the Time this Piece was written.
Pupils, let the Lessons here impressed,
Sink intimate and deep into your Breast.
Now climb the Steep to Science in your Youth,
The Votaries of Wisdom, and of Truth.
Your Zeal let none within these Walls excel;
Strive for Esteem, for Glory, and -- farewell!
When some few Years have rolled their Toils away,
And Youth gives Place to Life's meridian Day;
Not Mother more shall joy in her first Birth,
Than I, if, blessed with all your Father's Worth,
You rise, in dangerous Times, your Country's Soul,
Or famed for Courage, or for tempered Rule.
Or if like Him, warned by declining Years,
You wisely quit the Scene of public Cares;
And seek a calmer Bliss in private Shade,
Where Nature's various Changes are displayed;
Tracing new Wonders of creative Power
With ravished Heart, improved from Hour to Hour;
Known to a few, but by that few beloved;
Happy at Home; within yourselves approved;
Your well-taught Offspring rising glad around;
With all your Virtues, all your Graces crowned,
To fill your Place, when, called to heavenly Day,
Calm as you lived, you die -- and tower away.
FINIS.

