INDIAN SONGS OF PEACE WITH A PROPOSAL, in a prefatory EPISTLE, FOR ERECTING
INDIAN SCHOOLS.

AND A POSTSCRIPT by the Editor, introducing YARIZA, an Indian Maid's LETTER,
to the principal LADIES of the Province and City of New York.

By the Author of the AMERICAN FABLES.

Nec longum tempus and ingens,
Exiit ad caelum ramis felicibus arabos.
VIRG. Nor long the Time till the great Tree arose,
Toward Heaven extending its fair happy Boughs.
NEW YORK: Printed by J. PARKER, and W. WAYMAN, at the New Printing-Office in
Beaver-Street, MDCCLII.

TO SYLVANUS,
SIR,
LATELY reading the little History of the Five Indian Nations, I met with a
Passage in it, which I thought worth particular Notice. It is this, I suppose
our Interpreters were not Poets enough to translate the Songs, otherwise I
might have gratified the Reader with a Taste of Indian Poetry.

I have enquired whether any such Songs could be found, as I know that you are
curious in such Things; and these, which I now send to you, since came to Hand.

Maratho is named for the Originals, and Yariza, and that is all that I can
tell you of them at present, but I shall make further Enquiry. This much I can
tell you now, that some question whether Yariza composed her Part, or only sung
it. The Dispute is not very material; but if there be such a Genius, as we are
told, among the Indians, I know not why the gentler Sex, may not be supposed to
partake of it, especially, on Subjects suitable to their Gentleness.

They seem to have been designed on Occasion of promulging the last General
Peace.

What Time is this for them? (says a Critic) Why did they not come sooner?

And, (if it be civil to answer one Question by asking another, but what shall
one do with captious Critic's) why were they not asked for, or inquired after
sooner? Perhaps they are come full soon, for any Thing that will be thought of
them. -- Perhaps it is the Fashion of Indian Writers, to keep their Composures
by them for some Time, to correct and polish; and well it were for some others,
and for their Readers, that they would do likewise. Better Pieces, than they
are, have lain by many more Years, before they have made their Appearance. --
Ay, -- but it looks suspicious, that Yariza says nothing of Prince Frederick,
who was living at that Time.

There might be a Reason given for that, -- her Thoughts were taken up; -- she
was lamenting the Death of the Queen; -- admiring the Princess, -- now Princess
Dowager: -- And is it not natural for the Female Kind, much to set by those of
their own Sex, who are highly eminent?

Very well, -- but to speak of the young Prince, and not to mention his Father,
a Prince so noble, human, beneficent, of such Appearance and Hopes.

Alas! -- these Critics love to perplex Matters. -- I shall leave them to
observe to you, that these Songs or Odes, call them which you please, by their
Air and Accent, appear of Indian Extraction They abound with that Phraseology.
The Tree, the Chain, the House of Peace, the great Sachem for the King, the
great Lake for the Ocean, Corlaer for the Governor of the Province, Manhaten
for New York, you very well know are Terms in Use with them.

The Book of Peace, if they are not used so to call the Book there intended, I
think it would be nothing amiss to learn them to call it so; and I can not
apprehend that the Translator, granting that he found not that Expression in
the Original, but added it, is to be blamed for such an Addition.

But suppose that the Writer of these Odes only took Hints from the Indian, and
that they are far from being a close Translation; yet, ought we not to esteem
the Indian Genius, which could give such Hints to him?

The Author of the little History of these Nations, says of them, to his
Excellency Governor Burnet, to whom he dedicates it; that though they were under
the darkest Ignorance, yet, a bright and noble Genius shines through these black
Clouds.

He goes on to say, that, none of the greatest Roman Heroes have discovered a
greater Love to their Country, or a greater Contempt of Death, than these
Barbarians have done, when Life and Liberty came in Competition.

In another Place he says, that, if Care was taken to plant in them, and
cultivate that general Benevolence to Mankind, which is the true Principle of
Virtue, -- they would no long: deserve the Name of Barbarians, but would
become a People whose Friendship might add Honor to the British Nation.

What Pity is it, that such a Genius should be sunk or depraved, which, if it
was relieved and rightly cultivated, might shine out to them, and to us, with
Advantage and with Honor.

Would not such cultivating of it, tend to the Good of the Public, not only of
this Province and those Nations, but promote the British, -- the Christian
Interest?

To this might be conducive, if some Person capable of furthering such an
Intention, were encouraged to settle for some Time in those Parts, to attain
the Language, if he has it not already, and under proper Direction to institute
Schools, or, at least, in the mean Time, one good School for Education, and to
enquire for the fittest Persons to recommend to the Care and Charge of it.

If there is already a School there; for I do not pretend to be well acquainted
with the present Disposition of Affairs in those Parts, there might be another
set up at a convenient Distance; and it may not be amiss, to set one or two
good Mistresses over a separate School of Girls. Much would depend on the
Improving and Refining that Sex, to reclaim and civilize the other.

In these Schools, some of the most Ingenious and Docile of the young Indians
might be instructed in our Faith and Morals, and Language, and in our Methods
of Life and Industry, and in some of those Arts which are most useful.

These, that is, some of the best disposed and qualified of them, might in Time
be set over other Schools, for it may be thought not unfitting, that there were
one, at least, for every Nation, or rather for each of the Tribes, which are
reckoned three in every Nation.

In the mean Time, the Youths so forming, might be profitable, each in the
Family which he belongs to, where he might be looked upon as a young
Instructor, and frequently be so,

This, likewise, might help to prevent Teachers being sent among them by
another Nation, which has been done formerly, and has been found prejudicial.

Our Historian, Mr. Colden, tells us, page 69. We may still observe the
Influence, which the French Priests had obtained over the other Nations, and to
what Christian-like Purposes they used it.

Those other Nations, page 70, are the Onandagas, Cayugas, and Oneydoes, three
of the Five; and the Purposes were spiriting them up against other Indians,
Friends of Virginia, whom they made War on, and killed some of the People of
Virginia who assisted those Indians.

And p. 71. By the Influence of one of them, named Milet, a Jesuit, on the
Oneydoes, they were frequently turned against the Southern Indians, Friends of
the English Southern Colonies.

These Quotations, I hope, will not seem tedious to you. This Observation may
arise from them, that since there have been, and still are Men so industrious,
for secular Ends (at least, such their Designs appear to us) as to compass Sea
and Land, to make Proselytes; it will be becoming in us to attempt more
extensive Methods for enlightening the Understanding, and reforming the Way of
Living of those People, to which we are urged by a Variety of the best Motives.

To civilize our Friends and Neighbors; -- to strengthen our Allies and our
Alliance; -- to adorn and dignify Human Nature; -- to save Souls from Death; to
promote the Christian Faith, and the Divine Glory, are the Motives.

There is yet another which may incline our Hearts to these People, and that
is, the great Love which they express to Peace. Is there a Nation under Heaven,
which speaks of it in more complacent and pathetic Terms?

No Wonder, if their young Men of Genius, their Bards or Druids, like Maratho;
their young Maids of fine natural Qualities, like Yariza; No Wonder, if they
should frame Songs of Peace, when the old Men, the Sachems, speak of it with
such Passion and Rapture, that their Speech seems a poetical Language; a Kind
of divine Enthusiasm. --

What do you think, Sir, would it not be worth a Philosopher's While to come
from Europe, to see these Nations of Peace-Lovers, and to converse with them,
and if he could purchase some Slips or Suckers of their Tree of Peace? Would it
not be well done to take them back with him, and recommend them to the European
Regions? The Princes there use to be fond of foreign Rarities. -- What if the
precious Tree was propagated in the Gardens at Kensington? What if in those at
Vienna, Marli, the Arranjuez, -- Potsdam? --

Not that those Imperial and Royal Gardens, are supposed now to want Trees or
Plants of such Kind, -- happy, if they take Root and flourish, -- if they be
duly cultivated; -- if the great Owners water them with their own Hands: Nor is
that beneath their Dignity, if they look on them as their Garden's chief
Ornaments, and Delight to meditate the Good of Mankind, under their Shadows: --
But, still, such Slips from hence might be favorably received as an exotic
Curiosity.

I return to the Five Nations. That you may not think that I magnify their Love
of Peace: Read their own Words, speaking of the Tree of Peace, in one of their
Orations, in the 3d Chap. of the History.

We now plant a Tree, whose Top will reach the Sun, and its Branches spread far
abroad, so that it shall be seen afar off, and we shall shelter over selves
under it, and live in Peace without Molestation. -- p. 67. The Tree of Peace is
planted so firmly that it can not be moved. p. 89. they say, That they shall
Dance to the Calumet of Peace, under its Leaves, and shall remain quiet.

In like Language, they speak of the Chain, which seems to signify with them, a
League of Peace or Alliance.

Page 60. We gladly catch at, and lay hold of the Chain, which we desire may be
kept clean and bright like Silver. p. 67. Now we have a new Chain, a strong and
a straight Chain that cannot be broken, -- Let us on both Sides hold the Chain
fast.

Is it not a Pity that People, who seem so much to love Peace, should not be
furthered in the best Methods of preserving it inwardly in their Minds, as well
as in their outward Condition? I doubt not, but that the worthy Man, who was
there formerly, did his Endeavor, and that he who is now there does the same;
but what is one Man to such Multitudes?

Should they not be more extensively acquainted with the Doctrine and Precepts
of the Prince of Peace, by the Knowledge and Observance of which, they would be
led into those serene Regions, where their beloved Tree flourishes with a sweet
Odor for ever?

Should not Schools and Oratories be set up in sundry Parts of the Indian
Nations, or, at least, as has been said before, one or two principal Ones, from
whence others might derive, as from some beneficent Springs-Head flows a
Stream, which becomes a great River to refresh an extensive Country, and make
glad the Hearts of a populous Nation?

Where are the Men, who desire, like the Heroes and Lawgivers of Antiquity, to
rescue Nations from Barbarity; like the chosen Missionaries, to propagate the
Divine Light, which came to enlighten the World: Is it not becoming them to
appear in such an Undertaking?

However useful one, or another might be in the immediate Parts: Do you not
think, Sylvanus, that such an Intention would require the chief Men of the
Province, for Presidents and Conductors of it? Should not the leading Men of
the Neighboring Colonies, desire to associate in it; the rather as the Welfare
and Security of those Colonies as well as of this, seem to have some Connection
with a right Institution of these Indians?

It is not improbable that the British Society, on proper Application, would
further encourage it. Nor is it to be doubted, but that some in high Stations
in Britain, would promote it.

The Court, the Nobles, and Gentlemen there, many of whom are of the finest
Taste and Expression, in the various Kinds of Eloquence, might, in Consequence
of this, in a little Time, expect from hence, finer Indian Odes, than what are
now presented to them.

But if they think little of the Songs of India, (as indeed these Transeripts,
at least, are not much to be thought of, whatever Originals may be) yet, it is
becoming them to advance the Cause of Christianity; and it is not unworthy of
their Care, to promote, by all proper Means, the Maintaining the Balance of
Power in America, as well as in other Parts of the World.

An Objection has been raised by some Gentlemen, not against the Expediency of
this Work, but because of the Difficulty of it.

They represent the Indians, as an untractable People, very tenacious of their
own Manners and Fashions.

If such an Attempt and Performance were very easy, there would be the less
Honor in accomplishing it. But neither can I imagine it so very difficult.
Very wild and savage Nations have been reformed; therefore, the Indians, who
are nothing so Savage, may be reformed. One or two Men, have sometimes done a
great deal toward civilizing the Manners of a People. What may not be done by
the eminent Men of a large Province, in Conjuction? Perhaps to be assisted by
some of their best Neighbors, and supported by a high Encouragement.

How much have some wild People, such formerly, improved in other Countries
within this Century, and some in half that Time. What need to speak of other
Nations and of ancient Ages? Mr. Colden, whose Book I open again, seems to
think the Indians like other People. I am fond to think, says he, that the
present State of the Indian Nations, exactly shows the most ancient and
original Condition of almost every Nation. If the Original be the same, why may
there not be a like Progress, especially in a People, who seem to have an
innate Disposition to Science, and who breathe untaught Eloquence?

Then, -- that Love of Liberty and Honor; -- that Roman, -- that British
Spirit: -- They seem naturally akin to us, -- beside our Alliance, -- let us
help our Brethren. If the rough Gem throws out some Sparks of Light, how will
it shine when polished! If the Tree appears fair in the Verdure of its Leaves,
will not the Blossoms and Fruits make it look more lovely!

Speaking of Trees, minds me of two Lines in Virgil, which seems applicable to
this Subject.

Exuarint Sylvestrem animum, Cultuque frequenti, In quaseunque voces Arts,
hand tarda sequentur.

The savage Mind, by Culture when subdued, Will with the nobler Arts be soon
imbued.

But there is no Occasion for Virgil's Skill in grafting to prolong this
Discourse. -- Perhaps it is too tedious, I would not multiply Words.

My reading Mr. Colden, and transcribing the Indian Songs, raised these
Thoughts in me. I imagined, that communicating them might be of Service. It is
rot for me to proceed any further: If what is written seems for the Good of the
Public; the Ways and Means; the proper Method, -- that lies before others.

It may be, at the next Assembly, if it shall seem good to them; a Committee
will be appointed to enquire into the State of the Indian Nations, and into the
best Methods for preserving, and strengthening, and improving our Alliance with
them.

Perhaps, some will say, such Cares should begin at Home; that it becomes them
chiefly to provide for the Education of their own Youth; and that they are to
consider of erecting and endowing a stately Edifice suitable to that Purpose.
-- It is very well, -- wherefore should they not? -- But it is noble to have
extensive Views; That they may do; and yet not leave the other unders. They may
look to the Welfare of their Families, and to the Honor and Advantage of the
Province. -- Wherefore should they not? -- For this they have Dwellings in
these Lands, and Seats in that Council.

But, at the same Time, they may comprehend, and deliberate on the promoting,
more largely the British Interest, and the Cause of Humanity, of Christianity.

This would give a peculiar Luster to their Assembly. This would be to rise
Forts and Bulwarks on their Borders. This would be to make their Province and
City, a Name and a Praise on the Earth. -- This would be indeed, more fully, to
entitle them to the dear Appellations of Fathers and Patriots.

I am, SIR, Your most obedient And most bumble Servant.

THE TREE of PEACE, etc.
THE ARGUMENT.
Introduction to the Song of Maratho. -- The Tree of Peace planted and blessed.
-- The Chain of Concord magnisy'd. -- The Ax, that is, War, buried in the deep
Pit. -- A Commendation of Peace and social Virtue. -- An Exhortation from
Peace. -- Corlaer (that is the Governor of the Province) entreated to send more
Instructors. -- An Acknowledgment for the Blessing of Peace to the Divine
Being, whom these Indians call See Garangula' s Answer to M. Delabarre in the
History, Page 86
the Great Spirit. -- The King commended as a Friend to Peace. -- Address to
the King and to Britain. -- A Benediction. -- Yariza called upon to sing her
Part. --

NOW the joyful Morning shone,
Bright as ever was Morning known;
When the Indian Nations met,
The fair Tree of Peace to set.
As the Tribes, there, all prepared,
The Solemnity regard;
From amidst the attentive Throng,
Maratho began the Song.
Plant and bless the facred Tree,
Prosperous may its Shadow be!
Fast lay hold of Earth its Roots!
Be the Fruits of Peace its Fruits!
Lofty let its Top arise,
And be favored by the Skies!
Spirits good, from High who view,
Water it with heavenly Dew!
Now lay hold of Concord's Chain;
Every Hand a Link maintain!
Let each Heart the Band confess!
And united Voices bless.
Bind it graceful round your Arms,
Gird your selves with all its Charms;
Fair and splendid let it shine
For this is the Chain Divine.
But the Grave of War, -- the Pit,
Bury the Ax now deep m in it:
Never more thine Edge uprear,
Keep it Earth, -- O keep it there.
Yet if it must rise again,
If bad Faith should break the Chain,
Then, O Earth, thy Charge deliver
With a keener Edge than ever.
Rather, hence, let Men be wise,
Learning Works of Peace to prize;
Man to Man, no more a Foe,
Cease devising mutual Woe.
Are there not wild Beasts in store,
Through the Forests to explore?
Why should wrong taught Weapons dare,
Against the Life of Man to war?
Happy Peace from Heaven was sent
To bid Savage Rage relent,
And of better Life be fond;
And approve the social Bond.
Turn, she says, 'all the Iron War
'To a sitter Use by far;
'That which Mankind did destroy,
'To improve the Earth employ;
'From the River, from the Wood
'Let your young Men bring you Food,
'For the fair Support of Life;
'And hence know no other Strife.
'Let them vie to make the Field,
'More abundant Bread to yield,
'And where now the Wood-Land stands,
'Shew well cultivated Lands.
'And, withal, O let them learn
'Virtue's Beauties to discern,
'T' understand what is good and true,
'That which Men should most pursue.'
Think you hear from sacred Peace,
Breathing Balsam, Words like these:
In your Hearts these Words receive,
In your Memories engrave.
Send, Corlaer, more good Men here,
Who such Words may more endear,
And our Knowledge more increase,
From the House and Book of Peace.
The Great Spirit, Lord of all,
He, who bids the Thunder roll,
Who commanded the Sun's Birth,
Who sends Showers to water the Earth.
The most potent Sovereign,
Gracious to the Sons of Men,
He the troubled World seren'd,
He for us this Peace ordained.
The high Sachem, at the Helm
Of the pow'rtul British Realm,
GEORGE, who is Great on Lands and Seas,
Indians, is a Friend to Peace:
Deeds of War, in his Esteem,
Which to others pompous seem,
Are not great, but as they tend
In a happy Peace to end.
He has set a Tree of Peace,
The Earth, and the great Lake to grace;
May the Nations love its Shade!
And its Verdure never sade!
And this Tree which we erect,
Be it guarded, be it decked
By the royal Sachem's Care,
Given in Charge to the Corlaer.
Given in Charge, -- yet still retained;
Reign thus long, as thou have reigned,
And thy various Realms survey,
As the Sun maintains its Sway:
Shine on all, -- look into all, --
Nor the distant seem too small;
That might wrong a vulgar Eye,
Not the Ken of Majesty.
Guardian Britain! though remote,
Yet of mighty Name and Note,
Let thy Peace our Peace complete!
And thy Grandeur make us great.
All these Coasts, -- but, Thou, great Isle
Have high Heaven's continual Smile!
Still, a Sovereign happy Land!
Still, the Seat of Empire stands!
Indian Nations! now repeat, --
'Heav'n preserve the British State!
'And the British Chief, and Race,
'And these Lands, -- and bless the Peace.'
The three last Lines sung in Chorus. After a Pause, Maratho sings again.

Where Is Yariza's blooming Train,
Let them now adorn the Scene:
Let the Virgin Band advance,
And her Song direct their Dance.
The Tree of PEACE, etc. PARTH. YARIZA' s SONG.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Introduction. -- The Tree of Peace invoked and celebrated. -- An Image of
War, -- and of Peace. -- The Indian Maids exhorted and encouraged to Industry.
The chief Ladies of New York requested to assist them. A fine Web proposed to
be made to carry to Court. -- Not resolved on because of the Queen's Death,
which is lamented. -- They are comforted by the Appearance of the Princess and
the young Prince. -- Exclamations for Prosperity to the Tree of Peace, and for
a Divine Blessing on the British King and Nation, -- and on themselves. --

Magna Sacerdos
Arboris, ac summi fida internuncia caeli.
Juv.
Juvenal spoke this of a Jewess, applied to the Roman Women's Superstitions, --
It is not meant in that Sense here. -- To accomodate it to Yariza. -- The
Translation of it may run thus. She the great Priestess of the Tree Maintains,
An Intercourse with Heaven in sacred Strains.


COME O Virgins! and obey,
And adorn the solemn Day:
Maratho, we hear thy Call,
And attend the Festival.
Indian Maids! prepare, prepare
In these Rites your Parts to bear:
From around the Tree a Ring,
Dancing to the Notes I sing.
Lovely Plant of happy growth!
Good for Shade and Shelter both;
From on high thou first wast given,
From a Nursery in Heaven.
Ah! remembering thy great Birth,
Can thou flourish here on Earth,
Nor by Summer's Drought annoyed,
Nor by Winter's Frost destroyed?
And shall no rude Whirlwind dare
Thy fair Branches to make bare?
Shall thy Leaves these Lands regale,
Shall thy Blossoms charm and heal!
Shall thy Fruits of fragrant Cheer
Never satiate? ever dear,
Shall they hence to Mankind be
As is Light, or Liberty?
Tree of Paradise! grow high!
Let thy Top ascend the Sky!
And thy Boughs spread more and more,
Till the Earth they cover over!
Every Bird of sweetest Voice,
Come and in this Shade rejoice;
In the Song of Peace combine,
Come and tune your Notes to mine.
Come ye Younglings with your Dams,
Come the little gentle Lambs!
Bounding as ye come along,
As if Dancing to the Song.
But, far hence each Savage Beast,
That delights in laying Waste,
Beasts of War. -- No Wolf come here,
Nor the Panther nor the Bear.
Savage War! Men well might see,
Cruelty belongs to thee.
Like some raging Tiger, thou,
Bathed in Blood, did Fury vow.
Gentle Peace of heavenly Mind,
ever Good, and ever Kind!
Like the lovely Turtle-Dove,
Cooing Music, breathing Love.
Now our Hearts are undismayed,
Now our Hands shall grace this Shade.
Why should others us excel,
Why, so much, in doing well?
Here, though Dies diversely strike,
Virtuous Souls should seem alike,
As from Birds of different Dye,
May come equal Harmony.
Wool and Flax, shall by our Care,
(...) Habits fine and fair;
(...) Wheels as well go round?
(...) ^ooms for us be sound?
Would the Ladies of chief Note,
(...) now promote
(...) sair Designs,
(...) and Machines.
(...), ever long, from hence,
(...) bright Influence,
(...) them, in Throngs,
(...) and finer Songs.
Neighboring People, in amaze
When they come this Way, will gaze,
While they see that we intend
Some choice Web abroad to send.
This to the great Court I Will take
That Is beyond the spacious Lake;
Shall I? -- or shall I forbear?
Ah! -- the good Queen is not there.
Cease the Dance, O Virgin Band,
And in solemn Silence stand!
Caroline adorns the Skies!
Thither it is that Virtues rise.
Thence they come, they there must go; --
They seem Aliens here below: --
When shall such another Queen,
Gracing British Realms be seen!
Cease to weep, -- now dry your Tears,
A new Light from Heaven appears;
For the Princess seems to shine
As another Caroline.
And the Prince, her high first born,
Promises the World to adorn;
As a Plant of Peace to grow,
And another GEORGE to show.
Now, once more, in lightsome Round,
Tread the consecrated Ground;
Charm the Earth, and charm the Air,
Kindly, the fair Tree to rear!
Every Root, and every Bough
By the sacred Influence grow!
Hear O Earth! O Air! and strive
Which shall make it most to thrive!
Hear! -- (but, now, forbear to move;
Higher Sounds light Steps reprove;)
Now, all Voices join with me,
Hear O Heaven! -- and bless the Tree!
And thy British Servant bless,
Yet with Years of happy Peace,
And the Britons of all Lands,
Where so ever that People stands.
Bless us, also, Power Divine!
Formed by thee, we too are thine;
Make us yet more clearly see
The sure Path, which leads to thee. --
O send forth Critics may object against this, as a Scripture (...), (...)
proper to come from Yariza; but let them consider that the might have heard it
from the Minister.

It is surely a Phrase not improper for him to have (...) frequently before his
Sermons. And perhaps some snort Hymns and Prayers in the Indian Language, would
be one of the best Steps to be first taken for their Instruction. --


thy Truth, thy Light
To direct our Steps aright,
To the blissful glorious Place,
Where is everlasting Peace.
A POSTSCRIPT
By the EDITOR.
YARIZA's Letter, which came lately to Hand, it is hoped, will not be
disagreeable to the principal Ladies to whom it is directed.

To judge of it by the Style and Sentiments, it seems no less genuine than the
other Pieces. It may be reckoned more rare. We have had before now Productions
of the Oratory of the Male Indians, but this, perhaps, is the first of the
Female.

Some may imagine the Whole to be from Maratho: But why should we doubt some of
the Indian Women having some Genius for Poetry and Oratory, when we know there
are of the Sex, eminent in those Arts, in other Countries.

One would think that there is a peculiar Delicacy and Tenderness, suitable to
the Sex, which distinguishes what is ascribed to Yariza. Her Song appears to
have a more pathetic Simplicity.

Maratho speaks briefly of the Tree of Peace, and then of the Chain of Concord,
and of the Grave or Pit of War; nay, he blusters a little of the Ax rising
again, as if War was not yet quite out of his Head. Yariza is all Gentleness,
and seems loath to remove her Contemplations from the delightful Tree.

At the very first, there appears a Concern for it, lest being of heavenly
Origin, it should not grow kindly here on Earth, lest the Drought, or Frost, or
Storms should injure it. The Leaves, the Blossoms and Fruits, are all mentioned
in such a Manner, as show her Fondness for it.

The Birds of sweetest Voice, and the gentlest Creatures embellish it. Wheels
and Looms are its Decorations.

But here arises a Difficulty: It seems doubtful whether she can be warranted
in her Design to go to Court, and in her speaking of the great Personages.

Is this Propriety of Sentiment? It is very sure, she might have heard of the
Queen, and Princess, and of the young Prince, and how dear they were to
Britons: But did it become her to attempt their Eulogies? The whole Affair is
submitted to the Ladies and to the Critics, only, let them remember in her
Favor, that she did not intend to go to Court without a fine Web along with
her.

Although the Solemnity of the Occasion might lead her she appears there but as
by Accident. She does not depend on any Songs composed by her or Maratho, to
introduce her, but on good Huswif'ry.

She makes but a short Visit to lament the absent Brightness, and to take
Comfort from that which is present.

She soon returns to the fair Tree, which seems dearer to her than the Grandeur
of a Court, than the Pomp of Majesty.

She had looked undazzled on royal Splendour, and on an illustrious Progeny. But
here she is in Raptures She invokes the Earth, the Air, and Heaven. -- She
appears no longer as an Indian Maid, the untaught Yariza, but as a Sybil, or
rather a Prophetess in a divine Transport, while she extends her Hands, and
looking up, blesses the King and Nations.

Has she not communicated her Rapture? Is not this Comment smit with her
Enthusiasm? -- Be it so, -- perhaps such Enthusiasm is not blameable.

However, would it not be well done by those, to whom her Letter is addressed,
yet to encourage her to go to Court; or after some Time, direct thither others
of the Indian Maids, who shall become most accomplished, with some of their
sine Industry.

Such a Present, it may be well imagined, would not be unacceptable to the
chief Ladies of the Court of Britain.

And such a Motive, beside many others, and the Benefit thence to arise to
themselves might influence those of the Fair Sex here, who have it most in
their Power, to promote the Instruction and Improvement of the Female Indians.
As for the Men, it is hoped that they will take Care of the Male Sex; and
should the gentler Kind, who are allowed to have a greater Share of Tenderness
be outdone on so fair an Occasion for their Emulation: -- But, perhaps, Yariza
is too long detained from her Address to them.

YARIZA's LETTER To the principal LADIES of the Province and City of New York.
Fair Ladies,
PARDON Yariza, while presuming thus to address to you; she speaks not only for
herself, but for many Thousands of young Indian Maids in these Parts, who
desire to offer their Services to you, and to congratulate you on the Planting
of the Tree of Peace.

May you walk delightfully under its Shade, for, most surely, Corlaer has set
up one there, as our Sachems have done here.

May it spread its Branches over all your Abodes, and over the whole Country,
and no wild Beaft of War come out of the Forest to root it up. May the Island
of Manhatan, and the neighboring Isles, and the large Land, all become as one
Garden of Peace and Pleasure; and may your Children grow up like fair Plants
that are cherished by the benign Heat of the bright Luminary, and nursed by the
refreshing Dew of Heaven. May each of you have in your Habitations, a fair
Shrub, or little Tree, as a Family Tree of Peace, to bless your Dwellings. May
the Exhalations from it, be as the sweet Odor of Incense, or as the Leaves of
the sweetest Trees in the Forest, to gladden your Apartments. Let no rude
Sounds of Discord or Disquiet, be as a blighting Wind to wither the Leaves
thereof. No Distress nor Diffidence, like a thick Fog, cast an unkindly Mildew
to taint them, but the Man's Eyes, like the Sunbeams, cheer its Roots, and the
Woman's Voice, as a gentle Breeze, fan and regale the Branches. Let her draw
deep into her Breast the Balsam of its Effluence, and her Lips breathe forth
and improve the Fragrance.

How gladly would the Indian Maids attend on you in your (high Wigwams) great
Houses, to learn somewhat of your Gracefulness and Goodness, to watch the
Bidding of your fine Eyes, and wait on the Beckoning of your fair Hands! -- But
we are not worthy, till better fashioned, Send us, therefore, we pray ye, some
good Women, who may teach us those Sounds, wherein you utter your Commands and
Meaning, that we may perfectly understand, and be the more sit to attend to
them, and who may learn us somewhat of the Performances of the fine Needles,
wherein yourselves are so excellent; and who may direct us in those Operations
for the Looms, wherein your Maidservants are instructed.

The Indian Virgins, O Ladies, cast themselves at your Feet, humbly desiring
your Protection and Patronage. Think to what it is that you are called upon: To
be as pure Living-Springs, that water a dry sandy Defart; as a bright Light to
illuminate dark Regions; as a divine Voice sounding in the Forest, to raise the
sweetest Confort. You are called upon to be the Praise of suture Ages, as well
as of the present; to have the Blessings of Nations on you and the Blessings of
Heaven.

May you long adorn the Tree of Peace, -- and may we, also, by your Means, be
assisted in those Works and Knowledge, which will yield the finest Garlands to
bind to its Branches.

Live happy, O amiable Ladies, and look favorably on the Daughters of the Five
Nations, in behalf of whom, this Gratulation of the Planting of the fair Tree,
this Offer of their Service; this Request for their Improvement; their good
Wishes for your Welfare, are offered with Respect to you, and Admiration of
you, by

YARIZA.

FINIS.

