A GENERAL IDEA OF THE COLLEGE OF MIRANIA; WITH A Sketch of the Method of
teaching Science and Religion, in the several Classes: AND Some Account of its
Rise, Establishment and Buildings.

Addressed more immediately to the Consideration of the Trustees nominated, by
the Legislature, to receive Proposals, etc. relating to the Establishment of a
COLLEGE in the Province of NEW YORK.

Quid Leges sine Moribus vanae proficiunt? Hor. Nullum Animal morosius est;
nullum majore Art tractandum quam Home. Natura sequitur melius quam ducitur.
Seneca. NEW YORK: Printed and Sold by J. PARKER and W. WEYMAN, at the New
Printing-Office in Beaver-Street, 1753.

[Price One Shilling and Six Pence.]

THE CONTENTS.
VERSES spoken at the opening of the College of (...). p. 5 Introduction. p. 7
Object of Education, and Design of our Creation, p. 10, 11, 12 A grand Division
of Mankind into two Classes. p. 13, 14 Mechanic's School, p. 14, 15
Latin-School, p. 16, 17 College; or five learned Classes; 1st, or Greek Class,
p. 17 2d, or Mathematical Class, ibid 3d, or Philosophical Class, p. 18 4th
Class. -- Rhetoric, 19, 20. Poetry, p. ^ Criticism, 16. Composition, 22. Taste,
24, 25. p. 16 5th Class. p. 26 Animal Anatomy; Agriculture, p. 16, 27 History,
Politics, etc. p. 27, 28, 29 Economy of the Classes, p. 31. 32. etc Public
Exercises, p. 34, 35 Declamation, ibid Dramatic Performances, p. 36 English
Language, ibid, p. 37 Modern Languages, ibid Masters in athletic Exercises, ib.
p. 38 Natural Religion and good Morals, p. 38, 39 as enforced in the 1st Class
in the Study of Homer, p. 40 2d Class, especially in the Study of Astronomy, p.
41 3d Class; chiefly in the Study of Micrography, p. 42 4th Class. p. 46 5th
Class, In the Study of Agriculture, 47. By a Landscape, ibid. p.48 Taste of true
Greatness formed, By Historical Facts, p. 49, 50, 51, 52. 53 Love of the
British Constitution, p. 55, 56 Good Effects of such an Education, p. 56, 57,
58, 59, etc Of the Edifice, p. 61, 62, 63 Method of filling up the Classes, and
carrying the whole into Execution in five Years. p. 69 A Provincial annual
Lottery, p. 70 An English Lottery, ibid Commencement, ibid An English School in
each Township, p. 71 And one Latin School in the most convenient Place in each
County, ibid Conclusion, touching the Imitation of this Institution of M^rania,
in the Province of New York, p. 75 Postscript, containing part of a Letter from
the West Indies, with some Remarks upon it, and upon the Religion to be
established in our College. p. 51, etc.

The Reader is desired to correct with his P^, the following ERRATA:
PAGE 17, line 17, read Euclid's. p. 21, l. 12, r. Aristotle's Poetics. p. 24,
l. 22, after Time place a Cemma, p. ibid, in the Note, l, 10, r. majestic, p.
29, l. 31, for third, r. said. p. 32, l. 1. for two, r. too. p. 33, l. 1. r.
videretur. p. 45, l. 21, r. God. p. 47, l. 1, r. to admire, p. 48; l. 4, r.
odenterous.

Advertisement.
THE following Sheets were plan'd at the same Time with the Pamphlet on the
Situation, etc. of our intended College, published last October; and designed
to follow it whenever the Public, by a more general Attention to the Concerns
of Education, should seem prepared to receive it. For, however necessary and
seasonable an Enquiry, concerning the proper Situation and Advantages of a
College in this Province, was in itself, as a first Step, to settle a Point
that had been long disputed, and to unite all Parties in a speedy Execution;
yet I was always convinced, that this is but the least Part of what ought to be
settled previous to our proposed Establishment, and Nothing more than a mere
Trifle in Comparison of the Constitution, Government, and Discipline of a
College; with which indeed Nothing can be compared; and concerning which no
Person, I believe, has more frequently employed his Thoughts than I have done.
This will fully appear to those who can form a just Idea of the Study and Labor
it must have cost to bring all the Parts of the following Work into their
present Order in such a small Compass: A Labor, nothing could have induced me,
at present, to undergo, but an unfeigned Zeal for the Advancement of useful
Literature in this uncultivated Corner of the Globe, and a fond Desire to make
some Amends to the Public, on the main Subject, for their kind and unmerited
Reception of the former Essay.

This Work is addressed more immediately to the Consideration of the Trustees,
though I am sensible that, by the Design of their Nomination, they are not
empowered to give any absolute Decision on the Expediency of Proposals of this
Nature. However, as they are the only standing Body, upon whom this great Work
rests, so far as it is yet advanced, it was proper to send these Papers abroad
under their Protection. The Manuscript would have been presented to them at
their first public Meeting, had I not been advised by some of them, to whom I
showed it, as private Friends, that such a Scheme could be best judged of in
Print; when every Person might have the calm Perusal of a Copy; and that the
sooner it appeared, of the greater Service might it become. -- As it was
written with this very Intention, to give Men of Sense and Learning an
Opportunity of blaming, altering, or improving it, before the Meeting of the
General Assembly, I immediately committed it to the Press, without consulting
Reputation, by advising, as usual, with some of my very condescending and
learned City Friends, by which Means it might have appeared to greater
Advantage. -- But as I have still a better Aim than any Reputation to be gained
by the best executed Thing of this Nature, I shall not even envy my very
Enemies the Pleasure they may find in detecting some Imperfections which, on
more Thought, I could have removed; or others which, perhaps, I never intended
to remove: Let them only show they can do so with good Manners; then every
Error they discover, or Improvement they propose, on the following Scheme, will
be of some Service to the Public, and Matter of great Joy to the Author.

Verses spoken at the Opening of The COLLEGE of MIRANIA.
IT comes! at last, the promised ERA comes!
Now Gospel Truth shall dissipate the Glooms
Of Pagan-Error; and, in copious Streams,
Over this dark Hemisphere, shed saving Beams!
For, lo! her azure Wing bright SCIENCE spreads,
And soft-approaches to these new-found-Shades;
Exultant, stretching forth her hallowed Hands
To plant her Laurels in serener Lands!
Each Muse around Her strikes the warbling String;
And, mid Her Train, Peace, Justice, Freedom sing --
-- A GODDESS comes! -- they sing and rend the Air --
A GODDESS comes! to welcome Her prepare!
Woods, Brooks, Gales, Fountains, long unknown to Fame,
At length, as conscious of your future Claim,
Prepare to nurse the Philosophic-Thought;
To swell the serious, or the sportive Note!
Prepare, ye Woods! to yield the Sage your Shade;
And wave ambrosial Verdures over his Head!
Ye Brooks! prepare to prompt the Poet's Strains;
And softly murmur back his amorous Pains!
Haste, O ye Gales! your spicy Sweets impart;
In Music breathe Them to the exulting Heart!
Ye Fountains! haste, the inspiring Wave to roll;
And give Castalian Draughts to lave the Soul.
It Is done! -- Woods, Brooks, Gales, Fountains, all, obey;
And say with general Voice -- or seem to say --
-- Hail, Heaven-descended! holy SCIENCE, hail!
Thrice-welcome to these Climes; here ever dwell,
With Shade and Silence, far from dire Alarms;
The Trumpet's horrid Clang, and Din of Arms!
To Thee we offer every softer Seat;
Each sunny Lawn; or sylvan sweet Retreat;
Each Flower-verg'd Stream; each Amber, in this Place, is a general Name for
Gum. Resins and all odorous vegetable Juice^, exsuding from Trees, Shrubs and
Herbs.
Amber-dropping Grove;
Each Vale of Pleasure; and each Bower o^ Love:
Where youthful Nature, with stupendous Scenes,
Lifts all the Powers; and all the Frame serenes.
O then! here fix, -- ( Earth, Water, Air invite!)
And bid a NEW-BRITANNIA spring to Light! --
Smit-deep, I antedate the Golden Days;
And strive to paint them in sublimer Lays!
Behold! on Periods, Periods brightening rise!
On Worthies, Worthies crowd before mine Eyes;
See! other BACONS, NEWTONS, LOCKS appear;
And to the Skies our Laureat-Honors rear.
See! mid undying Greens, they lie inspired,
On mossy Beds, by heavenly Visions fired;
Aloft they soar, on Contemplation's Wing,
Over Worlds and Worlds -- and reach the ETERNAL KING.
Awaked by other Suns, and kindling strong
With purest Ardors for celestial Song,
Lo! other POPES and SPENCERS glad-resound
The rural Lay to Shepherds dancing round;
Find other Twit'nams in each bowery Wood;
And other Mullas in each sylvan Flood.
Lo! the wild INDIAN, softened by their Song,
Emerging from his Arbors, bounds along
The green Savannah patient of the Lore
Of Dove-ey'd Wisdom -- and is rude no more.
Hark! even his Babes MESSIAH's Praise proclaim;
Or fondly learn to lisp JEHOVAH's Name!
O SCIENCE! onward thus thy Reign extend
Over Realms yet unexplor'd till Time shall end;
Till Death-like Ignorance forsake the Ball,
And Life-endearing Knowledge cover all;
Till wounded Slavery seek her native Hell,
In triple Bonds eternally to dwell!
Not trackless Deserts shall thy Progress stay;
Rocks, Mountains, Floods, before Thee must give Way:
Sequestered Vales, at thy Approach, shall sing;
And with the Voice of cheerful Labor ring.
Where Wolves now howl, shall polished Villas rise;
And towery Cities grow into the Skies. --
(...) Pope's Wind^ (...) 399.
" Earth's distant Ends our Glory shall behold;
"And the NEW-World launch forth to seek the OLD."
INTRODUCTION. To the TRUSTEES, etc.
Gentlemen,
TO every One that has the Interest and Reputation of this Province at Heart,
particularly to You, it must give a very sensible Satisfaction to behold, at
length, the general Attention drawn toward the Establishing a public Seminary
in it, under the Patronage of the Government, for the Institution of Youth in
the liberal Arts and Sciences. The Spirit now seems to burn so much the
stronger in Proportion to its Slowness in Catching; and gives sure Presage that
we shall not only retrieve our Honor, by rivaling the foremost of our Neighbors
in this truly pious Work, but as far outdo them as they have got the Start of
Us, and as our superior Abilities have put it in our Power.

The Day, on which it is expected the General Assembly will meet, draws near;
when, in Consequence of a V^e of last Sessions, this important Affair will be
the Subject of their Deliberations. And, as the Plan or Idea of the whole
Institution ought, first of all, to be fixed, that every Step they take may
tend uniformly to the Execution of the same, it is the indispensable Duty of
every Person of Learning and Leisure, to assist with his unbiased Thoughts on
this Head. I, therefore, thought it incumbent on me to contribute my Mite for
this good Purpose, as well to exonerate myself of what I owe the State, as to
satisfy the Expectations of some Gentlemen who have a Right at all Times to
command me.

While I was ruminating upon the Constitutions of the several Colleges, I had
either personally visited or read of, without being able to fix on any Thing, I
durst recommend as a Model worthy our Imitation, I chanced to fall into the
Company of a valuable young Gentleman, named Evander, who is a Person of some
Distinction of the Province of Mirania, After some Conversation on learned
Topics, he was led to give me an Account of a Seminary established about twelve
Years ago in that Province, in which I thought I perceived all that seems
excellent in the ancient and modern Institutions reduced to the greatest Method
and Simplicity. This I have pre^m'd to propose to your Consideration; which, as
it may be further improved by you, and other learned Men among us, seems
extremely well adapted to the Circumstances of this Province of New York, as we
are now entirely such as the Miranians were when they founded their College,
with Regard to Riches, Trade and ^he Number of People.

Mirania, Gentlemen, is one of the Provinces of the New-World first settled by
our Countrymen, the English, above a Century ago. In what Degrees of Lat. etc.
it lies, is of no Importance; I am not to write its History, but only to give a
general Account of its College and the Method of Education practiced in it;
which, as nearly as I can remember, I shall do ^n E^ander's own Words, as I am
sensible that every Deviation from them would be a Blemish. -- After a modest
Apology, with which I shall not trouble You, he began as follows, --

EVANDER's Account of the College of MIRANIA, etc.
"IT had been the peculiar Happiness of my Countrymen, ever since their first
Settlement, to enjoy an uninterrupted Tranquillity; at Peace with their
Neighbors, unrivaled in their Trade, and blessed in one Administration of a
Succession of mild and just Governors, who had the real Interest of the
Province at Heart. These favorable Circumstances had, from time to time,
besides constant Supplies from the Mother Country, invited over vast Numbers of
Foreigners, who, quitting their native Land, sought a calm Retreat in Mirania;
where under the Protection of wise and equal Laws, and far beyond the Reach of
Priestly Domination, and the rapacious Minions of sceptred Robbers, they might
dare to think for themselves, dare to challenge and enjoy the Fruits of their
own Industry.

THUS, about twelve Years ago, the Miranians saw themselves a mighty and
flourishing People, in Possession of an extensive Country, capable of producing
all the Necessaries, and many of the Superfluities of Life. They reflected that
the only Method of making these natural Advantages of lasting Use to themselves
and Posterity, -- the only infallible Source of Tranquillity, Happiness and
Glory, -- was to contrive and execute a proper Scheme for forming a Succession
of sober, virtuous, industrious Citizens, and checking the Course of growing
Luxury. They were sensible, that though a Combination of lucky Circumstances,
almost wholly independent on them, had raised them so high, they should be
wanting to themselves if they depended longer on blind Chance for any Thing
which was now in their Power to command. They were convinced that, without a
previous good Education, the best Laws are little better than Verba minantia,
and, considered as such, will be dup'd and broke through with Impunity by
illustrious Villains; -- That the Magistrate can at best but fright Vice into a
Corner, and that it is Education alone can mend and rectify the Heart; -- That
no Government can subsist long on Violence and brute Force; and that Nature
follows easily when treated rationally, but will not bear to be led, or driven.
They saw also, that among the Foreigners, who were as numerous as the English,
many Distinctions were forming upon their different Customs, Languages and
Extractions, which, by creating separate Interests, might in the Issue prove
fatal to the Government. They wisely judged, therefore, that Nothing could so
much contribute to make such a Mixture of People coalesce and unite in one
common Interest, as the common Education of all the Youth at the same public
Schools under the Eye of the civil Authority. Thus, said ^^^y, indissoluble
Connexions and Friendships will be formed; Prejudices worn off; and the Youth
will in Time either forget their very Extraction, or from a more liberal
Education, and manly Turn of Thought, learn to contemn those little ridiculous
Distinctions that arise among the Vulgar, because their Fathers first spoke a
different Language, or drew Air in a different Clime.

With these Views the Miranians applied themselves to project a Plan of
Education; every Person of Genius, Learning and Experience offering their
impartial Thoughts on this Subject, whether they were in a private or public
Capacity; as sensible that an Undertaking of such lasting Consequences demanded
the united Councils, -- the Heads and Hearts of a whole country.

The Object they kept always in Sight, was the easiest, simplest and most
natural Method of forming Youth to the Knowledge and Exercise of private and
public Virtue; and therefore they did not scruple to reject some Things
commonly taught at Colleges; to add others; and shorten or invert the Order of
others, as best suited their Circumstances. They often had this Sentence in
their Mouth, which I think, in other Words, I have read in TILLOTSON, -- That
the Knowledge of what tends neither directly nor indirectly to make better Men
and better Citizens, is but a Knowledge of Trifles; it is not Learning, but a
specious and ingenious sort of Idleness. -- We must not then, said they, wilder
ourselves in the Search of Truth, among the Rubbish contained in the vast Tomes
of ancient Rabbis, Commentators and Schoolmen; nor in the more refined
Speculations of modern Metaphysicians concerning Spirit, Matter, etc. nor yet
in the polemic Writings about Grace, Predestination, mo^^^l Agency, the
Trinity, etc. etc. which so inflame the World at this Day, to the Disgrace of
Christian Meekness and Charity. The Years of Methusalem would be far too short
to attain any Proficiency in all the Disputes and Researches of this Kind,
which have so long puzzled the learned World, and are still as much undecided
as at first. Almighty God seems to have set the Knowledge of many Things beyond
our present Ken, on purpose to confound our Pride, and whisper to us
continually the Degeneracy and Imperfection of our Nature, and when we consider
such Things in this Light, we make the only proper Use of them: For, suppose we
could live long enough to become as well versed in all these Points, as the
most subtle Doctor that ever breathed, what would it contribute to the main
Point, the making better Men and Citizens? Why, just nothing at all! We ought
then, continued they, rejecting Things superfluous and hypothetical, to mount
directly up to fundamental Principles, and endeavor to ascertain the Relations
we stand in to GOD and universal Intelligence, that we may sustain, with
Dignity, the Rank assigned us among intellectual Natures, and move in Concert,
with the rest of Creation in accomplishing the great End of all Things.

To satisfy ourselves of this, -- Quid sumus, et quidnam victuri gignimur --
requires no such Depth of Understanding, no such subtle Reasonings and tedious
Researches, as some would persuade us. For, besides his revealed Will, God has
given Intimations of his Will to us, by appealing to our Senses in the
Constitution of our Nature, and the Constitution and Harmony of the material
Universe. We have only to reason by Analogy, and chastise our Reasonings by
these holy Oracles. Then the least Attention will convince us, that what God
chiefly expects of us here, is to love Him, and all his Creatures, for his
sake; -- to view through the Medium of Benevolence and Charity, those
inconsiderable Differences which, in a State of Imperfection, must subsist
among free Agents, and which God himself, perhaps, views with Pleasure; -- to
do always the greatest Good in our Power, whether to ourselves or Fellow
Creatures, of whatever Country, Sect or Denomination they may be; -- to act a
just and honest Part in our social Capacity; -- and lastly, as much as
possible, to repair the Ruins of our Nature, by improving and enlarging our
Faculties, and confirming ourselves in Habits of Virtue, that thus we may in
some sort, be qualified to be replac'd in our original high Rank, to which,
through the Redeemer's Merit, we may yet aspire to rise, and be advanced from
Stage to Stage of Perfection and Bliss, through all the endless Periods of our
Being. --

To say, or even think, our present Span is too short for these Purposes, is
Presumption, is shocking Impiety; it is to arraign the Councils of the most
HIGH, and charge him with Injustice. We have, in reality, not only Time enough
to obey the Dictates of our serious Affections, by learning and discharging the
Duties we owe to God and Man, but sufficient left for Recreation, and innocent
Amusement; unless we will make Life too short by creating Business for
ourselves which no Way concerns us, and turning our Attention to Subjects
which, after all our Searches and Researches, will make us neither wiser nor
better than when we first set out.

Hence it appears, continued they, of what lasting Importance it is, to
accustom Youth early to distinguish the True from the False, by directing their
Studies to such Things as come more immediately home to their Business and
Bosoms. Were Men as generally agreed what these Things are, as they soon would
be, could they lay Passion and Prejudice wholly aside, then indeed the Business
of Education would be short, easy and pleasant; and the Government of Mirania
would have found no Difficulty in fixing on a proper and unexceptionable Plan
for this Purpose. But they saw with Concern, that while there were Passion,
Prejudice, Custom, Malice, Pride, Ignorance and different Opinions in the
Province to struggle with, the best Scheme they could concert would not be
alike acceptable to all, and would be liable to many Exceptions and
Misconstructions. -- No matter: That did not deter them from their Duty. They
had the noble Resolution to follow the unbiased Dictates of their own Good
Sense, conscious that, though they could not project an inexceptionable, far less
a perfect, Plan, they should acquit themselves to GOD, and the uncorrupted
Judgment of Posterity, by rendering it as perfect as they could, and delivering
it down in a Condition of being improved as often as Circumstances might alter,
and Experience discover Defects in it. -- But it would be needless to trouble
you with all the Difficulties and Toils they encountered, before they brought
the Scheme to the Point of Perfection aimed at: -- I shall give an Account of
the several Classes, and Method of Study, as they are at present: after that I
shall give an Account of the Building, and conclude with taking Notice of the
chief Steps taken by them in carrying the whole into Execution. This is what is
most material for your Purpose. You must not, however expect, I can be very
particular in this Account: A full Detail of every Thing worth Notice in such
an Institution, would furnish Matter for a Volume; which would be an useful
Book, if done by an able Pen.

With Regard to Learning, the Miranians divide the whole Body of People into
two grand Classes. The First consists of those designed for the learned
Professions; by which they understand Divinity, Law, Physic, Agriculture, and
the chief Offices of the State. The Second Class of those designed for Mechanic
Professions, and all the remaining People of the Country. Such a Division is
absolutely necessary: For, if the shortest Way of forming Youth to act in their
proper Spheres, as good Men and good Citizens ought always to be the Object of
Education, these two Classes should be educated on a very different Plan. The
Knowledge of the learned Languages, as the Means of acquiring other useful
Knowledge, is indispensibly necessary to the first Class. To the Second, the
Time thus spent is entirely thrown away, as they never have any Occasion to
make use of those Languages. A more general Tincture of the Sciences, except
Arithmetic and Mathematics, will also serve their Purpose.

Any Scheme then, that either proposes to teach both these grand Classes after
the same Manner, or is wholly calculated for one of them, without regarding the
other, must be very defective. And yet so it is, that Colleges are almost
unversally calculated for the First Class; while a collegiate School for
breeding Mechanics, is rarely to be met with. This Class of People, by far the
most numerous, and also the Hands and Strength of every Government, are
overlooked, and have Nothing but this wretched Alternative left them; either to
glean what Scraps of Science they can at private Schools, (often under no
Regulations as to Morals or Method) or to go through a Course of Learning at
Colleges, for which they have neither Time nor Use.

These Considerations gave Rise to what is called the Mechanic's School in this
Seminary. It might, however, as well have been called a distinct College; for
it is no Way connected with what is called the College, (by Way of Distinction)
than by being under the Inspection of the same Trustees, and the Government of
the same Head, whom they call Provost or Principal. Most of the Branches of
Science, taught in the College, are taught in this School; but then they are
taught without Languages, and in a more compendious Manner, as the
Circumstances and Business of the Mechanic require. This School is so much like
the English School in Philadelphia, first sketch'd out by the very ing^us and
worthy Mr. Franklin, that a particular Account of it here is needless. The
Miranians only differ in this, that they teach every Thing necessary for the
Mec^anic, in this School, without suffering the Youth of it to have Recourse to
the mathematical, or any other Professor in the College, or learned Classes;
which it is thought would be inconvenient, as they must be taught at a different
Hour, and by a different Method from what these Professors teach the said
learned Classes. -- They took Care at first to put a Master, and Ushers, in the
Mechanics School, capable to teach all the Branches of Science necessary for
the Mechanic, in all the Perfection requisite. The Expense I can think of no
solid Objection to such an Institution for Mechanics. This Class of People must
be educated as well as the other; and, were it necessary, it might be proved to
a Demonstration, that a less Number of Instructors, and consequently a less
Expense, can educate them in a Collection of Schools, in the Collegiate or
Society Way, than when dispersed at separate Schools. How much greater the
Success must be, and how much more consistent with found Policy, in the former
Case, will be evinced in the Course of this Narrative. -- Should such an
Institution for Mechanics, be included in the general one proposed in this
Province, as I hope it will, and should not this Sketch, together with that of
the English School of Philadelphia, be satisfactory, I may afterward give a
more particular Idea of it.
is the same that it would be by the Pennsylvanian Method; because the Number
of Instructors in every School, can always be proportioned to the Number of
Scholars. -- In this School, nine Years complete the Mechanic's Education;
proportionable to which there are nine Forms or Classes. In the Three lowest,
English is taught grammatically, and as a Language, with Writing. In the six
higher Classes, English and Writing are continued, at the same Time that
Accounts, Mathematics, Ethics, Oratory, Chronology, History, the most plain and
useful Parts of natural and mechanic Philosophy, are taught; to which is added,
something of Husbandry and Chemistry, which, as improved of late, they esteem
of great Use to every Mechanic. Thus, at about fifteen Years of Age, the
Mechanic's Education is finished; and he comes out well qualified to make a
good Figure in every Profession wherein Languages are not required. All these
Classes are taught at present by one Master and two Ushers, but more must soon
be wanted. The Master, whose Place is of very great Consequence, and next in
Trust to the Head of the Seminary, is Vice-Principal, and governs the Whole in
the Absence, or during the Indisposition of the Principal. The Miranians value
themselves highly on the Newness and Peculiarity of this School; and often tell
Strangers that, as a trading People, it is of as great Importance to them, as
the College for breeding Men for the learned Professions. Indeed they speak of
erecting it soon into a separate College, and calling it Barnard-College, in
Honor of a famous Alderman of Mirania, who has left a very considerable Sum
for endowing it as a College. Then the two Colleges will be called the
University of Mirania, a Name the Seminary is already entitled to. I proceed
now to speak of the five learned Classes, at present called the College,
preparatory to which is

The LATIN SCHOOL.
This School is divided into five Classes, proportionable to the five Years the
Youth continue in it; which is long enough, as the Latin Tongue is here taught
in the most samiliar and approved Method, without burdening the Memory too much
with Rules. Such of the Youth as discover Genius, and are intended for the
learned Professions, are removed from the third Class of the Mechanic's School,
to be entered into this, provided they be nine Years of Age, can write
tolerably, and read and articulate the English Tongue. The first four Years are
wholly given to the Latin Tongue, and improving the Boys in English and Writing
at leisure Hours. The fifth Year, the highest Class divide the Day between
Latin and Greek,; proceeding through the Declensions, Conjugations, St. Luke's
Gospel, Lucian's Dialogues, etc. Thus at 14 Years of Age, well versed in the
Latin-Tongue, with some Tincture of the Greek, the Youth are entered into --

The Greek Class, being the first, or lowest of what is called the College. --
In this, as in every other Class, the Youth remain one Year. In the Forenoon,
they read Theocritus' Idyllia, with some select Pieces of Hessiod, Homer, and
Xenophon: In the Afternon, they learn Arithmetic, vulgar and decimal; Merchants
Accounts, some Parts of Algebra, and the first six Books of Eucild's Elements.
-- The Master of this Class is styled Professor of Greek: His Place is of very
great Importance, for giving the Youth an Opportunity of acquiring the Greek in
all its Elegance and Purity, from a Master whose particular Profession that
Language is. Without this Knowledge of Greek, which is not to be acquired at
Latin-Schools, especially in the Country, (from which the Country Youth must,
however, be immediately admitted into the learned Classes or College) it will
appear, as we go along, impossible for them to bear their Part right in the
remaining Studies; nothing being read but the original Authors.

SECOND CLASS.
The next Year is spent in this Class; the Master of which is styled Professor
of Mathematics. He carries the Youth forward in Algebra; teaches the eleventh
and twelfth Books of Euclid, Geometry, Astronomy, Chronology, Navigation, and
the other most useful Branches of the Mathematics. So much of Logics and
Metaphysics as is useful, is joined with Mathematics: But a small Space of Time
serves for these Studies; Logics, in particular, as commonly understood, being
in great Disrepute among them. They, therefore, and their chief Attention this
Year, to the more advantageous Study of Mathematics, which, by the Bye, they
esteem the best System of Logics that can be given to Youth. The Evolution of
mathematical Truths, through a Chain of Propositions, contributes more, in one
Year, say they, to expand the Faculties of the Mind, and accustom it, by a just
Attention to intricate Subjects, to reason closely, and in Train, than a Life
spent in the sophistical Distinctions and idle Jargon of School-Logic. At
proper Seasons, when the Weather permits, this Class is exercised in practical
Geometry; in surveying Lands, Waters; and in plotting and ornamenting the Maps
of such Surveys. There is a weekly Exercise for their further Improvement in
Greek and Latin.

THIRD CLASS.
The Master of this Class is called Professor of Philosophy. The Day is divided
between the Studies of Ethics and Physics: Under the latter, the Miranians
comprehend Natural History; Mechanic, or corpuscular Philosophy, and
experimental Philosophy; for the Illustration of which, they are provided with
a complete Apparatus. With Regard to Ethics, they seem to think that a full,
yet compendious, System, calculated by some sound Philosopher, for Youth at
Colleges, is a Book still wanted. They own, that the English excel in detached
Pieces on all moral Subjects; but these, say they, are only the -- disjecta
membra Ethices. -- No one Author has handled the Subject of Ethics, in all its
Ramifications, with a View to the Information of Youth: And it is dangerous as
well as difficult, to learn Morals from different Authors, most of whom clash
with one another; or had their peculiar Notions to propagate, and favorite
Systems to erect. -- In this Class, at present, they read the Philosoph. Books
of Plato and Cicero, in their Originals, with Lock, Hutchinson, etc. the
Professor, taking Care to guard the Youth against every Thing in which these
Authors stand singular. -- But they have a Method peculiar almost to
themselves, of teaching Morals, upon which they lay the greatest Stress, and
that is by historical Facts; of which I shall speak by and by. -- The private
Reading of such Books as Derham, Nettleton, on Virtue and Happiness, etc. are
recommended for the greater Improvement of the Youth in the Studies of this
Class; the Professor, from Time to Time, satisfying himself, by proper
Questions, what Advantage they reap from such Books: I do not mention Keil,
Gravesand, Newton's Princip. etc. because classical Books; and supposed in the
Study of natural Philosophy. --

FOURTH CLASS.
The Master of this Class is styled Professor of Rhetoric and Poetry. As it is
in this and the following Class, continued Evander, that my Countrymen bring
all that has been before taught, home to the Business of Life, and are more
singular in their Method; I must beg to be something more particular in the
Account of them. A great Stock of Learning, without knowing how to make it
useful in the Conduct of Life, is of little Significancy. You may observe, that
what has chiefly been aimed at, in the foregoing Classes, is to teach Youth to
think well, that is, closely and justly. When this is attained, it is a noble
Basis; but would, however, be useless without its Superstructure, without
teaching them to call forth, and avail themselves of, their Thoughts, in
writing, speaking, acting and living well. To make Youth Masters of the first
two, viz. writing and speaking well, which are the Business of this Class,
nothing contributes so much as being capable to ^^^^h what has been well
written or spoken by others: Hence the proper Studies of this Class, are
Rhetoric and Poetry, from which arise Criticism and Composition.

I shall speak first of Rhetoric, as it is the first Study. The Professor
begins with giving the Students a general Notion of the Precepts and different
Kinds of Rhetoric, from Tully and Quintilian; then proceeds to make them read
Tully's Cration for Milo, leisurely in its Original; applying, as they go
along, the Precepts of Oratory; and making them apprehend its Plan, Series,
Delicacy of Address; the Strength and Disposition of the Proofs; the Justness
of the Tropes and Figures; the Beauty of the Imagery and Painting; the Harmony
and Fullness of the Periods; the Pomp and Purity of the Diction; and, in fine,
that Grandeur of Thought; that astonishing Sublime; that Torrent of Eloquence,
which, moving, warming, seizing the Soul, sweeps all irresistably down before
it. -- After this, Demosthenes's Harangue for C^esiphon, which Tully calls the
Model of perfect Eloquence, is read in its Original, and explained in the same
Manner.

These two celebrated Orations, thus explained and apprehended, are judged
sufficient to give Youth a right Idea of Oratory, and fix its Precepts in their
Mind, which is not to be done so much by reading many Orations, as by studying
a Few thoroughly: And therefore, only three more Orations, one in Greek, one in
Latin, and one in English, are read in the School through the whole Year. These
are successively handled thus: In the Evening the Professor prescribes a
certain Portion of the Oration, and appoints the Students to write out their
Observations upon its Conformity to the Laws of Rhetoric; the Plan, Thoughts,
etc. by Way of Criticism; this they bring with them next Day to the Class or
School, when the Part prescribed is read over, and this Criticism of theirs
examined and corrected. A new Portion, as before, is prescribed against next
Meeting, till in this Manner they have finished the whole three Orations.

In the same Manner is Poetry studied, which is, indeed, rather the same than a
different Study; Poetry being nothing else but the eldest Daughter of
Eloquence. The Arrangement of the Fable in the One corresponds to the Plan and
Series of the Other. Tropes and Figures they have in common: And where, in the
Peculiarity of her Dress, and the more frequent Use of Epithets, etc. Poetry
affects to differ, the Youth are not unacquainted with it; as they have been
made to observe it in reading the Classic-Poets. The Rules, Nature and Design
of the several Kinds of Poetry, are, in the first Place explained; then, as in
the Study of Rhetoric, they privately write a Piece of Criticism upon them,
beginning with the lesser Kinds, as the Ode, Elegy, Satyr, etc. proceeding to
the Drama, Pastoral and Epopaea. All these Criticisms are carefully revised and
corrected by the Professor, which is all the public Business of the Class. The
Reading of Aristotle's Poetry, and the best French and English Critics is
allowed, and even recommended, to assist and direct the Judgment of Youth in
this Exercise.

Here I interrupted Evander, by telling him, that I thought this Study alone,
might require half the Year. No, replied he; They don't spend above eight Weeks
on the Study of all the Kinds of Poetry. This is owing chiefly to the placing
the Study of Poetry after Philosophy and Rhetoric, which makes it extreme easy:
And partly to the Age of the Youth, they being now, at least, in their 18th
Year, and capable of greater Application; partly to the Delight they take in
the Study, and partly to their having read most of the different Kinds of
Poems, when learning Languages, which renders the Review of them pleasant, in
order to apply the Rules of Criticism. -- About a Fortnight is enough for all
the lesser Poems; the same Space of Time serves for the Drama and Pastoral,
(which all but the English Critics examine by the Laws of the Drama) and
lastly, about a Month serves for the Epopaea. --

The Remainder of the Year, which is about six Months, is spent in composing
and delivering Orations; and it is no Wonder, that this Exercise is attended
with great Success, when deferred to this its proper Season. Philosophy,
Rhetoric and Poetry, being sufficiently tasted and admired; the Youth must be
animated, in their Compositions, to imitate those bright Models that gave them
so much Pleasure in the Reading. The Study of Poetry, in particular, teaches
them a certain Elevation of Thought; makes them give lively Descriptions, with
Strength, Variety, Copiousness and Harmony of Style; and diffuse a Delicacy
over every Thing they compose. -- They begin first with smaller Essays on
proper Subjects; thence proceed to frame Orations according to the Precepts,
and on the Models, of perfect Eloquence: These the Professor corrects,
carefully pointing out where the Subject would have required more Conciseness;
where more Copiousness; where the figurative Style, and Graces of Speech; where
the Plain and Simple; where they ought to have risen; where fallen; where they
have given Conceit instead of Wit; the forced and far-fetched, instead of the
easy and natural; Bombast and Swelling, instead of the Sublime and Florid. Thus
to correct one Oration and hear another (that has been corrected before)
delivered, with proper Grace and Action, is all the Business of the Class at
one Meeting or Diet. Of this the Youth have their Turns, so that when the Class
consists of twenty Students, each of them, in their Turns, compose and deliver
an Oration once in When we allow but ten Days to compose an Oration, besides
attending the Duties of the Class: we must suppose their Pieces short.
ten Days. And as they must all be present at the correcting and delivering two
Orations each Day, they profit as much by the Faults or Beauties found in the
Compositions of their School-Fellows, as by their own. --

In correcting the Compositions of Youth, however, the Professor is sensible,
that great Judgment and Art is required: Always remembering that they are Youth,
he is greatly careful not to discourage them by too much Severity. If ever he
seems displeased at any Thing, it is when he discovers a Sort of Stiffness,
Precision and Judgment in their Pieces above their Years, which he considers as
a certain Sign of Coldness and Sterility; while, on the other Hand, Redundancy
of Thought, and sprightly Sallies of Imagination, share his distinguished
Indulgence. These he calls the blooming Shoots of Genius; and, though exuberant,
thinks they are no more to be lopped off at an improper Season, or in an
unskilful Manner, than the luxuriant Growth of a thriving young Tree. It is
dangerous for any Hand, but that of Time, to reduce these wholly within their
proper Bounds.

I Am persuaded, you will think it no Objection against the Study of Rhetoric,
that it has often been prostituted to the vilest Purposes. What is there that
may not be abused by bad Men? But in the Possession of a good Man (and such my
Countrymen are careful to form all their Youth) Eloquence is the most glorious
Gift of Nature. It makes Him the Sanctuary of the Unfortunate; the Protector of
the Weak; the Support and Praise of the Good; and the eternal Terror and
Control of the Bad. We must often address to the Passions would we reach the
Heart. And till we can lay Body aside, and resolve ourselves into pure Spirit,
it is proud unmeaning Jargon, to say we can relish naked unornamented Truth; or
be ravished with the plain unaffected Beauties of Virtue. -- The Miranians
don't, however, propose to make Orators and Poets of their Youth, by these
Studies. They are sensible both the Orator and Poet must be born, not made.
But, say they, those to whom Nature has given a Genius for Composition, either
in Poetry or Prose, will be thus put in the Method of improving that Genius to
the greatest Advantage; and those who have no such Genius, will, however, be
enabled, by these Studies to write elegantly, or at least correctly, in the
epistolary Way, and on the common and most important Concerns in Life.

Unless the Taste is thus formed, and Youth taught to be sound Critics, on the
Beauties of those celebrated Pieces that have challenged the Admiration of all
Mankind, and stood the Test of Time; unless they can discover wherein those
Beauties consist; -- what is Learning? -- Nay, without this In Support of
Evander's Sentiments in this Paragraph, suffer me to quote the following
beautiful Verses from Dr. Armstrong's Epistle on Benevolence.

" It Is chiefly Taste, or blunt, or gross, or fine,
Makes Life insipid, besti^l or divine,
Better be born with Taste to little Rent,
Than the dull Monarch of a Continent. --
Without fine Nerves and Bosom justly warmed,
An Eye, an Ear, a Fancy to be charmed;
In vain, majectic Wren expands the Dome;
Blank as pale S^UCCO RUBENS lines the Room;
Lost are the Raptures of bold Handel 's Strain;
Great Tully storms, sweet Virgil sings in vain.
The beauteous Forms of Nature are effaced;
Tempe' s soft Charms, the raging w^try Wast,
Each greatly-wild, each sweet romantic Scene,
Unheeded rises and almost unseen.
Yet these are Joys with some of bett^r (...),
To sooth the Tolls of Life's (...).

Taste, or Relish for the Pleasures of Imagination; what is Life itself? Nature
has given the Rudiments of it to every Man: But if we compare the Man who has
perfectly cultivated it, with him who has not, they seem almost of a different
Species. To the latter are entirely lost, the Gay, the Tender, the Easy, the
Natural, the Sublime, the Mavelous, and all the nameless Graces of a finished
Piece! -- Should Solitude, should Want of Business, should Misfortunes of any
Kind, force such a Man to seek Relief from Books, alas! he finds them -- "But
formal Dullness, tedious Friends!" -- He may read; but he will be as
unconscious of the masterly and delicate Strokes of what he reads, as the
Mountain is of the Ore lodged in its cavern'd Side. A stupid Sort of Admiration
is the highest Pleasure he is capable of receiving. -- While, on the Contrary,
the Man who has been taught to take the full Gust of the generous Pleasures
arising from the Contemplation of Beauty, Order, Harmony, Design, Symmetry of
Parts, and Conformity to Truth and Nature, finds, within Himself, an
unexhaustable Fund of the most noble and rational Amusement. No Moment of Time.
-- I speak it feelingly, said Evander, -- No Moment of Time needs hang heavy on
his Hands. No Situation, no Circumstances, ^.
neither at home or abroad; neither in Youth nor old Age; neither in Prosperity
nor Adversity; but can be rendered more agreeable, while he can taste the
intellectual Joys of his darling Studies. Suppose then Youth should reap no
other Advantage from the Studies in this Class, but the Power of filling up
those vacant Hours to Advantage, which those, who want such a Taste, usually
spend in trifling Visits, Cards, Hunting or Drinking-Matches, and other hurtful
Pleasures; we have Reason to think a few Months properly spent in forming this
Taste, a very essential Part of Education; and the Master that neglects this in
Education, may well expect to earn the bitterest Curses of those he deprives of
such a solid Joy, in all Conditions of Life. But further, the Miranians say,
that this Taste for polite Letters, not only teaches us to write well, and
renders Life comfortable to ourselves, but also contributes highly to the
Cement of Society, and the Tranquillity of the State. They don't hesitate to
affirm, that they think it almost impossible for a Man that has a Taste for the
imitative Arts, and can feel the noble Charms of Rhetoric, Poetry, Painting,
Music, Sculpture, etc. -- to be a boisterous Subject, an undutiful Son, a rough
Husband, an unnatural Parent, a cruel Master, a treacherous Friend, or in any
Shape a bad Man. These Studies enlarge the Mind, refine and exalt the
Understanding, improve the Temper, soften the Manners, serene the Passions,
cherish Reflection, and lead on that charming Langour of Soul, that philosophic
Melancholy, which, most of all, disposes to Love, Friendship, and every tender
Emotion. -- To conclude this Article, (which, as it treated my favorite
Studies, I have, perhaps, tired you with) it appears to me that the Studies, in
this and the next Class, are those we must chiefly cultivate, would we be good
Men and good Citizens. -- Si Patri^e v^^umus, si No^is vivere chari. -- And all
the Studies in the former Classes seem of little other Value but as they
prepare for these.

FIFTH or highest CLASS.
The Principal, whose Name is Aratus, instructs this Class in the Study of
Agriculture and History. The Knowledge of Nature acquired in the third Class,
contributes greatly to make the Study of Agriculture easy at this Time. In some
previous Lectures Aratus resumes this Subject; and particularly gives the Youth
a good Tincture of Physic and animal Anatomy, which is not only of great Use to
teach them the proper Care of their own Health and Bodies; but highly necessary
to explain the Economy and Mechanism of Plants, the Structure of their
Vessels, their Generation, Manner of Life and Accretion, Perspiration,
Circulation of Sap, etc. Of all which, the surest Way of giving any Idea, is by
observing and tracing the Analogy between Plants and Animals. -- After this he
examines, with the Youth, the mineral Strata of the Earth; enquires into the
Nature of those saline and aqueous Juices that constitute the nutritious Matter
or Food of Vegetables; and of those other Fossils which, being either
heterogeneous to the vegetable Substance, or too gross and scabrous to enter
into the Roots of Plants, serve however to soften and separate the concreted
Parts of the Earth, and prepare it for the Ends of Vegetation. The Whole (...)
illustrated by a Course of chemical and statical Experiments.

The Theory of Vegetation once explained, and tolerably understood; what
remains in the Study of Husbandry is not very difficult. For after obtaining a
good Insight into the vegetable Economy, the Quality of Soils, etc. by the
Analysis of Plants, Fossils and Air, the Youth are enabled to judge what Effect
every Manure will have on every Soil; what is the proper Manner of preparing
the Ground for the Seed; and what Seed or Plant should be assigned each natural
Earth. In this chiefly consists the Husbandman's Art. After this Foundation is
laid, they proceed to read the best Geoponic Writers, such as Varro, Columella,
Tull, Bradley, etc. assigning, as they go along, the rationale, for the natural
Phenomena and Rules of Tillage, recorded in these Authors, upon the Principles
and Philosophy of modern Naturalists.

One Part of the Day is given through the Year, to the Study of Agriculture, as
laid down above: The Remainder to the Study of History; by which, it is plain I
do not mean the Reading of History to satisfy the Curiosity for a Moment, with
the Knowledge of single unrelative Facts; which, to their great Loss is all that
Youth generally profit by History, at the Age, and according to the Method, it
is handled at Colleges. -- In the Course of the abovementioned Studies, and
from their private Reading for Amusement, the Miranian-Youth, I need not tell
you, must by this Time have a pretty full Knowledge of the principal Events that
happened in the World before they were born. The Business of this Class is of a
far more noble and extensive Nature. It is to review those Events in the calm
Light of Philosophy, when related in their full Extent, attended with a
Deduction of their immediate and remote Causes and Consequences, in order to
make them a Lesson of Ethics and Politics, -- an useful Rule of Conduct and
Manners through Life. It is dangerous to send raw unpracticed Virtue abroad into
a World where Right and Wrong are too often confounded; and nothing can ob^^^e
this Danger but the giving Youth a previous Acquaintance with the World, and
making them behold Virtue and Vice with all their Consequences painted in
genuine Colors by the Historian. Numerous are the Evils that arise in Society
when Youth are sent into it, especially in any high Station without this
Knowledge. In this Case neither Logics, Mathematics, Physics, Rhetoric, nor all
the Branches of speculative Knowledge they are capable of attaining can direct
their Conduct, nor prevent their falling a Prey to designing Men. These
^ciences, however, if we do not stop at them, are highly useful, and render the
Studies of this Class, pleasant and profitable. As the Study of Agriculture was
made easy by the previous Knowledge in natural Philosophy; so is the previous
Knowledge of the fundamental Principles of Ethics, a fine Introduction to the
Philosophical Study of History. This Subject Aratus resumes before entering upon
History. He considers Man in the solitary State of Nature, surrounded with
Wants and Dangers, the whole Species at Enmity with one another, the stronger
lording it over the weaker, and nothing secure to any Man, but what he can
either acquire or maintain by Violence: From thence he takes Occasion to show
the Necessity Mankind lay under, of entering into Society, and voluntarily
resigning some Share of their natural Freedom and Property to secure the Rest.
Then he explains the different Forms of Government with the Advantages, and
Inconveniences in the Administration of each.

This being pren^s'd, the Youth enter upon the Study of the Grecian History in
this Manner, viz. the Principal prescribes a Portion of it, which against next
Day they must read in their Chambers, and abrige the Substance of it into
Writing, about twice or thrice as large as a copious Argument of any Chapter.
This fixes the Facts deeply in their Minds; teaches them moreover to express
themselves in a short laconic Manner when Occasion requires it; and when the
History is finished, serves as a Recapitulation of the Whole, to which they may
always have Recourse through Life, and bring the Facts fresh into their Memory.
These Summaries are revised in the Class by the Principal, who is careful to
make them apprehend the Blameable and Praiseworthy in the Constitution of the
several Grecian States; and, in the familiar Way of Dialogue, to make them give
their Opinion upon ^^e Facts mentioned, the Manners and Customs of the People,
etc. drawing proper Morals from the Whole. In ^his Manner a Portion is abrig'd,
and descanted upon, every Day, till they have gone over the History of the
flourishing Ages of Greece; which they perform in about the Space of a Month.
The History of Rome (Mr. Hooke's judicious Collection of it) is studied in the
next Place down to the Days of Augustus: This requires about two Months more,

See (...) Letters on the Study of (...)
All between this Period and the Beginning of the 16th Century is past over,
the Remainder of the Year being spent in the Study of modern History; from
Puffendorf's Introduction to which, they first take a general View of the
principal States and Kingdoms in Europe, that now divide that Power among them,
upon which depends the whole System of Police operating at present. After that
they descend to study the History of England, from the Beginning of the said
16th Century, after the same Manner they before studied the History of Greece
and Rome; the Principal taking Care, as they go along, to note the Rise,
Interests, Dependencies and Constitutions of the several Nations and States,
whose Histories are interwoven with that of England; and where a fuller Account
than Puffendorf's is necessary of these States, in order to understand their
Reasons and Motives of Action on any Occasion, referring the Youth to that
Period of their particular Histories. From the Beginning of Henry VIIths Reign,
to the End of Queen Ann's, is what they study; and that Part of Rapin, with the
Continuation to the End of the Third Queen Ann takes up about five Months. They
conclude the whole with a View of our Colonies in this Hemisphere; their State,
Produce, Interests, Government, etc; taking some Notice as they go along, of
the French and Spanish Settlements we are chiefly concerned with in Trade.
Every Sunday Night about an Hour is spent in the Study of the Bible History.

Though this is but a small Part of the History of Mankind, yet it is as much as
can conveniently be brought, and much more than generally is brought, into a
Scheme of collegiate Education. The Youth are thus sent into the World well
acquainted with the History of those Nations they are likely to be most
concerned with in Life; and also with the History of Greece and Rome, which may
be justly called the History of Heroism, Virtue and Patriotism. This is enough
to prepare them for Society, and put them in the Method of studying the History
of any other Nations they think proper, in a philosophical Manner, whenever
their Inclination and Leisure shall prompt them to it.

This, continued Evander, is a Sketch of the Studies of the several Classes;
which I could with Pleasure, in this Account, pursue through all their different
Ramifications. But as this is inconsistent with my designed Brevity, I have
only mentioned the general Heads of Science, wholly neglecting such Branches as
are either included in, or necessary to, the Knowledge of those I have
mentioned. -- In the Second Class, you will observe I have not spoke a Word of
plain Trigonometry, because it is supposed in the Study of Geometry. Neither
have I mentioned Perspective, Painting, etc. because included in the beautiful
Sciences of Optics; nor even Optics themselves, nor spherical Trigonometry, as
they are all supposed in the general Study of Astronomy. In like Manner, I have
not mentioned Dialing, because after being taught Astronomy, and the Use of the
Globes, the whole Theory of Dialing is learned in a few Hours: And so of all
the other Classes, which I take Notice of expressly, that you may not judge the
Studies of any one Class unproportion'd to those of another, without taking
into the Account all their Branches, Praecognita, etc. -- Here I told Evander,
that I was well enough satisfied the Studies of the Classes were very well
proportioned, as they become still more extensive the farther the Youth advance
in Years; but that I thought the Studies of every Class were more than Youth
could probably become sufficiently acquainted with in the Time allotted them.

He replied, that if the Miranian Youth did not attend the Duties of the
College longer than the ordinary Terms, my Observation would be just. But,
continued he, my Countrymen are entirely against long Vacancies, and
interrupting the Studies of Youth for half the Year. They cannot see any
Advantage in such a Practice; and are certain that it is attended with many
Inconveniences. Vacations and holy Days in this College, don't exceed two
Months. Besides, they don't propose any Thing more than to give the Youth a
general Knowledge and Tincture of these Studies. This is all that can be done at
College: For as Bent of Genius will not carry all the Youth of a Class the same
Lengths in every Study; that Scheme of Education is humanly perfect, by which
all the Students may become ordinary Proficients in all the Studies; and are
put in a Method of excelling in those particular Sciences to which Nature has
bent their Genius. The They are and must be at least in their 14th Year when
entered into these (...), and in their 1^th when they leave them, as may be
gathered from what is said above.
Age of the Youth, contributes highly to aid the Execution of such a Scheme;
and I can assure you, from Experience, that by attending even eight or nine
Months in the Year, all that is narrated above may be done by Youth of ordinary
Genius; without making it any Burden to them. -- You will, no doubt, take
Notice that the Number of Masters are fewer than ordinary by this Scheme; and
the Economy different from the most Part of Colleges; which have a distinct
Professor for every Branch of Science; as a Professor of Anatomy, Botany,
Chemistry, Civil Law, etc. while the Students attend a great many different
Masters and Studies at different Hours. But, though my Countrymen could afford
Salaries for such a Number of Pofessors, they would never give into this
Method; for they think it a great Disadvantage to Youth, to be concerned with
two many Masters and Studies at the same Time. They judge it a much better
Method, that such Branches of Science as are related to one another, should be
thoro'ly studied under one and the same Master, before the Youth proceed
farther; and that the whole Studies or Branches of Science, should be ranged in
their natural Order; that those of each lower Class may be an Introduction to
the Class above it, and the Youth thus raised by a Chain of easy Steps to the
Summit of their Education. Hence a Professor serves, by the above Scheme, for
all the Branches of Knowledge that can be acquired in one Year; which resolves
the Classes and Masters into a Number proportioned to the Number of Years; and
renders the whole Plan plain and regular.

That the Studies laid down for the five foregoing Classes, are ranged in their
natural Order, will best appear to those who are best acquainted with the
Nature and Object of them. I shall not trouble you, then, with any Defense of
what may appear an Innovation of the Method of Study in these Classes; since
you will allow, when you consider the whole attentively, that to change this
Order ever so little would greatly confound and retard the Execution. With
Regard to the three lower Classes, there can be no Objection; as Mathematics go
before Philosophy in every Seminary; and are so necessary to it, that Mr.
Lock, I think, advises the Study of Mathematics suppose we should propose no
other Advantage by them than to strengthen the reasoning Faculty, and prepare
the Mind for the Study of Philosophy, by accustoming it to think closely, and
call forth those Thoughts in a syst^matical Manner.

That Rhetoric, Poetry, Criticism and Composition, should be learned after
Philosophy, seems decided by the Authority of the greatest Orators and Poets.
-- Thus Horace -- Scribendi recte, sapere est and Principium and Fons. -- Thus
Tul'y blames the Orators of his Time for neglecting the Study of Philosophy and
polite Literature, -- Nemo vederetur exquisitius quam Vulgus Hominium studuisse
Literis, quibus Fons perfec^^ Eloquentiae continetur; Nemo qui Philosophiam
complexus esset, Matrem O^ium been Factorum, beneque Dictorum. Quintilian every
Way is of the same Opinion. And Pliny advises it in express Terms. -- More
primum, mox Eloquentiam discat, (Puer) quae male si^e Moribus discitur. But
without any Authorities, the Thing is self-evident. Eloquence is generally the
sublimest Philosophy; now it is absurd to speak of writing or composing
philosophically till we are Philosophers; or of writing elegantly without a
Taste for polite Letters. In Reality, no Man but he who can distinguish
philosophically between Right and Wrong, (the Honestum and Turpe) and who is
possessed of all the moral Virtues, can be a good Orator, for this Reason that
no Man can move others, unless he himself is moved with what he speaks. A bad
Man may, to give his Words Force, seem moved when he reasons of Virtue; but
whenever his Character ^s fully detected, all his most artful Pretenses this
Way will only, so much the more, shock his Audience.

Here I asked Evander, why foreign Universities, etc. placed Rhetoric before
Philosophy, if the latter was so necessary to it? He answered, that as far as
he could learn, the Difference between the Method of his Countrymen, and that
of the best modeled Colleges, was not material. It Is true, said he, these
Colleges begin the Study of Rhetoric in the lower Classes, but they continue it
through the higher Ones. Thus the first Year perhaps the Youth learn no more than
the Figures of Speech, and the Precepts; the Knowelege of Logic and Grammar is
enough for this Purpose. Composition, Criticism, and that Part of Rhetoric to
which Philosophy and polite Letters are necessary, fall of Course after the
Study of Philosophy, etc. which is the same Thing upon the Whole; unless that
it is inconsistent with this Maxim of my Countrymen, never to engage Youth in
more than one or two Studies till they are fully Masters of them; and to render
their Plan as simple as possible, that they may stand in need of no more
Professors and Tutors than their Circumstances enable them to employ; the sole
Consideration that ever makes them depart from the Practice of Nations more
learned than themselves.

I presume, I need offer no Reasons for placing the Studies of Agriculture,
History and Politics in the highest Class. As these Studies seldom enter into
the Scheme of Education, but are left for every Man's private reading after his
Education at the University is finished, it is plain they should be last. They
are indeed the Studies of Men, and require a ripe Judgment. But moreover all
the former Studies, as I have observed already, are necessary and subservient
to them. Even Rhetoric herself is of great Use in reading a well-wrote History,
as the Beauties of the Diction and Speeches must otherwise be in some Degree
lost and untasted. And if this was not the Case, yet still, methinks, History
and Agriculture should be placed last, in order to send Youth abroad into the
World, warm (if I may so express it) from those Studies which their own
Interests, and the Service of their Country will require them chiefly to
cultivate till Death.

The next Thing to be spoken of is the public Exercises of these five Classes;
for the Miranians are fully convinced of the great Advantages consequent upon
bringing Youth early to speak in Public; and therefore have set all the
Saturdays of the Year wholly apart for this Purpose.

Upon these Days, the Masters, Scholars, and as many of the Citizens as please
to attend, being assembled in the Chapel after Morning Prayers; one of the
Students in the First or Greek Class appears as Respondent with an Opponent or
Interrogator from the Third Class; the latter pitches upon any Greek Author,
the Respondent has read during the Course of the Year in his Class, and
prescribes a Passage in it to be rendered into English ^empore; this the
Respondent does, pointing out the Author's Beauties, Spirit and Sentiments;
clearing up his Obscurities and Difficulties; and giving an Account of the
Case, Tense, Mood, Derivation, Construction, etc. of every Word. The Opponent
takes Care to set him right where he errs; and gives him an Opportunity, by
proper Interrogations, to display his Skill and Improvements to the best
Advantage. The Master of that Class to which the Opponent belongs, superintends
these Exercises, and may interfere with his Assistance if there should be
Occasion. But this seldom happens. --

After these, one of the 2d Class appears as Respondent^ with an Opponent from
the 4th, the Opponent endeavors to impugn a Thesis given out and defended by
the Respondent. Then he changes the Subject and interrogates him concerning his
Skill in such Branches of the Mathematics as he (the Respondent) has learned in
his Class.

In the next Place, a Respondent appears from the 3d Class with an Opponent
from the 5th. The Method of Exercise the same as above. The Subject Ethics and
Physics. --

Besides bearing a Part, as Interrogators, in the foregoing Exercises, the 4th
and 5th Classes have an Exercise of Declamation peculiar to themselves. First
one of the Youth in the Class of Rhetoric delivers a Speech with proper Grace
and Action on any philosophical Subject, or on the Nature, Rules and Advantages
of Eloquence and Poetry, which are their present Studies.

Lastly, one of the 5th or highest Class delivers an Oration, framed according
to the exact Rules of Rhetoric, upon any civil Topic that is, or may be,
disputed with Regard to the Interest of their Country. And such Harangues I
have often known to be of very public Service, not only when delivered, but
when thought worthy of appearing in Print. Sometimes too their Subject is the
Usefulness of History and Agriculture; the Pleasures of Retirement, or any
moral Subject. Thus when there are not above twenty Boys in each Class, every
Boy in the three lower Classes appears in public twice a Year, and those of the
two higher Classes four Times. -- There are Exercises of the same Kind in the
higher Classes of the Mechanic's School: And in the Latin School, instead of
Exercises or public Acts, there are quarterly Examinations; and proper Rewards
distributed to excite Emulation.

Under this Article it may be proper to observe that the fourth, or Class of
Rhetoric, on the King's Birth-Night, entertain the Town with some of our best
dramatic Performances. And at their Commencement, the fifth Class do the same.
On these Occasions, they are honored with the Presence of the Governor and all
the Ladies and Gentlemen of Distinction. But the three lower Classes, as they
have not been taught Rhetoric, etc. are not perm^^^ed a Share in this; nor are
these two higher Classes ^llow'd to exhibit any more, but this one Performance
a-piece; as it would interfere with the Duties of the Class to prepare
themselves for more: And this is sufficient to teach Them this sort of Exercise.

There is one Thing peculiar to the Miranians in these Exercises, which I had
almost forgot to mention; and that is that all their public Acts, Declamations,
etc^ are ^n the English Tongue. No People are more careful than they to teach
Youth to translate Latin readily, as may appear in the Course of the
forementioned Studies, where every Author is read in the Original: But, when
this is ^ttain'd, they aim at nothing more. They are sensible, there is a great
Difference between being able to explain a Classic Author extempore, and the
Writing as good Language as that Author. Almost any Person may attain to the
first: -- But only an Erasmus, a Casimir, a Buchanan, and a few more, have
wrote pure classic La^in, unmixt with Barbarisms and foreign Idioms, since it
became a dead Language. They don't however, deny, but learned Men, to render
their Works more universally useful, may write in the Latin-Tongue, though they
cannot write with classic Elegance and Purity. But they greatly condemn the
Practice of neglecting the Mother Tongue, and embarassing a young Student, by
obliging him to speak or compose in a dead Language. While he is hunting after
Words to explain Himself by, he must be continually on the Rack; one Half of
his Sentiments, one Half of his sprightly Sallies of Fancy, which would
otherwise shine through his Compositions, must escape his Memory ere he can find
Words to express them. The Consciousness of speaking improperly, often
barbarously, must damp his Ardor, and restrain him from delivering himself with
that becoming Ease and Confidence, that Grace of Voice and Action, that
Propriety and Harmony, which he could not fail of, did he apply that Time and
Pains to the English-Tongue, which is often without Success given to the Latin.
-- Besides, my Countrymen seem to think it below their Dignity, to declaim in a
foreign Tongue, before an English Audience. In particular, my Friend, continued
Evander, very gaily; to speak in Latin, we think, would be an Insult on our
Ladies, who often honor us with their Presence on those Occasions; and, by
their brilliant Appearance, add new Grace to the Action, new Music to the
Tongues, new Sprightliness to the Imagination, and new Fire to the Bosoms of
the Youth. --

There are likewise Masters in the College for teaching the French, Italian,
Spanish and German Tongues, at private Hours; and a Fencing-Master, who,
besides the Use of the Sword, teaches the military Exercise. There is, lastly,
a Dancing Master; whom I should have mentioned first; as this Art is learned by
the Boys when very young; viz. in the lowest Classes of the Latin and
Mechanic's School. None of the Youth, however, are obliged by the Statutes of
the College to attend these Masters; and if they do attend them, it must be
before they are entered into the fourth or rhetorical Class, because it would
interfere with the Duties of the two higher Classes, which, as you will remember,
consists chiefly in Reading and Writing in private. The Students in these two
Classes are esteemed Men; and it is reckoned shameful for them to be ignorant
of Dancing, Fencing and modern Languages till that Time. -- None of these
Masters are included in the Institution, in any other Thing, but that the
Governors or Trustees upon any Complaint that their Characters are bad and
their Example dangerous, may deprive them of the Benefit of teaching the Youth;
A Punishment great enough: For, though they have no Salaries from the Public, yet
as each of them has generally thrice the Number of Boys that are in any of the
Classes, their Income is nothing inferior to the Income of the Masters that are
upon the Establishment. And the College also gives each of them, that behave
well, a handsome Gratuity yearly; as a Testimony of their being willing to
encourage the Learning of all polite Arts and manly Exercises among the Youth.

Here Evander paused, as if in Expectation of some Remarks from me upon the
Excellency of the Institution he had given me an Account of. I told him that as
far as he had yet proceeded I mightily approved (...) But that I thought the
Study of Religion, without which no Scheme of Education could be of Advantage
to the State or private Persons, did not sufficiently enter into his Account;
and that if the Miranians did nothing more this Way than he had spoken of, I
judged their Scheme deficient in the most interesting Article.

He resumed, that my Observation was just; and that it was for this very Reason
he had left the Account of their Method of studying Religion and Morals to a
separate Article; as well, because of their Importance, as because they are the
chief Object of the Studies of every Class, and consequently could not be
brought into the Account of any particular Class.

My Countrymen, proceeded he, are fully persuaded that those who are entrusted
with the Education of Youth can do more lasting Service to the Interests of
Religion and Virtue, at a Time when the Heart is susceptible of every
Impression, than all the good Men, all the Philosophers, all the Magistrates,
armed with all the Power, of a Country, can do, if, for Want of Education, the
Heart is suffered to become callous, as it were, and obstinate in the Habits of
Vice. They were, therefore, extreme careful to look for something still better
than Learning in all the Masters they chose into the Seminary; admitting none
but Men of irreproachable Characters; MEN whose Lives should be a daily Comment
on their Precepts, and their genuine Goodness of Heart a constant Pledge for
the Morals of the Youth committed to their Care; Men indefatigable in the
Discharge of their Duty from a Consciousness of the weighty Trust reposed in
them, and an unfeigned Zeal for the present and future Interests of their
Pupils; Men, in a Word formed to command Love and Reverence; and from their
Sweetness of Temper disposed to strew the Path to Science with Roses. They
prudently foresaw, that upon their meeting with Men of this Character at first,
not only depended the Reputation of the College, but in a great Measure, the
Morals and Genius, of the Country to latest Generations.

Such Men they had the Happiness to meet with: And it will, I hope, prove a
pleasing and useful Speculation, to take a more particular View of the Method
of inculcating good Morals, or natural Religion, practiced by Them; and which
may be practiced by every Good Master in the Course of these Studies. Some may
be ready to imagine they bestow a great deal of Time and Labor this Way; but,
on the Contrary, though Virtue and Goodness is always in their Eye, it is but
seldom in their Mouth. They know too much of human Nature, to propose teaching
Morals, etc. by formal Discourses and tedious Lectures. At the very Thought of
this, Youth take the Alarm and seem to put themselves on their Guard against
all that can be said: While a Word dropped, as it were, casually by a skillful
Master in a proper Season, shall strike so much the deeper as it was now
expected, and make an Impression never to be eras'd. His great Business then,
who would train up Youth to Religion, consists in the first Place, in getting
the entire Possession of their Hearts; in keeping a jealous Eye over them; in
preventing the Approach of every Thing that is of a noxious Quality; in making
every Thing around them breathe Innocence, Purity and Truth; and lastly, in
watching the proper Opportunities of It seems as unreasonable to expect Lessons
of Morality can bring forth any (...), unless the Heart is thus artfully
prepared for the Reception of them, as to expect any natural Seed will take
Root and grow if sown at a Venture without preparing the Ground for it. --
dropping the Seeds of Goodness into the Heart, while it remains in this
healthful State, which will not fail to bring forth (2) Luke, viii. Chap.
an hundred Fold, provided he adds to the Whole his own Example, and seems
fully persuaded of the Truths he would impress upon them; never mentioning
Religion and Virtue without the utmost Devotion and Fervor of Soul.

Opportunities of this Kind will never be wanting to the Master who has himself
a good Heart. I shall take Notice of a few of them; and though every classic
Author furnishes noble Lessons of Morality, I shall confine myself to the five
learned Classes last-mention'd because I would be brief. I shall take Care to
ascribe Nothing more to the Scholar than I myself have felt; nor can I ascribe
half so much to the Master, as I have known the good Aratus to put in Practice:
For under him I had the Happiness to pass through these five Classes; as I was
one of the Youth with whom he opened the College which could not be opened
higher than the Greek Class, as will be shown in the Sequel. -- In this Class,
under such a Master, the Reading of Home^ was like traveling through a
delightful Country; richly variegated with all that is beautiful and grand in
Nature; where every Thing conspired -- "To raise the Genius and to mend the
Heart;" -- conspired to entice us forward through Meads of Pleasure, in a flowery
Path to Virtue! -- How strongly would the good Man take Occasion from the
Sentiments even of this Heathen-Author, to inculcate the Belief of One Supreme
GOD, Father and Disposer of all Things; as also the Immortality of the Soul;
future Rewards and Punishments, etc. How zealously would he press Home upon us
Respect for Kings, Magistrates, Parents and all Superiors? How beautifully
would he make us mark the Decorum and Honestum of Life painted in the
Characters; and every Thing little and mean exposed? In what affecting Language
and noble Images would he show us Hospitality, Generosity, Benevolence,
Justice, Honor, Piety, Integrity, Prudence, Friendship, Fidelity, Sincerity,
Intrepidity, Patience and Resignation recommended? In a Word there was no
Virtue, no Duty of civil Life, but he would enforce from Homer; in so much that
I was almost ready to subscribe to the Opinion of those who say (however
hyperbolically) that was all that ever was written on Morals, nay were all the
Arts and Sciences, lost, the Stamina of the Whole might be gathered again from
Homer. And while Aratus taught us to gather the Roses of such an Author, he not
only made us shun the Thorns; but, as Bees from poisonous Herbs extract healing
Liquids, he taught us even to reap Advantages from those very Absurdities,
those monstrous Fictions about the Nature of the Gods, their Jars, Thefts,
Robberies, Rapes, Adulteries, Incests, Drunkenness, etc. which were the Faults
of the Age not of the Poet. From hence he took Occasion to teach us the just
Value of those sacred Volumes which have rescued us from such Superstition and
Blindness.

In the next Class what fresh Opportunities did he find of leading us from
Worder to Wonder, and bringing the DEITY before our Eyes in the Study of His
stupendous Works? How were our Minds dilated and exalted when, in the Study of
Astronomy, he led us to consider the heavenly Bodies? And how little did every
Thing we were wont to fancy great then appear to us? Even the terraqueous Globe
on which we dwell, with all its Kingdoms and boasted Grandeur seemed in our Eye
but a small Point in the Solar-System? The Solar-System itself dwindled into
Naught when compared with the numerous Systems of those Stars that in a clear
Night stud the Cerulean! All these Systems again were lost in the vast Expanse
when compared with that Infinity of Systems which Philosophy's purer Eye can
descry beyond the Reach of all Optics! And thus, while he taught us to rise
from System to System, beyond all definite Space, 'till we were lost in the
Imagination, and at the same Time convinced us, that so far from being nearer
the Limits, we were still but on the Frontiers of of the CREATOR's Kingdom; --
how would we stand astonished at our own Littleness, and the Grandeur of that
Whose Arm Almighty put these wheeling Globes
In Motion, and wound up the vast Machine!
Who rounded in his Palm those spacious Orbs;
Who bowl'd them flaming through the vast Profound.
And set the Bosom of old Night on Fire!
Dr. YOUNG.
GOD whose Hand framed all those Clusters of Systems; kindled all their Suns;
and feeds their immense Fires from Age to Age? How ridiculous and absurd would
we then esteem it for Man, -- the Atom-Lord of this Atom-World, -- swol'n with
Pride, to strut about and boast that all these were made for him; or to exalt
himself against the great SOVEREIGN of such an incomprehensible Domain? -- What
a Thirst of Knowledge did the Contemplation of these Wonders kindle within us?
And how did we seem to spurn this "evanescent Speck of Earth", and ardently
affect that Period when, shaking off this cumbrous Vehicle of Flesh, we shall
perhaps scar through the wide Realms of Nature, see Things as they are, and be
indulged in a free Correspondence with all those Systems and all their
Inhabitants? -- While our Minds were in this State, then, then was the Time the
good Aratus would sow, and sow deep, the Seeds of Piety and Goodness. Then was
the Time he would press Home upon us the Worth and Immortality of our Souls.
For, would he say, if a God, that does nothing in vain, and that shows such
Wisdom and Design in all Things that come under our Comprehensions, has endowed
you with Desires and Passions so superior to your present Objects, and with a
Capacity of soaring so far beyond them; if he has given such a restless
Curiosity of prying farther and farther into the beautiful Scheme of Nature; --
be assured this Curiosity will not be frustrated; you will not drop into Naught
before this Scheme is unfolded to you! No: all those noble Passions and Desires
will be fully satisfied! There are in Reserve for you superior Displays to be
eternally opened upon you, at proper Periods, as your Powers and Capacities are
for ever enlarged! Mean Time, steddily practice what Right-Reason injoins; and
wait patiently till your Change come.

Nor was it alone, by ascending in the Scale of Nature that Aratus taught us to
admire the Almighty Author's Greatness. We were forced to acknowledge Him still
greater, if possible, in the smallest than the greatest Things; when in the
third Class we descended in the Study of Nature to its other Limit (if Nature
can be said to have Limits). -- To confine myself to that single Branch of
Physics called Micrography, how did it surprise us to discover living
Creatures, Thousands of which would be imperceptible to the unassisted Sense,
swarming by Legions in each Leaf and Grain; heaving and animating our choicest
Cates; mantling our purest Liquors; and crouding even the transparent
Atmosphere. But when we were convinced that these Animalcules are so far from
being the last Degree of Smallness, that there are others as much smaller than
them, as they are smaller than us; then were we as much lost in the
Divisibility of Matter, as we were formerly in its Multiplicity. As in the one
Case we could conceive no End of the Magnitude and Addition of heavenly Bodies,
so in the other, we could conceive no End of Divisibility and Smallness. On
each Side of us the Gradation is endless. Astonished at ourselves, we now saw
Man in a different Light. He that but a little before seemed only an Atom of an
Atom-World almost imperceptible in the Bosom of the Universe, seemed now
distended into a World, even into ^n Universe, when compared but with the last
Degree of perceptible Smallness. He now appeared in his proper Place as -- the
Nexus utriusque Mundi -- the middle Link of Creation; not only as his Soul
seems the mean Perfection between the highest Degree of created Intelligence,
and absolute Insensibility; but as his Body seems the mean Bulk between the
greatest Aggregate of Matter, and the last Particle of possible Smallness. --
But how was our Astonishment increased, when we were convinced that every the
Minutest of these Animals are formed with as exact Proportion, Nicety, and
Design, as Man himself; -- Each within this little Bulk contains
An Heart that drives the Torrent through its Veins:
Muscles to move its Limbs aright: A Brain,
And Nerves disposed for Pleasure and for Pain:
Eyes, to distinguish; Sense, whereby to know
What Is Good or Bad, is, or is not, its Foe.
They too are pained with Love; -- address the Fair,
And with their Rivals wage destructive War.
Univer^^^
that they have their distinct Joints, Limbs and Muscles, all disposed in
Number, Weight and Measure; that they have their proper Vessels, and Liquids
circulating in those Vessels, caused also by the Systole and Diastole of a
Heart, or something analogous which expels the Blood or Liquids into those
Vessels, and receives its refluent Stream; that they have not only all the
Parts necessary to perform the animal Functions, but are sensible of Pain and
Pleasure; and know how to shun Danger and pursue their proper Happiness: and
lastly, that though these are so extremely small that Thousands of them would not
be so big as a Grain of Sand, yet they contain others within them formed with
the same Exactness as themselves! Speculations of this Kind did not fail to
impress us with just and noble Apprehensions of the Deity: But oh! when our
artful and pious Tutor reminded us, on these Occasions, that GOD performed all
these minute Operations, that he made the small Heart, Arteries Valves, and
poured the vastly subtle Liquids into the Vessels, of these diminutive
Animals, -- all with the very same Right Hand, with which he rounded those
immense Orbs, and hung all those Systems of Worlds, (whose inconceivable
Numbers lately confounded us) at his Footstool like a little sparkling Signet
of various Gems -- Could we, O could we then, do you think, forbear to fall
down in the deepest Abasement and Adoration, crying out. -- How wonderful, how
incomprehensible, how Great, how Good is the LORD?

Forgive me, my Friend, proceeded Evander, if, in this Part of my Narrative, I
should be tedious, or discover any unbeseeming Raptures. The Time spent in
these Studies was the happiest Period of my Life, and which I have often wished
I could begin again: A Period, I can never reflect upon, without feeling my
Bosom burn, and thinking I hear the good Aratus, with Hands outstretched, and
Eyes glowing Affection and Devotion pouring important Truths from his fervent
Tongue, and leading us imperceptibly from the visible to the invisible Things
of Gods. It Is impossible to express what a Fund of Piety and natural Religion
may be laid in, by a few Words dropped on these Occasions, by a good and fervent
Man, whose Person and Character we love, and whom we suspect of no Design upon
us but our own Welfare. I should therefore have thought myself as inexcusable,
had I neglected to take some Notice of these Opportunities of instilling
Goodness, as the Master must be who, in the Study of Nature, can neglect to
make the right Use of them. Such a One, indeed, neglects the most essential
Part of Education; inasmuch as a good Heart is infinitely preferable to all
speculative Knowledge: -- He neglects to form a Relish for that devout
Contemplation of the Works of GOD, which is not only capable to give Joy and
Satisfaction in all Times and Conditions of Life, but will no doubt constitute
a great Part of our Pleasure, and be the Subject of our Contemplation and
Wonder for ever and ever! -- On the other Hand, the Master who embraces these
Opportunities, with Judgment and Discretion, will have no Reason to join in the
vulgar Complaint, that Youth will not learn Religion; and that Philosophy
rather tends to make them Freethinkers. It Is true, when a gloomy Temper and
starch Behavior is put for Religion, Youth will spurn it; and when they get
but a small Tincture of Philosophy they may be Free-thinkers in the modern
Sense. But, let them once taste the manly, noble and generous Pleasures, which
true Philosophy and true Religion impart; -- never, never can they forsake
them, for the mean Satisfactions of the narrow-soul'd Deist or Atheist,
according to a fine Thought of the great Bacon: A superficial Taste of
Philosophy, says he, may perchance incline the Mind to Atheism; but a full
Draught thereof brings it back again to Religion: -- The weighty Sense of
which, Pope has happily transferred into the following beautiful Lines. -- A
little Learning is a dangerous Thing;
Drink deep, or taste not the Pierian Spring:
There shallow Draughts intoxicate the Brain;
And drinking largely sobers us again.
Essay on Crit.

I have already hinted how much the Studies of the fourth Class, Rhetoric and
Poetry, tend to better the Heart and improve the Temper. I shall therefore pass
to the Study of Agriculture, which Tully Venio nunc ad Voluptates Agricolarum,
quibus ego incredibiliter de^^^^ quae nee ulla impediuntur Senectute, and mihi
ad Sapientis vit^m proxime a^^dere videntur. -- De Senectute. --
and Res Rustica, sine dubitotione, proxima and quasi Consanguinea Sapientiae
est. -- De re rust. --
Columella call the Study of Wisdom, and the Life of a wise Man: -- A Study,
which has given that Happiness to the most renowned Names in Story which the
World could not give; and in their declining Age afforded them solid Pleasures
after being cloyed with all that Mankind call Great.

It would be needless and endless to enumerate all the Opportunities a Master
of Aratus's Character found to lead us admire and adore the Deity in this
Study. He could not explain the Theory of Vegetation without exhibiting whole
Worlds of Wonders. He could not examine the Structure of the most indifferent
Plant without making us perceive in it the same Wisdom and Design that appear
in the Structure of the most perfect Animal. He could not explore the mineral
Kingdom without showing us the same Agreement and Fitness in the Disposition of
Things, even amid the dark Recesses and secret Bowels of the Earth, as on her
beautiful Surface. Her beautiful Surface he could not survey with us, without
swelling our Hearts with Wonder, Love and Gratitude. -- In this Point, Aratus,
ever zealous to teach us every Thing that can either improve or rationally
amuse, was singularly industrious. -- It is a Disgrace, he would say, for Man
to live like a Stranger in a World made chie^^^ for Himself; neither tracing
the Wisdom, nor adoring the Beneficence, of its Disposition. -- It is a Shame
for a reasonable Being to wander, as if deaf and blind, in the Midst of Nature;
neither attending her Voice. nor ^^^iving any higher Emotions than the
unconscious Brute from gazing the awful lovely Spectacles she presents, with a
Design to entertain and ennoble our best Faculties. --

To form the Taste, therefore, aright in this Respect, our worthy Tutor (who
used us in this highest Class more as Men and his bosomed Friends, than his
Pupils) would, when the Season and Study of Agriculture invited us to the
Fields, entice us onward to some romantic Eminence, as if to show us some
curious Herb; and there, seating Himself, would artfully turn our Attention and
Conversation upon the wildly-beautiful Landskips that every where rush upon the
Sight in this new World, where Nature yet wantons in Virgin-Prime, fresh as it
were from the Maker's Hand, and unprofan'd by little Works of Art. -- Before
us, we would survey mighty Rivers, whose distant (...) among Nations and
Regions yet unknown, rolling their (...) Floods in silent Majesty toward the
Main; bank'd with vast Woods and Forests, whose venerable Trees, planted by GOD
himself, and almost coevel with the World, wave their gracef^l Verdure to every
odoriferious Gale. Turning to (...) other Side, we would behold vast Lawns
opening ^nterminable, between these Woods; enameled with (...) the Colors,
Wealth and Fragrance of Nature; and affording a finely diversified Prospect, --
here gentle Brooks, meandring along their peebly Channels, to pour their
tributary Urns into these larger Rivers; there a wild Profusion of rich
Hillocks tufted with various Trees, whose uncultivated Beauties, and embowering
Shades, inviting Repose, seemed formed to be the gay Abodes of Peace and Love;
and here again Groups of tame Animals feeding, in mingled Peace and Happiness,
with their wild Brothers of the Woods, yet unapprehensive of the barbarous
Huntsman's Toils; -- the whole rural Prospect closed by vast Mountains pil'd
into the Clouds, whose enormous Height even ^ake the distant Sight, and chill
the Frame with delightful Horrors. -- And while these beautiful Sights would
hold our Eyes and Hearts captive; Aratus, ever watching the Time to moralize,
would remind us how inseparably Beauty and Utility, Magnificence and Frugality,
are always connected in the Works of GOD. These Inequalities and Varieties on
the Surface of the Earth, he would suggest, not only serve to form enchanting
Prospects, but also to fructify the Soil. These Hillocks and little Valleys
form Rivulets, and drain off the supervacaneous Moisture, these Rivulets form
Rivers; these Rivers supply the Expense of Evaporations from the Ocean; these
Evaporations form Magazines of Dews and Rains; and lastly these Magazines of
Dews and Rains are condensed and called down upon the Earth by the Help of the
high Mountains. Thus the Globe is ever supplied with fresh Recruits of
Moisture, and saline Juices. And thus, though all T^m^gs di^ler, all agree to
promote the same wise End^ Order walks Hand in Hand with Variety. The Mountains
but stand the lofty Ministers of the Vales. Unless they thus reared their gelid
Crests into the Skies to arrest and condense the fluctuating Vapors, the hotter
Countries would be left destitute of Rain; and the whole Moisture of the Globe,
might by Degrees evagate toward the Poles, and be congealed round them. The
Mountains also produce many curious Vegetables and Minerals of sovereign Use,
which are not to be found elsewhere. -- But I should never have done, should I
take Notice of all the Opportunities the good Man found in the Study of Nature,
both to refine and exalt the Understanding. -- I shall next pass to the Study
of History, which as he managed it, is nothing else but Religion and Philosophy
taught by Examples. And indeed he was of the same Opinion with the great
Archbishop of Combray.
Fenelon, that the surest and most successful Method of teaching Religion is by
historical Facts: a Truth, which from the Feelings of myself and School-Fellows
in this Class, I am sufficiently convinced of. For,

When the Mirror of Ages was held up to us, and all the c^^ebrated Names of
Antiquity made to pass in bright Review before us; -- when we beheld the Train
of private and public Miseries, which has always been the Consequence of Vice,
with the glorious Effects of Virtue; -- when we saw the public Villain branded
with eternal Infamy, and delivered down as a Malefactor to all Posterity, while
the Patriot's Name is embalmed and rendered for ever illustrious by the
concurring Shouts of Mankind; -- could we forbear, in our own Imaginations and
Resolutions, to enlist ourselves for Life under the Banner of Virtue? Could we
forbear to glow with a generous Emulation of earning the fair Esteem of good
Men, and sharing some Part of the Fame of those venerable Worthies we read of?
Or could we once think of committing a base and dishonest Action, without
shrinking from it with Horror, at the Apprehensions of the eternal Reproaches
of the World?

The Study of History, and the Knowledge of the Greatness, illustrious
Atchievments, and Manners of other Nations, may supply the Place of traveling,
and make Youth shake off that ridiculous Littleness of Thought, that
contemptible Vanity, of making the Customs, Manners and Actions of the small
Spot wherein they were born, the Standard of Right and Wrong; -- the Model of
every Thing great and noble. This begets a more manly and generous Turn of
Thought; extends their Views; and teaches them, as Citizens of the World, to do
Justice to the Virtues of every Nation and People, unbiased by a weak
Attachment to any particular Corner of the Earth. And indeed there is some
Danger that History, with all it is Advantages, should have the same Effect that
traveling too often has; I mean, to cure this Vanity too much, and make them
too much in Love with the false Magnificence and Greatness of other Nations. --
Youth are apt to be dazzled when they read of a mighty Thunderbolt of War,
returning Victorious over vast Nations and Kingdoms; his native City moving as
it were from its Foundations to meet him and usher him home, throned like a God
on a triumphal Car; crowned with Gold; buskined with Pearl; clad in Purple
stiff with Embroidery; bearing Laurels in his Hand; famous Kings and Generals,
laden with Chains, led Captive before him; white-rob'd Senators following
after him; solemn Music sounding his Praises; ten thousand Hands strewing his
Way with Flowers; and ten times ten thousand Tongues swelling the loud, Io
Triumph to the Skies! -- On these Occasions I have known the sagacious Aratus
stedfactly examine our Looks and Countenances; and if he had any Reason to
judge, such pompous Descriptions were likely to pervert the Taste of solid
Glory, he would observe to us that all this Apparatus of the Triumph was only
Externals, only the Trappings of the Conqueror, and no Part of the intrinsic
Worth of the Man; nor of any V^lue, but as the Testimony of a grateful People
for some great and good Action. He would remind us that there is something
still greater than Victories and Triumphs, even in a good Cause, to which the
chief Applause of Ages has been paid: That it is the Heart alone which
denominates Men good and great; and that they who, obeying the Dictates of a
good Heart, do all the good in their Power, are truly and equally great,
whether their Lot be the private Shade, and the Command of a Family; or the
public Theater of the World, and the Command of Armies and Provinces. --

To illustrate this, he would ask us, whether in our Sense and the Sense of all
Ages and Men, Timeleon, when he declined all the Dignities offered him by the
grateful Syracusans, and retired to practice in Silence the Virtues of a
private Life, only saving to himself the Pleasure of seeing Millions happy by
his Means, did not appear even as venerably great, as when he came at the Head
of an Army, resolved either to die or rescue the same Syracusans from Slavery
and Oppression? Whether Curious, when he refused the vast Sums offered him by
the Samnite Ambassadors, though they found him so poor as to be cooking his own
Supper in the Chimney-Corner, did not show still as much Magnanimity as when in
the Front of dreadful War he conquered wherever he came? And whether he was not
still as great when serving up a Share of the same Supper to the same
Ambassadors with that terrible Arm from which they so often had sled trembling,
as when twice carried in Triumph to the Capitol? Whether Fabricius and the same
Curious, when they refused (notwithstanding their private Estates were but a few
Acres) to accept of any more than Colume^^ de re ^ust.
seven Acres of the Lands they had conquered (the Share of a common Soldier)
did not acquire more Glory than in adding whole Kingdoms to the Commonwealth?
Whether all Ages have not more applauded Fabius for saving from certain
Destruction, his Rival and Adversary Minucius, who by the basest Means had
supplanted him in the Esteem of the People, than for defeating the great
Hannibal and saving the Republic? Whether Cincinnatus has not received more
Renown for abdicating the Dictatorship on the sixteenth Day, which he might
have held six Months; and, when he could be of no further public Use, stealing
away from the Praises and Acclamations of his fellow Citizens, to manure his
little Farm, and cheer his lovely-lonsom Racilia, to whom in his Absence he had
committed the Care of it; -- whether I say, he has not received more Renown for
this Instance of Moderation, than even for deserving those Praises by saving
the State from the Aequi? Whether he did not appear as illustrious at the
Plough-Tail as on the triumphal Car? Whether he did not appear as great and
venerable in the Sight of all Men, (perhaps more so in the Sight of God) when
seated on a humble Turf he decided the Differences of his Neighbour-Peasants,
and restored Peace to a poor Family; than when seated on the high Tribunal of
Rome, and vested with uncontrollable Authority, he gave Law and Peace to half
the World? --

These renowned Worthies, would Aratus continue, when they conquered Nations;
when they saved their Country; when they triumphed over its Enemies, -- did
what was great indeed; but that which many have done: But when they conquered
themselves; when they saved their bitterest Adversaries; when they triumphed
over Poverty, and would not stoop to gather Gold, Diadems and Kingdoms for
their own private Use, they did Deeds in which they stand singular; -- Deeds
far above Ambition's vulgar Flight,
That raised their Names to more than Mortal-Height!
Deeds that draw Wonder when but simply told;
That still can charm us -- as they charmed of old,
And shall to latest Times their Luster hold.
By Contrasts of this Kind I have known him labor, to preserve and improve our
Taste of solid Glory; till unable to resist their Impression, we would, like
true Philosophers, pronounce with our own Mouths, that if there are other
Actions as great and heroic as Triumphs and Victories even in the Cause of
Religion and Liberty; surely, one single Deed of Love where we can, or one
single Sigh for Distress where we cannot relieve, as corresponding more with
the Scheme of Heaven, is ten thousand Times more great and brave than, through
the Lust of Rule, to carry Violence and Conquest round the whole Globe. In this
Sense, the greatest Conqueror is but the greatest Brute, and the greatest
Coward. -- Charmed by such illustrious Models of all human Virtue, who managed
the Treasures, and filled the most eminent Posts, of their Country, without
fouling their Fingers with a Bribe; who conquered the most opulent Kingdoms,
without adding one Dram to their private Fortune; and, whenever their
Country's Service did not require their immediate Presence, descended
volun^arily from the Command of Mankind to manure a few private Acres, and
trace the Wonders of divine Power in the Works of Nature; -- charmed I say, at
these Relations, we would in these Moments receive a lasting Conviction, --
That Nothing can be honorable but Integrity and the Plaudit of good Men;
nothing shameful but Vice and Communion with the Bad; nothing necessary but our
Duty; nothing great and comfortable but the conscientious Discharge of it: And
that true Glory does not consist in breathing the fiery Spirit of War, and
thirsting eagerly after Dominion; but in delighting to see the World happy and
unalarm'd; in fervently striving to promote this Happiness; in cultivating the
Arts of Peace; encouraging Agriculture and Manufactures; educating Children
aright as the rising Hopes of the State; and serving God in Tranquillity of Mind
and Purity of Heart. -- History will inform us that none, but those who thus
lived, have either been happy in their Life, or esteemed after their Death.

I shall only mention one Advantage more in the Philosophical Study of History;
namely, that to behold the dreadful Effects of Tyranny and religious Imposture
in other Countries; and all the Scenes of great and real Distress to be met
with, especially in more modern History; teaches Youth to set a just Value on
our excellent Constitution, and tends more to soften the Breast, to purge and
regulate the Passions, than all the imaginary Distress of the best conducted
Drama.

How have I felt the Passions of Terror, Pity and Joy to rise alternately in my
Breast, while Aratus has moralized on some historical Passages? -- When
animadverting on the Conduct of inhuman Tyrants, he would represent them,
marking the Godlike Patriot's Body with inglorious Stripes; frowning the holy
Sage to Dungeons, Racks or Flames; spurning the Good and Brave to the most
abandoned Places of the Earth, or by Thousands to the Galleys, Bonds and
Gibbets; -- and for what Crime? What Cause? -- No Cause; no Crime, alleged! A
Debauch; troubled Rest; or some Accident, had sour'd the arbitrary Monsters'
Tempers! or perhaps some contemptible Priest, Harlot or Minion was to be
gratified thereby! -- Again he would represent them (when instigated by such
unrelenting Councillors, or by false Glory) brandishing the ruthless Sword of
Oppression from Country to Country; tearing the tattered Weed from wintry
Limbs; snatching the lean Morsel from the starving Peasant's Mouth, and (O more
piercing Thought!) from the Mouth of his weeping Spouse and clamant Babes;
rending -- (O brutal! O cowardly!) rending the untasted Virgin from her
faithful Bridegroom's longing Arms; razing Cities; spoiling Houses and Fanes;
dragging Priests from the Altar, with Mother's and Children, into Slavery; and
forcing hoary Age in its last Period to become a Minister to the Vices of
luxurious Youth: -- In short, wherever they come, Destruction reveling around
them and turning the Earth into a human Shambles; Terror flying wildly-frantic
before them; meagre Famine, shivering Nakedness, pale Despair, and every great
Distress, in unfrequented Places, stalking horribly-ghastful behind them. Thus
would the humane Aratus describe, in the most moving Terms, the Woes attending
civil and religious Tyranny, till he observed his Descriptions to have their
full Effect upon us; -- till he saw -- Each tender Bosom heave the social Sigh;
The social Tear start from each tender Eye.


Then would he contrast to these, more joyous Prospects. -- A Land of Liberty;
Life and Property secure; hence, a People busy to improve their unprecarious
Fortune; Cities teeming with Wealth; Commerce extended as far as Winds blow and
Waters roll; every Gale and Tide wafting Riches into Port, and bearing forth
the Fruits of Industry in fair Exchange; Arts and Letters flourishing; the
lowest Sons of Labor glad; luxuriant Harvests nodding the heavy Head along the
golden Plain; Pastures green with copious Herbage; flowering Vales lowing Joy;
consenting Hills bleating it; the very Oh Liberty! thou God^ess heavenly
bright, --
Even Poverty looks che^rful in thy Sight;
Thou make the gloomy Face of Nature gay,
Giv'st Beauty to the Sun, and Pleasure to the Day.
ADDIS.
Sun himself seeming to dart his choicest Beams on the favored Land: -- and
above all, a KING who is the common Father of his People, and as such reigning
in their Hearts, watching over the happy Constitution of such a Country, even
with a Subject's Zeal; and using every generous Effort to rescue the Wretched
of other Climes from Slavery, and place them also in the Lap of Freedom, to
taste the same invaluable Blessings! --

While the good Man would dwell on these pleasing Themes, his Eyes would
sparkle with Joy; and we, all Ear and Attention, would hang upon his Tongue,
lost in a Train of mingled Passions hard to be described; till a conscious
Preference to the British Constitution, rising gradually over the rest, and
swelled at last to Transport too big to be restrained, would force, from the
cogenial Souls of Master and Scholars, this triumphant Exclamation -- -- O
Nomen dulce Libertatis!
O Jus eximium nostrae Civitatis!
CIC.

And oh! -- continued Evander, elevating his Voice; (as this was the concluding
Study of our Education) O! with what an Ecstasy of Joy, do you think, we
reflected, that in a few Weeks we were going to be enrolled active Members of
that same happy Society we so much admire; that same happy Society, in which,
had it been left to our Choice, we would have chosen to live and die, above all
those we had read of in the Volumes of History down to this present Day? What a
mighty Influence must this single Reflection have on all our future Conduct? And
what may not be expected from young Men initiated into Society in this
Disposition of Mind; thus conscious of the inestimable Privileges they are
called to; thus prepared, thus resolved to act a great and good Part? -- Is it
not reasonable to hope, that Nothing will ever be able to deter or allure them
from their Duty; but that they will continue firm, inexorably firm as Fate, to
maintain and, if need be, to revenge such a glorious Constitution, whenever, or
howsoever infringed; whether by secret or open Villainy? May it not be expected
that their genuine Goodness of Heart, impregn'd and fertiliz'd as it were by
such an Education, will be a living Spring of great and generous Actions; not
spou^ing forth a little frothy Water on some gaudy Day, and then remaining dry
the rest of the Year, -- but gliding ever gently along with a pure and even
Current, neither mudded with sinister Views, nor overflowing its Banks with an
ungoverned and ill-judg'd Zeal even for what is Right? May it not be hoped that
whatever is their Lot they will sustain it with Dignity? If Poverty; with that
Magnanimity and Integrity which rendered Epaminondas gloried in his Poverty,
and in being able to reduce his Desires and Wants within the Bounds of Nature,
and the Smallness of his Estate; rather than to increase his Estate to the
Demands of Desires and Wants, which, when this Boundary of Nature is once past,
may be multiplied without End. P^l^pidas would have sha^'d his plentiful
Fortune with Epaminondas; but the latter always told him, that as Poverty
brought no Disgrace on him, he would bring none on Poverty by quitting it.

There are some who, in Pity to themselves, think all these Virtues ^er^oned
above, so superior to human Weakness, that they would either make them pass for
Fictions, or greatly exaggerated by Historians. I, for my Part, think them as
certainly attested, as any historical Facts can be; and think moreover that, in
the present Case, it is not worth while to enquire whether they are true or
feigned. If they are Delusion, they are a plea^ing Delusion; and it is for the
Interest of Mankind and Virtue to make Youth believe them true, though we knew
them to be feigned; that thus, they may be excited to as near an Imitation of
them as possible.


Epaminondas, Curious, Circi^atu^, etc. so venerable in their Sight, and that of
all the World: -- If Riches; (which is more hard, with that Moderation and
Benevolence of Heart, which rendered Cimon, Pelopidas, Atticus, etc. the
Delight of all that knew them: -- That they will not squander them away
according to the modern Custom, in pampering the Luxury of a Scoundrel-Train of
Debauchees, who in return (detested Intercourse^) feed the Lord of the Table
with the Oil of Flattery; but that they will bid the helpless Heart sing for
Joy, and cheer those gloomy Retreats where, through an ingenuous Delicacy and
mistaken Shame, Poverty and modest Merit shroud themselves from the fastidious
Scoff of giddy Pride and an undiscerning World. -- In short may it not be hoped
they will entirely devote themselves to the Service of their fellow Creatures,
and their Country? And should the prevailing Power of Calumny and Faction
hinder them from doing the Good they meditate, or force them from the Scene of
public Action, and perhaps into Exile; may it not be hoped, that, even in these
difficult Moments, the Love of their Country and Mankind will prevail over
every other Consideration; and that they will not with a headstrong Opposition
shock the Constitution, nor retire, like Camillus, uttering Curses against
their native Soil; nor, like Coriolanus, meditating great Revenge; but, like
Milo, praying for the everlasting Prosperity even of their ungrateful Citizens,
in these moving and divine Words, -- Valiant, valiant Cives mei; sint
incolumes, sint florentes, sint beati; stet h^c urbs pr^clara, mi^ique Patria
carissima, quoqu^ modo de me merita erit: tranquilla Republica Cives mei,
quoniam mihi cum illis non licei, sine me ipsi, sed per me tamen, perfruantur.
Ego cedam atque abibo. Thus fore'd from the Service of their Country, then is
the Time they will reap the choicest Fruits of such an Education. Their Minds
now vacant from all worldly Cares, and honorably dismissed from Business and
civil Duties, they can elevate themselves so high, as to look down with calm
Contempt on all they fell from. Instead of being the Citizens of one Kingdom,
they will now see themselves the Citizens of the World, and in the Society of
universal Nature. Into whatever Clime they rove, there they will find
themselves at home; there they will be honored; there esteemed. If driven into
the most abandoned Parts of the Globe, yet even there they will not be alone;
they will find themselves in the Midst of Nature, and in the Presence of
Nature's GOD; with whom such an Education has taught them to hold high
Converse. Every the minutest Object around them will be capable of giving
Amusement and Instruction. So far from regre^ting the Loss of Power and earthly
Gran^eur, the whole Earth itself will appear, in their philosophic Eye, but a
Speck of Dirt, no bigger than the Roman Empire appeared to the younger Scipio
in his Dream. -- Should, however, their relenting Country again demand their
Service, sacrificing all Resentment to their Duty, they will return with no
other Reluctance but that of exchanging the peaceful Amusements o^ Ease for a
Scene of Cares, Watchings and Toils. -- In a Word, it may justly be expected
that those who are thus educated will, in all Circumstances, and in all their
Conduct and Dealings, do Honor to human Nature and wipe off that Reproach from
the Christian Religion, which many of its unworthy Professors have brought upon
it, in the Eyes of the Infidels around us. When an Education of this Kind has
taught all Christians that deal and converse with these Nations of Infidels
around us, to practice strict Justice, Integrity, Honor, and all the other
Precepts enjoined by our Religion, then these Nations will not fail to admire
such shining Virtues; and when once they admire, they will not be far from
imitating. -- That glorious Era, and those happy Consequences, foretold and
fondly anticipated, in the Verses spoken at the first opening of this Seminary,
will not then be far distant. But till such an Education has made the
idolatrous People around us in Love with our Manners and Actions; it is in vain
to think all the pious Endeavors of single Men, or the Tongue of an Angel, or
any Thing less than a Miracle can spread the Gospel over these Parts among a
sagacious People that daily see us belie its Precepts.

Thus have I, as briefly as I could, given you a Sketch of the Method of
teaching Science and natural Religion in these five higher Classes. The same is
to be understood of the higher Classes in the Mechanics School, where the same
Opportunities of inculcating natural Goodness offer in the Study of Physics and
History, though in a Method somewhat different. To this I have added a few of the
Advantages my Countrymen have in Part reaped, and must more and more reap from
such an Institution. There is only one Thing wanting to improve and perfect the
whole; and that is the Study of ceveal'd Religion, by which I mean the general
uncontroverted Principles of Christianity, which is all they teach at College.
For this Purpose the Sunday Evenings are set apart; when about an Hour is
spent, in all the Classes, in the Study of the Old and New Testament; the Law
and historical Parts being chiefly left for the higher Classes. -- This is
sufficient, if any human Care can be so, to make Youth good Christians. For
when every proper Opportunity is embraced throughout the Week, to lay in such a
Fund of natural Religion and Goodness, as I have shown above; the great Truths
of Christianity cannot fail of a favorable Reception on the Sundays, whether
they come from the Masters in the Evening Classes; or from the Pulpit in the
Time of divine Service. -- Easy and delightful must the Task of the Clergy be,
when by the Constitution of a Country the whole Instructors of Youth go Hand in
Hand with them in advancing the Interests of Virtue and Piety! -- Happy, said
Evander (his Face brightening with a laudable Excess of Fondness for his
Country) Happy are the People that are in such a Case! -- Is it possible to
figure aught more venerable and august than the whole Wisdom and Experience of
a Community thus using every human Effort, to train up, and secure to the
State, a Succession of good Men and good Citizens to the latest Generations? Is
it possible to conceive aught more lovely, than the Youth of a Country thus
collected in one School of Virtue; and striving, in the Presence of the Public,
with a noble Emulation, and divine Heroism, to excel each other in every Thing
that does Honor to their Nature? -- Can there be a Constitution more
Praiseworthy than that which has contrived the Means of fanning and
encouraging this Cives cum Civibus de Virtu^e certantes.
divine Contest concerning Virtue among Youth? Is there aught in the whole
Sphere of Nature which GOD himself surveys with greater Pleasure, than a People
thus employed? Nay, perhaps it is not too bold to think, that, if all the Ranks
of Being, between Man and the Seraph that burns by the Throne of GOD, have
stood firm in their Duty, and co-operated with HIM from the first of Time in
accomplishing his eternal Scheme, yet he does not receive so much Matt. xviii.
13.
Joy from beholding the Whole, as from seeing a Society of fallen Adam's Race,
thus assiduous to repair the Ruins of their Nature; thus ardently wrestling to
render themselves acceptable in his Sight, that they may be restored to his
Favor, and correspond for ever with the general Ha^mony. -- Can we then doubt
but he will shower down his choicest Blessings on such a People; and delight to
make them long a distinguished Nation on the Earth? Considered in this Light,
well might Tully call Education a divine Work! well might Plato call it a
God-like One! --

Of the EDIFICE or BUILDINGS.
I come next to give you a rude Sketch of the Edifice; for I am not Architect
enough to describe its whole Ordonnance in Terms of art. It consists of four
Buildings which form an oblong Square, enclosing an Area of 120 Feet by 100 f.
I shall speak of each separately. --

First, or North Building. The lower or Ground-Floor, the full Length of 120 f.
is the public Chapel, where all the Scholars in the Se^inary, assemble every
Morning to public Prayers. Here also all public Examinations, public Acts and
Orations on the Saturdays; Commencements, etc. are held. -- The Floor over
this, of the same Length, is the public Hall, where the Youth eat in public;
and where all public Entertainments, Balls, Plays, etc. are given. The Cielings
of these two Floors being very high, this Building is of the same Height with
the other Sides of the Square, where the Buildings consist of three Floors or
Stories each. This Chapel and public Hall are capable of receiving several
Hundreds of People, besides all the Youth of the Seminary. They are each of
them well seated along the Walls, leaving a large Space in the Middle empty.
The Chapel has a very beautiful Rostrum. --

Second, or East Building. Length 100 f. The First or lower Floor is the Latin
School, divided into five Classes, 18 f. square each. But the Building being 26
f. wide, 8 f. is left toward the Area which constitutes a Piazza or Portico,
100 f. long, supported by a delicate Row of Columns whose Members are in Ionic
Proportion, and their Intercolumination of Consequence 4 Modules or 2 Diam. --
This Portico is of great Use as an Ambulatory for the Youth to exercise
themselves in, when through Rain, Snow, etc. the Area would not be convenient.
There is no Partition but a Curtain between these Classes; and each Class has a
Door for itself from the Portico, with a Chimney and two Windows in the
opposite Wall; but there are no Windows in the Wall toward the Portico,
because the Light would not be good. This Method of making a Door for every
Class, will be found of great Service to let the particular Classes go out and
come in without disturbing one another, when the Curtains are shut; and when
the Scholars become so numerous as to require a Master for every Class. The
Curtains are far preferable to There is only one Thing in which Partitions of
Stone and Timber would have been better, and that is in strengthening the
Building; but as there is a Wall between the Portico and the Classes running
the whole Length, a good Architect can render such a Bailding sufficiently
strong without Partitions across.
Partition Walls, because when one Master is to teach two, three, or whatever
Number of Classes, by removing the Curtains, he brings them all as it were into
one School. --

The second Floor of this Building is likewise divided, by Curtains, into the
five learned Classes, of the same Dimensions, with the five on the Floor below
them. They have likewise a Door, Chimney and two Windows each. Before these
Classes, and over the Portico is a Gallery, of the same Breadth of 8 f. and
Length of 100. This Gallery, as their Circumstances permit, is to be adorned
with all curious History-Painting for the Improvement of Taste. The Pictures of
the Benefactors of the College are hung in it, with the Statutes of the
Seminary; and the Names of all the Youth that take the Degrees; and those that
win the yearly Prizes in the Latin School.

The highest or third Floor in this Building constitutes the public Library
which is 60 f. long; and the Experimental-Room, where the Apparatus is kept and
all Experiments performed: this takes up the remaining 30 f. of the Length of
the House. There is a stately Steeple to this Building, in which is a small but
handsome Observatory. --

Third or South-Building. Length 120 f. The lower Floor consists of the six
lower Classes of Mechanics, which require the The (...) ^eet that ^e^am in the
Length of each Building, more than is taken up by the Classes, are for Stair
Cases. N. ^. Classes are (...) i^ this ^^^^gnt for that Space of the Building
set apart for every (...) There (...) other Word to describe it by, as School
is ap^ly (...) a Number of Classes.
full Length. The Dimensions and Disposition of these Classes the same as
above; consequently there is another Portico before them, which communicates
with that before the Latin School. The three higher Classes of Mechanics are on
the 2d Floor of this Building, the Remainder of this Floor, and all the third
Floor being Apartments for the Youth to lodge in.

The fourth or West-Building, is divided in the Center by the public Entrance
to the Area, which is an Arch 10 f. wide; and has a strong Gate which is shut
every Night. One half of this Building on that Side of the public-Gate next the
mechanic Classes is laid out in more Apartments to accommodate the Youth. The
other half, or lot of it, is set apart for the Principal and his Family. But
the Entrance is on the Out^ide of the College-Gate, that none of his Family may
have any Communication with the College after the said Gate is shut. The
Principal has, however, a Door to the Area of the College from his House, but
he always keeps the Key of it himself.

There is a very large Garden belonging to the College; fertile of every Thing
fit for the Kitchen; and stored with all rare and curious Vegetables for the
Advancement of natural Knowledge and Husbandry. I shall say Nothing of the
Government of the College, which differs little from any other good
Institution; nor could I explain it to you without repeating the Statutes which
would be tedious. In every Thing strict Decorum and Economy are observed. The
Meals are plain, neat and plentiful. Every Scholar pays his Proportion of the
monthly Bill. It Is the Principal's Business to see that this Bill be just; and
that the Victuals be well-drest, good and healthful according to the Statutes.
-- The College has the Privilege to send a Member to the General Assembly; and
I, continued Evander, have the Honor at present to represent them.

This is a rude Sketch of the whole Institution as it is at present: It remains
to take Notice, according to my Promise, of the chief Steps taken in the
Establishment of it. -- The foregoing Plans of Education and Building being
sketch'd out and agreed upon, a Charter was obtained incorporating a certain
Number of Gentlemen by the Name of Trustees, with Powers to carry the said
Plans into Execution, as far as they should be enabled by public or private
Contributions; and make such Improvements of them as should seem necessary,
keeping always up to the original Intent of the Institution. To enable Them to
open the Seminary, a Law was made applying the Interest of a Sum that had
formerly been raised, as Salaries for Instructors, in such Proportions as they
should judge proper. But this Sum being insufficient to employ any more
Instructors than would be necessary for the first Year; about an hundred
public-spirited Gentlemen subscribed to pay, for the Space of five Years, such
Proportions of any Sum not exceeding 600 l. per An. as the increasing Number of
Instructors, should render necessary; hoping before the Expiration of that Term
a sufficient Sum might be raised for Endowment.

Thus authorized, and enabled, the Trustees applied themselves with all
possible Diligence, Prudence and Unanimity to the Execution of their weighty
Trust; and in the first Place to engage three proper Persons to open the
Mechanic's and Latin School, and the Greek or lowest Class of what they call
the College. This was the most difficult Part of their Work. Men duly qualified
were not easily to be met with; and those who were best quality'd were most
backward to engage; as having an adequate Idea of the Importance and Difficulty
of the Work they were invited to. They foresaw that even the greatest Prudence,
with the most indefatigable Labor and Vigilance, could not command Success in
the Beginning of such a Work, unless they further laid their Account to bear
patiently Reproaches, Slanders and the very Martyrdom of their Characters from
a Few. -- (shall I disgrace my Country by naming Them!) -- a few lurking
Traitors, who did not blush to throw Dirt at every Proposal for establishing
such an useful Institution in Mirania; either because they Themselves could not
model it to their own Minds, or that they might favor the Interests of those
that were already so modeled in other Places. This and every other Obstacle,
however, the laudable Zeal of the Trustees surmounted. They prevailed upon the
three Men, who are now, Principal, Vice-Principal, or Master of the Mechanic's
School, and Master of the Latin-School, to open their respective Parts of the
Seminary in a House of the City set aside for this Use, till the Edifice should
be finished; assuring these Men, that they, as Trustees, would not only support
them in the Discharge of their Office, but that they might depend on being also
supported by the concurring Interest and Countenance of every Man of Worth in
the Province. Happy was it for the Province, that Men of such distinguished
Zeal were pitched upon as Trustees; and happy was it for the Trustees that
Heaven directed them, in the first Instance, to the Choice of such Masters! To
these concurring Circumstances, under GOD, may be ascribed all that Reputation,
the Seminary has acquired. The Masters as elsewhere observed, are truly
affable, indefatigable and patient; which renders their Method of Communication
familiar and secure. If at any Time the Youth should not seem to comprehend
their Meaning thoroughly, they vary their Method, and expose what they would
communicate in every possible Light, being apt, always, rather to suspect their
own Want of Method and Perspicuity of Address, than any Defect of Genius or
Attentention in the Youth. Learning in them, though universal, is but a secondary
Qualification. Their amiable Temper, mild Behavior, Forbearance and
Placability, have long since struck Envy and Calumny dumb. Supported by the
Testimony of a good Conscience, and the Countenance of the better Part of their
Citizens, the Slanders of their Enemies had no other Effect upon them, but to
quicken their Toils, make them redouble their Diligence, in their Country's
Service; and, with the Philosopher of old, live and act so, that no Person
should believe any Thing to their Prejudice. On the Model of their Virtues, the
other Masters, admitted from Time to Time into the Seminary, thought it their
Honor and Duty to form Themselves, and secure general Esteem. The Principal is
a Clergyman of the established Religion of the Country, which was deemed a
reasonable Compliment, to the Constitution; but, by an express Act of the
Corporation, he forfeits his Place by accepting any pastoral Cure, or following
any other Profession. The Government of such a Seminary, and teaching the
highest Class, was deemed sufficient Business for one Man; and Business too of
such a Nature, as to entitle the Man, who discharges it conscientiously, to
handsome Encouragement from his Country, without uniting inconsistent Offices
to patch up a Living for Him. -- There are, however, some of the other
Professors that are allowed to increase their Income, by serving as Clergymen,
Physicians, etc. in the City. This was not thought inconsistent, as they have
little other Care of the College upon them, but attending their respective
Classes duly at proper Hours; which Hours they must keep sacred; and upon no
Pretense whatever break in upon them. --

The Seminary being thus opened, every private School, in or near the City, was
suppressed. For such Schools there was now no Use, the Province having, as it
were, taken the Business of Education out of private into public Hands, and
opened one general School, calculated for training up all Ranks and Conditions
of People, in the surest and least expensive Method, to be good Men and good
Citizens in their proper Spheres. Without this Step, the Classes could never
have been filled; and the whole Intention of the Institutors would have been
defeated, had private Persons been suffered to teach on a different Plan, and
draw off the Youth by their Interest with particular Families, Sects and
Parties; or, which is oftener the Case by a mean Attention to the Foibles and
Weakness of Parents. In this Case, we should never have beheld such a divine
Sight as all the Miranian-Youth assembled, as before said, in One School of
Virtue, fired with the noble Emulation of distinguishing themselves by all that
is Good, in the Eye of the Public. We should never have seen that Mixture of
People, of which Mirania consists, coalesc'd in the rising Generation. As,
therefore, it is the Business of Government to see that Youth, who are the
Property of the State, should be educated according to the Intention of the
State, they thought it incumbent on Them to take Care, that Nothing should
retard the Execution of that Plan for which they had toiled so much, and
resolved to be at so much Expense. Those, they thought, who could be Enemies to
such a generous Undertaking, and would not avail Themselves of such an
Institution, were certainly Enemies to the Well-Being of their Country; and, as
such, ought to be deprived of every other Means of public Instruction. Though
this Precaution was commendable, and seemed absolutely necessary to the Success
of the Underaking; yet the Consequence and Disposition of the People, rendered
it needless. -- In a short Time, there was scarce a Person so blind, as not to
see how far such a public Institution must be superior to any other Education,
and to prefer it accordingly. They saw, Nothing was proposed but to train up
their Children to Science and natural Goodness; and to keep them free of all
Prejudices, with Relation to idle Disputes, Distinctions, and Opinions, till a
liberal Education and ripe Judgment, should make them capable of thinking for
themselves. -- Such an Education, say they, is what we owe to our Children; to
educate them otherwise, is an unjust Imposition on their reasonable Faculties
-- What could we wish more? On Sundays they go with ourselves to divine
Service; and all the Week, we are satisfied, they are in the Hands of Men of
Piety, Moderation, Learning and Honor. -- Nothing can be more catholic, nor
more advantageous to Society, than such an Institution, as appears from this,
that there is scarce an Instance of a religious Dispute between those educated
in it. Men blessed with such an Education will, in all Probability, be good Men
of any Protestant Church; nor will they think the different Modes of pro^essing
the same FAITH, and paying the same HOMAGE to the DEITY, of Consequence enough
to occasion the least Dispute, or Breach of Charity, between Fellow-Citizens.
There is scarce a Protestant Sect on Earth, that does not subsist in Mirania,
and yet, I do not know a single Person that, in Consequence of such a manly
Education, has left the Sect or Community in which he was born. What, say they,
suppose we communicate with our respective Congregations! let us all live quiet
moral Lives, charitably sympathising with one another's Wants and Infirmities,
then are we all of one Religion in the fundamental and most important Articles.
-- The only Hardship in Suppressing these Schools, would have been against
those Schoolmasters that had come to Mirania in Hopes of Subsistence, and had
served the Citizens when they could not be served otherwise. In Consideration
of this, the Trustees preferred every one of them, that were found qualified,
before any other Persons even of equal Merit, that offered as Professors,
Ushers, etc. in the Schools of the Seminary. --

I shall now show you how the Classes were filled up, and Instance it in the
five learned Classes; leaving you to apply it to the Classes in the Mechanic's
School, as it would be tedious to mention the Whole: You will be pleased only
to remember, that the three Parts of the Seminary were opened the same Day.

1st Year. Aratus opened and taught the Greek or first Class, consisting of as
many of the Youth of City and Country as had a good Knowledge of Latin and some
Tincture of the Greek; there being no Youth fit to be advanced higher.

2d Year. With this same Set of Youth, he opened the second or mathematical
Class. A Professor of Greek was chosen in his stead to teach the Greek Class,
which was filled up with the highest Class from the Latin-School; and some
Youth from the Country. -- This Year the Number of Scholars required one Usher
to assist the Master of the Latin-School; and two to assist the Master of the
Mechanic's School. Thus four new Masters were added, and the
Gentlemen-Subscribers assess'd proportionably.

3d Year. Aratus advanced with his Scholars to the third Class. A Professor of
Mathematics was chosen to supply his Place in the second Class, which was now
filled up by those that had been in the Greek Class the foregoing Year; the
highest Class in the Latin School being advanced into the Greek Class as before.

4th Year. He advanced with his Scholars into the fourth Class. A Professor of
Philosophy was chosen to supply his Room in the third Class, which was filled
up by advancing all the inferior Classes as before.

5th Year. Aratus opened the Fifth, or highest Class. A Professor of Rhetoric
and Poetry was chosen for the fourth Class, which was filled up by the Youth
that had made the third Class the former Year; all the inferior Classes being
advanced one Class higher as usual. Thus, the fifth Year, the Seminary was
brought to that State in which I have above described it; all the Classes being
full. --

During these five Years, the Trustees had been carrying on the Edifice
according to the Plan laid down; which they had been enabled to do by an yearly
Lottery. But as they saw that a great Sum would be wanting besides what might
remain of the^^ Lotteries, after the Erection of the Buildings; they empowered
certain Gentlemen to solicit and manage a Scheme of a Lottery for them in
London, in order to raise L. 8000 Sterling to be added to their own Funds for
completing the Revenues of the College. These Gentlemen having previously
published the whole Plan of the Miranian Institution, the generous Design of it
was so much approved and countenanced by the pious and learned of all
Denominations in that great City, that the Managers no ^oner advertised the
Scheme of a Lottery to enable the Miranians to carry their Project into
Execution, than all the Tickets were sold. And though it was proposed to raise
only eight Thousand Pounds, yet as a great many of the smaller Prizes were
generously given to the Managers for the Use of the College, about L. 12000
Ster. came clear to the Miranians. A famous Bishop also gave a large Sum to be
laid out in purchasing a Library; and a Layman, a great Promoter of natural
Knowledge, complimented them, at his Death, with his whole mathematical and
philosophical Apparatus. Thus at the Conclusion of the 5th Year, my Countrymen,
by a Concurrence of happy Circumstances, found their Edifice finished, and
themselves enabled to endow it in a Manner far superior to their warmest Hopes.
-- Then it was that the fifth Class, of which I was one, commenced Masters of
^ts it the first Degree in this College, and all foreign Univer^^ties, but
(...) and C^^b^^dge.
Masters of Arts, in the Presence of a vast Concourse of People from all Parts.
On this Occasion the new Edifice was opened with prodigious Eclat. The Orations
and Ceremony of Commencement were held in the Chapel; after this a magnificent
Entertainment was served up in the public Hall; and in the Evening, we who had
commenced Masters of Arts, entertained the Company with the Tragedy of Cato. --

The Day following, all the Classes in the Seminary were publicly examined:
That which was the 4th now becoming the 5th, in Lieu of those who had proceeded
Master of Arts; and all the lower Classes being advanced one Class higher, to
the lowest in the Latin-School, which being thus left empty, was filled up from
the English Classes in the Mechanic's School, by such of the Youth as were
designed for the learned Professions. It was further appointed that this Custom
should be observed yearly, on the Day after the Commencement; and that for the
more Regularity in the Classes of the Latin-School, upon which depends the
Regularity of the Rest, it was appointed that no Boys should, for the future,
be admitted into it but once each Year, and that always on the said Day. There
is no Inconveniency in this Method; because every Person, being appriz'd of it,
can take his Measures accordingly. --

It was now at last, continued Evander, that the Miranians, encouraged by their
Success in this great Undertaking, proposed to render it still more extensive,
by erecting Schools throughout the Province. You may be ready to imagine this
should have been the first Step, in order to supply the College with Students.
But they considered, that it would be impossible to find proper Masters for
these Country Schools, unless they first bred them at their own College; by
which Means one uniform Scheme of Education might be carried on in every Part
of the Province. --

In every Township, they erected an English School; and one Latin School in the
most convenient Town of each County. As Masters to the English Schools, they
sent young Men of Genius that had been educated gratis in the Mechanic's
School. To the Latin-Schools, in the several Counties, they sent fit Persons,
chiefly educated gratis in the Latin School and learned Classes of the College^
And these Masters now send Youth from the Country, to be entered into the Greek
Class, as well accomplished as those that are taught in the Latin School of the
College. In the Generality of the Towns where these Schools are (...) there was
formerly a small Sum paid to a Schoolma^^er by the Society: This Sum is
increased by an Addition of something more, paid by the respective Townships.
In every County there are Gentlemen appointed Visitors of these Schools.

This is all that need be done in the Province for the Education of Youth at
present. And it redounds greatly to the Glory of the Projectors, that little
more need be done for many Generations. The College and the two Schools, if
quite full, are capable of educating thirty Boys in each Class, (570 in the
whole) and of sending abroad yearly 30 well tutored Mechanics, and the same
Number of Gentlemen for the learned Professions and the Offices of the State.
How many more are educated at the Country Schools I cannot ascertain. The whole
annual Expense of this Institution, for Salaries to the Masters, is but L. 1200
Miranian Currency: Could it be possible to educate such a Number of Youth with
so little Expense by any other Method? Before the public Establishment of it,
the Education of Youth (if it then might be called Education) cost the
Province, and perhaps the City, a Sum equal to this: There was at least as much
more drawn out of the Province for the Want of such an Institution; and if we
take into the Consideration, that there is more than the Revenue of the College
brought into the Province from other Countries that prefer it to any other
Seminary; and lastly, that the Capital of this L. 1200 was for the most Part
raised in England; it will appear how much we are Gainers by such an
Institution even in Money Matters. What we have gained, and still hope to gain,
in other Respects, I have partly taken Notice of in the Course of this
Narrative; and shall only add that some of our Countrymen, who have returned,
after being absent for the Space of these last twelve Years can scarcely be
persuaded, that we are the same People; -- our whole Genius; -- the whole Face
of the Country, seem so much changed and improved." --

CONCLUSION.
This is the Account, Gentlemen, my Friend gave of the Seminary of Mirania. How
far it may be still improved, and imitated by us, is entirely submitted to your
Wisdom. It is no romantic Scheme, but such as I am certain may be easily put in
Execution. Nothing that I can think of can be more simple, if the Extensiveness
of the Scheme is considered. It is also well adapted, I conceive, to our
Circumstances: And as I have already said that Mirania was such as this
Province is now, when its College was opened twelve Years ago; so it is not
unreasonable to add, that by following, and perhaps improving, their Plan, we
may, twelve Years hence, be all that Mirania is now represented to be. The
Mechanic's School is an Institution as necessary, in this trading Country, as
in Mirania. To the Latin School, and the five learned Classes, there can be no
Objection. Ten Years is the least Time that can be allowed for finishing the
Studies laid down above for those intended for the learned Professions. A Class
for each Year is the Standard generally agreed upon, unless where the Numbers
of Scholars render more necessary: But this is the greatest Interval that can
conveniently be between the Classes; consequently the Number of Classes, in the
foregoing Scheme, cannot be reduced. But as these Classes may perhaps be It is
not probable however, that the Classes will be thin at first: For, even in the
small Part of the Province, I have had an Opportunity of knowing, there are
above a Dozen young Gentlemen fit at present to be entered into the Greek
Class, which is the highest that can be opened in the College at first: Now
suppose there were no more for this Class, and nearly the same Number for the
lower Classes in the Latin School; -- has there ever been a College opened at
first in this Part of the World under greater Advantages, or with such a Number
of Youth?
thin at first, we can do what is equivalent to a Diminution of their Number; I
mean, to appoint but one Instructor for two or three Classes: And when the
Numbers of Students shall render more Instructors necessary, our Abilities to
employ more must be proportionably greater; for to me it seems inconsistent to
say a thriving Country cannot always subsist a Number of Instructors
proportioned to the increasing Numbers of its Youth.

In this Province one Master and two Assistants may for many Years be
sufficient for the Mechanic's School: A Master and one Assistant for the
Latin-School: And the Head of the Seminary with two Assistants for the five
learned Classes. But for the two or three first Years even one half of this
Number may be enough. Now, as no other School will be wanted in the City, is
the Expense of employing this Number of Instructors for the whole Youth of the
City, and as many as shall be sent from the Country, too much for this Province
without any foreign Assistance? Let those, who think it is, enquire whether the
Education of Youth does not, at this very Day, cost the Province more within
and How much this Province loses at present, by sending their Youth to be
educated in other Places, seems but too little attended to. Several of those I
have mentioned as fit for the Greek Class, among whom are the young Gentlemen
at present under my Care, are preparing to leave the Province in a few Weeks,
for Want of some collegiate Institution. It seems still less considered how
much Money might be brought into the Country from the West Indies, if we had a
College modeled in some such manly Manner as that proposed above. I am
certainly informed by Gentlemen that have an Interest in the West Indies, that
we might expect very great Assistance from these Islands, would we only show
them that we have some good Institution in View, and have made a Law for
carrying it speedily and properly into Execution. There are many Reasons that
induce the People of these Countries to give the Preference to this Province;
particularly the Healthfulness of the Climate, our Situation, Similarity of
Manners, and some others I shall not mention; which would also induce the
Mother Country to patronize and encourage such an Institution among us. Happy
for us, did we know as well as some of our Neighbors to make a right
Improvement of the superior Advantages, with which Nature and Fortune have
favored us. This I do not mention to create mean Jealousies between
neighboring Provinces, but to awaken and animate that generous Emulation, by
which it will ever be the Interest of all of them to be actuated.
without itself, than it would cost us by the Establishment proposed. But if we
are really unable to carry such a Scheme into Execution, yet still let us begin
it: There is no Danger such a noble Undertaking should fail of Success. Why may
we not expect the same good Fortune which the Miranians had in an English
Lottery? If we should be disappointed in our Expectations from every Quarter;
yet still it will be glorious to have attempted an extensive and great Work. As
we are about the Establishment of a Seminary, we should have an extensive and
universal Institution, such as is laid down above, always in our Eye. If we
cannot do the Whole, in the forementioned Space of Time, let us begin to do
what is most necessary; and do it in such a Manner, that our Posterity shall
have nothing to do but finish, in an uniform Manner, the Scheme at first
projected.

With Regard to the Edifice; what is called, in the foregoing Plan, the Second
or East Building, might accommodate all the Classes of a College in this
Province for some Time. The Rest of the Buildings of the Square may be added as
Occasion serves --

A single Province has a vast Advantage, in the Execution of a Scheme of this
Nature, above an extensive Monarchy. In large and populous Countries, Education
cannot be immediately the Care of the Legislature; they can only enact good
Laws for Education, and devolve the Execution of them upon fit Persons, in
every particular Seminary: But in a single Province, where all the Youth may be
collected into one general Seminary, the Legislature, or those commissioned by
them, may, and should, be the immediate Superintendants of Education; than
which nothing can be more worthy their Care. The Practice of ancient States, in
this respect, is truly surprising and worthy our Regard. In their Infancy they
did not busy themselves so much in making Laws for the Punishment of Criminals,
as for hindering there being any Criminals among them, by stopping up the great
Inlets of Vice, and training up Youth to be, as it were, constitutionally Good.
Hence a mighty Republic subsisted many Generations without a Law to punish
Parricide; because, as the first Legislators wisely foresaw, no Person would be
guilty of such a Crime, while the Laws for educating Youth in the just
Reverence of Magistrates, Parents and all Superiors remained in full Force.
Hence it was that the Infancy of States generally exhibited all those bright
Models of Virtue mentioned above; whose happy Effects had taken such deep Root
as to support them for some Time after all real Virtue was expired among them.
We should always keep those Ages of Simplicity in our View, and form our
Conduct upon the bright Patterns they present us with; remembering always, that
as this is our Infant-Condition, we must follow those Patterns, would we
transmit to our Posterity, a healthful and thriving State.

Hence it appears how necessary it is to give History, Agriculture and
Religion, the chief Place in a Plan of Education calculated for an
Infant-Country. It is History that, by presenting those bright Patterns to the
Eyes of Youth, awakens Emulation, and calls them forth steady Patriots to fill
the Offices of the State. It is not by forming them mere Scholars the State can
become flourishing; but by forming them Patriots, and putting them in the
Method of becoming Politicians and good Lawgivers. It Is but a few that have
either Leisure or Genius to be benefited by the Labors of a mere learned Man;
but a whole Country, may be made happy by the successful Toils of the Patriot;
and happy not for one, but many Generations. Those that are educated to be true
Patriots, are like so many Suns in Society. Possessing a larger Share of
etherial Spirit, they infuse Life, Spirit and Joy into all around them.

It Is shameful for any Man to be entirely ignorant of what happened in the
World before he was born; but for a Man to be called to the Service of his
Country, or to worm himself into high Offices, and even the Councils of his
Prince, not only without knowing the Causes assigned for the Rise, Glory and
Fall of the chief Nations of the World, but even without knowing the History
and Constitution of his own Country, it is not only shameful, but the blackest
Treachery; and worse, methinks, than an open Conspiracy against his Prince and
Country.

The Advantages of training up skilful Husbandmen, are so manifestly great to
us, as an Infant-Colony settled in the most fertile Soil, that it is needless to
insist on them. Did Gentlemen of Distinction understand the rational Part of
Husbandry, as they must by this Scheme, and set the Example to the Countrymen
around them; were there some proper Laws made for encouraging an Accession of
Hands, and better settling this Province, it might be made the Granary of half
the European Settlements in America. -- Who, that considers this, but must be
surprised at the general Complaint, that this Country must be ruined unless a
new War happens soon? Good Heaven! It is those very Riches acquired in Time of
War that impoverish us, and must in the Issue prove our Ruin if not prevented
by proper Measures. In Time of War Riches pour in upon us all at once, and seem
even to deluge our Streets: This turns our Attention from the Improvement of
our slower, but surer, natural Wealth; introduces Luxury; multiplies our Wants;
and turns the Balance of Trade against us with the Mother Country, which in a
Moment drains us of all our Money, and leaves us dependent on the Chance of War
for a fresh Recruit. What a precarious Situation is this? Whereas, let us set
our ourselves to improve our Manufactures, and chiefly to call forth, from the
teeming Womb of a grateful Soil of Earth, that luxuriant Wealth it is capable
to produce, then have we in our Power an unprecarious Source of never-failing
Plenty. In that Case the Balance of Trade can never be against us. In the
longest Peace we cannot be poor; and in War, the Returns of our Bravery, in
Defense of the true British Cause, Religion, Liberty and Commerce, must
infallibly make us rich! We shall then no more, like the Waggoneer in the
Fable, be seen idly praying Jupiter to do that for us, which, by applying our
Shoulders to the Wheel, we may do for ourselves.

As for the Study of Religion, in the above Scheme, it is the Soul of the
Whole. It teaches us not only to enjoy aright what Science, History and
Agriculture enable us to acquire in Life; but consecrates us for Eternity, and
makes this Life, what it should be, an Introduction to all the future Stages of
the Consummation of our Virtue and Happiness! --

All I have to add, Gentlemen, is to beg your kind Acceptance, and candid
Perusal of this Work; remembering always that it comes from a single Person, of
small Experience, unassisted with proper Books, and at a Distance from the
Conversation of some of you, whose Sentiments I should otherwise have often
taken the Freedom to enquire into, relating to many Parts of it. Conscious of
these Disadvantages, I should never have attempted such a tedious and difficult
Work, had I not seen it absolutely necessary, and been apprehensive that no
other Person would bestow their Leisure upon it. As to the Faults that may be
found in it, I shall never be ashamed of them, because none but a Person that
has an universal Knowledge of all the Branches of Science treated of, which I
do not pretend to, could avoid Faults. Whoever looks for a perfect Scheme,
looks for what the Author never dreamed of, in a Work that might employ all the
learned Men of the Province, and still leave Room to find Faults and propose
Improvements. -- You, Gentlemen, whose superior Stations and Abilities have
recommended you as the First and more immediate Patrons of this great Work,
will not, I hope, think the rudest Hints below your Notice; since even from
these you are capable to reap Advantage. My very Errors may be rendered useful;
since those who can best discover will be least liable to fall into, them. I
shall not be sorry to see the foregoing Scheme set wholly aside, if Persons of
more Abilities can thereby be excited to plan a Better. Would every Person
offer his Sentiments with the same Frankness that I have offered mine; a good
Scheme might certainly be extracted from the Whole. Should this Scheme of
Mirania deserve any Notice, no Person shall be more ready than I to acknowledge
what is deficient in it; and assist in improving what is commendable, when I am
enabled so to do by the Observations of those who sincerely wish Prosperity to
this Undertaking. As for those Writers who delight to give frequent Specimens
of their Knack at Wrangling and Chicane; or who are determined to think Nothing
right in this Affair, but what comes from themselves, my Time is too precious
to follow them through the Maze of Perplexity. They may, if they please, ascribe
every Thing I have done to a selfish Motive; I shall leave it to Time and the
Issue of the Thing to convince them how much they have injured me. It will then
be sufficient Punishment for them to reflect on their Usage of One who never
offended them, but by a Zeal for the Happiness of that Province, which they
ought to love more, than one, who is a Stranger in it. There was no other Way I
could manifest that Zeal but on the Subject of Education, as all the Time I
have lived in the World has been spent in my own Education and that of others.
As this Subject then happens to be very interesting to this Province at
present, I should never have forgiven Myself, had I neglected the sole
Opportunity I can ever have of being in the least Degree useful to it. -- Sorry
should I be, however, if, after all my Partiality in treating this Matter, I
should fall under the Displeasure of any Sect or Party, who may claim an
exclusive Right of modeling this Institution to their Mind. Every Person is at
Liberty, and I think ought, to offer his Sentiments. You, Gentlemen, and the
Legislature are the only proper Judges of the Whole; and I make no Doubt you
will, prefer that Scheme which you think best calculated to promote the Peace
and Happiness of the Province without regarding the Heats and Disputes that may
arise at first on this Head; or be started on purpose, to retard the Execution
of a Work, far too long delayed already.

But, Gentlemen, I will not embarass You, nor myself, at the End of a Work of
this Nature, by descending farther into Particulars: Neither shall I once
address You to exert yourselves in this great Undertaking, for the same Reason
that I did not once address You, nor an honorable Branch of the Legislature on
a former Occasion. If You consider my Design at that Time, such an Address as
forced and foreign to it, would have been Censure. My Business, then, was with
those who are the Masters of the Purse, and the chief Projectors of new Laws.
This I should never have mentioned in this Place, as being sensible that no
Address of mine can be of Importance enough to give or diminish Fame, had it
not been made a Handle of, for want of a better, to create Jealousies and
Distrusts. --

An Apology for the Method of conveying the foregoing Proposals would, I hope,
be needless to those who consider the Dryness of the Subject. When handling the
Article of Religion, I designedly scattered a few Flowers, that I might help to
remove the vulgar Prejudice; and show that, by proper Conduct, this might be
made the most agreeable and amusing Part of Education. What I have said on this
Subject stands as it flowed at first upon my Thoughts; which has made some of
the Periods perhaps too long. But this I could not help, unless I could have
spared Time to divide such Periods, and add something for Connection; which
would, however, have made the particular Paragraphs much longer. The Verses
prefixed, are part of an unfinished Pastoral in Imitation of Virgil's Silenus,
entitled Science, and therefore akin to my Subject. --

To conclude, Gentlemen, I have spared no Pains, and left none of the few
Books, I have on Education, unconsulted: that I might render it useful, it
being the last Service I am capable of offering to promote this great
Undertaking. All I can do more, is to pray GOD that the Success may be
answerable. -- Under GOD, it greatly depends on You to make it so: And no one
can doubt, but you will zealously exert yourselves for this Purpose, who
reflects, that whatever Degree of Glory this Province shall acquire from such
an Institution, your immediate Descendents will reap the chief Advantage of it,
since the large Share of Property you will leave them possessed of, must make
them nearly concerned in the Interest of the Province; and point them out for
the chief Offices of the Government, which you now deservedly fill. --

I am, Gentlemen, Your most obedient humble Servant, W. SMITH.
He^^itage on Long Island, March 2, 1753.
POSTSCRIPT.
LAST Lost, after most of the foregoing Sheets were printed off, I had the
Honor to receive, by the Way of Philadelphia, a Letter from a Gentleman of the
West Indies, distinguished for his Rank and Fortune, but more so, in the
learned World, as a Patriot Writer. It came in Return to one sent Him with my
former Pamphlet, in November last; and as it contains some new Arguments for
fixing the College in our Metropolis, which did not occur to me, and also
confirms in the strongest Manner what I have hinted in the This Part of the
Letter, had it come to Hand soon enough, should more properly have been added
after the said Note. The Original has been shown to some of the Trustees.
Note, Page 74, of this present Work, viz. that the West-Indian Gentlemen,
would certainly give this Province the Preference in the Education of their
Children, I shall presume upon the worthy Author's Forgiveness, and transcribe
a Part of it; being persuaded, that what he has said in two Pages, must have
more Weight than any Thing I could say in twenty, to hasten such an
Establishment here, as he, and all his Countrymen, seem more ardently to
desire, than many of our thoughtless Selves. Some, I am well aware, will
misconstrue what I do into Vanity. Be it so; it is a Vanity the most commendable
of all others; and such as the Latin-Philosopher has taught me not to disown.
Contemptu Famae, Virtus contemnitur. -- But to return to the Letter, my learned
Correspondent writes thus;

-- Your Thoughts on Education are very just, and your Arguments in Favor of
establishing of a College rather in the City of New York than elsewhere are
convincing: But I wish you had been more copious on the latter Subject, and
much more explicit and precise on the former. I wish you had fully described
the Plan of Glasgow-College, as improved by that great Philosopher, Mr.
Hutchinse^, together with your own, or other People's Improvements upon the
proper Discipline of a College, which, perhaps, is the most material Part of
such a Plan; as it is the only strong Barrier against the Admission of Vice:
For, I conceive, by proper Discipline, the Vices of a populous City, might be
excluded from a College built in the very Suburbs; from whence the Youth might
be permitted, twice a Week, at seasonable Hours, to visit Coffee-Houses, the
Exchange, and all the Resorts of Business, except Taverns. Thus their Minds
might be formed to what the French call Police; as also to Comme^ce, and to a
strict Observation of Mechanic Arts, which are the main Springs of Commerce.
For want of Skill in those Points of greatest Importance to our Mother Country
it is, that Trade is so little understood by our Members of Parliament, and so
much neglected at this very Time, when all other Nations are trying every Art
to extend their Commerce. Is not this Ignorance of our learned Men imputable
chiefly to the Situation of our Universities, so remote from every Theater of
Action, and of real and useful Life? And to what is the awkward Rusticity of
our Book-Worms to be ascribed, but to an absolute Recess from all practical
Politeness?

I wish also you had carried your Argument one Step farther, and hinted to the
Legislature that a It is thought the setting a part some Ferries, at present of
little Value, might make a considerable Part of such a Fund, always increasing
in Propertion to the Increase of People, and the increasing Demands of the
College.
Fund should be established out of some public Tax, sufficient not only to
raise a convenient and elegant Structure, but to be an ample Endowment also, to
encourage able Professors in all the Sciences, and the best Masters in athletic
Exercises, to accept, nay to seek for a Station at the College of New York; to
which all our young Islanders would then certainly go for Education, to the
great Advantage of that City. -- I am sure, Sir, if you will but revolve these
Points in your Thoughts for one Hour, you might offer such a System, grounded
upon such clear Evidence, as would open the Eyes of Party, and Purblindness
itself to a speedy Establishment of such a College as you wish for; and such as
would gratify even the Wishes of Patriotism. But, I fear, if it rests upon cold
and slow Donations, the next, perhaps the tenth, Generation will not see the
Completion of it. The Subject, I perceive, glows in your Bosom, and has exalted
your Fancy to several sublime Flights in the Poem at the End of your Treatise.
I fear, your Apprehensions of our Mother-Country's falling at last into the Way
of other Nations, are but too well grounded. I hope I am too old to be a
Spectator of that sad Event: But when Corruption has taken hold of the main
Roots, the best-grown Oak must soon -- very soon -- fall, even by the least
Breath of the most Christian Tyrant! Where then can the People of a free State,
fallen into Destruction, take Sanctuary, but among their own Kindred, in a
well-ordered and free Government, such as those of NORTH AMERICA might be? -- I
had the Honor, to think as you do on this Subject, many Years ago; and have,
therefore, advised all my Friends to secure a What the Author here means is the
Danger he, and all his Friends of the Carribbee-Islands, are exposed to; as the
French, in every late War, have formed Designs to get the Possession of these
Islands; and as there is but too much Reason to fear, the vast naval
Preparations, they are now making, will perhaps render them too successful in
their next Attempts.
Retreat there, as my Brother has wisely done; and as I intend to do whenever
he will point out an handsome Purchase to be made at a reasonable Price; more
especially, if a proper Seminary for Learning is soon established among you!
For it is owing solely to this Want of Education for our Children, that our
Gentlemen here are not fond of purchasing in North America. -- But to return
from this Degression, etc. etc.

Thus far this valuable Personage, whose Name, was I at Liberty to mention it,
would add new Fo^ce to his important Observations: And how great a Satisfaction
is it to me, that I am not only prepared to answer his Letter, by sending him
some Copies of such a Plan of a College as he seems to desire, and such as I
know must be agreeable to the manly Genius of those Islanders, when dispersed
among them; but that I can, moreover, on the best Foundation, assure them that
every Thing good in the said Plan, will, with all possible Speed, be carried
into Execution in this Province? I have heard it said, that we have no Reason
to expect the West-Indians would send their Children here, as they have been
long accustomed to send them to England: But they who say so, know little what
our English Universities are at present: For, to use the Words of the Authors
of the Revie^, for November, 1750, -- That even both our Universities (not
forgetting that in the Metropo^is of a neighboring Kingdom) are rendered of
little Use to the Public, or to the Welfare of Religion, by the idle Doctrines
and corrupt Manners which prevail in them, is a Truth equally notorious and
melancholy: and any effectual Scheme for a thoro' Reformation, or (if this is
impossible, through the Perverseness of their Members) a total A^^lition of them,
would merit the Attention of every Lover of his Country, every Well-wisher to
true Christianity, and to civil and religious Liberty. -- Besides this, the
Risque and Expense of sending Children from the West Indies to this Place, are
not so great as to send them to England. It is not to be questioned then, but
these young Islanders, as my Correspondent hints, would infallibly come for
their Education to these Provinces, and that of New York above all others,
would we go into some such generous and liberal Institution as that proposed
above. And what a noble Prospect of Wealth and Glory does this open to Us,
unless we will ^ar the Whole by some unprecedented religious Establishment,
that may be disagreeable to the Persuasion of these Islanders? I always foresaw
the Disputes that would arise on this Head, and therefore, in the foregoing
Work steered quite clear of every Thing that might kindle them among a People
that, till a few Months ago, seemed remarkable for that Christian Peace and
Charity which reigned among all religious Sects in the Province. But as these
Disputes have now taken their Rise from another Quarter, I should as freely
give my Sentiments on them, as I have on every other Point relating to our
intended Seminary, did not the Printer wait for this Postscript, to enable him
to perform his Promise of publishing these Papers tomorrow. -- Though I have
every where given it as my Opinion that, in a well-constituted Seminary, all
Protestant Youth should be admitted on a perfect Parity, and indulged in the
free Exercise of the Religion of their Parents on Sundays etc. -- though I have
called every Attempt to draw them off from this Religion, before they can judge
for themselves, a manifest Imposition on their tender Reason; and though I
believe there is no Person among Us so bigoted, as to dream of refusing that
general Toleration to our young Students, which our wise Laws have granted to
all other Persons; yet certain it is, that to establish a College, without
establishing some Form of public Prayer and Worship in it, would be a Thing
wholly unheard of before; and would effectually defeat the Design of such an
Institution. In this Establishment then, the Preference must be given to some
one of the Modes of Worship, or let me call them Churches, subfisting at
present; unless we delay the Founding a College for twenty, perhaps a hundred,
Years more, till all Sides can agree to patch up some new sort of religious
Worship for it, out of all those we have at present; which, however strange it
appears, seems to be contended for. That such a Preference will be productive
of none of those dreadful Consequences denounced against it, might easily be
made manifest. And it might as easily be made manifest, to which of our
Churches (supposing them all equally orthodox, which is all that can be asked)
the Compliment of this Though it is my sincere and impartial Opinion, that we can
never establish any Religious Worship in a College, nor even a College itself
in this Province, without such a Preference; though I (...) how much the Success
of the Undertaking depends upon such an Establishment, and am persuaded that
our present Clergy, and chief Gentlemen, are of too Catholic a Spirit to dream
of obtruding the Religion of any Church upon our Youth; and farther, though it
might be proved from incontestable Experience, that using the Prayers of any
Church upon public Occasions, has no Tendency to bring the Students over to the
Persuasion of that Church, when they are indulged in going to their respective
Places of Worship on Sundays: -- Yet as we are not sure of a Succession of such
Men, and as Things should be made as easy as possible to all Parties; good
Policy will direct the Legislature to temper this Preference with such
Limitations, as may for ever prevent our College from becoming a narrow One, or
falling into the Hands of any Sect or Party.
Preference is due. Is there any one of them that has already a Preference by
the Constitution of the Province? Is there any one of them that is known to
have superior Ability and Intention to bestow large Donations on our
Infant-College? Is there any Religion that would in a superior Degree,
recommend our College to the Beneficence and Protection of the pi^s Great, and
perhaps the Legislature, in our Mother Country? Or any Religion which, when
^stablish'd, would draw the Youth of the American-Isan^s, (I mean the British
Antilles) rather to ours, than any of the neighboring Colleges? -- Those who
know the Answer to these Questions, will be at no Loss to decide in this
present Dispute concerning the Religion to be established in our future
College. -- I said the American-Islands; it being chiefly from thence we are to
expect Students, as well as large Subscriptions or Donations to aid us in this
Work; and not from the neighboring Provinces that have Colleges of their own.
For let the Constitutions of those Colleges be as narrow and partial as they
are represented, can any one imagine that, when they are like to lose the
Advantage of educating their own Youth, on this Account, they will be so
impolitic as not to alter and catholicise these Constitutions. At present they
are under no Necessity of doing this, because, all our American Colleges of
Note being under the same narrow Government, Youth cannot better themselves by
leaving one to go to another. But, if ours is established in a proper Manner,
they must new-model their Colleges to retain their Youth at Home; and what sort
of religious Establishment, among us, must be productive of so much Good, is
very evident. -- I cannot at present, and for the future, I fear, shall not,
find Leisure, to set these Points in the Light they deserve. But what I have
hinted may, I hope, excite some other Person, speedily to do it. --

All I shall add is, to entreat and obtest the Legislature, by the Spirit of
their Ancestors, and the Glory of the English Name, to proceed, at their first
Meeting, to take some resolute and decisive Step in this whole Affair; without
regarding the ungoverned Heats of Sectaries, which, in that Case, will quickly
die away. For to me it appears, that the longer this Work is delayed, the more
Difficulties will arise, or be raised, to retard it. Let them but begin; --
Support, Aid and Success will not -- cannot -- be wanting. This I have often
said before; and this (as the Matter is now become so interesting) might as
properly be said, at the Conclusion of every public Paper, on whatever Subject,
as Cat^ concluded his every public Speech with -- Delenda est Carthago.

April 10th, 1753,

FINIS.

