A JOURNAL OF THE PROCEEDINGS AT Two CONFERENCES Begun to be held at Falmouth
in Casco-Bay, in the County of York, within the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in NEW ENGLAND, on the Twenty-Eighth Day of June 1754,
BETWEEN His EXCELLENCY WILLIAM SHIRLEY, Esquire Captain General, Governor and
Commander in Chief, in and over the Province aforesaid, And the CHIEFS of the
Norridgwalk Indians; And on the Fifth Day of July following, Between His said
EXCELLENCY and the CHIEFS of the Penobscot Indians.

BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND: Printed by John Draper, Printer to His Excellency the
GOVERNOR and COUNCIL. 1754.

A JOURNAL
Of the Proceedings at two Conferences begun to be held at Falmouth in
Casco-Bay, in the County of York, within the Province of the Massachusetts Bay
in NEW ENGLAND, on the Twenty-Eighth Day of June 1754, between His EXCELLENCY
WILLIAM SHIRLEY, Esquire Captain General, Governor and Commander in Chief, in and
over the Province aforesaid, and the CHIEFS of the Norridgwalk Indians; and on
the Fifth Day of July following, between his said EXCELLENCY, and the CHIEFS of
the Penobscot Indians.
ON Saturday the 21st of June, in the Forenoon, the Governor attended by
several Members of His Majesty's Council for the said Province, the Speaker,
and several Members of the House of Representatives, with diverse other
Gentlemen; and accompanied by the Honorable Col. Paul Mascarene, Commissioner
from the Province of Nova Scotia, embarked on board the Ship Burryeau for
Casco-Bay; and on passing Castle William was joined by the Province Sloop
Massachusetts, having on board Major General Winslow, and other Officers of the
Forces raised for his Majesty's Service in the intended Expedition upon the
River Kennebeck, and eight Transport Vessels, on Board of which were 500 of the
said Forces; the remaining 300, which were not then ready, being ordered to
embark and follow in a few Days.

On Wednesday the 26th of June, in the Forenoon, the Governor came to an Anchor
in the Harbor at Falmouth, where he found the Province Sloop and Transports
had arrived the Day before, and the Forces encamped on Bang's Island; that the
Honorable Daniel Warner, Peter Gilman and Clement March, Esqrs Commissioners
from the Government of New Hampshire were come to meet him, and that the
Norridgwalk Indians had waited there some Days for his Arrival.

Upon going on Shore the Governor was informed by Capt. Lithgow, the Commander
of Richmond Fort, that a Party of the Arssegunticook Indians, which he supposed
to be then within the distance of 7 or 8 Miles of it, had, in Answer to his
Excellency's Letter of Notification to the Indians, to meet him at the
Interview, declared, that they should not come, because they had not yet wiped
away the Blood of the two Indians belonging to their Tribe, which had been
killed the last Year within the Government of New Hampshire.

The same Day, in the Afternoon, the Governor received a Letter from Capt.
Bradbury, dated at St. George's the 18th of June, enclosing one from Father
Gounon, the Jesuit of the Penobscot Tribe of Indians to Father Audran the
Jesuit of the Norridgwalk Tribe, dated at Penobscot the 4th of June 1754, which
he had intercepted by Means of the Indian, to whom the Carriage of it was
entrusted; and informing his Excellency, that the same Indian had told him,
That he had lately had the Carriage of another Letter from Canada committed to
him, which he lost upon the Road; that it was a bad one, though he would not
undertake to say fully what the Contents of it were; but that he certainly knew
that the French Indians, in great Numbers, were determined to come over [from
Canada] to this Side of the Country, when the Corn should be fit to gather, and
fall upon the English. -- Capt. Bradbury also informed his Excellency in the
same Letter, "That he was almost sure, the Penobscot Indians would not meet him
at Falmouth." (As they had likewise declared to his Excellency, in a Letter
wrote to him by them in behalf of the Norridgwalk Indians, as well as
themselves, before he left Boston,) though he [Capt. Bradbury] thought the French
would find it difficult to persuade the Penobscots to break with the English,
unless they should be forced into it by great Numbers of French Indians from
Canada.

On the Day following the Governor received a Letter from James Bane, dated in
June; in which he informed him, That the Chief Man's Son of Passam^quody had
told Capt. Bradbury and himself at St. Georges, that the Indians of the
Norridgwalk Tribe had sent two Belts of Wampum to the Penobscots, to get them
to join ^ Canada Indians and themselves against the English; and that there was
absolutely a Number of Canada Indians, then at Penobscot, on that Business; but
that they had not determined what to do as yet.

The Letter from Pere Gounon, to Pere Audran, is as follows,

Mon Reverend Pere,
P. X.

VOus avez tort de craindre l' Anglois; il n'en veut qu' a vos Terres, et non a
vos Vies: Si vous voulez neanmoins seuls defendre vos Terres, vous Serez les
Victimes de votre Temerite: Il faut que The French Names of Norridgwalk, and
Penobscot.
Narantsuaq and Panauamsque agissent de Concert; sans cela les Narantsuaniens,
ou au moins la Mission de Narantsuaq est perdue: le Coup est decicif: Il faut
ici beaucoup de Prudence; Tachons vous et moi de ne pas paroitre dans cette
Affair: Il faut que nous aidons nos Savages, sans nous brouiller ni avec le
Francois, ni avec l' Anglois, quoique nous agissons contre l' un et contre l'
autre: La Conduite de l' un et de l' autre n'est pas droite devant Dieu: Vous
ferez bien de ne pas fair le Voyage de Quebec: Envoyez y a l' inscu de l'
Anglois: J'y envoye; on part demain: Voici la parole, que Je fais porter au
General;

Mon Pere,
JE viens vous exposer ma misere:

L' Anglois prend mes Terres, et Je suis Trop foible pour lui resister: Nos
Arms ne sont point egales: Il me montre de Canons, and une Quantite
prodigieuse deGuerriers; puis Je manquer d'en etre accable and detruit meme? J'
ay toujours cru que mon Pere me defendroit, si Je venois a etre vivement
attaque.


Il faut que vos Gens aillent porter la meme Parole; vous voyez que les miens
vout parler au nom des notres, qu' ils ne promettent de fraper l' Anglois; si
les Votres srapent l' Anglois, et qu' ils le frapent les premiers, nous les
abandannons; si au contrary l' Anglois frape le premier, nous le fraperons
vivement.

Exhortez votre People a ne pas s' exposer, mais a s' armer du Courage; s' ils
quittent leurs Terres pour un Moment, ils les perdent pour toujours: Il paroit
par les Discourse de ceux du Fort St. George, que si les Paunauampsouien veut
defendre les Terres de Naranssuaq. l' Anglois ne les prend^a point: Il faut
done, que vos Gens paroissent ne pas craindre l' Anglois, et quon dise a l'
Anglois ce que l'on a repondu a L'interrogation, qu'on est venu fair; Je n'
ose pas les Solliciter, ni leurs parler pour Narantsuaq: Si les Affairs
tournoient mal, on me jetteroit la Pierre: que vos Gens ne plaignent point
leurs Peines, qu'ils ne cessent de porter ici des paroles and fair des
Interrogations; il est necessaire qu' ils viennent nous dire parler a l'
Anglois; on le sera s' ils viennent.

Qu'on dise a l' Anglois, que les Pannauampsquien ne veulent point, que les
Narantsuaniens aillent, a Matsigauneg comme j'entens dire, que l' Anglois
demand.

Je suis dons l' Union de vos S. S. S.S. avec un tres profond Respect Mon Rev.
Pere, votre tres humble and tres obeissant Serviteur, S. P. Gounon.
A Paunauamsqe, Cc 4. Juen 1754. A mon Reverend Pere, mon Reverend Pere Audran,
Missionaire de la Compagnie de Jesus a Narantsuaq.
Je vous pry encore, mon Rev. Pere, de representer a votra Peuple qui'l perd
son Tems (en Confidence s' il est possible, on au Moins avec Finesse) de s'
adresser au Francois pour le Secourir: Il perdra ses Terres certainment and
sera oblige de vivre miserablement, ca and la dans les Villages de Becancourt
and St. Francois; qu' il ne quitte point leurs Terres, s'il ne veut etre tres
miserable.

L' Anglois nous appelle a Maigan: Nous lui avous respondu, que s'il avoit
quelque chole a nous dire, qu'il viendroit nous le dire chez nous: Nous serious
biens fachez que Narantsuaq alat a Margan.



My Reverend Father,
P. C.

YOU are in the wrong to fear the English; they want only your Lands, they
don't want your Lives: Nevertheless if The Tribe of Norridgwalk Indians under
his Care.
You will defend your Lands by yourselves alone, you will be the Victims of
your Rashness; Norridgwalk and Penobscot must act in concert; without this the
Norridgwalks, or at least the Mission of Norridgwalk is lost: The Blow is
decisive: Much Prudence is necessary here: Let you and I take care not to
appear on this Affair: We must assist our Indians without embroiling our selves
with the French or English, though we act against both of them: The Conduct of
neither of them is right in the Sight of God: You will de well not to go to
Quebec: Send there unknown to the English: I am sending there: They set out to
Morrow. This is the In Writing.
Word which I cause to be carried to the General;

The constant Appellation of the Governor of Canada, used by all the Indians.

N. B. This was sent by the Jesuit to the Governor of Canada in the Name of the
Penobscot Indians, without their Knowledge; as appears by the Declaration of
their Delegates upon their Conference with Governor SHIRLEY.


My Father,
I Am come to lay my Misery before you:

The English take my Lands; and I am too weak to resist them: Our Arms are not
equal: They show me Cannon, and a prodigions Number of Warriors: Can I fail of
being born down by them, and even destroyed? I always believed my Father would
defend me if I was attacked vigorously. The End of the Message.



Your People must go and carry the same Word: Mine you see are going to speak
in the Name of our Tribe: They do not promise to strike the English: If you
promise to strike the English, and strike them first, we abandon them: If on
the contrary, the English strike first, we will strike vigorously.

Exhort your People not to expose themselves, but to arm them selves with
Courage: If they quit their Lands for a Moment, they lose them forever. It
appears by the Talk of the People at St. George's Fort, that if the Penobscots
will defend the the Lands of the Norridgwalks, the English will not take them:
Your People then must appear not to fear the English; and the English must have
the same said to them, which has been said in answer to the Demand, which is
made here. I dare not solicit them [ the Penobscots] nor speak to them for
Norridgwalk: If things should succeed ill, they would stone me: Let not your
People regret any Pains they must be at: Let them not cease to send Expresses
here, and to make Demands; it is necessary they should come to tell us to speak
to the English: It will be done if they come.

Let the English be told, that the Penobscots are not willing that the
Norridgwalks should go to Casco, as I hear the English demand.

I am in the Union of your holy Sacrifice, with profound Respect, Your most
humble and most obedient Servant, S. P. Gounon.
Penobscot, June 4. 1754.
I beg you again, my Reverend Father, to represent to your People that they
lose their Time (under the Seal of Secrecy, if possible; at least artfully) of
applying to the French for Succors. They will lose their Lands certainly, and
be obliged to live here and there miserably in the Villages of Becancour and
St. Francois Two Villages upon the South Side of St. Lawrence's River.
Let them not quit their Lands; if they have not a mind to live miserably.

This was wrote on the outside of the Letter, and appears to have been wrote
after it was (...) up.
The English call us to Casco: We have answered them that if they had any Thing
to say to us, they should come and say it where we are: We should be very sorry
if the Norridgwalks should go to Casco.



To my Reverend Father, my Reverend Father Audran, Missionary of the Society of
Jesus, a Norridgwalk.

From the insolent Behavior of the Norridgwalk Indians in general toward the
Inhabitants of Kennebeck River, and at Richmond Fort, it was apprehended for
some Weeks before the Interview, that they were upon the point of breaking out
into open Hostilities; so that their Arrival at Falmouth to meet his Excellency
was contrary to Expectation, and seems owing to the Accident of their Prielt's
having left them 20 Days before, to go to Canada, against the Advice of the
Jesuit of the Penobscots, and the mis-carriage of that Jesuit's Letter
beforementioned to him.

Besides the beforementioned Information given to the Governor by Capt.
Lithgow concerning the Refusal of the Arsseguntacook Indians to be present at
the Interview (which in his Excellency's Conference soon after with the
Norridgwalk Indians was confirmed by them,) Governor Wentworth had acquainted
him a few Weeks before he set out for Falmouth, that some of those Indians had
then lately carried off a whole Family Captive, and plundered two Houses within
the Province of New Hampshire; so that there was no Foundation to expect that
they would send any of their Tribe to the Treaty.

As to the Penobscot Indians, with whom it appears from their Jesuit's Letter
to the Jesuit of the Norridgwalks, as well as from their own to the Governor,
how active and successful that Priest had been in persuading them not to meet
his Excellency at Falmouth, but to insist upon his coming to treat with them at
St. George's River; though there seemed very little, if any, grounds to expect,
they would be induced to come to Falmouth; yet as it had been determined in
Council before his Excellency left Boston, that it would be below the Dignity
of his Majesty's Governor, and the Honor of the Province, for his Excellency
to submit, in case of that Tribe's peremptory Refusal to meet him at Falmouth,
which Place he had appointed for the Interview, to go to them at St. George's;
and at the same Time his Excellency looked upon it to be a Point of
considerable Consequence for facilitating the several Parts of the Service, he
was engaged in upon Kennebeck River, to have a friendly Conference with them at
this Conjuncture; he determined to use his utmost Efforts to bring them to meet
him at Folmouth, and accordingly forthwith dispatched a Sloop to St. George's
for that Purpose, with his Orders to Capt. Bradbury, contained in the following
Letter;

SIR,
I Would have you let the Chiefs of the Penobscot Indians know, that in
compliance with their and the Norridgwalk Tribe's repeated Request in their
Letter dated from Richmond the last Winter; wherein they pressed me to come
early this Summer in Person to treat with them upon the Matters therein
mentioned, I am come to this Place, as soon as the public Affairs of the
Province, and their Hunting Season would permit me, to meet them; and tell
them, that I bring with me a sincere Disposition to renew and strengthen the
ancient Friendship, which has from Time to Time subsisted between this
Government and their Tribe.

I would likewise have you let them know, that I have thought very much upon
what they wrote to me in their last Letter from St. George's, concerning their
Expectation, that I would come thither to treat with them, and that River's
being the usual Place of Conference between the Governors of this Province, and
their Tribe; and you must tell them from me, that they are greatly mistaken in
that Matter: Neither Governor Shutt, nor Governor Dummer, nor Governor Belcher
ever met them at St. George's; they (the Indians) came from St. George's to
Arrowsick Island in 1717, to meet the first of those Governors, and always
either to Boston or Falmouth to treat with the other two: It is true that I
appointed my first Interview and Conference with them in 1742, to be held at
St. George's; but the Reason of my choosing that Place then, was, because I was
desirous of visiting the most remote Settlements in that Part of the Province,
at my first taking the Administration of the Government upon me; and if I had
come to St. George's at that Time upon their Request, yet even that would be a
strong Reason why they should now come to meet me at Falmouth; where Col.
Mascarene has accompanied me, as a Commissioner from the Government of
Nova Scotia, and three Commissioners from the Government of New Hampshire, to
have an Interview likewise with them, on the Part of those Provinces.

Upon the whole, I would have you acquaint them, that I sully expeil them to
come to me to this Place; that I have sent a Sloop to bring them thither, and
English Colors for them to make use of upon this Occasion; and ordered you to
attend and conduct them; that if they persist in their Refusal to do it, after
I am come so far to brighten the Covenant Chain with them, and so early in the
Year to gratify them; I shall look upon it as a great Affront to the English
Governments, and a sure Mark that they are indifferent whether they preserve
our ancient Amity and Kindness for them or not.

I particularly observe, what they write to me at the End of their Letter; in
which they say, "That they write in behalf of the Norridgwalks, as well as
themselves." This must be An Expression usd by them in their Letter to the (...)
crooked Talk; the Norridgwalk Indians came here some Days before my Arrival,
to treat with me at this Place; the Penobscot Indians therefore had no Power
from them to write to me on their behalf in that Manner: This is I say crooked
palk; it does not resemble that Truth of Heart, which the Penobscots ever
professed to have; but must proceed from some bad Counsel given to them, in
order to create a Mitunderstanding between the English and them; and to destroy
the Peace and Friendship between us.

Upon this Occasion I would have you remind them of their Priest's Letter to
me, which I communicated to them the last Summer; in which he endeavored to
diswade me from sending Commissioners the last Year, to distribute the Presents
from this Government to them; and of the Proofs I then sent them of his
Artifices to raise Jealousies among them, in order to break off our Friendship:
And I would have you assure them, that I have lately received undoubted Proofs
of the same Priest's acting at this Time the like treacherous Part to them, and
using his utmost Endeavors to engage them in Acts of Hostility against us.

And I would have you further tell them, That if this Government had not a
great Regard for them, and a real Desire to continue their ancient Friendship
and Kindness to them, I should not have been so earnest in my Endeavors to
perpetuate Peace and Amity between us; but the Success of that must depend upon
their Meeting me here; and their Refusal to do it will be looked upon by me, as
an high Affront and a full Proof that they are determined to break off
Friendship, with us.

I am Sir, Your Friend and Servant, W. SHIRLEY.


At the same Time; as the Norridgwalk Indians were the original Proprietors of
the Lands upon Kennebeck River, and the only Indians now interested in them,
and there was Reason to expect that the Presence of the Penobscots, who would
probably come fully instincted by their Priest to use their utmost Influence
over the Norridgwalks in opposition to the intended March to the Head of
Kennebeck, etc. the erecting a Fort higher up the River than Richmond, and
making further the Settlements upon it, would embarrass the Conference with the
Norridgwalks upon those Points; the Governor determined with the Advice of His
Majesty's Council, to have a separate Conference with the last mentioned
Indians, and dispatch them away from Falmouth (if possible) before the Arrival
of the Penobscots there.

The Delay likewise, which the Governor's staying for the Arrival of the
Penobscots, before he treated with the Norridgwalk Indians, would have
occasioned to the Proceeding of the Troops, whose Presence at Casco, during the
Conference with those Indians, it was apprehended would contribute to make them
acquiesce in the March of the Forces through their Country, building the intended
Forts up the River Kennebeck above Richmond, and making other Settlements upon
it, was another Motive for hastening on the Conference with that Tribe.

Accordingly his Excellency received a Visit from the Norridgwalks the same Day
at his Lodgings; and appointed the Day following, being Friday the 28th of June
to speak with them in public.

FRIDAY June 28. 1754.
THE Governor with the Gentlemen of his Attendance, the Commissioners from
Nova Scotia, and New Hampshire, being assembled at the Townhouse, the Chiefs
of the Norridgwalk Tribe of Indians were conducted thither; and after
Salutations had passed between them, His Excellency spoke to the Indians as
follows,

Friends and Brethren of the Norridgwalk Tribe,

'THrough the Protection of the Divine Providence I am arrived safe at this
Place, after a tedious and rough Passage; and I hope I now see you and your
Wives and Children in good Health.

'Before I embarked, I sent Orders that upon your Arrival here you should have
every Thing provided, necessary for your Refreshment; and I hope your
Entertainment has been to your Satisfaction.

Brethren,

'In the last Winter I received a Letter from your Tribe, the Penobscot, and
Arssegunticook Indians, pressing me to come to Richmond, early this Summer, to
treat with you and them, instead of sending Commissioners to you at the usual
Time; and in Compliance with your Request, I am now come in Person as soon as
the public Business of my Government, and your Hunting Season would admit, to
renew the Covenant with you.

'The Honorable Colonel Mascarene, who is appointed a Commissioner in behalf
of the Province of Nova Scotia; and the three Honorable Gentlemen on my left
Hand, who are Commissioners from the Province of Piscataqua, [ New-Hampshire]
are come here likewise to join with me in brightning the Chain.

'I was in Hopes to have found the Penobscot, and Arssegunticook Indians here
at my Arrival, that I might have saluted you all together; but as I am desirous
of taking as early an Opportunity, as may be, of greeting your Tribe, and
having a Friendly Conference with you, I am determined not to wait for their
coming; but to speak with you to Morrow, at 10 O'Clock in the Forenoon, and
shall order a great Gun to be fired as a Signal for you to come on Shore, where
you shall find an Officer ready to Conduct you to the Place of Conference.'

Then the Governor asked them, whether all their Chief Men of the Tribe were
present; and whether any Penobscot Indians were with them.

Col. Job, in the Name of the Indians, addrefs'd the Governor as follows,

Brother,

'What your Excellency says is very good.

'There are some of the Penobscots with us.

' Passagueant is not well; but will be here to Morrow, God willing: God has
brought us here; and we are glad to see you in good Health: Passagueant and
Quenoiis knew of our coming here, and join with us in saluting You. Our young
Men rejoice to see your Excellency: We want nothing but Peace. -- God knows our
Hearts, that they are good: When Capt. Lithgow informed us you was coming, we
left our Corn and other Business to meet you: All our young Men and Women are
desirous that Peace should continue.

'We should be glad of some Tobacco and Paint -- Our young Men are always
desirous of painting themselves according to our Fashion at these Meetings.

'Capt. Lithgow told us, we should want for nothing: We want some Ammunition to
kill Game with, as our living is wholly on fresh Meat.'

GOVERNOR: Your young Men shall be supplied with Ammunition and Paint; and I
will order more Rum, and some fresh Beef for your Refreshment.


Col. Job: We thank your Excellency for your Kindness to us.


GOVERNOR: How many are there of your Tribe now at Falmouth?


Col. Job: Forty-two; Men, Women and Children.


GOV'R: What Number of Men have you here?


Col. Job: Twenty-seven.


GOV'R: Are any of the Arssegunticook Indians with you?


Col. Job: Not one.


GOV'R: How many of the Penobscot Indians are with you?


Col. Job: There are Eight of that Tribe here.


GOV'R: Do these Penobscot Indians intend to remain with you?


Col. Job: No, they design to return to Penobscot, as soon as the Treaty is
over: They will open their Hearts and speak to your Excellency freely. -- We
desire you would order five Gallons of Rum a Day to be distributed among us.


GOV'R: I don't grudge you that Quantity of Rum; but am concerned least it
should over-heat your young Men, and make them quarrel one with another; and as
we are met here on weighty Affairs, I would have you consider coolly of them.


Col. Job: We will take care that our young Men keep themselves sober: We
desire no more than two Gallons of Rum, and one Gallon of Mellasses for our
Children.


GOV'R: You shall have it.


Then his Excellency the Governor drank King GEORGE's Health, and Profperity
to the Norridgwalks, and that Peace might continue between them, and the
English Colonies. -- Which Healths were pledged by all the Indians present.

Then the Indians withdrew.

SATURDAY, June 29. 1754.
THE Governor, the Commissioners aforenamed, and other Gentlemen, being
affembled in the Meeting House at Falmouth, (the Townhouse being found
inconvenient the Day before,) and attended there by the Indians; After the
usual Salutations,

Walter McFarland was sworn well and truly to interpret, what should pass
between his Excellency and the Indians of the Norridgwalk Tribe at this
Conference.

Then his Excellency spoke to them as follows;

Brethren,

'I Hope I meet you all in good Health this Morning: I gave Orders since I saw
you here Yesterday, that every Thing, which you and your Squaws then desired of
me, should be provided for you as soon as possible.

Brethren,

'In your Letter to me from Richmond, the last Winter you say thus;

Brother,
YOU have a long Time wanted that which is good, viz. Peace: We also want that
which is good; and we want to see you the next Spring; and when we hear each
other talk, we will both endeavor to do that, which is right between us.


'You have well spoken, Brethren, in what you have said; and I am now come to
talk with you upon it; and to do what is necessary for settling our Peace upon
a lasting Foundation.

'The French have of late built Forts in several Places upon this Continent,
within the Territories of King GEORGE, which has greatly disturbed our Peace
in those Par's; and I am informed, that they either have, or design soon to
erect one on the River Kennebeck, or the Carrying-Place called Wa-non-du-wa
wan-nock, near the Head of it, which is within the Limits of this Government:
If they should be suffered to do that, Brethren, it would soon destroy your and
our Peace upon this River. I have therefore brought with me a strong Body of
Soldiers to march up to the Head of it, and over the Carrying-Place, in order
to discover whether the French have made any Settlements, or built any Forts
there, or not; and in case they have, or are attempting to do it, I shall
summon them in a peaceable Manner to retire, and if they shall refuse to depart
out of the English Territories, I will drive them off by Force.

'Further, Brethren, In order to hinder the French from making Encroachments
upon the River Kennebeck, it is my Intention to build a strong House upon it,
higher up than Richmond; and a large Magazine to lodge our Stores at, in our
Way thither: And as this strong House will be nearer your Headquarters at
Norridgwalk, than that at Richmond is, I design to remove the Truck Trade from
Richmond to that Place; so that then you will have less Way to come for your
necessary Supplies than you now have: And in case we should have a War with the
French, (which we shall use all Means in our Power to prevent, and I hope will
not happen) this strong House will be a Place of Shelter and Protection to you,
as well as to the English, against their Hostilities.

'You will judge, Brethren, how well disposed my Heart is toward you in this
Matter, by my hiding from you nothing, which I have in it; and I hope you think
what I say is right.

'You moreover say, Brethren, in your Letter to me, that you like well
Governor Dummer's Treaty, and what was then done; and that Governor Dummer
then set the Bounds between the English and you.

'You may be assured, That We shall on our Part, inviolably observe Governor
Dummer's Treaty; and that the English shall not in making Settlements pass the
Bounds, which are there set between you and them: And we expect that you
likewise shall on your Part keep that Treaty.

'By that it is agreed, That the English shall and may peaceably and quietly
enter upon, improve and forever enjoy, (...) and singular their Rights of Land,
and former (...), Properties and Possessions, within the Eastern Parts of this
Province; (...) with all Hands, Mets, Shoars, Beaches and Fisheries within the
same; without any (...), or Claim by you or any other Indians; and be in no
ways molested, interrupted, or disturbed therein.

'(...) Hand, That you and the (...) of Indians, within this Province, and
(...) and their natural Descendants, shall respectively hold and enjoy all your
and their Lands, Liberties and Properties, not by you or them conveyed, or sold
to, or possessed, (...) any of the English Subjects: Also, The Privilege of
Hunting, Fishing and Fowling as formerly.

'Now, in pursuance of this Treaty, Brethren, I pronate you in the Name of the
English Governments, that none of his Majesty's Subjects within them, shall be
allowed to make Settlements upon any Lands above Richmond, for which they
cannot produce good and (...) Deeds of Conveyance, either from you or your
Ancestors: And for the better Prelervation of your Rights and Privileges of
Hunting, Fishing and Fowling, whole and entire to your selves, a Law had been
lately passed by the Government of the Massachusetts Bay, whereby all his
Majesty's Subjects within it are prohibited, under severe Penalties, from
trespassing upon you: On the other Hand, We expect that the English shall have
Liberty to make settlements wherever they shall think proper, on any Lands
which they have fairly purchased of your Ancestors, without any Molestation or
Hindrance from You, or any other Indian Tribe.

'But I must observe to you, with regard to the Extent of the Limits of the
English and French Territories upon this Continent; that you are not concerned
in any Disputes which may arise on that Point: This is a Matter which lies
wholly between Us and the French; and we do not desire you, as the French do,
to expose your Lives in any of our Quarrels with them: All, that we expect, is,
That you leave us to decide our Disputes, and consult your own Safety by
remaining Neutral.

'I have now talked with you upon the principal Matters, which are mentioned in
your Letter to me; and shall not proceed further in the Conference, until I
have received your Answer to what I have said upon them.

'Before you give it, I would have you maturely consider and deliberate upon
every Thing, which I have now spoke; for which purpose, least any Article of it
should escape your Memory, I shall commit what I have said to the Interpreter
in Writing; and he, when you are retired and deliberating upon it, shall
distinctly interpret every Paragraph of it to you again, and I shall expect you
to meet me here with your Answer ready to be delivered on Monday Morning next,
at 10 O'Clock, when you shall have the same Signal made for you to come on
Shore, as you had to Day.

'I shall say nothing further to you at present than that these are weighty
Matters, which nearly concern the Welfare of your Tribe, and I hope your Answer
to me upon them will be a wise one, and such as will promote that by securing
our Friendship and Kindness to you.'

Qumois, in behalf of the Indians, addressing himself to the Governor, said,
-- I would speak to your Excellency.

Brother,

'We thank you for your kind Speech to us, and for opening your Heart so freely
to us; we see your Heart is good.'

Then the Governor drank the same Healthy that he did the Day before -- which
were pledged by the Indians.

MONDAY July 1. 1754.
PRESENT as before.

AFter Salutations, Mr. Ezekiel Price was sworn to make true Entries of what
should pass between the Governor and the Indians at this Con-ference; as also
that the Entries already made by him in it were just and true, according to the
best of his Knowledge and Skill.

Then his Excellency asked the Indians, if they had considered what he had said
to them on Saturday, and were ready to give him their Answer to it.

Col. Job, holding in his Hand the Governor's Letter to the Indians in the
last Winter, spoke in their Name, as follows;

'Here is the Letter which your Excellency wrote; it is a good Letter, we like
it well, -- all our Brethren the Indians like it well.

'We have carefully considered what you said to us on Saturday.

'As to the strong House, you intend to build on the River Kennebeck, we cannot
consent to it is being built; it is our Land, and we get our Living by Hunting:
Richmond Fort on the River belongs to King GEORGE, and we are content it should
remain, as it stands; but we cannot consent to the Building of any other Fort,
or making any new Settlements on that River.

'Governour Dummer's Treaty is liked by all the Indians; and we all desire to
stand by that, and submit to it is Rules.

'We want nothing but Peace; but we cannot agree that you should go any further
up the River.

'We are here in behalf of the Penobscots, and all the Indians; they know of
our coming, and it is the same, as if they all were present.

'When you see us, it is the same Thing as if you see all the Tribes of Indians.

'We tell you our Heart. -- If you should send your Army up Kennebeck River,
you will not see a Frenchman; there is none upon the River, nor near it. -- GOD
knows what I speak is true; I speak from my Heart.

Brother,

'Your Brethren of the Norridgwalk Tribe, and some of the Penobscots are met
here; we are come for Good. -- This Wampum is a Token of the Sincerity of our
Hearts, holding three Strings of Wampum in his Hand, which he gave the
Governor.

'If we agree to that which is Good, all the Indians will stand by it.'

GOV'R: 'You say the Indians now present are here in behalf of the Penobscots
to treat with me; and, that the Penobscots will stand by what is now agreed to;
and that it is the same Thing as if their Tribe was present.

'I have lately received two Letters from St. George's; one sent from the
Penobscot Indians before I came from Boston, and the other since I arrived at
Casco.

'In the first of these Letters the Penobscots told me, they expected I would
come to St. George's; and that they could not come to Falmouth to treat with me.

'The Penobscots also sent me Word, since I came here, that they would not
treat with me, unless I came to St. George's. -- And by a Letter I have in my
Hand, I am satisfied they received this Advice from their Priest.

'I cannot but think therefore that you are mistaken, when you tell me that any
Indians now present are authorized to appear in behalf of the Penobscots, and
to act for them; since that Tribe has declared to the contrary.' --

The Governor made here a short Pause, expecting an Answer from the Indians;
but they seeming a little confounded, and making none, he proceeded;

'I now look upon my self as treating with your Tribe only.

'I regard your Tribe as much as I do the Pencbscots; and there is no Occasion
for their being present, or consulted upon the principal Points of this
Conference.

'You say you stand by Governor Dummer's Treaty; so do we. -- Most of the
Indians who were concerned in making of it, are dead: Governor Dummer was then
the Governor of this Province; but now I am the Governor of it.

'It was therefore necessary, that that Treaty should be committed to Writing,
that Governor Dummer's Successors, and the present Generation of Indians might
know what was then agreed upon in it.

'You well know the Mark of Wenemouet, Loron, Edger-Emet, and the others of the
principal Indians, who made and signed that Treaty; and as they are dead, their
Marks must now speak for them. -- '

His Excellency then produced the original Treaty made with Governor Dummer to
the Indians, who after having perused the Marks of the Indian Chiefs, which
signed it, observed to his Excellency that none of the Norridgwalks had signed
the Treaty.

Governor SHIRLEY,

'You told me just now, That you appeared for the Penobscots: That was the Case
with the Penobscot Indians at the Time of making Governor Dummer's Treaty;
they were delegated by the Norridgwalks, St. Francois, St. John's, and other
Tribes of Indians, to represent them at that Conference, and conclude a Treaty
on their behalf with the English: -- Besides, Your Tribe has at every Treaty
since that Time, as well as the present Conference declared, That they liked it
well, and will stand by it; and submit to it is Rules. Particularly, When I met
you at St. George's, thirteen Years ago, Loron who was your Speaker at that
Interview, and Col. Lewis, and all the other Indians then present, produced the
Counterpart of this Treaty to me; and insisted upon it as what was binding
between us. And at Falmouth, in 1749, your Tribe, the St. Francois, Penobscots
and Weeweenocks, all signed the Treaty then concluded: And by that Treaty you
made the same Agreement with the English, which your Predecessors made with
them in Governor Dummer's Treaty.'

[Then his Excellency produced to them the Treaty made and concluded at
Falmouth in 1749,] and proceeded thus;

'This Treaty, ( viz of 1749,) was ratified by your Tribe the last Year; and
the Year before; and several of you now present then signed your Marks to it.'

[Then his Excellency caused the afore-recited Paragraph in Governor Dummer's
Treaty, concerning the Agreement that the English should have and enjoy all
their former Rights and Possessions in the Lands, which had been sold and
conveyed to them by the Indians, to be read over again;] and spoke to them as
follows;

Brethren,

'I must now observe to you, That above One Hundred Years ago, the English
purchased of your Fathers all the Lands lying on the River Kennebeck, as high
up as W^sserunsike: That in Consequence of that Purchase they took Possession
of and made Settlements upon them; and (at the Desire of the Indians) anciently
built at Taconnet Falls a Trading-House, where a greater Trade was carned on,
than there is now in all the English Truck-Houses together; as you have in the
Conference of last Year acknowledged: And there are still to be seen at
Cushnock and Taconnet old Ruins of Houses, which plainly prove that there were
Houses formerly built there by the English.

'At the Treaty made by the Norridgwalks, and other Eastern Indians with
Governor Shute in 1717, it was agreed, That the English should settle the
Lands where their Predecessors had done". And by Governor Dummer's Treaty in
1726, That the English should settle upon, and forever peaceably enjoy all
their Rights of Land and former Possessions within the Eastern Parts of this
Province, and whatever had been sold and conveyed to them by the Indians. -- If
the Indians had not been convinced at the Time of making those Treaties, that
the Lands formerly possessed and settled by the English, and which had been
purchased by them of the Indians, were fairly fold to them, they would not have
entered into those Agreements.

Brethren,

'As to building the intended strong House and Magazine higher up Kennebeck
River than Richmond, I must remind you of what passed between us on the second
Day of this Conference; in which I opened my Heart to you: I told you, that the
only Motive of my doing it was to keep the French from coming into the River,
and to protect all the Lands upon it, Your Lands as well as those of the
English, against them; This is what all Princes do within their own Dominiens,
without asking Leave of those who inhabit the Lands there: The building of
Forts don't take away the private Property of the Subjects in their Lands: And
as by Governor Dummer's Treaty (which you say is Right, and you like well, and
will stand by;) and by the Treaty of Peace in 1749, your Tribe and the other
Indian Tribes who were Parties to them have submitted to be ruled and governed
by the King of Great Britain' s Laws, and desired to have the Benefit of the
same.

[Here that Paragraph was read to them out of both those Treaties.]

'King GEORGE has an undoubted Right by virtue of those Treaties, as well as
by the established Law of Nations, to build Forts upon your Lands in the
Eastern Parts of this Government, as well as those of the English: Your Tribe
and the English are made Brethren by those Treaties, and King GEORGE is our
common Father; and this Fort is to be built for the Protection of all his
Children, the Indians as well as the English.

Brethren,

'I would put you in Mind of what happened in Times past; About 30 or 40 Years
ago, the French stirred up yours and the neighboring Indian Tribes, when they
were at Peace with the English, to make War with them -- The Indians during the
Continuance of it committed Ravages in our Borders, and killed several of our
People; But what Fruits did the Tribe of Norridgwalks reap, by the Mischief
which they then joined in doing to the English; they had several of their young
Men cut off, and the English at last, being highly provoked by their
Hostilities, sell upon the old Town of Norridgwalk, destroyed many of the
Tribe, and drove them all off from their Lands, which by Right of Conduest in
War (a Title held to be good by all the Indian Tribes in general among
themselves,) the English became Masters of, and it was entirely owing to their
Kindness to your Tribe, that you were restored to those Lands by Governor
Dummer's Treaty, and suffered to return and live in Peace upon your present
Possessions.

'This Instance, Brethren, of the Calamity which going to War with the English
brought upon your Tribe in that Day, and of the Kindness which they then showed
to you, in permitting you to return and live again upon your Lands, after your
Tribe had forfeited all Pretensions to their Friendship by being guilty of a
Breach of the most solemn Engagements, should now be well considered by you:
And it ought to be a Warning to your never to suffer yourselves to be seduced
again by the French, to enter, into War with the English, which if it should
ever happen, must sooner or later end in the Destruction of the small Remnant
of your Tribe.

'It will be much wiser for you to live in Peace, and enjoy your Lands, under
the Protection of the English.

'And as a Token of the Sincerity of my Heart, in what I have said to you, I
deliver you this Belt of Wampum. Gave a Belt of Wampum.

'I have another Article, Brethren, to speak with you upon.

'By Governor Dummer's Treaty it is agreed, That if any Conttoverfies or
Differences should at any Time after happen to arise, between any of the
English and Indians, for any real or supposed Wrong, or Injury done on either
Side, no private Revenge shall be taken for the same, but proper Application
made to his Majesty's Government upon the Place, for Remedy or Redress thereof,
in a due Course of Justice.

'This was ratified by the Treaty of Peace made in 1749, and the Norridgwalks,
Penobscots, Arssegunticooks, and Weeweenocks thereby engaged further That if
any Indians should at any Time commit any Acts of Hostility against the
English, they would join their young Men with the English, in reducing such
Indians to Reason.

'Now, Brethren, It has unfortunately happened that two Indians of the
Arssegunticook Tribe were killed the last Year, by two Englishmen in the
Government of Piscataqua, for several Injuries and Insults which these Indians
had been guilty of within it: The Circumstances of which I shall relate to you.
In April 1752, two Indians of that Tribe named Sabatis and Christi, came to
Canterbury in the aforesaid Province, where they were friendly entertained
above a Month; but at their going off they stole two Negroes, which they bound
and carried over Merrimack River, where one of them made his Escape and
returned to his Master; but the other was carried to Canada, and sold to a
French Officer at Crown-Point, at which Place he still remains; or was seen
very lately.

'In May following a Party of ten or twelve Arssegunticook Indians met with
four English Men, at a Branch of Contoocook River, within the Government of
Piscataqua, shot one of them dead upon the Spot, captivated and carried two of
them to Canada, where they were detained some Months, and until they were
ransomed; the other with Difficulty making his Escape: All which was done in
Time of Peace.

'In 1753, the aforenamed Sabatis came again to Canterbury, where being
reproached by the Wife of the Man, from whom he and his Companion had the Year
before stolen the Negro, which they had sold in Canada, he together with
another Indian then in Company, was guilty of great Outrages to her; and it was
by these and other Injuries and Insults committed by them there, that the two
English Men were provoked to kill them soon after; but the Government of
Piscataqua disapproving the Action (as is well known from their Proceedings
against the Persons, who were supposed to be guilty of it) have disclaimed the
private Revenge, which the two English Men in their Province took of the
Arssegunticook Indians, for the Injuries and Insults which the English had
received from them, and used Endeavors to bring to Punishment the Offenders,
who were guilty of a Breach of the said Treaties: And you see, Brethren, that
that Government have now sent three Commissioners to meet the Arssegunticooks
here, in order to have Injuries on both Sides redressed in a Course of Justice,
and an amicable Manner.

'The Arssegunticooks ought to have acted the like Part, and met us here,
especially as since they knew of the killing of those two Indians, they renewed
the Treaty of Peace made with the Governments of Piscataqua and Massachusetts
in 1749, by signing a Ratification of it at Richmond in the Fall of the Year,
and accepted Part of the Presents which the Government of the Massachusetts Bay
made to the Indians upon that Occasion; and joined the last Winter with your
Tribe and the Penobscots, in pressing me to meet them in these Parts early this
Summer: But instead of doing this, they have within the last seven Weeks
captivated an English Man, with his Wife and three Children in the Province of
Piscataqua, and plundered his House, as they did at the same Time the House of
another English Man in the Neighborhood, which happened fortunately to have
left it a Day or two before the Indians came: And they declare that they will
take further Revenge upon the English; for which Purpose they have a Party out
now near Richmond, waiting for an Opportunity to do it.

'Wherefore, Brethren, as the English have faithfully kept the beforementioned
Treaties on their Part, and the Arssegunticooks have broken them; we have a
Right by Virtue of them, to call upon you and the Penobscots to join your young
Men with our's, in reducing the Arssegunticooks to Reason: Yourselves must be
convinced that this is necessary to be done, in order to prevent shedding of
Blood, which will in the End wholly rust and canker the Covenant-Chain; which
ought to be kept as free from the Stain of it as may be.

Col. Job: What we speak is Truth, we will do every Thing in our Power to
prevent those Indians from doing Mischief.


GOV'R: Will you join your young Men (...), and compel them to do what is Right?


Col. Job: We will do every thing (...) those Indians quiet and peaceable: We
have already (...); they will come to Norridgwalk before they do more: (...)
killed did no Mischief; it was the Albany Indians who did the (...) of the two
Indians killed) was an Albany Indian.


GOV'R: You are mistaken; Sabatis was not an Albany Indian, but belonged to the
Arssegunticook Tribe; he has declared it himself to several, and if you doubt
it, I can produce certain Proof of it.

'Who had the Command of that Party of Indians which captivated two English Men
and killed another, when a Fourth escaped from them near Contoocook River, as I
before observed to you?'


Col. Job: It was an Albany Indian, who had been with the Arssegunticooks a
great while.


GOV'R: You are mistaken; Capt. Moses (alias Actean) commanded that Party; he
was an Arssegunticook; the two Men who were carried by him Captive to Canada,
heard him acknowledged as such there; and himself has declared, that he
formerly belonged to the Norridgwalk Tribe; but had married among the
Arssegunticooks.


Col. Job: We will enquire and know more about it in a few Days; the Indians
some times say more than is true.


GOV'R: Although we knew of this Murder, and the captivating of the two Men,
the English Governments did not take any Revenge, but admitted the
Arssegunticooks, the last Year, to Ratify the Teaty made five Years ago and
gave them Presents -- Observe the different Behavior of the English from the
Indians in this respect.


Col. Job: It is the first Time, I have heard any Thing of the captivating of
the Family, and plundering the two Houses in Piscataqua. -- I speak from my
Heart.


GOV'R: You well remember the Arssegunticook Indians captivated three Children
at North-Yarmouth, within the Government of the Massachusetts Bay: What is
become of them? -- At the last Conference Passag^eant promised to go and fetch
them home.


Col. Job: He would have gone; but hearing Your Excellency desired him to
attend at this Treaty, he was prevented.


GOV'R: Are you ready to Ratify and Confirm the Treaty of Peace made as Casco
five Years ago?


Col. Job: We are ready to Ratify it -- we are desirous of Peace, and as we are
dotermin'd to do all in our Power to prevent Mischief, we hope your Excellency
will do the same.


GOV'R: You may certainly depend upon it that I will.


Col. Job: Lot not your young Men act the Devil's Part, by doing Mischief to
us: You, as well as we, like Governor Dummer's Treaty, -- Let us all stand by
it: Before we part, both of us will confirm that Treaty.


GOV'R: The Ratification of that Treaty, and of the Treaty of Peace made five
Years ago at Casco shall be wrote ready for us both to sign to Morrow.

'All that I have said at this Conference is from my Heart; which I have opened
freely to you; and I will hide nothing in it from you: You have told me that
you would not consent that the English should build a Fort upon Kennebeck River
above Richmond: I would not have you misunderstand me; I did not ask your
Consent.

'King GEORGE, nor any other Prince, ever asks the Consent of any Person to
build Forts within their own Territories: You well know the French King does
not.

'Whatever English Forts, are built or Settlements made upon that River, you
may be assured, that as long as you continue to behave peaceably toward the
English, you shall be treated as Friends and Brethren by them.'


Col. Job: Your Talk is good; it pleases us greatly. -- We look upon you to be
our Brother; and God knows we are sincere.


TUESDAY July 2. 1754.
PRESENT as before.

GOV'R. Brethren,

'I Have caused Instruments of Ratification of the Treaties of Peace made by
your Tribe, and the other Eastern Indians with Governor Dummer in 1726; and
with the Commissioners from this Government, and that of Piscataqua, in 1749,
to be prepared for us to sign, as was proposed between us Yesterday. -- But
before we proceed to do this, I must call upon you to open your whole Hearts to
me with the same Sincerity that I have used in diselosing what is in mine to
you.

'You will not think much of my being so solicitous to know whether I can now
depend upon your pacifick Professions, if you recollect your Behavior toward
us soon after your signing the Treaty of 1749. -- About nine or ten Months
after that, your Tribe joined with some of the Arssegunticook and Penobscot
Indians in captivating seventeen of the People of this Government; viz.
thirteen from Swan-Island, one from Richmond, two from Sheepscot, and one from
Brunswick; as also in killing a great Number of our Cattle: The Reason given by
you for the doing of this Mischief was, that it was done to satisfy you for two
Indians, which happened to be killed by some English: After which you declared
to us, That the Indian Blood was then wiped away -- And that the English might
go safely about their Business; for that it was Peace between all the Indians
and the English.

'The English thinking you sincere in this Declaration left their Garrisons,
and returned to their Dwelling-Houses; but notwithstanding your Declarations,
when the English were off their Guard, some of the Arssegunticook Indians soon
after captivated three Boys at North Yarmouth, killed some Cattle, and burnt
and plundered several Houses; and soon after that killed a Man coming from
North Yarmouth; A short Time after this, six Men were captivated, and one Man
killed at the New-Meadows, together with nineteen Cattle, as was also a
considerable Number of Cattle at Richmond about the same Time; and in doing
this last mentioned Mischief, your Tribe was principally concerned, being
assisted only by a few Canada Indians in some Part of it; other Part of it
being done by your Tribe alone: And we are certain that these Accounts are
true, because we have received them from some of your own Tribe.

'What can you say in Justification of your selves for this Behavior?


[ After a short Pause without Answer from the Indians,] the Governor
proceeded,

Brethren,

'I have been informed since my Arrival here, That a Letter has been sent from
the Canada Indians to the Penobscots, acquainting them that they intended to
pass over to our Eastern Frontiers, when the Corn should be ripe, and tall upon
the Engish Settlements there.

'I now require of you to inform me, what you know concerning this Matter?

Colonel Job beginning to speak to the Governor; Quenois, who sat next to him,
turned toward him, and said in a low Voice, -- Besure you tell no more Lies;
-- If you do, the Governor will certainly find you out: -- Upon which Col.
Job, after expostulating with Quenois in two or three Words, proceeded thus;

Brother,

'We will speak the Truth from our Hearts, and hide nothing from you.

'We heard that there was such a Letter sent from Canada to the Penobscots; and
we told Capt. Lithgow what the Canada Indians and the Arssegunticook Indians
intended to do. -- They say they are coming to satisfy themselves for the Loss
of the two Men belonging to the Arssegunticook Tribe.'

GOV'R: What have the Canada Indians to do in this Matter?


Col. Job: The Canada Indians and the Arssegunticook Indians are all the same.
It is very likely that those Indians, who intend to do this Mischief, will come
first to Norridgwalk, and we will then do our utmost to hinder them from doing
any more Mischief.


GOV'R: ' Brethren, I must further acquaint you, That I received a Letter from
St. George's a few Days ago, wherein I am informed, That your Tribe had sent
two Bel's of Wampum to the Penobscot Indians, inviting them to join with you
and the Canada Indians against the English: Is this true?'


Col. Job: We never had any Thing but Good in our Hearts: That Letter is a Lie:
The Canada Indians might send Wampum; but we never did, and we desire you would
not think we over had it in our Hearts to do it.


GOV'R: Brethren,

'Notwithstanding the Mischief you have done us since the last Treaty of Peace;
if you are determined to live peaceably with us for the future, and are
desirous of continuing in Friendship with us, we will still receive you as
Friends and Brethren, and sign the Ratisications of the beforementioned
Treaties of Peace: But if your Hearts are not Right toward us, I would not
have you sign them; because if after that, you should commit any Acts of
Hostility against us, you may depend upon it, we shall never trust you again.

'And I would have you well consider, that if you should provoke us to be your
Enemies by your Violation of this Peace, the Consequence must in the End be the
utter Destruction of the small Part of your Tribe which still remains.

'I hope you rightly understand what I have told you more than once in this
Conference, it was my Intention to do, and the English expected from you: I
shall repeat it once more, before we proceed to sign the Ratification: I told
you, I should send a strong Body of Soldiers to march up Kennebeck River, as
high as the Head of it, and over the Carrying-Place, which is between that and
the River Chaudiere; and cause a strong House to be erected, and a large
Magazine for Stores in the Way to it; that the English had fairly purchased
Lands of your Ancestors, as high up that River as Wesserunsick, and made
Settlements there; and that we expected they should be at Liberty to make
Settlements again as high as their Fathers have purchased of your Ancestors,
whenever they shall think proper, without being molested by you or any other
Tribe of Indians.

'I have now done speaking, and am ready to hear what you have further to say
to me -- I hope you will speak freely.


Col. Job: Brother,

'We will open our Hearts and speak freely.

'We came here for that which is Good; and hope what we shall now do will end
in Good.

'The English shall be welcome to renew their Settlements as high up the River
as they have beretofore settled Lands, and purchased any from our Tribe; and we
are content that they shall peaceably enjoy them.

'We have considered of what your Excellency told us concerning building a Fort
and Magazine upon Kennebeck River; and are content you should build them where
you please, and promise not to molest or disturb you in doing it.

'We should be glad to know on what Part of the River you propose to build the
Fort and Magazine.'


GOV'R: I have given Orders to the Commander of the Troops, which I have sent
up that River, to search for the most convenient Place in it to set the Fort
upon; and until I hear from him, I am not able to inform you concerning this
Matter. -- But I believe it will not be higher up the River than Taconnet Falls.


Indians: 'Capt. Lithgow uses us kindly, and we desire that he may be continued
in the TruckHouse at Richmond.

'We should be glad that there was a Truck-House at Sato; and that Capt. Lane
had the Care of it.

'By Governor Dummer's Treaty it was agreed that the English should not hunt on
our Lands. -- The English have Land enough to work upon to get a living,
without Hunting upon our Lands. -- What we say in this Matter we speak in
behalf of all the Tribes of Indians, who are in Friendship with the English.

'GOD is a Witness that what I have now said to your Excellency is true; and
that it comes from my Heart.'


GOV'R: 'I am well pleased with what you have now said; and hope it comes from
your Heart.'

'I think as you do, that the English have no right to hunt on your Lands, and
that they ought to be punished for doing it.'


Then one of the Indians complained that he had a Gun left at Capt. Oulton's;
also some Beaver, two Broad Cloth-Blankets, six Shirts, some Wampum and Sable
Strings.

The Governor assured the Indians he would enquire into thatMatter, and that
Justice should be done them therein.

Col. Job: I would speak to your Excellency,

'We are not allowed enough for the Beaver we bring to the Truck House; Beaver
is very scarce and hard to be got; it ought to be sold for a better Price.'


GOV'R: 'You may always depend upon having the same Price for the Beaver you
bring to the Truck-Houses, that it will fetch in Boston, exclusive of all
Charges.

'The Law made for punishing the English, who shall hunt on any of your Lands,
shall be carried into Execution.

'Two English Men have already been punished agreeable to this Law; and I will
use my Endeavor that all, who transgress it, shall be punished.

'You have sometimes given into the Truck-House Winter Beaver, instead of Spring
Beaver; you ought to be more careful in this Matter.

'I will give Orders that the Commissary-General shall from Time to Time, send
an Account to Capt. Lithgow of the Prices of Beaver at Boston; and Capt.
Lithgow shall give you as much for it at Richmond, is it will fetch in Boston.

'I am glad to hear you approve of Capt. Lithgow, and Capt. Lane; I shall
always en deavour to keep good Officers in the several Truck-Houses.'


Then the Ratifications of the Treaties of Peace, made between Governor
Dummer, and the several Tribes of Eastern Indians; as also of the Treaties of
Peace made and concluded at Falnouth in Casco-Bay about five Years ago, being
distinctly read over and interpreted to the Indians, were signed by his
Excellency the Governor, the Commissioners of the Provinces of Nova Scotia and
New Hampshire, on the one Part; Passagueant, Col. Job, and the Indians of the
Norridgwalk Tribe of the other Part.

GOV'R: 'As we have now mutually ratified the former Treaties of Peace. I doubt
not but you will join with the English Governments-in keeping them inviolable;
and I hope Peace will continue between us as long as the Sun and Moon shall
endure.

Brethren,

'As a Mark of the Kindness which the Massachusetts Government has for you,
they are willing, in casse you incline to send any of your Children to Boston,
to be at the Charge of maintaining them there, and having them instructed in
the English Language, Reading, Writing, drawing Plans, and other Things proper
for their Education; and will return them to you whenever they or you shall
desire it: This may be a Means of strengthening and perpetuating Friendship
between us; which is the only Reason of my proposing it to you.

'As a further mark, Brethren, of the Kindness I bear you, I shall order Capt.
Lithgow to deliver you out of the Truck-House under his Care, the Value of Ten
Poundt old Tenor, for each Man who has met me here; and Five Pounds old Tenor
for each of your Squas here present, as soon as you shall return to Richmond.

'And in case your Tribe shall continue in Peace and Friendship with us, the
Government will in the Fall of the Year, order the Presents which they have
promised to give you Annually, during your good Behavior toward us, to be
delivered to you.

Brethren,

'I am sorry that you will not admit our Brother Ambrose to associate with you on
Account of his having engaged in the Service of the English against the French
in the late War between the two Crowns: But Ambrose shall lose nothing by that;
this Government will take him into their especial Protection and Maintenance:
The English will ever distinguish those who shall be their Friends among the
Indians, by their Kindnels and good Offices to them.'


Indians: It is Ambrose's own Fault that we don't let him associate with us: He
has turned off his own Squa, and carried off one that belongs to another
Indian.


Then Colonel Mascarene, speaking to the Indians, told them, 'That he
represented the Province of Nova Scotia at this Conference; and as a Token that
that Province had a sincere Desire to maintain Peace and live in Friendship
with them, he would in the Name of that Province give unto each Man of their
Tribe present at this Conference, the Value of Forty Shillings old Tenor, and
to each of their Squas the Value of Twenty Shillings; which Capt Lithgow would
deliver them out of the Truck-House at Richmond; and assured them if they would
go to Halifax, that that Government would receive and entertain them kindly.'

Also, Capt. Warner, in the Name of the Commissioners from the Government of
New Hampshire, and in behalf of that Government, told the Indians, 'That as a
Mark of the sincere Regard that Province had for them, they would give them the
same Present which was given them by the Province of Nova Scotia; and that
Capt. Lithgow would deliver it to them accordingly.'

Then the usual Healths were drank by his Excellency the Governor and pledged
by the Indians. After which,

Col. Job, addressing himself to the Governor said,

'Upon our return Home, we will spread the good News of Peace among our young
Men and the rest of our Tribe; and will endeavor that the Peace now concluded
shall continue as long as the Sun and Moon shall endure.' -- And having asked
Leave of his Excellency to suffer him in behalf of the rest, to falute his
Excellency and the Commissioners, etc. with a short Dance in the Indian Manner,
instantly performed the Salutation, and then withdrew with the other Indians.

WEDNESDAY July 3. 1754.
PRESENT, as before.

GOV'R: Brethren,

'I Was loath to dismiss you until I had the Opportunity of seeing you once
more.

'I expect that other Affairs of my Government will take up my whole Time; so
that this will be the last Time I shall meet you upon this Interview.

'I wish you a good Passage to Richmond; and hope on your return Home, you will
find your Squas and Papooses and the rest of your Tribe in good Health.

Brethren,

'I have one Thing more to say to you: As you pass from Town to Town great
Damage is done by your Dogs in killing Sheep, etc. you ought to muzzle them to
prevent these Mischiefs; and I hope you will do it.

'I told you the Massachusetts Government had made a Law to prevent the English
from Hunting on your Lands. -- You shall have it read and interpreted to you.

[Which was done accordingly.]

Brethren,

'I have one Word more to say to you before we part; and I would have you well
consider it: --

'If you live in Peace with the English, your Tribe may increase and multiply;
but if you should be unfortunately led into a War with us, your whole Tribe
will in the End probably be destroyed, and not a Man of it left to enjoy any of
your Lands.

'You well know that the Number of your Tribe does not now consist of more than
one third Part, it did of before the War with us in 1723 and 1724.

'I give you this Advice in the Sincerity of my Heart; and out of the Brotherly
Kindness, which the English bear to you: I have now done.'


Passagueant, Brother,

'It makes my Heart glad to hear you speak in this peaceable manner: I hope a
strong Peace is now settled between us.'


Then his Excellency drank the usual Healths; which were pledged by the
Indians; And after shaking Hands the Indians withdrew.

The Indians having desired, his Excellency would allow all their young Men and
Squas to entertain him with a Dance in the Afternoon, his Excellency consented,
and was present at it with the Commissioners and other Gentlemen.

N. B. After the Conference was ended, three of the Indian young Men came to
the Governor and desired they might be carried to Boston; which was
accordingly done: Also Capt. Lovel, one of their chief Men, desired leave of
the Governor to send two young Sons of his for Education to Boston: Which his
Excellency encouraged him to do.

AS soon as the Conference was finished, his Excellency ordered the Troops to
be embarked, and proceed directly to Kennebeck River: Accordingly they sailed
out of the Harbor for that Place on Thursday the Fourth of July; as did the
Indians likewise on the same Day by his Excellency's Orders.

THE Contents of the Letter herein before inserted from the Governor to Capt.
Bradbury, dated the 27th of June, having been communicated to the Pen^bscot
Indians, they immediately delegated Thirteen of their Chiefs to attend his
Excellency at Falmouth; who embarked at St. George's on board the Sloop which
was sent for them, and arrived at Falmouth on Friday the Fifth of July in the
Forenoon.

THE principal Matters, for which the Expedition was concerted, being settled
with the Norridgwalks, viz. The marching a Body of Troops through their
Country, -- the erecting of Forts higher up the River Kenneb^ck than that at
Richmond; -- and, the making new English Settlements upon it; -- The Way seemed
now clear for an Interview with the Penobscots.

There was now no colorable Pretense for the Penobscots to make Objections to
the Proceedings of the Government of the Massachusetts Bay, had they been ever
so strongly disposed to oppose them, after the Acquiescence of the Norridgwalk
Indians, who were the sole Proprietors of that Part of the River and Country in
question, which had not been sold by them to the English: His Excellency
therefore determined to speak with the Penobscots on the Day of their Arrival;
and accordingly ordered the Delegates to be conducted to him in the Afternoon,
to the beforementioned Place of Conference with the Norridgwalks. And, after
the usual Salutations,

Capt. Joseph (...) was sworn to interpret truly, what should pass between his
Excellency and the Indians of the Penobscot Tribe, and Mr. Ezekiel Price was
sworn to make true Entries of what should pass between his Excellency the
Governor and the Indians at this Conference.

Then the Governor spoke to the Indians, as follows,

Friends and Brethren of the Penobscot Tribe.

'I Hope I meet you in good Health; and that you left your Squas and Papooses
and the rest of our Brethron at St. George's well.

'In the last Winter I received a Letter from your Tribe, the Norridgwalks, and
Arss^gunticooks, pressing me to come to the Eastern Parts early this Summer in
Person, instead of sending Commissioners to you at the usual Time: And in
Compliance with your Request, I am now come here to renew the Covenant between
us.'

'The Honorable Colonel Mascarene, who is appointed a Commissioner in behalf
of the Province of Nova Scotia; and the three Honorable Gentlemen on my left
Hand, who are appointed Commissioners from Piscataqua, are come here likewise
to join with me in brightning the Chain.'

Brethren,

'Upon my Arrival at this Place, I found the Norridgwalks, in whose Name you
wrote to me before I left Boston; that they expected I should come to St.
George's to treat with you and them, and that they could not come to meet me at
Falmouth, had waited for me here some Days: And I was sorry that I did not find
Delegates from your Tribe here likewise, after having come so far to meet you
at your own Desire; but have been obliged to send another Letter, and wait for
you nine Days.

Brethren,

'The Endeavors of your Priest to prevent my sending Commissioners to treat
with you the last Fall, and to distribute the Government of the
Massachusetts-Bay's Presents to you, and raise Jealousies and a
Misunderstanding between us then, (of all which I appris'd you in my Letter by
those Commissioners,) leave me no Room to doubt now to whom I am to Impute your
late ill Behavior: But as I am persuaded that it proceeded from his bad
Counsel, and not from the genuine Sentiments of your own Hearts, and find by
your coming here, that you have considered better of the Matter; I shall pass
it over, in hopes that you will not offer this Government the like Affront for
the future.'

Here the Governor declared to them his Intention of sending a Body of
Soldiers to the Head of Kennebeck River, and across the Carrying-Place between
that and the River Cha^diere; and building Forts upon the River Kennebeck, in
the same Manner that be did to the Norridgwalk Indians: And proceeded thus,

'I have communicated all this to our Brethren the Norridgwalks, who are the
only Proprietors of all the Lands upon Kennebeck River, which have not been
conveyed and sold by them to the English; and they are so well satisfied with
the Sincerity of our Intentions, and the Uprightness of our Hearts toward them
in building this Magazine and strong House upon that River, that they have
assured me at my late Conference with them, that the English are welcome to
build Forts upon it, where they please.

'Tho' I well know, Brethren, that your Tribe never pretended to own any Lands
upon the River Kennebeck, yet as a Proof that I would hide nothing from you,
which I have in my Heart to do; I have acquainted you likewise with my Design.'

Brethren,

'I have been informed that a large Number of the French Indians will be sent
from Canada to commit Hostilities against us in the Time of Indian Harvest; and
that the French have promised to build Forts at Penobscot, and the Head of the
River St. Francois, for the Protection of those Indians, who shall be concerned
in it.'

'I have also been informed since my Arrival here, that the Norridgwalks have
sent two Belts of Wampum to your Tribe, desiring that you would join (...) and
the Canada Indians against the English; and that there was a Number of Canada
Indians now at Penobscot consulting upon that Matter: Likewise that the
Arssegunticook Indians had sent you a Belt of Wampum to invite you to join with
them in falling upon the English.

'Also that you have lately sent a Letter to the Governor of Canada,
pretending that the English are going to take your Lands from you, and desiring
the French to assist you against them.'

'As I have opened my Heart to you, so I expect that you will not hide from me
what you know concerning these Matters.

Brethren,

'In the Letter, which you sent me the last Winter, you express your
Satisfaction in Governor Dummer's Treaty, and promise to abide by it; and to
show you, the English Governments are determined to stand by it too, we are
ready to ratify and confirm it, together with the Treaty of Peace made at
Falmouth in Casce Bay, in 1749: But before we proceed to do that, I think it
necessary to hear what you say in Answer to what I have been informed of,
concerning the Designs of the French in Canada, their making or erecting
Settlements or Forts at Kennebeck, Penobscot, or elsewhere within the English
Territories: And as the Matters I have laid before you require your serious
Consideration, I shall wait until to Morrow Morning for your Answer.'

Ausong, (in behalf of the Indians of the Penobscot Tribe) addressing himself
to his Excellency, said,

Brother,

'We, who are present, are fully authorized to represent the Tribe of
Penobscots at this Conference; and in their Name salute your Excellency, and
the Gentlemen, who are with you.'

'We will consider of what your Excellency has now said to us; and, when we
meet you in the Morning, will speak to you upon it.'

His Excellency then drank King GEORGE's Health; and that Peace mignt continue
between the English and the Penobscots, which Healths the Indians pledged and
withdrew.

SATURDAY July 6. 1754.
PRESENT, His Excellency the GOVERNOR, the Commissioners, etc. and the Indians.

GOV'R: Brethren,

'I Am now ready to hear your Answer to what I said to you Yesterday.


Ausong, (in Behalf of the Indians of the Penobscot Tribe,) addressing the
Governor, spoke as follows:

Brother,

'WE rejoice that we have an Opportunity of seeing you in good Health.

'What your Excellency told us Yesterday concerning the Designs of the French,
is entirely new to us; -- We knew nothing of these Things before.

'What we know we will reveal to your Excellency, and open our Hearts freely to
you.

'We heard, a Belt of Wampum was sent to the Norridgwalk Indians; but never
heard that any was sent to our Tribe.

'The French have not built, neither are they building any Fort near us, as you
have been informed: Some of our Tribe went to Canada the last Spring, where
they were told it was all Peace between the English and French; and the French
advised them to keep Peace with the English, and do no Mischief.

Brother,

'Our Hearts are fixed on Peace -- As we are Friends and Brethren, we desire a
clear Path may be kept open between us.

'As you have opened your Hearts to us, so we will speak freely and inform you
of all we know.

'We represent all the Indians as far as Passamaquody.'

GOV'R: 'You say some of your Tribe went to Canada this Spring, and that they
told you it was all Peace, and advised you to keep Peace with the English --
How then came your Priest to tell you it was War, and endeavor to persuade you
to fall on the English?'


Here the Indians seemed to be in a general Surprise at what the Governor
said:

After which he proceeded,

Brethren,

'Are you certain, that no Letter was sent from your Tribe to the Governor of
Canada, in the Month of June last?

Ausong: 'We cannot write ourselves; we gave no orders to the Priest or any
other Person to write such a Letter for us, neither do we know of any such
Letter's being sent.'


GOV'R: Brethren,

'As you say, you know of no such Letter, I believe You; but I must inform you
that I have in my Hand the Copy of a Letter, which your Priest wrote in your
Name to the Governor of Canada; telling him that the English had a Design to
take your. Lands from you, and desiring you may be assisted from Canada; and
this Copy is of your Priest's own Hand Writing.'


Ausong: 'I assure your Excellency as I did before, we know nothing concerning
this Letter.'


GOV'R: 'I mention this that you may perceive the Artifices, which your Priest
uses, to stir up War between you and us.'


Ausong: 'I am a Man, my Heart is good, and what I now say is true.

'When we were at Boston, you told us if any thing bad was like to happen, it
should be discovered to us.

'If the Hatchet was like to be taken up, we would inform you of it -- It is
our full Intention to keep the Path between us open and clear.'


GOV'R: 'I shall always heartily join with you in keeping the Path free and
open.

'The Norridgwalks have ratified the two Treaties beforementioned, and if you
are ready to do the same; I have Instruments of Ratification prepared.'


Ausong: 'We have always stood by Governor Dummer's Treaty, and will never
depart from it; and are now willing to Ratify it.'


GOV'R: 'When you met me at St. George's about thirteen Years ago, you brought
with you a Counter-part of Governor Dummer's Treaty -- What is become of it?'


Indians: 'It is lost.'


Ausong: 'I have already told you, the French are not building any Forts on our
Lands; -- You may depend upon it, that what we have said is true.

We are not willing that either the French or English should build any Forts or
make any Settlements upon our River; and we have declared to the French that
they never shall incroach on our Lands.'


GOV'R: 'If the French should ever attempt to make any Encroachments on your
Lands, give us Notice of it; and we will come to your Assistance, and help you
to drive them off: Your Lands are within King GEORGE's Territories, and under
his Protection.'


Then his Excellency ordered the Ratifications of the Treaty made by Lieut.
Governor Dummer, and that concluded in 1749, with the Eastern Indians, to be
distinctly read and interpreted to the Penobscots: Which being done; the
Governor asked them if they were ready to sign them.

Indians: We are ready.


Then the same were interchangeably signed.

His Excellency then acquainted the Indians of the Law passed by this
Government forbidding the English to bunt on their Lands; and told them that be
would endeavor that every Person who offended against that Act should be
punished; and assured them that Justice should be done them respecting their
Trade in the same Manner as he did to the Norridgwalks: And then proceeded thus,

Brethren,

'I would speak to you concerning the Behavior of the Arssegunticooks.

'By the two Treaties beforementioned it is agreed, That if any real or
supposed Wrong should happen to be done by the English or Indians to either
Party, no private Revenge should be taken, but Application made to the King's
Government to have the same redressed in a Course of Justice: And it is further
engaged by the Indians; That if any of your Tribes of Indians should break
these Treaties, you would join your young Men with ours, and reduce such
Indians to Reason.

'The Arssegunticook Indians were present the last Year at the Ratification of
those Treaties, agreed to them, and received the Governments Presents.'

Here his Excellency related the Behavior of the Arssegunticooks, in the same
Manner as he did to the Norridgwalk Indians: And proceeded,

Brethren,

'Here are present three Honorable Gentlemen commissioned from the Government
of Piscataqua, who are come to meet the Arssegunticook Indians, in order to
have the Mischiefs committed on both Sides amicably redressed, and to wipe off
the Blood that has been spilt; but those Indians will not come to meet them.

'Thus you see how these Indians have behaved toward the English; and
notwithstanding they signed the Ratifications of the Treaties afore-mentioned
the last Year, and received the Governments Presents, and joined with you in
desiring me to meet them early this Year to treat with them; yet they refuse to
come to meet me: And a Party of that Tribe is now lurking in the Neighborhood
of Richmond, who declare they will have further Satisfaction for the Blood of
the two Indians killed by the English, the Year before last.

Wherefore, to prevent any more Bloodshed, I must now call upon you to join
your young Men with ours in reducing these Indians to Reason.'

Indians: 'What you say is Right.'


GOV'R: 'Will you join your young Men with ours; and oblige these Indians to
submit to Reason?


Indians: 'We don't like the Behavior of the Arssegunticooks; we will use our
utmost Endeavors to prevent these Indians doing any more Mischief.


Ausong: 'Soon after my return Home I intend to set out for Canada; and will
then speak to these Indians and persuade them to live in Peace with the
English.'


GOV'R: 'I shall depend upon your preventing them from doing any further
Mischief; if you do not, I must insist upon your joining your young Men with
ours, to reduce them to Reason.

'I have now done speaking.'


Ausong: 'We thank your Excellency for your kind Treatment of us: It is a great
Satisfaction that you have opened your Heart so freely to us: It will be very
grateful to all our Tribe; and we shall endeavor still more and more to keep
the Covenant between us inviolable, and preserve the Friendship of the English.'


Then the Governor made them the same Offer in Behalf of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay that he did to the Norridgwalks, for maintaining and
educating any of their Children which they should send to Boston.

He acquainted them also, That he should order Capt. Bradbury to give each of
the Delegates a Present of the Value of Ten Pounds old Tenor, out of the Truck
House at St. George's upon their Return thither: As did the Commissioners from
the Provinces of Nova Scotia and New Hampshire, That they had desired Capt.
Bradbury to make them a Present of Forty Shillings old Tenor a-peice on Behalf
of each of their respective Provinces.

The Governor then assured them that the Government of the Massachusetts Bay,
would make their whole Tribe the annual Present in the Fall, which had been
promised them upon their maintaining Peace and Friendship with the English.

After which the Indians desired leave to entertain the Governor, and
Commissioners and other Gentlemen with a Dance in the Afternoon, which they did.

The Dance being ended, one of the Delegates asked the Governor to permit him
to bring his Son next Spring to Boston, and leave him there for Education: And
the Day following two more of them desired his Excellency to send them to
Boston for some Time, all which the Governor granted.

On Sunday the 7th of July, the Indians came in Procession from on Board their
Sloop to the Meeting House, and attended Divine Service Morning and Afternoon.

And on Monday the 8th of July, set sail to return to St. George's River.

Attest'r Ezekiel Price, Cler.


