A SERMON. Preached on OCCASION of the late TREATY Held in ALBANY, by his
HONOR Our Lieutenant Governor, With the INDIAN NATIONS, And the Congress of
Commissioners, From several Governments in these BRITISH COLONIES.

By Theodorus Frielinghuysen, M. A. Pastor of the Reformed Dutch Church, in the
Place aforesaid.

Turn us again, O God; and cause thy Face to shine, and we shall be saved.
NEW YORK: Printed and Sold, by J. PARKER, and W. WEYMAN, at the New
Printing-Office in Beaver-Street, MDCCLIV.

Candid Reader,
ALTHOUGH by Providence it be allotted to me, for the most Part, to preach the
Word of God in the Dutch Tongue, notwithstanding it does sometimes happen, that
it is required of me to do it in English. -- As it is the Duty of every
faithful Pastor, to lay Hold on all Occasions that appear in any wise conducive
to promote Piety and real Religion among Mankind, without any Distinction of
what People, Language or Nation soever: I would not neglect, in the late War,
when I had on Lord's Days preached twice in Dutch to my own Flock, to preach a
third Sermon in English, to the Companies of Soldiers intended to defend us
against the Assaults of the Enemy, who at that Time were without Urim or
Thummim, without Priest or Levite, to show them the Way of the Lord.

The New England Gentlemen, as they have yet something left of the Religion of
their pious and venerable Ancestors, were the Persons who at that Time pressed
me to what is mentioned, by their Remonstrances, that they, desiring to hear
God's Word, and not understanding the Dutch Tongue, appealed to my Conscience,
whether, as Providence had so ordered, that I had learnt something of the
English, I could suffer them to be destitute of the Means of Grace, as Sheep
that have no Shepherd?

Gentlemen, from the same Quarters of our Land, were they, who, at the (...)
TREATY and CONGRESS, desired me to preach in English in our Church: (...) the
following is one of the Sermons I delivered on that Occasion; (...) greater
Number of Gentlemen of Note and Distinction in the (...) had been seen in it
before. --

Should I say, (...) my Friends desired me to have it printed, it might serve
for an (...) that is often made: But I hope I shall be the more excusable, when
(...) the tender Concern for my Native Land, now in a critical (...), makes me
wish abler Men among my Reverend Brethren, of more Years and superior Talents,
may do effectually, and to better Purpose, what I, though endeavoring, am not
able to do; that is, to make the Inhabitants of our Land heartily sensible we
stand in much Need of a Reformation; and that the Dispensations of God's
Providence, do now call us aloud thereunto. --

It will perhaps be said, I might have contributed my Mite in the Dutch Tongue
and, that it seems to savor of Ostentation in a Dutch Clergyman, to appear in
Public in English. -- But I hope all sensible and intelligent Persons will be
satisfied, by observing, there is scarce a Printer in the (...) of the World,
who would care to print a Sermon in Dutch: And, were it printed, such is the
State of Retrogradation of the Dutch Tongue, in these Colonies, that many even
of our own Church, would not be able to understand it. Besides, I have the
Honor and Happiness of being an Englishman born; and though I have received
Holy Orders in the Dutch Church, am so far from Aversion to the English Tongue,
that I am of Opinion it has several Beauties and Advantages, many other
Languages are incapable of: And I do moreover, claim the Liberty of a Freeborn
Englishman, especially of an American, in my Sphere, and consistent with my
Office, to speak, to preach, to write, and to act in every Thing, as I, in my
own Conscience, am convinced (...) likely to do the most Good. -- As it is not
the Applause of Men I (...), so do I not fear their Censure: the Subject I
treat on, is not calculated to obtain the one, and forbids me to shun the
other. I shall add no more, save my ardent and most humble Prayers to God, That
real Religion, may find a Dwelling Place in our Land, knowing its Happiness,
Safety and Prosperity to depend thereon. --

As to any typographical Errors that may creep in, Gentle Reader, the Author
hopes he will be excused; whereas he lives at such a Distance from the Press,
that it cannot fall under his Cognizance. --

A SERMON.
JEREMIAH XVIII. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, Verses. At what Instant I shall speak
concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up and to pull down,
and to destroy it:
If that Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their Evil, I will
repent of the Evil I thought to do undo them.
And at what Instant I speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to
build and to plant it: If it do Evil in my Sight, that it obey not my Voice,
then I will repent of the Good wherewith I said I would benefit them.
Now therefore go to, speak to the Men of Judah, and to the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, Thus says the Lord, Behold I frame Evil against you, and devise a
Device against you: Return ye now every One from his evil Way, and make your
Ways and your Doings good. --

My dear Hearers, Grace, Mercy and Peace, be multiplied unto you, now and for
evermore:
AS a merciful God, the Creator, and supreme Governor of the Universe, ever
regards the Inhabitants of this earthly Globe, with an Eye of Pity and
Compassion; so does he, for the most Part, give timely Notice of those
Judgments he intends to inflict on guilty Mortals; to the End, that by
Repentance his Ire may be appeased, or his Chastisements be the more just and
equitable. -- Would I recall former Ages, and set before you the State of Man's
Innocence, in the happy Eden: Know ye not God gave our first Parents to
understand what would be the dreadful Consequences of their Transgression: What
Ruin, what Destruction, what Misery it would enhance upon themselves and their
Progeny? Do ye not think God sent his holy Angels, those celestial Ministers,
of which there are Thousands of Thousands before his Throne, to forewarn the
human Pair of their Danger, on Account of the Fall of Satan, with his apostate
Crew? Or if this be Matter of Doubt to you, give me Leave to speak of Enoch,
the Seventh from Adam, who prophesied; Behold the Lord comes with Ten
Thousands of his Saints, to execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that
are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly Deeds* which they have ungodly
committed; and of all their hard Speeches, which ungodly Sinners have spoken
against him. Did thou not, O Enoch, before the Gates of Heaven were expanded
unto thee, before exulting Spirits escorted thee above yonder sparkling Orbs,
exhort thy Cotemporaries? Ye Men of Renown, ye bulky Giants, think not Heaven
is regardless of you, or your Thoughts, Words and Deeds: As ye hunt after Men,
your own Flesh and Blood, so shall God Almighty pursue and overtake you. I see!
O I see, his Judgments already a coming! Heaven begins to lour; look how the
celestial Luminaries begin to contract a sad and gloomy Aspect, lurid and dim;
frowning a Tempest of Vengeance: Repent therefore, or you are lost, ye huge
Mortals! -- Happy, had they harkened unto him! But whilst they fall upon him,
God takes him away: Blessed Messengers, snatch him to milder Climes, to happier
and more hospitable Regions! -- And what shall I say of thee, O Noah, thou
Preacher of Righteousness; what Scoffs, what Sneers, what Revilings have thou
suffered of thy Fellow Laborers? Did not Men reproach both thee and thy Ark,
Madman, what meanest then by this Wre^k; though afterward, in vain, they
stretched out their Arms to Heaven, to be in it? Elijah the Prophet, was he not
zealous for his God; and did he not protest against the Worshippers of Baal?
And thou Jonah, Son of Amittai, wast thou not constrained to preach and to cry
against Nineveh, that great City, because her Wickedness was come up before God
in Heaven, though unto thee a hard Task; unto them, of blessed Consequence, and
salutary Effect?

In this Manner, is also Jeremiah, a Prophet, who saw the Visions of the
Almighty, sent to Israel, an untoward and stiff necked People, to reclaim them
from their Backslidings and Prevarications, to the Service of Jehovah, the
eternal and most High. Hereunto he was formed in the Womb; hereunto he was
sanctified from his Infancy: The Charge seemed to him too great; the Burden
appeared to him too weighty for his juvinile Shoulders. Ah! Lord, said he,
behold I cannot speak, for I am a Youth. Who is sufficient for these Things? It
is a Work that, without the corroborating Influences of thy Holy Spirit,
without Aid and Succor from above, would ^^nk beneath its Weight, one of the
mighty Cherubim. But God, with whom is the Residue of the Spirit, inspires him
with Life and Courage, and Magnanimity of Soul: And having in the preceding
Chapter, commanded him to prophesy, concerning Judah's Captivity, shows him in
this, the absolute Power with which God is invested in disposing of Nations,
under the Type of a Potter, from thence to exhort Israel to return unto the
Lord, from whom they were apostatized most ungratefully.

So that the Words of my Text contains this important Truth; That as sincere
Penitence is a Means of averting an imminent and denounced Evil, from a Nation
or People; so Impiety and Irreligion is the Way to forego all the good
Blessings, which otherwise might have been expected: And that to declare this,
is the Province of God's faithful Servants, in order to reclaim vicious Mortals
from sinning against God, to a Course of real Religion and Piety.

The Fitness and Propriety of this Matter to be now treated upon, in our
present Situation of Affairs, I hope you will observe, my sensible and
intelligent Hearers; whereas the present Time is a critical Juncture, in which
we are to withstand, resist, and oppose our ambitious rivalling Neighbors, in
their Encroachments upon our Borders.

O Lord, do thou cleanse us from our Dross; do thou send a Spirit of genuine
Repentance among us: -- Should thou search us as Jerusalem, with Candles, our
Backslidings would appear too glaringly. -- Heal us, O Lord, and we shall be
healed; save us, and we shall be saved. --

In order to treat upon this Matter, I shall, as to the Explication, take
Notice of these three Things.

First, That when God threatens a Nation by an imminent Evil to its
Destruction, true Repentance is a Means to avert the Evil, and to escape and
avoid the impending and denounced Ruin.

Secondly, That when God promises Blessings to a Nation; Irreligion, Impiety
and Ungodliness is a Means to ma^r and forego all those Blessings.

Thirdly, That it is the indispensible Duty of God's faithful Servants, to
declare this, in order to reclaim vicious Mortals from their wicked Way, unto
the Fear and Service of the Lord.

As to the first: At what Instant, says the Lord, I shall speak concerning a
Nation, and concerning a Kingdom; to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy
it: I conceive, a Nation, a Kingdom, a People upon this Terraqueous Globe,
blessed by the beneign Deity, with the Enjoyment of those Comforts which the
State of Man's Pilgrimage in this miserable World affords; as Health, Peace and
Plenty, Honor, Glory, Empire, and Puissance: But which Nation, forgetful of
the bounteous Benefactor from whom they derive these Blessings, violates and
contemns his Laws, despises his Ordinances, and lives in Impiety and
Irreligion, -- which draws over this Nation a gloomy Cloud, fraught with
Heaven's Artillery, big with Indignation from on High; a portentous Interval,
an awful Moment, and a dreadful Instant, wherein God denounces his Punishments
against a sinful People, threatening to destroy them in a Storm of Vengeance.

And I take thee, O Israel, to be this Nation in particular: Thy God and thy
Father's God led thee forth, by a mighty Hand and a strong Arm, out of Egypt,
the Place of thy Servitude, of thy ignominious Slavery; and placed thee in the
Land of Canaan, flowing with Milk and Honey. -- Ye Canaanites, ye ^^bu^ites, ye
Pharisites, Amorites, Hevites, and Amalekites, ye were an Abomination unto the
Lord, because you worshipped accursed Idols, the Workmanship of the Hands of
Men, if not Devils; wherefore the God of Heaven and Earth, who is to be
worshipped in Spirit and in Truth, cast you out. Thou Sun stood'st still in
Gibea, and thou Moon in the Valley of Adjalon, in the Day when God gave Israel
Victory over their Enemies. How were for Israel, the Waters of the River Jordan
divided asunder: How did the Walls of Jericho fall of their own accord! Ye ^led
for Fear, O ye Nations of Palestine, to the Isles beyond the Sea, even to the
British Isles, leaving behind you Monuments of your Terror, Pillars with this
Inscription, -- "We fly from the Face of Joshua." Had thou, O Israel, not
forsaken the Lord how would he have established thee, even as Mount Sion, for
ever? -- But, alas! you soon wallowed in all the Abominations of these
Heathens; worshipping their Gods, the Balims, the Astaroths, the Melechets of
the Heavens; the Succoth Ben^thes; and even offered up your Offspring to
Moloch, that horrid Idol, that execrable Abomination: -- Wherefore the Lord had
spoken against thee, in an awful Instant, in a dreadful portentous Interval, to
pluck thee up as a Tree that is torn up by a Whirlwind, Root and Branch; to
pull thee down as a Building demolished and laid in total Ruin, so that not one
Stone be left upon the other; and to destroy thee as those who perish from the
Face of the Earth: And had it not been that the Shiloh, unto whom the gathering
of the Nations should be, was to come forth from thee; and for the Sake of the
Remnant that is to be saved, you had been made as Sodom and Gomorrha, as Admah
and S^^oim: Nay, the Remembrance of you had been blotted out from among the
Children of Men.

The Lord has not left himself without a Witness toward thee: He has
forewarned thee Times and Ways past Enumeration: -- He has commanded, he has
charged you to return unto him, in order to escape Subversion, Destruction and
Desolation on Earth in this, and the Damnation of Hell in the other World.

Concerning a Nation and Kingdom, does the Lord speak by his holy Angels, his
swift Messengers, sending them to forewarn and rebuke a sinful People. Remember
the Angel at Bochim, who upbraided you with your Disobedience, O Israel, in
such a tender Manner, that you wept for Grief, and lifted up your Voices for
Compunction of Heart. Judge. II. 1, 5. Can Israel ever forget the Angel, who, in
David's Reign stood with an outstretched Sword, as a Flame of Fire, over
Jeru^alem, threatening to destroy her by Pestilence? The Assyrians, how was
their Pride mortified, when an Angel of the Lord in one Night, smote an Hundred
and Eighty five Thousand of them? Methinks I hear the Cry, the doleful Cry of
the Egyptians, when in the Morning they found all their Firstborn slain by
Angels.

The Lord does speak concerning a Nation, a Kingdom and People, by Signs and
Tokens in the Heavens; by Comets and terrifying Stars, foreboding dreadful
Calamities, doleful Afflictions and sore Chastisements. There are Signs in the
Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars; and upon the Earth, Distress of
Nations, with Perplexity; the Sea and the Waves roaring; Men's Hearts failing
them for (...) and for looking after those Things which are coming on the
Earth; for the Powers of Heaven shall be shaken.

As when to warn proud Cities War appears,
Waged in the troubled Sky, and Armies rush
To Battle in the Clouds, before each Van
Prick forth the ^^ry Knights, and couch their Spears
Till thickest Legions close; with Feats of Arms,
From either End of Heaven the Welkin burns. --
What else were those Armies seen in the Sky? What else that Comet which so
long h^ng over Jerusalem, before her total Subversion, by Titus Vespasian? The
Comet which appeared in the Beginning of the late War, has that been seen in
vain? I saw this Comet while I prosecuted my Studies in the University of
Utrecht, where it afforded Matter of much Disputation to the Learned in that
famous Academy: some asserting it to be only the superstitious Opinion of the
ignorant Vulgar, to believe Comets foreboding any Thing; others pleading they
did forebode: And, truly, when we reflect on what has happened in Europe, and
in America, soon after the Appearance of this Comet, I think it may let us into
the Truth of the Matter.

By afflictive Dispensations of Providence does the Lord speak unto the
Nations, threatening them Destruction, if they repent not. -- What Famines, what
Earthquakes, what Deluges and Inundations; what Pestilences and malignant
Diseases has not a sinful World been chastised with? And what is worse than
all these, what Bloodshed, what Slaughter and Massacre, by War and Persecution,
has often rendered this terraqueous Globe an A^^ldama, reeking with tipid Gore,
and gluttoned with human Carnage! King David, wisely and piously, chose to fall
into the immediate Hand of God, rather than into those of Men; and yet all
these are God's Warning Voice to the Nations, that when his Judgments are upon
the Earth, its Inhabitants may learn Righteousness.

Unto you, O Nations, does the Lord speak by his Faithful Servants; his
Prophets, his Priests, his Evangelists; his Apostles, his Pastors and Teachers.
Wonders and Miracles have they done for your Conversion unto God: Heaven and
Earth, God and all his Saints, have they called to Witness over you, that they
warned you of your Danger. -- Whether ye now hear, or whether ye forbear, you
shall know there have been Prophets among you.

If now this Nation turn from their Evil, says the Lord, I will repent of the
Evil I thought to do unto them. What is it then, O sinful Nation, the Lord
requires of thee? Is it not Repentance? Is it not to turn from your Evil?

Turning from Evil or Repentance, may be taken in Relation to a Nation in
general, and to an individual Person in particular. The Repentance of a Nation
in general, is, when a Nation believing God's Threatenings, and humbling
themselves before him by Confession of Sin, by Fasting and Prayer, and by other
Actions of Humiliation, endeavor a Reformation from the Vices they were guilty
of, and to live in a Course of opposite Virtues. -- Which general Repentance,
it is to be hoped, in some may be sincere, and of a genuine Sort; but is to be
seared, that in many, and the greatest Part, it is only surperficial, and
merely external, not proceeding from a good internal Principle of Renovation
and Regeneration: -- Notwithstanding it is often so pleasing in the Sight of
God, that he thereon averts a denounced Evil, and for the present, spares a
People he had threatened with Destruction. -- I doubt not, O Ninevites, but your
Repentance was, by some of you, genuine, and of a salutary Nature; though at
the same Time, I fear that, with the greatest Part, it was but like the Morning
Cloud, and like the early Dew which passes away.

This Turning from Evil, implies in it two Things; A forsaking of an evil Way,
and a coming to a good One.

From an evil Way the Children of Men cannot turn, unless they see that evil
Way: For Example, a Person who has mistaken his Way, must he not be made
sensible of his Error, before he will endeavor to rectify his Mistake? Yonder
I see a Stranger in this our City, who thinks he is going to Church; but
behold, the Courthouse or the Prison brings him up: He begins first to doubt,
whether he be right or not; then he believes he was wrong, so he turns back to
the Road which leads to the Church. He who sails down a River, in order to come
to a City that is situated from him up the River, unless he sees himself
steering the wrong Course, and rectifies his Mistake, will never arrive at the
intended Place. So a Person who becomes really penitent, and is bent on
forsaking his Evil; his Eyes are opened to see his miserable Situation in an
unrenewed State; his Sins are set before him in all their aggravating
Circumstances and most heinous Nature, for which he loathes and abhors himself.

His Conscience is then awakned, and lashed with the Curses of God's Holy Law*
so that thou, O Sinner, do complain within thyself,

O Conscience, into what Abyss of Fears
And Horrors have thou driven me: out of which
I find no Way, from deep to deeper plunged!
Now do I hear thee plead Guilty, confessing with Shame and Confusion of Face,
and Contrition of Heart: Against thee, against thee only have I sinned, O Lord,
and done Evil in thy Sight: That thou might be justified when thou speak,
and be clear when thou judge. Nevertheless, are earnest, humble, and fervent
Prayers sent up to Heaven; Be merciful, O God, to me a Sinner! what shall I do
to be saved? All the Ordinances and Means of Salvation are now attended unto;
in public Worship do thou wait at the Pool of Beth^sda; in thy Closet thou
bendest thy Knees to the Eternal.

Tell me, convinced Sinner, can now thy own Righteousness satisfy thee? Are not
your best Performances an unclean Thing, and all your Righteousness as filthy
Rags? Do they not all fade as a Leaf, and your Iniquities, like the Wind, take
you away? Are not your Prayers and Devotions polluted with Sin, and yourselves
struck with loathsome Leprosy, from the Crown of the Head unto the Sole of the
Feet? Can you any more change yourselves, than the Ethiopian can change his
Skin, or a Leopard his Spots?

Submit then, penitent Souls, submit yourselves to the Righteousness, Justice
and Sovereignty of God, acknowledging that even Tears from such Eyes might be
offensive, and Prayers from such Lips abominable, composing yourselves to lay
the Hand upon the Mouth and be silent, should God inflict the most dreadful
Doom that can be executed; not as the accursed of God, uttering Blasphemies
against Heaven, but as relenting Lovers of the Deity resolve --

What better can we do, than to the Place
Repairing where he judged us, prostrate fall
Before him reverent, and there confess
Humbly our Faults, and Pardon beg, with Tears
Watering the Ground, and with our Sighs the Air
Frequenting, sent from Hearts contrite, in Sign
Of Sorrow unfeigned, and Humiliation meek. --
Lord Jesus, says the humbled Soul, here is a miserable Sinner, who has
deserved Hell and Destruction, throws himself at thy Feet: Nothing have I to
plead, save Mercy; and if Mercy do not save me I am lost; and should I perish,
thou art just; of this my Heart and Conscience are incontestible Witnesses; But
if I die, let me die imploring thy Grace and Mercy, thy Pardon and Favor.

O now is the Way of Salvation laid open to a God-seeing Soul! Jesus is both
able and willing to save to the uttermost. The atoning Blood of the immaculate
Lamb of God, has Merits commensurate with the Glories of the Divinity. O! a
Discovery this, surpassing the Powers of Utterance! Never was a condemned
Malefactor more affected by a Proclamation of Pardon, than the humbled Soul by
the Tender of Salvation, through Jesus Christ. -- Then do they receive him by
Faith, as the Lord their Righteousness -- Blessed Jesus, (wrapped up in an Ecstasy
of Devotion, the Soul exclaims,) do thou call me unto thee! Will thou have
Mercy on me! I come, I accept thy gracious Offer, and surrender myself to be
thy eternal Slave; thou have redeemed me from Death and Destruction; thou have
raised me to Life everlasting, full of Glory: And therefore, my Life, and my
all, my Soul and Body is thine for ever; I say it with my Mouth; I attest it
with my Heart; I sign it with my Hand, and am willing to seal it with my Blood.

And as a sincere Penitent, thus is delivered out of his sinful State, so is he
also brought over to a Way of Sanctity and Holiness. -- The Understanding
becomes enlightened; the Will sanctified; the Conscience rectified: -- And is it
not absolutely necessary, that a good Tree produce good Fruit? Must not a
Fountain of living Water send forth its Silver Streams? Or is it possible that
a good Tree planted in the Garden of God, should bring forth Apples of Sodom,
or a Vine of S^on, the Clusters of Gomorrah!

Fit and just, yea, necessary is it therefore, that sincere Converts, as the
King's Daughter, become all glorious within; their Clothing is of wrought
Gold: -- As they now are Worshippers of the Deity, in Spirit and in Truth; so
are they Partakers of the Blessedness of the Man, who walks not in the
Council of the Ungodly, nor ^^andeth in the Way of Sinners, nor sits in the
Seat of the Scornful* Whose Delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law
does he meditate Day and Night: Who shall be like a Tree planted by the Rivers
of Water, that brings forth his Fruit in his Season; his Leaf also shall not
wither, and whatsoever he does shall prosper.

When a Nation thus turns from their Evil, the Lord will repent of the Evil he
thought to do unto them. -- As forsaking God is the Cause of Destruction, so
would returning unto him, be a Means to avoid the Evil that was denounced; in
which Respect God is said to repent: -- Not as if he altered his eternal high
Decree; no, he is an immutable God, and his Council shall stand firm for ever;
and he does whatsoever pleases him: -- So that this Repentance in God, is to
be understood in a Manner, becoming the Supreme Being; that is, with Relation
to the external Dispensations of his Providence, wherein he acts thus, That,
when a Nation or People is become exceeding sinful, he denounces his Judgments
against it, threatening it with Destruction; but upon Condition, they continue
in their Disobedience and Impiety: Which Condition is sometimes more openly
expressed, and sometimes more secretly understood. -- Ye Inhabitants of
Nineveh, that great City, you exhibit us an Example of God's Dealings with the
Children of Men. -- Jonah the Prophet, was commissioned from Heaven to declare
your Destruction: He cried, and said, Yet Forty Days, and Nineveh shall be
overthrown. But behold, upon your Repentance, though your Wickedness was come
up before God in Heaven, the Lord spared you. -- When you believed God, and
proclaimed a Fast, putting on Sackcloth, from the greatest, even unto the least
of you: When your King, on hearing the Word of the Lord, rose from his Throne,
laid his royal Robe from him, and covered himself with Sackcloth, and sat in
Ashes; saying, Let Man and Beast fast, let them be covered with Sackcloth, and
cry mightily unto God; yea, let them turn every one from his evil Way, and from
the Violence that is in their Hands: Who can tell if God will turn and repent,
and turn away from his fierce Anger, that we perish not? Then God saw your
Works, that you turned from your evil Way; and God repented of the Evil that he
had said he would do unto you, and did it not. -- O amazing Condescension of
the Great God; be astonished at it, O Heavens! that on Repentance of his
miserable sinful Creatures, such are the Bowels of his tender Compassion, he is
said himself to repent!

And as true as this is, no less evident is the second Thing, which is to be
considered in the Text: That when God promises Blessings to a Nation, Kingdom
or People. Irreligion, Impiety and Ungodliness, is a Means to mar and forego
all those Blessings, and to change them into a Curse: For at what Instant,
says the Lord, I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to
build and to plant it: If it do Evil in my Sight, that it obey not my Voice,
then I will repent of the Good wherewith I said I would benefit them.

Blessed is the Instant, happy the Conjuncture when auspicious Heaven deigns to
smile on a favorite Nation, its peculiar Darling: Then are holy Angels a
tutelar Safeguard in the Midst of it, and all around its Borders; evil Spirits,
who wander to and fro, up and down the Earth, seeking whom they may destroy,
are restrained. The planetary Regions shed forth benign Influences, to foster
and fructify those Quarters of the Earth which are allotted to its Heritage: It
multiplies and branches out into Ten Thousands Millions and Myriads; Health,
Wealth, Honor and Grandeur, dwell every where within its far and wide extended
Limits; Peace and Plenty find a palladian Habitation within its Boundaries. --
The Rulers are noble, great, wise and good Men, sincere Worshippers of the
Deity; the People are loyal, honest, frugal, benevolent, pious, fearing God,
and eschewing Evil: They become honorable to their Neighbors, worthy to their
Allies, formidable to their Enemies, lovely to their God. --

And if this were not enough, God speaks, to build and to plant; to establish,
to prosper, and to bless them yet more and more, by increasing their Happiness,
and by rendering it lasting and durable. Nor would the Portion of an Esau, who
said, I have much, be their chief Good or sole Comfort; but the Blessing of
Jacob, who could say, I have all, should crown their Felicity. -- Godliness
with Contentment, is great Gain; it is profitable unto all Things, having
Promise of the Life that now is, and of that which is to come. -- And that I
may sum up the Whole; every Thing would conspire to render them, (if our
Pilgrim State on Earth, while we wade through a tempestuous Gulf, a Chaos of
Vanity of Vanities, for all below is Vanity, says the Preacher; will allow
this Epithet,) A HAPPY PEOPLE, whose very Adversities and Afflictions would
tend to their Good. --

Happy, but for so happy ill secured
Long to continue. --
O now for that warning Voice, Woe to the Inhabitants on Earth! For if they do
Evil in his Sight, who made them what they are; if they obey not the Voice of
him who spoke the Universe into Being and Existence for ever, overruling all,
according to his eternal Decree and high Behest; then is the Scene most sadly
changed: A dreadful Gloom overshadows them, foreboding that Heaven's Providence
shall pursue other Measures with an exceeding sinful Nation, than it did with a
People that had the Fear of God before their Eyes, and his Greatness upon their
Hearts. -- His Angels are now armed with flaming Swords against them: Evil and
impure Spirits are let loose upon them. -- The Firmament is as Brass, and the
Earth as Iron. -- Famines, Plagues, Deaths, Wars, Confusions, Corruptions,
together with all the other horrid Train of Sin and dire Retinue of Vice,
render the Contrast of their prior State, a bitter Remembrance of Happiness
lo^t, and Misery got. As a Nation, People or Kingdom, is exalted, and made to
prosper, by Virtue, Piety and real Religion; so does always, in its retrograde
State, Sin, Vice, Ungodliness, Impiety, Irreligion and Corruption, lead the Van
before its Perdition; for,

-- In Plain Truth,
Virtue and Vice are Empire's Life and Death. --
Thus Empires carry in them their own Bane,
And in a fatal Circle ever run
From virtuous Industry and Valor, first
To Wealth and Conquest; next to Luxury;
And then to ^oul Corruption; bloted Morals,
Faction and Anarchy, a horrid Train!
Till at the last they rush by their own Weight. --
This Nation, this Kingdom and People, artthou again, O Israel: -- Remember
what blessed Promises the Lord made unto Abraham thy Father; how he took him by
the Hand leading him abroad, under the open Canopy of Heaven, and said, Look
upwards, and behold th^s;e glittering Stars* (...) numerous shall thy S^e^ be
(...) they are to you innumerable: What I tell thee is more certain than the
Ordinance which keeps the celestial (...) their Orbits, that they burst not
forth from their Atmospheres: And which is still more than all this, many of
thy Offspring shall, after the Renovation and Restoration of all Things, be
taken up above yonder Stars. -- According to this Pro^^^^se, (for not one of
the good Words the Lord has spoken, fal^s unaccomplish'd upon the Ground,) ye
were multiplied: -- The Lord brought you out of Egypt, doing Wonders and
Miracles; the Waters fled before you, together with the Nations: Bread from
Heaven did you eat; Water out of the Rock did you drink: He planted you in
Canaan, under the happy Hierarchy, Theocracy, and Monarchy of Heaven: He built
you a sacred Temple; He gave you just, holy and good Laws; He commanded you to
be holy as he is holy: He forbid you, he charged you not to walk in the Way of
the Heathen, not to serve their Gods, their accursed Idols; not to bow down and
worship their Pagods; not to pollute yourselves with their Abominations; -- but
to demolish them. -- Oh! that ye had harkened unto his Voice! But, alas! you
did Evil in his Sight; you wallowed in all the Abominations of the Heathens:
And therefore it repented the Lord of the Good wherewith he said he would
benefit you. He let the Heathen annoy you from Time to Time: The Nations of the
North he sent upon you, to destroy, to lay waste, and to lead Captive: And at
last, the People of the West completed your Destruction: -- Which shall last,
until ye, together with the Nations, rejoice in the Faith and Salvation of the
Messiah, when the Lord will be merciful unto his Land, and to his People.

Under the Parable of the Vineyard, the Lord shows the Justice of those his
Judgments, in the Vth Chapter of Isaiah's Prophesies. Now will I sing to my
well beloved, a Song of my Beloved, touching his Vineyard. My well beloved has
a Vineyard in a very fruitful Hill: And he fenced it, and gathered out the
Stones thereof, and planted it with the choicest Vine, and built a Tower in the
Midst of it, and also made a Wine Press therein: And he looked that it should
bring forth Grapes, and it brought forth wild Grapes. And now, O Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and Men of Judah, judge, I pray you, betwixt me and my Vineyard.
What could have been done more to my Vineyard that I have not done? Wherefore
when I looked that it should bring forth Grapes, brought it forth wild Grapes?
And now go to* I will tell you what I will do to my Vineyard; I will take away
the Hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up: And break down the Wall thereof,
and it shall be trodden down. And I will lay it was^e: I^ shall not be pruned,
nor dug, but there shall come up Briars and Thorns: I will also command the
Clouds, that they rain no Rain upon it: For the Vineyard of the Lord of He^ts
is the House of Israel, and the Men of Judah his pleas^nt Plant: And he looked
for Judgment, but behold Oppression; for Righteousness, but behold a Cry. --

The Lord Christ also by the same Parable of a Vineyard, which by the Owner was
let out to Husbandmen, who killed his Servants, and his only Son, when he sent
for his Hire; and by the Simile of a Fig-(...), unto which the Planter had done
all he could, which, notwithstanding, brought forth no Fruit, and was there^o^^
after much Forbearance and Long-suffering, hewn out and cast into the Fire;
rebukes the Jews of his Times. --

So does then the third Part of the Text appear; That it is the indispensable
Duty of God's faithful Servants, to declare these Dealings of the Lord, in
order to reclaim Sinners from their wicked Way, to the Fear and Service of the
Lord. -- Now, therefore, go to, speak to the Men of Judah, and to the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, Thus says the Lord, Behold I frame Evil against you,
and devise a Device against you: Return ye now every one from his evil Way, and
make your Ways and your Doings good. -- Dreadful is the Charge, grievous the
Task to be b^ performed; it is no less than to declare the Great God of Heaven
is framing Evil and devising a Device against sinful Man, an insignificant Lump
of Clay, which at one fatal Stroke of his omnipotent Hand, he can reduce to its
primitive Nothing. The Evil with which the Lord threatens Israel, is,
doubtless, in a most literal Sense, the Babylonian Captivity; that Evil which
was to come from the North, out of the Land of Chald^^ and Babel: Nor would I
exclude that Abomination of Desolation, which was to come upon them from the
West by the Romans. But all these were only the Beginnings of Tribulations, the
Condemnation of H^ll, eternal Damnation, had a near Connection with the Evils
aforesaid, in so much, as many unregenerate Sinners thereby should go to their
own Place, being sent to doleful Shades. -- Behold, notwithstanding God's
tender Compassion, how his Mercy speaks against his Judgments! He desires
not the Death of the Sinner, but that he repent and live! Return ye now every
one from his evil Way, and make your Ways and your Doings good. --

The Lord will have Jeremiah to go immediately, and not to loiter and tarry;
because this Message would admit of no Delay: Besides that, the Mind of the
Prophet was now big with this Vision and Charge, his Breast laboring to give
it Utterance; and he would therefore, at least speak with more Spirit and
Resolution, than when he tarried longer; and ^he lively Impressions were worn
out of his Mind. It is not an easy Matter, to carry such Messages to haughty
and perverse Mortals: Such is the Complexion of human Nature, that, with the
greatest Reluctance, we speak of God's severe Judgments to our Fellow
Creatures. -- Moses it constrained to excuse himself on account of his heavy
Speech; Lord, said he, send him whom thou should send, but send me not, I am
very unfit, thou know my Stammering Mouth and my heavy Tongue. -- We is me,
for I am undone, exclaimeth Isaiah, because I am a Man of unclean Lips, and I
dwell in the Midst of a People of unclean Lips; for mine Eyes have (...) the
King, the Lord of Hosts. -- A Youth cannot prophesy, was the Plea of Jeremiah.
-- Fit and just is it therefore, they should take Hold on such Occasions, when
their Souls are ^^red, and their Hearts glowing with Zeal and Ardour; and they,
in some Measure, attain to a Frame of Mind, beyond the common Tether of
Humanity. -- And especially, it is a Time for God's faithful Servants to speak,
when there are approaching Evils: And when black and gloomy Clouds, portending
Judgments from on high, hang over a Nation: -- Nor can they forbear doing it,
without leading Guilt upon their own Souls, according to the awful Charge God
gave E^^^i^^, in the xxxiii. Chapter of his Prophesies: So thou, O Son of Man,
I have set thee a Watchman unto the House of Israel; therefore thou shall hear
the Word at my Mouth, and warn them from me. When I say unto the Wicked, O
wicked Man, thou shall surely die: If thou do not speak to warn the wicked
Man from his Way, that wicked Man shall die in his ^^iquity, but his Blood will
I require at thine Hand. Nevertheless, if thou warn the Wicked of his Way, to
turn from it (...) If he do not turn from his Way, he shall die in his
^^iquity, but thou have delivered thy Soul. --

Thus have I, My dear Hearers, laid open to you this important Matter. I
proceed now to make some Application: For the Basis of which I shall observe,
That, in several Respects, it is with us, as it was with the Children of
Israel. --

Were the Children of Israel led out of Egypt, God Almighty, giving them the
Land of the Heathen? So are our Ancestors brought over from Europe to this
Land; some flying from Persecution and Slavery, others out of Want and
Necessity; some out of Curiosity, and others for the Sake of Conscience, and on
a religious Account. -- As the Children of Israel are they multiplied in
Number; they are increased in Wealth and in Honor; in Riches, and Affluence of
Fortune. The Land of the Heathen is become our Inheritance and Possession: --
So that we are the Vine spoken of in the lxxx. Psalm; Thou have brought a Vine
out of Egypt: Thou have cast out, the Heathen, and planted it. Thou prepared^^
Room before it, and did (...) take deep Root, and it filled the Land. The
Hills were covered with the Shadow of it, and the Boughs thereof were like the
goodly Cedars. She sent out her (...) unto the Sea, and her Branches unto the
River. --

The Heathen were not entirely cast out; but some of them left to be as Briars
and Thorns in Israel's Sides, to chastise them when they forsook the Lord, and
did Evil in his Sight. -- Are not the Heathen Natives of this Land, such Briars
and Thorns in our Sides, to scourge us back to our God, from whom we have
apostatized most ungratefully?

And as the Lord at length, gave Israel over into Captivity, by the King of
Babel, because of their Wickedness and Impenitence; and finally let Jerusalem
be destroyed, and the holy Land conquered by Titus V^spas^an; is it not to be
feared, if we do not repent of our Sins, turn from our Evil, reform from our
Vices, and make our Ways and our Doings good, that we shall at last be
conquered and destroyed, by the French and their Indians?

Does not the Lord speak to us, as he did against Israel, by warning
Dispensations of his Providence? Whilst the French, conscious of their Success
in the late War, and of the Influence they have obtained over the Indians, are
now endeavoring to encroach upon our Borders, by seizing, peopling and
fortifying the Lands along the Ohio; thereby to make themselves Masters, if
possible, of the Northern Parts of America? Nor does any Thing less, seem
sufficient to satiate their unbounded Ambition, or prescribe Limits to their
enterprizing Genius. -- Their natural Situation is such, that, being in
Possession of Canada, in the North, and of Missisippi, in the South; if they
once take Root along the Ohio, they may, by Degrees, people all that vast Tract
of Land to the Westward, between us and the South Sea, to California, East and
West; from Canada to Missisippi, North and South, which, by Lakes and Rivers,
is very conveniently situated to serve their Purpose: Not to mention its
fruitful Soil, and milder Climate, every way vastly preferable before inclement
Canada. -- As to People, they may be easily transported thither from France,
overstocked, and much encumbered by its Inhabitants. And then, may they not
drive us into the Atlantic Ocean, or scatter us to and fro, upon the Hills and
Mountains; or in the vast Desert, as Sheep pursued by Evening Wolves?

I see a seething Pot in the North, that may boil over upon us, and scorch us
in a most dismal Manner. -- Out of the North an Evil may break forth upon all
the Inhabitants of the Land: The Families of the Kingdoms of the North, may
execute God's Judgments against us, touching all our Wickedness, in forsaking
God, and worshipping the Works of our own Hands.

High Time is it therefore that we repent, and turn from our evil Way, and make
our Ways and our Doings good. -- Our Sins and Abominations are very great; the
Cry thereof comes up before God in Heaven; which appears but too glaringly. --

Is not the Land infected by Persons tainted with wicked and ungodly
Principles? Are there not many Fools, who say in their Heart, there is no God?
Are there not many who disbelieve, who mock and redicule his Revelation? Do Men
not rob God of his Glory, and throw it away upon the Creature? Is not Atheism,
Deism, and Infidelity, spread among us far and near? Is not a Latitudinarian
Way of Freethinking, become the fashionable Religion of the highest Mode, in
this our evil Day? And such as keep up as yet, the external Form of sound
Words; alas! how is the Spirit and Power of internal Religion, of real Piety
and Godliness, lo^t by many of them?

As there is such Corruption in Principle, can it be possible, in the Nature of
Things, there should be no Abominations in Practice? -- Must not a bitter
Fountain send forth such Streams? Whence else that horrid execrable Vice of
taking God's sacred Name in vain, of cursing and swearing impiously? Is it by
many not reckoned as a Flourish of Speech, to set off their Words, with a by
God, and a God Dam, though the Lord has said, he will not hold Guiltless those
who take his Name in vain: And it is to be believed, unless they repent, God
will make their Damme, and God dam my Soul, the truest Words they ever spoke.

I shall not speak of the Perjury and false Oaths, under which our Land groans:
Nor shall I aver that there are Persons who have taken sacred Oaths to execute
their Offices faithfully; but have, by the Execution of them, rendered
themselves forsworn more than once.

Do we reflect upon that daring and God-provoking Profanation of the
Sabbath Day; it is shocking, to see how all Manner of Work is done on the same;
and even the greatest Enterprises in the World, begun on that Day which we are
commanded to celebrate by holy Rest. -- How are the Means of Grace, the
Ordinances of Salvation, slighted and despised; the public Worship of God, not
to speak of private Devotion, neglected?

I shall not now dwell upon all the Debaucheries; I pass by in Silence, the
Fraud and Deceit, the Theft and Injustice, the Violence and Oppression so often
committed among us. Nor shall I mention the Back-bitings, the Lying and
Slander, the Hatred, Spite and Malice, with which we are infected: Nor shall I
declaim against the Envy, the Animosities and Heart burnings wherewith many
Minds are inflamed.

But that drinking to Excess, which is now become fashionable, and of the
highest Mode, I cannot, I may not, pass by in Silence. It cries aloud to God in
Heaven! How do rational Creatures thereby become half Brute and half Devil? It
is an Abomination unto the Lord, and a Root of all Evil. -- This Vice, above
all others, promotes the Ruin and Destruction of a Nation, and destroys
wretched besotted Souls, who are enslaved to it, to all Intents and Purposes.

Do we consider the Pride and Haughtiness of Spirit which now prevails; I fear
it will be, Toll^bantur in altum ut lapsu gravi^ri ruarent, They were lifted up
on high, that their Downfall may be the greater. -- The Luxury and Intemperance
of the Age is such, that we may say, Savior armis incub^it Luxuria;

By far more fatal than destructive Arms,
-- fell Luxury prevails.
And why should I mention more Particulars? Sins are committed against all the
Commandments of God's holy Law. -- And were we but sensible of it; did we but
humble ourselves before God, we might find Mercy with him. -- But, alas! what
aggravates our Evil, is the Abhorrence many have of genuine Repentance, and the
Detestation of real, internal and experimental Piety. -- It is not enough with
many, that they themselves will not press into the Kingdom of Heaven, but they
also endeavor to hinder, with Might and Main, such as perhaps would. -- O ye
Enemies to real and experimental Religion, what do ye mean? If you are to be
saved (for such is your Hope, which I would to God was better grounded) in your
Latitudinarian Way, do you not think the Professors of experimental Religion,
shall be happy too? Is it not to be believed, a just and holy God, will crown
sincere Endeavors after Holiness, with a Reward in the other World, suitable
to the Progresses made in this State of Probation. Nay, if it should unluckily
so happen, that you fall short of eternal Happiness, do ye not conceive others
who had more Religion than you, may arrive safe on the happy Shore of eternal
Felicity, in Heaven's ever blessed Harbor? Why, in the Name of Wonder! do ye
then seem to bless your Lot above that of the sincere Worshippers of the Deity?
Unenvied by me be for ever your better Portion of Vanity in this tragical World!

O that the Lord of his infinite Mercy, graciously would be pleased to send his
holy Spirit into the Hearts of many, to work in them genuine Repentance! Should
I launch out into Futurity, and open to you the different Scenes of the other
World: Should I set before your Eyes the Horrors and Ignominies of the dismal
Abyss, in which the accursed Crew suffer everlasting Condemnation: Should I
speak of the Glories of the New Jerusalem: Should I dwell on the Beatitudes of
the celestial ever-blessed Paradise, and say so much of unutterable Things, as
on this Side of immortality I can: Yea, should one, either Angel or Man, come
from the other World, and prophesy to you, unless God darted Light and Life
into thy Soul: O irregenerate Sinner, it would perhaps not bring thee as far as
Bileam, who wished to die the Death of the Righteous; or as Felix, who
trembled; or as Agrippa, who was almost persuaded. It is not with me, but unto
God, who calls the Things that are not as if they were, does it appertain, to
bring into the World a new Creature of his own; of which old Things are passed
away, behold all Things are become new. -- I shall therefore at present, only
urge the Necessity of a genuine and speedy Repentance from the Drift of my
Text: That, upon Repentance, God will spare a sinful People, against whom he
has denounced his Judgments; and upon Apostasy, he will destroy a People, he
has vouchsafed to bless and prosper. --

Oh, consider! if we do not repent from our evil Way, turn unto the Lord, and
make our Ways and Doings good; he may at last, give us over to be a Prey to our
incroaching, ambitious, haughty and cruel Neighbors, the French and their
Indians. I have already shown you, God acted so with Israel: And that he has
threatened and warned us by bitter Dispensations of his Providence, during the
late War, both by the Sword of the Enemy, and by his own immediate afflicting
Hand, (witness the Depredations the French and their Indians, by their
Incursions, have made upon our Northern Frontiers: witness the Smallpox and
Measels; witness that particular, virulent and malignant Fever, whereby so many
went to their long Homes,) and does now, in an especial Manner, warn us; I am
sorry to say, were a less difficult than grievous Task to show. -- I believe
the Idea yourselves have of our present Situation at this critical Juncture, at
this dubious Instant, in this portentous Interval, is such, that I need not
particularize, in order to make you sensible of the Cloud which hangs over our
Heads, in-so-far as to confess: --

Lord by the Encroachments of our Neighbors upon us, our Situation is become
gloomy and dark. -- Now is the Time to bestir ourselves, and to be valiant, for
the Land and the Cities our God has been pleased to give us. -- But, O Lord!
how shall a sinful People stand before thee? Will thy Justice not require
Vengeance on our Sins and Abominations? Our Warriors who should withstand the
Enemy, have they Reason to think God will send his holy Angels to protect them,
and to put their Adversaries to Flight? Can they hope God will hold up their
Faces, and cover their Heads, in the Day of Battle? Are not ungodly Sinners the
worst of Warriors? The Men of Sodom and Gomorrha, of Admah and Seboim and
Bela, proved as wretched Warriors, as they were great Sinner^* They lost the
Battle against Cheda^l^omer, and the Kings that were with him; they fled
ignominiously: But, behold! Abram the Hebrew, with his Three Hundred and
Eighteen Worshippers of the Deity, overcomes the Conqueror, and rescues the
conqured Fugitives and Captives. --

And no Wonder; the Terror of the Lord seizes impious Men: When Death is before
their Eyes, the World of Spirits then open to their View, overshadows their
Souls with gloomy Apprehensions, foreboding the Blackness of Darkness for ever:
Infernal Vultures of Prey hover over their Heads, to snatch away their guilty
Souls to doleful Shades. -- But there stands the Man, who firmly believes God's
eternal Predestination; who does holy acquiesce in his irresistible high
Decree, who has made his Peace with God; Angel Guards attend him, to conduct
his parting Spirit into the celestial Paradise: See how intrepid he stands!
composed as the Saint whose Errors are forgiven, glowing with heroic
Enthusiasm: See how he ^^^^ches up against the blazing Steel; Fire, Smoke and
Thunder terrify him not: (...) fatal Lead whistles around his Head, without
darting Panic into his Heart; his Breast being defended by a Shield of triple
Adamant, is ^ar more impregnable to the Terror, than to the Death of the hallow
Engine: -- Or is it that we look for Council of War, and high Exploit? Here
will we find the Saint to excel the Sinner; for the Fear of the Lord is the
Beginning of Wisdom, as well as of Courage: Besides, the Saint is honest and
loyal, and inspired with Patriot Zeal; whereas the best that can be said of the
unregenerate Sinner, is, where Mammon leads the Van, Belial will never fail to
bring up the Rear. --

If then we do not turn unto the Lord, can any Thing else be expected from the
Justice of God, and from the Nature of Things, but that we shall be plucked up,
be pulled down, and be destroyed? For the Lord God of Hosts, says, he (...)
that to an (...) Nation, against which he denounces Evil. -- True it is, our
Adversaries are as far from God, and farther, if possible, then we; they
worship Idols in a literal Sense, and adore the Works of their own Hands: But
so did the Nations also, who led Israel Captive. God will judge Antichrist no
doubt, and his Fall is yet to come, when the Nations shall shout: She is
fallen, she is fallen, Babylon, that great City! But, notwithstanding, it is
likely, that she will first be li^ted up on high. -- Our Enemies shall not
escape the Punishment of their abominable Sins, no more than the Nations did
who destroyed Israel: And, nevertheless, they may get the Victory over ^s; and,
glorying in their own Strength, triumphing and exulting in their Success, boast
in their mighty Feats of War; -- 'We are the Men, who have done great Things!
Once we were but a Handful, in a cold and frozen Climate, barren, inclement and
despicable: But behold, what wise Measures, happy Schemes and blessed Inventions
can bring about. -- Valor, unconquerable Valou^, has subdued under our Feet, a
numerous, a strong and mighty People, and given us the sole Possession of a
Land, wherein there is no good Thing wanting, that is upon the Earth. -- Now
are we Masters, sole Masters, of one Half of the greatest Continent on this
terraqueous Globe: And so it is likely we may effect in the new-^ound World,
what in the Old we could not, we should never have accomplished; that is, hatch
a universal Empire. Great Things now to our holy Catholic Church! Great Things
to our grand Monarchy! Glory to the Gallic Nation!'

And what will then b^^ our woeful Condition? Must we then either die, or submit
to Servitude and Tyranny, to Idolatry, Superstition and Thraldom, far worse
than the most cruel Death? Or must we transport ourselves, naked and forlorn^*
beyond the Ocean? Or in what inhospitable Part of this Globe shall we pitch our
fugitive Tents? And complain, with bitter Remembrance, of our former State; --
'O woe unto us! that we have sinned so heinously against thee, O Lord! Thou
have given us a good Land, and better Things might yet have been expected: But
by our Sins and Abominations, we have made the Land to spew us out. -- O how
shall we lift up our Fac^s? All they who pass by shall hiss us! because an
insignificant People, nay, an idolatrous People has overcome us. -- Farewell
now those fertile Lands; farewell those fruitful Fields; farewell ye fat
Meadows, and fructiferous Valleys! Vales, Hills, Mountains, Woods, farewell;
farewell ye pleasant Rivers, ye populous Towns farewell; farewell ye joyous
Cities, adieu all! -- And which is worse still, and altogether intolerable, how
foolishly, how sinfully, how shamefully lost! Is this the sickle Chance of
human Affairs, good Lord! why were we so filly as ever to set our Hearts upon
this World?'

Will not the very Savages, the Natives, the Aborigines of this Land, reproach
us? -- 'Why did we not drive you away; nay, why did we not kill you, when ye
came first in the great Canoe, over the Great Lake? It Is true, we had no Guns,
Powder and Bullets; but we wanted not Bows and Arrows: -- We had no Iron
Hatchets, nor Steel Knives; but we were not destitute of Stone Ones: We had no
Woollen Blankets, but we were covered with Deer-Skins and Furs. -- It Is so, we
lived not as you did, nor as we do now; but we lived as well. This Part of the
World suited us as well as over the Water did you. O had we never tasted your
Rum! It has spoiled, it has killed, it has destroyed us long ago; and now your
Woman-heartedness leaves us a Prey to the French. O why did we rely upon those
for Help and Succor, who cannot help themselves! Nay, Fools that we were! Why
did we receive a People into this Land, which the great Spirit had separated
from us, by the Great Lake, as a Sign they had no Business here? But we thought
you were wise and good, because you were White. -- You told us you worshipped
the Great Spirit, who has made, and preserves, and blesses all Things; but have
you been at any Pains, in earnest, to learn us to worship him? The French
worship Images, as well as we did; they fall upon-their Knees, and adore a
Piece of Wood or Stone, in the Shape of a Man, of a Woman, and of a Cross; and
yet they have, like the Devil, never been at Rest to bring us to their
Religion. -- We made your great Canoe fast, first with a Rope to a Tree, next
to a Rock, then we got an Iron Chain, at length we fastened it to a Silver
Chain, quite in Onondago, and we kept it always white without Rust: But what
Good does it do us now? You are gone, and we are Slaves! We are worse than
Negroes, for their Masters take Care of them: But we are neither our own
Masters, nor does any Body take Care of us. -- We are worse off than the very
Brutes, than the wild Beasts, who, without a Soul, run in the Woods.' --

Seeing such, and far beyond my Description, would be our deplorable Situation,
in Case we were subdued by our Neighbors; O then! for the Love of God, and of
our native Land! while Repentance and Reformation is the only Way to screen and
secure us from so fatal an Evil, let us turn unto the Lord, let us make our
Ways and our Doings good.

One Thing much to our Encouragement, my Breast labors to bring forth; and it
is, that glorious Prophesy: For from the rising of the Sun, even unto the going
down of the same, my Name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every Place
Incense shall be offered unto my Name, and a pure Offering: For my Name shall
be great among the Heathen, says the Lord of Hosts. -- Were it permitted to
me, to pry into prophetic Gloom, and to scan the Depths of Destiny, methinks I
might here find: -- 'As thou Sun give Light from East to West, so shall Man,
whom I have created in the East, people the Earth still Westward on; and with
him shall go polished Life, Arts and Science, and real Religion, by which Glory
redounds to my Name, Salvation to my Creatures. -- Two Thousand Years may
expire before I give my Law in Form; Two Thousand more before Messiah come,
unto whom is to be the Gathering of the Nations: when through manifold and
diverse Viciffitudes, my Gospel reach remote America; all the While as the Light
advances to the West, leaving the more Eastern Parts of the Earth darker and
darker, until a Time of Apostasy, together with its deserved Punishment from
Heaven, close the Eve of Two Thousand Years more; which, as I created the World
in Six Days, and resting on the Seventh, instituted a Sabbath of Rest, may
close the World Six Thousand Years; whereon there may be a Sabbath of Rest of a
Thousand Years, when the Earth shall be filled with the Knowledge of me, both
Jews and Gentiles, all Nations and Languages throughout the whole Earth, as one
People, rejoicing in my Salvation every where; Satan, the apostate Angel, being
bound that he deceive not: And then ensue the last gloomy Night of universal
Defection and Apostasy, in which I come to judge the Quick and the Dead, and
give Renovation and Restoration to all Things.' --

For as the Sun, refulgent God of Day,
Rejoicing Earth, diurnal, rides along,
Pompous, from East to farthest West; even so
Who knows but Empire, Liberty and Arts,
With their resplendent Train, and doomed to move
From East still Westward; and e're the long Day
Of Time shall end, in Soul-rejoycing Tour,
Surround the Globe and every People bless?
And this, methinks, the universal King,
When first he spoke this Earth from Chaos Gloom,
Gave them in Charge: --
Descend, ye heavenly Powers!
And first illumin Eastern Swains who tend
Their feeding Flocks, and in the rural C^t
With Innocence and simple Nature live:
Then, gathering Glory still as you advance,
Bend Westward over Hefestia, Persia, Greece;
Thence over Hesperian Realms; and as you move
Sublime along, let your Heart-gl^^'ning Rays
Far to the North, on Scythin' s (...) Race
And vast Sarmatia, shine: Then the Alpine Heights
Ascend, there bidding Rocks and Mountain^ (...)
And Snow eternal, charm the Soul even more
Than Arno' s ^eeming Vale, fors^^k by you:
Then onward coursing, over Germania bend;
R^^ching, the while, the farthest Polar Verge
Of wintry Scandinavia' s frozen Climes:
Then Westward still over fair Britannia' s Isles,
And utmost Thule' s self, p^^s^e your Course;
There on Europa' s last, but noblest, Sons,
Beam your full Bla^e: And, fondly ling 'ring long,
Forsake them not, till every virtuous Spark
Forsake their puls^less Breast; and the old World,
Spurning all Cure, in broad Corruption lies.
Then, steering over the Western murmuring Main,
Stretch over America' s unknown Extent;
Her every latent N^^k explore (...) and pierce
The awful central Depths of her wild Woods,
Planted of old, where (blush ye Scenes of Art)
Untutored Nature holds her bloodless Reign;
Till all her sluggish and unthinking Sons,
Of every Language and of every Hu^,
Roused and exalted by your genial Beam
Boldly to assert their native Rights as Men
Enjoy by Turns, their Day of polished Bliss,
And sink by Turns, in Slavery's gloomy Night.
Thus, when you have performed your destined Round,
And shone, with setting Ray, on the ^tmost Bourne
Of California, which, far jetting (...),
Nearly embraces Asia' s Eastern-Goast,
Where in the Dawn of Time you first appeared;
Then will I, rising in my Might, stretch forth
My strong right Arm, and Renovation give
To Nature; will my Scepter reassume;
And bid you re-ascend to the bright Realms
Of Day, for ever there, beneath my Sway,
With steadfast Peace and Order joined, to reign;
Where Sloth, Corruption, Flux and sad Decay
Can never come; where Death himself must die. --
This Thought, I say, is exceedingly in our Favor, in-so-much as it gives us
to understand, that as we have been last enlightened by the Sun of Grace, so
the blessed Light may continue longest on our Hemisphere; and that the Day of
our Life may be spun out, even after our Mother Country is expired.

-- But all, at last,
( Famed Lacedaemon, Athens, Carthage, Rome,)
Have fallen, and prove how frail are human Things.
And thus, since Death's the inevitable Doom
Of every Body, the Animal alike
And politic; who does not, pensive, see
That even Britannia' s self, the firmest State
That ever was built, though founded on the Rock
Of Freedom and of Right, must moulder down;
And at the last (but O indulgent Heaven
R^ll far that Day! must (...) into the Tomb
Where the airy Ghosts of mighty Empires (...)
In melancholy G^i^^, with (...) Mark
Of Glory left, their with^^'d (...) all
Drop^ from their Brow to ^iss the Pride of Man! --
Gracious God! can there be any Thing more tender? Can any Thing be more
adapted to turn us unto thee! to fire our Bosoms, our very Souls, with the Glow
of thy Love, surpassing all Understanding, than that indulgent Heaven will
smile yet on us, when it frowns on our Kindred Mortals?

O then! That the Magistracy would exert themselves, in our present Situation,
as becomes them! Rulers of the Earth, on you I fix my Eyes: By God Almighty
you are placed in that high and exalted Station of Life, in order to be a
Terror to Evildoers, and to encourage such as do well. -- You ought to take
Care no Abominations be committed among us without Correction -- That taking of
God's sacred Name in vain, that Blasphemy, that Sabbath-breaking, that Contempt
and Neglect of Divine Worship, requires your Attention, your Redress, and ought
to be discouraged by your Precepts and Example. -- It is scarcely to be
believed, what Influence the great Ones of the Earth have on their pliant
Inferiors: Every Thing that comes from them, goes down with the tractable Part
of the Vulgar, as Water runs down the Channel: -- And what, though vicious and
perverse Mortals, though incorrigible Sinners hate you, Your Virtue, your
Piety, your Zeal and Love for the Glory of God, and the Good of Mankind, will
triumph at Length, and be in blessed Memory, when the Names of the Wicked shall
rot. -- Let therefore nothing deter you from promoting the Fear of God. --

As, when black frowning Tempest ^rops the Globe,
When groaning Thunder seems to rock its Frame,
And general Horror lours on Nature's Face;
Some Mountain l^^ts, superb, its (...) crowned Head
And glorying in its Height, unshaken stands,
Indignant ba^^^ing all the mingled Rage.
Of Ocean's Billows battering its fast Base,
And Bor^as bowling dreadful on its (...) --
-- So, when loud Factions Storms involve a State,
And shed De^ection on the lukewarm Throng,
The glowing Patriot lifts his fearless (...),
Alone unmoved, exultant in his Aim,
His generous, Godlike Aim, to prop the Fall
Of Virtue, and protect his suffering (...)
And, while this glorious Purpose (...) his Breast,
Defies the Billows of the P^^ple's Hate,
His blinded, noisy, thankless Citizens,
Misconstruing all his Measures into Wrong;
Or even a blustering Tyrant's steady Rage,
Or Death itself, in every ^^ster'd Terror;
To damp his Soul, or shake his stern (...). --
Ye Sons of Levi, ye Priests, ye Prophets of the Lord! Unto you does it
appertain, in an especial Manner, to endeavor to reclaim sinful Mortals. -- Go
to then, and speak to the Inhabitants of the Land, thus says the Lord, Return
ye n^w every one from his evil Way, and make your Ways and your Doings good. --
This is your indispensable Duty; to this End you are set as Watchmen on the
Walls of Jerusalem. You are God's Ambassadors to the Nations. -- Arise
therefore, g^^d up your Loins, and speak unto them all that the Lord has
commanded. -- Be not dismayed at their Faces, left the Lord confound you before
them. -- At least, My Brethren, let us behave in such a Manner in the Discharge
of our Duty, that we may be clear of the Blood of such as perish in their Sins.
Let us consider, that they who be wise, shall shine as the Brightness of the
Firmament; and they that turn many to Righteousness, as the Stars for ever and
ever: and that all Jesus's faithful Servants, shall enter into the Rest and
Peace of their Lord. -- Although your Labor be hard, your Charge difficult,
and your Pains often, but ill requited, by an ungrateful World; nay, although
for all your Love, ungodly Sinners hate and revile you, for your Blessing,
curse (...); yet shall not all the Bombast and Sarcasm with which witling
Scriblers, for Righteousness Sake, persecute you, or any other Thing, if you
are faithful, be able in the least to harm you. --

Have you not known the new-ris'n Sun look sick
And lurid, through the turbi^^ Medium seen,
When Morning-Fogs, and Vapors, copious steam'd,
From Earth's (...) Womb, obscure his beamy Head
And dim the Day? Then have you not observed
How, as his Car ascends the Vault of Heaven,
All these still melt before him, and the Scene
Brightens apace; till all at last revealed,
He looks down in full Majesty, and sheds
A burnished Radiance over the Hemisphere,
Enlivening Herb, and Flower, and Beast and Man?
Then general Nature smiles; and all the Soul
Of Mirth is waked at once; the mingled Low
Of Kine and Bleat of Sheep, from Hill to Dale,
Responsive ring; but, chiefs the aerial Tribes
Mount on the Wing of Joy, (...), grateful, pour
Their little Hearts in choral Hymns to Heaven.
Thus shall your Virtue, though obscured a while,
By Envy and Detraction's (...) Fogs,
Incessant gather Brightness; these shall melt
Before it, and their Place be known no more;
But it shall soon, without a Cloud between
Or Tongue malign to (...) its Rays
Appear in full Effulgence, all around,
Filling the Land with Carols and sweet Glee;
Till Death's calm Sunset call you hence at last,
To shine eternally in better Climes!
And now to conclude; I pray God of his infinite Mercy, may be pleased, to save
this Land from perishing by Vice, Irreligion, Impiety, and Ungodliness; and I
prophesy it will stand long enough. -- And may God bless the Endeavors that
are now made for the public Good. -- May the Endeavors of His HONOR our
LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR, at this TREATY, be blessed, to engage the Indian Nations
in our Interest. -- May the COMMISSIONERS from the several Governments, be
directed by the Giver of all Wisdom and Understanding, to concert such Schemes,
to take such Measures, and to join in such Leagues and Confederacies, at this
present CONGRESS, as may, by the Blessing of Heaven, prove effectual to
withstand, oppose, resist and repel (...) unjustly incroaching Neighbors. --
And may we all, as one Man, as one (...) and one Soul, each and every one in
that Office, in the Sphere and Station of Life into which the Lord has placed
him, endeavor to promote the Glory of God, our own Salvation, and the Good and
Happiness of the whole Community. -- Let us, Men and Brethren, be of good
Courage, and behave ourselves valiantly for our People, and for the Cities of
our God: -- And let the Lord do that which is good in his Sight: -- To whom be
Honor and Glory, Power, Might, Majesty and Dominion, World without End. AMEN.

FINIS.

