THE Antigonian and Bostonian Beauties; A POEM. Occasioned by seeing the
ASSEMBLY, at St. John's Antigua, on Thursday the 7th of July, and afterward at
Boston, in King Street.

-- on she came;
Grace was in all her Steps, Heaven in her Eye;
In every Gesture Dignity and Love.
MILTON. By W. S. A. B.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by D. FOUL in Queen Street.

The BEAUTIES, etc.
YE sacred Nine, whose sweetly flowing strains,
So long have charmed Britannia's blissful plains*
So long have given her tuneful sons to claim,
The foremast rank amidst the rolls of same;
That Greece herself, your whilome favorite shore.
Deserted, boasts your residence no more;
But yields the glory to that pleasing grove.
Where Waller warbl'd forth his slighted love:
Where Denham, Dryden, Pope, or Prior sung.
Or matchless Shakespeare charmed the listening throng:
Where Chaucer crst reformed the unpolished swains,
Or greater Milton breathed diviner strains:
Where Avon flows, or gently winding Tweed.
Or Thames reflects the primrose painted mead.
And since no more by famed (...) spring,
But Cowper's hill, or Windsor shades ye sing;
O let me thence your heavenly aid implore,
To themes unsung by British Muse before
The sparkling charms of the Antigonian fair
For Beauty still should be the Muses care:
For this, forsake your loved retreats awhile,
And deign to visit our remoter Isle.
What though the soul-enliv'ning source of Day,
Illumes our plains with more intemp'rate ray;
Yet cooling breezes fan the sultry noon,
And yield delights beneath a torrid sun.
What though no streams meander through the plains,
To slake the sev'rish thirst of languid swains;
Yet spring and summer join to charm us here,
And endless verdure crowns the blooming year.
Come then Aonian Maids, come tuneful choir,
And beam upon our Isle poetic fire.
Come Paphian goddess, queen of love's domain,
With all the subjects of thy gentle reign;
The comely Graces from the Idalian grove,
And little blind, but potent god of love;
Eros and (...), with (...) joined,
Nor leave the goddess of bright youth behind;
While wakeful fancy wantons in your train,
TO exalt my numbers, and improve my strain,
BEGIN the Song from that most pleasing night,
When late the assembled charmers shone so bright.
The dazzling ring, whose rosy smiles could move,
The frozen hermits icy breast to love;
And like the sun that gilds the Greenland sea,
Make horrors shine and every gloom look gay.
Hail beauty, hail! though earthly, yet Divine,
For what knee bows not to thy sacred shrine?
While meaner Monarchs, meaner rule maintain,
A vassal-world acknowledges thy reign.
The prince that shines beneath the Imperial crown,
For thee would lay the sacred scepter down;
While suppliant crowds to him bow down the knee,
More suppliant far he bends his soul to thee.
The hero tried in many a well-fought day,
With pride confesses thy superior sway,
And crowns and kingdoms, trophies to his arms.
Lays with his heart, a trophy to thy charms.
THE humble peasant at thy pleasing smile,
Forgets the mis'rses of perpetual toil,
And pleased can burn beneath the scorching sun,
To taste thy favors when his work is done.
WHEN virtue dwells with thy angelic form,
To her smooth paths thou can the sinner charm:
But when, alas! thou treadst the sinners road,
Thou can delude the saint himself from God.
THE sullen Cynic who avoids thy arms,
Blasphemes because he merits not thy charms,
And flies with dire remorse thy soft abode,
As Atheists shun the arguments for God.
THE savage Indian, whose death-dealing bow
Is all his art, and all he seeks to know,
Amidst the clouds of ignorance can see
A Power Divine, and likens it to thee.
SUCH beauty is, and so divinely bright,
Did she display her heavenly chaims that night.
In each accomplished, sweetly smiling fair,
In sportive innocence assembled there.
BUT aim, my muse, in soft melliflu'nt lays,
To give to fame each lovely fair one's praise;
Such lofty themes to greater bards belong,
But where such merit calls, attempt the song.
BEHOLD the long-wish'd hour approaches nigh,
And sable darkness veils the clouded sky,
Cecilia's sons the harmonions lyre attune,
And blazing lights recall the absent noon;
When DELIA through the admiring numbers pressed,
Like Phoebus rising from the golden East;
Where art first seemed her utmost skill to express,
In all the rich magnificence of dress:
But Delia smiled so innocently gay,
That lovely nature bore the prize away.
BUT hark! the murmuring plaudit's far and near,
Proclaim the approach of SACHARISSA fair,
She comes, she comes! behold the enchanting maid:
What phy it is such blooming charms should fade.
Shall that soft breast of undissolving snow,
Forget to rival all that is fair below?
Ah lovely maid! redeem the time that flies,
Fast as new conquests from thy sparkling eyes;
Redeem the time, and in thy lover's truth,
O prove the best preservative of youth.
BUT see where lovely FLAVIA moves a queen,
Divinely sweet, ineffably serene.
Wherever she wings her way, ill nature flies;
When ever the charmer speaks, resentment dies.
Where charms like these our admiration move,
To see the fair but once, must be to love.
BUT see where like the bright return of day,
CHLOSIS in her approach illumes the way.
So fair her form, and so sublime her parts,
That words would only injure her deserts:
For where so many heavenly beauties shine,
Angels should sing, and language be divine!
BUT see like Phaebe, 'midst the starry throng,
Where PHILLIDA majestic moves along,
In whose soft frame ten thousand charms appear,
Sweet as the Spring, and as the morning fair.
Such outward charms the Greeian queen confessed;
But had such icy virtue steeled her breast,
The hapless Dardan race had flourished long,
And other themes survived in Homer's song.
THERE SYLVIA moves, where every beauty's joined
To grace the person and improve the mind,
Whatever the great, the amiable, and just,
Of virtue, beauty, sense or wit can boast.
In age itself her charms we shall adore,
That bane of beauty must improve her more;
For what her lovely face a so shall find,
Will add new beauties to her nobler mind.
BUT lo! the loveli'st of her lovely race,
ORINDA comes, with more than mortal grace,
Whose passions led by virtue's dictates move,
In one harmonious round of social love:
For all that is tender dwells within her breast.
Sure fairer frame never harbored fairer guest.
BEHOLD the charming AMORETTA move,
In graceful attitude the queen of love.
Beneath her rising front's horizon bright,
Two radiant luminaries beam their light,
While down her bosom flow her lovely looks.
Like Phoebus golden beams on crystal rocks.
On either lip in soft conjunction meet,
The cherry's ripened hue, and juicy sweet:
The soft retreat of her still softer breath,
And sweet enclosure of her ivory teeth:
For all that can the raptured bosom charm,
In picture joined her lovely picture form.
BUT there the matchless CHLOE moves along,
The sweetest theme to swell the poet's song;
The aromatic breath of Sharon's flowers,
When waked by influence of vernal showers,
Not half the melting sweetnesses can claim,
That wanton round her love-commanding frame.
AND now DORINDA, beauteous maid, appears,
In all the lovely pride of blooming years;
Whose gentle soul with endless sweetness fraught,
Never new the tempest of an angry thought.
Compassion, peace, complacency, and love,
The heavenly springs that all her passions move.
THERE like the sun, adored in Persian plains,
Bright FLORIMEL unlook'd-for conquest gains:
Her unaffected innocence the same,
As (...) ever yet she looked into the stream.
THERE lovely STELLA shines, in whom unite,
Whatever can charm the soul, or please the sight.
(...) happy he to whom it shall be given
With her to anticipate the joy of heaven;
Whose (...) smile or sympathetick tear,
Can sweeten all the bitterness of care.
O could I teach my flowing strains to charm,
Smooth as her soul and beauteous as her form;
My language like her lovely frame, refined,
My thoughts sublime as her exalted mind:
That mind that does the busy world despise.
And (...) itself ascend the lucid skies.
Then should her praise through every living line,
In brightest bloom to future ages shine.
THERE POLLY like the dawn of flowery May,
In youthful bloom makes all around her gay:
For gloomy cares her cheerful presence shun,
As wintry clouds avoid the summer's sun,
Her virtue to her wit adds double grace,
As jewels take new luster from her face.
THESE are the suns that gild our happy plains,
The queens that share imperial love's domains.
Imperial love, that passion wisely given,
To show mankind a glimpse of future heaven;
Where happy spirits find in endless love,
The most sublime of all the joys above.
AND now the charmers fill the flaming hall
And form in choreal sets the harmonious ball:
In mazy dance to mirthful music move,
And charm the soul ten thousand ways to love.
So Venus 'erst the nymphs and graces led,
Beneath the silver moons depending shade;
So fired the breast of each admiring swain,
Meand'ring lightly over the sylvan scene.
FAR hence each wretch whose sullen spleen would aim,
Those soft amusements of the fair to blame;
And murmur like the Owl that hates the sun,
At joys your apathy has never known.
BUT come ye vot'ries of the smiling fair,
Ye swains who boast their pleasing chains to wear:
Their pleasing chains, for that enchanting state,
Can render freedom dull, and bondage sweet!
COME join the Bard to hail the lovely ring,
With every wish the willing Muse can bring.
May every bliss to each bright charmer flow,
That lavish fortune can to merit show:
Long unmolested by corroding cares,
May circ'ling pleasures crown their circ'ling years:
And when they yield to death's impartial chase,
New beauties, Phoenix-like, supply their place.
Some Thoughts from Seneca; Against Rash Judgment and Anger, Not to be
inquisitive, and hearken to Tale-Bearers, who mind every Body's Business, to
the neglect of their own, and endeavor to part the dearest Friends in the
World.
IT is good for every Man to fortify himself on his weak side: and if he loves
his Peace, he must not be Inquisitive, and hearken to Tale-bearers; for the Man
that is overcurious to hear, and see every thing, multiplies Troubles to
himself: For a Man does not feel, what he does not know. He that is listening
after private Discourse, and what People say of him, shall never be at Peace.
How many things that are Innocent in themselves, are made Injurious yet, by
misconstruction? Wherefore some things we are to pause upon, others to laugh
at, and others again to pardon. Or if we cannot avoid the Sense of Indignities,
let us however shun the open profession of it; which may be easily done as
appears by many Examples of those, that have suppressed their Anger, under the
Awe of a greater Fear. It is a good Caution not to believe any thing till we
are very certain of it, for many probable things prove false, and a short time
will make Evidence of the undoubted Truth. We are prone to believe many Things
which we are unwilling to hear, and so we conclude, and take up a prejudice
before we our judge. Never (...) a Friend unheard; or without letting him know
his Accuser or his Crime. It Is a common thing to say, Do not you tell that you
had it from me, for if you do, I Will deny it, and never tell you any thing
again. By which means, Friends are set together by the Ears, and the Informer
slips his Neck out of the Collar. Admit no Stories upon these terms; for it is
an unjust thing to Believe in private, and to be Angry openly. He that delivers
himself up to Guess, and Conjecture, runs a great hazard; for there can be no
Suspicion without some probable Grounds; so that without much Candor, and
Simplicity, and making the best of every thing, there is no living in Society
with Mankind. Some things that offend us we have by report; others we see, or
hear. In the first Case, let us not be too Credulous; some People frame Stories
that they may deceive us: Others, only tell what they hear, and are deceived
Themselves. Some make it their Sport to do ill Offices; others do them only to
pick a Thank: There are some that would part the dearest Friends in the World;
Others love to do Mischief, and stand aloof off, to see what comes on it. If it
be a small matter, I would have witnesses, but if it be a greater, I would have
it upon Oath, and allow time to the Accused, and Counsel too, and hear it over
and over again.

IN those Cases where we ourselves are Witnesses, we should take into
Consideration all the Circumstances. If a Child, 'twas Ignorance: If a Woman, a
Mistake: If done by Command, a Necessity; If a Man be Injured, it is but Quid
pro quo. If a Judge be (...) what he does: If a Prince, I must Submit; either,
if Guilty, to Justice, or if Innocent; to Fortune: If a Brute, I make myself
one by Imitating it: if a Calamity, or Disease, my best Relief is Patience: If
Providence, it is both Impious and Vain to be Angry at it: If a Good Man I Will
make the Best on it; If a Bad, I Will never Wonder at it. Nor is it only by Tales,
and Stories, that we are inflamed, but Suspicions, Countenances; nay, a Look,
or a Smile is enough to blow us up. In these Cases let us suspend our
Displeasure, and plead the Cause of the Absent. Perhaps he is innocent; or if
not, I have time to consider on it, and may take my Revenge at Leisure: but when
it is once Executed, it is not to be Recalled. A Jealous Head is apt to take
that to himself which was never meant him. Let us therefore trust to nothing,
but what we see: And chide our selves where we are over Credulous. By this
Course we shall not be so easily imposed upon; nor put to trouble ourselves
about things not worth the while; as the Loytring of a Servant upon an Erand,
the Tumbling of a Bed; or the Spilling of a Glass of Drink. It Is a Madness to
be disordered at these Fooleries. We consider the thing done, and not the Doer
of it. It may be he did it Unwillingly; or by Chance. It was a trick put upon
him, or he was forced to it. He did it for Reward perhaps, not Hatred; nor of
his own Accord; but he was egged on to it. Nay some regard must be had to the
Age of the Person, or to Fortune; and we must consult Humanity, and Candor in
the Case. One does me a Great Mischief at Unawares. Another does me a very
small one by Design: Or peradventure none at all, but intended me one. The
Latter was more in Fault, but I Will be Angry with neither. We must distinguish
betwixt what a Man cannot do, and what he will not. It Is true; he has once
offended me, but, How often has he (...) me? He has offended me often, and in
other kinds. And why should not I hear it as well now as I have done? Is he my
Friend? why then (...) against his will. Is he my Enemy? It Is no more then I
looked for. Let us give way to wise Men, and not squabble with Fools, and say
thus to our selves, We have all of us our Errors; No Man is so Circumspect, so
considerate, or so fearful of offending, but he has much to answer for. A
Generous Prisoner cannot immediately comply with all the sordid, and Laborious
Offices of a Slave. A Footman that is not breathed, cannot keep pace with his
Master's Horse: He that is over-watch'd, may be allowed to be Drowzy. All these
things are to be weighed before we give any Ear to the first Impulse. If it be
my Duty to love my Country, I must be kind also to my Countrymen: If a
Veneration be due to the Whole so is a Piety also to the Parts: And it is the
Common Interest to preserve them. We are all Members of one Body, and it is as
Natural to help one another, as for the hands to help the feet, or the eyes the
hands. Without the Love, and Care of the Parts, the whole can never be
preserved, and we must spare one another, because we are born for Society,
which cannot be maintained, without a Regard to Particulars. Let this be a Rule
to us, never to deny a Pardon that does no Hurt either to the Giver, or
Receiver. That may be well enough in One, which is Ill in Another; and
therefore we are not to condemn any thing that is Common to a Nation: for
Custom defends it. But much more Pardonable are those things which are Common
to Mankind.

IT is a kind of Spiteful Comfort, that whoever does me an Injury, may receive
one, and that there is a Power over him that is above me. A Man should stand as
firm against all Indignities, as a Rock does against the Waves. As it is some
satisfaction to a Man in a Mean Condition, that there is no Security in a more
prosperous; And as the Loss of a Son in a Corner is born with more Patience,
upon the sight of a Funeral carried out of a Palace; So are Injuries, and
Contempts, the more tolerable from a meaner Person, when we consider, that the
Greatest Men, and Fortunes are not exempt. The wisest also of Mortals, have
their failings, and no Man living is without the same Excuse. The difference
is, that we do not all of us transgress the same way: but we are obliged in
Humanity to bear one with another. We should, every one of us bethink ourselves
how remiss we have been in our Duties: How immodest in our Discourses; how
Intemperate in our Cups; and why not as well how Extravagant we have been in
our Passions. Let us clear our selves of this Evil, purge our minds, and
utterly root out all those Vices, which, upon leaving the least string will
grow again, and recover. We must Think of every thing, Expect every thing that
we may not be Surpised. It is a Shame, says Fabius, for a Commander to excuse
himself, by saying, I was not aware of it.

Of ANGER.
-- The general Cause of Anger, is the Sense, or Opinion of an Injury; that is
the Opinion either of an Injury simply (...) of an Injury done which we have
not deserved. Some are Naturally given to Anger; Others are provoked to it by
Occasion; The Anger of Women, and Children, is commonly sharp, but not lasting:
Old Men are rather querulous, and peevish. Hard Labor, Diseases, Anxiety of
Thought, and whatsoever hurts the Body, or the Mind, disposes a Man to be
Froward, but we must not add fire to fire.

HE that duly considers the subject Matter of all our Controversies, and
Quarrels, will find them Low, and Mean, and not worth the Thought of a Generous
Mind; but the greatest Noise of all is about Money. This is it, that sets
Fathers and Children together by the Ears; Husbands and Wives; and makes way
for Sword and Poison: This is that, tires out Courts of Justice; enrages
Princes, and lays Cities in the Dust, to seek for Gold, and Silver in the Ruins
of them. This is it, that finds work for the Judge, to determine, which side is
least in the wrong; And whose is the more plausible Avarice, the Plantiffs, or
the Defendants: And what is it that we contend for all this while, but those
Baubles that make us Cry, when we should Laugh? To see a Rich old Cuff, that
has no Body to leave his Estate to, break his Heart for a handful of Dirt; And
a Gouty Usurer, that has no other Use of his Fingers left him, but to Count
withal; to see him I say, in the Extremity of his Fit, wrangling for the odd
Money in his Interest: -- If all that is precious in Nature were gathered into
one Mass, it were not worth the trouble of a Sober Mind. It were endless to run
over all those ridiculous Passions that are moved about Meats, and Drinks, and
the matter of our Luxury; Nay, about Words, Looks, Actions, Jealousies,
Mistakes, which are all of them as Contemptible Fooleries as those very Baubles
that Children Scratch, and Cry for. There is nothing Great, or Serious in all
that which we keep such a Clutter about; the Madness of it is, that we set too
great a value upon Trifles. One Man flies out upon a Salute, a Letter, a
Speech, a Question, a Gesture, a Wink, a Look. An Action moves one Man; A Word
affects another: One Man is tender of his Family; another of his Person; One
sets up for an Orator; Another for a Philosopher; This Man will not bear Pride,
nor that Man Opposition. He that plays the Tyrant at Home, is as gentle as a
Lamb Abroad. Some take Offense if a Man ask a Favor of them, and others, if he
does not. Every Man has his weak side; Let us learn which that is and take a
care of it; for the same thing does not work upon all Men alike. We are moved
like Beasts, at the Idle appearances of things; and the fiercer the Creature,
the more is it startled. The sight of a Red Cloth enrages a Bull. A Shadow
provokes the Asp; Nay, so unreasonable are some Men, that they take Moderate
Benefits for Injuries; and Squabble about it, with their nearest Relations;
They have done this and that for others, they cry; And they might have dealt
better with us if they had pleased. Very Good! And if it be less than we looked
for, it may be yet more than we deserve. Of all Unquiet humors, this is the
worst, that will never suffer any Man to be happy, so long as he sees a happier
Man than himself.

HOW Vain, and Idle are many of those things that make us stark Mad! A resty
Horse, the overturning of a Glass; the falling of a Key, the Dragging of a
Chair, a Jealousy, a Misconstruction. How shall that Man endure the
Extremities of Hunger, and Thirst, that flies out into a rage only for the
putting of a little too much Water in his Wine? What haste is there to lay a
Servant by the Heels, or break a Leg or an Arm immediately for it, as if he were
not to have the same power over him an hour after, that he has at that Instant.

When we are abroad we can bear well enough with foul ways, nasty Streets,
noisome Ditches; but a spot upon a Dish at home, or an unswept Hearth,
absolutely distracts us. And what is the Reason, but that we are Patient in the
one Place, and phantastically Peevish in the other? Nothing makes us more
Intemperate than Luxury, that shrinks at every stroke, and starts at every
shadow. It Is Death to some to have another sit above them, as if a Body were
ever the more, or the less honest for the Cushion.

HOW ridiculous was that of Cyrus; who, in his design upon Babylon, found a
River in his way that put a stop to his March: The current was strong, and
carried away one of the Horses that belonged to his own Chariot: upon this he
swore, that since it had obstructed his Passage, it should never hinder any
Body's else: And presently set his whole Army to work upon it, which diverted it
into a hundred and fourscore Channels, and laid it dry. In this Ignoble, and
unprofitable employment, he lost his Time, and the Soldiers their Courage, and
gave his Adversaries an opportunity of providing themselves, while he was
waging War with a River, instead of an Enemy.


