Personal Affliction and frequent Reflection upon (...) Life, of great Use to
lead MAN to the Remembrance of GOD. A SERMON, Preached on Sunday Sept. 1, 1754,
in Christ-Church, PHILADELPHIA; Occasioned by the Death of a beloved PUPIL, Who
departed this Life, August 28, 1754, in the 16th Year of his Age.

By W. SMITH, M. A. Professor of Philosophy in the Academy of PHILADELPHIA.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLIN, and D. HALL, at the
New-Printing-Office. 1754.

To the YOUTH of the ACADEMY, etc.
BEING advised that the Publication of the following Discourse might be of some
Use, I believe the Propriety of this Address to you will be readily
acknowledged. The Reflections contained in it poured themselves upon my Mind on
the Death of One, who but a few Days ago bore a Part in all your Studies and
Diversions, and enjoyed a Share of Health, Strength and Spirits inferior to
none of you. As you all knew and loved him; -- as I beheld many of you weeping
over his Grave, I am inclined to think the MORAL of his Death will be
acceptable to you at least, however unfavorably grave and serious Subjects are
generally received by People of your Years.

YOUR own Experience now convinces you that you hold your Lives on a very
uncertain Tenure, and that no Period of your Age is exempted from the common
Lot of Mortality. Hence every wise Person, young or old, must think it his
grand Concern to be always prepared to meet Death. As for you, who are yet
under the Direction of others, if you behave so as to merit the Esteem of your
Parents, Instructors, and good Men that you are conversant with, you need not
doubt of meriting also the Love of God in Christ. Thus, however early your
Summons from Life may be, you shall neither (...) unprepared nor unlamented.

THOUGH perhaps there is not a more affecting Incident in this World than the
Death of a hopeful Youth, liberally educated, and just stepping into a Life of
honest Action, yet those can never be said to have died untimely, or to have
lived in vain, who leave such an amiable Character behind them, as your
deceased School-fellow did.

THAT he truly deserved the Esteem he enjoyed I can vouch from Experience. He
grew up under me. With Pleasure I marked his gradual Improvements. My highest
Hopes were fixed upon him. To me he never was once wanting in Duty or
Affection, and I returned him my warmest Regard. By a like Conduct you may
command a like Esteem from your Instructors, though I hope, none of us shall ever
be called to give a like public Testimony of it toward any of you.

AS such a Testimony of Love to the Deceased, a Good-natured Reader will
heartily receive the following Sermon. If there is any Merit in it, I would
ascribe it wholly to the Influence of the Subject; for such was my
Indisposition in Body as well as Spirits, during the very short Time I had to
prepare it in, that if it had not been to ease a full Heart, I was incapable of
writing at all. I do not, however, offer want of Time as any Apology for the
Performance. It is my Opinion that much Correction, or indeed any Change that I
could make, either in the Language or Method, would be for the worse. I
followed the Train of Reasoning which the Text pointed out, and which naturally
offered itself to my Mind; and were I to see a Discourse artfully ranged into
Heads, divided and subdivided, I should hardly be persuaded that it had been
dictated or inspired by real Grief.

I AM obliged to some among you for the affectionate Verses sent me on this
Occasion. I thought the greatest Honor I could do, either to them or myself,
was to prefix them, together with your Names; conscious that so much Tenderness
and Goodness of Heart, manifested by Persons so young as you are, might atone
for far greater Faults than any of you can well fall into. With Regard to the
Critics, if we have any such, I wish them something better worthy of their
Animadversions than this pious Collection of our Tears. The Man who can refrain
from publishing his Grief, till he can do it in all the Elegance of Language
and Sentiment, may be justly suspected to have felt no real Grief. To lose a
fair Opportunity of Action, through too scrupulous a Regard to Reputation, is
mean and selfish; and therefore whatever Merit we may claim as Writers, I hope
we shall always, as at present, have the superior Merit of showing ourselves
warm for our Friends, tender in our Natures, and ready to embrace every
Opportunity of doing Good.

Philadelphia, September 7, 1754.
VERSES TO THE Rev. Mr. SMITH, On hearing his SERMON, upon the Death of his
hopeful Pupil, our dear Fellow-student, The young Gentleman so justly lamented
here, was the second Son of the Hon. Josiah Martin, Esquire of New York. At the
Time of his Death he studied in the higher Class of Philosophy in the Academy
of this City.
Mr. WILLIAM THOMAS MARTIN.
I CALL no Aid, no Muses to inspire,
Or teach my Breast to feel a Poet's Fire;
Your soft Expression of a Grief sincere,
Brings from my Soul a sympathizing (...)
Taught by your Voice, my artless Sorrows flow;
I sigh in Verse, am elegant in Woe,
And loftier Thoughts within my Bosom glow.
For when, in all the Charms of Lang^^^^ (...),
A manly Grief flows, genuine, from the Breast,
What generous Nature can escape the Wound,
Or steel itself against the Force of melting Sounds?
O! could I boast to move with equal Art
The human Soul, or melt the stony Heart;
My long-lov'd Friend should through my Numbers shine,
Some Virtue lost be wept in every Line;
For Virtues he had many -- 'Twas confessed
That native Sense and Sweetness filled his Breast.
But cooler Reason checks the bold Intent,
And, to the Task refusing her Consent,
This only Truth permits me to disclose,
That in your own, you represent my Woes;
And sweeter than my Song, is your harmonious Prose!
Academy, September 5, 1754. F. HOPKINSON.

On the same, by a Fellow-student.
AND is your Martin gone? Is be no more,
That living Truth, that Virtue seen before?
Has endless Night already hid the Ray,
The early Promise of his glorious Day?
That Grief, great Mourner! in such Strains expressed,
Shows he was deep implanted in your Breast.
Yet bark! soft-whispering Reason seems to say,
Cease from your Sorrows, wipe these Tears away.
He Is gone, he is past the gloomy Shades of Night,
Safe-landed in the eternal Realms of Light.
Happy Exchange! to part with all below,
For Worlds of Bass, where Joys unfading flow,
And fainted Souls with Love and Rapture glow.
Academy, September 6, 1734. S. MAGAW.

On the same, by a Fellow-student.
WHILE for a Pupil lost, your Sorrow flows,
In all the Harmony of finished Prose;
While melting Crowds the pious Accents hear,
Sigh to your Sighs, and give you Tear for Tear;
We too, in humble Verse, would ^^eat the Theme,
And join our Griefs to swell the general Stream;
For we remember well his matchless Power,
To steal upon the Heart, and cheer the social Hour.
Ah! much-loved Friend too soon thy Beauties fade!
Too soon we count thee with the silent Dead!
Thou, late the fairest Plant in Virtue's Plain,
The brightest Youth in Wisdom's rising Train;
By Genius great, by liberal Arts adorned,
By Strangers seen and loved, by Strangers mourned;
Blessed in a tender Brother's friendly Breast;
And in paternal Fondness doubly blessed!
Art thou now sunk in Death's tremendous Gloom,
Wrapped in the awful Horrors of a Tomb?
Ah me! bow vain all sublunary Joy!
Woes following Woes, our warmest Hopes destroy!
But Hark! -- some Voice celestial strikes mine Ear,
And bids the Muse her plaintive Strains forbear.
"Weep not fond Youths, -- it cries, or seems to cry, --
"He lives, your MARTIN lives, and treads the Sky:
"From Care, from Toil, from Sickness snatched away,
"He shines amid the Blaze of Heaven's eternal Day.
Academy, September 7, 1754. J. DUCHE.

On the same.
CHECK, mournful Preacher! check thy
streaming Woe,
Pierce not our Souls with Grief too great to know;
He joys above whom we lament below.
Snatched from our Follies here, he winged his Way,
To sing HOSANNAS in the Realms of Day.
With him, the Fight of Life and Death is over,
And agonizing Throes shall pain no more;
No more shall fell Disease, with wasteful Rage,
Blast the fair Blossoms of his tender Age;
Transplanted now, he blooms a heavenly Flower,
Where Spring eternal decks yon Amarinthine Bower.
Thy pious Sorrows, SMITH, to future Days,
Shall bear his Image, and transmit his Praise.
Still, still I feel what thy Discourse impressed,
When Pity throb'd, congenial, in each Breast:
When deep Distress came thrilling from thy Tongue,
And sympathizing Crowds attentive hung.
To mourn for thy loved Pupil all approved;
On such a Theme, 'twas Virtue to be moved.
Whoever these tender Pages shall explore,
Must learn those Griefs the Pulpit taught before.
Academy, September 7, 1754. T. BARTON.

On the same.
O DEATH! could manly Courage quell thy
Power,
Or rosy Health protract the fatal Hour;
Could Tears prevail, or healing Arts withstand
The unsparing Ravage of thy wasteful Hand;
Then MARTIN still had lived a Father's Boast,
Nor had a Mother's fondest Hopes been lost;
Then SMITH thy darling Youth, thy justest Pride,
With Virtue's first Examples long had uv'd.
But he is blessed where Joys immortal flow;
Cease Tears to stream, be dumb the Voice of Woe.
Released from Vice, in early Bloom set free
From the dire Rocks of this tempestuous Sea,
The youthful Saint, in Heaven's ambrosial Vales,
With Glory crowned aetherial Life inhales.
No more let Grief repine, or wish his Stay,
In this dark Gloom, this Twilight of our Day.
Rather we'll hail him fled from Night's Domain,
Arrayed in Light to tread the azure Plain.
There Science dwells; -- before the mental Eye
Nature's stupendous Works unfolded lie,
There Wisdom, Goodness, Power diffusive shine,
And fire the glowing Breast with Love divine.
Academy, September 7, 1754. P. JACKSON.

PSALM xlii. 6. O my God! my Soul is cast down within me, therefore will I
remember Thee --
IT is elegantly said by the Author of the Book of Job v. 6.
Job, who seems to have experienced all the dire Vicissitudes of Fortune, --
"That Man is born to Troubles, as the Sparks fly upwards." -- These Troubles,
however, as he further observes, serve the wisest Purposes, inasmuch as they
are not the Effects of what is called blind Chance, but of that unerring
Providence, which graciously conducts all Events to the general Good of the
Creature, and the final Completion of Virtue and Happiness. -- "Affliction
comes not forth from the Dust, neither does Trouble spring out of the Ground."
-- Very far from it. At that great Day, when the whole Council of God shall be
more perfectly displayed to us, we shall be intimately convinced, that all His
Dispensations are wise, righteous and gracious; and that, "Though no Chastening
for the present seems joyous, but grievous, nevertheless it afterward yields
the peaceable Fruit of Righteousness to them that are exercised thereby Heb.
xii. 11.
."

OF the Truth of this we might soon be convinced at present, were we but wise,
and suffered ourselves to reflect on what we daily see. It is with the greatest
Injustice, as well as Perverseness* that Men ascribe their Sins altogether to
worldly Temptation, and inveigh upon all Occasions against this Life upon
Account of its Vanities. These, if well attended to, would perhaps put us on
our Guard against Sin; and, upon Enquiry, it will be found that the great
Source and most prevailing Cause of all Iniquity, is a stupid Listlessness, and
want of Consideration. The Lusts and Pleasures of Life are only the Means by
which our great Adversary lulls us into Security or (...), which, like some
vast Weight, oppresses the more generous Efforts of the Soul, and bears all
silently down before it, unless checked by the powerful Hand of Affliction.

HENCE then, were I capable of wishing Evil to any Person, I could not wish a
greater to my greatest Enemies, than a long and uninterrupted Prosperity. A
flattering Calm portends a gathering Storm; and, when the Stream glides smooth,
deep and silent on, we justly suspect that the Sea, or some Declivity, is near;
and that it is soon to be lost in the vast Ocean, or tumble down some dreadful
Fall or craggy Precipice. I sincerely pity those, who were never visited with
Adversity, and who never took Time to consider whence they came, where they
are, or whither they are bound. If I loved them I could not but be apprehensive
lest, being drunk with Prosperity, they should swim smoothly from Joy to Joy
along Life's short Current, till down they drop, through the Pit of Death, into
the vast Ocean of Eternity! In such a Case, what more charitable Wish could be
indulged toward such Persons, than that the chastening Hand of Heaven might
fall heavy upon them, arrest them in their thoughtless Career, and teach them
to pause, ponder and weigh the Moment -- the eternal Moment -- "of the Things
that belong to their Peace, before they be hid from their Eyes."

THAT there should be any Persons, endowed with Reason and Understanding, who
never found Leisure in this World seriously to reflect, or to enquire for what
End they were sent into it, would seem incredible, did not Experience assure us
of it. There are really so many affecting Incidents in Life (perhaps graciously
intended to awaken Reflection) that their Hearts must be petrified indeed, one
would think, and harder than Adamant, or the nether Millstone, who can live in
this World without being sometimes affected, if not with their own, at least
with the human Lot.

I HOPE it is far from being my Character that I am of a gloomy Temper, or one
that delights to dwell unseasonably on the dark Side of human Affairs. Our Cup
here is bitter enough, and Misfortunes too thick sown, for any One who loves
his Species, to seek to embitter the Draught, by Evils of his own Creation. But
there is a Time for all Things; and, on some Occasions, not to feel, sympathize
and mourn, would argue the most savage Nature.

THE Sun has lately risen dark upon me; and this Day, every Thing that comes
from my Mouth will, in spite of me, be tinctured with Melancholy. It is,
however, a virtuous Melancholy, which it would be impious to check; and
therefore, if it is publicly indulged on this Occasion, I hope it will be
thought excusable. You know it is natural for those who are sincerely afflicted
to believe that every Person is obliged to sympathize with them, and attend
patiently to the Story of their Woe. But whether this be your present
Disposition or not, I shall say nothing which you are not as much concerned to
receive deeply into your Hearts, as I am desirous to pour it from mine.

I WOULD only strive to persuade you, that a constant Feast was never intended
for us here; and that it is the good Will of your Father, that you should be
frequently roused by what happens around you, to cherish serious Reflection and
religious Mourning, which may be recompensed with eternal Joy. That you should
do so is highly reasonable in itself; for, next to the immediate Praises of the
Deity, there is not an Exercise that tends more to ennoble the Soul, than
frequently to cast an Eye upon human Affairs, and expatiate upon the various
Scene, till we lead on the sacred Power of The religious Melancholy here
recommended, is far from being that gloomy Despondency into which some People
fall. No; it is virtuous Reflection, and that philosophic Pensiveness and
Tenderness of Soul, which so much become the Dignity of our Nature, and our
Situation in this Life.
religious Melancholy, and feel the virtuous Purpose gently rising in our
sympathising Bosoms, thrilling through our inmost Frame, and starting into the
social Eye in generous Tears.

SCORNED be the Man whose proud Soul pretends never to be cast down from the
lofty Throne of Stoic Insensibility. He may arrogantly boast that nothing can
move him, while the World goes well with him; but let Heaven strip him of his
gaudy Plumes, and throw him back naked and despicable into that World, where he
had fixed his Heart, he will find to his Cost that, though he never had the
Virtue to be cast down and feel for Others, yet he will have the Weakness to be
cast down to the very lowest Pitch, and become the most abject despondent Thing
alive, for Himself. When his transient Honors are thus fled, his haughty Looks
will be humbled. He will then begin to contemn his past Folly, and enter deeply
into his own Bosom. He will no more rely on the Smiles of Fortune, or the
Flatteries of Men; but acknowledge, from dear-bought Experience, that in this
Life there is no sure Refuge but God, nothing permanent but Virtue, nothing
great but a humble Heart; and that the only Way to be happy Men, is to remember
always that we are but Men, -- poor dependent mortal Men.

BUT, besides personal Affliction (which is perhaps a last Resource, and
sometimes dangerous, as it plunges some into invincible Despair) the
All-gracious Governor of the World, still watchful to turn every Event to the
Good of his Creatures, without violating their moral Liberty, has many other
Ways of leading them to the Remembrance of him. Whether we look within or
around us, we shall find enough in the Prospect to humble our Souls, and
convince us that, not trusting to any Thing in a World where all Enjoyments are
fleeting, we shall then only be safe in it, "when we have put on the
Breast Plate of Righteousness, and armed ourselves with the Sword of the Spirit
Galat, vi. 1^, ^^.
."

"FEW and evil are the Days of our Pilgrimage here G^^, xlvii. ^.
." God never intended this World as a lasting Habitation for us; and Evil is so
blended with Good, that we cannot reasonably set our Affections upon it.
Wailing, weak and defenseless, we are ushered into it. Our Childhood is trifled
away in roving from Toy to Toy. Our Youth is a Scene of Folly and Danger; our
Manhood of Care, Solicitude, Toil and Disappointment. Our Old Age -- if happily
we reach Old Age -- is a second Childhood. Withered, wan, and bowed beneath our
Infirmities, we become, as it were, a living Hospital of Woes; a Burden to
ourselves, and perhaps a Nuisance to others.

IN each of these Stages, the Number of Evils is greatly increased, partly by
our own Misconduct, and partly by our necessary Connexions with others; for the
equitable Judgments of God are often general. "All Things come alike to all
Men; and there is but one Event to the Righteous and the Wicked Eccles. ix. 2.
." Moreover, many of those Evils are of such a Nature, that no Prudence of ours
can either foresee or prevent them. All the Stages of Life necessarily subject
us to Pains and Diseases of Body, and many of them to the acuter Pains of an
anxious Mind. Upon the whole it appears that our Life is but a Vapor, which is
seen a little While, and then vanishes away, as a Tale that is told, and
remembered no more; or as a Wind that passes over, and comes not again.

THE Man must be thoughtless, indeed, who is not humbled with these
Reflections. But suppose his own Life should pass over as happily as possible,
and he should feel but few of these Evils; yet, unless he shuts his Eyes and
his Ears from the World, he must still find something in it, which ought to
move the tender Heart to Sorrow and Remembrance of God.

OUR blessed Savior himself, though more than human, and conscious of no
personal Ill, cast his Eye upon Jerusalem, and wept over it, on Account of its
impending Fate. Just so, if we calmly cast an Eye upon the World, we shall drop
a Tear over it on Account of the unavoidable Misfortunes that prevail in it.

DON'T we often see Tyranny successful, ruthless Oppression and Persecution
ravaging the Globe, the best of Men made Slaves to the worst, and the lovely
Image of the Deity spurned, dishonored, disfigured! How many Men, of genuine
Worth, are cast out by Fortune to mourn in solitary Places, shivering with pale
Distress, unseen, unpitied, forlorn and helpless! How many pine in the
Confinement of Dungeons, without enjoying the common Air, or the Common Use of
their own Limbs! How many are chained down, for Offenses not their own, to the
Galleys for Life! How many bleed beneath the Sword, and bite the Ground in all
the sad Variety of Anguish, to sat the cruel Ambition of contending Tyrants!
How many are deprived of their Estates, and disappointed in their most sanguine
Expectations, by the Malice of secret and open Enemies, or, which is far more
piercing, the Treachery of pretended Friends! How many boil with all the
Tortures of a guilty Mind, and the bitterest Remorse for irreparable Injuries!
How many pursue each other with the most implacable Malice and Resentment! How
many bring the acutest Misery upon themselves by their own Intemperance! How
many condemn their Souls to a kind of Hell, even in their own Bodies, by an
unhappy Temper, and the violent Commotions of disordered Blood! How many are
completely wretched in their Families, and constantly galled by the unavoidable
Misfortunes of their dearest Friends! On one Side the Distress of the Needy,
the Injuries of the Oppressed, the Cries of the Widow and Orphan, pierce our
ears. On the other Side, we hear the Voice of Lamentation and Mourning; our
Friends and Neighbors weeping for dear Relations suddenly snatched away, and
refusing to be comforted because they ARE NOT. Here one's Heart is torn asunder
by having a beloved Wife or Child snatched from his Side! There another wails
with the Loss of an affectionate Parent or Brother! Here sturdy Manhood drops
instantly beneath the sudden Stroke! There blooming Youth -- be still now my
bleeding Heart, wring me not thus with streaming Anguish -- there blooming
Youth falls a premature Victim to a Doom seemingly too severe! Beneath the cold
Hand of Death, the Roses are blasted; restless Agility and Vigor are become the
tamest Things; and Beauty, Elegance and Strength, one putrid Lump!

SURELY, if we would think on these, and such Things, which ought not to be the
less striking for being common, and which render this Life a Scene of
Suffering, a Valley of Tears, we could not set our Hearts much upon it, but
should be arrested even in the Mid-career of Vice, and trembling learn to weigh
the Moment of Things, and secure the one Thing needful. All the tender Passions
would be wakened in our Bosoms. Our sympathizing Souls would be cast down
within us, and alarmed at their own Danger, would rave round from Stay to Stay,
calling incessantly for Help, till they could find a sure and never-failing
Refuge.

BUT where is this never-failing Refuge to be found? It becomes me now to point
out some ever-flowing Spring of Comfort, some eternal Rock of Salvation, for
the Soul, after having thus mustered up such a baleful Catalogue of unavoidable
Miseries, to alarm and humble her, -- Now, as I have hinted before, this
eternal Refuge is pointed out in the Text. In such Circumstances, we shall
never find Rest, but in resolving with holy David -- "O my God! my Soul is cast
down within me, therefore will I remember thee."

WITHOUT remembering that there is a God, that overrules all Events, what Hope
or Comfort could we have, when we reflect on all the aforesaid unavoidable
Miseries of Life, and many more that might be named? Did we, with the Atheist,
believe them to spring up from the Dust, or to be the blind Effects of
unintelligible Chance, and of undirected Matter and Motion, what a poor
Condition should we think ourselves in here? Would not all appear as "a Land of
Darkness, as Darkness itself, under the Shadow of Death, without any Order,
where the Light is as Darkness Job x. 22,
?" Surely we could not wish to live in this World upon such a precarious
Footing; and yet we should not know whither to fly from it, unless into the
darker State of dreary Annihilation, at the Thoughts of which the astonished
Soul shudders and recoils. Upon such a Scheme, all our Hopes would be thin as
the Spider's Web, and lighter than Chaft that is dispersed through the Air. Our
Adversity would hurry us into the most invincible Despair, and our Prosperity
would be as a Bubble bursting at every Breath. Philosophy would be a Dream, and
our boasted Fortitude mere unmeaning Rant.

BUT on the other Hand, if, when our Souls are cast down within us, we will
remember that there is a God, whose great View in creating was to make us
happy, whose Design in afflicting is to reclaim us, and who governs the World
by his Providence only to conduct all to the greatest general Good -- then, and
then only, have we sure Footing. We shall neither raise our Hopes too high, nor
sink them too low. If Fortune is kind, we shall enjoy her Smiles without
forgetting the Hand that guides her. If she frowns, we shall feel our Woes as
Men, but shall robly bear them as Christians. For if we are really Christians,
our holy Religion teaches us that this Scene of Things is but a very small Part
of the mighty Scheme of Heaven; -- that our present Life is only the dim (...)
of our Existence; -- that we shall shortly put off this Load of Infirmities,
and be translated to a State, where no Temptations can assail, no Fears
distress us; but where "every Tear shall be wiped from our Eyes, and where
there shall be no more Death, nor Sorrow, nor Crying, nor Pain, because the
former Things are passed away Rev. xxi. 4.
."

IF we are thus intimately convinced that unerring Wisdom, Power and Goodness,
hold the Reins of the Universe, and are at Peace in our own Consciences, the
Storm of the World may beat against us; but, though it may shake, it can never
overthrow us.

"ALTHOUGH the Fig Tree shall not blossom, neither shall Fruit be on the Vines;
though the Labor of the Olive shall fail, and the Fields shall yield no Meat;
though the Flock shall be cut off from the Fold, and there shall be no Herd in
the Stall; yet will we rejoice in the Lord, and we will Joy in the God of our
Salvation Habbak. iii, 17, 18.
." -- Although Misfortunes should besiege us round and round; though Woes should
cluster upon Woes, treading on the Heels of each other in black Succession, yet
when we remember God, and fly to him as our Refuge, we shall stand collected
and unshaken, as the everlasting Mountains, amid the general Storm.

WITH our Eye thus fixed upon Heaven, trusting in the Mercies of a Redeemer, and
animated by the Gospel Promises, we shall urge our glorious Course along the
Tract of Virtue, bravely withstanding the Billows of Adversity on either Side,
and triumphing in every Dispensation of Providence, Though Death should stalk
around us in all his grim Terrors; -- though Famine, Pestilence and sell War
should tear our best Friends from our Side; -- though the last Trump should found
from Pole to Pole, and the whole World should tremble to its Center; -- though we
should see the Heavens opened, our Judge coming forth with Thousands and ten
Thousands, his Eyes flaming Fire, the planetary Heavens and this our Earth
wrapped up in one general Conflagration; -- though we should hear the Groans of an
expiring World, and behold Nature tumbling into universal Ruin; -- Yet then,
even then, we can look up with Joy, and think ourselves secure. Our holy
Religion tells us, that this now glorified Judge was once our humbled Redeemer;
-- that he has been our never-failing Friend, and can shield us in the Hollow
of his Hand. The same Religion also assures us, that Virtue is the peculiar
Care of that Being, at whose Footstool all Nature hangs; and that, far from
dying or receiving Injury amid the Flux of Things, the fair Plant, under his
wise Government, shall survive the last Gasp of Time, and bloom on through
eternal Ages!

AND now, my respected Audience, I think it is evident that if we search all
Nature through, we shall find no sure Refuge but in keeping a clear Conscience,
and remembering God. If we constantly exert ourselves to do our Duty, and
remember that there is an all perfect Being at the Head of Affairs, the worst
that can happen to us can never make us altogether miserable; and without this,
the best Things could never make us in any Degree happy.

IF therefore, it is one great Design of all Afflicction, to bring us to such a
Remembrance, and make us examine into the State of our own Souls, I thick I may
be permitted to beseech you, by your own Hopes of immortal Glory and Happiness,
not to be blind and deaf to the repeated Warnings given you by your kind Parent
God. Though the Afflictions do not happen immediately to you, they happen for
you. And though all seems well at present, which of you knows how soon the Lord
may visit you in his fierce Anger? Which of you, young or old, can say your
Souls will not next, perhaps this very Night, be required of you? And think, O
think, if you have never been led to remember God, by the repeated Warnings
given you in this World, how unfit a Time it will be to remember Him, when you
are just stepping into the next; -- when (as you have seen lately in the Case
of many younger and stronger than most of you, here present) you shall be
struck senseless on a Deathbed at once, and know not the Father that begat
you, nor are conscious of the Tears of her that gave you Suck?

IF you can but think on these Things, -- the Vanity of this World, and the
Eternity or the next; -- if you can but think on the Value of those Souls, for
which a God incarnate died, and sealed a Covenant of Grace with his Blood, into
which you have solemnly sworn yourselves; -- surely if you weigh these Things,
you will stop your Ears against the Arts of the Charmer, charm be ever so
wisely. In vain shall the World pour her Siren Song in your Ears, saying --
"Behold here the true Path to Happiness. Why will you, O Man, bestow your Labor
and Toil for that which you are never sure to attain? Why will you refuse the
Pleasures I constantly offer you? See all the rest of Nature this Moment happy
without Toil or Care! You alore, who are Lords of this World, are miserable by
your own Folly! Come on, then! enjoy the good Things that were made for you.
Fill yourselves with costly Wines and Ointment. Crown yourselves with Rose-buds
before it be too late, and bring every Flower and Fragrance of the Spring under
Contribution to their Master."

In vain, I say, shall the World tempt you thus. The Reflections which I have
indulged above will sufficiently convince us that this Life has no such unmixt
Pleasures as these for us; and that what alone can either alleviate the Evils
of this World, or make its Goods give us any substantial Joy, is to remember
and draw near to God.

BEHOLD then, once more, this very God himself invites you to draw near to him;
and commemorary him at Preached on a Sacrament Day
his holy Table. Let him not, therefore, invite you in vain. Do not shamefully
renounce your most exalted Privilege, and voluntarily out yourselves off from
the Society of GOD'S universal Church. You all know what is required to make
you worthy of this exalted Privilege. It is a steadfast Faith in the
Gospel-promises, and the Mercies of God; a sincere Repentance for past
Offenses; an unfeigned Purpose of future Amendment, and an unbounded Charity
and Benignity of Heart toward our Fellow-mortals, however seemingly different
in Sentiment and Profession from us. If we have these Dispositions, either
begun now, or continued down to this Day from some earlier Period of our Life,
we can never come unworthily.

"Up! escape for thy Life! look not behind thee; stay not in all the Plain!
escape to the Mountain, lest thou be consumed Genesis xix. 17.
-- " was the Alarm rung in the Ears of Lot by his good Angels. Just so permit
me to alarm you; and O were my Voice like Thunder, that it might be heard through
every Corner of this City, while I warn you to escape from the Destruction that
hangs over you! Up! fly for your Lives to The Communion Table.
yonder Mountain of your God! Let not your Souls find any Rest in all the Plain
of this Life, till you have fixed on the everlasting Rock of your Salvation.
Let no Excuses detain you, nor linger while the Danger is at hand. Haste ye,
this precious Moment, lest it should be the last, haste ye to secure your
Interest in the Blood of Christ, and renew your Covenant with him. By these
Means, whatever may happen henceforward, you shall be safe -- eternally safe
from every Thing that can really hurt you.

I HOPE you will excuse my Warmth and Fears for you on this Occasion. I wish I
had no Ground for it. But you cannot but miss several whom you saw here last
Sacrament-day, and some of them younger than most of you, particularly the dear
Youth, whose much-lamented Death forced this Train of Reflection from my Heart.
But one Sabbath has intervened since twice I had the Honor to preach from this
Place, and twice that Day he was of the Audience. At that Time I believe none
of you dreamed he was so soon to be the Subject of Grief to many. You all saw
him; and who once saw, must have loved him. If glowing Health, Strength, Beauty
and Gracefulness of Person; -- if a Genius excellent by Nature, and carefully
adorned by all the Aids of a liberal Education; -- if the Esteem of his
Instructors, and mine in particular, in whose Bosom he had long grown up; -- if
the Tears of his Fellow-students, and especially of affectionate Brothers, with
whom he lived in constant Harmony; -- if the Love of the fondest Parents, who
perhaps the very Moment of his Dissolution were concerting Schemes for his
future Honor in Life, but are now sadly bewailing his present Lowness in Death;
-- if these Circumstances -- and perhaps none were ever more moving -- if these
Circumstances, I say, could have arrested the inexorable Hand of Death, and
saved such a rising Hope of his Country, late, very late, had he received the
fatal Blow! He bid fair to have been the longest Liver among us, and my Eyes
would have been for ever closed before any One had dropped that Tear to his
Memory, which is this Moment forced from me. But the fell Disease was of the
most inveterate Kind. All the Power of Medicine, and all the Love we bore to
him, could not gain one supernumerary Gasp. He fell, his Age almost Sixteen;
and as I long loved, so must I long remember him with pious Regard.

TO the Will of Heaven, however, I hope mine shall always be wholly resigned.
"Shall we receive Good at the Hands of God, and shall we not receive Evil
also." -- "The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, blessed be the Name of
the Lord!" I sincerely believe my dear Pupil is in a Far better State than
this. He has happily escaped from a World of Troubles. He has but just gone a
little before us, and perhaps never could have gone, in any Period of his Life,
more beloved, more lamented, or more prepared for Happiness, if unsullied
Innocence and Purity of Manners be the Means of Happiness. -- Strangers tended
his Sickbed with paternal Care. Strangers closed his Eyes, while their own
trickled down with Sorrow. Strangers followed him to the Grave in mournful
Silence; and, when his Dust was committed to Dust, Strangers paid the last
tributary Drop -- Yet after all to have a Son so beloved and so honored even by
Strangers, and to be surprised with the News of his Death, before they heard of
his Sickness -- what a severe Blow to the distant Parents! -- This Thought
unmans me -- again my Affections struggle with Reason -- Nature! thou art
Conqueror -- I can add no more -- I have now done the last Duty of Love -- let
silent Tears and Grief unutterable speak the rest! --

The END
A HYMN, comprising the chief Heads of the foregoing Sermon, composed to have
been sung after it was delivered.
FATHER of all! still wise and good,
Whether Thou giv'st or take away's
Before thy Throne devoutly bowed,
We hail thy providential Sway!
II.
SAVE us from Fortune's hollow Smile,
That lures he guardless Soul to Rest;
A Round of Pleasure is but Toil,
And who could bear a constant Feast?
III.
SOMETIMES thy chast'ning Hand employ,
Gently to rouse us, not to pain!
Sometimes let Sorrow prove our Joy,
And scatter Folly's noisy Train!
IV.
OFTEN let us drop a pensive Tear,
Over this much-suffering Scene of Man*
Acute to feel what others bear,
And wise our own Defects to scan.
V.
TEACH us, while Woes and Deaths are nigh,
To think on Thee, and weigh our Dust;
Well may we mark the Hours that fly,
And still find Leisure to be just.

