Extract from the Journal of the Honble House of Representatives, of His
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England, Begun and held at
Boston, in the County of Suffolk, on Wednesday the 28th Day of May, Annoque
Domini, 1755. Relating to the Imprisonment of Daniel Foul and Royal Tyler.
Veneris 30. Die Maii, A. D. 1755.
MR. Speaker informed the House, that in Consequence of his signing a Warrant
for the Committment of Daniel Foul, on the 24th of October last, by Order of
the late House of Representatives, he has been served with a Summons to answer
the said Foul at the next Inferior Court to be held at Boston in July next,
in an Action of Trespass commenced against him for One Thousand Pounds Damages,
for his signing the said Warrant: Which Procedure he communicated to the House,
that they might take the same under Consideration, and determine what they
judge proper to be done in the Case.

The Votes of the late House of Representatives relative to the said Affair,
and the Copy of the Summons, were read; and after a considerable Debate.

Ordered, That Mr. Gridley, Judge Russell, Mr. Trowbridge, Mr. Tyng, and Col.
Williams, be a Committee to take the said Affair under Consideration, and
report thereon as soon as may be.

Martis 10. Die Junii, A. D. 1755.
The Committee appointed to consider the Summons served on Mr. Speaker, the
Messenger of the House, and the Keeper of his Majesty's Goal in Boston, by
Daniel Foul and Royal Tyler, reported thereon, according to Ordered.

Read and Ordered, That the same be recommitted for Amendments, and that the
Committee sit forthwith.

Mercurii 11. Die Junii, A.D. 1755.
The Committee appointed on the Affair of the Summons served upon Mr. Speaker
etc. reported their Amendments thereon, according to Order: Which was read, and
is as follows, viz.

The Committee to consider and report on the Suits now brought against the
Speaker of the last House of Representatives, the honorable THOMAS HUBBARD,
Esquire; their Messenger William Baker, and the Keeper of the Prison Alexander
Young; by Daniel Foul and by Royal Tyler against the Messenger; find, that
the House of Representatives of this Province on the 24th Day of October last;
Voted, That a Pamphlet Entitled, The Monster of Monsters, then lately
published; is a false scandalous Libel, reflecting upon the Proceedings of said
House in general, and on many worthy Members in particular, in Breach of the
Privileges thereof; and Resolved, That the Messenger of the House do forthwith
take into Custody Daniel Foul of Boston, Printer, who they were informed was
concerned in Printing and Publishing the said Pamphlet, and that the Speaker
issue his Warrant for that Purpose; that the Speaker issued his Warrant
accordingly; and that the said Foul was thereupon on said Day apprehended and
brought into the House by the Messenger, and examined, and recommitted by Order
of said House; and that afterward on said Day the said Daniel Foul was
brought into the House, and further examined touching the Premises; and that
during said Examination he behaved very contemptuously toward the House; for
which, as well as on Suspicion of his printing and publishing said Pamphlet, it
was ordered by said House, That the said Daniel Foul be committed to the
Common Goal in the County of Suffolk, and that the Speaker issue his Warrant
accordingly; and that the said Speaker thereupon issued his Warrant directed to
the Messenger of said House, and to the Keeper of said Prison, for the
Commitment of said Daniel Foul to said Prison, on Suspicion of his printing
and publishing said Pamphlet; and thereupon on said Day the said Daniel Foul
was committed to the aforesaid Goal, by the said William Baker the Messenger,
and there received and imprisoned by Alexander Young the Keeper; and on the
25th Day of said October the said House Resolved, That Daniel Foul has been
concerned in publishing a scandalous Pamphlet, entitled The Monster of
Monsters, in which the House are greatly reflected on, in Breach of their
Privilege; and that he continued in said Goal on said Commitment until the
29th Day of said October, when he was brought to the Bar of said House, and
Reprimanded by said Speaker for publishing said scandalous Libel, and by the
said Speaker's Warrant discharged upon paying Cost, according to the Order of
the House.

And the Committee further find, That the said Royal Tyler was on the said
24th Day of October, by the Speaker's Warrant issued to the Messenger,
according to the Order of the House, taken by him into Custody, and brought
before them for being concerned in printing and publishing said Pamphlet, and
thereupon remained in his Custody until the 26th Day of said October, when he
was by Order of the House, discharged from said Custody.

Whereupon the Committee humbly Report,

That these Arrests and Commitments are the Matters of Complaint in said
Actions; that the Right of Commitment by the House of Representatives of this
Province for the Breach of their Privileges, will probably come into Question
in the Course of these Actions; that this Power of committing has often and for
a long Time been exercised by many former Houses of Representatives; that the
House of Representatives of this Province are the indisputable Judges of any
Breach of their Privileges, and have an Authority to arrest, commit and
examine for such Breaches, not only their own Members, but others; That it was
the indispensable Duty of the Speaker of said House to issue his Warrants
according to the aforementioned Orders, and of the Messenger of said House, and
Keeper of said Goal to execute them; and that these Suits are an Attempt
against the Rights of the People of this Government, in the Authority of this
House to commit for a Contempt to their Representative Body, and to frustrate
all Effect of this Authority, and to introduce Disorder and Confusion; and that
therefore the honorable THOMAS HUBBARD, Esquire; who issued these Warrants,
William Baker the Messenger, and Alexander Young the Keeper of the Prison, who
obeyed them, be defended in these Actions; and that a Committee of the House be
appointed to attend and take Care of the Defense.

Signed Jer. Gridley, per Order.

The Report aforegoing was read; and after a considerable Debate thereon, the
previous Question was put,

Whether the Acceptance of this Report should be determined by Yeas and Nays?

Resolved in the Affirmative.

Then the Question was put, Whether the House accept the foregoing Report?

Resolved in the Affirmative.

YEAS

Estes Hatch, Esquire; Samuel Miller, Esquire; Jeremy Gridley, Esquire; Mr. Richard Bayley,
Henry Gibbs, Esquire; Daniel Epps, Jun. Esquire; Robert Hooper, Esquire; Mr. Joshua Frye,
Capt. John Leach, Mr. Thomas Lancaster, Mr. Isaac Merrell, Capt. Benjamin
Milliken Mr. Jonathan Foster, Edmund Trowbridge, Esquire; Mr. James Russell, Mr.
John Hunt, Mr. Simon Hunt, Thomas Greenwood, Esquire; Capt. John Noyes, William
Lawrence, Esquire; Capt. Enoch Kidder, Joseph Buckminster, Esquire; Mr. Benjamin Hills,
Samuel Livermore, Esquire; Nathanael Russell, Esquire; The Hon. Chambers Russell Esquire;
Benjamin Reed, Esquire; Capt. Moses Marsh, Israel Williams, Esquire; Elijah Williams,
Esquire; Mr. Eldad Tailor, Mr. Daniel Kellogg, Mr. David Wilder, Mr. Jabez Upham,
John Murray, Esquire; Mr. Daniel Greenwood, John Whitcomb, Esquire; Timothy Ruggles
Esquire; Mr. Samuel Read, Mr. Francis Whipple, Thomas Foster, Esquire, Thomas Clap Esquire;
John Little, Esquire; Daniel Howard Esquire; Mr. Israel Turner, Mr. Isaac Bonney, Mr.
Ebenezer Sproutt, Mr. Elisha Barrow, James Otis, Esquire; Roland Cotton, Esquire; John
Freeman, Esquire; Mr. Jonathan Barney, Capt. Aaron Kinsley, Capt. Nathanael Sole,
Mr. Benjamin Day, Mr. Daniel Williams, Mr. Thomas Morey, Edward Milliken, Esquire;
Abishai Folger, Esquire;

NAYS.

Mr. John Tyng, James Bowdoin, Esquire; Mr. William Cooper, Mr. Samuel Heath, The
Hon. John Quincy, Esquire; Mr. James Humphry, Mr. Jacob Cushing, Mr. Ephraim
Chenery, Mr. William Bowdoin, Mr. Daniel Staniford, Mr. Thomas Barnard, Capt.
Benjamin Newhall, Mr. Abraham Morrell, Mr. John Temple, Mr. Samuel Wit, Mr.
Abraham Bigelow, Mr. Stephen Hall, Jun. Thomas Steel, Esquire; Mr. John Heywood,
Mr. Phinehas Heywood, Mr. Phinehas Lovett, Mr. John Brewster, Nathanael Stone
Esquire; Mr. John Bradbury, Nath Sparhawk, Esquire; Mr. William Gerresh, Mr. John Winn,
Charles Fr^st, Esquire; Mr. Samuel Hill.

Ordered, That Mr. Trowbridge, Mr. Gridley, and Col. Otis, be a Committee for
the Purposes mentioned in the foregoing Report.

Jovis 19. Die Februarii, A. D. 1756.
It being represented to the House that it will be necessary to furnish their
Committee appointed to defend Mr. Speaker, and the Messenger of the late House,
in the Actions brought against them by Daniel Foul and Royal Tyler; and there
being at this Time a very full House, it was Resolved to proceed immediately to
consider the said Affair, and make an Allowance for that Purpose accordingly:
And thereupon,

Voted, That there be allowed and paid out of the public Treasury of this
Province the Sum of One Thousand Pounds Sterling. to Edmund Trowbridge, Jeremy
Gridley, and James Otis, Esqrs; the Committee appointed by this House the 11th
Day of June last to attend and take Care of the Defense of THOMAS HUBBARD, Esquire;
Speaker of the last House of Representatives. William Baker their Messenger,
and Alexander Young, the Keeper of the Prison, in the Actions brought against
them by Daniel Foul, and against the said William Baker by Royal Tyler, to
enable the said Committee to defend said Actions to a final Judgment and
Execution, the said Committee to draw out the said Sum as there shall be
Occasion, and to be accountable. Sent up for Concurrence.

Veneris 20. Die Februarii, A. D. 1756.
William Brattle, Esquire; brought down the Vote of the House for granting L. 1000
Sterling to a Committee of the House appointed to defend Mr. Speaker etc. in
the Actions against them, now depending. Passed in Council, viz. In Council
Febr. 20th 1756. Read and concurred with the Amendments at A, B, C, and D. Sent
down for Concurrence.

Read and unanimously non-concur'd; and the House adhere to their own Vote.

Sent up for Concurrence.

On a Motion made and seconded by diverse Members,

Ordered, That Col. Otis, Mr. Gridley, Judge Russell, James Bowdoin, Esquire; and
Col. Cotton, be a Committee to prepare the Draught of a Message to the
honorable Board, Remonstrating against their Proceedings in altering and
amending the Votes of the House respecting Grants of Money, and report thereon.

Sabbati 21. Die Februarii, A. D. 1756.
The Committee to prepare the Draught of a Message to the honorable Board,
Remonstrating against their altering Grants made by the House, reporting the
following Message, viz.

The House of Representatives in the Grant Yesterday made to a Committee of the
House, to defend the Privileges of the Representative Body of this Province,
sensible of the Attempt made against the Right of the People of this Government
in the Authority of their Representative Body, to commit for a Contempt to
them, voted a Sum of Money for the Defense of this fundamental Privilege, and
sent this Vote to the honorable Board to be concurred or non-concurred,
neither of which they did, but were pleased to send it back with Alterations.
Whereupon the House declare it to be their clear Opinion, that the Grant of any
Money by this Court to be raised by the People, must not only originate with
the House, in Consequence of their representing the People, but that such Grant
cannot, in Consequence of this their singular Right, be any Way subject to the
Alteration of any other Branch of the Government; and that the Amendment made
Yesterday by the Board in the said Grant, is a Violation of the Privilege of
the House, upon a Vote made for the Support of their Privileges; which they
are determined thoroughly to defend and maintain against all Attempts and
Encroachments whatsoever.

Read and accepted, and Voted, That the foregoing Message be sent to the
honorable Board.

And Ordered, That Col. Quincy, Mr. Tyng, Mr. Sparhawk, Mr. Vassal, Nath.
Russell, Esquire; Col. Ruggles, Col. Clap, Capt. Livermore, and Col. Murray, be a
Committee to carry up the same.

John Chandler, Esquire; brought down a Message from the honorable Board; which he
read and laid on the Table, and then withdrew.

The said Message is as follows, viz.

The Board have no Inclination to engage in a Controversy with the honorable
House on any Point whatsoever, at a Juncture when Affairs of such vast
Importance are depending, and although the Board have been in the constant
Practice of lessening Grants made by the honorable House, ever since the
Charter, yet they do not design to enter into any Dispute on this Point at this
Time: Before the Message from the honorable House of this Day, the Board had
absolutely non-concur'd the Vote of the honorable House, which had first been
amended by the Board, but upon a Non Concurrence of the honorable House, was
again sent up to the Board.

The Board are desirous of keeping up the Harmony that has subsisted between
the several Branches of the Legislature, and are neither for extending their
own Privileges nor abridging the Privileges of the honorable House, and are
willing to come into any Expedient, that may preserve the Rights of each House.

The Board would have no Exception to a Vote, effectually securing the Payment
out of the public Treasury, of every reasonable Expense, that may attend or be
the Consequence of the Actions referred to: but they apprehend that many
Inconveniences may arise from the granting any determinate large Sum for this
Purpose, and that all the Ends proposed by the Vote of the honorable House may
be fully answered without it.

The said Message was read again.

The Message from the honorable Board of this Day was read again; and after
some Debate thereon, Ordered, That the same be committed to the Committee
appointed to prepare a Message to the honorable Board, Remonstrating against
their altering Grants of Money made by the House, to prepare the Draught of a
proper Answer thereto.

Lunae 23. Die Februarii, A. D. 1756.
The Committee appointed to prepare the Draught of an Answer to the Message of
the honorable Board of the 21st Instant, reported thereon. Which was read and
accepted, and

Voted, That the following Message be sent to the honorable Board, viz.

It was not with any Disposition to Controversy, the House sent their Message
on Saturday last to the honorable Board, but entirely from a Persuasion that
it is no more in the Power of the honorable Board to lessen a Sum of Money
granted by the House, than to make a Grant or augment the Sum; and although the
honorable Board have said they have been in the constant Practice of lessening
Grants made by the House, ever since the Charter, the House consider this as a
sudden Assertion, and impossible to be proved.

The House are very sensible of the Importance of the Affairs now depending in
this Court, and are desirous that the Harmony which has hitherto subsisted
between the several Branches of the Legislature may continue; they are at the
same Time sensible of the Attempt made abroad against a Privilege, without
which the House cannot subsist, and conceive it to be their Duty to take Care
of their own Being, for the Sake of that Harmony which is necessary for the
public Weal at this Juncture.

The House have considered the Conveniences and Inconveniences of the Grant
of Money, which they made to their Committee on Thursday last, to indemnify the
Speaker of the last House, against the Actions brought against him, and those
who acted by Virtue of his Warrant, issued by Order of that House; and to
secure this and all future Houses from any petulent, seditious Contempts, were
then as well as are now clearly of Opinion, that their Power of committing for
these Contempts, is of the greatest Importance to them; and that the Grant as
made is most convenient, and best adapted to answer the Purposes of it; and
should be glad the honorable Board would enter again into the most extensive
Consideration of the Advantages and disadvantages of it.

Ordered, That Major Hawley, Mr. Pain, and Nath. Russell, Esquire; be a Committee
to carry up the foregoing Message to the honorable Board.

Ordered, That Col. Cotton go up with a Message to the honorable Board to
enquire, whether they have (in Consequence of the Message from the House)
passed upon their Vote for granting a L. 1000 Sterling to their Committee
appointed to defend the Speaker and others, in the Actions brought against them.

Who returned that he had delivered the Message. Thomas Hutchinson, Esquire; came
down with a Message from the honorable Board to acquaint the House, that at
their Desire they had reconsidered the said Vote for granting L. 1000 Sterling
to the Committee of the honorable House; and after a full Deliberation, had
again non-concur'd thereon.

Ordered, That Col. Olis, Mr. Gridley, and Judge Russell, be a Committee to
prepare the Draught of a proper Vote for a Grant of a Sum of Money to defend
the Speaker etc. of the last House of Representatives against the Suits brought
against them, and report thereon.

The Committee appointed to prepare a Vote respecting a Sum of Money to be
allowed for the Defense of the Speaker etc. of the last House of
Representatives, reported the following Vote; which was read and accepted.

Voted, That THOMAS HUBBARD, Esquire; Speaker of the last House of Representatives,
William Baker their Messenger, and Alex. Young, the Keeper of the Prison, be
saved free and harmless from all Charges, in defending the Action brought
against them by Daniel Foul, and that said William Baker likewise be
indemnified of all Charges in the Action brought against him by Royal Tyler;
in both which Actions the Privileges of the House of Representatives are in
Issue; and that a Sum not exceeding One Thousand Pounds Sterling be allowed and
paid out of the public Treasury, to Edmund Trowbridge, Jeremy Gridley, and
James Otis, Esqrs; the Committee appointed by this House the 11th of June last,
to attend and take Care of their Defense, to enable the said Committee to
defend said Actions to final Judgments and Executions; the said Committee to
draw out any Part of said Sum as they shall find Occasion, by Warrant from the
Governor and Council; and to be accountable.

Sent up for Concurrence.

Martis 24. Die Februarii, A. D. 1756.
Ordered, That Mr. Cooper go up with a Message to the honorable Board to
enquire, whether they have passed on the Vote of the House for supplying their
Committee with Money to defend the Speaker and others, in the Actions brought
against them.

Who returned, that he had delivered the Message.

William Brattle, Esquire; came down with a Message from the honorable Board to
acquaint the House, that they have not passed on their Vote granting a Sum of
Money to their Committee, for the Defense of the Speaker and others.

Ordered, That Capt. Epes go up with a Message to the honorable Board to
enquire, whether they have passed on the Vote of the House granting a Sum of
Money for the Defense of the Speaker etc. of the last House of Representatives?

Who returned, that he had delivered the Message, and was informed, that they
had non-concur'd the said Vote.

Jovis 26. Die Februarii, A. D. 1756.
On a Motion made and seconded, Ordered, That Mr. Trowbridge, Judge Russell,
and Mr Cooper, be a Committee to prepare the Draught of a Vote for saving
harmless the Speaker etc. of the last House of Representatives, in the Actions
lately brought against them, and now depending in the Law; and report thereon.

The Committee appointed to prepare the Draught of a Vote for Defense of the
Speaker, etc. reported the following Vote, which was read and accepted, viz.

Whereas THOMAS HUBBARD, Esquire; William Baker, and Alexander Young, have been
impleaded by Daniel Foul, and the said William Baker has been impleaded by
Royal Tyler, for their Doings by Order of the last House of Representatives,
and the Actions are still pending in the Law; and whereas the Rights and
Privileges of the House of Representatives of this Province are in and by
these Actions called in Question:

It is therefore,

Ordered, That the said THOMAS HUBBARD, Esquire; William Baker, and Alex Young, be,
at the Charge of this Province, defended in the Actions aforesaid, throughout
the Course of the Law, and indemnified; and that Edmund Trowbridge, James Otis,
and Jeremy Gridley, Esqrs; a Committee heretofore appointed by this House, to
attend and take Care of the Defense of the Actions aforesaid, be from Time to
Time paid out of the public Treasury such Sums of Money as shall be sufficient
to enable them properly to defend those Actions in this Province; and in Case
of an Appeal to his Majesty in Council, or that the Actions aforesaid should be
otherwise carried Home, that the said THOMAS HUBBARD, Esquire; William Baker, and
Alexander Young, be there defended in the Actions aforesaid, at the public
Charge by the Agent of this Province. Sent up for Concurrence.


