A true REPRESENTATION of the PLAN (...) at Albany, for uniting all the British
Northern Colonies, in order to their common Safety and Defense; containing
Abstracts of the Authorities given by the several Governments to their
Commissioners; and of several Letters from the Secretaries of State, and Lords
Commissioners for Trade and ^^^ntations, concerning such an Union Together with
a Representation of the State of the English and French Colonies in
North America; and the said Plan of Union, with the Doings of the Commissioners
thereon; and some Remarks on the whole.
PARAGRAPH in the Commission given by the Honorable William Green, Esquire
Governor of the Colony of Rhode Island, to their Commissioners.

I DO THEREFORE, by Virtue of an Act of the General Assembly of this Colony,
authorize, empower, and commissionate you, the said Stephen Hopkins and Martin
Howard, jun. forthwith to repair to Albany aforesaid, and there, in Behalf of
this Colony, to meet and join with the other Commissioners, in consulting what
Methods are proper to be used, to preserve the Friendship of the aforesaid Six
Nations of Indians, and their Attachment to the British Interest in America.
And also, what else may be necessary, to prohibit the French, and their Allies
the Indians, from encroaching on the Lands within the Dominions of His Majesty.
And in general, as far as the Abilities of this Government will permit, to act
in Conjunction with the said Commissioners, in every Thing necessary for the
Good of His Majesty's Subjects in those Parts. And to answer as far as we can,
the Designs of His Majesty's Instructions to this Colony, communicated to us by
the Earl of Holdernesse.

PARAGRAPH in the Commission given by his Excellency William Shirley, Esquire
Governor of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, to their Commissioners.

AND WHEREAS, the Great and General Court or Assembly of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay aforesaid, have elected and appointed you to represent and
appear for the said Province, at the Convention aforesaid, for the Purposes
abovementioned. As also, for entering into Articles of Union and
Confederation, with the aforesaid Government, for the general Defense of His
Majesty's Subjects and Interests in North America, as well in Times of Peace as
War.

PARAGRAPH in the Commission given by the Honorable Thomas Fitch, Esquire Governor
of the Colony of Connecticut, to their Commissioners.

THEREFORE in Pursuance of the said Act of Assembly, you the said William
Pitkin, Roger Wolcot, jun. and Elisha Williams, Esqrs are commissioned,
authorized, and empowered, in Behalf of His Majesty's Colony of Connecticut, to
meet the Commissioners appointed by His Majesty's other Governments in America,
at Albany, on the 14th of June next; and in Concert with such Commissioners,
from His Majesty's other Governments, as shall meet there, to consult proper
Measures for the general Defense and Safety of His Majesty's Subjects in said
Governments, and the Indians in his Alliance, against the French, and their
Indians: And to use and pursue proper Measures in Pursuance of your
Instructions from the said General Assembly, relating the Matter aforesaid.

PARAGRAPH in the Commission given by the Honorable Horatio Sharp, Esquire
Lieutenant Governor of the Province of Maryland, to their Commissioners.

AND WHEREAS, I have had Intimation, that the Commissioners from the several
neighboring Colonies, will receive Instructions from their respective
Governments, to concert Measures with the Commissioners from the other
Provinces, for the better securing these Indians for the future, in our
Alliance, and preventing their being alienated from our Interest, by the
Artifices or Insinuations of our Enemies, as well as for the more easy Defense
of His Majesty's Dominions on this Continent. You shall, if any Propositions of
that Nature are made by the Commissioners, in Behalf of their respective
Governments, let them know, that this Province is also disposed to contribute
to the Execution of any general Scheme to promote such desirable Ends.

PARAGRAPH of a Letter from the Earl of Holdernesse, one of His Majesty's
Principal Secretaries of State; dated at Whitehall, the 28th of August, 1753,
directed to the Governor and Company of Rhode Island.

AND WHEREAS, it may be greatly conducive to His Majesty's Service, that all
his Provinces in America, should be aiding and assisting each other, in Case of
any Invasion: I have it particularly in Charge from His Majesty, to acquaint
you, That it His Royal Will and Pleasure, that you should keep up an exact
Correspondence with all His Majesty's Governors on the Continent.

Two Paragraphs of a Letter from the Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners
for Trade and Plantations; dated at Whitehall, the 18th of September, 1753.
directed to Sir Danvers Osborne, Governor of New York, and laid before the
Commissioners at Albany.

WHEN we consider of how great Consequence the Friendship and Alliance of the
Six Nations is, to all His Majesty's Colonies and Plantations in America in
general, as well as to New York in particular: When we consider, that this
Friendship and Alliance is only to be gained and preserved by making Presents
to them at proper Times, and upon proper Occasions; and by an inviolable
Observance of all our Engagements with them: And when we recollect the Attempts
which have been lately made, to withdraw them from the British Interest, we
cannot but be greatly concerned and surprised, that the Province of New York
should have been so inattentive to the general Interest of His Majesty's
Subjects in America, as well as to their own particular Security, as to have
given Occasion to the Complaints made by the Indians; but we are still more
surprised, at the Manner in which these Complaints were received, the
dissatisfactory Answers given to the Indians, and at their being suffered to
depart (though the Assembly was then sitting) without any Measures taken to bring
them to Temper, or to redress their Complaints. -- 'And this leads us to
recommend one Thing more to your Attention, and that is, to take Care, that all
the Provinces be (if practicable) comprised in one General Treaty, to be made
in His Majesty's Name; it appearing to us, that the Practice of each Province
making a separate Treaty for itself, in its own Name, is very improper, and may
be attended with great Inconveniency to His Majesty's Subjects.

PARAGRAPH of a Letter from Sir Thomas Robinson, one of His Majesty's Principal
Secretaries of State; dated Whitehall, the 5th of July, 1754. directed to the
Governor and Company of Rhode Island.

ALTHOUGH you have neglected to give any Answer to the Earl of Holdernesse's
Letter of the 28th of August last, yet as I cannot doubt of your Receipt of
that Letter, wherein the King's Orders were signified to you, not only to act
vigorously in Defense of your Government, but to be likewise aiding and
assisting His Majesty's other Colonies in America, to repel any hostile
Attempts made against them; I am now, by the King's express Command, to enforce
to you the said Directions, in the strongest Manner, and to acquaint you, that
His Majesty expects your immediate Observance of them.

Two Paragraphs of a Letter from the same Sir Thomas Robinson; dated at
Whitehall, the 26th of October, 1754. directed to the Governor and Company of
Rhode Island.

AND cannot fail to excite you to exert yourself, and those under your Care, to
take the most vigorous Steps to repel your common Danger, and to show that the
King's Orders which were sent you last Year by the Earl of Holdernesse, and
were renewed to you in my Letter of the 5th of July, have at last roused that
Emulation and Spirit that every Man owes at this Time to His Majesty, the
Public, and himself. -- But with Regard to such other Articles which are of a
more general Concern, It is His Majesty's Pleasure, That the same should be
supplied by a common Fund, to be established for the Benefit of all the
Colonies collectively, in North America: For which Purpose, you will use your
utmost Endeavors, to induce the Assembly of your Province, to raise forthwith
as large a Sum as can be afforded, as their Contribution to this common Fund,
to be employed provisionally, for the general Service of North America,
(particularly for paying the Charge of levying the Troops to make up the
Complement of the Regiments abovementioned) until such Time as a Plan of
general Union of His Majesty's Northern Colonies, for their common Defense, can
be perfected.

At a MEETING, etc. on Tuesday, 9th July, 1754.
PRESENT, The Hon. the Lieutenant GOVERNOR of New York, and the Four GENTLEMEN
of the Council of New York: And all the COMMISSIONERS, except Mr. FRANKLIN,
absent by his Appointment in the Morning.

THE Draught of the Representation, etc. was read and considered, Paragraph by
Paragraph, some Amendments made, and the whole was agreed to, and ordered to be
minuted as follows.

THAT His Majesty's Title to the Northern Continent of America, appears to be
sounded on the Discovery thereof first made, and the Possession thereof first
taken in 1497, under a Commission from Henry the VIIth of England, to Sebastian
Cabot.

That the French have possessed themselves of several Parts of this Continent,
which by Treaties, have been ceded and confirmed to them: That the Rights of
the English to the whole Sea Coast, from Georgia on the South, to the River St.
Lawrence on the North, excepting the Island of Cape-Breton in the Bay of St.
Lawrence, remains plain and indisputable.

That all the Lands or Countries Westward from the Atlantic Ocean to the South
Sea, between 48 and 34 Degrees of North Latitude, were expressly included in
the Grant of King James the First, to diverse of his Subjects, so long since, as
the Year 1606, and afterward confirmed in 1620; and under this Grant, the
Colony of Virginia claims an Extent as far West as to the South Sea; and the
ancient Colonies of the Massachusetts Bay and Connecticut, were by their
respective Charters, made to extend to the said South Sea; so that not only the
Right to the Sea Coast, but to all the Inland Countries, from Sea to Sea, have
at all Times been asserted by the Crown of England.

That the Province of Nova Scotia or Accadia, has known and determinate
Bounds, by the original Grant from King James the First; and that there is
abundant Evidence of the same, and of the Knowledge which the French had of
these Bounds, while they were in Possession of it; and that these Bounds being
thus known, the said Province by the Treaty of Utrecht, according to its
ancient Limits, was ceded to Great Britain, and remained in Possession thereof,
until the Treaty of Aix la Chapelle, by which it was confirmed; but by said
Treaty it is stipulated, That the Bounds of the said Province shall be
determined by Commissioners, etc.

That by the Treaty of Utrecht, the Country of the Five Cantons of the
Iroquoise, is expressly acknowledged to be under the Dominion of the Crown of
Great Britain.

That the Lake Champlain, formerly called Lake Iroquoise, and the Country
Southward of it, as far as the Dutch or English Settlements, the Lake Ontario,
Erie, and all the Countries adjacent, have by all ancient Authors, French and
English, been allowed to belong to the Five Cantons or Nations; and the whole
of those Countries, long before the said Treaty of Utrecht, were by the said
Nations, put under the Protection of the Crown of Great Britain.

That by the Treaty of Utrecht, there is a Reserve to the French, a Liberty of
frequenting the Countries of the Five Nations, and other Indians in Friendship
with Great Britain, for the Sake of Commerce; as there is also to the English,
a Liberty of frequenting the Countries of those in Friendship with France, for
the same Purpose.

That after the Treaty of Utrecht, the French built several Fortresses in the
Country of the Five Nations, and a very strong one at a Place called
Crown-Point, to the South of the Lake Champlain.

That the French Court have evidently, since the Treaty of Aix la Chapelle,
made this Northern Continent more than ever, the Object of its Attention.

That the French have most unjustly taken Possession of a Part of the Province
of Nova Scotia; and in the River St. John's, and other Parts of said Province,
they have built strong Fortresses; and from this River they will have, during
the Winter and Spring Season, a much easier Communication between France and
Canada, than they have heretofore had, and will be furnished with a Harbor
more commodiously situated for the Annoying the British Colonies by Privateers
and Men of War, than Louisbourg itself.

That they have taken Possession of, and begun a Settlement at the Head of the
River Kennebeck, within the Bounds of the Province of Main, the most convenient
Situation for affording Support, and a safe Retreat, to the Eastern Indians, in
any of their Attempts upon the Governments of New England.

That is appears by the Information of the Natives, the French have been making
Preparations for another Settlement, at a Place called Cobass, on Connecticut
River, near the Head thereof, where it is but about ten Miles distant from a
Branch of Merrimack River; and from whence, there is a very near and easy
Communication with the Abnekais Indians, who are settled on the River St.
Francois, about forty Miles from the River St. Lawrence; and it is certain, the
Inhabitants of New Hampshire, in which Province this Cohass is supposed to lie,
have been interrupted and impeded by the French Indians, from making any
Settlement there.

That since the Treaty of Aix la Chapelle, the French have increased the Number
of their Forts in the Country of the great Lakes, and on the Rivers which run
into the Missisippi, and are securing a Communication between the two Colonies
of Louisiana and Canada, and at the same Time, putting themselves into a
Capacity of annoying the Southern British Colonies, and preventing any further
Settlements of His Majesty's Dominions.

That they have been gradually increasing their Troops in America, transporting
them in their Ships of War, which return to France with a bare Complement of
Men, leaving the rest in their Colonies; and by this Means, they are less
observed by the Powers of Europe, than they would be, if Transports as usual
heretofore, were provided for this Purpose.

That they have taken Prisoners diverse of His Majesty's Subjects, trading in
the Country of the Iroquoise, and other inland Parts, and plundered such
Prisoners of several Thousand Pounds Sterling; and they are continually
exciting the Indians to destroy or make Prisoners the Inhabitants of the
Frontiers of the British Colonies; which Prisoners are carried to Canada, and a
Price equal to what Slaves are sold in the Plantations, is demanded for their
Redemption and Release.

That they are continually drawing off the Indians from the British Interest,
and have lately persuaded one Half of the Onondago Tribe, with many from the
other Nations along with them, to remove to a Place called Oswegachie, on the
River Cadaracqui, where they have built them a Church and Fort; and many of the
Senecas, the most numerous Nation, appear to be wavering, and rather inclined
to the French. And it is a melancholy Consideration, that not more than 150 Men
of all the several Nations, have attended this Treaty, although they had Notice,
that all the Governments would be here by their Commissioners, and that a large
Present would be given.

That it is the evident Design of the French to surround the British Colonies,
to fortify themselves on the Back thereof, to take and keep Possession of the
Heads of all the important Rivers, to draw over the Indians to their Interest,
and with the Help of such Indians, added to such Forces as are already arrived,
and may be hereafter sent from Europe, to be in a Capacity of making a general
Attack upon the several Governments; and if at the same Time, a strong Naval
Force be sent from France, there is the utmost Danger, that the whole Continent
will be subjected to that Crown: And that the Danger of such a Naval Force is
not merely imaginary, may be argued from past Experience. For had it not been
by the most extraordinary Interposition of Heaven, every Sea Port Town on the
Continent, in the Year 1746, might have been ravaged and destroyed, by the
Squadron under the Command of the Duke D'Anville, notwithstanding the then
declining State of the French, and the very flourishing State of the British
Navy, and the further Advantage accruing to the English, from the Possession of
Cape-Breton.

That the French find by Experience, they are able to make greater and more
secure Advantages upon their Neighbors, in Peace than in War. What they
unjustly possessed themselves of, after the Peace of Utrecht, they now pretend
they have a Right to hold, by Virtue of the Treaty of Aix la Chapelle, until
the true Boundary between the English and French be settled by Commissioners;
but their Conquests made during War, they have been obliged to restore.

That the French Affairs relative to this Continent, are under one Direction,
and constantly regarded by the Crown and Ministry, who are not insensible how
great a Stride they would make toward an Universal Monarchy, if the British
Colonies were added to their Dominions, and consequently the whole Trade of
North America engrossed by them.

That the said Colonies being in a divided, disunited State, there has never
been any joint Exertion of their Force, or Council, to repel or defeat the
Measures of the French; and particular Colonies are unable and unwilling to
maintain the Cause of the whole.

That there has been a very great Neglect of the Affairs of the Iroquoise, as
they are commonly called, the Indians of the Six Nations, and their Friendship
and Alliance has been improved to private Purposes, for the Sake of the Trade
with them, and the Purchase or Acquisition of their Lands, more than the Public
Services.

That they are supplied with Rum by the Traders, in vast and almost incredible
Quantities; the Laws of the Colonies now in Force, being insufficient to
restrain the Supply. And the Indians of every Nation, are frequently drunk, and
abused in their Trade, and their Affection thereby alienated from the English;
they often wound and murder one another in their Liquor, and to avoid Revenge,
fly to the French; and perhaps more have been lost by these Means, than by the
French Artifice.

That Purchases of Land from the Indians by private Persons, for small trifling
Considerations, have been the Cause of great Uneasiness and Discontents; and if
the Indians are not in fact imposed on and injured, yet they are apt to think
they have been; and indeed, they appear not fit to be entrusted at Large, with
the Sale of their own Lands: And the Laws of some of the Colonies, which make
such Sales void, unless the Allowance of the Government be first obtained, seem
to be well founded.

That the Granting or Patenting vast Tracts of Land to private Persons or
Companies, without Conditions of speedy Settlements, has tended to prevent the
Strengthening the Frontiers of the particular Colony where such Tracts lie, and
been Prejudicial to the rest.

That it seems absolutely necessary, that speedy and effectual Measures be
taken, to secure the Colonies from the Slavery they are threatened with; that
any farther Advances of the French should be prevented; and the Encroachments
already made, removed.

That the Indians in Alliance or Friendship with the English, be constantly
regarded under some wise Direction or Superintendancy. That Endeavors be used
for the Recovery of those Indians who are lately gone over to the French, and
for securing those that remain. That some discreet Person or Persons be
appointed to reside constantly among each Nation of Indians; such Person to
have no Concern in Trade, and duly to communicate all Advices to the
Superintendants.

That the Trade with the said Indians be well regulated, and made subservient
to the Public Interest, more than to private Gain.

That there be Forts built for the Security of each Nation, and the better
carrying on the Trade with them. That warlike Vessels be provided, sufficient
to maintain His Majesty's Right to a free Navigation on the several Lakes.

That all future Purchases of Lands from the Indians be void, unless made by
the Government where such Lands lie, and from the Indians in a Body, in their
public Councils. That the Patentees or Possessors of large unsettled
Territories, be enjoined to cause them to be settled in a reasonable Time, on
Pain of Forfeiture.

That the Complaints of the Indians, relative to any Grants or Possessions of
their Lands, fraudulently obtained, be inquired into, and all Injuries
redressed.

That the Bounds of those Colonies which extend to the South Seas, be
contracted and limited by the Alleghenny or Apalachian Mountains; and that
Measures be taken, for settling from time to time, Colonies of His Majesty's
Protestant Subjects, Westward of said Mountains, in convenient Cantons, to he
assigned for that Purpose. And finally, that there be an Union of His Majesty's
several Governments on the Continent, that so their Councils, Treasure, and
Strength, may be employed in due Proportion, against their common Enemy.

ALL which is submitted.

At a MEETING in the Courthouse at Albany, on Wednesday, the 10th of July,
1754. P. M.
PRESENT, The Hon. JAMES DE LANCIY, Esquire Lieutenant Governor of the Province of
New York: Joseph Murray, William Johnson, John Chambers, and William Smith,
Esqrs of the Council of the said Province of New York.

COMMISSIONERS for the several Governments.

Samuel Wells, John Chandler, Thomas Hutchinson, Oliver Partridge, and John
Worthington, Esqrs. for the Massachusetts.

Theodore Atkinson, Richard Wibird, Mesbec Wear, and Henry Sherburne, jun.
Esqrs for New Hampshire.

William Pitkin, Roger Wolcot, jun. and Elisha Williams, Esqrs. for Connecticut.

Stephen Hopkins and Martin Howard, jun. Esqrs for Rhode Island.

Benjamin Tasker, jun. and Abraham Barnes, Esqrs. for Maryland.

John Penn, Richard Peter's, Isaac Norris, and Benjamin Franklin, Esqrs. for
Pennsylvania.

THE Consideration of the Plan of an Union was resumed; which Plan is as
follows.

PLAN of a proposed Union of the several Colonies of Massachusetts Bay,
New Hampshire, Connecticut, Rhode Island, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania,
Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, and South Carolina, for their mutual
Defense and Security, and for the Extending the British Settlements in
NORTH AMERICA.

THAT humble Application be made for an Act of the Parliament of Great Britain,
by Virtue of which, One General Government may be formed in America, including
all the said Colonies; within and under which Government, each Colony may
retain its present Constitution, except in the Particulars wherein a Change may
be directed by the said Act, as hereafter follows.

That the said General Government be administered by a President General, to be
appointed and supported by the Crown; and a Grand Council, to be chosen by the
Representatives of the People of the several Colonies, met in their respctive
Assemblies.

That within Months after the Passing of such Act, the House of Representatives
in the several Assemblies, that happen to be sitting within that Time, or that
shall be especially for that Purpose convened, may and shall choose Members for
the Grand Council, in the following Proportions; that is to say:
Massachusetts Bay, 7 New Hampshire, 2 Connecticutt, 5 Rhode Island, 2 New York,
4 New Jersey, 3 Pennsylvania. 6 Maryland, 4 Virginia, 7 North Carolina, 4
South Carolina, 4 48

Who shall meet for the first Time at the City of Philadelphia in Pennsylvania,
being called by the President General, as soon as conveniently may be, after
his Appointment.

That there shall be a new Election of Members for the Grand Council every
three Years; and on the Death or Resignation of any Member, his Place shall be
supplied by a new Choice, at the next Sitting of the Assembly of the Colony he
represented.

That after the first three Years, when the Proportion of Money arising out of
each Colony to the General Treasury, can be known, the Number of Members to be
chosen for each Colony, shall from time to time, in all ensuing Elections, be
regulated by that Proportion (yet so as that the Number to be chosen by any one
Province, be not more than seven, nor less than two).

That the Grand Council shall meet once in every Year, and oftener if Occasion
require, at such Time and Place as they shall adjourn to at the last preceding
Meeting, of as they shall be called to meet at, by the President General on any
Emergency; he having first obtained in writing, the Consent of seven of the
Members to such Call, and sent due and timely Notice to the whole.

That the Grand Council have Power to choose their Speaker, and shall neither be
dissolved, prorogued, nor continue sitting longer than six Weeks at one time,
without their own Consent, or the special Command of the Crown.

That the Members of the Grand Council shall be allowed for their Service, Ten
Shillings Sterling per Diem, during their Session and Journey to and from the
Place of Meeting, twenty Miles to be reckoned a Day's Journey.

That the Assent of the President General be requisite to all Acts of the Grand
Council; and that it be his Office and Duty to cause them to be carried into
Execution.

That the President General, with the Advice of the Grand Council, hold or
direct all Indian Treaties, in which the general Interest or Welfare of the
Colonies may be concerned; and to make Peace or declare War with Indian
Nations. That they make such Laws as they judge necessary for regulating all
Indian Trade. That they make all Purchases from Indians for the Crown, of the
Lands now not within the Bounds of particular Colonies, or that shall not be
within their Bounds, when some of them are reduced to more convenient
Dimensions. That they make new Settlements on such Purchases, by granting Lands
in the King's Name, reserving a Quit-Rent to the Crown for the Use of the
General Treasury.

That they make Laws for regulating and governing such new Settlements, 'till
the Crown shall think fit to form them into particular Government.

That they may raise and pay Soldiers, and build Forts for the Defense of any
of the Colonies, and equip Vessels of force to guard the Coast, and protect the
Trade on the Ocean, Lakes, or great Rivers; but they shall not impress Men in
any Colony, without the Consent of its Legislature.

That for those Purposes, they have Power to make Laws, and lay and levy such
general Duties, Imposts, or Taxes, as to themselves appear most equal and just,
considering the Ability and other Circumstances of the Inhabitants in the
several Colonies, and such as may be collected with the least Inconvenience to
the People; rather discouraging Luxury, than loading Industry with unnecessary
Burdens.

That they may appoint a general Treasurer and a particular Treasurer in each
Government, when necessary; and from time to time, may order the Sums in the
Treasuries of each Government, into the General Treasury, or draw on them for
special Payments, as they find most convenient; yet no Money to issue, but by
joint Orders of the President General and Grand Council, except where Sums have
been appropriated to particular Purposes, and the President General is
previously empowered by an Act, to draw for such Sums.

That the general Accounts shall be yearly settled, and reported to the several
Assemblies.

That a Quorum of the Grand Council, empowered to act with the President
General, do consist of Twenty-five Members; among whom, there shall be one or
more from a Majority of the Colonies.

That the Laws made by them for the Purposes aforesaid, shall not be repugnant,
but as near as may be agreeable, to the Laws of England, and shall be
transmitted to the King in Council, for Approbation, as soon as may be, after
their passing; and if not disapproved within three Years after Presentation, to
remain in Force.

That in Case of the Death of the President General, the Speaker of the Grand
Council for the Time being, shall succeed, and be vested with the same Power
and Authorities, and continue 'till the King's Pleasure be known.

That all Military Commission Officers, whether for Land or Sea Service, to act
under this General Constitution, be nominated by the President General, but the
Approbation of the Grand Council is to be obtained, before they receive their
Commissions. And all Civil Officers are to be nominated by the Grand Council,
and to receive the President General's Approbation, before they officiate. But
in Case of Vacancy, by Death or Removal of any Officer, Civil or Military,
under this Constitution, the Governor of the Provinces in which such Vacancy
happens, may appoint, 'till the Pleasure of the President General and Grand
Council can be known.

That the particular Military as well as Civil Establishments in each Colony,
remain in their present State, this General Constitution notwithstanding; and
that of sudden Emergencies, any Colony may defend itself, and lay the Accounts
of Expense thence arisen, before the President General and Grand Council, who
may allow and order Payment of the same, as far as they judge such Accounts
just and reasonable.

After DEBATE on the foregoing PLAN:

RESOLVED, That the Cmmissioners from the several Governments, be desired to
lay the same before their respective Constituents, for their Consideration; and
that the Secretary to this Board, transmit a Copy thereof, with this Vote
thereon, to the Governor of each of the Colonies, which have not sent their
Commissioners to this Congress.

ORDERED, That all His Majesty's Governments on this Continent, may have
Liberty from time to time, to take Copies of the Proceedings of this Congress,
or any Parts thereof, paying for the same; and that no other Copies be
delivered by the Secretary.

THUS having seen Abstracts of the Authorities given the Commissioners who were
at Albany, and of those Letters from the Crown, which occasioned such
Authorities to be given; together with the State of the British and French
Colonies in America, and the proposed Plan of Union, formed in Consequence of
the whole: From and impartial View thereof, let every Man judge, Whether it was
not the Intent of all the Colonies who sent Commissioners, that they should
form some General Scheme or Plan, for the Safety and Defense of the English
Colonies, and the Indians in their Alliance? Look into the Commission from
Governor Green: and after full Powers are given to do every Thing relative to
the Indians in Alliance with us, What mean these following Words? And also,
what else may be necessary to prohibit the French, and their Allies the
Indians, from encroaching on the Lands within the Dominions of His Majesty. And
in general, as far as the Abilities of this Government will permit, to act in
Conjunction with the said Commissioners, in every Thing necessary for the Good
of His Majesty's Subjects in these Parts. And to answer as far as we can, the
Designs of His Majesty's Instructions to this Colony, communicated to us by the
Earl of Holdernesse. Surely such Words as these, have some Meaning; and if the
Commissoners were so unhappy as quite to mistake their Meaning, let those
penetrating Wits who think so, show to the World, how they are to be
understood. But if those Authorities were too extensive, let them be blamed who
gave such Authorities, and not those who executed them in the most sparing
Manner possible. And will any Man believe, such exact Likeness in Substance,
should be in the Authorities given by every Government to their Commissioners,
without having any Conference together about it, if the Directions from the
Crown had not pointed it out to them in so plain a Manner, that they all
understood them alike? And is it not as plain, from the Letters since received
from the Secretaries of State, that they all understood them in the Sense the
King intended them?

Although all this were allowed, yet some may say, If you had Powers given you to
enter into some such General Scheme, you ought not to have consented to one so
hurtful and destructive of our Liberties as this is! Whether the Plan formed at
Albany, be a good one, or a bad one, I shall not undertake to determine; yet let
it be considered, that the Rhode Island Commissioners were but two of the whole
Number, and therefore were far from being able to govern or form Things as they
might think best; neither did they ever pretend they could not be mistaken; and
Errors of Judgment will always be forgiven by Men of Candor.

And now let us examine what the Commissioners did relating to this Plan, and we
shall find, they did no more than form it, and agree to lay it before the
General Assemblies of the Colonies from whence they came, for their
Consideration. They did not, as is falsely asserted, order it to be sent Home.
They did not establish it as an Act or Ordinance of the Board of Commissioners,
as they all might have done, by the Authorities given them. They did not leave
it in the Power of any one to obtain a Copy of it, and send it Home; but
strictly forbid their Secretary to give any Copy, except to the Colonies. Nor
did they ever agree to any Thing more, than to carry it to their respective
Governments, and lay it before their Constituents. And agreeable to the Resolve
of the Board of Commissioners, those from Rhode Island, did lay this Plan, with
all other their Proceedings at Albany, before the General Assembly, at their
Session in August last, for their Consideration. Was this criminal! Was this
betraying their Trust! Or was there any Thing more in this, than their Duty!
Even Envy and Ignorance joined together, cannot say there was! And those who
have been bold enough to Assert, That any Thing more relating to this Plan of
Union was done, suffered to be done, or connived at, by the Commissioners, are
hereby publicly called upon, to prove their Assertions, or confess their
Falsehood.

Once more, let us hold up this so much talked of, Plan of Union, and view it
in another Light: And here, to do my Adversaries all the Justice they can
possibly desire, I will, for Argument-sake, confess it to be as bad as they
represent it to be. Viewing it in this Light, it must be sound contrary to, and
subversive of our happy Constitution, and all those valuable Privileges we
enjoy under it. This destructive Plan was laid before the General Assembly, for
their Consideration, in the Month of August last: This gave an Opportunity to
those Patriots belonging to the Council, who now say so much against this Plan,
to have exerted themselves in Defense of our Liberties, so much in Danger, and
prevented the dismal Effects so much seared. Well! What have these Champions
for Liberty, done in this Matter? Have they not let it lie before the Assembly
between six and seven Months, without taking it once under Consideration? Or,
Have they ever rejected it? or so much as once in all this Time, moved to have
one Word wrote Home, to prevent its taking Place? Was it bad, as they say it is,
then certainly 'twas their Duty to have done all in their Power to prevent its
taking Effect. All Men must confess, the Plan was either good or bad; if 'twas
good, Why do they blame it? if 'twas bad, Why have they done Nothing about it?

Now, let every sober-minded Man determine, Whether these Men can be real
Friends to the Colony, who placed in the foremost Offices, and entrusted with
its Safety, could let a Thing so dangerous to its Interest, lie unobserved by
the General Assembly, near seven Months, 'till perhaps it may be too late to
prevent it? And then to serve a private Party Turn, suddenly to roar out, The
Colony is in Danger! All who have Eyes, will see through such thin Disguses, and
be assured, that the Designs of these Men, are only to blast the Reputation of
one of the Rhode Island Commissioners, who at present may seem to stand in
their Way; and not to do the Colony any Service; for if that had been the Case,
they would have told us these Things sooner.

What could the Commissioners for Rhode Island have done more? or what could
they have done less than they did, relative to this Plan? It was not in their
Power to procure a better; and whether it was good or bad, it was equally their
Duty to lay it before the Assembly who sent them: They did so, and did no more;
and every Member of both Houses of Assembly can bear Witness, I have never used
the least Endeavor to induce them to accede to it. If it is bad, as some are
pleased to represent it, Must not every Man say. They who have suffered it to
lie thus long, are the very Men who have betrayed their Trust, and the Interest
of the Colony?

Real want of Merit, occasions these Men's Endeavor to rise upon the Ruin of
their neighbor's Reputation. But can the Faults of my Neighbor, make me fit
for an Office? And can the valuable Privileges of this Colony be safe in those
Hands, where every Thing else seems to be neglected, but what will serve their
private Purposes? As I am a Candidate for an Office, I sincerely desire all Men
may put their Country's Interest in the first Place, and give their Votes only
where they think it is most safe; and assure themselves, such a Conduct will
perfectly please the Colony's, and their Friend,

Stephen Hopkins.
Providence, March 29. 1755.

