Wars and Rumors of Wars, Heavens Decree over the World.

A SERMON, PREACHED In the CAMP OF THE New England FORCES. ON Occasion of the
EXPEDITION to remove the Encroachments of the FRENCH, on his Majesty's
Dominions in NORTH AMERICA.

By THEODORUS FRIELINGHUYSEN, A. M. Pastor of the Reformed Dutch Church in
ALBANY.

Printed at the DESIRE of MANY who heard it.

Thou make us a Strife unto our Neighbors:
And our Enemies laugh among themselves.
NEW YORK: Printed and Sold by HUGH GAIN, at the BIBLE and CROWN, in
Queen Street, 1755.

A SERMON, etc.
St. MATTHEW xxiv. 6. And ye shall hear of Wars, and Rumors of Wars: See that
ye be not troubled; for all these Things must come to pass, but the End is not
yet.


My dear Hearers, Grace and Mercy be multiplied unto you, now, and for
evermore.
WHEN we consider, that soon after the Beginning, the eternal Father, having
brought forth this whole Creation of his, sat on a Throne, glorious, exalted
and lifted up on high, surrounded by Hosts of exulting Angels (those Morning
Stars that sang together, those Sons of God that shouted for Joy) viewing every
Thing he had made, pronouncing it all, very good; and we do then reflect on the
present Situation of Affairs among Mortals, we must condole the Fate of our
Globe, as being changed from a Garden of God, an Eden, a Paradise of Holiness,
Joy and Felicity, into a Haunt of impure Spirits, a Scene of Sin, Horror, Woe
and Disappointment, a Lazar-house of Anguish and Torture, infested with Wars
and Rumors of Wars, Famines, Earthquakes, Inundations, Conflagrations,
Diseases, Pestilences, Deaths. And, notwithstanding this Reflection, gloomy as
it is, we would be very foolish indeed, if we thought the infinitely wise, and
great JEHOVAH, to whom all his Works are known from Eternity, had been
frustrated in his Scheme, he concerted to demonstrate the Glory of his eternal
Power and Deity; -- he who calls the Things that are not, as if they were,
can bring forth Light out of Darkness, and Life out of Death; -- he is both
wise and able, by his absolute and irresistible Providence, so to overruled the
greatest Evils, that they serve the wisest and most glorious Purposes. -- Had
there been no Fall, no Need had there been of a Redeemer; nor should the Saints
in Glory ever have had Reason to adore the Love, Mercy, and free Grace of God,
which saved them from so great Damnation, as the Vessels of his Wrath and
Indignation, shall suffer in the horrid Abyss, burning with Fire and Sulpher
unconsumed, prepared for the Devil and his apostate Crew. It is indeed an awful
Reflection, that this our Globe shall, in the last Conflagration, be all in a
Blaze of Fire; but that it will serve to purify and renew it, makes more than
ample Amends. -- And do we animadvert upon the Calamities and Tribulations that
befall a sinful World, we shall soon perceive that they serve wise Purposes, to
wit, that Sinners may learn Righteousness, and that Saints by their Patience
and Resignation to the eternal Decree of Heaven, by their Courage and godly
Heroism, may glorify the heavenly Father, when they fight the Battles of the
Lord Sebaoth.

Therefore our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, with so much Calmness and
Composure of Mind, fore-tells his Disciples, what great Changes should happen
on the Earth, before the End of the World come -- The Temple at Jerusalem
should be destroyed, that not one Stone be left upon the other, Judea laid
waste and desolate, and the Jewish State abolished. -- As they were nearly
concerned in this (and the human Mind is always inquisitive) they came
privately unto him, and said, Tell us, Lord, when shall these Things be? And
what shall be the Sign of thy coming, and of the End of the World? -- Jesus
cautions them against the Delusions (...) Impostors, who should come in his
Name, and dece^ many, by high Protestations and marvalous Predictio^

And in order to settle their Minds, and at the sa^^ Time not to leave them
altogether ignorant of Futur^ he reveals unto them the Fate of the World,
before the great and tremendous Day of Conflagration, and Consummation of all
Things come; to wit, that there shall be terrible Calamities and doleful
Tribulations on Earth, occasioned by Wars, Famines, Pestilences, Earthquakes,
Persecutions and Impostures. -- Against all which Jesus exhorts them to stand,
not only with manly Resolution and Courage, but also with godly Heroism and
Magnanimity of Soul, saying, Ye shall hear of Wars, and Rumors of Wars: See
that ye be not troubled; for all these Things must come to pass, but the End is
not yet.

So that the Words of my Text contain a Prediction of our blessed Lord, wherein
he foretells his Disciples, that it should be the Fate of the World to be
molested with Wars and Rumors of Wars, at the same Time commanding and charging
them not to be troubled thereat, but to have good Courage, and to be inspired
with godly Heroism and divine Magnanimity, from a Consideration that these
Things were ordained and decreed so to be, and so to happen, before the End of
the World come.

If ever any Words were apposite to an Occasion, these are so to our present
Situation, while we not only hear of Wars and Rumors of Wars, at a Distance,
but are upon an Expedition, to remove the Encroachments our antichristian
Neighbors, who also are our great Enemies, have made on our Borders: For which
End this Army, in the Midst of which I stand, is raised, and now soon to go
forth to meet their Adversaries in an awful Instant, in a critical Conjuncture,
and in a portentous Interval, that must determine our great Dispute.

I do then bend my Knees; I lift up my Eyes to the open Canopy of Heaven; I
spread out my Hands unto the Lord, my God, and pray from the Bottom of my
Heart; give Eear, O Shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a Flock,
thou that dwell between the Cherubim, shine forth before Ephraim and
Benjamin, and Manassah, stir up thy Strength, and come and save us. O Lord, God
of Hosts, how long will thou be angry against the Prayer of thy People? Turn us
again, O God of Hosts, and cause thy Face to shine, and we shall be saved.

In order that I may lay open and unfold the Prediction of the Lord, I shall
stand up and speak, as the Lord pleases to grant me Utterance (and O Lord, do
thou enlighten me by thy holy Spirit, strengthen and support me by thy
omnipotent Hand. Let one of the celestial Seraphims come with a live Coal from
thy Altar, and touch my Heart and my Mouth, that I may speak as it becomes me
to speak) of these three great Things.

First, That it is the Fate of the World, to be molested by Wars and Rumors of
Wars.

Secondly, That the People of God must see to it, that they be not troubled
thereat; but be inspired with good Courage and godly Heroism.

Thirdly, That these Things are ordained and decreed, so to be, and so to
happen, before the End of the World comes.

As to the first; we must remark, that he who here speaks, is our blessed
Lord, who speaks not as Men speak, often by mere Conjecture, or from external
Appearances of Things, but with divine Infallibility, and never-erring
Authority. All Things, past, present, and to come, are known to him: And it is
his Province to reveal unto his Prophets and Saints, whatsoever he sees fit
they should know. Wherefore he does here lay open and unfold to his Disciples,
the Fate and Lot of the World in general, and that of Judea in particular;
which is, that they should hear of Wars and Rumors of Wars: Wars present, and
Wars at a distance, but in Prospect; a Succession of Wars and Rumors of Wars:
Scarce was the one past, but the other was near at Hand, even at the Doors. --
And it has Weight with me, that to Wars, here are added Rumors of Wars:
Because it is with Wars, as with other temporary Evils we fear and dread, that
the Prospect of them oftentimes is more terrible and more alarming, than the
Experience of the very Thing itself; though not always, but sometimes the
reverse -- We have at present no more than Rumors of Wars, and it has put us
to such Preparation (which it ought to do) to such Expenses, to such Labor and
Toil, that we wish for War itself; nay, we conceive, if War in Fact do not
come, the Rumors of War we have had, would press very heavily upon us -- And be
felt throughout our whole Land a long Time.

Do we endeavor to trace the first Origin of Wars, we may find that they
descend from a grand Battle that was fought in Heaven, when Satan threw of his
Allegiance from the eternal Father, and with his Apostates waged War against
Michael and his Angels -- Satan lost the Battle (for how should he stand
against the Almighty?) And was doomed to the infernal Abyss, there to suffer
with his apostate Crew, the everlasting Condemnation of Hellfire, as Saint
Jude says in his Epistle, and the Angels which kept not their first Estate,
but left their own Habitation, he has reserved in everlasting Chains under
Darkness, unto the Judgment of the great Day -- Satan notwithstanding, by the
Sufferance of Heaven, found Means to come upon this earthly Globe; on which Man
was created, good and upright, after the Image and Likeness of his great Maker,
whom the arch Enemy of God and Man beguiled, deceived and perverted, to fall
off from his Creator, and to enter into Allegiance with him -- And hence spring
Wars and Rumors of Wars on Earth. --

There is not only Enmity sat between the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of
the Serpent, but Mankind in general is become hateful and hating one another:
From which Motive it came to pass that Cain slew his Brother Abel -- The
Antidaluvian Giants were Men of Renown, and mighty in Feats of Arms, and
withal exceeding wicked -- Tubal Cain, the Inventor of Weapons of Death, and
Lamech the revengeful, and others, no doubt, as well as Nimrod, hunted after
Man and Beast -- And soon after the Flood, the Inhabitants of the Earth being a
little multiplied, began again to wage Wars against one another, and have
persevered in that Practice to our Times, as History both sacred and profane,
will testify abundantly -- God's favorite People of old, the Jews, during the
whole Existence of their Theocracy, Hierarchy, Monarchy, Aristocracy, and
Democracy, have had to struggle with an almost uninterrupted Series of Wars,
until at last they were completely conquered by the Romans -- The Egyptians,
the Assyrians, the Babylonians, the Grecians, the Barbarians and Scythians, the
Romans and the Macedonians, together will almost all Nations on the whole
terraqueous Globe, in Asia, in Africa, in Europe, and in America, in both the
Indies, and on the Isles in the Sea, far and near, have levied many cruel Wars,
soon after the Fall of Man, unto this present Day; and will do so still, for
some Time.

Of old, Wars were carried on in a more simple Manner, than they are now Adays
-- Man fought with Spears, Javelins, Swords, Slings, Darts, Bows and Arrows --
They had indeed their Kings, their Armies, and their Chieftains, but were void
and destitute of that Pomp and Grandeur, which is now seen in military Affairs
-- Some times indeed, they made Use of battering Rams, to beat down the Walls
of a besieged City, and of great Engines to throw and whirl huge Stones, to
annoy their Adversari^^ as the Romans did in the Siege of Jerusalem, when the
Abomination of Desolation, as it was predicted and prophesied, came upon the
holy Land, and upon the holy Place: -- But they were nothing to our Cannon. --

The Discovery of Gunpowder has made a surprising Alteration in the Affairs
of War; it takes away the (...) between ^he strong and the weak, except only
that it allows a greater Chance to small and puny Bodies, to escape the fatal
Lead, than it does to great and robust ones -- It derides the Shield and the
Buckler, the Harness and the Coat of Mail, nay, would even pierce the Scales of
the Leviathan, that Sea Beast, hugest of God's Works, who laugheth at the
shaking of the Spear; the Dart and the Habergeon are his Sport -- Walls of
Stone, and Trenches dug in the Ground, are not a sufficient Bulwark against the
hollow Engines and the Iron Globes; and should they stand their terrible Shock,
the very Earth may be undermined, and torn up from her Caverns, by the horrid
Blast of Gunpowder; by created Force and Power not to be resisted -- It is a
Thing so terrible, that Milton in his Paradile Lost, ascribes the Invention of
it to the Devil, when he fought against the good Angels, whereby they were much
pestered.

-- Immediate in a Flame
But soon obscured with Smoke, all Heaven appeared,
From these deep throated Engines belcht, whose Roar
Embowel'd with outrageous Noise the Air,
And all her Entrails tore, disgorging foul
Their devilish Glut, chained Thunderbolts and Hail
Of Iron Globes, which on the Victor Host
Levelled, with such impetuous Fury smote,
That whom they hit, none on their Feet might stand,
Though standing else as Rocks, but down they fell
By Thousands, Angel on Archangel rolled.
He also supposes that the Discovery of it among Mankind, would be by
Inspiration of the Devil, as the Angel foretells Adam.

-- Yet happily of thy Race
In future Days, if Malice should abound,
Some one intent on Mischief, or inspired
With dev^^^sh Machination might devise
Like Instrument to plague the Sons of Men
For Sin, on War and mutual Slaughter bent.
Be this as it will, I think had the making of Gunpowder, and the Distilling
of Spirituous ^iquors never been invented, it would have been much better for
the World. I acknowledge both of them are of some Use but in my Opinion, the
Abuse is far greater.

The Scene of War is a horrid Scene. Nation rises up against Nation, and
Kingdom against Freedom. Warriors are levied; Armies are raised; they (...) up
to meet one another, Front to Front, a horrid Front! -- The hollow Engines
roar, the aetherial Sky is filled with Fire, Smoke and Thunder -- Swords and
Arms clash; the fatal Lead, and the Weapons of Death, dislode many a wretched
Soul from a mangled Body -- They lie sprawling, gasping, agonizing, dying, Row
by Row -- The Trumpets sound; the Drums beat, and the Wariors shout, that by
the Din and Clangor of the Living, the Peals of the Wounded, and the Groans of
the Dying, may not be heard -- Painted Savages, cruel Barbarians, deformed and
disfigured as Devils incarnate, stark naked like infernal Serpents, lie
sculking and stalking about, thirsting after Blood; now hovering hither and
thither, as Vultures and Harpies of Prey; then rush in, yelling and screaming,
as Hell Hounds destroying human kind -- Death and Slaughter are spread all
around; reeking Gore and mixed Carnage, are trodden under Foot of Man and Beast
-- Heads, Arms, Limbs, Members, Joints, and mangled Bodies, strew the Ground --
Here lies an Officer, and there a Soldier, weltering in Blood, fast asleep in
Iron Slumbers, not to be awaked, though his Scalp is taken off, before the last
Trumpet blows -- Here lies one quite dead, and yet with haughty Brow, as if not
conquered; there one expiring, frowning and threatening Death as he dies; and in
that Place one frightened to Death, before he was shot in his Flight, seems yet
to fly after the Soul has fled the Body. Another is so wounded that he can
neither live nor die. Yonder I see a dire Sight. The Ground upon which the
Warriors stand, they think is firm and solid Land; but behold! All is hollow
and undermined: Now are they blown up in the Air with horrible Noise and Ruin;
and falling down, are buried neither dead nor alive -- The Victory hangs
doubtful for a While, now inclining to the one, and then to the other, and
sometimes to neither Side -- When the one Army flies, the other pursues; and
when neither flies, perhaps the greatest Part fall together; and Thousands of
Mortals are sent to the other World -- And those that survive, remain either a
free People, or in Bondage, Captives and Slaves, as they have been favored
with glorious Victory, or been constrained to suffer foul Defeat -- The whole
Nation or Kingdom at Home, feels the Consequences of the Battle fought in the
Field -- This is War by Land. --

And the Seas, as if of themselves they were not troublesome enough, are often
infested by Wars -- Not the raging Billows, yawning to devour and swallow up,
not the blusterous Winds, not Hurricanes and Tornadoes, on Account of which,
they who follow the Seas, ought to have their Breasts armed with threefold
Brass, are so terrible as the Fire, Smoke and Thunder of the floating Castles,
driving on under a crowd of Canvass, and vomiting Flame and Fire, worse than
Aetna and Vesuvius -- Some sink and some swim; some have Sails and Tackle torn;
some are foundered, bilged and wrecked; others sat on Fire, and blown up in the
Skies -- The Ocean flows with Blood all around, and the adjacent Land is
shocked by an Earthquake -- They that go down to the Sea in Ships, they that
trade and do Business on great Waters, sometimes fall into the Hands of Pirates
and Buccani^rs, who rob and dispoil them of every Thing, and send them to the
other World, or a begging Home, or to a strange Land lost and forlorn.

Methinks I hear you by this Time say, is this the Tenor, and this the Base of
Wars? Then are they a Disgrace to the human Species! Yes, so they are -- Man in
this Respect excells (if in Cruelty there be any Excellence) Bears and Tigers,
Wolves and Lions, who very seldom, if ever, prey upon their own Species; nay,
less prone are they to Harmony among themselves, than even the Apostate Angels.

O Shame to Man! Devil with Devil damned
Firm Concord holds, Men only disagree
Of Creatures rational, though under Hope
Of heavenly Grace: And God proclaiming Peace,
Yet live in Hatred, Enmity and Strife
Among themselves, and levy cruel Wars,
Wasting the Earth, each other to destroy:
As if (which might induce us to accord)
Man had not hellish Foes enough besides,
That Day and Night for his Destruction wait.
God will judge the Nations, no Doubt, who levy Wars without a just Cause. The
Slaughter and Massacre, the innocent Blood poured out as Water on the Ground,
cries aloud against them, for Vengeance from Heaven. If Cain, who slew his
Brother Abel, was to be avenged seven Fold, and Lamech, who slew a Man to his
Wound, and a young Man to his Heart, Seventy and seven Fold, my God! what will
be the Retribution of those who for the Sake of gratifying their base Lusts, of
Pride, Ambition, Covetousness and Luxury, and an insatiable Thirst after Wealth
and Dominion, Fame and Puissance, and universal Empire, have been the Cause of
sending Thousands of immortal Souls, and many very unprepared too, into the
World of Spirits? They certainly will have a very heavy Reckoning to answer at
the great Day of Account, because of the Injustice they have done to their
fellow Creatures.

And notwithstanding all this; that Wars in a just Cause, when our Religion,
our Lives, our Liberties, and Properties are concerned, are both lawful and our
indispensible Duty, appears from the Nature of Things, from God's Dealings with
his favorite People, and from the Oracles of sacred and inspired Truth every
where -- If it be lawful for me, when a Highwayman, a Robber, or an Assassin
endeavors to take away my Life, that I in my own Defense, from a Principle of
Self-preservation, implanted in human Nature, take away his Life, how much more
is it lawful and expedient for a whole Nation or Kingdom, when their Religion,
their Lives, their Liberties, their Possessions, and all that, which of
temporal Blessings is precious and dear unto them, is in the utmost Danger of
being snatched away at one fatal Grasp, to cut off from the Land of the living,
those common and universal Robbers, those Pests to Mankind, and those Plagues
to human Society, that will at any Time, set the whole World in Uproar,
unjustly to aggrandize themselves by the Spoils and Ruin of others? -- Nay, is
it lawful for me, when in the Night, a Thief breaks through into my House, that
I kill him upon the Spot, not knowing but his Intention may be to kill me,
because a Thief is a Murderer, how much more is it lawful to a Nation, a
Kingdom, or People, when another Nation or People discovers a dark Design, by
breaking through Limits, Borders and Boundaries, through Treaties and
Covenants, in Time of Peace, incroaching and shedding innocent Blood, to repel,
in the Fear of the Lord, by Force, the Force and Violence of the grand Thief,
who, when he has stolen enough, always falls a murdering and a butchering? What
did Abram, the Hebrew do, when Lot, his Brothers Son, was taken Captive ^y
Chadarlaomer, and the Kings that were with him? W^y, he with his Three Hundred
and Eighteen trained Servants, Worshippers of the Deity, pursued the victor
Host, conquered the Conquerors, and rescued his Friend -- If such who make a
Trade of War, of Robbery, Encroachment and Plunder, were permitted to go on
without Control, God knows where, or whether ever they would stop, before they
had reduced this whole terraqueous Globe, to the last Degree of Horror,
Desolation, Bondage and Misery -- The Supreme Being, the eternal Father of all
Things, is the sole Proprietor of this our Globe, who by his Providence,
distributes and allots to Nations their sundry Heritage and Portions, unto
which as they have a Right, either by express command from Heaven, or by first
Discovery or Possession, they ought to be contented with -- God gave the Land
of Canaan to Israel his favorite People of old; he commanded them to drive out
the idolatrous Nations inhabiting the same -- Moses, under God, the Leader of
the Israelitish Host, was very willing to execute the Lords Command. Let us
remember how he held up his Hands on the Top of Mount Horeb, when Israel fought
against Amalek; Aaron and Hur, staying up his Hands when they were become heavy
-- How did he exhort and encourage Israel to be valiant? For the Lord your God,
is he that goes with you, said he, to fight for you against your Enemies, to
save you -- And I may not forget thee Joshua, Son of Nun, so eager to smite the
Amorites, that by thy Prayer thou prolonged the Day of Battle, in order to
obtain a complete Victory, by making the Sun to stand still at Gibeon, and the
Moon in the Valley of Ajalon -- Should I speak of the Judges in Israel, of
ancient Caleb, the Son of Jephuna, of Othniel, his loving Son-in-Law, of Ehud,
who with a Word and a Blow, brought God's Message to Eglon, the Moabytish King,
and of Shamyer who with an Ox Goad slew Six Hundred Philistines; and of thee
Deborah, thou Prophetess, and Mother in Israel thou heroic Woman; and of thee
Barak, who conq^ Sisera, Jabius Substitute, ye acted valiently, in fig^ the
Battles of the Lord -- Nor can I pass thee by Gi^ Son of Joash, who first waged
War against Baal and his Altar and Grove, then against the Medianites,
victorious in both, but not well rewarded by thy own People. And what shall I
say of thee Jephthah Gileadite, by God's Blessing happy in thy Wars, but by
thine own Rashness unhappy in thy Daughter? Samson that wonderful Danite, was
he not a Nazarite of God, to deliver Israel out of the Hands of the Philistines?
Did not the Spirit of the Lord come upon him for that Purpose, so that, though
he had slain many in his Life, the Dead which he slew at his Death, were more
than they which he slew in his Life? Although conquered by a Woman, he was
unconquerable by his Enemies, or by Death! The Rest were long to tell: And I
have said enough to show, that the Judges in Israel waged War in the Name of
the Lord, and that the Lord was with them -- And not only with them, but even
King Saul, though none of the best of Men, had God's Blessing on him in his
Wars, until he was disobedient unto the Lord's Voice. Jonathan, that lovely
Prince, a better Man than his Father, how did he with his Armor Bearer, in the
Strength of the Lord, defeat the Garrison of the Philistines! Pious King David,
how often did he consult God concerning his Battles; Lord shall I go forth and
engage with them, or shall I not? Will thou be pleased to grant me Victory?
Will thou deliver them into my Hands? And having God's Permission, and his Word
of Promise, he went forth, fought valiantly, and returned triumphant -- King
Asa, and King Hezekia, being sore beset, the one by the Aethiopians, the other
by the Assyrians, in their Distress, cried unto the Lord; he heard their
Prayers, and fought for them against their Enemies -- What a surprising
Deliverance was wrought by the Hands of Judith, that goodly Woman, that
Heroine, who smote off the Head of Holophernes! And the Maccabees, what great
Deeds did they do in Feats of War, all the while putting their Trust in the
Mighty One of Israel! which, though it be written in the Apocrypha, is
nevertheless worthy of Notice, and very much to our Purpose. --

Thus have ye before you, my Brethren, a Cloud of Witnesses to evidence, that
to fight the Battles of the Lord, is both lawful and well pleasing in his
Sight, who governs the Universe -- But perhaps ye will say, this was connived
at in the Times of Forbearance; but since Light and Immortality has been more
clearly displayed by the Gospel Dispensation, it was not so among the Saints --
Remember than the Exhortation of John the Baptist, to the Soldiers: Do Violence
to no Man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your Wages, for how
could they expect Wages, if it was not permitted to fight, when it was required
of them? He does not say unto them, your Calling is bad in itself, and
therefore I can give you no Directions in it; you must get yourselves disbanded
before I have any Thing to say to ye: But abstain from Cruelty, Oppression, and
Mutiny, unto which Vices Soldiers are often but too prone -- And our blessed
Lord himself, we find, did not rebuke the Centurion and other Soldiers, because
they were in that Employment, but rather declared not to have found so great
Faith, no, not in Israel, as in one of the Military Order -- Saint Peter also,
being by the holy Spirit sent to Cornelius, the devout Centurion, says not,
throw up thy Commission of the Band called the Italian: But instructs him and
his Family, in the Way of Salvation; and I doubt not in the least, but for all
the Lessons Saint Peter gave him, he was the better Officer -- Our Lord indeed,
as is right, strongly forbids, private Resentment, private Pique and Duelling
For in the private Wrongs we receive, we neither can nor ought to be our own
Judges nor Avengers; but must ^ave it to God, and to the Magistracy, in this
respect his Vicegerent, to do us Justice -- But that his People, in a just
Cause, may not fight his Battles, he says not. --

Seeing now Wars and Rumors of Wars are such terrible Things, and sometimes
very necessary and unavoidable, the Lord Jesus exhorts his Disciples to good
Courage and godly Heroism. See that ye be not troubled, says he; which is the
second Thing to be considered in the Text.

Which does then imply, that such is the Complexion of human Nature, as to have
a Propensity to be troubled thereat -- Wars put us to Jeopardy of our Lives,
and are often a Means of Death -- Nothing is dearer to a Man than his Life; and
Death is the King of Terrors to human Nature -- So that if ever Satan spoke the
Truth, it was in this; Skin for Skin, yea, all that a Man has, will he give
for his Life -- Some live in the Enjoyment of Things in this Life, so pleasing
to them, and so much according to their Wish, that parting from it is a very
melancholy Reflection -- And they know very well Death deals so arbitrarily,
that he minds not that at all; but for the most Part is so cruel, as to seize
those first who have the greatest Desire to live longer -- The young and the
gay, the rich, the great and the noble, and especially such as by an unexpected
Turn of Things, have been raised to a particular Degree of Happiness, such as
it is, in this vain and transitory World, he preys upon with insatiable
Voracity -- Others, who, notwithstanding they value the Enjoyments of Life
little, are yet struck with Terror by the dire and ghastly Aspect of Death, for
which, by the Weakness and Imbecility of their Minds, they have a natural
Dread and Abhorrence -- Others again, who perhaps for themselves, fear Death as
little as they value Life, and care little whether they swim or sink, live or
die, have beloved Relations, tender Pledges of Love and Affection, which to bid
so long an Adieu, is worse than Death -- Here is one Wedlock-bound to a loving
Wife, the Delight of his Life, a Relation so dear and tender, that the divine
Lawgiver says, when a Man has taken a new Wife, he shall not go out to War,
neither shall he be charged with any Business: But he shall be free at Home one
Year, and shall cheer up his Wife which he has taken; or perhaps he has
betrothed a Woman, and has not taken her, or built a new House, or planted a
Vineyard: There is another, who besides, is blessed with many Children, that can
so ill spare him: A third perhaps, has the Care and Support of an aged Parent,
a Father, or a Mother, or both. A fourth perhaps, all these at once. A fifth
peradventure, has neither of these, and yet by Ties of Love and Affection,
such as there was in Jacob toward Rachel, or such fraternal Amity as subsisted
between David and Jonathan, he may be very much troubled at the griesly Aspect
of Death, (often so cruel as to take the one and leave the other behind) at
least more than otherwise he should be -- Besides all this, Wars do not only
threaten us with Death, but also endanger our Bodies to be mangled and maimed:
We are in Jeopardy of losing Members of our Bodies by them; the hairy Scalp,
the Crown of our Heads, an Eye, an Arm, a Leg, and so forth; and thus be
constrained to suffer the Mortification of seeing and feeling ourselves die by
Piece-Meals; we may be taken Captive, be abused, tortured and cruelly treated.
-- We may moreover see dear Relations die or suffer extremely; Wives and
Daughters, Sisters and Virgins are sometimes ravished, and otherwise abused.
Children butchered like innocent Lambs, destinated to the Slaughter; tender
Babes and suckling Infants, torn from their Mothers Breasts, and dashed against
the Stones; -- ancient Parents dragged by their hoary Hairs, and stabbed to the
Heart -- Our Habitations consumed by Fire, and all our Effects ruined and
destroyed: -- Our Land, Cities and Towns taken from us, and possessed by the
Enemy, while we ourselves are left destitute and forlorn -- Nay, by Wars we may
be despoiled of our inestimable religious and civil Liberties, and be
constrained to spend our Days under Tyranny and Persecution, Bondage and
Servitude; Error, Heresy, Idolatry, Superstition and Thraldom -- Yea, Wars are
often accompanied by a long Train and Retinue of malignant Diseases and
contagious Distempers, and may end in Famine and Pestilence -- All these Evils,
and many more too long to enumerate, we may suffer by Wars. --

And notwithstanding all this (and more than I have said, or can say) we are
commanded and charged by our blessed Lord, to see that we be not troubled: --
We must keep up our drooping Spirits; we must have good Courage, and be
inspired with godly Heroism. -- We must see that we put our Trust in God, and
fly to him for Refuge and Succor; that we put ourselves in a Posture of
Defense, and then fight the Battles of the Lord valiantly -- Submitting the
whole to his Disposal. --

We must see to it, that our Cause be just and good. We are not to engage in
War from Motives of Lust, from Principles of Pride, Ambition, Rapacity,
Cruelty, Covetousness or vain Glory. This would be espousing the Cause of the
Devil, the Destroyer and Murderer of Mankind -- But for our Lives, our
Liberties, our Properties, and our most holy Religion. -- When wicked Men will
rob us of those Blessings, the Lord has been pleased to bestow upon us, then
is our Cause a just one, and becomes God's Cause, unto whom we may safely
appeal to decide the Controversy, as did Jephthah the Gileadite, when he was
constrained to engage in a War, against the King of the Children of Ammon; so
now, says he, the Lord God of Israel, has dispossessed the Amorites from
before his People Israel, and should thou possess it? Wilt not thou possess
that which Chemosh thy God gives thee to possess? So whomsoever the Lord our
God shall drive out from before us, them will we possess. -- Wherefore I have
not sinned against thee, but thou do me wrong to War against me: The Lord
the Judge, be Judge this Day between the Children of Israel, and the Children
of Ammon.

We must see to it, that in our Wars we engage in the Name of the Lord -- In
the Name of our God we must set up our Banners -- And above all Things, we must
enlist-under Emmanuel's Banner for spiritual Warfare, that we may have Peace
with God, and be in his Favor; that whether we live, or whether we die, we may
be the Lord's. -- We must begin, carry on, and end our Wars with God, and not
with Belial -- We must implore his Approbation, his Aid, his Blessing and
Succor, to our Enterprise, whom Moses his faithful Servant besought; if thy
Presence go not with me, carry us not up hence -- Let us Remember what Samuel
did, when all Israel was penitently gathered together at Mizpeh, imploring
Heaven for Deliverance from the Hands of the Philistines; Samuel cried unto the
Lord, for Israel, and the Lord heard him: And the Lord thundered with a great
Thunder, on that Day, upon the Philistines, and discomfited them; and they were
smitten before Israel: So that Samuel had Reason to erect a Monument Stone,
calling it Ebenezer, hitherto has the Lord helped us -- And thou pious King
Hezekiah, though thou had thy Failings and Weakness, art an Example of
Imitation unto us, in thy Prayer, which, out of the Fullness of thy Heart, thou
did send up to Heaven, when Sennacherib besieged Jerusalem, and Rabshakeh
reproached the living God! then did thou pray, O Lord God of Israel, who
dwell between the Cherubim, thou art the God, even thou alone, of all the
Kingdoms of the Earth, thou have made Heaven and Earth. Now, therefore, O Lord
our God, I beseech thee, save thou us out of his Hand, that all the Kingdoms of
the Earth may know that thou art the Lord God, even thou only. -- And behold
God's gracious Answer of this Prayer: And it came to pass that Night, that the
Angel of the Lord went out, and smote in the Camp of the Assyrians, an Hundred
and Fourscore and five Thousand: And when they arose early in the Morning,
behold, they were all dead Corpse. --

We must see to it, that we put ourselves in a proper Posture for War -- We
must not be as Laish, that lies in the Valley of Bethrehob, a People that
dwelt careless, after the Manner of the Sydonians, quiet and secure, where
there was no Magistrate in the Land, that might put them to shame in any (...)
We must fortify our Towns and Cities, we (...) and Citadels, Towers and
Castles, and strong Holds of Defense -- We must Watch and Ward, and be upon our
Guard. We must sound an Alarm, when required, with the mart^ Trumpet, and
gather our Forces together as one M^n, from Dan even unto Bersheba -- We must
cry, to Arms! to Arms! Arm Warriors, arm!

We must indeed see to it, that we act with Prudence^ Caution and
Circumspection; and not rush into the B^^tle with stupid Rashness; worse than a
Horse, a Mule, or an Elephant would do. Lions, Bears and Tigers, in catching
their Prey, seem to act with some Forecast^ what then should not rational
Creatures do? Consultations and Councils of War are to be held, Advice is to be
taken, Matters are to be deliberated upon, good Schemes are to be concerted,
and Affairs are to be wisely managed. -- The Strength and Situation of the
Enemy is to be reconnoitred and spied out, if it may be done, when, and at what
Place, it will be best to set Battle in Array against them, or how we may avoid
being annoyed by them. -- Let us not be too vain of our own Strength and Force,
nor think too mean of our Adversaries, it will create Indolence and Negligence,
and put us off of our Guard and Duty; far be from us, all Manner of Vaunting
and idle Presumption: He, that girdeth on his Armor, and Harness, let him not
boast as he that lays it off. -- But then, at the same Time, there must be
good Courage and Resolution, Activity, Magnanimity, Fortitude, Faith and Trust
in God, and in his eternal high Decree; chief Ingredients in Heroism!
Pusilanimity and Cowardice, says an ingenious Author, retards every Thing,
obstructs every Design, and gains no Point; and although there be the best
Schemes under Heaven, laid for Success against the Enemy, and gaining the
Conquest over them; yet, if the Army, or those that lead forth the Host, be Men
of no Courage, and do no^ prosecute and carry forward ^^e well-laid Schemes,
all turns out to be nothing. Alas! How many Armies have been routed! How many
Thousands of Men's Lives lost! And how many Expeditions entirely frustrated!
Because such as were to head the Army, have been timorous and wanted Courage;
were afraid to fight; or perhaps worse, were deceitful and treacherous. --
Scripture History informs us, how many that have wanted Courage have fled
before the Enemy; but then what noble Feats does it tell us, such have done,
who have been Men of Courage and good Spirit! How did the Heroes in the
Israelitish Nation, driv^ ^t their Enemies before them, subdue strong and
potent Kingdoms, and possess their Territories after them. --

We must see to it, that we refer the Issue wholly to the Supreme Being, firmly
believing that an omnipotent, infinitely wise, good and righteous God,
overrules all Events, according to his own good Pleasure, submitting ourselves
to his sovereign Disposal, as Job exhorted the Army of the Children of Israel,
when they were sore beset on all Hands; be of good Courage, and let us behave
ourselves valiently for our People, and for the Cities of our God; and let the
Lord do that which is good in his Sight. -- If we are conquered, we must say,
the Will of the Lord be done; if we conquer and overcome, we must give the
Glory to God. --

And all this for a good and sufficient Reason; because, all these Things are
ordained and decreed, so to be, and so to happen, before the End of the World
come, as in the third and latter Part of the Text; for all these Things must
come to pass. -- Such is the eternal, the irrevokable and irreversible Decree
of Heaven -- And whatsoever is decreed in Heaven, will not remain pendent in
the Clouds -- Such is the Will of the eternal Father, unto whom all his Works
are known from Eternity, who has concerted the whole Scheme, and laid the Plan
of the Universe: And his Will must be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven. -- All
Things are decreed by God, and the whole of our Fate is ordained by him, and it
shall happen unto us as he has decreed it. -- We must with patient Job,
confess, Lord-our Days are determined, the Number of our Months are with thee,
thou have appointed our Bounds, which we cannot pass. -- We must say, the Lord
gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord: -- Let him
bring upon me that which is appointed for me! We must deny ourselves, take up
our Cross, and follow Jesus. -- We must even lose our own Lives in ourselves,
that we may find them in God. -- This is godly Heroism and spiritual Warfare,
by which we conquer ourselves, and all the Powers of Hell and of this World;
and whereby we are of a Truth rendered capable to fight the Battles of the Lord
of Sabbath. Fortior est qui se quam qui fortissima vincit Moenia, nec Virtus
altior ire potest. -- He who conquers himself, is stronger than he that
conquers the strongest Walls, and Virtue can go no higher. --

We must then, as rational Creatures, be earnestly engaged in the Use of all
good and lawful Means, which the Lord has been pleased to put in our Way, to
promote our Happiness, in this and in the eternal World: But at the same Time
submit, with an holy Complacency in the just and good Will of God, to all that
he has decreed over us. -- Whether we sink or whether we swim, whether the
Lord kills us, or whether he preserves us alive, when we are in a Way of
dutiful Obedience to him, it must be Matter of holy Indifference to us,
whatsoever be his Disposal. --

Human Nature, alas! in its lapsed State, is but too prone to murmur and cavil
at the Dispensations of God's Providence. Godly Asaph, when he saw the
Prosperity of Fools, and reflected on the Adversities of the Wise and Pious,
breaks forth into Complaint: But as for me, my Feet were almost gone: My Steps
had well nigh slipped: For I was envious at the Foolish, when I saw the
Prosperity of the Wicked. -- But at length, when he went into the Sanctuary of
God, and saw the End, his Mind became serene and calm, and his whole Soul wrapped
up in an Ecstasy of Devotion, choosing God for the only and eternal Portion of
his Soul, and entrusting his all with him. --

While it has been my Business to see the Visions of the Almighty, I have seen
horrible Sights. -- I have seen Impiety and Oppression successful; Innocence I
have seen oppressed and abused. Those who feared the Lord, and eschewed Evil, I
have seen agonizing under Affliction upon Affliction, while at the same Time,
such as had not the Fear of God before their Eyes, nor his Greatness upon their
Hearts, were elevated with Prosperity. -- The wicked and ungodly I have seen
raised to Wealth and Honor, to Posts and Profits, while the sincere Worshipper
of the Deity, was as a despised Lamp, as one mocked of his Neighbor, and
laughed to scorn. -- Such as were a Burden to the World, I have seen continued
beyond the common Period pf Life, and such as seemed a Blessing; even Stars of
the first Magnitude, I have seen taken away by Death out of their Spheres, in
the bright Morning of Youth.

All these Things, and worse than these, mine Eyes have seen, mine Ears have
heard, and I myself have felt. Queque ipse miserrima vidi, quorum magna Pars
fui. -- Notwithstanding, do I ^ay my Hand upon my Mouth, and am silent; I
acquiesce in the eternal high Decree of Heaven; I submit with Patience and
Resignation, to the all overruling irresistible Providence of God: From which,
as soon as I do but in the least depart, I am lost in inextricable Labyrinths,
and find myself entangled in ten Thousand Mazes; I plunge from Deep to deeper
still, without reaching any Bottom; I am whirled round, without ever coming to
the Center of the Whirlpool -- But when I roll myself over upon the Rock of
Ages, my Soul returns again unto its Rest.

-- And if by Prayer
Incessant, I could hope to change the Will --
Of him, who all Things can, I would not cease
To weary him with my assiduous Cries:
But Prayer against his absolute Decree
No more avails, than Breath against the Wind,
Blown stifling back on him that breaths it forth:
Therefore to his great Bidding I submit.
Although now this holy Submission to the Will and Decree of Heaven, be what
our Dependence upon the Supreme Being makes our Duty, yet is there another
weighty Reason for it, to wit, our own Advantage: For if we do not submit
ourselves to the Disposal of Heaven, it will not take away our Adversities and
Calamities, but rather increase them; for then we are constrained to bear both
the Evil and the Murmurings of our Minds against it, which is a double Evil;
whereas if our Souls are inspired with Resignation to, and Complacency in the
Will of God, we have at worst, no more to suffer than one bare Evil; nay,
scarce any Evil at all, that divine Frame of godly Heroism changing Evil into
Good; so that were it possible one inspired therewith, should be ever in the
Place where the damned suffer everlasting Torments, it would make that Hell a
Heaven to him. --

Moreover, we often see, how those, that with godly Heroism resign themselves
to the Disposal of Heaven, are remarkably preserved and delivered by his
mavelous Providence, while others behaving with the most abject Pusilanimity,
and inglorious Timidity, have perished. -- Persevering Joseph, the Hebrew, who
would rather hazard his Life, than pollute his Conscience, how was he from the
Dungeon, exalted to Honor and Dominion, while the King's Baker was hanged
betwixt Heaven and Earth! Heroic David, how did thou in thy great Distress,
when thy temporal all was taken Captive, and thy own People spoke of stoning
thee, encourage thyself in the Lord thy God, and obtain mavelous Conquest and
surprising Victory over thine Enemies! But, poor Saul, who was wont to be
victorious when he trusted in God, how does he now, when he was forsaken of
God, and had with, Fear and great Dismay, consulted the Sorceress at Endor,
fall upon Mount Gilboa, as if he had not been anointed with Oil! Ye leprous
Samaritans, who ventured out into the Syrian Camp, saying, Why sit we here
until we die? If they save us alive we shall live; and if they kill us, we
shall but die; how were ye, when ye returned, Proclaimers of good Tidings! But
that wretched Lord, or Minister of State, on whose Hand the King leaned, who
said to the Man of God, Behold, if the Lord would make Windows in Heaven, might
this Thing be; how was he by the People, trod upon in the Gate that he died,
seeing but not enjoying what he at first would not believe, though foretold him
by a Man of God!

There is yet at last, one great Comfort in the Text, for the People of God,
which is this; But the End is not yet. -- Although it be the general Fate of
the World, to be molested by Wars and Rumors of Wars; yet shall there, before
the End be, come a glorious State of the Church, in which shall dwell Peace,
Joy and Rest, for the People of God: When Jews and Gentiles shall be one
People, rejoicing every where in the Salvation of the Lord; for his Name shall
be great, from the rising of the Sun, unto the going down of the same, and
every where shall Incense be offered, and a pure Offering. -- The Fullness of
the Gentiles shall come in, and all Israel be saved. -- Antichrist shall fall,
so that the Nations shout with Joy, she is fallen, she is fallen, Babylon that
great City. -- Satan the old Serpent, shall be bound a Thousand Years, that he
deceive not the Nations. -- Then will Jerusalem the beloved City, be the
peaceable Habitation of the Saints of both Jews and Gentiles, while our
glorious Redeemer sways his Scepter over all. -- Gog and Magog, will indeed,
when Satan is to be losed a little while, with innumerable Numbers, compass and
besiege the Camp of the Saints, and the beloved City: But Fire will come down
from God out of Heaven, and devour them. -- This Millennium of Peace, Joy and
Rest to the Church militant, is a great Consolation to the People of God: --
And it must certainly come before the End be; for while we hear of Wars and
Rumors of Wars, the End is not yet: There must be a Thousand Years of Peace, a
Sabbath of Rest, before the End come. --

Nothing is more certain, than that the End of the World shall come, but the
precise Time when it is to be, is as uncertain. -- Of that Day and Hour,
knows no Man; no, not the Angels of Heaven. -- Some have thought the World is
to stand six Thousand Years: Two Thousand Years before the Law-giving, two
Thousand under the Law, and two Thousand under the Gospel. -- It has been
about two Thousand Years before the Law was given in Form, and from thence to
the Gospel Dispensation, also about two Thousand Years; but I think, if we
endeavor to pry into the Gloom of sacred Prophecy, it will appear probable,
from the great Things that must yet come to pass, that the World is to stand
two Thousand Years under the Gospel, before the glorious State of the Church
come; which is to continue a Thousand Years, and makes three Thousand Years
under the Gospel; in the whole, seven Thousand Years of the World's standing.
-- After this there is to ensue a Period of Time of universal Defection and
Apostasy, when the World shall be as much sunk in Irreligion, Impiety and
Sensuality, as in the Days of Noah, when the Deluge over whelmed the World; so
that the Son of Man, when he comes to judge the Quick and the Dead, shall
scarce find Faith on Earth. -- But how long this Time of Apostasy will last, no
one of God's Creatures can tell. --

As of old, the World passed through the Water, so is it, in the last
Conflagration and Consummation of all Things, to pass through the Fire, as
Saint Peter says; the Heavens shall pass away with a great Noise, and the
Elements shall melt with fervent Heat; the Earth also, and the Works that are
therein, shall be burnt up. -- But whence this Fire is to proceed, we know not.
-- Some think it is to be done by the elementary Fire that surrounds our Globe;
others think, the Earth will be removed out of her Center, and be swallowed up
by the Sun, that vast Ocean and Furnace of Fire: Others more plausibly think,
there is a fiery Constellation, which in its Course is to meet our terraqeous
Globe, through which the Earth is to pass, in order to be purified by Fire. --
How uncertain soever these Conjectures may be, this is certain, that the
Consummation of this World, is to be by Conflagration; which is not to
annihilate, but to purify and to renew it, as Saint Peter says also,
nevertheless we, according to his Promise, look for new Heavens and a new
Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness. -- How then the Constitution of the
Earth will be, I am at a Loss to tell, but that it shall be as the Garden of
God, even as Eden, a Paradise, I doubt not in the least. -- The wicked shall
then be cast away into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.
-- And the Saints shall enter into Life eternal.

And at last, it must be Matter of Consolation exceeding great to the Saints,
that their Existence is not to end with their Tribulations; but that there
remains a Rest for the People of God, in the other World, in the celestial
ever blessed Paradise. -- Their Tribulations will not last always, but shall
soon have an End; and their Peace and Joy, exceeding full of Glory, shall
endure for ever, in the Kingdom of their Father.

So ye see, my dear Hearers, I have laid open and unfolded to you, as well as
the Lord has granted me Utterance, the Fate of the World, as predicted by our
Lord, to the Encouragement of all those that Love him to the End of Days. -- I
have held forth to you the high Decree of Heaven, as much as it was permitted
to me his Creature. -- I proceed now to make some Application and Exhortation,
on Occasion of this Expedition, for removing the Encroachments the French, our
Antichristian Neighbors and great Enemies, have made on our Borders. --

The Words of our Lord, Ye shall hear of Wars and Rumors of Wars, are now
verified among us. -- The French King, and Court, seem to be much bent on
aggrandizing their Monarchy, that nothing can satiate their unbounded Ambition,
or prescribe Limits to their enterprizing Disposition, than universal Empire on
Earth; and perhaps not that neither. It may be, if they had made a Conquest of
the whole World, they would wish for more Worlds to conquer also. Quid non
mortalia Pectora cogis Auri sacra Fames? -- This worse than enterprising Genius
in the French, was the Source of their late Wars in Europe and in America; in
which notwithstanding, they were remarkably frustrated and baffled: Louisburgh,
at Cape-Breton, was taken from them, and their Navy went to Wreck. -- But as
they who have an Enterprise much at Heart, are not discouraged by one
Disappointment, having when one Project miscarries, another in Embryo; so the
French, considering the Interest they had apparently obtained among the Indian
Nations in North America, have now transferred the Scene of War from Europe to
us, hoping to accomplish in the Newfound World, what in the old, they could
not. They have then since the Proclamation of the late Peace, discovered a
particular Inclination to encroach upon our Borders. -- His Majesty King
GEORGE, our most gracious Sovereign, always taking tender Care of the Concerns
of his liege, loyal and loving Subjects, was graciously pleased, having the
Interest of his Dominions in America much at Heart, to send the Earl of
Albemarle, and Governor Shirley, in an Embassage to France, to settle the
Boundaries between the two contending Nations in North America: But by the
Prevarications and Dissimulations of the French, their Negociations were
rendered abortive. -- Whereon the French seized, and began to fortify the Lands
along the Ohio, refusing to withdraw their Forces from thence, when in his
Majesty's Name, they were charged so to do by the Governor of Virginia. -- This
(as it ought to do) alarmed our Colonies exceedingly, and Commissioners from
several Governments were sent to Albany, to consult, what was to be done in
this Emergency; at which Congress, I believe (though I am not privy to these
State Affairs) a Union or Alliance was struck between the several Governments,
to join in endeavoring to remove the French from their Encroachments on his
Majesty's Dominions. The Result of which Confederacy, I believe, is the present
Expedition. -- The French, to prevent us, I suppose, from sending any Forces to
Ohio, stimulated their Indians to do Mischief in some of our Governments, by
cutting off the greatest Part of Hosac, and by killing, scalping, and
captivating some People, hereabouts, and in New England: And by Conspiracy (as
the Report goes) perhaps to prevent Britain from sending Forces to America,
threatened her with an Invasion. -- But as the Lord often takes the Crafty in
their own Devices, so have all these Doings of the French greatly tended to our
awakening. -- At Home, a great Armada is prepared; and his Majesty has sent
General Braddock abroad, with an Army to the Ohio, there, if it please God, to
dislodge the French in the Southward. -- Colonel Winslow, with an Army of
New England Heroes, is engaged to drive the French from their Encroachments in
the East, and to bring the treacherous Neutrals to Terms of good Behavior. --
General Pepperell (so say the public Prints) intends with an Army
Northeastward, to Kenebec River, and farther into Canada. -- In our several
Governments, Forces have been raised, some under the Command of his Excellency
General Shirley, to act their Part in the Westward, on Lake Ontario and at
Niagara. -- Others, under Command of Major General Johnson, and Major General
Lyman, to remove Encroachments in the North, at Crown-Point, that fatal Place.
--

Our Affairs, my dear Friends and Brethren, are come to a high Crisis! The
whole of the Land, the Lord our God, has been pleased to give us, seems at
present to hang in an awful Balance. -- If Matters go for us, it may be well
with us; but if they go against us, Woe! Woe unto us! -- The Idea I have of the
Consequence of our present Enterprise, against our Antichristian unjustly
encroaching Neighbors, is such, that I want Words to set it off. -- Our Cause
is a just and a good Cause, and what, by the Providence of Heaven, we are
called, we are constrained unto. -- For my Part, I would cheerfully venture in
it the last Drop of Blood that flows in my Veins (Dulce et decorum est pro
Patria mori) and should neither have wanted Resolution nor Inclination to
engage in fighting the Battles of the Lord, against our Antichristian Enemies
and their Barbarians, were not my Sphere of Action circumscribed by the
pastoral Office in the Church of God, and by the Care of Souls. -- But although
thereby my Hands are bound, my Heart, my Tongue and Pen is not. -- I am
desirous in my Sphere, to serve my God, my King, and Country, every Way I can,
and would willingly contribute my Mite toward our great Enterprise of removing
the French Encroachments. -- I do therefore in the Name of the Lord, exhort,
beseach, pray, obtest and conjure our whole Israel, from Dan even unto
Bersheba, that while we hear of Wars and Rumors of Wars, we be not troubled
thereat, whereas all these Things must come to pass, and the End is not yet;
but be inspired with good Courage and godly Heroism. --

Let us consider how just our Cause is, and how necessary, that we exert
ourselves against our encroaching Neighbors. -- Has not the Lord, by his
Providence, directed us to the first Discovery, and the first Possession of
this Land? -- Not to speak of the Discovery and Settlement probably made in
America, by Madock, Prince of Whales; did not John Cabot, very early, at least
before the French did, discover Newfoundland, and his Son Sebastian, all the
Coast from Newfoundland to Florida? Did not Sir Walter Raleigh, in the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, of blessed Memory, take Possession in America on this Side of
the Continent? And did he not sail into the South Sea, on the other Side of the
Main, and there receive a Surrender of California, from the King of the
Country? And did he not take Possession in the Queen's Name? Did not the Dutch
surrender and c^de to the English, New York, and Part of New Jersey? Did not a
pious People in Britain, so zealous for their God, that they fled from their
Native Country, into these wild Deserts, in order to enjoy the Liberty of
worshipping their God in Spirit and in Truth, settle in New England? Did not
God give the Land of the Heathen unto them? And was it not granted unto them by
Royal Charter, East and West, from Sea to Sea, from the Atlantic Ocean to the
South Sea, provided only such Part as might be in the Possession of any
Christian State or Potentate, of which there were none, except only the Dutch,
who ceded what they had to Great Britain? Have not the Iroquois, or Six
Nations, by most solemn Treaties, been acknowledged to be under the Protection
of the English, and their Claim to that Country yielded? Is it now lawful for
the French to come creeping in between us? Notwithstanding all these Things,
have the French these many Years been making Encroachments upon us. What else
is the Fort at Crown-Point, that fatal Place? And several others in the
North-eastward, and in the Westward, on Lake Ontario and Erie? Have they not in
Time of profound Peace, broken through solemn Treaties and Covenants, and built
three Forts on the Lands along the Ohio, thereby to annoy our Settlements,
employing their Indians, those Bloodhounds, in plundering, murdering, scalping
and captivating us, on all our Frontiers? -- They have already shed the
innocent Blood of our People along the Ohio, in Washington's Defeat. -- Last
Summer, without any Provocation in these Northern Parts, they have cut off and
burnt the greatest Part of Hosac and Sinkhaie, and have murdered, scalped, and
taken Captive several of our People. -- Although now this has been chiefly
perpetrated by Indians, it is notwithstanding evident, it proceeds from the
Instigation of the French. And must we suffer those most inhuman Barbarians,
those Griffins of Prey, to bathe their Clutches in innocent Blood, without
taking Vengeance on them? Must they with Impunity, snatch away our People in
ignominious Captivity, and having abused them with all the Barbarity they are
Masters of, arrogantly demand a Sum of Money for their Ransom, sufficient to
buy them a Negro or Slave? O just Heaven, do thou assume our Cause against
them! The Groans and Cries, the dying Convulsions of our unhappy suffering
Innocents, have been heard and seen by thee, from whom nothing is hid; O
Almighty Lord! Suffer this no longer, we beseech thee, take thou Vengeance on
them!

By what we have already seen and felt of the Maltreatment and Oppression, the
Violence and Cruelty of our Antichristian Neighbors, and their Barbarians, we
may judge, what they would do, if we permit them to go on; and if we were
unsuccessful in our present Expedition, for removing their Encroachments,
boundless and uncontrollable would be their Insolence; let us pursue them,
would they say, to the Ends of the Earth; at least, let us never stop until we
have driven those Hugonots, those pestilent Heretics, clear off from the
Continent of America. -- In vain did we seek universal Empire over the whole
Earth, by Wars in Europe; it is to be obtained on this Side of the Atlantic
Ocean. -- We must transport as many of our People as we can, from France, and
by them set the English adri^t; then are we in Possession of a spacious, of a
fruitful Land, wherein there is no good Thing wanting that is upon the Earth,
in which, when we have been once settled a little while, we will push our good
Fortune farther, (for the Northren Nations have always been an Over-match for
the Southern) and play the same Trick upon the lazy and indolent Spaniards, we
have done upon the English, which will make us Masters, sole Masters, of the
Silver and Gold Mines in Peru and Mexico; and if we once get them, the whole
World is ours.

This, it is likely, would be their Scheme; when our Condition would be woeful
indeed. We must then either die, or submit to Servitude and Tyranny, to
Idolatry, Superstition and Thraldom, far worse than the most cruel Death! Or
must we transport ourselves, naked and forlorn, beyond the Ocean? Or in what in
hospitable Part of this Globe, shall we pitch our fugitive Tents, and lament
with bitter Remembrance of our former State? Farewell now those fertile Lands;
farewell those fruitful Fields; farewell ye fat Meadows, and fructiferous
Valleys! Vales, Hills, Mountains, Woods, farewell! Farewell ye pleasant Rivers,
ye populous Towns, farewell; farewell ye joyous Cities, goodly Possessions,
farewell; adieu all!

And while we thus lament, will not Great Britain have Reason to utter her
mournful Complaint? Our Trade is lost and gone! Our floating Castles are no
more, or at least no more a Match for those of our inveterate Enemies! The
cruel Fate of our Brethren, of our conquered Colonies in America, follows hard
after us, and will ever long overtake us. A free Kingdom built on the Rock of
Liberty and of Right, must become subject to lawless and despotic Tyranny and
arbitrary Thraldom, and thus sink into the Tomb, and moulder and crumble into
Dust, out of which will only grow a Province of France; worse than which
nothing can be conceived. -- O! had we exerted our whole Strength in the Name
of the Lord in due Time! Had we behaved as it became valiant Britons, it would
be some Satisfaction ^ But alas! what aggravates our Misery, is, that we have
forsaken our God, and that therefore we have been forsaken by him, so that our
Eyes were struck with Blindness, our Hearts with Languor, and our Hands with
Weakness. -- Yea, all Europe shall fell the Consequence, and condole with us
that the Balance is broke, and our friendly Allies swallowed up by the grand
Monarchy. -- The Dutch, the Germans, the Danes, and the Rest, are all
inevitably to share our unhappy Fate. -- Thus should Great Britain, and all her
Allies complain. --

But let us also consider, how happy our Situation should be, if it pleased the
Lord to crown our Enterprise, unto which we are constrained, with good Success:
-- If we, in the mean While, that there are only Rumors of War, remove the
French Encroachments along the Ohio, on Lake Ontario and Erie, at Niagara, and
at Crown-Point, that fatal Place; and then War should be declared at Home, and
a Fleet sail up the River of St. Lawrence to attack Quebec, and our Armies
march up by Land to Montreal, and farther into Canada, we may, with the
Blessing of Heaven, do to the French what they thought to have done us; that
is, drive them quite off from the Continent of America, (for when Quebec, the
Root, is eradicated, the Trunk and Branches must fall of their own Accord) and
until that happen, there can be no Peace in Jerusalem; unless the French change
their Religion, their Policy and their Genius: No Wall of Stone, were it one of
the Worlds prodigious Wonders, as that between China and Tartary, no unfordable
Waters, profound Lakes and rapid Streams of Rivers, no insurpassable Alpian
Mountains, and craggy Clifts of Rocks, and Promontories, no impenetrable Woods
and wild Deserts, can be a sufficient Boundary between us: (As to Treaties and
Covenants, they are their Sport. --) They and their Savages bent on Bloodshed,
would wade, or sink or swim, and creep and leap through, and over all, to annoy
us, and we should endeavor to be avenged on them for their Insolence. -- And
thus must we be kept in continual Alarm, and at all Times have our Lives in our
Hands; or being teized and worried out beyond Patience, quit the Land to them
at length; which God forbid. (Delenda est Carthago.) -- But were we so happy in
our removing of Encroachments, as to remove the French quite out of
North America, then would we be blessed with an happy Situation, in a good
Land, flowing with Milk and Honey, abounding with every Necessary, and many
Comforts (if such any earthly Thing can be) of Life. -- Then would we be
delivered of those most inhuman Barbarians, those Canibals, the preying, the
murdering, and scalping Indians. -- Then might we sit in Peace and Quietude
under our Vine and Figtree. -- No Reason should we have to envy the Spaniards
of Peru and Mexico, their Gold and Silver Mines; we should get more than enough
of that Dust, by Mortals dignified for the Produce of our own Country. --

There is something very much to our Encouragement, which is, that Antichrist
must fall before the End come; and that there must be a peaceable and glorious
Kingdom, or Hierarchy on Earth, a Thousand Years, when the Name of the Lord
shall be great, from the risi^g of the Sun, unto the going down of the same,
and (...) and a pure Offering shall be offered every where (...) the Fullness of
the Gentiles shall come in, and a^ Israel be saved; all Nations of the Earth
rejoicing in the Salvation of the Lord: And Satan, the old Serpent, be bound,
that he deceive not Mortals. -- The French now adhere and belong to Antichrist,
wherefore it is to be hoped, that when Antichrist falls, they shall fall with
him. -- It is moreover certain, that real Religion must yet flourish in
America, in the glorious State of the Church; the French Religion is polluted
with Idolatry, and therefore it is to be expected, that they either shall be
converted or subdued. --

But as this makes for us, so is there also much against us: Our Sins and
Abominations are exceeding great. -- What wicked and ungodly Principles; what
Atheism and Infidelity; what Cursing and Swearing, and taking God's sacred Name
in Vain; what Perjury and false Oaths; what Profanation and Sabbath breaking;
what Neglect of public and private Worship to the Supreme Being; what
Debauchery and Uncleanness; what Whoredom and Adultery; what Theft and
Injustice; what Violence and Oppression; what Lying, Slander, and Hatred and
Malice; what Drunkenness, Luxury and Intemperance; what Pride and Haughtiness
of Spirit; what Impenitence and Hardness of Heart; what Enmity against real and
experimental Religion, does not our Land groan under, in this Iron Age of
Defection and Apostasy, which God will punish with Judgments from Heaven?

If we look into the History of Antiquity, and remark the Ways of God's
Dealings with Israel, his favorite People of old, we shall find, the
Dispensations of his Providence toward them were such, that when they loved
and served their God, he gave them Victory over their Enemies; but when they
polluted their Souls with the Abominations of the Heathens, they were left a
Prey to their Adversaries, who butchered them as Brutes destinated to the
Slaughter, domineered and tyrannized over them. -- Our Antichristian
Neighbors, it is true, are as far remote from the Favor of Heaven, as we, and
farther too, if possible; they worship Idols in a literal Sense, and adore the
Works of their own Hands; but so did the Nations also, that lead Israel
captive. There is more expected of a Nation blessed with the Light of Truth,
than from one groping in the Darkness of Ignorance, of Superstition and
Idolatry. -- O that we were wise! That we understood this! That we would
consider our latter End! How should one chase a Thousand, and two put ten
Thousand to Flight, except their Rock had sold them, and the Lord had shut them
up?

Before then, my dear Hearers, I exhort you to the Enterprise ye are now going
upon; I beseech, I pray, and obtest you in the Name of the Lord, to renounce
the Service of Sin and Satan, and to enlist for spiritual Warfare, under
Emanuel's Banner, against the Diabolians. -- Seek an Interest in the blessed
Redeemer. -- Enter into that everlasting Covenant, which shall never be broken.
-- Make your Peace with God, and then ye need not be troubled. -- Then will you
be fit to live, and fit to die; and though ye die, ye shall live for ever. --
Such of you as are really pious (of which I trust there are some, who have
chosen God for the only and eternal Portion of their Souls) I expect will also
make the best Warriors. -- And what I have said once on another Occasion, that
had a near Connection with this, I now speak again in the same Words: -- Ungodly
Sinners are the worst of Warriors. -- And no Wonder! The Terror of the Lord
seizes impious Men: When Death is before their Eyes, the World of Spirits then
open to their View, overshadows their Souls with gloomy Apprehensions,
foreboding the Blackness of Darkness for ever. Infernal Vultures of Prey hover
over their Heads, to snatch away their guilty Souls to doleful Shades. -- But
there stands the Man, who firmly believes God's eternal Predestination; who
does wholly acquiesce in his irresistible high Decree, who has made his Peace
with God; Angel Guards attend him, to conduct his parting Spirit into the
celestial ever blessed Paradise. See how intrepid he stands! Composed as the
Saint whose Errors are forgiven, glowing with heroic Enthusiasm. See how he
marches up against the blazing Steel; Fire, Smoke and Thunder terrify him not:
The fatal Lead whistles around his Head, without darting Panic into his Heart;
his Breast being defended by a Shield of triple Adamant, is far more
impregnable to the Terror, than to the Death of the hollow Engines; great,
noble, and heroic Deeds are done by him. -- Or is it that we look for Council
of War, and high Exploit? Here will we find the Saint to excel the Sinner; for
the Fear of the Lord is the Beginning of Wisdom, as well as of Courage:
Besides, the Saint is honest and loyal, and inspired with patriot Zeal; whereas
the best that can be said of the irregenerate Sinner, is, where Mammon leads
the Van, Belial will never fail to bring up the Rear.

Come on then, my dear Friends, begin this Enterprise with the Lord, and not
with Belial. Be ye inspired with good Courage and godly Heroism, to fight the
Battles of the Lord; and the Lord of Sabbath, the God of the Armies of Israel,
shall be with you, to hold up your Faces, and to cover your Heads in the Day of
Battle; to save and defend, to bless and to prosper you exceedingly. -- He will
send his holy Angels (those heavenly Hosts, who encamp round about the Tents of
the faithful) to protect you, and to put your Adversaries to Flight. --

And may the Lord of Hosts bless the Arms of his Majesty, our most gracious
Sovereign, every where abundantly! O would God grant General BRADDOCK, to be
successful along the Ohio, from thence to expel the French entirely! -- May Sir
WILLIAM PEPPERRELL, (that Hero who has heretofore been blessed with such
signal Success in the Reduction of Cape-Breton) and Colonel WINSLOW, be
exceeding prosperous in the North-eastward, against a Treacherous Enemy! May
his Excellency General SHIRLEY, with the Forces at Oswego, remove the
Encroachments of our Adversaries, to good Purpose in the West, at Niagara and
thereabouts, on Lake Ontario and Erie! -- May this Army, commanded by Major
General JOHNSON, and Major General LYMAN, be blessed from Heaven, with
exceeding good Success against Crown-Point, that, fatal Place. -- The Lord of
Sabbath be a Wall of ^ire round about it, and a Glory in the Midst of it!

May ye, Gentlemen Officers, who have the Command in this Army, be valiant as
David's Heroes, and valiant Men! Be ye pious and fearing the Lord, as Cornelius
the devout Centurion. -- May ye be Men of God's right Hand, Workers of Justice
and Righteousness, kind and examplary to your Soldiers, dear and precious to
your Friends, victorious and terrible to your Enemies, loving Worshippers of
the Deity, going forth in his Fear and Strength, returning triumphant with his
Praises, beloved, preserved and blessed, by him with whom is the Fullness of all
Blessings, in this and the eternal World.

My Brethren of the Clergy, ye Sons of Levi, who are a going up with this Army:
-- May ye see the Visions of the Almighty! His Urim and Thummim be with you. As
Aaron and Hur, support ye and stay up, the Hands of Moses when they become
heavy. -- Be ye fervent in Prayer, faithful in Exhortation. -- When this Army
goes out to Battle, approach ye then and speak unto the People, in the Name of
the Lord: Let not your Hearts faint, fear not, and do not tremble, neither be
ye terrified: For the Lord your God, is he that goes with you, to fight for
you against your Enemies, to save you. -- Above all, exhort them to spiritual
Warfare under Emanuel's Banner; they will make much the better Soldiers for it.
-- And the Lord grant you to be Instruments in his Hand, of saving many
precious Souls, that shall be your Joy and Triumph in Glory!

Ye Doctors of Physic, be ye tender of the Health, of the Lives and Limbs of
these our Friends and Brethren, that are going forth to fight the Battles of
the Lord, for their King and Country, and for our most holy Religion. Caution
them against every Thing that may be hurtful to their Healths, and may have a
Tendency to bring on Indispositions, Diseases and Distempers to Body or Mind.
-- Apply faithfully the reviving Medicine, the assuaging Opiate, and the
healing Balsam, to the Sick and Wounded. -- It is indeed better to pluck out an
Eye, to cut off a Limb and Member, than that the whole Body die, and rot and
perish; yet are they not to be lopped off and destroyed, without the most
absolute Necessity, and the greatest Extremity. -- Mortals so wretched and
miserable, that they can neither live nor die; that Priest and Levite can do no
more than give them over to the Mercy of Heaven, are often the Objects of your
Commiseration. -- Neglect not, I beseech you, to treat them with Mercy; and a
merciful God, the gracious Physician of Souls, reward you with everlasting
Mercy. --

And now, all ye Warriors and Soldiers, be ye valliant as the Children of
Israel. -- Put your Trust in the Lord of Hosts, and not in your own Strength
and Numbers. -- Be ye Pious and Religious, as that devout Soldier, who waited
continually on Cornelius the good Centurion. -- Abhor that abominable Practice
of impious Swearing, and of taking God's sacred Name in vain. -- The Lord will
not hold such guiltless; ye may thereby provoke Heaven to blast this
Expedition: And should you even succeed, and return victorious, little Reason
will your Country have to thank you, if you return Home, habitua^ed to a Vice
of which others may catch the Contagion, and spread the Infection to such a
Degree of Abomination, that just Heaven be incensed to send down a Storm of
Vengeance on the whole Land. -- As ye are yet, for the most Part, pretty well
free of this horrid Vice, shun and avoid it, worse than you would do the evil
Spirit. -- Refrain ye from all Manner of Profaneness and Im^iety. -- Avoid
hard Drinking: Be not drunk in strong Liquor, in Wine or in Rum, in which there
is Excess; but be full of the Spirit. -- Whatsoever is honorable, whatsoever
is manly and becoming, whatsoever is good and just, that do ye. -- Fortify your
Minds with Resolution, with Patience and Resignation, to do, and to suffer all
that the Lord in his Providence requires of you. -- Enter into an everlasting
Covenant with God; choose him for the only and eternal Portion of your Souls;
and surrender yourselves to him, Soul and Body, for Time and Eternity, so that
ye be not your own, nor another, ^t his, the Lords, for ever. -- You shall
have many Difficulties to encounter, and perhaps more than you are aware of --
Your Army will be but unequally yoked with Unbelievers. -- And it happens
sometimes, that even the Righteous suffer in the Judgments God inflicts to
punish the Ungodly. -- Moreover, you are to deal with a barbarous, a cruel, a
savage, a merciless Enemy; nay, an Enemy whose very Mercies are Cruelty, whose
very Appearance is frightful, whose very Shouts and martial Cries, are enough
to strike a Mind not well fortified, with Panic and Confusion. -- Death, the
King of Terrors, in all his ghastly and formidable Shapes, the World of
Spirits, nay, almost a Resemblance of Hell, will be represented to your View,
in a most horrible Drama, in a most terrible Scene. -- But be ye not terrified
at all this; see that ye be not troubled, for all these Things must come to
pass, but the End is not yet. -- Be ye inspired with good Courage and godly
Heroism, resigning yourselves in the Hands of the Lord, wholly acquiescing in
his eternal high Decree, be assured no Harm can befall you, but by Heaven's
Permission: Every Ball and Iron Globe, that proceeds out of the Mouth of the
Cannon, every Bomb from the Mortar, every Bullet out of the Musket, every
Sword out of the Sheath, i^ under his Direction; and must do just so much, and
no more, than pleases him. -- Should you then see the Cannons mortal Mouth,
and the Mortars gaping wide upon you; should you hear it roar, and see it
vomiting Fire and Flame, and perceive the Globes of hard ^^on, and of fatal
Lead, as Bees buzzing about your Ears, be ye not troubled thereat, well
knowing, and firmly believing, Heaven overrules all. -- Should you see
Savages, disfigured and deformed, like Devils incarnate, come rushing in upon
you, yelling and screaming, as if all Hell was let loose, be assured, if God
sends his holy Angels to protect you, they that be for you, are more than they
that are against you. -- Should you see Scores fall on your right Hand, and on
your left, know ye that God is able to preserve you, if it be his holy Will;
and should you die, if you are but in God's Favor, it will be an happy
Exchange of Mortality, for Immortality; of Corruption, for Incorruption. -- Men
and Brethren, be of good Courage, and let us behave ourselves valiantly for our
People, for our Land, and for the Cities of our God; and let the Lord do that
which is good in his Sight. -- This is a critical Conjuncture, this is a
portentous Interval, that must determine much of what unto us is valuable in
this miserable World: Our Lives, our Liberties, our most holy Religion, are at
^take; and on you, under God, it depends, in a great Measure, whether we shall
be a free People, or Slaves; whether we shall keep our most holy Religion, or
whether we shall be necessitated to submit to Idolatry, Superstition and
Thraldom. -- Remember the Heroes of old, how they fought the Battles of the
Lord, for ye have them for an Ensample: Remember Abram, Moses, Caleb and
Joshuah; remember Barak and Deborah, Gi^eon and Jephthah, and Samson; forget
not David and Jonathan, and others who were valiant, too long to tell, ^or
Judith, and the Maccabees. -- Or is it, that ye think ^^se Examples far remote?
Remember then, the Va^our of the ancient Britons, and how King William of
^mmortal Memory fought! -- Never forget how dear and precious, our venerable
and pious Ancestors esteemed their Religion, and the Liberty of worshipping God
in Spirit and in Truth, that they emigrated out of their Native Country, on
Purpose to enjoy the free Exercise of it here, when the whole of this Land was
nothing else than a ^ast Desert, and an howling Wilderness; and how va^antly
they behaved ever since! It must, certainly be yet ^esh in your Memories, what
our Brethren, the Heroes New England (among which many of you were) have ^ne
against Cape-Breton, when God was so remarkably ^h you, inspiring you with
Valor heroic, with good ^urage and Conduct, and prospering your Enterprise,
that its proud Walls gave way to your Arms, and it fell into your Hands; which
was a Means of promoting the Peace of all Europe. -- It seems the Lord by his
Providence, has placed you a Bulwark against the French Encroachments, there
being yet something of the Life and Spirit of genuine Religion among you,
which, alas! is too much lost in our Land! -- Be ye then faithful in the Trust
committed by Heaven to your Charge. -- You have already suffered much by the
French and their Indians, and what we are all like to suffer, if they (which
God forbid!) should prevail over us, is too manifest to want any Explanation.
-- Our Land is yet in its Infancy, and Posterity is greatly interested in it,
how w^ at present behave. -- Let therefore no one think too hard of it, to
leave his Family and dear Relations, as well a^ to venture his Life and Limbs,
in order to engage i^ this Enterprise; it is for their good, as well as for our
own Persons. -- If the Lord be with us, we may expect good Things yet to come.
-- Who knows, if War be declared, but we take all Canada; and then we may
expect Peace in our Jerusalem, which the Lord of his infinity Goodness grant,
if it be his holy Will and Pleasure! -- However, be this as it will, and
leaving the hidden Things to the Lord our God, unto whom they appertai^ this is
certain, that it is our indispensible Duty, now ^ behave ourselves valiantly,
trusting the Event of the whole to him, whose Will must be done on Earth, as is
in Heaven. -- And that the gracious Presence of the Lord our God, may go with
you on this Expedition that the Light of his Countenance shine upon you, (...)
the Terror of the Almighty seize your Enemies, (...) smite them before your
Faces, so that ye return triu^phant, is my Blessing over you, out of the
Sanctua^ the Covenant God of his People, make it yea, and Am^

Ye People of Albany, you the Flock committed to (...) pastoral Charge, I
exhort to treat these our Breth^ with Kindness, and to lend them an helping
Hand when insoever you can. -- Ye see already the vast Difference there is in
Expeditions, when begun with the Lord, and when with Belial. -- The Time was,
that Forces came up to us on a shadowy Expedition, not having the Fear of God
before their Eyes, nor his Greatness upon their Hearts, (sad Presages these of
an unsuccessful Event, and of blasted Expectations!) Now you see Worshippers of
the Deity, in Spirit and in Truth. -- The Time was, that Forces came up to us,
without Urim or Thummim, without Priest or Levite, to show them the Way of the
Lord. -- Now ye see Priests of the Lord, with whom is Urim and Thummim, of
which there is one come while I have been speaking, whom I bid welcome in the
Name of the Lord. -- The Time was, that you heard and saw nothing but cursing,
swearing, drinking, carousing, dallying, playing, and all Manner of Impiety and
Ungodliness; now you hear and see Prayers put up to the Supreme Being, as
constantly as the Morning and Evening Sacrifice was offered up by the Children
of Israel, (Do ye the same in your Families?) Instead of the profane Music ye
formerly heard on Balls and Assemblies, ye now hear the sacred Songs of Sion
sung in their Camp. -- Instead of Blasphemy and profane Discourse, ye see and
hear now a religious Conversation, (O that ye in this Respect followed their
Example!) -- The Time was, that Droves of Cattle were slaughtered, for the Sake
of the Hides and Tallow, and Buildings demolished for the Sake of Fuel, or for
the Nails and Iron Work in them, and when the aggrieved Party complained, the
only satisfactory Answer they received for their Comfort, was, Such is the
Tenor of War, so it always happens in Times of War. -- Now you see that this is
false; for not a Chicken has been hurt, as yet, by these our New England
Brethren. -- And as to Valor and Heroism, I who have been an impartial
Spectator into the whole Scene, must say this of the few New England Men we had
then among us, to defend us against the Assaults of the Enemy, that, as they
had yet something of Religion, of which others seemed to have made a total
Abjuration, they stood, where others fled; nay, where others dared not to set
their Feet, they have kept the Field. -- So than, if I prognosticate any Thing
aright, the Omens are at present inclining to the fortunate Side, and we may,
with the Blessing of God, hope for something great and good for our Land, to
deliver us out of the Hands of our unjustly encroaching Enemies. -- It may be,
that on Account of our Sins, Heaven has yet more Chastisements for us in
store, and that these our Brethren, who all the While will be but unequally
yoked with Unbelievers, being overpowered by hostile Force and Numbers, are put
to the Worst; but this I dare prophesy, they shall not fall unavenged of our
Enemies, nor without making many of them bite the Ground, as an Atonement for
the innocent Blood they have shed. -- And therefore, what I have said once, I
say again; let us be kind and loving to these our Friends and Brethren, as they
are to us; and let us lend them an helping Hand when and wheresoever we can. --
And the Lord speed and succeed them, with his Blessing from on High! -- Say ye
all in your Hearts, Amen, so be it. --

And may we all, they that go up hence, and they that continue here, yea the
Whole of our Land, from Dan even unto Beersheba, (and O! that I could raise my
Voice loud as Thunder, that all might hear! for we are a sinful Land, and a
sinful People) altogether humble ourselves low before our God, penitently
confessing our Sins and Abominations, fervently imploring his gracious Pardon
and Forgiveness of our numerous Transgressions! May we thoroughly reform from
our Vices! May we put away every wicked and unclean Thing from among us! May we
become a holy People, zealous in good Works, acceptable to our God! O! that
many may be stirred up, by the Lords holy Spirit, to inlist for spiritual
Warfare, under Emanuel's Banner! O that many may turn unto the Lord and live! O
that many Souls may be conquered by the gracious Arrows of Heaven, and be
overcome by the Shafts of God's Love, which surpasses all Understanding! --
Let us resign all our Concerns, and especially this Expedition, in his Hands,
who governs the Universe, acquiescing in his eternal high Decree, whatsoever be
the Event of Things. -- Should we be put to the Worst, let us wait with
Patience on the God of our Salvation, and persevere in fighting his Battles,
until his Help appear out of Sion, his holy Hill, for our Deliverance, and
until his Time come to be gracious, and ^o show Mercy to his Land, and to his
People: -- Are we victorious, let us be thankful to our God, proclaiming his
Praises with grateful Hearts, ascribing unto him all the Glory, (Not unto us,
not unto us, but unto thy Name, O Lord, give Glory!) and walk in his holy Ways.

And now what shall I say more? I seem to have spoken all out, and nevertheless
I fell as if I had yet much to speak. -- O may Almighty God, who rules in the
Hea^ens above, and on the Earth beneath, direct the Wars and Rumors of Wars he
has decreed over us, and all ^her Dispensations of his Providence that must
come to ^ss, for the good of our Land, and for Sion's Prospe^^y, that there be
Peace and Truth in Length of Days! -- And I conclude, praying as he taught us
to pray, who ^d the Spirit without Measure; eternal heavenly Fa^^er, lead us
not into Temptation, but deliver us from ^vil: For thine is the Kingdom, and
the Power, and ^ Glory, for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

