Dr. Mayhew's DISCOURSE On Rev. XV. 3d, 4th. Occasioned by the EARTHQUAKES In
November 1755.

A DISCOURSE On Rev. XV. 3d, 4th. Occasioned by the EARTHQUAKES In November
1755. Delivered in the West-Meeting-House, Boston, Thursday December 18,
following.

In five Parts, with an INTRODUCTION.

Part I. Of the Greatness of God's Works. Part II. Of their mavelous and
unsearchable Nature. Part III. Of the moral Perfections and Government of God.
Part IV. Of our Obligation to fear, glorify and worship Him. Part V. Practical
Reflections upon the Subject, relative to the Occasion.
By Jonathan Mayhew, D. D. Pastor of the West Church in Boston.

They shall speak of the Glory of thy Kingdom, and talk of thy Power: To make
known to the Sons of Men His mighty Acts, and the glorious Majesty of His
Kingdom. PSALM CXLV. BOSTON: N. E. Printed by Edes and Gill, and Sold at their
Office, next to the Prison in Queen Street; and by R. Draper, in
Newbury-Street, M,DCC,LV.

Advertisement.
ONE or two whole Paragraphs, and the Parts of several others, omitted in
delivering the ensuing Discourse, for want of Time, are inserted in this
Publication in their proper Places, without any Mark of Distinction.

The INTRODUCTION.
MY BRETHREN,
THAT part of God's holy word, upon which my Discourse at this time will be
grounded, is in the XVth Chapter of the Revelation of St. John, the 3d and 4th
Verses.

-- GREAT and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are
thy ways, thou King of Saints! WHO shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy
name! for thou only art holy: For all nations shall come and worship before
thee; for thy judgments are made manifest.

THE uncommon and alarming occurrences of divine providence, which we have
experienced in the late EARTHQUAKES, seem to demand a very particular and
uncommon notice. And although I have not, till now, invited you into the house of
God, for that purpose; yet you, My Brethren of this society, are my witnesses,
that I have not let these providential visitations pass wholly unregarded
hitherto; but, more than once, taken occasion to speak of them; and improved
them as an argument to enforce that practical religion and holiness of life,
which is doubtless the moral end and design of them. So that many things which
might have properly been said upon the occasion, have already been said in this
place: Which must be my apology with those who may not hear, in this discourse,
some things which they might, perhaps, expect in it. For I am not fond of
repetitions, especially upon a subject which suggests such a great variety of
reflections, as renders it quite needless to use any; and in discoursing upon
which, it is, indeed, much more difficult to contract and suppress, than it is
to enlarge.

AND now we are assembled together, out of the common, stated course, to
contemplate, and religiously to improve, these mighty and wonderful works of
God, I know of no passage of scripture, fitter for the basis of a discourse
upon such an occasion, than that which was just now read to you. This will
naturally lead us from particular instances and manifestations of God's power,
to a more enlarged contemplation of his mighty deeds; and the glory and majesty
of that kingdom, which "rules over all."

THERE is such an elevation and dignity, such a divine energy and pathos, in
this passage of scripture, as can hardly fail to raise and fix the attention of
every one. However, if any thing farther should be necessary to this end, it
will be found in the great occasion upon which, the glorious place where, and
the blessed Ones by whom, the words are supposed to have been originally
uttered. I shall, therefore, just remind you of these things, before I proceed
to a particular consideration of the passage itself.

ST. John the Divine, being in the Spirit, and rapt in the visions of God into
future times, had a representation made to him of the woes and plagues, and the
final destruction, which were to come upon those of the grand apostasy from the
pure faith and worship of the Gospel; upon that antichristian power which is
emblematically described by a woman arrayed in purple, and scarlet color, and
decked with gold, and precious stones and pearls; -- and having upon her
forehead a name written, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS, AND
ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH. Rev. 17. 4, 5.
The plagues which St. John in his vision, or rather visions, saw coming upon
great Babylon, (whatever is intended hereby) were successive; and arising one
above another in greatness and terror, till at length there were voices, and
thunders and lightnings, as he expresses it; and a great Earthquake, such a one
as was not since men were upon the earth, so mighty an Earthquake and so great.
And the great city was divided into three parts; and the cities of the nations
fell; [i. e. of the nations which had "drank of the wine of the wrath of her
fornication," chap. XIV. ver. 8.] and great Babylon came in remembrance before
God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath. Chap.
XVI. ver. 18, 19.
It seems to have been at this dividing of the great city into three parts by
an Earthquake, attended, or immediately followed by a mighty fire; and not at
her final overthrow, that St. John saw the kings of the earth who had committed
fornication with her; the "merchants who were made rich by her;" and "every
ship-master, and all the company in ships," -- standing afar off, for fear of
her torment, weeping and wailing, and saying, Alas! alas! that great city --
for in one hour so great riches is come to "naught"! -- and crying when they
saw the smoke of her burning, saying, What city is like unto this great city!
And they cast dust upon their heads, weeping and wailing, and saying, Alas!
alas! that great city, wherein were made rich all that had ships in the sea --
Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets; for God has
avenged you on her! Chap. XVIII. ver 3, 15 -- 20.
I say, it seems not to be her final destruction, at which these lamentations
of some, and exultations of others, are made; that being to be effected by
another, and still greater earthquake. And this her utter ruin was accordingly
represented to St. John immediately after, by the following expressive emblem.
"And a mighty angel," says he, took a stone like a great millstone, and cast
it into the sea, saying, THUS, with violence, shall that great city Babylon be
thrown down, and shall be FOUND NO MORE AT ALL. And the voice of harpers and
musicians, and of pipers, and of trumpeters, shall be heard no more at all in
thee -- and the light of a candle shall shine no more at all in thee; and the
voice of the bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard no more at all in thee:
for thy merchants were the great men of the earth; for by thy sorceries were
all nations deceived. Ver. 21, 22, 23.
This is plainly her final overthrow and destruction. But who, or what is meant
by Babylon the great, the woman arrayed in purple and scarlet, and styled the
mother of harlots and abominations of the earth; who or what, I say, is
intended hereby, I shall leave every one to conjecture; only just observing,
that St. John tells us, she sits on "seven hills;" that she reigns over
the kings of the earth; and that in her was found the blood of prophets, and of
saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth.

Now it is to be observed, that when St. John saw the "seven angels having the
seven last plagues Chap. XV. ver. 1.
" to pour out upon the earth, and particularly upon Babylon, he had also a
vision of that glorious region where those were, that had gotten the victory
over the beast, and over his image, and over his mark, and over the number of
his name -- having the harps of GOD. Ver. 2.
And those blessed and happy persons it was, that he heard singing this song of
MOSES the servant of GOD, and the song of the LAMB, saying, Great and
mavelous are thy works, Lord GOD Almighty! etc.

This is the anthem of the blessed, in those glorious mansions, with reference
to the great events of which St. John speaks; while they anticipate the final
overthrow of that power which exalts itself above all that is called God, and
that is worshipped. And these circumstances being taken into consideration,
they cannot but give an additional solemnity and dignity to this passage of
scripture, in which there is such a native sublimity and grandeur, as cannot
but strike, warm, and elevate the minds of all, except the grossly abandoned, or
naturally-stupid.

To imagine that we, poor sojourners on earth, and inhabitants of clay, can,
with a proper ardor, and an equally elevated devotion, bear a part in this song
of praise and triumph, were, indeed, great vanity and presumption: But yet, not
so much as to listen to it, and try to join the chorus, were certainly
unbecoming our profession and character as christians: For by becoming truly
such, we claim a kindred with the blessed above; and are, in a sort, of one
society with them; being the adopted children of Him, of whom the whole family
in heaven and earth is named. In the strong and emphatical language of
scripture, we are not only fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the household
of God, here on earth; but we are come unto mount Sion, and unto the city of
the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem: -- and to the general assembly and
church of the firstborn which are written in heaven; and not only to the
spirits of just men made perfect, but to an innumerable company of angels; and
not only to an innumerable company of angels, but to Jesus the Mediator of the
new covenant; and not only to Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant, but to
God the Judge of all. Heb. xii. 22, 23, 24.
If we are truly the disciples of Christ, we are now united by faith, by love,
temper and affection, not only with saints, angels, and archangels above, but
with our glorified Redeemer; and God himself dwells in us, and we in God 1 John 4, 15.
.

LET us, therefore, bearing in mind the honorable kindred, and glorious
relation, which we boast to the inhabitants of Sion that is above, draw near
with a true heart, in full assurance of faith; even as seeing him who is
invisible; and in his immutable veracity beholding and anticipating the great
events represented in these visions of St. John; Let us, I say, now draw near
in full assurance of faith, saying, Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord
God almighty! just and true are thy ways, thou King of saints! Who shall not
fear thee, and glorify thy name! for thou only art holy: For all nations shall
come and worship before thee; for thy judgments are made manifest!

HOWEVER, it is not my design at present, to consider these words with a
particular view to the original design of them, as they are found in the
visions of St. John: Had this been my intention, I should have been more exact
and critical in pointing out to you the order and series, and the distinct
parts of these visions; which is now needless: Because I intend to consider the
passage as if it were independent, having no connection with any thing
preceding or following. And being taken in this light, it will, I suppose,
naturally enough lead us to such contemplations upon God, his works and
attributes; and to such practical reflections as will perfectly coincide with
the present occasion, and our design in coming to worship and bow down before
the Lord our Maker at this time. For it naturally leads us, in the

FIRST place, to consider the greatness of God's works; which proclaim his
omnipotence. And

SECONDLY, their wonderfulness, and inscrutability. -- Which two particulars
are obviously suggested by the former part of the passage: Great and mavelous
are thy works, Lord God Almighty!

THIRDLY, the moral perfections of God, in the exercise of which he governs the
universe -- Just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints -- thou only art
holy -- thy judgments are made manifest.

FOURTHLY, The obligations lying upon all men to fear, glorify, and worship him
-- Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name -- all nations shall
come and worship before thee.

And,

LASTLY, It will lead us to some practical reflections upon those great and
mavelous works of God, to make a religious improvement of which, we are now
assembled together.

I SHALL be the shorter in the speculative, doctrinal part of my discourse,
that I may have the more time for what I imagine will be more useful; I mean,
the practical. And as I would hope there are none present, but what are present
with a good intention, I should be sorry if any of my hearers should go away
without being the better for what they hear. Accordingly, though I will endeavor
to remember that men have heads, as well as hearts and consciences; yet I shall
aim rather at speaking to the latter, than to the former.

PART I. Of the Greatness of God's Works.
LET us then, in the first place, consider the greatness of God's works; which
proclaim his omnipotence. Great -- are thy works, Lord God Almighty! -- It is
to be observed, that there are no powers in what we commonly call natural,
secondary causes, but what are, to say the least, originally derived from the
first; and no real agency in any that are wholly material. Activity or agency,
properly speaking, belongs only to mind or spirit; and all those powers and
operations which in common language are ascribed to natural bodies, are really
effects and operations of the supreme, original cause. So that all the works
which we behold, are, strictly speaking, God's works; excepting those which are
wrought by men, and other finite, intelligent beings. And even these latter
are, in one sense, God's works; because, though human agency, and the agency of
other subordinate intelligences, is not to be wholly excluded and set aside;
yet the active powers of these beings are both derived from, and upheld by Him,
to whom "power" emphatically "belongs" Psalm lxii. 11.
: And also because all these subordinate agents, in all their operations, are
under the control and dominion of the Almighty; and employed by Him to fulfill
his purposes and pleasure. So that all the works which we behold are, in a
large sense, and in the language of scripture, the doings and works of God. And
accordingly the works of God, in the scripture phraseology, comprehend those of
creation, of nature and providence; and whatever God does as the Lord and
Governor of the world, whose kingdom rules over all.

AND now, how manifold, and how great are these works! Whether we turn our eyes
to the great and wide sea, or to the dry land; to the earth beneath us, or to
the heavens above us, still we behold the mighty works of God. The ocean, which
is shut up within limits which it cannot transgress, but when God gives it a
dispensation for so doing; and wherein are things "innumerable both small and
great beasts;" this is, surely, a great and astonishing work. And how mighty
and powerful is that Being who made, and who has fixed bounds to it, saying,
Hitherto shall thou come, and no farther; and here shall thy proud waves be
stayed? that Being, who holds the waters of it in the "hollow of his hand;" and
whom its winds and surges obey? that Being, upon whom all its numerous
inhabitants wait, that he may give them their meat in due season; which are
troubled when he only "hides his face," and die when he "takes their breath?"

THE dry land is not less full of his great works and wonders. Consider the
beasts of the forests, and the cattle upon a thousand hills: Consider the huge,
bulky animals, and the places where they range; the wide extended plains, and
the "everlasting mountains" with their summits above the clouds; the mighty
volcanos in different parts of the world, whence rivers of liquid fire flow for
miles into the ocean, like those of water from other mountains, as though they
were going to contend for that place which God "founded" for the other element:
Consider the concussion of an Earthquake, when half a continent with its
neighboring islands, and their surrounding seas, are at once shaken; as though
the land and water which God once separated, were again to be mixed and
confounded together: Consider these works of God, I say, and tell me if they
are not great!

CONSIDER next, the air and atmosphere with which the whole earth is
surrounded, and in which it is infolded as in a garment: Consider the numerous
people, the winged inhabitants thereof, the fowls of heaven, which God daily
feeds; and hears when they cry Job xxxviii. 41. and Psalm cxlviii. 9.
unto him, though we understand not their language: Consider the whirlwind and
the tempest, when God bows the heavens, and comes down, and darkness is under
his feet; when he rides upon a cherub and does fly, yea when he flies upon the
wings of the wind; when he makes darkness his secret place, his pavilion round
about him, where dark waters are, and thick clouds of the skies; when again, at
the brightness that is before him, his thick clouds pass, hailstones and coals
of fire; when the Lord also thunders, and the Highest gives his voice: -- yea,
when he sends out his arrows, and scatters the [guilty, affrighted] nations;
and shoots out his lightnings and discomfits them: Psalm xviii. 9 -- 15. This
passage of scripture seems plainly to refer to the plagues of Egypt, and to
what happened at the Red Sea.
Consider the returns of day and night, when we are alternately enlivened and
cheered by the light, and covered with gloom and and darkness: Consider the
annually-returning seasons, when God alternately renews the face of the
earth, and binds the fields and rivers in icy bands: Consider these works of
God, I say, and then pronounce, whether they are great or not! But lo, these
are [but] parts of his ways; and how little a portion is heard of him! Job
xxvi. 14.


AND if these works of God, which have now been hinted at, are great, and
proclaim an all-powerful Being; what do those innumerable worlds do, which we
behold revolving about us in such an admirable order! Who made those two great
lights, the one of which rules by day, and the other by night? Who made the
stars also? Who, those numerous, immense globes, compared to some of which, our
earth is but as an atom, and our ocean as a drop of the bucket? Whose breath
gave them all being? Whose hand gives them their motions? Who directs their
courses? Who makes them know their proper places and distances, so as not to
jostle, and wrack world on world? Whose hand constantly maintains their order,
and sustains them in being? When you consider these things, surely you cannot
avoid exclaiming, -- Great -- are thy works, Lord God Almighty! For [verily]
the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and
Godhead. Romans i. 20.


BUT the works of God may come under another, and a mixed consideration, if I
may so express it; I mean, as they are the doings of Him who is the righteous
The reader is desired to observe, that though God's moral perfections and
government, properly come under the THIRD head of discourse proposed; yet it is
in this mixed, complex sense, that his works are spoken of as "great and
mavelous," in the text. The words have plainly respect to the acts and doings
of God, considered in a twofold light; as he is the Lord of universal nature,
and the just Ruler and Judge of Men. Upon which account it was thought proper
to consider their greatness in this light, by way of anticipation, before the
morality of the divine government comes, in course, to be distinctly spoken of.
Sovereign of the world, as well as the Creator of it, and the Lord of nature.
In which respect they are also great and illustrious; and equally so, perhaps,
whether we consider the works of God's righteous severity, or his works of
mercy and goodness.

GOD's works of judgment, which have been abroad, and made manifest in the
earth, from one generation to another, may justly be termed great. Was not
that, one such work, for example, when God rained fire and brimstone out of
heaven, and consumed those wicked cities, Sodom and Gomorrha; and when the
ground on which they stood, was sunk, doubtless by an earthquake, to a standing
nauseous pool, as at this day? Was not that another such work, when he sent his
Angel, and by him, destroyed in one night, such a vast multitude in the
Assyrian camp? Was not that another, when he destroyed Pharaoh and his mighty
host in the red sea? -- that same Pharaoh, whom he raised up; for to show in
him his power, and that his name might be declared throughout all the earth?
Exodus ix. 16.
How many mighty works, of a similar nature to these, has God wrought? and what
desolation has he made in the earth, in a way of judgment, since the
foundations thereof were laid by him! But how great, more especially, was that
work of God, when the fountains of the great deep were broken up? when the
waters arose above the tops of the tallest mountains, and the flood of his
anger came upon the world of the ungodly, and swept them all away!

BUT God's works of goodness and kindness are not less great and illustrious,
from age to age, than those of his just severity. The preservation of Lot,
whose righteous soul was grieved with the filthy conversation of the wicked;
and the preservation of Noah, a preacher of righteousness, with his family, in
the ark, from whom the depopulated world was re-peopled after the deluge;
these, I say, were great works of kindness and mercy. And was not that another
such, when he led his chosen people like a flock out of Egypt, directing their
march by a cloud by day, and a pillar of fire by night; till, at his command,
the sea retired, and rose as a wall on either side of them, to let them pass?
Was not that another work of great kindness to his chosen people, though
attended with terror to them, when he gave them his laws and statutes at Sinai?
when the mountain trembled and quaked; and all the people saw the thunderings,
and the lightnings, and the noise of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking;
and -- removed, and stood afar off? Exodus ^x. 18.
But to arise still higher; if the giving of the law by Moses his servant, and
by the ministration of angels, was a great work of God's kindness; how much
greater is that of his giving the gospel of peace to the world, by his Son
JESUS CHRIST, who is made so much better than the angels, as he has by
inheritance obtained a more excellent name than they? Is not the redemption of
this sinful, apostate world, the work of God? or is it not emphatically a great
one? Without controversy, great is this work of God, this mystery of godliness,
which angels desire to look into! and at which not only hell, but heaven
itself, and all that is therein, stands astonished, excepting HIM whose work it
is; and whom "the heaven, and the heavens of heavens cannot contain"!

THERE are other great things, both in the way of judgment and of mercy to be
accomplished upon this stage, before the scene is closed. We have, perhaps, not
seen as yet half the acts of this mighty drama. But we know the principal
contents, and chief heads of the whole, by reflecting upon what is actually
past, and looking into that "sure word of prophecy" which shines as a light in
a dark place, until the several great days and periods dawn in succession, and
the "day star [at length] arises in our hearts". The chief articles and
circumstances of the plot, if I may so express it, and the winding up of the
whole, are in general made known to us by revelation. Babylon the great shall
be utterly destroyed; which, surely, will appear to be a great work, whenever
it is accomplished. God has not utterly and finally cast away his ancient
people Israel; they shall be recalled from their several and wide dispersions:
And this work, which God will surely effect by his power and providence, will
be equally great. It was not said in vain, I will give thee the heathen for
thine inheritance; and the UTTERMOST PARTS of the earth for thy possession; but
when all Israel shall be saved, the FULLNESS of the gentiles shall also come in;
and there shall be "one fold and one shepherd"; and every tongue shall confess
that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of GOD, the FATHER.

BUT how great, beyond expression, beyond conception, will the conclusion of
this drama of ages be! When all the numerous actors shall appear before the
visible Representative and Image of the invisible God Col. i. 15.
, to receive his life-giving plaudit, or to be hissed and frowned into
perdition! When those who have acted their part ill, shall mix their cries and
wailings in horrid discord, with the triumphant songs The Author thinks, but is
not certain, that there is some-where in Dr. Scott's works a passage, to which
this part of the sentence may seem to be at least an allusion.
and hosanna's of the redeemed, who have acted well; with the voice of the
archangel and with the trump of God! When the scenes, the stage, and the
mighty theater itself, shall all drop and fall together! -- I leave it to you
to judge, whether these works of God will be great, or little!

To me it appears, that whether we contemplate the works of God in the natural,
or in the moral world; or at once view them in that twofold light, in which I
have now been considering them; whether we reflect upon those of them which are
already accomplished, or look forward to those which shall infallibly be
accomplished hereafter; still we cannot but exclaim -- Great -- are thy works
Lord God Almighty! Nor will I lessen and debase these works of God, even so
much as to ask, What comparison there is betwixt them, and the most august of
those which are done by men, by the kings and potentates of the earth; to which
trifles we sometimes ascribe grandeur and dignity!

PART II. Of the mavelous, unsearchable nature of God's Works.
IT is now time for us to consider the wonderful nature of God's works: For
they are not only great, but mavelous! -- Mavelous are thy works, Lord God
almighty! -- They may, indeed, be said to be mavelous, only in respect of
their greatness; since no contemplative man can avoid being astonished at them,
considered merely in this view. But they are also mavelous in another
respect; viz. as we cannot penetrate into, or fully comprehend them, by reason
of the narrowness of our capacities A little reflection upon the operations of
our own minds, will indeed make it evident, that all wonder, surprise,
astonishment, at bottom proceed from, and connote ignorance; for nothing which
we fully understand, ever excites our wonder or admiration. And it is certain
that no such passion can have any place in a perfect, all comprehending mind.
So that God's works are mavelous, only with relation to his imperfect
creatures: And the more imperfect and short-sighted creatures are, the more
mavelous must these works appear to them; I mean, if they at all think of
them.
. We can form no adequate, I had almost said absolutely, no conception at all,
of creation, the first and original work of God. And it is but a little way
that we can see into the nature and causes and reasons of things; the means and
methods and ends, by and for which, many events are bro't about both in the
natural and moral world. As none can by searching find out the Almighty unto
perfection; so neither can any perfectly understand and comprehend his works,
even the least of them; and much less the greatest. My thoughts are not your
thoughts, neither are your ways, my ways, says the Lord. For as the heavens
are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my tho'ts
than your thoughts Isai. lv. 8, 9.
. I know there are not wanting men, who pretend to have a thorough
understanding of these matters; of almost all the works of nature and
providence. But whether they are to be accounted wise men, or fools who know
nothing as they ought to know it, we may learn in part from Solomon's
reflections upon this head: I said I will be wise, but it was far from me, says
he. That which is far off, and exceeding deep, who can find it out? I applied
mine heart to know and to search, and to seek out wisdom, and the reason of
things Eccles. vii. 23, 24, 25.
-- When I applied mine heart to know wisdom, and to see the business that is
done upon the earth -- then I beheld all the work of God, that a man cannot
find out the work that is done under the sun: because though a man labor to
seek it out, yet he shall not find it; yea farther, though a wise man think to
know it, yet shall he not be able to find it. Chap. viii. ver. 16, 17.
If a wise man cannot find out the work of God, it would be strange if fools
could; nor, indeed, is there any greater evidence of folly, than the pretense
of having done it. There is a reflection of much the same nature with this of
Solomon, in the book of Job: Which does great things, past finding out, yea,
and wonders without number. Job ix. 10.
-- He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength -- which removes the
mountains, and they know not; which overturneth them in his anger: which
shakes the earth out of her place, and the pillars of heaven tremble: which
commands the sun, and it rises not; and seals up the stars: which alone
spreads out the heavens, and treads upon the waves of the sea: which makes
Arcturus, Orion, and the Pleiades, and the chambers of the south. Ver. 4, -- 9.


THERE is, indeed, such a thing as natural philosophy, which is of great use
both to the purposes of life and godliness; and which, therefore, well deserves
to be cultivated. However, the whole of what goes by that name, seems to be no
more than the observing of facts, their succession and order; and reducing them
to a general analogy; to certain established rules, and a settled course and
series of events; called the laws of nature, from their steadiness and
constancy. This, I say, seems to comprehend the whole of what we usually call
natural philosophy. But after all the improvements that have been made herein,
how many things are there in the natural world, which never have been, and
perhaps never will be, reduced to any such general analogy, or to the common
known laws of nature? How many phaenomina are there, which we may call the
irregulars, the anomalies, and heteroclites in the grammar, in the great book
and language of nature, by which God speaks to us as really, as by his written
oracles? Were the laws of comets, of inundations, of earthquakes, of meteors,
of tempests, of the aurora borealies, of monstrous births? were the particular
laws and causes of these, and of a thousand other phenomenon, I say, ever
plainly discovered? I mean, so that they could be methodically calculated,
foretold, and accounted for, as we calculate, foretell and account for common
tides, eclipses, etc? No, surely; this has never been done by the greatest
philosophers, with any tolerable degree of certainty and precision; though there
have been very ingenious, and even probable hypothesis concerning some of these
phenomenon. However, their causes and laws still remain very much in the dark:
which may be owing, in part, to our not having critically observed a sufficient
number of facts in each kind, from whence to draw general conclusions, and on
which to form theories. For there is doubtless as regular an order and
connection of these facts and effects, in nature, whether actually seen and
known by us or not; and therefore as truly a course of nature with respect to
them, as there is of, and with respect to, the most common and familiar. But
this connection and order is, as yet, too recondite and hidden for human
penetration; so that we can do but little more than form conjectures about
these things. These works of God may, therefore, justly be called mavelous,
past finding out; and these wonders of nature are also without number.

BUT upon supposition that all those works of God, which we call the works of
nature, could be brought to a common analogy, and methodicaly arranged under
certain known laws, as some of them are, so as to admit of a solution as
plainly, and in the same sense, that eclipses, common tides, or any other
natural phenomenon do; even upon this supposition, I say, our knowledge would
still be very imperfect; and the works of God, still mavelous to us. For it
is to be remembered, that these general laws, by which we think to account for
all other things, are themselves mysterious and inexplicable. Who, for example,
can, without vanity and presumption, pretend to understand the great law of
gravitation; the most general and extensive one, which we know of in nature?
Who, I say, can, without the utmost vanity and presumption pretend to a
thorough understanding of this law? especially after a NEWTON has confessed his
ignorance of it; and expressed his doubts, whether it were the effect of God's
immediate power, operating regularly upon every particle of matter throughout
the universe; or whether it were the effect of some intermediate, natural
cause, unknown to us? some subtle medium pervading all natural bodies and
substances? And though the latter were known to be the case, still the same, or
rather a greater difficulty would recur, respecting that prior, and higher
natural cause; and so on in infinitum; or, at least, 'till we come to that
great First Cause and Agent, who is the "least understood" of all things. For
He must needs be more incomprehensible even than any of his mavelous works,
since our first knowledge of Him, is learnt from them.

WHAT is said above concerning the law of gravitation, is equally applicable to
all others, which we call natural causes, or laws of nature: They are all
really incomprehensible. We can no more penetrate into the true reason why a
spark of fire, rather than a drop of water, should cause an explosion when
dropped on powder; than we can tell why a stone, left to itself in the air,
should fall, rather than ascend: i. e. we cannot do it at all. Thus it is as to
all natural causes in general. So that, as was intimated above, our knowledge
would be very imperfect, even though we could easily reduce all the phenomenon
in the natural world, to known, general laws; as it is certain we cannot. We
should then know nothing but facts and effects, their regular succession and
order. For though we speak of the natural, visible causes of many things; yet
these causes seem to be plainly effects themselves; and the real cause of them,
and of all things, is hidden, quite veiled from mortal sight; though He be not
far from every one of us. Acts xvii. 27.
Behold, we go forward, but He is not [visibly] there; and backward, but we
cannot perceive Him: One the left hand, where He does work, but we cannot
behold Him: He hides Himself on the right hand, that we cannot see Him. But He
knows the way that we take! Job xxiii. 8, 9, 10.


THAT cause which acts thus regularly, mightily, and marvellously, everywhere;
must needs be all-wise, all-powerful, and omnipresent: And into His
incomprehensible agency, non-pluss'd philosophy itself must ultimately resolve
all natural effects, together with their apparent, visible causes.

So that the whole natural world, is really nothing but one great wonder and
mystery. It is not only those which we, in common language, call the great
works of God, that are mavelous and inscrutable; but the least of them also.
We are even an astonishment to ourselves. For we are fearfully and wonderfully
made: Mavelous are thy works, and that my soul knows right well! My
substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret, and curiously
wrought -- Thine eye did see my substance yet being unperfect, and in thy book
all my members were written, which in continuance were fashioned! -- Psalm
cxxxix. 14, 15, 16.
The most common, the least, and the most inconsiderable effects of God's
power, which we behold, baffle human wisdom and penetration. A flower of the
field, which springs up in the morning, and at night is withered; the mite that
is undiscernable to the naked eye; every atom or mote than flies in the
sunbeams, or is wafted by the breeze, contains marvells and wonders enough to
non-pluss the greatest sage. These are all the works of God; and all
mavelous: And though we do not call them great; yet the least of them proclaims
the wisdom, the eternal power and godhead, of the Creator.

THE works of God, as he is the moral See the marginal note, P. 17.
Governor of the world, are also mavelous and unsearchable; at least many of
them are so. The second, or the new birth, which is of the Spirit, and which we
are all so much concerned to experience, is not less mysterious than the first.
For as thou know not what is the way of the Spirit, nor how the bones do
grow in the womb of her that is with child; even so thou know not the works
of God who makes all Eccles. xi. 5.
; and by whom we are created anew in Christ Jesus. And although our Savior
cautioned Nichodemus not to "marvel" at his saying, Ye must be born again; yet
he immediately compares this mysterious work of the Spirit, to one of the
visible effects of God's invisible power in the natural world; which though one
of the most common, is yet truly wonderful -- The wind blows where it
lists, says he, and thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence
it comes, and whither it goes: so is every one that is born of the Spirit;
John iii. 7, 8.
of that Spirit, which is ever operating both in the kingdom of nature, and of
grace. For we may apply to all these operations and effects, however different
they may seem, what the apostle says of the different kinds of miraculous gifts
in that age of the church -- All these works that one and the self-same
spirit. 1 Cor. xii. 11.


THE dispensations of God's providence toward mankind, have all somewhat that
is mysterious and incomprehensible in them. We cannot see into all the
connections and dependences of things and events in the moral world; so as to
give a clear account and solution of them. Difficulties and objections will
remain, through our ignorance and short-sightedness, against the scheme and
methods of God's dealing with the children of men, after puzzled theology has
done its best. In which respect it is said, that clouds and darkness are round
about Him, although righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his throne
Psalm. (...)
Amongst the mavelous, unsearchable dispensations of God to the world,
considered as the moral Governor of it; we may particularly reckon our being
subjected to sorrow, pain and death, through the offense of one; and our
restoration to happiness and life eternal, by the obedience unto death of a far
Greater, "the Lord from heaven:" God's calling the Jews of old to be his
peculiar people; their rejection, with the circumstances attending it; and
their preservation in their present dispersed state: The sufferings to which
good men are sometimes subjected, while the wicked are prospered, and flourish
like a green bay tree: The utter overthrow and ruin of some wicked nations,
while some others, to appearance as wicked, if not more so, are preserved, and
favored with the smiles of providence. These and many other dispensations of
providence, both past and future, we cannot penetrate to the bottom of, or
clearly see into. So that whether we consider God's natural works, or his
moral; or consider his works at once in both these lights, they are not only
great, but mavelous. No heart can think of these things worthily: and who is
able to conceive his ways? It is a tempest which no man can see; for the most
part of his works are hid. Who can declare them (...) justice? or who can
endure the (...) is afar off, and the trial of all things is in the end.
Eccles. xvi. 20, 21, 22.
Whether, therefore, you are a true philosopher, a true christian, or both, as
St. Paul was, still you must adopt this language? -- O the depth of the riches,
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments,
and his ways past finding out! For who has known the mind of the Lord? or who
has been his counselor? Or who has first given unto him, and it shall be
recompensed to him again? For of him, and through him, and to him are all
things: To whom be glory for ever Amen! Romans xi. 33 -- 36.


PART III. Of the moral Perfections and Government of God.
BUT though human wisdom cannot scan or comprehend the great and mavelous
works of God; yet we do, or may know so much, both of Him and them, as may
serve the ends of practical religion; which is the end of man. -- So that
though we should guard against vanity on one hand, yet we should equally guard
against false modesty, or skepticism on the other. We are not shut up in a
vast, dark labyrinth, without any crevice or clue at all. We see at least some
glimmerings of light; and if Theseus-like, we follow the clue which is actually
given us, it will lead us out of this darkness into open and endless day. But
not to dwell upon metaphor, and allusion: God gives us such notices of himself
by his works, by the course of his providence, by our reason, and by his word,
that though we must confess our ignorance of innumerable things, still we may
say with confidence -- Just and true are thy ways, thou King of saints! -- Thou
only art holy! -- "Thy judgments are made manifest!"

AMIDST all our darkness and ignorance, we see enough, unless we are wilfully
blind, to convince us, That God is a moral Governor; or that a moral government
is actually established, and gradually carrying on in the world; and that we
ourselves are the subjects of it. Had we only the light of nature to direct us,
we might by properly following it, conclude with a good degree of certainty.
That God is a beneficent, true, and righteous being; the patron of good men,
and the enemy of the wicked; and one who will, sooner or later, give to every
man according to his deeds. For is not the Creator, and Upholder, also the Lord
and Judge, of all? Or shall not the Judge of all the earth do right! -- The
work of a man shall he render unto him, and cause every man to find according
to his ways. Yea, surely, God will not do wickedly, neither will the Almighty
pervert judgment! Who has given him a charge over the earth? or who has
disposed the whole world.! Though these words are found in one of the books of
revelation, yet the passage is really the language of nature: Nor, indeed, do I
remember that any have supposed that Elihu who utters them, was inspired. These
are the sentiments which naturally arise in an improved, virtuous mind, upon
contemplating the works of God; the great, independent Being, and source of all
things.

THE moral perfections which we usually ascribe to God, seem to have a
connection with those natural ones, which must necessarily belong to the
original cause of all things; particularly with independency, or
self-sufficiency, infinite wisdom, and unbounded power. It is scarce, if at all
possible, to conceive of that Being who has these natural perfections, to be
false, cruel, or unjust; or to be otherwise than faithful and true, holy and
righteous. So that these latter attributes are, in some sense, deducible from
the former. But this argument, usually called by metaphysicians, the argument a
priori; this argument, I say, in conjunction with some others, will appear
conclusive to every thoughtful and honest man: I mean, particularly, those
arguments which may be drawn from the moral nature which God has given us; from
the consciousness we have of right and wrong; from the law written in our
hearts; from our immediate sense of good and of ill desert; and from the
vestiges and traces of goodness and righteousness, which we plainly see in the
constitution, and in the course of nature; and the dispensations of God's
providence toward men. For although the judgments By the judgments of God, if
I mistake not, people generally, indeed almost always, intend the
manifestations of God's displeasure in the afflictive dispensations of his
providence. But in the language of scripture, by that phrase is often meant the
statutes, ordinances and commandments of God; but more generally, I think, the
judicial acts of God in the course of his providence, as he is the moral
Governor of the world, in such a large sense as equally to comprehend the kind
and favorable dispensations of providence, with those of his righteous
severity; though sometimes with a more particular reference to one of them,
than to the other. In the passage now under consideration, it seems to be used
in this large, comprehensive sense; those judgments of God which are supposed
to be "made manifest", being not only acts and instances of his vindictive
justice against Babylon; but also manifestations of his truth, goodness and
faithfulness to the upright, as he is the "King of saints." Sometimes the
phrase ought to be understood in a still more extensive sense; so as to include
the laws of God, and the execution of them, both in rewarding the good, and in
punishing the wicked: i. e. it comprehends whatever God does, considered in the
character of the moral governor, the lawgiver, and the judge of the world. In
this most comprehensive sense, God's judgments are often said to be "right," to
be "righteous," etc. etc. etc.
of God are not now made manifest in so great a degree as they will be at that
period, to which the passage my discourse is grounded upon, relates; yet they
are discoverable in some degree at present, by what we daily see and
experience. Although there may be room left for men of perverse and corrupt
minds to cavil against, there is really none for men of fair, ingenuous minds
to doubt of, much less to deny, the morality of the government we are now
under, the things which have been just hinted at above, and for a particular
discussion of which, there is not time, being duly considered.

HOWEVER, I must just observe, That as the light of nature shows the world to
be under a moral government and Governor, faithful, good, and righteous; so
revelation, not only sometimes asserts this, but always supposes, and takes it
for granted, as the foundation and groundwork of all; as the basis on which
the whole fabric stands. The whole scheme of our redemption by Christ, from
first to last, in all its parts, is grounded upon this supposition. For
certainly the christian revelation presupposes mankind to be antecedently under
the righteous government of God, and accountable to him for their actions;
since it proposes a method for our escaping the punishment due to the
transgressors of His laws. It supposes God to be good and merciful; since this
very method of salvation for sinners, could originate in nothing but goodness
and mercy -- [ God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotton Son, etc.
-- ] It either asserts, or takes it for granted, that God does, in the course
of his providence, even in all ages, reward and punish here, in some degree,
the good and the wicked respectively, both individuals and whole communities.
But the christian revelation is more especially a confirmation of the morality
of God's government, as it so expressly teaches us, That there is a time of
retribution approaching, wherein the righteous shall receive a glorious
recompense of reward; and the wicked, the punishment which their sins deserve,
though delayed for a season; and all men in general, receive the things done in
the body, whether good or bad. This will be the completion and perfection of
that moral scheme and plan, which is already established; which is carrying
into execution from age to age; and which is plainly discernable to those who
are not loath to see and acknowledge it; discernable, even from our own frame
and constitution, and from every day's experience. For we find a law of
righteousness written on our hearts, though we may try to expunge and disannul
it, by reason of the law of sin that is in our members, and which wars against
it. We find ourselves entrusted in some sense, by the Author of our being, with
our own happiness; we find that virtue is the road to felicity; and vice, to
misery here. Nor is there the least presumption in reason, against the general
doctrine of revelation, That our good and bad deeds, or at least the effects of
them, shall follow us into another state, where this moral scheme shall appear
in its perfection, both in the goodness, and in the righteous severity of God.
For there may be certain grand periods in the moral, as well as in the natural
world; both a seed-time, and a time of harvest; in the latter of which, he that
has before sowed to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; and he that
has sowed to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap everlasting life. And you
know who has said in this allegorical way, -- "The harvest is the end of the
world," etc.

PART IV. Of our Obligation to fear, glorify and worship God.
THIS passage of scripture leads us, in the next place, to consider the
obligation which we are under to fear, glorify and worship God; which
obligation results from his perfections, and the relation in which he stands
toward us -- Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? -- All
nations shall come and worship before thee. And who can doubt his obligation to
do thus, if God is such a Being as he has been imperfectly represented to be,
in the foregoing parts of this discourse? if he is indeed the "Lord God
almighty"? if his works are thus "great and mavelous"? if he is the "King of
Saints"? if his ways are all "just and true" if he "only is holy"? if his
"judgments" are, and will be, thus "made manifest"? What man? what nation,
shall not fear, adore and worship a Being, so gloriously great, powerful, just
and good!

THERE is One, and but One, to be feared: And certainly you can be in no doubt.
Who that One is. There is a harmony and uniformity of design visible in the
works of nature and providence, which shows that all originally proceeds from,
and is governed by ONE: Which dictate of nature, or reason, is abundantly
ratified and confirmed by revelation. For it is as clearly and expressly
declared, That there is but "One God," as it is, that there is but one Mediator
between God and men 1 Timothy ii. 5.
: as plainly, That there is but One God, the Father, of whom are all things, as
that there is but One Lord, Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. viii. 6.
And the most distinguishing title or characteristic of this One God, in the
new testament, is, "The God and father of our Lord Jesus Christ" 1 Pet. i. 3.
. He, undoubtedly it is, that exclusively of all other beings, is here styled
the "Lord God Almighty"; the "King of Saints"; and of whom it is said, that He
"only is holy", etc. And certainly it is equally our duty and our interest to
fear; glorify and obey, this One Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy
Jam. iv. 12.
; the Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in us all Ephesians. iv. 6.
; who is God omnipresent, even "from everlasting to everlasting". Is it not
altogether reasonable for us, weak, dependent, imperfect creatures, to
reverence, worship, and obey Him that made us, and all things? Him, in whom "we
live, and move, and have our being? Him, in whom all conceivable perfections,
whether natural or moral, are united, even in an infinite degree; (if it be not
a solecism to speak of degrees in infinity, and perfection) and who governs the
universe in the exercise of these perfections? Men who do not thus fear and
serve God, must counteract their own nature; I mean their rational,
intellectual and moral nature; the light and dictates of their own consciences.
For they cannot but see and feel, in some degree at least, that they ought to
do thus; that they are under an indispensable obligation, in point of reason
and fitness, as well as interest, to do it; so that, if they do it not, but the
contrary, they must needs be without excuse, and "condemned of themselves".

IT is no sooner known, that there is really such a glorious Being existing,
than every man's own heart even antecedently to any formal, rational process,
tells him in general, what his duty is; what is the proper, practical
inference; how he ought to stand affected toward God; and what part he has to
act. And if men will but duly consider their own frame and make, their reason
will, upon a little reflection, ratify these first dictates of their hearts and
consciences. Are we not so constituted by the Author of our being, that great
power excites a certain awe in us, unless we are, or at least imagine ourselves
to be, more powerful that He, in whom we observe it? Does not a common man
almost shudder at the thoughts of a giant; one of the sons of Anak, even though
he knows he is long since dead, and can do him no harm? Does not superior
wisdom amongst men, naturally attract respect and reverence? I mean, from all
who have themselves wisdom enough to discern it? Is not this our reverence of
superior wisdom heightened, when that wisdom is in conjunction with veracity,
and justice duly tempered with goodness and mercy? I mean, so as not to
degenerate into cruelty on one hand, nor into any childish weaknesses on the
other? Is not our reverence still heightened, when these qualities are found in
age? in one, whose head was hoary, even before we saw the light? Is it not
still increased, if this same person is our prince and lawgiver, and one on
whose protection we depend? (a supposition which, God be praised! we may now
make with some propriety --) Yea, would not our reverence of him be still
greater, if we were in his presence, and under his eye, than while he is absent
from us, or we from him? Yea, I will ask once more, whether our respect and
reverence to such an earthly sovereign, would not be greater, if we actually
saw him exerting his great and good qualities, in redressing the wrongs of his
subjects; in punishing the evil and rebellious, and protecting and patronizing
the good; than while we only believe or hear that he does thus, as occasion and
opportunity are offered? If I were not almost tired with asking, and you,
perhaps, with hearing questions, I would still ask, whether, all these
qualities, being united in the same person, and all these circumstances
concurring to heighten our esteem and reverence, we should not, of course,
resign ourselves up to the will of their object, and cheerfully obey him;
thinking ourselves happy in his favor, Vid. Bp. Butler's Sermon. 4th Edit. P.
269 -- 272.
and dreading the thoughts of his just displeasure as one of the greatest of
evils? I presume there is no man, who understands these questions, which are
not indeed difficult to be comprehended, but what would answer them all in the
affirmative, if he sincerely spoke the dictates of his heart, without indulging
to chicanery, and to the making of subtle evasions. It would evidently be fit
and reasonable for us to be affected toward such a person as has been
described, in the manner above expressed; and you would think that man very
unreasonable, a kind of monster notwithstanding his human shape, who did not
thus reverence, and thus demean himself toward, so great and good a personage,
standing in such a relation toward him.

HERE, then, you have the groundwork, and principles of religion in your own
frame and constitution; so that the longer you reflect, the more reason you
will see to fear, and adore God, and to keep his commandments. For is there any
being so powerful as the "Lord God Almighty?" Is there any one so wise as the
"only wise God?" any one so righteous and faithful as He, all whose ways are
"just and true?" any other so pure and spotless as He, who only is holy? Any
one so venerable in respect of his years and age, as the "Ancient of days," who
was, and is, and is to come? Is there any one so properly our sovereign, and
lawgiver, as the King of saints, whose "Kingdom rules over all?" any one who
is so near to, and constantly present with us, as He who is omnipresent, "in
whom we live," and who is "through all, and in us all?" In fine, is there any
one, whose judgments, and the effects of them, are and will be made so manifest
before our eyes, as His, who is "the Judge of all the earth?" His, whose
providence now governs the world, and who will hereafter judge it in
righteousness, by that man whom He has ordained? -- Who then shall not fear
and reverence? who, not glorify and praise? who, not obey, Him? Shall not all
nations come and worship before him, before whom all nations are as nothing;
and Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the beasts thereof sufficient for a
burnt-offering! Isa. xl. 16, 17.
Your obligation thus to fear, glorify and worship the great God, results so
immediately and plainly from his nature, and your own, and the relation in
which he stands toward you, that you must, I had almost said, uncreate your
Creator or yourselves, and thereby destroy this relation, before your reason
will absolve you from such obligation. But what I intend is, that while God is
God, and men are men, they are bound by all the ties of reason religiously to
fear, and worship, and obey Him.

THERE are some things, even at first view so plain and obvious to fair and
honest minds, as almost to preclude any reasoning or agumentation concerning
them. The obligations to practical religion in general, supposing there is
really a God, seem to be of this kind. They can scarce be made plainer by
reasoning, than they are without it; as the sun will not become the more
visible to a man who opens his eyes, by all the reasonings of philosophers
about it. Accordingly, in the passage of scripture now under consideration,
there is no formal ratiocination; but only a warm, devout and rapturous
exclamation, the national dictate of a good heart, and which will immediately
find its way to the hearts and consciences of all men, who have not very grossly
corrupted and debauched their own nature -- Who shall not fear thee, O Lord,
and glorify thy name. -- All nations shall come and worship before thee! --
However, there is, I suppose, somewhat of the prophetic kind in these last
words: They do not only express what is right and fitting; but also suggest
what shall eventually come to pass, after God's judgments are made manifest in
the original sense of the passage; that sense which was mentioned in the
introductory part of this discourse. For ALL nations shall actually come and
worship before God, when Babylon the great is destroyed.

THE obligations we are under in general religiously to reverence, worship and
obey God, being, as I suppose, sufficiently evident: it may be proper to
subjoin here, that God's holy word ought to be the rule of the worship, service
and obedience which we pay to him. How greatly the christian religion has been,
and still is corrupted, in most countries where it is professed, even to the
introduction of the grossest superstitions and idolatries, there is neither
time nor occasion now particularly to mention. It becomes us to take heed that
we do not ourselves add to, or even countenance, in any degree, these
corruptions. Especially if we have any well-grounded persuasion upon our minds,
what is intended in the new testament by Babylon, that "mother of harlots and
abominations," we should keep at a distance from her; for God will, sooner or
later, make her plagues wonderful, as well as manifest. What concord has
Christ with Belial, says St. Paul 2 Cor. vi. 15, -- 18.
: -- And what agreement has the temple of God with idols? -- Wherefore come
out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord; and touch not the
unclean thing, and I will receive you; and will be a Father unto you, and ye
shall be my sons and daughters says the Lord Almighty. A corrupt and
idolatrous church is not the less to be separated from, because she dishonours
Christ and his religion by calling herself after his worthy name: And it well
deserves to be remarked, That St. John, in the midst of the visions which he
had of the woes coming in succession upon Babylon, now become the habitation of
devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and
hateful bird, Rev. xviii. 2.
tells us that he heard a voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her, my
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her
plagues. Ver. 4.


I HOPE I shall give no just ground of offense to any, (which I should be very
loath to do) by adding here, That for the same general reason that we ought not
to go wholly over to that apostate church which the scriptures sometimes intend
by the name Babylon, we ought not to conform to, or symbolize with her, in any
of her corruptions, and idolatrous usages: but to keep at as great a distance
from them as possible, by strictly adhering to the holy scriptures in doctrine,
discipline, worship and practice. Nor does this seem to me to be a needless
caveat, even in any protestant country whatever: For I am verily persuaded that
there is not now, nor has been for many generations past, any national church,
wholly and absolutely free from these corruptions. Notwithstanding our boasted
reformation, it is, alas! but too evident that we are not yet past that long,
dark and corrupt period of the christian world, to which St. John refers, when
speaking of mystical Babylon he says, That ALL NATIONS had drunk of the wine of
the wrath of her fornication; and that the KINGS of the earth had committed
fornication All know that under the Mosaic dispensation, departing from the
worship of the only true God, and the worshipping of idols and false ones, was
often expressed by going a whoring after other gods, by "committing
fornication" and "adultery", etc. It is not therefore strange that the like
abominations under the gospel dispensation, should be expressed by the like
terms; that the head, or MOTHER CHURCH, during that grand and amazing apostasy
which is plainly foretold, should be characterised as "the mother of harlots;"
that all those kings and nations which follow her example, should be said to
commit "fornication" with her, and to drink of the wine of the wrath of her
fornication.
with her. Rev. xviii. 3.
We should therefore conform to our Bibles, whatever becomes of the decrees of
councils, popes or Kings; though they should, like one of the ancient kings of
literal Babylon, set up their golden images and idols, and command us to fall
down and worship, at what time we hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp,
sackbut psaltery, dulcimer, and all kinds of music Dan. iii. 5.
; yea, though they should point us to their furnaces, heated one seven times
hotter than they were wont to be heat Ver. 19.
. We read of a still more terrible fire, into which the "beast" shall be cast,
and with him the false prophet that works miracles before him, with which he
deceives them that receive the mark of the beast, and them that worship his
image Rev. xix. 20.
. But blessed is he that fears, and glorifieth, and patiently worshipeth the
Lord God almighty, the "King of Saints", according to his word and
institutions; even he that does His commandments, that he may have right to
the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city. For without
are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and IDOLATERS, and
whosoever loves and makes a LIE Chap. xxii. ver. 14, 15.
.

PART V. Practical Reflections upon the Subject, relative to the Occasion.
BUT it is perhaps more than time for me to proceed to the practical part of my
discourse; and to apply the subject to ourselves and the present occasion. We
have lately had a very striking and awakening memento, or rather example, of
the greatness, and the mavelous nature of God's works; when this continent,
for eight or nine hundred miles together, with the neighboring islands, and
the Atlantic ocean, were at once shaken, and thrown into convulsions. That this
is truly the work of God, and that it is both a great and mavelous one, I
suppose I need not go about to prove to you, after what has been said above.
Indeed, if I mistake not, you all discovered plainly enough, that this was your
sense of it, at the time of this event, to say nothing of what you have done
since, or do at present.

YOU think then, that an Earthquake is one of the mighty works of God; You
think justly. And whenever you behold, or experience these his great and
mavelous works, it may well excite your fear of him: for how gloriously
terrible in majesty is that Being, who is able to produce such astonishing
effects! But shall I tell you, that you every day behold greater works than
these? far more illustrious displays and manifestations of the power of God?
This is really the truth. Did not God create the whole earth? Does he not daily
uphold it in being, with all that it contains? And is not the creating and
upholding the whole, a far greater work than shaking and removing a small part
of it? Certainly it is. You can, therefore, never look upon the earth even when
it does not quake, without being silently admonished to fear and obey him that
made it; as truly admonished to do so, as when the "pillars of heaven tremble",
and the "Highest gives his voice"; though some may, perhaps, have never attended
to this silent and constant admonition. But when you extend your views beyond
this earth, to the numerous worlds around; when you look up in a serene night,
and attentively behold this gloriously "dreadful ALL"; when you see "worlds on
worlds," and systems on systems "composing one universe;" when you seriously
contemplate Him, whose hand once formed, and still grasps, and moves, and
directs this stupendous and amazing Whole; whenever you do thus, I say, you
cannot but think even an earthquake, or the earth itself, comparatively
speaking, a little work; a far less, than innumerable others. One principal
reason why an earthquake appears to be such a great and stupendous work as it
does to most people, is because, instead of enlarging their minds by
contemplating objects that are truly great, they narrow them by attending only
to little things; such toys and trifles, I mean, as are found in this world,
the riches and vanities of it; the pomps, the thrones, the scepters and diamems
of kings. It is not strange that they who can think such little things great,
and admire them as being so; they whose thoughts are ever grovelling on the
ground on which they tread, and never ascend above it; it is not strange, I
say, that such persons should be astonished at the grandeur of an earthquake,
even though they had nothing to fear from such an event. For it must be
confessed that there is nothing, I mean no merely natural occurrence or event
in this world, which can more properly be called great, than such an one. But
to a contemplative man, as was intimated before, there are many other works of
God, which still more fully declare his power and glory; and which are
therefore to such men louder calls to reverence and obey him; though less
calculated to minister terror and amazement.

WHEN we behold, or reflect upon, the great and mavelous works of God,
all-powerful, wise, holy, just and good the effect hereof should not be the
exciting in us a fruitless admiration of, and astonishment at them; but the
exciting in us a due reverence and esteem of of Him, whose works they are; till
from admiring them, we come to admire, to fear, to love nothing besides Him,
the Lord God almighty, the King of saints, who only is holy. For all his works
are little, in comparison of Him; and can claim no regard or notice, any
farther than they may help to lead us to the knowledge, and to worthy
conceptions of Him. And unless our thoughts are thus led to God from his works,
so as to inspire us with the reverence, love and admiration of him, we had
almost as good stare at puppet-shows, as contemplate the heavens.

AN earthquake is indeed very peculiarly adapted to rouse and awaken the minds
of the inconsiderate, and of those who forget God; and to beget in them that
fear of him, which is the the beginning of wisdom; more adapted to this end,
even than the greater and more constant manifestations of his eternal power and
godhead. This is evident from the effect: for many who disregard these constant
displays of God's power, and other perfections, from year to year, are yet
alarmed by an earthquake, and impressed with a serious sense of religion. How
many, who were perhaps never excited to fear God, by beholding the heavens,
which declare his glory, the moon and the stars which he has ordained, have
been excited hereto, by these late occurrences of his providence? Where is that
sinner, so tho'tless, so stupid and abandoned, whose flesh did not tremble for
fear of God, and who was not afraid of his judgments, when the earth so lately
shook and trembled? Nor were these fears excited in them without the highest
reason, when we reflect that God has often declared in his holy word, that
earthquakes are, sometimes at least, sent in his righteous displeasure; not
merely for the warning and admonition of some sinners, but for the destruction
of others: And when we reflect what amazing desolation he has often actually
wrought by them in the earth! Some recent examples and instances whereof, we
have indeed, now within a day or two, heard of in Europe: The particulars of
which are so awful and terrible, that I shall not now enumerate them; for I
have no inclination, were it in my power, to throw you in a panic; but only to
reason calmly with you of righteousness, temperance and judgment to come; of
your obligation to fear and obey Him, whose works are thus great and
mavelous, and his judgments thus made manifest in the earth Since the
delivering of this discourse, we have had an account of the more awful and
amazing destruction of the city of Lisbon, St. Eubes, etc. the events alluded
to above, being the effects of the earthquake at Cadiz and Seville, of which we
had heard at that time. And these events may not only very naturally bring to
our minds what St. John says concerning the effect of that "great earthquake"
of which he speaks, when the cities of the nations fell, and great Babylon came
in remembrance before God; when he saw the kings of the earth, the merchants
which were made rich by her, "every ship-master, and all the company in ships",
and sailors, and as many as trade by sea, standing afar off, and crying when
they saw the smoke of her burning; I say these events may not only very
naturally bring to our minds what St. John says concerning that "great
earthquake"; but may also very justly, all circumstances being duly considered,
confirm our belief, that these were really the visions of God, not the reveries
of man; and consequently, that all those woes and plagues which he saw coming
upon Babylon, (I mean those which are not already fulfilled) shall in due time
be most punctually, accomplished upon her -- However, we should upon this, and
all similar occasions, remember the words of our Savior when he speaks of
those on whom "the tower of Siloam fell", and those whose "blood Pilate mingled
with their sacrifices": -- "Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish".
Luke xiii. ^ -- 5.
. It is not only natural, but just and proper for wicked men to tremble and to
be afraid, when God thus arises to shake terribly the earth, and his judgments
are abroad in it. And if their own lives are spared, they ought not only to
tremble at, but to learn righteousness from, these alarming events. This, through
the tender mercies of our God, is the case of those wicked men who are here
present before Him, if there are any persons present, to whom that character
belongs. Would to God, there were not! --

BUT upon the presumption that there are at least some such; (not an unnatural
or uncharitable presumption, I conceive, considering the largeness of the
assembly, and the present state of religion in the world) Upon this
presumption, I say, let me be allowed to address myself briefly and seriously
to such unhappy men; not as their enemy, God forbid! but as their friendly
monitor -- Let your hearts and tongues be filled with the high praises of God,
that your lives have been thus graciously preserved; and that the thing which
you so greatly and justly feared, not to say deserved, is not come upon you.
What distress and anxiety were you lately in! Where, alas! and what would you
now have been, had the earth opened her mouth and swallowed you up? or had your
falling houses crushed you to death? examples of both of which, there have been
many in former times, and some very lately. Had either of these been your own
case, I say, where, and what would you now have been! -- Wretched, and accursed
of God, in that region of darkness and despair, where the rich man lift up his
eyes being in torment! But in the time of your apparent danger, when the
sorrows of death compassed you, and the pains of hell gat hold upon you, Psalm
cxvi. 3.
God who is long-suffering and rich in mercy, as well as holy and all-powerful,
inclined his ear; Ver. 2.
and you are still among the living. What then will you render unto the Lord
for all his benefits toward you? Ver. 12.
and particularly for this? Will you not now praise and glorify his name? The
mariner (at his "wits end" while the storm beats upon him, and when every
sleeper "awakes and calls upon his God:" the mariner, I say,) when the storm is
over, blesses Him whom winds and seas obey, that he has escaped foundering and
shipwreck. Thus it becomes you to do, whom God has mercifully preserved when in
at least equal perils by land. Did you not make your vows to him in the time of
your distress? And will you now pay them Ver. 14.
? Will you not forever hereafter praise and reverence, worship and serve the
Lord God Almighty, the King of saints, and the Preserver even of sinners, though
He who only is holy? Will you not now, at length, break off your sins by
righteousness; and implore the forgiveness of them through him, in whom God is
reconciling the world unto himself? Did you not resolve to do thus, in the late
time of your terror and amazement? And will you not now perform these vows and
engagements? Where there not some particular sins, that more especially then
flew in your faces; and which you then more particularly resolved to forsake,
if God should spare your lives? Were there not some particular duties, with the
omission of which your consciences then especially accused you; and which you
particularly resolved to practice for the future, if you should have an
opportunity for it? Your consciences* which are always the voice of God within
you, were, I doubt not, then awake, and plainly told you the truth. It was no
delphic, ambiguous response, which they then gave; but one clear and distinct,
convincing and infallible as the oracle of God. Remember, O man! what that
great oracle, conscience, within thee, pronounced at that time; take the
warning, and obey the heavenly voice! Presume not to repeat those sins, with
which it then charged you; nor to omit those duties, your former neglect of
which then gave you disquietude.

IT is not only melancholy, but astonishing, to observe how soon wicked men
often get rid of their just fears and apprehensions of the divine displeasure,
and break through their better resolutions, when they no longer see the rod of
God held out, and shaken at them. They act as if they thought he then ceased to
be that just, and holy, and almighty Being which they apprehended him to be,
while they thought themselves in immediate danger of his judgments; as if they
thought he was not angry with the wicked every day, but only when there are
some alarming occurrences in the course of his providence; and so return to
their former vices and impieties, almost as soon as the particular evils and
dangers they apprehended, are removed. Suffer me therefore to warn you against
this folly; and to beseech you, as you value the salvation of your souls, not
to suffer that religious sense of things, which was lately awakened in you by
these awful occurrences, to wear off; and so return to your old crimes. At the
time of, or immediately after, the late earthquakes, did vicious men find in
themselves any inclination to repeat their old sins; and to break the
commandments of God? Did the drunkard then think of his bowl or bottle? Did the
whoremonger and adulterer then find any disposition to perpetrate their horrid
crimes? Did the thief at that time meditate future thefts and villainies? Did
the man who was unjust in his commerce and dealings, then scheme and plan
future fraud and injustice against his neighbor? Did the misers heart then
repose itself on his god? -- I mean, his gold? Did he then make gold his hope;
and say unto the fine gold, Thou art my confidence! Did the profane swearer and
blasphemer then ask God to damn either himself or his neighbor? I can hardly
believe there was a man amongst us so intemperate, so lewd, so addicted to the
hidden things of darkness and dishonesty, so devoted to his mammon, or so
profane and impious, as to do thus at the mentioned time. No: how wicked soever
some of you might possibly be; yet you all then feared God; or at least were
afraid of him, and afraid to sin against him; because you then really believed
him to be holy, just and almighty. The drunkard was then far from desiring to
indulge to intemperance: The burning adulterer's blood then ran cold in his
veins: The thief would then have dropped the spoil from his hand; and he that
stole, resolved to steal no more: The most zealous worshipper of mammon, then
wished for a treasure in heaven: And the blasphemer's oaths and curses, were
turned into prayers and supplications. All, all then thought, that God was
worthy to be feared, and glorified, to be worshipped and obeyed.

WELL: Do you suppose that God is changed; and now become a different Being
from what he so lately was, when he shook the earth, and caused the pillars of
heaven to tremble? Do you imagine, because you do not now see these same
manifestations of his power, justice and holiness, that of almighty he is now
become weak! of just, regardless of justice! of holy, unholy! And consequently,
that though he was lately so proper an object of your fear, yet he is no longer
so; but that you may now safely contemn him? that you may trample upon his
laws? that you may tread under foot his Son? that you may disregard his word,
and profane his day? that you may neglect his worship, his institutions and
ordinances, and despise his threatenings? Can any man be so extravagantly
foolish as to think thus! Verily, he is the Lord, and he "changes not;" the
Father of lights, with whom there is no variableness, neither shadow of
turning. Though the earth should never "tremble" again, he is always the same
holy, righteous, powerful and jealous God, which you lately conceived him to
be, when he "looked upon it": He is the same when he dwells in the calm, and
all nature smiles around, as when he "makes darkness his secret place," and
"flies upon the wings of the wind," when he gives his voice in thunder, a smoke
going out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth, devouring!

TAKE heed, therefore, that you do not suffer those just sentiments concerning
the power and holiness of God, and your duty to him, which were lately awakened
in you, to be effaced; cherish and improve them; and let them be written on
your hearts as with a pen of iron, and the point of a diamond; or as graven on
the rock for ever. You ought certainly always to fear, always to glorify,
always to worship and obey him, who is always almighty, always holy, always
just, always present with you; even though he should never manifest himself and
his power to you in the same terrible manner. But you are to remember, that God
may perhaps visit us with other, and far greater earthquakes, or with terrible
and destructive inundations of the sea, as he has lately visited others, in
diverse places; or with other desolating judgments: For he never wants means and
ways by which to punish the disobedient, even in this world. But, as was said
before, though his judgments should not now be made manifest in any of these
ways* yet he is always the same glorious, righteous, almighty and terrible God;
even "yesterday, to day and forever". And he will most surely render to every
man according as his work shall be, in the day that he has appointed for that
end, whether it be near or remote. You should therefore have an habitual
reverence of him upon your minds; such a one, as through his grace, and
assistance, will always be productive of obedience and holiness in your lives.
As he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
conversation; because it is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy. And if ye call
on the Father, who without respect of persons, judges according to every man's
work, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear. 1 Pet. i. 15, 16, 17.


HAPPY is the man that fears always; but he that hardens his heart shall
fall into mischief Prove. xxviii. 14.
! Happy, thrice happy are they, who ever religously reverence, and sincerely
obey almighty God; and who are the objects of his peculiar love and favor,
through the glorious Mediator of the new covenant. Miserable, beyond expression
miserable are they, who are the objects of his righteous displeasure, through
sin; through obstinate impenitence and unbelief. What real harm or evil can come
nigh the former, shielded by that hand that "garnished the heavens", and formed
"the crooked serpent Job. xxvi. 13.
!" What good can the latter expect, under his frown, whose right hand shall
teach him terrible things Psalm xlv. 4.
! What worm can resist omnipotence! What craft can evade the justice of the
all-wise and holy One! Or who fly from him who is omnipresent! If you fly to
the most distant parts of the earth or sea, he is there: if you ascend to the
highest heaven, behold he is there, if you descend to the lowest hell, he is
equally there! And wherever he is, he is always the same glorious almighty,
wise and holy Being; the friend, the hope, the salvation of the good; the
enemy, the terror, the destruction of the wicked! When he gives quietness, who
then can make trouble? and when he hides his face, who then can behold him?
whether it be done against a nation, or against a man only? Job. xxxiv. 29.
Who then? what man? what nation shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy
name! Shall not all nations come and worship before thee! --

I WOULD willingly hope there may be some good effects of the late terrible
earthquake, not only in this capital, where people have appeared to be so
generally affected by it; but throughout the province; and indeed throughout
these American plantations and colonies, as far at least as it extended.
Without running into a commonplace invective against the times, or pretending
to give a detail of the sins and vices which are prevalent throughout these
British colonies, one may, I think, say with modesty, that there is ample room
for, and therefore great need of, a general reformation of manners; even
amongst persons of all orders and degrees, without any exception. This alarming
occurrence of providence, is, in the nature of it, as a moral means, calculated
to produce such an effect, such a reformation. And considering our lives are
all thus mercifully preserved, one would willingly believe that God really
meant it to us for good; that we might awake to righteousness and not sin; that
we might be made partakers of his holiness hereby; and so become the suitable
objects of, and in due time enjoy, his favor; that kind protection, and those
smiles of his providence, which we at all times need, and, in some respects,
more particularly at this.

TO mention only one of these respects: We are, and have been for some time
engaged in an unhappy, and, hitherto, an unprosperous war with our French
neighbors on the continent, and their Indian allies, supported and encouraged
in their encroachments and depredations by the power of France: With which
martial, though perfidious nation, a more general war seems to be now on the
point of breaking out. Four The expeditions here referred to, are two against
Fort Du Quesne, that against Niagara, and that against Crown-Point: What has
been attempted, and successfully executed, at Nova Scotia, chiefly by
New-England-men, enlisted by Lieut. Col. Winslow of the Massachusetts Bay, (not
being so properly an expedition against our open enemies, as a necessary
precaution against treacherous, or at least justly suspected people, living in
the British dominions) not being included here.
(that is, in short, all the late) expeditions made against them, for the
securing of our territories, have proved unsuccessful; and not only
unsuccessful, but some of them fatal to a considerable number of British
subjects; and not only so, but some of them at least, very dishonorable to the
British name and arms: Not to say any thing of the great expense of these
expeditions to the crown, and to these colonies. -- How have these colonies
lately bled! How are some of them still bleeding, by treacherous and savage
hands! What scenes of violence! of rapine! of fire! of murder! especially on
the frontiers of the southern colonies!

NOW though we have not, that I know of, any reason to doubt of the justness of
our cause, with reference to our enemies on the continent; yet from God's
fighting against us in his holy providence; from his thus defeating our
attempts; from his thus giving our barbarian, and even worse than barbarian
enemies, our blood to drink; from his making us appear, not only not
formidable, but even contemptible and ridiculous in their eyes; so that they
laugh, and "eat us up as they eat bread!" -- From God's thus fighting against
us in his holy providence, I say, we have great reason to suspect that we do
not stand right with him as a people that is called by his name; but that we
have before made him our enemy, by fighting and rebelling against him. Who,
indeed, can doubt but that this is the case, if he seriously reflects, how
little there is of pure and undefiled religion amongst us? or rather, how much
there is of flagrant immorality, profaneness and irreligion, throughout these
colonies? I say these things from my heart; and hope they will not be looked
upon only as words of course: For I do not allow myself to trifle with my
Maker, or to take his holy and venerable name in vain, even in a Sermon, which
would not sanctify the deed. And there have been many other things of late
years, in the course of divine providence toward us, besides those mentioned,
which might justly make us fear, that God is greatly provoked at our sins.

THE late visitation of his providence in the formidable earthquake, which
extended almost throughout these British colonies, seems to me, if I can
understand the language in which it speaks, to be a loud call to them all to
consider of their ways; and to return to God by unfeigned repentance, and a
general reformation. It is to be hoped, that none of them which have heard,
will disregard the admonition; or so soon forget it: as the same sort of
warnings are forgotten in some of our West India Islands, where they are more
frequent; where there has been at least ONE, which should never be forgotten;
and where, nevertheless, by what we hear, the wickedness of the people is
increased to the very heavens, so that were not God's mercies far above them,
we might conclude that their utter ruin and destruction could not be long
deferred! God forbid, that we on the continent should thus refuse to hear the
rod, and him that appointed it, though we have been so gently chastized by it.
It is to be hoped, that we shall be effectually taught by it, in conjunction
with the other late corrective dispensations of divine providence, to fear the
Lord God almighty, the King of Saints, who only is holy, whose works are great
and mavelous, all whose ways are just and true, and whose judgments are at
this time made so manifest in the earth; that so iniquity may not be our ruin,
but that God, even our own God, may delight to bless and build us up; to
prosper us against our enemies, instead of pulling us down, and destroying us
by them. Who knows, but this may be one design of our good and gracious God,
who is the governor among the nations, in visiting and admonishing us in this
manner? If it is, we should surely concur and fall in with it, by turning every
one of us from our transgressions; and this, even though our future and eternal
interest were out of the question. For whatsoever is dear and valuable to us in
this world, seems to be now at stake; and our ultimate dependence, you know, is
upon God.

SHOULD France throw over a considerable body of well disciplined and appointed
troops into America, early in the spring, which seems not an improbable
supposition, I almost tremble for the consequence, notwithstanding our numbers
of raw men, however naturally-brave -- Especially if our military operations on
the continent, which God forbid! instead of being conducted by wisdom and due
caution, by zeal and patriotism, by integrity and a determined fortitude,
should happen to be conducted by folly or rashness, by irresolution or
party-spirit, by treachery or cowardice! -- But perhaps any fears or suspicions
of this sort, are perfectly chimerical and groundless; so that I shall say no
more upon the point --

HOWEVER, such is the present critical situation of our affairs, such the
aspects of providence toward us, and so numerous our sins against heaven, that
all who value their lives, liberties or estates, not to say their souls, had
need to fear God, and thereby endeavor to secure his favor and protection.
And had I a voice that could be heard throughout these British governments, I
would now lift it up like a trumpet; I would cry aloud and not spare -- Repent,
repent; fear God, and bring forth fruits meet for repentance! -- Then shall thy
light break forth as the morning, and thine health shall spring forth speedily;
and thy righteousness shall go before thee, and the glory of the Lord shall be
thy rereward. Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer -- Then shall thy
light rise in obscurity, and thy darkness be as the noonday: And the Lord
shall guide thee continually -- Isa. lviii. 8, -- 11.
But if we do not grieve, when God smites and chasteneth us; if we refuse to
receive correction, and will not return to him; but "make our faces harder than
a rock;" we may then justly fear that he will smite still harder; and chastize
us, not with whips, but with scorpions. If we persevere in our disobedience, we
may reasonably suppose, that he will repeat his stripes; and not only break the
skin, and make us bleed a little; but that he will make us bleed in earnest;
yea, that he will "tread us in his anger, and trample us in his fury;" and (if
I may go on with the scripture phraseology) that our blood will be upon his
garments, till he has "stained all his raiment!" Isa. lxiii. 3.
When we consider our demerits, we must acknowledge that God has hitherto
corrected us with a Father's hand; and, if I may so express it, has first
molified and bathed the rod with a salutary balsam, to heal the stripes which
itself gave. Let us not, by our repeated transgressions, provoke him to dip it
next in poison, that it may cause our wounds to fester to our very heart and
vitals; and in the end prove mortal!

I TREMBLE not only for my dear native country, when I consider the sins of it;
but also for a certain European nation, which I will not mention by name: A
nation blessed with some peculiar advantages, civil and religious: A nation not
much exalted by righteousness, for a long time past: A nation often admonished
by providence, and sorely scourged: A nation often threatened even with utter
ruin and destruction: A nation often almost miraculously preserved from ruin
and destruction by her enemies, both foreign and domestic: And yet a nation
where infidelity, irreligion, corruption and venality, and almost every kind of
vice, seems to have been increasing all the time! -- Will not almighty God, who
"only is holy," sooner or later visit for these things? and will not his soul
be avenged on SUCH A NATION AS THIS! Jer. v. 9.
But to return to ourselves.

LET us, my Brethren, hearken to the word of admonition; I do not mean my own,
but God's. For his voice is loud and vocal, even in those dispensations of his
providence, which are the occasion of our being assembled together in his house
at this time: It is still sounding in our ears, unless we are like the deaf
adder that stops her ear, and will not hear. The language of it is the same
in general with that of God's written word, -- Let the wicked forsake his way,
and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord! And if
we duly attend to, and obey this voice of God, both in his word and in these
visitations of his providence, he will surely have mercy on us, and abundantly
pardon; for he is as good as great; and delights not in the death of sinners:
Nor are the works of his mercy and loving kindness, either less, or less
numerous, than those of his righteous severity, when his judgments are made
manifest. Incline your ear therefore, and hear, and your soul shall live; ye
shall eat that which is good, and your soul shall delight itself in fatness. We
may justly hope for the smiles of divine providence, in giving us temporal
prosperity, if we turn at God's reproof, and fear, and worship, and serve him,
according to the gospel of his Son, "in spirit and in truth." Let us not
mistake the nature of christianity so widely, as to imagine that an idle,
inoperative faith, or observing the external forms of religion, and crying, The
temple of the Lord, will avail us without repentance toward God, and faith
that works by love to Him, to our Redeemer, and fellowmen, and an universal
obedience to his commandments. Much less should we imagine, that we can
recommend ourselves to the divine favor, by furious party-zeal in religious
matters; by indulging to a censorious spirit, and setting at naught our
christian protestant brethren, whose lives are blameless, on account of
differences in opinion. The day which is coming, and which will reveal the
secrets of all hearts, will show that this is not the religion of Christ, but a
contradiction to it; and that men who do thus, "know not what spirit they are
of." But not to digress.

WHETHER we shall be generally amended and reformed, and, in consequence
hereof, enjoy the protection and smiles of divine providence, and outward
prosperity, God only knows; though this is what all good men desire and pray for:
And whether their desires and prayers are answered or not; yet they themselves
are secure and happy, even in the worst and most "perilous times". Being such,
we shall enjoy what is infinitely more to be desired than all temporal and
worldly blessings together, the favor of almighty God, the King of saints, and
a peaceful conscience; an happiness which the world can neither give nor take
away. That sense of security which good men commonly enjoy, is of more value,
especially in times of terror and distress to the wicked, than this and ten
thousand other worlds together: And no man, surely, who knows what this means,
would make the exchange! Need I then caution good men against anxiety, even in
these evil days? What though you see that iniquity abound, which may perhaps
bring sore calamities upon us? Your treasure and hope are not in this world.
What though treacherous and barbarous nations are now ravaging our borders, and
laying waste our country? What though you hear of wars and rumors of wars, of
earthquakes and inundations in diverse places, the sea and the waves roaring?
What though religion is generally at so low an ebb in the world, even in
protestant countries? What though the idolatrous corrupters of christianity, or
mystical Babylon, should long triumph? What though the souls of them which have
been slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they held, (seen by
St. John "under the altar") should still for some ages cry, How long, O Lord,
holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on
the earth! What though all things, should wear even a much more gloomy aspect
than they do at present? -- Still you know, that the Lord God almighty, the
King of saints reigns; that he only is holy, that all his ways are just and
true; that his judgments will sooner or later be made manifest; and that in his
loving kindness you are secure against all real harm, though the earth and
heavens were mixed in one common chaos? The King of saints will never leave nor
forsake those, who are truly such. Why then, O son of Sion, should thy soul be
cast down, or disquieted within thee, if thy God reigns! Hope thou in him;
for thou shall yet, and forever praise him* Lift up the hands that hang down,
and the feeble knees: And glory in this, that thou understandest and know
Him, who exercises loving kindness, judgment and righteousness in the earth.
Jer. ix. 24.
And

LET wicked men, if they regard their own happiness either in this world or
another, turn their feet unto God's testimonies, and be reconciled to Him through
him that died for us, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us unto God.
Then shall you also taste and see that the Lord is indeed gracious; a very
present help in trouble. For even when your flesh and heart shall fail you, he
will be the strength of your heart, and your portion forever!

TO conclude: Let those who truly fear God already, that King of saints who
only is holy, daily endeavor, by his grace and assistance, to become more like
him. Let the late visitations of his providence, awaken you to greater zeal and
diligence in his service; that you may go on unto perfection. To which end,
ever set before you, and aspire at a conformity to, the glorious example of
your Redeemer; of him, whom not having seen you love; and in whom ye greatly
rejoice. There are some virtues and graces, in which even many good men are
very defective: Particularly those of meekness and patience under abuses and
insults; charity and forbearance toward persons of a different persuasion in
religious matters; and love to their personal enemies. Even many of those who
ought surely to be "ensamples to the flock," of these sublime and excellent
virtues, sometimes seem to exhibit a very different example to it -- However
these are certainly christian virtues, by whomsoever disregarded, or
cultivated. And whatever difficulty may attend the exercise of them, we ought
to learn them, and to improve in them, by contemplating the doctrine and
example of the great apostle and high priest of our profession. These are some
of his sublimest lessons of virtue and christian perfection. Remember always,
who and what you are; whose sons; whose disciples; to what world you stand
related, with whom you are "joint heirs", and what is the hope of your calling.
Act with a greatness and dignity becoming your character, and glorious
expectations. Be above little resentments, and even the provocations to great
ones: Learn, sometimes at least, to silence calumny by silence: Return blessing
for cursing, and good for evil, overcoming the latter by the former. If you
are, or imagine your selves to be, wiser and stronger than the others, learn to
bear the infirmities of the weak; to have compassion upon the ignorant, and
them that are out of the way. Let your candor and good will be extensive and
conspicuous: Scorn all bigottry, party-spirit, and narrowness of mind in
religious matters; and allow to all men that liberty herein, which you take
yourselves, without hating or reviling them, merely because they differ from
you in opinion. Yea, learn to love with a tender and unfeigned charity, your
most malicious and abusive enemies -- So shall you act up to your holy
profession; so shall you be followers of them who through faith and patience
inherit the promises; so shall you act sutably to the relation in which you
stand to Jesus Christ the Son of the living God, who "is not ashamed to call
you brethren:" And so shall you be emphatically the children of your Father
which is in heaven; for he makes his sun to rise on the evil and on the good;
and sends rain on the just and on the unjust -- Be ye therefore perfect, even
as your Father which is in heaven is perfect. Mat. v. 45 -- 48.


AND thus, being not only by profession, but by practice, the children of light
and of the day, you shall at length shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of
your Father: -- Not, indeed, in all respects like that natural sun, which is
just now withdrawing his friendly, benign beams, from our hemisphere: For in
the ages to come, or rather when these momentary ages are no more; even long
after that glorious luminary, that great and mavelous work of God, is become
"black as sackcloth of hair", and all his fires are extinct, yours shall still
burn and shine, not only with an undecaying, but an ever-increasing luster,
united with that GOD who is both LIGHT and LOVE, and in whom THERE IS NO
DARKNESS AT ALL!

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THE Author of the foregoing Discourse takes this opportunity to correct some
mistakes in the Appendix to the two Discourses, which he lately published upon
the same occasion.

The most considerable apertures and chasms made in the ground by the late
earthquake, were not, as he then supposed, in the town of Pembroke, but in
Situate, near if not adjoining to it.

The accounts which he mentioned concerning the dividing of a great hill upon
Cape-Cod, in halves, and of a prodigious chasm at Newington, (of which accounts
he then spoke doubtfully) now appear to have been without foundation.

The sentence which stands thus, p. 3. of the Appendix, This was as much more
considerable than the last on tuesday morning, as that was less considerable
than the first, ought to have run thus -- This was almost as much more
considerable than the last on tuesday morning, as it was less, etc.

From what we have heard from Halifax since the publishing his Appendix, and
from St. Martin's, respecting the inundation there, on the same day the
earthquake happened here, it is at least probable that the extent of the
earthquake was twice as great as he then conjectured.

And lastly: Whereas he incidentally gave it as his opinion, that the course of
the earthquake was from S. W. to the N. E. he now thinks it much more probable,
that it was nearly from N. W. to S. E. agreeable to what the very learned and
worthy PROFESSOR of the Math. and Phil. at our College, has said in the notes
to his Discourse on earthquakes, since published -- A Discourse which (if one
who was so lately his pupil, might presume to give his opinion) cannot fail to
do great honor to its Author, to the learned society of which he is a member,
and to his country: Even notwithstanding what Mr. L. Evans has, with sufficient
assurance, assigned as a sufficient reason for paying Philadelphia the
particular distinction of making it the first Meridian of America; viz. That it
FAR EXCELS in the progress of letters, mechanic arts, and the public spirit of
its inhabitants, all other parts of the "British dominions on this continent!"
Mr. Evans's Analysis to a general Map, etc. p. 1.
-- But I am not so rude as to make invidious comparisons betwixt these
governments in point of literature; or to say, Who is, or is not, THE BEST
JUDGE IN AMERICA", Dedication of Mr. Evans's Map.
of this gentleman's late Map --

J. M.

The most material Corrections.
Page Line Read 20 13 heaven of heavens 25 2 bottom hypotheses 36 14 his law.
38 13 just and true? 44 4 natural dictate 50 2 diadems 52 6 throw you into 54
11 bot. will you not now 55 1 bot. providence; and (...) 71 2 Even many of

N. B. The need of some of these Corrections was observed time enough to make
them before the whole impression was finished.


