AN IMPROVEMENT OF THE Doctrine of Earthquakes, Being the Works of GOD, and
Tokens of his just Displeasure.

Containing an Historical Summary of the most remarkable Earthquakes in
NEW ENGLAND, from the first Settlement of the English here, as also in other
Parts of the World since 1666.

By Thomas Prince, M.A. And one of the Pastors of the South Church in BOSTON.

To which is added, A Letter to a Gentleman, giving an Account of the dreadful
EARTHQUAKE felt in Boston, New England Nov. 18. twenty five Minutes past 4 in
the Morning.

BOSTON, New England, Printed and Sold by D. FOUL in Ann-Street, and by Z.
FOUL in Middle-street. 1755.

Just Published, Sold by D. Foul in Ami-street, and Z. Foul in Middle-street,
Price six Coppers,
A Discourse on Earthquakes, being the Works of GOD and Tokens of his just
Displeasure: Wherein is given a particular Description of this awful Event of
Providence. Also on Account of the natural, instrumental, or secondary Causes
of these Operations in the Hands of GOD. After which, our Thoughts are led up
to Him, as having the highest and principal Agency in this stipendous Work.
Made public at this Time on Occasion of the late Dreadful Earthquake which
happened on the 18 th. of Nov. 1755. By THOMAS PRINCE, A. M.

Also two POEMS, one on the Conflagration, applied to that grand Period or
Catastrophe of our World, when the Face of Nature is to be changed by a Deluge
of Fire. The other entitled, The GOD of Tempest and Earthquakes. Price 3
Coppers.

Of Earthquakes.
OF all Temporal Judgments, what is more Terrible than a sudden and destroying
EARTHQUAKE? Famines, Plagues, and Wars are wasting and dreadful Calamities. But
these destroy in a gradual manner, and give the Inhabitants Time to escape or
prepare to meet them. But an Earthquake comes on a sudden, and frequently does
it is destructive Work in a Moment, and there is no resisting or flying away.

AND in such a dismal Hour, while the Earth is Quivering under us -- Does not
every one rightly conceive, they feel the Glorious GOD then shaking it with his
amazing Power? Does not every Mind look up and clearly see Him offended in an
high Degree, and apprehend Him ready to express his Wrath in their immediate
and utter Destruction?

1. IN these dreadful Works of GOD, Let us see the extreme Evil and Danger of
sinning against Him.

OUR Sins of every Kind are full of Contrariety and Dishonor to this most
Glorious BEING. And as they are justly most offensive to HIM, they are also
most dangerous and destructive to us. They are so many Instances of our
slighting his supreme Authority, of abusing his infinite Goodness, and of
rising in Opposition against Him. It is by these alone we raise his Anger; and
by our Continuance in them, move Him to express it, both in Threatening and
Bringing on us his destroying Judgments. And O! who can stand before Him when
once He appears to be Angry? For the LORD is the true GOD, He is the living
GOD, and an everlasting King: At his Wrath the Earth shall TREMBLE, and the
Nations shall not be able to abide his Indignation. Jer. X.10.

IT is this offensive and mischievous Thing that has moved Him to testify his
Displeasure in this lower World, and in every Age: To destroy not only
particular Persons, Families and smaller Villages; but even whole Cities,
Countries, Kingdoms, with their vile Inhabitants, and in various manners.
Famines, Fires, Wars, Tempests, Plagues and Earthquakes are so many bitter
Fruits and Tokens of his high Resentment of the Sins of Men. There is no
Calamity, though ever so great, extensive, grievous, sudden; but what our Sins,
especially when persisted in, expose us to, and provoke the righteous GOD to
execute on us.

NOR will our sacred Covenant Relation to Him, our high Profession, or our
formal religious Services, in the least avail to secure us from them. No! Alas!
They rather aggravate our Guilt, inflame his Wrath, and put Him on to mark us
out with more signal Miseries; as He declared to his ancient People, about Two
Years before the Earthquake. Amos iii.1.2. Hear this word that the LORD has
spoken against you, O Children of Israel, against the whole Family which I
brought up from the Land of Egypt, saying; You only have I known of all the
Families of the Earth: Therefore I will Punish you for all your Iniquities.

And for Particular Places that have been most eminent for Religious Services
-- See how severely He threatened Jerusalem of old, under the Term of A^^d; i.
e. The Lion of GOD. When she grew rampant like that Creature in her violent and
sinful Courses; He would no more spare but treat Her with the utmost Rigor. He
would bring every Kind of Distress upon Her: and among the rest this dismal
one. Isa. xxix.1, 2, 5, 6. Woe to Ariel, to Ariel, the City where David dwelt:
Add ye Year to Year, let them Kill Sacrifices: Yet will I distress Ariel, and
there shall be heaviness and sorrow, and it shall be to me as Ariel -- Yea it
shall be at an instant suddenly, Thou shall be visited of the LORD of Hasts
with Thunder, and with Earthquake, and Great Noise, with Storm and Tempest, and
the Flame of devouring Fire.

This terrible Threatening is doubtless put on sacred Record for our Admonition
upon whom the Ends of the World are come: and the Righteous GOD may execute it
when He pleases on the like provoking Towns and Cities, O! That we might
continually Remember it! and fear; least as it has begun to be accomplished on
us, it should go on to be fulfilled in its extreme Severity.

2. What abundant Reason have we to adore the Patience and Mercy of GOD, and be
exceeding Thankful, that we, our Families and Towns are not swallowed up in
this calamitous Dispensation.

What Loads of Guilt and Wrath are lying upon us: and how have they been
growing every Year? How long have we been going on in our provoking Sins,
against Light and Grace, Threatenings, Invitations, Mercies, Judgments, and
every Means that GOD has used for our Reformation? And O! How heavy did we feel
our Guilt, and what awful apprehensions had we of the glorious Holiness,
Omniscience, Power and Justice of an angry GOD in that dismal Night of our
Distress and Danger? Then we see no other Refuge but that mighty BEING, whom we
had been constantly Offending: and yet to Him alone must we look for Safety.

And while we felt Him shaking us over the dreadful Gulf, it may be of Fire and
Brimstone, and our Houses over us also ready to give way every moment and crush
us to pieces -- O! How earnest were our anxious Souls for speedy Mercy and
Deliverance? O LORD have Mercy on me, make have to help me! Preserve the House
from Breaking, and let me not sink into the Depths of the Earth! O GOD, in the
multitude of thy Mercy hear me! Let not the water-flood overflow, nor the Deep
swallow me up, nor let the Pit shut her mouth upon me! O LORD hear me, for thy
Loving Kindness is Good! Turn to me according to the multitude of thy tender
Mercies, and hide not thy Face from me: For I am in Trouble: Hear me speedily:
Draw nigh to my Soul and redeem it, etc.

And how wonderfully Gracious and Kind was GOD in our Time of Trouble. If He
had put forth his Power in an higher measure, or had not stayed his Hand as He
did, but shaken us a few Minutes longer; our Dwellings could not have born the
Shock, but must have fallen to pieces on us, destroyed the Lives of Multitudes
at once, and most miserably crushed and broken others. What a doleful howling
from mortal Wounds and Death had come out of our fallen Houses? and what an
astonishing Desolation had we been this Day?

But his Divine Compassions wrought toward us, as they wonderfully did to
EPHRAIM and ISRAEL of old -- How shall I give Thee up? How shall I deliver
Thee? How shall I make Thee as ADMAH? How shall I set Thee as ZE^OIM? Mine
Heart is turned within me: my Repentings are kindled together: I will not
execute the Fierceness of mine Anger: I will not return to destroy Thee; For I
am GOD and not Man, the holy One in the midst of Thee! Hos. XI.8.9.

But that we may see something more of the Greatness of our Deliverance; I
shall here briefly mention these Two Things, 1. GOD's amazing Execution of this
sort of Judgments in other Places. And, 2. His repeated Threatenings of them in
these Parts of the World.


1. GOD's amazing Execution of this sort of Judgments in other Places.

And here I must invite you, in the Words of the Psalmist. -- Come, Behold the
Works of the LORD, what Desolations he has made in the Earth! -- I will speak
of the glorious Honor of thy Majesty and of thy wondrous Works: And Men shall
speak of the might of thy terrible Acts, and I will declare thy Greatness.

Nor need I here search the Records of former Ages: But confine my self to the
Instances of the last Fourscore Years; and even of these, the most Remarkable
only; for it would fill a Volumn to recite them all. And as I enumerate the
Circumstances, I desire you to think, they might have been the same with us;
and would have been so, were it not for the wonderful Forbearance and Mercy of
GOD.

IN a Province of PERSIA, which lies in the same Latitude with ours in 1667,
there was an extraordinary Earthquake which lasted Three Months, and not only
overturned Houses, Towers, Churches, etc. But swallowed up in one Moment Eighty
Thousand Men, besides Women and Children. Multitudes of Villages and Towns,
through out the Province were destroyed the same Day: Several Mountains sunk
into a Level, and the great Roads were broken up and became unpassable. And
about Four Years after, there was another Earthquake in the same Province on
New Years Day, which swallowed up abundance of People and Houses.

IN the famous City of SMYRNA, which stands on a most convenient Harbor in one
of the finest Bays of the World, is one of the principal Seats of Trade in the
Turkish Empire, consisted of about 90,000 People, and is not far from our
Latitude neither -- On June 30 1688, at Noon Day, there was a terrible
Earthquake, which in one Minute threw down most of the Buildings and shattered
the rest. Immense Wealth was swallowed up: the Castle sunk into a Chasm that
opened under it: and Five Thousand People perished. And to add to the misery, a
few Hours after, a Fire broke out of the Ruins, which consumed the Rest of the
City but a few scattering Houses.

In the City of NAPLES on Saturday June 5. N. S. 1688, There was a dreadful
Earthquake which ruined many of their stately Churches, Colleges, Palaces, and
killed many People: And on the next Day another, which threw down many
Buildings that were weakened the Day before. Three Ships were sunk in their
Harbor. Several Seats and Places in the neighboring Country were quite
destroyed, and most of their Inhabitants swallowed up. Among the rest,
BENEVENTO was almost totally ruined; and of Ten Thousand People, there remained
scarce Six Hundred alive.

IN the Kingdom of SICILY, near the same Latitude, in the Night after March 8.
1669, came on a dreadful Earthquake: which shook all the Buildings of One of
their Towns to the Ground, and almost ruined Two more.

BUT this was nothing to that most amazing one which befell that Kingdom on Jan.
9 and 11. N. S. 1692, 3.

THE Night after Friday Jan. 9. in a serene, warm and pleasant Time, the Shakes
began with a Quivering motion, and were so violent as to throw down a great
many Buildings and fright the People into the Churches and Fields for Refuge.
But on the Lord's Day following they came on like a swift Rolling Billow, and
with such a vehement Impulse, as in Four Minutes to throw above Fifty Towns and
Cities, with their magnificent Streets, Churches, Colleges, Castles, Towers and
Palaces, into utter Desolations, Great Churches fell down at once, while the
frighted People were at their Devotions and crushed them to Death by Thousands.
In the adjoining Seas there was such a furious Emotion, that several Ships as
well as smaller Vessels were drowned all along the Coast of the Island. And
many considerable Towns and Cities were so wholly destroyed, that there were no
Inhabitants left to give an Account of the manner of their sudden Destruction.

Among the rest, CATANIA, a famous, ancient, splendid City, full of Learning,
Wealth and stately Structures, sunk out of sight in a moment. Some Fishermen in
the Bay informed, They saw the City sink down with the Noise, as of a Thousand
great Cannon discharged at once. And in the Place were it stood appeared a Lake
with vast Heaps of Rubbish here and there above the Water. Of Eighteen Thousand
nine Hundred Inhabitants, Eighteen Thousand perished; the rest having left it
the Morning before: and throughout the Island, One Hundred and Twenty Thousand,
besides the bruised and like to die, about Twenty Thousand more.

PALERMO the chief City at the other End of the Kingdom received some Damage in
most of it is buildings, and of the People not above a Hundred killed. But
doubtless, we remember the awakening Accounts not long since Published here of
the late dreadful Earthquake which befell that City in the Night between the 1.
and 2. of September 1726. It began between 10 and 11, and in a calm and serene
Sky like ours in 1727. though at first the Shocks were not so violent and did
no hurt: But soon increasing they continued with great Fury for above Twenty
Minutes: whereby about a Quarter Part of that large City was entirely
overturned, and reduced to a Heap of Rubbish. In one of it is Wards, an whole
Street gaped at once with a dreadful Noise: from whence there broke out Flames
mixed with calcined Stones and a Torrent of burning Brimstone, which consumed
the whole Ward in less than half an Hour. In Five Days after there were Three
Thousand drawn out Dead from the Ruins, and many dismally mash'd to pieces: and
'twas computed about 15,000 People perished in that amazing Convulsion.

At BATAVIA on the large Island of JAVA, in the East Indies, between the 4th
and 5th of Jan. 1699, there was an Earthquake, whereby Sixteen Hills sunk down
with a great Noise, in the adjacent Country.

And at Lima the principal City of Peru and the largest in South America, on
June 17. N. S. 1678, there was a terrible Earthquake, which ruined a great Part
of the City. And on Monday, October. 20. N. S. 1687, at Four in the Morning came
on another with an horrible Noise; when some Houses fell and some Persons
perished under their Ruins. At 5, another shake with the same Noise. And at 6,
when they though it they were all in Safety, came on a Third with a rushing Noise
and great Fury. The Sea roaring arose beyond it is Bounds: The Bells rung of
themselves: The Destruction was so great that no Building stood: Several Places
round about were ruined: Above Five Thousand Dead Bodies were found, and they
found more Daily when the Accounts came away so that they knew not their Number.

But to come a little nearer Home.

There are many in this Country that well remember the fearful Tidings of that
Earthquake in JAMAICA, on June 7th 1692. It came on between 11 and 12 at Noon,
in a clear, calm and Sunshine Day. It began with a small Trembling, so as to
make some think of an Earthquake; which Thought was confirmed by a second Shake
something stronger, accompanied with a hollow rumbling Noise almost like
Thunder, which made them begin to run out of their Houses. But alas! This was
but short warning for them to provide for their Safety: For at the Heels of the
second came the Third and most violent Shake, which threw down and drowned 9
Tenths of PORT ROYAL their Capital Town in two Minutes, and all the Houses by
the Wharff in less than One.

The Streets rose like the Waves of the Sea; lifting up all that were in them,
and immediately dropping down into Pits. The Shake was so fierce, that it threw
the People on their Knees and Faces, as they run in the Streets to seek for
safety. In several Places the Ground would Crack and open and shut quick and
fast in a wonderful manner. Some have seen Two or Three Hundred of these
Openings at one time. In some of which many of the People were swallowed up:
Some the Earth caught by the middle and squeezed to Death: The Heads, Arms or
Legs of others only appeared above Ground. At the same Time a Flood of Water
gushed out and rolled over others: Some caught hold of Beams and Rafters:
Others were afterward found Dead and almost covered with Sand. Some who were
swallowed quite down, rose again in other Streets, being cast up with great
Quantities of Water, and some into the midst of the Harbor: and yet some of
these through the wonderful Goodness of GOD were saved; while others that went
down quick, were never seen more.

These were the smaller Openings. The larger swallowed Great Houses: and out of
some there issued whole Rivers spouting to a vast Height in the Air, with ill
Stenches that were very offensive. All the Wharves and some of the Houses sunk
at once: And the most so soon, that the People had no time to get out; those
who were in the upper Chambers meeting the Water at the Garret Stairs as they
were running down for Safety. While some of the Houses were quite swallowed up
in the Earth; others were thrown on Heaps: And even the best Streets in the
Town full of stately Buildings sunk so deep as to be near thirty Foot under
Water.

Several Sloops and Ships were overset and lost in the Harbor. The Sea
suddenly rising and swelling with a strange Emotion, came rolling with such a
Force as to drive the Ships from their Anchors, breaking their Cables in an
Instant, and dashing them against the Tops of the sunken Houses.

While the Earth was laboring in these Convulsions, the People run up and
down, pale and trembling with Horror, like so many Ghosts; as if the
Dissolution of the whole Frame of the World were at hand.

And yet the Shake was stronger in the Country than in the Town, where it left
more Houses standing than in all the rest of the Island; though it be more than
One Hundred and Sixty Miles Long, and about Fifty Broad. They were almost all
either thrown down or swallowed up. And my Author says, it is not to be
doubted, if there had been Five Thousand Towns in Jamaica, but every one of
them had been ruined.

The Waters of Wells above 30 Foot deep flew out at the Top. In several Places
the Earth gaped prodigiously with great Spoutings of Water. The Sky which
before was clear and blew, became in a Minute, dull and redish, like a red hot
Oven. Amazing Noises were made by the Fall of the Mountains and the Rumblings
that were heard under Ground.

In the Mountains were the most violent Shakings. Some falling down, stopped up
the Roads and Rivers; and many were thrown in Heaps upon others. A great
Mountain split, and tumbling, drove all the Trees before it, and overwhelmed
several Settlements with their Inhabitants, a Mile off. Another large high
Mountain sunk and was quite devoured; And in the Place thereof arose a Lake 12
or 15 Miles over.

IN a certain Ground on the North Side of the Island, the Planters Houses, with
the greatest Part of their Plantations, were swallowed up, Houses, People,
Trees and all in one great Opening; in the room of which arose at first a Lake
of a Thousand Acres extent; But afterward it dried away, and left not the
least appearance of House, Tree, or any thing else that was there before.

IN fine, The Earth continued shaking for Two Months after: And all the while,
the Mountains tottering, and bellowing most loud and hideous Noises. About two
Thousand People perished in Town, a Thousand more in the other Parts of the
Island; and it is thought, if the Shakes had fell out in the Night, but very few
had been left alive. Great Numbers of Dead Bodies were floating from one side
of the Harbor to the other; sometimes one or two Hundred in an Heap, as the
Winds and Seas drove them. And such a general SICKNESS presently followed which
few escaped, and was very fatal. Half the People saved from the Earthquake at
Port Royal, are said to have Died of the Sickness at Kingston: where Five
Hundred Graves were dug in one Months time, Two or Three buried in One Grave.
About two Thousand swept away; and in the Rest of the Island a Thousand more.

And thus I have mentioned something of GOD's amazing Execution of this Sort of
Judgments in Other Places.

We may now briefly,

2. Consider his repeated Threatenings of the same in these Parts of the World.

This is no less than the Eleventh or Twelfth Earthquake which has been
perceived in this Country since our Fathers Arrival hither, and even within
this 120 Years. Four or Five of the Shocks were indeed much smaller and less
extensive. But this is the Fifth that has been very General and very Awakening.

The First of them all was on June 2. 1638. Mr. MORTON says, It was a Great and
terrible Earthquake. It was heard before it came with a rumbling Noise like
remote Thunder. It came from the Norward and passed to the Southward. As the
Noise came nearer, the Earth began to shake: And it quickly rose to that
Violence as to make the movables to clatter and fall. Those who were in their
Houses were afraid of their falling: And others abroad were not able to stand,
but were forced to catch hold of Fences to preserve themselves. About half an
Hour after, came another Noise and Shaking, though not so loud or strong as the
former. It was far in the Land as the Indians observed: and not only ashore,
but, also at Sea, some Ships on the Coasts being shaken thereby.

The same Author tells us, That in 1658 there was another Great Earthquake in
New England.

And on Jan. 26. 1662, 3, at the shutting in of the Evening, there was a very
Great Earthquake; and the same Night Another; though somewhat less than the
former. And on the 28th of the same Month Another about 9 in the Morning.
CANADA seems to have been the chief Seat of this Great Concussion. For on the
very same Day. viz. Jan. 26. O. S. 1663, Monsieur FREZIER tells us, Began an
amazing Earthquake There, which continued till July following and made
incredible Alterations on the Surface of the Earth for 400 Leagues through the
Country. And CLUVERUS gives us a most hideous Description of it, in his
HISTORIARUM totius mundi EPITOME.


On the Night after the Lord's Day October. 29. 1727. about 40 Minutes past 10.
in a calm and serene Hour, the Town of Boston was on a sudden extremely
surpised with the most violent Shock of an Earthquake that has been known
among us. It came on with a loud hollow Noise like the Roaring of a Great fired
Chimney, but incomparably more fierce and terrible. In about half a Minute the
Earth began to heave and tremble: The Shock increasing, rose to the Height in
about a Minute more, when the Movables, Doors, Windows, Walls, especially in
the upper Chambers, made a fearful Clattering, and the Houses rocked and (...),
as if they were all dissolving and falling to pieces. The People asleep were
awakened with the greatest astonishment: many others affrighted run into the
Streets for Safety. But the Shaking quickly abated, and in another half Minute
entirely ceased.

The Noise and Shakes seemed to come from the Norwestward, and to go off
Southeasterly; and so the Houses seemed to reel. Some Damage was done to the
more brittle sort of Movables, and some Bricks on the Tops of some Chimneys
fell; but not an House was broken, nor a Creature hurt. At several times till
Daylight, were heard some distant Rumblings, and some fainter Shocks were felt.

And after several smaller ones in the Interval since, This Last seems to be
the most dreadful of all, among us.

And now, When we hear what Desolations have been made by this terrible
Judgment in other Parts of the Earth, and how often we have been threatened Here
with the same; How greatly do these things inhance our Deliverance? How
glorious should the Mercy and Patience of GOD appear in our Eyes? How high
should it raise our Thankfulness to Him? How affectionately should we rejoice
in the LORD our Deliverer? And how loudly should we declare his Greatness and
Sing forth his Praises.

LET us therefore always bare in our Minds the Scriptural Threatenings of this
fearful Calamity, with the surprising Instances of their sudden Execution on
others. And let us remember the GREAT and TERRIBLE DAY of GOD is hastening, and
how near we know not -- when the LORD of GLORY shall come down to shake the
Heavens and the Earth to pieces, to set this lower World on Fire, to consume
the Sinners out of it; to refine it, and that it may be a Place of
Righteousness and fit for his Dwelling. Then, though the Jews may have the
distinguishing Grace to mourn with Repentance, when they see Him they have
pierced, yet the rest of the Tribes of the Earth shall mourn with utter
Despair. And then so insufferable will his Brightness quickly appear; that
though at first they might fly from the tottering Rocks and Mountains, they
will soon fly back to get under them, and wish them to fall and cover them from
the Face of Him that sits on the Throne, and from the Wrath of the Lamb. Rev.
vi.12, -- c.

TO Conclude, Let us therefore now this moment look to this only SAVIOR,
Receive Him in all his Offices, Give up our selves wholly to Him for ever: And
then live in the Exercise of every watchful Grace and Duty; with our Lips and
Lives continually Praise Him; and abound in the delightful Contemplations of
Him, till we come to long for that Illustrious Appearance. And then We shall
lift up our Face with an holy Joy and Confidence; our temporal Dangers will end
in Eternal Safety; our trembling Dwellings be changed for an unmovable
Kingdom; and our anxious Fears will vanish in perfect Quietness and Assurance
for ever.

For of that Great Day we have the lively Description in Nahum I.2, -- 8. GOD
is jealous, and the LORD revengeth, etc.

A LETTER, giving an Account of the most dreadful EARTHQUAKE that has ever
happened since the first Settlement of New England. By another Hand.
SIR, Boston, Nov. 21. 1755.
IN Compliance with your Desire, I shall give you an Account of the surprising
Earthquake which happened the 18th Inst. at 25 Minutes past 4 in the Morning,
having been perfectly awake sometime before it began; and having felt several
before in this Place as well as the West Indies, I had a better Command of my
self in making my Observations thereon, especially as I laid in my Bed the
whole time under the best Composure of Mind I could bring my self to. It was
first introduced with a Noise like several Coaches rattling over the Pavements,
or rather like the Noise of many Cartloads of paving Stones thrown down
together. I was sensible it came from the Northwest, and that side of my House
felt the first Concussion. The first Motion was a strong Pulsation, which threw
my House upwards; immediately after a Tremor succeeded, which in half a Minute
abated a little, but then instantly a quick Vibration with sudden Jerks
followed; and this by my best Observation held near a Minute, before the second
Abatement, which went off gradually, in about half a Minute more, so that the
whole Duration from the first Pulse, to the End of the Shock seemed to be about
two Minutes; the greatest Force I apprehend was about a Minute after it began,
and had that Vibration, with those sudden Jerks, continued one Minute longer, I
much question whether one House in Town had been left standing. The first View
I took was the Steeples of the Churches and Meetings, and was glad to see them
standing, but the Spindle and Vane of Faxeuil Hall Market was thrown down; I
observed the Tops of many Chimneys demolished, others cracked and much damaged,
Bricks, Tile and Slates scattered in the Streets, and large Quantities of
Mortar and Rubbish almost every where spread, especially in the Streets near
the Dock, and Alleys between the Warehouses, where most Damage seemed to have
been done; and several Houses have suffered by large Cracks and Breaches to
their Foundation.

Upon the first Shock of the Earthquake, many Persons jumped out of their Beds,
and ran immediately into the Streets, while others sprung to the Windows,
trembling, and seeing their Neighbors, as it were naked; shrick'd with the
Apprehensions of its being the Day of Judgment, and some though it they heard the
LAST TRUMP founding, and cried out for Mercy, others fainted away, with the
Fright, and those of the most composed Temper, that were sensible of these
tremendous Shakings, expected instantly, to be swallowed up, and buried in the
Ruins. In short Children ran screaming to their Parents, to save them; and the
Brute Creatures lowed, and ran to the Barns, for Protection; the Dogs bowled at
their Masters Doors, the Birds fluttered in the Air, with a Surprise; and all
the Animal Creation were filled with Terror: and never was such a Scene of
Distress in New England before. In my Walk out about Sun rising, every Face
looked ghastly, and many Persons Knees smote one against another, and few were
recovered of the great Fright and Surprise they had been put into, by this
awful Providence; and all seemed to expect a Repetition of this terrible
Judgment. In fine, some of our solid, and Pious Gentlemen, had such an Awe and
Gloom spread in their Countenances, as would have checked the gay Airs of the
most intrepid Libertine among us. Such Judgments may well make us cry out with
the Psalmist, My (...) for Fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
Some further Accounts of Earthquakes, and an Enquiry into the natural,
instrumental or secondary Causes of them, will soon be published.


