PENNSYLVANIA: A POEM.

By a STUDENT of the College of PHILADELPHIA.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by B. FRANKLIN, and D. HALL. MDCCLVI.

ADVERTISEMENT.
AS the following little Poem discovers a Degree of Judgment, Genius and
Public-Spirit seldom to be met with in Persons so young as the Author, it was
thought that the Publication of it might be seasonable at this Time, as well to
contribute toward the Healing our unhappy Breaches, as to encourage the Author
to Attempts of an higher Nature. The Piece has been perused by some Persons of
acknowledged Taste, and is recommended to the Candor of the discerning Reader,
who will be pleased to find the Author in several Places rising by manly
Imitation to the Beauties of some of our ablest Masters, whom he keeps before
him.

PENNSYLVANIA.
WHILE ruthless WAR strides over the ensanguin'd Plain,
And lawless Rapine, Slavery, Death and Bonds,
Her direful Train, stalk horrible around;
While Homebred Faction rends the sinking State,
And Discord, Hell-born Fiend, triumphant reigns;
O let the peaceful MUSE, whose tender Years
Ill brook this savage, rude, tumultuous Scene,
Retire awhile, and seek with anxious Eye
If happily she may find a calm Retreat,
Where in the Covert of some bowery Grove
Peace dwells with Shade and Silence, Sisters mild!
There vent her inward Grief in plaintive Strains
And tell the listening Gloom her Country's Woe
LED by my roving Thoughts full often I stray
With measured Step along thy pebbled Shore,
O Delaware! whose silver-winding Wave,
Majestic rolling through a Length of Soil,
Visits the secret Haunts and deep Abodes
Of many a King and Queen of various Hue,
Whose artless Shoulders unadorned and plain
Groan not beneath the Load of regal State!
There lonely wandering on, I pensive court
Thy murmuring Tide to sooth my Heartfelt Pain;
How sweet is Solitude, the secret Walk,
The gloomy, deepening Shade, and silent Hour,
To Him, whose Soul unruffled and serene
Can view with social Pity and Concern
The Feuds and Factions of a jarring World!
ONE Evening mild, as at my wonted Hour
I walked the Margin of my native Stream,
Musing of Good and Just, the sacred Themes
That through the Day, devolved from STREPHON'S Tongue,
Had charmed my listening Ear -- I chanced to stray
Where KENSINGTON her growing Honors spreads,
And views her Features in the crystal Wave;
Strait with a Flood of Glory compassed round
A Form celestial struck my dazzled Sense;
In her majestic Mien, her Looks divine,
And graceful rich Attire, the Goddess shone;
And PENNSYLVANIA'S Genius stood confessed.
But though surrounded with the effulgent Blaze,
Her down-cast Eye and Tresses discomposed
Some inward Discontent and Anguish spoke.
Torn from her Brow the peaceful Olive lay
All withered and neglected at her Feet.
Her Right Hand grasped the dreaded Spear of MARS,
And on her Left MINERVA'S Aegis hung.
Pensive and sad she fixed her Eyes on thee,
Fair PHILADELPHIA! Offspring of her Toil;
And thus, with many a mingled Heart-fetch'd Sigh,
In Accent mild, she spoke, or seemed to speak:
AND is it thus my Cares are recompensed?
Is this the Issue of my anxious Toils? --
To see this fertile Soil, this sacred Spot,
My fair Inheritance, the calm Abode
Of Peace and Virtue, Liberty and Law,
Laid waste and ravaged by a cruel Foe!
To see my bleeding Sons, like blasted Plants,
Falling beneath the Ruffian Murderer's Hand! --
And not one Arm uplifted to assert
The pious Cause, avenge their guiltless Blood,
And hurl Destruction on an impious Race! --
Was it for this I left my native Soil,
Thee, great BRITANNIA! Mistress of the Main!
And sought these distant Shores then far remote
From the sweet Influence of thy tempered Rule;
To spread thy Sway, and give this fruitful Land
A fair Accession to thy wide Domain?
Was it for this I planned the Scheme of State,
A Constitution just, impartial, free;
And gave my Sons to know the ruling Art,
To balance fair the Legislative Powers,
And teach the Freeborn Subject Freedom's Laws?
Was it for this I bade the teeming Earth
Pour from its Bosom the luxuriant Crop,
To crown with smiling Plenty, Wealth and Ease,
The vigorous Labors of my hardy Swains?
Was it for this I bade each useful Art,
Each Heaven-born Science spread their Blessings round,
And taught my rising Sons bright Wisdom's Lore?
For this I toiled with all a Mother's Care,
And raised by Patriot-Deeds my Infant State? --
To see at last the proud Usurper's Arm
Outstretch'd, in Act to seize by brutal Force,
And Rapine base my just and righteous Claim;
Myself, despairing yet of brighter Days,
Constrained to drink the bitter Cup of Woe! --
Great my Misfortunes now, as erst my Bliss! --
AVENGING Justice! whither art thou fled!
That thus the lawless Sons of Rapine act
In base Defiance of thy Sovereign Power!
Oh come! and armed with thy vindictive Sword
Pour ample Ruin on their guilty Heads!
For their heaped Crimes the Retribution just.
AH! what a Train of complicated Woes
In black Succession pass before my View,
Whenever I turn my Eyes to yonder Plains?
Where in soft Murmurs through the verdant Soil
MONONGAHELA rolls his gentle Tide.
There doomed to perish in a glorious Cause
Full many a gallant Youth and Veteran bold,
BRITANNIA'S hardy Sons, with BRADDOCK lie,
The hapless Partners of a Lot severe!
Great Chiefs, in Arms renowned, in Suffering brave!
FLUSHED with the Daring of their bold Emprize,
And fired with Thirst of Blood, and sordid Gain,
The Sons of FRANCE, in Council dark convened
Sternly resolve their Conquest to pursue.
And now send forth their gloomy painted Tribes,
Those human Monsters of the Desert wild! --
A dismal Prelude to their black Designs!
AND shall my Sons, a numerous Race robust,
With ill-timed, base Forbearance tamely brook
This savage Treatment from a treacherous Foe? --
And have you then forgot your high Descent,
The peerless Fame of your illustrious Line
Renowned of old, from great BRITANNIA sprung? --
For sure I am, the Queen of Nations bore
Me, your presiding Genius, and uprear'd
Her PENNSYLVANIA with a Mother's Care;
Fair as the fairest of her beauteous Race,
And blessed with equal Honor, Wealth and Strength.
And will you then my Sons, my much-loved Race!
For whom I toiled so many a rolling Year,
At last degenerate from your pristine Worth,
And level all a Mother's towering Hopes?
Why is the ruthless Sword of Vengeance sheathed?
Why careless sleeps the British Lion bold,
Nor threats Destruction with his lifted Paw?
Ah say, what means this Lethargy supine,
Whose baleful Influence lulls the inactive Land? --
Is there no daring, martial Spirit here?
No dauntless Breast to rouse my slumbering Sons,
And guide their Strength combined against the Foe? --
O for some bold intrepid Son of MARS,
A God-like MARLBOROUGH, or a brave EUGENE!
To train my docile Race to Arms and War,
And lead them forth to Deeds of martial Fame.
Then should I see the haughty Gallic Troops,
With their confederate Indians black and fierce
All routed fly before my conquering Sword.
Then should I see well-pleased the British Flag
Triumphant reared on fair OHIO'S Banks,
And proud DU QUESNE laid level with the Dust.
NOR blame, my Sons, these earnest Words sincere,
Nor call my Zeal ill-timed or idly warm! --
Ah should the base, insulting Foe presume
Over yonder Hills to march their hostile Bands,
Lay waste the Labors of the industrious Swain,
And whelm the Country in a general Blaze;
Tear from the bleeding Mother's fondling Arms
The wailing Babe, and in its guiltless Breast
With Hand inhuman plunge the reeking Blade;
Then, urged with Hope of Gain, in dread Array
Bear all their Terrors to your trembling Gates; --
Or should the gloomy War-Ship, armed and manned,
Full on your Front her thundering Cannon play,
And ceaseless hurl the fierce, destructive Bomb,
To raze my PHILADELPHIA'S towery Pride;
Ah then too late you may at last lament
Your blasted Laurels and your faded Fame;
Too late repent you of your long Neglect,
Your tame Forbearance, and ungenerous Ease;
And deem my Counsels wise, and just my Zeal,
Too late alas! when all is sunk and lost!
Then rouse at once, nor let the impending Storm
That gathers fast, and frowns with boding Brow,
Burst unresisted on this prostrate Land.
YET ere I close -- one racking Thought disturbs
My anxious Bosom, and alarms me more
Than all the Terrors of a foreign War.
Still shall the Gallic Tyrant uncontrolled
Spread wide his Conquests through my fair Domain,
And still persist in Violation base
Of perfect Rights, and Treaties sacred held;
While restless Party-Rage divides your Strength,
And Feuds intestine rend your infant State.
Where shall I find some generous healing Hand
Of dextrous Skill, and honest, friendly Views,
By calm, impartial Reason, and the Tongue
Of soft Persuasion, to close up the Breach
That Discord makes between my jarring Sons?
What means, ah say, what means this Phrenzy dire
That spreads and burns in every rankled Breast?
Rouse, rouse, my Sons, nor weigh in equal Scale
With Matters of high Import and Concern
Those of inferior Worth; -- but know betimes,
And dearly prize, the unconquerable Force
Of Arms united, and of Strength combined.
THEN boldly march, assured of high Success,
And bid your Troops undaunted take the Field.
To guide your Infantry, with Conduct wise
In this brave Daring be ALPHONZO'S Care;
While fired with Thirst of Fame, and great Exploit
My bold CHAMONT commands the flying Horse.
In all your Acts myself will still preside,
Unite your Counsels, and direct your Arms.
BUT I must hence. -- For lo! even now convened
Your thoughtful Senate The Poem was wrote while the Assembly were sitting.
calls my active Aid.
Thither I fly to warm the Patriot-Breast
With British Ardor in fair Freedom's Cause;
To wake each manly Purpose in the Soul,
And every generous Aim for public Weal.
That so my growing, well-supported State,
Spite of the opposing Foe, may spread and rise.
And spread and rise it shall, while MORRIS rules
Humane and just, and through the Country round
Sheds the mild Influence of a gentle Sway.
THUS spoke the ruling Genius of our Land,
Then sudden vanished from my wondering Gaze.
And now bright-issuing from her Eastern Dome,
In Silver Car the peerless Queen of Night
Triumphant rode through Heaven's illumined Vault.
Homeward I sped, and bade the Muse record
This awful Vision in her artless Strain.
FINIS.

