The FAITHFUL MINISTER Encouraged.

A SERMON, Preached at the Opening of the SYNOD of of NEW YORK, met at
Philadelphia, October 1. 1755.

By JAMES DAVENPORT, A. M. late Minister of the Gospel at Southwold, on
Long Island, now at Hopewell, in New Jersey.

Published at the Request of some of the Hearers.

COL. iv. 17. And say to Archippus, Take heed to the Ministry which thou have
received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it.

1 TIMOTHY iv. 16. Take heed unto thy Self, and unto thy Doctrine: Continue in
them: For in doing this, thou shall both save thy Self, and them that hear thee.

1 PET. v. 4. And when the Chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a
Crown of Glory, that fades not away.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by James Chattin, at the Newest-Printing-Office, on the
South Side of the Jersey Market. 1756.

PREFACE.
Candid READER,
THE following Sermon needs no Commendation. The Truth, Weight and
Seasonableness of its Matter, the Sobriety of its Style, the Modesty of its
Address, together with the Spirit of Piety, of Humility, of undisguised Zeal
for God, and affectionate Love to Man, which breathes in every Part, and
animates the Whole, will commend it to the Consciences of all that fear God,
who have the Pleasure of perusing it. Here are no high sounding Words of
Vanity, or little Artifices to exalt himself, and catch a vulgar Applause; but
an honest, serious Endeavor to honor God, and do good to Mankind. -- Let not
the pious Author be offended with our Freedom, in saying, that his Life adds
Weight to this Discourse; for the Latter is but a Copy of the Former: Nor
should it be forgotten, that the gracious God, who delights to honor the Humble
and Sincere in Heart, gave manifest Tokens of his special Presence, when this
Discourse was delivered: Not only the Speaker, but diverse of the Hearers, both
Ministers and People, being solemnly affected and tenderly touched with the
precious Truths therein contained. -- May God, of his infinite Mercy, keep
these Things in the Imagination of the Thoughts of our Hearts, and enable us to
act accordingly: May we, especially who are of the Sacred Order, obtain Mercy
to be faithful, as well as prudent and humble unto Death.

There is nothing of greater Consequence to the Weal of the Churches, than
taking due Care respecting the Admission of Candidates into the Ministry. If we
are lax in this, and easly introduce Persons who have no positive Evidences of
vital Godliness; Error will come in as a Flood, and inundate the Churches;
experimental Piety gradually languish, and at last totally expire: To prevent
which awful Events, may Almighty GOD bless the following Discourse. -- We add
no more, but remain thy Servants for CHRIST's Sake.

GILBERT TENNENT, RICHARD TREAT.

Philadelphia, Nov. 17. 1755.
The FAITHFUL MINISTER Encouraged: A SERMON, etc.
2 CORINTHIANS. iv. 1. Therefore seeing we have this Ministry, as we have received
Mercy, we faint not.


THE Dispensation of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, Men, Brethren and Fathers, in
several important respects, far excels in Glory the Mosaic Dispensation. This
the Apostle had observed and clearly proved in the preceding Chapter, and from
thence draws the just Conclusion in our Text, Therefore seeing we have this
Ministry, as we have received Mercy, we faint not.

Here we may observe several Things.

1. We have the Gospel Ministry referred to, called, This Ministry.

2. Here are some engaged in this Work: WE HAVE this Ministry. They are put in
Trust with the Gospel 1 These. ii. 4.
.

3. This is to be acknowledged as a Mercy from God: As we have RECEIVED MERCY,
Some Expositors choose to join this Sentence with the last Clause, thus; as we
have received Mercy, we faint not.

These understood the Mercy here intended, to be, that of Ministers being kept
from fainting under their Trials.

Others join the two first Sentences in our Text together thus, Therefore
seeing we have this Ministry, as we have received Mercy. They conceive the
Mercy here spoken of is that of being called and employed in the sacred Work.
Beza's Judgment in particular is mentioned in the Continuation of Poole's
Annotations, in these Words; The Traducers of this great Apostle took Advantage
from his great Trials and Afflictions, by reason of them, to conclude him no
such Man, as he was by some represented; and the Apostle upon that takes
Advantage to magnify his Office. God (says he) having entrusted us with so
glorious a Ministration, as I have proved that of the Gospel to be, according
to the Measure and Proportion of Gifts and Graces, which God has bestowed upon
us, or by reason of that infinite Grace and Mercy, which God has showed us, in
calling us to so honorable a Station and Office, though we meet with many
Adversaries, many Afflictions, many Difficulties, yet we bear up, and sink not
under them, nor faint in our Spirits because of them.

Thus far he. In this Sense I propose to consider the Words of our Text.

4. We may observe, that great Difficulties must be expected in the Work of the
Gospel Ministry, or there would be no Danger of Fainting.

Again, that we ought not to faint under these Difficulties and Trials, but
should be able to say, through Grace, with the Apostle, we faint not.

And further, that an excellent Argument against Fainting in this Work, may be
drawn from the Gospel Ministry itself, and the several Motives, that relate to
it. Therefore seeing we have this Ministry, we faint not.

Lastly, That faithful Ministers are kept from Fainting, by these precious
Truths and Motives set home with divine Power on their Souls; hence they can
say with the Apostle, We faint not; otherwise we should surely faint.

I might comprize these important Observations in a general One, and lay it
down as the Foundation of the present Discourse; but as that would open too
large a Field for this Opportunity, I shall confine myself to the Consideration
and Improvement of these two Things, viz. The Mercy of being called to the Work
of the Gospel Ministry, and some of the Reasons and Arguments which are adapted
to guard against extreme Discouragements, and to excite to active and
persevering Diligence and Faithfulness in the Work.

And here I would humbly and earnestly entreat my reverend Fathers and Brethren
(with others of God's People present) to lift up your Hearts with Faith and
Fervency to the God of all Grace and Fullness in Jesus Christ, that I may be
enabled so to speak on these Heads, and you so to hear, as that our Souls may
be much quickened and animated in our Work, in order to the saving Good of many
Souls, and the Advancement of the Divine Glory in the World.

I am, according to the Method proposed,

1. To consider it as a Mercy to faithful Ministers of the Gospel, that they
have this Ministry, that they are called to this Work. We have this Ministry,
as we have received Mercy, says our Text. God in his Mercy is set forth by an
excellent Divine, as God willing to succor sinful Men in their Misery. And how
is this remarkably manifested to, and experienced by such of the sinful
miserable Sons of Men, as are prepared for, and improved in the ministerial
Work. Thus the Apostle Paul, with respect to the glorious Gospel of the blessed
God, which was committed to his Trust, says, I thank Jesus Christ our Lord, who
has enabled me, for that he counted me faithful, putting me into the Ministry
1 Timothy i. 11, 12.
.

Indeed, when Men rush into the Ministry, without the Qualifications which the
Word of God requires; they act a most foolish Part, and a Part most dangerous
and pernicious, both to themselves and others: But when they are endowed with
those Qualifications, and withal set apart to the sacred Work by Fasting and
Prayer, and the laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery Acts xiv. 23. 1 Timothy
iv. 14.
they may well be drawn out in Thankfulness to God and Christ, on the Account,
and say, This is a Mercy, a great Mercy, conferred on us unworthy, vile and
sinful Dust, that unto us is committed the Ministry of Reconciliation 2 Cor. v.
18, 19.
.

This the Ambassadors of Christ justly esteem a Mercy, as it respects
themselves, as it respects others, and as they may thus in an eminent Degree
promote the Divine Glory in the World.

1. As it respects themselves.

What a Mercy is it to be called to a Work, which is calculated to promote
their Increase of Grace as well as Gifts? And what a Comfort must it be to the
faithful Ministers of the Gospel, to consider, that their general and
particular Callings do happily coincide and subserve each other? Their general
Calling, the Care of their own Souls, their particular Calling, the Care of
others Souls. The more closely they walk with God themselves, so much the more
faithful and engaged they are in their Work, and the more likely to be
successful; and on the other Hand, the more faithful they are in their Work,
through Grace, so much the more they grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ 2 Pet. iii. 18.
. So much the more their Souls prosper and are in Health Epist. of John v. 2.
and ordinarily the more they enjoy the Consolations of the Divine Spirit,
which are not small, the more their Light shines before others, and they adorn
their Profession, and the more they are attemper'd to the heavenly State, and
prepared for eternal Glory.

It Is true they are from several Quarters beset at times with Temptations,
perhaps more so than others; as Officers in an Army are more aimed and pointed
at by the Enemy than private Soldiers; but these Temptations their great Lord
and Leader wisely permits, to prove them, and bring them to know more of
themselves, that they may take root downwards, in order to bear Fruit upwards;
he shows them thus their own Insufficiency, and leads them to depend upon his
All Sufficiency in the New Covenant, and hereupon they find him a very present
Help in Trouble Psalm xlvi. 1.
: They are thus humbled and purified, and made more meet for their Master's
Service, more watchful and circumspect, more patient and resigned under Trials
and Sufferings, and more diligent in their Work, and probably more successful
too; and this is a great Mercy,

Again, the Ministers of Jesus Christ, are to give themselves to reading, to
Meditation and Prayer; and how may they thus, through the divine Blessing, grow
apace, both in doctrinal and experimental Knowledge, yea, I may add, in every
Christian Grace and Virtue? And is not this a great Mercy?

It is a further Comfort and a Mercy too, that we, who have this Ministry, may
be preaching to ourselves, as well as praying over the Sermons we prepare for,
and preach to others; yea, we may see more clearly the beautiful Harmony and
Connection of divine Truths, as well as feel more of the happy Effects of them;
while we are attending on the Exposition of sacred Scripture, and when
catechizing our People, or making Preparations therefore.

In the Administration of divine Ordinances, especially the Sacraments of the
New Testament, how may we reap much Profit and Pleasure ourselves, through
Grace, see more of the Faithfulness, Grace, Holiness, and other Perfections of
our God and Savior; and grow more holy, comfortable and fruitful.

In our Pastoral Visits we may often, through Divine Assistance, caution and
comfort, direct and edify others and ourselves at the same Time,

And in the Discipline of God's House, while we endeavor to reclaim others, we
may be not a little guarded and benefited ourselves: We may be led to see much
of the Aggravations and Evil of Sin, the Snares that lie thick around, the
constant Necessity of Watchfulness and Prayer, and of living by Faith on God in
Christ; that we may as Christians, and as Ministers, bring forth much Fruit.

In a Word, every Part of the ministerial Work is in some respect or other
adapted to promote our increasing Conformity to the Perfections and Will of God
in our Hearts and Lives: Is it not then a Mercy, a great Mercy, that we have
been called to this Work? We have this Ministry, as we have received Mercy.

Though it is a difficult, yet it is also a delightful and useful, as well as
honorable Work; and it is a Mercy, not only with respect to us, but also,

2. With respect to others.

It is truly adapted, both in the public and private Parts of it, as a Means to
promote the best, the everlasting Interests of all our Hearers; but Men are
hardened by Sin and Unbelief, and blinded by Satan and the World: They hate the
Light, and will not come to the Light, lest their Deeds should be reproved John
iii. 20.
. And nothing short of the Almighty Energy of the Holy Ghost, will make the
Word effectual to saving Purposes; well may the Regenerate then be said to be
born of the Spirit John iii. 5, 8.
. By Grace we are saved, through Faith, and that not of ourselves, it is the
Gift of God: Not of Works, lest any Man should boast Ephesians. ii. 8, 9.
. But as the Spirit makes Use of the Word, so we are said to be born again by
the Word of God, and begotten through the Gospel 1 Pet. i. 23. 1 Cor. iv. 15.
. And Faith is said to come by Hearing, and Hearing by the Word of God; for how
shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear
without a Preacher? and how shall they preach, except they be sent Romans x. 17,
14, 15.
? The Apostle was not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for, says he, it is the
Power of God unto Salvation to every one that believes Very just then is the
Conclusion drawn by the pious and ingenious Watts,
Should all the Forms that Men devise,
Assault my Faith with treacherous Art,
I Would call them Vanity and Lies,
And bind the Gospel to my Heart.

; and to these we are the Savor of Life unto Life, through rich Grace,
although to others the Savor of Death unto Death Romans i. 16. 2 Cor. ii. 16.
.

We are called in the ministerial Work, as Instruments to instruct the
Ignorant, to convince the Erroneous, to reclaim the Vicious, to awaken the
Secure, to rouse the Slothful, to sap the Foundation of Hypocrites, and to show
the Self-righteous their extreme and destructive Folly; and though this is
truly hard Work, yet it must be done in God's Strength, and when done and
blessed, very useful.

It is further useful and pleasant withal, to direct enquiring Souls to Christ,
to win them over to him, through his all-powerful Grace, that they may receive
him in his most glorious Person and precious Benefits, as he is offered in the
Gospel: And what a Mercy is this both to us and them.

Again, we are called as Instruments, to build up the Saints in Faith, and
Holiness, and Comfort. We are to comfort them in their Trials from within and
without, with the same Consolations, wherewith we ourselves are comforted of
God. And is it not a Favor to be made thus useful to God's People? We were
called in our Work to carry the Lambs in our Bosom, and gently to lead those
that are with Young, after the Example and under the Influence of the great,
the chief Shepherd Isa. xl. 2.
. We are to give Milk to Babes, as well as strong Meat to the more grown 1 Cor.
iii. 1, 2.
to strengthen the Weak, to fix the Wavering, to guide the Doubting, to quicken
the Backward, to succor the Tempted, to direct Believers to be strong, not in
the Grace they have received, but in the Grace which is in Christ Jesus; and to
be engaged, through Grace, in improving the Comforts they enjoy, as
Encouragements and Means to an higher End, even Holiness and the Divine Glory.
Thus our Work, the ministerial Work is adapted, and thus it is blessed to the
Benefit of many Souls: We may justly say then, We have this Ministry, as we
have received Mercy: Especially since,

3. We may, with Divine Assistance, by and in this Work, in an eminent Degree
promote the Divine Glory in the World.

How is the Glory of God and Christ and true Religion manifested by our
Increase in Gifts and Grace, in Holiness and Usefulness Thence it appears in
some Measure what a Master we serve, what a God we worship, what a Savior we
preach and offer, what a Religion we profess and recommend.

My Brethren, certainly God is the greatest and best of Beings; surely then,
the setting him forth to be, or manifesting him as such, is the greatest and
highest End that can be: This is his Glory, this End is worthy of a God, and
this is the highest End of all his Friends, Children and Servants: This End,
the Work of the Ministry, is wonderfully suited and blessed to promote: What a
Mercy is it then to any of us vile, apostate and perishing Sons of Men, to be
brought home to Christ, and called to this sacred Work. We have this Ministry,
as we have received Mercy.

I would here make two Remarks on this Head, before we pass to the next.

1. We may plainly see, that we who are in the Ministry, have no reason to
think highly of ourselves, no reason to be proud and Vainglorious. We should
indeed take Care to magnify our Office, and in no Instances or respects to
under-act the sacred Character; but at the same Time, the Language of each of
our Souls, must be that of Job, Behold I am vile Job xl. 4.
It is a divine as well as wise and just Remark made by one of the greatest
Masters of Thought in the last Age, that Persons of Quality and Character ought
to have two Setts of Thoughts by which to regulate their Conduct: By the one
they are to view themselves in their State of distinguishing Elevation, which
is not from Nature, but arbitrary Establishment; by the other they are to take
a Prospect of themselves in their natural Condition of Infirmity and Equality,
with the rest of Mankind. (And I may here add, of Sin and Misery* Pemberton 's
Election Sermon, p. 1.
. The Temper of our Minds, and the Tenor of our Lives, should be humble and
holy. How should we be clothed with Humility, as it were from Head to Foot, who
are Ministers of the meek and lowly Jesus: How should we watch and pray against
Pride, hate and shun this vile Monster and this dangerous Snare, this awful
Condemnation of the Devil. Let us often think, for our Humiliation, What have
we, that is in any Measure good and valuable, that we have not received? And
again, what have we that we have not misimproved? And as to the Gospel
Ministry, it will be a special Guard against Pride, to realize, through Grace,
how we came by it, namely, by mere undeserved Mercy, and shall we be proud of
Mercy? We have this Ministry only as we have received Mercy. Where is Boasting
then? It is excluded.

2. Hence we may observe Ground of peculiar Encouragement in the Work of the
Ministry amidst all the Difficulties that attend it. We have this Ministry, as
we have received Mercy; and is it a Mercy we have it, and shall we be
discouraged with it? Shall we be discouraged with Mercy? Therefore let us not
faint.

With this Thought we come by an easy Transition, to the

2. General Head, under which I am to consider and set before you some of the
many Reasons and Arguments inducing to Faithfulness in the Ministerial Work:
And here,

1. The Command in God's Word should powerfully and constantly engage to be
faithful and not faint in this great Work. This Command we have in these Words
Mat. xxviii. 19, 20. Acts xx. 28. 2 Timothy iv. 1, 2, 5,
Go ye and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe all Things whatsoever
I have commanded you. And in another Place, Take heed to yourselves, and to all
the Flock, over which the Holy Ghost has made You Overseers, to feed the
Church of God, which he has purchased with his own Blood. And again, I charge
thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the Quick and the
Dead at his Appearing, and his Kingdom: Preach the Word, be instant in Season,
and out of Season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all Long-suffering and
Doctrine. Watch thou in all Things, endure Afflictions, do the Work of an
Evangelist, make full Proof of thy Ministry. With many other Passages to the
same Purpose. Surely, my Brethren, the Mind and Will of the Lord, infinitely
glorious in himself, and withal our Maker, Preserver, and Governor, Benefactor
and Redeemer, thus revealed in his Word, should engage us, through Grace, to
cheerful, constant and faithful Obedience. Therefore seeing we have this
Ministry, as we have received Mercy, let us not faint.

2. The Example of Christ should animate us in the ministerial Work.

Here we have a perfect Pattern to copy after. The blessed Jesus discovered
from Time to Time the most ardent Love to God and Man in his more public and
private Transactions and Ministrations, and sought not his own Glory, but the
Glory of him that sent him; so should we, through his Grace.

How zealous and courageous was he, and yet how prudent and discreet? How plain
and pungent, and yet how compassionate, how regardless of the Flatteries or
Frowns of the World? how meek and lowly of Heart? how faithful in the Discharge
of personal and relative Duties? how holy and pure? how resigned to his
Heavenly Father's Disposal? how frequent and fervent in Prayer, and how
laborious in his beloved Work? John xi. 4. John iv. 34.
I must work, says he, the Works of him that sent me, while it is Day. And
again, My Meat is to do the Will of him that sent me, and to finish his Work.

How willing was he to do and suffer what he was called to, even to the Death?
Oh Sirs! Let the same mind be in us, that was in him: Wherefore, holy Brethren,
Partakers of the heavenly Calling, let us consider the Apostle and High Priest
of our Profession, Christ Jesus; who was faithful to him that appointed him, as
also Moses was faithful in all his House Heb. iii. 1, 2.
. Let us not then be weary or faint in our minds, or flag in the more difficult
Part, or latter Stages of our road; but may we say, and speak it with Truth,
Seeing we have this Ministry, as we have received Mercy [of the Lord] we faint
not.

3. The Example of Christ's faithful Servants in the Ministry should animate us
in the Work. It Is true, my Brethren, the best of Christ's Ministers are
imperfect in the present State, and therefore not to be proposed as perfect
Patterns for Imitation; but we are to be Followers of them, even as they are of
Christ 1 Cor. xi. 1.
; so far as they are so, and no farther. How encouraging is it to observe them,
while attended with a Body of Sin and Death, and assaulted by Temptations from
the World and the Devil, as we are; yet, through Grace, approving themselves
sincere, and in a good Degree engaged in their Work.

What a lovely Example is set before us in our Text, and the following Verse;
Therefore seeing we have this Ministry, as we have received Mercy, we faint
not: But have renounced the hidden Things of Dishonesty, not walking in
Craftiness, nor handling the Word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of
the Truth, commending ourselves to every man's Conscience in the Sight of God.
And again, in the same Epistle, We do all Things, dearly Beloved, for your
Edifying 2 Cor. xii. 19.
. Our Exhortation, says this great Apostle of the Gentiles, in another Epistle
1 These. ii. 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10.
was not of Deceit, nor of Uncleanness, nor in Guile, but as we were allowed of
God to be put in Trust with the Gospel, even so we speak, not as pleasing Men,
but God, which tries our Hearts. For neither at any Time used we flattering
Words, as ye know, nor a Cloak of Covetousness; God is Witness. Nor of men
sought we Glory, neither of you, nor yet of others: Being affectionately
desirous of You, we were willing to have imparted unto You, not the Gospel of
God only, but also our own Souls, because Ye were dear unto us. Ye are
Witnesses, and God also, how holily, and justly, and unblameably we behaved
ourselves among You that believe: And elsewhere Acts xx. 26, 27, 18, 20, 31, 24.
. I take You to record this Day, that I am pure from the Blood of all men; for
I have not shunned to declare unto You, the whole Counsel of God. Ye know how I
kept back nothing that was profitable unto You, but have showed You, and have
taught You publicly and from House to House. Remember that by the Space of
Three Years, I ceased not to warn every one Night and Day with Tears. Again
speaking of Bonds and Afflictions abiding him, he says, But none of these
Things move me, neither count I my Life dear unto myself, so that I might
finish my Course with Joy, and the Ministry which I have received of the Lord
Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the Grace of God.

Oh! how willing have the faithful Servants of the dear Redeemer been in the
primitive Times, and since, to keep under their Bodies 1 Cor. ix. 27.
to live near to God, to spend and be spent in the Service of Christ and of
Souls; and even when called to it, to seal the Truth with their Blood.

We have great reason, my Brethren, to bless God, that a considerable Number of
the Ministers of the Gospel, in Great Britain and America have, in our Day,
been much engaged in the Cause of God; among these may be reckoned godly Mr.
Whitefield, whose indefatigable and successful Labors, for almost twenty Years
together, should be improved for the Encouragement and Quickening of all truly
engaged in the sacred Work; whose Name is justly very dear to us: May God
Almighty always keep him, with other his Servants, humble; bless them, and make
them Blessings, and that more and more abundantly, to the Praise of his Glory
in Christ Jesus.

While we are musing on these Things, let the Fire of Divine Love and Zeal be
enkindled in our Breasts, and burn vigorously, that we may be sweetly
constrained to say, Therefore seeing we have this Ministry, as we have received
Mercy, we faint not, and, throngh Grace, we will not faint.

4. The Example of the holy Angels, should quicken us in our Work. They are
Messengers of the Lord, as their Name imports; in several respects their Work
and ours resemble each other; no Wonder then, that Ministers of the Gospel are
called Angels Rev. i. 20.
. It may further be intended by this Appellation, that we should be excited, as
far as the Imperfections of the present State admit, to an Imitation of the
holy Angels, who are said Mat. xviii. 10. Dan. ix. 9, 21. Ps. c. iii. 20, 21.
Psalm. xxxiv. 7. Luke xv. 10.
always to behold the Face of our Father which is in Heaven, and fly with
winged Zeal to execute his Commands, encamp round about those that fear the
Lord, for their Comfort and Deliverance, and rejoice at the Conversion of
Sinners, etc.

Are the Angels heavenly-minded, zealous and faithful in their Work, let us be
so in ours, through Grace; Therefore, seeing we have this Ministry, as we have
received Mercy, let us not faint.

5. The Industry and Malice, Subtilty and Success of the Devil in his Attempts
to ruin Men's Souls, should engage us the more in faithful Endeavors, that they
may be rescued and saved; or in other Words, should quicken us to Diligence in
our Work.

We are not ignorant of Satan's Devices 2 Cor. ii. 11.
: Let us then be concerned, that we, and others, especially those under our
immediate Care, may be guarded against them.

The Drift of the Spirit of God, in order to the recovery of poor captive Souls
out of the Snare of the Devil, is to counter-act, and to guard against his
Devices 2 Cor. iv. 3, 4. comp. with Acts xxvi. 17, 18.
. The Ministers of the Gospel, as Workers together with God 2 Cor. vi. 1.
are engaged as Instruments to guard against the same Devices, and are
especially concerned that Souls may not receive the Gospel of the Grace of God
in vain 2 Cor. vi. 1. 1 Pet. v. 8.
. Our Adversary the Devil, as the Apostle Peter observes, as a roaring Lion,
walks about, seeking whom he may devour.

Is the Devil, the Enemy of all Good, an Adversary to Souls? Shall not we
Ministers of the Gospel be Friends to them?

Is he, with his Instruments, set with Boldness, like Lions, against Souls?
Sha'n't we be courageous as Lions in going through all Difficulties to promote
their saving Good? Does he roar with Malice and Wrath against Souls? Sha'n't we
cry with Fervency to God for them, and cry aloud to them with Bowels of Pity
and Compassion, and beseech them to be reconciled to God? Does the Devil walk
about, seeking whom he may devour, and that with awful Success, and shall we
stick at any Pains, Night or Day, in public or private, at home or abroad, in
the Business of our Calling as Ministers, which is to seek whom we may as
Instruments save from the Jaws of this devouring Lion, and guide to the regions
of Glory? If we, Brethren, should faint, the Devil will not; Therefore seeing
we have this Ministry, as we have received Mercy. let us not saint.

6. The Worth of Souls should engage Ministers of the Gospel to Faithfulness in
their Work. The great Worth of Souls makes the Devil so eager to destroy them.

This makes the holy Angels engaged for their Good; this causes Joy in Heaven
on their Conversion. Here are two Worlds at Strife; about what? about earthly
Crowns and Scepters? no! these are Trifles. About what then? The Souls of Men,
whose Worth is exceeding great. What are all the Kingdoms of the World, and
Glory of them, in Comparison with the Soul? If you put these in one Scale, and
the Soul in the other, they come up light as Vanity itself.

Our Blessed Savior has determined this Point, both by his Words and Practice;
by his Practice, when he poured Contempt on the World; but laid down his
precious Life, and shed his Heart's Blood, to redeem and save perishing Souls:
-- By his Words, which are these Mutthew xvi. 26.
What is a Man profited, if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own
Soul? Or what shall a Man give in Exchange for his Soul?

Oh! Shall we not be engaged then, agreeable to the Design of our Commission,
and from a Sense of the Worth of Souls, in the most painful and faithful
Endeavors, through divine assisting Grace, to open Men's Eyes, and to turn them
from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God, that they may
receive Forgiveness of Sins, and Inheritance among them that are sanctified by
Faith which is in Christ. Therefore, beloved Brethren, seeing we have this
Ministry, as we have received Mercy, let us not faint.

7. Men's Care and Pains about Things of less Worth, should engage and animate
us in our Work A Soul immortal, spending all her Fires,
Wasting her Strength in strenuous Idleness,
Thrown into Tumult raptured, or alarmed,
At ought this Scene can threaten, or indulge,
Resembles Ocean into Tempest wrought,
To waft a Feather, or to drown a Fly.
Night Thoughts.
. How will Men rise up early, and sit up late Psalm cxxvii. 2.
and eat the Bread of Sorrow and Care, in order to obtain earthly Enjoyments,
which perish in the Using. What Pains will Men take, yea, what Hazards will
they run, in pursuit of "glittering Gems, gaudy Honors, and shining Dust,"
which after all are Vanity? How will Men be at vast Expense and Labor, some
Way or other, to please and pamper their Bodies, which yet must soon moulder
into their kindred Dust; and shall not we be as much, nay more concerned about
their precious Souls, that must surely live forever, either in a State of
Happiness, or Misery Beware what Earth calls Happiness; beware
All Joys, but J^^s that never can expire.
Who builds on less than an immortal Base.
Fond as he seems, condemns his Joys to Death.
Night Thoughts.
? Therefore seeing we have this Ministry, as we have received Mercy, let us
never faint.

Again, the Sufficiency of Divine Grace held forth to us in the precious
Promises of God's Word, should comfort and animate us in our Work. Many and
great are our Trials and Difficulties from without and within, and they often
meet and join their Forces; we may well say then, Who is sufficient for these
Things 2 Cor. ii. 16.
? And we should surely sink, had we not a more than human Prop, at such a Time,
a divine Support; such as Paul had given him, when afflicted with a Thorn in
the Flesh, the Messenger of Satan to buffet him: When in this Distress, he
besought the Lord thrice, he had this Answer 2 Cor. xii. 9,
My Grace is sufficient for thee, for my Strength is made perfect in Weakness.
How is it with Paul now? he is kept from fainting, he is refreshed, he even
rejoices and triumphs, and gives God the Glory; Most gladly therefore, says he,
will I rather glory in my Infirmities, that the Power of Christ may rest upon
me. Again he tells us elsewhere, where Phil. iv. 13.
He can do all Things, through Christ, which strengthens him; so may we too,
living by Faith on the same Mediator of the New Covenant, which is well ordered
in all Things, and sure: Let us then trust in the Lord for ever; in the Lord
Jehovah is everlasting Strength Isa. xxvi. 4.
. But what need I enlarge? Have we not the express Promise of our Lord Jesus
Christ to his faithful Ministers Mat. xxviii. 20.
Lo, I am with you always, even unto the End of the World. Therefore, seeing we
have this Ministry, and these Supports and Encouragements, as we have received
Mercy, we faint not.

Furthermore, surrounding Dangers joined to the last Consideration, should
engage us to Faithfulness in our Work. Indeed Dangers in themselves tend to
damp and discourage, but when they meet with a Mind prepared for them, they
serve to quicken and animate. This is remarkable in Persons of a martial
Spirit; I may instance in Alexander the Great, who in a Time of great and
uncommon Peril, breaks out into this Expression, Hoc est periculum, par animo
Alexandri: This is a Danger fit for the Spirit of an Alexander to encounter.

As the Devil would fain ruin Souls, so he would fain keep Ministers of the
Word from being faithful; and often stands at their Right Hand to resist them
Zech. iii. 1.
. The remains of Corruption within us, give great Strength to his Temptations;
and the Difficulty and Danger is increased by the World; I mean by the Fears
and the Hopes of the present State. Oh! what Need have we to live near to God,
that we may be well supplied and fortified against these Assaults; and likewise
strengthened and engaged through Grace, to pluck Souls as Brands out of the
Burning, and to use skilfully and faithfully those Weapons of Doctrine and
Discipline, which are not carnal, but mighty, through God, to the pulling down
of strong Holds 2 Cor. x. 4.
the strong Holds of Sin, especially Licentiousness and Self-righteousness, and
of Satan and the World, who are joined in a most dismal and dangerous
Confederacy.

Again, the Dangers that at present surround our Land and Nation, should deeply
affect us, and engage us in increasing Zeal, Labors and Faithfulness.

We are indeed blessed with very great Privileges both civil and sacred, under
the Smiles of indulgent Heaven, and the mild and just Administration of the
best of Kings, who may well be styled a Father of his People; but the haughty,
perfidious and cruel French, with their Confederates, are bent upon rending
these Privileges if possible from us; upon destroying our Lives, or, which
ought to be much dearer to us, our Liberty and our Religion.

An holy and righteous God, though he has favored us with some remarkable
Instances of undeserved Goodness and Success in the East and North; for which
we ought surely to return him our most grateful Acknowledgments in Heart, Lip
and Life; yet because of the many and grievous Sins of this Land and Nation has
suffered our Enemies to gain some Advantages against us, especially in our late
awful Defeat to the Westward.

Thus we see in some Measure what we are when left to ourselves; but Woe will be
indeed to us if God depart from us Hos. ix. 12.
and a Deluge of Popery, Tyranny and Slavery overwhelm us.

Our Danger is evidently much increased by the aforesaid terrible Frown of
Divine Providence; but what makes our Case most of all dark and dismal is this,
viz. Our continuing in general stupid and unreform'd, unbelieving and
impenitent under this late awful Judgment, added to the Drought, and to other
Judgments sent before, as well as under the many and great Mercies and
Privileges we have long enjoyed, and long abused and misimprov'd, which the
Lord in his Providence therefore loudly threatens to take from us, to withdraw
his gracious Influence and Protection at once, and what would then be left
behind, but Darkness and Perplexity, Confusion and Horror, Desolation and
Misery?

In this Day of Darkness and Gloominess, my Brethren, we should be deeply
humbled and penitent ourselves, and faithfully promote others being so. In this
Day of imminent Danger, let us not fail to sound the Alarm with Faithfulness
and Compassion, with Plainness and Pungency. Let us cry aloud, and not spare
Isa. lviii. 1.
let us show to our People, and the People of this Land and Nation, their
Transgressions and their Sins, Sins against God's Law and against his Grace,
etc. and let us, through Grace, be more faithful than ever in our Labors, both
in public and private for the good of dear precious Souls: And how should we
Brethren withal, as Daniel successfully did Dan. ix. 3, 20.
set our Face to the Lord God, to seek by Prayer and Supplication, with Fasting
and Humiliation, and confessing our Sin, and the Sin of our People.

Thus let us stand in the Gap, as well as on the Watch Tower: For Zion's Sake
we will not hold our Peace, and for Jerusalem's Sake we will not rest, until
the Righteousness thereof go forth as Brightness, and the Salvation thereof as
a Lamp that burns Isa. lxii. 1.
. Therefore seeing we have this Ministry, as we have received Mercy, we faint
not, and, through Grace, we will not faint.

Several other Arguments engaging to Faithfulness in the ministerial Work,
might here be considered, but as I would not be tedious, I purpose to mention
them more briefly in a concluding Address, and pass now to the

APPLICATION.
1. Hence we learn, what young Men should have a true and just Sense of, who
are about to enter upon the Work of the Gospel Ministry; even of these
important Arguments and Motives mentioned, and such like.

Surely they ought to sit down and count the Cost in the first Place: -- It
would be extreme Folly to do otherwise, and if they do that well, they would by
no Means venture on the Work, without a real and spiritual Sense of the Motives
engaging to Faithfulness therein; for without that, they might justly expect to
faint and fail under the Difficulties of the Work, which are such, as would be
too hard for a Gabriel, unassisted to grapple with. What Presumption, what
Madness is it then, for any one to undertake this Work in his own Strength,
which is Weakness itself, and will be as nothing, when set against the united
Temptations of the World, the Flesh and the Devil? How is the poor Soul made an
easy Prey, being without God, and without his Grace and Strength secured? and
what is like to become then of the miserable Souls he undertakes the Care of?

How awful is it for a Person to promise before God, Angels and Men, to be
faithful in a Work, which is properly spiritual; and which at the same Time he,
being unconverted, hates, because it is spiritual, from the Bottom of his
Heart; for the carnal Mind is Enmity against God Romans viii. 7.
What greater Solecism than a Man of God without true Godliness, a Christian
Minister, that is not a true and real Christian; and such none can be without
real Regeneration, and true Sanctification wrought in him by the Renewings of
the Holy Ghost; which therefore every one that desires to enter into the Holy
Office of the Gospel Ministry, or does officiate therein, ought most seriously
to enquire into his Experience of; and not forget, that it is required of a
Minister of Christ, that he be blameless, sober, just, holy, temperate, and
that he exercise himself unto Godliness. Holiness then (even that Holiness
without which no Man shall see the Lord) belongs to the Scripture Character of
a Steward of God; and this all unsanctified, unholy Ministers ought to think of
with Trembling. In a Word, it appears from the Work, Design, Ends, and Use of
the Gospel Ministry, and Scripture Qualifications required of him who
officiates therein, that he must be a Man of sincere Piety, and true Godliness

Pierson's Sermon on Mr. Dickinson's Death.
,.

Is not he more likely to make the Hearts of God's People sad, than to feed
Christ's Sheep and Lambs, while he is void of any true Love to Christ John xxi.
15, 16, 17.
? Is not he more likely to direct poor Souls that are enquiring the Way to
Glory into some Soul-ruining By-path, especially the Path he is in himself,
than to point them to the right road, which he is experimentally an utter
Stranger to?

Oh! that young Men would be cautious upon this Head, lest they incur the Guilt
of Blood to an amazing Degree, and pave the Way to a most aggravated
Condemnation We have all of us personal Guilt enough upon us, let us not add
other Men's Guilt to our Account: To be guilty of the Blood of the meanest Man
upon Earth, is a Sin, which will cry in your Consciences; but to be guilty of
the Blood of Souls Lord! who can bear it?

Flavel 's Treatise of the Soul of Man.
.

And how careful should the Ministers of the Gospel be, with respect to the
Introduction of others into the sacred Work In the Light of this Truth, we may
also read our Duty, how we ought to govern ourselves in the Ordination of Men
to the ministerial Office. This Office is to be committed unto faithful and
able Men, 2 Timothy ii. 2. Not to Novices, 1 Timothy iii. 6. I know the Necessities of
the Church are great; but no more Haste (I beseech you) to supply their Wants
than good Speed. Satis celeriter fieri, quickquid commode geritur: That Is soon
enough, that is well enough. It Is a less Hazard, to put an ignorant Rustic into
an Apothecary's Shop, to compound and prepare Medicines for Men's Bodies, than
to trust a Man destitute both of Faithfulness and Prudence with the
Dispensation of Christ's Ordinances to Men's Souls.

Flavel 's Sermon. on the Character of an Evangelical Pastor.
: And it seems to me these would act very unadvisedly, that should enter on
that great and sacred Work (of the Ministry) before they had comfortable
Satisfaction concerning themselves, that they have had a saving Work of God on
their Souls.

Edwards 's Thoughts concerning the Revival of Religion.
Though they don't know the Heart; yet to insist upon sufficient Grounds of
Satisfaction, not only that they who offer themselves, are gifted, learned,
orthodox, and the like, but also that they are savingly acquainted with Christ,
and truly engaged to promote his Glory, and the Salvation of immortal Souls.

Is it not expressly required, that the Scripture-Bishop, or Minister of the
Gospel, be holy Tit. i. 8.
? Surely then scriptural and satisfying Evidences of Holiness and divine Grace,
should be waited for in this Case; especially since Timothy is plainly
directed, and we thereby, To commit these Things to faithful Men, who shall be
able to teach others also 2 Timothy ii. 2.
.

I shall conclude this Head with the mention of what I have seen in a Letter
indicted by the excellent Mr. David Brainerd when on his Deathbed, and in the
near Views of Eternity, he there signifies, that it appeared exceeding clear to
his Mind, as well as lay with great Weight upon it, that there ought to be
great Satisfaction of the true Piety of those we introduce into the sacred
Work; for, says he, "If godly Ministers are left to be lax upon this Head, the
Number of ungodly ones will the faster increase, and these will more readily
strain a Point, as to the Principles and Practices of those they admit into the
Ministry; and thus the Land may gradually be overrun, not only with the
unconverted, but even with heterodox, loose and vicious Ministers; which
dreadful Evil may the Lord, of his infinite Mercy in Jesus Christ, make us wise
and faithful, through his Grace, seasonably to prevent."

2. We learn that Ministers of Jesus Christ should be frequently and intensely
fixed in Meditation on these and such like Motives, which are truly weighty,
and suited to promote Faithfulness in their Work; and withal be often wrestling
with Jehovah in the Name of Christ for a deep and steady Sense of them, that we
may thus delight in the sacred Work, even when Success is denied, and look upon
it still a great Favor and Honor to be allowed and enabled to speak and act
for God in Christ as his Ambassadors; and that we may, if Success be granted,
receive it as an additional Comfort, and give God the Glory, to whom only it
belongs. Therefore seeing we have this Ministry, as we have received Mercy, we
faint not.

3. Hence the great Propriety and useful Tendency of the Ministers of the
everlasting Gospel, especially in their Presbyterial and Synodical Conventions,
their putting each other, in their Turns, in Mind of those great Truths, which
tend to establish, comfort and animate them in the great and difficult Work,
and through the divine Blessing will have that Effect, and keep them from
fainting; especially since Christ is the great and only Head and King of his
Church, and we all his Ministers are Fellow Laborers Ephesians. i. 22. Philem. 24th
Verse.
: It cannot then be justly deemed arrogant, when the meanest and unworthiest of
the Ministers of the Gospel, use a plain and pathetic Freedom, as at this Time,
with others convened, how much soever superior in Age or Learning, Gifts or
Grace; yet with becoming Respect.

This naturally leads me to a Word of

EXHORTATION.
And here I would

1. With all Humility address myself to my Reverend Fathers and dear Brethren
in the Gospel Ministry convened, whom I reverence, esteem and love, and whom in
general I Am persuaded (and rejoice from my inmost Soul on the Account) that the
God of the Spirits of all Flesh has made upright before him, and, in a good
Measure, faithful to him, and the Souls of Men, in the great and difficult and
yet honorable Work he has called them to.

I just mention this, which I can speak with great Sincerity, and affectionate
and dutiful, but just Regard, to prevent any Misconstruction of the Freedom of
Speech I use in this Discourse.

Permit me, Reverend Sirs, on this Occasion to congratulate you, that you are
called, not only to know, but also to preach the unsearchable Riches of Christ.
Well may we say, What are we, O Lord, or what is our Father's House? that thou
have brought us hitherto; and that to us this Grace should be given; to us! who
are less than the least of all Mercies; yea, to us! who are less than the least
of all Saints. Oh! then, have we this Ministry? it is only because and as we
have received Mercy. Have we furthermore special Supports and Consolations,
Assistances and Successes at Times? Still it is as we have received Mercy, and
only so; let God then have all the Glory.

Let us give Thanks with our whole Souls, at the Remembrance of the Divine
Holiness, Power and Grace, displayed at one Time and another, especially about
twelve or fifteen Years ago, in a very glorious and wonderful Work of
Conviction and Conversion of Sinners, as well as Edification of God's People;
which notwithstanding several unhappy and sad Extravagances, or Extremes, which
attended the same, we (as a dear Brother in the Ministry expresses it) still
dare to call a Work of God.

Alas! my Brethren, that we and others have so much abused and misimprov'd this
unspeakable Mercy, and provoked the Lord in such a Measure to depart from us!

And how are we called to lament, that Iniquity awfully abounds in our Land and
Nation; Infidelity, and many false and corrupt Principles, multiplied; and
gross Immoralities, Profaneness, and Vices of all Sorts, Worldlymindedness and
Lukewarmness in religion, Divisions in Church and State, spiritual Sloth and
Barrenness, Blindness and Hardness, Ingratitude and Stupidity, under awful
Threatenings and Judgments, Presumption and Security, Pride, Self-righteousness,
Unbelief, and Opposition to the late glorious Work of God; and, in a Word,
awful Disregard, and even Contempt of God and his Laws, of Christ and his
Gospel, and Person, and Grace; of their own Souls and their Families and others
best and eternal Interests: And how are we further called to lament that the
Love of many waxes cold? What a general Coldness and Deadness, as to religion,
has for some Years prevailed; nor can we deny, that the Ministry has been
infected herewith; though, blessed be God, we have some Revivings in our
Bondage, both as to divine Comforts and Success, and should not despise the Day
of small Things Zech. iv. 10.
.

Under the Judgments we feel or fear, let us be humbled, but not discouraged.

Come, my beloved Brethren, let us arise, through Grace, and shake ourselves;
let us, for God's Sake, for Christ's Sake, and for precious Soul's Sake, arise,
and shake off remains of Sloth and Backwardness on the one Hand, and sinking
Discouragements on the other: Let us, in the Lord's Strength, quit ourselves
like Men, yea, like Men of God, in this dark, degenerate and difficult Day. Oh!
what Honor would this reflect on God and religion!

Let us walk with God, as Enoch did Genesis v. 22.
: Let us be valiant, and yet discreet, active and diligent; steadfast, and
unmovable, fervent in Spirit, and full of the Holy Ghost; always abounding in
the Work of the Lord; knowing that our Labor is not in vain in the Lord 1 Cor.
xv. 58.
. If we are faithful, and Souls be not gathered, yet we shall be glorious in
the Lies of the Lord; -- if they be, then we shall say ever long, Lord, here we
are, and the Children thou have graciously given us; and shall rejoice with
them in Glory for ever.

Oh! my Fathers, my Brethren, the Eyes of Christ, who will judge the Quick and
the Dead at his Appearing, and his Kingdom, his Eyes, I say, which are as a
Flame of Fire Rev. i. 14.
are upon us continually in all Parts of our Work and Conduct, with reference
to the final Judgment, and that strict Account we must give at his Bar: And if
any of us should then meet with the Doom of the Slothful Servant, how dreadful!
how intolerable! -- The very Thought is big with Horror! and Words fail! --

But on the other Hand, how glorious, inconceivably glorious, is the Reward we
shall have, if we are faithful, through Grace: Oh! how shall we exult with
extatic Joy, when our Lord says to us, Well done good and faithful Servants,
enter into the Joy, the eternal Joy, of your Lord.

With this Prospect, shall we not most willingly spend and be spent in our Work
for Christ, and for Souls? especially considering what Christ Jesus our Lord
has done and suffered for us; and how he has groaned and sweat, bled and died
for us on the Cross, that we might live and reign with him in Glory.

Let us further realize the infinite Glory, Purity and Excellency of Christ,
behold him altogether lovely, and think nothing too much to do or suffer for
him, but all vastly too little. Had we a Thousand Lives, and he called for
them. should we not, with the greatest Freedom and Alacrity, lay them all down,
as one speaks fast, as the successive Minutes roll. -- But I must hasten. --
Christ's Dying Love to his Church, as well as to us, should engage us in our
great and difficult, yet honorable, profitable and pleasant Work.

Again, the People of God are helping us by their Prayers, and holding up our
Arms, while we are doing the Lord's Work, and fighting the Lord's Battles; and
though evil Men watch for our halting, this should but make us watch and pray
the more, and work the harder, and stand more sure, not in our own, but the
Lord's Strength.

Furthermore, Faithfulness in our Work, will express Gratitude to the blessed
Jesus, for calling us to the Knowledge of himself, and for putting us into the
Ministry, both which are very great Mercies: Therefore seeing we have this
Ministry, as we have received Mercy, let us not faint; especially since our
Time is short and Death comes hastening on shall I squander away what is
unutterably important, while it lasts, and when once departed, is altogether
irrevocable? O! my Soul, forbear the Folly: Forbear the desperate Extravagance.
Will thou chide as a Loiterer, the Arrow that boundeth from the String: or
sweep away Diamonds, as the Refuse of the House? -- Throw Time away!
Astonishing, ruinous, irreparable Profuseness! Throw Empires away and be
blameless. But O! be parsimonious of thy Days: husband thy precious Hours.
Hervey's Contemplations.
. Alas! that so much of our Time is run to Waste, and we have done no more for
God: Oh! then, let us seize the flying Moments, and employ them all for God,
and Christ, and Souls.

Some of our Number within a few Years past are called home from their Work to
their Reward, from light and momentary Trials, to a far more exceeding, and
eternal Weight of Glory.

Oh! that a double Portion of the Spirit may fall on us who survive, that we
may redeem our Time in the best Manner, and double our Diligence!

Many Opportunities we have to express our Love to Christ and Souls in this
Life, that we shall never have afterward: Oh! that we may improve them all,
through Grace, to the best Purpose!

Hold out Faith and Patience, hold out Zeal, Activity and Courage, a little
longer, and we shall, Reverend and dear Sirs, be with our triumphant Brethren
above, and perfectly enjoy, glorify and praise our God and Savior for ever and
ever.

2. I would speak a Word to those of the Children of God who are not in the
Ministry. Brethren! Pray for us! 1 These. v. 25.
. Many Difficulties we meet with in our Work; Oh! pray, that we may not faint
or flag; but may find the Grace of our God abundantly sufficient, that we may
be successful, if it be the Lord's Will; but, especially, that we may be
faithful to the Death, and then receive a Crown of Life.

I may say to you as I have heard it was said by those who were going to take
Cape-Breton, when they parted with their Friends upon the Shore, Do you pray
for us, and we will fight for you: Yea, I may say farther, Do you pray for us,
and we will work for you, and pray for you too, through Grace, that you may
grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that
you may live by Faith on him, continually bring forth much Fruit, adorn your
Profession, and ripen apace for Glory; and Oh! Give the Lord no Rest, till he
make Jerusalem a Praise and Joy in the Earth. And, dear Brethren, pray often,
and pray earnestly, for poor, Christless, perishing Souls.

I would now,

3. Conclude with an Address to such.

No small Part of our Work, my dear Hearers, who are yet in the dismal State of
Unregeneracy relates to you; and many Difficulties, Services and Fatigues we
are willing to go through without fainting, out of Love to, and Concern for
your precious Souls, if by any Means we may win you over to the Knowledge and
Love of God and Christ, and, at least, save some.

Oh! consent to be happy, and to live for ever, and don't kill yourselves;
don't throw yourselves Body and Soul into Hell: This you will do, if you
continue in Sin and Unbelief.

We come in God's Name to you, and pray you in Christ's Stead to be reconciled
to God: -- We preach the Terrors of the Law, as Means suited to awaken and
convince you of your sinful, awful State, and absolute Need of a Savior; and
we set before you the Invitations of the Gospel, and the Grace, Beauties and
Glories of Immanuel; with Desires, that you may, by the Almighty Power and
Grace of God, be made willing to receive Christ Jesus, just as he is offered in
the Gospel, and rest upon him alone for Salvation: Then, my Brethren, you will
be inconceivably happy and blessed for ever.

But Oh! if you continue to neglect and refuse Christ you must perish. The
faithful and true Witness has declared plainly with his own Mouth, He that
believes not, shall be damned Mark xvi. 16.
. If you will go to Hell, after all, from under the glorious Advantages of the
Gospel, how aggravated must your Damnation be Mat. xi. 21, 22, 23, 24.
? Oh! can you bear to lie under the dreadful Wrath of the great and terrible
God in the Flames of Hell, without one Drop of Water to cool your scorched
Tongues; where the Worm of Conscience never dies, and the Fire is not quenched;
and where you must lie roaring, wailing and gnashing your Teeth, for ever and
ever.

Oh! then rest not in your present Condition; and, though you must take all
possible Pains in religion, read, hear, pray, meditate, and, in a Word, strive
with all Earnestness, yet don't rest upon that, or think that God is obliged
hereupon to save you; but acknowledge he might most justly after all this, cast
you into Hell: -- Come therefore as poor, guilty, empty, vile, sinful,
perishing, ill-deserving, and Hell-deserving Creature to a full, glorious and
all-sufficient Christ, who is most ready and willing to save. If any Man
thirst, let him come to Christ and drink. Oh! come, poor Souls, here are many
of us Ambassadors of Jesus Christ together; I trust we join most cordially and
affectionately in warning you to flee from the Wrath to come, and in calling
and inviting you to Christ. Oh! come before the Master of the House is risen
up, and has shut to the Door Luke xiii. 25.
for then it will be too late for ever. Oh! don't delay, Thousands have been
ruined that way. Hear the Lord's Voice, through his Grace, Today: Oh! let there
be Joy in Heaven over you this Day, and then I trust we shall meet ever long in
pure, perfect and eternal Glory: Which may the Lord grant, through Jesus Christ!
Amen and Amen.

FINIS.

