Mr. Beckwith's Election-SERMON, May 13th. 1756.

That PEOPLE A safe, and happy People, who have GOD for, and among them.

Showed in a SERMON Preached before the General Assembly OF THE Colony OF
CONNECTICUT, May 13th, 1756.

Being the Day of the ANNIVERSARY ELECTION there. By George Beckwith, M. A.
Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in Lyme.

Numb 14 14. -- That thou LORD art among this People. -- Deuteronomy. 33.29. Happy art
thou O Israel: Who is like unto thee, O People Saved of the LORD, the shield of
thy Help,and who is the Sword of thy Excellency! and thy Enemies shall be found
Liars unto thee,and thou shall tread upon their high Places. Psalm. 60 11.12.
Give us help from Trouble; for vain is the help of Man. Through GOD we shall do
Valiantly: For He it is that shall tread down our Enemies. New London, Printed
and Sold by T. GREEN, Printer to the GOV. and COMP, 1756:

At a General Assembly of the Governor, and Company of the Colony of
Connecticut, Holden at Hartford, on the 2d Thursday of May, Annoque Domini,
I756.
Ordered. That Ebenezer Silliman Esquire; and Mr. John Griswold Return the Thanks
of this Assembly to the Reverend GEORGE BECKWITH, for his Sermon delivered
before the Assembly, on the I3th Instant, and desire a Copy thereof that it may
be Printed.

George Wyllys, Secr.

The Presence, and Favor of GOD; the Defense, and Happiness of His People.
ROMANS, viii, 31. What shall we then say to these Things? If GOD before us,
who can be againsus?
AS the all-wise GOD has made, and upholds the World, by his Power; so he
overrules, directs, and orders universal Nature, by his Providence. The
Dispensations of which have been very extraordinary of late, in the terrible
Earthquakes, that have been in one Country, and another, and in the dire
Effects they have produced; some of which have been amazingly Awful; and;
vastly exceeding, in their Extent through many Kingdoms, and Countries, and in
the Destruction of many Cities, Towns, Villages, and Places, any thing of the
like Kind that ever has been known in any one Year of the World. It appears
from various accounts computed, that the Earthquakes, being on the first of
Nov. last, continued for the space of 60 Days, and were felt with more, or less
Violence, from the eastern Shores of the Atlantic Ocean to the heart of
Germany; and from the frozen Clime of Iceland almost to the Tropic of Cancer;
a prodigious extent of about four thosand Miles from East to West and about two
thousand from North to South.
Nation is rising against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom; rumors of Wars
ready to break out, are spread among the Nations: And our own Nation is obliged
to have recourse to Arms for the defense, and security of her just Rights; and
our own Land is actually engaged in a dangerous WAR. Which with the Invasions
that has been made on our Frontiers, the Blood that has been already spilt,
and the vigilant Preparations each side are making for a more vigorous carrying
on the War; together with other remarkable Dispensations of Divine Providence,
seem all plainly to forebode some great Overtures, and Events in the womb of
divine. Providence ready to break forth. What shall we then say to these
Things? The frowns of Heaven, and the Dangers that surround us; does not the
same excite in every thinking Man, good Christian, and loyal Subject, serious,
and enquiring Tho'ts what these Dispensations calls us to; what we have to do,
and what may best be done, to secure ourselves against those threatening
Dangers, and Invasions of our Enemies; which seems to put every Thing that is
dear to us at stake; not only the Property of the Country, and our Enjoyments
in it; but also our Liberties, Privileges, and the holy Religion we are blessed
with; and when this is the general Concern and Enquiry in such a critical Day,
where can we better go for Direction than to the sacred Oracles of GOD, which
offer the best Directions in all Cases, and Light in the darkest Times. And if
we enquire at the Divine Oracles we shall find ourselves directed to look to
GOD, and seek his Face, and Favor, Presence, and Blessing, as the best, and
only sure Way for Deliverance from Dangers and Troubles, and for Protection,
and Safety at all Times. For if GOD be for a Kingdom, a Government, or a
People, who can be against them to their real Harm, much less to their Ruin: As
St. Paul triumphantly speaks in our Text, -- What shall we then say to these
Things? TO GOD's abundant Grace toward Christians; his mysterious Love to them
in Jesus Christ, his kind, and gracious Intentions toward his People, and the
wonderful special Care he takes of them; who keeps them as the Apple of his
Eye, who is Afflicted, in all their Afflictions, and ready to their help in
every time of Need, to relieve and succor them, to protect and save them in
all Times of their Trouble, and Danger; on their humbly looking to and trusting
in him for the same.

What shall we then say to these Things? Why this we may surely say, and ought
believingly and thankfully to say, That if God be for us who can be against us
so as to prevail to the ruin of GOD's People? Surely none at all! GOD is for
his People, as he is in Covenant with them, and so engaged to them and for
them, as he condescends to dwell among them, and take them under his special
Care, and Protection, and is ready to bestow every needed Blessing of Grace,
and Providence on them, on their seeking to, and trusting in him for the same.
So that GOD's being for us implies Preservation, and Guidance, Counsel, and
Conduct, in all our Ways: Protection, Preservation, and Help in every time of
Need, together with the bestowment of all the Blessings of Grace, and
Providence, so far as shall be for GOD's Glory, and our best Good; Yea, GOD is
for his People, and bringing about their Good and Salvation, ^emporal, and
spiritual when he seems to be against them. And since it is so. If God be thus
for us who can be against us, so as to prevail to the ruin of GOD's Church and
People, be their Enemies never so many, never so strong and potent, never so
malicious, politic, and designing. Yet GOD is above them to control all their
Measures, confound their Counsels, and overthrow their evil Machinations
against his People. What then can they do while GOD is for his People, and with
them, to Protect, Defend, and Preserve them, and Fight for them.

The DOCTRINE which seems to offer it self to our Consideration is this, ( viz.)

That GOD's Favor for, and Presence with his Covenant People, is their
Happiness, best Security, and Safety always; especially in Times of Trouble,
and Danger.

Their being GOD'S Covenant People, and as such near to him, and interested in
his divine Favor, does not exempt them from Enemies, Troubles, and Dangers in
this sinful World. No their being so, often raises them up Enemies, and
exasperates ungodly Men against them, and exposes them to their Rage, and
Persecution, who would gladly ra^e Zion even to the Foundations thereof. But
GOD has such a Favor for them for his Covenants Sake, and for CHRIST's Sake,
the Head of the Covenant; and because there are many upright Ones, and elect
Vessels in the collective Body) as he has not for the rest of the World. For
what Nation is there so great, who has God so nigh unto them as the Lord our
God is in all things that we call upon Him for. This is their Happiness, in
this is their best Security, and Safety: For if God be for us, who can be
against us.

Two Things here offer for clearing the Doctrine ( viz.) To Consider,

I. What is implied in God's being for, and with his People.

II. To show, that this is their Happiness, best Security, and Safety always,
specially in Times of Trouble, and Danger.

I am then to consider first PROP. I. What is implied in God's being for, and
with his People. For his being for them, certainty implies his Presence with
them, And here, 1. More is intended in it, than that of GOD's being
Providentially for, and, Essentially with them; for so GOD is for, and with the
whole Creation: His Presence fills Heaven, and Earth, and all Space. If I
ascend into Heaven, thou art there. If I make my Bed in Hell, behold thou art
there. Psalm. 139.8. and seq.
He is essentially present with all Creation, upholding all Things by his
Power, and governing universal Nature by his Providence. He is not far from
all, good, and bad, for in him we Live, and Move, and have our Being: And he is
for all Creation, as he upholds all Things in being, and order by the Word of
his Power: Preserves, governs,and provides for all his Creatures. He is
providentially good, and kind unto All,and supplies the wants of every living
Thing: All Eyes wait upon God, and he gives to every one their Meat in due
season. -- His tender Mercies are over all his Works. He is especially present
with Mankind, inspecting, and overruling the affairs of Kingdoms, States, and
Governments, to overturn, pluck down, or build up as pleases him; to deliver,
and save the Oppressed, and humble the proud Oppressor. He is present with all
Individuals, Observing all our Thoughts, Words, and Actions, and recording the
same in his Book of Remembrance, in order to bring every Work into Judgment,
with every secret thing, whether it be Good, or whether it be Evil. Thus GOD is
present with the whole Creation, and is for all his Creatures, as he is their
Creator, universal LORD, Preserver, and Benefactor.

But then,

2 GOD is for, and with his own Church and People, in a more eminent, and
peculiar Way, and Manner. He has chosen them out from the rest of Mankind, and
taken them into Covenant, to be a peculiar People to himself, a chosen
Generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People. He has
brought them near to himself. Numb 16.10
Hence there is none like them in the account of the Blessed GOD; none near to
him in Favor as they be: For what one Nation in the Earth is like thy People,
even like Israel, whom God went to redeem for a People to Himself. 2 Samuel 7.23.
Hence GOD condescends to stand in a peculiar Relation unto them, as their
Covenant GOD, and Friend. For thou have confirmed to thyself, thy People Israel
to be a People unto thee forever; and thou Lord art become their God, 2 Samuel
7.24.
in a peculiar, and appropriate Sense. Hence they are Styled his Chosen, his
Saints, his Portion, and the Lot of his Inheritance. For the Lord's Portion is
his People, Jacob is the Lot of his Inheritance. Deuteronomy. 32.9
Therefore the LORD takes them under his peculiar Care, and keeps them as the
Apple of his Eye: He interest's himself in all their Interest; and is afflicted
in all their Afflictions, as the Prophet speaks: In all their afflictions, he
was Afflicted, the Angel of his Presence Saved them, in his Love, and in his
Pity he Redeemed them, and he bare them, and carried them all the Days of Old.
Isa. 63.9
So that GOD's being for us, or for his Covenant People, implies his Favor for
them, Presence with them, Care of them, Guidance, Protection, help in Trouble,
Deliverance, and Salvation.

Hence,

(1) It implies special Favor, such as GOD has not for the rest of Mankind. He
is their Father, and they are the Sons, and Daughters of the Living GOD. For
thou art an holy People unto the Lord thy God, the Lord thy God has chosen
thee to be a special People unto himself; above all People that are upon the
Face of the Earth: And he has avouched thee this Day to be his peculiar
People. Deuteronomy 14.2.and7.6.and^6 18


(2) Care and watchfulness for their Protection and Safety. It Is his Vineyard
over which he does watch Night and Day. I the Lord do keep it, I will Water it
every Moment; left any hurt it, I will keep it Night, and Day. Isa. 27.3.
Because he is for them, his Eye is ever toward them for Good, watching over
them, to preserve, p ot and, and Defend them, as a sheperd does his Flock. For
the Eyes of the Lord run to, and fro in the whole Earth, to show himself
Strong, in behalf of them, whom he favors. 2 Chronicles. 16.9
The Lord is thy keeper, the Lord is th shade upon thy right Hand: And be that
keeps Israel, shall neither Slumber, nor Sleep. Therefore, Fear not, O my
Servant Jacob, faith the Lord, neither be dismayed, O Israel, for so I will
save thee from a far, for I am with thee, says the Lord, to save thee.

And he is thus ready to help, and save them, as having a peculiar Favor for
them, even when he Corrects them, and seems to be against them: Hence the
Prophet reproves Israel for distrusting GOD's Favor for them, and Care of
them, even in the very darkest Times. Why say thou O Jacob, and speak O
Israel, my Way is hid from the Lord, and my Judgment is passed over from my
God? 'T was what they had no Ground to say of GOD; for he was always both ready
and able to Help, and Save them. He gives power to the Faint, and to them that
have no Might, be increases strength.

(3) Divine Guidance, and Conduct: GOD is for them; therefore will he Guide
them by his prudent Counsel: As he taught Ephraim to go, taking him by the
Arms: Hes. 11.3.
So he led, and conducted Israel all the Days of Old. He led him about, he
instructed him, he kept him as the Apple of his Eye. So the Lord alone did lead
him, and there was no strange god with him. Deuteronomy. 32.10.12.
In like manner GOD assures his People, they shall not want his divine
Guidance, Counsel, and Conduct. For he that has Mercy on them, shall lead
them, even to Springs of Water, shall he Guide them -- I will lead him also,
and restore Comforts to him, and to his Mourners. Isa. 49.10. and 57.18.
To this end has he given us his sacred Oracles to be a Lamp unto our Feet,
and a Light unto our Paths; to teach and point out to us the Way of Duty, and
Safety, and be our Guide to Happiness.

Again, He Guides his People by the influences, and unerring Counsels of his
blessed Spirit; making them to hear a Voice behind them saying, This is the
Way, walk ye in it; when they turn to the right Hand. and when they turn to the
Left. He Guides them also by his Providence and the special hints, and
intimations of the same. I will instruct thee and teach thee in the Way that
thou shall go, I will Guide thee with mine Eye; Psalm. 32.8.
(...) by the secret intimations of his Will in the hints, and turns of
Providence, which he enables his People to understand, and take Direction from,
as a Man makes his Servant know his Mind by the wink of his Eye Moreover, He
guides, and conducts them by wise Rulers, and faithful Teachers, which his
Providence sets over them, to this very end: Thou leadest thy People like a
Flock by the Hand of Moses, and Aaron. Psalm. 77.2^.
GOD indeed Led them by the Pillar of Cloud by Day, and of Fire by Night. But
more especially by the Agency, and Conduct of Moses, and Aaron, whom he
appointed over them in their respective Orders to lead, and guide his People,
in the ways of Duty and Safety. How great a Blessing this! and what safety to
the State! Such are good Rulers, and faithful Teachers to every State, and
Church, great Blessings, her Safety, Strength, and Ornament. The Chariots of
Israel, and the Hors-men thereof. To which end, GOD is with the Rulers of his
People; Counselling their Cousellors, and Teaching their Senators Wisdom. He
directs them by Wisdom from on High, in the great Affairs of State, and leads
them into right Councils in critical, and dangerous Times, that he may save his
People by their Hands. How much then should we praise? and how Thankful to GOD
should we be, for the Blessing of good Rulers? And how ready should we be to
Obey them? By whom GOD Leads, and Guide us for our Safety, and Benefit. Let us
prize, and improve the Blessing as becomes the Character of Christians.

(4) It implies Help in Times of Danger, and Trouble, and sure Deliverance, in
GOD's Time, which is the best Time. So the Prophet throws the Gauntlet, and
bids Defiance in the Name of the Lord, to all the Enemies of his People.
Associate yourselves, O ye People, and ye shall be broken in Pieces; and give
ear, all ye of far Countries; gird yourselves for War; and ye shall be Broken
in pieces; Gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in Pieces: Take Counsel
together, and it shall come to naught; speak the Word, and it shall not stand;
for God is with us, Isa. 8.9, 10.
to Fight for us, Save, and Deliver us.

GOD indeed may seem to be against his People, suffering WARS, and various
Evils to break in upon them, for their Sins, Apostacies, and unworthy Carriage
toward Him. But he is for them still, and with them in their Troubles, and
Adversities. When thou passest through the Waters I will be with thee; and through
the Rivers they shall not overflow thee; when thou walk through the Fire thou
shall not be burnt, neither shall the Flame kindle upon thee. -- For I am the
Lord thy God, the Holy one of Israel, thy Salvation. Isa. 43.2.
And GOD's People at last, shall see their Desire upon their Enemies, and shall
Triumph over them. Faithful is he that has Promised, he will Perform it. How
Safe then must that People be even in the midst of Dangers, that have the most
High for them, and with them.

(5) Finally here, GOD's being for us includes in it all Happiness. For his
Favor is Life, and his Smiles give all Prosperity. Happy is that People that
is in such a Case; yea, Happy is that People whose God is the Lord. Psalm.
144.15.
GOD can make those things that seem to be most against us, and most hurtful
and dangerous to Church and State; yet to work together for our Good, Interest,
Safety, and Happiness; their Enemies when he pleases shall serve them to these
Ends. They shall bow down their Faces toward the Earth, and lick up the Dust
of thy Feet. Isa 49 23.
Thus all who wait for GOD, and trust in Him, and are resigned to his Will,
shall find sure Deliverance at last; and not be disappointed in their Hope. For
I will (says GOD) contend with them, that contend with thee, and will Save thy
Children. And will feed them that Oppress thee, with their own Flesh, and they
shall be drunken with their own Blood, as with sweet Wine; and all Flesh shall
know that I the LORD am thy Savior, and Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob.
Isa. 49 26.
Thus GOD is for his People.

I am in the next, and last Place to show,

PROP. II. That in this consists our Happiness, best Security, and Safety at
all Times, especially in Times of Trouble, and Danger.

It Is GOD's Presence with his People that makes them Great, and Honorable,
Safe, and Happy; and is their best Security in Times of threatening Danger; for
where GOD is present, sure Help is nigh, and Salvation at hand. He is a present
Help in time of Trouble; God is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved;
God shall Help her (his Church) and that right early: Psalm. 46.1.5.
Or as the Apostle triumphantly expresses it, If God be for us, who can be
against us? Who can harm a People, or ruin them who have GOD among them, and
for them? to Guide, Protect, and Save them: Who have his Favor as an Hedge,
and Wall of Security round about them; to keep off all Enemies, and every evil
Occurrent. That this is their Happiness always, and Safety, specially in evil
Times, and amidst Dangers, will fully appear, if we consider,

[1] The almighty Power of GOD, engaged to, and for his own Covenant People.
Having an Interest in GOD as his Covenant People, they have an Interest in all
his Divine Perfections, Power, Widom, Goodness, Unchangeableness etc. according
to that, Son thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine. Luke ^5.31.
They that are with GOD in Covenant, have Interest in all that GOD is, and all
that he has. Hence we have his Almighty Power to Shield, and Protect us; in
which there must be infinite Safety, and Security. He is the Almighty GOD, who
can, and will do all his Pleasure. Whatever pleases him, that he does, in
Heaven above, and in the Earth beneath, none can stay his Hand, or hinder the
execution of his Counsels. Universal Nature is under the control of his
Almighty Power. He looks on the Earth, and it trembles, he touches the
Hills, and they Smoke, the Mountains flow down at his Presence. -- And the
Nations shall not be able to abide his Indignation. And when it is needful for
the Salvation of his People; he will say to the Sun, Stand thou still in
Gibeon, and thou Moon in the Valley of Ajalon; as in the Days of Joshua. He
will check the violence of Fire, and command it not to hurt his People, when in
the midst of it: As he did for the three Children in the midst of the fiery
Furnace. He, will make the Waters of the Sea, and of Jordan divide to give them
Passage and to stand congealed into a Wall on either Hand, for their Defense,
while they pass, safely on: So all Nature shall protect his People, and at the
same Time destroy their Enemies; the Flood shall return upon them to their
Destruction; the Stars in their courses shall fight for the Lord's People, and
destroy their Enemies. They fought from Heaven, the Stars in their courses
Fought against Sisera. Judge. 5.20.
He will shut the mouths of Lions that they cannot hurt his People, and will
rebuke Kings for their sake, with a charge to do them no Harm. GOD's Angels
also, those blessed Ministers of his Power, incamp round about his People, and
delivers them, and annoy and destroy their Enemies at his Command, as they did
the Assyrian Host, besieging Jerusalem. How safe then must GOD's People be
under the Protection of his infinite Power, engaged for them? While all
Providence, all creatures, all Nature at his Command, becomes engaged for
their Defense, and Protection; and underneath are the everlasting Arms. -- This
Power of GOD engaged for his People, is an infinite, unlimited, and
everlassting Power:

And therefore,

(1.)Infinitely exceeds any Power that (...) be engaged against them. What is
the power of mighty Princes, or potent Nations combined, to the almighty Power
of GOD? how easily can he check, and control them, and turn all their devices
head long; and confound them in every Enterprise. All the inhabitants of the
Earth are reputed as nothing; they are as a drop of a Bucket, and are accounted
as the small dust of the Balance. Isa. 40.I5.
The Lord shall laugh at them; and has their vain Attemps against them in
Derision.

(2.) GOD's Power has fast hold of the Hearts of all Men; that he can control
all the Counsels of his People's Enemies; curb their Pride, and Passions, and
bring them to be at Peace with his People, when he will; or can confound them
in all their Counsels taken against his People, and turn them into foolishness.
For he leads Counselors away spoiled, and makes the Judges Fools. Job 12.17.
The Wisdom of their wise Men shall perish; and the Understanding of their
prudent Men shall be hid. Isa. 29.14.
Or he can take away their Hearts, intimidate their Minds, that their Hands
cannot perform their Enterprises: He can so weaken their Strength, and Courage,
That one Man shall chase a Thousand, and ten put ten Thousand to flight.

(3.) The mighty Power of GOD can Save his People in the greatest Dangers, and
bring about their Salvation, in ways, and by means (to us) the least likely,
and probable. How unlikely was it to humane Probability that Pharaoh should be
brought to let GOD's People go from under his tyrannical Yoke in manner as he
did, laden with Jewels, and rich Spoils of the Egyptians, and that when pursued
by the strength of Egypt, the Sea should open a safe, and dry Passage to GOD's
People: But drown all their Enemies! How improbable was it to humane appearance
that Gideon with his three Hundred Men, Armed only with Pitchers, Lamps, and
Trumpets,should discomfit, and destroy, that vast Army of Midianites, who with
their Allies were like Grass-hoppers for Multitude? Also that Deborah, and
Barak with a few ill-arm'd, and undisciplined Men, should defeat, and destroy
Sisera, and his vast Army, strengthened with a Thousand Chariots of Iron?

Moreover, in the days of the Judges, and afterward under pious Kings: How
often did the Lord make an handful of his People Victorious over vast Armies of
their Enemies? When to humane probability Victory must have turned to the other
side. -- But it is equally easy to infinite Power to Save by many, or by few.
And he saved his People because they called upon and trusted in Him.

This Observation might be brought down to latter Times, and nearer to
ourselves. Who more unlikely than King Henry VIII. to bring on that glorious
Reformation, began in our Nation, in his Reign, and effected by wonderful
Means! Or than King James II. to open the Way to that glorious Revolution, and
that by Arbitrary proceedings and jesuitical Counsels; Means indirect enough to
so glorious an Event; yet by these were the Eyes of the Nation opened, and the
Way paved to that great Salvation.

Again, How often did our Predecessors, the first Planters of this Country,
experience glorious Salvations wrought for them, against their numerous,
surrounding Enemies when their Numbers, and Strength, was as nothing compared
to that of their Enemies.

In like manner the Success granted our small Army in the last War against that
strong Fortress of Cape-Breton; was certainly a Salvation beyond a rational
Probability. And when thereupon a strong Fleet, was sent from France, to
attempt the recovery of that Place, or make Reprizals on us. How totally was it
frustrated, and broken by the immediate Hand of Heaven? This French Fleet
consisted of about 16 Sail of large of Men of War, mostly line of battle Ships,
and some small Frigates, and a large Number of Transports, with Troops on
board; a Strong Armiment this! but very Sickly when they arrived in Chebucto
Harbor, where they lay for some Time, and Buried many: They made no attempt on
any Place, but putting again to Sea, were broken, and parted by a violent
Storm, in which some Perished, and many more being taken in one Place, and
another, few ever got safe back to France. How great a Disappointment this to
France! And how remarkable, memorable, and favorable a Providence this, to
this Land.
How great a Mercy to this Land? How glorious a Salvation this!

Nor indeed is the Hand of GOD to be less seen and acknowleged in the signal
disappoinment and overthrow of the French Fleet, persidiously sent against
Halifax, and NovaScotia last Summer, to fall upon, seize, and destroy the same,
under the cover of Peace. -- Also in the Success, and glorious Victory granted
to our Forces at Lake-George; when the Enemy apprehended the Advantage to ly so
on their Side, that they came on to Battle with raised expectaions of Success,
and Victory. But the greater was their Disappoinments, and Defeat. Thus does
the Almighty GOD sometimes bring about the Salvation of his People, and do
great Things for them, in Ways, and by Means, least likely to human
Probability. Well, if God be for us, who then can be against us: Let us obey
his Laws, seek his Favor, and Trust in Him, then we shall be safe amidst all
the threatening Dangers that any Time surround us.

2 The Truth under consideration will further appear if we consder the infinite
Wisdom of GOD. He is Wise in Heart as well as mighty in Power, can therefore
save his People in every State, and Condition, be their Dangers never so
eminent, their Enemies never so crafty, malicious, and powerful, nothing can
escape his Notice who is omnipresent; nor can infinite Wisdom ever be
overreached, or ever be at a loss what to do in any Case. How vain then must
all the attempts of the Enemy be against GOD; or against those he will protect?
For there is no Wisdom, nor Counsel against the Lord. And as his Wisdom extends
to a perfect Knowledge of all Things in all Worlds; seeing at one single View
all the purposes in the Hearts of Men, all their Counsels, Actions, and
Designs: So he knows how to take the Wise in their own Craftiness, and save his
People from every Plot, hatched, or hatching against them, by their Enemies;
and this he sometimes does,

(1.) By directing them into salutary, and right Counsels for their own Safety,
and Defense. They know not (it may be) their own Danger but GOD does, and by
his divine Wisdom directs them into right Measures for their own Defense, and
Safety. He influences, and enlarges their Minds, giving to them such a Spirit
of Wisdom, Counsel, and Forecast, as to over-match the Counsels of their
Enemies; supplant them in their evil Designs, and guard themselves against all
their attempts upon them: They have Prudence given them to foresee the Evil,
and hide themselves, they are directed from on High to proper Expedients, and
wise Precautions, for their own Safety, and Defense: Even as the British Court
in the Summer past, were directed into a Foresight of, and into right Counsels
and Measures for, disappointing and defeating, the secret and persidious
Designs of the French Court on Nova Scotia, and other English Settlements on
this Continent.

And as the Officers of the Army at LakeGeorge were directed into a right
Conduct on the critical Day of Battle there; by which Means GOD saved his
People; the greater Part of them, from the cruel Designs of that Blood-thirsty
Army of French, and Indians, and gave us a Signal Victory over them, on that
Memorable EIGHT OF SEPTEMBER last: Very conspicuous were the intermediate Steps
of divine Providence, leading on, and opening the Way to that great Salvation:
I was my-self an Eye witness of this great Action, and saw the Salvation of the
LORD on that Day. The particulars of which are carefully Recorded, in my
Journal of that Expedition.
And a great Smile of Providence was it on these Churches: May the same never
be forgotten; and all the Praise be ascribe there, where it is all Due. --

(2.) Sometimes by seasonable providential Warnings, discovering, and pointing
out their Danger: Sometimes in an ordinary, and sometimes in an extraordinary
Way. So GOD warned the King of Israel by his Prophet of the designed Invasion
of the King of Syria upon him. By which means he was enabled to Defeat the
same, and Save himself, not once, nor twice. Of the same kind was the Discovery
that divine Providence made of the secret, and dreadful Gun-Powder-Plot, in our
own Nation; a Mercy of Heaven never to be forgotten. So the cruel Plots of the
Churches Enemies laid against them, are disappointed, and broken by a
seasonable Discovery made of them by divine Providence.

(3.) Sometimes by providing for them an Azylum, a City of Refuge, or Place of
defense, and safety from impending Dangers, and Ruin. As GOD provided an Ark
for Noah, and his Family: A Zoar for Lot and His -- And the City of Pella for
the first Christians, to which they fled, and were Saved, when Jerusalem was
Destroyed. And so the Earth helped the Woman, and the Wilderness was made her
safe Retreat, from the Rage of the Dragon. Even as this wilderness Land was
made of GOD a safe Retreat to our Fathers, when they fled from the Persecutions
at Home.

(4.) Sometimes by controuling, and overruling the Enemies Counsels, for His
People's Deliverance.

GOD rules supreme in the Courts of Princes, and over all the Children of
Pride; turning their Hearts, and overruling their Counsels at His Pleasure. The
Kings Heart is in the Hand of the LORD: As the Rivers of Water He turns it
whethersover He will. Prove. 21.1.
Sometimes he leaves, or gives them up to a Spirit of Infatuation; that they
are ensnared in their own Ways, and confounded in their own Counsels; they are
guided by a Spirit of Folly to their own Ruin. When a People are left to weak,
and foolish, and to uncertain, and wicked Counsels: Not having Wisdom to
project right Means; nor steadiness, nor courage to pursue proper Measures,
what then is like to follow but their own Disappointment and Ruin, to the
Deliverance, and Salvation of GOD'S own People? Thus was the haughty King of
Syria confounded in his own Counsels at the Siege of Samaria; when relying on
the superior Numbers and Strength of his Army, he despised Ahab, and his
handful of Men coming out to raise the Siege; and gave those foolish, and
haughty Orders, Whether they be come out for Peace take them alive, or whether
they be come out for War take them alive. 1 Kings 20 18.
On which followed his immediate Defeat, with a great slaughter of his Army, to
the Deliverance of GOD's People. And it may teach all Generals that a despised
Enemy often proves a formidable one; as those two experienced Generals with
their old veteran Soldiers from Europe found it to be last Summer, when they
despised the raw, and unexperienced Soldiery of this Country to their own
Defeat and Ruin. General Braddock, who unhappily fell in the Battle at Ohio,
July 9th. 1755. And the French General. Baron de Dieskau, who was Beaten,
dangerously Wounded, and taken Prisoner in the Battle at Lake George, Sept..
8th. 1755.


(5.) Sometimes by dividing their Counsels so that they shall weaken the Hands
of one another, and so cannot perform their Enterprise. Scarce any thing is
more dangerous to a State, or Army, than divided Counsels, or want of Unity in
them: And when this is found prevailing, it is an Omen of the approaching Ruin
of that State, or Army. And thus GOD sometimes divides the Counsels of His
Churches Enemies, by which He defeats their malicious Designs, and saves His
People. So that vast consederate Army which came up against Jehoshaphat, and
his Kingdom were utterly Destroyed by divided Counsels, and Mutiny among
themselves. Ammon, and Moab stood up against the Inhabitants of Mount Seir,
utterly to slay and destroy them. And that being done every one helped to
destroy another. 2 Chronicles. 20.13.
And thus GOD's People had Deliverance from that formidable Invasion. -- How
dangerous, and destructive a Thing is Mutiny in an Army! and how carefully
should every leading step to it be avoided, and unity of Counsels be maintained
as they would hope to prosper, and be successful.

But to proceed

(6) GOD can take off the Enemies of his People from their malicious Designs
against them, by cutting them out other Work to do. Thus he defeated the
designs of Sennacherib when he came with a powerful Army to sack, and destroy
Jerusalem, and delivered His People from that eminent Danger by causing him to
hear a Rumor 2 Kings 19 7.
of an Invasion coming on his own Kingdom, on which he raised the Siege, and
hastened Home for the Defense of his own Territories. So GOD causes evil Men
to make Work for one another, and thus secures the Peace, and Safety of His own
People. Such Work may possibly be cutting out for the Kingdom of Spain, to
employ them on this critical Day, by the Jesuits usurped Kingdom in Paraguay,
and the progress he is making down the River Plate to enlarge his new Kingdom.
This may be a means of hindering the junction of the Spanish Arms with the
French against us, or at least of dividing, and weakening down their Power, --
Or Again,

(7.) When GOD's People are to all appearance on the brink of Ruin He can raise
them up some mighty Deliverer, and so save them from all the Danger as he did
for Israel many a Time. A Moses, a Joshua, a Sampson, a Jephtha, a David. And
for our own Nation a WILLIAM, when it was on the brink of Ruin. -- And may I
not add a GEORGE too, whence we enjoy the present happy Establishment? Yea GOD
can make the Beast help the Woman, the Papists, the Protestants, as he has many
a Time done. -- Or further,

(8.) He can help and save his People by giving them a Superiority of Wisdom,
Strenght, and Courage, to overmatch their Enemies: As he gave to the Jews in
the Time of Esther on the Day of their intendded Assassination, When no Man
could withstand them but the Fear of them fell on all People: Esther 9.2.
And their Enemies were so intimidated that they could not find their Hands, --
Or again,

(9.) GOD will by his own immediate Hand break the Power of the Enemy; and open
the way for the Deliverance, and Salvation of his People. As he did for Israel
when he opened a Passage through the red Sea, for their Deliverance, from the
Power of the pursuing Egyptians. Or as in the Days of Joshua, and Deborah, when
the Stars in their Courses, Sun, and Moon, Fought against the Enemies of GOD's
People; and GOD Rained from Heaven, Hailstones, Fire, and Tempest, on their
Heads to their utter Destruction, and Overthrow before his People; So let all
thine Enemies Perish, O Lord. -- Or,

(10.) Finally, By removing particular Persons out of this World, in the very
crisis of his Churches Danger: As in the Case of Queen Ann, and Lewis XIV. So
his Church had Deliverance, and Salvation. Thus infinite Wisdom is never at a
loss to find out ways, and means by which to Save his People be their
Streights, and Dangers what they will. He will make the Wrath of Man to Praise
him, and the remainder thereof he will restrain: Surely they are safe, and
happy then, who have GOD for and with them; a present and all-sufficient Help
in every Time of Need.

3 The Truth before us will further appear if we consider the infinite Goodness
of GOD engaged for his People's Safety: GOD being for his People, his Goodness,
and Mercy is engaged for them, and to them. So when Moses was under fearful
Apprehensions whether Isreal's Sin in making the molten Calf, and their frequent
Murmurings would not wholly throw them out of the divine Favor, and
Protection: GOD to Satisfy him was pleased to say, I will make all my Goodness
to pass before thee; Exodus 33.19
leading my People, and will be merciful to my People, and spare them as a
Father does his Son: That their Follies, and Failings shall not cast them out
of my Protection. -- Here lies the Difficulty, when we find so much amiss with
ourselves; and looking abroad find so much Sin in Church, and State; Iniquity
abounding, and the Love of many waxing Cold; so much degeneracy from the pious
Paths our Fathers walked in, etc. Our Hearts are ready to misgive and say, Can
GOD be for such a degenerate, sinful, and backsliding People? Will he save a
People walking so unworthy the Grace, and Privileges indulged them? Now under
such dark Apprehensions, GOD's boundless, and covenanted Mercy, is our only
Support, and it is a proper, and sufficient Foundation for Faith, Hope, and
Trust in GOD: If his Churches will consider and turn to him, at the call of his
Word, and rebukes of his Providence (and not Tempt GOD by trusting in him to
deliver, and save them, while yet they refuse to put away those Sins for which
he is Correcting them) for this is the intendment of all his corrective,
Dispensations, not to destroy his People; no, but amend them, and teach them
Righteousness, and stir us up to seek his Face, and Favor that he may appear
for, deliver, and save us. God is slow to Anger, but swift to show Mercy, and
to save his People. He is sovereign in his Goodness, boundless in his Grace;
the Reasons of which are from, and within himself: He therefore has Mercy on
whom he will have Mercy; and so because he will. And thou' when his People Sin,
and grow corrupt he will withdraw his wonted Protection, and Favor, and return
to his Place, 'till they acknowledge their Offenses, and seek his Face: Yet he
remembers them as his Covenant People still, and waits to show Mercy, is ready
to be Entreated of them, Appear for, and Save them, when ever they acknowledge
their Offenses, and seek his Face, Hos. 5.15.
and Protection. -- His turning away from his People, is not his disowning, and
casting them off: No, but he remembers them as his Covenant People still, and
has a Favor for them, for the sake of the Covenant into which he has taken
them, and for Christ's sake the Head of the Covenant, and Styles himself a
Covenant-keeping GOD which he is never unmindful of, But remembers his Covenant
forever, the Word which he Commanded to a thousand Generations, Psa. 105.8
It Is not therefore (blessed be GOD's Goodness) every change in us, that will
throw us out of his Covenant, Favor, and protecting Goodness: No, for says
the Most High, I am the Lord, I change not; therefore ye Sons of Jacob are not
consumed, Mali. 3.6.
in your own Changes. -- Supernatural Grace, contending with Sinfulness of Men.
-- Milton Paradi. Lost book II pa. 312. ver. 359.360^ Edit. 15.


Further, GOD's infinite Goodness, and Mercy toward his Covenant People,
appears in his readiness to hear any Intercessions made in their behalf, any
Prayers put up for them, that he may Spare, Save, and have Mercy on them; And
he saw that there was no Man, and be wondered that there was no Intercessor:
Isa. 59.16.
He looked for some to plead, and pray for his People, as being ready to hear
any Intercessions in their behalf, And he wondered, that there was no
Intercessor, none to speak a good Word, to put up a few earnest Prayers for his
People, as being ready and desirous to be entreated on their behalf, that he
might Spare and have Mercy on them, and save them out of their Troubles,
notwithstanding their Provocations: How rich is GOD in Mercy, and Goodness
toward his People? How willing to have his Hand stayed, and his Wrath turned
away, when they have provoked him to Anger by their many Provocations? Yea,
after long waiting, and continued incorrigibleness in his People, yet how loath
is divine Goodness to give them up to Ruin. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim?
how shall I deliver thee, Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I
set thee as Zeboim? mine Heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled
together: I will not execute the fierceness of mine Anger: I will not return to
destroy Ephraim; for I am God, and not Man, the holy One in the midst of thee,
-- Hos 11, 8.9.
So the tender Father reasons with himself, How can I cast off my untoward Son?
For he is my Son, though he be untoward. So they are my People still though they be
a sinful People; these are my Churches, How shall I give them up to be
Destroyed? I remember my Covenant with them; mine Elect among them; and shall
not I Save, and Spare them for these Elect's Sake, and for my covenant Mercies
Sake? For, He will ever be mindful of his Covenant; many a Time did he Deliver
them, but they provoked him with their Counsels; and were brought low for their
Iniquity. Nevertheless he regarded their Afflictions when he heard their Cry,
and be remembered for them his Covenant, and repented according to the multitude
of his Mercies. Psalm. 106.43, 44 45.
So I humbly hope, and trust he will do for these Churches, and not give them
up to be Destroyed by their antichristian Enemies.

But it is Time that I hasten to the IMPROVEMENT, which shall be in two Uses
only, ( viz.)

USE I. We may learn from what has been offered, that the People of GOD should
Trust in him, and not be Dismayed in dark and threatening Times: But Improve
awful, and threatening Providence to their own amendment, and turning to GOD.
They should Call upon him, commit, their Case to him, and so doing, Trust in
him without Dismay. And they, have sufficient Reason, and Encouragement so to
do; being as his Covenant People interested in all his blessed Perfections for
their Security, and having his divide Promise for it, that if we turn to him,
he will turn to us, Turn Ye unto me, says the Lord of Hosts, and I will turn
unto you, says the Lord of Hosts; Zach. 1.3.
GOD is for his People, a present Help in Time of Trouble and Danger, to all
that Call upon, and trust in him, and he is able to Deliver, and Save them,
when all other Help seems to fail; yea, that is GOD's usual Time to Help. --
And it is much for the Honor of GOD, and what his Perfections demand at our
Hands; that turning to him when he Rebukes us, we Trust in him without Dismay,
and that in the most difficult, and threatening Times It Is no great matter to
trust when there is little, or no apparent Danger; but when Danger is eminent,
and Creature supports, and dependances, seem to fail, when we have little, or
nothing else to trust to, but the immediate Hand, Providence, and Grace of GOD:
Then to Trust in him without dismaying Fear, this is Faith, and becoming
Christians, and greatly Honors GOD, and such Faith, and Trust GOD will not
disappoint: But has ever appeared for, and saved his People, when they have
thus turned to, and trusted in him: So GOD was with Hezekiah, and prospered him
in all his Wars, and whithersoever he went forth, because he trusted in the
Lord God of Israel. And so the Church witnesses to the Honor of GOD, They
trusted, and thou did Deliver them, they cried unto thee and were Delivered,
they trusted in thee, and were not Confounded. Psalm. 22.5 118.9. and 125.1.
He is a Buckler to all that trust in him; Therefore, Whosoever trusts in him
shall be safe; Judgment is before him, therefore trust in him; for none that
trust in him shall be desolate: It Is therefore better to trust in the Lord than
to put confidence in Men, it is better to trust in the Lord than to put
confidence in Princes. Let the Church, let GOD's People therefore, by Faith,
and Prayer run into the Name of the Lord as into their strong Tower, and there
let them trust, and not be afraid, with any dismaying Fear; whatever
commotions, storms, and troubles there may be in the Earth; for the Lord is
good, a strong Hold in the Day of Trouble, and he knows them that Trust in
him, to protect, deliver, and save them; Therefore, he that trusts in him,
Mercy shall compass him round; thou will keep him in perfect Peace, whose mind
is stayed in thee; because he trusts in thee, -- therefore Trust in the Lord
forever, for in the Lord JEHOVAH is everlasting Strength. Isa. 26.4.
Thus the Lord abundantly excites, and encourages his People to come to him,
seek his Face, and Favor, and to put their Trust in him, and not be dismayed
when the World threatens, and Satan tempts; nor terrified in the Day of evil
Tidings, He shall not be afraid of evil Tidings, his Heart is fixed trusting in
the Lord. And so GOD directed the Chaplain' of the Army, to exhort, and excite
the People to Trust in him, in the Day of Battle, and so doing they should be
Victorious, And it shall be when ye come nigh unto the Battle, that the Priest
shall approach, and speak unto the People, and shall say unto them, Hear O
Israel, ye approach this Day unto the Battle against your Enemies; let not your
Hearts faint, fear not, and do not tremble, neither be ye terrified because of
them, for the Lord your God is he that goes with you, to fight for you,
against your Enemies, and to save you: Deuteronomy 20.2, 3, 4.
Therefore look to him, call on him, and trust in him, so shall you be
Victorious. And have not these Churches abundant Reason, and great
Encouragement, at this threatening Day, thus to turn to, and trust in GOD; for
where the Grace of GOD has planted true Churches, and keeps them in the
profession, and practice of the true Religion, and Fear of GOD; his Providence
ever does, and will Protect them: Therefore vain in the end shall be the
attempt of their Enemies against them.

True it is Success does not always attend the just (...) in particular
Conflicts, and GOD sometimes makes his People's Enemies a (...) to correct the
Sins, and Wantonness of his own People, yet GOD does not, will not, forsake his
own People looking to, and trusting in him, in their Troubles and Dangers; but
he is for them, when he seems to be against them, and will Save them, and make
them Victorious in the End, Call upon me, in the day of Trouble, I will Deliver
thee; and thou shall Glorify Me; Psa. 50.15.
So GOD will Save all that trust in him, but the Foes of Christ, and his
Interest shall be made his Footstool; let them rage, and threaten as they will,
they imagine a vain Thing, GOD has their Spite, and Counsels in derision: He
will break them with a rod of Iron, he will dash them in Pieces like a Potters
Vessel. The Kingdom that Christ has let up, must stand, and grow, and shall
never be destroyed; so GOD speaks by his Prophet, The God of Heaven shall set
up a Kingdom, which shall never be destroyed; and the Kingdom shall not be left
to another People; but it shall break in pieces, and consume all those
Kingdoms, and it shall stand forever: Dan. 2.44. and 7.14.
This Kingdom is the true Gospel Church which antichrist shall not be able to
Destroy, while keeping in GOD's Way, they Fear, and Trust in Him. And many of
our Godly Ancestors Died in this Faith, that GOD would not leave, or give up
these Churches of his own Planting in this Land, to be overcome by their
heathen, and idolatrous Enemies, inhabiting round about them, though they might
at times be made a great Scourge to them, when they departed from GOD. -- Why
then should we be dismayed in this Day of Threatening, and Rebuke? Let us
diligently, let us fervently Seek GOD, and turn to him from all our sinful
Ways, call upon, and trust him, so he will surely be for us, Deliver, and Save
us.

USE II. This Subject further Teaches us, That it is Wisdom, and Interest, as
well as Duty of GOD's People, to live in his holy Fear, and do every thing
whereby they may engage his gracious Presence with them, and for them; for this
is their Honor, Happiness, and Safety always: If GOD be for and with us, vain
shall be the attempts of our Enemies upon us and all Things shall go well in
Church, and State; his Presence gives all Prosperity: Happy, thrice Happy the
People that have GOD for them, and present among them: And were, it not for the
abounding Sins among us, this might always be our happy Case; Sin is our worst,
and most dangerous Enemy, it troubles both Church, and State, it forfeits GOD's
protecting Presence, and Blessing; it is the Achan that troubles our Camps, and
discomfeits the Hosts; it is the worm at the root of every Enjoyment, and
Blessing, and opens the flood-gate of GOD's righteous Judgments to flow in upon
us. -- And were it not for the Sins found in our Skirts, we should have nothing
to fear from other Enemies. So long, as Israel Feared GOD, and walked in his
Statutes, their Enemies could never stand before them: And when a People's Ways
please the Lord, he will make even their Enemies to be at Peace with them.
Prove. 16.7.
Is it not then our Duty, Wisdom, and Interest, in the Fear of GOD, to humble
ourselves before him under the many just Rebukes of his Providence; and putting
away our Sins, turn to him, and learn Righteousness. -- And every one in our
respective Places, and Capacities should set ourselves to do all we can to
promote and bring forward a general Reformation; and thus seek the divine
Favor, and engage the divine Presence with us,and with our Forces gone, and
going into the War; is not this a general Concern, and of vast Importance? And
should not every one take a Share in it, and exert ourselves according to the
Influence each one may have in our several Places, and Capacities.

Here,

[1] Those whom GOD has exalted to rule over his People, to lead, guide, and
conduct them, have fair opportunity, and advantage to contribute much to this
great, and good End, and that both in the State, and Army: They have a great
ascendant over, and influence on the Community, and may do much to reform, what
is amiss, and to bring GOD's People back again unto him, and to influence, and
promote that Reformation which may be a means to engage GOD's gracious Presence
with, and for us: This they may do several Ways; as by a leading Example in
every Thing that is Religious, Virtuous, and Good: Example is a powerful Thing;
it is more easily perceived, and does more powerfully incline to Practice than
bare Precepts; it insinuates itself into the minds of Men, and leaves very
strong Impressions there: What an Ascendant then have civil Rulers over the
Body of the People by their great, and observable Examples; and how much Good
may they do by them? when their Lives are Patterns of Religion, Virtue, and
Trust in GOD. -- Again, by discountenancing, and bearing down all Vice, Fraud,
Oppression, and Immorality, Profaneness, and contempt of Religion; and by using
all proper means, and methods to reform every Thing amiss among us, -- By
Enacting good Laws, well attempered to the good of the State, and seeing them
duly, and well Executed, and not trampled upon as some Laws relating to
Religious Matters have too much been, which tends to enervate the force, and
obligation of all Law in general. Sat Verbum Sapientibus:

Once more, By filling every place of subordinate Power, and Trust for
inspecting, and executing the Laws, with Men of Religion, approved Fidelity,
and Virtue: How much Good may be done to Church, and State this Way? Also by
taking due Care that all Sabbath Profanation be restrained, or duly punished; a
growing Sin this in the Land! and very offensive to GOD, and destructive of
Religion; for which we may expect GOD will Visit, if there be not a Reformation
-- Finally, by promoting, and encouraging Religion by all proper Ways. -- The
awful decay of Religion, neglect of GOD'S House, Worship, and Ordinances,
together with the growth of Error, and corrupt Principles, and Profaneness,
appear to me, to have a very dark Aspect in them, on the Country, and Churches.
Here the Honor of GOD is immediately concerned. He is jealous for the purity
of Religion, and his own Worship, and will not endure to have the Truth
perverted, and despised; his Ordinances slighted, neglected, and trampled on:
We shall find it at our Peril if we do so: And yet how growing are sinful
Practices of this kind in this Land of great Light? How are the public Worship,
and Ordinances of GOD neglected? and Religion growing more, and more into
disesteem. -- And is there no way left to remedy this dangerous Evil? Is there
nothing that may be done by our honorable Legislature to remedy the same, and
to promote a more due, and becoming Sanctification of the holy Sabbath? and to
oblige all to a more steady, and orderly attendance on the public Worship of
GOD, in his House; in some Way agreeable to their Profession, and Consciences?
For surely none are so singular in their Opinion, but that they can join with
some Denomination of Christians, or other, unless their Religion be to have no
Religion at all, or to be contrary to all Men.

[2] Ministers of the Gospel are under high Obligations to do all they can to
promote Reformation, and what ever tends to engage GOD's Favor for, and
Presence with his People: It Is the very end of their sacred Office, to Walk
with GOD themselves, and use all Endeavors proper that his People may do so
too, They are to teach Jacob God's Judgments, and Israel his Laws; to the End
his People may Walk therein, and Please him, that he may delight to dwell among
them, and bless them, with all Blessings of Grace, and Providence, and
Salvation. They are to keep their own Vineyard, and the Fountain whence flows
their Teaching, and Practice, clear from Error, corrupt Principles, etc Sin;
and thus doing to teach the Truth to others, and by good Reasonings, and wise
Motives, urge, and press, the Practice of it upon the People of GOD, and so
endeavor the Reformation of every growing Evil, whether in Principle,
Doctrine, or Practice. They are also as Watchmen to observe the Times, and
Providence of GOD, and to give notice, and warn the People when his Hand is
lifted up, and Judgments threaten; then to humble themselves, and reform, rise
up, and call upon GOD, and prepare to meet the LORD with their Humiliations,
Reformations, and earnest Prayers for Mercy, Pardon, Deliverance, and
Salvation. -- And surely the Times, and Providence of GOD call upon us to be
in earnest, to be vigilant, to cry aloud, and not spare to warn the People of
our respective Charges faithfully, and endeavor zealously by all proper means,
and methods, to promote a general Reformation, so necessary at this threatening
Day. -- Let us then consult the Duties of our Office, and consider what GOD
calls us unto, in this Day of his awful Visitation, and righteous Rebukes; and
conforming to his Will; let us endeavor faithfully to discharge the Duty of
the Ministry we have received of the Lord Jesus. Let us keep fresh in our Minds
a sense of the great Account we must shortly give of Ourselves, and Ministry to
CHRIST the Judge of all; and to all Endeavors add fervent, and constant
Prayers to the GOD of all Grace, that he will graciously pour out his Spirit on
the Land; bless the means of Grace; and sanctify awful Providence, to the real
Awakening, and Reformation of his People; and that he will spare his People,
and be merciful to his Churches, to this Land, and to the whole Kingdom, Let
the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, Weep between the Porch and the Altar,
and let them say, Spare thy People O Lord, and give not thine Heritage to
reproach; that the Heathen should Rule over them; wherefore should they say
among the People, where is their God? Then will the Lord be jealous for his
Land, and pity his People. Joel 2.17.18.


[3] Parents, and heads of Families may do much to promote a Reformation,
revive Religion, etc so engage the divine Favor, and Presence with his People;
and ought to use their best Endeavors to this End: You have the rising
Generation committed of GOD to your Care, to instruct, and train up in his
Fear, and holy Ways, that when grown up, they maybe useful Blessings in Church,
and State. This is a great Betrustment! On the well improvement of which, much
depends the future Prosperity of the Country, both in Church, and State. -- And
can we ever expect a happy general Reformation to obtain, unless it begin in
Families, and so be carried on through out the whole Community? If heads of
Families would happily unite in this, like Godly Abraham, To command their
Children, and House-holds after them, to keep the Ways of the Lord to do
Justice, and Judgment; what great Things might in this way be effected for our
general Good, and Happiness. -- Let Parents, and heads of Families then
consider their Duty, and the Voice of GOD in the Judgments of his Providence,
and be excited to use all proper care, and pains, to restrain the Vanity,
Pride, and Licentiousness of Youth; and to impress their Minds with an early
sense of their Duty to GOD, the worth of their own precious, and immortal
Souls, and with Reverence for GOD's sacred Word, holy Sabbaths, Worship, and
Ordinances, and the inestimable Worth of true, and early Religion. And let them
have your own good, and pious Examples, going before, to excite, lead, and
encourage them; and add your daily, fervent Prayers to GOD, that he will
vouchsafe his Blessing to succeed the Pains you take, and that our Children
might be all Taught of GOD; then great will be their Peace, and Happiness; and
Glory yet dwell in our Land.

[4] and finally, Let every one be excited to consider his own Ways, repent of,
and put away all Sin, for which GOD is contending with us, and diligently seek
his Face and Favor, and gracious Presence with his People. This highly
concerns the whole Community, and every Member of it; as we have all a common
Interest in it, which binds us to be concerned for the Welfare and Prosperity
of the same. And as we would not tempt GOD by trusting in him, or pretending so
to do, while yet we refuse to put away our Sins, and turn to him.

The Times we are cast into, and Providence of GOD, surely call us every one
to search and try our Ways, and turn unto the LORD, that he may turn unto us in
ways of Mercy, and save us from the Hand and Will of our Enemies; and from all
the Evils we feel and fear: revive His own Work in the midst of us, Bless, and
Build us up, and not Pluck us down.

Let us therefore put away from the midst of us all the Things that offend GOD,
procure His Frowns on us, and cause the removal of His gracious protecting
Presence from us -- Let Injustice, Pride, Wantonness, and Profaneness,
Intemperance, and Uncleanness no more be found among us; let these things be
Abhorred by us which GOD's Soul Hates. Let Strife, and Uncharitableness be put
away, together with all sinful Exactions, Oppression, and Covetousness. -- Let
us unite in a due, and more serious Sanctification of GOD's Holy Sabbath, and
prize, and attend the Worship of His House. Let us love, and obey His just
Laws, and live in the constant Practice of that Holy Religion we are Blessed
with: For so to do is our Glory, Honor, and Happiness. So Moses exhorts
Israel, Set your hearts unto all the words which I testify unto you this day.
-- For it is not a vain thing for you, because it is your life; and through this
thing ye shall prolong your days in the land. Deuteronomy. 32.46, 47.
Thus doing GOD will be with you, and His Presence shall Save, Prosper, and
Protect you. -- Let us carefully avoid all sinful Murmurings under the
corrective Hand of GOD in His Providential Dispensations toward this
Government, and Land; which calls for so many of our brave Officers, and goodly
young Men, to jeopard their Lives in the high Places of the Field, and brings
so heavy Charges on the Government. Has not our Sins, and Departings from GOD
procured us this? And shall we not accept the Punishment of our Iniquities,
with a submissive humble Temper of Mind, and improve all to our future
Amendment? Besides has not GOD a right to discipline His own People, and to
call us, and our Sons to what Service he pleases? Instead therefore of
complaining that we are called to offer up our Isaac's to this Service of the
LORD; let us in humble Submission say; It Is the Lord, let him do what seems
him good. 1 Samuel 3.18
And let our Hearts be toward them that offer themselves willingly among the
People to this help of the Lord, against the Mighty.

And as for our Substance it is what GOD has given us, It Is all his own. 1 Chronicles. 29 14. -- of thine own have we given thee. ver. I6. -- and is all thine
own.
And shall we Murmur, when He calls for any part of it? especially when it is
to defend and secure, every Thing that is Sacred and Dear to us? Our Country
and Estates, Wives, Children, Liberties and Privileges, and above all the
sacred Religion we are Blessed with; yea, and our own Lives too. -- And when
GOD thus calls for it, how unreasonable would it be in us, and how offensive to
the Most High? should we Murmur at our civil Rulers under whose wise and just
Direction, and Administration the whole Affair is conducted: As though they
brought this Charge upon us, or took our Substance from us: Or should we grudge
those their just Wages, who bravely venture their Lives in our Defense, and in
the Defense of their Country. Had we rather give up all, and be enslaved to
arbitrary Power, Idolatry, And Tyranny, than to improve a Part, to save, and
defend the Whole? Let us not thus offend GOD. How often did Israel, by their
sinful Murmurings, bring down the heavy Judgments of GOD on their own Heads. --
But on the other Hand, let us adore and bless GOD, who has graciously Blessed
and Increased us from the first settlement of the Country, unto this Day: And
that through the blessing of His divine Providence, we have a sufficiency for our
own Support at Home, and for the Supply of our Forces Abroad, without any
Importation of Provisions from any other Country.

And what adoring Thanks do we owe to GOD, for His Mercy in putting it into the
Heart of Our Most Gracious Sovereign, and the British Court, and Parliament, to
take such a seasonable and tender Care of us, for our Protection and Defense,
in this day of our Danger; and for the seasonable Supplies granted us for our
further Assistance, Help, and Protection. Particularly, in His Majesty's
sending so large a Sea Force into these Seas, last Summer; for the Protection
of Halifax, and Nova Scotia, and His Majesty's other Governments; thereby
defeating the persidicus designs of France, against Nova Scotia: Also in
sending 10,000 stands of Arms, with War Stores to these Governments; and in
graciously laying before his Parliament the distressed state of these
Governments, under the heavy weight of Charge brought on them by the War; and
the Parliament graciously Granting thereupon, one hundred, and twenty Thousand
Pounds Sterling, for the relief, and the help of the Governments.
Also that our choice Privileges civil, and sacred are still continued to us;
that on this Day of the Gladness of our Hearts, we have reasons to say,
Precious are thy Thots unto us O God; how great is the sum of them? No one
Government under Heaven enjoys greater, or better Privileges than we do, it we
may have Wisdom to know, and use them well. And that of our being Governed by
Men chosen from among ourselves, is not of the least of them.

They have a common Interest with us, and a natural Concern for the good of
Church; and State; and administer Justice Wisdom, and Fidelity: That no People
can boast of being under a more just, or happier Administration, or better
Government, than we can. If therefore we are disquiet, contentious or
murmuring, unthankful to GOD, or undutiful to Government; how inexcusable shall
we be? and how Just would it be in GOD, to deprive us, of these invaluable
Blessings. -- Well then, let us not forfeit our choice Privileges by abusing
them, but let us prize them; and esteem, and honor our Rulers, praying daily to
GOD for them; that under their wise, and good Government we may lead quiet and
peaceable Lives, in all Godliness and Honesty. -- Let us submit to their (...)
legal Authority, not for Wrath, but Conscience sake, because they are God's
Ministers to us for Good, attending continually on this very Thing. And let us
all seek Peace, and ensue it, that while we have Wars abroad, we may have
Peace, and an happy Union, among ourselves at home; which is the Glory,
Strength and Beauty, of Church and State.

Thus turning to GOD, and seeking His Face and Favor, Pardon and protecting
Presence with us; and so trusting in Him and committing our righteous Cause
unto Him, who Judges rightly; let us cheerfully and willingly exert ourselves
in every proper Way, for the defense of the Government and Country, against the
invading Enemy. Is not GOD for us? is not the Cause His? are not our Enemies
His Enemies? which have from Generation to Generation, shed the Blood of His
Saints and People, and still retain the same persecuting Spirit, and are
implacable haters of the truth and interest of our Lord Jesus Christ; and will
not GOD give them Blood to drink, for they are worthy? The Cause we are engaged
in is most Just on our side; these Governments never desired, or attempted to
cross the Line dividing the Claims between the two Kingdoms in North America,
to invade or molest them, but they have been constantly Encroaching on His
Majesty's Claims, ceeded and acknowleged, to belong to the Crown of Great
Britain by several Solemn Treaties, and in Violation of them. And in times of
Peace between the two Crowns they have been always stirring up, furnishing out,
and sending the Indians in Alliance with them, upon our Frontiers, to Kill,
Murder, and Scalp, Men, Women and Children, and do purchase the Scalps taken on
their return; and have built, and garrisoned many Forts within the English
Claim, with the View and Intent, to gain the Sovereignty of this Country, to
our Oppression and Ruin. And now openly make War upon us, and therein avow
their Design. Don't all this make the War most Just and Necessary on our side?
And in so just a Cause, may we not hope and expect that GOD will be for us, and
on our side, and then we need not fear those perfidious Enemies.

Again, both former, and latter Experiences; of GOD's appearing for, and
granting success to our Forces, against these perfidious, Enemies, may excite,
and encourage, our resolution in prosecuting the present necessary, and
unavoidable War. Here the Time would fail me, to speak of the many Successes
granted to our Fathers in former Times. Of those granted at Cape-Breton, to our
Forces last War. -- Of the Disappointment, and Destruction, of the French
Chebucto Fleet. -- And Disappointment of that sent against Halifax, and
Nova Scotia, last Summer. -- Of the Success of our Army sent to the Eastward.
-- And signal Victory granted at Lake George, to our Army sent against
Crown-Point. -- Concerning which would to GOD, the Governments could unite in
thankful Hearts to GOD, for that, so great a Salvation, and Mercy and not sully
the Glory of it, and Offend GOD, by murmuring Complaints, that the Army went no
further. -- In all these Successes how has GOD appeared for us, and shall not
the consideration of it, excite, and engage us in prosecuting the present War,
in our own just, and necessary Defense.

And is it not a further exciting Encouragement thus not only the Conduct of
our Soldiery in the above mentioned Expedition and Action, at Lake-George (in
Conjunction with the Forces of the other Governments) but also, that noble
Ardour and Resolution which appeared through this Government on hearing the Army
was in Distress at the Lake; when all slew to Arms, and Thousands immediately
began their March, to relieve and join the Army against the Enemy. An Account
of which being by his Honor our Governor, transmitted Home, found such a
Gracious Acceptance and Approbation with His Majesty as is expressed in His
Most Gracious Princely and Fatherly Letters, written on that Occasion to his
Honor, and this Honorable Assembly. What a smile of divine, Providence this!
and how exciting and encouraging such princely Notice and Favor. And may the
same noble Spirit and Ardour still appear in all the Members of this Community,
to promote the War, and exert themselves in like manner for the defense of
their Country, upon any like future Occasion that may happen, and do nothing to
forfeit the Reputation gained by the former. --

Suffer me only to add, that as we know the Time is drawing on, for the utter
Destruction of Antichrist; so who knows, but our Enemies may be moved, by
divine Providence, to make a push for the Sovereignty of this Country, much
sooner than good Policy would have dictated it; to the very End, that they may
be over-thrown, and subdued, before they shall be too strongly Settled to be
Dislodged; and that to open the Way for the true Religion of Jesus Christ, to
spread all over the Land, even to the remotest Heathen; and who would not exert
himself to the utmost, to be instrumental in promoting so glorious a Work. And
as the awful Earthquakes that have been, have had their most dreadful,
destructive, and destroying Effects, upon popish, and mohammedan Countries, and
upon some of their chief Cities, and Places, and to vast Desolations in them;
but nothing so in any Protestant Country: Amazing are the accounts we have of
the Destruction of Lisbon, and Devastations made by the Earthquakes in many
other Parts, and Places of the Kingdom of Portugal: Also in many Parts, and
Places of France, and Spain: In some Parts of Germany; and in many Places in
Italy and the other neighboring States: But most prodigious are the accounts
we have from Barbary, of the dreadful Effects of these Earthquakes there; the
greater Part of the large City of Fez, being quite Destroyed, and a vast many
People Killed: Great part of the City of Morocco Destroyed, and much People
Buried in the Ruins: In the City of Mequinez, scarce one House left standing:
-- Great Devastations at Tangier, and Sallee: And yet much greater, (as report
has it) in the Heart of the Country, where Accounts speak of whole Provinces
being Destroyed. And yet through the distinguishing Goodness of GOD, very little
Damage has been done by these terrible Earthquakes, in any Protestant Country.
Which surely must be considered as a Thing very remarkable in divine Providence.
Who knows but this may be in divine Providence, a prelude to heavier
Judgments, to follow on those idolatrous, and heathen Countries, to the
overthrow of their Power, and false Religion, or opening the Way to their
Conviction, and so to the spreading of the Truth, where Satan's seat now is.
Which may be further encouraging to Protestants.

Thus in a Word, as we have not only necessity to urge us, but also many
encouraging Motives to excite us, to exert ourselves, in the Defense of our
Country, Liberties, and holy Religion; let us go on Vigorously, contributing
freely what ever is necessary to promote the same, and to encourage, and assist
our Brethren called to jeopard their Lives in the high Places of the Field, for
our Defense, and the Defense of our dear Country, And when the Host goes forth
against thine Enemies, then keep thee from every wicked Thing: For their Sake,
and our own: And let our Camps be careful so to do likewise, For the Lord thy
God walks in the midst of the Camp, to deliver thee, and to give up thine
Enemies before thee, therefore shall thy Camp be holy, that he see no unclean
thing in thee to turn away from thee. Deuteronomy 23.9.I4.
And let them not want our hearty good Wishes, and constant Prayers to GOD, for
his protecting Presence, and Blessing to be with, and accompany our Forces, and
prosper them; in all their Ways, and in every, Enterprise: For if GOD be with
them, who can be against them? Let us awake to Prayer, and Repentance, and
Reformation, in this Day of Threatening, and Rebuke so we may contribute to the
success of our Arms abroad, and obtain GOD's Blessing at home. Who knows how
short his Time may be, and what awful Providence may be approaching us? let us
therefore improve a day of Grace, and the means of Grace well, while those
Blessings are indulged us and turn to the LORD at His Rebukes, and (...)
Righteousness by all His Judgments that are (...) in the Earth. So may we hope
and expect, (...) GOD, even our own GOD, will be for us, and with us; as he
has been with our Fathers. That He will not leave nor forsake us, nor suffer
our Enemies to triumph over us; but will subdue them before us; and be still a
Wall of Fire round about us; and the Glory in the midst of us; and that His
Salvation shall still be for Walls, and Bulwarks.

AMEN.
ERRATA
Page 6 lin. 2. (in the margin) for being, read began. Pa. 10 lin, 9 read prize.
Pa. 18 lin. 12 for Salvation. read Savior. Page 23 lin. 17 for ten rea^ two

FINIS.

