Kawanio Che Keeteru: A TRUE RELATION OF A Bloody BATTLE Fought BETWEEN GEORGE
and LEWIS, In the YEAR 1755.

Printed in the Year M,DCC,LVI.

THE Words I have chosen at the Head of my Title Page, I am told by a Gentleman
skilled in the Indian Languages, is very expressive of a HERO relying on GOD to
bless his Endeavors, in protecting what he has put under his Care.

To form some Idea of its Signification, he says, you may imagine a Man, with
his Wife, and Children about him, and, with an Air of Resolution, calling out
to his Enemy, ALL THESE GOD HAS GIVEN ME, AND I WILL DEFEND THEM.

ARGUMENT.
How GEORGE, for to regain his Right,
With LEWIS held a dreadful Fight;
In which the Man who raised the Strife;
Was vanquished, and lost his Life:
Whereon a warm Dispute arose,
About the legal Use of BLOWS.
THERE lived a Man not long ago,
And yet may live, for ought I know;
A Patriot hold, of honest Fame,
A Briton true, and GEORGE his Name:
His generous Breast contained a Heart,
That dared to act an honest Part.
He loved the Cause of Liberty;
And scorned a Life that was not free:
His Country's Cause he would defend,
And venture all to serve a Friend.
No Man more bold in Time of Danger;
To bear, as well as (...), a Stranger.
Thus long our Hero, lived at Ease
With all the World, in Love and Peace,
Till LEWIS, whose ambitious Mind,
Nor Law, nor Justice, ever could bind;
Seized on a Part of GEORGE's Land,
And held Possession, Sword in Hand.
Our Hero, though averse to War,
Could not this daring Insult bear,
But soon resolved his Foe to fight,
And by the Sword regain his Right.
BUT, as it is very seldom known,
That one Misfortune comes alone,
So honest GEORGE had scarcely heard,
How he, as to his Land, had fared,
When, lo! 'twas his unhappy Fate,
To meet another Loss, as great.
For LEWIS, who to gain his End,
Would to the meanest Things descend,
Contrived our Warrier's House to rob,
And bribed a Thief to do the Job.
The Villain followed the Direction;
Then fled to LEWIS for Protection;
But first had seized on GEORGE's Money,
And plundered him of every Penny:
Stole every Pistol, Sword and Gun,
That he could lay his Fingers on.
But what chagrin'd our Hero most,
Was, that his trusty Sword was lost.
His Sire, at Blenbeim, found it good,
And stained it there with Gallit Blood;
With it our Warrier gained Applause,
At Culloden, in BRITAIN's Cause:
This Sword gave GEORGE no little Pain;
But it was stolen, and Grief was vain.
THUS GEORGE, now in a needful Hour,
Had not a Weapon in his Power;
And what made the Misfortune worse,
Had scarce a Farthing in his Purse.
IN this sad Case, away he flies,
With all the Warrier in his Eyes,
To SIMON, his Acquaintance, who
Was his fast Friend, and Neighbor too,
To whom he freely did impart,
The Cause of all his present Smart.
Quoth he, "I Am come upon my Word,
"To borrow Cash, to buy a Sword;
"For LEWIS, that perfidious Knave,
"Who fain would all the World enslave,
"Whose restless and ambitious Mind,
"The Laws of Justice cannot bind:
"Has seized my Land, and what is worse,
"Resolves to hold his Claim by Force.
"I therefore am resolved to try,
"To have my Land again, or die;
"I Will bring the proud Invader down:
"I know his Strength, and know my own.
SIMON was of a generous Cast*
In Friendship, constant to the last*
He wanted not his Share of Sense,
Nor was averse to Self-Defence;
But durst not own it to the Church,
For fear of eccles'astick Birch.
Quoth SIMON, "It Is a wretched Case,
"That this Disturber of our Peace,
"Should lord it over his Neighbors thus,
"What will at last become of us?
"If he has seized on Land of thine,
"No doubt he soon will seize on mine,
"But GEORGE, thy rash Design forbear,
"And trust to Heavens paternal Care;
"Those who for Self-Defence contend,
"Cannot on Providence depend.
"Besides, Defense cannot be right,
"Since Christians are forbid to fight:
"But as thy Money is so scant,
"A little Sum thou shall not want;
"For to refuse a Friend your Purse,
"Is really mean, or something worse.
"GEORGE, I will lend thee twenty Pieces;
"They Will do thee Service, as thy Case is*
"Whatever Use thou puts them to,
"Is no Concern of mine, to know.
GEORGE understood what SIMON meant;
And bowing-low, away he went,
Revolving in his honest Mind,
The Vice and Follies of Mankind.
SIMON, he saw, used all his Art,
To hide the Language of his Heart;
That all he said on Self-Defence,
Was nothing more than mere Pretense:
But as he just had gained his Suit,
'Twould be imprudent to dispute.
As happy now, as any Lord,
He with his Money bought a Sword,
And Weapons, such as suits a Knight,
When ready to engage in Fight.
He hourly now impatient grows,
To meet the Foe* and come to Blows.
But quite averse to shedding Blood,
Our valiant Warrier held it good,
Rather than try his Right by Force,
To take a more pacific Course:
He therefore sent a trusty Hand,
To let the Tyrant understand,
That though he was for Fight prepared,
And from the Combat nothing feared;
Yet, as he was inclined to Peace,
He freely would submit his Case,
For to be tried at Reason's Bar,
And would abide the Judgment there.
But LEWIS of his Prowess vain,
Treated this Message with Disdain.
"Go back, Quoth he, and tell your Lord,
"That I try Titles by the Sword;
"It is the shortest Way by far,
"And less expensive than the Bar;
"And it is the Way that I intend,
"To bring our Quarrel to an End:
"Let Us fight it fairly, Hand to Hand,
"And the Survivor take the Land.
When GEORGE this Message had received,
Quoth he, "If I am not deceived,
"This Boaster, when too late, may find
"Himself much more to Peace inclined,
"And wish, in vain, that he had closed,
"With the fair Offer I proposed.
"This Message take him instantly:
"Tell the perfidious Man from me,
"That all his Threats I hold in scorn,
"And will attend Tomorrow Morn,
"At Dawn of Day, and in the Field,
"He has by Force unjustly held."
NO sooner had the King of Day,
Bedecked the Eastern Sky with gray,
When both the Champions well prepared,
In the decisive Field appeared.
Quoth GEORGE, "I joy to meet you here;
"Now to defend yourself prepare."
LEWIS returned, "Yourself defend,
"Your Life, or mine, the Strife must end"
This said they instantly engage,
With manly Strength, and martial Rage,
A bloody Combat long they held,
Each Side unknowing how to yield.
They sought as brave, some Authors tell us,
As did famed Hector and Achilles;
And asking both these Heroes Pardon,
They laid each other full as hard on.
At length our Warrier filled with Shame,
Unto a close Engagement came,
And soon let LEWIS understand,
What 'twas to fight him Hand to Hand.
For, now, alas! the Crimson Tide,
Flowed freely from the Aggressor's Side;
And though he scarce his Sword could wield,
His Pride forbad his Heart to yield.
When GEORGE perceiving his Distress,
His haughty Foe did thus address:
"LEWIS, Quoth he, let us end the Strife;
"Restore my Land, and take thy Life."
Quoth LEWIS; "Know, that still I live,
"And scorn the Life that thou can give.
"No; one of us must die this Day,
"For Death alone shall end the Fray.
Thus he; when at our Warrier's Head,
With both his Hands a Blow he made;
But GEORGE, who kept a watchful Eye,
Perceived the Stroke, and put it by,
And at this Usage quite enraged,
His Foe with double Force engaged.
NOW LEWIS, when it was too late,
Saw plainly his approaching Fate;
Yet, dauntless, bravely played his Part,
'Till GEORGE's Sword had pierced his Heart
At which he fell; and falling, cried,
MY PUNISHMENT IS JUST; and died.
NOW from the Multitude around,
Loud Acclamations shake the Ground;
Crying, Now all our Fears are fled,
For, lo! the lawless Tyrant's dead;
May Heaven its choicest Gifts bestow,
Upon the Man that gave the Blow.
GEORGE, now all Tenderness appears;
Nor could he stop the flowing Tears
But stood* revolving in his Mind,
The various Follies of Mankind,
Then on the Dead he cast his Eye,
And thus addressed the Standers by:
"I Am grieved, said he, that one so brave,
"Should thus untimely fill the Grave:
"But when at Truth Men shut their Eyes,
"And Reason's sacred Laws despise,
"Will make their vicious Wills their Law,
"And keep by Force the World in awe,
"Rob us of Freedom, Life and Treasure,
"And tell us, it is their Will and Pleasure;
"Then the Oppressed should have Recourse
"To Arms, and right themselves by Force:
"And he that will his Freedom lose,
"Rather than Force with Force oppose,
"Let crazy Heads say all they can,
"Does not deserve the Name of Man.
NOW swift as Lightning through the Skies,
The News of GEORGE's Conquest flies,
And quickly reaching SIMON's Ears,
It dissipated all his Fears:
For now he thought himself secure,
Since haughty LEWIS was no more.
Qouth he, "I Am glad that Neighbor GEORGE,
"Has been to Wickedness a Scourge;
"And though Defense at any Time,
"The Faithful hold to be a Crime;
"Yet GEORGE, by Force, we must confess,
"Has freed his Neighbors from Distress;
"Has saved their Lives and Liberties,
"And set their aching Hearts at Ease.
WHILST SIMON thus, from Truth had swerved,
NATHAN stood by him unobserved.
NATHAN, as some are pleased to say,
(...) honest in his Way;
He understood as well as any,
To make Advantage of a Penny:
His Countenance was as demure,
As (...) the PHIZ of SIMON PURE.
(...) on Defense, he had read over,
With many a pious Author more,
Who with enthusiastic Din,
Make Self-Defence a deadly Sin.
His Liberty and Life he would lose,
Rather than Force with Force oppose,
Nor yet resist in any wise,
Were Heaven itself to be the Prize.
Yet if a Thief his Mansion breaks,
And from him the least Trifle takes,
The Fugitive he will pursue;
Bind him by Force, and hang him too.
THIS Bigot knew well what had past,
'Twixt GEORGE and SIMON, first and last;
And like himself, had lost no Time,
To tell the Church the (...) Crime:
And as she knew his Disposition,
Thought him most fit for Inquisition:
Him therefore she dispatched away,
To know (...) SIMON had to say.
NATHAN with this was so elate,
That he set off without his Hat,
Which gave the pious Man the Pain,
And Shame, of twining back again.
His Hat regained, away he stretched,
Till SIMON's Mansion House he retcht:
Then (...) a while to fetch his Breath,
(...) Countenance as pale as Death,
And putting on a serious Face,
Such as becomes a Child of Grace;
A Sigh he gave, and then a Groan,
And thus began with dismal Tone.
"OUR Elders, SIMON, sent me here,
"Upon a weighty sad Affair:
"The Church is almost brokenhearted,
"Lest thou have from the Truth departed:
"For when her Pillars are unsound,
"She soon will tumble to the Ground."
QUOTH, SIMON, "NATHAN, Why all this!
"I pray thee tell me what is amiss?"
"Perhaps, Quoth Nathan, it is invented,
"Or not so bad as represented:
"But, Friend, it does my Mind distract,
"For fear the Story should be fact."
QUOTH SIMON, "NOT come to the Case,
"Thou'st made, I think, a long Preface."
QUOTH NATHAN, "Then, the Charge is this;
"We think that thou have done amiss:
"That thou a handsome Sum did lend,
"To Neighbor GEORGE, thy trusty Friend;
"Although he told thee on his Word,
"He Would lay it out to buy a Sword.
"That with the Cash, a Sword he bought,
"And with it had a Battle fought,
"And slain his Neighbor in the Fight,
"In order to obtain his Right.
"If this be true, thou'st gone too far,
"And acted out of Character.
QUOTH SIMON, "Be not in a Hurry
"To judge, before you hear my Story.
"I lent my Cash, I freely own,
"Unto my Friend, who then had none,
"Who told me on his honest Word,
"He wanted it to buy a Sword.
"I lent the Cash; but at the Time,
"Told him, Resistance was a Crime;
"Bid him his rash Design forbear,
"And trust to Heaven's paternal Care
"Told him, Defense could not be right,
"Since Christians were forbid to fight.
"This I repeated over and over:
"Pray could the Church have told him more?"
Quoth NATHAN, "Though all this be true,
"It will not for thy Purpose do;
"For one may see with half an Eye,
"Thou gav'st thy Principles the Lie.
"For to oppose a Thing, and yet
"At the same Time encourage it,
"Smells strongly, SIMON, to be free,
"Of very gross Hypocrisy;
"And he that can act such a Part,
"Must have, I think, a carnal Heart."
QUOTH SIMON, "Thou art warm I see*
"Thou may be civil; yet be free:
"To be ill-natured and uncivil,
"Is in a Saint, a shameful Evil.
"But to the Matter in Dispute,
"I thus thy Arguments confute*
"When GEORGE the shining Gold had got;
"Was it then mine? I think 'twas not:
"Reason will tell thee 'twas his own.
"Then pray what Right had any one,
"For to concern himself about,
"Which Way he laid his Money out?
"Suppose he would cast it in the Sea?
"Pray must the Fault be laid on me?"
"The Fault, Quoth NATHAN would be thine,
"If GEORGE had said, 'twas his Design;
"For had he uttered such a Thought,
"Thoud'st not have lent a single Groat,
"And George might have returned with Shame,
"And Pennyless as when he came:
"In short, it is as clear as Day,
"That thou have erred, and gone astray.
"For to affirm thou did not know,
"What GEORGE would with the Money do,
"Is all Evasion; all Pretense;
"'It Is an affront to common Sense."
QUOTH SIMON, "All I Have said, I see,
"Goes just for Nothing, NOT, with thee;
"With one of thy uncommon Cast,
"To reason, is but Labor lost
"Suppose the Worst of all that is sed;
"I Have followed, as our Elders led.
"Have they not cried out, one and all,
"Against Defense, as Criminal?
"And with grave Faces, told the People,
"'It Was sinful as to build a STEEPLE.
"That none could trust in Providence,
"Who arm themselves for their Defense;
"And on this Tenet, did deny
"To grant the Public a Supply;
"Although 'twas called for by the Crown:
"These Truths to all the World are known.
"But now, instead of persevering,
"In these their Tenets, without var'ng,
"These non-resisting Saints, we find,
"Are clearly of another Mind,
"And to secure themselves their Places,
"Begin to put on Martial Faces,
"And voted Sixty Thousand Pound,
"Their Enemies to kill and wound:
"Have made a very fine Machine,
"To catch your Geese and Gudgeons in*
"Not caught as usual for our Food,
"But in our Cause to shed their Blood.
"By this the observing World may see,
"Faith changes with Convenience;
"And that what is Today a Crime,
"May not be so another Time;
"That People may take up their Creeds,
"Or lay them down, as Interest leads.
NOW, NATHAN looked like one Aghast,
And sighing deeply, spoke at last.
Quoth he, "What mortal Man could ever
"Have Thought things would be, as they are
"Our pious Elders, thought, no Doubt,
"Means would be found to bring about,
"Between the jaring Crowns, a Peace,
"Then all Hostilities would cease;
"Their Principles have been secure,
"And they gone on as heretofore,
"Were they in his at all to blame?
"The Saints have often done the same
"They Are bid be harmless, it is true;
"Yet be as wise as Serpents too."
QUOTH SIMON, "Thou have fell upon,
"The very Scheme they carried on,
"The only Source from whence arose,
"Our present Miseries and Woes;
"And which will be a lasting Shame,
"On those who now I shall not name.
"For had they acted honestly,
"And early given a Supply,
"Or if, through Principle or Fear,
"They could not give toward the War,
"In either Case, I think they should,
"Have left their Seats to those that would.
"Had this been done, our Elders then,
"Would have appeared like honest Men;
"Nor should we at this Day have seen,
"An Indian Foe, or Fort Duquesne;
"Nor would great BRADDOCK, once so brave,
"Have at the Meadows filld a Grave.
"And to be short, this Fact is plain,
"Their Love of Power, has been our Bane."
"MY Heart, Quoth NATHAN's almost burst,
"To hear the talk as now thou do,
"And still it gives me Joy to see,
"The Church not censured yet by thee:
"For She, I Am sure, has (...) no Ill,
"But shines with wonted I (...) still,
"These earthly Things she (...) above,
"And daily prays for Peace and Love."
QUOTH SIMON, "All (...) may be true,
"Or may be not, for aught I know,
"But I mean those and only those,
"Who did Supplies at first oppose,
"And ever since have been a brewing,
"What hitherto has been (...).
"As to my Case, I Will only (...) on it;
"It would be idle to say much on it,
"But tell the Church she would better far,
"Her Process against me forbear,
"Lest I should wisper in her Ear,
"Some Cases she will not like (...) hear.
"For let me say, was I (...),
"And Punishment to be inflicted,
"I think she has few Sons, (...) none
"Who would have Right (...) a Stone."
QUOTH NOT, "this (...) something (...)
"And to my Knowledge is not true;
"It grives me, SIMON, to the Heart*
"To see thee this from Truth depart.
"For none can talk at such a (...)
"Who are not in a carnal State;
"But there is a (...) which carnal Men*
"Have never (...), felt or seen;
"And those (...) remain therein,
"Will ever (...) Defense a Sin.
"I Would rather lose my tender Wife,
"My Fortune, (...) and Life,
"Than to resist murdering Foe,
"And by his (...) avert the Blow."
QUOTH SIM^^ "by what now thou'st said
"Thou art (...) in thy Head:
"Or what is (...) arrant Cant*
"And mere (...) Rant
"What! see (...) with all her Charms,
"Distressed, and (...) Ruffian's Arms,
"And not thy (...) Assistance give?
"Sure such a (...) ought not to live.
"I Am shock't, and beg to hear no more,
"Return my Answer -- there is the Door."
FINIS.

