THE ANARCHY OF THE RANTERS, And other LIBERTINES; THE HIERARCHY OF THE
ROMANISTS, AND OTHER Pretended CHURCHES, equally refused and refuted, in a
twofold Apology for the Church and People of God, called in Derision, Quakers.

WHEREIN They are vindicated from those that accuse them of Disorder and
Confusion on the one Hand, and from such as calumniate them with Tyranny and
Imposition on the other; showing, that as the true and pure Principles of the
Gospel are restored by their Testimony; so is also the ancient Apostolic ORDER
of the Church of Christ re-established among them, and settled upon its right
Basis and Foundation.

By ROBERT BARCLAY.

Phil. 2.3. Let nothing be done through Strife or vain Glory; but in Lowliness
of Mind let each esteem other better than themselves. Heb. 13.7. Remember them
that have the Rule over you, who have spoken unto you the Word of God, whose
Faith follow. PHILADELPHIA: Reprinted, and Sold by B. FRANKLIK, and D. HALL,
1757.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
SUCH is the Malignity of Man's Nature in his fallen State, and so averse is he
from walking in the straight and even Path of TRUTH, that at every Turn he is
inclinable to lean either to the Right Hand or to the Left; yea, such as by the
Work of God's Grace in their Hearts, and powerful Operation of his Spirit, have
obtained an Entrance in this Way, are daily molested, and set upon on all
Hands; some striving to draw them the one Way, some she other: And if through
the Power of God they be kept faithful and stable, then are they caluminated on
both Sides; each likening or comparing them to the Worst of their Enemies.

Those that are acquainted with the Holy Scriptures, may observe this to be the
Lot of the Saints in all Ages; but especially those, whose Place it has been
to reform and restore the Ruins of the House of God, when decayed, or any
considerable Time have been liable to such Censures: Hence those that set about
repairing of the Walls of Jerusalem, were necessitated to work with the one
Hand, and defend with the other.

Christ is accused of the Jews as a Samaritan; and by the Samaritans quarrelled
for being a Jew. The Apostle Paul is whipped and imprisoned by the Gentiles,
and upbraided with being a Jew, and teaching their Customs; the same Paul is
hawled, and ready to be killed by the Jews, for breaking the Law, and defiling
the Temple with the Gentiles. The like has also befallen these faithful
Witnesses and Messengers, whom God has raised up in this Day to witness for his
Truth, which has long been in a great Measure hid; but now is again revealed,
and many brought to be Witnesses of it, who thereby are come to walk in the
Light of the Lord.

This People thus gathered, have not wanted those Trials, that usually
accompany the Church of Christ, both on the Right Hand, and on the Left, each
characterizing them in such Terms, as they have judged would prove most to
their Disadvantage. From whence (as the Testimony of the false Witnesses
against our Lord did not agree neither do these against us) some will have us
to be foolish, mad Creatures; others to be deep, subtle Politicians; some to be
illiterate, ignorant Fellows; others to be learned, cunning Jesuits, under a
mere Vizard: Diverse Professors will have us to be only Pensioners of the Pope,
undoubtedly Papists; but the Papists abhor us as Heretics: Sometimes we are a
disorderly, confused Rabble, leaving every one to do as they list, against all
good Order and Government; at other Times we John Owen charges us with so much
Ignorance, that though he writes against us in Latin, he fears we will not
understand it. And Thomas Dansen about the same time accuses us of being
Jesuits, sent from abroad under this Vizard.
are so much for Order, as we admit not Men to exercise the Liberty of their
own Judgments. Thus are our Reputations tossed by the Envy of our Adversaries;
which yet cannot but have this Effect upon sober-minded People, as to see what
MALICE works against us; and how these Men, by their contradictory Assertions
concerning us, save us the Pains, while they refute one another.

True it is, we have labored to walk amidst these Extremities; and upon our
appearing for the Truth, we have found Things good in themselves abused on both
Hands: For such has always been the Work of an Apostasy, to keep up the Shadow
of certain Truths; that there-through they might shelter other Evils. Thus the
Jews made use of the Law and the Prophets to vindicate their Abuses; yea, and
to crucify Christ: And how much many Christians abuse the Scriptures and the
Traditions of the Apostles, to uphold Things quite contrary to them, will in
the General be readily acknowledged by most.

But to descend more particularly; There be two Things especially, both of
which in their primitive Use were appointed; and did very much contribute
toward the Edification of the Church: The one is,

I. The Power and Authority, which the Apostles had given them of Christ, for
the gathering, building up, and governing of his Church; by Virtue of which
Power and Authority they also wrote the Holy Scriptures.

II. The other is, That Privilege given to every Christian under the Gospel, to
be led and guided by the Spirit of Christ, and to be taught thereof in all
Things.

Now, both these in the Primitive-Church wrought effectually toward the same
End of Edification; and did (as in their Nature they may, and in their, Use
they ought to do) in a good Harmony very well consist together: But by the
Workings of Satan, and Perverseness of Men, they are made to fight against and
destroy one another. For on the one Hand the Authority and Power, that resided
in the Apostles, while it is annexed and entailed to an outward Ordination and
Succession of Teachers, is made Use of to cloak and cover all Manner of Abuses,
even the Height of Idolatry and Superstition. For by Virtue of this Succession
these Men claiming the like Infallibility, that was in the Apostles (though
they be Strangers to any inward Work or Manifestation of the Spirit in their
Hearts) will needs oblige all others to acquiesce and agree to their
Conclusions, however different from, or contrary to, the Truths of the Gospel;
and yet for any to call such Conclusions in Question, or examine them, is no
less than a heinous Heresy, deserving Death, etc. Or while the Revelation of
God's Mind is wholly bound up to these Things already delivered in the
Scriptures (as if God had spoke his last Words there to his People) we are put
with our own natural Understandings to debate about the Meanings of them, and
forced to interpret them, not as they plainly speak, but according to the
Analogy of a certain Faith made by Men, not so much contrived to answer the
Scriptures, as the Scriptures are strained to vindicate it; which to doubt of,
is also counted Heresy, deserving no less So faith James Durham, a noted Man
among the Presbyterians, in his Exposition upon the Revelations.
than Election out of our native Country, and to be robbed of the common Aid
our Nativity entitles us to. And on this Hand, we may boldly say, both Papists
and Protestants have greatly gone aside.

On the other Hand, some are so great Pretenders to inward Motions and
Revelations of the Spirit, that there are no Extravagancies so wild, which they
will not cloak with them; and so much are they for every One's following their
own Mind, as can admit of no Christian Fellowship and Community, nor of that
good Order and Discipline, which the Church of Christ never was, nor can be
without. This gives an open Door to all Libertinism, and brings great Reproach
to the Christian Faith. And on this Hand have foully fallen the German
Anabaptists, so called, John of Leyden, Knipperdolling, etc. (in Case these
monstrous Things committed by them be such as they are related) and some more
moderate of that Kind have been found among the People in England, called
Ranters: As it is true, the People called Quakers have been branded with both
of these Extremes; it is as true, it has been and is their Work to avoid them;
and to be found in that even and good Path of the Primitive Church, where all
were (no doubt) led and acted by the Holy Spirit; and might all have prophesied
one by one; and yet there was a Subjection of the Prophets to the Spirits of
the Prophets. There was an Authority some had in the Church, and yet it was for
Edification, and not for Destruction: There was an Obedience in the Lord to
such as were set over; and a being taught by such, and et a knowing of the
inward Anointing, by which ach Individual was to be led into all Truth. The
Work and Testimony the Lord has given us is, to restore this again, and to set
both these in their right Place, without causing them to destroy one another.
To manifest how this is accomplished, and accomplishing among us, is the
Business of this Treatise; which, I hope, will give some Satisfaction to Men of
sober Judgments, and impartial and unprejudicate Spirits; and may be made
useful in the good Hand of the Lord, to confirm and establish Friends against
their present Opposers; which is mainly intended, and earnestly prayed for, by

Robert Barclay.
The 17th of the 8th Month, 1674.
THE ANARCHY OF THE RANTERS, etc.
SECTION I. The Introduction and Method of this Treatise.
The End of the Law and Beginning of the Gospel Dispensation recited.
AFTER that the Lord God in his own appointed Time had seen meet to put an End
to the Dispensation of the Law, which was delivered to the Children of Israel,
by the Ministry of Moses; through and by whom he did communicate unto them in
the Wilderness from Mount Sinai, diverse Commandments, Ordinances, Appointments
and Observations, according as they are testified in the Writings of the Law;
it pleased him to send his own Son the Lord Jesus Christ in the Fullness of
Time; who having perfectly fulfilled the Law, and the Righteousness thereof,
gave Witness to the Dispensation of the Gospel. And having approved himself,
and the Excellency of his Doctrine, by many great and wonderful Signs and
Miracles, he sealed it with his Blood; and triumphing over Death (of which it
was impossible for him to be held) he cherished and encouraged his despised
Witnesses, who had believed in him, in that he appeared to them, after he was
raised from the Dead; comforting them with the Hope and Assurance of the
pouring forth of his Spirit, by which they were to be led and ordered in all
Things; in and by which, he was to be with them to the End of the World, not
suffering the Gates of Hell to prevail against them. By which Spirit come upon
them, they being filled, were emboldned to preach the Gospel without Fear; and,
in a short Time, Thousands were added to the Church; and the Multitude of them
that believed, were of one Heart, and of one Soul, and great Love and Zeal
prevailed, and there was nothing lacking for a Season.

The diverse Sorts of them that were called in the Apostles Days.
But all that were caught in the Net, did not prove good and wholesome Fish;
some were again to be cast into that Ocean, from whence they were drawn: Of
those many that were called, all proved not chosen Vessels, fit for the
Master's Use; and of all that were brought into the great Supper and Marriage
of the King's Son, there were that were found without the Wedding Garment. --
Some made a show for a Season, and afterward fell away; there were that drew
back; there were that made Shipwreck of Faith, and of a good Conscience: There
were not only such as did backslide themselves, but sought to draw others into
the same Perdition with themselves, seeking to overturn their Faith also; yea,
there were that brought in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought
them. And also of those Members that became not wholly corrupt (for some were
never again restored by Repentance) there were that were weak, and sickly, and
young; some were to be fed with Milk, and not with strong Meat; some were to be
purged, when the old Leaven received any Place; and some to be cut off for a
Season, to be shut out (as it were) of the Camp for a Time, until their Leprosy
was healed, and then to be received in again.

Moreover, as to Outward, there was the Care of the Poor, of the Widow, of the
Fatherless, of the Strangers, etc. Therefore the Lord Jesus Christ, The Order
in the Church of God in the Outward.
who is the Head of the Body, the Church (for the Church is the Body of Christ,
and the Saints are the several Members of that Body) knowing in his infinite
Wisdom, what was needful for the good ordering and disposing all Things in
their proper Place, and for preserving and keeping all Things in their right
Station, did, in the Dispensation and Communication of his Holy Spirit,
minister unto every Member, a Measure of the same Spirit, yet diverse according
to Operation, for the Edification of the Body; some Apostles, some Teachers,
some Pastors, some Elders: There are old Men, there are young Men, there are
Babes. For all are not Apostles, neither are all Elders, neither are all Babes;
yet are all Members: And as such, all have a Sense and Feeling of the Life of
the Body, which, from the Head, flows unto all the Body, as the Ointment of
Aaron 's Beard, unto the Skirts of his Garment: And every Member has its Place
and Station in the Body, so long as it keeps in the Life of the Body; and all
have need one of another; yet is no Member to assume another Place in the Body,
than God has given it; nor yet to grudge or repine its follow Member's Place;
but to be content with its own: For the uncomely Parts are no less needful than
the comely; and the less honorable than the more honorable; which the Apostle
Paul holds forth in 1 Cor. 12. from Verse 13 to 30.

The Ground of Rents and Divisions.
Now the Ground of all Schisms, Divisions or Rents in the Body is, when as any
Member assumes another Place than is allotted it; or being gone from the Life
and Unity of the Body, and losing the Sense of it, lets in the Murmurer, the
Eye that watches for Evil, and not in holy Care over its Fellow Members: And
then, instead of coming down to Judgment in itself, will stand up and judge its
Fellow Members, yea, the whole Body, or those whom God has set in a more
honorable and eminent Place in the Body than itself. Such suffer not the Word
of Exhortation; and term the Reproofs of Instruction (which is the Way of Life)
Imposition and Oppression, and are not aware how far they are in the Things
they condemn others for; while they spare not to reprove and revile all their
Fellow Members: Yet if they be but admonished themselves, they cry out, as if
their great Charter of Gospel Liberty were broken.

Now though such, and the Spirit by which they are acted, The Subtilty of that
Spirit.
be sufficiently seen and felt by Thousands, whose Hearts God has so
established, as they are out of Danger of being entangled in that Snare, and
who have Power and Strength in themselves to judge that Spirit, even in its
most subtle Appearances; yet there are, who cannot so well withstand the
Subtilty, and seeming Sincerity some such pretend to, though in Measure they
have a Sight of them; and others, that cannot so rightly distinguish between
the Precious and the Vile; and some there are that through Weakness, and want
of true Discerning, may be deceived, and the Simplicity in them betrayed for a
Season; as it is written, With fair Speeches and smooth Words, they deceive the
Hearts of the Simple.

Therefore having, according to my Measure, received an Opening in my
Understanding as to these Things, from the Light of the Lord, and having been
for some Time under the weighty Sense of them, I find at this Instant a Freedom
to commit them to Writing, for the more universal Benefit and Edification of
the Church of Christ.

Now, The Heads treated of, viz.
for the more plain and clear Opening and Understanding of these Things, it is
fit to sum up this Treatise in these following general Heads, to be considered
of:

I. First, From whence the Ground and Cause of this Controversy is, the Rise
and Root of it?

II. Secondly, Whether there be now any Order and Government in the Church of
Christ?

III. Thirdly, What is the Order and Government which we plead for? In what
Cases, and how far it may extend? In whom the Power decisive is, and how it
differs? And is wholly another, than the oppressing and persecuting
Principality of the Church of Rome, and other Antichristian Assemblies.

SECTION II. Concerning the Ground and Cause of this CONTROVERSY.
The first Dawning of the heavenly Day of the Lord described.
WHEN as the Lord God by his mighty Power began to visit the Nations with the
Dawning of his heavenly Day (for thus I write unto those that have received and
believed the Truth) and that he sent forth his Instruments, whom he had fitted
and prepared for his Work, having fashioned them not according to the Wisdom
and Will of Man, but to his own heavenly Wisdom and Counsel, they went forth
and preached the Gospel in the Evidence and Demonstration of the Spirit: And
breaking forth.
Not in the enticing Words of Man's Wisdom; but in Appearance as Fools and Mad,
to those that judged according to Man. But their Words and Testimony pierced
through into the inner Man in the Heart, and reached to that of God in the
Conscience; whereby as many as were simple-hearted, and waited for the
Redemption of their Souls, received them as the Messengers of the most high
God; and their Words were unto them, not as the Words of Men, but as the Words
of God; for in the receiving and embracing the Testimony of Truth through them,
they felt their Souls eased, and the acceptable Day began to dawn in and upon
them.

Now what Evidence brought these Men to make their Testimony to be received?
Did they entice? Did they flatter? Did they daub up? Did they preach Liberty to
the Flesh or Will of Man? Nay verily, they used no such Method: Their Words
were as Thunderbolts, knocking down all that stood in their Way, and pouring
down the Judgment of God upon the Head of the Transgressor every where. Did
they spare the zealous Professor more than the open Profane? Nay verily, they
condemned equally the Hypocrisy of the one, as well as the Profanity of the
other; yet wanted they not Regard to the tender Seed and Plant of God in
either. Did they give way? Did they yield to the Wisdom of Man? To the
Deceitfulness of the Serpent, that would reason Truth for themselves, saying, I
must stay, until I be convinced of this, and that, and the other Thing; I see
not yet this to be wrong, or the other Thing to be my Duty? How did they knock
down this Manner of Reasoning by the Spirit of God, which wrought mightily in
them, showing and holding forth, that this is the Day of the Lord that is
dawned; that all are invited to come; that none ought to tarry behind; that
that which so pleads is the same Spirit which of old Time said in those that
were invited, I cannot come yet, I must first marry a Wife; I must go prove my
Yoke of Oxen; I must go visit my Possessions; let me first bury my dead Father.
Did not the Lord through them testify and declare against these Things? And is
there not a Cloud of Witnesses, who felt the Enemy thus reasoning to keep us in
the Forms, Fellowships; false Worships, and foolish Fashions of this World? But
we felt, as we were obedient, all these Things to be for Condemnation; and
that, as we obeyed the pure Manifestation of the Light of Jesus in our Hearts,
there was no Hesitation. We might and should have parted with all those Things
at the First; and what occasioned such Scruples, was but that which drew back,
through being unwilling to give pure Obedience to the Cross of Christ: For as
many as gave Obedience and believed in the Light, found no Occasion of
stumbling; but such as believed not were condemned already, because they
believed not in him that appeared. Now the Boldness, The Courage of the
Messengers.
and Courage, and Efficacy of these Messengers Testimony, wrought such
Astonishment, Fear and Amazement in the Hearts of such as were ingenuous, that
many began to be inwardly pricked, as in the Days of old, and the Foundations
of many began to be shaken; and some that were asleep were awakened, and many
that were dead and buried in the Graves of Sin, and Formality, and
Superstition, and Idolatry of all Sorts, were alarmed; and many were brought in
from the Hedges, and the Highways, and the Truth was received by Thousands
with great Cheerfulness, and a Readiness of Mind: And the Feet of those were
beheld to be beautiful upon the Mountains, that brought the glad Tidings of
these good Things. And great Lowliness and Simplicity of Heart was upon such
that were newly convinced of the Truth, and deep Humiliation of Spirit, and
Subjection to the Power, both in themselves, and in those who were over them in
the Lord, and had gathered them into the Truth.

But as it was in the Gatherings of old, so it also sell out in this Day; all
kept not their first Love: As among those Thousands, which Moses led out of
Egypt, and carried through the Red Sea, who had sung Praises to God upon the
Banks of Salvation, many Carcases fell in the Wilderness; some who murmured and
longed to return again to the Fleshpots of Egypt; and some for opposing and
contradicting the Servant, Opposition and --
and Servants of the Lord, whom the Lord had made Use of to lead them out of
Bondage, in saying, Ye take too much upon you; Has the Lord indeed only spoken
by Moses? Has he not spoken also by us? And as among these Multitudes, which
were gathered by the Apostles, there were many who continued not faithful to
the End; some returned back again with the Sow to the Puddle, after they were
washed: some embraced the present World; some again separated themselves, --
Separation entering.
being sensual, and without the Spirit, despising Dominion, and speaking Evil
of Dignities; their Mouths speaking great swelling Words, being puffed up, and
not abiding in these Things, which they were taught of the Apostles: So it is
to be lamented, that among these many Thousands, whom the Apostles and
Evangelists whom God raised up in This Day (for the gathering of his Seed and
People out of spiritual Egypt and Babylon into his pure Light and Life) did
bring forth and gather, there are that have fallen upon the Right Hand and the
Left. Some are turned back again into Egypt, running into the same Excess of
Lust and Riot, from whence they were once purified and redeemed: Some could not
bear the Reproach of the Cross of Christ; and were by and anon offended in him:
Some could not bear the Tribulations, Sufferings and Persecutions, which came
for the Truth's Sake; and the Seed in them was soon scorched with the Heat of
the Day. And some not abiding in Subjection to the Truth in themselves, were
not contented with that Place and Station in the Body, which God had placed
them in; but became vainly puffed up in their fleshly Minds, intruding into
those Things which they have not seen: And would needs be Innovators, given to
Change, and introducing new Doctrines and Practices, not only differing,
Innovators causing Divisions.
but contrary to what was already delivered in the Beginning; making Parties,
causing Divisions and Rents, stumbling the Weak, and denying, despising and
reviling the Apostles and Messengers of Christ, the Elders of the Church, who
loved not their Lives unto Death, but through much Care, and Travel, and
Watchings and Whippings and Bonds, and Beatings, in daily Jeopardy, gathered us
by the mighty Power of God into the most precious Truth. Yet in all this there
has nothing befallen us, but that which has been the ancient Lot of the
Church of Christ in the primitive Times.

Now He, that was careful for his Church and People in old Times, The good
Shepherd of Israel's Care over his Church and People.
has not been wanting to us in our Day; but as he has again restored the Truth
unto its primitive Integrity and Simplicity, and as he has delivered our
Understandings from these false Doctrines and Principles, which prevailed in
the Apostasy; so he has not gathered us to be As Sheep scattered without a
Shepherd, that every one may run his own Way, and every one follow his own
Will, and so to be as a confused Mass or Chaos, without any Order; but He, even
the LORD has also gathered, and is gathering us into the good Order,
Discipline, and Government of his own Son, the Lord Jesus Christ: Therefore he
has laid Care upon some beyond others, who watch for the Souls of their
Brethren, as they that must give Account.

There are then Fathers that have begotten us unto Christ Jesus through the
Gospel, The several Stations in the Church. 1 Cor. 4.15, 16, 17.
of whom we ought to be Followers, and to remember their Ways, which be in
Christ. There are then Fathers and Children, Instructors and Instructed, Elders
and young Men, yea, and Babes; there are that cannot cease, but must exhort,
instruct, reprove, condemn, judge; or else, for what End gave Christ the Gifts
mentioned, Ephesians. ^.11, 12? And how are the Saints perfected, and the Body of
Christ edified of those, who came under the Cognizance, and, as it were, the
Test of this Order and Government? I may chiefly sum them up in three Sorts
(though there be diverse other little subdivided Species of them.

1. Profane Backsliding Apostates.
The First is, Those that turn openly back to the World again, through finding
the Way of Truth too narrow. These have not been capable to do us any
considerable Hurt; for being as Salt, that has lost its Savor, they mostly
prove a Stink among those to whom they go: And I never knew any of them, that
proved any ways steadable to those to whom they go. I find other Professors
make but small Boast of any Proselytes they got out from among us; I hear
little of their proving Champions for the Principles of others against us. And,
indeed, for the most Part they lose all Religion with the Truth: For I have
heard some of them say; That if ever they took on them to be religious, they
would come back again to the Quakers, etc.

2. Unwary repenting Sinners.
Secondly, Those, who through Unwatchfulness, the secret Corruption of their
own Hearts, and the mysterious or hidden Temptations of the Enemy, have fallen
into his Snares; and so have come under the Power of some Temptation or other,
either of fleshly Lusts, or of spiritual Wickedness: Who being seasonably
warned by those that keep their Habitation, and faithful Overseers in the
Church; have been again restored by unfeigned Repentance: Not kicking against
the Pricks; but have rejoiced, that others watched over them for their Good,
and are become Monuments of God's Mercy unto this Day.

3. Self-Separating, troublesome Opposers.
Thirdly, Such, who being departed from their first Love and ancient Zeal for
the Truth, become cold and lukewarm; and yet are ashamed to make open Apostasy,
and to turn back again, so as to deny all the Principles of Truth, they having
had already such Evidence of Clearness upon their Understanding: Yet not
keeping low in their own Habitations, but being puffed up, and giving Way to
the restless Imaginations of their exalted and wandering Minds, fall out with
their Brethren; cause Divisions; begin to find fault with every thing, and to
look at others more than at themselves; with swelling Words to talk of, and
preach up, a higher Dispensation, while they are far from living up to the Life
and Perfection of this present; like unto such who said, We will not have this
Man to rule over us: Cry out of Formality and Apostasy, because they are not
followed in all Things; and if they be reproved for their Unruliness, according
to the good Order of the Church of Christ, then they cry out, Breach of
Liberty, Oppression, Persecution! we will have none of your Order and
Government; we are taught to follow the Light in our Consciences, and not the
Orders of Men. Well, of this hereafter; but this gave the Rise of this
Controversy: Which leads me to that which I proposed in the Second Place.

SECTION III. Whether there is now to be any Order or Government in the Church
of Christ.
Church Order and Government granted.
IN Answer to this Proposition, I meddle not at this time with those that deny
any such thing as a Church of Christ; I have reserved their Plea to another
Place. Neither need I to be at much Pains to prove the Affirmative, to wit,
That there ought to be Government and Order in the Church of Christ, unto the
Generality of our Opposers, both Papists and Protestants; who readily confess
and acknowledge it, and have heretofore blamed us for want of it. Though now some
of them, and that of the highest Pretenders, are become so unreasonable, as to
accuse us for the Use of it; improving it, so far as they can, to our
Disadvantage: For such is the Blindness of partial Envy, that whereas the
supposed Want of it was once reckoned heretical, now the present Performance of
it is counted criminal.

These, then, to whom, I come to prove this Thing, are such, who having cast
off the Yoke of the Cross of Christ in themselves, refuse all Subjection or
Government: Denying that any such thing ought to be, as disagreeing with the
Testimony of Truth; Or those, who not being so wilful and obstinate in their
Minds, yet are fearful or scrupulous in the Matter, in respect of the dangerous
Consequences, they may apprehend, such a Thing may draw after it.

For the clearing then as well the Mistakes of the one, as answering the Cavils
of the other, I judge the Truth of these following Assertions will sufficiently
prove the Matter; which I shall make no great Difficulty to evidence.

Reason I.
First That Jesus Christ, the King and Head of the Church, did appoint and
ordain, that there should be Order and Government in it.

II.
Secondly, That the Apostles and primitive Christians, when they were filled
with the Holy Ghost, and immediately led by the Spirit of God, did practice and
commend it.

III.
Thirdly, That the same Occasion and Necessity now occurring, which gave them
Opportunity to exercise that Authority, the Church of Christ has the same
Power now as ever, and are led by the same Spirit into the same Practices.

The Abuse makes not void the true Use.
As to the First, I know there are some, that the very Name of a Church, and the
very Words, Order and Government, they are afraid of. Now this I suppose has
proceeded, because of the great Hypocrisy, Deceit and Oppression, that has
been cloaked with the Pretense of these Things; but why should the Truth be
neglected, because Hypocrites have pretended to it? The right Institution of
these Things, which have been appointed and ordained of God, must not, nor
ought not to be despised, because corrupt Men have abused and perverted them. I
know not any thing that has been more abused and perverted in the whole World,
than the Name of a Christian; shall we then renounce that honorable Title,
because so many Thousands of wicked Men, yea, Antichrists have falsely assume it
to themselves? The Man of Sin has taken upon him to sit in the Temple of God,
as God; yet we must not therefore deny, that God is in this Temple. If the
Synagogue of Satan assumed the Name of the Church of Christ, and has termed
her Oppression and Violence, the Power and Authority thereof; therefore must
not the Church of Christ, and its Authority, be exercised, where it truly is
according to his Mind? This I prefix to warn all to beware of stumbling at
Things which are innocent in themselves; and that we may labor to hold the
steady even Path of Truth, without running into either of the Extremes. For
that Jesus Christ did appoint Order and Government to be in the Church, is very
clear from his plain Words, Matt. 18.15, 16, 17, 18. Ver. 15. Church Order
appointed by Christ, and the Form thereof.
Moreover, if thy Brother shall trespass against thee, go tell him his Fault
between thee and him alone; if he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy
Brother. Ver. 16. But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two
more, that in the Mouth of two or three Witnesses, every Word may be
established. Ver. 17. And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the
Church: But if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an
Heathen-Man, and a Publican. Ver. 18. Verily, I say unto you, whatsoever ye
shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on
Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. From which Scripture it does manifestly and
evidently follow, I.
First, That Jesus Christ intended there II.
should be a certain Order and Method in his Church, in the Procedure toward
such as transgress. Secondly, That he that refuses to hear two, is become more
guilty (as hardened) than in refusing to hear him that first reproved alone.
Thirdly, That refusing to hear the Judgment of the Church, or whole Assembly,
he does thereby exclude himself, and shut out himself from being a Member; and
is justly judged, by his Brethren, as an Heathen and a Publican. III.


IV.
And lastly, that the Church, Gathering or Assembly of God's People, has Power
to examine and call to Account such, as appearing to be among them, or owning
the same Faith with them, do transgress; and in case of their refusing to hear,
or repent, to exclude them from their Fellowship: And that God has a special
Regard to the Judgment and Sense of his People thus orderly proceeding, so as
to hold such bound in Heaven, whom they bind on Earth, and such loosed in
Heaven, whom they loose on Earth. I am partly confident, that no rational Man
will deny, but that these naturally follow from the abovementioned Scripture;
and if there should be any found so unreasonable as to deny it, I could prove
it by necessary and unevitable Consequences; which at present, as taking it for
granted, I forbear to do. If it be reckoned so great a Crime to offend one of
the little Ones, that it were better for him, than so do, that a Millstone
were hanged about his Neck, and he were drowned in the Depth of the Sea;
without Question, to offend and gainsay the whole Flock, must be more criminal;
and must draw after it a far deeper Judgment.

The End of Church Order.
Now if there were no Order nor Government in the Church, what should become of
those that transgress? How should they be again restored? Would not this make
all Reproving, all Instructing, all Caring for, and Watching over one another,
void and null? Why should Christ have desired them to proceed after this
Method? Why does he place so much Weight upon the Judgment of the Church, as to
make the refusing of hearing it, to draw so deep a Censure after it; which he
will not have to follow the refusing to hear one or two apart, though the
Matter be one and the same? And so, as to the substantial and intrinsic Truth
of the Thing, there lies the same Obligation upon the Transgressor to hear that
one, as well as all; for that one advises him to that which is right and good,
as well as the whole; and they do but homologate or confirm that which that one
has already asserted: Yet Jesus Christ, who is the Author of Order, and not of
Confusion, will not have a Brother cut off, or reputed a Publican, for refusing
to hear one or two, but for refusing to hear the Church. And if it be objected,
That the Church of Rome, and all other false Churches, make use of this
Scripture, and cover their Persecution, and Cruelty, and Oppression by it; and
thou say no more than they say. I Answer; I suppose no Man will be so
unreasonable as to affirm, that the Church of Rome abusing this Scripture, will
Objection.
make it false in itself; but how we differ in our Application of this
Scripture, shall be spoken of hereafter. I am not now claiming Right to this
Power, as due to us (that is reserved for another Place;) but this, I say, is
that which I now aver to be manifest from the Scripture-Testimony, and to be in
itself an unquestionable Truth, That Jesus Christ intended there should be
Order and Government in his Church; which is the Thing at present in Hand to be
proved; Which if it be so really true (as it cannot be denied) then I hope it
will also necessarily follow, that such, who really and truly are the Church of
Christ, have Right to exercise this Order and Government.

Reason II. Church Order practiced by the Apostles and primitive Christians. --
In Elections.
Secondly, That the Apostles and Primitive-Christians, did practice Order and
Government, we need but read the History of the Acts, of which I shall mention
a few pregnant and undeniable Testimonies, as we may observe in the very first
Chapter of the Acts, from Verse 13. to the End, where at the very first Meeting
the Apostles and Brethren held together after the Ascension of Christ, they
began orderly to appoint one to supply the Place of Judas; it may be thought,
this was a needless Ceremony; yet we see how the Lord countenanced it. I hope
none will say, that the Apostles appointing of these two Men, or of him, upon
whom the Lot did not fall, contradicted their inward Freedom, or imposed upon
it; but both agreed very well together; the one in the Will and Movings of God
in appointing, and the other in the same, in submitting to their Appointment.

-- in Distributions for the Poor.
Moreover, after they had received the Holy Ghost, you may read, Acts 6. so
soon as there was an Opportunity, how they wisely gave Order, concerning the
Distribution for the Poor, and appointed some Men for that Purpose. So here was
Order and Government, according to the present Necessity of the Case: And the
Lord God was well pleased with it, and the Word of God increased, and the
Number of the Disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly. Might they not have
said then, as some say now; We will give our Charity to whom we see Cause; and
we will take no Notice of your Appointments and Orders: Whether would God have
approved of such, yea, or nay?

W. M. in his Queries.
Thirdly, When that the Business of Circumcision fell in, whether it was fit or
not to circumcise the Gentiles? We see, the Apostles saw not meet, To suffer
every one to follow their own Minds and Wills: They did not judge, as one
confusedly supposes, That this Difference in an outward Exercise, would
commend the Unity of the true Faith: Nay, they took another Method. It is said
expressly, Acts 15.16. And the Apostles and Elders came together, to consider of
this Matter; and after there had been much disputing about it (no doubt then
there were here Diversities of Opinions and Judgments) the Apostles and Elders
told their Judgments, -- in Differences occuring.
and came also to a positive Conclusion. Sure some behoved to submit, else they
should never have agreed. So those that were the Elders, gave a positive
Judgment; and they were bold to say, That it pleased not only them, but the
Holy Ghost. By all which it does undeniably appear, that the Apostles, and
primitive Saints, practiced a Holy Order and Government among themselves: And I
hope none will be so bold as to say, they did these Things without the Leadings
of the Spirit of God, and his Power and Authority concurring, and going along
with them.

The Apostles Doctrine concerning Order in the Church.
And that these Things were not only singular Practices; but that they held it
doctrinally; that is to say, it was Doctrine which they preached; that there
ought to be Order and Government in the Church, is manifest from these
following Testimonies, 1 Cor. 4.15, 16, 17. Cor. 4.15, 16, 17.
(15.) For though you have Ten Thousand Instructors in Christ; yet have ye not
many Fathers: For in Christ Jesus, I have begotten you through the Gospel.
(16.) Wherefore I beseech you, be ye Followers of me. (17.) For this Cause have
I sent unto you Timotheus, who is my beloved Son, and faithful in the Lord; who
shall bring you into Remembrance of my Ways, which be in Christ, as I teach
every where in every Church. Here the Apostle Paul is very absolute: First, In
that he desires them to be Followers of him. Secondly, In that he sends a
Teacher, yea, a Minister, and eminent Bishop, or Overseer of the Church, for to
put them in Mind of his Ways, which be in Christ, as he taught in every Church.
No doubt there were Apostates, and dissenting Spirits in the Church of Corinth,
that gave Paul occasion thus to write, as he testifies in the Beginning of the
Chapter, how he was judged by some of them; he shows, how they were grown high;
Verse 8. Now ye are full, now ye are rich, ye have reigned as Kings without us,
etc. Might not these Dissenters of the Church of Corinth, have reasoned thus
against Paul? Did not this Paul teach us, at first, to mind the Measure of
Grace in ourselves, and follow that? (for no doubt that was Paul's Doctrine)
But now he begins to Lord it over us, and tells us, we must be Followers of
him. Might not they have judged the Beloved Timothy to be far out of his Place?
Might they not have said, It seems it is not God that moved thee, and sent thee
here by his Spirit; but lordly Paul, that seeks Dominion over our Faith: It
seems thou come not here to preach Christ, and wish us to be Followers of
him, and of his Grace in our Hearts; but to mind us to follow Paul's Ways, and
take notice, how he teaches in every Church: We are not concerned with him, nor
with his Messenger, nor with any of your Orders, and so forth. Does not this
run very plausible? I question not but there was such a Reasoning among the
Apostate Corinthians; let such as are of the same Kind among us examine
seriously, and measure their Spirits truly hereby. Yea, he goes yet further in
the following Chapter, Dissenting Reasonings against Church Government.
1 Cor. 5.3 -- 13. The Power of giving Judgment in the Church.
Verses 3, 4. Verse 3. As absent in Body, but present in Spirit, have judged
already, as though I were present, concerning him that has so done this Deed.
Verse 4. In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together,
and my Spirit with the Power of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. Would not one think
this to have been a very presumptuous Word? And yet who dare offer to condemn
it? From all which, I shall shortly observe, that it seems it was judged no
Inconsistency nor Contradiction, to be Followers of the Grace in themselves, to
be persuaded in their own Hearts, and also to be Followers of the Apostle Paul,
and of his Ways; because his Ways and Example was no other than the Spirit of
God in themselves would have led them to, if they had been obedient. Therefore
he found it needful to charge them positively to follow him, without adding
this Reason.

-- As of Fathers.
Next, the great Argument the Apostle uses to persuade them hereunto, upon
which he mainly insists, because he had begotten them into the Truth; Ye have
not many Fathers; for in Christ Jesus, I have begotten you through the Gospel:
Wherefore I beseech you, be ye Followers of me. So he makes that as the Cause;
which the same Apostle also in his Expostulation with the Galatians, putting
them in mind how he preached the Gospel to them at first, and Chap. 4. Ver. 15.
Where is then the Blessedness ye spoke of? For I hear you Record, if possible,
ye would -- And Overseers.
have plucked out your own Eyes, and given them unto me. We see then, that the
Lord has, and does give such, whom he has furnished, and sent forth to gather
a People unto himself, Care and Oversight over that People; yea, and a certain
Authority in the Power over them to bring them back to their Duty, -- To be
obeyed.
when they stray at any time; and to appoint, yea, and command such Things as
are needful for Peace, and Order, and Unity's Sake: And that there lies an
Obligation upon such, as are so gathered, to reverence, honor, yea, and obey
such as are set over them in the Lord. For, says the same Apostle, 2 Cor. 2.9.
For to this End also did I write, that I might know the Proof of you, whether
you be obedient in all Things: And Chap. 7. Ver. 13.15. Yea, and exceedingly
the more joyed we for the Joy of Titus, because his Spirit was refreshed by you
all. Ver. 15. And his inward Affection is more abundant toward you, whilst he
remembers the Obedience of you all, how with Fear and Trembling ye received
him. Betrayings of the Enemy.


Now this will not at all infer, as if they had been implicitly led of old: Or
that such, as having the same Authority to exercise it now, sought Dominion
over their Brethren's FAITH, or to force them to do any thing beyond, far less
contrary to, what the Lord leads us to by his Spirit: But we know (as they did
of old) that the Enemy lies near to BETRAY under such Pretenses. And seeing, in
case of Difference, The Murmurer shut out.
the Lord has, and does, and will reveal his Will to his People, and has, and
does raise up Members of his Body, to whom he gives a Discerning, and Power,
and Authority to instruct, reprove, yea, and command in some Cases, those that
are faithful and low in their Minds, keeping their own Places, and minding the
Lord, and the Interest and Good of his Truth in the general over all, shut out
the Murmurer; and the Spirit of God leads them to have Unity, and concur with
their Brethren. But such as are heady and high-minded, are inwardly vexed, that
any should lead or rule, but themselves: And so it is the high Thing in
themselves, that makes them quarrel with others for taking so much upon them;
pretending a Liberty, not sinking down in the Seed to be willing to be of no
Reputation for its Sake. Such, rather than give up their own Wills, will study
to make Rents and Divisions, not sparing the Flock; but prostrating the
Reputation and Honor of the Truth even to the World, minister to them an
Occasion of Scorn and Laughter, to the hardening them in their Wickedness and
Atheism. The Honor of Truth prostrated by Divisions.


Besides these Scriptures mentioned, I shall set down a few of many more that
might be instanced to the same Purpose.

Scriptures for Submission and Lowliness of Mind; and Esteem of the Brethren.
Ephesians. 5.21. Submitting yourselves one to another in the Fear of God.

Phil. 2.3. Let nothing be done through Strife or vain Glory, but in Lowliness
of Mind, let each esteem other better than themselves.

Verse 29. Receive him therefore in the Lord with all Gladness, (...) hold such
in Reputation.

And 3.17. Brethren, be Followers together of me; and mark them which walk so,
as ye have us for an Ensample.

And 4.9. Those Things, which ye have both learned, and received, and heard,
and seen in me, do; and the God of Peace shall be with you.

Col. 2.5. For though I be absent in the Flesh, yet am I with you in the
Spirit, joying and beholding your Order, and the Stedfastness of your Faith in
Christ.

1 Thessalonians. 5.12. And we beseech you, Brethren, to know them which labor among
you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you.

Verse 13. And to esteem them very highly in Love, for their Work's Sake; and
be at Peace among yourselves.

Verse 14. Now we exhort you, Brethren, warn them that are unruly, comfort the
feeble minded, support the weak, be patient toward all Men.

2 Thessalonians. 2.15. Therefore, Brethren, stand fast, and hold the Traditions which
you have been taught, whether by Word, or our Epistle.

2 Cor. 10.8. For though I should boast some what more of our Authority (which
the Lord has given us for Edification, and not for your Destruction) I should
not be ashamed.

Now though the Papists greatly abuse this Place, as if hereby they could
justify that Mass of Superstition, which they have heaped together; yet except
we will deny the plain Scripture, we must needs believe, there lay an
Obligation upon the Thessalonians to observe and hold these Appointments, and,
no Doubt, needful Institutions, which by the Apostles were recommended unto
them: And yet who will say, that they ought, or were thereby commanded to do
any Thing contrary to that which the Grace of God in their Hearts moved them to?

2 Thessalonians. 3.4. And we have Confidence in the Lord touching you, that ye both
do, and will do the Things which we command you.

Verse 6. Now we command you, Brethren, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that ye withdraw yourselves from every Brother that walks disorderly, and not
after the Tradition which he received of us.

The Authority of the Church, no Imposition
What more positive than this? and yet the Apostle was not here an Imposer. And
yet further, Verse 14. And if any Man obey not our Word by this Epistle, note
that Man, and have no Company with him, that he may be ashamed.

Thus, Heb. 13.7. Remember them which have the Rule over you, who have spoken
unto you the Word of God, whose Faith follow; considering the End of their
Conversation.

Verse 17. Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit yourselves; for
they watch for your Souls, as they that must give Account: That they may do it
with Joy, and not with Grief; for that is unprofitable for you.

Jude 8. Likewise also these filthy Dreamers defile the Flesh, despise
Dominion, and speak Evil of Dignities.

The primitive Christians Order practiced in the Church.
I might at length enlarge, if needful, upon these Passages, any of which is
sufficient to prove the Matter in Hands but that what is said may satisfy such
as are not wilfully blind and obstinate. For there can be nothing more plain
from these Testimonies, than that the ancient Apostles and primitive Christians
practiced Order and Government in the Church; that some did appoint and ordain
certain Things; condemn and approve certain Practices, as well as Doctrines, by
the Spirit of God: That there lay an Obligation in Point of Duty upon others to
obey and submit: That this was no Encroachment nor Imposition upon their
Christian Liberty; nor any ways contradictory to their being inwardly and
immediately led by the Spirit of God in their Hearts: And lastly, That such, as
are in the true Feeling and Sense, will find it their Places to obey, and be
one with the Church of Christ in such like Cases: And that it is such as have
lost their Sense and Feeling of the Life of the Body, that dissent, and are
disobedient, under the false Pretense of Liberty. So that thus it is
sufficiently proved what I undertook in this Place.

Reason III.
Thirdly, I judge there will need no great Arguments to prove the People of God
may, and do well to exercise the like Government upon the very like Occasion.
For even Reason may teach us, that what proved good and wholesome Cures to the
Distemper of the Church in former Ages, will not now (the very like Distempers
falling in) prove hurtful Distempers of the Church require a Cure now as of old.
and poisonable; especially, if we have the Testimony of the same Spirit in our
Hearts, not only allowing us, but commanding us so to do. It is manifest
(though we are sorry for it) that the same Occasions now fall in; we find that
there are that have eaten and drunken with us at the Table of the Lord, and
have been Sharers of the same spiritual Joy and Consolation, that afterward
fall away. We find (to our great Grief) that some walk disorderly; and some are
puffed up, and strive to sow Division, laboring to stumble the Weak, and to
cause Offenses in the Church of Christ: What then is more suitable, and more
Christian, than to follow the Footsteps of the Flock, and to labor and travel
for the Good of the Church, and for the removing all that is hurtful; even as
the Holy Apostles, who walked with Jesus, did before us? If there be such that
walk disorderly now, must not they be admonished, rebuked and withdrawn from,
as well as of old? Or is such to be the Condition of the Church in these latter
Times, that all Iniquity must go unreproved? Must it be Heresy, or Oppression,
to watch over one another in Love? To take Care for the Poor? To see that there
be no corrupt, no defiled Members of the Body, and carefully and christianly
deal with them, for restoring them, if possible; and for withdrawing from them;
if incurable? I am persuaded, that there are none that look upon the Commands
of Christ and his Apostles, the Practice and Experience of the primitive Church
and Saints, as a sufficient Objection.
Precedent to authorize a Practice now, that will deny the Lawfulness or
Usefulness hereof, but must needs acknowledge the Necessity of it. But if it be
objected (as some have done) do not you deny, that the Scripture is the
adequate Rule of Faith and Manners; and that the Commands or Practices of the
Scripture are not a sufficient Warrant for you now to do any Thing, without you
be again authorized, and led unto it by the same Spirit? And upon that Score,
do you not forbear some Things both practiced and commanded by the primitive
Church and Saints?

Well, I hope I have not any Thing weakened this Objection, but presented it in
its full Vigor and Strength: To which I shall clearly and distinctly answer
thus.

Times alter the Usefulness of Things commanded.
First, Seasons and Times do not alter the Nature and Substance of Things in
themselves; thought it may cause Things to alter, as to the Usefulness, or not
Usefulness of them.

Secondly, Things commanded and practiced at certain Times and Seasons fall ^
themselves, when as the Cause and Ground; ^ which they were commanded, is
removed, ^ there is no need now for the Decision about circumcision, seeing
there are none contend for it. Neither as to the Orders concerning Things
offered to Idols, seeing there is now no such Occasion: Yet who will say, that
the Command enjoined in the same Place, Acts 15.20. To abstain from
Fornication, is now made void; seeing there is daily Need for its standing in
Force, because it yet remains as a Temptation Man is incident to? We confess,
indeed, we are against such as from the bare Letter of the Scripture (though if
it were seasonable now to debate it, we find but few to deal with, whose
Practices are so exactly squared) seek to uphold Customs, Forms or Shadows,
when the Use, for which they were appointed, is removed, or the Substance
itself known and witnessed; as we have sufficiently elsewhere answered our
Opposers in the Case of Water Baptism, and Bread and Wine, etc. So that the
Objection, as to that, does not hold; and the Difference is very wide, in
respect of such Things: The very Nature and Substance of which can never be
dispensed with by the People of God, so long as they are in this World; yea,
without which they could not be his People. For the Doctrines, and fundamental
Principles of the Christian Faith, we own and believe originally and
principally, because they are the Truths of God; whereunto the Spirit of God in
our Hearts has constrained our Understandings to obey and submit. In the
second Place, we are greatly confirmed, strengthened and comforted in the joint
Testimony of our Brethren, the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, who by the
Revelation of the same Spirit in the Days of old believed, and have lest upon
Record the same Truths; so we having the same Spirit of Faith, according as it
is written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken; we also believe, and
therefore we speak. And we deny not but some, that from the Letter have had the
Notion of these The joint Testimony of the Apostles, etc. to the Truths of God
in our Hearts.
Things, have thereby in the Mercy of God received Occasion to have them
revealed in the Life: For we freely acknowledge (though often calumniated to
the contrary) that whatsoever Things were written aforetime, were written for
our Learning; that we through Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures may have
Hope. So then I hope, if the Spirit of God lead me now unto that which is good,
profitable, yea, and absolutely needful, in order to the keeping my Conscience
clear and void of Offense toward God and Man, none will be so unreasonable as
to say, I ought not to do it, because it is according to the Scriptures. Nor do
I think it will savor ill among any serious, solid Christians, for me to be
the more confirmed and persuaded that I am led to this Thing by the Spirit,
that I find it in myself good and useful; and that upon the like Occasions
Christ commanded it, and the Apostles and primitive Christians practiced and
recommended it.

Now, seeing it is so that we can boldly say, with a good Conscience in the
Sight of God, that the same Spirit, which leads us to believe the Doctrines and
Principles of the Truth, and to hold and maintain them again, after the
Apostasy, in their primitive and ancient Purity, as they were delivered by the
Apostles of Christ in the Holy Scriptures; I say, that the same Spirit does now
lead us into the like Holy Order and Government to be exercised among us, as it
was among them, being now the like Occasion and Opportunity ministered to us;
therefore, what can any christianly or rationally object against it? For that
there is a real Cause for it, the A real Cause for the same Order.
Thing itself speaks; and that it was the Practice of the Saints and Church
of old, is undeniable: What kind of Ground then can any such Opposers have
(being such, as scrupling at this, do notwithstanding acknowledge our
Principle) that this were done by Imposition or Imitation, more than the Belief
of the Doctrines and Principles? Seeing as it is needful to use all Diligence
to convince and persuade People of the Truth, and bring them to the Belief of
it (which yet we cannot do, but as Truth moves and draws in their Hearts) it is
also no less needful, when a People is gathered, to keep and preserve them in
Unity and Love, as becomes the Church of Christ; and to be careful, as faith
the Apostle, That all Things be done decently, and in order; and that all that
is wrong be removed, according to the Method of the Gospel; and the Good
cherished and encouraged. So that we conclude, and that upon very good Grounds,
That there ought now, as well as heretofore, to be Order and Government in the
Church of Christ.

Head III.
That which now comes to be examined in the third Place is,

1. First, What is the Order and Government we plead for?

2. Secondly, In what Cases, and how far it may extend? And in whom the Power
decisive is?

Thirdly, How it differs, and is wholly another than the oppressive and
persecuting Principality of the Church of Rome, and other Antichristian
Assemblies?

SECTION IV. Of the Order and Government which we plead for.
IT will be needful then, before I proceed to describe the Order and Government
of the Church, to consider what is, or may be properly understood by the
Church: For some (as I touched before) seem to be offended, or at least afraid
of the very Word; because, The Power of the Church, the Order of the Church,
the Judgment of the Church, and such like Pretenses, have been the great
Weapons wherewith Antichrist and the apostate Christians have been these many
Generations persecuting the Woman, and warring against the Man-child. And,
indeed, great Disputes have been among the learned Rabbis in the Apostasy
concerning this Church what it is, or what may be so accounted; which I find
not my Place at present to dive much in, but shall only give the true Sense of
it, according to Truth, and the Scriptures plain Testimony.

What the Word CHURCH signifies properly.
The Word CHURCH in itself, and as used in the Scriptures, is no other but a
Gathering, Company, or Assembly of certain People, called or gathered together:
For so the Greek Word signifies (which is that the Trauslators render Church)
which Word is derived from the Verb Evoco, I call out of, from the Root Voco, I
call. Now though the English Word Church be only taken in such a Sense, as
People are gathered together upon a religious Account; yet the Greek Word, that
is so rendered, is taken in general for every Gathering, or Meeting together of
People: And therefore where it is said, The Town Clerk of the Ephesians
dismissed the Tumult, that was gathered there together, the same Greek Word is
used, Acts 19.41. he dismissed the Assembly (or the Church.) dimisit Concionem.


What a religious Church is.
A Church then, in the Scripture Phrase, is no other than a meeting or
gathering of certain People, which (if it be taken in a religious Sense, as
most commonly it is) are gathered together in the Belief of the same
Principles, Doctrines and Points of Faith, whereby as a Body they become
distinguished from others, and have a certain Relation among themselves; and a
conjunct Interest to the maintaining and propagating these Principles they
judge to be right: And therefore have a certain Care and Oversight over one
another, to prevent and remove all Occasions that may tend to break this their
conjunct Interest, hinder the Propagation of it, or bring Infamy, Contempt, or
Contumely upon it; or give such as on the other Hand are, or may be banded
together to undo them, just Occasion against them, to decry and defame them.

How to distinguish the true Church from the false.
Now the Way to distinguish that Church, Gathering, or Assembly of People,
whereof Christ truly is the Head, from such as falsely pretend thereto, is by
considering the Principles and Grounds upon which they are gathered together,
the Nature of that Hierarchy and Order they have among themselves, the Way and
Method they take to uphold it, and the Bottom upon which it stands; which
will greatly contribute to clear all Mistakes.

Forasmuch as Sanctification and Holiness is the great and chief End among true
Christians, which moves them to gather together; therefore the Apostle Paul
defines the Church in his Salutation to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.2. Unto the
Church of God which is at Corinth, them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus,
called to be Saints. So the Church is such as are sanctified in Christ Jesus,
called to be Saints.

The Church's Care over its Members, etc.
The Power and Authority, Order and Government we speak of, is such, as a
Church Meeting, Gathering or Assembly claims toward those that have, or do
declare themselves Members, who own, believe and profess the same Doctrines and
Principles of Faith with us, and go under the same Distinction and
Denomination; whose Escapes, Faults and Errors, may by our Adversaries justly
be imputed to us, if not seasonably and christianly reproved, reclaimed or
condemned. For we are not so foolish, as to concern ourselves with those who
are not of us; far less, who stand in Opposition to us, so as to reprove,
instruct, or reclaim them, as Fellow Members or Brethren: Yet, with a Respect
to remove the general Reproach from the Christian Name, with a tender Regard to
the Good of their immortal Souls, for the Zeal we owe to God's Glory, and for
the Exaltation and Propagation of his everlasting Truth and Gospel in the
Earth, we have not been wanting, with the Hazard of our Lives, to seek the
scattered Ones, holding forth the living and sure Foundation, and inviting and
persuading all to obey the Gospel of Christ, and to take Notice of his
Reproofs, as he makes himself manifest in and by his Light in their Hearts. So
our Care and Travel is, and has been toward those that are without, that we
may bring them into the Fellowship of the Saints in Light; and toward those
that are brought in, that they may not be led out again, or drawn aside, either
to the Left Hand, or the Right, by the Workings and Temptations of the Enemy.

These Things being thus cleared and opened, we do positively affirm, That we
being a People gathered together by the Power of God (which most, if not all of
those, that arising among ourselves do oppose us herein, have acknowledged)
into the Belief of certain Principles and Doctrines, and also certain Practices
and Performances, by which we are come to be separated and distinguished from
others, so as to meet apart, and also to suffer deeply for our joint Testimony;
there are, and must of Necessity be, as in the gathering of us, so in the
preserving of us while gathered, Diversities of Gifts and Operations for the
edifying of the whole Body. Hence, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the
Elders, that rule well, be counted worthy of double Honor, especially they who
labor in the Word and Doctrine: And this we suppose neither to be Popish, nor
Antichristian, let our Opposers say it, as often as they can, without reckoning
the Apostles such. Diversities of Gifts in the Church.


Meetings about Business.
Secondly, Forasmuch as all are not called in the same Station, some rich, some
poor; some Servants, some Masters, some married, some unmarried; some Widows,
and some Orphans, and so forth; it is not only convenient, but absolutely
needful, that there be certain Meetings at certain Places and Times, as may
best suit the Conveniences of such, who may be most particularly concerned, in
them; where both those that are to take Care may assemble, and those who may
need this Care, may come and make known their Necessities, and receive Help,
whether by Counsel or Supply, according to their respective Needs. This does
not at all contradict the Principle of being led inwardly and immediately by
the Spirit; else how came the Apostle in that Day of the powerful pouring forth
of the Spirit of God, to set apart Men for this Purpose? Sure, this was not to
lead them from their inward Guide; yea, on the contrary, it is expressly said,
Look ye out among you seven Men of honest Report, full of the Holy Ghost, and
Wisdom, whom we may appoint over this Business. Sure, they were not to
undertake a Business, being full of the Holy Ghost, which might import a
Contradiction to their being led by it: So we see it is both fit and suitable
to the Apostles Doctrine, to have Meetings about Business. Now if any should be
so whimsical of conceited, as to scruple their being at set Places and Times,
though these be nothing relative to the essential Parts, but only
Circumstances, relating -- established by the Apostle.
to the Convenience of our Persons (which we must have regard to, so long as we
are clothed with Flesh and Blood: And such Notionists, as are against this
godly Care, work far more in their vain Imaginations, than they reduce to
Practice; being like unto such, of whom the Apostle James testified, who
content themselves, with saying to the Naked, be clothed; and to the Hungry,
be fed; while they offer not, in the least, to minister to them those Things
which are needful for clothing and feeding of them.) Yet shall we not scruple
to make it appear, that it is not without very good Ground that we both appoint
Places and Times. And first, as to the Place, I say as before, it is with our
Bodies we must meet, as well as with our Spirits; and so, of Necessity, we must
convey our Bodies unto one Place, that we may speak and act in those Things we
meet for: And that must be in some certain Place, where all must know where to
find it; having herein a Regard to the Conveniences and Occasions of such as
meet. Were it fit, that those of the Church of Corinth should go do their
Business at Antioch, or the Church of Jerusalem at Rome? Nay surely, God has
not given us our Reason to no Purpose; but that we should make use of it for
his Glory, and the Good of our Brethren; yet always in Subjection to his Power
and Spirit. And therefore we have Respect to these Things in the appointing of
our Meetings and do it not without a Regard to the Lord, but in a Sense of his
Fear. And so the like as to Convenient Places to meet in --
-- And convenient set Times appointed.
Times, which is no contradicting of the inward Leading of the Spirit. Else how
came the Apostle to appoint a Time to the Corinthians in their Contributions,
desiring them, 1 Cor. 16.2. To lay by them in Store Upon the first Day of the
Week; yea, says he not, that he gave the same Order to the Church of Galatia.
I know not how any in Reason can quarrel about set Times for outward Business,
it being done in a Subjection to God's Will, as all Things ought to be; or else
how can such as so do, but quarrel with the Apostle for this Imposition (at
that rate) upon the Churches of Corinth and Galatia? We appoint no set Times
for the Performance of the Worship of God, so as to appoint Men to preach and
pray at such and such set Times; though we appoint Times to meet together in
the Name of the Lord, that we may feel his Presence, and he may move in and
through whom he pleases, without Limitation. Which Practice of Meeting
together, we are greatly encouraged to by the Promise of Christ, and our own
blessed Experience; and also we are severely prohibited to lay it aside by the
Holy Apostle; and also, on the other Hand, by the sad Experience of such as by
Negligence or Prejudice forsake the Assemblies of God's People; upon many of
which is already fulfilled, and upon others daily fulfilling the Judgments
threatened upon such Transgressors: Read Heb. 10. from Verse 23, to the End,
where that Duty is so seriously exhorted to, and the Contempt of Reasons for
the Continuance of our said Practices.
it reckoned a wilful Sin, almost (if not altogether) unpardonable; yea, a
treading under Foot the Son of God, and a doing Despite to the Spirit of
Grace; which is fulfilled in our Day, and proves the lamentable Fruits of such
as have so back slidden among us. And therefore having so much good and real
Ground, for what we do herein, together with the Approbation and Encouragement
of Christ, and his Apostles, both by Command and Practice, we can (as that both
the Alpha and Omega, the Foundation and Cap-stone required) faithfully affirm
in good Conscience, That God has led us by his Spirit, both to appoint Places
and Times, where we may see the Faces one of another; and to take Care one for
another, provoking one another to Love and good Works. And our Faith and
Confidence herein cannot be staggered by a mere Denial in our Opposers, which
no Man of Conscience and Reason will say it ought; seeing the Thing itself has
such a solid and real Cause and Foundation, so good and suitable a Pattern and
Example, and that it is constantly confirmed to us, both by the Testimony of
God's Spirit in our Hearts, and by the good Fruits and Effects which we daily
reap thereby, as a Seal and Confirmation that God is well pleased therewith,
and approves us in it.

Having thus far proceeded to show that there ought to be Order and Government
among the People of God, and that that which we plead for is, That there may be
certain Meetings set apart for that End; it is next to be considered, In what
Cases, and how far it may extend.

SECTION V. In what Cases, and how far this Government extends. And first, as
to Outward and Temporals.
The Occasion of those Meetings about Business.
I Shall begin with that, which gave the first Rise for this Order among the
Apostles; and I do verily believe, might have been among the first Occasions
that gave the like among us, and that is, The Care of the Poor; of Widows and
Orphans. Love and Compassion are the great, yea, and the chiefest Marks of
Christianity: Hereby shall it be known, says Christ, that ye are my Disciples,
if ye love one another. And James the Apostle places Religion herein in the
first Place; Pure Religion (says he) and undefiled before God and the Father
is, to visit the Fatherless and Widows in their Afflictions, etc. For this
then, as one main End, do we meet together, that Enquiry may be made, if there
be any Poor of the Household of Faith that need, that they may be supplied; that
the Widows may be taken Care of; that the Orphans and Fatherless may be bred up
and educated. Who will be so Unchristian, as to reprove this good Order and
Government, and to say it is needless? But if any will thus object, May not the
Spirit lead every one of you to give to them that need? What needs meeting
about it, and such Formalities? 1. To take Care for the poor Widows and Orphans.


I answer, The Spirit of God leads us so to do; what can they say to the
contrary? Nor is this a Practice any ways inconsistent with being inwardly and
immediately led by the Spirit; for the Spirit of God does now, as well as in
the Days of old, lead his People into those Things which are orderly, and of a
good Report; for he is the God of Order, and not of Confusion: And therefore
the holy Apostles judged it no Inconsistency with their being led by the
Spirit, to appoint Men full of the Holy Ghost, and of Wisdom, over the Business
of the Poor. Now, if to be full of the Holy Ghost be a Qualification needful
for this Employment; surely the Nature of their Employment was not to render
this so needful a Qualification useless and ineffectual, as if they were not to
be led by it. The Example of the Apostles.


Moreover we see, though they were at that Time all filled with the Spirit, yet
there was something wanting before this good Order was established. There was a
Murmuring, that some Widows were neglected in the daily Ministration; and we
must not suppose the Apostles went about to remedy this Evil, that was creeping
into the Church, without the Counsel of God by his Spirit, or that this Remedy
they were led to, was stepping into Apostasy; neither can it be so said of us,
we proceeding upon the like Occasion.

Contributions for the Poor.
If then it be thus needful and suitable to the Gospel, to relieve the
Necessities of the Poor, that as there was no Beggar to be among Israel of old,
so far less now; must there not be Meetings to appoint Contribution, in order
to the performing these Things? Which is no other, but the giving of a general
Intimation what the Needs are, that every one, as God moves their Hearts, and
has prospered them (without Imposition, Force or Limitation) may give toward
these needful Uses. In which Case these Murmurers at our good Order in such
Matters, may well think strange at the Apostle: How pressingly! how earnestly
does he reiterate his Desires and Provocations, so to speak, in this Respect to
the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 16.2. and the eighth and ninth Chapters of the second
Epistle throughout!

Now, though he testifies to them elsewhere, That they are the Temples of the
Holy Ghost, and that the Spirit of God dwells in them; yet cease be not to
entreat and exhort, yea, and to give them certain Orders in this Matter.

Besides all these Reasons, which are sufficient to convince any unprejudicate
Man, the secret Approbation of God's Spirit accompanying us in this Thing,
together with the Fruits and Effects of it; which Hundreds can witness to,
whose Needs have been supplied, and themselves helped through diverse
Difficulties; and the Testimonies of some already, and of many more Orphans,
and Fatherless Children, who have found no Want, neither of Father nor Mother,
or other Relations, through the tender Love and Care of God's People, in
putting them to Trades and Employments, and giving them all needful Education:
Which will make it appear, e're Fatherless Children put Apprentices.
this Age pass away, to those that have an Eye to see, that these are not the
mere Doings and Orders of Men; but the Work of him who is appearing in Ten
Thousands of his Saints, to establish not only Truths, but Mercy and
Righteousness in the Earth.

2. To compose Differences in the Church in outward Matters.
And for that End therefore in the second Place this Order reaches the taking
up and composing of Differences as to outward Things, which may fall out
betwixt Friend and Friend; for such Things may fall out through the Intricacies
of diverse Affairs, where neither has any positive Intention to injure and
defraud his Neighbor, as in many Cases might be instanced. Or if through the
Workings and Temptations of him, whose Work is to beset the Faithful, and
People of the Lord, and to engender (so far as he can) Strife and Division
among them, any should step aside, as to offer to wrong or prejudice his
Neighbor; we do boldly aver, as a People gathered together by the Lord unto
the same Faith, and distinguished from all others by our Joint-Testimony and
Sufferings, that we have Power and Authority to decide and remove these Things
among ourselves, without going to others to seek Redress. And this in itself
has so much Reason, that I cannot tell if any, that are not wholly prejudicate
or obstinate, can blame it. For if we be of one Mind concerning Faith and
Religion, and that it be our Joint-Interest to bring all others unto the same
Truth with us, as supposing them to be wrong, what Confidence can we have to
think of reclaiming them, if the Truth we profess have not Efficacy, as to
reconcile us among ourselves in the Matters of this World: If we be forced to
go out to others for Equity and Justice, because we cannot find it among
ourselves, how can we expect to invite them to come among us, when such
Virtues, as which still accompany the Truth, are necessarily supposed to be
wanting? Should we affirm otherwise, it were to destroy the Truth and Faith we
have been, and are, in the Lord's Hand, building up: And indeed the Spirit and
Practice of such as oppose us herein, has no less Tendency.

Objection.
Moreover, besides the enforcing and intrinsic Reason of this Thing, we have
the Concurrence, Approbation and Comfort of the Apostle's Testimony, 1 Cor. 6.
Dare any of you, having a Matter against another, go to Law before the Unjust,
and not before the Saints? If it be objected, Do you reckon all unjust that are
not of you? Think ye all other People void of Justice?

Believers not to go to Law before the Unjust, etc.
I answer, Though the Apostle uses this Expression, I am persuaded he did not
reckon all others unjust, that had not received then the Christian-Faith. There
were, no doubt, moral and just Men among the Heathen; and therefore the same
Paul commends the Nobility of Festus. He reckons them there Unjust in respect
of the Saints, or comparatively with them, as such as are not come to the just
Principle of God in themselves, to obey it, and follow it: And therefore though
he accounts them, who are least esteemed in the Church, capable to decide such
Matters; yet he supposes it safer to submit to their Judgment in such Cases,
though it were by taking Wrong, or suffering Wrong, than to go before others,
to the greater Reproach of the Truth. We hope, though many Occasions of this
kind have fallen in among us, since we have been a People, none have had just
Occasion to decline our Judgment. And though some should suppose themselves to
be wronged; yet if they should bring their Matter before others, we might say,
as the Apostle says in the forementioned Chapter, Ver. 7. This were thereby a
Fault in them, and would evidence a greater Care of some outward Concern, than
of the Honor and Interest of Truth; and therefore such as have a tender Regard
that way, would rather suffer what, to their Apprehensions, may seem wrong. For
in Matters wherein two Parties are opposite in the Case of Meum and Tuum. it is
somewhat hard to please both; except where the Power of Truth, and the
righteous Judgment thereof reaching to that of God in the Conscience, has
brought to a true Acknowledgment him that has been mistaken, or in the Wrong;
which has frequently fallen out among us, to the often refreshing and
confirming our Souls in the certain Belief, that Christ was fulfilling his
Promises among us, In restoring Judges, as at the first, and Counselors, as in
the Beginning. The Case of Meum and Tuum.


Going before Unbelievers from the Judgment of the Brethren, is a Dishonor to
thc Truth.
Now, suppose any should be so pettish, or humorous, as not to agree in such
Matters to the Judgment of his Brethren, and to go before the Unbelievers (for
though I reckon them not such Unbelievers as the Heathen of old, because they
profess a Faith in God and Christ; yet I may safely say, they are Unbelievers
as to these Principles and Doctrines, which we know are the Truth of God; and
in that Sense must be Unbelievers as to him, that so appealeth to them from his
Brethren.) I say, such as so do, first commit a certain Hurt, and Evil, in
staining the Honor and Reputation, of the Truth they profess, which ought to
be dearer to us than our Lives. And even in that outward Matter, for which they
thus do, they run a Hazard, not knowing whether Things shall carry, as they
expect: If they lose, they have a double Prejudice; if they gain, it is a too
dear Rate, even with the Hurt of Truth's Reputation, which their outward
Advantage cannot make up. If then, it be unlawful to do Evil, that Good may
come of it, even a Spiritual Good; far less is it lawful to do a Positive Evil,
of so deep a Dye as to bring an evil Report upon the good Land, and give the
Uncircumcised an Occasion to rejoice: Out of the uncertain Hope of an outward
Gain, it is far better to suffer Loss, as the Apostle very well argues in the
Place abovementioned.

Indeed, if there be any such, have been, or appear to be of us, as suppose.
There is not a wise Man among us all, nor an honest Man, that is able to judge
betwixt his Brethren; we shall not covet to meddle in their Matter, being
persuaded, that either they, or their Cause, is naught. -- Though (Praises to
God) among all those that have gone from us, either upon one Account or other,
I never heard that any were so minded toward us; but the most Part of them
having let in the Offense of some Things, or Persons, have had this unanimous
Testimony concerning us, that generally we are an honest and upright-hearted
People. Apostates Testimony concerning us.


But whatever Sense our Enemies, or Apostates have of us, who look asquint on
the Face of Truths, and can see nothing a-right in those they love not, or are
prejudicate against: This we can say, in the last Place (besides the Reasons
and Scripture above declared) that the good Fruits, and Effects, which daily
abound to the Household of Faith, in this, as well as the other Parts of the
Government the Lord is establishing among us, does more and more commend it
unto us; and confirms our Hearts in the certain Belief of that, which we can
confidently testify in good Conscience, That God has led us hereunto by his
Spirit; and we see the Hand of the Lord herein, which in due Time will yet more
appear; that as through our faithful Testimony, in the Hand of the Lord, that
antichristian and apostatized Generation, the NATIONAL MINISTRY, has received
a deadly Blow by our discovering and witnessing against their forced
Maintenance, and Tithes, against which we have testified by many cruel
Sufferings of all Kinds (as our Chronicles shall make known to Generations to
come) so that their Kingdom in the Hearts of Thousands, begins to Priests
forced Maintenance and Tithes, have received a deadly Blow.
totter and lose its Strength, and shall assuredly fall to the Ground, through
Truth's prevailing in the Earth; so on the other Hand do we, by coming to
Righteousness and Innocence, weaken the Strength of their Kingdom, who judge
for Rewards (as well as such as preach for Hire) and by not ministering Occasion
to those, who have heaped up Riches, and lived in Excess, Lust and Riot, by
feeding and preying upon the Iniquities and Contentions of the People. For as
Truth and Righteousness prevails in the Earth, by our faithful witnessing and
keeping to it, the Nations shall come to be eased and disburdened of that
deceitful Tribe of Lawyers (as well as Priests) who by their many Tricks and
endless Intricacies, have rendered Justice, in their Method, burdensome to
honest Men, and seek not so much to put an End, as to foment Controversies and
Contentions, that they themselves may be still fed and upheld, and their Trade
kept up. Whereas by Truth's Propagation, as many of these Controversies will
die by Men's coming to be less contentious; so when any Difference arises, the
Saints giving Judgment, without Gift or Reward, or running into the Tricks and
endless Labyrinths of the Lawyers, will soon compose them. And this is that we
are persuaded the Lord is bringing about in our Day, though many do not, and
many will not see it; because it is indeed in a Way different and contrary to
Men's Wisdom, who are now despising, Christ in his inward Appearance, because of
the Meanness of it, as the Jews of old Lawyers by Tricks and Intricacies foment
Controversies.
did him in his outward: Yet notwithstanding there were some then that did
witness, and could not be silent, but must testify that He was come; even so
now are there Thousands that can set to their Seal, that he has now again the
Second time appeared, and is appearing in Ten Thousands of his Saints; in and
among whom (as a first Fruits of many more that shall be gathered) he is
restoring the Golden Age, and bringing them into the Holy Order and Government
of his own Son, who is ruling, and to rule in the midst of them, setting forth
the Counselors as at the Beginning, and Judges as at First; and establishing
Truth, Mercy, Righteousness and Judgment again in the Earth: Amen, Hallelujah!
Christ restoring the Golden Age.


3. To take Care in the Case of Marriages.
Thirdly, These Meetings take Care in the Case of Marriages, that all things be
clear; and that there may be nothing done in that Procedure, which afterward
may prove to the Prejudice of Truth, or of the Parties concerned; which being
an outward Thing (that is acknowledged in itself to be lawful) of the greatest
Importance a Man or Woman can perform in this World; and from the sudden,
unwary, or disorderly Procedure whereof, very great Snares and Reproaches may
be cast both upon the Parties, and the Profession owned by them: therefore it
does very fitly, among other Things, when it occurs, come to be considered of
by the People of God, when met, to take care to preserve all Things right and
savoury in the Household of Faith. We do believe, our Adversaries, that watch
for Evil against us, would be glad how promiscuously or disorderly we (...) in
this (...) Matter, (...) the more boldly accuse (...) all human and christian
(...) not left us (...) this Thing; nor (...) just Occasion against (...)
therefore in this (...) we, who can do nothing against: the (...) all for, and
with Regard to the (...), ^ave diverse Testimonies for the Lord. And --

1. Our Testimony against marrying with the Unbelievers.
First, That we cannot Marry with those that walk not in, and obey not the
Truth, as being of another Judgment, or Fellowship; or pretending to it, walk
not suitably and answerable thereto.

2. By the Priest.
Secondly, Nor can we go to the Hireling-Priests, to uphold their false and
usurped Authority, who take upon them to marry People without any Command, or
Precedent for it from the Law of God.

3. In forbidden Degrees.
Lastly, Nor can we suffer any such kind of Marriages to pass among us, which
either as to the Degrees of Consanguinity, or otherwise, in itself is unlawful,
or from which there may be any just Reflection cast upon our Way.

Test. 1. Against Unbelievers.
As to the first Two, they being Matter of Principles received and believed, it
is not my Work here to debate them; only since they are received and owned as
such (for which we can, and have given our sufficient Reasons elsewhere, as for
our other Principles) we ought to care how any, by walking otherwise, bring
Reproach upon us; yet not to pass them wholly by, as to the First. Besides the
Testimony of the Spirit of God in our Hearts (which is the original Ground of
our Faith in all Things) we have the Testimony of the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor.
6.14. Be ye not unequally yoked together, etc. Now if any should think, it were
much from this Scripture to plead it absolutely unlawful, in any Case, to join
in Marriage with any (however otherwise sober because of their not being one
with us in all Things, I shall speak my Judgment. To me it appears so; and to
many more who have obtained Mercy; and we think we have the Spirit of God. But
whether it be lawful or not I can say positively, It is not expedient, neither
does it edify, and (as that which is of dangerous Consequence) does give justly
Offense to the Church of Christ: And therefore no true tender Heart will prefer
his private Love to the Good and Interest of the whole Body.

Test. 2. Against the Priests Usurpations.
As for the Second, In that we deny the Priests their assumed Authority and
Power to marry, it is that which in no wife we can recede from, nor can we own
any in the doing of it; it being a Part of our Testimony against the
Usurpations of that Generation, who never yet, that I ever heard of, could
produce any Scripture Proof, or Example for it. -- And seeing none can pretend
Conscience in the Matter (for they themselves confess, that it is no Part of
the Essence of Marriage) if any pretending to be among us, should, through
Fear, Interest, or Prejudice to the Truth, come under, and bow to, that Image,
have we not Reason to deny such slavish and ignoble Spirits, as mind not Truth
and its Testimony?

Test. 3 Against forbidden Degrees of Consanguinity and Pre-engagements, and c.
Lastly, Seeing, if any walking with us, or going under the same Name, should
hastily or disorderly go together, either being within the Degrees of
Consanguinity, which the Law of God forbids, or that either Party should have
been formerly under any Tie or Obligation to others, or any other vast
Disproportion, which might bring a just Reflection upon us from our Opposers;
can any blame us for taking Care to prevent these Evils, by appointing, that
such as so design, make known their Intentions to these Churches or Assemblies,
where they are most known, that if any know just Cause of Hindrance, it may be
mentioned, and a timous Let put to the Hurt, either by stopping it, if they
can be brought to condescend; or by refusing to be Witnesses and Concurrers
with them in it, if they will not? For we take not upon us to hinder any to
marry, otherwise than by Advice, or disconcerning ourselves; neither do we
judge, that such as do marry contrary to our Mind, that therefore their
Marriage is null and void in itself, or may be dissolved afterward; Nay, all
our meddling is in a holy Care for the Truth. For if the Thing be right, all
that we do, is to be Witnesses; and if otherwise, that we may say for our
Vindication to such as may upbraid us therewith, that we advised otherwise, and
did no ways concur in the Matter; that so they may bear their own Burden, and
the Truth and People of God be cleared.

What kind of Persons cannot bear the good Order of Truth.
Now I am confident that our Way herein is so answerable to Reason and
Christianity, that none will blame us therefore; except either such, whole
irregular and impatient Lusts cannot suffer a serious and
Christian-Examination, and an advised and moderate Procedure; or such, who
watching for Evil against us, are sorry we should proceed so Orderly, and would
rather we should suffer all manner of Irregularities and Abominations, that
they might have the more to say against us. But the solid and real Reasons we
have for our Way herein, will sufficiently plead for us in the Hearts of all
sober Men; and moreover, the Testimony of God's Spirit in our Hearts, does
abundantly confirm us both against the Folly of the one, and the Envy of the
other.

4. Our Care for restoring or separating Offenders.
Fourthly, There being nothing more needful, than to preserve Men and Women in
Righteousness, after they are brought into it; and also nothing more certain,
than that the great Enemy of Man's Soul seeks daily how he may draw back again,
and catch those, who have in some Measure escaped his Snares, and known
Deliverance from them; therefore do we also meet together, that we may receive
an Opportunity to understand, if any have fallen under his Temptations, that we
may restore them again, if possible; or otherwise separate them from US.
Surely, if we did not so, we might be justly blamed as such, among whom it were
lawful to commit any Evil unreproved; indeed, this were to be guilty of that
Libertinism which some have falsely accused us of, and which has been our Care
all along, as became the People of God, to avoid: Therefore we have sought
always to keep the House clean, by faithfully reproving and removing, according
to the Nature of the Offense, and the Scandal following thereupon; private
Things privately, and public Things publicly. We desire not to propagate Hurt,
and defile Peoples Minds, with telling them such Things as tend not to edify;
yet do we not so cover over, or smooth over any Wickedness, as not to deal
roundly with the Persons guilty, and causing them to take away the Scandal in
their Acknowledgment before all, to whole Knowledge in has come: Yet judge we
not ourselves obliged to tell that in Gath, or publish that in the Streets of
Askelon, which make the Daughters of the Uncircumcised rejoice; or strengthen
Atheists and Ranters in their Obdurateness, who feed more upon the Failings of
the Saints, than to imitate their true Repentance. And therefore where we find
an unfeigning Returning to the Lord, we desire not to remember that which the
Lord has forgotten; nor yet to throw Offenses in the Way of the Weak, that
they may (tumble upon them.

And therefore I conclude, that our Care as to these Things also is most
needful, and a Part of that Order and Government, which the Church of Christ
never was, nor can be without; as does, abundantly appear by diverse Scriptures
heretofore mentioned.

SECTION VI. How far this Government does extend in Matters Spiritual, and
purely Conscientious.
THUS far I have considered the Order and Government of the Church, as it
respects outward Things; and its Authority in condemning or removing such
Things, which in themselves are Evil, as being those, which none will readily
justify: The Necessity of which Things is such, that few but will acknowledge
the Care and Order in these Cases to be commendable and expedient.

Now I come to consider the Things of another Kind, which either verily are, or
are supposed to be Matters of CONSCIENCE, or at least, wherein People may lay
claim to Conscience, in the acting or forbearing of them. In which the great
Question is, How far in such Cases the Church may give positive Orders or Rules
How far her Authority reaches, or may be supposed to be binding, and ought to
be submitted to? For the better clearing and Examination of which, it will be
fit to consider,

Quest. 1.
First, Whether the Church of Christ has Power in any Cases, that are Matters
of Conscience, to give a positive Sentence and Decision, which may be
obligatory upon Believers?

Quest. II.
Secondly, If so, In what Cases and Respect she may so do?

Quest. III.
Thirdly, Wherein consists the Freedom and Liberty of conscience, which may he
exercised by the Members of the true Church diversely, without judging one
another?

Quest. IV.
And Lastly, In whom the Power decisive is in Case of Controversy, or
Contention in such Matters? -- Which will also lead us, To observe the vast
Difference betwixt Us and the Papists, and others in this particular.

Quest. I.
As to the First, Whether the Church of Christ has Power in very Cases that
are Matters of Conscience, to give a positive Sentence and Decision, which may
be obligatory upon Believers. --

Answer.
I Answer affirmatively, She has; and shall prove it from diverse Instances,
Articles of Faith are Matters of Conscience.
both from Scripture and Reason. For First, All Principles and Articles of
Faith, which are held doctrinally, are in Respect to those that believe them,
Matters of Conscience. We know the Papists do out of Conscience (such as are
zealous among them) adore, worship and pray to Angels, Saints and Images, yea,
and to the Eucharist, as judging it to be really Christ Jesus; and so do others
place Conscience in Things that are absolutely wrong: Now I say, we being
gathered together into the Belief of certain Principles 1. Proof from Right
Reason.
and Doctrines, without any Constraint or worldly Respect, but by the mere
Force of Truth upon our Understanding, and its Power and Influence upon our
Hearts; these Principles and Doctrines, and the Practices necessarily depending
upon them are, as it were, the Terms that have drawn us together, and the Yet
this is not so the Bond, but that we have also a more inward and invisible, to
wit, the Life of Righteousness, whereby we also have Unity with the upright
Seed in all, even in those, whose Understandings are not yet so enlightened But
to those, who are once enlightened, this is as an outward Bond; and if they
suffer themselves to be darkened through Disobedience, which as it does in the
outward Bond, so it does in the inward.
Bond by which we became centred into one Body and Fellowship, and
distinguished from others. Now if any one, or more, so engaged with us, should
arise to teach any other Doctrine or Doctrines, contrary to these which were
the Ground of our being one; who can deny, but the Body has Power in such a
Case to declare, This is not according to the Truth we profess; and therefore
we pronounce such and such Doctrines to be wrong, with which we cannot have
Unity, nor yet any more Spiritual-Fellowship with those that hold them? And so
cut themselves off from being Members, by dissolving the very Bond by which
they were linked to the Body. Now this cannot be accounted Tyranny and
0ppression, no more than in a civil Society, if one of the Society shall
contradict one or more of the fundamental Articles, upon which the Society was
contracted, it cannot be reckoned a Breach or Iniquity in the whole Society to
declare, that such Contradictors The Disbeliever of the Principle of Fellowship
excludes himself therefrom, and scatters.
have done wrong, and forfeited their Right in that Society; in case, by the
original Constitution, the Nature of the Contradiction implies such a
Forfeiture, as usually it is; and will no Doubt hold in religious Matters. As
if a Body be gathered into one Fellowship, by the Belief of certain Principles,
he that comes to believe otherwise, naturally scatters himself; for that the
Cause, that gathered him, is taken away: And so those that abide constant in
declaring the Thing to be so as it is, and in looking upon him, and witnessing
of him to others (if need be) to be such, as he has made himself, do him no
Injury. I shall make the Supposition in the General, and let every People make
the Application to themselves, abstracting from us; and then let Conscience and
Reason in every impartial Reader declare, whether or not it does not hold?
Suppose a People really gathered unto the Belief of the true and certain
Principles of the Gospel, if any of these People shall arise and contradict any
of those fundamental Truths, whether has not such as stand, good Right to cast
such an one out from among them, and to pronounce positively, This is contrary
to the Truth we profess and own; and therefore ought to be rejected, and not
received, nor yet he that asserts it, as one of us? And is not this obligatory
upon all the Members, seeing all are concerned in the like Care, as to
themselves, to hold the Right, and shut out the Wrong? I cannot tell, if any
Man of Reason can well deny this: However, I shall prove it next from the
Testimony of the Scripture.

2. Proof from Scripture.
Gal. 1.8. But though we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel unto
you, than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. we said
before, so say I now again, if any Man preach any other Gospel unto you, than
that ye have received, let him be accursed.

1 Timothy 1.19, 20. Holding Faith, and a good Conscience, which some having put
away, concerning Faith, have made Shipwreck. Of whom is Hymenaeus and
Alexander, whom I have delivered unto Satan, that they may learn not to
blaspheme.

2 John 10. If there come any unto you, and bring not this Doctrine, receive
him not into your House, neither bid him Rejoice. (For so the Greek has it.)

These Scriptures are so plain and clear in themselves, as to this Purpose,
that they need no great Exposition to the unbiassed and unprejudicate Reader.
For seeing it is so, that in the true Church there may Men arise, and speak
perverse Things, contrary to the Doctrine and Gospel already received; what is
to be the Place of those that hold the pure and ancient Truth? Must they look
upon these perverse Men still as their Brethren? Must they cherish them as
Fellow Members, or must they judge, condemn and deny them? We must not think
the Apostle wanted Charity, who will have them accursed; and that gave
Hymenaeus and Alexander over to Satan, after that they had departed from the
Hymenaeus and Alexander instanced.
true Faith, that they might learn not to blaspheme. In short, if we must (as
our Opposers herein acknowledge) preserve and keep those, that are come to own
the Truth, by the same Means they were gathered and brought into it; we must
not cease to be plain with them, and tell them, when they are wrong; and by
sound Doctrine, both exhort and convince Gainsayers. If the Apostles of Christ
of old, and the Preachers of the everlasting Gospel in this Day, had told all
People, however wrong they found them in their Faith and Principles, Our
Charity and Love is such, we dare not judge you, nor separate from you; but let
us all live in Love together, and every one enjoy his own Opinion, and all will
be well: How should the Nations have been; or what Way can they be brought to
Truth and Righteousness? Would not the Devil love this Doctrine well, by which
Darkness and Ignorance, Error and Confusion might still continue in the Earth
unreproved, and uncondemned? If it was needful then for the Apostles of Christ
in the Days of old to reprove, without sparing to tell the Highpriests, and
great Professors among the Jews, that they were stubborn and stiff-necked, and
always resisted the Holy Ghost, without being guilty of Imposition and
Oppression, or want of true Love and Charity; and also for those Messengers the
Lord raised up in this Day, to reprove and cry out against the
Hireling-Priests, and to tell the World openly, both Professors and Profane,
that they were in Darkness and Ignorance, but of the Truth, A wrong Charity and
false Love to cherish in Error -- is --
Strangers and Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel; if God has gathered a
People, by this Means, into the Belief of one and the same Truth, must not
they, if they turn and depart from it, be admonished, reproved and condemned
(yea, rather than those that are not yet come to the Truth) because they
crucify afresh unto themselves the Lord of Glory, and put him to open Shame? It
seems the Apostle judged it very needful they should be so dealt with, Tit. r.
10. when he says, There are many unruly and vain Talkers and Deceivers,
especially they of the Circumsion, WHOSE MOUTHS MUST BE STOPPED, etc. Were such
a Principle to be received or believed, that in the Church of Christ no Man
should be separated from, no Man condemned or excluded the Fellowship and
Communion of the Body, for his Judgment or Opinion in Matters of Faith, then
what Blasphemies so horrid, what Heresies so damnable, what Doctrines of
Devils, but might harbor itself in the Church of Christ? What need then of
sound Doctrine, if no Doctrine make unsound? What need of convincing and
exhorting Gainsayers, if to Gainsay be no Crime? Where should the Unity of
the Faith be? Were not this an Inlet to all Manner of Abomination; and to make
void the whole Tendency of Christ, and his Apostles Doctrine; and render the
Gospel of none Effect; and give a Liberty to the unconstant and giddy Will of
Man to innovate, alter and overturn it at his Pleasure? So that from all that
is above mentioned, -- The Inlet of all Manner of Abominations.
we do safely conclude, that where a People are gathered together into the
Belief of the Principles and Doctrines of the Gospel of Christ, if any of that
People shall go from their Principles, and assert Things false and contrary to
what they have already received; such as stand and abide firm in the Faith,
have Power, by the Spirit of God, after they have used Christian Endeavors to
convince and reclaim them, upon their Obstinacy to separate from such, and to
exclude them from their spiritual Fellowship and Communion: For otherwise, if
this be denied, farewell to all Christianity, or to the maintaining of any found
Doctrine in the Church of Christ.

Quest. 2.
But, Secondly, Taking it for granted, that the Church of Christ, or Assembly
of Believers, may, in some Cases, that are Matter of Conscience, pronounce a
positive Sentence and Judgment without Hazard of Imposition upon the Members,
it comes to be enquired; In what Cases, and how far this Power rcacheth?

Answer.
I Answer, First, As that which is most clear and undeniable, in the
fundamental Principles and Doctrines of Faith, in Case any should offer to
teach otherwise, as is above declared and proved. But some may perhaps
acknowledge, that indeed if any should contradict the known and owned
Principles of Truth, and teach otherwise, it were fit to call out and exclude
such; but what judge thou as to lesser Matters, as in Principles of less
Consequence, or in outward Ceremonies or Gestures, whether it be fit to press
Uniformity in these Things? For Answer to this, it is fit to consider,

Consideration 1.
First, The Nature of the Things themselves.

2.
Secondly, The Spirit and Ground they proceed from.

3.
And Thirdly, The Consequence and Tendency of them.

But before I proceed upon these, I affirm, and that according to Truth, that
as the Church and Assembly of God's People may, and has Power to decide by the
Spirit of God in Matters fundamental and weighty (without which no Decision nor
Decree in whatever Matters is available) so the same Church and Assembly also,
in other Matters of less Moment, as to themselves (yet being needful and
expedient with a Respect to the Circumstance of Time, Place and other Things
that may fall in) may and has Power by the same Spirit, and not otherwise,
being acted, moved and assisted, and led by it thereto, to pronouce a positive
Judgment: Which, no Doubt, will be found obligatory upon all such, who have a
Sense and Feeling of the Mind of the Spirit, though rejected by such as are not
watchful, and so are out of the Feeling and Unity of the Life. And this is that
which none that own immediate Revelation, or a being inwardly led by the
Spirit, to be now a Thing expected or dispensed to the Saints, can, without
contradicting their own Principle, deny; far less such, with whom I have to do
in this Matter, who claiming this Privilege to Particulars, saying, That they
being moved to do such and such Things, though contrary to the Mind and Sense
The Decision of Matters of less Moment in the Church obligatory.
Cons. 1.
of their Brethren, are not to be judged for it; adding, Why may it not be so,
that God has moved them to it? Now, if this be a sufficient Reason for them to
suppose as to one or two, I may without Absurdity suppose it as well to the
whole Body. And therefore as to the First, to wit, The Nature of the Things
themselves. If it be such a Thing, the doing or not doing whereof, that is,
either any Act, or the Forbearance of any, may bring a real Reproach or Ground
of Accusation against the Truth professed and owned, and in, and through, which
there may a visible Schism and Dissension arise in the Church, by which Truth's
Enemies may be gratified, and itself brought into Disesteem; then it is fit for
such, whole Care is to keep all right, to take Inspection in the Matter, to
meet together in the Fear of God, to wait for his Counsel, and to speak forth
his Mind, according as he shall manifest himself in and among them. And this
was the Practice of the primitive Church in the Matter of Circumcision. For
here lay the Debate: Some thought it not needful to circumcise the Gentiles;
others thought it a Thing not to be dispensed with: And no doubt of these (for
we must remember, they were not the rebellious Jews, but such as had already
believed in Christ) there were that did it out of Conscience, as judging
Circumcision to be still obligatory. For they said thus, except ye be
circumcised after the Manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved. Now what Course took
the Church of Antioch in these Cases? Acts 15.2. Against the Reproach of Truth.
The Church at Antioch, sends a Case to Jerusalem for Advice from the Elders.
They determined, that Paul and Barnabas, and certain other of them should go
unto Jerusalem, unto the Apostles and Elders, about this Question. We must not
suppose they wanted the Spirit of God at Antioch to have decided the Matter,
neither that these Apostles neglected or went from their inward Guide in
undertaking this Journey; yet we see, they judged it meet in this Matter to
have the Advice and Concurrence of the Apostles and Elders, that were at
Jerusalem, that they might be all of one Mind in the Matter. For there is no
greater Property of the Church of Christ, than pure Unity in the Spirit; that
is, a consenting and oneness in Judgment, and Practices in Matters of Faith and
Worship (which yet admits of different Measures, Growths and Motions, but
never, contrary and contradictory Ones; and in these Diversities of Operations,
yet still, by the same Spirit, the true liberty is exercised, as shall be
declared hereafter:) Therefore prays Christ, That they all may be One, as he
and the Father is One. To which Purpose also let these following Scriptures be
examined:

Romans 12.16. Be of the same Mind one toward another.

1 Cor. 1.10. Now I beseech you, Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no Divisions among
you; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same Mind, and in the same
Judgment.

Ephesians. 5.21. Submitting yourselves one to another in the Fear of God.

Phil. 2.2. Fulfill ye my Joy, that ye be likeminded, having the same Love,
being of one Accord, of one Mind.

And yet more remarkable is that of the. Apostle Paul to the Philippians, Chap.
3. Verse 15. Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded; and if in
any Thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you.

Verse 16. Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the
same Rule, let us mind the Jams Thing.

Verse 17. Brethren, be Followers together of me, and mark them which walk so,
as ye have us for an Example.

Pretenders and Innovators judged by the Power of God.
So here, though the Apostle grants Forbearance in Things, whereto they have
not yet attained; yet he concludes, they must walk so, as they have him for an
Example, and so consequently not contrary, or otherwise. And therefore we
conclude, that whereas any in the Church of God pretending Conscience or
Revelation, shall arise to teach and practice (however insignificant or small
in themselves) whether Principles or Practices, yet if they be contrary to such
as are already received as true, and confirmed by God's Spirit in the Hearts of
the Saints, and that the introducing of these Things tend to bring Reproach
upon the Truth, as such as are not edifying in themselves, and so stumble the
Weak; those who have a true and right Discerning, may, in and by the Power of
God authorizing them (and no otherwise) condemn and judge such Things: And they
so doing it, it will be obligatory upon all the Members, that have a true
Sense, because they will feel it to be so, and therefore submit to it. And thus
far as to the Nature of the Things themselves.

Conf. 2.
Secondly, As to the Spirit and Ground they proceed from, Whatsoever
Innovation, Difference, or diverse Appearance, whether in Doctrine or Practice,
proceeds not from the pure Moving of the Spirit of God, or is not done out of
pure Tenderness of Conscience, but either from that, which being puffed up,
affects Singularity, and there through would be observed, commended and
exalted; or from that, which is the Malignity of some Humors and natural
Tempers, which will be contradicting without Cause, and secretly begetting of
Divisions, Animosities and Emulations, by which the Unity and unfeigned Love of
the Brethren is lessened or rent; I say, all Things proceeding from this Root
and Spirit, however little they may be supposed to be of themselves, are to be
guarded against, withstood and denied, as hurtful to the true Church's Peace,
and a Hindrance to the Prosperity of Truth. What proceeds not from the Spirit
of God, to be withstood and denied.


Question
If it be said, How know ye, that these Things proceed from that Ground?

Answer.
For Answer, I make not here any Application, as to particular Persons or
Things; but if it be granted (as it cannot be denied) that there may arise
Persons in the true Church, that may do such Things from The Spirit of
Discerning in the Church, judges Transgressors.
such a Spirit, though pretending Conscience and Tenderness; then it must also
be acknowledged, that such, to whom God has given a true Discerning by his
Spirit, may and ought to judge such Practices, and the Spirit they come from,
and have no Unity with them, which if it be owned in the general, proves the
Case, to wit, That some pretending Conscience in Things seeming indifferent,
but yet it proceeding in them from a Spirit of Singularity, Emulation or
Strife, those that have received a Discerning thereof from the Lord, may and
ought to judge the Transgressors, without being accounted Imposers, Oppressors
of Conscience, or Inforcers of Uniformity, contrary to the Mind of Christ;
against which the Apostle also guardeth the Churches of old.

Phil. 2.3, 4. Let nothing be done through Strife, or vain Glory; but in
Lowliness of Mind let each esteem other BETTER THAN THEMSELVES.

Look not every Man on his own Things; but every Man also on the Things of
others.

Now, if it be an Evil to do any Thing out of Strife; then such Things that are
seen so to be done, are they not to be avoided and forsaken? So that we are
confident, our Judgment herein cannot be denied, or reputed erroneous; except
it be said, That none will, or can arise in the Church of Christ, pretending
such Things from such a Spirit; which I know not any that will, it being
contrary to the Pretenders may arise, and must be watched against.
Discerners of Evils to reprove and warn.
express Prophesies of the Scripture, and the Experience of the Church in all
Ages, as may appear from Mat. 24.24. Acts 15.54. 1 Timothy 4.5. 2 Timothy 3.8. Mark
13.21, 22, 2 Pet. 2.19. Or on the other Hand, that those that abide Faithful,
and have a Discerning of those Evils, ought to be silent, and never ought to
reprove and gain-stand them, nor yet warn and guard others against them; and
that it is a Part of the commendable Unity of the Church of Christ, to suffer
all such Things, without taking Notice of them. I know none will say so; but if
there be any so foolish as to affirm it, let them consider these Scriptures,
Gal. 2.4. 1 Timothy 1.20. 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. Tit. 1.9, 10, 11.

Now if none of these hold true; but, on the contrary, such Evils have been,
and may be found to creep in among the People of God, and that such as see
them, may and ought to reprove them; then necessarily the doing so, is neither
Imposition, Force nor Oppression.

Conf. 3.
As to the Third, concerning the Consequence and Tendency of them, it is mostly
included in the two former: For whatsoever tends not to Edification, but, on
the contrary, to Destruction, and to beget Discord among Brethren, is to be
avoided: According to that of the Apostle, Romans 16.17. Now I beseech you,
Brethren, mark them which cause Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the
Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. -- Sowors of Discord among
Brethren to be avoided.


-- To follow Peace among ourselves --
And since there is no greater Mark of the People of God, than to be at Peace
among themselves; whatsoever tends to break that Bond of Love and Peace, must
be testified against. Let it be observed, I speak always of the Church of
Christ indeed, and deal with such as are of another Mind; not as reckoning only
false Churches not to have this Power, but denying it even to the true Church
of Christ, as judging it not fit for her so to act, as in Relation to her
Members. For though Christ be the Prince of Peace, and does most of all commend
Love and Unity to his Disciples; yet I also know, he came not to fend Peace,
but a Sword, that is, in dividing Man from the Lusts and Sins he has been
united to. -- To the breaking of the Bands of the Wicked.
And also it is the Work of his Disciples and Messengers, to break the Hands
and Unity of the Wicked, wherein they are banded against God and his Truth, and
the Confederacy of such as stand in Unrighteousness, by inviting and bringing
as many as will obey, unto Righteousness; whereby they become disunited and
separated from their Companions, with whom they were centred, and at Peace, in
the contrary and cursed Nature. And, indeed, blessed are they that are sent
forth of the Lord to scatter here, that they may gather into the Unity of the
Life: And they are blessed that, in this Respect, even for Righteousness Sake,
are scattered and separated from their Brethren; that they may come to know the
Brotherhood and Fellowship, which is Prove. 20.26.
in the Light; from which none ought to scatter, nor to be scattered, but be
more and more gathered thereunto. And this leads me to what I proposed in the
third Place, under this Head, of the true Churches Power in Matters Spiritual,
or purely Conscientious; which may be thus objected:

Quest. 3.
If thou plead so much for an Oneness in the smallest Matters, wherein
consists the Freedom and Liberty of the Conscience, which may be exercised by
the Members of the true Church diversely, without judging one another?

Answer.
In Answer to this Proportion, I affirm, first in general; that whatsoever
Things may be supposed to proceed from the same Spirit, though diverse in its
Appearance, tending to the same End of Edification, and which in the Tendency
of it, lays not a real Ground for Division, or Dissension of Spirit,
Fellow Members ought not only to bear one another, but strengthen one another
in them.

Now the Respects wherein this may be, I can describe no better than the
Apostle Paul does principally in two Places, which therefore will be fit to
consider at Length for the Opening of this Matter; this being one of the
weightiest Points pertaining to this Subject. Because, as on the one Hand due
Forbearance ought to be exercised in its right Place; so on the other, the many
Devices and false Pretenses of the Enemy creeping in here, ought to be guarded
against.

Place 1.
The first is, 1 Cor. 12. from Verse 4. to 31. thus:

Diversities of Gifts, Administrations and Operations from the same Spirit
makes no Division.
Verse 4. Now there are Diversities of Gifts, but the same Spirit.

Verse 5. And there are Differences of Administrations, but the same Lord.

Verse 6. And there are Diversities of Operations, but it is the same God which
works all in all.

Verse 7. But the Manifestation of the Spirit is given to every Man to profit
withal.

Verse 8. For to one is given by the Spirit the Word of Wisdom, to another the
Word of Knowledge by the same Spirit.

Verse 9. To another Faith by the same Spirit, to another the Gifts of Healing
by the same Spirit.

Verse 10. To another the Working of Miracles, to another Prophecy, to another
Discerning of Spirits, to another diverse Kinds of Tongues, to another the
Interpretation of Tongues.

Verse 11. But all these works that one and the self-same Spirit, dividing to
every Man severally, as he will.

As many Members in one Body concur to the upholding the same.
Verse 12. For as the Body is One, and has many Members, and all the Members
of that one Body being many, are one Body, so also is Christ.

Verse 13. For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one Body, whether we be
Jews or Gentiles, whether we he bond or free; and have been all made to drink
into one Spirit.

Verse 14. For the Body is not one Member, but many.

Verse 15. If the Foot shall say, because I am not the Hand, I am not of the
Body; is it therefore not of the Body?

Verse 16. And if the Ear shall say, because I am not the Eye, I am not of the
Body; is it not therefore of the Body?

Verse 17. If the whole Body were an Eye, where were the Hearing? If the whole
were Hearing, where were the Smelling?

Verse 18. But now has God set the Members every one of them in the Body, as
it has pleased Him.

Verse 19. And if they were all one Member, where were the Body?

Verse 20. But now are they many Members, yet but one Body.

Verse 21. And the Eye cannot say unto the Hand, I have no Need of thee nor
again, the Head to the Feet, I have no Need of you,

Verse 22. Nay, much more those Members of the Body, which seem to be more
feeble, are necessary.

Verse 23. And those Members of the Body, which we think to be less honorable,
upon these we bestow more abundant Honor, and our uncomely Parts have more
abundant Comeliness.

Verse 24. For our comely Parts have no Need, but God has tempered the Body
together, having given more abundant Honor to that Part which lacked:

Verse 25. That there should be no Schism in the Body; but that the Members
should have the same Care one of another.

Verse 26. And whether one Member suffer, all the Members suffer with it; or
one Member be honored, all the Members rejoice with it.

Verse 27. Now ye are the Body of Christ, and Members in particular:

Verse 28. And God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily
Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that Miracles, then Gifts of Healing Helps,
Governments, Diversities of Tongues.

Verse 29. Are all Apostles? Are all Prophets? Are all Teachers? Are all
Workers of Miracles?

Verse 30. Have all the Gifts of Healing? Do all speak with Tongues? Do all
interpret?

Which I would not have set down at large, but that there be some so careless
(especially in Matters they like not) that they will scarce be at the Pains
seriously to read over a Citation only named; and that also this being
presented before the Reader, in the Current of the Discourse, will fix the
Nature of my Application the more in his Understanding. For the Apostle shows
here the Variety of the Operations of the diverse Members of the Body of Christ,
working to one and the same End; as the diverse Members of a Man's Body toward
the maintaining and upholding of the whole. The Sum of the Premises.


Now these are not placed in contrary Workings, for so they would destroy one
another; and so the Apostle in the ordering of them in three several Kinds
proves this. First, Diversities of Gifts. Secondly, Differences of
Administrations. Thirdly, Diversities of Operations: And that which is the Bond
that keeps the Oneness, here he also mentions, to wit, The same Spirit, the
same Lord, the same God: The Apostle names nothing of Contrariety or
Opposition. But left any No Contrariety in the Body of Christ.
should be so critical, as to bring in here the School-Distinction of
Contrarium Oppositum, and Contradictorium, I shall not deny, but Contrariety or
Opposition, in the Sense it is sometimes taken, may be found in the Body
without Schism: As the comely Parts may be said to be Opposite or Contrary to
the Uncomely, or the Left Hand contrary to the Rights or the Foot opposite to
the Head, as the uppermost Part to the undermost; or the Doing a Thing is
contrary to the Forbearing of it; but as for that which is acknowledged to be
Propositions, or Termini Contradictorii, that is, contradictory Propositions,
which are in themselves irreconcilable, whereof one must be still wrong, and
that still destroy one another, and work contrary Effects, they are not at all
admitted, nor supposed to be in the Body of Christ; as I shall give in one
Instance, Verse 8. To one is given by the Spirit the Word of Wisdom, to another
the Word of Knowledge by the same Spirit. First, here are two different Gifts,
but not contrary. Secondly, There may something like Contrariety, in the Sense
aforementioned, be here supposed; as, some may want this Gift of Wisdom and
Knowledge, and so to have is contrary to want (though as to these two, none may
be absolutely said to want them; yet all have them not in the same Degree, as a
special Gift; though as to some Gifts there may be an absolute Want, as that of
Miracles, and Interpretation of Tongues.) But should I suppose such a
Contrariety, or more properly a Contradiction, as Instances, 1. 2.
Diversities of Works and Operations in the Body.
to Wisdom, to oppose Folly, and to Knowledge, utter Ignorance; this were an
Opposition not to be admitted of in the Body, because it were false to suppose
that to proceed from the same Spirit. And such Contrarieties or Diversities, as
cannot justly be supposed to proceed from the same Spirit of God, which is the
Bond that links together, cannot be mutually entertained in the Body; so the
Differences and Diversities, which the Apostle admits of, while he speaks
largely in this Matter, are, That none ought to be offended at his Brother,
that be has not the same Work and Office in the Body that he has; but that
every one keep in his own Place, as God has appointed them; that neither them
that are set in a higher Place, despise them that are set in a lower; nor them
that are set in a lower, grudge and repine at such as are set higher; but all
work in their proper Place toward the Edification of the Whole. And that the
Apostle intends this, is manifest, where he draws to a Conclusion, Verse 27.
Now ye are the Body of Christ, and Members in particular, and God has set some
in the Church, first, Apostles, secondly, Prophets, etc. and then he subsumes,
Are all Apostles, etc.

Place 2.
Which the same Paul again confirms, Ephesians. 4.8.11. to the 17th, which was the
second Place I intended; and shall only mention, for Brevity's Sake, leaving
the Reader to consider of it at his Leisure.

This is also held forth by the beloved Disciple John, in his threefold
Distinction, 1 John 2.12, 13. The true Liberty in the Church.
Of Fathers, young Men, and little Children: And by Peter, 1 Pet. 5.1.5. in
that of Elders and Younger. The true Liberty then in the Church of Christ is
exercised, when as one judges not another in these different Places; but live
in Love together, all minding the Unity and general Good of the Body, and to
work their own Work in their own Place. Also the Forbearance of the Saints is
exercised, when as they judge not one another for being found in the different
Appearance, either of Doing or Forbearing; which may be peculiar to their
several Places and Stations in the Body: For that there is, and may be
Diversities of Works there, is excellently well expressed by the Apostle, viz.
Diversities of Works expressed by the Apostles.


Romans 12.3. For I say, through the Grace given unto me, to every Man that is
among you, not to think of himself more highly than be ought to think; but to
think soberly, according as God has dealt to every Man the Measure of Faith.

Verse 4. For as we have many Members in one Body, and all Members have not the
same Office:

Verse 5. So we being many, are one Body in Christ, and every one Members one
of another.

Verse 6. Having then Gifts differing, according to the Grace that is given to
us, whether Prophecy, let us prophesy according to the Proportion of Faith,

Verse 7. Or ministry, let us wait on our Ministering; or he that teaches, on
Teaching:

Verse 8. Or he that exhorieth, on Exhortation: He that gives, let him do it
with Simplicity; he that rules, with Diligence; be that shows Mercy, with
Cheerfulness.

If any then should quarrel with his Brother for exercising that which
belongs to the Office of the Body Christ has called him to, and would force
him to exercise the same Office he does, though he be not called to it; here is
a Breach of Christian Liberty, and an imposing upon it.

The Breach of Liberty begets Jarrs and Schisms.
Now all Schisms and Jarrs fall out in this twofold Respect: Either when any
Person or Persons assume another, or an higher Place in the Body, than God will
have them to be in, and so exercise an Office; or go about to perform that,
which they ought not to do; or when, as any truly exercising in their Place,
which God has given them, others rise up and judge them, and would draw them
from it; both of which Cases have been, and may be supposed to fall out in the
Church of Christ. As 1 Cor. 4.3.4. where some judged Paul wrongously; 3 John 9.
where one exalting himself above his Place, judged whom he ought not. We see
then, what Diversities be most usually in the Church of God, consisting in the
Difference of the Gift proceeding from the same Spirit; and in the diverse
Places, that the several Members have in the same Body for the Edification of
it; and every one being here in his own Station, his standing therein is his
Strength and Perfection; and to be in another, though higher and more eminent,
would but weaken and hurt him: And so in this there ought to be a mutual
Forbearance, that there may neither be a coveting nor aspiring on the one Hand,
nor yet a despising or condemning Acts of Forbearance in the primitive Church.
on the other. But besides the Forbearance of this Nature, which is most
ordinary and universal (and for the Exercise whereof there is, and will still
be a Need, so long as there is any Gathering or Church of Christ upon the
Earth) there is a certain Liberty and Forbearance also, that is more
particular, and has a Relation to the Circumstance of Times and Places, which
will not hold universally; whereof we have the Example of the primitive Church,
testified by the Scriptures in two or three Particulars. The first was, In
suffering Circumcision to the Jews for a Time, and not only so, but also diverse
others of the legal and ceremonial Purifications and Customs, as may appear,
Acts 21. Ver. 21, 22, 23, 24, etc. The second was, In the Observation of
certain Days, Romans 14.5. And the third, In the abstaining from Meats, 1 Cor. 8.
throughout: Here the Apostle persuades to, and recommends a Forbearance,
because of the Weakness of some; for he says not any where, nor can it be found
in all the Scriptures of the Gospel, that these Things such weak Ones were
exercised in, were Things indispensably necessary, or that it had been better
for them, they had not been under such Scruples, providing it had been from a
Principle of true Clearness, and so of Faith.

Acts of Forbearance or Condescension under the Law.
Next again, These Acts of Forbearance were done in a Condescension to the
Weakness of such, upon whom the ancient (and truly deserved in its Season)
Veneration of the Law had such a deep Impression, that they could not yet
dispense with all its Ceremonies and Customs: And to such the Apostle holds
forth a twofold Forbearance.

1. To Jews.
First, A certain Compliance by such Believers, as were gathered out from the
Jews; though they saw over these Things, yet it was fit they should condescend
somewhat to their Countrymen and Brethren, who were weak.

2. To Genetiles.
Secondly, The like Forbearance in the Gentiles, not to judge them in these
Things; but we see, that it was not allowed for such weak Ones to propagate
these Scruples, or draw others into them; and that when as any of the Churches
of the Gentiles, who wanted this Occasion, would have been exercising this
Liberty, or pleading for it, the Apostle does down-rightly condemn it, as I
shall make appear in all the three Instances abovementioned.

1. Of Circumcision.
First, In that of Circumcision, Gal. 5.2, 4.

Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit
you nothing; Christ is become of none Effect unto you: Whosoever of you are
justified by the Law, ye are fallen from Grace.

Can there be any Thing more positive? Might not some here have pretended
Tenderness of Conscience, and have said, Though the Decree of the Apostles do
dispense with Circumcision in me; yet if I find a Scruple in myself, and a
Desire to it cut of Tenderness, why should it be an Evil in me to do it, more
than in the Jews that believe? We see, there is no Room left here for such
Reasoning.

Inst. 2. of Observation of Days.
Secondly, As to Observations, Gal. 4.9, 10, 11. Might not they have answered,
What if we regard a Day to the Lord, must we not then? Are not these thy own
Words? We see that did not hold here, because in them it was a Returning to the
beggarly Elements.

Inst 3. of Meats.
Thirdly, As to Meats, 1 Timothy 4.3. Here we see that is accounted a Doctrine of
Devils; which in another Respect: was Christian Forbearance. And therefore now,
and that in the general Respect, he gives this Reason, Verse 4. For every
Creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received with
Thanksgiving of them that believe, and know the Truth. So we see, that in these
particular Things there is great Need of Wariness in the Church of Christ; for
that sometimes Forbearance under a Pretense of Liberty may be more hurtful than
downright Judging. I suppose, if any should arise, and pretend Conscience, and
claim a Liberty for Circumcision, and the Purifications of the Law, whether all
Christians would not with one Voice condemn it? And so as to Days and Meats,
how do the Generality of Protestants judge it? Though I deny not but there may,
and ought to be a mutual Forbearance in the Church of Christ in certain such
Cases, which may fall in; and a Liberty there is in the Lord, which breaks not
the Peace of the true Church; but in such Matters (as I observed at large
before) both the Nature of the Things, the Spirit they come from, and the
Occasion from whence, and their Consequence and Tendency is to be carefully
observed.

SECTION VII. Concerning the Power of DECISION.
Head III. Proposition 2.
SEeing, then, it may fall out in the Church of Christ, that both some may
assume another Place in the Body than they ought, and others may lay claim to a
Liberty, and pretend Conscience in Things they ought not, and that without
Question the Wrong is not to be tolerated, but to be testified against, however
specious its Appearance may be; and that it must, and ought to be judged: The
Question will arise, Who is the proper Judge or Judges, in whom resideth the
Power of deciding this Controversy? And this is that which I undertook, in the
next Place, to treat of, as being the specific Difference, and distinguishing
Property of the Church of Christ, from all other antichristian Assemblies and
Churches of Man's building and framing.

The Spirit of God the proper Judge of Controversies in the Church.
To give a short, and yet clear and plain Answer to this Proposition: The only
proper Judge of Controversies in the Church, is the Spirit of God, and the
Power of deciding solely lies in it; as having the only unerring, infallible
and certain Judgment belonging to it; which Infallibility is not necessarily
annexed to any Persons, Person or Places whatsoever, by Virtue of any Office,
Place or Station any one may have, or have had in the Body of Christ. That is
to say, that any have Ground to reason thus, Because I am, or have been such an
eminent Member, therefore my Judgment is infallible; or, Because we are the
greatest Number; or, that we live in such a noted or famous Place, or the like:
Though some of these Reasons may, and ought to have their true Weight in Cases
of contradictory Assertions (as shall hereafter be observed) yet not so, as
upon which either mainly, or only the infallible Judgment is to be placed; but
upon the Spirit, as that which is the firm and unmovable Foundation.

And now, if I should go on no further, I have said enough to vindicate us from
IMPOSITION, and from the Tyranny, whether of Popery, Prelacy, or Presbytery, or
any such like we have, or may be branded with, as shall after appear.

Exodus 25.22. Numb. 7.89 Hos. 11.10. Amos 7.14 2 Chro. 18.6, 7. John 6.45. Heb.
1.1, 2.
But to proceed: Herein lies the Difference betwixt the Dispensation of the
Law, and the Gospel or New Covenant; for that of old all Answers were to be
received from the Priests in the Tabernacle. For he, that appeared betwixt the
Cherubims there, spoke forth his Mind to the People; and there were also
Families of the Prophets, to whom they resorted for the Answer of the Lord
(though sometimes, as a Signification of the further Glory that was to be
revealed, it pleased God to reveal his Mind to some, even to them, who were
neither Prophets nor Prophets Sons) but, under the Gospel, we are all to be
taught of God, that is, none are excluded Judgment infallible proceeds from the
Spirit infallible.
from his Privilege, by nut being of the Tribe of Levi, or of the Children of
the Prophets: Though this Privilege is as truly exercised in some, by assenting
and obeying to what God commands and reveals through others (they feeling Unity
with it in the Life) as by such, who by the Revelation and Command of God's
Spirit hold forth his Will to his People in certain Particulars, which the same
Spirit leads and commands them to obey. So that we say, and that with a very
good Ground, that it is no way inconsistent with this sound and unerring
Principle to affirm, That the Judgment of a certain Person or Persons in
certain Cases is infallible, or for a certain Person or Persons to give a
positive Judgment, and pronounce it as obligatory upon others, because the
Foundation and Ground thereof is, not because they are infallible, but because
in these Things, and at that Time they were led by the infallible Spirit. And
therefore it will not shelter any in this Respect to pretend, I am not bound to
obey the Dictates of fallible Man; is not this Popery, I not being persuaded in
myself? Because it is not to be disobedient to them, but to the Judgment of
Truth through them at such a Time; and one or more there not being persuaded,
may as probably proceed from their being hardened, and being out of their Place,
and in an Incapacity to hear the Requirings, as that the Thing is not required
of them, which none can deny; but it may as well be supposed, as the contrary.
But for the further clearing of this Matter, before I conclude, I shall not
doubt both to affirm and prove these following Propositions.

Assert. 1.
First, That there never will, nor can be wanting, in Case of Controversy, the
Spirit of God, to give Judgment through some or other in the Church of Christ,
so long as any Assembly can properly, or in any tolerable Supposition be so
termed.

Assert. 2.
Secondly, That God has ordinarily, in the communicating of his Will under his
Gospel, employed such whom he had made use of in gathering of his Church, and
in feeding and watching over them; though not excluding others.

Assert. 3.
Thirdly, That their de Facto, or effectual Meeting together, and giving a
positive Judgment in such Cases, will not import Tyranny and Usurpation, or an
Inconsistency with the universal Privilege that all Christians have to be led
by the Spirit; neither will the Pretenses of any contradicting them, or
refusing to submit upon the Account they see it not, or so, excuse them from
being really guilty of disobeying God.

Assert. 1. Proved.
For the First, to those that believe the Scripture, there will need no other
Probation than that of Matt. 28.20. And lo, I am with you always, even unto the
End of the World. And Verse 18. And the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against
it.

The Infallible Spirit the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against.
Now if the Church of Christ were so destitute of the Spirit of God, that in
Case of Difference there were not any found that, by the infallible Spirit,
could give a certain Judgment; would not then the Gates of Hell prevail against
it? For where Strife and Division is, and no effectual Way to put an End to it,
there not only the Gates, but the Courts and inner Chambers of Darkness
prevail; for where Envy and Strife is, there is Confusion, and every Evil Work.

The erring Church or People --
But that there may be here no Ground of Mistake or Supposition, that we were
annexing Infallibility to certain Persons, or limiting the Church to such; I
understand not by the Church, every particular Gathering or Assembly,
circumscribed to any particular Country or City: For I will not refuse but
diverse of them, both apart and together, if not established in God's Power, may
err. Nor yet do I lay the absolute Stress upon a general Assembly of Persons,
as such, picked and chosen out of every one of those particular Churches; as if
what the Generality or Plurality of those conclude upon, were necessarily to be
supposed to be the infallible Judgment of Truth: Though to such an Assembly of
Persons truly stated (as they ought) in God's Power, he has heretofore
revealed his Will in such Cases; and yet may, as the most probable Way (which
shall be spoken of hereafter:) Yet such, as a mere Assembly, is not conclusive,
nor yet do I understand by the Church, every Gathering or Assembly of People,
who may hold sound and true Principles, or have a Form of Truth; for some may
lose the Life and Power of Godliness, who notwithstanding may retain the Form
or Notions of Things, but yet are to be turned away from, because in -- Having
the Form of Truth.
so far (as I observed before) as Sanctification, to wit, those that are
sanctified in Christ Jesus, make the Church, and give the right Definition to
it: Where that is wholly wanting, the Church of Christ cease to be; and there
remains nothing but a Shadow without Substance. Such Assemblies then are like
the dead Body, when the Soul is departed, which is no more sit to be conversed
with; because it corrupts, and proves noisome to the Living. But by the Church
of Christ, I understand all those that truly and really have received and hold
the Truth, as it is in Jesus, and are in Measure sanctified, or sanctifying in
and by the Power and Virtue thereof working in their inward Parts; and this may
be made up of diverse distinct Gatherings or Churches in several Countries or
Nations: I say, so long as these, or any of them do retain that, which justly
entitles them the Church or Churches of Christ (which they may be truly called)
though there may fall out some Differences, Divisions or Schisms among them; as
we may see there was no small Dissension in the Church of Autioch, and yet it
ceased not to be a Church, Acts 15.2. and 1 Cor. 1.11. The true Church.


The certain Judgment of Truth is never wanting in the Church of Christ.
For it has been declared unto me of you, my Brethren, that there are
Contentions among you; and yet, Verse 2. he entitles them the Church of God,
them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus: So long, I say, as they truly retain
this Title of the Church of Christ, as being really such, there will never be
wanting the certain Judgment of Truth. For which, besides the positive Promise
of Christ beforementioned (which is not without Blasphemy to be called in
Question, or doubted of) I shall add these Reasons. That seeing the Church of
Christ is his Body, of which he is the Head, it were to make Christ negligent
of his Body, who styles himself the good Shepherd, and has said, He will never
leave nor forsake his own; or else (which is worse) it will infer a Possibility
of Error, or Mistake in Christ, in whom, as the Head, are the Eyes of the Body,
by which it is to be ruled in all Things. Next, We never find in alt the
Scripture since the Gospel, that ever this was wanting; but that God still gave
infallible Judgment by his Spirit in some of the Respects abovementioned. If
the Transactions and Controversies of the after Centuries be alleged, I will
boldly affirm and prove, That there was never a true Judgment wanting, so long
as the Nature and Essence of the true Church was retained: If any will needs
affirm otherwise, let them show me where, and I shall answer it. Though I deny
not (that after the Mystery of Iniquity did begin to work, or had so wrought,
first by intermixing, and afterward by altogether forsaking the Nature of
Truth, retaining only the bare Name of the Church) but that there might be some
scattered Ones, here and there one in a Nation, and now and then one in an Age,
who, by the Power and Virtue of the Spirit of Life working in them, might be
truly sanctified; yet these were but as Witnesses in Sackcloth, no ways
sufficient to give these Assemblies, in which they were engrossed, the
Appellation Witnesses in Sackcloth.
of the Church of Christ, coming no more under Observation by the Generality,
nor having, as to them, any more Influence than some little or scarcely
discernable Sparks of Fire in many great Heaps and Mountains of Ashes. And thus
much to prove, that where there is any Gathering or Assembly, which truly and
properly may be called the Church of Christ, the infallible Judgment will never
be wanting in Matters of Controversy.

Assertion 2 proved.
Secondly, That ordinarily God has, in the Communicating of his Will under his
Gospel, employed such whom he had made use of in gathering of his Church, and
in feeding and watching over them, though not excluding others. For, as in a
natural Body (to which the Church of Christ is compared) the more substantial
and powerful Members do work most effectual; and their Help is most necessary
to supply any Defect or Trouble in the Body: So also, if there be Diversities
of Gifts in the Church (as is above proved) and some have a greater Measure,
and some a lesser, those that have the greater are more capable to do Good, and
to help the Body in its Need, than others that are weaker and less powerful.
Since there are Strong and Weak, Babes and young Men, who have overcome the
evil One, and in whom the Word of God abides, such are more able, when the
Enemy besets, to resist (having already overcome) than others who are but yet
wrestling, and not Conquerors. Now, every Controversy and Dissension in the
Church Comes from the Besetments of the Enemy; yet if any of these strong From
the Besetments of the Enemy Dissentions arise.
or young Men, or powerful Members, go from their Station, it is not denied but
that they are as weak as any; and it is pre-supposing their Faithfulness in
their I lace that I thus affirm, and no otherwise. Nor vet do I limit the Lord
to this Method: For in him are all the Treasures both of our Wisdom and
Strength; and the weakest in his Hand are as strong as the strongest, who may
now, as well as heretofore, kill a Goliath by the Hand of little David; yet we
see the Lord does ordinarily make use of the Strong to support the Weak: And
indeed, when such as may be termed weak are so made use of, it alters the
Nature of their Place, and constitutes them in a higher and more eminent
Degree. For though it was little David, it was also he that was to be King of
Israel. Though the Apostles were mean Men among the Jews, yet they were such as
were to be the Apostles of the Lord of Glory; Instruments to gather the lost
Sheep of the House of Israel, and to proclaim the acceptable Day of the Lord.
And though Paul was once accounted the least of all the Saints, a Child born
out of due Time; yet was he him who was to be the greatest Apostle of the
Gentiles.

Now then, let us consider whom the Lord makes use of in the Affairs of the
primitive Church, and through whom he gave forth his infallible Judgment. Did
he not begin first by Peter? He was the first that spoke in the first Meeting
they had, Acts 1. and who first stood up after the pouring forth of the Spirit;
and who first appeared before the Council of the Jews, and spoke in Behalf of
the Gospel of Christ: Though I am far from calling him (as some do) the Prince
of the Apostles; yet I may safely say, he was one of the most ancient and
eminent, and to whom Christ, in a Manner somewhat more than ordinary, had
recommended the Feeding of his Flock. We see also he was first made use of in
preaching to the Gentiles, and what Weight his and James's Words had in the
Contest about Circumcision toward the bringing the Matter to a Conclusion,
Acts 15. Yet that we may see Infallibility was not inseparably annexed to him,
he was found blameable in a certain Matter, Gal. 2.11. notwithstanding his
Sentence was positively received in many Particulars.

So also the Apostle Paul argues from his gathering of the Churches of Corinth
and Galatia, that they ought to be Followers of him, and positively concludes
in diverse Things. And upon this Supposition, exhorts the Churches (both he and
Peter) in many Passages heretofore mentioned (which I will not, to avoid
Repetition, again rehearse) to obey the Elders that watch for them; to hold
such in Reputation, and to submit themselves to them that have addicted
themselves to the Ministry of the Saints, Cor. 16.15, 16.

Also, we see how the Lord makes use of John, his beloved Disciple, to inform
and reprove the Seven Churches of Asia; and no Doubt John (the rest, by the
usual Computation, being at that time all removed) was then the most noted and
famous Elder alive: And, indeed, I mind not where, under the Gospel, Christ
has used any other Method; but that he always, in revealing his Will, has
made use of such as he himself had before appointed Elders and Officers in his
Church; though it be far from us to limit the Lord, so as to exclude any from
this Privilege; nor yet, on the other Hand, will the Possibility hereof be a
sufficient Warrant to allow every obscure Member to stand up and offer to rule,
judge, and condemn the whole Body; nor yet is it without Cause that such an
One's Message is jealoused and called in Question, unless it have very great
Evidence, and be bottomed upon some very weighty and solid Cause and
Foundation. And God does so furnish those whom he raises up, in a singular
Manner, of which (as I said) I mind no Instance in the New Testament: And in
the Old we see, though it was strange that little David should oppose himself
to the great Goliath, yet he had, before that, killed both the Lion and the
Bear, which was no less improbable; and which of all is most observable, was,
before that Time, by the Appointment of God, and the Hand of the Prophet,
anointed King of Israel. Compare the 16th and 17th Chapters of the First of
Samuel.

Assertion 3 proved.
Now, as to the Third, That any particular Persons, de Facto, or effectually
giving out a positive Judgment, is no encroaching nor imposing upon their
Brethrens Conscience, is necessarily included in what is said before; upon
which, for further Probation, there will only need this short Reflection: That
for any Member or Members, in Obedience to the Lord, to give forth a positive
Judgment in the Church of Christ, is their proper Place and Office, they being
called to it; and so for them to exercise that Place in the Body, which the
Head moves them to, is not to usurp Authority over their Fellow Members. As, on
the other Hand, to submit and obey (it being the Place of some so to do) is not
a renouncing a being led by the Spirit, seeing the Spirit leads them so to do:
And not to obey, in case the Judgment be according to Truth, and the Spirit
lead to it, is, no Doubt, both offensive and sinful. And that all this may be
supposed in the Church of Christ without Absurdity, and so establish the
abovementioned Propositions, will appear by a short Review of the former
Passages.

If that Peter and James, their giving a positive Judgment in the Case of
Difference in diverse Particulars, did not infer them to be Imposers, so neither
will any so doing now, being led to it by the same Authority: Every one may
easily make the Application. And, on the contrary, if for any to have stood up
and resisted their Judgment, pretending an Unclearness, or so, and thereby held
up the Difference after their Sentence, breaking the Peace and Unity of the
Church (Things being concluded with an It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to
us) I say, if such would have given just Cause of Offense, and have been cut
off, as Despisers of Dignities of old, will not the like Case, now occurring,
hold the same Conclusion? Now, whether those Popositions do not hold, upon the
Principles before laid down and proved, I leave to every judicious and
impartial Reader to judge. Acts. 15.21.


Submission and Obedience to the Judgment of Truth, the Spirit of God leads
into.
Moreover, we see how positive the Apostle Paul is in many Particulars
throughout all his Epistles, insomuch as he says, 2 Thessalonians. ult. v. 14, If any
Man obey not our Word by this Epistle, note that Man, and have no Company with
him, that he may be ashamed. And in many more Places, before mentioned, where
he commands them both to obey him, and several others, who were appointed (no
Doubt by the Spirit of God) to be Rulers among them; and yet, who will say,
that either the Apostle did more than he ought, in commanding; or they less
than they were obliged to, in submitting? And yet neither were to do any Thing
contrary, or more than the Spirit of God in themselves led them to, or allowed
them in. And if the Church of God bear any Parity or Proportion now in these
Days with what it did of old (as I know no Reason why it should not) the same
Things may now be supposed to take Effect that did then, and also be lawfully
done upon the like Occasion, proceeding from the same Spirit, and established
upon the same Basis and Foundation. And thus much, as to that Part, to show in
whom the Power of Decision is: Which being seriously and impartially
considered, is sufficient to clear us from the Tyranny, either of Popery, or
any other of that Nature, with those that are not either wilfully blind, or
very ignorant of Popish Principles, as the judicious Reader may observe. But
seeing to mainfest that Difference was one of those Things proposed to be
considered of, I shall now come to say something of it in its proper Place.

SECTION VIII. How this Government altogether differs from the oppressing and
persecuting Principality of the Church of Rome, and other Antichristian
Assemblies.
Head III. Propos. 3 proved.
WHatever Way we understand the Popish Principles in this Matter, whether of
those that are most devoted to the Sea of Rome, as the King of Spain's
Dominions, and the Princes of Italy; the Jesuits, and Generality of all those
called religious Orders, who hold, that Papa in Cathedra non potest err are,
licet absque Concilio; that is, That the Pope in his Chair, cannot err, though
without a Council; or of those that are less devoted, who plead this
Infallibility in the Pope and Council, lawfully convened, who yet, by the more
zealous, are reckoned petty Schismatics; I say, whatever Way we take them, all
those that do profess themselves Members of the Romish Church, and are so far
such, as to understand their own Principles, do unquestionably acknowledge.
Principles of the Romist Church.


I.
First, That no General-Council can be lawfully called, without the Bishop of
Rome, as Christ's Vicar, and Peter's Successor, call it.

II.
Secondly, That either he himself, or some for him, as his Legates, must be
there present, and always preside.

III.
Thirdly, That the Members having Vote, are made up of Bishops or Presbyters,
or Commissioners, from the several Orders, being of the Clergy.

IV.
Fourthly, That what is concluded on by Plurality of Votes, and agreed to by
the Pope and his Legates, must necessarily be supposed to be the Judgment of
the infallible Spirit.

V.
Fifthly, That all the Members of the Church are bound implicitly to receive
and believe it, because it proceeds from a Council to be accounted lawful in
the Respects abovementioned, without Regard to the intrinsic or real Truths
of the Things prescribed, or bringing them in any Respect to the Test or
Examination of the Spirit of God in themselves, or the Scripture's Testimony,
or their Agreement or Disagreement with Truths, formerly believed and received;
for so much as to prove or try them by Way of Doubt, they reckon a Breach of
the first Command; as, on the other Hand, a Matter of Merit, implicitly to
receive and believe them, however inconsistent with the Testimony of the Spirit
in one's own Heart, Scripture, Truth and Reason.

VI.
Sixthly, That no Man, as a Member of the Church of Christ, in that simple
Capacity, unless a Clergyman, or the Ambassador of some King, etc. can be
admitted to sit, vote, or give his Judgment.

VII.
Seventhly, That it is in no Respect to be supposed, that any Members,
especially Laics, whether in a particular City, Country or Nation, may meet
concerning any Things relating to the Faith and Worship of the Church, and
give, by the Spirit of God any Judgment; but that all such Meetings are to be
accounted schismatical and unlawful. And,

VIII.
Lastly, That the Promise of Infallibility, and the Gates of Hell not
prevailing, is necessarily annexed to the Pope and Council, called and
authorized in the Manner above expressed.

Now, if to deny every one of these Propositions, wherein all understanding Men
know the Errors and Abuses of the Romish Church consist, be to be Popish; then
indeed may we be supposed to be one with the Papists in this Matter, but not
otherwise: So that the very mentioning of these Things is sufficient to show
the Difference betwixt us and them. But if any will needs plead our Agreement
with them thus;

Objection.
The Papists affirm an Infallibility of Judgment in the Church of Christ, and
so do you; therefore you are one with Papists.

Answer 1.
I answer; That proves no more our Oneness in this Matter, than if it should be
said, The Papists plead that God ought to be worshipped, and so do you;
therefore ye agree: Notwithstanding of the vast Differences as to that, which
is not only known betwixt us and them, but betwixt them and all Protestants,
who agree more with them in the Matter of Worship than we do.

Answer 2.
Next again, Infallibillity in the Church (according as we hold it. and I have
above defined it) no Man upon our Supposition (or Hypothesis) can deny. For
since we first assert, as a Principle, that no Gathering, no Church, nor
Assembly of People, however true their Principles, or The true Church is led by
the Infallible Spirit
exact their Form be, are to be accounted the Church of Christ, except the
infallible Spirit lead and guide; what can be the Hazard to say, that in such a
Church there is still an infallible Judgment? Indeed this is so far from
Popery, that it resolves in a Proposition quite contradictory to them. The
Romanists say, That the infallible Spirit always accompanies the outward
visible Professors, and is annexed to the eternal Succession of Bishops and
Pastors, though ever so vicious, as to their Lives: Yea, though perfect For
some Popes have been known to deny, or at least to doubt the Truth of the
Scriptures as to the History of Christ, and to call in Question the immortality
of the Soul, and the Resurrection.
Atheists and Infidels in their private Judgments, yet if outwardly professing
the Catholic Faith, and Subjection to the Church, they must be Partakers of
the infallible Spirit. We say the quite contrary: That where there is either
Viciousness of Persons, of Unsoundness of Judgment in the particular Members,
these cannot, by Virtue of any outward Call or Succession they have, or any
Profession they make, or Authority they may pretend to, so much as claim an
Interest in any Part of the Church of Christ, or the infallible Spirit.

The infallible Judgment where it is.
So then, if we admit none to be Members of the Church but such as are led and
guided by the Spirit, it will be no Popery, in the second Place, to affirm,
that where there is a Company of People so gathered, who are not any longer to
retain justly the Name of the Church of Christ than they are led and guided by
his Spirit, or a Church so qualified and designed, there is still an infallible
Judgment. So that this Infallibility is not annexed to the Persons, to the
Succession, to the bare visible Profession (though true, which the Church of
Rome is denied to be) or to any Society, because of its Profession; but singly,
and alone to the true, real and effectual Work of Sanctification and
Regeneration, the New Creature brought forth in the Heart: And this is the
Spiritual Man, which the Apostles faith, judges all Things, 1 Cor. 2.15. To
affirm there is an Infallibility here, cannot well be condemned by any; or
whosoever does, mud needs say, the Spirit of God is fallible: For we place the
Infallibility in the Spirit, and in the Power, not in the Persons. And so these
are the Degrees we ascend by; Because such and such Men are led by the Spirit
of God, and are obedient to the Grace in their Hearts, therefore are they
Members and Officers in the Church of Christ. And because they are Members of
the Church of Christ in the Respect before declared, therefore there is an
infallible Judgment among them. We do not say, Because such Men profess the
Christian Faith, and have received an outward Ordination, and so are by a
lawful Succession formally established Officers in the Church, when they meet
together (according to certain Rules above declared) there is an Infallibility
annexed to their Conclusions, and they cannot but decide what is right; or
rather, what they decide must needs be supposed to be right. Who sees not here
a vast Disproportion?

The Constitution of a Synod, or a general Council among --
Now we differ herein fundamentally; that is, as to the very Basis and
Foundation upon which we build; and that not only from the Church of Rome, but
also from the Generality of Protestants in this Matter. All Protestants do
acknowledge a general Council to be useful, yea necessary, in the Case of
Division or Debate; let us consider the Basis upon which they proceed, and the
Stress they lay upon it.

1. Protestants.
First, All jointly, both the prelatical and Presbyterial, will have this Synod
or Council to consist of a Convocation of the Clergy, chosen and sent from the
particular Congregations, with some few laick Elders, called together by the
civil Magistrate, in case he be one in Judgment with them.

They decide by Plurality of Votes. And though they assume not an absolute
Infallibility, in that they reckon it possible for them to err, yet do they
reckon their Decisions obligatory upon their supposed Consonancy to the
Scripture; and however do affirm, That the Civil Magistrate has Power to
constrain all to submit and obey; or else to punish them either by Death,
Banishment, Imprisonment, Confiscation of Goods, or some other corporal Pain;
even though such be persuaded, and offer to make appear, that the Decisions
they refuse, are contrary to the Scriptures.

2. Papists.
And Lastly, (among the Papists) None, though otherwise confessed to be a Member
of the Church, both knowing and sober, except commissionate in some of the
Respects above declared, can be admitted to sit, vote, and give his Judgment.

3. We differ from them both.
Any that will be at the Pains to apply this to the Foundation I before laid of
the Infallibility of Judgment, in that we may account only to be truly called
the Church of Christ, will easily see the great Difference betwixt us, which I
shall sum up in these Particulars:

1.
First, Do we exclude any Member of the Church of Christ, that may be truly
accounted so, to tell his Judgment?

2.
Secondly, Do we say Man ought to be persecuted in his Outward for his Dissent
in Spirituals?

3.
Thirdly, Do we plead that Decision is to pass conclusive, because of the
Plurality of Votes?

And much more, which the Reader may observe from what is already mentioned;
which that it may be all more obvious at one View, will appear somewhat clearly
by this following Figure; which will give the Reader an Opportunity to
recollect what lay heretofore more scattered.

I. The ROMANISTS say, II. The Generality of PROTESTANTS say; West Cons. of
Faith. Chap.
1. That there is an Infallibility in the Church: Which Infallibility is, when
the Pope calls a general Council of Bishops, etc. that whatsoever they conclude
and agree upon must needs be the infallible Judgment of the Spirit of God,
because of the Promise of Christ, That he would not suffer the Gates of Hell to
prevail against His Church. 1. That though all Synods and Councils may err; yet
such Assemblies are needful for the Edification of the Church. That such do
consist of a Convocation of the Clergy, with some few Laics particularly
chosen. That all others, except those so elected, have not any Right to vote or
give Judgment. 2. And that the Pope and Council, made up of certain of the
Clergy, having one outward Succession, and being law fully ordained, according
to the Canons, are that Church, to which that Promise is made, however wicked
or depraved they be; yet this infallible Judgment follows them, as being
necessarily annexed to their Office, in which the Authority still stands in its
full Strength and Vigor. 2. That such an Assembly so constitute, may
ministerially determine Controversies of Faith, Cases of Conscience, Matters of
Worship, and authoritatively determine the same. The Decision is to be by
Plurality of Votes, without any necessary Respect to the inward Holiness or
Regeneration of the Persons; if so be they be outwardly called, ordained and
invested in such a Place and Capacity, as gives them an Authority to be Members
of such an Assembly. 3. So that there lies an Obligation upon the whole Body of
the Church to obey their Decrees: And such as do not, are not only certainly
damned for their Disobedience, but that it is the Duty of the Civil Magistrate
to punish such by Death, Banishment or Imprisonment, etc. in case they refuse.
3. What they thus decide (as they judge according to the Scripture) ought to be
received with Reverence, and submitted to: And those that do not, to be
punished by the Civil Magistrate by Death, Banishment or Imprisonment, though
they declare, and be ready to evidence, that it is because they are not
agreeable to the Scripture they refuse such Decrees.

III. The QUAKERS say,

The sanctified Members.
1. That whereas none truly ought, nor can be accounted the Church of Christ,
but such as are in a Measure sanctified, or sanctifying, by the Grace of God,
and led by his Spirit; nor yet any made Officers in the Church but by the Grace
of God, and inward Revelation of his Spirit (not by outward Ordination or
Succession) from which none is to be excluded, if so called, whether married,
or a Tradesman, or a Servant.

Their infallible Judgment --
2. If so be in such a Church there should arise any Difference, there will be
an infallible Judgment from the Spirit of God, which may be in a General
Assembly; yet not limited to it, as excluding others: And may prove the
Judgment of the Plurality; yet not to be decided thereby, as if the
Infalibillity were placed there, excluding the sewer. In which Meeting or
Assembly upon such an Account, there is no Limitation

THE CONCLUSION.
A summary Recollection of the Whole.
THE Substance then of what is asserted and proved in this Treatise, resolves
in these following Particulars.

I.
First, That in the Church of Christ, when it consists of a visible People (for
I speak not here of the Church in the dark Night of Apostasy, that consisted
not of any Society visibly united) gathered into the Belief of certain
Principles, and united in the joint Performance of the Worship of God, as
meeting together, praying, preaching, etc. there is, and still must be, a
certain Order and Government.

II.
Secondly, That this Government, as to the outward Form of it, consists of
certain Meetings, appointed principally for that End; yet not so as to exclude
Acts of Worship, if the Spirit move thereunto.

III.
Thirdly, The Object of this Government is twofold, outward and inwards. The
Outward relate mainly to the Care of the Poor, of Widows and Fatherless; where
may be also included Marriages, and the Removing of all Scandals in Things
undeniably wrong. The Inwards respect an Apostasy, either in Principles or
Practices that have a Pretense of Conscience, and that either in denying some
Truths already received and believed, or asserting new Doctrines that ought not
to be received. Which again (to sub-divide) may either be in Things
fundamental, and of great Moment; or in Things of less Weight in themselves,
yet proceeding from a wrong Spirit, and which in the natural and certain
Consequence of them, tend to make Schisms, Divisions, Animosities, and in Sum,
to break that Bond of Love and Unity that is so needful to be upheld and
established in the Church of Christ. Am here come also under this Consideration
all Emulations, Strifes, Backbitings, and evil Surmisings.

IV.
Fourthly, That in the true Church of Christ (according to the Definition above
given of it) there will, in such Cases of Differences and Controversies, still
be an infallible Judgment from the Spirit of God, either in one or other, few
or more.

V.
Fifthly, That this infallible Judgment is only, and unalterably, annexed and
seated in the Spirit and Power of God; not to any particular Person or Persons,
Meeting or Assembly, by Virtue of any settled Ordination, Office, Place or
Station, that such may have, or have had in the Church; no Man, Men, nor Meeting

THE CONTENTS.
Section I. THE Introduction and Method of this Treatise. Section II.
Concerning the Ground and Cause of this Controversy. Section III. Whether there
be any Order or Government in the Church of Christ. Section IV. Of the Order
and Government we plead for. Section V. In what Cases, and how far, this
Government extends. Section VI. How far this Government extends in Matters
spiritual, and purely conscientious. Section VII. Concerning the Power of
Decision. Section VIII. How this Government altogether differs from the
Oppressing and Persecuting Principality of the Church of Rome, and other
antichristian Assemblies.
The CONCLUSION.


