POEMS On diverse Subjects, Viz.

On the four Ages of Man.

On the Day of Judgment.

The 24th Psalm Paraphrased.

A Prayer.

A Letter to some Christian Friends.

A Dream.

GOD's Judgments our Moniters.

To the subjects of the special Grace of GOD, and it is Opposers.

Chronicles IInd Books (...) Chap. 16, 17, 18. ver. Paraphrased.

A Poem to the Memory of Dr. WATT's.

BRADDOCK'S Defeat.

The Noble Man.

Two wedding Posies.

Two Letters.

To the Memory of that worthy Man Lieut. NATHANAEL

BURT of Springfield.

Several Acrosticks.

A Word of Advice referv'd for my two Grand-Sons,

being yet Babes.

By Martha Brewaer, of Lebanon.

NEW LONDON:

Printed, and Sold by JOHN GREEN, 1757.

PARDON her bold Attempt who has revealed
His thoughts to View, were fit to be Concealed,
Since thus to do was urged Vehemently,
Yet most no doubt will call it Vanity;
Condemn the Style you may without Offense,
Call it Insipid, wanting Eloquence.
I Blush to Gaul so delicate an Ear,
Which to Sublimer Sonnets do adhere;
For why my Muse bad but a single Aim,
My self and nearest Friends to Entertain;
But since some have a gust for Novelty,
I here presume upon your Clemency,
For rare it is to set a Female Bard,
Or that my Sex in Print have e're appeared:
Let me improve my Talent though but small,
And thus it humbly wait upon you shall.
M.B.
March 9th, 1757.
An ESSAY On the four Ages of Man, Resembling the four Seasons of the Year.
HAIL great Historians with your generous Fire,
Lay down your Books a while for to enquire,
A home born Story, and Discriminate,
Man's budding, blooming, ripening, withering State;
His first Approach is with a rusul Roar,
More senseless than a Beast, nor half the Power;
But soon arrives to wear a graceful Smile,
Which gains him such exceptance for a while,
That Weaponsless he conquors every Foe,
Nor Cares, nor Fears, nor Malice Undergo.
Thus see the Resurrection of the Spring,
The Buds shoot Forth the merry Birds do Sing:
All nature Shouts, and Echoes to their Song,
To reap the Favors waited for so long.
But to proceed, the Infant grows a-pace,
When numerous Evils get upon his Chase,
All fully Bent to crop him in the Bud,
And spill his Name, his Fortune, and his Blood,
The worst of all were in his Nature Bred,
And thus the filly Creature is Betrayed:
Some Friends he has would fain his good Insure,
Yet many ways his Evils they procure;
But there is one whose Power and Grace extends,
Can save the Wretch, to whom we him Commend.
The next we see advancing on the Stage
Is vigorous Youth all in his blooming Age;
As Flora in her Prime a Carpet spreads,
Of rich Imoroidery over the Hills and Meads,
While thearing Vines and Trees adorns the Bed
With curious Hangings each their Occurs shed,
Which with their Fruits a double Blessing yield,
And Corn with growing verdure decks the Field:
Even thus I say the gallant Youth appears,
In manly Features, and in graceful Aus;
His Front a stately Banner toward the Foe,
With noble Courage seated on his Brow;
His Eyes a penetrating Wit declare,
A Judgment Sound with artful Genious rare;
Here beams of Love do gently dart their Rays,
And amorous Glances slide along his Face:
His Skin the Fair and Ruddy neatly met,
As Ruby's would in Alabaster set:
Polite his Carriage, and his Features gay,
His form Delectable, and his array
Befitting well his every Exercise:
His Patrimony large, his Fortunes rise,
His Lips chant high in Academick strains,
And healthful sanguine Juices fill his Veins:
His Temper mild, and a rare Symmetry
Runs through the whole attracting every Eye;
Come noble Youth, and waft along in Pleasure,
Taste all delights without Restraint or Measure;
But know these Favors are so dearly bought,
The least Abuse must be to Judgment brought;
And there your Coin will not for Current pass,
To pay the Debt, or Bail the out, Alas!
Except your Judge your Advocate should be,
To pay the Debt, and set the Prisoner free,
Which if he does you will Love His Service more
Than all your Lust and Vanities before.
But lo, another rising on the Stage,
And by his Gravity it is Middle-age;
As when bright Sol withdraws his burning Rays,
The Summers Livery withers and decays,
And gentle Autumn with an Aspect mild,
Upon the painful Farmer casts a Smile,
The Earth her flowery Garb has cast away,
And now her summate Glory does Display;
For now delightful, fruitful Stores abound,
And thus the Year is with God's Goodness Crowned,
So Middle-age has shed her Frantic Airs,
Whereby her nobler Powers more Bright appears;
As when bright Phoebus Travails up the Sky,
The sparkling Gems of Heaven before him fly;
His Magnitude soon makes them dis-appear,
And radiant Blushes spread the Hemisphere.
Thus Reason fully Ripe, the Judgment Keen,
Each intellectual Faculty Syrene:
His Schemes Computed, and his Goods Procured,
His Seat Erected, and his Lands Manured;
A Consort Loyal, and with Virtue stored,
A pleasant Offspring flourish round his Board;
A Thousand harmonising Blessings meet,
And all Concur to make his Breast their Seat,
Where such an ample source of Knowledge lies,
That all insipid, fordid Notions Dies;
Not envies, nor aspires a regal Throne,
He does enjoy a Kingdom of his own.
Thus Middle-age exceeds what went before,
Both in his outward, and his inward Store;
(...) Topic that he ever fought,
Is now Complete, and to Perfection brought.
But turn another Leaf, and there you will Read
A dreadful theme, 'twill make your Hearts to Bleed,
To see how Tyrant Sin does fill the Throne,
Where Righteousness should Dwell, and Reign alone:
(...) every Cross, and every Evil breeds,
(...) a Death, and Hell, are Paths to which it leads;
There Is none but Giant Grace can Victory get,
And when he does, then is the Man Complete,
The Fourth and Last is venerable Age,
Leaning upon his Staff, his aspect Sage;
He on his Head a Crown of Glory Wears;
not made of sparkling Gems, but silver Hairs:
Likewise the many Marks upon his Face,
Demands profound Respect in every Place:
His Head once richly Stored with Knowledge sweet,
He has no room for more, but does Repeat,
His past Experience to his numerous Seed,
Who with a filial Reverence do him heed,
To whom their best adherence now is due,
To their Procurer and Protector too;
Let anxious Care no more disturb his Head,
His provident, and frugal Hand has laid,
A Stock sufficient, as his Schemes were Blessed,
To feed himself and leave his Heirs the rest;
Yet does his Hand find some Employment still,
Since they that nothing do, do always ill;
And when his Glass has few more Sands behind,
More Vanity in humane Things he finds;
But love of Friends, or more I scarce know what,
Still draws him Back to Earth's inferior Spot.
The Winter Season shall an Emblem be,
The Leaves are Shed, the Fruits all Housed be;
The vived Blood is Chil'd in every Vein,
But still the Root does Life and Growth retain;
A Snowy Robe Adorns instead of Hairs,
And Underneath a withered Face appears;
And thus the lies Benumbed nor strives to rise,
'Till the benign Influence of the Skies,
Destroy's her Foe and gently calls her forth,
In brighter Beauty and with larger Growth;
So may the Sun of Righteousness arise,
And the Celestial Dove descend the Skies,
And quicken every Age of mortal Dust,
And make this State more Glorious than the first,
Nor let the aged Sinner die Accursed;
Makes us to Grow 'till we advance so far,
To raise our Feet up High beyond the Stars;
There wholesome Fruit and living Water flows,
There we may Bathe, and take a sweet Repose,
On the last Judgment.
ABOUT the middle of the Night,
When all securely Slept,
The Dead, the Risen, Reigning Lord,
His Armies musters up.
Hark! High, beyond those Crystal Orbs,
An Herald strong Pro^^^ms,
The great Assize, my radiant Guards,
March down, attend the same.
Ye Courtiers of this lower House
Lift up your Raptured Eyes,
Behold, the Bridegroom's on his way.
Behold, he tares the Skys.
The losty Battlements of Heaven
In vast Confusion hurled,
The Sun with his refulgent Rays,
Drops down to burn the World.
All Nature is at once Unhinged,
And in Convultions thrown;
What panick Hearts, horrendous Cries?
What Tears, and bursting Groans?
Hark! the shrill Trumpet sounds long,
Hail, dearly purchased ones,
With trimmed Lamps and gorgeous Robes,
Draw near the great White Throne.
The Saints that come with CHRIST, descend
Bright Angels guard their way,
To reap the World, set ope' their Graves,
Revive their sleeping Clay.
(...) says the Soul, my Body rise,
Embrace thy Consort Dear,
Our LORD's preserved every Dust,
And wiped of every Tear.
Saints, Quick and Dead, now Glorious made,
On CHRIST's right Hand advance,
While all around, behold (...) Crowned,
TO inhabit Holiness.
Then Sinners Grudge, Blaspheme their Judge,
And Gnashing gnaw their Tongues;
Too late they ask for pardoning Grace,
But straight with Guilt are stung.
Feign would they Delve, each dangerous Shelve,
To quit the Judges Face,
But naught can Screen, or change his Mein,
Hell is their proper Place.
The Devils too, their Rage Renew,
Their Doom being now Complete.
Who Sting and Drive those wretched Ghosts,
Their Cursed Remains to meet.
Sleep on our Rueful Wretched Dust,
Our Torment don't Augment;
We that have partners been in Sin,
Must Share in Punishment.
With trembling Joints, and visage Grim,
Crawl forth against their Wills;
Have found us oh, our hateful Souls,
Our Lusts shall Plague you still.
Thus every Member, every Sense,
And every Faculty,
Filled with GOD's Wrath, and scourged with Fiends
Seeks Death, but cannot Die.
Thus hellish Feuds and wretched Wights,
Into the Lake are turned,
Sealed down with Ire in Vengeful Fire,
Eternally are Burned.
The magnificent Judge Returns,
Homewards his Chariots rise;
Cherubick Legions sweetly Sound,
Each Emmalating tries.
To touch the highest String of Praise,
And accent every Note,
While every Victim crowned with Bay's,
Incircle him about.
With palms in Hand, and golden Harps,
The Trophies of his Grace,
Unite the Choir and all refound,
The Great Redeemer's Praise.
Thus they attend their Glorious Head,
'Till He ascends the Throne,
And to His Father does Resign,
The Kingdom he has won.
And GOD be all, in all, yea all,
His Creatures Happiness;
All their Desire, and Glory too,
The Source of all their Bliss.
The Godhead Smiles, Welcome he says,
To Mansions Fair and Bright,
Each loud Proclaim their Lord the Lamb,
And Glory in the Height.
The 24th Psalm Paraphrased.
THE stately Structure of this Earth,
Jehovah did Erect,
All the rich Product of the same,
His curious Architect.
The Bones of Stone, yea Gold and Pearls,
The Skin a verdant Fleece;
Enameled over with Fruits and Flowers,
Supporting Man and Beast.
Of which this vast and spacious Plan,
Is Peopled all around;
Each savage Breed, and tamer Herd,
And Man their Ruler Crowned.
The Lion strong, the prudent Ant,
The Elephant and Worms,
Proclaim their wise Creator GOD,
By all their various Forms:
Likewise the Earth so firmly Built,
Upon the sickle Waves,
And Founded on the unstable Flood,
Unmovable she stays.
All Nature on his firm Decree,
Hangs poised in even Scales,
And Jesus Love to the Elect,
Eternally Prevails.
Who shall ascend Celestial Heights,
To Worship near the Throne,
And safely stand to hear their Judge,
Pronounce the Sweet well done.
It Is they whose Hearts and Lives agree,
In working Righteousness;
But by what Means do they arise?
By whom have they access.
The Heavenly Ladder Christ Descends,
And stoops even to the Ground,
Then opens Faith her glimmering Eyes,
And seizes the first round;
Love quickly flies to clasp the next,
Humility the third,
Repentance soon be-dews the fourth,
The fifth with Longings fired:
Even by the Bowels of their LORD,
That others might come in,
And taste the Streams, those living Streams,
And in that Ocean Swim.
Hope leans her Breast upon the sixth,
Patience the seventh holds,
And Self-Denial on the eighth,
The World and Lusts Controuls.
Zeal to the ninth lifts up her Plumes,
And Holy Search the tenth,
And Watchfulness still further goes,
Until the Soul at length;
Being well equip't for War, and clad,
In Christ's bright Livery,
Breaks through each Squadron of the Foe,
And with Agility,
Ascends Celestial Realms of Love,
And prostrate near the Throne,
Vies with Seraphic Choirs above,
To Praise the great THREE ONE.
Thus Crowned is every humble Soul,
That trusts Jehovah's Grace,
And thus the Righteous Nation Blessed,
Inherit Holiness.
Hail! high, Celestial Palace Hail!
Your pearly Leaves ope' wide,
Receive your Champion and your LORD,
With Victory by his Side.
What bold Commander's this that claims,
(Quoth Justice) entrance here?
My flaming Sword is Brandished,
No sinner shall come near.
Says Christ, thy Sword speaks Death and Hell,
But I have Conquered him,
Mercy against Judgment does Rejoice,
And both Triumph over Sin.
Justice and Grace do straight Embrace,
The LAMB ascends the Throne,
And the high Arches Echoes loud,
The Songs of Victory won.
The Trinity unitedly,
Calls out to Man in Sin,
Lift up your Heads, set ope' your Hearts,
And let king JESUS in.
Who Is he say they, we cannot obey?
Quoth Jesus come and see,
'Twas for your Guilt, my Blood was spilt,
My Bonds can set you Free.
Behold my now you will quickly Bow,
And lift up Heart and Voice,
Likewise ye Saints lift up your Heads,
Ye Ransomed ones Rejoice.
A Prayer.
DEAR God of Love and Source of Light,
Leave not my helpless Soul,
To Languish in Eternal Night,
Dear Savior make me whole.
I can be Blessed without the light,
Of Sol's benign Rays,
But cannot live an exile from,
The Presence of thy Grace.
While my dear Father hides His Face,
My Comforts all Amort,
My Spirit Faints, my Flesh Consumes,
My purposes Abort.
Drop from Above the Grace of Love,
The nect'ral sweet Persume,
Into my palpitating Heart,
Into the inmost Room.
Or take thy weary Pilgrim Home,
Unable scarce to move;
I Will Cry no more as heretofore,
Drop down the Grace of Love.
A Farewell to some of my Christian Friends at Goshen, in Lebanon.
April 5th 1745.
DEAR Friends through Grace we have Died and Lived,
Mourned and Rejoiced together,
Hence may we Live alone to God,
And Reign with Him for Ever.
Come view that pure electing Love,
Which never did Begin;
Which in a Way of Justice wrought,
And Triumphs over Sin.
His Holy, pure and Piercing Eyes,
In one Eternal View,
See's all Past, Present, and to Come,
Which unto us are New.
There is a Wheel, within a Wheel,
Beyond what we descry;
He Will make us feel Sin's deadly Wound,
And then his Blood apply.
He makes His Glories Shine around,
The World does dis-appear;
Anon the Vail does Interpose,
And then we Mourners are.
He fitteth Instruments for use,
By which He seeds us rare,
We Feast with joy at length Adore,
Those that the Cisterns are.
He shows it is not in them, but Him,
Alone our Refuge lies;
We own with Praise, at length we turn,
And do the means Despise.
His tender Mercies still pursues,
And bids us have our Eye,
On Him through them, and use them still,
Which through him yield Supply.
The operations of His Hand,
O! may we much Regard,
Though what He does we know not now,
We shall know afterward.
Then let us not with Jonab fret,
Although our Gourds decay:
And may we not with Jacob grieve,
When Joseph's sent away;
GOD meant it all for Good; and thus
To us He often shows,
A Sampson's Riddle; so our Thorns,
May bear the sweetest Rose.
'Till Heaven be Poor they shall have Store,
Whom GOD has made his Choice,
They on Him Rest, are in Him Blessed,
And ever shall Rejoice.
O! Sojourn not in Mesheck then,
A Land of Toil and Woe,
Nor in the Tents of Kedar dwell,
It Is Dark and Dangerous too.
Dear Friends, the Life is more than Meat,
The Soul excels the Clay;
O Labor then for Gospel Food,
Which never shall Decay.
Don't hoard up Treasure for your Babes,
That Moth and Rust defile,
But Plant them where the Gospel Dews,
Does most Enrich the Soil.
And finally my dearest Friends,
Let Us Pray for Zion's Peace,
Although her Walls are broken down,
The Lord will her Increase.
Jehovah as a Wall of Fire,
Shall be to her also;
Salvation shall for Bulwarks be,
Her cup shall over flow.
LORD humble each of us that we,
At thy dear Feet may lie,
O Jesus! strengthen what Remains,
That ready is to Die.
And guide us safely by thine Eye,
That we may never Slide,
For thou thy Self, unto thy Self,
Must be our only Guide.
In the Year, 1744.
IT being soon after Death of my FATHER.
I Dreamed, I saw him standing in the Room where I was, and none else Present;
be was in good Habit, with a healthful and pleasant Countenance: And knowing be
was Dead, I bast^ed to him with Joy to (...) him again: He cheerfully said to
me Child, I am a Glorified Spirit, and am come to make you a Visit! I prayed
him to tell me where he had been? and what he had seen? He suggested to me that
he could give me no Adequate idea of it, except is were given me from Above:
But said he it is full of Glory, perfect Happiness, and Eternity Crowns it. I
asked him if he had Conversed with the most ancient and primitive Saints? He
answered Yes, and that it was the privilege of all the Saints in Glory, which
they Improve according to the largeness of their Desires. I asked him if the
Saints in Heaven knew what was acted on this Earth? He answered so much as
concerns the Kingdom of Christ, and no more. I asked him if the Saints had a
Prospect of Hell? He answered Yes, when they had a mind to. I asked him what
the Pains of Death were? He answered to me, it was little or nothing, I was
immediately Transmitted into Glory. I asked him how it seemed to the Soul to
Exist without the Body? He answered there is nothing wanting, it feels no lack,
but in some Respects it seems as though it had a Body, and used the Tongue in
ascribing Praises to God, and was Active in Worship. And then I awake and was
Refreshed, thinking on my Dream, without any fear, or uncomfortable awe of
Ghostly Death, but a though I had had a real Visit from a dear deceased Father,
and Saint from Heaven,

AMEN.
GOD's Judgments are our Monitors.
CREATION fair below the approachless Throne,
Give Audience to the High and Lofty One,
Who loud Proclaims by Heralds, round this vast,
Her final Dissolution hastens fast.
The preludes of that awful Day appears,
Which long before was sounded in our Ears.
At least some rare Event will soon disclose,
After such fearful Signs and dreadful Woes,
The Bloody Banners flourished over our Head,
For many Years did strike our Hearts with dread;
Both Air and Earth did Quake, with hideous Groan,
And Pestilence did Mow our Children down;
But since we slighted all these Warnings sent,
Has not the Lord grown weary to Repent.
Bathing His Sword in Heaven He sends it forth,
By Cruel Murders from the West and North:
While Blood and Fire, with Smo^ky Pillars rise,
From ruined Seats which darkens Air and Skies:
Confused Noise, and Garments roul'd in Blood;
And must we tamely bear their Neighborhood?
Must our brave Heroes now forget to Fight,
And quit dear Liberty our Native right,
Exchanging every Taste of true Delight,
For Egypt's Bondage, and for Egypt's Night.
But O! it is Sin obstructs them in their Course,
Our treacherous Sins Pursued without Remorse;
It blunts their Arrows, makes their Courage flag,
And cause their Chariot Wheels so slowly drag.
Never was People so Indulged as we,
So light a Yoke, such Christian Liberty:
More Privileged within our happy selves,
Then veiled Jews, ye then Episcopals;
Therefore deserve a sorer Punishment,
Then all the World, except we do Repent.
Prepare, prepare to meet an Angry God,
Behold He comes with an uplifted Rod;
Repent before He strike the final Blow;
Or shall we dare Encounter such a Foe?
How often His Ensigns in the Heavens are set?
And the Earth Trembles underneath our Feet?
'Twas by His Word, it is Being did receive,
He looks thereon, it Quakes, the Mountains Cleave;
The flinty Rocks as Clay are crumbled down;
The frightened Sea into Convultions thrown.
Earth's Thirst was not Allayed by Blood of Slain,
Nor Fat of Mighty, but she Drinks again.
She opens many Grim devouring Jaws;
Whole Towns and Cities sink into those Flaws;
They from her Substance did derive at first,
Then tore her Intrails for to serve their Lust;
And growing weary of their long Abuse,
She has recalled them back again with Use.
But Language cannot Paint, nor Heart Devise,
Their Dreadful Shrieks, and Horrible Surprise:
No longer Space allowed for to Repent,
But Swift and Awful, to the Judgment went.
Yet our America undaunted Lies,
Because she is felt no such Catastrophies.
So proud Belshazzar Warning still refused
Although he knew his Grand-fire was Deposed.
And our Destruction seems to make Haste,
By Sword, by Earthquakes, Sickness, Drought and Blast.
Yea far more Tolerable it might be,
For to be swallowed up by Earth or Sea;
Then to be forced to Wear the Papal Yoke,
Which Heaven Avert, we humbly do Invoke
And cause thy Spirit to Descend again.
Upon the Earth like purifying Rain.
To the Subjects of the special Grace of God and it is Opposers, Composed Aug.
1741.
O Glorious Trinity Above!
We Thanks and Praise Thy Name,
That we have leave to beg thy Love,
And to Extol the same.
Thou made us for Thy pleasure sake,
We thine own Image Bore,
But we Thy Holy Covenant brake,
And thereby lost our Power.
O Dreadful Fall! from Heaven to Hell,
All Creature Refuge failed;
But Hark! the Lord Jehovah tells,
His Mercy has prevailed.
In humble Flesh our Lord was Dressed,
And Justice Satisfied,
But Darkness so their Souls Possessed,
That most his Works Denied.
Because he took a Servants form,
No Earthly Crown did wear,
But Sinners that were once Forlorn,
His Chosen Followers were.
His Glorious Miracles they saw,
Wrought by the King of Heaven;
Blasphemed and said 'twas Beelzebub,
Which Sin was never forgiven.
They Sinned against that Glorious Light,
The Holy Heavenly Dove,
Which our Eternal Savior sends,
To fill His Saints with Love.
Christ Says it is best I should Depart,
That this Blessed One may Come,
And whosoever does my Works,
The Father and the Son.
We will him Love, and will come down,
And with him make Abode,
How will that Glorious Temple Shine,
Where dwells the Mighty GOD.
Christ Says, a City on a Hill,
Cannot be hid, then Strange,
If Christ does Reign instead of Sin,
And Man not know the Change.
This is the Day of GOD's great Power,
He makes them willing now,
His Arrows Sharp within their Hearts,
They under him do Bow.
Is any Thing too Hard for GOD,
Nor shortened is his Hand,
He has the same Almighty Arm,
As when he did Command,
Light out of Darkness for to Shine,
Has Shined in our Hearts,
With Day spring Visits from on High,
Here, and in distant Parts.
GOD Powers out his Holy Spir't,
Now in these latter Days,
Upon young Men, and Maidens too,
And on old Men and Babes.
His Glorious Feast is now Prepared
Some Wise and Great Refuse,
But he His Chosen Servants sends,
Compels the Poor to Choose.
Y^^ Priests and Ministers of GOD,
O Cry Aloud and Mourn,
Between the Altar, and the Porch,
Cease not your Flocks to Warn.
Smite with the Hand, Stamp with the Foot,
Declare their dreadful D^om,
GOD is their Enemy and Judge,
And Hell their dismal Gloom.
But you Blind, Leaders of the Blind,
Dumb Dogs that cannot Bark;
Are still A-sleep still Slumbers Love,
And Stumble in the Dark.
Do ye not come in Jesus Name,
Of Souls you have the Charge,
Are Traitors put into your Hands,
And you set them at Large?
Then must your Life go for their Life,
The Sentance now is given;
Then do not stand in Fear of Man,
But Fear the GOD of Heaven.
You Proud Opposers now draw near.
Who join the Spiteful Jews.
Who say this Work's from Beelzebub,
GOD don't such Power use.
Will Satan move a Man to Pray?
To Weep and Mourn for Sin?
To beg of GOD to search his Heart,
And keep his Conscience Clean?
To lie in deep Humility,
And own GOD's Sovereign Power?
And to Implore free pardoning Grace,
In a distressing Hour?
If GOD is Pleased to Return,
Their Sore Captivity,
Then is their Mouth with Laughter filled,
Their Tongues do Sing for Joy.
He Loves his Neighbor as himself,
He Mourns their Woeful State;
He ha^'t forgot the Doleful Shrieks,
When he past by Hells Gate.
But you do Cry, you do us Judge,
There Is Peace, what needs this Watch?
There Is Stolen Goods within your House,
That cannot bear a Search.
Is Light now come into the World,
And Men will Darkness choose?
The Mote that is in thy Brothers Eye,
Will not thy Beam Excuse.
But they have Persecuted Christ,
Also his Holy Saints;
His Prophets and Apostles too,
The Church has these Complaints.
Christ did not Come for to send Peace,
But else a Sword to send,
Parents and Children different Roads,
Each other will offend.
And some 'tween two Opinions Halt:
It Is time to make your Choice,
Will you the LORD, or Baal serve?
Christ's Sheep will know his Voice.
O Holy, Just and Dreadful God!
Through Jesus give us Grace,
Thy Spirit Witnessing with ours,
That we may Sing his Praise.
Then shall our Souls with Eagles Wings,
Mount up the Starry Road,
In sweet Fruition of a Christ,
Join the Angelic Crow'd.
There Is not a Seraph round the Throne,
Can Sing Redeeming Love,
Nor Taste free pardoning Grace: The Streams,
Dear Lord how Swift they move?
Jesus into thy Garden come,
And gather Lillies there;
Change our dull Senses into Sight,
Then Farewell every Snare.
It being falsely Reported that the Author borrowed her Poetry from Watts and
others; the following Scripture was presented to her, to Translate into Verse,
in a few Minutes Extempore, as a vindication from that Aspersion; which was
accordingly Performed as follows.

IId. Chron. 6th Chap. 16, 17, 18 ver. Now therefore, O Lord God of Israel,
keep with thy Servant David my Father, that which thou have Promised him,
saying, there shall not fail thee a Man in my Sight to sit upon the Throne of
Israel; yet so, that thy children take heed to their way, to walk in my Law, as
thou have walked before me.

Now then, O Lord God of Israel, let thy Word be Verified, which thou have
Spoken unto thy Servant David.

(But will God in very Deed dwell with Men on the Earth? Behold, Heaven, and
the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee; how much less this House which I
have Built!)

GREAT God, the God of Israel,
Remind thy Covenant,
Nor let thy Glorious Promise Fail,
Made to thy Gracious Saint.
My Father David did obtain,
This Promise for his Seed,
That they upon his Throne should Reign,
'Till Times last Period.
With this Proviso, not to shun,
Nor from his Laws to Swerve,
But as becomes true Israel's Sons,
Thy Precepts to observe.
And now let Israel's Heavenly King,
Fulfill thy Gracious Word,
And to his Royal Offspring bring,
Thy promised Goodness, Lord.
But O, my Tongue does Falter, Spirits Fail,
Will the Eternal All, so Condescend,
Omnipotence upon the Earth to dwell?
Ye Creatures all, in vast Amazement stand.
Behold the Heavens are thy handy Work,
Thou tramplest on the Spangled Firmament;
The whirling Clouds are of thy Feet the Dust,
And all that is Beauteous here, thy Hands did Paint.
The Heavens before thy Sight, appear not Pure,
Thou Chargest Folly on the Glorious Clan,
The Heaven of Heavens cannot Contain thee sure;
How then this House, Builded by Sinful Man?
A Funeral Poem, on the Death of the Reverend Isaac Watts, D. D.
O Help! Eternal Instant help Invoke,
Ye Churches, least this heavy awful Stroke,
Prove Insupportable to us Indeed,
Which makes our Souls in tenderest Passions Bleed.
Great Watts is set that Bright and Glorious star,
Which often conducted Strangers from a-far;
To come by Faith, and view their Sav'ours Seat,
And pay their humble Tribute at his Feet.
Ye Heaven Born Souls, whom his Seraphic Lays,
Has often Inspired to shout your Makers Praise.
Those sacred Relics still your Minds engage,
They shall Survive, to Bless from Age to Age.
No Celebrated Mortal knew thy Worth,
No Skill but such as thine, can set it Forth:
And where can that be found but where thou art,
And Gabriel now must act that friendly Part.
And all the Golden Harps have full Employ,
To Sing him Welcome, and to Magnify,
Wisdom and Grace that caused a lump of Clay,
TO enclose a Star of so Divine Array.
To write his Character I never can,
It so exceeds my Muse's narrow Plan.
Nor will the noblest Bard's Hy-per-bo life,
Speak but his Due, and that shall well Suffice.
But since in Mourning all do claim a Right,
Permit my feeble Muse to bring her Mite.
A humble Tribute at the Doctors Hearse,
Who was the Phoenix of the Universe.
For why his Absence gives so keen a Wound,
Absent for Ever, O that dreadful Sound!
Out of his spicy Ashes let one rise,
To Bless our Church, our Nation and Allies.
But could his Righteous Soul, no more endure?
Our Foolish Vanities are so impure.
Spend no more precious Time to do us Good?
Stay froward Muse, Instruction was his Food!
Nay, but his sublime Soul, that often did rise,
On Wings of Faith, above the upper Skies;
Did burst at length the brittle Cords of Life,
For Life Immortal, free from Sin and Strife.
The pearlly Gates flew open to receive,
The Heavenly Kindsman; but did we conceive,
The Hallalujahs be does Instant raise,
And rivals Seraphs in ascribing Praise.
Our Hearts would Melt in flames of sacred Fire,
And Christ, and Grace would be our whole Desire
The nimble Cherubs that patrole the Sky,
Often met him Soaring to the Realms on High.
Waiting his Exit from Earth's mean employ,
No sooner's Signed but with extatic Joy,
They clap their Wings, and set each Harp to Sound,
Making the vast of Heaven to Echo round;
O Watts's vacant Mansion will be filled,
What Praise to God, will this great songster yield?
His Music while below, all Ears did Wound,
How will it then in these bright Orbs Resound?
Then swift as Lightning they his Soul Convoy,
Like Lackies waiting 'til with perfect Joy.
His now enlarged Capacity is Crowned,
The least conceit of which, our Senses drown.
Nor will I mention Painted Glories here,
Elysian Fields have no Resemblance there.
But here the Summum-Bonum of his Bliss,
He Is like his Lord, and see's him at he is.
When he Expired might I have been his Heir,
I would have begged Urania for my Share.
But all in Vain, his Mantle's out of reach,
But still his Works, yea even his Ashes Preach.
His ANAGRAM.
Isaac Watts.
Was is at act.
Say who Below has acted Better?
Or who Above a greater Debtor?
Braddock's Defeat, July 9th, 1755.
AND must this valiant Hero fall?
Cursed be the Day through Ages all;
Ye Streams of proud Monongabal,
Be turned to Brinish Tears.
His Deeds have won Immortal Fame,
Nor Envy can Extinct his Name,
Old Mars will not allow the same,
But pay the long Arrears;
New England Boys shall pledge their Cup,
And drink the Drugs of Fury up,
'Till both the Pagan, and the Pope
Shall stagger at the Blow.
Their Armor Drunk with Gallic Blood,
Shall raise a far more rapid Flood,
Than that where Noble BRADDOCK stood
When Honor sunk so low.
Consult the Rolls of ancient Fame,
See whence this foul Disafter came;
It Is when the Rulers grow profane,
The Lord of Hosts Resents
He is obliged by covenant Band,
To pu^ge his own peculiar Land;
Are they a Signet on his Hand?
Yet will be pluck them thence.
Moses so Meek, so full of Grace,
His Maker knew him Face, to Face;
Yet one rash Word decides the Case,
And forfeits Canaan's Land.
Much more when Men Blaspheme his Name,
While Lust and Wine, their Blood Inflame;
No Counsel can their Rage Reclaim;
They trust their Martial Bands;
Nebuchadnezzar once Deposed
When outward Glory was his Boast;
And vain Belshazzar's Joyn^ were loosed;
Quick Ruin then Ensues.
But when GOD's Banner is Displayed,
Star in their Courses lend their Aid;
Or Gideon's Cake of Barley Bread,
A Midians Host Subdues.
An Oxes Goad a crooked Horn,
An Asses Jaw, a Sling and Stone;
Have Large and Noble Victories won;
Yea by one single Word;
The Glorious Lamps of Heaven Amazed,
Stood still, and at the Triumphs gazed;
This is our GOD who shall be praised,
Yea, Trusted and Adored.
The Noble Man.
COME gentle Muse, assist my Quill,
All thy Celestial Dews Distill;
In (...) portrature show all thy Skill,
The Noble Man to Lymn:
Paint him with Garlands on his Head;
Let vulgar Tongues his Praises spread,
Their lavished Honors round him shed;
It Is all an Airy Dream.
Though King's his Auditors should be,
And Princes before him bow the Knee;
Yea by Extract, and Pedigree,
His Head awaits a Crown.
While Riches like a Golden Shower,
Into his Coffers daily Pour,
His Rents from cities, and from Towers,
The Trophies he has won.
If it is none of these doth^ly,
Methinks I hear the Pop'lar Cry
Farewell to true Nobility,
For sure there is none beside.
Thus narrow Minds no farther go,
Than outward pomp, or gaudy Show,
Which at the height, is far below,
Nor will the Test abide.
Yet high Descent shall Honored be,
And public Posts of Dignity;
But if alone they Written be,
They swell with baneful Pride ^
Whose Torrent, like a rapid Flood,
Bears down, and robs the public Good,
To feed their Lusts, a vicious Brood,
Where numerous Mischiefs hide.
But are these outward Blessings joined,
With sweet Adornings of the Mind?
From gross and sensual Dregs refined?
The Noble Man appears,
A Magazine of Bliss unfurled,
Diffuses Blessings round the World,
Protects the Good, and curbs the Churl;
All Foggs of Darkness clears.
Wisdom and Prudence in him meet;
A Troop of Virtues on him wait,
And all his Lusts beneath his Feet;
With Candor on his Brow ^:
He Reigns a King, nor can be Poor,
He is so Fraught with inward Store,
He nor can have, nor with for more,
Earth can no more Bestow.
Presented to the Reverend Mr. Wheelock, upon his Wedding Day.
Lebanon December 4th, Anne Domini, 1747. Reverend, and Honored, Sir,
Trusting your Clemency will Pardon what is Amiss, and accept of a sincere Wish.
I venture to present the enclosed Lines, though Rude, and Undigested, they being
only a faint Lineament of her Heart, who is with all dutiful Respects and
Affection,

Yours -- MARTHA BREW^TER,


ALL sweet Fruition now Betide,
The venerable Groom and Bride.
Fresh Olives by a noble Vine,
May bless the World, for future Time.
And may the King of Glory Grace,
These Nuptials with Celestial Rays,
Of Joy, and Happiness Sublime,
Converting Water into Wine.
Your mutual Loves let still Increase,
And we be Blessed with Truth and Peace.
Still Guide us as you have ever done,
And late Receive a Glorious Crown.
Seraphic Love your Hearts Inspire;
In Consort join the Heavenly Choir.
The fairer Palm, the higher Crown,
The lower will ye -- cast it down.
Given to my Daughter Ruby Brewster, on the Day of her Marriage with Henry
bliss.
A Mothers wish, let Happiness,
These nuptial Rites attend;
Grace from Above, Virtue and Love,
Intwine the Silken Band.
The Groom with Pleasure, adds to his Treasure,
A Ruby Fair and Bright;
The Bride has Bliss, and Happiness,
In which she takes Delight.
True Love is Pure, and will Endure,
When other Glory's Cease;
A Living Stream, a Heavenly Beam,
Sent down from Paradise:
It bears the Cross, and will Rejoice,
Though various Scenes arise;
It knows no Rage, nor War will Wage,
It works no ill Device.
With Love Profound, may ye Abound,
While on this Earth ye move;
Then through rich Grace, may ye have Place,
And enter into Love.
A Letter to my Sister in Law, Huldah Brewster, hearing she was just entering
into the State of Marriage with Mr.John Goold.
My Sister Dear, these Lines appear,
A Signal of my Love;
May you be found, with Blessings Crowned,
Distilling from Above.
My charming Sweet, when shall we meet,
And mingle our Delight?
If not on Earth, yet after Death,
Our Souls must take their Flight.
And then Receive, without Reprieve,
Before the Great White Throne,
Our Sentance Just, of come ye Blessed,
Or sink ye Cursed down.
Then let us Press, with Earnestness,
To win the Glorious Prize;
And linger not, with ancient Lot,
Least Death and Hell Surprise.
Are you a Bride? all Joy Betide,
And Bless your Marriage State;
And may your Souls with Jesus Wed,
Before it be too late.
I Pray the LORD His Grace afford,
Both to the Groom and Bride;
Sweetness in Life, and at their Death,
Nothing may them Divide.
O if their be, Felicity,
In interchanging Love;
Then view Love int's Original,
'Twill list your Souls above.
Yet bear in Mind, though Love be Kind,
Least too much love of Goold,
Provoke the LORD, your Soul Defraud,
And so my Dear Farewell.
A Letter to my Daughter Ruby Bliss,
My only Daughter Dear, my Hearts Delight,
Since cruel Distance keeps thee from my Sight:
I breath forth Sighs into the empty Air,
My best Desires pursue thee every where.
My ardent Love can reach thee where thou art,
And mingle with thy sympathizing Heart.
My Breast a Magazine of tenderest Passions,
Pregnant with Grief, seeks Vent in several Fashions;
Sometimes the optic Fountains up do break,
And liquid Salts do deluge over my Cheek:
Each Filial due Performance strikes my Heart,
And mournful Pleasure shoots through every Part;
(...) Fancies over the Mind still Float,
Sometimes your Joys, and prosperous State I dote,
But grim Distrust soon rifles my Repose,
Presents you Sick, Bereaved and full of Woes:
O Absence! Absence! sharper than a Thorn,
The tender Sian from the Stock is Torn:
But sure my fond Affections wildly Rove,
My nobler Powers in higher Orbs should move.
O glorious Landlord! Thou have pruned me,
Then Grant me Grace, to bear much Fruit to Thee.
My pleasant Branch, which thou have Grafted, Lord,
Make her the charge of Angels, and afford,
Thy special Benediction while Alive,
Then to some Glorious Mansion her Receive;
But while she is Station'd here, let her obtain,
Such precious Fruit as shall embalm her Name:
Let Bud, and Branch, and Tree securely stand,
Draft by the Culture of thy Gracious Hand:
Planted by purling Streams, and crystial Founts,
In Gospel Soil, and circle-ed about,
With a bright Rainbow of the Promises,
A sure Defense and costly purchased Peace.
Cheer up my drooping Heart, shake of thy Woes,
Though cruel Distance means to Interpose.
There is a Place where we may Daily meet,
With joint Request, before the Mercy Seat;
In hopes of which your tender Mother rests,
Until your Countenance her Eyes shall Biess.
A Funeral Poem on the Death of that worthy and pious Gentleman, Lieut.
Nathanael Burt, Deacon of the Church at LongMeadow in Springfield, who was
Slain in the Battle at Lake-George, in the Retreat, September 8th, 1755.
Composed March 7th, 1757.
OH! -- he -- is -- gone,
I Would almost said left us alone,
For why such Grace and Virtue in him shone.
A Soul for Comeliness and Height,
Such Faith, such Sweetness martial Spright,
As in a Royal David did Unite.
Both Church and Military Mourn,
An Officer from each is torn,
While mingled Tears and Blood do dress his Urn.
His dear Remains deserted too,
And left in a promise'ous Hue,
Of Friends, of Galleys, and their Savage Crew.
He Will Bless our longing Eyes no more,
Nor Charm our Ears as heretofore,
Nor with his Alms, relieve the humble Poor.
Exit to France Mel-pem-e-ne,
And there assist in Tragedy,
Some foster Muse Concert a while with me.
Say how Nathanael, as he came,
To CHRIST, was called as by Name?
By Him a guiltless Ifra'lite Proclaimed.
So our's was called among the Trees,
Up to his LORD, to dwell in Peace,
Where Sin, and Toil, and Wars forever Cease.
With Courage Brave, his Armor Plies;
He Is Called, they Drop, a Cherub Flies,
And guards him Homeward to his native Skies.
Blessed sudden Victory sweet Surprise;
Methinks he Beckens at he Flies,
Fight on, for to the Heavenly Hosts he Cries,
Shall Fight for those that trust the LORD;
Your cause is Good, fear not their Sword,
I Have set my Seal, and find to Heaven a Road.
May GOD the best of Blessings send,
My Children and my bosom Friend:
Love GOD, with him Begin, yes Live and End.
And kindly take this parting Stroke,
Left you his Holiness Provoke,
To lay on you a far more grievous Yoke,
May we e're long in Glory meet,
And Bow before the Mercy Seat;
There one eternal Day with Joy may Greet;
And mingle Praise, with all the Hosts,
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
Each humbly Striving who shall Laud him most;
An Acrostick for my Husband.
OH! may propitious Heaven still extend,
Lasting Delights, to solace thee my Friends;
Enjoying every lawful Sweet below;
Viewing by Faith, the Fountain whence they Flow,
Erected be his Throne, within thy Heart.
Rule and Replenish there, thy every Part.
Blessed with a Vine, whose Love and Loyalty,
Richer than choicest Wine her Progeny
Each like an Olive Branch adorn thy ^louse,
With the fair Transcript of thy loving Sp^^use:
Soft are the Charms inviolable Bands,
Twine round the Lovers Heart, Raptured he stands;
Eternal King that have these Powers given,
Renew our Love to Thee, and Love us up to Heaven.
An Acrostick for my only Son.
WHile Amorous, Gay, and Sanguine swells thy Veins,
An Offering of first Fruits, Jehovah Claims.
Due Odours of a sweet Perfume Present,
Steeped in the Blood of the new Covenant;
What vulgar Notes Applaud, must be Suspected;
Obedience to the Standard never Neglected:
Retire within the Mind, and shut the Door,
To all disord'red Passions, Rude and Sow'r,
Here Summons, and exert each Manly Power.
BY Adequate, and Studious Observation,
Rise to the Poles, then dive to Navigation,
Early enrich thy Heart with moral Virtues,
Whereby to rectify inverted Nature:
Survey the Globe of man, then turn thine Eyes
To Search through Natures obscure Mysteries;
Envy may Hiss in Vnn, at virt'ous Minds,
Regent in her own Breast, the sits Inshrin'd.
An Acrostick for my only Daughter.
REceive good Counsel of the Wise, nor let
Unhallowed Lips Provoke, or Cause to Fret.
^e Wise and Virt'ous, Modest, Chaste and Grave,
Increase in Learning, practice what you have,
Enter the List 'gainit Sin, with Courage Brave.
BE not Exalted far above your Sphere;
Regard those Minds that truly Noble are:
Esteem a real Friend, if such there be;
With Kindness overcome an Enemy:
Set not your Heart on Pomp, and Worldly Pleasure,
It Is not a lasting, nor a solid Treasure.
Employ your Thoughts on Co^d, delight in Reading,
Receive the Lord, and Live, and Die Believing.
For my two Grand-Sons, Solomon, and Calvin Bliss.
YOU dear Descendants from my Line,
My Blessing here I give,
When your Grandmother does Decline,
These Lines may speak and Live.
You the dear partners of my Blood,
How could I bare to Think,
That you should miss, eternal Bliss,
And to Perdition sink?
May GOD appear, and touch your (...),
And touch your Hearts likewise,
That you may pray, both Night and Day,
With undissembled Cries.
Nor may you Cease, 'till he shall please
To Seal your Pardon sure;
Yield not to Fears, nor Sinful Jeers,
Since Hell you cannot Endure.
It is no (...) but best of Fame,
To make to wise a Choice:
The Wicked's Spor^ is very short,
While Saints or ^^, Bejoyce.
Oh Solomon my (...)
Be equal to your (...)
May Wisdom, Grace, and Riches Bless,
Immortal be your Fame.
Dear Calvin too, do you pursue,
That Christian Heroes Road;
Whose Name you bear; nor need you Fear,
It is the Road to GOD.
FINIS.

