A VOYAGE TO THE SOUTH SEAS, In the YEARS 1740-1. CONTAINING, A faithful
NARRATIVE of the Loss of his Majesty's Ship the the WAGER on a desolate Island
in the Latitude 47 South, Longitude 81: 40 West: With the Pro^^^^ings and
Conduct of the Officers and Crew, and the Ha^^^^ips they endured in the said
Island for the Space of five Months, their bold Attempt for Liberty, in
Coasting the Southern Part of the vast Region of Patagonia; setting out with
upwards of Eighty Souls in their Boats, the Loss of the Cutter, their Passage
through the Streights of Magellan; an Account of their Manner of living in the
Voyage on Seals, Wild Horses, Dogs, etc. and the incredible Hardships they
frequently underwent for Want of Food of all Kinds; a Description of the
several Places where they touched in the Streights of Magellan, with an Account
of the Inhabitants, etc. and their safe Arrival at the Brazil, after sailing
one thousand Leagues in a Longboat; their Reception from the Portuguese, an
Account of the Disturbances at Rio Grand, their Arrival at Rio Janeiro, their
Passage and Usage on Board a Portuguese Ship to Lisbon, their Return to
England, their Confinement for the Loss of the Ship, and their Releasement: the
Arrival of the Captain, who had been left behind by his own Request where the
Ship was lost; the Officers second Confinement, Trial and Acquittance; the
Arrival of three of the Crew, who had been left with five others on the
uninhabited Part of Patagonia, etc. Interpersed with many entertaining and
curious Observations, not taken Notice of by Sir John Narborough, or any other
Journalist, with many Things not published in the first Edition.

By JOHN BULKELEY and JOHN CUMMINS, Late Gunner and Carpenter of the WAGER.

The SECOND EDITION, with ADDITIONS.

Bold were the Men who on the Ocean first
Spread the new Sails, when Ship wreck was the worst:
More Dangers Now from MAN alone we find,
Than from the Rocks, the Billows, and the Wind
Wal^er. LONDON, Printed. Philadelphia. Reprinted by James Chattin, for the
Author 17^^ (Price 10 ^.)

To the Honorable WILLIAM DENNY, Esquire Lieutenant Governor of the Province of
Pennsylvania, etc.
SIR,
AS I have the Pleasure to reside in the Government over which You have the
Administration, I thought I could do no less than lay this Second Edition of
the Voyage of the WAGER at Your Feet, not doubting from Your established
Character for Justice, Benevolence, Charity and Peace, it will meet with
suitable Protection. Permit me, dear Sir, to say, May You long live to enjoy
the good Wishes of the People of Your Government, and Pennsylvania, under Your
wise and candid Administration, become renowned for Unanimity and Harmony,
which will make her the Terror of all her Enemies, and a Praise in the Earth:
-- With what paternal Affection would our gracious Sovereign then look upon
her, she would deservedly become the Object of His peculiar Care, and That of a
British Parliament: How pleasing would this be to our PROPRIETARY FRIENDS and
GUARDIANS, whose Interests are inseparable joined with Ours, and Ours with
Theirs? But, more than all, how acceptable would this be to Almighty God, the
Father of All, who would make Pennsylvania as the Garden of the Lord; and He,
by his Providence, which I have experienced in many and great Difficulties,
would go with our Armies, and crown them with Success, and, in due Time, would
restore the Blessings of Peace. For the Completion of these great and glorious
Events, Prays, Your Servant,

JOHN BULKELEY.

The DEDICATION to the FIRST EDITION.
To the Honorable EDWARD VERNON, Esquire Vice Admiral of the Blue, etc.
SIR,
WE have presumed to put the following Sheets under your Protection, though we
have not the Honor of being personally known to you, nor have applied to you
for the Liberty of using your celebrated Name on this Occasion.

As this Book is a faithful Extract from the Journals of two British Seamen,
late Officers in his Majesty's Navy, we thought we could not more properly
dedicate it than to a British Admiral.

We know your Detestation of Flattery; and you know, from long Experience, that
a British Seaman has a Spirit too brave to stoop to so degenerate a Practice.

The following Pages we hope will recommend themselves to you, because they are
written in a plain maritime Style, and void of Partiality and Prejudice.

The Distresses mentioned in this Book have perhaps not been equaled in our
Age; and we question whether any Navigators living have, for so long a
Continuance, suffered such Variety of Hardships, as the unfortunate People of
the Wager.

After surviving the Loss of the Ship, and combating with Famine, and
innumerable Difficulties, a Remnant of us are returned to our Native Country;
but even here we are still unfortunate, destitute of Employment, almost without
Support, or any Prospect of being restored to our Stations, till some important
Questions are decided, which cannot be cleared up till the Arrival of our late
Captain, or at least the Commodore.

We, Sir, who present you with this Book, have been several Years in the Navy,
and thought ourselves well acquainted with its Laws and Discipline, and have
many Certificates to produce, that we have always acted in Obedience to
Command; but the Proceedings of the Officers and People, since the Loss of the
Ship, are reckoned so dark and intricate, that we know not what to expect, nor
what will be the Result of our Superiors Determination.

The only Consolation we have in our present Anxiety, is placed in a Confidence
of the unbias'd Integrity, Justice, and Humanity of the Right Honorable
Persons who will One Day determine for or against us.

When you read our Account of the Affair, you will find the Facts impartially
related, the whole Narrative written without the least Shadow of Prejudice or
Malice, and no more in Favor of ourselves than of the other Officers
concerned: We stand or fall by the Truth; if Truth will not support us, nothing
can.

In our Voyage from the Brazil to Lisbon, we were obliged to you for the
generous Treatment we met with from an Enemy, a Subject of Spain, a Person of
Distinction, and a Passenger in the same Ship: Your Virtues have procured you
the Esteem even of your Enemies.

Your Zeal for the National Service, deserves the Love of every Honest Briton:
To leave an abundant Fortune, your Family, and your Country, to hazard your
Life in the most perilous Expeditions, with no other Motive than to retrieve
the Honor of the Nation, shows the Spirit of a true British Hero, and deserves
the highest Commendations.

That you, SIR, may never deviate from your Integrity, but continue a Terror to
the Enemies of Britain, an Honor to his Majesty's Service, and an Ornament to
your Country, are the sincere Wishes of,

HONORABLE SIR, Your most dutiful, And most obedient Humble Servants, JOHN
BULKELEY, JOHN CUMMINS.

THE PREFACE.
AS an Introduction, we think proper to acquaint the Reader with our Reasons
for causing the following Sheets to be made public to the World. The chief
Motive, which induced us to this Task, was to clear our Characters, which have
been exceedingly blemished by Persons who (next to Heaven) owe the Preservation
of their Lives to our Skill, and indefatigable Care; and who having an
Opportunity of arriving before us in England, have endeavored to raise their
Reputation on the Ruin of Ours.

It will appear to the Reader, on Perusal of the following Pages, that this
Journal was attempted to he taken from us by Violence at Rio Janeiro; that we
have preserved it, at the Hazard of our Lives; that there was no Journal kept
after the Loss of the Ship, by any Officers but ourselves; and if we had not
been careful in making Remarks on each Day's Transactions, Persons must have
continued in the Dark, in relation to all the subsequent Proceedings.

It is a very usual Thing to publish Voyages, especially when the Navigators
have met with any extraordinary Events. We believe, our Expedidition, though it
was not a Secret, is allowed to be an extraordinary One, and consequently
attended with extraordinary Events: Indeed while the Commodore was with us,
every thing went well, but when the Squadron separated, Things began to have a
new Face; after the Loss of the Wager, there was a general Disorder and
Confusion among the People, who were now no longer implicitly obedient. There
were two Seamen particularly, who propogated this Confusion, they said they had
suffered Ship-wreck in his Majesty's Ship the Biddeford, and received no Wages
from the Day that the Ship was lost; that when they were out of Pay, they
looked upon themselves as their own Masters, and no longer subjected to
Command. The People however were not altogether infected, but still continued
to pay a dutiful Respect to their Commander; but when the Captain had rashly
shot Mr. Cozens (whose Fate the Reader will find particularly related) they
then grew very turbulent and unruly, the Captain daily lost the Love of the
Men, who with their Affection lost their Duty.

Our confining the Captain is reckoned an audacious and unprecedented Action,
and our not bringing him home with us, is reckoned worse; but the Reader will
find that Necessity absolutely compelled us to act as we did, and that we had
sufficient Reasons for leaving him behind.

Our Attempt for Liberty in sailing to the Southward through the Streights of
Magellan with such a Number of People, slow'd in a Long Boat, has been censured
as a mad Undertaking: Desperate Diseases require desperate Remedies; had we
gone to the Northward, there appeared no Probability of escaping the Spaniards,
and when we had fallen into their Hands, it is not unlikely but they might have
employed us as Drudges in their Mines for Life, therefore we rather chose to
encounter all Difficulties than to become Slaves to a merciless Enemy.

Some Persons have objected against our Capacity for keeping a Journal of this
Nature; but several Judges of Maritime Affairs, allow this Work to be exact and
regular. We think, Persons with a common Share of Understanding are capable of
committing to Paper daily Remarks of Matters worthy their Observation,
especially of Facts in which they themselves had so large a Share. We only
relate such Things as could not possibly escape our Knowledge, and what we
actually know to be true. We don't set up for Naturalists and Men of great
Learning, therefore have avoided meddling with Things above our Capacity.

We are also condemned by many for being too busy and active for Persons in our
Stations. There was a Necessity for Action, and a great deal of it too; and had
we been as indolent and regardless for the Preservation of the People, as
others who were superior in Command, there would not have been so many who were
shipwrecked in the Wager, now in England to give a Relation of the Matter.

The Gentleman who commanded in the Longboat on his Arrival before us at
Lisbon, represented us to the English Merchants in a very vile Light, we were
even advised by some of our Friends there not to return to our Country, lest we
should suffer Death for Mutiny. But when the Gentlemen of the Factory had
perused our Journal, they found, if there was any Mutiny in the Case, the very
Person who accused us, was the Ringleader and chief Mutineer. We were confident
of our own Innocence, and determined to see our Country at all Events, being
positive that we have acted to the best of our Understandings, in all Respects,
for the Preservation of our Lives and Liberties; and when our Superiors shall
think proper to call us to an Account, which we expect will be at the
Commodore's Arrival, we do not doubt but we shall clear ourselves in spite of
all invidious Reflections and malicious Imputations.

It has been hinted to us, as if publishing this Journal would give Offense to
some Persons of Distinction. We cannot conceive how any Transactions relating to
the Wager, although made ever so public, can give Offense to any Great M^n at
Home. Can it be any Offense to tell the World that we were ship-wreck'd in the
Wager, when all People know it already? Don't they know that the Wager was one
of his Majesty's Store-Ships? That we had on Board not only Naval Stores but
other Stores of an immense Value? Don't they also know that we went abroad with
Hopes of acquiring great Riches, but are returned Home as poor as Beggars? We
are guilty of no indecent Reproaches, or unmannerly Reflections; though, it is
certain, we cannot but lament our being engaged in so fatal an Expedition. When
Persons have surmounted great Difficulties, it is a Pleasure for them to relate
their Story; and if we give ourselves this Satisfaction, who has any Cause to
be offended? Are we, who have faced Death in so many Shapes, to be intimidated,
lest we should give Offense to the -- Lord knows whom? We never saw a satirical
Journal in our Lives, and we though that Kind of Writing was the most obnoxious
to give Offense.

It has been a Thing usual, in publishing of Voyages, to introduce abundance of
Fiction; and some Authors have been esteemed merely for being marvelous. We
have taken Care to deviate from those, by having a strict Regard to Truth.
There are undoubtedly in this Book some Things which will appear incredible.
The Account given of the Patagonian Indians, and our own Distresses, though ever
so well attested, will not easily obtain Credit; and People will hardly believe
that Human Nature could possibly support the Miseries that we have endured.

All the Difficulties related we have actually endured, and perhaps must endure
more: Till the Commodore's Arrival we cannot know our Fate; at present we are
out of all Employment, and have nothing to support ourselves and Families, but
the Profits arising from the Sale of our Journal; which perhaps may be the Sum
Total we shall ever receive for our Voyage to the South-Seas By what is added
to this Second Edition, it will appear, that after the Arrival of the Captain,
the Officers were tried for the Loft of the Ship, and being all acquitted,
except Lieutenant Beans, they were paid their Wages to the Time the Ship was
wrecked.
.

SUBSCRIRERS NAMES.
A
RObert Alison, 2 Joseph Allicock Martin Ashburn Matthias Aspden James
Alexander William Airs John Allen Peter Adams Alexander Allaire Joseph
Appleton Josiah Appleton Francis Alison, A. M. Rector of the Academy, and
Vice-Provost of the College of Philadelphia Abraham Isaac Abraams William
Anderson Richard Allen Benjamin Allen John Abeel Garret Abeel James Achland
Samuel Auckmuty David Abeel John Alsop Henry Agnew Captain Amory Edward Allen
David Allon Samuel Ayrault Captain Benjamin Almy Ebenezer Allen William Allier
Daniel Ayrault, Junior John Andrews Nathan Angel Henry Appleton Thomas Alleyne
Jacob Ashton Rev. Not. Appleton Charles Apthorp Josiah Allen Enos Alling
Captain Stephen Alling
B
John Bolton Joseph Bell Guftavus Brown George Brooks Samuel Bolton Edward
Browning William Bromwich Joseph Baker Thomas Bedford Cornelius Bradford Daniel
Benezet Nathaniel Brown Samuel Bonnel Andrew Bankson Thomas Brooks Thomas Boude
Benjamin Bretton Richard Bailey William Bell Gunning Bedford Samuel Bettle John
Baynton William Bywater George Brown John Brown Thomas Budd George Briggs David
Budd John Brinckle Richard Butler George Bliss Robert Black Phinehas Bond
Joshua Bispham, Esquire Jacob Brion, 2 William Bulkley, Esquire Joseph Borden John
Berrien John Bard William Brownejohn Thomas Brown Christopher Banker Joris
Brinckerhoff William Bayard Andreas Breesded Edward Broadfield James Baley
Robert Boil Gerard W. Beekman, 2 William Beekman Charles Berrow Samuel Brown
James Beekman Samuel Brown Isaac Blanck Evert Byvanck Gerard G. Beekman Edward
Burling John Batler Johannes Burger John Bell James Bogert Thomas Brookman
Ephraim Brasher Hezekiah Belden John Benedzet Nathan Bulkeley Thadius Burr, 2
Andrew Burr, Esquire Henry Bostwick Jonathan Bulkley John Benjamins David Brooks
Abyah Beach Samuel Baker Luke Balcock, A. B. Nathan Beer Zebulun Bradley
Abraham Beck Abraham Burban Stephen Ball Taber Bowen Samuel Bulden Ephraim
Bake^ Charles Bulkley Benjamin Bowen John Brown Peter Borns, Esquire Captain Brown
Jah Breton Esquire Jeremia Brown Samuel Borden, 2 Josiah Brown Francis B^inley,
John Bennet Walter B^sfum John Banester John Barker George B^ckmaster Joseph
Brown Rev. John B^ss Alexander Black Robert Brown Samuel B^rrett Nathanael
Brown, 2 Rev. Ephra^m Bound Richard B^enhe^t Simon Bradstreet Nathan Boceren
Joseph Brany Nathan B^rler William Burrows Edward B^^nley Thomas Baker Stephen
Brown John Bro^ort Andreas Beach ^ames Brownson Jonathan Baldwin Thomas Bills
Jacob Bryant, 2 William Brad^ord, 2
C
William Corry Thomas Carp^nter Samuel Corsan William Clark James Claypool
Abraham Carpenter John Corry John Cox John Cowan William Clampsser Peter
Chevalier J. L. Clarkson William Cliffton Jer^miah Coren Thomas Campbell Samuel
Caruthers David Chambers James Clulow Warwick Coats Nathan Cook Thomas Coats
John Cox James Child Jacob Cooper Abraham Coats James Coultas George Cunningham
Ebenezer Call Robert Cother Edward Campbell David Clark Caleb Cash John Coats
William Chancellor Alexander Crawford Calvin Cooper Slater Clay Joseph Cord
Daniel Cooper Rev. Collin Campbell Rev. Thomas B. Chandler William Collin
Cornelius Clapper, Ter. Nicholas Carmer Luke Clarke Jonathan Crone Andrew
Craigg William Cobham Cornelius Clapper Milcohn Campbell Moses Clement
Alexander Colden, Esquire Richard Curson John Cortland Peter Clopper Robert
Crommelin Peter Cockrain Stephen Cortland Francis Child Thomas Cand^ll
Christopher Codwise Bartholomew Cox^tte George Colton, A. B. Amos C^esbrough
John Chandler, Stud. Benjamin Church Joshua Chaudler Nathan Cort Joseph Copp
Thomas Cranston, Esquire James Capoone Thomas Coggett Jeremia Child Henry Collins
Joseph Cozeeres Richard Carpenter Caleb Carpenter Samuel Casey Thomas Crowley
Matthew Cozze^s John Collins James Collins Benjamin Cuthing Jonathan Clarke
John Coll Edward Church Peace Carneace Samuel C^rwend Samuel Chamblet Jozah
Corder William Cutlar John Cunningham Abraham Chattin Abraham Chattin, jun.
John C^a^^in Nixson Chattin James Chattin Abishai Chattin Francis Chattin
J^siah C^attin Nathan Carry Noah Clap Richard Carry Rev. Benj^min Chapman William
Cooley Daniel Curtis I^aac Cowgill
D
Henry Dawkins William D^ckinson Issachar David's Charles Dingee Samuel Davis
Joseph Davis Robert Dixon Edward Duffield J^nathan Dodd Charles John Dutens
Josiah Franklin Davenport Thomas Downer William Dillworth Joseph Donaldson
Isaac Dushane Joseph Davies Peter Dicks Hugh Davy Andrew Doz William Doyl
William Davis John Davis Elias Desbrosses J^sper D^ake Henry Derham John
Deys^er George Duncom Joshua Delaplaine John D^nlap James Desbresses, Thomas
Durham Warman Dunian Capt. James Dunlap Jeremiah Day, A B. Timothy Danielson,
A. B. John Dibbler Thomas Dodd Joseph D^shon Richard Deshon Henry Davis
Fristram Dalton Samuel Damforth William Daniel John Dies William De Peyston,
Joshua Dwight Aaron Day
E
Oswell Eve George Emlen Samuel Edgell Joseph En^on Jonathan Edwards Edward
Evans Cad. Evans Caleb Evans, 2 Samuel England John Ellis William Eagle John
Earl William Even John Ellery Justin Ely Daniel Easton Clark Elliott Edward
Ellis William Eppes John Erving Revel Elton, Esquire
F
William Franklin William Fisher Nathan. Falconner Lester Falkner Dr. Richard
Farmer William Forest Pluncket Fleeson Moses Foster Henry Flower William
Falconer Joseph Fox James Fa^is Judah Foulke Richard Footman George Fudge John
Franks Jonathan Fisk John Farrell William Farquhar George Folliott Walter
Franklin David Freeman Edmund Fanning Ebenezer Fetch James Franklin Daniel
Fourtane Ebenezer Flagg John Flagg Henry Frankland Francis Foxcraft, Esquire Thomas
Fletcher Jonathan Fitch, Esquire Samuel Foulk
G
William Griffitts, 6 William Grant Thomas Groves George Gilbert John Goodwin
William Gardner John Gass Joseph Galloway Alexander Gumley Theophilus Grew
Walter Goodman George Gray John Gastin William Ghiselin Josiah Gavin Isaac
Garrique Thomas Gregory Christian Grassola Moses Ghiselin Lewis Gordon Joseph
Gr^swo^d Thomas Grigg Richard Goodwin John Godby En^is Graham Thomas Grant John
Grissiths Thomas Grigg John Gregory John Green John Gardener Rev. Matthias
Graves Nathami^l Garham J. G. Benjamin Green Alexander Grant Samuel Green John
Goddait William Gyles John Girrish Josiah Gilbert James Green Samuel Gardner
Francis Green Thomas Gerry Capt. Jonathan Glover Daniel Gibbs Josiah Green
George Gilpin Nathaniel Gothem Gideon Gardner Thomas Green John Gaissin S^ephen
Griswold David Gardner Orchard G^y
H
John Hodsdon Joshua Howell Peter Hunter David Harper George Hawkins John Heart
John Hinton Eleazer Hubbil Lancel^t Hatrison William Henry Jacob H^^^zheimer
Robert Let. Hooper Robert Heney William Hollinshead Samuel Howell Michael
Hillegas Richard Hall William Hopkins Benjamin Herbeson Samuel Have Eden
Haydock Hugh Hodge Charles Harrison Alexander Huston Glover Hunt James
Hendricks Andrew Hodge Philip Halbert John Hughes Joseph Hillborn, 2 John
Hirchcock James Hood Thomas Harper William Hamilton Samuel Hasell William
Hinton John Hayes Matthias Holston Charles Humphrys Daniel Hopewell Robert
Hendrickson Memucan Hughes John Hunt John Heart William Hewlings, Esquire John
Hutchinson Samuel Horner William Harrison Jona Hampton Thomas Harding Joseph
Hildreth William Hulett John Haghen Samuel Heath John Hastier Nathaniel Hazard
Benjamin Hildreth Peter Horinscolt Whitehead Hicks John Holdon James Haller
Henry Haydock John Halsted Richard Harris Haynes Hanford Rey. Noah Hobart John
Herpin Daniel Hubbard Thomas Howell James Hilhouse, A. M. John Sloss Hobart
Nathaniel Hooker, A B. Daniel Humphry, Amos Hallam Benjamin Humphr^vill Elisha
Hinman Nicholas Hallam Josiah Hull, Esquire James Harris Joshua Hinche Benjamin
Harris James Honyman, Esquire Andrew Hunter Elnathan Hammon Stephen Hopkins, Gov.
of Rhode Island John Hawkins Rev. Ed. Holyoke, 2 Belcher Hancock Eliezar
Holioke Simon Howard Abraham Hasey Sarah Hasting John Holkan Robert Hooper, Esquire
Nathaniel Hoope^ Joseph Horner John Hastings Capt. John Hamock Benjamin
Hattarall Benjamin Hurd John Holbrook Abraham Hitchcox Samson How Zachariah
Hawkins Uria Hill, 6 John Hotchkiss Stephen Hawley Rev. Theophile Hall
I
Charles Jones John Ingles Thomas Jackson Thomas January Emanuel Josiah John
Jenning Charles Jervis, 2 John Jones Paul Jackson Charles Jenkins Jona. Ingham
Thomas James John Jenkins Isaac Janvier Joseph Jacobs Anquila Jones John Jones
Matthew John's Robert Strettell Jones Henry Jenkinson Rev. Robert Jenney Richard
Johnson Joseph Jons Thomas Jenning, Esquire Isaac Ivins, 6 William Imlay John
Justice Daniel Jones John Imlay Cavalier Jovet Tunes Jacobs Rev. Samuel Johnson
Robert Johnston David Johnston Capt. Richard Jeffers William Sam. J^hnson
Samuel Isaacs Charles Jeffry John Jefferes Robert Jenkins, Timothy Ingraham
Joseph Jacob Nathaniel Ingerfoll, Leonard Jarvis William Jarvis Ralph Ingraham
John Justice Daniel Jones
K
John Kidd John Knight Joseph King John Kearsley, jun Reynold Keen Benjamin
Kendall Alexander Karter James Keppock John Kearsley Jacob Kollock, Esquire Edward
Kasby Samuel King James Kinsey Joseph Kerkbride Philip Kissick John Kingston
Peter Keteltas Linies King Alexander King, Stud. Thomas Kinnicut William
Kneeland Capt Ebenezer Kent, Jun. John Koster John Kearsey Martin Killogg
Benjamin Levy William Lightfoot John Leacock Thomas Lowry Henry Lisle Thomas
Linnon Samuel Lloyd George Leadbetter John Linington Benjamin Loxley Robert
Lloyd Benjamin Leech William Leech Thomas Lawrence Evan Lewis Ann Lowry Thomas
Lawrence Esquire Aaron Leaming Jeremiah Leaming John Lawrence, Esquire John Lawrence
Thomas Leonard, Esquire Archelaus Lewis John Latham John Livingston Isaac Low
Battholomew LeRoux, 2 James Livingston Edward Laight John Lawrence Abraham
Leggett Gabriel Ludlow Lothrop Lewis Richard Law Ebenezer Lines Edmund Lewis,
A. B. Jonathan Lyman, Stud. Stephen Leach Josias Lindon Robert Lightfoot Samuel
Lyndon Moses Levy John Lion, Jun. Samuel Lock James Lovel Samuel Livermore,
Jun. Richard Lee Ben^amin Lynde Richard Lechmere John Lee Jeremih Lee Isaac
Lothrop Elisha Lewis Jonathan Lewitt
M
Benjamin Misslin Samuel Misslin Evan Morgan Richard Morris Francis Many John
Malcolm Evan Morgan John Mitchell James Miller James Moore James Murphy Thomas
Marshal Samuel Morris, Jun. Abraham Mirchel John Murrey Benjamin Marshal Joseph
Morris George Morriton Christopher Marshal Edmund Milne William Macum Samuel
Massey William Montgomery William Muir, 2 Thomas Mayre John Moland Alexander
Magee A. Morris, Jun. William Morris, Jun. Robert Menden^all Humphry Marshall
John Monrow John M'Clughan Joseph Marriott Capt. George Mercer William Morris
William Mercier Joshua Mulock John Morres Peter Martin Edward Man Samuel Mecher
N. A. Meyers Thomas Miller Nathaniel Marston Josiah Martin Isaac Martin Donald
Morrison Robert Murray Nathan Mallary J^didiah Mills Samuel Mather Rev. Eleazer
May Andrew M'Kenzie Jam^s Mumfort Benjamin Mason John Mawdsley Thomas Muffart
Godfry Malbone Capt. William Mumfort N. Marks David Moore Jonathan Marsh, Jun.
Robert M'Leod Daniel Mowry, Jun. Pelatiah Man Thomas Marsh Jonas Meriam Capt.
John Machet Benjamin Marston John Melvel Isaac Mansfield Jsabella Meinkesner
William Meyer Lewis Massey
N
John Nixon William Nicholson Zaha^ias Nieman Charles Norris, Esquire John Nukinson
James Neilson Benjamin Nicholls Samuel Nottingham Charles Nicall Simon Newton
Samuel Nightingale Jonathan Norwood Capt. Robert Nivins Nathaniel Nichols Rev.
Samuel Newel
O
John Ord Joseph Oborn Bryan O Harra George Okill George Owen Pat. O Hunlon
Joseph Ogden Daniel Offley Doctor Jacob Ogden Bulkley Olcott Jonathan Otis
Joseph Olney James Otis Samuel Allyne Otis Simon Orne Joshua Ome, Esquire Joshua
Ome, Jun. Andrew Oliver, Esquire Joseph Osborn
P
Samuel Purviance William Peter's Thomas Parsons John Parker James Pain Thomas
Paschall Stephen Potts Edmund Physic Abraham Prior William Pearson Silas
Parvin John Palmer Reese Peter's John Price Benjamin Price Thomas Preston John
Pyott Thomas Pryor Joshua Pearson Robert Parsons Adonijah Peacock Henry Paxson,
Esquire Thomas Perry Frederick Philipse John Provost William Pearse John Panet
Peter Penfield Jacobs Pints Ebenezer Pluznmer Aaron Phelps Abel Pitkin, A. B.
James Pierpoint, A. M. Rev. Timothy Pitkin Ebenezer Parmell Guy Palms Rev.
Thomas Pollen Robert Proud Isaac Polock William Pearce Sanders Pitman Samuel
Pemberton Samuel Payson Joseph Parsons Phillips Paysons William Prichard
William Pynchon Henry Prescot Thomas Porter Elisha Parks Edward Procter Henry
Paxson, Esquire Henry Quigg Cornelius Quick Henry Quigg
R
John Rhea Daniel Rundle Joseph Redman Emanuel Rouse William Ransted John Reily
James Reynolds Richard Renshaw Joseph Redman Francis Robinson William Rice
Solomon Rochsord Henry Roberts John Ruxby John Ross Francis Rawle John Rich
Thomas Rogers William Ranbury Daniel Roberdeau Isaac Roberts Dr. John Redman
William Rush John Robinson Mrs. Reardon Phillip Rees John Roberts, 6 Alexander
Rowdall John Rogerson Alexander Ross Patrick Reynolds George Reading, Esquire
Nicholas Roosevelt Joseph Read Thomas Robinson Robert Richardson Burnett
Richard Anthony Rutgers Peter Remyen John Room Adrian Rutgers William Rayman
Ebenezer Rumreill Stephen Ray William Ros, minor, A. B Chandler Robbins, A. B
Elnatham Rosseter George Richards Joshua Raymond Benjamin Rice John Read Jacob
Richardson William Rogers Thomas Robinson Thomas Richardson Robert Rodman
Thomas Robson John Randell Bazzillea Richmond Thomas Raynolet Ebenezer
Roeskwell Charles Russell Samuel Rogers Timothy Rogers William Rickells, Esquire
Jesse Raymond Nathaniel Richardson James Russell, Esquire John Row Icabod Robison
Alexander Ross Patrick Reynolds
S
WILLIAM SMITH, A. M. Provost of the College of Philadelphia John Shleydorn
Jacob Spike Backridge Sims Joseph Styles, 4 Joseph Shute John Stretch Daniel
Swan Francis Sewer William Shute John She James Stephens Thomas Sugar
Valentine Standley William Standley Richard Smith John Sayre Alexander Seaton
Michael Sisk William Spafford Edward Shippen, Jun. Rev. William Sturgeon Thomas
Salter Alexander Stedman, Esquire Joseph Saul Conrad Schneider James Smith William
Smith Isaac Stretch George Shreiber John Siesty Richard Swan, Jun. Benjamin
Smith Jonathan Shoemaker, Jr. Thomas Shinn John Shaw Samuel Smith Lawrence
Swency John Simontown John Shermerhorn Henry Sleght Isaac Seers Cap. James
S^edly Exnerience Stors Thomas Stevens Nathaniel Shaw, Jun. Capt. Phineas
Stanton Oliver Spicer Jonathan Starr Isaac Stelle Francis Skiner, Robert
Stoddard Rev. Ezra Styles Edward Scott Robert Stevens Joshua Saunders Robert
Shearman Edward Scott Daniel Singer Capt. Ebenezer Stedman William Symmes Oaks
Shaw Nathaniel Sheaffe Francis Shaw Samuel Swett Richard Skiner Philip Sanders
Joseph Smithurst Benjamin Stacey William Spooner Isaac Smith John Sprague John
Smith Thomas Shreve Reynold Seagar Rev. Mr. Asa Spalding Benjamin Spalding
Benjamin Sedgwick Israel Scottard Mr. Stephens Thomas Shinn William Stogden
T
Abraham Tailor, 3 John Tailor James Turner John Thornhill Thomas Tillyer
William Topham Partick Temins Charles Thomson Peter Thomson Peter Turner John
Tranel Robert Towers John Trimbell Thomas Thompson Joseph Trotter Christopher
Thomson Jacob Tagart John Tailor, Esquire Samuel Tremble John Th^mson Richard Tole,
2 William Tuchey Sohn Troup Reub. Warren Thompson Benjamin Tanner William
Talman Abraham Tomlinson John Thomson James Tilley Edward Thurston John Tweedy,
2 James Tanner William Tate Eleazer Toevet John Townsend Nicholas Townsend
Samuel Tompkins Jona. Thurston Thomas Tailor Joshua Turpin Ebenezer Thomson
Paul Tew Robert Treat Samuel Turner John Turner Willoughby Toppan Thomas
Twisden Edward Trowbridge, Esquire Richard Task Ebenezer Tailor Rev. Samuel Todd
James Tu^daway Rev. Jonathan Todd Edward Uillat Thomas Uill Esquire William
Vanderspiegle Direl Van Allen Peter Van Duerson Thomas Vatal Isaac Van Hook,
Jun. Richard Van Dyck William Verdenburgh Roger Viets, Stud. David Verderhey,
Jun. Thomas Vernon Samuel Vernon Daniel Vernon Peter Vimon Rev. William Vinal
Cornelius Henry Vassal, 2 William Vans James Wharton William Wishart Townsend
White, 2 Isaac Williams Joseph Wa^ Joseph Wood John Willcocks, 2 William
Walliams Samuel Wi^a^^on Benjamin W^^k^^^ Peter Wanton Charles W^^^^^ William
Wood, 6 William Wagstaff Joseph Warner Jacob Winey Ralph Weeks John Wood, Ju^.
Daniel Wister John Winter Samuel Watson William Whitebread, Jun. John Wallace
William Wallace Moses Wells John Wilkinson, Jun. Edmond Winder John Wilkinson
Abraham Watson Swan Warner Christopher Wit James Whitehead Samuel Williams
Joseph Worthington Joseph Watkins James Wright, 6 Christopher Wetherill Emanuel
Williams Samuel Woodruff, Esquire James Willson John Watts John Wiley Charles
Williams, Esquire Philip Wilkinson William Wickham John Waddell David Whitney
Benjamin Wynkoop Edward Winslow Rev. Samuel Whittelsey Robert Walker John
Whiting David Whitney Abraham Woolent Lemuel White John Wright John Winthrop,
Esquire Joseph Wanton, Esquire John Wing Cap. Joseph Wilson Thomas Wickham Philip
Wanton Resolved Watterman Thomas Wilson John Winthrop, Esquire Thomas Wentworth
John Whitter Ephraim Woolson Jeremiah Whee^wright Pain Wingate Leonard
Williams William Wett Miles Ward, Jun, Jona. Webb, Jun. William Walter John
Weber Rev. Edw. Wigglasworth, ^. William White Joseph Walker Ebenezer Wyeth
Joshua Winslow Isaac Wilkins David Wyir David Wood Samuel Williams Zebulon
West, Esquire Pela^iah West Rev. Benjamin Woodbridg Elisha Williams Ezekiel
Williams Charles Webb Seth Westmore Samuel Wyllys Sarah Windsor William
Winchester William Young William Yewham Robert Young Samuel Yates N. Yorwernem
A VOYAGE TO THE SOUTH SEAS.
ON Thursday the 18th of September 1740, sailed from St. Hellens his Majesty's
Ship Centurion, Commodore Anson, with the Gloucester, Pearl, Severn, Wager, and
Trial, and two Store Ships; this Squadron was designed round Cape Horn into the
South Seas, to distress the Spaniards in those Parts. The Ships were all in
prime Order, all lately rebuilt. The Men were elevated with Hopes of growing
immensely rich, and in a few Years of returning to Old England laden with the
Wealth of their Enemies.

Saturday, the 20th, the Ram-head bearing N. by W. half W. distant four
Leagues, the Commodore hoisted his broad Pendant, and was saluted by every Ship
in the Squadron, with thirteen Guns each. This Day joined Company with us his
Majesty's Ships, Dragon, Winchester, Chatham, South-Sea-Castle, and Rye-Galley,
with a large Convoy of Merchant Ships.

Thursday, the 25th, we parted Company with the Winchester and the
South-Sea-Castle, with their Convoys, bound for America.

On Monday, we parted Company with the Streights and Turkey Convoys.

Friday, October the 3d, at Eight in the Morning, we saw two Brigantines to the
South East; the Commodore gave a Signal to chase; at Nine fired two shot to
bring 'em to; at Ten spoke with the Chase, being two Brigs from Lisbon, bound
for New York.

Sunday, the 26th, about Five in the Morning, the Severn showed Lights, and
fired several Guns ahead; soon after we saw the Land bearing W. by S. and at
Noon the East End of Madeira bore North, distant five Leagues.

Wednesday we moored in Fonchiale road, so called from a City of that Name,
which is the Metropolis of the Island of Madeira; here we employed most of our
Time in getting aboard Water, and stowing our dry Provisions between Decks.

Tuesday, November the 4th, Captain Kidd our Commander was removed on board the
Pearl, and the Honorable Captain Murray succeeded him in the Wager. Captain
Norris of the Gloucester having obtained Leave to return to England, on account
of his ill State of Health, occasioned the above removals.

While we lay at Madeira, we were informed of ten Sail of Ships cruising off
and on, to the Westward; these Ships were judged to be French, and had been
seen every Day for a Week before our Arrival: The Commodore sent out a
Privateer Sloop, but she returned the Day following, without seeing 'em; so
that we can give no Account of 'em.

On Wednesday the 5th, we sailed from Madeira. On the 20th the Industry
Store-Ship parted Company; and on Friday the 28th, by Account, we crossed the
Equinoctial.

On the 17th of December we saw the Island of St. Catharine, at Noon; the
Northmost Land in Sight bore W. N. W. and the Southmost S. W. by W. Variation
per Amplitude ^3.57 Easterly.

On the 18th, the North End of the Island of St. Catharine bore N. W. by W.
distant seven Leagues; and the Island of Gaul bore N. W. distant six Leagues.

On the 19th we anchored in St. Catharine's Bay in upward of twelve Fathom
Water, the Island Gaul, on the Coast of Brazil, bearing N. by E. distant four
Leagues. On the 20th we anchored in St. Catharine's road, and the Day following
we moored between the Island of St. Catharine's and the Main.

On Monday the 22d, the Commodore ordered fresh Beef for the sick People.

On the 27th came in a Portuguese Brig from Rio Janeiro, for the Rio Grand:
While we lay here, the People were generally employed in over-hauling the
rigging, and getting aboard Water.

On the 17th of January 1741, we sailed from St. Catharine's; the Commodore
saluted the Fort with eleven Guns, the Fort returned the same Number.

On Thursday the 22d we lost sight of the Pearl.

On Tuesday the 17th of February, the Pearl joined the Squadron; and on the
19th we came to Anchor off the river of St. Julian's, on the Coast of
Patagonia, St. Julian's Hill bearing S. W. by W. and the Southmost Land in
sight S. by E. distant from the Shore three Leagues. This Day our Captain, the
Honorable George Murray, took Command on Board the Pearl, Captain Kidd having
died on the Voyage since we left St. Catharine's.

Captain Kidd was heard to say, a few Days before his Death, That this Voyage,
which both Officers and Sailors had engaged in, with so much Cheerfulness and
Alacrity, would prove in the End very far from their Expectations,
notwithstanding the vast Treasure they imagined to gain by it; that it would
end in Poverty, Vermin, Famine, Death and Destruction. How far the Captain's
Words were prophetic, will appear in the Course of our Journal. Captain Cheap
succeeded Captain Murray on Board the Wager.

On the 26th of February we sent on Board the Pearl twelve Butts and two
Puncheons of Water; the Pearl having, while she was separated from us, been
chased by five large Spanish Men of War, the Commander in Chief being
distinguished by a red broad Pendant with a Swallow's Tail at his Main-top-mast
Head, and a red Flag at his Ensign-staff: During the Chase, the Pearl, in order
to clear Ship, threw overboard and stove fourteen Tons of Water; she likewise
stove the Long Boat, and threw her overboard, with Oars, Sails and Booms, and
made all clear for engaging; but Night coming on, at Seven o'Clock lost Sight
of the Enemy; at Five in the Morning saw the Spanish Ships from the Mast-head,
two Points on the Lee-quarter, still giving Chase, and crowding all the Sail
they could; but at Nine the Pearl lost Sight of 'em entirely. We judged this to
be Admiral P^^arro's Squadron, sent out in Pursuit of Commodore Anson. Had our
Ships united fallen in with 'em, it is probable we might have given a good
Account of 'em. While we lay at St. Julian's, we saw the Sea full of Shrimps,
and red as if they were boiled; the Water appeared tinctured to that Degree,
that it looked like Blood.

On the 27th, we sent on board the Pearl four Puncheons of Water more; at Six
in the Morning, the Commodore made Signal to weigh; at Eight weighed, and came
to Sail; this Day we lost Sight of the Gloucester.

The 28th, the Gloucester came into the Squadron again.

On the 7th of March we passed through the Streights of Le Mair; Cape Diego on
the Island of Terra del Fuego bore N. W. by W. three Leagues, and the West End
of the Island, Staten Land, bore E. N. E. distant Four Leagues, the Squadron
under reeft Courses.

On the 10th we lost sight of the Ann Pink, on the 12th carried away the rails
and Timbers of the Head on both Sides.

On the 16th the Ann Pink joined the Squadron again.

The 30th the Gloucester broke her Main-Yard in the Slings.

April the 1st, the Commodore ordered Mr. Cummins, the Carpenter, on Board the
Gloucester.

On the 8th carried away the Mizen-Mast, two Feet above the Awning; there was
no Sail on the Mast. Upon the roll of a Sea, all the Chain Plates to Wind-ward
broke, Lat. 56.31. Long. 87.4 West. At Noon Cape St. Bartholomew bore North 84
Degrees. E. distant 229 Leagues.

The 10th lost Sight of the Severn and Pearl, Lat 56.29. Long. 85. West. At Ten
^ast Night feel in with two small Islands; at Eight in the Morning the Islands
bore N. N. W. by the Compass, distant eight Leagues, in the Latitude 54.00
South; we took 'em for the Islands which lay off Brewer's Streights, Latitude
54.50 South, Long. 84.56 West.

On the 12th we had very hard Gales at West, with the largest Swell I ever saw;
I was Officer of the Watch (though I was Gunner of the Ship, I had the Charge of
a Watch during the whole Voyage;) we had our Larboard Tacks on Board: Between
Six and Seven in the Morning, holding by the Topsail Hallyards to Wind-ward,
there broke a Sea in the Ship, which carried me over the Wheel, bilg'd the
Cutter, and canted her off the Skeets Bottom up athwart the Barge; it likewise
half filled the Longboat; the Boatswain was for heaving the Cutter overboard,
I ordered him to do nothing with her till I had acquainted the Captain, who was
then very ill in his Cabin: The Captain desired me to use all Means to save
the Cutter; at the same Time I asked Leave to skuttle the Longboat, and get
the Sprit-sail Yard and Jib in, for fear of endangering the Bowsprit; which he
ordered to be done, and told me, it was a very great Misfortune that he should
be ill at such a Time. When I came from the Captain, I found the Lieutenant on
the Deck, got the Cutter in her Place, skuttled the Longboat, and got the
Sprit-sail Yard and Jib-boom in. The Carpenter is still aboard the Gloucester.

The 13th, under reeft Courses, the Larboard Tacks; the Commodore being on the
Weather Quarter, bore down under our Lee, and spoke, with us. He asked the
Captain, If the Carpenter was returned from the Gloucester? The Captain
answered, No; and am surpised Capt. Mitchell should detain him, when he knows
I must want him about my Mizen-mast. The Commodore told him he would speak with
the Gloucester, and order him on Board. He then asked the Captain, Why he did
not set the Main-top-sail, and make more Sail? Capt. Cheap made Answer, My
rigging is all gone, and broke fore and aft, and my People almost all taken
ill, and down; but I will set him as soon as possible. The Commodore desired he
would, and make what Sail he could after him.

The 14th, the Carpenter returned from the Gloucester, it being the only Day
this Fortnight a Boat could live in the Sea. As soon as the Carpenter came on
Board, he waited on the Captain, who ordered him to look on the Chain Plates
and Chains, and to give his Opinion of the Mast's going away. The Carpenter
looked as ordered, and gave Capt. Cheap for Answer, That the Chain Plates were
all broke. The Captain shook his Head, and said, Carpenter! That is not the
Reason of the Mast's going away. The Carpenter not willing, as the Mast was
gone, to lay it to any one's Mismanagement, or to occasion any Uneasiness about
what was now past Prevention, fitted a Cap on the Stump of the Mizen-mast, got
up a lower Studding-same Time fixed her Main-Yard; sail-Boom, of 40 Feet, and
hoisted a Sail to keep the Ship to.

Today, being the 19th, and the finest Day we had in these Seas, we were
employed in repairing the rigging; we bent a new Main-Sail, and reeft him, as
did the Ann Pink; the Gloucester at the same Time fixed her Main-Yard; the
Commodore and Trial keeping ahead, and at a considerable Distance; between
Four and Six at Night saw the Commodore's Light. At Six, being relieved by the
Master, he could not see the Commodore's Light, though it was visible to every
one else on the Quarter Deck: The Master persisted he could not see it; on
which I went and acqauinted the Captain, who came upon Deck, and seeing the
Light, asked the Master, Where his Eyes were? This was the last Time I ever saw
the Commodore. The Lieutenant having the first Watch lost Sight of him at Nine
o'Clock, and at Ten was obliged to hand the Fore-Sail; in the doing of which we
lost a Seaman overboard. We saw the Gloucester. and Ann Pink a-stern in the
Morning; but they were soon gone ahead, and out of Sight.

The 21st, as I was in the Steward's room, Joseph King, Seaman, came for a
Pound of Bread. I heard him ask the Steward, If he thought they would be served
with the same Quantity of Water as before? Without waiting for an Answer, No, G
-- d d -- n 'em; as the Commodore was parted, they should find the Difference.
Not knowing the Consequence of this, or by whom the Fellow might be spirited
up, I acquainted the Captain with the Affair, who ordered me to deliver a Brace
of Pistols charged with a Brace of Balls to every Officer in the Ship who
wanted 'em, and to take no further Notice of the Matter.

May the 1st. This Day the Officers were called, and their Opinions asked
concerning the best Bower-Anchor; resolved to cut the Anchor away, for fear of
endangering the Ship, there being no Possibility of securing it without putting
our Fore Mast in extre^^^ Danger, the Shrouds and Chain Plates ^^^g all broke.

Fourteen Days before the Loss of the Ship, the Wind at S. and S. S. W. steered
N. W. by N. and N. N. W. by the Compass: Laid the Ship to for the first four
Nights; the meaning of this I could not learn. I asked the Lieutenant the
reason of our bearing for the Land on a Lee Shore, when we had a fair Wind for
our rendezvous, which I had always thought was for the Island of Juan
Ferdinandez. The Lieutenant told me the rendezvous was altered to an Island in
the Latitude of 44 S. Upon this I said to the Lieutenant, This is a very great
Misfortune to us; that we can do nothing with the Ship in the Condition she is
in upon a Lee-shore; and am surpised, that we should be obliged to go there.
The Lieutenant told me, he had said every Thing he could to dissuade the
Captain from it, but found him determined to go there. The fifth Night, and
every Night after, made Sail; the Wind to the Westward. I never relieved the
Lieutenant, but I asked him, what he thought of a Lee-shore with the Ship in
this Condition? he always replied, He could not tell. We saw rock-weed in
abundance pass by the Ship. The Honorable John Byron, Midshipman, being on the
Quarter Deck, said, We cannot be far off the Land by these Weeds. The Lieutenant
and Mate being by, I said, Gentlemen, what can we do with the Ship in the
miserable Condition she is in on a Lee-shore? The Leiutenant answered, Whenever
I have been with the Captain since our first lying to, I always persuaded him
to go for Juan Ferdinandez; therefore I would have you go to him, he may be
persuaded by you, though he will not by me. I said, If that was the Case, my
going to him is needless. In a Quarter of an Hour afterward, the Captain sent
for me, and said, Gunner! What Longitude have you made? I told him 82. 30. What
distance do you reckon yourself off the Land? I answered, about 60 Leagues: But
if the two Islands we saw are those which are laid down in your Chart to lay
off Brewer's Streights, and the same Current continues with the Western swell,
we cannot be above a third Part of the Distance off the Land. The Captain made
Answer, as for the Currents, there is no Account to be given for 'em; sometimes
they set one Way, and sometimes another. I said, Sir, very true; but as the
Ship has been always under reeft Courses, with the Mizen-Mast gone, she must
wholly drive to Leeward, and nigher the Land than expected. The Captain then
told me, I suppose you are not unacquainted of my rendezvous for the Island of
Nostra Signora Di Socora, in the Latitude of 44. I replied, Sir, the Ship is in
a very bad Condition to come in with the Lee-shore; and if it is possible to
bring the Ship to an Anchor, we shall never purchase him again. The Captain
answered, I don't design to come to an Anchor; for there are no Soundings until
you come within seven Leagues of the Land. I purpose to stand off and on
twenty-four Hours; and if I don't see the Commodore, or any of the Squadron in
that Time, we will go for Juan Ferdinandez. To this I said, Sir, the Ship is a
perfect Wreck; our Mizen-Mast gone, with our standing rigging before and abaft,
and all our People down; therefore I cannot see what we can do in with the Land.
The Captain's Answer was, It does not signify, I am obliged and determined to
go for the first rendezvous.

On the 13th, at Eight in the Morning, the Straps of the Fore-Jeer Blocks
broke; reeff'd the Top ropes, and lowered the Yard; went to strapping the
Blocks. At Nine, the Carpenter going forward to inspect the Chain-Plates, saw
the Land from the Fore-Castle; on which he asked the Boatswain's Mate, who was
by him, If he saw the Land? He answered, No. The Carpenter showed it him, and
he saw it plain. The Carpenter then showed it to the Lieutenant; but he would
not believe it to be Land, because it bore N. N. W. and said it was impossible;
therefore he never informed the Captain of the Sight of Land, as the Honorable
Mr. Byron has heard the Captain say. At Two in the Afternoon lowered the
Fore-Yard, and hawl'd the Fore-sail up. Notwithstanding I was Officer of the
Watch, I was obliged to go upon the Fore-Yard, where was Mr. Campbell
Midshipman, one Boatswain's Mate, four Seamen, and the Master's Servant; which
were all the Hands we could get out of the Ship's Company to assist. Whilst on
the Yard I saw the Land very plain, on the Larboard-beam, bearing N. W. half N.
nearest High Land, with Hillocks, and one remarkable Hommacoe like a
Sugar Loaf, very high. At the Sight of Land I came off the Fore-yard, and
acquainted the Captain. He immediately gave Orders to sway the Fore-yard up,
and set the Fore-sail; then we wore Ship, with her Head to the Southward. The
Captain coming forward unhappily received a Fall, which dislocated his
Shoulder, so that he was obliged to be put into the Surgeon's Cabin. Some Time
after he sent for the Lieutenant and myself, acquainting us of the Necessity
there was for making Sail, as being on a Lee-Shore; therefore desired we would
use our utmost Endeavors to crowd the Ship off. You see, Gentlemen, said he,
my Misfortune will not permit me to continue on the Deck: As for the Master, he
is not worthy of the Charge of a Watch; therefore I must desire you Mr.
Bulkely, to be in the Watch with him, and to make but two Watches: Keep a good
Look-out, and, if possible, set the Main-top-sail. Mr. Beans, I must desire Mr.
Cummins to be with you; and beg you will take all the Care you can. I having
the first Watch, set the Main, Fore and Mizen Stay-sails; it blew so hard I
found it impossible to set the Main-top-sail; of which I acquainted the
Captain: All the Hands we could muster in both Watches, Officers included, were
but twelve; the rest of the Ship's Company were all sick below: I very often
could get no more than three Seaman in my Watch. The Ship for these three Weeks
has been no better than a Wreck; the Mizen-mast gone; the standing rigging and
Chain-Plates, before and abaft, mostly broke and ruined. The Topsails now at
the Yards are so bad, that if we attempt to loose 'em for making Sail, we are
in Danger of splitting 'em; and we have not a spare Sail in the Ship that can
be brought to the Yard without being repaired. This is the present deplorable
Situation of the Ship. All the first and middle Watch it blowed and rained; and
withal so very dark, that we could not see the Length of the Ship: For the
greatest Part of the Night she came up no nearer than S. by W. and S. S. W. At
Four in the Morning she came up with her Head West; so that her Head was then
off the Shore.

Thursday, May the 14th, 1741, at Half an Hour past Four this Morning, the Ship
struck abaft on a sunken Rock, sounded fourteen Fathom; but it being impossible
to let go the Anchor Time enough to bring her up, being surrounded on every
side with rocks (a very dismal Prospect to behold!) the Ship struck a second
Time, which broke the Head of the Tiller; so that we were obliged to steer her
with the Main and Fore-sheets, by easing off one, and hawling aft the other, as
she came to, or fell off. In a short Time after, she struck, bilged, and
grounded, between two small Islands, where Providence directed us to such a
Place as we could save our Lives. When the Ship struck it was about Break of
Day, and not above a Musket Shot from the Shore. Launched the Barge, Cutter,
and Yaul over the Gunnel; cut the Main and Foremast by the Board, and the
Sheet-Anchor from the Gunnel. The Captain sent the Barge on Shore, with Mr.
Snow the Mate, to see if the Place was inhabited, and to return aboard
directly; but, without any regard to his Duty, or the Preservation of the Lives
of the People, he staid ashore. The Barge not returning as expected, the
Lieutenant was sent in the Yawl, with Orders to bring off the Barge. The
Lieutenant tarried ashore, but sent off the Boat. As soon as the Boat came on
Board, the Captain, being very iil, was persuaded by the Officers to go ashore:
With the Captain went the Land Officers, Mate, and Midshipmen; the Officers
remaining on Board were the Master, Boatswain, Gunner, and Carpenter: The
Boatswain, who was laid up a Month before the Loss of the Ship, became of a
sudden very vigorous and active. At Night it blowed very hard at North, with a
great tumbling Sea; we expected every Moment that the Ship would part, fetching
such Jirks and Twistings as shocked every Person aboard, who had the least Care
for the Preservation of Life; yet, in the dismal Situation we were in, we had
several in the Ship so thoughtless of their Danger, so stupid, and insensible
of their Misery, that upon the principal Officers leaving her, they fell into
the most violent Outrage and Disorder: They began with broaching the Wine in
the Lazaretto; then to breaking open Cabbins and Chests, arming themselves with
Swords and Pistols, threatening to murder those who should oppose or question
them: Being drunk and mad with Liquor, they plundered Chests and Cabbins for
Money and other Things of Value, clothed themselves in the richest Apparel
they could find, and imagined themselves Lords, Paramount.

Friday the 15th the Ship was bilged in the Mid-ships on a great rock; we took
Care to secure some Powder, Ball, and a little Bread. In the Afternoon, the
Carpenter and myself went ashore with several of those imaginary Lords in the
rich Attire they had plundered Yesterday; but upon the Purser and Lieutenant
Hamilton of Marines presenting Pistols to some of their Breasts, those Grandees
suffered themselves very quietly to be disrobed of all their Greatness, and in
a few Minutes looked like a Parcel of transported Felons. On our coming ashore,
we found the Captain had taken his Lodging in a little Hut, supposed to be
built by Indians; as for our Parts, we were forced to take Shelter under a
great Tree, where we made a large Fire; but it rained so hard, that it had
almost cost us our Lives; an Invalid died that very Night on the Spot. Before I
left the Ship I went to my Cabin for my Journal, but could not find it; I
believe it is destroyed with the rest, for there is not one Journal to be
produced; we have good reason to apprehend there was a Person employed to
destroy them; I afterward found Part of the Master's Journal along shore, tore
to Pieces: Whatever is related in this Book, preceding the Loss of the Wager,
is extracted from a Journal belonging to a Gentleman lately an Officer on Board
the Pearl. After we lost sight of the Pearl, I was obliged to have recourse to
my Memory, which I believe has been very faithful to me. From the Time we were
Ship-wreck'd, the Carpenter and myself were exceeding careful in writing each
Days Transactions: Had other Persons taken the same Care, there would be no
Necessity of imposing upon the Public a partial and inconsistent Narrative,
instead of a faithful relation of Facts.

On the 16th, the Weather very boisterous, and a great Sea, the Boatswain
wanted a Boat; but finding no Appearance of any coming aboard, brought a
Quarter Deck Gun, a four Pounder, to bear on the Captain's Hu^, and fired two
Shot, which went just over the Captain's Tent. This Day, being resolved to
contrive something like a House, to secure us from the Inclemency of the rain,
and Severity of the Weather, we hawl'd up the Cutter, and propping her up, we
made a tolerable Habitation. As for Food this Island produces none; nor is
there any Vegetable upon it but Cellery, which grows here in abundance, and is
of great Use to us, the Men being in general very much troubled with the Scurvy.

On the 17th of May, being Whitsunday, got several wild Fowls, and plenty of
Muscles, Limpetts, and other Shellfish, which we find very refreshing, having
subsisted a long Time on nothing but Salt-provisions.

The 18th went on Board the Ship, to see if it was possible to come to any
Provisions; got out of the Lazaretto two Casks of Flouer and some Wine, which
were very useful.

On the 19th went aboard again to scuttle the Decks, in order to get some Beef
and Pork out of the Hold; we also scuttled the Carpenter's Store-room, for
Nails and other Things of Service.

The 20th cut away the Gunnel, to get the Long Boat out; which was done. Today
we found several Men dead, and some drowned, in the Ship; supposed to have
drank till they were not able to get from the Water, as it flowed into the
Ship. While we were aboard working on the Wreck, there came a-long side a Canoe
with several Indians, bowing and crossing themselves, giving us to understand
they were inclinable to the Romish religion; we gave 'em out of the Ship two
Bales of Cloth, and sent them ashore to the Captain; he gave them Hats, and
presented each of them with a Soldier's Coat. They had Abundance of the largest
and best Muscles I ever saw, or tasted. This Day was the first Time of the
Boatswain's coming ashore; the Captain called him rogue and Villain, and felled
him to the Ground with his Cane, so that he was motionless, and to Appearance
dead; when he had recovered the Blow, and saw a cockt Pistol in the Captain's
Hand, he offered his naked Breast; the Captain told him, he deserved to be
shot, and said no more to him. The Captain, Lieutenant Hamilton of Marines, the
Surgeon, and Purser, always appeared in Arms on the Beach, on the coming ashore
of every Boat, in order to prevent the People bringing any Thing from the Ship
in a clandestine Manner; they were so cautious of any Thing being imbezzled,
that they would not suffer the Boats to go off and work by Night,
notwithstanding the Moon, Tides, and Fairness of Weather were more favorable
to us by Night than Day; by this we omitted several Opportunities of getting
out Provisions, and other useful Things, which we shall shortly stand in great
Need of.

The 21st, continued to scuttle between Decks; in getting Necessaries out of
the Ship, found several Men dead.

The 22d, the Indians brought us three Sheep, and some Muscles. They are a
People of a small Stature, well shaped, of an Olive Complexion, with black
Hair; in Behavior very civil: they have little Clothes, except about their
Waists, notwithstanding the Climate is excessive cold. They stayed all Night,
it being very rainy Weather, and has been ever since we have been here, the
Wind blowing from North to N. W.

Saturday the 23d, the Wind from the E. N. E. to North, fell Abundance of Snow,
insomuch that the Mountains are covered with it. It freezes very hard, and we
find it extremely cold. The next Day, the same Weather, we went aboard, and
scuttled for Flo^^ in the Forehold.

The 25th, little Wind at N. E. and frosty Weather, went aboard again, and got
out of the Forehold eight Barrels of Flour, one Cask of Pease, with some Brandy
and Wine. This Day went to Allowance, of half a Pound of Flour per Man, and one
Piece of Pork for three Men, it being the first Time of serving since on Shore.

The 26th, we got out more Casks of Flour, one Cask of Oatmeal, with some
Brandy and Wine. In the Evening the Indians came with their Wives, we gave the
Women Hats, and the Men Breeches; they made Signs as if they would bring more
Sheep.

On the 27th, we scuttled over the Captain's Store-room, got out several Casks
of rum and Wine, and brought them ashore. This was the first Time of the
Lieutenant's being between Decks since the Loss of the Ship. The following Day
we went aboard, cut down and tossed overboard the Ship's Awning, to make a Deck
for the Long Boat.

Since the 27th, we have been employed in getting up the Long Boat, and
repairing the Barge which had been stove ashore; rainy Weather.

On Wednesday, the 3d of June, hard Gales (...) Wind at N. N. West, with
Abundance of rain; deserted this Day James Mitchel, Carpenter's Mate, John
Russell, Armourer, William Oram, Carpenter's Crew, Joseph King, John Redwood,
Boatswain's Yeoman, Dennis O'Lary, John Davis, James Roach, James Stewart, and
William Thompson, Seamen. Took up, along Shore, one Hogshead of Brandy, and
several Things that drove out of the Ship, as Bales of Cloth, Hats, Shoes, and
other Necessaries. An Information was given, this Day, by David Buckley, to the
Captain, that there was a Design to blow him up, with the Surgeon, and
Lieutenant Hamilton of Marines. The Train was actually found, laid by the
Deserters, to blow 'em up the Night before they went off.

Thursday the 4th, we finished the Boats, and shot several wild Geese. Finding
Murmurings and Discontents among the People, we secured the Oars, and hawled up
the Boats, being apprehensive they would go away with them by Night.

The 5th, we went on Board the Ship, found several Casks of Wine and Brandy
between Decks, most Part of the Planks between Decks gone, and some Strakes to
Windward started out, Part of the upper Deck blown up, the Stumps of the Masts
and Pumps risen five Feet; brought ashore the Cask of Flour, with some Stuff
for the Use of the Long Boat; and two Quarter Casks of Wine; the Wind at S. by
E.

Saturday the 6th, the Wind at South and fair Weather, we went aboard, got out
of the Hold eight Casks of Flour, two Casks of Wine, a Quarter Cask and three
Hogsheads of Brandy. The Lieutenant went to the Indians, but could not find
'em, being informed by the Deserters that they were gone.

On Sunday the 7th, we went aboard the Ship, got out a Cask of Pork, two
Barrels of Flour, started one Pipe of Wine, and brought it ashore, with a
Quarter Cask of Pease, some Bales of Cloth, and Carpenter's Stores. This Day
Mr. Henry Cozens, Midshipman, was confined ^y the Captain; the Fault alleged
against him was Drunkenness. We learn from Nicholas Griselham, Seaman, who was
present and near the Captain all the Time, that as Mr. Cozens was rolling up a
sleep Beach, a Cask of Pease, he found it too heavy for him, and left off
rolling; the Captain seeing this, told him, he was drunk, Mr. Cozens replied,
With what should I get drunk, unless it be with Water? The Captain then said,
You Scoundrel, get more Hands, and roll the Cask up: Cozens called for more
Hands, but no People came; with that the Captain struck him with his Cane.
Griselham likewise says, that Cozens talked to the Captain about one Capt.
Shelvock; but the Words he does not remember. But the same Night I heard Mr.
Cozens use very unbecoming Language to the Captain, telling him, That he was
come into those Seas to pay Shelvock's Debts; and also insolently added, Though
Shelvock was a rogue, he was not a Fool; and, by G -- d, you are both. When he
spoke this, he was a Prisoner in the Store Tent, and asked the Captain, If he
was to be kept there all Night? On these Provocations, the Captain attempted to
strike him again; but the Sentinel said, he should strike no Prisoner of his.
But Cozens endeavoring to stave a Cask of Brandy, was soon after released.
This Day got out of the Ship several Chests of Wax Candles of all Sizes, Bales
of Cloth, Bales of Stockings, Shoes, with some Clocks, and mercantile Ware,
with which this Ship was thronged.

The 8th, Mr. Cummins and myself went to the Deserters; we find they are
determined to go off to the Northward; the reason of their Stay is the Want of
Craft to go off in. They now find themselves mistaken, they believed at first
they were on the Main, but are convinced they are four or five Leagues from it,
therefore they purpose to build a Punt out of the Wreck of the Ship: They live
on Sea Weed and Shell Fish; got up one Cask of Beef, which was brought on Shore
with a Cask of Brandy, found one Cask of Beef on the rocks.

On Tuesday the 9th, I went with the Doctor's Mate to the Deserters, and spoke
to William Oram, a Carpenter, and a very useful Man, desiring him to return,
with a Promise of Pardon from the Captain: In this Affair I was obliged to Act
very secretly. Today, Mr. Cozens, the Midshipman, had a Dispute with the
Surgeon; the latter having some Business in our Tent, which when he had done,
on his going away, Mr. Cozens followed him; they soon fell to Blows, but the
Surgeon had so much the Advantage of the Midshipman, that he tied his Hands
behind him and left him. In the Evening the Captain sent for me and the
Carpenter to his Tent: We found with the Captain, the Lieutenant, Purser,
Surgeon, and Lieutenant Hamilton of Marines. Here we had a Consultation, which
was chiefly concerning the Disturbances among the People, as well in our Tent
as in the rest. Mr. Cummins and I assured the Captain, that the People in our
Tent were generally very well affected to him, and that we never would engage
in any Mutiny against him, or any other Officer that would act for the public
Good, and his Majesty's Service: The Captain said, he had no reason to suspect
us, for we were the only two in the Ship, that he put any Trust or Confidence
in; strict Orders were given the Sentinel to keep a good Look-out, and have a
watchful Eye on the Provisions; notwithstanding all this Precaution and Care,
there was one third Part of a Barrel of Flour, and half a Barrel of Gunpowder
taken away that Night. It is to be observed, that this Day's Consultation was
the first that Captain Cheap ever had with his Officers; had he sometimes
consulted them aboard, we might probably have escaped our present unhappy
Condition.

Wednesday the 10th, This Day, serving the Provisions, the Boatswain's Servant,
a Portuguese Boy, talking bad English, and bringing in the Allowance of Wine,
the Boatswain, Mr. Cozens, Midshipman, and the Cook his Mess-mates, with some
Difficulty, understood by the Boy's Talk, that one of the Men had his Allowance
stopped; Mr. Cozens went to know the reason; the Purser and he having some
Dispute two or three Days before, the Purser told him, when he asked for his
Wine, that he was come to Mutiny, and, without any further Ceremony, discharged
a Pistol at his Head, and would have shot him, had he not been prevented by the
Cooper's canting the Pistol with his Elbow, at the Instant of its going off;
the Captain, and Lieutenant Hamilton, hearing the Discharge of the Pistol, the
latter ran out with a Firelock, then called the Captain out of his Tent,
telling him that Cozens was come to Mutiny; the Captain on this jumped out,
asking where the Villain was, clapped a cocked Pistol to Mr, Cozens's Cheek,
and precipitately shot him, without asking any Questions; the Noise of the two
Pistols going off, reached our Tent; it was rainy Weather, and not fit for
Gunning, so that we could not imagine the Meaning of it; soon after we heard
Mr. Cozens was shot by the Captain: The Lieutenant came to call all Hands to
the Captain; I asked if we must go armed; the Lieutenant answered, yes; but, on
Consideration, I thought better to go without Arms: When we came to the
Captain, he acquainted us with what he had done, and told us he was still our
Commander. The Captain, Purser, Surgeon, Lieutenants Hamilton, Ewers, and
Fielding of Marines being all armed, I said to the Captain, Sir, you see we are
disarmed; on this the Captain dropped his Firelock to the Ground, saying, I see
you are, and have only sent for you, to let you all know I am still your
Commander, so let every Man go to his Tent; accordingly every Man obeyed him.
In our Tent we had eighteen of the stoutest Fellows that belonged to the Ship;
and I believe the Captain, and the Gentlemen abovementioned, have some
Suspicion of Mr. Cummins and myself, believing we can sway most of the Seamen
on Shore: But I think this Day we have given a Proof of the Sincerity of our
Intentions, and our Detestation of Mutiny, by not appearing in Arms at the
report of Mr. Cozens being shot; we walked up with the Captain, where we saw
Mr. Cozens with his Elbow on the Ground resting his right Cheek on the Palm of
his Hand, alive, and to Appearance sensible, but speechless; the Captain
ordered him to the sick Tent, the Surgeon's Mate dressed his left Cheek where
he was shot, and felt a Ball about three Inches under his right Eye; the
Surgeon refused dressing him; this we may impute to his having lately a Quarrel
with Mr. Cozens, which has been already mentioned. The shooting of Mr. Cozens
was a very unhappy Affair: the Person whose Allowance was stopped, made no
Complaint to him, he was too officious in the Business, and his preceding
Behavior, and notorious disrespectful Words to the Captain, might probably
make the Captain suspect his Design was Mutiny; though this we must aver, that
Mr. Cozens neither on this, or any other Occasion, appeared in Arms since the
Loss of the Ship: However, his Fate laid the Foundation of a great deal of
Mischief which afterward followed.

Thursday the 11th, moderate Gales at W. N. W. The Carpenter employed in laying
the Blocks for the Longboat. Dr. Oakly, of the Land Forces, was desired to
assist the Surgeon's Mate, to take the Ball out of Mr. Cozens's Cheek, which he
then was inclinable to do; but in the Afternoon finding it not agreeable to the
Captain, refused to go, as we are informed by the Surgeon's Mate, who desired
some Surgeon might be present, to be Witness of the Operation; the Ball was
taken out, and for some time supposed to be lost, but was afterward found.

This Day being the 12th, the Carpenter finished the Blocks for lengthening the
Longboat; in the Morning he went to the Captain's Tent for some Bolts for the
Use of the Longboat, where he saw the Surgeon at the Medicine-Chest, who asked
him how that unfortunate Creature did, meaning Mr. Cozens; the Carpenter told
him he had not seen him Today: The Surgeon then said he would have visited
him, but the Captain would not give him Leave. This was looked on as an Act of
Inhumanity in the Captain, and contributed very much to his losing the
Affections of the People, whose Opinion was, that as Mr. Cozens was very strong
and healthy, with proper Assistance, he might recover; the People did not
scruple to say that the Captain would act a more honorable Part to discharge
another Pistol at him, and dispatch him at once, than to deny him relief, and
suffer him to languish in a cold wet Place in Pain and Misery.

On the 13th, Mr. Cozens being, to all outward Appearance, likely to recover,
desired he might be removed to our Tent, which was his Place of residence
before this unhappy Accident: We being unwilling to disoblige the Captain, the
Carpenter and myself waited on him; we told him, we were come to ask a Favor,
hoping that he would have so much Mercy and Compassion on the unhappy Man who
was in the sick Tent, as to permit us to remove him to his former Lodging; but
the Captain answered, No; I am so far from it, that, if he lives, I will carry
him a Prisoner to the Commodore, and hang him.

On the 14th, went aboard the Ship, but could do nothing, she working so very
much; we brought ashore the Fore-top-sail Yard; the Boat went up the river,
brought back Abundance of Geese and Shaggs. Wind at West.

Monday the 15th, hard Gales of Wind at West, with rain and Hail; drove ashore
three Barrels of Flour; and abundance of small Stuff out of the Ship; took up
a-long Shore several Pieces of Pork and Beef; John Anderson, a Seaman, walking
round the rocks, and reaching after a Piece of Beef, slipping his Footing, was
drowned, but taken up directly, and that Night buried: Turned the Boatswain out
of our Tent for breeding Quarrels; his turbulent Temper was so well known to
the Captain, that he expressed himself pleased at our turning him out, and said
he was surpised we ever admitted him among us.

On the 17th, the Carpenter at Work on the Long Boat: The Surgeon's Mate this
Day took out of Mr. Cozens's Cheek a Ball much slatted, and a Piece of Bone,
supposed to be Part of the Upper Jaw, which was desired by Mr. Cozens to be
delivered to me; I received it, with the first Ball mentioned to have been lost.

Thursday the 18th, the Carpenter cut the Longboat in two, and lengthened her
eleven Feet ten Inches and half by the Keel.

Sunday the 21st, went aboard the Ship; but it being dangerous going about any
Thing, by reason of her working much, and a great Sea tumbling in, the Boats
were employed in going about the rocks in Search of Subsistence.

The 22d, the Carpenter went with the Boat up the Bay to seek the Indians, but
saw nothing of them; at Night the Boat returned, the People having shot.
Abundance of wild Fowl.

The 23d, the Lieutenant went with the Boat, and found the Indians just come
from the Place where they catch Seal; their Canoes were loaded with Seal,
Sheep, and Oil.

Wednesday the 24th, departed this Life Mr. Henry Cozens, Midshipman, after
languishing fourteen Days with the Wound he had received in his Cheek: We
buried him in as decent a Manner as Time, Place, and Circumstances would allow.
There have died sundry Ways since the Ship first struck, forty-five Men; seven
have deserted from us, and still continue away; remain and now victual'd one
hundred Men.

Thursday the 25th, the Wind at W. N. W. and rainy Weather; saw the Indians
coming toward us in their Canoes; but the Deserters settling where they took
their Habitation when first we saw 'em, by their rowing, we thought they were
designed to go there; and knowing the Deserters intended to take one of their
Canoes to go over to the Main, we therefore launched the Yawl and went off to
them; there were five Canoes of 'em, laden with Seal, Shellfish, and four
Sheep; they brought with 'em their Wives and Children, so that in all they were
about fifty in Number; they hawl'd their Canoes up, and built four Wigwams,
which they covered with the Bark of Trees and Seal-skins; we imagined by this
they had an Intention to settle with us; they are a very simple and inoffensive
People, of a low Stature, flat nosed, with their Eyes sunk very deep in their
Heads; they live continually in Smoke, and are never without a Fire, even in
their Canoes; they have nothing to cover their Nakedness, but a Piece of an old
Blanket, which they throw over their Shoulders: We always see 'em in this
Manner, notwithstanding we cloth 'em whenever they come to us. By the Crosses
set up in many Parts of the Land, one would think they had some Notion of the
Romish religion: We cannot make 'em understand us by any Speech, nor by our
Signs; we showed 'em a looking Glass; when they saw the representation of
themselves, they seemed amazed, and showed a thousand antic Gestures; and when
once they beheld themselves in the Looking-Glass, they could hardly be
prevailed on to look off.

On Sunday the 28th, in the Afternoon, about twelve of the Indian Women went
off in their Canoes: We thought they were gone to get Muscles, but soon saw 'em
diving; which we imagined was for Pieces of Beef or Pork that came out of the
Wreck; but when they came ashore, we found they had been only diving for
Sea-Eggs. The Women among those People seem to take more Pains for the
Provisions of Life than the Men; the latter having little to do but to provide
Wood, and indulge themselves by the Fire, while the Women go every Tide a
Fishing. Today we killed two Indian Sheep.

Monday the 29th, launched the Yawl to go with the Indians to show us where
they get the Muscles; but being too late for the Tide, we came away without
any: The Captain sent to our Tent two Quarters of Mutton; the Carpenter daily
at Work on the Longboat. Winds variable.

On the 30th, the Indian Women went again for Sea Eggs, and brought a great
Quantity, with Abundance of white Maggots about three Quarters of an Inch in
Length, and in Circumference the Bigness of a Wheat-straw. These Women keep an
incredible Time under Water, with a small Basket in their Hands, about the Size
of the Women's Work-baskets in England, into which they put whatever they get in
their diving. Among these People the Order of Nature seems inverted; the Males
are exempted from Hardships and Labor, and the Women are mere Slaves and
Drudges. This Day one of our Seamen died: We observe, the Indians are very
watchful of the Dead, sitting continually near the above mentioned Corpse, and
carefully covering him; every Moment looking on the Face of the Deceased with
abundance of Gravity: At the Burial their Deportment was grave and solemn;
seeing the People with their Hats off during the Service, they were very
attentive and observant, and continued so till the Burial was over: They have
nothing, as I have said before, but a Blanket to cover 'em, and the Boys and
Girls are quite naked, notwithstanding we felt it as cold here, as in the
hardest Frosts in England, and almost always rainy.

Wednesday, July the 1st, employed in cutting Timbers in the Woods for the
Longboat; rainy Weather: the Wind at S. W. the Indian Women diving for Food as
before.

Thursday the 2d, last Night the Store-Tent was broke open, and robbed of a
great deal of Flour.

Monday the 6th, hard Gales of Wind, with Showers of rain and Hail; came ashore
from the Ship, one Cask of Beef, with several of the Lower Deck Carlings, and
Plank of the Upper and Lower Deck Beams; and, what was reckoned very odd, the
Cabbin-Bell came ashore, without its being fastened to any Wood, or any one
Thing of the Ship near it.

Tuesday the 7th, hard Gales of Wind, with Hail, rain, and Lightning: The
Indian Women went out as usual in their Canoes to dive for Sea Eggs, and
brought ashore Abundance of 'em; they jump overboard out of their Canoe about
a Mile from Shore; they take the Handle of their Baskets, which I have already
described, between their Teeth, and dive in five or six Fathom Water; their
Agility in Diving, and their Continuance under Water, for so long a Time as
they generally do, will be thought impossible by Persons who have not been
Eyewitnesses of it; they seem as amphibious to us as Seals and Allegators, and
rarely make use of any Provision but what they get out of the Sea.

Wednesday the 8th, launched the Yawl and went on Board; saw several Casks,
some of Meat, and some of Liquor; the Decks and Sides abaft drove out, and
entirely gone; the Larboard Side abaft drove on shore; about two Miles and a
half from the Tent a Cask of Liquor was found, and broached by the Person who
found it, which was allowed to be a great Fault; he likewise broached a Cask of
Meat, which should have been preserved to carry away with us.

On Thursday the 9th, the Indians with their Wives and Children launched their
Canoes, and went away; it is believed they wanted Provisions, such as Seal; they
are indeed never settled long in a Place; it was said some of our People wanted
to have to do with their Wives, which was the reason of their going away so
soon. Today we saw several Things drive out of the Ship up the Lagoon, as the
Stump of the Mainmast, one of the Pumps, with one of the Gun-Carriages. Wind
at N. W.

Friday the 10th, went aboard the Ship, sound her broke asunder just at the
Gang-Way; saw the Cables out to the Windward, but could not see any Casks of
Liquor or Provisions; went to shorter Allowance of Flour, one Pound for three
Men per Diem. Last Night the Tent was robbed of half a Barrel of Flour: Orders
were given by the Captain to watch the Store-Tent by Night; all the Officers,
the Marine included, with the Mates and Midshipmen, were obliged to watch, the
Captain and Carpenter alone excused, the Carpenter being every Day at work on
the Longboat.

Friday the 17th, for this Week past hard Gales of Wind, with rain and Hail as
usual. Last Wednesday the Ship parted her Upper Works from the Lower Deck:
Launched the Boat and went off to the Wreck, but could do nothing; went up the
Bay; took a Quarter Cask, about three Parts full of Wine; saw the Indian Dogs
ashore but no People.

Saturday the 18th, launched the Boat, sent her to the Wreck, and brought
ashore one Cask of Beef; it is believed some Guns were heard from the Sea: The
Watch reported they have heard them two Nights past. Great Disturbances among
the People. Wind at E. N. E. and frosty Weather.

Sunday the 19th, launched the Boat, sent her to the Wreck, hooked a Cask
supposed to be Beef; but when towed ashore, we found it contained nothing but
Hatchets; we took up along Shore, Abundance of Cheque Shirts in Dozens, also
Caps, Bales of Cloth, and Pieces of Beef and Pork.

Wednesday the 22d. This Day began to build a House to dwell in, finding our
Stay here, will be much longer than we at first expected.

The 23d, took up along Shore several Pieces of Beef and Pork, Shirts, Caps,
Frocks, Trowsers, Pieces of Cloth, with other serviceable Things, and Wax
Candles of all Sizes.

Saturday the 25th, hard Showers of rain and Hail; the Wind at North. Shot
several Sea-Gulls, Geese, Hawks, and other Birds: The Carpenter had this Day
given him by one of the People, a fine large rock-crab, it being the first of
the Kind we ever saw here.

Sunday the 26th, moderate Gales and variable Winds, with rain and Hail: Most
Part of our People eat a Weed that grows on the rocks; it is a thin Weed of a
dark green Color, and called by the Seamen, Slaugh. It is surprising how the
black Current Trees, which are here in great Plenty, have budded within these
three Days. Began thatching our new House with Bushes: Today we caught a fine
rock-fish; this is the first Fish we have seen alive since our being here.
Observing our new Town, we find there are no less than eighteen Houses in it.

Monday the 27th, launched the Beat, went to the Wreck, but found nothing;
close Weather, the Wind still at North; raised the Sheers for erecting a Tent
over the Longboat to keep the Men from being exposed to the continual rains.
This Day we finished the Thatching of our new House.

Wednesday the 29th, Fresh Gales at N. W. with rain; sure no Men ever met with
such Weather as we have in this Climate: Today we walked in the Woods to take
some notice of the Trees, which we find to be very much like our Beech in
England; but the Trees and Bushes are in general of a soft free Nature, and
with a spicey Bark.

Thursday the 30th, Wind still at N. W. and rainy Weather. This Day departed
this Life Nathaniel Robinson, the last private Man of the Invalids; there are
now only two left, viz. the Captain and Surgeon. Being at the Honorable Mr.
Byron's Tent, I found him looking in Sir John Narborough's Voyage to these
Seas; this Book I desired the Loan of he told me it was Captain Cheap's, and
did not doubt but he would lend it me; this, Favor I requested of the Captain,
and it was presently granted. Carefully perusing this Book, I conceived an
Opinion that our going through the Streights of Magellan for the Coast of
Brazil, would be the only Way to prevent our throwing ourselves into the Hands
of a cruel, barbarous, and insulting Enemy: Our Longboat, when finished, can
be fit for no Enter prize, but the Preservation of Life: As we cannot act
offensively, we ought to have regard to our Safety and Liberty. This Evening
Proposals were offered to the Officers concerning our going through the
Streights of Magellan; which at this Time they seem to approve of.

Friday the 31st, hard Gales at N. W. with rain: This Day was taken up along
Shore an Otter just killed, but by what Animal we could not tell; it was
bleeding fresh when taken up, and proved a dainty repast. Came ashore the
Ship's Beams, with several Things of great Value.

Saturday, August the 1st, hard Gales at N. W. with rain and Hail. This Day put
to an Allowance of Flour, one Quarter of a Pound a Man per Diem, and one Pint
of Wine; those who like Brandy, to have half a Pint in Lieu of Wine. We have
now in a manner nothing to live on but what we pick up along the Shore: The
Ship's Company agree to go through the Streights of Magellan.

Sunday the 2d, This Morning found the Store Tent robbed of Brandy; filled up
all the ullago Casks; picked up about the rocks Abundance of Clams, a
Shellfish not unlike our Cockles: These Fish are at present the Support of our
Life. The People are now very quarrelsome and discontented.

Monday the 3d, this Day having fine Weather (which is a Prodigy in the Place)
launched the Boat, and went about the rocks and Islands on Discovery. This Day
we also moved into our new House, it being a very commodious Habitation,
exceeding well thatched; in this Dwelling there are Cabbins for fourteen
People, which are covered inside and out with broad Cloth: This is a rich
House, and, in some Parts of the World, would purchase a pretty Estate; there
are several hundred Yards of Cloth about it, besides the Curtains and Linings,
which are Shalloon and Camblet; in short, considering where we are, we cannot
desire a better Habitation. The People fall into Disputes concerning the Boat,
where we are to proceed with her, when she is built and ready for going off. It
is the Opinion of the Navigators, that going through the Streights of Magellan
is the safest and only Way to preserve Life and Liberty: The Artists, who have
worked the Bearings and Distance, are very pressing that it should be moved to
the Captain, purposing to have their reasons drawn up, and signed by all who
are willing to go that Way, and to be delivered to the Captain for his Opinion:
upon this there was a Paper drawn up, and as soon as the People heard it, they
came flocking to sign first, crying all aloud for the Streights, seeming
overjoyed, as if they were going to England directly, without any Affliction or
Trouble, but there must be a great deal of Hardship to be encountered before we
arrive at our native Country: This Paper was signed by all the Officers on the
Spot, except the Captain, Lieutenant, Purser, and Surgeon, and by all the
Seamen in general, except the Captain's Steward.

Tuesday the 4th, at the Time of serving at the Storehouse, about Twelve
o'Clock, (...) went to the Captain, with the Master, Carpenter, and Boatswain,
and read to him the Paper; he answered, he would consider of it, and give his
Answer: Here follows a Copy of the Paper signed.

WE whose Names are under-mentioned, do, upon mature Consideration, as we have
met with so happy a Deliverance, think it the best, surest, and most safe Way,
for the Preservation of the Body of People on the Spot, to proceed through the
Streights of Magellan for England. Dated at a desolate Island on the Coast of
Patagonia, in the Latitude of 47 Degrees. 00 Min. South, and West Longitude from
the Meridian of London 81 Degrees, 40 Min^ in the South-Seas, this 2d Day of August
1741.

John Bulkeley, Gunner John Cummins Carpenter Thomas Clark, Master John King,
Boatswain John Jones, Master^^ Mate John Snow, ditto Robert Elliot, Surgeon's
Mate The Hon. John Byron, Midshipman Alexander Campbell, ditto Isaac Morris,
ditto Thomas Maclean, Cook John Mooring, Boatswain's Mate Richard Phipps, ditto
John Young, Cooper Richard Noble, Quartermaster William Rose ditto William
Hervey, Quarter-Gunner David Buckley, ditto
SEAMEN.
John Bosman William Moore Samuel Stook Henry Stevens John Montgomery John
Hayes John Heart James Roach Job Barns John Petman William Callicutt George
Smith Peter Deleroy James Mac Cawle John George John Shorclan Richard East
William Lane William Oram Moses Lewis Nicholas Griselham Samuel Cooper Benjamin
Smith John Duck James Butler.
We whose Names are under-mentioned, have had sufficient reasons, from the
abovementioned People, to consent to go this Way, Signed by

Capt. Robert Pemberton, Commander of his Majesty's Landforces. William
Fielding, Lieutenants. Robert Ewers, Lieutenants.


Wednesday the 5th, this Day I went with the Master, Carpenter, Master's Mate,
and Midshipmen, to the Captain, to acquaint him with what was done, and
resolved on; and farther told him, It was a Duty incumbent on us to preserve
Life before any other Interest. He answered, Gentlemen, I desire Time to
consider of it, and will give you my final Determination; on which we took our
Leave, and came away.

Thursday the 6th, hard Gales at W. S. W. and rainy Weather. At Noon went with
Mr. Cummins to Captain Pemberton's Tent, to have some farther Conference for
our future Deliverance. While we were there, the Captain sent his Service to
Capt. Cheap for a Pair of Pocket-Pistols, his own Property, which had been
refused him on his request some Time before. The Servant was answered by the
Captain's Favorite, and Prime Minister, the Steward, The Captain is ill, and I
cannot let you have 'em. This answer not being satisfactory to Capt. Pemberton,
he sent a second Time, and insisted on the Delivery of his Pistols; but was
answered, they could not be come at before the Captain was up; but a little
Time after it was judged proper to send Captain Pemberton his Pistols. From
Captain Pemberton's we went to the Lieutenant's Tent; while there, the
Lieutenant was sent for to Captain Cheap; about an Hour after the Carpenter and
myself were sent for; when we came to him, he said, Gentlemen, I have maturely
considered the Contents of your Paper, so far as it regards the Preservation of
the People on the Spot: This Paper has given me a great deal of Uneasiness,
insomuch that I have not closed my Eyes till Eight o'Clock this Morning, for
thinking of it; but, I think, you have not weighed the Thing rightly; do you
know we are above one hundred and sixty Leagues distant S. W. from the Sreights
of Magellan, with the Wind against us? Then think on the Distance to be run
afterward on the other Side the Streights, with the Wind always against us,
and where no Water is to be had. I answered, Sir, you say it is above one
hundred and sixty Leagues to the Streights; but let the Navigators work it, and
they will find it not above ninety Leagues; yourself and Lieutenant are
undoubtedly Navigators and Judges, therefore will certainly find it as I say.
Mr. Cummins acquainted him, according to his Calculation, the Vessel would
carry a Month's Water at a Quart a Man per Diem; and, Sir, do you consider,
after running a-long Shore to the Northward this Side the Land, that we have
one hundred Leagues to run right out to Sea to the Island of Juan Ferdinandez;
and five hundred Chances to one, if we meet the Commodore there, or any of the
Squadron; nor do we know but the Commodore may have shared the same Fate with
ourselves, or perhaps worse? The Captain answered, It Is a thousand to one if we
see the Commodore at Juan Ferdinandez; for, Gentlemen, to let you into a Secret
which I never discovered before, we shall meet him at Baldavia, his Orders were
from -- to go there with the Squadron, it being a Place of little or no Force.
Mr. Cummins answered, Sir, it is agreed, the Commodore is at Baldavia; but we
make it in our Bargain, when we go from hence, that we wi^^ put ashore at every
Place when we want Water, whenever the Weather will permit, without any
Obstruction. The Captain replied, There is no Occasion for that; we will water
at the Islands, and take a Vessel going along. Mr. Cummins said, Sir, what
shall we do with a Vessel, without Provisions, for ninety Souls? The Captain
answered, We will take a Vessel laden with Flour from Chili, there being a
great many Trading Vessels that Way; and then we will proceed through the
Streights of Magellan. Mr. Cummins said, How shall we take a Vessel without
Guns not having any but Muskets, and our Enemies know as well as ourselves,
that we have a Squadron in these Seas, therefore undoubtedly are well armed,
and keep a good Look-out. The Captain's Answer to this was, What are our small
Arms for, but t^ board 'em? The Carpenter said, Sir, if a Shot should take the
Beat under Water, it would not be in my Power to stop a Leak of that kind,
where the Plank is so thin, that in some Places it is not above three Quarters
of an ^^ch thick. The Captain then said, Gentlemen, I am agreeable to any
Thing, and willing to go any Way, for the Preservation of the People; but at
the same Time would have you consider of it, the Wind being always against us
on the other Side the Land, and we have above seven hundred Leagues to the
river Plate. I answered the Captain, It Is not above five hundred and ninety
Leagues from hence to Cape St. Antonio's; and, as I have before said, let the
Navigators work it, and reason take Place, which is what we chiefly desire to
be governed by: Another Inducement we have to go the Way proposed is, that we
may be assured of Water and Provision. I allow that, says the Captain, and we
may save our own; but how do you know whether we may not meet Enemies in the
Streights? I replied to the Captain, We can have no Enemies to encounter there
but Indians in their Canoes, and those we can master at our Pleasure. The
Captain then seemed to countenance our Opinion again, and said, When we come to
St. Julian's we shall be sure of Salt in Plenty for our Provisions, without
which our Fowls will not keep above two or three Days: Besides, when we come to
the river Plate, we may meet with a Prize, they not being acquainted with any
English Vessel like ours, with Schooner Sails; by which Means we may run up the
river, and take a larger Vessel: If we fail here, we may go ashore, and get
what Cattle we please; but what Business have we at the Rio Grand? We must go
to the Rio Janeiro. I told him, we should be obliged to stop at every Place
a-long Shore for Supplies; at St. Catharine's the Governor will give us a
Certificate, so that we shall be known to be the People that were there in the
Squadron. The Captain said, That Is true, and I can get Bills of Credit in any
Part of Brazil; besides, the People may be separated, some in the Flota, and
some in other Ships; with less Hands we may go to Barbados. Mr. Cummins told
him, We might venture to England with twelve Hands. Yes, you may, says the
Captain, with thirty. It is to be observed, during all this Debate, the
Lieutenant spoke not a Word. The Carpenter asking him the reason of his Silence
i^ all the Consulation he; answered, I Will give my Opinion hereafter. The
Captain said, I knew nothing of his being acquainted with it, till Mr. Bulkeley
told me Yesterday; but at the same Time, Mr. Beans, I expect you will be the
first that will sign the Paper. I imagined the Captain meant our Paper, and
immediately answered with some Warmth, As he had refused signing at first, and
at the same Time agreed to the Proposal, that I had signed so close, that there
was no room left for his Name, and now it was too late for him to sign. The
Captain surpised me, by saying, I don't mean your Paper. I told him, Any
other, which should be contrary to ours, would never be signed by us. Mr.
Cummins said to the Captain, Sir, it is all owing to you that we are here; if
you had consulted your Officers, we might have avoided this Misfortune;
considering the Condition the Ship was in, she was not fit to come in with the
Land, all our Men being sick, and not above three Seamen in a Watch; suppose
the Mast had gone by the Board, as was every Moment expected. The Captain made
Answer, Gentlemen, you do not know my Orders, there never were any so strict
given to a Commander before; and had I but two Men living besides myself, I
must, and was obliged to go to the first rendezvous, which was the Island of
Nostra Senhora di Socora: I was obliged to go there at all Events. I made
Answer to this, Sir, if that is the Case, it seems plain, the Thing was
designed we should be here; But, Sir, I am of Opinion, notwithstanding the
Commodore had his Orders from -- to go with the Squadron to Baldavia, that at
the same Time those Orders were so far discretional, that if the Squadron was
disabled, Care was to be taken not to endanger his Majesty's Ships. Yes, that
(says the Captain) was settled at St. Julian's: Notwithstanding what has been
said, Gentlemen, I am agreeable to take any Chance with you, and to go any Way;
but would have you consider of it, and defer your Determination till all is
ready to go off the Spot. I then told the Captain, You have known, Sir, from
the Time you saw the Proposal, that the People are uneasy, and the Work is at a
Stand, and in this Situation Things will be until this Affair is settled;
therefore the sooner you resolve, the better. The Captain replied, I design to
have a Consultation among my Officers: Have you any more Objections to make? I
answered, Yes, Sir, one more; which is, When you go from hence, you are not to
weigh, come to an Anchor, or alter Course, without consulting your Officers.
The Captain said, Gentlemen, I was your Commander till the Ship parted, or as
long as any Stores or Provisions were getting out of her. We told him, we had
always taken Care to obey his Orders in the strictest Manner; which he allowed
us to have done; and he added, You were the Officers that I placed my whole
Dependence in. We answered, Sir, we will support you with our Lives, at long as
you suffer reason to rule; and then we parted. After this Consultation the
Captain seldom came out of his Tent, which occasioned great Disturbances among
the People.

Friday the 7th, the Wind at W. N. W. with rain. This Day the Navigators worked
the Bearings and Distance along Shore, from one Place to another, to know the
true Distance: Hereupon it was agreed to proceed through the Streights of
Magellan, according to Sir John Narborough's Directions, which give us great
Encouragement to go that Way. Captain Pemberton draw'd his Men up, and
dismissed 'em again. Great Uneasiness among the People.

Saturday the 8th, this Morning went to the Lieutenant, for him to acquaint the
Captain all his Officers were ready to give sufficient reasons for going
through the Streights of Magellan, desiring a Consultation might be held in the
Afternoon. At Three o'Clock the Captain sent for me and Mr. Cummins; when we
came, the Master and Bortswain were sent for, but they were gone in Search of
Subsistence, as Limpets, Muscles, etc. The Captain said, Gentlemen, I don't
doubt but you have considered upon the Business you are come about; therefore I
am determined to take my Fate, with you, or where the Spirit of the People
leads, and shall use my best Endeavors for their Preservation; but I am afraid
of meeting contrary Winds, for after the Sun has crossed the Line we must
expect to meet 'em. I made Answer, By all Accounts, the Wind hangs from N. W.
to the S. W. above three Parts of the Year; which is in our Favor. Mr. Cummins
told him, There was fresh Water to be got as well on one Coast as the other;
and if Sir John Narborough's Treatment was so ill in a profound Peace, what
must we expect in a Time of open War? The Captain said, I am afraid very bad.
Then Mr. Cummins spoke in this Manner to the Captain: Sir, I always took you
for an honorable Gentleman, and I believe you to be such; on your Honor, Sir,
I beg you will give the true Sentiments of your Mind, whether through the
Streights is not the surest and safest Way to preserve our Lives,
notwithstanding we have a Thousand Difficulties to encounter with any Way? The
Captain answered, I really think going to the Northward is the safest Way; for
suppose we should be drove off to Sea, when on the other Side the Land, what is
to be done then? I said, Sir, it is our Business to keep the Shore, to prevent
all Accidents that may happen that Way. Then Lieutenant Beans made an
Objection, Suppose you have the Wind blowing right in, and a tumbling Sea, so
as to endanger the Boat, what are we to do? I made Answer, Sir, If you
remember, when we were riding at St. Julian's, it blowed a very hard Gale of
Wind right in from the Sea, yet, even then, the Sea did not run so high as to
endanger a Boat riding at Anchor: Another Instance I bring you from St.
Catherine's, when we had such hard Gales, that the Trial lost her Masts, and
the Pearl separated from the Squadron; yet, at that Time, there was no Sea
comparable to what we have met with this Side the Land. The Lieutenant allowed
this to be Fact. Then the Captain said, I will allow you to have Water at Port
Desire; but do you consider the lengthening your Distance, by keeping along
Shore, and rounding every Bay, and some of those Bays are very deep. I told
him, That undoubtedly there was Water all along the Coast, and that we had no
Business to round the Bays, but to steer from one Head-land to the other. Then
Lieutenant Beans made a second Objection, Suppose we are forced into a Bay, and
Shoal-Water? I answered, We should always have a Boat ahead, and our Draught
of Water will not be above four or five Feet at most; and if we should be so
unfortunate as to lose our Boat, we must keep the Lead a going. The Lieutenant
replied, That was true, and there could not be a great deal of Difficulty in
it. This was the only Time the Lieutenant ever spoke in Public on the Affair;
he always allowed, when absent from the Captain, that going through the
Streights was the best Way; but in the Captain's Presence he sided with him,
and was for going to the Northward.

Sunday the 9th, at Three this Afternoon, I went with Mr. Cummins, the Master,
and Boatswain, as desired, to the Captain, to give him our Opinions, believing,
going through the Streights the surest Way to preserve Life: It was therefore
agreed, That if the Wind did not set in against us, at the Sun's Crossing the
Line, that the Captain would go that Way. The Captain asked every Man's
Opinion, and found the People unanimous for the Streights of Magellan. Today,
being fair Weather, launched the Yawl to go a Fowling; shot several Geese,
Ducks, Shaggs, and Sea-pies. Heel'd the Longboat for planking.

Monday the 10th, Wind at N. and N.N.W. rainy Weather. Eat Slaugh and Sea-weed
fried with Tallow-Candles, which we picked up along Shore; this we reckon at
present exceeding good Eating, having nothing to live on but a Quarter of a
Pound of Flour a Man per Day, and what we can get off the rocks; for many Days
the Weather has been so bad, that we have not been able to stir abroad, though
almost starved for want of Food.

Tuesday the 11th, hard Gales at S. W. with heavy rains. This Afternoon the
People came in Arms to acquaint us of the Stores being robbed; they therefore
wanted our Consent for moving the Stores to our Tent; on which we desired they
would desist from offering any Violence; we told 'em of the ill Consequence of
Mutiny, which, as we always abhorred, we took all imaginable Care to prevent:
The People, on our Persuasions, instantly quitted their Arms. The Captain
presently sent for me and Mr. Cummins, to acquaint us with what had happened:
He told us, the Purser accidentally coming by, saw the Prisoner, Rowland
Crusset, a Marine, crawling from the Bushes, and from under the Store-Tent, and
found on him upwards of a Day's Flour for Ninety Souls, with one Piece of Beef
under his Coat, and three Pieces more, which were concealed in the Bushes, to
carry off when an Opportunity offered; and the Centry, Thomas Smith, his
Mess-mate, a Marine, undoubtedly was privy to the robbery. The Captain farther
said, We have nothing to do with them; but I shall send to Captain Pemberton to
insist on a Court Martial: I really think, that for robbing the Store-Tent
(which, in our present Circumstances, is starving the whole Body of People) the
Prisoners deserve Death. This was not only the Captain's Opinion, but indeed
the Sentiments of every Person present. After we parted from the Captain, we
were sent for by Capt. Pemberton: He acquainted us, he would go as far as the
Martial Law would allow him, and in Conjunction with the Sea-Officers: I look
(said he) on the Lieutenant as nothing, and the Captain in the same Light: As
for you two (meaning the Gunner and Carpenter) I confide in, and shall have
regard to your Opinions. When the Articles of War were read, we found their
Crime did not touch Life, but that they were to suffer Corporal Punishment.
Whilst Mr. Cummins was laying open the Nature of their Guilt, and the ill
Consequence of Lenity in the Circumstances we were in, I proposed a Way, next
to Death; which was, if judged proper by Captain Pemberton and Captain Cheap,
to carry them off to an Island where the Ship parted, there being Muscles,
Limpets, and Clams in Abundance, and no want of Water, and there to be left
till we should be ready for sailing; and, to strike a Terror in all for the
future, that if any Man should be guilty of the like Offense, without any
respect of Person, he should share the same Fate. This Proposal was approved of
by both the Captains. At Night Lieutenant Beans surpised us with a new kind of
Proposal we little dreamt of, which was, to have a proper Place of Devotion to
perform Divine Service in every Sabbath Day: For this Sacred Office our Tent
was judged the most commodious Place. The Duty of public Prayer had been
entirely neglected on board, though every Seaman pays Four-pence per Month
toward the Support of a Minister; yet Devotion, in so solemn a Manner, is so
rarely performed that I know but one Instance of it during the many Years I
have belonged to the Navy. We believe religion to have the least Share in this
Proposal of the Lieutenant. If our Tent should be turned into a a House of
Prayer, and this Project takes, we may, perhaps, in the Midst of our Devotion,
be surpised, and our Arms taken from us, in order to frustrate our Designs,
and prevent our return to England through the Streights of Magellan, or any
other Way.

Wednesday the 12th, hard Gales from S.W. to W. with heavy Showers of Hail and
rain. Served out Provisions Today, a Piece of Beef for four Men; some Time
past we have had but a Quarter of a Pound of Flour per Man per Day, and three
Pieces of Beef; we live chiefly on Mussles, Limpits, and Clams, with Saragraza
and Thromba; one is a green broad Weed, common on the rocks in England; the
other is a round Sea-Weed, so large, that a Man can scarce grasp it; it grows
in the Sea, with broad Leaves; this last we boil, the Saragraza we fry in
Tallow; in this Manner we support Life: Even those Shellfish and Weeds we get
with great Difficulty; for the Wind, the rain, and Coldness of the Climate in
this Season, are so extremely severe, that a Man will pause some Time whether
he shall stay in his Tent and starve, or go out in Quest of Food.

Friday the 14th, very hard Gales at W. and N. W. with Showers of rain and
Hail, which beat with such Violence against a Man's Face, that he can hardly
withstand it; however, one of our Mess-mates Today shot three Gulls and a
Hawk; which gave us a very elegant repast. This Day was held a Court Martial on
the Centry who was believed confederated with the Marine that robbed the
Store-Tent: Sentence was passed on 'em to receive six hundred Lashes each:
Captain Cheap, not thinking the Punishment adequate to the Crime, cut 'em short
of their Allowance; so that they have now but half the Provisions they had
before: The Day following the Offenders received Two Hundred Lashes each, as
Part of their Punishment. We hawl'd the Longboat higher up, for fear the Sea
should wash the Blocks from under her. We have found out a new Way of managing
the Slaugh; we fry it in thin Batter with Tallow, and use it as Bread.

Sunday the 16th, Fresh Gales of Wind at S. W. with heavy Showers of Hail: The
People generally complain of a Malady in their Eyes; they are in great Pain,
and can scarce see to walk about. The last Tide flowed nine Feet perpendicular;
Today we picked up Shellfish in Abundance, with Pieces of Beef and Pork. The
Prisoners received two Hundred Lashes more.

Tuesday the 18th, this Day the Carpenter, who has all along been indefatigable
in working about the Longboat, saw one of the Seamen cutting up an Anchor
Stock for Firewood, which had been designed for a particular Use for the Boat;
at Sight of the Fellow's Folly be could not contain himself: This Affair, added
to the little Concern and intolerable Indifference that appeared in the
Generality of the People, for some Time impaired his Understanding, and made
him delirious; all possible Methods are used to restore him, as he is the only
Man, who, through the Assistance of Providence, can complete the Means of our
Deliverance.

Wednesday the 19th, The Carpenter was so much recovered, that he went to work
as usual; at Night, the Lieutenant acquainted us, that the Captain desired to
speak with the Carpenter and me Tomorrow at Noon, to consult what should be
done with the Two Prisoners, having received but Four Hundrrd Lashes out of the
Six, to which they were sentenced by a Court Martial, the other Two Hundred
being remitted by their own Officers.

Thursday the 20th, We waited on the Captain, who acquainted us with what the
Lieutenant had mentioned last Night relating to the Prisoners: We told him the
People were very uneasy about this Mitigation of the Punishment inflicted on
them by a Court Martial; therefore it was agreed they should provide for
themselves as well as they could; but to have no Sort of Provisions out of the
Store-Tent for the future.

Saturday the 22d, we begun upon several Contrivances to get Provisions, such
as building Punts, Cask-Boats, Leather-Boats, and the like.

On Sunday the 23d, The Store-Tent was again robbed, and, on Examination, was
found a Deficiency of Twelve Days Brandy for Ninety Men: The Lieutenant,
myself, and Carpenter went to the Captain to consult some Way which might
effectually prevent those villainous Practices for the future; the Captain
desired us to make a nice Enquiry into this robbery, being determined to
inflict the severest Punishment on the Offenders; though it would give him the
greatest Concern if any innocent Person should suffer. This Day we confined one
of the Sentinels for being drunk on his Post; the Day following the Boatswain
gave us Information of the Persons who had robbed the Tent; they were two
Sentinels, Smith and Butler; those very Persons were the first who insisted,
that the Seamen, as well as themselves, should watch the Store-Tent; their own
Officers, as ye^, have brought them to no Examination: We have also Information
that the Purser holds frequent Conversation with the rebels, contrary to all
the Laws of the Navy, supplying them with Liquors in Abundance, to the great
Distress of his Majesty's faithful Subjects, who have but Half a Pint per Day
to subsist on. There are now great Disturbances among the People concerning
going to the Northward; they believe Captain Cheap never intended to return to
England by his proposing this Way, in Opposition to the Opinion of all the
Navigators, who have given reasons for going through the Streights of Magellan.
There is a Sort of Party-rage among the People, fomented by a kind of Bribery
that has more Influence on the Seamen than Money; there are some daily bought
off by rum and other strong Liquors. Unless a Stop is put to these Proceedings,
we shall never go off the Spot.

Tuesday the 25th, This Day felt Four great Earthquakes, three of which were
very terrible; notwithstanding these violent Shocks and Tremblings of the
Earth, we find no Ground shifted. Hard Gales of Wind at the North, with heavy
Showers of rain.

Thursday the 27th, The Disturbances increase among the People; we plainly see
there is a Party raised to go to the Northward; we went to the Lieutenant, and
consulted with him what was to be done in the present Exigence; myself being
reckoned the Projector of the Scheme for going through the Streights was
threatened to be shot by Noble the Quartermaster; After having some Discourse
with the Lieutenant, he told me, If I would draw up a Paper for the Captain to
sign, in order to satisfy the People, that he would go the Southward, and every
Officer to have a Copy of it to justify himself in England, it would be as
proper a Method as we could take. The Paper was immediately drawn up in these
Words, viz.

WHEREAS upon a General Consultation, it has been agreed to go from this Place
through the Streights of Magellan, for the Coast of Brazil, in our Way for
England: We do, notwithstanding, find the People separating into Parties, which
must consequently end in the Destruction of the whole Body; and as also there
have been great robberies committed on the Stores, and every Thing is now at a
Stand; therefore, to prevent all future Frauds and Animosities, we are
unanimously agreed to proceed as abovementioned.

This Paper was delivered to the Lieutenant, who said that he was sure the
Captain would sign it; but in case of refusal, he should be confined for
shooting Mr. Cozens, and he would take the Command on himself: And, to prevent
further Disturbances, the Purser, as he much conversed with the rebels, it is
agreed by the Body of Officers, to send him off the Island, for acting so
contrary to his Duty, in Contempt of the Articles of War, the Laws of his
Country, and the known rules of the Navy. It was likewise agreed, that any
Person who engaged himself in raising Parties, should be disarmed. By this
Day's Proceedings, we thought the Lieutenant a Gentleman of resolution; but the
Words and Actions of People do not always concur.

Friday the 28th, Today the Officers and People all appeared in Arms. The
Master, Boatswain, Gunner, and Carpenter, with Mr. Jones, Mate, and Mr.
Cambell, Midshipman, went into the Captain's Tent, the Lieutenant being with
him. As soon as the Officers were seated, a Consultation was held concerning
Smith and Butler's robbing the Store-Tent; they were sentenced to be
transported to the Main, or some Island. As soon as this Affair was over, we
talked to the Captain of the Uneasiness among the People; that there had been a
long Time a visible Inquietude among 'em, and that we could not help seeing
there were Schemes formed to obstruct our Design in going to the Southward. The
Captain answered, Gentlemen, it is Time enough to think of this when we are
ready to go off: Have not I told you before, that I do not care which Way I go,
Southward or Northward? I will take my Fate with you. Every Body now expected
the Lieutenant to reply, especially after the Zeal he expressed himself with
the Day before; but he sat speechless, without any regard to the Welfare of the
People, or to his own Proposals. Finding he did not move in the Affair, I took
out the Paper which was agreed to by the Lieutenant and the rest of the
Officers, and read it to the Captain, and asked him to sign it; which he
strenuously opposed and seemed very much enraged that it should be proposed to
him. Upon this we dropped the Matter, and began to discourse concerning the
Provisions: We thought it necessary, that ten Weeks Subsistence should be
secured to carry with us, and that the Liquor should be buried under Ground;
but he gave us no Answer. Finding no relief here, we went to Captain
Pemberton's Tent, to consult with him what we should do in the present
Exigence. On our coming out from the Captain, we saw a Flag hoisted on Captain
Pemberton's Tent, the Captain himself seated in a Chair, surrounded by the
People. On seeing this, all the Officers present at the Consultation, except
the Lieutenant, went over to Captain Pemberton. Here it was agreed, in Case the
Captain persisted to refuse signing the Paper, to take the Command from him,
and to give it the Lieutenant, according to the Lieutenant's own Proposal. At
the same Time Captain Pemberton told the People, he would stand by 'em with his
Life, in going through the Streights of Magellan, the Way proposed in the
Paper. The People gave three Cheers, crying aloud for England. The Captain
hearing the Noise, got out of Bed to his Tent Door, and called the People,
enquiring what they wanted; then sent for all the Officers: He was then told,
since he refused signing the Paper, and had no regard to the Safety of our
Provisions, the People unanimously agreed to take the Command from him, and
transfer it to the Lieutenant. Hearing this, with an exalted Voice, Captain
Cheap says, Who is he that will take the Command from me? Addressing himself to
the Lieutenant, Is it you, Sir? The Lieutenant replied, No, Sir. The Terror of
the Captain's Aspect intimidated the Lieutenant to that Degree, that he looked
like a Ghost. We left him with the Captain, and returned to Captain Pemberton's
Tent, to acquaint him of the Lieutenant's refusing the Command. We had not been
long here before Captain Cheap sent for us. I was the first Person called for;
at my entering his Tent, I saw him seated on a Chest, with a cocked Pistol on
his right Thigh; observing this, I desired Mr. Jones, who was the Mate he
always relied on for Navigation, to tell the Captain I did not think proper to
come before a cocked Pistol: Notwithstanding I was armed, I drew back, although I
had my Pistol cocked, and there were several Men near me armed with Muskets.
The Captain's personal Bravery no Man doubted of; his Courage was excessive,
and made him rash and desperate; his shooting Mr. Cozens was a fatal Proof of
it; he was grown more desperate by this unhappy Action, and was observed since
seldom to behave himself with any Composure of Mind. It is a Piece of human
Prudence to retreat from a Man in a Phrenzy, because he who does not value his
own Life, has another Man's in his Power. I had no Desire of falling by the
Hand of Captain Cheap, and should be greatly disturbed to be compelled, for my
own Preservation, to discharge a Pistol at a Gentleman against whom I never had
any Spleen, and who was my Commander. When Mr. Jones acquainted him with what I
desired him, the Captain threw his Pistol aside, and came out of his Tent; he
told the People, he would go with them to the Southward; he desired to know
their Grievances, and he would redress them: They all called out for their
Sea-Store of Provisions to be secured, and the rest equally divided. Here the
Captain showed all the Conduct and Courage imaginable; he was a single Man
against a Multitude, all of 'em dissatisfied with him, and all of 'em in Arms:
He told 'em the ill Consequence of sharing the Provisions, that it was living
Today and starving Tomorrow; but the People were not to be satisfied, the
Officers had now no Authority over 'em, and they were some Time deaf to their
Persuasions; nay, it was with Difficulty that they could dissuade 'em from
pulling down the Store-Tent, and taking away the Provisions by Force; they
removed the Provisions out of the Store-Tent, then fell to digging a Hole to
bury the Brandy; the Sea-Store to be secured, the remainder to be immediately
shared. Had this been complied with, the Consequences might have been very
terrible: However, to pacify 'em in some Shape, it was agreed, that every Man
should have a Pint of Brandy per Day, which, by Calculation, would last 'em
three Weeks. On this they seemed very easy, and went to their respective Tents.
The Captain told his Officers, that he would act nothing contrary to what was
agreed on for the Welfare and Safety of the Community. Finding the Captain in a
Temper of Mind to hearken to reason, I said to him, Sir, I think it my Duty to
inform you, that I am not the Person whom you imagine to be the Principal in
this Affair. The Captain answered, How can I think otherwise? I replied, Sir,
the Paper I read to you was your Lieutenant's Projection: There sits the
Gentleman, let him disown it, if he can. The Captain turning himself to the
Lieutenant, says, Mr. Bulkeley has honestly cleared himself. We then drank a
Glass of Wine, and took our Leaves. At Night the Captain sent for Mr. Cummins
and me to sup with him; we were the only Officers present with him: When I was
seated, I said, Sir, I have my Character at Stake, for drawing back from your
cocked Pistol: Had I advanced, one of us must have dropped.

Captain answered, Bulkeley, I do assure you, the Pistol was not designed for
you, but for another; for I knew the Whole before. We then talked of
indifferent Things, and spent the Evening in a very affable Manner.

Saturday the 29th, came here five Indian Canoes, laden with Mussels; Men,
Women and Children were about fifty: These Indians had never been with us
before; they are not so generous and good natured as our Friends I have already
mentioned; they were so mercenary, that they would not part with a single
Mussel without something in Exchange; their Stay was but short with us, for the
next Morning they launched their Canoes and went off.

Tuesday, September the 1st, the Carpenter was shot in the Thigh with several
large Pewter Sluggs by the Captain's Cook; but he being at a great Distance,
the Sluggs did not enter his Skin: Whether this was designed, or accidental, we
don't know; however, we thought it proper to disarm him.

Wednesday the ad, Wind at N. and N. by W. with rain. This Day we were informed
that three of the Deserters, viz. James Mitchel, Carpenter's Mate, Joseph King,
and Owen Thomson, Seamen, were gone over to the Main in a Punt of their own
building; the others were here Yesterday, and I believe would be gladly
received again, but am of Opinion there are few Voices in their Favou^

Friday the 4th, some Disorders among the People about watching the Provisions,
some taking all Opportunities to rob the Stores. Our Living now is very hard;
Shellfish are very scarce, and difficult to be had; the Sea-weeds are our
greatest Support; we have found a Sort of Sea-weed, which we call Dulse; it is
a narrow Weed, growing on rocks in the Sea, which, when boiled about Two Hours,
thickens the Water like Flour; this we esteem a good and wholesome Food.

Sunday the 6th, last Night the Store-Tent was robbed of Brandy and Flour: The
People at hearing of this were greatly enraged, and insist on searching the
Marines Tents; on Search they found four Bottles of Brandy, and four small
Parcels of Flour. The Captain sent for the Lieutenant, Master, Gunner,
Carpenter, and Surgeon, with Lieutenants Hamilton, Ewers, and Fielding, of the
Army; Captain Pemberton was also sent for, but was so ill that he could not be
present, but desired all might pass according to the Judgment of the
abovementioned Officers. A Consultation was held: Five of the accused Marines
did not appear, dreading the Punishment due to their Crime; they marched off to
the Deserters: Four more, who staid to be tried, received Sentence, on the
first Opportunity, to carry them off to the Ma^^, and there to shift for
themselves with the former Deserters. The Seamen insisted on a Pint of Brandy
each Man per Day, which was agreed on. The Provisions being found, were put
into the Store.

Monday the 7th, I was invited to a Dog-Feast at Mr. Jones's Tent: There were
present at this Entertainment, the Lieutenant, the Honorable John Byron, Mr.
Cummins, Mr. Campbell, Mr. Young, Lieutenants Ewers and Fielding, and Dr.
Oakley, of the Army. It was exceeding good Eating; we thought no English Mutton
preferable to it.

Tuesday the 8th, in the Afternoon, William Harvey, Quarter-Gunner, came to our
Tent, with a Paper signed by seven People; the Contents as follows, viz.

THESE are to acquaint you, the Gentlemen, Officers, and Seamen of the Ship
Wager, that, for the Easement of the Boat now building, we do agree to go in
the Yawl, after she is fitted up, with allowing us our Share of Provisions, and
other Conveniences, to go in her to the Southward, through the Streights of
Magellan, for the Coast of Brazil.

David Buckley, Quarter-Gunner William Harvey, ditto Richard Noble,
Quartermaster William Moor, Captain's Cook William Rose, Quartermaster John
Hayes, Seaman John Bosman, ditto


The next Day, the above mentioned added one more to their Number, viz. Peter
Plastow, Captain's Steward: He came to acquaint us, he was willing to go with
them, and hoped we would give our Consent; we told him we had nothing to do
with it, therefore he must apply to the Captain.

Thursday the 10th, hard Gales at W. N. W. with rain and Hail. The Captain sent
for the Lieutenant, Master, myself, the Carpenter, and Boatswain: When we were
all met, the Captain asked us, if Plastow had mentioned any Thing to us about
going off in the Yawl. We told him he had. Plastow being sent for, the Captain
said, Peter! I hear you are for going in the Boat. He answered, Yes, Sir; I
will take my Chance, for I want to get to England. The Captain bade him be gone
for a Villain, and said no more. This Plastow was a mighty Favorite with the
Captain, and had often been admitted to his Conversation: He above all Men
ought to have stood steadfast to him, because the Captain regarded him above the
whole Body of People, and has been heard to say as much. It was this Day
agreed, that the Sentence put off on the 6th should be executed the first
Opportunity, without any Delay; and that no Boat should go off from hence
before all was ready, believing some have a Design to go to the Northward.

Friday, the 11th, Wind at N. N. W. The People very uneasy: scarce any Work
done for this Week past; every Thing is at a Stand; we have now among us no
Command, Order, or Discipline; add to our Uneasiness, the Uncomfortableness of
the Climate; we have been Inhabitants of this Island sixteen Weeks, and have
not seen ten fair Days; the Murmurings of the People, the Scarcity of
Provision, and the Severity of the Weather, would really make a Man weary of
Life.

Monday the 14th, last Night very hard Gales at N. and W. N. W. with large
Showers of Hail, with Thunder. The Wind Today is much abated. As to the
Article of Provisions, nothing comes amiss; we eat Dogs, rats, and, in short,
every Thing we can come at.

Friday the 18th, Dennis O'Lary and John Redwood, Seamen, with six Marines,
were put off to the Main, according to their Sentence; it being a fine Summer's
Day. This Day the Lieutenant, bringing a Pair of Pistols to the Carpenter, and
complaining they were in bad Order, did not imagine they were loaded, snapping
the first it missed Fire, the second went off, but providentially did no Harm,
though the Lieutenant had then a Crowd of People about him.

Sunday the 20th, little Wind, and clear Weather. Launched the Barge, and went
off to the Wreck; we took up four Casks of Beef, with a Cask of Pease, which
was stav'd; we served out to each Man five Pieces of Beef, and Pease to such as
would have 'em, but there were none to take 'em, having now Plenty of Meat, our
Stomachs are become nice and dainty.

Wednesday the 23d, the People went to the Captain with a Two Gallon Cagg, and
asked it full of Wine: The Captain refused 'em; but apprehending that they
would make no Ceremony of filling it without Leave, and carrying it off by
Force, he thought proper to order it to be filled: They brought it to the
Longboat, and drank it in her Hold. Stepped the Long-Boat's Mast forward. The
People very much disordered in Liquor, and very quarrelsome.

Thursday the 24th, I was sent on a Week's Cruize in the Barge; the Officers
with me were Mr. Jones the Mate, and the Hon. Mr. Byron Midshipman, and Mr.
Harvey the Purser, who was a good Draughtsman; we went in order to discover the
Coast to the Southward, for the Safety of the Longboat; we were informed on
our return, that the People in our Absence went to the Captain, and got two
Gallons of Wine which they mixed with their half Pints of Brandy; they got all
drunk and mad, but no great Mischiefs ensued. Six Indian Canoes likewise came
in our Absence loaded with Men, Women and Children; they brought with them
Clams out of the Shells strung on Lines: The Indian Women dived for Mussels,
and brought them ashore in abundance; the Men went to the fresh Water river,
and caught several Fish like our English Mullets. The People bought Dogs of the
Indians, which they killed, and eat, esteeming the Flesh very good Food: The
next Day the Indians went out and caught a vast Quantity of Fish out of a Pond,
where they sent in their Dogs to hunt; the Dogs dived, and drove the Fish
ashore in great Numbers, to one Part of the Pond, as if they had been drawn in
a Seyne: the Indians sold the Fish to the People. This Method of catching Fish
is, I believe, unknown any where else, and was very surprising; and, what is
also very strange, after the Indians went away, we hauled the Seyne over the
Pond, and could never get a Fish.

Monday the 28th, returned with the Barge; the first Evening we were out we had
a good Harbor for the Barge, which we put into; the first Animal we saw was a
fine large Bitch, big with Puppies; we killed her; we then roasted one Side,
and boiled the other, were exceeding well pleased with our Fare, supped
heartily, and slept well: The next Morning we got up at Day-breaking, and
proceeded on our Cruize, finding all along the Coast to be very dangerous; at
Evening put into a Place of very good Shelter for the Barge: Here we found the
Indians had been very lately, the Shore being covered with the Offals of Seal:
In an Hour's Time we killed ten wild Fowl; we roasted three Geese and two
Ducks, the rest we put into a Sea Pie, so that we fared most elegantly; got up
at Daylight next Morning, but seeing the Weather hazy and dirty, thought it
not proper to put out with the Barge, fearing we should not get a Harbor
before Night; we took a Walk five Miles in the Country cross the Land to the
Southward, but could not see any Shelter for the Boat, being then twelve
Leagues from the Place we came from; so we returned back in the Evening, and
got into a fine sandy Bay; I think it as good a Harbor for Shipping as any I
ever saw: Coming into this Bay, saw the Southmost Land, which we had seen
before, bearing about S. S. W. right over an Inlet of Land, about two Miles.
After landing, lived as we did last Night; in the Morning we walked over, where
we found a deep Bay, it being eighteen Leagues deep, and twelve Leagues broad;
here we had a very good Prospect of the Coast; we found here the green Pease
that Sir John Narborough mentions in his Book.

Saturday the 3d of October, after our return from the Cruize, the Lieutenant,
the Master, myself, the Boatswain, and Mr. Jones the Mate, went to the Captain,
to acquaint him how forward the Boat was, and to consult some Measures to be
observed on board the Boat, to prevent Mutiny; he desired a Day or two to
consider of it.

On Monday the 5th, the Carpenter sent his Case Bottle, as usual, to the
Captain, to be filled with Wine; but it was sent back empty, with this Answer,
I will give him none: This sudden Change of the Captain's Behavior to the
Carpenter, proceeded from some Words which the latter dropped, and were carried
to the Captain; The Words the Carpenter spoke were to this Purport, That he was
not to be led by Favor or Affection, nor to be biassed by a Bottle of Brandy.
Today we heeled the Longboat, and caulked the Starboard Side, paid ber Bottom
with Wax, Tallow, and Soap, that came out of the Ship.

Tuesday the 6th, hard Gales at N. W. and N. with rain: This Morning the
Lieutenant acquainted us of the Captain's resolution, which was to be Captain
as before, and to be governed by the rules of the Navy, and to stand or fall by
them; it was objected in the present Situation, the rules of the Navy are not
sufficient to direct us, several rules being requisite in our Circumstances
which are not mentioned there; that the whole Body of Officers and People are
determined not to be governed by those rules at present. This Objection was
started, not from a Disrespect to those rules; but we imagined, if Captain
Cheap was restored to the absolute Command he had before the Loss of the Wager,
that he would proceed again upon the same Principles, never on any Exigence
consult his Officers, but act arbitrarily, according to his Humor and
Confidence of superior Knowledge: While he acts with reason, we will support
his Command with our Lives; but some restriction is necessary for our own
Preservation. We think him a Gentleman worthy to have a limited Command, but
too dangerous a Person to be trusted with an absolute one. This Afternoon the
People insisted to be served Brandy out of the Casks that were buried
Underground; accordingly they were served half a Pint each Man. Got the
Longboat upright.

Thursday the 8th, this Day the Master went to the Captain concerning ten half
Barrels of Powder more than can be carried off, which will make good
Water-Casks for the Boats: The Captain told him not to start the Powder, or
destroy any Thing without his Orders; and said, he must have Time to consider
of it. In the Afternoon, Captain Pemberton of the Land Forces, came on the
Beach, and desired the Assistance of the Seamen to take Captain Cheap a
Prisoner, for the Death of Mr. Cozens, the Midshipman; telling us, he should be
called to an Account, if he did not. This Evening the Carpenter went up to the
Hill-Tent, so called from its Situation; the People were shooting Balls at
Marks; some of 'em were firing in Vollies, without Shot or Sluggs: One of the
Men on the Beach fired at the Tent while the Carpenter was in it, who was
standing with a Book in his Hand; there was a Piece of Beef hung close at his
Cheek, the Ball went through the Tent and the Beef, but the Carpenter received
no Damage. Today I overhaul'd the Powder, and told the Lieutenant that I had
twenty-three half Barrels in Store, and that we could not carry off in the
Vessel above six half Barrels; therefore purpose to start the Overplus into the
Sea, and make Water-Casks of the half Barrels, they being very proper for that
Purpose. I desired him to acquaint the Captain with my Intention; that since he
had no regard for the Public Good, or to any Thing that tending to promoting
it, the Carpenter and I had determined never to go near him again. The
Lieutenant declined going, fearing the Captain would murder him; but he sent
the Master to him, to let him know the Necessity of starting the Powder: The
Captain's Answer to the Master was, I desire you will not destroy any one Thing
without my Orders. We now are convinced the Captain has no Intention of going
to the Southward, notwithstanding he had lately given his Word and Honor that
he would; therefore Captain Pemberton, in order to put an End to all future
Obstructions, demanded our Assistance to make him a Prisoner for the shooting
Mr. Cozens, intending to carry him as such to England; at the same Time to
confine Lieutenant Hamilton with him: which was readily agreed to by the whole
Body. It was reckoned dangerous to suffer the Captain any longer to enjoy
Liberty; therefore the Lieutenant, Gunner, Carpenter, and Mr. Jones the Mate,
resolved next Morning to surprise him in his Bed.

Friday the 9th, this Morning went in a Body and surpised the Captain in Bed,
disarmed him, and took every Thing out of his Tent. The Captain said to the
Seamen, what are you about? Where are my Officers? At which the Master, Gunner,
Carpenter, and Boatswain, went in. The Captain, said, Gentlemen, do you know
what you have done, or are about? He was answered, Yes, Sir, our Assistance was
demanded by Captain Pemberton, to secure you as a Prisoner for the Death of Mr.
Cozens; and as we are Subjects of Great Britain, we are obliged to take you as
such to England. The Captain said, Gentlemen, Captain Pemberton has nothing to
do with me; I am your Commander still; I will show you my Instructions; which
he did to the People; on this we came out. He then called his Officers a second
Time, and said, What is this for? He was answered, as before, That Assistance
was demanded by Captain Pemberton to take him Prisoner for the Death of Mr.
Cozens. He still insisted, Captain Pemberton has no Business with me; I could
not think you would serve me so. It was told him, Sir, it is your own Fault:
you have given yourself no manner of Concern, for the Public Good, on our
going from hence; but have acted quite the reverse, or else been so careless
and indifferent about it, as if we had no Commander; and if other Persons had
given themselves no more Trouble and Concern than you have, we should not be
ready to go from hence as long as Provisions lasted. The Captain said, Very
well, Gentlemen, you have caught me Napping; I do not see any of you in Liquor;
you are a Parcel of brave Fellows, but my Officers are Scoundrels: Then turning
himself to me, he said, Gunner, where is my Lieutenant? Did not he Head You? I
told him, No, Sir; but was here to see it executed, and is here now. One of you
(says the Captain) call Mr. Beans. When Mr. Beans came, he said, What is all
this for, Sir? Sir, it is Captain Pemberton's Order. Captain Pemberton has no
Business with me, and you will answer for it hereafter; if I do not live to see
England, I hope some of my Friends will. On this the Lieutenant left him. The
Captain then addressed himself to the Seamen, saying, My Lads, I do not blame
you; but it is the Villainy of my Officers, which they will answer for
hereafter. He then called Mr. Beans again, and said, Well, Sir, what do you
design to do by me? The Lieutenant answered, Sir, your Officers have designed
the Purser's Tent for you. Hum! I should be obliged to the Gentlemen, if they
would let me stay in my own Tent. The Lieutenant came to acquaint the Officers
of the Captain's request; but they judged it inconvenient; as Mr. Hamilton's
Tent joined the Purser's, one Guard might serve 'em both; accordingly all his
Things were moved to the Purser's Tent: As he was coming along, he said,
Gentlemen, you must excuse my not pulling my Hat off, my Hands are confined.
Well, Captain Beans! you will be called to an Account for this hereafter. The
Boatswain, after the Captain's Confinement, most barbarously insulted him,
reproaching him with striking him, saying, Then it was your Time; but now, G --
d d -- n you, it is mine. The Captain made no reply but this, You are a
Scoundrel for using a Gentleman ill when he is a Prisoner. When the Captain was
a Prisoner, he declared, he never intended to go to the Southward, having more
Honor than to turn his Back on his Enemies; and farther, he said, Gentlemen, I
do not want to go off in any of your Craft; for I never designed to go for
England, and would rather choose to be shot by you; there is not a single Man on
the Beach dare engage me; but this is what I feared.

It is very odd, that Capt. Cheap should now declare he never intended to go to
the Southward, when he publicly gave his Word and Honor he would go that Way,
or any Way where the Spirit of the People led: But he afterward told his
Officers, he knew he had a severe Trial to go through, if ever he came to
England; and as for those who lived to return to their Country, the only Favor
he requested from them, was to declare the Truth, without Favor or Prejudice;
and this we promised faithfully to do: His Words, in this respect, were as much
regarded by us as the Words of a dying Man, and have been most punctually
observed.

Saturday the 10th, little Wind at N. and N. W. Getting all ready for going off
this Afternoon, the Captain sent for the Lieutenant and me, desiring us both to
go to Captain Pemberton, to know what he intended to do with him. We
accordingly came, and both promised to go directly, and bring him his Answer.
When we came out, went to the Lieutenant's Tent; from thence I expected, and
made no doubt, but he would go to Captain Pemberton's: But when I asked him; he
refused; which very much surpised me. I thought it very ungenerous to triflle
with Captain Cheap, or any Gentleman in his unhappy Situation; therefore went
alone to Captain Pemberton. When I delivered him Captain Cheap's Message, the
Answer was, I design, and must carry him Prisoner to England. I returned, and
acquainted Captain Cheap with Captain Pemberton's Answer: He asked me then, if
the Lieutenant was with me. I told him, No; and I believe did not design it. He
said, Mr. Bulkeley, I am very much obliged to you, and could not think the
Lieutenant would use me thus. In the Evening the Lieutenant and I were sent for
again: The Captain said to the Lieutenant, Sir, have you been with Captain
Pemberton? He answered, No, Sir. I thought, Sir, you promised me you would:
However, I have his Answer from Mr. Bulkeley; I am to be carried a Prisoner to
England. Gentlemen, I shall never live to see England, but die by Inches in the
Voyage; and it is surprising to me to think, what you can expect by going to
the Southward, where there are ten Thousand Difficulties to be encountered
with: I am sorry so many brave Fellows should be led to go where they are not
acquainted, when, by going to the Northward, there is the Island of Chili, not
above ninety Leagues, where we need not fear taking Prizes, and may have a
Chance to see the Commodore. I made Answer, Sir, you have said, that we shall
be called to an Account for this in England: I must tell you, for my Part, had
I been guilty of any Crime, and was sure of being hanged for it in England, I
would make it my Choice to go there, sooner than to the Northward: Have not you
given your Word and Honor to go to the Southward? It is true, there is a
Chance in going to the Northward, by delivering us from this unhappy Situation
of Life to a worse, viz. a Spanish Prison. The Captain said no more but this,
Gentlemen, I wish you well, and safe to England.

Sunday the 11th, this Morning the Captain sent for me, and told me, he had
rather be shot than carried off a Prisoner, and that he would not go off with
us; therefore desired me to ask the People to suffer him to remain on the
Island: The People readily agreed to his request; and also consented to leave
him all Things needful for his Support, as much as could be spared. Lieutenant
Hamilton and the Surgeon chose to stay with him. We offered him also the Barge
and Yawl, if he could procure Men to go with him. The Question was proposed
before the whole Body; but they all cried aloud for England, and let him stay
and be d -- n'd; does he want to carry us to Prison? There is not a Man will
go. The Captain being deprived of his Command in the Manner abovementioned,
and for the reasons already given, it was resolved to draw some Articles to be
signed for the Good of the Community, and to give the Lieutenant a limited
Command. The Paper was drawn up in this Manner:

WHereas Captain David Cheap, our Commander in his Majesty's Ship the Wager,
never consulted any of his Officers for the Safety and Preservation of the said
Ship, and his Majesty's Subjects thereto belonging; but several Times, since
the unhappy Loss of the said Ship, he has been solicited in the most dutiful
Manner, promising him at the same Time to support his Command with our Lives,
desiring no more than to go off Heart in Hand from this Place to the Southward,
which he gave his Word and Honor to do; and being almost ready for sailing,
did apply to him, some few Days past, to draw up some proper Articles, in order
to suppress Mutiny, and other material Things, which were thought necessary to
be agreed to before we went off; but he, in the most scornful Manner, has
rejected every Thing proposed for the Public Good; and as he is now a
Prisoner, and the Command given to the Lieutenant, upon his Approbation of the
following Articles.

First, As we have no Convenience for dressing Provisions on Board the Vessel
for a third Part of the Number to be carried off the Spot, therefore this Day
served ou^ to every Man and Boy twelve Days Provision, for them to dress before
we go off; and also it is agreed, that whoever is guilty of defrauding another
of any Part of his Allowance, on sufficient Proof thereof, the Person found
guilty (without any respect of Person) shall be put on Shore at the first
convenient Place, and left there.

Secondly, In regard to the Boats going off with us, we think proper to allow
one Week's Provision for each Man appointed to go in them, in order to prevent
Separation from each other, which would be of the worst Consequence of any
Thing that can happen to us; to prevent which we do agree, that when under-way
they shall not separate, but always keep within Musket Shot, and on no Pretense
or Excuse whatsoever go beyond that reach. The Officer, or any other Person,
that shall attempt a Separation, or exceed the above mentioned Bounds, shall,
on Proof, be put on shore and left behind.

Thirdly, It is agreed, in order to suppress Mutiny, and prevent Broils and
Quarrels on Board the Vessel, that no Man shall threaten the Life of another,
or offer Violence in any Shape; the Offender, without any respect of Station or
Quality, being found guilty, shall be put on Shore, and left behind.

Fourthly, We do agree, whatever Fowl, Fish, or Necessaries of Life, we shall
happen to meet with in our Passage, the same shall be divided among the whole;
and if Captain David Cheap shall be put on Board a Prisoner, it shall not be in
the Lieutenant's Power to release him.

The aforesaid Articles were agreed to, and signed by the under-mentioned.
Robert Beans, Lieutenant Thomas Clark, Master John King, Boatswain John
Bulkeley, Gunner John Cummins, Carpenter Thomas Harvey, Purser Robert Elliot,
Surgeon's Mate John Jones, Master's Mate John Snow, ditto The Hon. John Byron,
Midshipman Alexander Campbell, ditto Isaac Morris, ditto Thomas Maclean, Cook
Richard Phips, Boatswain's Mate John Mo^^ing, ditto Matthew Langley, Gunner's
Mate Guy Broadwater, Coxswain Samuel Stook, Seaman Joseph Clinch, ditto John
Duck, ditto Peter Plastow, Captain's Steward John Pitman, Butcher David
Buckley, Quarter Gunner Richard Noble, Quarter Master William Moore, Captain's
Cook George Smith, Seaman Benjamin Smith, ditto William Oram, Carpenter's Mate
John Heart, Joiner John Bosman, Seaman William Harvey, Quarter Gunner Richard
East, Seaman Samuel Cooper, ditto Job Barns, ditto James Butler, ditto. William
Rose, Quarter Master John Shoreham, Seaman John Hayes, Seaman Henry Stevens,
ditto William Callicutt, ditto John Russel, Armourer James Mac Cawle, Seaman
William Lane, ditto James Roach, ditto John George, ditto John Young, Cooper
Moses Lewis, Gunner's Mate Nicholas Griselham, Seaman


Monday the 12th, at Daylight, launched the Longboat, and gave her the Name
of the Speedwell (which God preserved to deliver us;) we got all the Provision
on Board, and other Necessaries. The Captain sent for the Lieutenant, myself,
and the Carpenter, desiring us to leave him what could be spared, and to send
to the Deserters to know if they will go in the Yawl to the Northward; we
promised to grant him his request. Today every Body got on Board. The Captain,
Surgeon, and Mr. Hamilton, had their Share of Provision equal with us.

Tuesday the 13th, we sent the Barge to the Deserters, with Mr. Snow the Mate,
to know if they were willing to tarry, and go with the Captain to the
Northward; to acquaint them what Provisions and Necessaries should be allowed
'em: They readily agreed to tarry. On the return of the Boat, delivered to the
Captain the Share of Provision for the Deserters, and sundry Necessaries, as
under-mention'd, viz.

Six Hand-Grenadoes. Five half Barrels of Powder. Two Cags of Musket-Balls.
Lieutenant Hamilton's Pistols and Gun One Pair of Pistols for the Captain.
Twelve Musket-Flints. Six Pistol-Flints. Sundry Carpenters Tools. Half a Pint
of Sweet Oil. Two Swords of the Captain's own. Five Muskets, Twelve
Pistol-Balls. One Bible. One Azimuth Compass. One Quadrant. One Gunter's Scale.
Provision delivered to the Captain, Surgeon, and Lieutenant Hamilton, with
eight Deserters; which last are to be at half Allowance of the Quantity made
out to the People, which make the whole Number seven at whole Allowance.

To the Captain, Surgeon, and Lieutenant Hamilton.

Six Pieces of Beef. Six Pieces of Pork. Flower ninety Pound.
For the Deserters: Eight Pieces of Beef. Eight Pieces of Pork. Flower one
hundred Weight.


As soon as the above Things were delivered, we got ready for sailing. I went
and took my Leave of the Captain: He repeated his Injunction, That at my return
to England, I would impartially relate all Proceedings: He spoke to me in the
most tender and affectionate Manner; and as a Token of his Friendship and
regard for me, desired me to accept of a Suit of his best Wearing Apparel: At
parting, he gave me his Hand with a great deal of Cheerfulness, wishing me well
and safe to England. This was the last Time I ever saw the u^^ortunate Captain
Cheap. However, we hope to see him again in England, that Mr. Cummins and
myself may be freed from some heavy Imputations to our Prejudice laid on us by
the Gentleman who succeeded him in Command, and who, having an Opportunity of
arriving before us in England, not only in the Places he touched at Abroad, but
at Home, has blackened us with the greatest Calumnies; and by an imperfect
Narrative, has not only traduced us, but made the whole Affair so dark and
mystical, that, till the Captain's Arrival, the Lords of the Admiralty will not
decide for or against us. But if that unfortunate Captain never returns to his
Country, let us do so much Justice to his Character, to declare, that he was a
Gentleman possessed of many Virtues; he was an excellent Seaman himself, and
loved a Seaman; as for personal Bravery, no Man had a larger Share of it; even
when a Prisoner, he preserved the Dignity of a Commander; no Misfortunes could
dispirit or deject him, and Fear was a Weakness he was entirely a Stranger to;
the Loss of the Ship, was the Loss of him; he knew how to govern while he was a
Commander on Board, but when Things were brought to Confusion and Disorder, he
thought to establish his Command ashore by his Courage, and to suppress the
least Insult on his Authority on the first Occasion; an Instance of this was
seen on the Boatswain's first appearing ashore; shooting Mr. Cozens, and
treating him in the Manner he did after his Confinement, was highly resented by
the People, who soon got the Power in their own Hands, the Officers only had
the Name, and they were often compelled, for the Preservation of their Lives,
to comply sometimes with their most unreasonable Demands; and it is a Miracle,
amidst the Wildness and Distraction of the People, that there was no more
Bloodshed.

At Eleven in the Forenoon, the whole Body of People embarked, to the Number of
eighty-one Souls; fifty-nine on Board the Vessel, on Board the Cutter twelve,
and in the Barge ten: At Noon got under Sail, the Wind at N. W. by W. The
Captain, Surgeon, and Mr. Hamilton, being on the Shore-side, we gave them three
Cheers; which they returned. Coming out of Wager's Bay split the Fore-sail, and
very narrowly escaped the rocks; with the Assistance of the Barge, and our own
Oars, towed her clear, and bore away, into a large sandy Bay, on the Southside
of the Lagoon, which we called by the Name of the Speedwell Bay. At Four in the
Afternoon anchored in ten Fathom, fine Sand; the Barge and Cutter went ashore,
there not being room on Board the Boat to lodge the People.

Wednesday the 14th, fresh Gales at S. W. and W. with rain. At three this
Afternoon, being fair Weather, weighed, and came to Sail; to take a Cruize up
the Lagoon, to try the Vessel, it being smooth Water, she worked very well;
after three or four Trips returned, and anchored where we came from.

THESE are to certify the Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners for
Executing the Office of Lord High Admiral of Great Britain, That we, whose
Names are under mentioned, do beg Leave to acquaint your Lordships, that
Captain David Cheap, our late Commander in his Majesty's Ship Wager, having
publicly declared, that he never will go off this Spot, at his own Request
desires to be left behind, but Captain Pemberton, of his Majesty's Land Forces,
having confined him a Prisoner for the Death of Mr. Henry Cozens Midshipman,
with Lieutenant Hamilton for breaking his Confinement, did insist on delivering
them up on the Beach to the Charge of Lieutennant Beans; but he, with his
Officers, and People, consulting the ill Consequences that might attend
carrying two Prisoners off in so small a Vessel, and for so long and tedious a
Passage as we are likely to have, and that they might have Opportunities of
acting such Things in Secret as may prove destructive to the whole Body; and
also in Regard to the chief Article of Life, as the greatest Part of the People
must be obliged, at every Place we stop, to go on Shore in Search of
Provisions, and there being now no less than eighty-one Souls in this small
Vessel, which we hope to be delivered in; we therefore, to prevent any
Difficulties to be added to the unforeseen we have to encounter with, think
proper to agree, and in order to prevent Murder, to comply with Captain David
Cheap's Request: The Surgeon also begs Leave to be left with him.

Dated on Board the Speedwell Schooner in Cheap's Bay, this 14th Day of
October, 1741. Robert Beans, Lieutenant Thomas Clark, Master John King,
Boatswain John Bulkeley, Gunner John Cummins, Carpenter Robert Elliot,
Surgeon's Mate John Jones, Master's Mate John Snow, ditto Captain Pemberton, of
his Majesty's Land Forces Vincent Oakley, Surgeon of ditto.


Thursday the 15th, This Morning, it being Calm, made a Signal for the Boats to
come off, by firing five Muskets. At Daylight came to Sail, with the Wind at
W. by N. It blowing hard, and a great Swell, the Vessel would not work;
therefore we were obliged to put into a small Bay, lying S. W. of Harvey's Bay,
where we had a very good Shelter, there being a large Ledge of rocks without
us, which broke the Sea off. At Eleven we sent the Barge to Cheap's Bay for
what Canvass could be found serviceable, having left a sufficient Quantity
behind, to supply us with Sails, in Case we wanted 'em. Went in the Barge the
Hon. John Byron, at his own request, Alexander Campbell Midshipman, William
Harvey Quarter-Gunner, David Buckley ditto, William Rose Quartermaster,
Richard Noble ditto, Peter Plastow Captain's Steward, Joseph Clinch Seaman, and
Rowland Crusset Marine. This Afternoon the Carpenter want ashore in the Cutter,
with several of the People, to look for Provender. Shot several Geese, and
other Sea-Fowl; rainy Weather. Wind W. N. W.

Friday the 16th, continual rain, and hard Gales all Night at S. W. This
Morning the Carpenter came on Board, and acquainted us that he saw an Anchor of
seven Feet in the Shank, the Palm of each Arm filed off just above the Crown:
This Anchor we suppose to have belonged to some small Vessel wrecked on the
Coast. The Cutter brought off Abundance of Shellfish ready dressed for the
People.

Sunday the 18th, at Noon, the Cutter came off, and brought aboard Plenty of
Shellfish and Greens. The Honorable Mr. Byron Mr. Campbell and three of the
Barge's Crew, came from where the Barge lay. Mr. Byron came aboard, and
informed us of the Barge's being safe in the Bay, where we left her, and only
waited the Opportunity of Weather to come round with her: At the same Time he
desired to know, if we would give him, and those who would stay with Captain
Cheap, their Share of Provisions. This Question of Mr. Byron's very much
surpised us; and what surpised us more was, that he should be influenced by
Mr. Campbell, a Person whom he always held in Contempt. As for my Part, believe
Mr. Byron left us because he could not get any Accommodation aboard the Vessel
that he liked, being obliged to lie forward with the Men; as were also the
Carpenter and myself, when below: It is very certain, that we are so closely
pent up for want of room, that the worst Jail in England is a Palace to our
present Situation.

Tuesday the 20th, served out to the People eight Days Flour, to be dressed
ashore. I went in the Cutter to Command in my Turn for a Week.

Wednesday the 21st, close Weather; the Wind from W. to N. W. with rain and
Hail. Brought aboard Shellfish in abundance. At Noon the Honorable Mr. Byron
came with some of the Crew Over-land; he asked me, whether the Boat's Crew were
gone off, and if we had served the Provision, for he wanted to return to the
Barge. I told him all the People were out a Fishing, and that the first who
came in should carry him off. On which he said, I think we will go and get some
Fish too, having nothing else to live on. This was the last Time I ever saw his
Honor. When the People returned from fishing, they told me Mr. Byron had lost
his Hat, the Wind blowing it off his Head, I said, rather than he should want a
Hat, I would give him my own. One of the Seamen forced a Hat on his Head; his
Name was John Duck: But Mr. Byron would by no Means wear it; saying, John! I
thank you; if I accept of your Kindness, you must go bare-headed; and, I think,
I can bear Hardships as well as the best of you, and must use myself to them. I
took eight People, and went over Land to the Place where the Barge lay, to get
the Canvass that we stood so much in Need of; but found she was gone from
thence. The People in the Barge told our Men, that they would return to us
again; but it is plain they never intended it.

Thursday the 22d, This Day we saw Sea-Fowl in vast Flocks flying to the
Southward, where was a dead Whale. Looked out all this Day for the Barge, but
to no Purpose. The Barge not returning was a very great Misfortune, having no
Boat but the Cutter; and if by an unlucky Accident we lose her, we must be
reduced to the greatest Extremities to get Provision. The Persons in the Barge,
except the Captain's Steward, always approved of going to the Southward; but it
seems Mr. Campbell the Patroon prevailed on 'em to return to Captain Cheap.

Friday the 23d, Saw Thousands of Sea-Fowl; in the Morning they fly to the
Northward, and in the Evening come back to the South; they are Birds of a very
large Size, but of what Kind we do not know. Since we have been here we saw
several Indian Graves; they are dug just within the Surface of the Earth, with
a Board on each Side, and a Cross stuck up at the Head. The Day following a
Gun, a four Pounder, was seen near the Anchor in Clam Bay; we call it by this
Name, because of the vast Quantities of this Sort of Shellfish which are found
there.

Monday the 26th, it being very calm, and fair Weather, I went ashore to bring
off the People; weighed the Longboat, and took her in Tow over a Bar, where
was ten Feet Water, but a great Swell; as soon we got over the Bar, there
sprung up a Breeze of Wind at N. W. steered away S. half E. for the Southmost
Part of Land, which bore S. by E. distant fourteen Leagues. The two Points of
Land make a large and deep sandy Bay; we sounded, but found no Ground; it is a
bold Shore close to. I kept ahead in the Cutter, in order to provide a Harbor
for the Longboat; Providence directed us to a very good one: It blew so hard,
with thick hazy Weather, that we could not keep the Sea. At Eight at Night we
anchored in eight Fathom Water abreast of a fine sandy Bay, and Land locked
not above three Boats Length from the Shores: At the Entrance of the Harbor,
which lies about a League up the Lagoon, I set the Land; the Northmost Point
bore by the Compass N. by E. distant twelve Leagues, and the Southmost S. by W.
distant five Leagues, the Entrance lies E.

Tuesday the 27th, Fresh Gales at W. and cloudy Weather, with a great Swell
without, insomuch that we could not put out to Sea; we therefore sent the
People ashore to dress their Provisions: each Man is allowed but a Quarter of a
Pound of Flour per Day, without any other Subsistence, but what Providence
brings in our Way.

Thursday the 29th, Early this Morning, it being calm and thick Weather, with
small rain, we rowed out of the Lagoon; at Five it cleared up, with a fresh
Breeze at S. S. E. steered S. W. and S. W. by W. saw a small Island bearing S.
by W. the Southmost End S. by E. This Island we call the rock of Dundee, it
being much like that Island in the West Indies; but not so large, it lies
about four Leagues distant from the Southmost Point of Land out at Sea. This
Day it blowed so hard, that we were obliged to take the Cutter in Tow.

Friday the 30th, Hard Gales, and a great Sea; saw some Islands and some sunken
rocks; at Six saw the Main in two Points of Land, with a large Opening; on each
Side ^he sunken rocks are innumerable; the Entrance is so dangerous, that no
Mortal would attempt it, unless his Case was desperate, as ours; we having
nothing but Death before our Eyes in keeping the Sea, and the same Prospect in
running in with the Land: We ran in before the Wind to the Opening that
appeared between the two Points, the Northmost of which bore N. by E. and the
Southmost S. by E. We steered in E. and found the Opening to be a large Lagoon,
on the Southmost Side, running into a very good Harbor; here our small Vessel
lay secure in a Cove, which Nature had formed like a Dock; we had no Occasion
to let go an Anchor, but ran along-side the Land, and made fast our Head and
Stern. The People went ashore in Search of Provision; here we found Plenty of
Wood and Water, and fine large Mussels in great Quantities. Served to each Man
half a Piece of Beef.

Saturday the 31st, This Morning cast loose, and rowed toward the Mouth of the
Lagoons, designing to put out to Sea; but the Wind blew so hard, that we were
obliged to come to an Anchor. This Afternoon, in weighing the Grapenel, in
order to go to the Cove, we found it foul among some rocks; all Hands haul'd,
took a turn round the Main-mas^ and went aft; which weighed the Grapenel, but
streighten'd one of the Flukes: Here the Land is very high and steep on each
Side; the Carpenter and Cooper were on the highest of these Hills, and found
deep Ponds of Water on the Top of them; these Hills are very rocky, and there
are great Falls of Water all along the Coast: The whole Navy of England may lay
with Safety in many of those Lagoons; but the Coast is too dangerous for any
Ship to fall in with the Land. The People Today were very much afflicted with
the Gripes, and Pains in their Side. Here are Abundance of Trees, not unlike
our ^ew Trees: they are not above seven or eight Inches in Diameter, and the
Bark is like Cedar. The Land is to Appearance very good; but on digging beneath
the Surface, we find it almost an entire Stone. We saw no People here, though, it
is plain, here have been some lately, by their Wigg-wams or Huts. We are so
closely pent up for want of room, that our Lodging is very uncomfortable; the
Stench of the Men's wet Clothes makes the Air we breathe nauseous to that
Degree, that one would think it impossible for a Man to live below. We came to
sail, and steered out of the Lagoon West; went into a sandy Bay, one League to
the Southward of the Lagoon, Indian Huts to be seen, but no Natives.

Monday, November the 2d, at Five in the Morning, came to sail with the Wind at
S. and S. by E. At Noon the Wind came to the W. and W.N.W. in small Breezes:
This Day I had a very good Observation, it being the first since we left
Cheap's Island. We found ourselves in the Latitude of 50:00 S. After observing,
bore away, and ran into a fine smooth Passage between the Island and the Main.
These Islands I believe to be the same that are taken Notice of in Cook's
Voyage. From the Entrance to the Northward, to the going out of the Cape of
Good Hope (as we call it) the Distance is about six Leagues, and the Depth of
Water is from two Fathom to twelve; the Northmost Land before we came into the
Passage bore N. by W. and the Southmost, or Cape of Good Hope bore S. by E. In
the Evening anchored in a fine sandy Bay: Here we also saw Indian Huts, but no
People; Today we shot wild Geese in Abundance, and got of Shellfish, as
Limpets and Mussels.

Tuesday the 3d, At Four this Morning weighed, and came to sail with the Wind
at W. till we got about the Cape of Good Hope, then at W. N. W. steering S. and
a tumbling Sea from the W. The Cutter steered S. by E. into a deep Bay;
supposing them not to see the Southmost Land, we made the Signal for her, by
hoisting an Ensign at the Topping-Lift; as the Cutter was coming up to us, her
square Sail splitted; we offered to take them in Tow, but they would not accept
it; we lay with our Sails down some time before they would show any Signal of
making Sail; coming before the Wind, and a large Sea, we ordered them to steer
away for the Southmost Point of Land after us, and to keep as near as possible:
but instead of observing our Directions, they steered away into the Cod of a
deep Bay, supposed to be King's Bay: The Cutter being much to Leeward, and the
Weather coming on very thick, we were obliged to steer after her, but soon lost
Sight of her. The Place being exceeding dangerous, we could not venture any
farther after the Cutter; therefore we hauled by the Wind to the Southward; it
continued blowing hard, with thick Weather, with sunken rocks, and Breakers, so
that we were obliged to bear away before the Wind into a large Bay, the Tide
running rampant, and in a great Swell, every where surrounded with sunken
rocks, that we thought nothing but a Miracle could save us; at last we got safe
into the Bay, and came to in two Fathom Water, we steered in E. At four this
Morning rowed out between the Islands; after we got out, had a fresh Breeze at
N. W. steered out S. S. W. then S. and S. by E. the Cutter ahead. At seven in
the Morning abreast of Cape Good-Hope, saw a large high rock bearing S.
steered S. by E. going within it, and the Main abreast of the rocks; saw a
long Point making into Islands bearing S. by E. steered S. until abreast of
them: The same Day saw a very high Land, with a low Point running off, in small
Hommacoes, bearing from the Northmost Point S. by E. about eighteen Leagues;
between those two Points, is a large deep Bay, all within surrounded with rocks
and small Islands; steered S. and S. by W. for the outermost Point, the Cutter
keeping within, and we considering the ill Consequence of being embay'd, to
prevent which we haul'd the Mainsail and Foresail down, and kept the Vessel
before the Wind; at Eleven the Cutter came along-side, with her Mainsail split;
we called to them to take hold of a Tow-rope, but they refused, telling us that
the Boat would not bear towing, by reason of the Swell of the Sea, therefore
they would have us nearer the Shore, where we should have smooth Water; we
answered them that the Water was smoother without, and nothing nigh the Sea
that runs within; besides, we shall be embay'd, therefore we desire you to come
on board the Vessel, and we'll take the Boat in Tow: They had no regard to what
we said, we at the same Time, for above a Quarter of an Hour, lay in the Trough
of the Sea, with a fair Wind: The People in the Cutter would neither make Sail,
nor row; at last, finding them obstinate, we hoisted a skirt of the Mainsail,
and edged farther off, S. by W. When they found we would not go into that Bay,
they hoisted their Mainsail, and went ahead; being some Distance ahead, we
made sail, the Cutter still keeping ahead till One o'Clock, then she bore away
S. by E. and S. S. E. the reason of which we could not tell, it blowing very
hard, with a great Sea, nothing before us but rocks and Breakers, therefore of
Consequence the farther in, the Sea must be the greater. At half an Hour past
Two, the Cutter being on the Beam, and four Miles within us, we bore away after
them; and in a very heavy Squall of Wind and rain we lost sight of her: After
the Squall was over, it cleared up, but we saw nothing of the Cutter, nor could
we clear the Shore to the Northward, being not above two Miles off the
Breakers; therefore we were under a Necessity of hauling to the southward for
Self-preservation, and very narrowly escaped clearing the rocks: After running
about three Lragues, saw an Opening, where we hoped to find a good Harbor;
bore away for the Opening, we were here again surrounded with rocks and
Breakers, with a hard Gale of Wind, and a great Sea, the oldest Seaman on board
never saw a more dismal Prospect; we ran in before the Wind for about two
Leagues, expecting every rise and Fall of the Sea to be a Wreck, but Providence
at length conducted us to an indifferent Place of Shelter: We are now in a most
wretched Condition, having no Boat to go ashore in, to seek for Provender: And
the greatest Part of the People on board are so regardless of Life, that they
really appear quite indifferent whether they shall live or die; and it is with
much Entreaty that any of them can be prevailed on to come upon Deck, to assist
for their Preservation.

The People's Names in the Cutter are as follow, viz.

Names. Quality. Age. Where born. Thomas Harvey, Purser 25 Westminster John
Mooring, Boatswain's Mate 34 Gosport William Oram, Carpenter's Crew 28
Philadelphia Richard Phipp^, Boatswain's Mate 30 Bristol Matthew ^^^ely,
Gunner's Mate 34 Exeter John George, Seaman 22 Wandsworth Nicholas Griselham,
ditto 31 Ipswich James Stewart, ditto 35 Aberdeen James Roach, ditto 21 Cork
James Butler, ditto 32 Dublin John Allen, ditto 18 Gosport

Wednesday the 4th, Hard Gales at W. N. W. and a great Sea without; served out
Flour and a Piece of Beef to two Men for a Week's Subsistence; the Weather is
so bad that there is no other Food to be got.

Thursday the 5th, Little Wind at S. W. with heavy rains, at six this Morning
went under Sail, but could make no hand of it, therefore were obliged to put
back again: As soon as we came to an Anchor, the Boatswain employed himself in
making a raft to get Ashore with; this raft was made with Oars and Water
Barrels, when it was made, and over the Side it would carry three Men; but it
was no sooner put off from the Vessel's Side but it canted, and obliged the
People to swim for their Lives; the Boatswain got hold of the raft, and with
some Difficulty, reached the Shore; when he come off in the Evening, he
informed us he had seen a Beef Puncheon, which gave us some ^^^son to apprehend
some other Ship of the Squadron had suffered our Fate.

Friday the 6th, This Morning went under Sail, the Wind at W. N. W. with fresh
Gales and heavy rain; the Wind came to the Westward, and a great Sea, so that
we could not turn out over the Bar: In our putting back we saw the Cutter, a
very agreeable Sight, which gave us new Life; in the Evening anchored at the
Place sailed from; the Carpenter and others went ashore to get Shellfish, which
we stood in great Need of; at Night the proper Boat's Crew would not go Ashore
with the Boat as usual, but made her fast a-stern of the Vessel, with only two
Men in her, she never being left without four before; at Eleven at Night one of
the Men came out of her into the Vessel, it blowing very hard at N. N. E. in
half an Hour shifted to N. W. and rainy Weather, that we could not see a Boat's
Length: At Two the next Morning the Cutter broke loose from the Stern of the
Vessel; we called from on Board to James Stewart, the Man that was in her, but
he could not hear us; in a short Time we lost sight of her, believing she must
^^ove stove among the rocks. The Loss of the Cutter gives the few thinking
People aboard a great deal of Uneasiness; we have seventy-two Men in the
Vessel, and not above six of that Number that give themselves the least Concern
for the Preservation of their Lives, but are rather the reverse, being ^ipe for
Mutiny and Destruction; this is a great Affliction to the Lieutenant, myself,
and the Carpenter; we know not what to do to bring them under any Command; they
have troubled us to that Degree, that we are weary of our Lives; therefore this
Day we have told the People, that, unless they alter their Conduct, and subject
themselves to Command, that we will leave them to themselves, and take our
Chance in this desolate Part of the Globe, rather than give ourselves any
farther Concern about so many thoughtless Wretches: Divided the People into
four Watches, to make more room below. The People have promised to be under
Government, and seem much easier.

Sunday the 8th, This Morning the People requested Provisions to be served; it
being four Days before the usual Time, we think the request very unreasonable.
We laid the Inconveniences before them of breaking in upon our Stores,
considering the ^^dness of the Wearher, and the Length of our Passage; that if
we are not exceedingly provident in regard of serving our Provisions, we must
all inevitably starve. They will not hearken to reason; therefore we are
obliged to comply with their Demands, and serve out Provisions accordingly.
Several of the People have desired to be put on Shore, desiring us to allow
them some few Necessaries: We wanted to know what could induce them to request
our putting them ashore in this remote and desolate Part of the World: They
answered, they did not fear doing well, and doubted not but to find the Cutter,
which if they did, they would go back to the Northward, otherwise they would
make a Canoe; therefore insisted on going ashore. On their earnest Entreaties,
the Body of People agreed to their request: We haul'd the Boat close in Shore;
the People who chose to stay behind were eleven in Number; we supplied them
with proper Necessaries, and they signed a Certificate, to inform the Lords of
the Admiralty that they were not compelled to stay, but made it their own
Choice, and that they did it for the Preservation of themselves and us.

A Copy of their Certificate.
THESE are to certify the Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners for
Executing the Office of Lord High Admiral of Great Britain, etc. That we, whose
Names are under mentioned, since the Misfortune of losing the Cutter, have
considered the ill Conveniences and Difficulties to be attended, where so
great a Number of People are to be carried off; therefore we have requested,
and desired the Officers and Company remaining of the same Vessel to put us on
Shore with such Necessaries of Life as can be conveniently spared out of the
Vessel. We, of our own free Will and Choice, do indemnify all Persons from ever
being called to an Account for putting us on Shore, or leaving us behind,
contrary to our Inclinations.

Witness our Hands, on Board the Speedwell Schooner, in the Latitude 50: 40 S.
this 8th Day of November, 1741. Which was signed by the following People, viz.
Matthew Langley, Gunner's Mate John Russel, Armourer George Smith, Cook's Mate
William Callicut, Washerman John Williamson, Marine John McLeod, Boatswain's
Servant John Heart, Joiner Joseph Turner, Captain's Servant Luke Lion, Gunner's
Servant Richard Phipps, Boatswain's Mate Henry Mortimer, Marine
Witness
John Cummins, Carpenter John Snow, Master's Mate Vincent Oakley, Surgeon of
the Army.


Monday the 9th, at Ten at Night, we weighed, and rowed out of the Bay; at
Daylight got about four Leagues right out, every Way surrounded with rocks and
Breakers, with a great Western Swell: We found it a very difficult Matter to
get clear of those rocks and Breakers, they reach along shore eighteen Leagues,
and without us at Sea eight Leagues, I take it, that from the Land they are
fourteen Leagues in the Offing; those sunken rocks appear like a low level
Land. This Coast is too dangerous for Shipping, the Wind being three Parts of
the Year to the Westward, which blows right on the Shore, with a large Western
swell, that seldom or never ceases; it always blows and rains; it is worse here
than in the rainy season on the Coast of Guinea; nor can we as yet distinguish
Summer from Winter, only by the Length of the Days. Steered out of the Bay W.
by N. then S. by W. then S. At Noon I had a good Observation in the the
Latitude of 50: 50 South; the Northmost Part of the Bay bore N. E. by E. seven
Leagues; the Southmost Point of Land S. S. E. twelve Leagues. This Coast, as
far as we have come, lies N. by E. and S. by W. by the Compass.

Tuesday the 10th, At Four this Morning made all the sail we could, steering S.
E. in order to make the Land; at six steered in E. S. E. at seven made the
Land; at Eight saw a Point of Land bearing S. E. distant six Leagues, which,
when abreast, seeing no Land to the S. I take the Point for Cape Victory, and
the four Islands we see I believe to be the Islands of Direction, which Sir
John Narborough gives an Account of; excepting the Distance, they exactly
answer his Description; therefore, by the Latitude in Yesterday's Observation,
and by the Distance we have run since, we are now at the Opening of the
Streights of Magellan. At Ten in the Morning, hard Gales at N. W. steered S. E.
the Cape bearing E. distant four Leagues; at Noon bore E. by N. distant six
Leagues; haul'd the Mainsail down, and went under a Foresail. I never in my
Life, in any Part of the World, have seen such a Sea as runs here; we expected
every Wave to swallow us, and the Boat to founder. This Shore is full of small
Islands, rocks and Breakers; so that we cannot haul further to the Southward,
for fear of endangering the Boat; we are obliged to keep her right before the
Sea. At Five broached to, at which we all believed she would never rise again.
We were surrounded with rocks, and so near that a Man might toss a Biscuit on
them: We had nothing but Death before our Eyes, and every Moment expected our
Fate. It blew a Hurricane of Wind, with thick rainy Weather, that we could not
see twice the Boat's Length; we prayed earnestly for its clearing up, for
nothing else could save us from perishing; we no sooner asked for Light, but it
was granted us from above. At the Weather's clearing up, we saw the Land on the
North-Shore, with Islands, Rocks, and Breakers all around us; we were obliged
to put in among 'em for Shelter, finding it impossible to keep the Sea; we were
in with the Land amongst them, and compelled to push through, looking Death in
the Face, and expecting every Sea to bury us; the boldest Men among us were
dismayed, nor can we possibly give an Account in what Manner we have been this
Day delivered. After sailing amidst Islands, rocks, and Breakers, for above a
League, we got safe into a good Harbor, surrounded with small Islands, which
kept the Sea off; here the Water was as smooth as in a Mill-pond. We call this
Harbor the Port of God's Mercy, esteeming our Preservation this Day to be a
Miracle. The most abandoned among us no longer doubt of an Almighty Being, and
have promised to reform their Lives.

Wednesday the 11th, The Wind much abated, with rain. This Morning weighed and
ran farther in. In the Evening we saw two Indians lying on their Bellies on the
Top of a steep rock, just over the Vessel, peeping with their Heads over the
Hill. As soon as we discovered them, we made Motions to them to come down; they
then rose up, and put on their Heads white feathered Caps; we then hoisted a
white Sheet for an Ensign; at this they made a Noise, pronouncing Orza, Orza;
which we took for a Signal to come ashore. We would not suffer above two Men to
go ashore, and those disarmed, lest we should put them in Fear. The Indians had
nothing in their Hands but a Club, like to our Cricket-Batts, with which they
kill their Seal. As soon as they saw the two Men come ashore, they walked away;
and when they perceived our Men followed them, and gained Ground of them, they
took to their Heels, frequently looking back, crying Orza, Orza, beckoning the
People to follow, which they did for a Mile or two along Shore, out of Sight of
the Vessel: Then the Indians fled to the Woods, still wanting our People to
follow them; but being disarmed, they were apprehensive the Indians would
Bush-fight them; so they thought proper to give over the Pursuit, and to return
to the Boat.

Thursday the 12th, Hard Gales at W.N.W. with rain. At Six this Morning we
again saw the two Indians; they made the same Noise and Motions to come ashore;
at which I went with four of the People; the Indians walked and ran as before,
looking back, and making Signs to follow, which we did till we got to the Place
where the Canoe lay with four Indians in her. The two Indians got into the
Canoe, and put her off the Shore before we could get nigh them; as soon as we
got abreast of the Canoe, they made Signs as if they wanted Clothing; we
endeavored to make them understand we wanted Fish, and would truck with them;
they had none, but signified to us they would go and get some: They had a
mangey Dog, which they parted with to one of the People for a Pair of Cloth
Trowsers; this Dog was soon killed, dressed, and devoured. Here we found Plenty
of Mussels, which gave us great relief, having scarce any Thing to subsist on
for this Week past.

Friday the 13th, Very uncertain Weather, and squally; the Wind variable from
W.N.W. to S.S.W. This Morning all Hands ashore a fishing. Lieutenant Ewers of
the Marines killed a large Seal or Sea-Dog; it is exceeding good Food, and we
judged it to have weighed seventeen Score.

Saturday the 14th, Little Wind at W.N.W. and close Weather, with rain. At Five
this Morning cast loose, and steered South out between the Islands; the Weather
clearing up, we saw the South Shore; it first appeared like a large Island,
stretching away to the Westward, and at the West End two Hommacoes like
Sugar-loaves, and to the Southward of them a large Point of rocks; steered S.E.
until the Point bore W. then steered S.E. by E. I took the Point for Cape
Pillar, and was fully assured of our being in the Streights.

Sunday the 15th, At Three this Morning cast loose, and rowed, but could not
get out, so were obliged to put back, and make fast, it blowing hard, with
thick Weather all Day: in the Evening it cleared up. This Day several People
drove a Trade with their Allowance, giving Silver Buckles for Flour, valued at
twelve Shilling per Pound, and before Night it reached to a Guinea, the People
crying aloud for Provisions, which are now so scarce, that several on Board are
actually starving through Want.

Monday the 16th, At Three this Morning cast loose, being little Wind, and
steered up the Streights S. E. by E. the Wind at N. W. At Eight o'Clock got
abreast of Cape Monday; at Nine the Cape bore W. distant four Leagues; at Noon
running along Shore, made two Openings, which put the rest of the Officers to a
Stand, not knowing which to take for the right Passage. Asking my Opinion, I
gave it for keeping on the E. S. E. Passage, the other lying S. E. by S. On
which they said, Sir John Narborough bids us keep the South Shore on Board. I
answered, That Sir John tells us E. S E. is the direct Course from Cape Pillar;
I Will venture my Life that we are now in the right Passage; so we kept on E. by
S. half S. After running a League or two up, and not seeing Cape Quod, nor any
Outlet, the Wind blowing hard, we were for running no farther, whereas one
League more would have convinced every Body; but they all gave it against me,
that we were not in the right Passage. The Wind being at W. N. W. we could not
turn back again so that we were obliged to put into a Cove lying on the North
Shore, where we found good anchoring in four Fathom Water no Provisions to be
got here, being a barren rocky Place, producing not any Thing for the
Preservation of Life. This Afternoon died George Bateman, a Boy, aged sixteen
Years; This poor Creature starved, perished, and died a Skeleton, for want of
Food. There are several more in the same miserable Condition, and who, without
a speedy relief, must undergo the same Fate.

Tuesday the 17th, At Five this Morning weighed and rowed out, it being calm:
at Seven a fresh Breeze right up the Sound; we could not turn to Windward not
above a Mile from where we last lay; we made fast along Side the rocks; all
Hands ashore a fishing for Mussels, Limpets, and Clams; here we found those
Shellfish in Abundance, which proved a very seasonable relief. Just before we
got in, one of the Men gave a Guinea for a Pound of Flour, being all the Money
he had.

Wednesday the 18th, The Wind W. N. W. in hard Squalls, with Hail and Snow.
This Morning cast loose, and stood over to the Southward, believing the Tide to
run stronger and more true than on the North-shore, hoping shortly to get out
of the Sound, which is not above a League in the Wind's Eye. At Two o'Clock got
into a Cove on the Southside; made fast along Side of the rocks; all Hands on
Shore getting Mussels, and other Fish.

Thursday the 19th, Fresh Gales at W. N. W. with Hail and Snow. This Morning
cast loose, and sailed out, but could make no Hand of it; our Boat will not
work to Windward; put back from whence we came, and sent the People ashore to
get Mussels. This Night departed this Life Mr. Thomas Caple, Son of the late
Lieutenant Caple, aged twelve Years, who perished for want of Food. There was a
Person on Board who had some of the Youth's Money, upwards of twenty Guineas,
with a Watch and Silver Cup. Those last the Boy was willing to sell for Flour;
but his Guardian told him, he would buy Clothes for him in the Brazil. The
miserable Youth cried, Sir, I shall never live to see the Brazil; I am starving
now, almost starved to Death; therefore, for G -- d's Sake, give me my Silver
Cup to get me some Victuals, or buy some for me yourself. All his Prayer's and
Entreaties to him were vain; but Heaven sent Death to his relief, and put a
Period to his Miseries in an Instant. Persons who have not experienced the
Hardships we have met with, will wonder how People can be so inhuman to see
their Fellow Creatures starving before their Faces, and afford 'em no relief:
But Hunger is void of all Compassion: every Person was so intent on the
Preservation of his own Life, that he was regardless of another's, and the
Bowels of Commiseration were shut up. We slip no Opportunity, Day or Night, to
enter into the supposed right Streights, but can get no Ground. This Day we
served Flour and a Piece of Beef between two Men for a Week. Capt. Pemberton,
of his Majesty's Land Forces, gave two Guineas for two Pounds of Flour; this
Flour was sold him by the Seamen, who live on Mussels. Many of the People eat
their Flour raw as soon as they are served it. The Wind and Weather not
permitting us to go out, the Men were employed in getting Wood and Water.

Tuesday the 24th, This Morning, it being calm, rowed out; at Eight o'Clock had
the supposed right Streights open, having a Breeze at W. N. W. S. E. by E.
through the first reach, and S. S. E. through the second; then saw three
Islands, the largest of which lies on the North-shore; and there is a Passage
about two Miles broad between that and the Islands to the Southward; there is
also another Passage between that Island and the North-shore, of a Mile and a
half broad. Before you come to those Islands there is a Sound lying on the
South-shore: You can see no Sea-Passage until you come close up with the
Island, and then the imaginary Streights are not above two Miles broad. Steered
away for the Island S. E. about two Leagues; then came into a narrow Passage,
not above a Cable's Length over, which put us all to a stand, doubting of any
farther Passage. The Wind took us ahead, and the Tide being spent, we put into
a small Cove, and made fast. At Seven in the Evening, being calm, cast loose,
being willing to see if there was any Opening; but, to our great Misfortune,
found none; which very much surpised us. The Lieutenant is of Opinion, that we
are in a Lagoon to the Northward of the Streights. This I cannot believe; and
am positive, if ever there was such a Place in the World as the Streights of
Magellan, we are now in them and above thirty Leagues up. If he, or any of the
Officers, had given themselves the Trouble of coming upon Deck, to have made
proper remarks, we had been free from all this Perplexity, and by this Time out
of the Streights to the Northward. There is not an Officer aboard, except the
Carpenter and myself, will keep the Deck a Moment longer than this Watch, or
has any regard to a reckoning, or any Thing else. It is agreed to go back again.

Wednesday the 25th, Little Wind, with rain. At Eight this Morning rowed out,
and got about a League down; here we could get no Ground, and were obliged to
put back again.

Thursday the 26th, Little Wind; rowed out, got about five Leagues down. This
Day we were in such want of Provisions, that we were forced to cut up the
Seal-Skin and boil it, notwithstanding it has lain about the Deck for this
Fortnight.

Friday the 27th, Little Wind and close Weather. This Morning cast loose, and
rowed down; had a fresh Breeze at North; steered W. S. W. up into another
Opening on the South-Shore, hoping to find a Passage out of the Lagoon, as the
Lieutenant calls it, into the right Streights. After going two Leagues up^ saw
there was no Opening; put back, and made fast, where we came from; being
determined to go back, and make Cape Pillar a second Time; which is the South
Entrance of the Streights. Got abundance of large Mussels, five or six Inches
long; a very great relief to us at present,

Sunday the 29th, Hard Gales from N. W. to S. W. with heavy rains. Great
Uneasiness among the People, many of them despairing of a Deliverance, and
crying aloud to serve Provisions four Days before the Time. Finding no Way to
pacify them, we were obliged to serve them. We endeavored to encourage and
comfort them as much as lay in our Power, and at length they seemed tolerably
easy.

Monday the 30th, Fresh Gales at W. with continual rain. This Day died three of
our People, viz. Peter Delroy Barber, Thomas Thorpe and Thomas Woodhead,
Marines; they all perished for want of Food: Several more are in the same Way,
being not able to go ashore for Provisions; and those who are we^^ cannot get
sufficient for themselves; therefore the Sick are left destitute of all relief.
There is one thing to be taken Notice of in the Death of those People, that
some Hours before they die, they are taken lightheaded, and fall a joking and
laughing; and in this Humor they expire.

Tuesday, December the 1st, 1741, Little Wind, and fair Weather; which is a
kind of Prodigy in those Parts. In the Morning put out of the Cove, and got
four Leagues down; then the Wind took us ahead, and we put into another Cove,
where we got Mussels and Limpets. At Four this Afternoon saw an Indian Canoe
coming over from the North-shore; they landed two of their Men to Leeward of
the Cove; they came opposite to us, and viewed us; then went back, and came
with the Canoe within a Cable's Length of our Boat, but no nearer; so that we
had no Opportunity to truck with them.

Wednesday the 2d, Little Wind, with rain. At Nine this Morning rowed out, and
got about a League farther down; the Wind beginning to blow fresh, we put into
another Cove, and found Plenty of Shellfish, which kept up our Spirits
greatly; for it is enough to deject any thinking Man, to see that the Boat will
not turn to Windward; being of such Length, and swimming so poynant upon the
Water, that the Wind, when close haul'd, throws her quite to Leeward: We have
been seventeen Days going seven or eight Leagues to Windward, which must make
our Passage very long and uncomfortable.

Friday the 4th, Little Wind at S. and fair. This Morning rowed out; at Ten got
down, where we saw a Smoke, but no People; we saw a Dog running along Shore,
and keeping Company with the Boat for about a Mile: we then put in, with a
Design to shoot him; but he soon disappointed us, by taking into the Woods. We
put off again with a fine Breeze, steering N. W. by W. down the Streights. The
Carpenter gave a Guinea this Day for a Pound of Flour, which he made into
Cakes, and eat instantly. At Six in the Evening abreast of Cape Monday; at
Eight abreast of Cape Upright, being fair Weather. Intend to keep under Sail
all Night.

Saturday the 5th, Little Wind, and fair. At four this Morning, I saw Cape
Pillar, bearing W. by N. distant eight Leagues; saw a Smoke on the South Shore,
and at Noon we saw a smoke on the North Shore, but we did not care to loose
Time: At Three o'Clock saw Cape Desseada, bearing from Cape Pillar S. W.
distant four Leagues; at Four o'Clock wore the Boat, and steered E. S. E. The
Lieutenant was now fully convinced we have been all along in the right
Streights, and had we run but one League further, on Monday, Nov. 17, we had
escaped all this Trouble and Anxiety: As for my own Part, I was, very well
assured, from the first Entrance, that we were right; but the Lieutenant would
not believe that it was Cape Pillar on the S. Shore coming into the Streights,
but thought we were in a Lagoon to the Northward; so that we have been above a
Fortnight coming back to rectify Mistakes, and to look at Cape Pillar a second
Time: At Eight o'Clock came abreast of the Smoke seen in the Morning. The
People being well assured that we are actually in the Streights of Magellan,
are all alive. Wind at W. S. W.

Sunday, Little Wind at W. with rain: At Three this Morning abreast of Cape
Monday; at Six abreast of Cape de Quad opposite to which, on the South-shore,
saw a Smoke, on which, we went ashore to the Indians, who came out on a Point
of Land, at the Entrance of a Cove, holoing, and crying, Bona! Bona!
endeavoring to make us understand that they were our Friends; when ashore, we
traded with them for two Dogs, three Brant Geese, and some Seal; which Supply
was very acceptable to us; we supped on the Dogs, and thought them equal in
Goodness to the best Mutton in England: We took from the Indians a Canoe, made
of the Bark of Trees, but soon towed her under Water, and were obliged to cut
her loose; steered N. E. by E. At Eight o'Clock a-a-breast of St. Jerome's
Sound; at Twelve, abreast of Royal Island.

The Indians we saw in the Streights of Magellan, are People of a middle
Stature, and well-shaped; their Complexion of a tawney Olive Color, their Hair
exceeding black, but not very long; they have round Faces, and small Noses,
their Eyes little and black; their Teeth are smooth and even, and close set, of
an incomparable Whiteness; they are very active in Body, and run with a
surprising Agility; they wear on their Heads white feathered Caps; their Bodies
are covered with the Skins of Seals and Guianacoes: The Women, as soon as they
saw us, fled into the Woods, so that we can give no Description of them.

Monday the 7th, Fresh Gales at W. N. W. and fine Weather; at Six this Morning
abreast of Cape Forward, steered N. by E. At Nine abreast of Port Famen, at
Twelve at Noon, put in at Freshwater-Bay, and filled one Cask of Water, having
none aboard; at One o'Clock put out again, steered N. by E. expecting Plenty of
Wood and Water at Elizabeth's Island; at Nine at Night passed by Sandy Point;
it bore S. S. E. and the Island St. George E. N. E. distant three Leagues.

Tuesday the 8th, At Four this Morning, being calm, weighed, and rowed toward
Elizabeth's Island, it bearing W. N. W. At Four in the Afternoon anchored off
the Northmostside in eight Fathom Water, fine Sand, about half a Cable's Length
from the Shore, put the Vessel in, and landed some People to see for Wood and
Water: In the Evening the People came aboard, having been all over the Island
in search of Wood and Water, but found none; here indeed we found Shaggs and
Sea-Gulls in great Numbers, it being Breeding Time; we got a vast Quantity of
their Eggs, most of them having young ones in the Shell: However, we beat them
up all together, with a little Flour, and made a very rich Pudding. Elizabeth's
Island is a beautiful Spot of Ground to Appearance, with very good Pasture; but
it is entirely barren of any thing for the Support of Man. This Day John
Turner, Marine, perished for want of Food.

Wednesday the 9th, At Four this Morning weighed, and steered E. N. E. for the
Narrows, with the Wind at S. S. W. when abreast of the Sweepstakes-Foreland,
steered S. S. E. on Purpose to look for Water; after going along shore about
fix Leagues, into a deep Bay, we saw a fine delightful Country: Here we saw the
Guianacoes in great Numbers, ten or twelve in a Drove; they are to be seen in
such Droves all along the Shore for several Leagues.

The Guianacoe is as large as any English Deer, with a long Neck; his Head,
Mouth, and Ears, resembling a Sheep; he has very long slender Legs, and is
cloven-footed like a Deer, with a short Bushy Tail, of a reddish Color; his
Back is covered with red Wool, pretty long; but down his Sides, and all the
Belly Part, is white Wool: Those Guianacoes, though, at a Distance, very much
resembling the Female Deer, are probably the Sheep of this Country: They are
exceeding nimble, of an exquisite quick Sight, very shy, and difficult to be
shot; at Noon, finding neither Wood nor Water, wore to the Northward: At Three
got abreast of the Foreland, hauled in for Fish Cove, which lies just round
the Eastern Point; here we expected to land, and shoot some of those
Guianacoes; but when abreast of the Cove, the Wind blew so hard right out,
that we were obliged to bear away for the first Narrow, it being impossible to
get in. At Eight this Evening entered the first Narrow, meeting the Flood,
which runs here very strong: At Twelve came to an Anchor in five Fathom, about
a Mile off Shore: The Tide flows on the Western Shore seven Hours, and ebbs
five. This Day Robert Vicars Marine perished with Want.

Thursday the 10th, At Four this Morning weighed, and came to sail; at six got
out of the first Narrow, hauled in for a deep Bay on the N. shore to seek for
Water: The Boatswain swam ashore, and in half an Hour afterward came down on
the Beach, and brought us the News of finding fresh Water: It being rocky
Ground, and ebbing Water, the Vessel struck; we were obliged, in this Exigence,
to slip the Cable, Time not permitting us to haul up the Anchor; we stood off
and on the Shore till half Flood; then went in, and took the Cable on Board:
After landing some People with Casks to fill, haul'd the Anchor up, and went
about two Miles farther out.

Friday the 11th, At Three this Morning the Boat struck upon the Tide of Ebb;
it ebbing so fast, we could not get her off; in a Quarter of an Hour's Time the
Boat was dry; we were favored with little Wind and smooth Water, otherwise she
must have stove to Pieces, the Ground being very foul; it ebbs dry above a
League off, and there is Shoal Water a great deal further out; so that it is
dangerous for a Ship to haul into this Bay. While the Boat was dry, got all the
Water-Casks out of the Hold, and put them ashore to be filled. At six haul'd
the Boat off, having received no Damage; at Eight, it being four Feet Flood,
run the Boat close in Shore, and took off our Water, the whole Quantity being
four Tons, out of which we were obliged to leave two Puncheons, one
Quarter-Cask, with three Muskets, a Funnel, and some other Necessaries; and
were very much concerned, lest we should also leave some of the People ashore.
The Wind blowing hard, and the Sea tumbling in, we were under ^ Necessity of
hauling off, and putting to Sea, for fear of losing the Boat. Since we left the
Island where the Wager was lost, we have several Times very narrowly escaped
being made a Wreck, and some Times have been preserved when we have seen our
Fate before our Eyes, and every Moment expected it, and when all the Conduct
and Ability of Men could have availed nothing. Any one, who has been a Witness
of those Providential Deliverances, and doubts the being of a Supreme Power,
disqualifies himself from any Title to all future Mercy, and justly deserves
the Wrath of an incensed Deity. This Day, at Noon, being well out of the Bay,
and nigh Mid-channel over, steered E. N. E. for Cape Virgin Mary, with a fine
Gale at S. W. At One we saw the Cape bearing N. E. by E. distant nine Leagues;
at seven in the Evening saw a low Point of flat Land, stretching away from the
Cape S. S. E. two Leagues; at Eight, little or no Wind, steered E. by S. at
Twelve at Night doubled the Point, the Wind at W. right in the Middle of the
Bay, where we filled the Water; in Land lie two Peaks, exactly like Asses ^a^s.
We would advise all Vessels from hauling into this Bay, it being shoal Water
and foul Ground. As for every other Part of the Streights of Magellan, from
Cape Victory to Cape Virgin Mary, we recommend Sir John Narborough, who in his
Account is so just and exact, that we think it is impossible for any Man living
to mend his Works. We have been a Month in those Streights, from our first
sight of Cape Pillar to Cape Virgin Mary. The whole Length of the Streights,
the reaches and turnings included, is reckoned one hundred and sixteen Leagues.

Saturday the 12th Little Wind, and fair weather. At one this Morning steered
N. by W. At Four the Wind came to N. W. Tacked and stood to the Westward; the
two Points stretching off from the Cape bore N. W. by W. distant two Leagues.
At Noon, the Wind being at N. E. steering along Shore from the Cape, saw on
Shore three Men, on Mules or Horses, riding toward us; when they came abreast
of us, they stopped, and made Signals, waving their Hats, as though they wanted
to speak with us; at which we edged close to the Shore, where we saw to the
Number of twenty; five of them rode abreast, the others were on Foot, having a
large Store of Cattle with them. On Sight of this, we anchored within a Mile of
the Shore. The Cape bore W. S. W. distant seven Leagues; the Swell tumbling in
from the Sea, would not permit us to speak with 'em; by their Motions, Actions,
Clothing, and, by their whole Behavior, we took them for Christians: It being
a plain level Land, they rode backwards and forwards like racers, waving white
Hankerchiefs, and making Signs for us to go into a Bay, which lay about a
League to the Northward; which we designed to do on the Tide of Ebb. The Flood
being very strong against us, they waited on the Shore till the Tide was spent;
we weighed and stood to Northward; the Wind blowing right in from the Sea, and
a great swell, we could not clear the Land; so that we wore and stood to the
Southward, and very narrowly escaped clearing the Breakers off the Pitch of the
Cape, which lay about two Leagues out at Sea to the Southward. At Nine at Night
the Cape bore W. distant six Leagues; stood out to Sea till Eleven o'Clock,
then wore and stood in, the Wind shifting to N. N. E. The next Morning we
steered in for the Bay, and saw those People again; but the Wind soon
afterward veering to the Westward, and blowing strong, we were obliged to bear
away: We could not by any Means come to the Knowledge of these People; whether
they are unfortunate Creatures that have been cast away, or whether they are
Inhabitants about the river Gallegoes, we cannot tell.

Tuesday the 15th, Fresh Gales, and fair Weather. This Morning saw the Land;
the Southmost Point bore W. S. W. the Northmost Point N. N. E. At Eight saw two
Ledges of rocks, r^nning two Leagues out from a Point of Land which makes like
an old Castle. At Noon the Extremes of the Land bore W. by N. distant three
Leagues; had a good Observation, Latitude 49: 10 S. Course made this
twenty-four Hours is N. by E. half E. distant 104 Miles, Longitude in 74: 05 W.

Wednesday the 16th, At Noon abreast of Penguin Island, not above half a Mile
from Shore. We saw on this Island Seals and Penguins without Number, the Shore
being entirely covered with them. We find the Penguin exactly to answer Sir
John Narborough's Description; therefore we beg Leave to give it the reader in
that excellent Navigator's own Word. The Penguin is a Fowl that lives by
catching and eating of Fish, which he dives for, and is very nimble in the
Water; he is as big as a Brant-Goose, and weighs near about eight Pounds; they
have no Wings, but flat Stumps like Fins; their Coat is a downy slumped
Feather; they are blackish Gray on the Backs and Heads, and White about their
Necks and down their Bellies; they are short-legg'd like a Goose, and stand
upright like little Children in white Aprons, in Companies together; they are
full-neck'd, and headed and beaked like a Crow, only the Point of their Bill
turns down a little; they will bite hard, but they are very tame, and will
drive in Herds to your Boat-side like Sheep, and there you may knock 'em on the
Head, all one after another; they will not make any great Haste away. We
steered N. W. by N. for the Harbor of Port Desire: The going into this Harbor
is very remarkable; on the South Side lies, one Mile in the Land, an high
peak'd-up rock, much like a Tower, looking as though it was a Work of Art set up
for a Landmark to steer into this Harbor; this rock is forty Feet high. At
Five o'Clock got into the Harbor; run up to Seal Island, which lies about a
League up; here we killed more Seal in half an Hour, than we could carry off,
being obliged to leave the greatest Part of what we killed behind. The People
eating greedily of the Seal, were seized with violent Fevers and Pains in
their Heads. While we were at Port Desire we had Seal and Fowl in Abundance.
The Carpenter found here a Parcel of Bricks, some of 'em with Letters cut in
them; on one of those Bricks these Words were very plain and legible, viz.
Capt. Straiton, 16 Cannons, 1687. Those we imagine have been laid here from a
Wreck. The Carpenter with six Men went in Search of Water; a Mile up the
Water's Side they found Peckett's Well, mentioned in Sir John Narborough's
Book; the Spring is so small, that it does not give above thirty Gallons per
Day; but the Well being full, supplied us. The People grow very turbulent and
uneasy, requiring Flour to be served out; which, in our present Circumstances,
is a most unreasonable request; we have but one Cask of Flour on Board, and a
great Distance to run into the Brazil, and no other Provision in the Boat but
the Seal we have killed here: Nay, they carry their Demands much higher,
insisting that the Marine Officers, and such People as cannot be assisting in
working the Boat, shall have but half the Allowance of the rest; accordingly
they have pitched upon twenty to be served half a Pound of Flour each Man, and
themselves a Pound. This Distinction the Half-Pounders complain of, and that
twenty are selected to be starved. While we were at Port Desire, one Day
dressing our Victuals we set Fire to the Grass; instantly the Flames spread,
and immediately we saw the whole Country in a Conflagration; and the next Day,
from the Wateringplace, we saw the Smoke at a Distance; so that then the Fire
was not extinguished.

Friday the 25th, Little Wind, and fair Weather, went up to our Slaughterhouse
in Seal Island, and took on Board our Sea-store, which we completed in half an
Hour's Time; turned down the Harbor with the Tide of Ebb; in the Evening, the
Wind at N. E. could make no Hand of it; so bore away for the Harbor again, and
came to an Anchor.

Saturday the 26th, at Three in the Morning sailed out of Port Desire Harbor;
steered out E. N. E. At six Penguin Island bore S. by E. distant six Leagues,
and Cape Blanco N. W. by N. four Leagues. This Day I took my Departure from
Cape Blanco; I judge the Cape to lie in the Longitude of 71.00 W. from the
Meridian of London.

Monday the 28th, Moderate Gales, and fair. This Day served out all the Flour
in the Boat, at three Pound and half each Man. We have nothing now to live on
but Seal, and what Providence throws in our Way.

Friday, January the 1st, 1741-2. Fresh Gales, and fair Weather, with a great
Sea. At Ten last Night shifting the Man at Helm, brought her by the Lee, broke
the Boom, and lost a Seaman overboard. The greatest Part of our Seal taken in
at Port Desire, for want of Salt to cure it there, now stinks very much; but
having nothing else, we are obliged to eat it. We are now miserable beyond
Description, having nothing to feed on ourselves, and at the same Time almost
eaten up with Vermin.

Wednesday the 6th, Departed this Life Mr. Thomas Harvey, the Purser; he died a
Skeleton for want of Food: This Gentleman probably was the first Purser
belonging to his Majesty's Service, that ever perished with Hunger. We see
daily a great Number of Whales.

Sunday the 10th, This Day at Noon, in working the Bearings and Distance to
Cape St. Andrew, do find myself not above thirteen Leagues distant from the
Land; there fore haul'd in N.W. to make it before Night. We saw Today
Abundance of Infects, particularly Butterflies and Horse-stingers. We have
nothing to eat but some stinking Seal, and not above twenty out of forty-three
which are now alive have even that; and such has been our Condition for this
Week past; nor are we better off in regard to Water, there not being above
eighty Gallons aboard: Never were beheld a Parcel of more miserable Objects;
there are not above fifteen of us healthy (if People may be called healthy that
are scarce able to crawl.) I am reckoned at present one of the strongest Men in
the Boat, yet can hardly stand on my Legs ten Minutes together, nor even that
short Space of Time without holding: Every Man of us has had a new Coat of
Skin from Head to Foot: We that are in the best State of Health, do all we can
to encourage the rest. At Four this Afternoon we were almost transported with
Joy at the Sight of Land (having seen no Land for fourteen Days before) the
Extremes of which bore N. W. about seven Leagues; we ran in with it, and at
Eight anchored in eight Fathom; fine Sand about a League from the Shore; the
Northmost Point bore about N. E. the Southmost Point about S. W. by S. This Day
perished for want of Food Sergeant Ringall.

Monday the 11th, At Four this Morning weighed, and came to sail, steering
along ^hore N. E. by E. This is a pleasant and delightful Country to sail by;
we kept within a Mile of the Shore; we saw Horses and large Dogs in great
Numbers, the Shore being perfectly covered with them. At Noon I had a good
Observation in the Latitude of 38:40 S. At the same Time saw ahead Land which
I take for Cape St. Andrew's; it is a long sandy Point, very low, where a Shoal
runs off S. E. about three Leagues. Sounded, and had but two Fathom and half at
High Water. When we got clear of this, we steered N. E. into a sandy Bay, and
anchored there in three Fathom and half, fine Sand; the North Point bore N. N.
W. the South Point S. E. by E. Here is a great Swell, and shoal-water. This Bay
we call Shoalwater Bay.

Tuesday the 12th, Lying in Shoalwater Bay, the Wind at S. E. and fair Weather.
Having nothing on Board the Vessel to eat, and but one Cas^^ of Water to drink,
we put her in as nigh as we could venture; so that any Person, who had the
least skill in swimming, might get ashore: Here runs a pretty large Surf, which
may endanger our Vessel; this puts us to a Stand: To go from hence without Meat
or Drink is certain Death. A few of the healthiest were resolved to swim on
Shore, to get Water and Provisions; the Officers, viz. the Boatswain, Carpenter
and Lieutenant Ewers, to animate the rest, first leaped into the Water; eleven
of the People followed them; in this Attempt one of the Marines was
unfortunately drowned: We tossed overboard four Quarter-Casks to fill with
Water: lashing to the Casks two Firelocks on each Side, with Ammunition for
shooting. When the Officers and People got on Shore, they saw Thousands of
Horses and Dogs; the Dogs are of a mongrel Breed and very large. They also saw
Abundance of Parrots and Seals on the rocks, but not a Bush growing on the
Place; they made a Fire with Horse-dung, and shot a great many Seal, which they
cut up in Quarters to bring aboard. One of the Water-Casks being leaky, they
cut it up and converted it into Fuel to dress the Seal. They caught four
Armadilloes, they are much larger than our Hedge-Hogs, and very like them;
their Bodies are cased all over with Shells, shutting under one another like
Shells of Armor. In this Country thirteen of his Majesty's British Subjects
put to Flight a thousand Spanish Horse. Horses are more Numerous here than
Sheep are on the Plains in Dorset and Wil^shire. We on Board see Abundance of
Seal lying on the Shore cut up in Pieces; but the Wind blows so hard we can by
no Means get at it. We think ourselves now worse off than ever, for we are
actually starving in the Sight of Plenty. We have but two People on board that
can swim; to give them all the Assistance we can the Lieutenant and myself with
the rest of the People, proposed to haul the Vessel nearer in, and make a raft
for one of the two to swim ashore on, and to carry a Line to haul some of the
Seal a-board: With much Entreaty these two Swimmers were prevailed on to cast
Lots; the Lot falling on the weakest of 'em, who was a young Lad about fifteen
Years of Age, and searce able to stand, we would not suffer him to go. While
our Brethren were regaling in the fullness of Plenty ashore, we aboard were
obliged to strip the Hatches of a Seal-skin, which has been for some Time
nailed on, and made use of for a Tarpawlin; we burnt the Hair off the Skin, and
for want of any Thing else fell to chewing the Seal-skin.

Wednesday the 13th, Fine Weather, and calm. At Six this Morning the Boatswain
shot a Horse, and the People a wild Dog. The Horse was branded on the Lest
Buttock with these Letters AR^ By this we conjecture there are Inhabitants not
far off. At Nine veer'd the Boat in, lashed the Oar's to the Hatches, and made
a Stage to haul up the Seal. The People swam off three Casks of Water; sent on
Shore one Quarter-Cask more, and two Breakers. Came aboard the Boatswain,
Carpenter, and Lieutenant Ewers; and four Men more are getting the Seal and the
Horse on Board; which was no sooner in the Vessel, than a Sea-Breeze came in,
and blowed so hard, that we were obliged to weigh; leaving ashore one
Quarter-Cask, two Breakers, and Eight of the People. The Wind at E. S. E. and a
tumbling Sea, came to an Anchor about a League off the Shore; we shared the
Provisions among the Company; we still see the People ashore, but cannot get
them off.

Thursday the 14th, Hard Gales at E. S. E. and fair Weather. Last Night the Sea
was so great, that it broke the rudder Head off; we were doubtful every Moment
of the Vessel's parting, which if she had, we must have been all of us
inevitably lost. We were obliged to put to Sea, not being able to get the
People off. We sent ashore in a scuttled Puncheon some wearing Apparel, four
Muskets, with Balls, Powder, Flints, Candles, and several Necessaries; and also
a Letter to acquaint them of the Danger we were in, and of the Impossibility of
our riding it out till they could get off.

In Fresh Water Bay, dated on Board the Speedwell Schooner, on the Coast of
South America, in the Latitude of 37: 25 S. Longitude from the Meridian of
London, 65: 00 W. this 14th Day of January, 1741-2.
THESE are to certify the Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners for
Executing the Office of Lord High Admiral of Great Britain, etc. That we, whose
Names are under-mention'd, having nothing left on Board the Vessel but one
Quarter-Cask of Water, were obliged to put into the first Place we could for
Subsistence, which was in Freshwater Bay; where we came to an Anchor, as near
the Shore as we could, without endangering the Vessel, having no Boat aboard,
and a large Surf on the Shore; therefore Mr. King the Boatswain, Mr. Cummins
the Carpenter, and Lieutenant Ewers, with eleven of the People, jumped
overboard, in order to swin^ ashore, with three Casks for Water; in which
Attempt James Greenham was drowned in the Surf, off the Shore: The Sea-Breeze
coming on, prevented the People getting on Board the same Night; therefore, on
Wednesday Morning, it being then calm, they brought to the Beach the Casks
filled with Water, with Seal and other Provisions in great Quantities, which we
haul'd on Board. The Boatswain, Carpenter, Lieut. Ewers, and three of the
People swam off; but the Sea-breeze coming in, and the Surf rising, the rest
were discouraged from coming off; we haul'd a good Birth off the Shore, where
we lay the Remainder of the Day, and all the Night. The Greatness of the Sea
broke off our Rudder-Head, and we expected every Minute the Vessel would
founder at her Anchor. Thursday Morning we saw no Probability of the People
coming aboard, and the Wind coming out of the Sea, and not one Stick of
Firewood in the Vessel to dress our Victuals, and it being every Man's Opinion
that we must put to Sea or perish, we got up a scuttled Cask, and put into it
all Manner of Necessaries, with four small Arms lashed to the Cask, and a
Letter to acquaint them of our Danger; which Cask we saw them receive, as also
the Letter that was in it; they then fell on their Knees, and made Signals
wishing us well; at which we got under Sail, and left our Brethren, whose Names
are under-mention'd.

Signed by Robert Beans, Lieutenant John King, Boatswain John Bulkeley, Gunner
Thomas Clark, Master John Cummins, Carpenter Robert Elliot, Surgeon's Mate John
Jones, Master's Mate John Snow, ditto


The Names of the People left on Shore in the Lat. of 37: 25 S. Long. 65: 00 W.

Names. Where born. Guy Broadwater Blackwall John Duck, London Samuel Cooper,
Ipswich Benjamin Smith, Southwark Joseph Clinch, ditto John Allen, Gosport John
Andrews, Manchester Isaac Morris, Topsham

Those People had a good Prospect of geting Provisions, and we believe
Inhabitants are not far off: they have all Necessaries for shooting; we hope to
set them again, but at present we leave 'em to the Care of Providence and the
wide World. At Noon sailed hence; at Four in the Afternoon could not clear the
Land, and were obliged to anchor in five Fathom, two Leagues from the Shore;
the Northmost Point of Land bore N. E. by N. and the Southmost Point S. by W.
Hard Gales at E. N. E. and a great Sea. At Noon Latitude in 38: 00 S.

Friday the 15th, Fresh Gales at N. N. W. and a great Sea tumbling into the
Bay. We are not able to ride it out; therefore, at Four in the Afternoon, got
under sail, and stood off to Sea; the Southmost Land bore S. W. by S. distant
five Leagues.

Monday the 18th, In the Latitude of 36: 29 S. the North Point of Fresh Water
Bay bearing S. W. distant forty-four Leagues, we went to an Allowance of Water,
at a Pint a Man per Day, having on Board not above twenty Gallons for
thirty-three Souls.

Tuesday the 19th, Little Wind at S. and clear Weather. At Four this Morning
saw Breakers right ahead; sounded, and found five Fathom; saw the Land making
like an Island, bearing N. E. by E. distant twelve Leagues; steered N. for
about a Mile or two; shoal'd the Water from two Fathom to nine Feet; then
steered N. N. E. and deepen'd the Water to five Fathom. By the Appearance of
the Land, we are well up the river of Plate, and do take the Breakers for the
English Bank. Steered and sailed all Day E. N. E. along Shore; in the Evening
anchored in a fine sandy Bay; saw two Men coming down on Horseback; the
Boatswain swam ashore, and got up behind one of them, and rode away to their
Caravans. When we made the Land, we had not one Drop of Water on Board: Several
People swam ashore to fill Water; one of 'em, when ashore, drank very
plentifully of Water; in attempting to come off, was so weak, that he could not
reach the Vessel, but was unfortunately drowned. Got one Cask of Water aboard,
which revived us exceedingly.

Wednesday the 20th, Mr. Cummins and myself went ashore; four of the
Inhabitants came down to us on Horseback. As I could talk Portugueze, I fell
into Discourse with them. They told me the English were still at War with the
Spaniards; that they had two fifty Gun Ships up the river of Plate, and one
sixty Gun Ship cruizing off Cape St. Mary's; and not above six Weeks ago a
seventy Gun Ship lying at Anchor, parted from her Anchors and drove on shore;
that the Ship was lost, and every Man perished. They also told me they were
Spaniards, Castilians, and Fishermen; that they came here a fishing; the Fish
they took they salted and dried, then sold them at Buenos Airs. The Town they
belonged to they called the Mount de Vidia, two Days Journey from hence. I
asked them how they came to live in the King of Portugal's Land. They said
there were a great many Spanish Settlements on this side, and gave us an
Invitation to their Caravan. We got up behind them, and rode about a Mile to
it; where they entertained us with good Jurk-Beef, roasted and boiled, with
good white Bread. We sought to buy some Provisions of them; but they had none
but twenty-six Loaves, about as big (...) Two-Penny Loaves in England; which
they would not part with under four Guinea^. We being in a weak Condition,
sca^^^able to stand on our Legs, and without ^^ead for a long Time, gave them
their Price. Their Patroon told us at the same Time, if it should be known that
they had supplied us, they should be all hanged. He promised, if we would give
him a Firelock, he would get us some wild Fowl, and as many Ducks in an Hour or
two as would serve all the People aboard. Mr. Cummins sent for his Firelock,
and gave it him, with some Powder and Sluggs. On our coming away, finding one
of their Company missing with a Horse, we were apprehensive of his being gone
to betray us; therefore immediately went on Board, got our Water in, and made
all ready for sailing to the Rio Grand.

Thursday the 21st, little Wind at N. W. and fair Weather. At four this Morning
got under Sail; steered E. N. E. At Twelve saw low Land stretch off to the
Eastward, which bore E. by S. At Four the Tide of Flood flowing strong in
obliged us to come to an Anchor in a large Bay, in eight Fathom Water; the
South Point bore S. S. W. the East Point E. S. E. at Eight at Night got under
Sail, steering E. S. E.

Friday the 22d, Little Wind at N. and fair Weather. At Eight this Morning saw
Cape St. Mary's, bearing N. W. distant ten Leagues; at Noon it bore W. S. W.
and the North Land S. E. by E.

Saturday 23d, Little Wind, and calm. In the Morning, not seeing the Land,
steered in N. at Noon saw Cape St. Mary's, bearing N. W. distant ten Leagues;
Latitude per Observation 34: 53 S. At Seven in the Evening, being in Shore, and
calm, anchored in fourteen Fathom Water, sandy Ground; the Cape bearing W. by
N. and the Northmost Land N. by E. This Day departed this Life Mr. Thomas Clark
the Master; as did also his Son the Day following.

Sunday the 24th, The Wind at S. and hazy Weather. At Two in the Morning
weighed and came to sail; steering N. E. within a League of the Shore. At Three
in the Afternoon saw three Islands; the Northmost of which is the most
remarkable one I ever beheld, appearing like a Church with a lofty Tower; at
Four we saw three Islands more, steered N. Quarter W. between those Islands,
until we saw the main Land. The most remarkable of these Islands is about four
Miles from the Main: They are all steep. At Eight anchored in fourteen Fathom,
fine Sand.

Monday the 25th, A fresh Gale at E. N. E. a^^ cloudy Weather. At Nine this
Morning got under Sail, in Order to go back to those Islands to get some Seal,
there being great Numbers on the rocks, and we in great want of Provision, with
the Wind against us. We took the Opportunity of the Wind back to the Islands,
but were disappointed, being not able to get ashore for Provisions, came to an
Anchor in fourteen Fathom, sandy Ground. Hard Gales at N. N. E. with Thunder,
Lightning and rain all Night.

Tuesday the 26th, This Morning moderate Gales at N. W. and fair Weather, got
under Sail; after clear of the Islands, steered N.E. by N. keeping along Shore;
it is a fine level Land, and regular Soundings fifteen Fathom, five Leagues off
the Land. We have no Seal, nor any other kind of Food on Board. We have a fair
Wind, and not far from our desired Port: so that we are in pretty good Spirits.
This Day died the oldest Man belonging to us, Thomas Maclean, Cook, aged 82
Years.

Wednesday the 27th, Moderate Gales at W. steered N. and sailed all Day within
a Cable's length of the Shore in three Fathom Water. We have now nothing but a
little Water to support Nature. At Noon had an Observation, Latitude in 32: 40
South: I reckon myself 18 Leagues from the Rio Grand, and hope to see it in the
Morning.

Thursday the 28th, Kept she Shore close a-board, and sounded every half Hour,
not caring to go within three Fathom, nor keep without five, sailing along by
the Lead all Night. At Six in the Morning saw the Opening of the river Grand;
kept within the Breakers of the Bar, having at sometimes not above seven Feet
Water at half Flood; steered N.E. by E. until the river's Mouth was fairly
open; then steered N. and N. N. W. until abreast of the Town; anchored on the
East-shore in two Fathom Water. There presently came a Boat from the Shore,
with a Sergeant of the Army, and one Soldier. The Lieutenant, myself, and Mr.
Gummins, with Captain Pemberton of the Land Forces, went on Shore with them.
The Commandant, the Officers, and People of the Place, received us in a most
tender and friendly Manner. They instantly sent on Board to the People four
Quarters of Beef, and two Bags of Farine Bread. We were conducted to the
Surgeon's House, the handsomest Habitation in the Place; where we were most
hospitably entertained. At Four in the Afternoon the Governor came to Town;
after a strict Enquiry into our Misfortunes, and the reasons of our coming into
this Port, being somewhat doubtful that we might be Inspectors of their Coast,
he began to examine me, the Lieutenant having reported me to him as Pilot. He
asked me if there was a Chart of the Coast on Board; and, if not, how it was
possible we ^^^ld hit the Bar, and venture into so hazardous a Place as this
is? I told him, as for a Chart, we had none of any kind; but I had a good
Observation the Day before, that our Vessel drew but a small Draught of Water;
that we kept the Lead always going, and in the Necessity we were in, we were
obliged, at all Events, to venture; and if we had not seen the Opening of the
river before Night, we must have been compelled to run the Vessel ashore. He
examined me also concerning the Places we stopped at, from Cape Virgin Mary to
this Port, and more particularly relating to the river Plate. He was very nice
in his Enquiry of our putting in at Cape St. Mary's, and of the Bearings and
Distance along Shore from thence to this Port. When he thoroughly satisfied
himself, he embraced us, and blessed himself to think of our Deliverance, which
he termed a Miracle. He offered every Thing the Country could afford to our
relief; the Sick were ordered to be taken Care of in the Hospital. He took the
Lieutenant and the Land Officers home with him; and desired the Commandant to
see that the rest of the Officers and People wanted for nothing. Before he went
he informed us, that his Majesty's Ships the Severn and Pearl were at Rio
Janeiro, in great Distress; that they had sent to England for Men, and could
not sail from thence until the Arrival of the Flota, which would be in May or
June. He also told us, that we should be dispatched in the first Vessel which
arrived in this Port; for he did not think we could with Safety go any farther
in our own; and that there could not be found twelve Seamen in the Brazils that
would venture over the Bar in her to sail to Rio Janeiro; therefore he ordered
our little Speedwell ashore; this Wonder the People are continually flocking to
see: and it is now about nine Months since we were cast away in the Wager; in
which Time, I believe, no Mortals have experienced more Difficulties and
Miseries than we have. This Day may be justly styled the Day of our
Deliverance, and ought to be remembered accordingly.

Sunday the 31st, Little or nothing remarkable since the Day we came in, only a
wonderful Change in our Diet; we live on the best the Country can produce, and
have Plenty of every Thing. This Afternoon the Governor, Commandant, and
Commissary, came on Board, to see our little Speedwell; they were surpised
that thirty Souls, the Number of People now living, could be s^ow'd in so small
a Vessel; but that she could contain the Number which first embarked with us,
was to them amazing, and beyond all Belief: They could not conceive how the Man
at Helm could steer without falling overboard, there not being above four
Inches rise from the Deck. I told them he sat down, and clapped his Feet against
the rise; and showed them in what Manner we secured ourselves. The Governor,
after viewing the Vessel over, told us, we were more welcome to him in the
miserable Condition we arrived, than if we had brought all the Wealth in the
World with us. At the same Time he fully assured us, we should be supplied with
every Thing that the Country could afford; that he would dispatch us the first
Opportunity to Rio Janeiro; and whenever we stood in Need of any Thing, he
ordered us to acquaint the Commandant, and our Wants should be instantly
supplied. He then took Leave of us, and wished us well. All the Deference and
dutiful respect we could show him, to express a grateful Sense of his Favor,
was by manning the Vessel, and giving him three Cheers. The next Day arrived at
this Place the Brigadier-Governor of the Island St. Catharine; he came close by
our Vessel, we manned her, and gave him three Cheers. The Soldiers of the
Garrison, having twenty Months Arrears due to them, expected the Brigadier was
come to pay them; but when they found themselves disappointed, they made a
great Disturbance among themselves. I applied to the Commandant for a House,
the Vessel, in rainy Weather, not being fit to lie in; he ordered me one
joining to his own, and gave me the Key. I took with me Mr. Cummins, Mr. Jones,
Mr. Snow, Mr. Oakley, and the Cooper; we brought our trifling Necessaries on
Shore, and removed to our new Habitation: Here we were dry and warm; and though
we had no Bedding, we lodged very comfortably. Since the Loss of the Wager, we
have been used to lie hard; at present we think ourselves very happily fixed,
and heartily wish that all the Persons who survived the Loss of the Ship were
in so good a Situation as ourselves.

Tuesday, February the 2d, 1741-2, Great Murmurings among the Soldiers; they
detained the Brigadier from going back as he intended this Morning, till he
promised to dispatch the Money, Clothes, and Provisions, and to see their
Grievances adjusted. On those Terms they have agreed he shall go; and this
Evening he returned for St. Catharine's. We apprehended, till now, that the
right Officers were in Place; but we find ourselves mistaken. Some Time before
we arrived here, there was an Insurrection among the Soldiers: Their Design was
against the Governor; but by his Address, and fair Promises of seeing them
righted, he diverted the Storm from himself, and got himself continued in his
Station; as were also the Major and Commissary. The Soldiers dismissed the rest
of the Officers, and supplied their Places with their own People, though they
were lately private Men; they appeared very grand, and were not distinguished
in Dress from the proper Officers. The Disturbance at Rio Grand is of no
Service to us, for we feel the Effects of it; our Allowance is now so small
that it will hardly support Nature; the People have been without Farina, which
is their Bread, for some Days past. We applied to the Governor, who promised to
supply us the next Day; accordingly we went for a Supply, which created fresh
Murmurings among the Soldiers; however we got a small Quantity of Bread to
supply us for ten Days. The Store-keeper showed me all the Provisions, which,
considering there were a thousand to draw their Subsistence from it, was a
small Stock indeed, and not above six Weeks at the present Allowance. He told
me we were served equally with the Soldiers; and when more Stores came, which
they shortly expected, our Allowance should be increased. I think, in reason,
this is as much as we can expect. The Lieutenant not coming nigh us since our
first landing, I went with the People up to him at the Governor's, about two
Miles from this Port, to endeavor to prevail with him to get us dispatched,
acquainting him of the Call and Necessity there was for our Assistance on Board
the two distressed Ships at Rio Janeiro. He said he had spoke to the Governor,
and could not get us dispatched till another Vessel came in. I told him, as the
Garrison were in want of Provisions, what we were living on here, would carry
us off; and if any Misfortune should attend the Vessel expected in with the
Provisions, we should be put very hard to it for a Subsistence. He promised to
acquaint the Governor; on which I took my Leave.

February the 17th, This Evening came into this Garrison three Seamen, giving
an Account of their belonging to a Vessel with Provisions and Stores for this
Place, from Rio Janeiro; that they had been from thence three Months, and had
been off the Bar waiting an Opportunity to come in; that not having any fresh
Water aboard, they were obliged to come to an Anchor ten Leagues to the
Southward of this Port; that a Canoe was sent with those three Men to fill the
Water, but the Wind coming in from the Sea, and blowing hard, obliged the
Vessel to put to Sea, and leave them ashore, from whence they traveled here,
and believed the Vessel was gone to St. Catharine's. The Governor, not
satisfied with their report, took them for Spies, and kept them as such.
However, in a Day or two afterward, he dispatched a Pilot and two Seamen for
the Island St. Catharine, to bring the Vessel round, in Case she should be
there.

I took this Opportunity of sending a Letter by them to the Honorable Capt.
Murray, Commander of his Majesty's Ship the Pearl, at Rio Janeiro; desiring
them to order it to be dispatched by the first Ship from St. Catharine's to the
Rio Janeiro.

Honorable Sir,
I Take it as a Duty incumbent on me to acquaint you, that his Majesty's Ship
the Wager was wrecked on a desolate Island on the Coast of Patagonia, in the
Latitude of 47: 00 S. and W. Longitude from the Meridian of London 81: 30, on
the 14th of May, 1741. After lengthning the Longboat, and fitting her in the
best Manner we could, launched her on the 13th of October, and embarked and
sailed on the 14th, with Barge and Cutter, to the Number of eighty-one Souls in
all. Capt. Cheap --, at his own request, tarried behind, with Lieutenant
Hamilton, and Mr, Elliot the Surgeon. After a long and fatiguing Passage,
coming through the Streights of Magellan, we arrived here the 28th of January,
1741-2; bringing into this Port alive to the Number of thirty, viz.

Robert Beans, Lieutenant John Bulkeley, Gunner John Cummins, Carpenter Robert
Elliot, Surgeon's Mate John Jones, Master's Mate John Snow, ditto John Mooring,
Boatswain's Mate John Young, Cooper William Oram, Capenter's Crew John King,
Boatswain Nicholas Griselham, Seaman Samuel Stook, ditto James Mac Cawle,
Seaman William Lane, ditto John Montgomery, ditto John George, ditto Richard
East, ditto James Butler, ditto Job Barns, ditto John Pitman, ditto John
Shoreham, ditto Thomas Edmunds, ditto Richard Powel, ditto Diego Findall (the
Portugueze Boy) Capt. Robert Pemberton, of his Majesty's Land Forces
Lieutenants Ewers and Fielding, ditto Vincent Oakley, Surgeon of ditto And two
Marines
All which are living at present, and waiting an Opportunity of a Passage in a
Portugueze Vessel, our own not being in a Condition to proceed any farther,
having no Sails, and being so bad in all other respects, that the Governor will
not suffer us to hazard our Lives in her; but has promised to dispatch us in
the very first Vessel that arrives in this Port; where we, with Impatience, are
obliged to tarry. We humbly pay our Duty to Capt. Leg, praying the
representation of this to him.

From Most Honorable Sir, Yours, etc.


Saturday the 20th, Last Night the three Seamen which came here, as mentioned
before, with five more of this Place, attempted to run away with one of the
large Boats; but they were pursued and taken: Their Design was for the river
Plate, the Wind then favoring them. This is evident, that the Governor was
right in his Conjecture, and did not suspect them wrongfully; they are now
Prisoners in the Guard-House. The next Morning I went to the Lieutenant,
desiring him to apply to the Governor for a Pass and Horses for myself, Mr.
Cummins, and John Young, to go by Land to St. Catharine's and St. Francisco;
where we need not doubt of a Passage to his Majesty's distressed Ships at Rio
Janeiro: That it was our Duty to hasten to their Assistance: That he, the
Lieutenant, ought, the very Day after our Arrival into this Port, without any
regard to Expense and Charges, to have dispatched (...) special Messenger by
Land; and then we might have been assured of a Vessel before now. The
Lieutenant answered, he had a Thought of enquiring at first coming about what I
had mentioned, and of going himself, though it cost him fifty Pounds; but he was
informed it was impossible to go by Land. I asked him, if so, how came the
Brigadier from St. Catharine's here? And how do People weekly go from hence
thither? As for Fatigue or Trouble, whoever undertook to go, he must expect
that; but there was no Hardship to be encountered comparable to what we had
already undergone. We lay here on Expense to the King, without doing any
Service, and run the Hazard of not only losing the Opportunity of getting on
Board our own Ships, but perhaps of missing the Flota, and of wintering here;
therefore I begged he would entreat the Governor to let us have Horses and
Guides; which he promised to mention to the Governor at Dinner, and send me his
Answer in the Afternoon without fail. I waited with Impatience for this Answer;
but the Lieutenant failing in his Promise, was the Occasion of my sending him
this Letter.

SIR,
I Am sorry you should give me the Liberty of telling you, you have not
discharged your Promise, by letting us know the Governor's Answer to what we
requested: Which was, at our Expense and Charge, to go to the Assistance of his
Majesty's Ships at Rio Janeiro; since which Time I am to inform you that we are
in want of Provision, having none of any kind allowed us Yesterday, and but one
small Fish per Man for two Days before. The Meaning of which I believe is owing
to you, by the endeavoring, through the Persuasions of the Persons you confide
in, to blacken us, and in so vile a Manner, that you seem unacquainted with the
ill Consequence, which may attend the touching a Man's Character. We know, and
are fully convinced, from what has been done already, that nothing will be
allowed or granted us but by your Means: Mr. Cummins and myself ask no Favor
from you, but to use your Endeavors to get us Dispatches to the Ships at Rio
Janeiro, where every Man must give Account of his Actions, and Justice take
Place. If I am not mistaken, you told me that what we were supplied with here,
was a Bounty flowing from the generous Spirit of the Governor, and the
Gentlemen of the Place. If this be the Case, we ought to be very thankful
indeed. I am surprised, Sir, you don't see the Grievances of the Inhabitants
here, and hear the Soldiers Murmurings for want of their Arrears. If they
should revolt at this Juncture, we shall stand a very bad Chance. I must
acquaint you, Sir, the Vessel we came in, is not so much out of repair, but
that, if you can get Canvas out of the Store for Sails, we can make 'em, and
get ready for sailing in ten Days Time. And if the Vessel expected here with
Supplies comes in a shorter Time, our Vessel will be ready fixed for the Use of
the Governor; and if one Vessel should not be large enough to carry us all off,
we can go in Company. I imagine you know of the Stores being robbed, and the
Disturbance among the Soldiers, which must occasion Uneasiness enough, without
repeating Grievances, where relief is not to be had. I beg, Sir, you will get us
dispatched with all Expedition to his Majesty's Service, that we may not lose
the Opportunity of joining the two Ships and the Flota.

SIR, Yours.


The next Morning the Lieutenaut came down on Horseback, being the first Time
of his appearing among us since we have been here, which is above three Weeks;
we went with him to the Commandant, who promised we should not want fresh Beef
and Fish; but as for Bread, there is none to be got. William Oram, one of the
Carpenter's Crew, died this Day in the Hospital.

March the 6th, For several Days the People very uneasy at the Vessel's not
arriving, the W^^d^ having been fair for above three Weeks past, and little or
no Provisions in Store, which makes them doubtful of any to be dispatched to
their relief. This Day we are resolved to go by Land, if the Governor will only
allow us a Guide; we acquainted ^he Lieutenant with our resolution; he went
with me and Mr. Jones to the Governor; we obtained Leave to go, with the
Promise of a Guide. Captain Pemberton, being at the Governor's, desired to go
with us; the Governor told him the Journey was so difficult and tedious, it
would be impossible for him to encounter with it. The Captain answered, that he
had a Company on Board his Majesty's Ship the Severn, where his Duty called
him, and was determined, with the Governor's nor's Leave, to share his Fate
with us by Land; which was granted. The Governor told us, notwithstanding the
present Scarcity of Provisions in the Place, that he had so great a regard for
an Englishman, that whilst he had any thing for himself, we should not want;
for which we thanked him heartily. This Governor is certainly a Gentleman of a
noble generous Spirit of exceeding Humanity and Goodness, and I believe him to
have a sincere regard for an Englishman.

March the 9th, This Morning Mr. Jones went over with me to the North Side, to
make an Agreement for six People to go to St. Catharine's; while we were here,
the Governor received Letters from St. Catharine's, which gave an Account of
four Vessels on their Passage for this Port; on the News of this we put by our
Journey: It was very lucky we had not set out on this Journey before we heard
the News: For on the nineteenth the Vessels from Rio Janeiro arrived, and
brought an Account that the Severn and Pearl were sailed from thence for the
Island of Barbados. Those Vessels not only brought the Soldiers Provisions,
but also (...) Pardon.

On the 20th, The Brigadier arrived, and had all the Soldiers drawn up, where
their Pardon was read to them: He acquainted them with what Money was come,
which was not above a third Part of their Arrears, but the remainder was on the
Passage. The Money he had for them should be paid directly as far as it would
go, if they would take it; but they cried out with one Voice, The Whole or
none; and a great Disturbance there was, some were for revolting to the King of
Spain, some began to change their Notes, and were for taking Part of the Money,
and the rest insisted upon the Whole. To quell this Disturbance, the
Commandant, whom they looked upon more than the Brigadier, or the Governor,
used his utmost Endeavors. They told the Commandant they were no longer
Soldiers than while they were in the King's Pay, and let those who are for the
King, draw off one Way by themselves; you are our Commander, we trust in you to
answer for us, what you do we will stand by with our Lives: On which the
Commandant delivered his Command up, shouldering his Firelock, and took the
Place of a common Soldier, telling them, since the King was so good as to
pardon them, he thought it his Duty to accept it; the Brigadier was so well
pleased with the Behavior of the Commandant, that he ran to him, took him in
his Arms, and embraced him; the rest of the Soldiers followed the Example of
their late Commandant, delivering their respective Commands up to their proper
Officers. This Day put an End to the Disturbance and Confusion which had been
some Time among them, and restored them to Tranquillity, good Discipline, and
Order.

March the 22d, This Morning went to the Lieutenant for Leave to go in the
first Vessel, which was expected to sail in four Days time; he told me he
expected to go in her himself, and that we could not go off all in one Vessel;
there might be room for the Officers, but the People must wait another
Opportunity. I told him that it was a Duty incumbent on the Officers that were
in Pay, particularly, to take Care of the People; you, Sir, have been sure of
half Pay ever since the Ship was lost; we are not, but I will tarry myself
behind with the People, and be answerable for them, if you will give me a Not^
under your Hand to secure me the Value of my Pay, from the Loss of the Ship;
otherwise I don't know any Business I have but to endeavor to get to England
as soon as I can, and will put it out of your Power to prevent my going off in
the first Vessel. I left the Lieutenant, and went with Mr. Cummins, Mr. Jones,
Mr. Snow, Mr. King, and Dr. Oakley to the Governor, to obtain leave for our
going; the Lieutenant followed us, and said, but one half could go at a time.
The Governor told us it was ordered that the Land Officers, myself and the rest
that applied to go by Land, should be the first dispatched, and might go on
board when we would; but as the Vessel did not belong to the King, we must buy
Provisions, and pay for our Passage. I said, Sir, we have not Money to answer
the Expense: He then asked me whether I had not several Times applied to him
for Leave to go by Land at my own Charges? I answered, we were obliged to
dispose of our Watches to raise that Money, which will barely be sufficient to
carry us six off that intended to go by Land, therefore what must become of
(...) ^est who have not a single Penny? And (...), Sir, that you are not
unacquainted (...) the King of Great Britain allows to all his Subjects,
distressed in this Manner, five Vintins per Day to each Man for Subsistence. On
my saying this, the Governor called the Commissary and Major; he walked and
talked with them aside; then came back again, and told us the Account was so
small, that it was not worth charging the King of England with it; therefore we
must buy our own Provisions, and pay our Passage; and as to what we had
received from them, we were welcome; upon which we thanked them, and came away.
We then consulted with the Lieutenant, to know what could be done with the
People; and that as the Vessel we came in was not fit to proceed in any
farther, it was to no Purpose to leave her there; therefore we desired his
consent to sell her, believing the Money she would bring, would be sufficient
to carry us all off. To this Proposal the Lieutenant consented. We then applied
to the Master of the Vessel, to know what he would have for our Passage; his
Demand was forty Shillings per Man; of which we acquainted the Lieutenant, who
told us he could not see what we could do, and, on second Consideration, would
not give his Consent to sell the Boat; for, when sold, he did not think she
would fetch the Money. Those Words of the Lieutenant put us all to a Stand,
especially after he had but now given his Consent to sell her; and in so short
Time to declare the reverse, was very odd; though indeed it did not much surprise
us, because this Gentleman was never known to be over steadfast to his Word.
Seeing no Possibility of carrying he People off without selling the Boat, I
told the Lieutenant, if he left them behind, I could not think but so many of
his Majesty's Subjects were sold; and believed he had made a Present of the
Vessel to the Governor. At this the Lieutenant paused for a while; and then
said, he had not Money to carry himself off without selling his Coat. I
replied, there was no Occasion for that, when he had a Gold Watch. The next
Morning went to the Lieutenant again about our going off; he acquainted us,
that the Brigadier had ordered Things in another Manner; that myfelf, and nine
more, being the Persons disirous of going, should be dispatched in the first
Vessel, and every Thing found us; that he, the Lieutenant, was to tarry behind
with the rest of the People, and to come in the next Vessel, an Estimate of the
Charges being made out; and also he told us, he had a severe Check for
requesting to go first himself, and offering to leave the People behind.

Sunday, March 28, I embarked on Board the St. Catharine's Brigantine, with the
Carpenter, Boatswain, the two Mates, the Surgeon of Marines, the Cooper, and
six of the People; the Provisions laid in for us were two Casks of Salt Beef,
and ten Alcadoes of Farina.

Wednesday the 31st, we sailed for Rio Janeiro, with the Wind at W. steered S.
E. and S. E. by E. until over the Bar; then E. by N. and E. N. E. with a fine
Gale and clear Weather; there is not above two Fathom and half Water on the Bar
at High Water; when you are in, it is a fine commodious Harbor for small
Vessels; it is a low Land of a sandy Soil: Here is Abundance of fine Cattle;
with Fresh Water Fish, Melon^ exceeding good, Plenty of Water, and the best
Milk I ever tasted.

Thursday, April the 8th, Little Wind at S. W. and fair Weather. At ten this
Morning anchored before the Town of St. Sebastians. The Portugueze Pilots, who
have been in England, call the Land here the Isle of Wight; and indeed it is
very like it, though not so large, being only eight Miles in Length. This is a
very secure Harbor for Shipping; a Stranger may go in or out without any
Difficulty. At this Place I was ashore, and think it as delightful and pleasant
a Place as ever I saw in America; abounding with Fruit, as Oranges, Lemons,
Bonano's; also with Yams, Potatoes, Fish and Fowl.

Saturday the 10th, Sailed from St. Sebastians; little Wind at S. W. steered
out S. E. between the Island and the Main; and at Eight in the Morning, on the
Monday following, we anchored before the City of Rio Janeiro.

Tuesday the 13th, This Morning we were all ordered before the Governor. A
Dutch Surgeon was sent for, who spoke very good English. After an Enquiry into
our Misfortunes, the Governor ordered him to be our Consul; telling us, that we
should have a convenient House, with Firing, and eight Vintins a Man per Day
Subsistence-Money: He also desired we might make no Disturbance among
ourselves; which we promised to avoid. A Nobleman went with the Consul to look
out for our Habitation; they fixed on a large magnificent House, fit for a
Person of Quality. This being the first Day of our coming ashore, they were
pleased to order a Dinner, and Supper out of Doors, and sent us where we were
to eat all together. This was the first Time of the Boatswain's eating with the
rest of the Officers since we left Cheap Island. The Consul was so kind as to
send us a Table, Benches, Water Pots, and several useful Things, from his own
House; we thought ourselves very happily seated.

Wednesday the 14th, This Morning the Consul went with the Officers and People
to the Treasury for our Money. Mr. Oakley, Surgeon of his Majesty's Land
Forces, was desired by the Consul to sign for it. The Boatswain, who now looked
upon himself as our Captain, was not a little displeased at this. When the
Money was received, the Consul would have given it the Surgeon to pay us; but
he excused himself, telling the Consul the Boatswain was a troublesome Man, and
it might occasion a Disturbance; on which the Consul was so good as to come and
pay it himself. Being all together, he told us the Governor had ordered us
eight Vintins a Man per Day; but at the same Time had made a Distinction
between the Officers and Seamen; that the Money received was to be paid in the
Manner following, viz. to the Seamen six Vintins per Man, and the Officers ten.
The reason of this Distinction was, that the Seamen could go to work, and get
Money by their Labor; when the Officers could not, but must be obliged to live
entirely on their Allowance. This Distinction caused great Uneasiness, the
Boatswain insisting that the People had a right to an equal Share with us. The
Officers, willing to make all Things easy, desired the Consul it might be so.
The Consul replied, the Money should be disposed of according to the Governor's
Direction, or not at all. The Boatswain then objected against the Cooper,
because he was no Office^. The Consul said, Master! I believe the Cooper to be
a very good quiet Man, and I dare say will take it as the Men do; but sooner
than this be an Objection, I will pay the Money out of my own Pocket. The
Boatswain then began at me, abusing me in a very scandalous and abominable
Manner; saying, among other Things; that the Cooper was got among the rest of
the Pirates, for so he termed me and the rest of the Officers. When the Money
was paid, we acquainted the Consul, that we had, till now, been separated from
the Boatswain; that he was of so perverse and turbulent a Temper, and so
abusive in Speech, that we could not bear with him. The Boatswain then chose to
be with the People, and gave us the Preference of the Foreroom, where we
desired to be by ourselves. There were two Doors to our room; we looked both of
them, and went to take a Walk in the Country: At our return in the Evening, we
found the Doors broke open, and a small Sword belonging to me was broken an
Inch off the Point, and the Scabbard all in Pieces. The Boatswain had in his
room an Irishman, whom he sent in on Purpose to quarrel with us. This Irishman
and Richard East, one of our own People, fell upon the Cooper and me: East
chose to engage with me; he struck me several Times; he compelled me to stand
in my own Defense, and I soon mastered him. During this Quarrel the Carpenter
called the Guards; at Sight of whom the Irishman made his Escape. I desired the
Guards to secure East a Prisoner, but the Officer told me he could not, unless
I would go to Prison with him. I told him it was my desire, and accordingly I
went. The Prison was in the Governor's House. I had not been there but a few
Minutes before the Governor sent for me; he enquired of the Officer concerning
the Disturbance, and ordered me to my Habitation; but detained East a Prisoner.
When I came Home I found the Boatswain, and two renegadoes with him, all about
the Cooper. On seeing me, he repeated his former abusive Words. He made us so
uneasy in our Lodging, that, to prevent Murder, we were obliged to lie out of
the House. Next Morning Mr. Oakley and Mr. Cummins went to the Consul; he came
with them to the House, where we were all sent for; he told us it was very
strange, that People who had undergone so many Hardships and Difficulties,
could not agree lovingly together. We answered, we never used to mess together;
and sooner than we would be with the Boatswain, we would make it our Choice to
take a House in the Country at our own Expense. The Boatswain, on hearing this,
fell again into his usual Strain of Slander and abusive Language, caling us
rogues, Villains, and Pirates. It was the Governor's first request, that we
might have no Disturbance among us; yet the Boatswain has not suffered us to
have a quiet Minute since we have been here. The Consul went with us two Miles
out of the City, at a sishing Village; where we took a House, at our own
Expense, to pay at the rate of ten Shillings per Month, there being seven of us
in all, viz. myself, the Carpenter, Surgeon, the two Mates, the Cooper, and a
Seaman. Here we thought ourselves safe and secure. The next Day, in the
Afternoon, two of the Boatswain's Friends, which had lately deserted from his
Majesty's Service, and an Irish Clerk with them, came to pay us a Visit. They
were so impertinent, as not only to enquire into the reasons of the Disturbance
among ourselves, but they also instructed us in our Duty, telling us, they came
from our Commander the Boatswain, with Orders to see our Journal. I told them
the Journal should not be a Secret to any Person who could read; but at the
same Time I would never part with it to be copied out: They then drank a Glass
of Punch with us and left us. This is a Place that a Man is obliged sometimes
to suffer himself to be used ill; if he resents all Affronts, he runs a great
Hazard of losing his Life; for here ruffians are to be hired at a small
Expense; and there is no Place in the World where People will commit Murder at
so cheap a rate. Between Nine and Ten at Night, three People, came to our Door;
one of which knocked, telling us that he was the Person that was with me and
the Cooper in the Afternoon. Being apprehensive that they came with no good
Intent, we refused opening the Door; telling them, that it was an improper
Season of the Night, and that we did not know they had any Business with us; if
they had, we told them to come in the Morning: But they still insisted upon the
Door being opened; saying, it would be better to do so, than to be taken away
in three Hours Time. When they had said this, they went away. We did not know
the Meaning of their Words, but imagined they were gone to bring some
Associates to beset the House; having nothing to defend ourselves with, we got
over the Back-Wall of the House, and took to the Country for Safety: In the
Morning applied to the Consul, who removed us to a House in the Midst of the
Village; he gave an Account to the Inhabitants of the Design the Boatswain had
formed against us, either to compel us to deliver up the Journal, or to take
our Lives; he therefore desired that the Journal and Papers might be deposited
in the Hands of a Neighbor there, till the Time of our going off. The People
of the Place offered to stand by us with their Lives, in Opposition to any
Persons who should attempt to do us an Injury.

Sunday the 18th, Early this Morning we were sent for to the Consul. He said to
us, Gentlemen, as the Lives of three of you are in Danger, and I don't know
what Villainy your Boatswain may be capable of acting, in regard to your Peace
and Safety; I Will endeavor to get you three on Board a Ship bound for Bahia and
Lisbon; accordingly he went to the Captain of the Ship, who consented that we
should go with him, on these Conditions, that the Governor would give us a
Pass, and that we would work for our Passage; this we agreed to: After this we
requested the Governor for a Pass, which he was so good as to grant, and is as
follows.

Nas Fortelasas sedeixem passar.
A 30 Abril, 1742.
Podem passar par Portugal eni qualquer Nao que selle ofreser semque che ponha
Impedimento algum Bahia, 19 Mayo, 1742.

DIZEM Joan Bocli, e Joan Cummins, e Joan Menino, Inglezes de Nasao, e Cazados
em Inglaterra, em quetem suas Mulleres e Fillios, que seudo Officais de
Calafate, e Condestavel, and Joneiro, de Imadas Fragatas Inglezas, dado a Costa
do Patagonia, che fesivel a portarem, a Oporto do Rio Grande, donde sel^edeo
faculdade para passarem aesta Cidade. E como Naferma do Regimendo de son
soberano Nao vensem sodo, algum desde otempo, que Nao Pagau detta Fragata,
selhes fas presis a passarem a Inglaterra, para poderem tratar de sua vida em
Compania de suas Familias; para oghe pretendem na Naude Lisensia passar a
Citade da Bahia, para da hi Opoderem farer para Lisboa, na primera ocasiao, que
che for po^ivel, e ^im desda Nao podem intentar dito transporte.

Quaime sedigne dar che Lisensia que nas Fortalesas selhe nas ponha Impedimento
a sua Passagem, Come e Costume aos Nacionaes decte Reyne.

A. ROVE.

The foregoing in English thus.

From all the Forts let them pass.
Rio Janeiro Grand. April 30, 1742.
That they may pass to Portugal in any Vessel that offers itself, without any
Hindrance whatever, to Bahia, May 19, 1742.

JOHN Bocli, [Bulkeley] John Cummins, and John Young, of the English Nation,
and married in England, where they have Wives and Children, the one being an
Officer, the other a Carpenter, and the third Cooper of the Ship, being an
English Frigate, arrived on the Coast of Patagonia; and at their Arrival in the
Great river, i. e. Rio Grand, Leave was granted them to come to this City; and
as in the Service of his Majesty, they do not advance any Money, from the Time
that they paid off the said Ship, they are obliged to pass to England, that
they may be enabled there to seek their Livelihood for their respective
Families: Therefore they desire that they may pass in the License Ship to the
City of Bahia, that they may from thence go to Lisbon, by the first Opportunity
that shall offer; and that without the said Ship they will not be able to
perform their intended Design.

Leave is hereby granted them to pass by the said Ship for Bahia; and we
command all the Forts to let them pass, and not hinder their Passage, as is the
Custom of the Nation of this Kingdom.

A. ROVE.

The following is a Copy of the Sollicitor's Certificate.

IS TO he para que todos sabem que os Senhores Abaixo Nomeados y bem mal
afortunados, nesta Cidade de Rio Janeiro se comportar ao com toda aboa Dereysao
nao dando escandalo Apesoa Alguma e Sao Dignos deque Joda p^ssoa posa os
favoreser emoque for de Ajudo para Sigimento de sua Viagem omais breve possivel
para Huropa.

John Bulkeley. John Cummins. John Young.
Hoje 1 de Mayo de 1742. A sim que Assiney este Papel Como Procurador Sosil da
Nasao Britanica. Pedro Henriques Delaed.

In English thus.

These Presents
BE it known to all Persons, that the under-signed are in a deplorable
Condition in this City of Rio Janeiro; who have behaved themselves with Decency
and good Decorum, not giving any Scandal to any Person whatsoever, and are
worthy that all People may have Compassion, and succor them in forwarding
their Voyage with all Expedition to Europe.

John Bulkeley. John Cummins. John Young.
The 1st of May, 1742. I have signed this Paper as a Solicitor of the British
Nation. Pedro Henrique Delaed.

Tuesday, May the 20th, This Evening myself, the Carpenter, and Cooper, went on
Board the St. Tubes, one of the Brazil Ships, carrying twenty-eight Guns,
Theophilus Orego Ferrara Commander, bound for Bahia and Lisbon. The People left
on Shore were.

John Jones, Master's Mate John Snow, ditto Vincent Oakley, Surgeon John King,
Boatswain Samuel Stook, Seaman John Shoreham, ditto John Pitman, ditto Job
Barns, ditto Richard East, ditto Richard Powell, ditto
Wednesday the 21st, Early this Morning the Captain came on Board; on seeing
us, he asked us, How we came on Board without his Leave? Notwithstanding he
gave Leave to the Consul for our Passage, we ought to have waited on him
ashore. There was on Board the Ship a Spanish Don, a Passenger, who told the
Captain no Englishman should go in the same Ship with him; therefore desired we
might be turned ashore; but the Captain insisted upon doing what he pleased
aboard his own Ship, and would not comply with his request. The Spanish Don,
when we came to converse with him, was very much moved with the relation of our
Misfortunes; and said to us, though our royal Masters, the Kings of England and
Spain, are at War, it was not our Fault; that we were now on Board a Neutral
Ship belonging to a King who was a Friend to both Nations; that he would not
look upon us as Enemies, but do us all the Service he could. He extolled the
Conduct and Bravery of Admiral Vernon at Porto-Bello; but, above all, applauded
him for his Humanity and generous Treatment of his Enemies. He made great
Encomiums on the Magnificence of the British Fleet, and the Boldness and
Imtrepidity of the Sailors, stiling the English the Soldiers of the Sea. He
supplied us in our Passage not only with Provisions from his Table, but also
with Wine and Brandy; and during the whole Voyage appeared so different from an
Enemy, that he took all Opportunities of giving us Proofs of his Generosity and
Goodness.

Friday the 7th of May 1742, This Morning anchored before the City of Bahia,
went on Shore to the Viceroy, showed him the Pass we had from the Governor of
Rio Janeiro: He told us the Pass was to dispatch us to Lisbon, and that the
first Ship which sailed from hence would be the Ship we came in; we petitioned
him for Provisions, acquainting him of our reception at Rio Grand, and Rio
Janeiro, that we had hitherto been supplied at the rate of eight Vintins each
Man per Day. He refused supplying us with any Thing; upon which I told him, we
had better been Prisoners to the King of Spain, who would allow us Bread and
Water, than in a Friend's Country to be starved. The Captain of the Ship we
came in, hearing the Viceroy would not supply us, was so kind as to go with us
to him, acquainting him how we were provided for at Rio Janeiro, and that he
would supply us himself, if he would sign an Account to satisfy the Consul
General at Lisbon, so that he might be reimburs'd. The Viceroy answered, he
had no Orders concerning the English, that he had Letters from the King of
Portugal his Master to supply the French, but had no Orders about any other
Nation, and if he gave us any thing, it must be out of his own Pocket,
therefore he would not supply us; The Captain then told him that we were
Officers and Subjects to the King of England, and in Distress; that we did not
want great Matters, only barely enough to support Life, and begged that he
would allow but four Vintins per Day, being but half the Sum hitherto allowed
us. The Captain's Entreaties availed nothing, the Viceroy continuing as fixed
in his resolution of giving us no relief; I don't believe there ever was a
worse representative of royalty upon the Face of the Earth, than this Viceroy;
His royal Master the King of Portugal is very well known to have a grateful
Affection for the British Nation (nor can we believe he is so Frenchify'd as
this Viceroy makes him) his Deputy differs greatly from him, he has given a
Proof of his Aversion to the English. We think Persons in the Distress we were
represented in to him, could in no Part of the World, nay in an Enemy's
Country, be treated with more Barbarity than we were here; We worked here for
our Victuals, and then could get but one Meal per Day, which was Farina and
Caravances. At this Place we must have starved, if I had not by me some Mon^
and a Silver Watch of my own, which I was obliged to turn into Money to support
us. I had (...) Money fourteen Guineas, which I exchanged with the Captain who
brought us here for Portugueze Money; He at the same time told me it would be
hard upon me to be so much out of Pocket, and said if I would draw a Bill on
the Consul General at Lisbon for the Sum, as if supplied from him, upon the
Payment of that Bill, he would return me my fourteen Guineas, accordingly a
Bill was drawn up by an English Merchant at Bahia, and signed by us, being as
follows:

NOS abaixo asignados Joam Bulkeley, Joam Cummins, and Joam Young Vassalos de
sua Magg de Brittanica El-Rey Jorge Segundo, declaramos que temos recebido da
mam do Snor' Cappam de Mar e Guerra Theodorio Rodrigues de Faria a coanthia de
Corenta cloatro Mil e Oito Centos reis em dinheiro decontado comque por varias
vezes nos Socorrco para o Nosso Sustento des o dia 17 de Mayo proximo passado
athe odia Prezente, por Cuja caridade rogamos a Deos conceda m^ra saud Born
succesto e por este pedimos humildeme te ao Snor' Consul Geral da Mesma Nacao'
que Aprenzentado que este Seja nao' duvide em Mandar Sattis faze^ as sobredito
snor' Cappam de Mar e Gucrra a refferida ^^anthia vis^o ser expendida em Obra
pia e que o Estado da nossa Mizeria ^pobreza tree nao' pode pagar e por passar
na Verdade o Refferido e nao' sabermos Escrever pedimos a Gabriel Prynn homem
de Negocio nesta Cidade e Interpret de Ambas as Lingoas ou Idosmas que este
por Nos sizese e Come Testemunha Asignase.

Sas 44 800 ^e Bahia 14 Setembro 1742. John Bulkeley. John Cummins. John Young.

Come Testamunha que fiz a rogo dos Sebreditor, Gabriel Prynn.

The foregoing in English thus,

WE the undersign'd John Bulkeley, John Cummins, and John Young, Subjects of
his Majesty King George the Second, King of Great Britain, do declare to have
received from the Honorable Captain of Sea and Land, Theodore Rodriques of
Faria, the Sum of forty-four-thousand and eight hundred Rees, None of this
Money was ever paid.
in ready and lawful Money, by different Times, for our Support and Succor
from the 17th of May Instant to this present Date: And, for the said Charity,
we implore the Almighty to grant him Health and Prosperity. And on this
Account, we humbly desire the Consul of the same Nation, that, by these
Presents, he may not omit giving full Satisfaction to the above mentioned
Captain of Sea and Land, for the said Sum, it being employed on a very
Charitable Account, being in a deplorable Condition, and not able to repay the
Same; And we not knowing in what Manner to write, to acknowledge the above
Favors, have desired Mr. Gabriel Pryn, a Merchant in this City and Interpreter
of both Languages, that he may act for us; and we leave it to him to do in this
Affair as it shall seem meet unto him; and as a Witness to this Matter he has
signed his Name.

Say 44 100. Bahia the 14th September 1742. John Bulkeley, John Cummins, John
Young.

To the Veracity of the above Assertion I have signed my Name. Gabriel Pryn.

Since our being here, we have been informed of one of his Majesty's Ships with
three Store-Ships being arrived at Rio Janeiro, supplied with Stores and Men
for the relief and Assistance of the Severn and Pearl (which were sailed before
in January last for Barbados) and that our People were gone on board of them,
and bound for the West Indies.

Here is a very good Bay for Ships to ride in, with the Wind from the E. S. E.
to the Northward and Westward back to the S. W. and Wind to the Southward,
which blows in, and makes a very great Sea. At the East Side coming in,
stands Point de Gloria, where is a very large Fortification, with a Tower in
the midst; from this Point the Land rises gradually; about a League from hence
is the City of Bahia; it is surrounded with Fortifications and equally capable
of defending it against any Attempts from the Sea or Lands.

Provisions her of all kinds are excessive dear, especially Fish, this we
impute to the great Number of Whales that come into this Bay, even where the
Ships lie at Anchor; the Whale Boats go off and kill sometimes ^even or eight
Whales in a Day. The Flesh of which is out up in small Pieces, then brought to
the Market Place, and sold at the rate of a Vintin per Pound; it looks very
much like coarse Beef, but inferior to it in Taste. The Whales here are not at
all equal in Size to the Whales in Greenland, being not larger than the
Grampus. After living here above four Months without any relief from the
Governor or the Inhabitants, who behaved to us as if they were under a
Combination to starve us, we embarked on board the St. Tubes with our good
Friend the Captain who brought us from Rio Janeiro; we sailed from Bahia the
11th of September for Lisbon, in Company with one of the King of Portugal's
Ships of War, and two East India Ships; but the St. Tubas not being able to
sail so well as the other Ships, lost sight of them the first Night. About 70
Leagues from the Westward of Madeira, we bent a new Foresail; within two or
three Days afterward, we had a very hard Gale of Wind, scudding under the
Foresail, and no Danger happening to the Ship during this Gale. When the Wind
had ceased, and we had fair Weather, the Captain, after the Evening Mass, made
an Oration to the People, telling them that their Deliverance from Danger in
the last Gale of Wind, and that the Ship though leaky making no more Water than
before, was owing to their Prayers to Nuestra Senhora Boa Mortua and her
Intercession. That in Gratitude they ought to make an Acknowledgment to that
Saint for standing their Friend in time of Need. That he himself would show the
Example by giving the new Foresail, which was bent to the Yard, to the Saint
their Deliverer; accordingly one of the Seamen went forward and marked out
these Words on the Sail, Deal esta Trinckado pour nostra Senhora Boa mortua
(which is as much as to say) I give this Foresail to our Saint the Deliverer
from Death. The Sail and Money collected on this Occasion amounted to upwards
of twenty Moidores.

On Monday the 23d of November, in the Latitude 39: 17 North, and Longitude 6:
00 W. that Day at Noon the Rock of Lisbon bearing S. by W. distant sixteen
Leagues; we steered E. S. E. to make the Rock before Night. At Four o'Clock it
blew a very hard Gale, and right on the Shore; the Ship lay to under a Foresail
with her Head to the Southward; at Six it blew a Storm, the Foresail splitting,
obliged us to keep her before the Wind, which was running her right on the
Shore. The Ship was now given over for lost, the People all fell to Prayers,
and cried out to their Saints for Deliverance, offering all they had in the
World for their Lives; and yet at the same time neglected all Means to save
themselves; they left off pumping the Ship, though she was exceeding leaky.
This Sort of Proceeding in time of Extremity is a thing unknown to our English
Seamen; in those Emergencies all Hands are employed for the Preservation of the
Ship and People, and, if any of them fall upon their Knees, it is after the
Danger is over. The Carpenter and myself could by no Means relish this
Behavior, we begged the People for God's sake to go to the Pumps, telling them
we had a Chance of saving our Lives, while we kept the Ship above Water, that
we ought not to suffer the Ship to sink, while we could keep her free. The
Captain and Officers hearing us pressing them so earnestly, le^t off Prayers,
and entreated the Men to keep the Pumps going, accordingly we went to pumping,
and preserved ourselves and the Ship: In half an Hour afterward the Wind
shifted to the W. N. W. then the Ship lay South, which would clear the Course
along Shore had the Wind not shifted; we must in an Hour's time have run the
Ship ashore. This Deliverance, as well as the Former, was owing to the
Intercession of Nuestra Senhora Boa Mortua: On this Occasion they collected
Fifty Moidores more, and made this pious resolution, that, when the Ship
arrived safe at Lisbon, the Foresail, which was split in the last Gale of Wind,
should be carried in Procession to the Church of this grand Saint, and the
Captain should there make an Offering equal in Value to the Foresail, which was
reckoned worth eighteen Moidores.

On Saturday the 28th of November, we arrived at Lisbon; and on the next
Morning every Person who came in the Ship, (excepting the Carpenter, myself;
and the Cooper) Officers, Passengers, the Spanish Don himself, and all the
People, Men and Boys, walked barefooted, with the Fore-sail in Procession, to
the Church of Nuestra Senhora Boa Mortua; the Weather at that Time being very
cold, and the Church a good Mile distant from the Landing-Place. We Englishmen,
when we came ashore, went immediately on the Change. I was pretty well known to
some Gentlemen of the English Factory. When I informed them that we were three
of the unfortunate People that were cast away in the Wager, and that we came
here in one of the Brazil Ships, and wanted to embrace the first Opportunity of
going to England; they told me, that the Lieutenant had been before us; that he
was gone home in the Packet Boat, and left us a very indifferent Character. I
answered, I believed the Lieutenant could give but a very bad Account of
himself, having kept no Journal, nor made any remarks since the Loss of the
Ship, nor perhaps before; that we doubted not but to acquit ourselves of any
false Accusations, having with us a Journal, which gave an impartial relation
of all our Proceedings. The Journal was read by several Gentlemen of the
Factory, who treated us, during our Stay at Lisbon, with exceeding Kindness and
Benevolence.

On the 20th of December, we embarked on Board his Majesty's Ship the
Stirling-Castle for England: Here we had again the Happiness of experiencing
the Difference between a British and a Foreign Ship, particularly in regard to
Cleanliness, Accommodation, Diet and Discipline. We met with nothing material in
our Passage, and arrived at Spithead on the 1st of January, 1742-3. Here we
thought of nothing but going ashore immediately to our Families; but were told
by the Captain, we must not stir out of the Ship till he knew the Pleasure of
the Lords of the Admiralty, having already wrote to them con^^rning us. This
was a very great Affliction to us; and the more so because we thought our
Troubles at an End. The Carpenter and myself were in View of our Habitations;
our Families had long given us over for lost; and, on the News of our Safety,
our relatives looked upon us as Sons, Husbands, and Fathers, restored to them
in a miraculous Manner. Our being detained on Board gave them great Anxiety; we
endeavored to console 'em as well as we could; being assured, that we had done
nothing to offend their Lordships; that, if Things were not carried on with
that Order and regularity which is strictly observed in the Navy, Necessity
drove us out of the common road. Our Case was singular: Since the loss of the
Ship, our chiefest Concern was for the Preservation of our Lives and Liberties;
to accomplish which we acted according to the Dictates of Nature, and the best
of our Understanding.

Note, Here ends that Part of the Journal which was printed in London.

A Copy of a Letter sent to their Lordships, whilst under Confinement on board
his Majesty's Ship the Duke, lying at Spithead, in January, 1743.
My Lords,
WE Humbly beg leave to acquaint your Lordships, That as Subjects of England we
are returned to our Country, in order for Trial: Had we been guilty of any
Misdemeanors or Crimes on the High-Seas, or inferior Parts, as Subjects we
should be called to Account, tried, acquitted or condemned. Which is all we
want and request.

From your Lordships most dutiful and Obedient Servant, J. B.


Shortly after this came an Order for Liberty, at which I thought it my Duty to
wait on their Lordships with the Journal; after it was sent in, waited upwards
of ten Days for an Answer, at our own Expense and Charge; receiving none, we
applied to the E -- of W -- who told us the Journal was too ^rge ever to be
perused, and time would hardly per^^t the looking of it over; therefore order^d
it to be returned again, and farther, ordered us to draw up a Narrative from
it, giving an Account of the Loss of the Ship, the Murder of the Midshipman,
the Confining the Captain, and the leaving him behind; which was all that was
wanted and requested.

This Narrative was drawn up, and concluded with these Words.

My Lords,
WE Have written this Narrative as short as we could, in doing of which, we
have strictly complied with the Desire of the Unfortunate Capt. Cheap, whose
last Injunction was to give a faithful Narrative to your Lordships. We have
writ it without Favor or Prejudice, and wherever it is deficient, do refer to
the Journal. After the unfortunate Loss of the Wager, we knew if ever
Providence should bring us to our Country again, that we should be called to
Account, therefore have omitted nothing material, at least, in our Journal.

From. Your Lordships most dutiful, und obedient.

Receiving no Answer to this, I thought it my Duty to write to their Lordships
for Trial, and to this Purpose:

My Lords,
WE Humbly pray your Lordships to admit us to Trial whilst the Witnesses are on
the Spot, lest they should be separated in several Ships and distant Parts, and
we should be called to Account in their Absence, which would be of the worst
Consequence to us.

From your Lordships most dutiful and obedient Servant, John Bulkeley.


At which their Lordships were pleased to fix a Day for examining all the
Officers late belonging to the Wager. The Gentlemen appointed to make Enquiry
into the whole Affair, were three Commanders of Ships, of distinguished Merit
and Honor. However it was afterward concluded not to admit us to any
Examination till the Arrival of the Commodore, or else Capt. Cheap, and to
exclude us till that Time from serving his Majesty, or receiving any Wages.

After this we were offered a considerable Sum by the Booksellers of London, to
publish our Journal to the World; this we would not attempt nor presume to do,
without acquainting their Lordships; for which Purpose I writ in the Manner
following.

My Lords,
WE Humbly beg Leave to acquaint your Lordships, that we are offered a
considerable Sum by the Booksellers of London, for the Copy of our Journal, to
publish it to the World; notwithstanding Money is a great Temptation to People
in our Circumstances, still we are determined to abide by your Lordships
Resolutions.

From your Lordships most obedient Servant, etc.


I received for Answer by one of the Messengers, That the Journal was our own,
and that their Lordships would have nothing to do with it, so you may do as you
will with it. I thought this Answer was Leave sufficient, on which I went to
publishing the Journal, which some People in the World have condemned me for;
had I not wrote to their Lordships for Leave, they might have blamed me. After
publishing the Work, we were told by many, that we were to be hanged for Piracy
in coming away with the King's Longboat without the Capt. and also for
mutinying, and not bringing him home with us. There was one great good Man that
gave his Judgment in our Favor, so far as to say, She was not the King's
Longboat; giving these reasons: At the first wrecking of the Wager, they cut
their Masts away, which rendered them incapable of hoisting her out; but some
Time after the Captain gave Orders to his Officers and People to go off to the
Wreck and bring the Longboat on Shore. They obey his Orders, go off to the
Wreck, saw the Gunnel down, launch the Boat, and bring her on Shore; when
there, the Captain orders her to be haul'd up at a proper Place for lengthning;
his Orders are obeyed; after which he orders the Carpenter to saw her asunder;
the Carpenter goes to work, obeys the Captain's Orders; now, it is to be
observed, that the Longboat is in two Parts, and by Capt. Cheap's Orders; by
which Orders, he has not only made her useless to the whole Body of the People
on the Island, but as useless to himself as the Wreck in the Sea, and by his
own Orders: But the Carpenter, with the Assistance of the People, have gone
into the Woods, out their own Timber, saw'^ their own Plank, and brought her
into a Position of 23 Tun^. I am farther to observe, that at that Time, when
the King's Ship was lost, that the Pay ceased, and it might as well have been
told them that they had no right to take up any Part of the Wreck of his
Majesty's Ship that floated a long the Shore, in Order to be delivered from
this Island, because it is the Wreck of the King's, Ship; and, if so, the
Subject has not a right to save his life by it: In regard to Mutiny, it was
desired to be known, whether the Officers and Seamen belonging to his Majesty's
Ship Ruby, who seized their Captain on Board the Ship for the Murder of Sir
John Dindly Goodyer, his Brother, and delivered him up to the Mayor of Bristol,
where Mutineers? these People were in Pay to the Government; and whether the
Officers and Seamen of the Wager on that desolate Island, out of Pay of the
Government, had not as much reason to confine Captain Cheap for the Death of
Mr. Cozens, and deliver him up to Captain Pemberton of His Majesty's
Landforces? This I leave to the Candid to judge, which were the greatest
Mutineers of the two?

About two Years after the Journal was published, I had an Offer made me by
some Gentlemen of the City of London, to go down to Plymouth in Order to bring
up to London the old Sapphire man of War, a forty Gun Ship, purchassed by those
Gentlemen for a privateer: This was the first offer made of getting into Bread
since my Arrival in England which I thought it my Duty to accept; the same Duty
bound me to trouble their Lordships for Leave, and accordingly writ a Letter to
this purpose.

My Lords,
I Humbly beg leave to acquaint your Lordships, that I have an Offer made me by
some Gentlemen of this City, which I think my Duty to accept, and at the same
Time would not accept or attempt to go abroad with out acquainting, your
Lordships, lest your Lordships should imagine I had flown from Justice; I am
willing and desirous of abiding by the strictest Trial of my Conduct in Regard
to Captain Cheap, and hope to live to see him Face to Face: But in the
Mean-time do hope I am not to be left on the Earth to perish, when I can be of
Service to my King, my Country, and Family.

Your Lordships most dutiful, and obedient, etc. J. B.


On this I received their Lordships Protection, in the following Words, viz.

BY the Commissioners for executing the Office of Lord High Admiral of Great
Britain and Ireland, etc. and of all His Majesty's Plantations, etc.

You are hereby required and directed not to impress into His Majesty's Service
Forty Men, to bring the Old Sapphire Man of War from Plymouth to the River
Thames, to fill out for a Privateer, ^John Bulkeley, Commander, belonging to
her, provided their Names, Ages, and Descriptions be inserted on the other Side
hereof, and that they do not belong to any of His Majesty's Ships; and in case
this Protection shall be found about any other Person, producing the same upon
his own Account, then the Officer who finds it is hereby strictly charged and
required to impress the said Person, and immediately to send the Protection to
us. And we do hereby direct that this Protection, for the securing the
forementioned Persons, and them only, from the Press, shall continue in force
for Six Weeks (to Protect them in their Passage in the Ship from Plymouth to
London) from the Date hereof, and no longer.

Given under our Hands, and the Seal of the Office of Admiralty, this eleven^^
Day of June, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Forty Five. By Command of their
Lordships, Tho. Corbett. A. Hamilton, G. Anson, H. Leg.


To all Commanders and Officers of His Majesty's Ships, Pressmasters, and all
others whom it does or may concern.
After receiving the above, I proceeded for Plymouth, there took charge and
fixed the Ship with Jury Masts, mustered forty Men, and ten Guns. In the middle
of July sailed in Company with three Sail bound for London, the Masters whereof
engaged with me not to Part Company, being doubtful of falling in with two
French Dogger Privateers, which had done a great Deal of Mischief in the
Channel. The next Morning about Six o'Clock, it being little Wind, the Starts
bearing N.N.W. saw the two Privateers in chase of three Ships to the S. in
about two Hours after they left off their Chase, and haul'd their Wind, in
order to speak with us; at which the three Sail being within me, haul'd their
Wind in order to run their Vessels on shore: on this I bore down to the
Privateers, run the ten Guns out of the starboard Side, and as soon as within
Gun shot hoisted the King's Colors and fired a Shot, which they did not
regard, by not hoisting any Colors; at which I ordered the Men below to get
all ready at once to haul all the lower Deck Ports up, by doing which we'll
give them to believe we are in a Man of War, and by having Jury Masts, will
think that we lost them in an Engagement or bad Weather; as soon as they
acquainted me they were ready, I ordered them to haul up, and fired another
Shot, which had the desired Effect, for they instantly hoisted Swedish Colors,
and tacked from us; by which Scheme six Sail of Merchant Vessels were saved
from being taken; the Privateers had each a Hundred and Seventeen Men on Board.
To the Fact of this I refer to the St. James's Evening Post, it being published
there. In about ten Months after this Captain Cheap arrived in England from
France: The Account he gave of his Proceedings, and the Perils and Dangers he
went through after he was left by us, is as follows, viz.

WHEN the Longboat and Cutter were gone, the Captain, and those who were left
with him, proposed to pass to the Northward in the Barge and Yawl; But the
Weather was so bad, and the Difficulty of subsisting so great, that it was two
Months after the Departure of the Longboat before he was able to put to Sea.
But as it has been already said, the Place where the Wager was cast away, was
not a Part of the Continent, but an Island at some some distance from the Main,
which afforded no other Sorts of Provision but Shellfish, and a few Herbs; and
as the greatest Part of what they had gotten from the Ship was carried off in
the Longboat, the Captain and his People were often in great Necessity,
especially as they chose to preserve what little Sea-provisions remained, for
their Store when they should go to the Northward. During their residence at
this Island, which was by the Seamen denominated Wager's Island, they had now
and then a straggtling Canoe or two of Indians, which came and bartered their
Fish and other Provisions with our People. This was indeed some little Succor,
and at another Season might perhaps have been greater; for as there were
several Indian Huts on the Shore, it was supposed that in some Years, during
the height of Summer, many of these Savages might resort thither to fish.

Upon the 14th of December, the Captain and his People embarked in the Barge
and the Yawl, in order to proceed to the Northward, taking on board with them
all the Provisions they could amass from the Wreck of the Ship; but they had
scarcely been an Hour at Sea, when the Wind began to blow hard, and the Sea ran
so high, that they were obliged to throw the greatest Part of their Provisions
overboard, to avoid immediate Destruction. This was a terrible Misfortune, in
a Part of the World where Food is so hard to be got: However, they still
persisted in their Design, putting on Shore as often as they could to seek
Subsistence. But about a Fortnight after, another dreadful Accident befell them,
for the Yawl sunk at an Anchor, and one of the Men in her was drowned; and as
the Barge was incapable of carrying the whole Company, they were now reduced to
the hard Necessity of leaving four Marines behind them on that desolate Shore.
But they still kept on their Course to the Northward, struggling with their
Disasters, and greatly delayed by the Perverseness of the Winds, and the
frequent Interruptions which their Search after Food occasioned; Till at last,
about the End of January, having made three unsuccessful Attempts to double a
Head-land, which they supposed to be what the Spaniards called Cape Tres
Montes, it was unanimously resolved to give over this Expedition, the
Difficulties of which appeared insuperable, and to return again to Wager
Island, where they got back about the Middle of February, quite disheartened and
dejected with their reiterated Disappointments, and almost perishing with
Hunger and Fatigue.

However, on their return they had the good Luck to meet with several Pieces of
Beef, which had been washed out of the Ship, and were swimming in the Sea. This
was a most seasonable relief to them, after the Hardships they had endured: And
to complete their good Fortune, there came, in a short Time, two Canoes of
Indians, amongst which was a Native of Chiloe, who spoke a little Spanish; and
the Surgeon, who was with Captain Cheap, understanding that Language, he made a
Bargain with the Indian, that if he would carry the Captain and his People to
Chiloe in the Barge, he should have her, and all that belonged to her for his
Pains. Accordingly, on the 6th of March, the eleven Persons to which the
Company was now reduced, embarked in the Barge on this new Expedition; but
after having proceeded for a few Days, the Captain and four of his principal
Officers being on Shore, the Six, who together with an Indian remained in the
Barge, put off with her to Sea, and did not return.

By this Means there were left on Shore Captain Cheap, Mr. Hamilton, Lieutenant
of Marines, the Honorable Mr. Byron, and Mr. Campbel, Midshipmen, and Mr.
Elliot, the Surgeon. One would have thought their Distresses had long before
this Time been incapable of Augmentation; but they found, on reflection, that
their present Situation was much more dismaying than any Thing they had yet
gone through, being left on a desolate Coast, without any Provision, or the
Means of procuring any; for their Arms, Ammunition, and every Convenience they
were Masters of, except the tattered Habits they had on, were all carried away
in the Barge.

But when they had sufficiently revolved in their own Minds the various
Circumstances of this unexpected Calamity, and were persuaded that they had no
relief to hope for, they perceived a Canoe at a Distance, which proved to be
that of the Indian, who had undertaken to carry them to Chiloe, he and his
Family being then on Board it. He made no Difficulty of coming to them; for it
seems he had left Captain Cheap and his People a little before to go a fishing,
and had in the mean Time committed them to the Care of the other Indian, whom
the Sailors had carried to Sea in the Barge. But when he found the Barge gone
and his Companion missing, he was extremely concerned, and could with
Difficulty be persuaded that the other Indian was not murdered; but, being at
last satisfied with the Account that was given him, he still undertook to carry
them to the Spanish Settlements, and (as the Indians are well skilled in
fishing and fowling) to procure them Provisions by the Way.

About the middle of March Captain Cheap and the Four that were left with him,
set out for Chiloe, the Indian having procured a Number of Canoes, and gotten
many of his Neighbors together for that Purpose. Soon after they embarked, Mr
Elliot the Surgeon died, so that there now remained only Four of the whole
Company. At last, after a very complicated Passage by Land and Water, Captain
Cheap, Mr. Byron, and Mr. Campbel, arrived in the Beginning of June at the
Island of Chiloe, where they were received by the Spaniards with great
Humanity; but, on Account of some Quarrel among the Indians, Mr. Hamilton did
not get there till two Months after. Thus, above a Twelvemonth after the Loss
of the Wager ended this fatiguing Peregrination, which by a Variety of
Misfortunes diminished the Company from Twenty to no more than Four, and those
too brought so low, that, had their Distresses continued but a few Days longer,
in all Probability none of them would have survive^. For the Captain himself
was with Difficulty recovered; and the rest were so reduced by the Severity of
the Weather, their Labor, and their Want of all kinds of Necessaries, that it
was wonderful how they supported themselves so long. After some Stay at Chiloe,
the Captain and the Three who were sent to Valparaiso, and thence to St. Jago,
the Capital of Chili, where they continued above a Year: But on the Advice of a
Cartel being settled betwixt Great Britain and Spain, Captain Cheap, Mr. Byron,
and Mr. Hamilton, were permitted to return to Europe on board a French Ship.
The other Midshipman, Mr. Campbel, having changed his religion, whilst at St.
Jago, chose to go back to Buenos Airs with Pizarro and his Officers, with whom
he went afterward to Spain on board the Asia; and there having failed in his
Endeavors to procure a Commission from the Court of Spain, he returned to
England, and attempted to get reinstated in the British Navy; and has since
published a Narration of his Adventures, in which he complains of the Injustice
that had been done him, and strongly disavows his ever being in the Spanish
Service: But as the Change of his religion, and his offering himself to the
Court of Spain, (though not accepted) are Matters which, he is conscious, are
capable of being incontestably proved; on these two Heads, he has been entirely
silent."

After Capt. Cheap's Arrival as above related, on reading an Advertisement in
the News-Paper, I found there was an Order for all the Officers and People of
the Wager that were in England to repair on board Admiral Steward, in order to
give their Depositions in for a Court Martial, to be held concerning the Loss
of his Majesty's Ship the Wager. I being then in London, sent into their
Lordships to acquaint them that on reading the Advertisement, I was going to
Portsmouth, in order to comply with their Directions. I was answered by one of
the Messengers, it was very well. The next Day being on the Royal Exchange, a
Gentleman which was one of the Procters of Doctors-Commons, asked me what News
now our Captain was come home? I told him I was going to Portsmouth to the
Court Martial: He then asked me if I knew nothing more than the Advertisement
for the Court Martial? I told him no; at which he told me, that the Monday
before the Advertisement was published, there were four Messengers dispatched
from the Marshal of the Admiralty, in order to take up the Lieutenant,
Boatswain, Myself and Carpenter. On this I replied, if that is Fact, I will go
and deliver my self up to the Marshal here in Town; finding me ^ix'd in my
resolution, he desired me to go and dine at the Paul's-Head Tavern in St.
Paul's Churchyard, where the Deputy Marshal was to dine that Day, accordingly
I went, and after Dinner applied to him, desiring to know his Opinion in regard
to the Officers of the Wager, as their Captain was come home; for that I had a
near relation which was an Officer that came in that Longboat to the Brazil,
and it would give me Concern if he should suffer: His Answer was, that he
believed we should be hanged; to which I replied, for God's Sake for what, for
not being drowned? And is a Murderer at last come Home to be their Accuser? I
have carefully perused the Journal, and cannot conceive that they have been
guilty of Piracy, Mutiny, not any Thing else to deserve it. It looks to me, if
so, that their Adversaries have taken up Arms against the Power of the
Almighty, for delivering them. At which he said, Sir, they have been guilty of
such Things to Captain Cheap whilst a Prisoner, that I believe the Gunner and
Carpenter will be hanged, if no Body else. As I was not known to him, on these
Words, I told him, then I was one of the Men that must suffer, for that I was
the unfortunate Gunner of the Wager: After he was convinced, he told me, I was
then become his Prisoner; he had me to his House, where I was confined until
the rest of the Officers were brought up to Town, which, as soon as they came
up, he wrote to their Lordships to inform them, that he had us all in Custody;
but that I had delivered my self up to him here in Town; desiring their
Lordships farther Directions concerning us. The Answer received was, to send us
to Portsmouth and there to deliver us up on Board Admiral Steward, to take a
receipt, and to take particular Care that the Gunner and Carpenter did not make
their escape. After on Board of Admiral Steward, we were told we were to be
hanged, nay, not a Letter came from any of our Friends, but there were these
Words mentioned, you are to be hanged! When the Captain came down to
Portsmouth, some of my Friends waited on him, desiring to know what he had to
allege against us? His Answer was, Gentlemen, I have nothing to say for nor
against the Villains, until the Day of Trial, and then it is not in my Power to
be off from hanging them. This Expression occasioned the whole Place to believe
it would be so. On the Sunday following we were had up ^o Prayers, where there
was a great Congregation, the Text was taken out of the Psalms, Them that go
down to the Deep, and occupy their Business in great Waters, see the Works of
the Lord.

In the Latter Part of this Sermon, these Words were applied; Men should not
feed themselves up in vain Notions or Expectations of a reprieve or Pardon, for
how often are Men deceived even at their last Moments? And Men that have seen
so many Providence of the Divine Being, it is not to be doubted but they are
prepared, etc.

Hearing this Sermon gave us some reason to think, that we were to fall by the
Violence of Power, contrary to the Laws of our Country. In the Evening of the
same Day we were informed by the Master and Gunner of the said Ship, that a
certain Gentleman had sent Word that we might have the Privilege of Pen, Ink
and Paper until the Day of Trial, which was to be on the Tuesday following, and
that he had made a resolution, that no Man after Sentence of Death should be
indulged with it on any Account.

All this we imagined was done on purpose to intimidate us, to retract from the
Truth which was published to the World: But our great, good and just God
supported and strengthened our Faith to bear with these Insults from Men. The
next Day in the Morning came on Board the Judge Advocate, in order to take our
Depositions for Trayl. When I was sent for, I was asked for a Deposition
concerning the Loss, of His Majesty's Ship the Wager; I made Answer, Sir, I am
surprised that you should offer to ask me for a Deposition whilst a Prisoner.
Sir, this is not the first, but the second Time to your Knowledge, that I have
been confined on this very Occasion; I always thought, or at least the Laws of
my Country tell me, that when a Man is a Prisoner, he must be accused; and I
take my Accuser to be Captain Cheap, expecting you was come here on purpose to
have given me his Charge, to prepare myself for Trial against him. The
Marshal's Answer was, Sir, this Court Martial is only to know how the Ship was
lost, therefore you must give me your Deposition in Regard to it. I answered,
Sir, that is made mention of in a very particular Manner in the Journal that is
published, and by the Truth of which Book I stand or fall. He made Answer, Sir,
that does not avail, you must give it us from under your own Hand Writing, I
replied, if I do, Sir, I must take it from the Journal; which I did. The next
Day came on the Trial, where Captain Cheap alleged the Loss of the Ship on
Lieutenant Robert Beans by not setting the Main-top-sail, and letting go the
Anchor, according to his Orders. However it was proved by some of the Officers
there, the Impossibility of it. After being examined about the Loss of the
Ship, was ordered by the Court to withdraw; some time after was ordered into
Court again, where was read, We do Honorably acquit Captain David Cheap, with
the Rest of his Officers, from the Loss of His Majesty's Ship the Wager,
excepting Lieutenant Robert Beans, who has disobeyed his Captain's Orders, by
not setting the Main-top-sail, and letting go the Anchor, as ordered; however,
in Regard to his Hardships and Misfortunes, do also acquit him with a Reprimand
from the Court.

In this Day's Proceedings we beheld the great and glorious Power of the
Almighty, in plead-our Cause, and defending us from falling by the Violence of
Men. In about a Week's time after, I went to London, and writ unto their
Lordships for Wages, receiving no Answer, applied to some of their Lordships in
Person, one of which was pleased to ask me if I was not one of the Men that
published the Book? I made Answer, I was; to this he replied, How dare you
presume to touch a Gentleman's Character in so public a Manner as you have
done? Do you think that Captain Cheap has nothing to say in Vindication of his
Character? He will no doubt call you to an Account for it: We have not heard as
yet, what he has to Charge you with, therefore no Wages, nor any Thing else can
be done for you, unless a Hearing from him. I made Answer, My Lord, I was
honorably acquitted with him, and the Book that is published has put it out of
the Power of Captain Cheap to allege any Thing against us. His Lordship
answered, I wish you may clear your Point in it.

The next Morning I delivered a Letter to his Lordship, as follows,

My Lord,
AS your Lordship's Goodness was pleased to tell me Yesterday, that no Wages
could be paid, nor any Thing else done for me, until a Hearing from Captain
Cheap; therefore do most humbly pray and beseech your Lordship; to intercede
with their Lordships, if there is to be a second Trial, that I may not be kept
in Suspense, being prepared for every Thing that Captain Cheap has to allege
against me; praying Leave to subscribe myself,

Your Lordships most dutiful and Obedient humble Servant, J. B.


On this Letter their Lordships were pleased to order the Wages to be paid to
the Time the Ship was lost.

I take this Opportunity, to recommend to the candid reader, the perusal of
that excellent Book, entitled, The Christian Pattern, or, The Imitation of Jesus
Christ, by Thomas a Kempis; which Book I brought with me through the various
Scenes, Changes, and Chances of the Voyage, and Providence made it, the Means
of comforting me. One Thing more, I pray to recommend to the Natives of N.
America, who are troubled with so many terrible Gusts of Wind, Thunder and
Lightning, being convinced (notwithstanding I have heard several say to the
contrary) that they must have a panick Fear, which, whether they have or not,
let me desire that they would make use of this short Prayer.

O God! most Mighty, O Lord! most Holy, and most merciful Father, Thou most
worthy Judge eternal, suffer us not, at our last Moments, for any Pains of
Death, to depart from Thee. These Words, sincerely used, will bring a Man's
Thoughts home to his Maker.

Shortly after receiving the Wages for the Wager, I was made Master of the
Royal George Cutter, employed in his Majesty's Service. I think it my Duty to
make public the following Order, in order to convince some People in the
World, that I was not thought altogether unworthy to serve, giving full
Satisfaction to the Gentlemen my Employers. This Cutter was about seventy Tuns,
had 60 Men, 10 Carriage Guns, 1^ Swivels, and rowed with 18 Oars.

Admiralty Office 11th July, 1746. Mr. Bulkeley, Master of the Royal George
Cutter; Sir,
I HAVE received and read to My Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty your
Letter of Yesterday's Date, representing that the Royal-George Cutter has been
ready for the Sea some Time, and am commanded by their Lordships to signify
their Direction to you to proceed with her to Plymouth, and on your Arrival
there, to apply to Commissioner Vanbrugh for further Orders.

I am your Servant, C. Osborn, d.

Notwithstanding my thus being appointed to the Command of the said Cutter,
yet, I afterward, upon maturely considering it, declined the Service; she
being too small to bear the Sea; which was verified in her Cruise, for she
foundered in the Bay of Biscay, and every Man in her was drowned.

About this Time arrived in England Samuel Cooper, John Andrews, and Isaac
Morris, three of the Men left on the Coast of Patagonia, as mentioned Page 160
the Narrative they gave of their Sufferings, is as follows:

A NARRATIVE of the Distresses, etc. of Eight of the Crew of the Long Boat, who
were left on Shore by the Lieutenant of the Wager on an uninhabited Part of
Patagonia, mentioned in this Book, Page 160, and taken from the Account of
Isaac Morris (one of the Men) who arrived in England, July, 1746. ON the 14th
of January, 1741-2, the Wind blew hard at E. S. E. and we saw our Vessel
stretching further off, and soon after we received, in a scuttled Cask, a few
Necessaries, with Ammunition, and a Letter See p. 162, for the Reasons for
leaving these unhappy Men ashore.
to acquaint us of the risque they should run in lying near the Shore, and that
they were obliged to stand farther off for their own Safety till the Weather
should be more favorable. Next Morning we expected they would have stretched
in for the Land; but, to our great Surprise, we saw the Schooner with her
Ensign hoisted at the Topping-lift, and under Sail from us.

The dismal Apprehension we were under at such an unexpected Stroke, appeared
plainly in our Countenances, and are much easier to be imagined than described.
We found ourselves on a wild desolate Part of the World, fatigued, sickly, and
destitute of Provisions. It Is true we had Arms and Ammunition, and, whilst that
lasted, made a tolerable Shift for a Livelihood. The nearest inhabited Place we
knew of was Buenos-Ayres, about three hundred Miles to the N. W. but at present
we were in a very poor Condition to undertake such an hazardous Journey, being
so miserably reduced by our tedious Passage through the Streights of Magellan.
Nothing remained but to commit ourselves to kind Providence, and make the best
of our melancholy Situation, till we had recruited ourselves.

We were in Number eight who were thus abandoned by our Crew, for whose
Preservation we risqued our Lives, in swimming ashore for Provisions. Our Names
were Guy Broadwater, Samuel Cooper, Benjamin Smith, John Duck, Jos. Clinch,
John Andrews, John Allen, and myself. After deliberating upon our unhappy
Circumstances, and comforting each other with imaginary Hopes, we came to a
resolution of taking up our Quarters on the Beach where we landed, till we
should grow strong enough to undergo the Fatigue of a Journey to Buenos-Ayres.
The Weather being very favorable, we took up our Lodging in a Trench near the
Seaside, quite exposed, without any Covering but the Heavens. Here we stayed
about a Month, during which Time we lived upon Seal, which were very plenty,
and which we knocked down with Stones after we had cut off their retreat, by
getting between them and the Sea. Here was likewise plenty of fresh Water, from
a small Spring which rose out of the Trench; so that, at the Month's End, we
had pretty well recovered ourselves, and concluded upon laying in a Stock of
Provisions for our Journey to Buenos-Ayres.

Having provided ourselves each with a Knapsack, which we made of Seal-skin, in
the best Manner we could, we put into it as much dried Seal as we could carry,
and their Bladders we filled with Fresh Water, which served us for Bottles. We
took our Muskets and Ammunition with us, and, thus accoutred, we set out on our
Journey about the Middle of February; and, that we might proceed with the more
Certainty, we were determined to keep close to the Seaside till we should come
to the Mouth of the River Plate. The first two Days we traveled about sixty
Miles, but could meet with no fresh Water, besides what we brought with us, the
Country being scorched with Drought, and the rains not yet set in. Our Water
being near expended, we were afraid to proceed, lest we should perish for want
of more; so, after a few Debates, we agreed to return back to our old Quarters,
and wait till the rainy Season. We were two Days and a half on our return,
after which we employed ourselves in building a Sort of Hut under a Cliff
adjoining the Seaside, to secure us from the Inclemencies of the Weather. Here
we tarried three Months, during which Time our Food was Seals and Armadillos,
which was the only Provision to be met with here, except Sea-weed, which we
sometimes made use of with our Meat instead of Bread. The Seal here differ from
those which I have seen in other Parts, both in Size and Make. The Males are
the Bigness of a good Calf; their Neck is shaggy; their Head and Face is
somewhat like a Lion's. The Females are like Lionesses before, but their Hair
is smooth all over like an Horse's, whereas the Male is smooth only on his
hinder Parts. From the hinder Part grow two large Fins like Feet, and two more
out of the Breast, by Means of which they can climb rocks and Precipices, though
they delight chiefly to lie asleep near the Shore. Some are fourteen Feet long,
and very fat; but in general they are about eight Feet: The Flesh of the young
ones is almost as white as Lamb, and tolerable good Eating. From the Shoulders
to the Tail they grow tapering like Fish; and when the Females give suck to
their Young they sit upon their Fins, which grow out of their hinder Part.
Their Hair is of different Colors, looking very sleek when they come first out
of the Sea.

The Armadillo is as big nearly as a small Sucking-Pig, the Body of it pretty
large. It is enclosed in a thick Shell, which guards all its Back, and comes
down on both Sides, meeting under the Belly, leaving room for the four Legs;
the Head is small, with a Nose like a Hedgehog, and a pretty long Neck, which
it thrusts out before its Body when it walks, but on any Danger she draws it in
under the Shell, and, thrusting in her Feet, she lies stock-still like a Land
Turtle, and though you kick her about she will not move herself. The Shell is
jointed in the Middle of the Back, so that she can turn the fore Part of her
Body which Way she pleases; the Feet are like those of a Land Turtle, and it
has strong Claws, with which it digs Holes in the Ground, and burrows in them
like a rabbit. Its Flesh is very good Eating, and tastes much like a Turtle.

Nothing remarkable happened to us in these three Months. Our Provisions, such
as they were, were not very difficult to be procured, and we were supplied with
Firewood enough from a small Wood or Coppice about seven Miles from us. We
seldom failed of bringing home something every Night, and generally had a hot
Supper. We passed our Time as cheerful as poor Fellows in our Circumstances
could. But we knew we could not take up this Place for our settled Abode; and
there was no Likelihood of any Inhabitants near us, nor for many Miles round
could we perceive the least Traces of any ever having been there; and 'twas to
no Purpose to expect the Sight of any Vessel off at Sea; for, it being a deep
Bay, and shoal Water, no Ships ever put in there, unless forced by Stress of
Weather, and then they must be wrecked. Nothing remained for us but to make a
second Attempt for the river Plate; for, if we should march to the Inland
Country in quest of Inhabitants, possibly we should meet with insuperable
Difficulties in finding the Way back again to what I may call our Home; whereas
if we kept our Course along the Seashore we could not err. For which reasons
we resolved upon another Attempt by the same rout, and, having laid in our
Stock of Seal, Armadillos, and fresh Water, toward the latter End of May, we
set forward once more.

In three Days we traveled about seventy Miles; when toward Night, there came
on a violent Storm of rain, Thunder and Lightning, which continued the whole
Night: We had a plain open Country, and no Place of Shelter could be found; we
had nothing to cover us but a Seal-skin Jacket, were half dead with Cold, and
afraid how our Provisions would hold out; for we met with no Supplies of any
Kind by the Way. To proceed farther was only lengthening our Journey back
again, which we feared, would be the Consequence at last, even though we should
still push on. There had been the strictest Harmony and Goodnature between us
till now; but now we were like to have disagreed even to parting. Some were for
pushing forward, be the Event what it might; and 'twas with Difficulty they
were persuaded not to divide. However, upon a representation of the great
Distance we were as yet from the Mouth of the river, and the Improbability of
meeting with Supplies of Provision by the Way, our Debates ended, and we
jointly concluded on making the best of our Way back to our Hut, having been a
second Time disappointed in our Attempt.

After being arrived at our old Quarters, we began to consult what Measures to
take for our Security from the Inclemencies of the Weather, and to provide for
our Subsistence, till it should please God, one Way or other, to deliver us out
of this Melancholy Situation. In order to avoid Disputes about the laborious
Part of getting Provisions, we agreed to divide ourselves into two Parties, who
were, alternately, to provide for the Whole: Four were appointed to scour the
Country one Day, and the other four the next. And we had bound ourselves by an
Oath never to quit each other, unless obliged by a superior Force; for though we
had as yet seen no Footsteps of Inhabitants, we could not be certain there were
none on this Part of the Globe. We had killed such a Number of Seal, that they
now became very shy of us, and had lived upon them so long that we were almost
surfeited; yet there was hardly any thing else to be met with. We saw a great
Number of wild Dogs, but could never come near enough to kill any; though now and
then we chanced to shoot a Puppy, which, as it was change of Diet, we thought
delicious Fare. We saw also some Deer, but could contrive no Method to take
them. One Day in our rambles, we met with a Litter of young Puppies: they were
but three, and seemed to be about two Months old, and taken Shelter in a Hole
of one of the Sand-hills. We took 'em out, and brought 'em home to our Hut.
Having discovered that these Puppies were whelped in Holes like those of
rabbits but larger, we went all out the next Day in quest of more, and had the
good Luck to find three Litters, in Number thirteen, which we carried home with
us, designing if possible, to bring them up tame. We fed them with Broth made
of Seals, and sometimes with the Flesh minced small; and they afterward became
very serviceable to us. Each of us had his Brace of Dogs, which were brought up
under as much Command as an English Spaniel, nor would they leave us to
associate with the wild Ones; they often supplied us with Armadillos, and once
they killed us a Deer. Being one Day hunting, we saw some wild Hogs, with their
Young; our Dogs pursued them, and took two of the Young, which we saved alive;
and we shot one of the old Ones, which afforded us many dainty Suppers. The
young ones proved to be a Boar and a Sow, which was very fortunate, and we
designed to rear them for Breeding, lest we should be obliged to a long
residence in this desolate Country. We brought them up very tame, insomuch that
they followed our Dogs when ever we went a hunting; and at Night both Dogs and
Pigs, took up their Lodging with us in our Hut.

For the present our Condition seemed tolerable; nay, we thought ourselves in
very comfortable Circumstances: We wanted for nothing, and, if we could have
confined our Thoughts to present Enjoyments, our Situation was very agreeable.
But our Views were farther, and the Fears of what might happen frequently
struck a Damp on our Pleasures. Winter was now approaching; we had the
Inclemencies of the Season to guard against, and if possible, a Stock of
Provisions to be laid up against future Emergencies. but we could not be much
beforehand with Provisions, having no Salt to cure them, and at present not Sun
enough to dry them; for with Winter came on continual Storms, with rains,
insomuch that some Days we could not stir out of our Hut.

'Twas now more than seven Months since the Longboat left us. Winter came on
very fast, and we were but badly secured from the Severity of the Weather. We
resolved immediatety to put our Habitation in Order, and to secure our Hut in
the best Manner we could. Accordingly it was agreed that six should stay at
home next Day to prepare Materials, and two only to go out after Provisions,
the Lot (...) upon myself and John Duck, to go ab^^^d: All the Game we could
meet with w^^e three Armadillos, tho's we traveled many Miles. 'Twas so dark
before we returned, that we despaired of finding our Hut, and were like to have
taken up our Lodging in the open Plain, if our Comrades had not come out in
quest of us, and, by making a Fire, directed us toward them. After we had
broiled our Game, and fed heartily, about Twelve we went to sleep. But, about
Two in the Morning, a violent Storm, with rain, Thunder, and Lightning, threw
down Part of the Cliff upon us, under which we had built our Hut, and was very
near proving fatal to us all; but, through Providence, none were hurt. With
Daylight came on tolerable Weather; and now the first Thing we had to do was
to rebuild our Hut. We immediately went to the Coppice where we used to seek
our Firewood, in order to fell some Poles. As we had but one Hatchet betwixt
us, one only could fell them, and the rest of us brought them out and bundled
'em. We had cut several, and were bundling them, when we saw Jos. Clinch
running out of the Wood, and crying, Lord have Mercy upon us, here is a great
Tiger. We were in the utmost Consternation; for having been frequently there
before, and never once seeing any Footsteps of Wild Beasts, we came without our
Arms, suspecting no Danger from that Quarter. We all took to our Heels, and
soon saw him running out of the Wood in Pursuit of us. When he was come within
twenty Yards of us, finding it impossible to escape him, we all turned toward
him, clapping our Hands, and making a loud Holo, in order to frighten him,
which had the desired Effect; for he immediately sat back on his Tail, gazing
at us. What to do we knew not, whether 'twas best to fly, or wait for his
turning; but Fear prevailed, and we walked gently off, without his pursuing us.
Next Day we all went with our Muskets in Chase of him, but could not meet with
him. We brought home our Poles, and fitted up our Hut in the best Manner we
could, sufficient to guard us from the rain.

About three Weeks after, when we were hunting on the Plain, about four Miles
from home, we saw a Lion couched on the Ground, watching his Prey, as we
imagined, it being close by a wild Cat's Hole. We joined close together in a
Body, with our Muskets ready; and Jos. Clinch fired a Ball at him at twenty
Yards Distance, resting his Piece on my Shoulder, but missed him: The Lion took
no Notice of the report of the Gun, nor stirred from his Posture. He charged a
second Time, ours being kept in readiness in Case he should advance toward us;
he fired, and shot him in the right Shoulder; he fell on his Back, and we ran
to him, and knocked him in the Head with the Bones of a dead Horse which lay
near him. We carried him to our Hut, dressed his Heart and Part of his ribs;
but 'twas very indifferent Eating.

Finding ourselves beginning to be surrounded with wild Beasts, and every Day
and Night in continual Danger (for we now seldom went abroad without meeting
some Beast of Prey; this being, I suppose, the Time of Year when they take
their Haunts toward the Seacoast), we determined to make another Push for our
Deliverance, and try our Fortune once more in an Expedition to Buenos Airs. In
order hereto we provided ourselves Shoes and Jackets of Seal-skins, and made
ourselves Knapsacks of the same to carry our Provender. The Weather was set in
fair, and we were fully determined to lay in such a Stock of Provisions as
should last us to the End of our Journey, if we should be a Month in performing
it. To this End we divided ourselves into two Parties; four of us were to go to
the rocks for Seal, and the other four to hunt on the Plain. Accordingly we set
out early in the Morning: 'twas my Lot, with Sam. Cooper, John Andrews, and
John Duck, to go to the rocks. Our usual Way in killing Seal being with Stones
or Clubs, we never carried our Muskets with us, we had been out all Day, and
killed three; and in the Dusk of the Evening, when we were got within a Stone's
Cast of our Hut, I perceived our Dogs very busy at a small Distance, wagging
their Tails in a very fondling Manner. Being ahead of my Companions, I passed
on without much regarding it, thinking they had lighted on a dead Colt. But
when I came to the Hut, I was quite confounded: The Hut was rifled, and all our
Necessaries taken away. In the utmost Consternation I ran back to my Comrades,
whom I saw standing where I had left the Dogs: Seeing me running eagerly
toward them, they cried out, What Is the Matter, Isaac? I told them our Hut was
pulled down, and every thing taken away. Ay, said they, and something worse has
happened; for yonder lie poor Guy Broad-water and Ben. Smith murdered. 'Twas a
most shocking Sight: One had his Throat cut and the other was stabbed in the
Breast; they were hardly cold, so we thought the Murderers could not be far
off. And we were under no small Apprehension of sharing a like Fate. We went to
the Hut to inspect more narrowly, and found every thing taken away; our Powder,
Ball, and Muskets gone, the Fire extinguished, and not the least Utensil left.
Where to go or what to do we knew not. We durst not trust ourselves another
Night on this fatal Spot, and yet were afraid to venture farther. At last we
came to a resolution of going to the next sandy Bay, about a Mile off, and take
up our Quarters there for that Night: But, when there, we could find no
Shelter, not so much as a Cliff to lie under; so were obliged to return to our
old Place, and pass the Night there, happen what would. Next Morning the Dogs
which belonged to our Comrades stood on the Top of the Cliff barking at us, and
would not come down, though we called them by their Names; and 'twas with
Difficulty we enticed them down in the Evening. What became of Jos. Clinch and
John Allen we knew not, nor could we afterward learn any Account of them: What
seemed most probable to us was, that the Indians had carried them off, and
murdered the other two, who possibly might make some resistance, as we had all
agreed to do, in Case we should be attacked; but, if so, we might probably have
expected to have found some or other of their Enemies killed, as our People had
Firearms with them. And it was impossible it could be the result of a Quarrel
amongst themselves, from the Manner of their Death; for one was stabbed, and
the other had his Throat cut, both very plainly done with a Knife, an
Instrument which none of us had the Possession of. We buried 'em in the the
best Manner we could, by scraping away the light Sand with our Hands two Feet
deep, and raising a Bed of Sand over the Corpses.

This was the most afflicting Stroke of any we received since our residence in
this unhappy Country. I will not pretend to describe the Horrors we felt; the
compassionate reader will paint our Distress in his Imagination in stronger
Colors than can be described by Words. To see four of our Companions snatched
from us suddenly we knew not how, ourselves deprived of our Arms and Utensils,
left without Fire, or any Method of procuring it, expecting every Moment to
share their Fate, or to be starved to Death, filled us with unspeakable Terrors.

In this melancholy State the only thing that remained to be done was
immediately to quit this unhappy Place, and make one Attempt more for Buenos
Airs. We had no Time to lose, but instantly set about tearing up the Seal in
small Pieces, raw as it was, with which we filled our Knapsacks, and their
Bladders we filled with Water, lest we should find none on our Journey. Having
furnished ourselves with as much Provision as we could carry, we set forward on
our Journey, with our sixteen Dogs and two Pigs; praying the Almighty to be our
Guide. We kept close along the Sea Coast, as we had done before, by which Means
we could not miss the River Plate; where when we should arrive our Design was
to travel along the Side of that river till we should come to some inhabited
Place: A Scheme easy enough in Imagination, but in Practice attended, as we
found, with insuperable Difficulties.

The Sea Coast all along is a plain sandy Beach; on the Land Side are here and
there very high Sand-hills: In the Valleys of those Hills we reposed ourselves
at Night. On the Beach we sometimes found some Cockles, which the Sea had
washed in; these were a great Dainty to us. We met with Part of the Wreck of a
large Ship which was drove upon the Beach, particularly a Man of War's
Gangboard, and a Piece of Plank marked fifteen Foot. In the Valleys of the
Sand-hills was Plenty of Water, which had been ponded up after the rains; and
we frequently met with dead Fish thrown in upon the Beach; so that we had a
Variety of raw Meat to feed upon. We also found by the Seaside a very large
dead Whale which was a Feast for our Dogs and Pigs, and at a little Distance a
Parcel of fine Whale-bone.

At the End of ten Days we made the Cape of the river, having traveled very
hard every Day, and met with tolerable Weather, but when we got there we found
a Multitude of small rivers and muddy Swamps to obstruct us. We swam over
several of them, with our Knapsacks across our Shoulders; and when Night came
on we covered ourselves with the rushes, but were almost devoured by Musketoes.
Next Day we made several Attempts to proceed farther, but found it impossible
to accomplish our Journey; the farther we went the greater Difficulties we met
with. We were several times in Danger of being suffocated, the Bog often
sinking us to the Shoulders; so that, after many fruitless Attempts to proceed,
we found we had no remedy left but to tread back the melancholy Path, and
return to our old Place of rendezvous; which we performed in less than ten Days.

At our return we were afraid to ramble far abroad, having neither Arms nor
Ammunition to defend ourselves from the Wild Beasts. Our two Pigs maintained us
near a Fortnight, and afterward we were obliged to live upon some of our
trusty Dogs; but this raw Way of feeding, which continued three Months longer,
brought us into an ill State of Health. About a Quarter of a Mile from our Hut
we found a dead Horse, of which now and then we took a Morsel, by Way of
Change; and could we have got Fire to dress it, the Variety would have been
agreeable enough. Notwithstanding our Fears, Necessity compelled us to go
abroad in Search of other kind of Provisions, and sometimes we had the good
Fortune to bring home an Armadillo.

One Morning we found the Trunk of a large Tree, and imagined 'twas not
impossible, with the Help of the Skins of Seal and Horses, to make a Sort of a
Boat with it, which might serve to convey us along Shore to the river Plate.
But we had no kind of Tool to use. J. Duck recollected that about eleven Months
before, at the End of our first Attempt for Buenos Airs, he threw away his
Musket, it being a very indifferent one, and not worth the trouble of bringing
home, having enough besides for our Use. We proposed to go in Search of it,
which if we could find might serve to make a Hatchet, Acoordingly we furnished
ourselves with some ra^ Seal and Water, went, and found the Musket, though above
sixty Miles. On our return home we found several Ostriches Eggs, about half
buried in the Sand, which was a refreshing Meal to us (though we never met with
any of the Birds.) When we brought it home (...) beat half the length of the
Barrel flat with Stones, and whetted an Edge to it against a rock, the other
Half served for the Handle, and it made a tolerable Hatchet; at least what
would have served instead of one, if Providence had not put an End to our
Design in the following Manner.

Two Days after we had finished our Hatchet, it being my Turn to stay in the
Hut, my three Comrades went to a Place which we called the Long Point in Search
of Provisions. Toward Evening I walked out to see if they were returning;
when, to my Astonishment, I discovered about a Dozen of Horses galloping down
the sandy Bay toward our Hut, and, as they came nearer, I plainly saw Men on
their Backs, and that they were Indians. 'Twas in vain to fly; I imagined
nothing but Death approaching, and prepared to meet it with all the resolution
I could muster up. I ran toward them, and fell on my Knees, begging my Life
with all the Signs of Humility I could make; when I heard a Voice saying, Don't
be afraid Isaac! we are all here. This revived me. The Indians alighted, and
whilst some were intent on examining the Hut, others stood with drawn Knives,
ready to dispatch us in case we made any resistance. When they had satisfied
there Curiosity they gave three confused Shouts, and immediately made us get up
behind them, and carried us away a few Miles in from the Seashore to the S. W.
where were about a Dozen more of their Companions, with upwards of four hundred
Horses which they had taken in Hunting. They treated us with great Humanity,
killed a Horse for us, kindled a Fire, and roasted a Part of it, which to us,
who had been three Months eating raw Flesh, was a most delicious Entertainment.
They also gave each of us a Piece of an old Blanket to cover our Nakedness. I
was in great Danger, it seems, of being left alone; for when the Indians met
with my three Comrades, they were immediately for hurrying them away to their
Place of rendezvous, till, with Difficulty they were brought to understand, by
Signs, that there was one more belonging to them a little Way off; and then
guided them to the Hut, where I had the Happiness of being taken Prisoner with
them.

Next Morning we decamped from this Place, driving our Troop of Horse before
us. We traveled nineteen Days before we arrived at their next Place of
rendezvous, which. I imagine, was about two hundred Miles from our Hut to the
S. W. in a Valley between two very high Mountains, where was fine Pasture for
their Horses, and several small rivers of fresh Water, but very little Wood to
be seen for many Miles round. In this Valley were about a Dozen Indian Huts,
built with Poles and the Skins of Horses, inhabited by another Party of
Indians, with their Wives and Children, who gazed very earnestly on us, as though
they had never seen any White People before. Here we were bought and sold four
different Times for a Pair of Spurs, a Brass Pan, Ostriches Feathers, and such
like Trifles, which was the low Price generally set on each of us; and
sometimes we were played away at Dice; so that we changed Masters several Times
in a Day. In this Place we remained near a Month, by which Time the several
Parties of Indians had returned from their Hunting, and joined us, each Party
bringing the Horses they had taken in hunting, and mixing them all in the
common Stock; which were examined and told over by one of the Indians who
seemed to be a sort of a Captain over the rest, and they amounted to the Number
of fifteen Hundred and upwards, some of which were no way inferior to the best
of our European Breed.

After one Day's grand Feasting, we set out in a Body for their Chief Town,
where the King, or Captain, lived, with fifteen hundred String of Horses in our
Cavalcade. We were four Months in performing our Journey, and, by the Method of
our traveling, I believe it must be a thousand Miles from the Seacoast where
our Hut stood. In the Daytime we traveled, and at Night reposed ourselves in
their moveable Huts, which sheltered us from the Weather. Our constant Food was
Horseflesh, which some chose to eat raw, and others broiled or roasted; and,
as for Drink, we never failed of Water; for I found they were well acquainted
with every small rivulet, of which there are Numbers in the rout they took,
though a Stranger would hardly have found them.

At length we arrived to the End of our Journey, the Chief Town, where the King
lives; but our Masters who had made the last Purchase of us were carrying us
with them to their own Home (which we learnt afterward was about two hundred
Miles beyond the Town where the King resided) and had carried us some Miles;
when a Party of Horse came after us, and brought us back to the Capital, the
King claiming us as his Property. This Town consists of about 30 Huts, built,
in a low irregular Manner, with Poles and Horses Skins, surrounded with
Palisadoes, about three Foot Distance from each other. The Inhabitants, Men,
Women, and Children, were about fourscore. We were soon summoned to appear
before his Majesty, who received us in his Hut, sitting on the Ground, with a
Javelin on one Side of him, and a Bow and Arrows on the other, a loose Mantle
round his Waist, and a sort of Turret of Ostriches Feathers on his Head, and a
long reed Pipe in his Mouth, smoking. After paying our Obedience to him, he
began to ask us several Questions in Spanish, of which they all can speak a
little, which we soon let him know we understood a little of; enquired what
Countrymen we were, and how we came to this Country. We told him we were
Englishmen, lost in the South Sea, in an English Man of War, as we were going
to fight against our Enemies the Spaniards; that we were eight in Number who
were left on a desolate Part of the Continent; that one Evening, on our return
from getting Provision, we found two of our Companions murdered, and two more
carried off, on the Spot of Ground where we were taken, our Hut pulled down,
and every thing taken from us; which we supposed must be done by some of his
Countrymen. He then called three or four of his Men, and talked very earnestly
to them in their own Language. But it seems they knew nothing of the Affair, as
he told us; though he was pleased to assure us strict Enquiry should be made of
the other Parties which were out at the same Time. For I found by him, that he
sends out several different Parties every Spring from every different Town
under his Government, who take different routs, and sometimes join one another
accidentally on their return. But of this more hereafter. When he found we were
at War with the Spaniards, he expressed a great deal of Joy, and asked if we
were Great Men in our Country. We told him yes. He said the Spaniards were
great Enemies to them, had took away their Country from them, and drove them to
the Mountains. When he had done examining us, he ordered a Horse to be killed
immediately and dressed for us; and lodged us in his own Hut for that Night,
till we had one built for us, which was the next Day. Here we staid eight
Months, and wintered, during which Time we had frequently Snow five or six Feet
deep. Our Work was chiefly to fetch Wood and Water, and skin all the Horses
which they killed; and though we were their Slaves, we were treated very
humanely, and they would suffer no one to use us ill. There were four Spanish
Women in the Town, whom they had taken captive in a Skirmish near Buenos-Ayres;
and the King told us, with a Smile, he would give us each a Wife.

The Country where these Indians resided, as indeed the whole Coast of
Patagonia, is very fruitful in Pasture, and abounds with great Plenty of wild
Horses, and a few black Cattle, which are entirely neglected by the Indians;
Horseflesh being preferred by them for eating, before any other Kind of Flesh,
and what they constantly feed upon. It Is situated in a very healthy Climate,
and, if the Soil was cultivated, would certainly produce Plenty of all Kind of
Crain. They have likewise Plenty of Wood, though few or no Timber Trees, several
large Coppices growing all round the Country, though near the Seaside we see
nothing but a plain open sanddy Coast.

The Patagonian Indians, at least those in that Part of the Country where we
resided, were tall and well-made, being in general, from five to six Feet high,
good-natured and obliging to one another, and never see each other Want. Though
they have what they call a King, yet he seems to be only a Chief or Captain of
a Party; for, as they have no settled Abode, but live scattered throughout that
Part of the World in little Towns or Parties, each Party seems to have a Chief,
who profides over them like a Petty King. I never could observe any rules of
Government among 'em; but in a Drinking-bout King and Subjects are all alike.
Their King is distinguished from the rest by his being the biggest Man, and by
wearing a kind of Sash round his Waist. It Is true he has a Deference paid him
by his Subjects, and whatever he orders to be done is immediately performed,
being himself exempted from any kind of Work; but I never saw any Punishments
inflicted by him, nor any Quarrels among themselves, except when they get at a
Drinking-Feast, and then their Wives always took Care no ill Consequence should
follow, by putting every Weapon out of their Way, and especially taking Care of
their Knives. For which reason I imagine that in Liquor they are always
quarrelsome. One or two Instances of that Kind happened whilst we were among
them. Their Method of Feasting is this: They have in the Summer a Plenty of
small sweet Berries growing like our Whortle Berries, and when they have
procured a sufficient Quantity of them, they dig a Pit in the Ground, about
four Feet square, the Bottom and Sides of which they line with Horse Hides.
This Cask (if I may so call it) they half fill with these Berries, and then
fill it up with Water, which they stir well with Sticks, and afterward leave
it to ferment about forty eight Hours. They all sit round, smoking and
drinking, for a whole Night together, Women as well as Men, singing in their
Way, but more like shrieking Cries; and when drunk frequently proceed to Blows.

They seldom live long in one Place; for when their Horses have eat up the
Pasture in one Place, they remove their Town and all their Goods, which is soon
done, a few Miles from the Former; and this several Times in the Year; so that
they have no settled Place of Abode. They have scattered Habitations all over
the Country, and but few Huts together: The Town where their Chief resides has
three times the Number of Dwellings to any of the rest which I saw.

They seem to have some Notion of a Deity, and pay a sort of Worship to the Sun
and Moon; especially at every New Moon, they collect themselves in a Body, and
make a solemn Procession round the Town, one going before with a kind of Hoop
in his Hand, round which are tied little Brass Bells adorned with Ostriches
Feathers, which he would frequently swing round in his Hand; and then the whole
Company would make a most hideous Noise, which, I suppose, they designed for
Singing. This Ceremony usually lasted about half an Hour. This Method with
their Hoop and Bells is likewise used when any of them are sick or dying. A
white Flannel Cloth is hung up before the sick Person, and the Man with his
Hoops and Bells, who is generally one of his relations, comes to visit him; and
after a few Minutes Conversation, he leaves him, and walks several times round
the Hut, jingling his Bells, and talking aloud in a variety of Accents which we
could understand nothing of, but imagined he designed it for Prayers for his
sick Friend. When any of 'em dies, they soon bury him, generally the next
Morning. They roll the Dead Body in a Hide, with every Thing that belongs to
him, as Bows, Arrows, etc. and carry it, without any Ceremony, at some Distance
from the Town; where they throw it into a large round Pit, dug on purpose,
which they afterward fill up with Earth. Yet notwithstandind they have no
Ceremony at their Funeral, their Mourning for the Dead is very strict, which
the Friends of the Deceased observe for three Months; during which Time they
remove themselves at a Distance from any of the rest of the Houses, and
converse with nobody; but are supplied with Provisions from the whole Town, by
the King's Order, 'till the Time of Mourning is over. They seem to have some
Notion of the Devil, at least are afraid of Apparitions; for none of 'em will
stir out of his Hut, when dark, without Company. And one Night in particular we
heard a great Noise in the Town, like several Drums beating, which, the next
Day, we found to be some of the Indians beating the Sides of their Houses,
which were made of Horse-Skins, with large Sticks, in order to frighten away
the Devil.

Each Indian has but one Wife, and they live together in a very loving Manner.
When any of 'em lye-in, there is a Provision made for them different from what
they are accomodated with at another Time; for the Entrance of the Hut, which
at other Times is always open, is shut up with Horses-Skins as soon as the
Woman begins to be in Travail; and no one goes in till she comes out with the
Child in her Arms, which is presently wrapped up in a Sheep's Skin, and, instead
of a Bed or Cradle, is lain an a Machine somewhat like our Hand-barrow, the
Bottom of which is likewise covered with a Sheep's Skin. This is hung up by the
four Corners, and the Child swings forwards and backwards, instead of being
rocked in a Cradle, its Arms and Legs being fastened to this Engine by a Lash
of Horse-skin, to prevent its falling over. By this Method of Treatment, when
Children, the back Part of all the Indians Heads are very flat; for they never
lay them but on their Backs. Perhaps it may be owing to this likewise that
there is not a crooked Person amongst them. In two or three Hours after they
have lain-in they go about their usual Work. Every Morning they take all their
Children, young and old, and carry them to the next Brook or rivulet adjoining,
and plunge them naked under Water, even when the ground is covered with Snow;
by which Means they are hardened to run about naked, even in the Midst of
Winter. The Men wear Beads and little Bells round their Neck, Wrist, and small
of their Legs; and the Women adorn their long Hair with the same. For such
Trifles as these, together with Knives, Brass Pans, and such like, they
traffic their Hides with the Spaniards, when at Peace with them.

And now their Time for making the Hunting Voyage approaching, which they
continually do every Spring, and generally spend a whole Summer in taking their
wild Horses, we made great Intercession to go with them; but were given to
understand, that we must be sent farther into the Country, to remain with other
Indians till their return. But at last we prevailed, by assuring the Chief that
the English had Friends at Buenos Airs, who would make him very handsome
Satisfaction for us, and would redeem us at any Price he should put upon us.
This seemed to please him, and he then consented. We were at present about 1000
Miles from Buenos Airs; and their rout extends to the Eastern Coast of
Patagonia, home to the Sea, about an hundred Miles to the Southward of Buenos
Airs. When they set out, they carry with them every Thing belonging to them,
Women, Children, Houses, and all. These last are slung across the Horses, and
at Night taken down for sheltering themselves from the Weather. They take with
them a few Horses more than they ride, which serve for maintaining them till
their Hunting begins, which seldom happens till they have traveled seven or
eight Days.

And now the wished for Time was come, when we all set out in a Body, except
John Duck, whose Misfortune it was to be too near of a Complexion with those
Indians (for he was a Molat^o, born in London) for which reason he was sold by
the Chief to a Master farther up in the Country; where, I believe, he will end
his Days, there being no Prospect of his ever returning to England. We had
traveled ten or twelve Days before we had any wild Horses; but soon after
several Stragglers sell Victims to their Ingenuity. Their Method of taking them
is really astonishing, and worthy of a very particular Description. As they are
excellent Horsemen, and their Horses as fleet as the wild Ones, it is very
seldom they miss, though now and then an Accident of that Kind happens; but the
rider is looked upon with Contempt. They have two different Methods of taking
them, each of which I have seen them perform with incredible Dexterity. The
first is with a Lash of Horse Skins, about two Inches Broad, and fifty Feet
long, with a running Noose at one End of it. This Noose they hold in their
right Hand, and the other End in the Left, till they come within a few Yards of
the Beast, when they throw the Noose over his Head, even on full Speed, and
hold the other End fast in their Left Hand. The Beast is soon stopped and taken.
The other Method is with a narrow Strap of Horse-skin, about twelve Feet long,
to each End of which is fastened a round Ball of Iron, about two Pounds Weight.
When within Distance of their Game, they hurl one of the Balls several Times
round their Head, till they have got the proper Swing, and then throw it at the
Horse's Legs, parting with the Ball in their Left Hand at the same Time; which
seldom fails of entangling their Legs, and throwing them to the Ground. The
Horses thus taken are secured by some of the Company, whose Business is chiefly
to tie these Horses together in a String, and guard them. In a few Days they
become very tame. They are likewise very dextrous in killing Birds with these
Balls, and will throw them to a prodigious Height in the Air. This is what they
are trained up to from their Infancy, and are very expert at, even in their
Youth. These Iron Balls, fastened in the above Manner, are likewise their chief
warlike Weapons, next to their Bows and Arrows.

Being now arrived within an hundred Miles of Buenos Airs, we begged of him to
dispatch one of his Men to the Governor, to acquaint him of three English
Prisoners he had with him at such a Distance, and to ask if he would redeem us;
which he did. And the Messenger, on his return, brought him a certain Pledge
for fulfilling his Promise, which was a Gold-laced Waistcoat. Next Day we were
told to get ourselves ready to go to Buenos Airs, and that he and some of his
Men would go with us.

The Hopes of once more seeing our Fellow Christians filled us with Joy. We
were brought immediately before the Governor, who satisfied our Indian Prince,
and paid him his ransom, which was ninety Dollars, and a few Trifles, and then
dismissed him. We returned him our hearty Thanks for his Kindness toward us
during our abode with him; in which Time we were treated with greater Humanity,
than we afterward met with in our long Confinement on board the Spanish
Admiral Pizarro.

After we had passed Examination by the Governor, and had given him a full
Account of our past Misfortunes, we were for a short Time dismissed upon
Parole. And here I should be very ungrateful if I did not do Justice to the
President of the English Assiento House, Mr. Gray, by acknowledging that 'twas
entirely owing to his Compassion and kind Intercession with the Governor, that
we were thus redeemed from the Hands of the Indians, he offering to do it at
his own Charge. We were sent for several Times before the Governor, and
earnestly pressed to turn Catholics, and serve the King of Spain; but our Answer
was, we were Protestants, and true Englishmen, and hoped to die so. Many
tempting Offers were made to seduce us; but, thank God, we resisted them all.
When he found all his Efforts were of no Effect, we were sent as Prisoners of
War on board the Asia, which lay then at Monte Vedio, about thirty Leagues down
the river, waiting for Orders, and had lain there upwards of two Years. This
was the Spanish Admiral Pizarro's Ship, which, after an unsuccessful Attempt to
pass Cape Horn, in order to be in the South Seas with his Squadron before ours,
was, by tempestuous Weather, drove back, and obliged to put into the river
Plate, having lost near half her Crew; the Admiral having quitted her, and gone
over Land to Chili.

We were confined on board the Asia above a Year, with 16 other English
Prisoners, in which Time we were treated more like Slaves than Prisoners of
War. Our Business was to do all their nasty Work; to swa^ and clean the Decks,
fore and aft, every Morning; and, after the Work was done, were confined
between Decks, with a Centin over us, as though we had been Criminals, with a
poor Allowance of Victuals. In short, our Usage was so bad that we agreed with
the rest of the English Prisoners to attempt our Liberty, though at the risque of
our Lives. Accordingly one Night we escaped from our Guard, intending to swim
ashore, and travel to a Portuguese Settlement on the North Side of the river,
the Ship lying within a Quarter of a Mile of the Shore. Myself and one more got
safe to Land; the others were discovered before they got into Water. I was
quite naked; the other had a Shirt wrapped round his Head. Before we got
halfway to the Shore, a Gun was fired from the Ship to alarm the Town. We
traveled till Two in the Morning, and then lay down among the rushes. The
Weather being very frosty, our Feet swelled and full of Thorns, we could travel
no farther. Soon after Daylight we met with some Men on Horseback, belonging
to the Plantations, to whom we surrendered ourselves; and they took us behind
them to their House. The next Day we were carried from thence by some Soldiers,
who were sent in Pursuit of us, and were carried on board the Ship; where we
were put in the Stocks, Neck and Heels, Four Hours every Day for a Fortnight.

At length we were informed of the Admiral's Arrival at Buenos Airs, who soon
after came on board, and gave Orders for refitting the Ship in the best Manner
they could, being determined to carry her to Old Spain. But there was a geat
Deficiency of Hands, for which reason Orders were given to impress what Men
they could at Monte Vedio. These, with the 11 Indians whom they had four Months
before taken Prisoners in a Skirmish at a Distance from Buenos Airs, whom they
designed for their Row Galleys, were sent on board; and soon after I had the
Pleasure of seeing my Brother Midshipman Mr Campbell, who was lost in the Wager
with us, but choosing to follow the Fortune of Capt. Cheap, arrived with him at
Chili. He came by Land from Chili with some Officers belonging to the Spanish
Admiral, and arrived in March at Buenos Airs. The latter End of October
following, 1745, we set sail from Monte Vedio in the Asia bound for Spain.

Three Days after we sailed, an Affair happened on board, which was like to
have proved fatal to the whole Crew; for about Nine at Night, we were alarmed
with the Cry of a Mutiny; and so indeed it proved: But such a one as would
never have been suspected by any of the Ship's Crew, or perhaps credited by
Posterity, if such a Number of Persons were not still living to attest the
Fact. But, lest I should do Injustice to the Memory of such a surprising Event,
I shall beg Leave to relate it in the Language of Mr. Walters, assuring the
reader that I was a Witness to the whole Affair.

" Pizarro had not yet completed the Series of his Adventures; for when he and
Mendinuetta came back by Land from Chili to Buenos Airs, in the Year 1745,
they found at Monte Vedio the Asia, which near three Years before they had left
there. This Ship they resolved, if possible, to carry to Europe; and with this
View they refitted her in the best manner they could. But their great
Difficulty was to procure a sufficient Number of Hands to navigate her; for all
the remaining Sailors of the Squadron to be met with in the Neighborhood of
Buenos Airs, did not amount to an hundred Men. They endeavored to supply this
Defect by pressing and putting on board many of the Inhabitants of Buenos
Airs, besides all the English Prisoners then in their Custody, together with a
Number of Portuguese Smugglers, whom they had taken at different Times, and
some of the Indians of the Country. Among these last was a Chief and ten of his
Followers, who had been surprised by a Party of Spanish Soldiers about three
Months before. The Name of this Chief was Orellana. He belonged to a very
powerful Tribe which had committed great ravages in the Neighborhood of Buenos
Airs. With this motley Crew (all of them, except the European Spaniards,
extremely averse to the Voyage) Pizarro set sail from Monte Vedio, in the River
of Plate, about the beginning of November, 1745. And the native Spaniards,
being no Strangers to the Dissatisfaction of their forced Men, treated both
these, the English Prisoners, and the Indians, with great Insolence and
Barbarity; but more particularly the Indians: For it was common for the meanest
Officers in the Ship to beat them most cruelly, on the slightest Pretenses, and
oftentimes only to exert their Superiority. Orellana and his Followers, though in
Appearance sufficiently patient and submissive, meditated a severe revenge for
all these Inhumanities. As he conversed very well in Spanish (these Indians
having in Times of Peace, a good Intercourse with Buenos Airs) he affected to
talk with such of the English as understood that Language, and seemed very
desirous of being informed how many Englishmen there were on board, and which
they were. As he knew that the English were as much Enemies to the Spaniards as
himself, he had doubtless an Intention of disclosing his Purpose to them, and
making them Partners in the Scheme he had projected for revenging his Wrongs
and recovering his Liberty. But having sounded them at a Distance, and not
finding them so precipitate and vindictive as he expected, he proceeded no
further with them; but resolved to trust alone to the resolution of his ten
faithful Followers. These, it should seem, readily engaged to observe his
Directions, and to execute whatever Commands he gave them. And, having agreed
on the Measures necessary to be taken, they first furnished themselves with
Dutch Knives, sharp at the Point, which being the common Knives used in the
Ship, they found no Difficulty in procuring. Besides this, they employed their
Leisure in secretly cutting out Thongs from raw Hides, of which there were
great Numbers on board, and in fiting to each End of these Thongs the double
headed Shot of the small Quarter Deck Guns. This, when swung round their Heads,
according to the Practice of their Country, was a most mischievous Weapon, in
the Use of which the Indians about Buenos Airs are trained from their Infancy,
and consequently are extremely expert. These Particulars being in good
Forwardness, the Execution of their Scheme was perhaps precipitated by a
particular Outrage committed on Orellana himself. For one of the Officers, who
was a very brutal Fellow, ordered Orellana aloft, which being what he was
incapable of performing, the Officer, under Pretense of his Disobedience, beat
him with such Violence that he left him bleeding on the Deck, and stupefied for
some Time with his Bruises and Wounds. This Usage undoubtedly heightened his
Thirst for revenge, and made him eager and impatient till the Means of
executing it were in his Power; so that, within a Day or two after this
Incident, he and his Followers opened their desperate resolves in the ensuing
Manner.

"It was about Nine in the Evening, when many of the principal Officers were on
^he Quarter Deck, indulging in the Freshness of the Night Air; the Waist of the
Ship was filled with live Cattle; and the Forecastle was manned with its
customary Watch. Orellana and his Companions under Cover of the Night, having
prepared their Weapons, and thrown off their Trowsers and the more cumberous
Part of their Dress, came altogether on the Quarter Deck, and drew toward the
Door of the Great Cabin. The Boatswain immediately reprimanded them, and
ordered them to be gone. On this Orellana spoke to his Followers in his Native
Language; when four of them drew off, two toward each Gang-way, and the Chief
and the six remaining Indians seemed to be slowly quitting the Quarter Deck.
When the detached Indians had taken Possession of the Gang-way, Orellana placed
his Hands hollow to his Mouth, and bellowed out the War-Cry used by these
Savages, which is the harshest and most terrifying Sound known in Nature. This
hideous Yell was the Signal for beginning the Massacre: For on this they all
drew their Knives, and brandished their prepared double Headed Shot; and the
six, with their Chief, which remained on the Quarter Deck, immediately fell on
the Spaniards, who were intermingled with them, and laid near forty of them at
their Feet; of which about twenty were killed on the Spot, and the rest
disabled. Many of the Officers in the Beginning of the Tumult, pushed into the
great Cabin; where they put out the Lights, and barricadoed the Door; and of
the others, who had avoided the first Fury of the Indians, some endeavored to
escape along the Gangways into the Forecastle; but the Indians, placed there on
Purpose, stabbed the greatest Part of them as they attempted to pass by, or
forced them off the Gangways into the Waist: Others threw themselves
voluntarily over the Barricadoes into the Waist, and thought themselves happy
to lie concealed among the Cattle: But the greatest Part escaped up the Main
Shrowds, and sheltered themselves either in the Tops or rigging. And though the
Indians attacked only the Quarter Deck, yet the Watch in the Forecastle,
finding the Communication cut off, and being terrified by the Wounds of the few
who, not being killed on the Spot, had Strength sufficient to force their
Passage along the Gangways, and not knowing either who their Enemies were, or
what were their Numbers, they likewise gave all over for lost, and, in great
Confusion, ran up into the rigging of the Foremast and Bowsprit.

"Thus, these eleven Indians, with a resolution perhaps without Example,
possessed themselves, almost in an Instant, of the Quarter Deck of a Ship
mounting sixty six Guns, with a Crew of near five hundred Men, and continued in
peaceable Possession of this Post a considerable Time: For the Officers in the
Great Cabin (among whom were Pizarro and Mindinuetta) the Crew between Decks,
and those who had escaped into the Tops and rigging, were only anxious for
their own Safety, and were for a long Time incapable of forming any Project for
suppressing the Insurrection, and recovering the Possession of the Ship. It is
true, the Yells of the Indians, the Groans of the Wounded, and the confused
Clamours of the Crew, all heightened by the Obscurity of the Night, had at
first greatly magnified their Danger, and had filled them with the imaginary
Terrors which Darkness, Disorder, and an Ignorance of the real Strength of an
Enemy, never fail to produce. For as the Spaniards were sensible of the
Disaffection of their pressed Hands, and were also conscious of their Barbarity
to their Prisoners, they imagined the Conspiracy was general, and considered
their own Destruction as infallible; so that, it is said, some of them had once
taken the resolution of leaping into the Sea, but were prevented by their
Companions.

"However, when the Indians had entirely cleared the Quarter Deck, the Tumult
in a great measure subsided; for those who had escaped were kept silent by
their Fears, and the Indians were incapable of pursuing them, to renew the
Disorder. Orellana, when he saw himself Master of the Quarter Deck, broke open
the Arm-Chest, which, on a slight Suspicion of Mutiny, had been ordered there a
few Days before, as to a Place of the greatest Security. Here he took it for
granted he should find Cutlasses sufficient for himself and his Companions, in
the Use of which they were all extremely skilful; and with these, it was
imagined, they purposed to force the Great Cabin. But on opening the Chest,
there appeared nothing but Firearms, which to them were of no Use. There were
indeed Cutlasses in the Chest, but they were hid by the Fire Arms being laid
over them. This was a sensible Disappointment to them; and by this Tme Pizarro
and his Companions in the Great Cabin were capable of conversing aloud, through
the Cabin Windows and Portholes, with those in the Gun-room and between Decks;
and from hence they learnt that the English (whom they principally suspected)
were all safe below, and had not intermeddled in this Mutiny; and by other
Particulars they at last discovered, that none were concerned in it but
Orellana and his People. On this Pizarro and the Officers resolved to atta^^^
them on the Quarter Deck, before any of the Discontented on board should so far
recover their first Surprise as to reflect on the Facility and Certainty of
seizing the Ship, by a Junction with the Indians, in the present Emergency.
With this View Pizarro got together what Arms were in the Cabin, and
distributed them to those who were with him; but there were no other Firearms
to be met with but Pistols, and for these they had neither Powder nor Ball.
However, having now settled a Correspondence with the Gun-room, they lowered
down a Bucket out of the Cabin Window, into which the Gunner, out of one of the
Gun-room Ports, put a Quantity of Pistol Cartriges. When they had thus procured
Ammunition, and had loaded their Pistols, they set the Cabin Door partly open,
and fired some Shot among the Indians on the Quarter Deck, at first without
Effect; but at last Mendinuetta, whom we have often mentioned, ha^ the good
Fortune to shoot Orellana dead on the Spot. On which his faithful Companions,
abandoning all Thoughts of farther resistance, instantly leaped into the Sea;
where they every Man perished. Thus was the Insurrection quelled, and the
Possession of the Quarter Deck regained, after it had been full two Hours in
the Power of this Great and daring Chief, and his gallant and unhappy
Countrymen."

After this all was quiet; and the Admiral, finding that none of the English
were engaged in this Insurrection, for a few Days treated us with a little
Humanity, endeavoring to engage us, by large Promises of Preferment, to enter
into the Spanish Service. But finding nothing would work on us, we afterward
felt the Smart of his resentment by a severe Usage.

Nothing remarkable happened afterward, more than what commonly happens at
Sea, till we arrived at Concubene, a Harbor about Five Leagues to the South of
Cape Finisterre; which was the latter End of February, 1745-6.

We begged to be sent ashore as Prisoners of War, but were told we must go in
the Ship to the Groyne. Whereupon we all went in a Body on the Quarter Deck,
and told the Admiral, if he would not send us ashore, we would be no longer
Slaves on board. Next Day we were sent ashore, and confined fifteen Days in a
Prison, with an Allowance only of Bread and Water, and chained together as
Criminals, till the Ship sailed for the Groyne; when we were released from our
Dungeon, and guarded to the Groyne by Land with a File of Musketeers. Where,
as soon as we arrived, we were put into the Guard-Hous^ for two Days; from
whence we were sent to the Castle of St. Antonio, which is on an Island at the
Entrance of the Harbor; a Prison for Thieves and Felons. In this dismal Place
we were kept Fourteen Weeks, among the worst of Malefactors, till an Order came
from the Court of Spain to send us to Portugal; allowing us a Guide, and a Real
per Day.

In Eight Days we got to Oporto, and made Application to the English Consul,
who, after hearing the Hardships we had gone through, gave us each Three Days
Maintenance and a Quarter of a Moidore.

On April 28, 1746, we embarked on board the Charlotta Snow, Capt. Henry
Miller, bound for London, under Convoy of the York, and Folkstone Men of War,
and arrived at London on the 8th of July following: Three only of the Eight
left on the Patagonian Coast being so happy as to see once more their native
Country, viz. Samuel Cooper, John Andrews, and Myself." [ Here ends Morris 's
Relation.]

Two Years after this having some Inclination to settle in London, I sent a
Petition to the Lords of the Admiralty as follows.

To the Honorable the Principal Officers and Commissioners of his Majesty's
Navy.
Honorable Sirs,
HAVING served ever since the Year 1728 in the Royal Navy on board several of
the King's Ships, and in the Station of an Officer, and being now desirous to
enter into some Business in the City of London, and it being necessary to
produce a Certificate of the Time of my Servitude in the Navy, in order to my
obtaining the Freedom of the said City. I most humbly pray your Honors to
order the proper Clerk to write me out a Certificate accordingly, which will
infinitely oblige, Honorable Sirs,

Your most obedient Servant, J. Bulkeley.
15th Jan. 1749.
The Answer was,

To be complied with, if he is entitled to it. After getting this Answer, I
received the following Certificate, which entitles me to the Freedom of the
City of London, and of all incorporated Towns in the British Dominions.

Navy-Office, 20th January, 1749.
IT appears by the Books of this Office, that John Bulkeley is born in His
Majesty's Ships hereafter mentioned, the Time, and in the Quality there
expressed, being seven Years, six Months, one Week, and five Days.

Savage Mostyr
Ships Names Entry Quality Discharge Time Y. M. W. D. Nassau 20 Feb. 1728 Mas.
Mate 11 Jun. 1729 0 4 0 0 Solebay 2 Jun. 1729 Mas. Mate 29 Nov. 1729 0 6 0 3
Kinsale 19 Dec. 1729 Able 10 Apr. 1730 0 4 0 1 Winchelsea 12 May 1730 Able 15
Mar. 1730 0 11 0 0 Diamond 20 Apr. 1731 Able 14 July 1731 0 3 0 2 Cornwall 15
July 1731 Midshipm. 3 Jan. 1731 0 6 0 5 Lyme 1 Jan. 1732 Midshipm. 13 Jun. 1733
0 5 1 3 Royal-Oak 1 July 1733 Ab. and Mid. 8 July 1734 1 0 1 1 Success 24 Feb.
1736 Gunner 31 Jan. 1737 0 12 0 6 Do. 15 Feb. 1737 Gunner 12 Apr. 1739 1 2 0 1
Wager 19 Jan. 1739 Gunner 14 May 1741 1 4 0 4 7 6 1 5



I shall now conclude my Narrative with remarking, that I believe few, if any,
of late Years, have gone through more Distresses, and Miseries than myself; yet,
in all my Trials, I was in some Degree blessed with the Patience of holy Job,
knowing, that as the Lord gives, he can take away, and blessed be his holy
Name.

"Presence of Mind, and Courage in Distress
Are more than Armies to procure Success.
True Courage dwells not in a troubled Flood
Of mounting Spirits and fermenting Blood.
Lodged in the Soul, with Virtue overruled,
Inflamed by reason, and by reason cooled.
In Times of Peace content to be unknown,
And only in the Field of Battle shown."
Addison's Campaign. FINIS.
^^^ata Page 210, Line 10, for inferior, ^^^reign.


