THE CHOICE: A POEM, After the Manner of (...) Promfret.

By a young Gentleman.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by Edes and Gill, in Queen Street, 1757.

THE CHOICE, A POEM.
IF youthful Fancy might it is Choice pursue,
And act as natural Reason prompts it to;
If Inclination could dispose our State,
And human Will might govern future Fate;
Remote From Grandeur, I Would be humbly wise,
And all the Glitter of a Court despise:
Unskil'd the Proud, or Vicious to commend,
To cringe to Insolence, or Fools attend;
Within myself contented and secure,
Above what mean Ambition can endure:
Nor yet so anxious to obtain a Name,
To bleed for Honor in the Fields of Fame;
Empty Parade, is all that Heroes know,
Unless fair Virtue hover in the Show.
BUT in these Walls, where Heaven has fixed my stay,
One half of Life, I Would wish to breath away:
The Fall and Winter of each future Year,
I Would humbly hope to spend contented here;
'Mid the fierce Ravage of a wintry Storm,
Kind Friends to cheer me, moderate Wine to warm;
Securely happy we'd delude the Day,
And smile the Seasons cheerfully away.
No needless Show my modest Dome should claim,
Neat and genteel without, within the same;
Decently furnished to content and please,
Sufficient for Necessity, and Ease;
Vain is the Pomp of Prodigal Expense,
Frugality denotes the Man of Sense;
My Doors the needy Stranger should befriend,
And Hospitality my Board attend;
With frugal Plenty be my Table spread,
Those, and those only whom I love be fed:
The Meek and Indigent my Banquet share,
Who love the Master, and approve the Fare;
Thy mellow Vintage Lisbon! should abound,
Pouring a mirthful Inspiration 'round;
While laughing Bacchus baths within the Bowl,
Love, Mirth and Friendship swallow up the Soul.
I WOULD have few Friends, and those by Nature true,
Sacred to Friendship, and to Virtue too;
Though but to few an Intimate professed,
I Would be no Foe, nor useless to the Rest:
Each Friend beloved requires a friendly Care,
His Griefs, Dejections, and his Fate to share;
For this my Choice should be to Bounds confined,
Nor with a Burst of Passion flood Mankind.
ABOVE the Rest, one dear selected Friend,
Kind to advise, and cautious to offend;
To Malice, Envy, and to Pride unknown,
Nor apt to censure Foibles, but his own;
Firm in Religion, in his Morals just,
Wise in discerning, and advising best;
Learned without Pedantry, in Temper kind,
Soft in his Manners, happy in his Mind;
Is there in whom, these social Virtues blend,
The Muse lifps Pollio, and she calls him Friend:
To him, when flushed with Transport I Would repair,
His faithful Bosom should my Solace share;
To him I Would fly when Sorrows prove too great,
To him discover all the Stings of Fate:
His social Soul, should all my Pangs allay,
Tune every Nerve, and charm my Griefs away.
O, now I wish to join the friendly Throng,
Elude the Hours, and harmonize the Song;
Each generous Soul still sedulous to please,
With calm good Temper, and with mutual Ease;
Glad to receive and give, the keen Reply,
Nor Approbation to the Jest deny.
BUT at a decent Hour with social Heart,
In Love, and Humor should my Friends depart:
Then to my Study, eager I Would repair,
And feast my Mind with new Refreshment there;
There plunged in Though It my active Mind should tread,
Through all the Labors of the learned Dead;
Homer, great Parent of Heroic Strains,
Virgil, whose Genius was improved with Pains;
Horace, in whom the Wit and Courtier joined,
Ovid, the tender, amorous and refined;
Keen Juvenal, whose all-correcting Page,
Lashed daring Vice, and shamed an impious Age;
Expressive Lucan who politely sung
With hum'rous Martial tickling as he stung;
Elaborate Terence, studious where he smiled,
Familiar Plautus, regularly wild;
With frequent Visit these I would survey,
And read, and meditate the Hours away.
NOR these alone, should on my Shelves recline,
But awful Pope! majestically shine,
Unequaled Bard! Who durst thy Praise engage?
Not yet grown reverend with the Rust of Age;
Sure Heaven alone thy Art unrivaled taught,
To think so well, so well express the Thought;
What Villain hears thee, but regrets the Smart?
But tears the lurking Demon from his Heart?
Virtue attends thee, with the best Applause
Conscious Desert! great Victor in her Cause,
She faithful to thy Worth, thy Name shall grace,
Beyond all Period, and beyond all Space:
Go, shine a Seraph and thy Notes prolong
For Angels only merit such a Song!
HAIL Briton's Genius, Milton! deathless Name!
Blessed with a full Satiety of Fame:
Who durst attempt Impertinence of Praise?
Or sap insidious thy eternal Bays?
For greater Song, or more exalted Fame,
Exceeds Humanity to make, or claim.
These to peruse, I Would often forget to dine,
And suck Refection from each mighty Line,
Next Addison's great Labors should be joined
Praised by all Tongues and known to all Mankind:
With Littleton the tender, and correct,
And copious Dryden, glorious in Defect;
Nor would I leave, the great and pious Young,
Divinely fired, and sublime in Song.
Next would I add the unaffected Gay,
And gentle Waller, with his flowing Lay;
Last Nature-Limning Thompson should appear,
Who linked Eternity within his Year.
These for Diversion, with the Comic Throng,
Should raise my Fancy, and improve my Song;
Extend my View, 'till opening Visions roll,
And all Piaeria bursts upon my Soul.
BUT to inform the Mind, and mend the Heart,
Great Tillotson, and Butler, Light impart;
Sagacious Newton, with all Science blessed,
And Lock, who always though it and reasoned best.
BUT Lo! for real Worth, and true Desert,
Exhaustless Science, and extensive Art,
Boerhaave superior stands; in whom we find,
The other Savior of diseased Mankind;
Whose skilful Hand could almost Life create,
And make us leap the very Bounds of Fate;
Death, Tyrant Death, beholding his decline,
That Boerhaave would his Kingdom undermine,
Armed with his surest Shafts attacked his Foe,
Who long eluded the repeated Throw,
At Length fatigued with Life, he bravely fell,
And Health with Boerhaave bad the World farewell.
THUS 'till the Year recedes, I Would be employed,
Ease, Health and Friendship happily enjoyed;
But when the Vernal Sun revolves it is Ray,
Melting hoar Winter with her Rage away,
Whe^^ ^ocal Groves a gay perspective yield,
And a new Verdure springs from Field to Field;
With the first Larks I Would to the Plains retire,
For rural Pleasures are my chief Desire.
AH doubly blessed! on native Verdure laid,
Whose Fields support him, and whose Arbours Shade;
In his own Hermitage in Peace resides,
Fanned by his Breeze, and slumbring by his Tides;
Who drinks a Fragrance from paternal Groves,
Nor lives ungrateful for the Life he loves.
I WOULD have a handsome Seat not far from Town,
The Prospect beauteous, and the Taste my own;
The Fabric modern, faultless the Design,
Not large, nor yet immoderately fine;
But neat Economy my Mansion boast,
Nor should Convenience be in Beauty lost;
Each Part should speak superior Skill and Care,
And all the Artist be distinguished there.
ON some small Elevation should it stand,
And a free Prospect to the South command;
Where safe from Damps I Would snuff the wholesome Gale,
And Life and Vigor through the Lungs inhale;
Eastward my moderate Fields should wave with Grain,
Southward the Verdure of a broad Champaign;
Where gamesome Flocks, and rampant Herds might play,
To the warm Sunshine of the Vernal Day;
Northward, a Garden on a Slope should lie,
Finely adjusted to the nicest Eye;
In midst of This should stand a Cherry Grove,
A breezy, blooming Canopy of Love!
Whose blossomed Boughs the tuneful Choir should cheer,
And pour Regalement on the Eye and Ear:
A gay Parterre the vivid Box should bound,
To waft a Fragrance through the Fields around;
Where blushing Fruits might tempt another Eve,
Without another Serpent to deceive.
Westward, I Would have a thick-set Forest grow,
Through which the bounded Sight should scarcely go:
Confusedly rude, the Scenery should impart,
A View of Nature unimprov'd by Art. --
RAPED in the soft Retreat my anxious Breast,
Pants eager still for something unpossess'd;
Whence springs this sudden Hope, this warm Desire?
To what Enjoyment would my Soul aspire?
It Is Love! extends my Wishes, and my Care,
Eden was tasteless 'till an Eve was there:
Almighty Love! I own thy powerful Sway,
Resign my Soul, and willingly obey.
GRANT me kind Heaven! the Nymph still formed to please,
Impassionate as Infants when at Ease;
Fair as the opening Rose; her Person small,
Artless as Parent Eve before her Fall;
Courteous as Angels, unreserv'dly kind,
Of modest Carriage, and the chastest Mind;
Her Temper sweet, her Conversation keen,
Not wildly gay, but soberly serene;
Not Talkative, nor apt to take Offense,
With Female Softness joined to Manly Sense;
Her Dress and Language elegantly plain,
Not sluttish, forward, prodigal or vain;
Not proud of Beauty, nor elate with Praise,
Not fond to govern, but by Choice obeys;
True to my Arms in Body and in Soul,
As the touched Needle to the attractive Pole.
Caution, opposed to Charms like these were vain,
And Man would glory in the silken Chain;
Unlike the sensual Wish that burns and stains,
But where the purest Admiration reigns;
Give me, O give me! such superior Love,
Before the Nectar of the God's above;
Then Time on downy Wings would steal away.
And Love still be the Business of the Day.
WHILE sporting Flocks in fond Rotations court,
And to the Thicket Pair by Pair resort;
While tuneful Birds in tender Murmurings plead,
Chanting their amorous Carolls through the Mead;
Linked Arm in Arm we'd search the Twilight Grove,
Where all inspires with Harmony and Love:
Ye Boughs, your friendly Umbrage wide extend!
Guard from rude Eyes, and from the Sun defend:
Ye wanton Gales! pant gently on my Fair,
Thou Love-inspiring Goddess meet us there!
While soft-invited, and with Joy obeyed,
We press the Herbage, and improve the Shade.
BUT is the Almighty ever bound to please?
Ruled by my Wish, or studious of my Ease?
Shall I determine where his Frowns shall fall?
And fence my Grotto from the Lot of all!
Prostrate, his sovereign Wisdom I adore,
Entreat his Mercy, but I dare no more:
No constant Joys Mortality attend,
But Sorrows violate, and Cares offend;
Heaven wisely mixed our Pleasures with Alloy,
And gilds our Sorrows, with a Ray of Joy;
Life without Storms a stagnant Pool appears,
And grows offensive with unruffled Years;
An active State, is Virtue's proper Sphere,
240 To do, and suffer is our Duty here:
Foes to encounter, Vices to disdain,
Pleasures to shun, and Passions to restrain;
To fly Temptation's open, flowery Road,
And labor to be obstinately good.
THEN, blessed is he who takes a calm Survey,
Of all the Events that paint the checkered Day;
Content, that Blessing makes the Balance even,
And poizes Fortune, by the Scale of Heaven.
I WILL let no future Ill my Peace destroy,
Or cloud the Aspect of a present Joy;
He who directed and dispensed the past,
O'er-rules the present, and shall guide the last:
If Providence a present Good has given,
I clasp the Boon in Gratitude to Heaven:
May Resignation fortify my Mind,
He cannot be unhappy that is resigned.
GUARD my Repose thou Lord of all within!
An equal Temper, and a Soul serene;
O! teach me Patience when opposed to Wrong,
Restrain the mad'ning Heart, and curb the Tongue;
May Prudence govern, Piety control,
All Slander, Rage and Bitterness of Soul;
Peace, Plenty, Health and Innocence be made,
The blissful Tenants of my tranquil Shade.
O LET me not maliciously comply,
To that cursed Action that shall raise a Sigh;
Or cause the wretched Orphan to complain,
Or see the Widows Tears, and see in vain:
From a remorseless Soul O set me free,
And prompt a Pang for every Wretch I see.
WHATEVER Station be for me designed,
May Virtue be the Mistress of my Mind;
May I despise the Abandoned and the Base,
Though Opulent, or dignified with Place;
And spurn the Wretch who meanly lost to Shame,
Thinks Wealth or Place, a Substitute for Fame:
If Wisdom, Wealth or Honor, Heaven lend,
Teach me those Talents happily to spend;
Nor make so blessed, as I would wish to live,
Beyond those Moments Heaven is pleased to give;
Then when Life trembles on the Verge of Rest,
And brings expended Minutes to the Test;
Absolve me Conscience, thou imperial Power!
O bless me with a self-approving Hour.
FINIS.
In the Title Page -- for Promfret, read Pomfret.


