The OPINION of one that has perused the Summer Morning's Conversation,
concerning Original Sin, wrote by the Rev. Mr. Peter Clark,

In TWO Things principally:

FIRST, That he has offered that, which has rendered it impossible the doctrine
of the imputation of Adam's guilt to his posterity, should be true in the sense
it is held by Calvinists.

SECONDLY, That though he pretends to be a friend to the Calvinistical doctrine
of imputed guilt, yet he has deserted this doctrine and given it up into the
hands of its enemies, as it teaches the liableness of all mankind, without
exception, to the torments of hell, on account of the first Sin.

To which is added, A few remarks on the recommendatory preface by five
reverend Clergymen.

In a LETTER to a Friend.

JOB xxxii. -- I also will show my opinion.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by GREEN and RUSSELL, opposite the Probate-Office in
Queen Street. 1758.

The OPINION of one that has perused the Summer Morning's Conversation,
concerning Original Sin.
SIR,
ACCORDING to your desire, once and again repeated, I now send you my opinion
of the book entitled, A summer morning's conversation, etc. The intimacy
between us may endanger your being prejudiced in favor of what I shall write.
I advise you therefore to read it with caution, judging of it from its
intrinsic weight, if it has any, and not as it comes from one that is your
tried friend.

My expectations, I own, were considerably raised, when I heard, that the Rev.
Mr. Clark, a Gentleman noted for piety, good sense, learning and candor, as
well as for Calvinistical Orthodoxy, had undertaken to answer the Winter
evening's conference about original sin, which was plausibly wrote, and, in its
manner, I confess, the most fitted, of any piece I have seen, to lead the
common people into other sentiments concerning the doctrine of original sin,
than those they had been taught in our Catechism, and the Confession of faith
commonly received among us. I soon procured the answer to this Pamphlet upon
its publication, and was eager to read it, having no suspicion but that I
should see the Calvinistical doctrine of original sin placed in a just and
strong light, and in a manner so striking, and, at the same time, so soft and
candid, as to gain the liking, if not the conviction, of those who were in a
contrary way of thinking: In all which respects to speak plainly and freely, I
am much disappointed; as is the case with several others I have had occasion to
converse with.

I did not think, that a Gentleman so generally well spoken of for his
humility, meekness, candor and good nature, would have wrote in language so
evidently betokening the want of these excellent qualities, I mean, as to
present exercise. I see not, that he discovers a more modest sense of his own
fallibility, than his antagonist; or that he writes with a less imbittered
spirit. It Is strange, we cannot in meekness instruct those that oppose
themselves. This is the christian manner of speaking, and it is naturally
suited to bring men to an acknowledgment of the truth. I have frequently had
reason to profess myself convinced of the propriety and truth of that saying of
Solomon, A soft answer turns away wrath; but grievous words stir up anger. I
imagine this Gentleman would have more honored himself, as well as the cause he
is pleading, and been more likely to convince gainsayers, if he had wrote more
in the meekness of wisdom.

How it may appear to others of more penetration than I am master of, I presume
not to say; but to me this Gentleman's performance is not so freed from
ambiguity, darkness, and perplexity, as might be desired. If my share of
understanding is not below what is common, there are many, who, upon reading
it, must say, if they will speak the real sense of their minds, that it is, in
some places, at least, unintelligible to them. Besides, it is very unlucky for
the common people, that he has been so lengthy. I suspect, the good ends
proposed by this work will, in a great measure, be lost as to them. They will
have neither leisure nor patience to go through with it. I imagine, the tho'ts
here expressed might, to advantage, have been communicated in one third part of
the room they at present take up; and the conversation would then have been
more universally attended to.

But these are comparatively small things, and I mention them in transitu only.
What I principally aim at is to let you know my opinion, with the grounds of
it, in two articles. The first is, that this Gentleman, so far as I am able to
judge, has unhappily said that, which renders it impossible the doctrine of the
imputation of Adam' s guilt to his posterity should be true, I mean in the full
sense in which it is maintained by Calvinists. The second is, that though he
wears the appearance of a friend to the doctrine of imputed guilt, as held by
Calvinists, yet he has deserted this doctrine, nay, given it up, as it
maintains that mankind universally, infants as well as others, are liable to
the damnation of hellfire, on account of Adam's first Sin.

As to the first of these articles, you will remember, I say, as it is
maintained by Calvinists; for I have no concern with any private scheme this
Gentleman may have of his own, that is aliene from their's. Agreably to the
doctrine of Calvinists, (which will be made evident to you under the next head)
Adam's posterity, as he was their covenant head, or legal representative, are
liable to the death he was threatened with in its full sense, without abatement
or mitigation, that is, as including in it the miseries of hell after the death
of the body. But it is, as I apprehend, impossible, in consistency with what
this Gentleman has said, that this should be true. A few words will suffice to
set this matter in an easy, and, as I would hope, a convincing light. This
Gentleman has told us, Page 55, that by the threatening, they (our
first-parents) were to die in the very day that he sinned. And again, in the
next Page, if there had been no redeemer appointed for fallen man, no
satisfaction to the injured justice of God for that first transgression, to
make way for his mercy to man, we don't suppose, that Adam would have had any
posterity at all; but that he himself would have been cut off, and perished,
according to the rigor of the threatening, in the very day, in which he sinned,
even as the sinning angels were, and that everlastingly. In these passages, so
far as my understanding reaches, he has rendered it impossible to support the
doctrine of the imputation of Adam's guilt to his posterity, at least in the
full sense in which Calvinists maintain it, because, in consistency with them,
it don't seem possible that he should be their covenant head, or legal
representative, so as that they should be liable with him to the threatened
penalty. How could they, since by the covenant that was made with him, he was
to "die the very day he sinned," and could not have had posterity without the
appointment of a redeemer? Surely, if Adam's posterity could not have come into
existence, as he sinned, upon the foot of the covenant God entered into with
him, but there was need of the interposition of grace, and a savior, in order
hereto, this covenant could not be made with him as legally acting for them. Is
it possible, this covenant should be so made with Adam as that his posterity,
in virtue of it, should become liable to the penalty of it, when, according to
the tenor of the covenant itself* they must, in case of his sin, have eternally
remained in a state of nonentity? For it is to be remembered, it is not
according to the tenor of this covenant, but (as this Gentleman pleads) by an
after-provisional act of grace, mitigating its rigor, and suspending the
operation of its penalty, that it became possible for them to be brought into
being. It must be a strange sort of covenant, which is so constituted as to
make persons legally liable to a certain penalty, when, at the same time, it is
not possible it should be inflicted on them, but by the introduction of a
posterior act of grace to bring them into existence that they might be the
capable subjects of suffering it! To say, that Adam so represented his
posterity as that they became legally subjected to the penalty threatened in the
covenant made with him; and to say, at the same time, that he never could have
had posterity in case he sinned, as in fact he did, but by an after provision
of grace, is, as far as I am able to conceive, so evident an inconsistency,
that no intermediate ideas can make it more clearly so, than it at once appears
to be upon the bare proposal of it.

The second article concerning which I would give my opinion is, that this
Gentleman, though he wears the appearance of a friend to the Calvinistical
doctrine of the imputation of Adam's guilt to his posterity* yet has deserted
this doctrine, nay, given it up, as it teaches that they are universally
liable, on account of his sin, to the torments of hell for ever; which, by the
way, is the principal sense, in which it is opposed by Arminians, and, as I
think, by the person he has been pleased to write against.

You will be fully let into the reasons, upon which I have taken up this
opinion, and prepared to judge of the validity of them, if I make two things
clear to you. 1st. That the whole race of Adam, all his posterity, according to
the Calvinistical scheme, so sinned in him, and fell with him, or, in other
words, are so chargeable with his guilt, have it so imputed to them, as that
they are, on that account, liable to, and deserving of, eternal damnation, the
pains of hellfire for ever; that it would be consistent with the justice and
mercy of God eternally to damn them all; and that, if any of them are not thus
damned, it is owing to nothing but grace, which grace might not have been
showed to any of them. And 2dly. That this Gentleman has not only with caution
avoided to assert, or vindicate, the doctrine of imputation in this sense, but
has really given it up into the hands of it is enemies.

1st. In proof of the first of these particulars, I might easily bring
testimonies from all the approved, noted, Calvanistical writers of bodies of
divinity; I might cite a cloud of witnesses from among the most famous orthodox
writers of sermons and tracts, both in Old and New England; I might place
before your view extracts from the Confessions of Faith, as assented to by most
of the Protestant reformed Churches: -- But this would carry me too great a
length; nor is there any need of so much labor: As it happens, I can support
the present fact by a single evidence, that is so circumstanced as to be, at
once, the evidence of the Elders and Messengers of the Churches of this
Province, and of a great number of the most celebrated orthodox divines in the
English nation.

The Westminster Confession of Faith was, under the solemnity of an oath, drawn
up, and subscribed by one Hundred and six of as noted and orthodox divines as
could be collected together from all parts of Great Britain. And, as this
confession of faith expressed the doctrinal sentiments of the Elders and
Messengers of the Massachusett's churches, synodically convened, Anno 1648, at
the call of the government, they unanimously though it fit to profess their hearty
assent and attestation to it, excepting some sections which relate to points of
controversy in church discipline. So that what is bro't, in a way of evidence,
from this confession, may fairly be looked upon as the joint testimony not only
of more than an hundred English Calvinistical Divines, but of all the Churches
of this Province. And the same may be said of the longer and shorter
Catechisms, which were compiled, published, and recommended by this famous
Assembly, and have been generally taught our children from the beginning of the
country to this day.

Be pleased now to attend to the evidence I shall bring from this Confession of
Faith, and these Catechisms.

Says the former, I. Our first parents, being seduced by the subtilty and
temptation of Satan, sinned in eating the forbidden fruit. -- II. By this sin,
they fell from their original righteousness and communion with God, and so
became dead in sin, and wholly defiled in all the faculties and parts of soul
and body. -- III. They being the root of all mankind, the guilt of this sin was
imputed, and the same death in sin and corrupted nature conveyed, to all their
posterity, descending from them by ordinary generation. -- IV. From this
original corruption -- proceed all actual transgressions. -- VI. Every sin,
both original, and actual, being a transgression of the righteous law of God*
and contrary thereto, does, in its own nature, bring guilt upon the sinner,
whereby he is bound over to the wrath of God, and curse of the law, and so made
jubject to death, with all miseries spiritual, temporal, and eternal.

In the Catechism, the evidence runs thus. Longer Catechism. Q. Did ALL mankind
fall in that first transgression? that is, of our first parents. A. The venant
being made with Adam as a public person, not for himself only, but for his
posterity, ALL mankind, descending from him by ordinary generation, sinned in
him, and fell with him, in that first transgression. Q. Into what estate did
the fall bring mankind? A. The fall bro't mankind into an estate of sin and
misery. Q. What misery did the fall bring upon mankind? A. The fall bro't upon
mankind the loss of communion with God, his displeasure and curse, so that they
are by nature children of wrath, bondslaves to satan* and JUSTLY LIABLE to all
punishments in this world, and that which is to come. Q. What are the
punishments of sin in the world to come? A. The punishments of sin in the world
to come are everlasting separation from the comfortable presence of God* and
most grievous torments in soul and body, without intermission, in hellfire for
ever. Q. Did God leave all mankind to perish in the state of sin and misery? A.
God did not leave all men to perish in the estate of sin and misery, into which
they fell by the breach of the first covenant, -- but of his mere love and
mercy delivers his elect out of it, and brings them into an estate of
salvation by the second covenant, commonly called the covenant of grace. The
like questions are found in the shorter Catechism, and the like answers are
given to them, as is generally known to our children.

I have no need to be at the expense of any pains in order to show you, that
the above evidence is direct and full to the point in hand. If you will only
trust your own eyes, you must be convinced, that according to this Confession,
and these Catechisms. THE WHOLE POSTERITY OF ADAM, all the descendants from him
in the ordinary way, without exception or limitation, so sinned in him, had his
guilt so imputed to them, as that, upon the account of this sin and guilt, they
are (...) liable not only to temporal* but eternal death; not only to miseries
in this life, but to never-ceasing torments in hell: And that they would all,
in fact, have suffered these eternal pains in hell* if the grace of God* through
a redeemer, had not rendered it possible they should escape them: which grace,
being perfectly free and undeserved, might have been withheld, and the whole
human race, Adam with all his posterity, left to perish everlastingly in
hellfire.

This, most certainly, is the true real Calvinistical orthodox doctrine of
original sin, as it respects the imputation of guilt: Nor can it be denied with
a better grace, than that the sun shines at noon day* though it may be disguised,
or kept out of sight, if any valuable ends are to be answered thereby.

2ndly, It remains now to satisfy you, that this Gentleman has really deserted
the Calvinistical doctrine in the above sense, yea, given it up into the hands
of its enemies, yea, into the hands of the very author he is answering. This
may seem strange; especially as he was a volunteer in writing against one that
had attacked the Orthodox doctrine in this sense, and set it in an odious
light. But however strange it may appear, it will* I believe, upon examination,
be found to be the real truth.

The question, stated by his Antagonist to be discussed was this, Whether we,
and all Adam's posterity, are charged by God with this first sin of his so as
that men, women and children are exposed, by this alone, to the eternal
damnation of hell? Whether this question is stated fairly, or unfairly, a
thorough friend to Calvinism would, one would think, have taken occasion from
it to assert the liableness of all Adam's posterity, infants as well as others,
to the eternal damnation of hell, viewed as children of Adam, and under the
imputation of his sin and guilt; and to labor in showing the consistency of
this doctrine with the perfections of God: But instead of asserting, or
vindicating, this orthodox doctrine, this Gentleman so speaks upon it as really
to give it up.

His finding fault with the state of the question looks this way. If it had
been stated thus, "Whether all that have descended from Adam by ordinary
generation are liable on account of every sin, both original and actual, to the
pains of hell forever"; he could not have said it was unfairly stated, without
directly flying in the face of the Westminster assembly, because the orthodox
Calvinistical doctrine upon this head is expressed in their very words, no
otherwise changed then by putting them into the form of a question. And what is
the difference, in real sense, between the question as stated by his
Antagonist, and thus stated from the Westminster-assembly? Are the words, "all
Adam's posterity, men women and children," more extensive in their meaning,
than "all that have descended from Adam by ordinary generation"? Surely, he
will not say this. Are the words, "exposed to the eternal damnation of hell,"
stronger than these, "liable to the pains of hell forever"? Neither will he
pretend this. If therefore there is any unfairness in the state of the
question, it must be in these words, "by his sin alone"; but do these carry a
different sense from those, "every sin both ORIGINAL and actual"? The truth is,
the question is stated according to the precise meaning of the orthodox
doctrine; and it looks as though this Gentleman did not care to enter upon a
vindication of it, as he thus finds fault with the question to be debated.

But this will more fully appear by what he goes on to say. Though he owns, page
7. "the imputation of Adam's sin to his posterity, men, women and children";
yet, in the very next words, he denies this imputation in the full orthodox
Calvinistical sense. For he says, Infants may be, and are, subject to the penal
consequences of the first transgression, viz. corruption of nature, pain,
sickness and death; in respect whereof it may be truly said to be imputed to
them, should they not be thereby subject to eternal damnation. Compare this
with the foregoing quotations, and judge, whether it agrees with the doctrine
of Calvinism. The doctrine of this Gentleman is, that some of Adam's posterity,
namely infants, may not be subject to eternal damnation, though they may be
subject to the penal consequences of his sin. The orthodox doctrine is, that
the penal consequence of the first transgression is death eternal as well as
temporal, the torments of hellfire as well as the miseries of the present
world; and that infants, unless they are not descended from Adam, have his
guilt so imputed to them as to be subject to all this punishment. In short,
according to the doctrine received in the country, as that which is Orthodox,
and Calvinistical," Every sin, original as well as actual, deserves God's wrath
and curse, both in this life, and that which is to come"; and consequently,
infants, if they are at all chargeable with original sin, are, in that view of
their case, liable to the eternal damnation of hell.

In the next page, he is so far from standing up in defense of the Calvinian
cause, even in the sense in which it was principally opposed by his Antagonist,
that he insinuates as though eternal death, meaning thereby, an eternal privation
of life, not including the torments of hell, was the most any suppose infants
liable to. His words are these, A thing [infants actually suffering the
torments of hell-fire] which few, or none maintain; even though some may suppose
them liable to eternal death, that is, an eternal privation of life; as they
may be, and yet not suffer the torments of hell. He is egregiously mistaken in
the first part of this sentence, as I shall presently have occasion to show
you. But, in the latter, he has, to me unaccountably, substituted the private
opinion of such men as Mr. Lock, and Tailor, in the room of the universally
known tenet of Calvinism. What thoro' Calvinist ever understood, by eternal
death, merely an eternal privation of life? I will be bold to affirm, that no
one, who had not departed from the principles of Calvinism, can be mentioned
that explains this eternal death in any other sense, than including the
torments of hellfire. To be sure, this is the sense in which it is to be
understood in our Catechism, and Confession of faith; insomuch that the very
children are acquainted with the distinction of death into temporal, spiritual,
and eternal, meaning thereby eternal damnation.

But this Gentleman has been more free still with the orthodox Calvinistical
principle, upon the point under consideration. For he says plainly, in his
marginal note, page 8. I could wish, that the latter part of the answer to the
19th question of the Assembly's shorter Catechism might be explained, so as not
to include those who die in infancy; but to be understood of those only of
Adam's posterity, who, by indulging their natural corruption, in actual
transgressions, render themselves liable to the eternal pains of hell, as the
utmost degree of misery consequent on the apostasy. Being made liable to the
pains of hell for ever is the part of this answer he wishes might be explained
so as not to include "those who die in infancy." If he means by this wish, that
he would have this answer so interpreted, as that people may be taught that
there may be Elect infants as well as others, and that these may, of the mere
good pleasure and free grace of God, through a redeemer, be delivered from hell
torments; this, I suppose, is the explanation that is generally given this
answer by well instructed Calvinists; and there was no need of any wish in the
case. But, if he means, as I conclude he does, from what has been already
offered, that he would have this answer so explained, as that those who die in
infancy are not in the number of Adam's posterity who deserve the pains of
hellfire, and are justly liable to them, and might justly have them inflicted
upon them, as being chargeable with his guilt; I say, if he means this, he
wishes, in reality of sense, that one main part of the orthodox doctrine may be
explained away; that people, instead of being instructed in one of the great
principles of Calvinism, may have it kept out of their sight, or something else
substituted in its room. And these words in the shorter Catechism are not the
only ones he must wish to be explained in a sense they don't contain, but a
good many others in the longer Catechism, and Confession of faith.

In this same 8th page he affirms very peremptorily, that "we have no reason to
conclude they [infants] suffer the eternal torments of hell"; which
affirmation, so strongly expressed, is the more strange, as he introduces it,
with what is previous to it, with this remark, " Secret things belong to God,
but things revealed belong to us, and to our children." It Is not a secret
thing, in the opinion of Calvinists, that infants, as well as others, are
justly liable, viewed as the children of Adam, to the damnation of hell. That
all Adam's posterity, upon the account of original sin, are liable to the pains
of hell forever, is, with them, one of the things God has revealed to us, and
to our children. Says the great Calvin, as I have met with the quotation,
"Cunctos mortales in unius hominis persona morti eternae mancipatos fuisse,
scriptura clamat." -- That is, "that all mortals are held under the guilt of
eternal death in the person of one man, is the loud voice of scripture." And in
this there is an universal agreement among Calvinists. But whether God, it
being a matter of mere good pleasure, will, through a redeemer, deliver all
infants from that eternal damnation, they deserve, and are liable to, is the
secret thing with Calvinists. I don't know of one thoro' Calvinist, besides
this Gentleman, that says in the peremptory manner he does, "we have no reason
to conclude they will suffer the eternal torments of hell." The contrary is
rather their opinion, that is, that some of them, at least, will in fact suffer
eternal damnation; as will be made evident to you by and bye.

Not that I blame this Gentleman for hoping the best concerning the future
state of infants: Nor do I find any fault with him, I rather think the better
of him, for not saying, with Calvinists, that the first sin is so imputed to
them, as that they are liable to the damnation of hell, and might justly have
it inflicted on them, if he don't believe it. But, if he is not orthodox in
this point, it is to me a wonderful thing, that he should undertake to write
against the Winter Evening's Conversation; as the principal, if not the only,
design of that book was to attack the Calvinistical doctrine upon this article
in special.

In short, from what has been already offered, without troubling myself, or
you, with any more citations, you will, I think, be fairly led to apprehend,
that, according to the notion this Gentleman entertains of the imputation of
Adam's guilt to his posterity, they are not, merely or solely, on this account,
subject to that eternal damnation in hell, with which his sin was threatened;
which, I am sure, is not the doctrine of Calvinism, but directly contradictory
to it. For which reason, a considerable part of his book is no vindication of
the Calvinistical doctrine in this point, nor answer to the author he wrote
against, as this was the special point of Calvinism which he attacked. And, as
it appears to me, this Gentleman, no more than his Antagonist, is a friend to
the Calvinistical doctrine, as it maintains the liableness of all Adam' s
posterity, without exception, on account of his first sin, to the eternal
damnation of hell; which was the very thing proposed by that writer to be
debated.

As I observed at first, this Gentleman's book was, to my apprehension, in some
parts, ambiguous and dark, however clear it might be to others of deeper
penetration: For which reason, it is possible I may have mistaken his
sentiments. If this should be the truth, this letter may be a kindness to him,
as I know you intend to make it public. Others, I have conversed with, if I am
mistaken, are mistaken also. And he will now have an opportunity, if he
believes the Calvinistical doctrine of the imputation of Adam's guilt to all
his posterity in the sense of our Catechisms* and the Westminster confession of
faith, more explicitly to say so; and to supply an essential defect in his
book, considered as an answer to the Winter Evening's Conversation, I mean the
want of a particular and full vindication of this doctrine, as maintained in
these Catechisms and Confession of faith, against the charge of its being
inconsistent with the justice and mercy of God.

Nor is the good hope he has of the salvation of all that die in infancy any
objection against this, if he is a sound and thoro' Calvinist. For their being
eventually saved, or damned, will make no alteration, logically speaking, in
the force of the arguments either to prove, or disprove, the consistency of the
Calvinistical doctrine with the perfections of God. Even upon the supposition
that all that die in infancy are saved, this doctrine cannot be true, to me it
seems impossible it should be true, if it was not consistent with the
perfections of God everlastingly to have damned them all. For the doctrine is,
that they deserve damnation; that they are liable to it, as chargeable with the
guilt of the first transgression; and that, if they are not eventually damned,
it is owing to the mere good pleasure, and free grace of God, which might not
have been dispensed toward them. But these cannot be truths, if in the
previous reason of things, it would have been inconsistent with the justice and
other perfections of God, to have eternally damned them. The supposing
therefore that all that die in infancy are saved is no vindication of the
Calvinistical doctrine upon the head under debate. In true reason, separate
from passion, affection, and imagination, the objected difficulties are
precisely the same, as if it be supposed that they are eventually damned. I
could therefore wish this Gentleman, notwithstanding his hoping so well of
those who die in infancy, had gone particularly and largely into a
reconciliation of the Calvinistical doctrine, as opposed by his Antagonist,
with the perfections of God. There is yet opportunity; and he may hereby
greatly serve the cause of orthodoxy, by removing away the greatest
stumbling block in the way of its being embraced.

It would, it may be, be a disappointment to you, if I should say nothing of
the recommendatory preface, with which the book I have given you my opinion of,
is ushered into the world. I profess an esteem for the Reverend Clergymen who
have signed it; though I cannot say, that I think they are infallible. They have
given proof, that they are capable of being mistaken, by adopting a mistake of
the reverend author whose work they praise. He had said, page 8, that "few or
none maintain that infants suffer the torments of hellfire." They say, the
Winter Evening's Conversation makes tragical exclamations against the doctrine
of original sin, commonly received in the churches of the reformation, as if it
implied, that children dying in infancy suffer the eternal torments of hell for
the first sin of Adam; -- when it is well known, the Patrons of that doctrine
are wont to leave the future state of such among the secret things which belong
to God alone. This, though the assertion of a celebrated author, and five
venerable attestators* I must be so free as to call a mistake, and a very great
one.

I may justly conclude, that these Gentlemen will look upon Calvin as a Patron
of the orthodox doctrine concerning original sin. Hear what he says. In his
commentary on Romans 5.17, having observed, that there were two differences
between Christ and Adam, and having described the first, he goes on, The other
is, that the benefit by Christ does not come to all men, as Adam involved his
whole kind in damnation. And the reason is in readiness; for since the curse we
draw from Adam is derived to us by nature, it is not to be wondered, if it
embraces the whole mass: But that we may participate of the grace of Christ, it
is needful we should be united to him by faith. Therefore that you may possess
the miserable inheritance of sin, it is enough that you are a man; for it
resides in flesh and blood. That you may enjoy the righteousness of Christ, it
is necessary to be a man endowed with faith, because fellowship with him is
obtained by faith. This is communicated to infants in a peculiar way; for they
have in the covenant the right of adoption, by which they pass into the
communion of Christ. I speak concerning the children of the pious to whom the
promise of grace is made: FOR OTHERS [a communi sort nequaquam eximuntur] ARE
BY NO MEANS EXEMPTED FROM THE COMMON LOT; that is, as he had said before, from
the damnation Adam had involved his whole kind in. And that he includes in
their damnation the torments of hell cannot well be doubted, as, in the
quotation from him a few pages back, he prefixes the Epithet eternal to this
damnation. But to prevent all dispute upon this matter, I will cite another
passage from him. It Is in these words of the 3d book and the 23d chapter of his
institutions, I ask, from whence it is, that the fall of Adam has involved so
many nations together with their infant children in eternal death without
remedy, unless because it so seemed good in God's sight?

St. Augustine, who is characterised by the author these Gentlemen recommend,
page 99, as one that "has been had in high esteem, by the universal church, as
an eminent instrument, whom God raised up to maintain and vindicate the
doctrine of grace against Pelagius, and other Heretics"; -- This
unexceptionable father, in Lib. I. de per. mer. et remis. e^p. 16, expressly
says, "Infants, dying without baptism, will suffer of all persons the mildest
damnation." You see he directly affirms their damnation, though he speaks of it
as the mildest; as indeed he ought to do.

It will not be questioned, whether the famous Arthur Hildersham was a Patron
of Calvinism; and he says on Psalm 51, Lect. 55, It is clear, God has declared
his anger against the sins of infants, not only by pursuing their sins with
hatred, but their persons; not by inflicting upon them temporal punishments
only, but by casting them into hell. And in the following page, he calls it a
damnable error, that all that die in infancy obtain the heavenly inheritance.
On the contrary, he says, that many infants have been [Vasa irae, et titiones
inferni] vessels of wrath and firebrarnds of hell.

But, as it would too much increase the length of this letter, to insert all
the testimonies, upon this head, that might be collected from particular
persons, I shall do here, as I did before, that is, give you in one view the
evidence of an hundred and six eminent Patrons of the doctrine of original sin,
as received in the churches of the reformation, and this as subscribed to by
the Elders and Messengers of the churches of this province, Anno 1648. It Is
contained in those words of the 3d article of the 10th chap. of the Westminster
Assembly's confession of faith; Elect infants, dying in infancy, are
regenerated and saved by Christ, through the Spirit, who works when, and where,
and how he pleases. The phrase Elect infants, essentially includes in it the
idea of some who are left. If there are elect infants, then there are reprobate
infants. There cannot be some chosen, unless others are passed by. And whoever
are passed by, are neither "redeemed, nor justified, nor sanctified, nor saved
by Christ"; as in the 2d article of the 3d chap: The unavoidable consequence of
which is, that they must perish eternally, as they are not delivered out of the
state the fall had bro't them into, which was a state that exposed them to the
torments of hellfire forever; as has been shown to be the doctrine of this
confession.

I shall add here, as it is one of the known principles of Calvinism, that all
Adam's posterity, who are not chosen in Christ before all worlds to eternal
life, will eventually suffer the torments of hell; it is certain if there are
non-elect infants, they must suffer these torments. And will these Gentlemen
say, it is the Calvinistical doctrine, that all infants are elected to eternal
life! I will publicly own I am mistaken, if they can produce so much as one
Calvinistical writer, of any considerable note, who has ventured to say so.
Nay, it is not the opinion of all Calvinists, that all the children, even of the
pious and faithful, that die in infancy, are among the elect that will be
saved. Such learned and celebrated Calvinists, as Paroeus, Zanchy, Perkins, and
Donteklok, as I find it expressed by a great author, directly assert, that
Election and Reprobation take place among the children of the faithful,
insomuch that some of their children that die in infancy are precipitated into
hell.

I shall bring one witness more. It may seem needless, when I have just given
you a multitude in one. But this may be the more regarded, as there are a
number still alive who might know him, and be able to assure us of the truth of
what we have heard of him, that he was a Gentleman of great piety,
understanding and learning, as well as of an unspotted reputation for
orthodoxy. And besides, the little book that contains his evidence has been
dispersed into all parts of the country, and put particularly into the hands of
the children and youth for their awakening, and instruction, and, possibly, by
some of the signers of this preface. The book, I mean, is Mr. Wigglesworth's
day of doom, the sixth edition of which I now use, though it was printed more
than forty years ago. I shall transcribe more of his words than I should have
done, had they not, besides affirming the fact I am proving, bro't in the Judge
of all the earth justifying the equity of it, notwithstanding all pleas, upon
the known indisputable principles of Calvinism. His words are these.

(166)
"Then to the bar, all they drew near
who died in infancy,
And never had or good or bad
effected pers'nally;
But from the womb unto the tomb
were straitway carried,
Or at the least 'ere they transgrest,
who thus began to plead.
(167)
If for our own transgression
or disobedience,
We here did stand at thy left hand,
just were the recompense;
But Adam's guilt our souls has spilt,
his fault is charged on us;
And that alone has overthrown,
and utterly undone us.
(168)
Not we but he ate of the tree,
whose fruit was interdicted:
Yet on us all, of his sad fall
the punishment's inflicted.
How could we sin that had not been,
or how is his sin our
Without consent, which to prevent,
we never had a power?
(169)
O great Creator, why was our nature
depraved and forlorn?
Why so defiled, and made so vile
while we were yet unborn?
If it be just, and needs we must
transgressors reckoned be
Thy mercy, Lord, to us afford
which sinners has set free.
(171)
Then answered the judge most dread,
God does such doom forbid,
That men should did eternally
for what they never did.
But what you call old Adam's fall,
and only his trespass
You call amiss to call it his;
both his and yours it was.
(172)
He was designed of all mankind
to be a public head,
A common root, whence all should shoot,
and stood in all their stead.
He stood, and fell, did ill or well
not for himself alone,
But for you all, who now his fall
and trespass would disown.
180
You sinners are, and such a share
as sinners may expect,
Such you shall have; for I do save
none but my own Elect.
Yet to compare your sin with their,
who lived a longer time,
I do confess yours is much less,
though every sin's a crime.
181
A crime it is; therefore in bliss
you may not hope to dwell;
But unto you I shall allow
the easiest room in Hell.
The glorious King thus answering
they ceased and plead no longer;
Their consciences must needs confess
his reasons are the stronger."
I am ready to think, it appears pretty plain to you by this time, that these
Gentlemen were mistaken. Whether they will entertain this apprehension of the
matter, I know not; but this I am well satisfied of, that they will not be free
to declare, "that they are deeply concerned to find the scripture-doctrine of
original sin misrepresented and derided," by the last quoted author. And if
not, why should they say this of the author of the Winter Evening's
Conversation for considering infants, in the course of his arguments, as
suffering in the fire of hell?

But should it be even supposed, that these Gentlemen were not mistaken in the
fact we have been considering, is it not very extraordinary, when they had so
fair an occasion to give their attestation to the known orthodox doctrine, that
infants, as well as others, deserve the damnation of hell, and are justly
liable to it, as chargeable with the guilt of the first sin; I say, is it not
strange, that they should omit dropping a word insinuating the truth of this
great Calvinistical point: Especially, as they took care to give their readers
to understand, that the orthodox doctrine did not so much as "IMPLY that
children dying in infancy suffered the torments of hell for this first sin."
May not weak well-minded people be in danger of being hereby turned aside from
what they esteem the truth of scripture? If I am not misinformed, some of these
Gentlemen have found fault with others, and rebuked them too, for withholding
the truth, when they had a fair occasion to speak to it. And the occasion here
loudly called upon them to speak; for if they were at the pains carefully to
read the book they recommended, before they signed the preface to it, it is
difficult to conceive how they could avoid seeing, that the true Calvinistical
doctrine, as it respects the liableness of all Adam's posterity to the torments
of hell, on account of his sin, was rather opposed than asserted, or
vindicated. And yet, they leave this important point altogether untoucht, or
rather so speak upon infants not suffering the torments of hell, as to endanger
people's being led to think they were not liable to them, in any view whatever.
I cannot but esteem this a great omission in such Gentlemen.

There is one thing more that has given me some surprise. It is this.
They;solemnly advise and entreat the churches, whenever vacant, to beware of
settling any man in the pastoral office, who does not profess a firm belief of
the great doctrine here defended, and the other important articles of our holy
religion dependent on it, or connected with it. A man may firmly believe the
doctrine here defended, and all other articles connected with it, and not
believe with our Catechisms, and the Westminster confession of faith, that all
Adam's posterity are liable to the damnation of hell, as chargeable with the
guilt of his first sin: And yet, in consistency with the solemn advice of these
Gentlemen, any vacant church might settle him in the pastoral office over them.
What will a late venerable orthodox Council say to this, who solemnly advised
one of our churches to dismiss their pastor, as unfit to be any longer their
pastor, if not upon this charge only, upon this as a principal one, namely,
that he did not think it consistent with the justice and mercy of God eternally
to damn any of Adam's posterity, MERELY upon the account of his first sin.
Surely, if a man may be settled in the pastoral office, though he don't believe
Adam's posterity are liable to the torments of hell, merely on account of his
first sin, it ought to be no reasonable objection against his being continued
in it, that he cannot see the consistency of this doctrine with the justice and
mercy of God. -- But I shall leave that Council, and these Gentlemen, to settle
this point between themselves.

I have now given you my opinion, with the grounds of it; and might easily have
enlarged this letter into the bulk of a book of 156 pages, but that I though it it
best not to be lengthy. Judge for yourself, and do it impartially.

I only add, I heartily join with these Gentlemen in praying, that this people
and their offspring may be nourished up in the words of faith and good
doctrine; and that the faith once delivered to the saints may be preserved pure
and entire in the churches, throughout all generations.

I am your sincere friend, A. B.

ERRATA.
Title Page, line 16, read, To which are added.

P. 10. l. 6, read, Covenant.

P. 24. l. 23, read, die eternally.


