THE Conquest of LOUISBOURG: A POEM.

By JOHN MAYLEM, Philo-Bellum.

BOSTON, N.E. Printed in the Year. 1758.

The Argument.
INvocation -- Begins [in the Year 1753] with the Cause of the War, the
Depredations and Hostilities of the Indians, in the profound of Peace, through
the French Instigation -- touching upon the Miscarriage of our Arms in America,
which excite his Britannic Majesty to a just Sense of the imminent Danger his
American Empire is threatened with; who summons a Parliament, and Mr. Secretary
Pit -- describes the deplorable Situation of Affairs in that Part of the World
-- Mr. Secretary Pitt's Address, imploring his Majesty's Royal Order -- Who
declares the French Perfidy, exciting them to Revenge -- And proposes an
immediate Descent upon the Island of Cape-Breton, with a strong Fleet, and
sufficient Land-Army, under the Command of Admiral Boscawen, and General
Amhurst, whom [by Mr. Pitt's Advice] he recommends to his Parliament, which is
approved of, with all the Demonstration of Joy and Satisfaction -- the Fleet
consisting of twenty four Ships of War (exclusive of near One Hundred and forty
Sail of Transports) Rendezvous at Plymouth, from whence they embark with twelve
Thousand Land Forces for Halifax, where they are joined by General Lawrence
with six Thousand Aids, who all embark for Cape-Breton, arrive there [May 1758]
in six Days, land their Troops, (of which eighteen are drowned) and drive the
Enemy from the Shore -- General Amhurst marches to the Attack of their Advance
Battery; and after a sharp Conflict drives them to the City -- The intrepid
Valor and Prowess of Amhurst, Wolf, Whitmore, Lawrence, Frazer, and Scott --
Their several Actions in that Heroic Enterprise -- The General opens his Lines,
and begins the Seige -- In the mean Tims Boscawen, Hardy, and Durell, Bombard
and Cannonade the Enemy from their Fleet -- A Bomb thrown from the English,
falls on the French Admiral's Ship, and destroys her -- The Enemy seized with
Despair, sink two of their Ships -- The Horror of a Seige described -- Forty
Days having elapsed, and a Breach forced in their Walls, they Capitulate
Prisoners of War -- but by the Admiral are sent to France (except their regular
Troops) Brigadier Monckton, goes on Command to St. John's River, and returns
from his Expedition with Success -- which concludes the Poem --

The Conquest of LOUISBOURG.
NOT to Aonian Spring, Parnasian Mount,
Famed Helicon, nor Aganippaes Fount,
For fancied Fire, I aim the wonted Flight,
Nor yet explore Olympus craggy height:
Where fabled GODS in famed Assembly meet,
Self-pois'd the Globe, an Atom at their Feet --
But to the empyreal Throne, for solid Rhyme,
Address the Universal Cause sublime --
O GOD! Immortal Deity -- Supreme!
Father of Goodness! deign a heavenly gleam.
Me with celestial Ray benign inspire,
And through each Vein diffuse poetic Fire!
AEther'al Vigor in each Line display,
While I the Man and glittering Arms essay:
Since Thou great Parent deigned paternal Aid,
And terrible thy mighty Power displayed.
Horoic Verse to noble Deeds belong
Arms and the Hero claim immortal Song.
These I attempt -- but first the mighty Cause
And bold Infringer of established Laws --
How violate so beautiful a Plan!
The Peace of Nature, and the Tie of Man --
In that warm Season of the rolling Year,
When Fields begin fresh Livery to wear,
And the gay Meads display their varied hue,
With all Green-Nature open to the view;
'Twas then the winding Maze of vernal Trees
Deigned a safe Covert, and benignant Breeze,
To the fell Savage; who in skulking mood
Ranged the vast Circuit of eternal Wood,
Through the Meanders of the Forest scour,
And the long-winding Labyrinth explore:
And the long-winding Labyrinth explore:
By Gallia won to fell Canadian Rage
With murderous Shaft, to horrid Deeds engage.
Nor Frontier Village, Garrison, or Seat,
But a dire Ravage, or Destruction meet.
Where Fathers stabbed, and Mothers in Despair,
With piteous Shrieks, and Cries afflict the Air,
The Brother and fond Sister meet in Death,
And hapless Babes resign their Infant Breath.
Stupendous Malice, and amazing Ill!
Black as Damnation, or their native Hell!
Thus long young Albion knew oppressive Weignt,
And felt each fad vicissitude of Fate.
With all Columbia constant in Alarms,
While partial Fortune aids the Gallic Arms.
Though kind Britannia her Assistance lends,
Yet sad Defeat on sad Defeat attends,
(Save that fair Fortress and important Town,
Which brave young MONCKTON on Acadia won)
But yet not here to dwell -- Ye Scenes away
And on my Muse, to sing the genial Ray,
And brighter Sunshine of the avenging Day.
Illustrious GEORGE! (revere the sacred Name!)
Hanover's darling, and Britannia's fame,
To Him the News of our impending Fate,
The Rumors of diurnal Hours relate.
His mighty Soul the teeming Ill invades,
And now in deep Concern he pensive treads,
The spacious Parlour, studious of the Theme,
And the deep Project of a weighty Scheme.
Till evening Dusk his Hours of study close,
And the late Minutes call him to repose --
If it repose be called -- All Night he lay,
By anxious Care oppressed, till gleam of Day,
When from his Bed the tho'tful Monarch rose
(Tho'tful -- but yet his Mind not discompose,
But such as might proceed from patriot Zeal
Or such as Parents for their Children feel)
Summoned his noble Peers and Mr. Secretary PIT.
trusty Sage,
TO impart his Care, and every Grief assuage;
Whose loyal Hearts the Fiat quick obey,
And to their Sovereign explore the Way.
In Majesty, high on his royal Throne,
Like Jove who whilom on Olympus shone,
So shon he; thronged by Sages in the Dome,
Like the famed Senate of Imperial Rome.
To whom he thus -- Best Partners of each though
That sway my Soul: This Juncture have I sought,
My anxious Breast to unbosom, and disclose
What sure must rouse us from our dull repose.
At which they all attent -- he thus proceeds --
O Peers and Sages! know your Country bleeds --
Four rolling Winters count four rolling Years,
Since perjured Gaul commenced her hostile jars;
While loud Reports (ill-boding) from afar,
Speak them our Rivals in the Scene of War.
The savage Brood, induced by Gallia's Sons,
Depopulate our Villages and Towns.
Blood, Murder, Devastation, Rape, attend
The endless ravage of a hellish Fiend.
If we to stop this Scene of Death delay,
We lose our Empire in America!
Here stopped a while -- As yet no one had spoke,
Then rose a Sage; And thus the Silence broke.
Dread Sovereign Liege! may the Almighty Power
On you and yours his daily Blessings shower!
This now emergent Crisis we'll embrace,
That loyal ACTION our Devotion grace.
It Is true, dread Sir, designing France, it seems
Are still debating on politic Schemes.
But first submiss -- implore your royal Care
And sage Opinion in the grand Affair --
Here ended -- thus his Majesty again
Peers, Counselors, and Sages -- listen then --
Since every corresponding Fact agree
To urge the Glare of Gallic Perfidy,
For swift Revenge, and Arms and double War,
Conclude that we immediately prepare.
He said, with Complacence -- While graceful hung
The dying Accent on his sacred Tongue.
When in the Dome, no more a solemn Pause,
But catching Murmurs echo his Applause:
At which in sage Address he further spoke,
And thus the buzzing Whisper gently brake.
O Britons Arm, and urge your future good,
Flush in your Cheeks, I see the British Blood,
And Gallia's Sons shall weep a Tyrian Flood.
Since your just Rights and Liberties you claim
Your Admiral, and General I name,
BOSCAWEN, valiant, generous, prudent, wise,
And AMHURST -- second in the Enterprise --
Twice twelve tall Ships, equip with teeming Fate,
And the just Vengeance of an injured State.
Cursh that imperious Town, which owes its Fame
To it is last Ruin, more than Louis' Name.
Swift over their perjured Heads, your Thunder roll
'Till the loud echo peal from Pole to Pole.
So spoke the Hero; who at once did prove
His Sovereign Duty, and a Parent Love.
Each conscious Breast the noble Fiat warms,
And the roused Lion grumbles out to Arms.
Arms and Revenge ring through the spacious Dome,
While each glad Anthem, waits the Monarch home.
And now the Drums beat up, and now appears
With Hearts elate twelve Thousand Volunteers.
Fired with Ambition in their Country's Cause,
Resolved to purchase Fame, and loud Applause,
The ample Seaports, each assiduous Man
Their floating Bulwarks for the mighty Plan.
The gathered Navy, glorious in her Pride,
In Plymouth's safe capacious Harbor ride.
Till the fair Summons of a genial Breeze,
Call forth to weigh, and cut the briny Seas.
Then for Cape-Breton the Atlantic plow,
While Joy sat smiling on each martial Brow,
Urge their swist Passage through the liquid green,
Till all Britannia sinks behind the Scene.
The dancing Castles, fanned by easy Gales,
Hide half the Circuit with their Canvas Sails.
Thus forty Days the yielding Deep explore
And reach at length, Acadia's distant Shore;
Where generous LAWRENCE, with propitious Sway,
Harmonious, rules in Peace the genial Day;
Whose fair Metropolis, and growing Town,
By Halifax in Nova-Scotia's known.
To a safe Harbor, bids the welcome Fleet,
And hails the Heroes to his ample Seat.
A spacious Basin now the Fleet immure
Where the tall Navy rendezvous secure.
NOW LAWRENCE, fired to Arm, and dread exploit,
With great BOSCAWEN, takes his eager Lot.
Six Thousand Aids, recruit their ample Force,
Then Re-embark, and shape their wonted Course
To that strong Citadel which Fame reports,
Impenetrable to the last Efforts.
Six Days their destined Way elate pursue,
Till all Cape-Breton opens to the View.
Like ancient Ilium which Achilles won,
Seemed the high Bastions of the haughty Town.
Then dis-embark their Troops -- who from each Boat
Leaped in the Water, ever to Land they got.
Unmindful of the Surges' foaming roar,
Or threatening Voice -- but waded to the Shore.
(Though eighteen Heroes found a Liquid Grave,
In the deep Bosom of a gaping Wave.)
Then with dread prowess, their Opponents charge,
And with dire Slaughter, beat them from the Verge.
See AMHURST now his warlike Squadrons range,
Portending dreadful Death, and loud Revenge.
Forms his fierce Legions in embattled Ranks
With Van and Rear-Guard, and important Flanks --
Then at their Head heroic and serene,
Marched like young Scipio to a bloodier Scene,
To a high Battery, or winding Length,
Of double Embrasures, of double Strength,
Whose mighty Walls the Enemy immure,
And the long Trenches, aid their great Secure.
Now over the Heath his brave Myrmidons leads
While the shrill Music founds to noble Deeds,
And the warm Sunbeams on their Firelocks play,
Strike off in Spires, and aid the blaze of Day.
A general halt ensues -- nor yet the Van
Had the fierce Onset of Attack began,
Six Deep the Front a martial Grace disclose
That dared the Thunder of their Gallic Foes.
But lo! while ready for the Charge they stood,
Death, Blunderbuss, Artillery, and Blood!
Blue Smoke, and purple Flame, around appear,
And the hot Bullets hail from Front to Rear.
Tremendous Fate by Turns incessant flies,
While the black Sulphur cloud the azure Skies.
And ghastly Savages, with fearful yell,
Invoke their Kindred of profoundest Hell.
Whose hoarse shrill powaws valiant AMHURST scorns,
And roars loud Thunder from his dread Cohorns.
Now, dire Confusions on Confusions rife,
And the deep conflict aids the mighty Noise.
From Hills of Smoke see Spire ascend on Spire,
And AMHURST there invelop'd all in Fire.
With his drawn Sabre from a livid Cloud,
With teeming Death, emerging like a God!
Ten thousand Beams spire from the flaming Steel,
And Gallia's Sons his weighty Prowess feel.
Now the vast Tumult wakes the drowsy Gods,
Who all look down to see the mighty odds.
When AMHURST there like Peleus mighty Son,
Dreadful in Arms and Tyrian Scarlet shone,
Engaging here, in martial Order stood
Fierce as Alcides or the Scythian God;
Till thundering Mars, no more the Sight could bear,
Turned pale with Envy, and let drop his Spear,
And Fame all flaming from the imperial Car,
Hailed him sole Rival of the God of War.
'Twas such inspired immortal Maro's Tongue,
When Ilium's Fate, "Arms and the Man" he sung.
Thus the long Conflict, undecided held,
And each fierce Veteran maintained the Field.
The conscious Hero, tho'tful of our Good,
Fierce in the Van, bespattered over with Blood,
With Mein majestic, thrice his Sabre shook,
Thrice waved his Arm, and thus, heroic, spoke --
Intrepid Heroes -- Britains loyal Band!
Who valiant fought on this important Land,
In equal Poise of this exploit the Event
As yet hangs dubious -- You fatigued and spent,
Like valiant Boys, give three Huzza's and rush
Victorious on -- and give a final push.
He said. And swift as the revolving Sun,
Drove rapid through, and urged his Passage on;
While mighty WOLF, in terrible array,
With dreadful Phalanx, change the Face of Day;
There sable Chiefs, and Gallic Heroes yield,
Gallic Perfidy -- A Poem by the Author of this.
"And vital Carnage spread the ample Field!"
See! WHET MORE yonder (moving over the Heath)
Makes it one sad continued Scene of Death.
Or, bending Victor over the ample Soil,
Reaps a huge Conquest with Herculean Toil.
With LAWRENCE there -- whose generous bosom warms,
And like Ascanius their Enclosure storms.
Of the deep Trenches quick essays the Verge,
And deals wide Slaughter with a heavy Charge.
Intrepid FRAZER rush's impetuous on,
Whose weilding Broad-Sword flames a circling Sun.
And Highland Heroes charge their double Flanks,
Attack whole Squadrons, and enclose their Ranks.
And SCOTT with Ardour penetrates the Wood,
And sable Warriors weep a vital Flood;
So a young Lion with amazing dread,
Straws the green Covert with the passive Dead.
Now Sword to Sword, and Clash to Clash oppose,
Such the fierce Prowess of determined Foes.
And Bayonet to Bayonet engage,
With tenfold Vigor, and redoubled Rage.
A nobler Emulation never was known,
Nor British Valor ever better shown.
'Till forced by Fate, the Gallic Bands retreat,
'Twas Britons only, could have urged the Feat.
On every Side the hardy Legions pour,
And their strong Works, and Magazines explore.
Twelve Furlongs off -- their grand Assylum take,
In a huge City which Defiance spoke.
Where mighty Ships, in daring Pomp and Pride,
Secure in their capacious Harbor ride.
Nor greater Force could haughty Louis boast,
On the long Borders of his ancient Coast.
Mean while BOSCAWEN lands destructive Aid:
Bombs, Mortars, Cannon, gloriously displayed,
In close Employ the Veterans engage,
For the dread Apparatus of a Seige.
Opposed to where, their famed Assylum stood,
Was a fair Rising by a Neighboring Wood,
An easy Eminence, whose Top accline,
To their strong Ramparts bore a level Line.
To this grand Object of their martial Scenes,
Through fierce Encounters move the huge Machines.
Now WOLF's long Trenches, and Fascines appear,
And conquered Batt'ries, open each Embrazure,
With horrid Mortars gaping on their Tier.
And the fixed Cannon point their fatal Maws,
While Peals of Thunder issue from their Jaws.
BOSCAWEN now his naval Vengeance hurls,
And Clouds of Sulphur fleet away in curls.
Intrepid HARDY from his floating Force,
Wings Fate on Fate, with an incessant Course.
And brave DURELL his keen Combustions throw,
While Shells or break above, or burst below.
Thus long the Sun, in his diurnal Race,
Saw the dire Conflict from his radiant Space:
When now a Bomb of huge Diameter,
From a vast Mortar, flamed a livid Sphere.
With dire Combustion filled, and Death innate,
The last sad prelude to their final Fate!
Aloft in Ambient Ether now it spires,
Strikes on the Sunbeams, interchanging Fires;
Now prone inclines in terrible display,
Like the last Comet at the Judgment Day.
On the French Admiral, tremendous cracks,
And swift as Lightning drops beneath the Decks:
Nor sooner entered, but the Brains and Blood
Flew round the Room -- nor to the eternal GOD!
Had Time their Prayers to send for future Good.
Arms, Trunks, and Legs, in wild Disorder lie,
And the green Harbor drinks the vital die.
The Hero here, distort from human Plan,
It Is scarcely known -- he ever was a Man --
Now all the Symptoms of Despair and Rage,
With every Passion in their Soul's engage.
Two of their mighty Ships they sink below,
And dare the Terror of a British Foe.
Mean while alternate Death's promiscuous fly,
And the fierce Meteors blaze along the Sky;
Then shiver in the Air, and sudden pour
A Cloud of Atoms, in a Sulphur shower.
Or in their City wild convulsive burst
Ten thousand Ways, and mingle with the Dust.
A gaping Chasm in their Wall disclose,
The reeking Soldier at his Death-repose.
While Fate in Showers of Lead connected rain,
And wing famed Heroes to her dark Domain.
The cutting Grape-shot spatter over the Heath,
And the fierce Langrel aid the glare of Death.
In such sad Scenes alternately involved,
Till one fair Season half her Course dissolved.
Too much the odds -- the Gallic Ensigns struck,
By all their patron Images forsook,
With drooping Flag and solemn Pace advance,
Their Courage faints, nor more can stand the Chance.
The last sad Purpose of their Soul's impart,
And claim the Mercy of a British Heart.
The generous Heroes, fired with manly Grief,
Nor hear them twice, implore a kind Relief:
But waft them to their ancient Mother Shore,
Though at their Option, Prisoners of War.
Three Cheers ensue -- then thrice the glad Parole,
BOSCAWEN, AMHURST, and a British Soul.
While MONCKTON, his late Conquest to secure,
Over all Accadia takes his eager Tour,
Hunts the black Savage from the Covert brake,
Who a last Farewell of their Eden take.
Thus blessed by Heaven in an important Hour,
A spacious Region owns the British Power.
Now a smooth Surface all along is seen,
And the white Tents harmonious intervene.
A fair Encampment open to the view,
With gay Decorum to enhance the Show.
Like social Heroes pass the Hours away,
Till (...) Duty urge them for the Day.

