TILDEN's MISCELLANEOUS POEMS, ON Diverse Occasions; Chiefly to animate and
rouse the SOLDIERS.

The Third EDITION, with sundry ADDITIONS.

NEW LONDON Printed and sold by T. GREEN

PREFACE, OR, INTRODUCTION.
Ingenious and Courteous READER,
IT may justly seem a Matter of great Surprise, that a Man near 70 Years of
Age, should attempt to be an Author: It may justly be deemed by you, or any
other Gentleman, to be the product of Superannuation. -- Yet, courteous Reader,
I have some Excuses to make, for digging up the rusty Talents out of the Earth
so long lain hid. In the first Place, When I was Young, I was bashful, and
could not stand the Gust of a Laugh; but having observ^d the Pres^ for more
than 60 Years, which has stood op^ and free to every idle Scribler, who have
come off with Impunity instead of the Punisament, I tho's they would have had;
I am thereby emboldened to venture myself among the Rest. But, ingenious Sirs,
I think I have greater and nobler Views: For, since brave Soldiers are the very
Life, Nerves and Sinews of their Country, and cannot be too much kon^red, nor
too well paid; being a Lever of Martial Discipline; I thought at this critical
Juncture it might be of some Service to the (...) to attempt to animate, and
stir up the (...) Spirit of our Soldiery, which is the (...) do under my
present Circumstance^. (...) Effort I made last Spring was so well accepted by
the Gentlemen of the Army, that I am thereby ambold^ to rev^se that, and some
other Pieces, and put them into a small Pamphlet. I have nothing further to
say, Gentlemen; but conclude with the three following Stanzies,

1.
Kind Sirs, if that you will accept,
This petty Pamphlet as a Gift;
With all the Powers I have left,
I will consult your Honor:
But if you throw her quite away,
As I confess you justly may,
I Have nothing further for to say;
But spit, and tread upon her.
2.
But if that kindly you receive,
And grant the Muse a blast Reprieve,
The little Time she has to live;
(...) 'Twill give her Life and, (...) not
And make her (...) Pinions strong;
Through lofty Theme she will fly along,
And every Stanzie in her Song,
Shall stand at your Devotion.
3.
As (...) and the Lark^ do (...),
When (...) in the Spring,
I Would taken my Late on every String;
Should join the martial Ch^ir:
(...) Muses of the Nine,
in this (...) Muse of mine,
on her grand Design,
To (...) martial Fire.
Miscellaneous Poems.
I. The British Lion roused.
HALL, great Apollo, guide my feeble Pen,
To rouse the august Lion from his Den,
Exciting Vengeance on the worst of Men.
2.
Rouse, British Lian, from thy soft Repose,
And take Revenge upon the worst of Foe^.
Who try to wring and haul you by the Nose.
3.
They always did thy quiet Breast annoy,
Raising, Rebellion with the rival Boy,
Seeking thy Faith and Interest to destroy.
4.
Treaties and Oaths they always did break through,
They never did nor would keep Faith with you,
By Popes and Priests indulged so to do.
5.
All neighboring Powers and neutral Standers by,
Look on our Case with an impartial Eye,
And see their Falseness and their Pe^fidy.
6.
Their grand Encroachments on us n^'
but by (...) increase.
Killing and scalping us in Times of^
7.
They buy our Scalps, exciting Savage Cla^,
In Children's Blood for to imbrue their Hand^,
Assisted by their cruel gallic Bands.
8.
Britons! strike home, strike home decisive Blows,
Upon the Heads of your perfidious Foes,
Who always Truth and Justice did oppose.
9.
Go, brave the Ocean with your Warlike Ships,
And spread your Terror over the western Deeps,
And crush the Squadrons of the gallic Fleets.
10.
Cleave liquid Mountains of the foaming Flood,
And tinge the Billows with the galic Blood,
A faithful Drubbing be their future Good.
11.
^ury their Squadrons all in watery Tombs;
And when the News unto Versallies comes,
Let Lewis swear by Gar, and gnaw his Thumbs.
12.
Oh (...) ride triumphant over the gallic Powers,
And conquer all these cursed Foes of Ours,
And sweep the Ocean with your iron Showers.
13.
While all the Tribe^ of Neptune's spacious Hall,
Shall stand astonished at the Cannon Ball;
(...) Hail stones down among them fall.
14.
(...) Tribes perhaps are killed dead,
(...) vast Amazement fled,
(...) aghast and scrach's his Head.
15.
My roving Muse the Surface reach again,
Search every Part of the Atlantic Plain,
And see if any Gallics yet remain.
16.
And if they do, let British Cannons roar;
And let thy Thunders reach the Western Shore,
While I shall strive to rouse her Sons once more.
II. The English Soldier encouraged.
ROuse, Heroes, Arm, brave Captains take the Field.
Great George commands, arm with the Spear and Shield.
Gird on the glittering Sword upon your Thigh,
Once more New England Courage bravely try.
Maintain the Honor you so bravely won,
Of late at Louisbourg on Cap-Breton,
Where, Hero like, you stormed and took the Town,
And gained immortal Trophies of Renown.
Now George commands drive back the encroaching
That plot in Time your fatal Over throw, (...)
From Accada, to the Ohio River,
They seize your Lands where Jove is (...)
Laying a Plan that they in Time to (...)
Over all these Lands may fing (...)
And Cloud your Sun with popish Superstition,
And make you dread their bloody Inquisition.
In vain you will sign, and make your sad Complaints
Unto these Idol worshippers of Saints.
Better to die if Heaven sees it fit,
In Fields of Blood than ever to submit:
Go Heroes bold, you have a Commission given
From George our King, and the great King of Heaven,
The Blood of Infant^ cries from the Ground,
With scalped Mothers scattered up and down.
Revenge, revenge our Blood and righteous Cause,
Upon these Rogues that break all Nature's Laws.
In Coverts they watch many Days and Nights,
To take a Time to do their base Exploits,
Scalp a few Children, Home again they run,
And swing their Scalps and fing their Te D^um.
They Have murdered thus in all our North Frontiers
Filled Mother's Hearts with Sighs, and Groans, and Tears,
And thus they have acted more than three Score Years.
Had ever Mortals such a cursed Foe?
Ask Jove or Mars, and they will tell you, no.
Cur^d be that Arm, and let the Sinews shrink,
That stay's it is Sword their cursed Blood to drink.
Drink, Martial Steel, till you your Thirst assuage,
For they deserve your utmost Martial Rage:
(...), drink I say, till you allay your Thirst,
(...) blatt them like a Thunder Gust,
(...) was there any Cause more just.
(...) blood their chiefest Pleasures have,
(...) ^eroes, roll them to their Graves:
Since they the Blood of Innocents have shed,
Let thundering Bombs fall blazing on their Head
With dire confusion hurl them to the dead.
In Ann^'s Reign a Soldier I have been (...)
But Years forbid that I should go again
My Hands are feeble, yet my Heart is true,
With Prayers and Wishes it shall go with you:
But ever we part, take this Advice from (...),
Against good Orders take no Lib^rtie.
Observe good Orders, (...) your Camp's undone,
And Mars will smite his bold rebellious Son^
Observe your Posts, watch well both Front and Rear,
And double Foes I think you need not fear:
Your Leaders brave, no doubt a Rule will fix,
Justice and Mercy for to intermix;
As knowing well that there is One above them,
They Will give you Cause both for to fear and love them:
Go, war like Souls, you have Leaders great and brave,
Crowned with Success, and if you well behave;
In British Anuals then your Names will shine.
To the remotest Periods of Time;
All round the Globe your mighty Fame will run,
And overtake the (...) of the Sun:
Ages to come. (...) they will say,
You Have fix^ our Right^ (...) America.
But whether am I borne? These tho 'ts of Arm
Have filled my traub^ B^east with strange A(...)
Break off, my song, my barbarous (...)
(...) silently steal do (...)
III. Braddock's Fate; with an incitement to Revenge.
Composed, August 20, 1766.

COME all ye Sons of Britanny,
Assist my Muse in Tragedy,
And mour^ brave Braddock's Destiny,
And spend a mournful Day.
Upon Monongahela Fields,
The Mighty're fallen over their Shields;
And British Blood bedews the Hills.
Of Western Gilbon.
2.
July the Ninth, O (...) Day,
They had a bold, and bloody Fray,
Our Host was smote with a Dismay;
Some basely did retire:
And lost brave Braddock in the Field;
Who had much rather die than yield:
A while his Sword he bravely wield,
In Clouds of Smoke and Fire.
3.
Sometime he bravely stood his Ground,
Thousand Foes did him surround,
(...) ^eceiv'd a mortal Wound,
(...) forced him to retreat.
As died upon the Thirteenth Day,
As he was homeward on his Way,
Alas! alas! we all must say,
A sore and sad Defeat.
4.
Now to his Grave this Hero's borne,
While Savag^ Foes triumph and scorn,
And drooping Banners dress his Urn,
And guard him to his To^
Heroic Monarchs of the dead,
You that so many Worms have fed,
He Is coming to your chilly Bed,
Edge close and give him Room.
His EPITAPH.
BENEATH this Stone brave Braddock lies,
Who always hated Cowardice,
But fell a Savage Sacrifice,
Amidst his Indian Foes.
I charge you, Heroes of the Ground,
To guard his dark Pavilion round;
And keep off all obtruding Sound,
And cherish his Repose.
2.
Sleep, sleep I say, brave, valiant Man,
Bold Death at last has bid thee stand,
And to reign thy great Command,
And cancel thy Commission.
Although thou did^t not much incline,
Thy Post and Hanours to resign;
Now Iron Slumber does confine;
(...) envies thy Condition.
A Survey of the FIELD of BATTLE.
REturn, my Muse unto the Field,
See what a Prospect it does yield;
Ungrateful to the ^yes and Smell;
A Carnage-bath'd in Gore,
Lies scalp'd and mangled over the Hills,
While sanguine Rivers fill the Dales;
And pale Face'd Horror sprends the Fields,
The like never here before!
2.
And must these Sons of Britanny'^,
Be clouded, set in western Skies,
And fall a Savage Sacrifice!
O! ^is a gloomy Hou^.
My Blood runs high in every Vein;
To climb the Mountains of the Slala,
And break the iron Jaws in swain
Of savage gallic Power.
3.
Our Children with their Mothers die,
While they aloud for Mercy cry;
They kill and scalp them instantly;
Then fly into the Woods;
And make a mock of all their Cries;
And bring their Scalps a Sacrifice
To their infernal Deities,
And praise their Demon Gods.
4.
Revenge, revenge the harmless Blood;
Which these inhuman Dogs have shed,
In every frontier Neighborhood;
For near these hundred Years;
Their murdering Clan in Ambush lies,
To kill and scalp them by surprise,
And force from tender Parents ^yes,
Ten Hundred Thousand Tears.
5.
Their sculking, scalping, murdering Tricks
Have so enraged Old The Author.^
Sixty six,
With Legs and Arms like withor'd Sticks,
And youthful Vigor gone;
That if he lives another Year;
Complete in Armor he will appear;
And laugh at Death, and scoff at Fear,
To Right his Country's Wrong;
6.
Lot Young and Old, both High and Low,
Arm well against this Savage Foe,
Who all around inviron us so;
The Sons of black Delusion.
New England's Sons, you know their Way,
And how to cross them in their Play,
And drive these murdering Dogs away,
Unto their last Confusion.
7.
One bold Effort O let us make,
And at one Blow behead the Snake;
And then these Savage Powers will break,
Which long have us oppressed
And this, brave Soldiers, will we do,
If Heaven and George shall say so too:
And if we drive the Matter through,
The Land will be at Rest.
8
Come, every Soldier, charge your Gun;
And let your Task be killing One;
Take A^m until the Work is done,
Don't throw away your Fire;
For he that fires without an Aim,
May kill his Friend, and be to blame,
And in the End come off with Shame;
When forced to retire.
9.
O Mother Land, we think we are sure,
Sufficient is thy Marine Powers,
To dislipate all Eastern Showers:
And if our Arms be blessed;
Thy Sons in North America,
Will drive these Hell born Dogs away.
As far beyond the Realms of Day,
As East is from the West.
10.
Forhear, my Muse, thy barbarous Song,
Upon this Theme thou'st dwelt too long,
It is too High, and much too Strong,
The Learned will not allow;
Much Honor should accrue to him,
Who never was at their Academ,
Come, blot out every (...) the Author gives to this Sort of Metret^
Telesem;
Get Home unto thy Plow.
IV. The CHRISTIAN HERO. Or, New England's Triumph.
Written soon after the Success of our Arms at Nova Scotia, and the signal
Victory at Lake-George.

O Heaven, indulge my feeble Muse,
Teach her what Numbers for to choose,
And them my Soul shall never refuse,
Triumphantly to Sing;
Unto that great and Heavenly Power,
Who saved us in a gloomy Hour,
When our dire Foes meant to devour,
'Twas Heaven's eternal King.
2.
Who made our Soldiers Me^ of Might,
And taught their Fingers how to sight,
And how to aim their Shafts aright,
In the decisive Hour:
Through Him, we have trod down our Foe,
Who all around environed us so,
And sought our fatal Overthrow;
Bless the delivering Power.
3.
He is our Fortress and our Shield;
He saved us in the bloody Field,
And made our Foes unto us yield,
In spite of all their Gods.
Their vet'ran Bauds we have vanquished,
And sent them head long to the dead,
While some in dire Confusion fled
To Coverts of the Woods.
4.
There Dieskau we from them detain;
While Canada aloud Complains;
And count the Numbers of their Slain,
And make their dire Complaint^
The Indians to their Deamon Gods;
And with the French there is little Odds,
While Images receive there Nods;
Invoking rotten Saints.
5.
New-England's Sons, and Daughters sing,
Triumph unto your heavenly King;
Who did such great Salvation bring,
In such a needy Hour.
Not all created Powers can trace
His Glories through unbounded Space;
Nor Seraph's Eye behold his Face,
Nor half describe his Power.
6.
Of old, when he was Israel's GOD,
He clave the red, Arabian Flood,
The watery Walls like Castles stood;
'Till Israel reached the Land;
But fell with most tremendous Force,
On Pharaoh's Riders, and His Horse,
'Til they were dashed, and drowned, and lost,
And cast upon the Sands.
7.
Through desert Lands their Tribes he led,
And forty Years he rained them Bread,
So that with Plenty they were fed,
On the Arabian Sands;
And often relieved them in Distress,
Whilst they were in the Wilderness,
'Til they his Mercies do confess;
And keep his great Commands.
8.
Again at his almighty Word,
Old Jordon backward rolled his Flood,
Which like a rocky Mountain flood,
Nor dared for to oppose,
'Til that the Feet of his high Priest,
The yielding Channel had released;
Then he returned his rapid Force,
His Banks he overflows.
9.
(...) he did convince
(...) proud, Chaldoe^ Prince;
(...) his grand Pretense
(...) wh^stand his Power.
(...) walk his^stery Stage,
(...) that (...) engage,
(...) reinforced with served sold Rage,
His Servants to devour.
10.
He Is still the same almighty GOD,
He brought our Fathers over the Flood:
And scattered all their Foes abroad;
Gave them this Wilderness;
His tender Mercies we must own,
Who heard us when we made our Moan;
O might we live to him alone,
And never more transgress.
11.
They planted were, the choicest Vine;
Religion was their grand Design;
But from their Ways we do decline,
The Source of many Woes
Yet has he not forsaken (...),
Although we have departed thus;
^et by his Arm assisting us;
We have trod down (...)
12.
It would be vile Ingratitude,
Since he our Foes has often subdued,
To show a wilful Turpitude,
And pamper flesh Desire;
But (...) the cursed Charms of Sin
We sear we shall return again,
Unto the Pit we turnbled in,
And wallow in the (...).
13.
O that he would our Souls renew,
And all our sinful Powers subdue,
And from Pollution purge us through
Wash us and make us clear,
In Lavers of that precious Blood,
Which issued from the Son or GOD,
More healing than was Siloams Flood;
The one effectual Mean.
14.
If he would seize our feeble Frame;
And mould our Souls over again,
Make them his Image to retain,
And all our Powers inspire;
Then should the Sun no more than we,
Nor Moon nor Stars obedient be,
Nor run with such Alacrity,
Nor such intense Desire.
15.
Forbear, my Muse, thy feeble Song,
The Theme's too high and much too strong
For any sinful mortal's Tongue;
It shakes thy feeble Frame;
The lostied Numbers cannot raise
A true and adequated Praise,
Unto the antientest of Days,
Nor celebrate his Fame.
16.
The highest Heavens supremely bright,
Are scarcely Pure in his Sight;
His Charge of Folly is most right,
On Angels high and just:
Then what shall we poor Mortals (...),
Who have been wont to disobey;
And dwell in Houses made of Clay,
And founded in the Dust?
17.
The reigning Powers around his Throne,
Before him they do cast their Crown;
With deep Abasement spread the Ground,
Submissive at his Feet,
The Glories of his Majesty,
Too powerful for a (...) Eye:
Therefore it does his Presence fly;
And seek a veiled Retreat.
18.
Forbear, my Muse, hide in the Dust,
But never forget to put thy Trust,
On the most Holy, High and Just,
The Fountain of all Power;
Come, cancel all thy feeble Lays,
And rather live, than speak his Praise,
Spend the Remainder of thy Days
To Love, and to Adore.
V. The Soldiers reproved for reflecting upon one another.
BRAV^ (...) a Shame
(...) of (...) to blame,
^
^
And base Efforts of small Revenge,
The bonds of Union will unhinge,
And separate endearing Friends;
And much retard the Wars.
2.
After such Glory you had won,
And made the French and Indians run,
And almost Canada undone;
And gained a Crown of Honor:
Will you indulge such base Envy,
Which does so tend to Mutiny,
And undermine your Country:
And throw Disgrace upon her.
3.
There is no Place nor Colony,
Can challenge the Supremacy;
In George we have an Equality;
Each is a twin born Brother.
Come let us then unite our Bands,
And join our Hearts as well as Hands;
While we the common For withstand,
Preferring one another.
4.
This finding Faults, and pi^king Flaws,
Will disconcert all Martial Laws,
And overturn the common Cause;
And make our Wheels to stand:
Perfidious France with Canada,
Will carry on their ^oasted Sway,
And bear from us the Prize away,
And drive (...) the Land.
5.
All Men in Power, if you please;
I could entreat you on my Knees,
To crush such ^ase Incend^ries;
Those Sons of vile Detraction.
What think you, Sirs, our Fo^s will say,
When they shall hear at Canada,
Our common Cause is thrown away,
By tumbling into Faction.
6.
There are some Scriblers who pretend
To be their Country's mighty Friends,
Distilling (...) From their Pens;
It is a burning Shame,
That in a Corner they should ^e,
And let their poisonous Arrows fly,
At Men in Place and Dignity,
And (...) their Names.
7.
Indeed there is a sm^tty ^oul,
Who writes his Name as black (...) Coal,
Who has in Slander grown qu^te bold.
And dip't his Pen in Gaul;
Vending a Pack of wicked (...),
Wherein he strove to (...)
And basely Brand with Cowardice
A NOBLE GENERAL.
8.
If he shall force me for to (...)
My Paper with his dirty Name,
It shall be to his ^asting Shame,
I Will tell him for his Pains.
For, Nature hurried, I Am afraid,
When that infamous Fop was made,
And in a Hurry closed his Head,
But never thought of Brains;
9.
He is a base Incendery,
The very Spawn of In^my,
And does disgrace his Colony:
We must think one is true;
That gallant Men with them were scarce,
Or else they meant to sand one Base,
The very Dregs of Sodom's Race;
A raking Villain too.
10.
It is beneath great ^ -- 's Sword,
A meet Correction to afford,
And to cashier him by the Board,
It will not admit the Thing.
I think the common Hang man should
Be the chastizer of the Fool,
And teach him to observe some Rule,
Or noose him in his String,
11.
Some say he was so p -- k y'd,
That at the Lake he like to have died,
And if ^e had, no one had cried
The Value of one Shilling.
But would have showed and have said,
Let Us was^ him Head long to the Dead,
And let this Epitaph be made
For the persidious Villain.
12.
Beneath this Stone interred does lie,
The base born Son of Infamy;
He Would Curse, he would Swear, and Who^ and Lie;
Black Crimes enough to load him.
This Pocky, Swearing, Cursing Sot,
While many a base born Brat he got,
He never refused a Whore nor Pot;
Good Men abhor and loath him.
VI. An Address to his Excellency, the Earl of Loudon.
(By an old American Soldier.)
INdulgent Heaven, most noble Peer,
And Royal George has sent you here,
To head our Troops this present Year,
Against our northern Foe,
Our most invet'rate Enemy.
Which exercise such Cruelty,
(The lesser Devils they outvie)
To work our Overthrow.
2.
Thy Sword can never silently.
And let the tender Mother die;
And see them scalp their Infantry,
And n^'e^ espouse their Cause.
I think thy Sword of Martial Steel,
A sort of Sympathy will ^eel,
And speed with Terror through the Field;
Exerting Martial Laws.
3.
When to the Field those Troops you have led,
Heaven with it is Shield cover your Head,
And strike your Foes with Fear and Dread,
Till Bourbon is undone;
And cause them for to die or yield,
Or else like Lightning quit the Field,
As swift as Phoebus Chariot Wheel,
When drove by Phaeton.
4
Most ^oble Peer, if I was Young,
My Limbs w^^h hardy Sinews strung;
My Feet as ready as my Tongue,
Should stand at your Devotion,
With all my Heart and both my Hands,
I Would list into your Martial Bands,
Observing all your wise Commands,
Nor se^k for more Promotion.
5.
I then would gladly lead the Van.
But am a^ old American,
Who was a Soldier to Queen Ann;
And so advanced in Years,
No longer I the Sword can wield;
But must throw down my pear and Shield,
And with Reluctance quit the Field,
And sheath my Sword in Tears.
6.
Yet if you say that I shall go,
I Have still a martial Soul I know,
That would disdain to say you no,
But still would take upon her,
At your Command to lead the Va^,
And beat the Foe with Sword in Hand,
Or die an old American,
Upon the Bed of Honor.
VII. To the Honor of the renowned King of Prussia.
REnowned Hero, great Victor in the East,
Thy martial Fame has overspread the West;
Our Sons of Mar^, rouse out of Sleep, and say,
Behold in the East, the Glory of our Day.
Great Alexander's risen from the dead,
Or else One greater risen in his Stead;
Before whose Arms, the French and Austrians run,
Nor can they stand, when more than three to one,
Their Horses, and their great Commanders fly,
While bloody Fate o'ertakes their Infantry;
And Priests, and Nuns, in cursed Confusion run;
Old Lewis swears by Gar, we'^e all undone.
Not Austria's Pride, nor France's Gasconade,
Can stay his Arms, or make his Troops afraid;
Nor can old Boreas, from the northern Pole,
Ever chill the Ardor of his Martial Soul.
Chains rapid Rivers to their Iron Shore,
But over Frederick, he has no such Power,
Scales lofty Mountains, over the lee and Snows;
And strikes his Terror, through his combined Foes;
So none could do, unless it were himself,
And rival ^weden, with her Charles the twelf^h.
In Winter's Campaign, like a Rock he stood,
His Country's Barrier, in a Sea of Blood.
Not Daun nor Fermer, with their vet'ran Bands,
Could stay the Progress of his martial Hands.
Great Daun at T^gau, his dire Terror felt,
His Lion Heart it utterly did melt;
Dire Peals of Thunder, did his Troops surround,
While sanguine Rivers overspread the Ground;
And from the Field, incessant Smokes arise,
As if he offered human Sacrifice:
Ten Thousand Souls, fled murmuring through the Wind,
To Purgatory, where they are confined.
In vast Amaze, some to the Elbe retire,
And die by Water, rather than by Fire.
Not Fermer's Camp, nor yet his hollow Square,
Could shield his Head, nor guard him every where^
Dire Peals of Thunder, through his Squadrons broke,
And blends his Camp, in Clouds of Fire and Smoke.
As mighty Torrents, from a lofty Steep,
Bear Rocks and Forests, headlong to the Deep^
Or, as when Aeolus, thundering Blasts are hurled,
As if he meant to level all the World.
Such are the Bowers, that are abundant given,
To this indulged Favorite of Heaven.
When from the Field, his Victims Home are led,
Like Friends and Brothers, at his Board they are fed;
So none can say, which of the Two ou^ toy,
His martial Powers, or Humanity.
Should Numbers drown him, yet his martial Name,
Shall shine like Sunbeams, on the Wings of Fame.
All round the Globe, his mighty Fame shall run,
So long as Time is measured by the Sun.
Ages to come, shall celebrate his Fame,
Whilst they forget great Alexander's Name.
Of mighty Caesar, we have lost ^he Sight,
Drowned in his Rays, more glorious and more bright.
To lesser Globes all round the azure Skies,
Puff out their Lamps, when Ph^ebus does arise.
They sought with Children, he with vet'ran Bands,
Where Art and Nature reinforced their Hands.
O Muse! ^orbear, thy Genius never can scan,
Nor show the Worth, nor Wonders of the Man.
VIII. A new Song of Triumph, On the Success of His Majesty's Arms^ in
North America.
HAIL Heaven^born Ba^d, who once (...) Israel's King
(...) thin^ Harp, and govern every String:
^ive those Hands, with all that w^nted Play,
The love the gloomy, envious Spirit away.
Thy sacred Tongue, with her inspired Lays,
(...) the Muse in an exalted Praise:
Did Israel ^^ng when the Philistines (...),
On thy returning with their Champion's Head!
When Z^^n's Daughters, in their chanting Lays,
Go^e thee the chi^^^st A^^ihure of Praise?
New Albion's Sons, have greater Cause to ^ing
Triumphant, Praise to Heaven's eternal King;
Who under us, has trod our Enemy;
There Is no Philistines ever with the^^ could vi^
For Savage Rage, and monstrous Cruelty.
They scalp'd our Children, and ^ip'd up our Wives,
Imbrued in Blood, their Hatchets and their Knives;
Made in their Sport to take away our Li^es.
Long Time they did our frontie^ Town^ distress.
And (...) them captive, through the Wildernes^
And if they Faint, or Faulter by the Way.
They kill and scalp them there, without Del^^. --
Burn some alive, while roasting in the Fire,
They eat their Flesh, before they quite expire --
Tear out their Hearts, from their tormented Breasts,
And gnaw upon them, like the Savage Beasts:
Scalp some alive, then cover their Heads with Fire,
Could Devils, in their hellish Rage, go higher?
No Tongue can tell their heights of savage Rage,
'Twould shook all Heart^, if acted on the Stage:
This Hundred Years, or more, they have ravaged thus,
Led on by Gallics for to butcher us; --
The Blood of Infants, cried from the Ground,
'Till they to Heaven, a sacred Passage found.
Our God beheld, and did espouse their Cause,
And put his Bridle in their iron Jaws;
Raised us up Heroes, made them Men of Might,
And taught their Hands, and Fingers how to fight;
And sent them over, with a brave British Force,
Over Seas, through Wilds, to the Canadian Coasts,
Who great and brave, did with those I roops advance,
Carried the British Arms all over New France.
'At first, brave Wolf gave them a fatal Check,
And paved the Way for those that took Qu^bec:
Then paid the precious Tribute of his Life,
To save New Albion from the Scalping Knife:
He in the Bed of Honor, bravely died,
While Victory stood in Triumph by his Side. --
Whilst we triumph, let us drop a martial Tear,
Over brave Worse, who fell the other Year: --
Sleep, sleep, great Soul, and take thy martial Rest,
Since by thy Arms, (...) Albion's Sons, are bles^.
While Pit is careful to enrole thy Name,
Among the most exalted Sons of Fame.
This present Year, our brave and warlike Host,
Have been conducted by the great Amherst;
Whose well laid Plans, by safe and sure Degrees,
Make^ him the Master of what Place he please;
Conquers with Terror, and with great Surprise,
Our cruel and blood-thirsty Enemies.
At Montreal, his three brave Armies meet,
That make the Conquest of New France complete:
Then with his Mercies, and his Clemencies,
He wins the Hearts, and Souls of Enemies.
Victori^us Sir, how are thy Arms displayed?
You Have corquer'd Foes, and Foes have happy made:
Gave them in lieu of Gallic Slavery,
The golden Pearl of English Liberty.
O! may they learn, after their grand Submission,
Mercy and Truth, and banish Superstition.
And may thy Name in English Annals shine,
To the remotest Periods of Time: --
Ages to come, shall sing thy Praise, and say,
Am^erst the brave, subdued Canada.
O glorious Day! King George's Arms are blessed,
Beyond what Hopes and Wishes could suggest.
All Canada submits to George's Crown,
Besides the royal Isle of Cape-Breton:
There Is Gua^al^up^, Gor^^ and Senegal,
A glorious Victim to his Arms do fall,
May they remain unto the British Crown,
Glorious Trephies of his great Renown:
Ages to come, shall sing his praise, and say,
'Twas George the Great, subjected Canada.
The God of Armies, he has been with us,
Or ^lse we never had triumphed thu^ --
In our own Strength, we ma'nt presume to beast,
Our mighty Arm is in the Lord of Ho^s;
Presides our Counsels, makes our Senate wise,
And crowns our Arms with glorious Victories,
O may the Laws of Gratitude impart,
Such deep impression upon every Heart,
That all may learn, throughout remaining Days,
As well to live, as for to speak his Praise;
No greater Obligation ever was laid --,
Upon a People, since the World was made,
To Love, to Fear, to Honor and Obey --,
Till Time shall and in the concluding Day.
Strike Harp and Lute, on every grateful String,
Great Albion's Nymphs, your Timbrils higher bring,
And heavenly Choirs, conduct our feeble Lays --
And teach our Tongues to speak and sing his Praise:
Our Tongues they fault^r, Numbers grow too faint
And leave our raptured Souls, their Tho'^ to pain^
May God perform his Promise to his Son,
Give utmost Regions, his Possession. --
And may our Natives his Inheritance be,
From the Atlantic, to the western Se^; --
And Satan over them, lose his black Contro^l,
From the South Ocean, to the northern Pol^ --
And far exceed the Limits of my Verse,
May his Dominions be the Universe.
And Christ assume his mighty Power and reign,
So long as Tim^ and Sinners do remain: --
And all submit unto his Power divine,
As far as Sol ever caused his Beams to shine.
IX. On the Success of the British Arms.
1
O Could the great, ingenious Pit,
Take Notice of an Indian Wit,
And view those Lines which I have writ,
And give his Approbation:
And Purcell give her Notes to sing,
She Would tune her Lute, on every String,
She Would sound the Glories of our King,
And of the British Nation. --
2.
(...) George the First, to him of late,
We have been blessed, in Church and State,
And Briton has grown wondrous great,
And made all Europe wonder.
Great. Britain's Sons, are Sons of Mars,
And mighty Thunderbolts of Wars,
Charge through all Dangers, without Fears,
And cloth their Necks with Thunder.
3.
The thundering Peals, and sulpherous Blaze,
Strike down our Fo^s, with vast Amaze,
While neutral Powers, stand and gaze,
Struck deep with Admiration!
Our floating Castles, on the Sca^,
Sail, and attack what Place they please,
And bring our Laurels home, with Ease,
And dignify the Nation.
4.
King George's Arms are wondrous blessed,
Both in the East, and in the West,
Our Foes could never stand the Test,
If brought unto the Trial.
Our mighty Ships, their Sq^adrons broke,
And cloud the Seas, with Fire and Smoke,
Whilst Gallics, all their Saints invoke,
But meet with a Denial.
5.
They often threaten to invade,
With new forged Bolts, which they had made,
But proved a Gallic Gasconade,
Without an Execution:
While Britons, all their Coasts invade,
And burnt the Boats that they had made,
And almost bro't the Gallic Trade
To final Desol^tion.
6.
Upon the Coast of Coromandel,
Thirteen strong Holds before them fell,
Besides G^res, and Senegal,
Submits to British Power.
Then Guadaloupe, and Cape-Breton,
And Canada comes kneeling down,
Submitting to the British Crown,
The like n^'er heretofore.
7.
Our English Empire in the West,
May equal any in the East,
If that our Settlements be blessed,
Throughout that vast Extension.
Our Timbers, F^rs and Fisheries,
Increase our Manufacturies,
And disconcert our Enemies,
Beyond all Comprehension.
8.
Perhaps our noble Fishery,
Near Fifty Thousand may employ,
And prove a marine Nu^cery,
To Man the Royal Navy.
While George reigns Sovereign of the Seas,
And gives what naval Laws he please,
And bring our Foes upon their Knees,
And make them cry Pecavi.
9.
Whilst that our Sovereign, great and wise,
Shall true Religion patronize,
And disconcert it is Enemies,
And lop the Limbs of Dagon.
Profaneness and Idolatry,
As well as stupid Bigotry,
Shall flee like Vapors of the Sky,
In spite of Pope and Pagan.
X. A Supplement to the General Triumph.
Composed soon after the Surrender of the HAVANNAH.

SOme wondrous Genious of the Heavenly Choir.
O! touch my Lips, and all my Powers inspire,
And loose the Hinges of my sault'ring Tongue,
Then would I sing the most triumphant Song,
Great Britain's Sons, shall be my wondrous Theme,
I Would paint those Heroes, on the Wings of Fame;
From Pole to Pole, I Would c^use their Fame to run,
Or like the Dawnings, play before the Sun.
In the first Rank, I Would p^int those wondrous Tars,
Jav^lins of Jov^, and T^underbo^s of Mars;
Who brave the Ocean, with their warlike Ships,
And spread their Terror over all the Deeps;
Cleave liquid M^u^tains, of the foaming Waves,
Exulting over Ten Million gaping Graves:
Bur^, sink, or take the haughty Gallic Fleets,
Or make them ru^, and seek for safe Retreats:
They sail by Steal^, to make ^^me small Efforts,
A^on, through Fear, they scut^le in their Ports.
Sink their br^ve Ships, and count them ^^^er there,
Than keep afloat, and be where Britons are.
Their Gasconades, they find are all in vain,
And flee for Shelter, to the Arms of Spain.
While George reigns Sovereign of the Ocean round,
And Neptune veils to royal George's Crown;
Leviat^^ns wonder, and the Tritons sing,
The Power and Grandeur of Great-Britain's King.
While all their Nymphs, sing, O, these wondrous Tars,
Darlings of Jove, and senior Sons of Mars,
Their sulfurous Clouds make liquid Nations wonder,
With showers of Hail, and direful Claps of Thunder,
Our Triton Tribes, are made to reason thus,
'This Iron Hail, be sure, is Ominous,
'Of Pending Judgments, hanging over us.'
In the next Rank, shall the great Heroes stand,
That carried our British Conquests on by Land;
Such martial Courage, governed every Breast,
The Death of some, invigorates the rest.
They keep their Ranks, with Resolution firm,
To die like Men, or batter down the Storm.
Storming of Castles, battering down their Wal^^,
And play with Death, as Boys do with their Balls,
They stormed Moore-Cas^le, took the rich Havannah,
And over Spain, they waved the British Banner.
To make the British Conquest more complete,
Took near a Quarter of the Spanish Fleet.
O, foolish Spain! that would not s^and in Fear,
To rake the British Lion by the Ear.
We may be sure, she had forgot the Fate
They met in Fifteen Hundred Eighty Eight;
When Britons burnt, and sunk into the Main,
The Power and Grandeur, and the Wealth of Spain,
Amherst and Monckton, and Lord Albermarle,
Each to the Crown, does add a Ruby Pearl.
Besides great Numbers of brave Heroes more,
Beyond my Power to recount them ever.
Who Hero like, have acted in their Station,
And gained Renown, and glorified the Nation.
Ages to come, shall sing their Praise, and say,
We'll fix an Era, in that glorious Day.
Some wondrous Bard, great Milton's senior Son,
Fulfill the Task, my Muse has left undone;
My Tong^e it faulters, my Numbers grow too sc^nt,
Here, take my Pencil, and improve my Point;
And make their Names, in English Annals shine,
Unto the last, concluding Hours of Time.
While ^ntient Heroes Glories fade away,
Like Morning Stars, before our rising Day,
Overwhelmed in Floods of Phaebu^' brighter Ray.
XI. The Indian Bard's Petition
IF Royal George, Great Britain's glorious King,
Could condescend to such a menial Thing;
And approbate a poor old Ind^^n Bard,
Of whom, in Britain, they have never heard,
'Twould make the Blood, run youthful in his Veins,
And animate his most exalted Strains;
And give the Bard, a Piece of conquered Land^.
A little Spot, whereon his ^oot may stand.
If Beggars might be Choosers, and I may,
I Would beg a little Lot on Ac^ada,
Near to the Banks, where finny Nations play.
And if I should obtain this royal Gift,
I Would sum^on all the Powers I had left,
I Would tune my Lute, and every grateful String,
Should sound the Glories of Great Britain's King.
Tall Oaks should listen, and the lofty Pine,
Should bend to hear those joyful Notes of mine^
I Would carve the Bark, and every naval Tree,
Should bear some Emblem of his Majesty.
To hear the River-stop their rapid Force,
'Til to the Seas, they would lose their wonted Course.
The Forest Herds, should me encompass round,
With horser Accents Bass the joyful Sound:
While all the Swains in North America.
Should join my Not^s, and swear Allegiancy,
And all their Nymphs should strike their Lutes with mine,
With Note so sweet, and softly femanine.
'Long live, King George, in glorious Majesty,
'Env^ (...) ^^^ction, and Detraction die;
'Love, Joy and Peace, attend his glorious Reign,
'Let Slanner die, and Treason bite the Chain.'
Ly down, my Lute, I Will ^lacken every String,
I Will say no more than this, God save the King.
XII. The Vanity and Uncertainty of all sublunary Things.
MY Muse, mount on the Morning Wings,
Survey all sublunary Things;
That are the airy Clouds below,
And see if ought you can inherit,
Save Vanity to vex the Spirit;
All round the tainted Atmosphere
Of Sin, Calamity and Care.
Of Sorrow and of mortal Woe.
2.
But, darling Muse, be not so bold,
As to prefer the sordid Gold,
To be the great, and sovereign Good.
Content never Alexander knew,
Who carried his Arms the World quite through,
His Honor and Gold, but Noise and Show,
He Is justly deemed a Murderer now,
For shedding a Sea of human Blood.
2.
Great Pompey, Caesar, Hannibal,
If these your Demigods you call.
Because they bore a mighty Sway.
Then Earthquakes, Fevers, Plagues and Floods,
Are much greater Demigods;
Because they bore a larger Sway,
More mortal Beings flew than they;
Th^n to them, Idol homage pay.
4.
My Muse, behold, and 'twil surpri^^,
Some Men on honor's Tower who rise,
And see how it confounds their Brain,
For ^'er they rise unto the Top,
And mi^ick the conceited ^op,
Their Brains t^^n round, and off they drop,
And off their painted Honors lop,
And blend in Dust their last Remains.
5.
Were all this Globe a Golden Mass,
'Twould prove too small a Thing at last,
For to content the Misers Mind.
For i^ he had it all in Store,
He still would want a little more;
How vain and empty Thing therefore,
This Pl^^^ God for to adore,
Or to his Homage be confined!
6.
By Watts's Standard, bold and just,
Honor and Gold are painted Dust,
They are at most but Noise and Show;
They never could save a Soul from Death,
Nor add to the Body, one single Breath^;
For soon the bubble Life it breaks,
And then w^s^ our gross Mistakes;
So vain are all Things (...) below.
7.
It Is (...) a few Moments here we know;
Vain Man walks in an empty Show;
Ever Death he strikes the fatal Stroke,
Then all his Spirits evaporate,
His Flesh goes down for Worms to eat,
Through every Cavern of the Heart;
And crawl through every vital Part;
His Name does vanish like the Smoke.
8.
What were their Names before the Flood,
Men's Daughters bore the Sons of GOD;
Whose Violence obtained Renown;
It Is all of them that we can know,
Above four Thousand Years ago,
With them their wicked Names did ro^.
In Moses's Time they are so forgot,
He only heard an Echo sound.
9.
Alas! all sublunary Things,
Honor and Gold of hasty Wings,
Which soon forsake the longing Sight.
So, when we try to gripe the Sands,
In spite it trickles through our Hands;
The most that we can here inherit,
Is Vanity to vex the Spirit,
And leaves us in the Gloom of Night.
10.
Say, Muse, what can there then appear,
To be our Summum Bonum here;
Or where shall we this Treasure find?
The Man whom Virtue truly shows.
To be content were ^'er he goes.
That Man alone he only knows,
To take a ^^ean and sweet Repose.
A calm, serent, contented Mind.
11.
If Knowledge and Love, make Spirits blessed;
If Knowledge the Food, and Love^ the Rest.
Yet happy Convent must crown the Whole;
And those which have eternal Bliss,
Will Not have a Heaven ^uch better than this,
Where happy Content is truly given;
They cannot wish for a greater Heaven;
For that is enough to fill the Soul.
12.
It will not be said by Men of Sense;
I mean a care^ess Indolence:
My Muse disdains that mean Contr^ul,
It is a Mind that does inh^rit,
An easy, but industrious Spirit,
Which never does envy, nor begrutch;
But always thankful it has so much:
A frugal, free and active Soul.
13.
Search over the Globe, and 'twill be known,
This is the true Philos'pher's Stone,
Which always made it is Owner blessed;
Whose Virtue the old Philos'pher told,
Turned Iron and Brass, to Silver and Gold,
And Iron and Brass, and Copper and Steel,
With happy Content are better a Deal,
Than all the Mines in the Spanish West.
14.
The Man who has this heavenly Bliss;
His Substance, be it more or less;
Yet Virtue teaches him to know,
It Is a Treasure to be content;
And the best Blessings that Heaven ever lent;
Whoever enjoys this heavenly Pleasure,
He has the best and largest Treasure,
Of any Mortal here below.
XIII. A distant Prospect of the Melenium, or the Promised Day; in the
Similitude of a Dream.
TIRED with this World's tumultuous Jar^,
Religious Broils, and Bloody Wars,
I laid me down to sleep,
I charged my Domestics round,
To keep off all obtruding Sound,
And Silence for to keep.
My troubled Mind, no Rest did find,
But still I felt Distress;
'Til that a Scene did intervene,
Which put my Soul to Rest.
For in my Dream, the Quaker Scheme
Prevailed throughout the Earth;
The Swords and Spears, made Hooks and Shears,
And the promised Day took Birth.
The thundering Bombs, and killing Guns,
Throughout the World did cease;
And murdering Steal, forsook the Field,
And left the World in Peace.
The Lion the Lamb, takes for his Dam,
The Wolf supports the Kid;
Curiosity, is all thrown by,
Envy and Slander's dead.
None tries to cheat, nor to defeat,
Nor overreach his Neighbor;
The Strong did seek to support the weak,
With Produce of his Labor.
The Lame and Blind, Relief do find,
Bounteous Supply;
And all Men strove to exceed in Love,
And endless Charity.
No Lawyers Pleas, for double Fea^,
Nor Judges sets to hear him;
His Destiny is work or die,
No Clients never come near him.
No mammon Priests, Mankind oppressed,
Nor send to Jail his Neighbor;
But each possessed as God had blessed,
The Product of his Labor.
All that could Preach, did freely teach,
The Knowledge God had lent him;
And meant to stay and take his Pay,
From him that freely sent him.
More bless to give, than to receive
The Words of our Redeemer;
An Hireling, is a Man of Sin,
An antichristian Scheamer.
When the Wolf comes, away he runs,
But if the Wolf he faces;
He freely gives their Carcases,
If he can hold their Fleeces.
Now God in Love, looks from Above,
And bottles all our Tears;
And Christ descends, on Earth to reign,
At least, a Thousand Years.
Men live in Love like Saints above,
In Peace and Unity;
The Knowledge of God, covers the Globe,
As Waters do the Sea.
Under their Vine, Men's Herds recline,
The Fig Tree yields her Store;
The Arts of War, Men care not for,
Nor learn it any more.
No baneful Strife, 'twixt Man and Wife,
Faith feeds their mutual Loves;
And Hyman's Chain, ties fast again,
The Turtles to the Doves.
The balmy Youth, nursed up in Truth,
In graceful Harmonies;
jesus they sing, our God and King,
Rules both Earth and Skies.
The Children young, begin their Song,
As they begin their Days;
And from their undissembling Tongues,
Their God has perfect Praise.
^th Old and Young, join in a Song,
As they have Utt'rance given;
Their Harmonies, mount up the skies,
And joins the Courts of Heaven.
(...) glorious Day, then I did say,
O! blessed be that Scheme;
(...) over joy'd, and Sleep destr^y'd,
And quite dissolved my Dream.
XIV. An Epitaph Upon Sir ISAAC NEWTON.
BEneath this Stone, here lies a Bard interred,
His Equal, never on this Globe appeared,
A Traveller, whose vast capacious Soul
Went through the Zodiac, and from Pole to Pole,
Discovering Worlds, which long lay hid in Night,
'Til GOD, he said, let Newton be a Light;
Systems on Systems, in far distant Space,
He bro't to View, and onward h^ld his Chase,
'Til distant Mansions, they so ch^rm'd his Sight,
He dropped his Clay, and thither took his Flight;
His guardian Angel, know him beaming far,
And waft him Homeward, in a golden Car,
And says, you're welcome, mighty Traveller,
Unto your Glories, and your Mansions here,
His Visitors, who came from every Pole,
O! how they view his great capacious Soul,
And represent him in an Angel's Shape,
As Men, like Man often Times do show an Ape.
He hither came, from yonder ^nsky Spo^,
Perhaps they never another such have got:
In heavenly Climes, this spacious Soul may grow,
To vie with us, who do admire him so.
XV. An Epitaph upon my Friend Doct. THOMAS LANGERELL. Who was drowned in
Connecticut^ River. June 1757, as he was attempting to save the Ferry-Man, who
had fallen out of the Boat.
HEre lies interred, a young, but learned Head,
Just mounts the Stage, then sinks among the Dead
Whilst be from Death did others seek to save,
Death threw his Dart, which plunged him in the Grave.
Drowned in the Prime and Glory of his Years,
He l^^t his Spouse to drown herself in Tears
And thus the cries, could not Minerva give
A blessed Reprieve, and let her Pupil live?
O gloomy Fate, no Learning Mortals have,
Can b^^^^ Death, or ever elude the Grave!
XVI. An ESSAY on Prodegies and Earthquakes.
HAil heaven born Muse, the chief of all the Nine,
This once assist this feeble Muse of mine,
And touch her Lips with a Heroes Fire,
While that she roves a cross the golden Lyre,
With reverend Awe, keep her within her Sphere,
To view the Seenes of the preceding Year,
Catastrophes, and awful Prodegies,
Are felt on Earth, and seen in a^ure Skies,
Vapors of Smoke and Flames, and Seas of Blo^d,
Show forth the Wrath of an offended GOD:
These awful Signs of his up lifted Hand,
They speak the Terror of his great Command:
Sulpher and Nitre from deep Cavern^ burns,
Convulse the Earth, the Mountains overturns,
The Earth it trembles, the Hills are sore afraid,
If half his Finger on this Globe is laid,
Tall Cities into ruin Heaps are laid,
Thousands of Mortals underneath are dead,
Ten Thousand more go screaming, screaching down
To the deep Cave^n^ of the gaping Ground,
While mighty Mountains sink their lofty Head,
And N^pr^ takes Possession in their Stead;
While fright^ned Mortals ^aggering every where,
A^ Shrieks, and Swoons, and cruel Death was there,
While neighboring Rocks and Hillsrepulse their Cries
^eat the imperious Echoes round the Skies,
While the hoarse Thunder from the hallow Ground
Threaten all Nature, and make it shudder round
Forbear, my Muse, too feeble are thy Lays,
To tell the sm^llest Portion of his Ways,
My Muse forbear to prophesy or say,
That these are prelude^ of the Judgment Day,
When all those Seeds shall from the Center burn,
All Nature to a mighty Chan^ turn,
Not needs a Comet for to help it burn;
That Day and Hour to Him is only known,
Who sets upon the high and lofty Throne:
^orbear, my Muse, be silent and remiss,
Ah! who shall live when the great God does this.
XVII. To Mrs. MARY HOWARD of Bridgewater; Upon her curing a Cancerous Humor,
which greatly endangered the Author's Life.
MY Heart abounds with Thankfulness,
To the great Author of my Bl^se;
And you, my aged Sug^on^ss,
Who did effect my Cure:
The Laws of Grati^^de impart
Such deep Characters on my Heart,
I hope they never will then to depart,
But evermore endure.
2.
When Heaven shall sign the grand Release,
Of you my aged Surgeoness;
I wish you everlasting Bliss,
Free from you. Toils and Cares;
When you your Journey here fulfill,
I hope that you will make your Will
And leave behind your wondrous Skill,
Among your Friends and Heirs.
3.
That Generations yet to come,
May say with J^stice over your Tomb,
Here lies a good and virtuous One,
To Charity inclined;
Who never was fraught with Avarice,
But was a skilful Surgeoness,
Relieving Thousands in Distress,
In Love to human Kind.
XVIII. To a Young POETRESS; Who has been lavish of her Praise, on the aged
Author:
YOUNG Lady do not take amiss,
That I presume to send you this,
Since that you are ^ Po^tress;
Our Souls perhaps are Mates:
But yours hovered round the Air,
For near the Space of F^rty Year,
Before it found a Body here;
So crossing are the Fates.
2.
So we are withheld with Iron Bands,
That Hymen never can join our Hands;
All Natures Laws the same withstands,
There can be no such Thing.
But if again your Face I see,
I hope you will so complaisant be,
To give that Piece of Poetry,
You made upon the Spring.
3.
When Heaven shall sign our grand Discharge,
And Death shall set our Souls at large,
Our Flesh with other Dust immerge;
There may be future Joys,
Freed from this Veil of Woe and Sin,
The Brother and the Sister Twin,
In heavenly Mansions meet again.
Where nothing gluts nor cloys.
4.
These Lines they cannot disengage,
Nor put your Lovers in a Rage;
With Innocence may Youth and Age,
Converse in Poetry. --
Subside my Muse, Madam Adieu,
All earthly Blessings wait on you;
With Male Admirers, not a few,
Til you shall married he,
5.
When Heaven shall sign the grand Release,
Of this young charming Poetress;
I wish her everlasting Bliss,
Amongst the fixed Stars.
Posses her Mansion that is above,
Surrounded by the Arms of Jove,
Disdaining Cupid's Toys of Love,
Or surly Frow^ of Mart.
XIX. The Lawyer's Affright.
(The following was occasioned by the Adventure of a famous Lawyer, who was
terribly affrighted, and almost driven from his Dwelling, by the Sight of an
Image made of a Pumpkin Shell, which having a Candle in it, in the Night made a
very frightful Appearance)

ALL you Lawyers indeed, who pretend for to plead,
First seek for an honest Direstor,
^est while you proceed, your'er frighted indeed.
With an infernal horrible Spectre.
2.
^or all your Renown, yet Fortune may frown,
When Aspects and Planets are lowering
And an Appatation may have a Commission
To give you a pitiful Securing.
3.
I Will tell you in brief, there was one of your Chief,
Who many a Lawsuit commences;
Yet an on^ious Sight did him so affright,
That he scarcely retained his S^ns^^.
4.
Some Mortal^ do tell 'twas a Pumpkin Shell,
That was fixed on the Top of a Pole;
Yet that Apparition he though it had Commission
To fetch him off Body and Soul.
5.
When it first did appear he to it did floor,
Being armed with Faith to the Brim;
If it be Lucifer, said he, I Will demur,
Or set up a Title with him.
6.
Over Dalton and Cook, he did nimbly look,
And finding a cogent Director,
I Am resolved, said he, to demur to his Plas,
And thus he accosted the Spectre.
7.
With you, Lucifer, I Will join in Demur,
That you have no Power to harm,
Nor by Law have you right, your Servant to fright,
And therefore walk off of my Farm.
8.
You come in the Night, and my Servants you fright,
That no Comfort of late they have enjoyed,
And by my lord Cook, like the Devil you look,
O lie, be gone, Satan, avoid.
9.
The (...) he who't 'twas a Defeat,
And he followed is over a Slough,
But the (...), and looked very stout,
Said he, (...) me I vow.
10.
More^fully he (...) the Monster's great Eyes,
With his Nostril^ like (...) of Fire!
He cries out, begone, ill looking Satan,
And do not approach me any nigher.
11.
The Monster draws (...) and puts him in Fear,
His Conscience it turns Adversary;
I fear now, says he, this Im^ will catch me,
And make me gang over Char^^^'s Ferry.
12.
By Cook and Littleton, I Would better to run,
To avoid his barbarous Tricks,
Lest he (...) me by the Throat to Char^^^'s Ferry Boat,
At the Bank of the River of Styx.
13.
Said Conscience your're naught, and have used to Extort,
And I Will tell you in fact your a Liar,
He pleads guilty now, and (...) through the Slough,
Quite up to his Buttocks and higher.
14.
Crying, he is of the Tribe that will not take a Bribe,
Or else I Would have given him a Guines,
B^^ he has got a Writ that I cannot abate,
To carry me (...) to G^^^na.
15.
Half frighted to Dea^^ he could scarce draw his Breath,
As some of our ^orians says:
There can be no Denial but that a great Trial
This Lawyer has made of his Faith.
XX. The Resignation or Dismission of the Muse.
Farewell, dear Muse, long Time I Have kept thee hid,
Unto this World (...) useless dull or dead,
While I Have been taking up some dirty P^^^;
I kept thee mostly to divert myself:
And then sometimes a Neighbor, Friend or Two,
That Is all the Use long Time I Have made of you,
Far from a noble and ingenious Mind,
I thee to Satyr did too much incline;
Ill natured Satyr always (...),
Unless it be to scourge a (...).
Farewell, dear Muse, farewell, fatewell, adie^,
And yet how loath I am to part with you;
Thee to confine, I dare not make Pretense,
To withered Organs and benighted Sense:
Go darling Muse, a better Friend you will f^nd,
Some learned Head more frugal and more kind,
What shall enlarge thy Feet and make thee (...)
From Pole to Pole and overtake the Sun:
Than take a Tour among the fixed Stars,
Beyond the Or^s of Jup^ter and Mars,
And see how System^ into Systems (...);
View other (...) rounding other Suns:
Till Thou^ands Systems they are bro't to View;
Whilst that ten Thousands they are hid from you,
Till you're convinced no Creature ever could trace
Creating Wisdom through the Realms of Space,
Sol^ System, c^ncel'd-Space would miss no more,
Tha^ would this World one Pebble from her Shore.
And the^ return unto this dus^y Clod,
To sing the Wisdom of creating GOD
While lofty Notes shall dance upon (...) Strings,
Attempt the Odes that holy Raphael (...)
On Wings of Faith and Love and ^trong Desire,
To join the Ho^ts of the Seraphic Ch^ir,
Thy Numbers mensur'd as they are above,
My ever ^^sing Joys and overflowing Love.
The Author's Apology to the last Impression.
Indulgent and Friendly Readers,
THE former Impressions has received such unexpected Approbation among my
ingeni^us and indulgent Friends; I am thereby emboldened, with the Advice of
some of my Friends, to make some Additions and Amendments, and promise the
critical and ^earned World, if they will let me come off this Time with
Impu^ity, never to trouble their delicate Ear^ any more with my t^isting
Impertinencies.

If that my Themes don't harmonise,
I hope the Learned and the Wise,
Will not severely critici^e,
My Aims were miscellaneo^^.
It Is easier to find Fault than mend,
Perf^ction they do not pretend,
Formed to divert and please a Friend,
Indulgent and ingenious.
But if these Lines they should offend,
It is against my Will;
For to divert, I did intend,
And show my simple Skill.

