A PARAPHRASE.

A PARAPHRASE ON PART OF THE ECONOMY OF HUMAN LIFE.

INSCRIBED TO HIS EXCELLENCY THOMAS POWNALL, ESQUIRE GOVERNOR OF THE PROVINCE OF
THE MASSACHUSETTS BAY.

BOSTON NEW ENGLAND: PRINTED AND SOLD BY GREEN AND RUSSELL, AT THEIR
PRINTING-OFFICE, IN QUEEN STREET. MDCCLIX.

THE CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTION. Page 3 ANGER. Page 7 DESIRE AND LOVE. Page 14 WOMAN. Page 22
HUSBAND. Page 34 FATHER. Page 41 SON. Page 49 BROTHERS. Page 53 WISE AND
IGNORANT. Page 56 MAGISTRATES AND SUBJECTS. Page 65 RELIGION. Page 75
ADVERTISEMENT.
"THE ECONOMY OF HUMAN LIFE" gave rise to the following performance.
The first draught of it was only a versification of the economy: but the
author having since considerably enlarged it without regarding the original, it
cannot be called in it is present state a versification. And even the title it
now bears "A PARAPHRASE" does not properly belong to it: for tho, in some parts
of it, it may be a paraphrase; in other parts, the matter is not the same.

It is called "a paraphrase" for want of a more suitable title; and to show not
only, what it had it is rise from; but, the author's obligations to "the
economy".

If what is here offered to the public should not be disapproved; the
remainder, or the whole together may perhaps, at some convenient time, be
submitted to their censure.

BOSTON MARCH 28, 1759.
A PARAPHRASE ON PART OF The Economy of Human Life.
INTRODUCTION.
YE Sons of earth! with lowly reverence bend;
And silently your deep attention lend
To truth, instructive truth; which from on high,
Is sent to you, the favorites of the sky.
Wherever the sun directs his genial ray;
Wherever superior orbs their light display;
Where sound, swift-wafted on the wings of air,
Can reach a fit -- a correspondent car;
Wherever are minds endowed with reason's ray;
Wherever fair reason can her charms display:
Even there -- built firm on nature's lasting base --
Let truth succeed, adorned with every grace:
There let truth's sacred precepts be conveyed;
Revered by all; by all with joy obeyed.
From GOD alone the wide extended earth,
And all the worlds around derived their birth:
Grace beauty and proportion from his hand
Sprung forth effulgent, at his great command.
Spread through the regions of unbounded space,
In all his works see harmony and grace:
In all his works, consummately divine,
Unbounded power and perfect wisdom shine:
In him united all perfection lies;
He Is good and great, omnipotent and wise:
His wisdom, pure as heaven's unsullied light,
All-glorious shines; beyond conception bright:
His dauntless arm a power almighty wears;
And in his works it is matchless power declares:
In unremitting streams his goodness flows;
And undiminish'd through all nature glows:
His attributes unrivaled pass all bounds;
Eternal Majesty Psalm. civ. 1. -- Thy Throne Eternal Majesty (...)
his throne surrounds:
There seated -- crowned with glory's spotless light.
And full-array'd with all-creating might --
He bids the world, an unformed sluggish mass,
Assume new beauty, harmony and grace:
Observant of it is Sov'reign's high commands,
The world all-graceful -- all harmonious stands:
His breath a renovating vigor gives;
And over all nature spread, all nature lives.
From the calm sky, or mounted on the storm,
He sees the universe his will perform:
He bids the orbs, which brighten yonder sky.
Perform their course; the obedient orbs comply
Over nature's laws he sov'reignly presides:
And nature's self by mere volition guides.
The perfect wisdom in GOD'S works displayed,
By human minds but darkly is surveyed:
Knowledge in man but as a dream appears;
His views are short; he reasons and he errs:
But GOD'S is boundless; at perfection stands;
Pervades all nature; and all hearts commands.
HE reasons not; nor truth by inf'rence knows;
For truth from HIM as from it is fountain flows.
Justice and judgment nature's laws do own
The eternal basis of the ALMIGHTY'S throne:
Mercy and love with equal luster shine
Around that throne, and speak it all divine.
In matchless glory who with GOD shall share?
Or with the omnipotent in power compare?
In wisdom, who is his rival? or can claim
In real goodness a superior name?
To HIS creative power man owes his birth;
And HE has fixed his station here on earth:
To HIS beneficence, quite unconfined,
Man owes the rare endowments of his mind:
The matchless wonders of the human frame
Declare the architect, and GOD proclaim.
Hear then his voice, O man! obedience pay
To his just precepts, which point out the way
To joys, that shall with raptures fill thy soul,
And age on age in endless series roll.
ANGER.
AS whirlwinds in their rapid course are found
To root up forests, and spread mischief round;
As earthquakes -- states and kingdoms overthrown --
By their convulsions make all nature groan:
So anger, leaping reason's sacred mound,
Mischief, with mischief coupled, spreads around;
Destruction all abroad promiscuous throws;
And far and wide dispenses woes on woes:
Unnumbred ills await it is deadly hand,
And scatter terror through the affrightned land.
These are the dire effects of royal rage;
And these reproach most christian LEWIS' Voltaire, the panegyrist of LEWIS
XIV, has given diverse instances of the rage and perfidy of that Monarch. A
remarkable one respects the Dutch: whose destruction (which he nearly
accomplished in 1672) he meditated at the very time he settled a treaty of
peace with them. The desperate remedy they had recourse to (which was the only
one in their power) was the cutting of their dikes: by which means Amsterdam
and all the adjacent country were laid under water. This stopped the progress
of Lewis; and, tho it almost ruined them, prevented their total destruction.
See the Age of Lewis XIV.
age:
These mark the annals of the STEWART-RACE;
Eclipse their glory; and their reign disgrace:
Whilst GEORGE and FRED'RICK -- in close See the convention of 1758 between his
Majesty and the King of Prussia.
union joined
To scourge the lawless tyrants of mankind --
Unsway'd by passion, rule by reason's laws;
And gain from all the admiring world applause.
When anger rages in an humbler Sphere,
The effects, tho similar, are less severe:
In every sphere, unheeding reason's ray,
It rushes on, impatient of delay:
In every sphere all happiness confounds;
Friendship destroys; and social virtue wounds.
The man, with rage inspired, is truly blind;
Before -- how bright soe'cr his reason shined:
Tossed like the Sea, while boisterous are its waves,
With equal rage, by passion tossed, he raves:
As on the Sea, on passion's billows tossed,
He quits the helm of reason, and is lost.
While yet thy reason unimpair'd remains;
Ere passion's furious hand has seized the reins;
By others madness warned, restrain thy own;
Nor drive blessed reason from her native throne;
Compel her not to quit the sovereign sway,
And to her mortal foe to yield the day.
When rising passion makes the blood grow warm,
And indicates a quick-approaching storm:
When passion risen, with tempestuous force,
Would bear down all things in it is rapid course:
Then -- then call reason to your instant aid;
And let her voice be instantly obeyed:
Then -- then -- in that important moment -- show
That reason can thy passion's rage subdue;
That reason can the wild excess control,
And to a calm reduce the boisterous soul.
Your passion to subdue, if hard you find;
And if to wrath your nature be inclined:
Prevent it; all temptations to it, fly;
And every way to elude it is efforts try:
Prevent it; and you will show a strength of mind,
Raised far above the level of mankind:
You Will show, that wisdom is your friendly guide;
And over your conduct, that her laws preside.
A fool with fools is quickly in a rage,
And in hot broils for trifles will engage:
His rage and folly keep an equal pace,
Reproach his nature and his form disgrace:
While wisdom's sons will kindly condescend
To pardon those who unawares offend:
When passion moves, will bid it not to rage;
And by example teach each sex and age:
Their passion moved, it moves by wisdom's laws;
And far from censure, gains deserved applause.
The man of generous principles possessed,
Whose nature's frailties touch his conscious breast,
If tears, that mark a true repentance flow;
And all the signs of reformation show;
Will ready pardon to offenders bring,
And hide their faults with love's befriending wing.
Indulge not wrath; when angry, quickly cool;
And let right reason all thy passions rule:
Anger but whets a sword to wound thy breast;
To slay thy friend; and all thy joys molest.
By rules of moderation always swayed,
To no rash act by anger be betrayed:
Let no rash act from sudden passion spring,
To hurt thy credit, or thy conscience sting:
Nothing attempt while passion swells thy breast,
And makes it is rage to all around confessed:
Passion drives reason from the imperial chair,
And does it is subjects noblest powers impair;
Unfits him for the action of the day,
And does his soul to numerous ills betray.
Let not revenge find shelter in thy breast,
And with a home-felt pain thy soul infest:
'Twill wound thy heart; allay it is sprightliest joy;
And all thy peace, if ever indulged, destroy:
Thy virtue and it is best productions soil,
And on thyself in all it is rage recoil.
Forgive when wronged; and never the wrong return
Nor in thy heart let rage and malice burn:
Who seeks for vengeance with a watchful eye,
In wait against himself does truly lie;
On his own head, by folly circled round,
He draws down ills that all his joys confound.
As water cast on fire abates it is force,
And in a moment checks it is rapid course:
So gentle words, when anger swells to rage,
Can check it is progress, and it is heat assuage:
By gentle words appease a wrathful breast;
And from a frenzy sooth it down to rest:
By gentle words the growing rage impede;
And make a calm to passion's storm succeed.
The man, whose anger you can thus assuage,
And thus appease when in it is fullest rage,
No more shall view thee with a vengeful eye;
Nor more his friendship and esteem deny:
Won by thy goodness, he will to reason bend;
And from a foe become your hearty friend.
Look round with care, and view the present state;
Unbias'd by the conduct of the great:
Look round with care; and but few things you will find,
That justly claim solicitude of mind:
Few things -- above the mean thy soul to raise;
Or make it with the rage of passion blaze.
Suppress my passion in it is earliest stage;
And all thy powers to check it is force engage:
Over reason let it never victorious ride;
Nor bear thee headlong down it is rapid tide:
It springs from folly, or from weakness springs;
And ample matter for repentance brings:
With shame it is coupled, to disgrace is joined;
And with remorse insep'rably combined.
DESIRE AND LOVE.
WHEN through your veins the blood impetuous flows,
And all the heat of youthful vigor knows:
When nature joyous feels the young desire;
And lovely Sirens for the kindling fire:
Heed well your steps; of every wile beware;
Their laughing eyes; their wanton looks and air:
Their laughing eyes, their looks and air conspire,
To kindle in the breast love's fiercest fire:
Heed well your steps; beware of all their wiles;
Their lovely voice, and their all-charming smiles:
Their charming smiles subdue the heedless youth,
And make him swerve from virtue and from truth:
His opening ear their lovely voices charm;
And with their music all his powers disarm:
Disarm of virtue; which in youth appears,
More lovely, and more graceful than in years:
Disarm of virtue; which alone can give
A joy, that shall all other joys outlive;
A joy, that shall increase with growing age;
Nor fail us when we quit this mortal stage.
Never let a harlot, by a close embrace
Once stain thy virtue, or thy name disgrace:
Resist her charms, by reason's dictates swayed;
Nor by her form, tho matchless, be betrayed:
Lend not an ear to her delusive tongue,
Perverse in wit, and eloquently wrong:
Nor let thy heart, attracted by her charms,
Resign thee to her all-enslaving arms:
Lest in life's prime -- when nature gay appears,
And, full of joy, unnumber'd beauties wears --
Thy full-orb'd sun, tho gloriously it shine,
Should in the morning of thy days decline:
When health's full spring, which can alone supply
The stream of pleasure, shall be quickly dry;
When every source of joy, so fast they flow,
Shall be all spent, or run at best, but slow:
When pain shall seize thee, in that early stage,
And quick reduce thee to the state of age.
Desire, uncheck'd by reason's rightful sway,
And deaf to what it is sacred precepts say,
Will rise to frenzy and to fury grow;
And, far from yielding joy, all joy over throw:
When such it is rage, over every bound it leaps;
And, spurning virtue's nod, the empire keeps:
Thus uncontrol'd, to madness 'twill inflame;
Defeat it is end; and frustrate all it is aim:
Thus uncontrol'd, 'twill every misery breed;
And, in the end, to sure destruction lead.
Now view the maid, the love-inspiring maid,
With virtue and with modesty arrayed:
Survey her matchless form; her mind survey;
And all their beauty in full light display.
Her matchless form, displayed in open light,
Attracts the eye, and charms the ravished sight.
Surveyed and re-survey'd from feet to head,
A thousand nameless beauties round her spread:
See down her neck the charming locks descend;
And, black as jet, in waving ringlets end:
The jetty locks, as down her neck they flow,
The lovely white to great advantage show:
Her comely neck, with symmetry and grace.
Rises majestic on it is noble base;
And, like a column of superior art,
Does to the eye 2 fine effect impart:
Her piercing eyes their harmless lightning play;
And dart around a joy-diffusing ray:
Her cheeks, adorned with lovely white and red,
May vie with roses in their flowery bed:
Her coral lips, whenever she speaks, disclose
The finest ivory in concentric rows:
Her tempting breasts in whiteness far outgo
The opening lilly, and the new fallen snow:
Her tempting breasts the eyes of all command,
And gently rising court the amorous hand:
Their beauty and proportion strike the eye,
And art's best skill to equal them defy.
These matchless charms, which now in bloom appear,
Are far exalted by the dress they wear:
With virtue robe'd, with modesty attired,
They Are more and more by all mankind admired:
With virtue robe'd, with modesty arrayed,
They Are in the fairest light to all displayed:
True virtue and true modesty inspire
With love sincere, unmixed with base desire;
Set off the beauties of her lovely face;
And give each feature a peculiar grace:
Each feature sheds a joy-inspiring ray;
And all around are innocently gay:
Each feature speaks the goodness of her mind;
By pride untainted, generous, frank and kind.
How full of innocence her sprightly eye!
Which with the dove's in innocence may vie;
From falsehood and from guile how free her heart!
How free from cunning, and intriguing art!
How sweet her kiss! than honey far more sweet;
And like her lips exempt from all deceit:
Her lips far sweeter odours breath around,
Than ever exhaled from India's odorous ground:
More sweet than ever perfumed the spicy coast;
More sweet than famed Arabia can boast.
Than roses far more grateful is her smile;
And more than roses can the sense beguile.
These are her charms -- her charms as bright appear
As yonder stars that deck heaven's sparkling sphere;
And, like to -- Agenera nata.
here is, which brot down fabled Ille pater rectorque deum, cui dextra trisulcis
Ignibus armata est, qui (...) orbem. --
Ovid. met. lib. 3. fab. 12.
JOVE,
Conquer the breast least capable of love.
These numerous charms, distinguished in their kind,
Are all eclipsed by her superior mind.
Endowed with every female excellence,
Good nature, prudence, virtue and good sense,
She sees without a frown a sister's charms,
And tho a rival takes her to her arms:
She looks around; each scene of life reviews;
And with a heedful step her course pursues:
She views her heart with circumspective eyes;
And by true wisdom's laws her conduct tries.
From noble or ignoble lineage sprung,
Vice in her presence dares not move it is tongue;
Awed by her presence, at her feet as dead
The monster lies; nor dares to lift it is head.
When from her lips the words harmonious flow,
They Are fraught with sense, and with ideas glow:
Ideas -- bright with truth's celestial ray;
And clear as Phoebus in meridian day.
Thus virtue, sense, good nature, prudence -- joined,
Display the rare endowments of her mind:
Endowments -- which, from nature tho they came,
Improved by wisdom, spread abroad her fame.
From nature's hand, which every good bestows,
Tho charm on charm in such profusion flows;
She Is not elate, she is not debased, with pride;
Nor lets it in her charms triumphant ride:
But modesty and kind deportment reign
In all she does, and just applauses gain.
These and a thousand nameless charms conspire
To waken in the breast love's generous fire.
Shut not to love, inspiring love, thy breast;
But, open to it is tenderness, be blessed:
It Is sacred flame, when incorrupt and pure,
Shall raise thy heart, and every joy insure:
It Is sacred flame shall mollify thy breast,
And make it suitable to be impressed
With principles -- just, generous, public, free;
That lead to union with Society;
That lead to pleasures social and refined;
Enlarge the heart; and elevate the mind.
WOMAN.
ATTEND ye fair! ye love-inspiring fair!
To wisdom's voice, and her instructions hear!
To wisdom's voice if you an ear will lend;
And unreserv'd to her just precepts bend:
If you will give ear to virtue's sacred voice;
And what she dictates make your early choice:
If truth's bright precepts free admission find;
And be imprinted deep upon your mind:
Your mental charms a bright'ning ray shall shed;
And round your form unnumber'd beauties spread.
True mental charms emit a brighter ray;
And more true beauty than a face display:
These charms shall make your beauty, in the wane,
The rose's sweetness as in bloom retain:
Shall make you be esteemed, beloved, admired;
Whilst every eye is with mere beauty tired.
In life's fair bloom; the morning of your days --
When men with rising passion on you gaze;
When nature, softly whispering in your ear,
Does all the meaning of their looks declare:
Then be your heart upon a watchful guard;
And to their soft persuasions closely barred:
Attend with caution to their crafty tongue;
More smooth than oil, and with temptation hung:
To their delusive words no def'rence pay;
But reason's voice religiously obey.
Nature, fair creature! when she formed thy mind,
Formed thee a fit companion for mankind:
Not merely to excite love's genial fire;
And with a flood of joy to quench desire:
Not wantonly to sport the hours away;
Nor, like a slave, man's lawless will obey;
But to assist him in life's numerous toils;
To cheer him in misfortune with your smiles;
To sooth his breast when troubles overbear;
And with your love to recompense his care:
To raise his drooping spirits in distress;
And with your own promote his happiness.
But who is she whom every grace surrounds;
Whom every grace with all that is lovely crowns;
By nature formed to touch a generous breast;
By nature formed to make man amply blessed?
Yonder she walks along in virgin-bloom:
And where she walks the rose's sweets perfume.
See from her presence fly ill-boding fear;
And every gloom before her disappear!
See innocence with cheerfulness combine,
Sit on her brow, and in her actions shine!
See modesty adorn her lovely cheek,
And in her language and behavior speak!
See temperance in due bounds restrain desire;
And give a check to passion's lawless fire!
Humility and meekness, round her head,
Are as a crown of circling glory spread:
Discretion ripens with her growing Years,
And on her brow in sceptered state appears:
When scandal tarnishes a rising name,
And throws from tongue to tongue her neighbor's fame,
Her soul disdains to spread the scandal round;
And, far from wid'ning, strives to heal the wound.
Unrivaled goodness warms her generous breast;
And there -- it is native home -- takes up it is rest:
Over her it bears so uncontrol'd a sway,
She thinks all nature does it is laws obey:
She harbors no suspicions in her mind;
But judges by herself of all mankind.
These virtues, with a graceful freedom crowned,
Spread far and wide her character around.
Among her virtues prudence bears the sway,
And shines abroad with a distinguished ray:
In all she does it uniformly guides;
And over her conduct constantly presides.
Softness and love with a majestic mien,
Speak in her eye, and in her looks are seen.
Her tongue harmonious music warbles round;
And on her lips is honey's sweetness found.
Sacred to truth, and by it is laws confined,
Her lips impart the language of her mind.
With a becoming grace her words appear;
And, like her honest heart, are all sincere.
By custom, and example undecoy'd,
With cheerful mind she keeps herself employed:
Each day's revolving sun her task renews;
Nor does her hand the welcome task refuse:
To that -- her mind so uniformly bends;
To that, with so much constancy attends;
That morning visits (destined to amuse;
To talk of dress, laced waistcoats, and the news;
To spread the scandal of the night before;
And, that once done, prepare the way for more)
Never interrupt the business of the day;
Nor by their levity her mind betray:
Much less shall rabbles, -- Certain modern assemblies so called: not yet known
in America.
which the sex debase,
Or routs, or -- Certain modern assemblies so called: not yet known in America.
drums her character disgrace.
By wisdom swayed, she thus her hours employs;
And thus employed, a tranquil mind enjoys:
A tranquil mind -- that very far outweighs
The applause of crowds; and ever her own just praise.
Thus fame from such a course of action springs;
And bears her high upon it is rapid wings;
Thus fame, thus inward peace -- so heaven ordains --
Flows from one source, and lasting strength obtains.
Observe her now on life's advancing stage!
And now review her in maturer age!
Her virtues in a fine assemblage blend;
And toward perfection uniformly tend:
In every character that she sustains.
Each virtue sways her breast; and there unrivaled reigns.
As CHILD -- submissive to her parent's will;
Which, to the utmost, all her powers fulfill:
To such submissive as submission claim,
Or by a parent's, or a husband's name:
Submission, not enforced by wrathful strife,
Is an unfailing lesson of her life:
A lesson, which she studies and obeys;
And which, when learnt, a duteous mind displays.
As PARENT, -- watchful over her tender brood:
And ever aiming at their greatest good:
By nature moved, by every tie enjoined,
She forms in virtue's mould the tender mind:
She brings them early into wisdom's school,
And forms them there by wisdom's sacred rule:
Betimes she points them to the paths of truth,
And through life's devious road directs their youth:
Her eye the whole of their behavior views;
And with the day it is watchful care renews:
To all it is checks -- long practiced to obey --
Their cheerful minds a strict obedience pay.
Thus by her precepts, and example warmed,
To virtuous habits are their manners formed:
Which, fully copied from her own, engage
The unfeigned love of every rank and age.
Now grown mature, to her regard they owe
The home-felt pleasures, which their bosoms know:
The home-felt joys, which, -- in a lengthening train, --
Through life's whole course within their bosoms reign.
As MISTRESS -- easy in each just command;
Her servants love her and obedient stand:
To her commands respect is always paid;
With judgment she commands and is obeyed.
Kind, good and generous to the servile race;
She rules their hearts -- and there her empire trace.
She speaks -- her willing servants swiftly run;
She points -- and instantly the thing is done:
For love, the law of love, within their breast,
Is firmly rooted; and so deep impressed,
That what she bids them do, they do of choice;
And naught desire but her approving voice:
Her unasked goodness to their feet gives wings,
Warmth to their love; and to their duty springs.
As FRIEND -- obliging, tender and sincere:
Upon whose breast true friendship's marks appear*
Her actions, gestures, speech and looks impart
The undissembled goodness of her heart.
Unitedly they all conspire to show
That in her friendships she is sincere and true.
Thus lovely in these characters of life:
She Is lovely too in character of WIFE.
A character -- by graceless tongues profaned --
Which yet, to virtue and it is habits trained,
Includes whatever is beautiful and good;
And raises vast delight, as soon as viewed.
In this -- unrivaled all her charms appear;
And, far from fading, grow with every year:
In this, as all the rest, good-natured, kind;
Her manners gentle; and her love refined:
She feels her partner's joys; his sorrows too;
And in them all demonstrates that she is true --
True to his Interests; true in every trust;
True to her vows; in every promise just.
If adverse fortunes discompose his breast;
And, unremitting, all his days molest:
Fearless to her -- by common interest joined,
He pours his soul, and opens all his mind:
Her counsels, guided by her love, assuage
His rising grief, and dissipate it is rage.
If fortune's favors compass him around;
And, great as heart can wish, his wishes bound:
The bliss derived from thence, however great,
Till she participates is incomplete.
Thus joy imparted, to the imparting breast
Yields greater joy, and makes it far more blessed.
Thus mutual joys their mutual love attend;
Mix with their griefs; and with their sorrows blend:
Thus mutual joys in souls like these are found;
And mutually from each to each rebound.
Supported on the expanded wings of fame,
Her merit spreads abroad her husband's name;
Who hears, delighted with the harmonious sound,
From every tongue her praises echoed round;
Who, blessed with such a matchless wife, shall stand
Among the happy in the foremost band.
At home observe her; there -- her conduct trace;
Observe her there -- adorned with every grace:
She there with dignity presides; and there
Her virtues seen, in all their charms appear:
Among her virtues prudence foremost stands;
And all her thoughts, ere brot in act, commands.
As soon as Phoebus shoots a trembling ray,
And while night-glories in full luster play,
She quits her bed; her house-concerns reviews;
And each domestic's proper task renews:
A frugal neatness in her dress appears,
Adapted to her station and her years:
Her family, the source of all her joys,
Her constant care, and strict regard employs:
There -- elegance in each apartment reigns;
And all the marks of housewifry retains:
There -- peace takes up it is residence; and there
No broils molest, no discord wounds the ear:
There -- joys, as great as mortals know, reside;
And thence, diffused abroad, spread far and wide.
In prosperous days, when all around is gay;
And fortune shines with an auspicious ray:
Unlike her sex, she is not elate with pride;
Nor, like her sex, throws modesty aside:
But unelate, with every charm appears;
And all the marks of true politeness wears.
If fortune frowning, throws it is shafts around;
And aims to bring her level with the ground:
Above them all, at fortune's frowns she smiles;
And all it is aim at her destruction foils:
With patience armed, she fortune's rage shall quell;
And all it is shafts heroinely repel.
Happy the man, whose heart, as well as hand,
Is joined with here is in wedlock's sacred band:
Happy the child, who from her womb shall spring;
And rise to age beneath her fost'ring wing:
Thrice happy both, to whom indulgent heaven
Has such a friend with such endowments given.
CONSANGUINITY; or, NATURAL RELATIONS.
HUSBAND.
TAKE to thyself -- obeying heaven -- a wife;
That comfort, joy and ornament of life:
Slight not the blessing, but become -- tho late --
A prop, support and guardian of the state.
But fix not suddenly; consult with care,
The genius, manners, temper of the fair:
Upon thy present choice -- so nature tends --
Thy future peace and happiness depends:
Not only thine, but -- such the important case --
Thine, blended with the welfare of thy race.
If, like the The Butterfly.
fly in varying colors gay,
In dress and ornament she wastes the day;
If from her favorite glass but seldom seen,
She views herself as beauty's matchless queen;
If with her charms her soul is warmly fired,
And, when they are praised, with raptures is inspired;
If always loud, and talkative -- her tongue;
Or always mirthful, and employed in song:
If wanton eyes betray her loose desires;
And in her bosom flame love's fiercest fires:
If passion, caprice, whim -- her only guides,
She scorns reproof, and all advice derides:
Estranged from home, if never at home she will stay;
But in a round of visits spend the day:
Turn from her charms, in beauty tho they vie
With the resplendent glories of the sky:
Turn from her charms -- her charms, by every art,
Betray the unwary; and inslave the heart:
Let not thy soul, by fancy's choice ensnared,
With such a part'ner be unequal paired:
To such a part'ner tied -- so hard the lot --
You Will wish to cut the worse than gordian knot:
But wish in vain. -- domestic comfort fled,
Succeeding ills shall circle round your head:
Succeeding ills, with every woe impressed,
Shall seize, with unresisted force, your breast:
Domestic comfort fled; abroad you will roam
In search of joys no longer found at home.
But vain the search. -- each object that you find,
Will be discolored by your sickening mind:
Which, far from tasting joys at every source,
Will interrupt them in the common course;
Or in the common course as down they flow,
Inverting nature, change them all to woe.
Then fly her arm's embrace; and, yet unjoin'd,
Enjoy a peaceful and a tranquil mind:
Forsake her paths, and reason's voice obey:
Who tread her paths, their own true good betray.
If in the FAIR ONE virtue always traced,
With every female excellence be graced:
If, full of charms, her manners strike your sight;
And more and more, as closer viewed delight:
If, joined with prudence, sense inspires her breast;
In every feature full to view expressed:
If beauty's sprightly charms adorn her face,
And, scattered over her, all her person grace:
If -- heaven propitious -- you should chance to find
A woman thus endowed, and thus refined;
Worthy to be thy friend, companion, wife;
Worthy thy love and confidence through life:
Take to thyself -- therein true wisdom lies --
And whilst you may, secure the matchless prize:
Like virtue's self she brings her own reward;
And justly claims a fixed and warm regard.
Regard the fair one, to thy wishes given,
As a prime blessing sent thee down from heaven:
Let every action, and each pleasing art
Engage her love, and win her blameless heart:
In all thy conduct show a generous breast.
With evry kind affection deep impressed:
In all thy conduct easy, calm and mild;
Not soon provoked; -- provoked, soon reconciled:
Treat her -- by love, as well as interest led --
As, under thee, the mistress and the head:
To her if suitable respect you show;
And do it frequently in public view:
Your servants shall a proper def'rence pay;
And what she bids, with cheerful hearts obey:
By reason's laws are all her wishes bound?
And each desire with modest freedom crowned?
Oppose them not; but -- partner in thy care --
Thy pleasures and amusements let her share:
The wish indulged, indulged each pure desire,
Within her breast shall glow love's warmest fire:
Love's warmest fire shall beam a bright'ning ray;
And all around it is purity display.
If temper, genius, education move
To lighter faults; with gentleness reprove:
Be not severe: but let an honest breast
Remind thee -- thou thyself have often transgressed.
Tho thine the right to rule with equal Sway;
Let not that right a rig'rous Soul betray:
But, mindful of her sex, it is weakness bear;
And overlook the frailty of the fair.
Commit thy secrets to her faithful breast;
Nor let an anxious thought disturb thy rest:
Her counsels, like her heart, are all sincere;
And, like her heart, all undisguis'd appear.
True to her bed, avoid a strange embrace;
Nor be Behold a reverend fire, whom want of grace
Has made the father of a nameless race.

"the father of a nameless race":
The baseness of whose blood, derived from thee,
Shall on thy name fix lasting infamy.
When pain and grief to pain and grief succeed;
Impair her health; and all her powers impede:
Thy tender love, even in the deepest woe,
Shall cause her heart with joy sincere to flow.
One look of thine, one tender look, shall stay
The rising grief; and every pain allay;
More lasting health and ease it shall impart,
Than all the nostrums of the medic art.
Observe her sex; survey her frame with care;
Their strength and weakness with thine own compare:
Her frame is tender, and her sex is weak,
And less true fortitude than thine bespeak:
Her nature's weakness with compassion bear;
Nor on her imperfections be severe:
But KNOW THY SELF; investigate thy breast:
There -- weakness, imperfection stand confessed.
FATHER.
CONSIDER thou! to whom the hand of heaven,
Indulgent to thy wish, a Son has given:
Consider thou! a Father now become,
The trust, the important trust, thou have at home.
The pretty innocent -- quite helpless born --
If unassisted, wretched and forlorn --
Demands thy care, thy constant guardian care,
To screen from danger, and from every snare:
Demands thy care to feed, to cloth, to warm;
And give protection from all threatening harm.
See nature kindle up the instinctive fire,
And in the mind parental love inspire:
Parental love -- which sways the human breast,
By words, by actions, and by looks expressed;
Pure, incorrupt, sincere, without alloy;
Displayed in sympathies of grief and joy:
A love -- to human bosoms not confined --
Seen in the world of life, in every kind;
So deeply fixed, so obstinately strong,
They Will hazard life to save their helpless young.
It rests on thee; on thee it rests alone,
That virtue's seeds be in his bosom sown:
Whether his future life shall useful prove,
And in a sphere of shining virtues move:
A blessing to himself -- nor there confined --
To thee a blessing, and to all mankind:
Whether an useful member he shall be;
Or one that is worthless in society:
Who, blind to virtue, deaf to honor's call,
Will into vice, and every meanness fall;
A burden to himself, and -- which is worse --
A plague to thee, and to mankind a curse.
Observe the bent and genius of his mind;
To what it is equal, and to what inclined:
To arts and science if his genius bend,
And all their depths attempt to comprehend:
Betimes implant the scientific seed;
And, what you plant, with streams refreshing feed:
If shoot the implanted seed, manure the soil;
And on the tender shoot vouchsafe a smile:
A smile from thee will emulation fire;
And in his breast an ardent love inspire --
A love of science, -- which can joys dispense,
Superior far to those perceived by sense;
A love of science, -- which improves the mind,
And elevates the heart with truths refined:
A love of science, and each sister art*
Which growing pleasures to the mind impart:
A love of thee -- whose smiles inspired his breast,
And set on work the ambition there impressed.
Improve the soil: the soil belongs to thee:
And a rich crop of what is sown you will see.
Prepare his mind, while soft, in early youth,
To love instruction, and to relish truth:
The tender mind let your example form;
And virtue's precepts his soft bosom warm:
Let no bad language from his lips proceed;
Nor from his hand the least injurious deed:
Check every faulty habit that appears;
Nor let it strengthen with his ripening years:
Point him, while yet the paths of vice untrod,
To virtue's road, which is the road to GOD.
Then, like a cedar of stupendous size,
In spite of opposition he shall rise --
Shall rise aloft to fame's sublimest height,
On pinions equal to the adventurous flight:
Shall, like a cedar on a mountain's head,
Over all around a grateful shadow spread:
A safe retreat from rising tempests form;
And sure protection from the gathering storm:
From Phoebus' beam, from Phoebus' scorching ray,
A sheltering arm over all around display.
A vicious son, a son devoid of shame,
Who spurns at virtue, and it is sacred name;
Who shuns with caution, even in early youth,
The pleasing paths that lead to heaven-born truth;
Who takes delight in each flagitious deed,
And runs with eagerness where vice will lead:
Shall wound, shall deeply wound, his father's breast;
And all his joys, tho pure before, molest.
But HE, who reason's sacred laws obeys;
And to it is voice a strict obedience pays:
Who follows virtue in it is roughest road,
And where it dwells takes up his fixed abode;
Whom vice, with all it is fund of softening charms,
Can never allure to it is destructive arms;
Who bends to truth, and to it is sacred nod,
And treads the paths his virtuous father trod:
Shall round his hoary locks a glory spread;
And in his breast a joy long-lasting shed.
Instruct your Son, while to instruction prone;
And let instruction's seed be early sown:
Teach him his Duty in his tender age;
And all his powers to practice it engage:
Teach him submission where it is justly due,
To heaven, the civil magistrate, and you:
Submissive manners will endear his name;
And, when blameworthy, often secure from blame.
Taught to be modest, modesty shall shed
A luster round him, and adorn his head.
Taught to be grateful, gratitude shall raise
Assisting friendships in a thousand ways.
Taught to be temperate -- in his cheek appears
The bloom of youth even in advancing years.
Teach charity -- and charity shall gain
The love of others, and that love maintain.
Teach prudence -- and her smiles shall fortune lend;
Her favors too, while prudence guides, shall send.
Teach justice in his dealings with mankind,
And press it home upon his youthful mind:
Justice, which over the virtues reigns as queen,
In all his conduct, in each action seen --
Shall raise his credit, far extend his fame;
And -- when no more -- will long embalm his name.
Teach him sincerity: 'twill free his heart
From self-reproach, and inward peace impart.
Teach him industry: and his wealth, tho low,
Shall soon increase; and from all quarters flow.
Teach him that god-like virtue, not confined
To names or sects, benevolence of mind:
Benevolence indulged exalts the soul,
And makes it is joys in streams unclouded roll.
Teach him true science: science fills the mind
With noble images, and truths refined;
In great designs will fit him to engage;
And with applause to tread life's public stage.
Teach him religion -- rational, and free
From formal stifness, and vain pageantry:
Religion purifies the heart, exalts the mind,
Makes it to virtue, and it is paths inclined;
And, when the soul shall drop the impris'ning clay,
Shall waft it to the realms of endless day.
Thus taught by thee -- around thy hoary head,
From him deri^'d shall circling glory spread:
Thus taught by thee -- thy name, with honor crowned,
Shall every tongue with praises echo round;
Till fallen asleep in undisturbed repose,
Resigned to heaven -- the present scene you close.
SON.
LOOK round, and all the works of God discern;
Survey his creatures, and true wisdom learn:
The instructive lesson to your mind applied,
Be there impressed, and all it is motions guide.
Go range the desert till the stork you find --
A fit example to instruct mankind --
See on his Wings, moved by the instinctive fire,
He bears, worn out with age, his feeble sire:
Aloft he bears him to a mountain's head;
And aids him there till numbered with the dead.
With every tender sentiment impressed,
Let his example warm your youthful breast:
The instructive precept thence derived obey.
And in thy conduct let it always sway:
Support thy father when bowed down with age,
And cheer his heart in life's declining stage:
Support him; and extend a guardian arm
To shield his hoary head from every harm:
Till down to rest, exhausted and decayed,
His weary limbs -- resigned to heaven -- are laid.
Sweeter than incense-odours, that arise
From Persia's altars, and perfume the skies;
Far sweeter than the spicy gales that blow
From India's shore, and all it is fragrance know;
Sweeter than these, with sweets of roses joined --
Sweeter than these, with every sweet combined --
Is love -- the love that sways the filial breast,
With every mark of reverence impressed.
For him, -- from whose rejoicing loins you sprung --
For her, -- upon whose fost'ring breasts you hung, --
Let gratitude kind sentiments inspire;
And in thy breast excite love's generous fire:
To their instructions lend a willing ear;
And all thy conduct by their precepts steer.
From love, which over you spreads it is friendly wing,
Their precepts and instruction always spring:
Observed the instruction, and it is voice obeyed;
And due respect to all their precepts paid;
Within thy breast shall true contentment reign,
And undisturbed it is easy sway maintain;
Joys unaffected shall thy bosom swell,
And there -- still growing -- with contentment dwell.
Thy infancy all-helpless call to mind,
Exposed to numerous ills of every kind;
Recall to mind -- when young how frow'rd thou were,
Tho blessed with all things parents could impart;
Recall to mind -- how in your tender age,
Your happiness did all their thots engage;
By virtue's precepts how they formed your mind,
And your best good, in all they did, designed;
Then swayed by duty, and a love sincere,
Due honor pay them, and their age revere:
When helpless grown, when silvered over by age,
And ready to forsake this mortal stage;
Allay their grief as languishing they lie,
And all their wants thy filial hand supply:
Thy filial hand, as now declines their day,
Their former love and goodness should repay;
Should strive to ease their pains, assuage their grief,
And, to it is utmost power, afford relief;
Till in the grave -- the debt of nature paid --
In silence undisturbed their hoary heads are laid.
Thy children thus, by thy example led,
When age comes on, and life's best joys are fled,
Shall in their breasts feel duty's powerful sway,
And all thy filial love with love repay;
Shall cheer thy heart, with pains and ills oppressed,
Or -- chearless -- heave a sympathizing breast;
Shall feel your joys and sorrows as their own;
And smiles return to smiles, to groans a groan:
Till nature spent -- till spent the vital flame,
Your deathless part forsakes it is mortal frame.
BROTHERS.
YE all proceeded from one common head;
One stock ye sprang from; by one stock are fed:
To the same breast, with nect'rous juices flowed,
Your first support, and vital heat ye owed.
Let mutual love just confidence inspire;
And kindle in each breast it is purest fire:
Let peace within your father's mansions dwell;
And every passion's lawless transports quell:
Never let fell malice, harbored in your breast,
Corrode it is joys, and all it is peace molest;
Never let it -- swayed by nature's sacred ties --
With brutal rage against a brother rise.
As soon as entered on life's busy stage,
Let mutual love a mutual help engage:
In each good office let your love abound;
And with an honesty unfeigned be crowned.
When business calls, when opening scenes demand
A lasting absence in a distant land;
Tho separated long, never thoughtless prove
(...) your relation, once indear'd by love.
(...) love fraternal, undisguis'd by art,
(...) in your breast, and warm a generous heart:
(...) let it dwell; there -- uncontrol'd -- maintain
(...) proper sway; and there forever reign.
Swayed by a just regard to kindred-blood,
Prefer a brother's to a stranger's good:
A brother's to a stranger's good prefer;
Tho in his conduct he may sometimes err.
When adverse fortune unrelenting reigns;
And all the sources of true pleasure drains:
Desert him not; your ready succor lend;
And, tho the world forsake, be thou his friend:
Be thou his friend; the assistance needed yield,
Till all the wounds, by fortune given, are healed.
Thy love -- diffusive -- let thy sister share;
And she too; be the object of your care:
When fortune's rage her tender bosom wounds,
Exhausts her strength, and every joy confounds:
Reach out with cheerfulness a helping hand;
And over her woes compassion's wings expand.
Thy father thus, through thee shall yet embrace
His once-lov'd offspring, and his numerous race:
Through thee -- when they are distressed -- shall give relief;
Supply their wants; and silence all their grief:
And thus through thee a father's care renewed,
Shall meet returns of love and gratitude.
PROVIDENCE, or the ACCIDENTAL DIFFERENCES OF MEN.
SECTION I. WISE and IGNORANT.
TO favored man is understanding given --
The noblest gift that ever came down from heaven --
Dispensed in such proportions to mankind,
As pleased the wisdom of the sovereign mind?
Has bounteous heaven, expressive of it is love,
Endowed thy mind with reason from above?
On thee, with liberal hand, has heaven bestowed
A mind, wherein true wisdom takes abode?
Dispelled the mists in which involved it lay?
And given it light by truth's enlight'ning ray?
The heavenly blessing, not to self confined,
Dispense to all around -- to all mankind:
Instruct them in the truths they ought to know;
And from your lips let wisdom's precepts flow:
Upon your tongue let wisdom's precepts dwell,
And all the darkness of their minds expel.
A noble joy true wisdom will impart;
And with just sentiments inspire the heart:
'Twill yield a lasting pleasure to the mind;
And, as it grows, give pleasures more refined:
'Twill open wide -- 'twill wide dilate the breast;
And make it is joys to all around confessed
Thus, taught by thee -- by thy instructions moved,
Their wisdom and their joys will be improved:
Their wisdom and their joys will grow with age;
And sweeten life, even in it is latest stage.
If all restraint your daring soul derides,
And, winged with genius, mounts where science guides;
If, on the wings of genius born, you soar,
And nobly aim at heights unken'd before;
The wise, well pleased to see your early youth
Employed in science, and the search of truth,
Will view your genius with complacent eyes;
And, filled with raptures, hail you as you rise:
Will feel their breasts -- by emulation fired --
With growing zeal for equal fame inspired;
And, charmed -- transported at the inspiring sight,
Will strive to rival your all-glorious flight.
Observe now folly; and true wisdom view:
Wisdom is least presuming of the two.
See wisdom's son the voice of reason hears
And truth as truth, wherever it is found, reveres:
But in the search -- so weak is reason's ray --
Doubts often arise, and long perplex his way:
Even doubts arise in things he once thot true;
And old opinions make him change for new.
But mark the fool; who, obstinate and blind,
Admits no doubts to discompose his mind.
Heady -- self-willed -- tenacious to the last,
His first opinion, right or wrong, holds fast:
Once in opinion fixed, he fixed abides;
Whim, humor, caprice, chance -- his only guides --
And, tho consummate folly on his breast,
In lasting characters is deep impressed,
Thinks every change of sentiment displays
Folly's plain marks, and all it is signs betrays:
Yet knows not that he is ignorant and blind;
The butt of ridicule for all mankind.
Observe how vain -- how empty he appears!
Folly and pride grow faster than his years:
When pride and folly in one person meet,
Pride renders folly but the more complete.
His words unnumber'd flow; and, naught but sound,
Oppress the hearer, and all sense confound:
If sounding words a want of sense betray;
Sound but the further will that want convey.
Even trifles light as air inspire his breast,
And (...) raise, by every sign expressed.
He boasts -- and boasts his worthlesness proclaim --
He boasts in trifles a superior name:
But ignorance in every thing betrays,
That Is worthy to be known, or worthy praise:
In these -- a willing ignorance can claim
Nothing but infamy and lasting shame.
In wisdom's path -- if there he chance to tread --
By folly's hand, even there, he will be led:
Folly shall disappoint his views and aim;
And all his actions recompense with shame.
He thinks -- with folly's spreading laurel crowned --
That he can all the depths of learning sound;
Can soar aloft on an unpractic'd wing,
And at one draught exhausts the muses' spring;
Can pierce through nature, and her course survey;
And all the laws by which she acts display.
Thus fancied wisdom in each look expressed,
Debarring what is real from his breast,
Plays round his heart in transports of delight;
And does from brother-fools applause excite:
Thus self-applause with joy his bosom fires;
And every fool to raise it more conspires.
Observe now wisdom's son -- by wisdom taught,
He grows in learning, and improves in thought:
He strives by every help to improve his mind,
In useful knowledge, and in arts refined:
The arts improve, and by his hand improve;
And with swift progress toward perfection move:
T'improve the arts he labors night and day;
And all the arts their brilliant charms display.
Pleased with the sight, his country's eye beholds,
How science opens, and each art unfolds --
Such arts -- such science, as will useful prove;
And fit her sons in spheres enlarged to move.
His country views him as her noblest friend;
And on his head her honors shall descend:
To worth so great, her gratitude shall raise
A monument, proportioned to his praise --
To future ages to transmit his fame;
And, while time lasts, to celebrate his name.
Tho arts and lit'rature his bosom fire;
And in his breast the noblest joys inspire:
Yet heaven-born virtue bears the sovereign sway;
And guides his steps by her enlight'ning ray:
With nobler joys can elevate his mind,
Than arts and lit'rature, however refined;
Can brighter luster round his temples shed,
Than arts can furnish, or than science spread;
And shall the prize at which he aims, secure --
Even happiness that science cannot insure.
Both arts and science virtue far excells;
For happiness in virtue only dwells;
To virtue's paths true wisdom's footsteps lead,
And blessed are they who in those paths proceed.
Has heaven, above the level of mankind,
With elevated sense endowed thy mind?
That high on reason's pinions it can soar;
And ancient wisdom to it is source explore?
Let pride, if ever it rises, be depressed;
Nor once usurp the empire of thy breast:
For human wisdom, howsoe'er refined,
Is all but folly to a brighter mind:
To brighter minds, that move in nobler spheres,
It Is all a phantom -- all a dream appears.
The man that is wise; that his own weakness knows;
And sees, from thence how imperfection flows;
Will never let insolence his virtue stain,
Nor earth-born pride within his bosom reign:
Adorned with virtue and an humble mind,
He sees his faults; to no gross failing blind:
Adorned with sense, with each endowment blessed,
He sees much imperfection in the best;
But modesty, which all his conduct guides.
From all around that imperfection hides.
All-graceful see his modesty appear!
In private charm, and charm in every sphere!
By wisdom's laws his actions are refined;
And he approves them first, and then mankind.
To virtue formed, by heaven-born virtue crowned,
His actions speak his happiness around:
True happiness in virtue's garden grows;
From virtue as it is source, it copious flows:
It flows to all who virtue's voice obey;
And due regard to all her dictates pay.
Virtue, when time shall cease and be no more,
Shall land her vot'ries on some happier shore;
Who, drinking deeply at the fount of truth,
Shall there all flourish in immortal youth:
Shall taste the joys that virtue can impart;
Joys, equal to the wishes of the heart --
Unrivaled -- lasting -- free from alloy;
That fill the mind, and all it is powers employ.
SECTION II. MAGISTRATES AND SUBJECTS.
O THOU! whom mortals with a bounteous hand,
Have raised to empire and supreme command:
Whom mortals, guided by a heavenly ray,
Have given the power to rule with sovereign sway,
Consider thou! distinguished thus by heaven,
The end for which the sovereign power was given:
Consider too -- to thy engagement just --
The great -- the vast importance of the trust:
Let that more strongly influence thy mind,
Than absolute dominion over mankind:
Let that, in lasting characters impressed,
In every action sway your princely breast.
In regal purple gloriously arrayed --
In all the robes of royalty displayed, --
The crown of majesty invests thy head;
And earth's first glories round thy temples spread:
Thy hand -- of sovereign power the scepter sways;
And far and wide the sovereign power displays:
All these and their supporting base -- the throne.
Thy equals have conferred; and they alone:
The robe, crown, scepter, throne -- thy people brir.
The royal ensigns that distinguish kings.
But for what purpose were these ensigns given? --
Thy people's gift, consented to by heaven: --
Why clothed with purple; -- placed upon the throne;
Why sway the scepter; and why wear the crown
Not for thy own -- but for the public good:
On which true patriot-pow'r has always stood.
Be thou a patriot-king -- not swollen with pride;
Not swayed by passion; nor to vice allied:
The public good, now trusted in your hands,
Your time, your talents and your ALL demands
At this great end in every action aim;
On this foundation raise a lasting fame:
Like Phoebus, chearing nature with his beams,
Spread happiness around in copious streams.
Glory, the first and last pursuit of kings,
From public good, as from it is fountain, springs:
The glory* flowing from that source, be thine;
And real glory round thy head shall shine:
Be thy dominion to that end applied;
Let that alone in every action guide;
And all thy subjects, to thy interests true,
Tho claimants rise, will own no king but you:
Thy subjects, happy made by thee, around
Shall all the glory of thy reign resourd.
A prince, on whom kind nature has bestowed,
A soul with princely qualities endowed
Employs his mind on subjects nobly great.
Connected with the welfare of the state;
Forsakes his pillow at an early hour,
And seeks for business worthy of his power.
He moves with dignity -- unawed by (...) --
And shines unrivaled in the exalted sphere:
The exalted sphere dilates his princely mind;
And fits him more and more to bless mankind.
Deep-vers'd in human nature and it is frame,
He sees at what mankind in general aim --
At honor -- wealth -- preferment's lofty seat --
For which the great contend with rival-heat.
He quick discovers by his piercing eye,
Their temper, genius, and ability:
To each, in just proportion to his worth,
Not solely from regard to rank or birth --
To each -- as in the noble strife they glow --
Will honors grant, or largesses bestow
True merit, which alone attracts his praise.
To just preferment he will always raise.
He calls together, for his kingdom's good,
The wise and great; tho not of noble blood:
Consults them freely as his surest guides;
And by their counsels -- wise and good -- abides.
His magistrates, whom fear can never degrade,
With vigor act; by justice always swayed.
His ministers are wise: and greatly aim
To raise the glory of his realm and name:
They Are wisdom's sons, for wisdom long renowned;
And spread the blessings of his reign around:
These are his bosom-fav'rites; these -- his friends;
On whose advice his cautious soul depends.
The social hour -- when state affairs permit --
Indulged with men of genius -- learning -- wit,
Delights his mind, fatigue'd by public cares;
And to his breast joy's healing balsam bears:
Their genius, learning, wit -- with his conspire
To rouse their breasts by emulation's fire.
They all, ambitious of a growing fame,
Like rivals strive for the superior name:
Their labors with his own concur to raise,
His kingdom's glory and it is sov'reign's praise.
The arts, encouraged by his royal smile,
Spring up and thrive, tho barren be the soil:
Science, which from the mind all clouds removes,
Beneath the culture of his hand improves:
The arts and Science, by his bounty fed,
With dignity erect a cheerful head;
And all around, in large and copious streams,
Dispense their light, and gladden with their beams.
The merchant, gathering wealth in copious stores.
Extends his commerce to the furthest shores
The frugal (...), by his constant toil,
Subdues and meliorates the stubborn soil:
The artist, blessed with an inventive mind,
Employs it in the service of mankind:
The scholar, whom a sprightly genius fires,
Improves the arts; and lasting fame acquires.
All these -- tho private interest be their aim --
Advance their country's good, and sov'reign's fame:
They each his royal approbation share;
And each the tokens of his favor bear.
At his command -- his subjects emigrate,
And lay the groundwork of a rising state: --
Fleets spread the sea to guard his kingdom's trade;
Keep off invasion; and, in turn, invade: --
Deep rivers opening, on their tide convey,
Far within land, the treasures of the sea: --
New harbors wide extend a circling arm,
To check the tempest; and ward off the storm.
His realms, with happiness and plenty crowned,
Increase in commerce; and in wealth abound:
Increase in strength; and by their strength secure
Interior peace; and peace abroad insure.
He frames wise laws to regulate mankind;
Whose source in equity and truth they find:
While such their source, his subjects joyful see
Their rights secure; secure their property:
The law, on which their happiness depends,
Chastizes vice; and virtue's cause defends.
Mercy's kind principles inspire his breast:
And, when they fitly may, are all expressed:
But rig'rous justice hardened vice attends;
And on its head in vengeance due descends.
To him, the poor -- when injured and oppressed --
Heave the big sigh; and ease their laboring breast:
He hears their plaints; compassionates their case;
And wipes the falling tear from every face:
The base oppression loud for vengeance calls;
And on the oppressor's head his vengeance falls.
Thus blessed, the people to their prince repair
TO express their love for his paternal care;
And, as the guardian of their rights and laws,
With one consent to yield him their applause.
Their kind regard his royal bosom warms;
And there -- toward them -- a like affection forms.
A love reciprocal in both obtains;
And with it is years increasing vigor gains.
Their happiness -- the subject of his prayer --
Engrosses all his time, his thoughts and care;
And, in a just connection with his own,
A bright'ning luster spreads around his throne.
Against his government, -- just, good, and wise, --
No disaffection, no complaints arise:
Founded on justice, and his subjects' love,
No foes disturb it; or can hope to move:
Their machinations, and unpurchas'd hate
Disturb him not; nor ever molest the state.
True to their prince, the guardian of their laws.
And uniformly steady in his cause,
His subjects to defend him draw the sword;
Expose their persons; and their wealth unhoard:
Firm and unshaken, in a dauntless band,
They drive invasion from the happy land:
The invading foe, like chaff before the wind,
Before them fly; and leave no trace behind.
At home -- abroad -- from all annoyance freed,
His happy subjects, blessed with peace, succeed:
And HE, the darling of the human race.
Endowed with virtue, and each princely grace --
With home-felt joy the regal scepter sways;
While circling crowds resound his matchless praise:
While circling crowds, by him supremely blessed.
Deep-rooted feel his empire in their breast:
And, loud proclaiming his all-righteous sway,
The increasing glories of his reign display.
RELIGION.
THIS sacred truth fix deeply in your mind,
And spread it far and wide amongst mankind;
THAT THERE IS A GOD, -- to whom this spacious earth,
And universal nature owe their birth;
Who rules the unnumber'd worlds that round us roll;
Whose sov'reignty extends from pole to pole;
Whose power is boundless; whose duration flows
Co-eval with eternity: -- who knows
His character -- tho men and angels joined --
Unsearchable by any finite mind.
There Is naught that human eye has seen can claim
To be the GOD, who (...) frame:
The sun -- the glorious regent of the day --
Which chears the world with it is enlight'ning ray:
Whose genial heat invigorates the earth,
And gives it is various fruits a ready birth;
This glorious sun -- the creature of his hand --
Bestows it is blessings but at his command:
This noble image of THE POW'R-SUPREME
Of whose essulgence it is a glorious beam --
May raise thy admiration, and no more:
But never bow down, nor at it is shrine adore.
To GOD supremely good, supremely wise.
In whom -- it is boundless source -- perfection lies;
To GOD, and GOD alone, both praise and song.
And every act of worship do belong:
To GOD -- who spread heaven's glorious arch around
And taught each star to know it is circling bound:
Who says -- when ocean roars -- I Will be obeyed;
And here shall thy insulting waves be staid:
Who, storms and tempests by a word a controls,
When in their fury they would invert the poles:
Who shakes the earth with his almighty hand;
And all aghast the trembling nations stand:
Who darts his lightnings flash on flash around;
And virtue's foes fall prostrate to the ground:
Who smiles; and joyous -- world springs forth on world:
Who frowns; and into ruin strait they are hurled.
O! venerate THE OMNIPOTENT -- adore
The world's great sovereign, and his love implore:
Secure his love, ere time absorbs thy breath;
And fly his anger, which is worse than death.
At his creative word -- at his command --
Nature sprung forth all-glorious from his hand:
To guide whose course his sovereign will ordained
Long -- long ere nature had existence gained,
Laws suited to each being's proper kind;
Laws that declare their author's boundless mind;
So varied in each species, that they raise
Our highest wonder, and transcend our praise.
Thus formed -- see nature to his sovereign will
Obedience pay, and all his laws fulfill:
See her, observant of his awful nod,
Through all her vast extent declare him GOD.
In the recesses of HIS boundless mind,
All knowledge HE revolves, quite unconfined:
The secrets of futurity do lie,
As present open to his piercing eye;
The heart's profoundest thot to him unfolds,
And all it is deep resolves his eye beholds;
It Is deep resolves, from mortal sight concealed,
To his all-searching eye are all revealed:
It Is deep resolves, even whilst unformed they lay,
Were seen by him as in the blaze of day.
His prescience, which all human search confounds,
Extends to all events, and knows no bounds
Over all his works his providence presides,
Sustains all nature and all nature guides.
In all his ways how wondrous he appears!
His counsels are as searchless as his years:
The manner of his knowledge, yet unken'd,
Does the utmost stretch of human thot transcend.
In goodness, as in wisdom, HE IS supreme:
Behold all nature with his goodness teem!
Survey his works -- in them his goodness view:
Conspicuous are his works; his goodness too.
This nether world, and worlds that roll above,
Has HE not formed in mercy and in love?
This nether world, and all the worlds around
His goodness own; and with his love are crowned.
Their various creatures all abroad declare,
His varied goodness and unceasing care:
On each such properties his hand bestows,
To each his goodness in such channels flows,
As best are suited to it is different kind;
And best may answer what his will designed.
HE bids successive generations rise;
And all their joys his bounteous hand supplies:
In all their joys they speak his matchless praise;
And each, that can, a grateful voice should raise.
HE IS the great head, the center, and the spring
Of every excellence -- perfection -- thing.
See justice, goodness, truth -- in him combine!
In him unrivaled each perfection shine!
They all conspiring blend their matchless rays;
And all around in one bright glory blaze.
All beings own him LORD -- let all admire
His glorious name; and in his praise conspire:
All beings own his just and powerful sway;
And, humbly prostrate, should their homage pay.
Revere his name: in grateful anthems raise,
Both heart and voice in your creator's praise:
Bow down before him: strict obedience pay
To HIM -- whom angels and all worlds obey:
To HIM -- who plan'd the world's stupendous frame:
Who said -- "EXIST"; and strait from naught it came:
To HIM -- whose wisdom, seen in nature's race,
Unrivaled beauty sheds over nature's face:
Whose wisdom sure as nature's self abides;
Directs it is course; and all it is motions guides.
To heaven's extended arch direct your view;
The glorious scene through all it is parts pursue.
See Phoebus mount -- the lofty summit gain!
And see him hastening to the western main!
See full orb'd Cynthia in succession rise;
And cheer with borrowed rays the midnight skies!
See fires unnumber'd all enkindling round;
And heaven irradiate to it is utmost bound!
Then own, wherever this glorious scene's surveyed,
The glory of THE ALMIGHTY-POWER displayed.
View next an humbler scene -- the earth next view;
It Is hills and vales, woods, fields and rivers too:
The hills with joy erect their towering heads;
The laughing vales spread wide their fruitful beds;
The fields and neighboring woods in concert sing,
And gratefully their annual tributes bring;
The rivers, as they wind their banks along,
In every murmur join the general song:
With one conspiring voice they all declare
That GOD is good -- that all his goodness share.
Extend your view -- the world of life look over;
Survey each species, and their powers explore:
On each the indulgent hand of heaven bestowed
The powers adapted to it is proper good:
But raised above the rest see human kind,
Distinguished far with nobler powers of mind!
See man! the head of lower creation made,
Acknowledged sovereign, and as chief obeyed;
Blessed with the powers of reason to maintain
The sov'reignty he holds, and wide domain;
Endowed with language to diffuse around
The sweets that from society redound;
Whose mind, exalted with superior powers,
Can contemplate -- as fly the swift-wing'd hours --
The matchless character of GOD; and raise,
In ceaseless songs, the great creator's praise.
To regulate thy conduct -- form thy mind,
Has HE not laws ordained most good and kind?
So wisely fitted to thy nature's frame,
So suited to thy being's end and aim,
That firm obedience paid them will secure
Contentment here, and future joys ensure.
O praise HIS name, to whom all praise belongs;
His boundless goodness praise with grateful songs:
His wondrous love thy warmest love engage:
His wondrous love to man in every age.
Thy cheerful heart -- while no base thots intrude,
Be all inspired with joy and gratitude:
Thy lips declare in all his praise that joy;
And in his worship find a loved employ:
Thy voice -- all grateful -- in harmonious lays,
Be often employed to sing your MAKER'S praise:
Let every action of thy life proclaim
The highest reverence for his sacred name:
Let heart, lips, voice -- with all thy powers combine;
And in his praise with raised devotion join.
HE IS just; and will abroad his justice show:
HE IS right; and will in righteousness review
The moral world: to which -- as judge supreme,
Whose judgments flow in an unclouded stream --
He Will round dispense -- at all that world shall own --
Impartial justice from his lofty throne.
In all the laws HIS boundless wisdom frames,
At the creation's greatest good HE aims:
To check that good if any boldly dare,
The bold offense shall his resentment share.
Think not, because thy punishment's delayed,
The strength of GOD'S almighty arm decayed;
Nor hope -- if to such madness hope can drive --
At one base action that he will ever connive.
HIS eye through secrets of the closest hearts,
As lightning pierces, and as lightning darts;
Before him -- tho concealed from mortal eye --
They Are all displayed; they all uncovered lie.
The persons, and the stations of mankind,
From him no notice, no regard shall find.
The sovereign prince, who rules without control.
Whose empire reaches to the farthest pole;
The humble peasant -- scorned by slaves of slaves --
Whose head from showers a lonely cottage saves;
The rich, whose tables sumptuously are spread;
The poor, who scarcely get their daily bread;
The wise, who can all science comprehend,
Can soar to heaven, to earth's abyss descend;
The fool, who that he is human, hardly knows.
Who, like a plant, just where he is fostered, grows:
Shall ALL -- when their etherial part is flown;
And changed this mortal state for one unknown --
Shall ALL receive from GOD'S almighty hand
A doom -- that on impartial truth shall stand
A retribution -- lasting as his throne;
Proportioned to their works, and them alone.
Then all the wicked, by their crimes oppressed,
Trembling, shall heave an agonizing breast,
And dread the doom, that does those crimes await:
A doom severe as their offenses great
But see! the just, of an unsullied name;
Whose works a shining character proclaim,
With hearts elate with joy, shall fearless stand;
And see strict justice dealt by his impartial hand.
Will HE impartially thus judge the world?
And from his blissful presence vice be hurled?
Then fear THE ALL-WISE through life's uncertain day;
And HIS commands with all your soul obey.
Let heaven-born virtue all your actions guide;
And let her voice without control decide.
To prudence, when she dictates, lend an ear;
And what she bids -- as heaven's command revere:
Let temperance, fraught with untumultuous joy,
Correct your passions, and their rage destroy:
Your commerce with mankind let justice sway,
And in her equal seals your actions weigh:
Let love, to human-kind around expressed,
Enlarge your heart, and warm a generous breast:
Let gratitude, to heaven supremely due
(...) all that bliss the circling years renew,
Your soul in transports of devotion fire,
And songs of praise to heaven's great king inspire.
These virtues in the present state shall yield
A happiness too great to be concealed;
And in the next, a bliss of nobler kind,
Vast as thy wish, and as thy soul refined:
Shall bear thee to the realms of endless day,
Where GOD in glory shall himself display.
This -- this is life's economy -- obey
It Is precepts, which direct to heaven the way:
Be every virtue thine, and every grace;
And dare to run in virtue's glorious race:
Then Si fractus illabatur orbis,
Impavidum ferient ruinae.
Hor: lib: 3. od: 3.
undismayed, tho earth's foundations shake;
Tho nature frightened to her center quake;
Tho being rush on being, world on world,
And into one vast ruin be all hurled:
Unstained thy virtue, and thy GOD obeyed,
You Will view the mighty ruin undismayed;
On virtue's pinions born, to heaven shall soar,
And, filled with rapturous joys, thy GOD adore.

