At the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the Governor and Company of the English Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England, in AMERICA; begun and
holden at Providence, within and for the said Colony, on the last Wednesday of
October, in the Year of our Lord, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Fifty Eight,
and Thirty-second of the Reign of His most Sacred Majesty GEORGE the Second, by
the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, and so forth.
PRESENT, The Hon. STEPHEN HOPKINS, Esquire Governor.
JAMES HONYMAN, Esquire Assistant. NICHOLAS EASTON, Esquire Assistant. ELISHA BROWN,
Esquire Assistant. GIDEON COMSTOCK, Esquire Assistant. JOSEPH EDMUNDS, Esquire Assistant.
JONATHAN RANDAL, Esquire Assistant. DANIELL CO^^^SHAL, Esquire Assistant. JEOFFRY
WATSON, Esquire Assistant. The SECRETARY.
DEPUTIES of the several TOWNS.
NEWPORT;
Lieut. Col. Benja. Wickham, Peter Bours, Esquire Col. Joseph Wanton, Capt. Daniel
Ayrault, Mr. William Read.
Providence;
Obadiah Brown, Esquire Capt. Charles Olney, Col. Christopher Harris, Lt. Col.
Barzilloi Richmond.
Portsmouth;
Mr. John Shearman, jun. Capt. John Shreive, jun. Mr. Thomas Shearman, jun.
Warwick;
Othniel Gorton, Esquire Benjamin Arnold, Esquire Maj. James Arnold, jun. John Warner,
jun, Esquire
Westerly;
Samuel Ward, Esquire Josbua Babcock, Esquire
Newshoreham;
None.
North-Kingstown;
Immanuel Northup, Esquire Capt. Daniel Fones.
South-Kingstown;
Latham Clarke, Esquire
East-Greenwich;
Capt. Benjamin Green, Capt. Rusus Spencer.
Jamestown;
Mr. William Martin, Mr. Isaac Howland.
Smithfield;
Thomas Arnold, Esquire Mr. Jeremiah Mowrey.
Situate;
Job Randal, Esquire Jeremiah Angel, Esquire
Gloucester;
Capt. Rusus Smith.
Charlestown;
Capt. Robert Potter, Capt. Peleg Cross.
West-Greenwich;
Mr. Benjamin Gardner, Capt. Tibbits Hopkins,
Coventry;
Caleb Green, Esquire Lieut. Col. Stephen Potter.
Exeter;
Capt. John Reynolds, Mr. Joseph Holloway.
Middletown;
Mr. Samuel Baley, jun. Mr. James Barker, jun.
Bristol;
Joseph Russel, Esquire
Tiverton;
Philip Tabor, Esquire
Little-Compton;
William Hall, Esquire Mr. Constant Southworth.
Warren;
Maj Josiah Humphrey, Capt. Thomas Cole.
Cumberland;
Jeremiah Whipple, Esquire John Dexter, Esquire
Richmond;
Samuel Test, Esquire
Cranston;
John Dexter, Esquire William Burton, Esquire
Hopkinton;
Edward Wells, jun. Esquire Peter Bours, Esquire was chosen Speaker; and Josias Lyndon,
Esquire Clerk of the Lower House.

IT is Voted and Resolved, That Gideon Comstock, Obadiah Brown, and Joshua
Babcock, Esqrs. and Lieut. Col. Benjamin Wickham, be, and they hereby are
appointed a Committee, to examine all the public Letters in the Hands of his
Honor the Governor, which have been sent to this Colony, or the Governors of
the same, and make Report unto this Assembly, which of them shall be recorded,
beginning with the first Letter sent by Sir Thomas Robinson: And it is farther
Voted and Resolved, That any two of the Committee have Power to act, and also
to consider and determine which of the Answers returned to the several Letters,
it will be proper to record.

Whereas Gideon Comstock, Job Randal, Benjamin Nichols, and James Helm, Esqrs.
were appointed by the last General Assembly, a Committee, and they, or any two
of them, authorized to examine the Accounts of Jahleel Brenton, Esquire with the
Colony, and report their Opinion upon the same, unto this present Assembly: But
the said Committee having not yet been able to complete the Business to them
committed, It is Voted and Resolved, That they be, and hereby are farther
continued a Committee for the Purpose aforesaid: And that they, or the major
Part of them, make Report unto the General Assembly as soon as conveniently may
be.

Whereas Nehemiah Marks exhibited unto this Assembly, an Account by him charged
against the Colony, for furnishing Josias Lyndon, Esquire Clerk of the Inferior
Court of Common Pleas, and General Sessions of the Peace, in the County of
Newport, with nine Quires of Demi Paper to make a Book for Records, for the
said Clerk's Office: And the said Account being duly examined, It is Voted and
Resolved, That the same be, and hereby is allowed, and that Twenty-five Pounds
Four Shillings, the Amount thereof, be paid the said Nehemiah Marks out of the
General Treasury.

BE it Enacted by this General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, It
is Enacted, That from and after the Publication of this Act, the Governor of
the Colony for the Time being, shall have Power, and hereby is authorized to
draw upon the General Treasurer, in order to pay the Postmasters residing
within this Government, for the Postage of all public Letters, and other
Papers, sent to this Colony, or to the Governor and Company thereof, to the
Amount of Twenty Pounds Old-Tenor, and no more, at any one Time: And that the
said Postmasters do once a Year, render unto the General Assembly, a particular
Account of what Money they receive out of the General Treasury, and for what
they received the same.

Whereas Francis Skinner of Newport, Bookbinder, exhibited unto this Assembly,
an Account by him charged against the Colony, for binding and making into a
Book, nine Quires of Paper, for the Use of the Clerk of the Inferior Court of
Common Pleas, and General Sessions of the Peace, in the County of Newport: And
the said Account bring duly examined, It is Voted and Resolved, That the same
be, and hereby is allowed, and that Twenty-five Pounds Four Shillings, the
Amount thereof, be paid the said Francis Skinner out of the General Treasury.

Whereas William Mumford, Capt. of Fort George, who was appointed by the
General Assembly to carry on the Building of the said Fort, exhibited unto this
Assembly, an Account charged against the Colony, for Money by him advanced to
purchase Lime, and for sundry other Disbursements which the Service necessarily
required: And the said Account being duly examined, It is Voted and Resolved,
That the same be, and hereby is allowed, exclusive of Commissions; and that the
Balance thereof, being Eight Hundred and Sixty-three Pounds Nineteen Shillings
and Ten Pence, be paid the said Capt. William Mumford out of the General
Treasury: And that the Consideration of the Article of Commissions, be, and
hereby is referred unto another Session of the General Assembly.

And it is farther Voted and Resolved, That Capt. Mumford be, and he is hereby
directed to sell all the empty Hogsheads in his Custody, that belong to the
Colony, for the most they will fetch.

AN ACT for supplying the Treasury.
BE it Enacted by this General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, It
is Enacted, That in order to supply the Treasury, the General Treasurer be, and
he is hereby directed to hire within thirty Days after the Rising of this
Assembly, for a Term of Time not exceeding one Year, at the Rate of Six per
Cent. per Annum, as much Money in Gold and Silver, and in the Bills of Credit
called Lawful Money and Old-Tenor, as he can, not exceeding the Value of Two
Hundred Thousand Pounds Old-Tenor: That he give Bonds to repay all he hires, in
the same Species that he receives, excepting the Old-Tenor Bills; of which Sort
the Government shall have the Liberty to pay the Sum hired, either in
Old-Tenor, or a Dollar for every Five Pounds Ten Shillings thereof.



AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the whole of the
Sum abovementioned, cannot be hired in Manner as is aforesaid, the Deficiency
shall be made up, in emitting whatever the same may be in Bills of Credit equal
to Lawful Money, of the same Tenor, and to be signed by the same Gentlemen as
the last Ten Thousand Pounds emitted by an Act of the General Assembly in May
last, were: And that the Bills bear Date at the Time of their being printed.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That a Rate or Tax be
assessed on the Inhabitants of this Colony, collected, levied, and brought into
the General Treasury, within one Year, sufficient to pay off such Sums as the
Treasurer may hire in Consequence of this Act: And that the Bills (if any are
emitted pursuant hereto) be redeemed at the Expiration of five Years, or
sooner, if the General Assembly shall think fit, by a Rate or Tax upon the
Inhabitants of the Colony, to be, by that Time, levied, collected, and brought
into the General Treasury.

It is Voted and Resolved, That the Committee of War do pay the Owners of the
Vessels that were employed as Transports in the Year 1757, to carry Soldiers
unto Albany (that is to say, such of them as have not yet been paid) the Sum of
Ten Shillings Sterling per Month, for every Ton the said Vessels measure: And
that the said Owners satisfy the Committee aforesaid, as to the Time their
Vessels were really in the said Service.

It is Voted and Resolved, That the Committee appointed to procure the Printing
of such Bills of Credit as may be emitted, or the major Part of them, agree
with any Person to perform that Service, who will do it in the best and
cheapest Manner.

It is Voted and Resolved, That the Hon. John Andrews, Esquire whom His Majesty
has been pleased to appoint Judge of the Court of Vice-Admiralty in this
Colony, be sworn to the faithful Execution and Discharge of the said Office,
before his Honor the Governor.

Afterward, to wit, on the 28th Day of this Instant October, the abovenamed
John Andrews appeared, and in Presence of his Honor the Governor, and the rest
of the Council, took and subscribed the State Oaths, and also an Oath for his
faithful Execution and Discharge of the office of Judge of the Court of
Vice-Admiralty in this Colony.

Whereas Job Hawkins of Providence, in the County of Providence, Shopkeeper,
preferred a Petition, and represented unto this Assembly, That he is now
confined to His Majesty's Gaol in Providence, upon Execution for Debt, the
Amount of which, with the Demands of his other Creditors, is more than he at
present is, or ever shall be able to satisfy, if continued in Confinement: That
his Inability to pay what he owes, was not owing to any bad Conduct in him; but
that his Trade being confined chiefly to the buying and selling dry Goods, his
Misfortunes arose from the Depretiation of our Currency: That unless he obtains
Relief from the General Assembly, he expects to languish in Gaol, it being
difficult and scarcely possible to prevail upon all his Creditors to unite in
Measures to procure him his Liberty: And as the General Assembly have
heretofore relieved many of the King's Subjects under the like Circumstances,
the said Job Hawkins prayed, that the Act for Relief of Insolvent Debtors, made
and passed by the General Assembly, at their Session in June, One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Fifty-six, may be extended unto him; and that he conforming
himself to the Conditions of the said Act, may have the Benefit thereof.

On due Enquiry into, and mature Consideration on the Premises,

BE it Enacted by this General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, It
is Enacted, That the Prayer of the said Job Hawkins, in his aforesaid Petition
made, be and the same is hereby granted.

It is Voted and Resolved, That Othniel Gorton and Job Randal, Esqrs. be, and
they are hereby appointed a Committee, to examine the Laws of this Colony
respecting Flags of Truce; and enquire also into all Proceedings respecting the
same, since the Commencement of the present War, and make Report unto this
Assembly at their next Session.

It is Voted and Resolved, That all Business lying before this Assembly,
unfinished, be, and the same is hereby referred unto the next Session: That the
Secretary publish, by Beat of Drum, in the Town of Newport, all the Acts and
Orders now made and past, in ten Days after the Rising of this Assembly, and
within forty, send Copies of the same, according to Law, unto each Town Clerk
in the Colony: And that this Assembly be adjourned to the last Monday of
February next. And it is farther Voted and Resolved nevertheless, That if the
Camp shall break up, and the Troops in the Pay of this Colony return before
that Day, his Honor the Governor be, and hereby is requested to call the
General Assembly together, if he, with the Advice of his Council, shall think
it necessary.

GOD Save the KING.
Published according to Order, the seventh Day of November, One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Fifty-eight, by THO. WARD. Secr'y.
A true Copy, duly examined. WITNESS Tho Ward Secr'y


