THE Prophetic NUMBERS OF DANIEL and JOHN CALCULATED; In Order to show the
TIME, WHEN THE DAY OF JUDGMENT For this FIRST Age of the GOSPEL, is to be
expected: And the Setting up the MILLENNIAL KINGDOM OF JEHOVAH and his CHRIST.

By RICHARD CLARKE, Minister of the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST.

REV. xix. 10. The Testimony of JESUS is the Spirit of Prophesy.

1 JOHN iv. 1. Beloved, believe not every Spirit; but try the Spirits, whether
they are of GOD: for many false Prophets are gone out into the World.

1 COR. ii. 14, and 15. But he that is spiritual discerns all Things, yet he
himself is discerned of no Man.

The natural Man receives not the Things of the Spirit of God: For they are
Foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. CHARLESTOWN, (South Carolina,) Printed. BOSTON: N. E. Reprinted
and Sold by EDES and GILL, and GREEN and RUSSELL, at their Printing-Offices in
Queen Street, 1759.

THE PROPHETIC Numbers OF DANIEL and JOHN CALCULATED, etc.
I Was led by extraordinary impressions to compute the numbers of Daniel and
John, who are both beloved prophets, and the counterparts to each other: They
contain the beginning and end of all the great confusion, which sin has brought
into the works of ALEIM JEHOVAH.

First, I was led to consider, where the theocracy of the God of Israel ended,
after the ancient departure out of Egypt, when his judges or rulers were cast
off by their kings.

This fell out in 427 years, when Saul was chosen: Then was I led to consider,
that about this time the ANTICHRIST of false interpretation for the gospel was
nourished with great ease and honor at the courts of emperors, eastern and
western, who did as much destroy the spirit of the gospel, as the kings of
Judah and Israel did the spirit of the law and the prophets.

This was near 1095 years before the CHRIST of the ALEIM of Moses, who is the
king or head of Israel, promulged again the theocracy of the triune JEHOVAH in
the beloved Son.

From this date I was conducted to calculate the last number of Daniel in the
close of his prophecy: Dan. xii. 12.
-- blessed and holy is he, that comes to the thousand three hundred and five
and thirty days, but go thy way 'til the end be; for thou shall rest and stand
in the lot at the end of the days.

These two numbers make 1762.

In verse 9 Daniel was bid to go his way; for the words were closed up and
sealed, 'til the time of the end: Verse 9.
that is, it would not be revealed, 'til the season of its fulfilling was
coming on and expiring. The LOT here is a term of the law, the LORD'S PORTION,
or the FIRSTBORN, the leading character of that dispensation.

Within four years of this time, under the gospel, SIXTUS III. in the year 432.
there was a pope, whose name was Sixtus III. which period nearly agrees.

This ought to appear an extraordinary mark to such, who believe, that the
whore of Babylon, and the great city, signify the corrupt church of Rome only:
since the THIRD SIXTH in all the languages of Babylon the great, answers to 666.

But if this number should compose the name of the BEAST, it must be
remembered, that the whore rides on the scarlet or purple colored beast; Rev.
xvii. 3.
and therefore it cannot be interpreted confusedly. For she appears the same as
Babylon the great, which contains all the peoples, Verse 5.
and multitudes and kindreds and tongues. We must allow that all mankind rise
out of water and blood of fallen Adam, and the spirit of this outer court. This
is the whore, sitting over these waters. The 70 tongues arose in Adam's fall,
though the typical history be shown at old Babel. It means then in spiritual
prophesying, that the carnal and corrupt heart, the animal man of St. Paul, the
heart and flesh of fallen Adam, had so defiled the gospel by base
interpretation, that the power of the beast was set up upon the new spirit, 1
John v. 8.
water and blood of JESUS, Ezekiel. xi. 19.
to be poured out upon all of the old flesh. Then the schools and sons of the
prophets were confined to a few only: And the two great leaders of the church
in this age were Jerome and Austin, 1 Corin. xiv. 29, 30, 31, 32.
we need not say more.

The world, the corrupt heart set up the beast, a false interpretation to save
the crucifying and living and dying with Jesus, because he had done all, as was
pretended, and carried away the law and the prophets; John v. 5, 6, 7, 8.
instead of the blessed Jesus opening the law and the prophets, and fulfilling
his mighty powers and spiritual priesthood in them, of a new spirit, and water
and blood, the one holy seed and work that he had been, and will be doing till
sin, and misery its wages and curse, are no more, -- Amen.

As the church of Rome, by the baseness and submission of other churches of
Africa, had the greatest hand, in bringing in one confusion and false lip of
interpretation after another, she may be considered as an eminent Antichrist,
full of false tongues and stammering lips; Isaiah xxviii. 11.
but in what light can she answer to the name Mystery or Babylon the great,
which comprehends all the peoples, and tongues, and languages, and nations;
and in her was found the blood of prophets, and of saints, Rev. xviii. 24.
and of all that were slain upon the earth.

Can words describe the World more plainly, which our savior uses so
continually in the gospel of St. John, and he scatters this word through his
epistles. This disciple of the bosom best knew the mysteries, the deep and
prophetic sense of his master's kingdom.

There are many antichrists, says this beloved writer, 1 John ii. 18.
who understood the full force and spirit of prophesying: And antichrist will
come, that is, an eminent one, the church of Rome, and another, even Mahomet.

Yet it must be considered, that the one temper and disposition, which slew all
the true interpreters and messengers of the revelation of God, in every part of
the great city, which is the world, slew them in Judea, and in Rome; under
Mahomet, and in Gentilism: They slew their bodies, or rejected their
interpretation by a false lip and lying tongue set up against them, which is
the spiritual death of prophesying in the sense of Paul and John, evangelical
prophets, and of the ancient prophets.

Secondly, I was led to compute the time, when the temple of Solomon was seized
by the old typical Babylonians after its building; and the spiritual prophets,
or interpreters of that temple had written.

The siege of Jerusalem fell out in 428, and the taking of the temple, about
two years after.

This is near the same time as before, and would expire by adding the 1335 days
of Daniel, in 1763, or 1765. This is near the same time when Jesus Christ the
PROPHET of his own spiritual, and heavenly temple disappeared in a manner: For
after he had shown the MYSTERY which he had been doing among the 70 nations, or
tongues of the world, by all the rites and figures of the law; how he had
killed and slain and poured out the false water and blood of Adam, and had been
pouring his pure and holy water, and blood and spirit, which he brought to
light on the cross? how he had done all the parts of the true sacrificer and
feeder of his people: Then came the time, when the true temple and all its
spiritual and inward priesthood was overthrown; when things imputed were
setting up instead of the royal blessings implanted and ingrafted into the old
dead tree, the tree of mortal flesh, through him as the tree of life, with
twelve fruits, mediating or coming between our foul water and blood. For these
holy powers were to quicken the dry bones, the dead earth, and vessels of
Adam's fallen tabernacle, into living spirit, and water and blood, by continual
union, touch and inhabitation of the Lord of the GLORY, or the CHERUBIM
overshadowing the world, as the temple.

I was then led to compute the number 666, by adding the one thousand two
hundred and sixty days for the prophesying of the two witnesses in sackcloth,
Rev. xi. 3.
before the false prophets should be cast down.

My mind was guided to consider the time, when Antiochus, a type of an insolent
power, and defiler of the sanctuary, that should rise up in the new temple, did
all those impieties and mocking insults on the old temple, 1 Mac. i.
as recorded in Maccabees, for three years and an half. This is the number of
time so famous among the Jews on his account. Lightfoot. Vol. II. p. 513.
This event fell out about 168, or 167, before Christ: Deducting these numbers
from 1926, it will bring us to 1758, or 1759, when the slaying of the witnesses
at the end or toward the expiration of their testimony will most likely begin.
This slaying of prophetic testimony does not mean only shedding blood, but
making merry over it, Joshua vii. 21.
as this golden tongue of St. John, which is covered, describes the peoples,
and tribes, and languages, and nations, rejoicing over the prophets; Rev. xi.
9, 10, 11.
not suffering their dead bodies, their rejected prophesies, to be put in
graves; that is, forgot and buried in silence, but talking of their testimony,
and sporting with it.

Again, The first name of Babylon the great, Rev. xvii. 5.
wrote on her forehead is mystery: Mystery always signifies something
concealed, and to be explained. The Hebrew word for mystery, according to the
pronuniciation of the natural vowels, or sounds is sater. Samech Aleph Thau He
Resh (...) 60 1 400 5 200.

Let us then join Antiochus under the law to his antitype under the gospel, who
cast out the mystery of a life hid with Christ in GOD, Col. iii. 3.
to a mystery of iniquity and folly, of Jewish rites and figures with an
heathen sense and meaning: And this will bring us to a time, when the false
prophet, 2 Thesal. ii. 9.10.
the lying and stammering lip of interpretation, had got into the temple, and
was working his lying wonders with all deceivableness of unrighteousness and
speaking lies in hypocrisy. 1 Timothy iv. 2.


We shall approach the time, Babylonian Thalmud 500, or 505 years after CHRIST.
when the Babylonian Thalmud, that spiritual captivity of the treasures, the
sacred vessels and holy mysteries of Moses was proclaimed with universal joy
and triumph. At this time such a doctrinal of the sacred truths, of the new
temple of Jesus was set up, and drove out Moses and his prophets, and Jesus the
son of the new house of glory, Heb. iii. 6.
and Paul, and John and Peter, his prophets with golden tongues.

Count 1260 days for the two witnesses in sackcloth from both periods, Rev. xi.
3.
as they are disputed: They will make 1760, or 1765. Near this time Babylon
with her strife of 70 tongues will be put to silence by the golden bells,
Psalms xxxi. 20.
on the typical garments, which are so many tongues and voices proclaiming the
great high priest Jesus savior, -- Amen. Luke ii. 10.
Soon the false and lying tongue will be put to silence all over the earth; for
the Lord of the glorious Cherubim will take to himself those only, who were
made holy by his own living, and divine substance being offered into their new
temples, and presented into them: For this only must be the power of his
endless life freely communicated to them. He is the prophet, Heb. vii. 16.
priest and king in all his spiritual characters, and powers given of rich
grace into his peculiar subjects, and children.

Others expect Christ to be a sin offering, which Paul the prophet says, was
only once to be offered in our flesh: Heb. ix. 24, 25, 26, 27.
But the people of his holy spirit, water and blood, who are truly partakers of
his spiritual and divine nature, 2 Peter i. 4.
were to feed on him as their daily meat and drink offering, and peace offering
from the altar of fire: From whence he is feeding his great congregation, and
covering them under the glory of all the cherubim burning to the four corners
of the earth. Ezekiel. i. 4. Chap. x. 6, 7.


Now this mystery of Babylon the great, Psalms xxxi. 20.
is just opening; and a firstborn lot out of her strife of tongues, and many
peoples, and languages, and nations, will be brought under the tents of Sem,
who is the first born of God the Aleim: Genesis ix. 26, 27.
Who is the man child of Psaiah and of St. John, Isai. lxvi. 7.
and the prophets. They will dwell with him, Rev. xii. 5. the son, the strong
male.
our elder brother the first born-Jesus under that glory, where the general
assembly and church of all the firstborn have been hid, Jer. xx. 15. xxx. 6.
and will be made known at the brightness of his coming: Ezekiel. i. 26.
For all who are born of the flesh, Dan. vii. 13.
by the will of man, and of his spirit, water and blood, and live after the
flesh, will die, John iii. 6.
and their carcases will be an abhorrence unto men. Isai. lxvi. 24.


After these calculations I was led to consider the 2300 days of the eighth of
David. which were appointed for cleasing the sanctuary.

An host, or holy number as some interpret, was given against the daily
offering by reason of transgression, Dan. viii. 12, 13.
to tread down the truth to the ground, and it practiced and prospered.

The daily offering is the whole complete service of the temple every day,
which was doing for the nations of the four corners of the earth.

So long as this number was secret, so long should Babylon the great, and her
kings, and peoples, tread down truth; Dan. viii. 13.
and the sanctuary under foot; institute and support false religion in
opposition to the one revelation of Moses and Jesus Christ.

In the thirteenth verse, Verse 13.
the saint who is called the revealer of secrets, or wonderful Numberer in the
margin, answers that the time was 2300 days. Evening.


Why they call this HOLY ONE the wonderful numberer does not appear, unless
they took it from the ancient Jews, who apprehended some great truth concealed:
For it is properly the one just or HOLY ONE answered to the question.

However it is declared, Verse 17.
that at the time of the end, should be the vision of that number.

I was then led to count this number, from the time of Belshazzar's impious
feast and mockery with all the great lords, Dan v.
and concubines of his vast kingdom, when they drank out of the sacred vessels
of the temple, which his father had taken away.

This is only a typical Babylon, for all nations and tongues were not shut up
in this empire.

This fell out in 538 years according to the most exact chronologies we have,
and it runs down to 1762 under Christ: The kingdom of this type was taken at
midnight, and himself slain by Cyrus, who put an end to the captivity of Judah.

Judah is a figure of the firstborn. Judah on whom the blessing was to be,
Genesis xlix. 8, 9, 10.
because he was to be Joseph the younger in the flesh, 1 John v. 7.
a sin-offering of love, to the glory of Aleim Jehovah, the Father, word, and
holy spirit.

This feasting and drinking out of the vessels of the temple expresses in that
fine way, in which GOD hides himself from profane and mocking tempers; it
expresses too the blindness of the christian age we are now in, who use the
vessels without the sense of the new temple. 2 Peter liii, 3. Jude 18. Col. i.
26. Chapt. iii. 3.
Peter and Jude describe the last times abounding with scoffers and mockers at
sacred truths, at the mystery of a life hid in Christ with GOD, the whole
godhead.

This profanation was the first committed, after the going out of the prophesy;
and it describes the general character of the sensual heart and life on earth:
Cain, Ham, Ishmael, and Esau are contained under this picture, who drank out of
the vessels and figures of religion without attending to the great and
spiritual blessings. It points out the age when they should through all the
kingdoms, and tongues and nations of the world, be drunk with wealth and
pleasure, 'till Jesus should come on a sudden, and cut them asunder, and give
them their portion in the fire and lake of Hell.

Our time cannot be affirmed to be exactly true; but at midnight, that is, at
an hour unexpected, as at the passover in Egypt, (though they had warning) will
Babylon the great fall, Exodus xi. 4.5.
and the delivere of all the holy people, or segullah selected out of all
nations shall come: Exodus xix. 5.
They shall go out of captivity to their own country, Mal. iii. 17.
the new Heavens and new earth under the true Cyrus Christ, King of kings, and
Lord over the lords of the whole earth. God appointed Cyrus, at the first
deliverer in type, by Isaiah, Isai. xliv. 28. xlv. i.
one of the prophets of the whole gospel dispensation.

Hence we must look for this overthrower of Babylon, the great city, and all
kingdoms, and cities and peoples of the world under the gospel, when the Lord
shall be exalted in that day. Isaiah. ii. 11.


Lastly, The prophet Daniel speaks, that he (the Messiah) shall confirm the
covenant with many for one week; Dan. ix. 28.
and in the division of the week, he shall cause the oblation to cease, and for
the over-spreading of abominations he shall make it desolate, even until the
consummation, and that determined, shall be poured upon the desolate.

The 70 weeks of Daniel are 490 days; Dan. ix. 27.
by centuries 49,000 years, or by ten times seven hundred for each week, they
will make 7000 years according to the mystic sense of the ancient Jews, who
allowed 7000 years for the week of the world. Seven of these weeks run up to
the seven weeks of pentecoste, and to the seven sabbatic years to the jubilee.
In equal portions, they make 49,000 years: For ten weeks, allowing a century or
double jubilee for each day, make the equal portions of the whose seventy
weeks, and reduce them to seven sabbatic years.

On this ground a week of years in Daniel is 7000. In verse 26th he says,
desolations are cut off, by which we may understand, that the time of them were
shortened, as our Lord has told us, Matthew. xxiv. 22.
that those days should be shortened for the elect's sake. It may be hence
concluded, that the judgments of God will be for these days, or first week of
the gospel happened, by reason of the great sins, and impieties of all nations,
and christian kingdoms in a more high degree.

This particular circumstance St. Paul also mentions: He will finish the
account or number, and cut it short in righteousness; Romans ix. 28.
for a short account will the Lord make on earth.

Our Lord was crucified on the sixth day of labor, or servile week of the old
law; Matt. xxvii. 46.
but he expired about the three in the afternoon, Mark xv. 53.
at the ninth hour, the time of offering the evening sacrifice.

It was about the sixth hour and there was darkness over all the earth, Luke
xxiii. 44, 45, 46.
until the ninth hour when Jesus gave up the spirit.

This period does not fill up a whole day, but falls short of a portion;
wherefore the spiritual sense (in which alone all parts of the holy high
priest's life will be fulfilled in a dignity becoming his high name) cannot
complete a sixth day of a thousand years for every day of the servile week.

The piercing of his side before the sun of this world set, between the 3d and
6th hour, Zach. xiv. 8.
appears to be the time of the great pouring his living waters and precious
blood into the righteous; Ezekiel. xlvii. 5.
and pouring out the vials of his wrath upon all the wicked, in a double cup
for all corrupt christians, and much more for those who have a purer gospel.

This time of a portion of 12 hours for a day is mentioned by the greats
prophet Jesus Christ, John ix. 12.
are there not twelve hours in a day: But these hours cannot be measured, to
proportion them to one thousand years, because we are not informed how soon he
was pierced after his death.

At this time the daily offering to the nations of the earth of the precious
water and sanctifying blood, the ransom, will be taken away from them; for the
bridegroom will be gone, and this period of the one week from the 70 of Daniel,
will be shortened for the over-speading of abominations.

At that time there will be no more oblation of his spirit, and water and
blood, shed out of the glory of the Cherubim, 1 John v. 6.
which covers all kingdoms peoples and tongues and nations under its spreading
wings, and its wheels are high and lifted up touching Heaven and earth.

Somewhere in the cutting, Ezekiel. i. 15, 18.
or division of this day, will the sun be darkened, which now lightens kingdoms
and cities and peoples to follow the lusts of the flesh, and the lust of the
eye, and the pride of life; and above all to the lust of wealth: The stars will
drop down from the heavens at once, I John ii. 16.
in one hour.

Then the rocks will be rent, the graves shall be opened, and the dead will
arise, and all nations shall stand before the son of man.

The 120 years of typical Noah, were shortened: The Egyptians, Chaldees and
Persians preserved the typical sense of the 120 years, and interealated a month
at the end of every hundred and twenty years, which they called the GREAT MOON.

Our Lord's body was 36 hours in the grave, which is the long day of typical
Joshua in his great victory; Joshua x. 12, 13, 14.
for then the sun was stopped in his course: In the antitype is meant, Isaiah
xxviii. 21.
that the sun of righteousness, Eccl. xlvi. 4.
in the going down of this day, will arise and break forth with healing in his
wings to the general assembly of the firstborn out of all nations. Heb. xii.
23.


Then will he rain down waters of life, Number. xxiv. 7.
and sprinkle his holy blood on his people; Jer. li. 13.
then will he cast down his heavenly fire, Eze. xliii: 2.
which shall burn the outer-court, and all that are Gentiles, Zach. xiv. 8.
in the flesh and not in the spirit. Rev. xi. 2.


The whole congregation of the firstborn and first fruits, is going with Jesus
Christ, the Lord and head, to enter the new earth and new heavens, while the
heavens that are now, are kept in store, 2 Pet. iii. 7.
reserved unto fire against the day of judgment, and perdition of ungodly men.

The VEIL of the hidden temple shall be opened; the wicked and scoffer will see
the kingdom of Christ within, brought to light, Luke xvii. 21.
and shall howl with astonishment, fear and anguish, Mark iv. 11.
at their madness and folly in scorning the mystery of the kingdom. Mat. xiii.
11.


For he shall cry with his VOICE as the sound of many waters; Eze. xliii. 2.
and all this world of the Curse shall vanish before him, Rev. i. 15.
who will plant his THRONE, Rev. xxi. 4.
and glorious kingdoms; wherein death and sorrow and curse shall be no more.

The word which is translated in the midst of a week, Robertson These. ling.
sanc. in Cheth. root. 101.
signifies any division, and not an equal one, as Kimchi has shown: This
appears the concealed meaning of a time, times, and the dividing of time twice
mentioned in Daniel. Dan. vii. 27. xii. 7.


It seems then to refer to the cutting of the last part, whatever portion GOD
shall appoint for it.

This circumstance is answered again by St. John, where the woman is nourished
in a wilderness for a time, times, and half a time, from the face of the
serpent.

Both these prophets beloved of their Lord, (whose deep sense veil the whole
kingdom of Jesus from the beginning to the fall of Babylon of death, and hell
and sin) bear a view to their master's language; that those days, or the time
of one week should be cut off, or shortened; and for the reason assigned by
Daniel, the over-spreading like a flood, of abominable impieties of the whole
world: This Age is the exact picture of it; Rev. xviii. 14.
when Babylon falls, and all her fine and goodly things for which her soul
lusted, are no more to be found.

The only number remaining is that of the 1290 days, Dan. xii. 11.
in the last chapter. Verse 11.


This number extends 30 days above the 1260 of St. John: And it is to be
explained in the great sense for the ages of ages to succeed, Mat. vi. 13.
Ephesians. iii. 11.
which are mentioned in several places. Rev. xiv. 11.


These must be divided in a double portion for jubilees, and a third for
centuries, the era of the Gentile church.

860 jubilees make 43,000 years: The first 7000, or one week or age being
added, they fill up the fifty days of Pentecoste, Levit. xxiii. 15, 16.
and the fiftieth year of jubilee; Levit. xxv. 8, 10.
the feast of weeks and the seven great sabbaths of years.

The last 430 of this number reckoned by centuries of Japhet the Gentile,
amount to the same number. If they are compounded, they make 86,000 years: But
as the 14 sabbatic years at the end of every 6000 must be considered as years
of release, by adding these, Exodus xxi. 2.
the double year of 100,000 is filled up: Deuteronomy. xv. 9, 12.
100 years was typical Noah in building his ark, Genesis vii. 13, 14.
for all creatures; where Ham the servant of servants, goes in with his
brethren Shem and Japhet. Rev. xiv. 6.


The 1260 days of St. John can give only 84,000 years; and the 14 sabbatic
years will not give the two octaves, Lev. xxiii. 15.
the eighth day to each period, which is the crown of pentecoste, Deuteronomy. xvi. 9.
and of jubilee. Lev. xxv. 10.


We must remember, that this first great week, or first age will be shortened:
It will not run so many sabbatic years, nor years of jubilee, nor centuries, as
the prophesies regarding time declare, in many places produced and explained.

The prophesy of Mr. Love ought not here to be omitted, as it is not his own. I
have not seen a word of his, or the calculations of any one.

Let us give the account of this prophesy in his own expressions.

"The prophesy which Jehoram copied off, and translated out of the Hebrew
language as it is written on Seth's pillar in Damascus: Which pillar is said to
have stood since before the flood, and was built by Seth, Adam's son, and
written by Enoch, the prophet; as likewise the holy precepts whereby the
patriarchs walked, before the law was given to Moses, which was also engraven
on the said pillar, whereof many Jews have copies in their own language,
written on parchment, and engraven on brass and copper: But the alteration of
the date makes them to stagger at it, not knowing that the dates were to be
altered by the birth of Christ.

"First, this prophesy is entitled, a short work of the Lord's in the latter
age of the world.

"Great earthquakes and commotions by sea and land shall come in the year of
God 1756.

"Great wars in Germany and America 1757.

"The destruction of popery, or Babylon's fall, in the year 1758.

"The anger of GOD against the wicked in the year 1759.

"GOD will be known by many in the year 1760. And this will produce a great man.

"The stars will wander, and the moon turn as blood in 1761.

" Asia, Africa, and America will tremble in 1762.

"A great earthquake over the whole world in 1763.

"GOD will be universally known by all: Then general reformation and peace for
ever; when the people shall learn war no more: Happy is the man that lives to
see this day."

These things have hitherto had an accomplishment sufficient for the opening of
a vision of prophesy. Popery is his own conception of Babylon; and it is fall
will be by the spirit of prophesying, that is, of interpreting sacred writ,
which is the testimony of Jesus. Rev. xix. 1.


The year 60 appears the rising of the witnesses, when greater gifts of the
spirit will be poured forth over the christian world.

The other effects 1761, 1762, 1763, appear to be the physical changes, which
the messiah, the Lord of the glory of the Cherubim is working, 'till he bring
the glory to open view.

Spiritual prophesying, or unfolding the mystery of GOD, even the father; Col.
ii. 3.
and of Christ (in whom are hid the treasures of wisdom and knowledge) will run
like a a silent stream, and speak like a soft voice a Bath-col: It will escape
the carnal heart and eyes, Rev. iii. 18.
which have not the unction of Christ the great prophet in them. 1 John ii. 20.


As for my own part I shall leave myself to be judged by the sons of the
prophets; for the spirits of the prophets or interpreters of holy writ, 1 Cor.
xvi. 32.
are subject to the prophets.

The false prophet of the law, and of Christ, is the false representation of
the mystery of the gospel: And this is that character, 2 These. ii. 9.
which works lying wonders even to deceive if it were possible, Rev. xiii. 13.
the chosen people of GOD.

Lastly, No manifestation of the divine goodness; no execution of judgments
ever came without a double voice of comfort to the good and of terror to the
wicked. It is of small moment who is the mouth, an angry Jonah, or a Daniel; a
covetous Balaam, or a John.

For these are public characters, designed for the edifying of the whole
church, whatever may be the end of the messengers: for both good and bad men
have been made instruments to cut off all evasion and objection on this point.

No time carries more marks than the present world and age for the fall of
Babylon the great, when every kingdom is looking out for more gold, Rev. xviii.
13.
and silver, and precious stones, and odours, and wine and ointment, like the
old Jews at the first revelation of the mystery, of the Messiah: He will come
as in the days of Noah, and Lot and Jerusalem: He will hide himself under the
spiritual glories of his kingdom from the profane, and sensual; from the rich
and noble according to the flesh, 1 Cor. i. 26.
wh^^ the humble and lowly in heart, in whatever part of the earth, or station
of life, shall find God and Christ, Isai. lxii. 32.
revealed in their souls, John iii. 29.
and shall be ready with the holy garment of the bride, Matthew. ix. 15.
to meet the bridegroom at his open manifestation and marriage. Rev. xxi. 2.9.


He, that has ears to hear, let him hear. xxii. 17. Mat. xi. 15. Mark iv. 9.
Luke viii. 8. Rev. ii. 7.
AMEN.

We will now draw all the numbers into a short view.

The 70 years of Jeremiah in chap. xxv. 12. xxix. 20. were understood by
Daniel, Dan. ix. 21.
and they appear to be the 70 weeks of years which Gabriel informs him of at
the 24th verse.

These 70 weeks make 490 days; and these days allowing a century or double
jubilee for each day, which is the end of time with the church of Christ among
the Gentiles; they will make 49,000 years. This number will answer to the seven
weeks of Pentecoste, and to the seven times seven years up to the jubilee. Thus
are filled up the seven Ages of the gospel, before the Messiah shall have
finished his glorious conquest over sin and death.

The proper theocracy of God was thrown off by asking a king about the year
427: 1 Samuel viii. 7, 8, 9.
The theocracy of God by the Messiah under the gospel was departing about this
time: The famous number of Daniel of 1335 days in chap. xii. 12. measured from
this year of the Christ of God, runs down to 1762.

Within four years of this period we meet with the pope Sixtus the third, or
third sixth: by adding these we shall come to 1766.

The typical temple of Solomon was taken by the typical Babylonians in 430, but
the siege of Jerusalem began in 428 years after the building of the temple.
Under the Messiah the prince of peace, and Lord of the true temple, spiritual
interpretation ceased about this time. If we measure this period by 1335 days
of Daniel, they will expire in 1763, or 1765.

The number of St. John of 666 and 1260 days for the prophets in sackcloth
added together, Rev. xi. 3.
make 1926 years. Measure this period from Antiochus who defiled the temple
under Moses, 167 or 168 years before Christ, to his antitype of the gospel, or
the power of Antichrist: This will lead us to the year of Christ 1758, or 1759.

Again. Let us compute the period of the Babylonian Thalmud proclaimed after
Christ, in the year 500, or 505: reckon 1260 days or years, before Meses and
the Messiah, Rev. xi.
two witnesses of God rise and come forth: and this will reach to the year
1760, or 1765.

If we reckon the number of Daniel in chap. viii. 12, 13. of 2300 days
appointed for the cleansing of the sanctuary, Dan. v.
from Belshazzar's impious feast, and the taking of the typical Babylon 538
years before Christ; this will conclude in 1762 of our time.

The cutting short of this first age of the gospel has been fully explained: So
that the only number of Daniel remaining is the 1290 days from the taking away
the daily oblation. Dan. xii. 11.


These appear to be days of jubilees and centuries, whose meaning I have opened
in page 18 and 19; according to my light, and the gift of God in Christ.

These witnesses of God in prophetic numbers concurring so nearly in time are
left to speak for themselves. May the Christ of God anoint our eyes, Rev. iii.
18.
that we may see and be wise to understand the signs of the times. Dan. xii. 10.


FINIS.

