SERMONS ON Important SUBJECTS; ADAPTED To the PERILOUS STATE of the BRITISH
NATION, lately preached in Philadelphia.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M. Minister of the GOSPEL.

JER. v. 3. Thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved.

JER. xxxv. 15. Amend your Doings, and ye shall dwell in the Land.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by JAMES CHATTIN, at the Newest-Printing-Office, on the
South Side of the Jersey-Market. 1758.

PREFACE.
Candid READER,
THESE SERMONS were preached to my own Congregation, without any Design of
making them public; but was induced hereto, as follows: In March last, I
received a Letter from the COLLEGE of NEW JERSEY, informing me of an
extraordinary Appearance of the divine Power and Presence there, and requesting
I would come and see; with this kind Motion I gladly complied, and having been
there some Time, had all the Evidence of the Reallity of the aforesaid Report,
which could be in Reason desired. Of this my dear Brother WILLIAM writes thus,
I went to the College last Monday, and saw a memorable Display of God's Power
and Grace in the Conviction of Sinners, the whole House was a BOCHIM; a Sense
of God's Holiness was so impressed on the Hearts of its Inhabitants, that all
of them, excepting two (esteemed religious) were greatly shaken respecting the
State of their Souls. This gracious Ray reached the LATIN SCHOOL, and much
affected the MASTER, and a Number of the SCHOLARS; nor was it confined to the
Students, some others were likewise awakened: I discoursed with all the present
Members of the College (excepting one) who generally enquired with Solicitude,
what they should do to be saved; nor did I ever see any, in that Case, who had
more clear Views of GOD and themselves, or in any House, more genuine Sorrow
for Sin, and Longing for JESUS; this blessed Work of the MOST HIGH, so far
exceeded my Expectation, that I was lost in Surprise, and constrained to say,
is it so, can it be so? Nor was my being, Eye and Ear witness from Monday to
Friday, able to recover me from my Astonishment! I felt, as the Apostles, when
it was told them the Lord had risen, they could not believe, through Fear and
great Joy! My Reverend Brethren, and Self, were like those that dream: The Lord
has done great Things for us, whereof we are glad (Ps. 126.) This religious
Concern was not begun by the ordinary Mean of Preaching, or promoted by any
alarming Methods, yet some were ready to sink under its Weight; it spread like
the increasing Light of the Morning, a wise and gracious Providence, had
brought about a Concurrence of different Incidents, which tended to engage them
to Thoughtfulness about their Souls The Incidents (refered to by my Brother)
were especially these, viz. Several Letters respecting the Necessity and
Excellency of internal Religion, sent to some of the Students, with practical
Books of like Tendency: The Sickness of one of the Scholars, in the College;
his being awakened out of Security, at that Time, and speaking to others;
together with other Students speaking to those about them concerning divine
Things.
; these Things, viewed in Connection, manifest the Finger of God. The Freeness
of whose Grace appears by considering, that a little before this merciful
Visitation, some of the Youth had given a greater Loose to their Corruptions,
than was common among them; a Spirit of Pride and Contention prevailed, to the
great Grief, and almost Discouragement of the worthy PRESIDENT. There was
little or no Motion of the Passions in the Preachers, during their public
Performances, nor any public Discourses in the Hours allotted for Study, only at
Morning and Evening Prayers, some plain and brief scriptural Exhortations and
Directions (proper to Persons under spiritual Trouble) were delivered: Before I
came away, several Persons received some Thing like the Spirit of Adoption;
being tenderly affected with a Sense of redeeming Love, and thereby determined
to endeavor after universal Holiness. I cannot fully represent this glorious
Work, it will bear your most enlarged Apprehensions of a Day of Grace; let God
have all the Glory! It was indeed to me as a Tree of Life, yea it is still to
my Soul, as though I had seen the Face of God!

THE hearer of Prayer, excited diverse Members of that Society to vehement
Wrestlings, for an Effusion of sacred Influence on the Students, that hereby
they might be prepared, as polished Shafts, to promote, with all the Ardor of
their Souls, the truly noble Interests of the Redeemer's Kingdom: This
believing Importunity did not continue long, before Jehovah rent the Heavens,
and came down, and brought Salvation with him to that House: This Prodigy of
Grace, excited high Admiration, grateful Love, and exceeding Joy, in those
Bosoms, that had been oppressed with Concern for the COLLEGE, in its secure
State! These Measures which the all-wise God used, to begin and carry on this
glorious Work of his Grace, were peculiarly adapted, and therefore probably
designed, to silence unreasonable Cavils against it! Diverse Persons, worthy of
Credit, assure us, that the aforesaid religious Concern, has been followed with
such Effects, as give Ground to Hope, it has and will issue in the saving
Conversion, of a considerable Number of the Scholars! Blessed be God for this
Benefit, so pregnant with Mercies to the Community; for hereby Salt is cast
into the Spring, that salutary Streams may flow out, to Water this Wilderness,
and make it blossom as the Rose! The Truth is, a gracious God has interposed,
in Favor of this Infant-Seminary, by a Series of surprising Events! -- It was
begun without One Farthing of a Fund to support it, or any Probability of
obtaining one; -- after waiting many Years, divine Providence procured a Royal
Charter, and provided valuable Benefactions, on both Sides the Atlantic (in
the Midst of Contempt and Opposition) sufficient to erect, and near finish, the
most spacious STRUCTURE on the Continent (a Structure grand and noble in
Prospect, and peculiarly adapted to answer the Use designed) and to carry on,
in a good Degree, the important Purpose of the Institution Seeing a pious
Ministry are exceeding necessary to preserve Foundation Principles, and promote
vital Religion, and that pious Youths of a promising Genius, are often found
among the poorer SORT, who are not able to give them a liberal Education, which
is necessary to qualify them for public Service; it is hoped that some who have
at Heart, the Prosperity of Zion, will contribute to the Support of such: A
Fund of this Kind is already begun in this College, by generous Benefactions
from Great Britain, but as not unequal to the Necessities of the Churches here!
: Matters being brought this Length, not by human Policy, but by the Arm of
JEHOVAH, it pleased the divine MAJESTY, to add this crowning Instance of
immerited Benignity, viz. To honor and beautify, by a singular Manifestation
of his Presence and Grace, the House HE had built, by an extraordinary
Providence! May Almighty GOD graciously keep Possession of his own House, in
all future Time, and make it by his continued Influence, a diffusive and
durable Blessing to the Church and State! As this Seminary, sacred to Learning
and Piety, resembles that of HALL, in SAXONY, in respect of its Rise, Progress,
and Influence, may it do so likewise in respect of Duration; and of this,
indeed, the aforesaid Smiles of Heaven, are encouraging Omens! -- Since the Day
of God's Power at the College, my Brother's Congregation at Freehold, has been
favored with an almost equal Shower of Blessing! -- Having preached a Number
of the following Sermons, at the College, in the Season before mentioned, the
greater Part of that Society, manifested a Desire of their Publication; which,
with the Desires of others, and Hope of their being useful, induced me to
publish Proposals for their Impression; I was the rather inclined hereto, by
considering that when I composed and delivered them, it pleased a gracious God
to Favor the meanest of his Servants, with the quickening Influences of his
holy Spirit, for diverse Months, in an uncommon Degree (adored be his Name) and
to bless them to some of my own Congregation; previous to that memorable divine
Effusion at NASSAU-HALL! And the calamitous State of our Country, and Nation,
was an additional Incentive; to serve which, in Sincerity, is the noblest
Ambition, and yields the highest Pleasure to a generous Mind! -- I am sorry I
cannot speak better for so great a MASTER, and in so good a CAUSE, but he
graciously accepts sincere Endeavors: Therefore to him, I humbly Dedicate
these SERMONS, and implore his Blessing on them, in the present, and succeeding
Times.

GILBERT TENNENT.
PHILADELPHIA, Oct. 20, 1757.
THE CONTENTS.
SERMON 1. On Original Sin, from Rom* 5.12. Page. 1. SERMON 2. On the Wisdom of
God in Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.24. Page. 54 SERMON 3 and 4. On Early Religion,
Prove. 8.17. Page. 92 10 SERMONS From Ezekiel. 33.11. On Conversion, Page. 143
SERMON 15. On the Riches of Grace, from Rev. 22.17. Page. 303 SERMON 16. On
Backsliding, from Jer. 3.22. Page. 347 SERMON 17. On Returning to God, from
Hos. 2.6, 7. Page. 373 SERMON 18. On religious Singularity, from Mat. 5.46, 47.
Page. 397
N. B. I have added one SERMON on Original Righteousness to the above, with
Design to complete the Order of Subjects, and enforce the Argument on Original
Sin.

Subscribers Names.
Messrs. and Mrs.
A
THE Hon. William Allen, Esquire 4 Richard Axell Benjamin Allwood Elisha Ayers
William Annin John Ayers, Esquire George Austin John Anderson, Esquire 6 David Allen 6
Theoph. Alexander John Aikine 2 Stephen Anthony Widow Adair William Alderman
The Hon. Col. John Armstrong 6 Henry Alwood Mary Anderson
B
Hugh Blackwood Rev. Mr. Bostwick John Burgan George Bryan, Merch. Capt. James
Bray 6 Margaret Bigger 2 Andrew Bonard John Bruce John Blackwood Daniel Baylie,
jun. Elizabeth Breese Benjamin Bird Samuel Bennet John Bleakly 6 James Birney
John Britt George Bullock Ebenezer Blackman 6 Nathan Booth Samuel Beardslea
Rev. Mr. Bellamy 6 Elizabeth Bullock David Bar James Barkley Rev. Charles Beaty
6 John Burnet, Esquire 12 Aaron Burr, Presid. 6 Noah Benedict, Stud. Caleb Barnam,
Stud. Abner Brush, Stud. 6 Moses Baldwin, Stud. Elizabeth Brice Anne Bennet
Thomas Butler James Bayard John Bayard Gustavus Brown
C
Rev. David Cowel 4 Ann Clarkson 4 Abraham Coats Nathan Cook John Collom John
Culbertson, Esquire 6 John Carpenter Duncan Campbell 6 John Carmichel John Carl
Robert Creighton 2 James Cathol John Craig William Craig Thomas Cook William
Crookshanks Patience Covenhoven Robert Cummins, Esquire Capt. William Craig Robert
Cather William Carson Jonathan Curtis John Cochran John Carmichel, Stud. James
Collins George Cochran David Chambers 2 Rev. Mr. Chestnut 6 John Craig Margaret
Clymer John Cloyd John Cole Daniel Cartwright Andrew Crawford Alexander
Crawford John Charlesworth William Callwell Jonathan Cathol Ann Clymer
D
James Dutton Dinah Rev. James Davenport 6 Capt. Samuel Drake 9 John Davies
Joseph Delap 8 Gerardus Duikinck Anna Dugdale John Demur, M. D. Jonathan Durell
Benjamin Deforest Rev. George Duffield David Davis 6 Enoch David Henry Derham
Jacob Dubois 6 Mary Davis Catharine Dorland Rev, Jonathan Dubois William Dorris
Capt. Nath. Donnel Edward Docherty Abraham Davenport 6
E
Thomas Eaken Archibald Erskins Hannah Evans James English David English 6
Robert Evans Timothy Edwards, Stu. Alexander Edwards
F
Samuel Ferguson Richard Ferguson Margaret Fletcher John Frappel Samuel Flemmin
John Frazer Peircifer Frazer Charles Ford 6 Michael Fisher, Esquire Michael Field
Richard Field Capt. Benj. Field John Field Jeremiah Field Standish Ford Philip
Freeman 6 Rev. James Finley Rev. Samuel Finley 2 Peter Fannel, Stud. Plunket
Fleeson
G
Capt. Thomas Gillis David Gordon Daniel Goodman Simon Giffen 6 Elnat. Gregory,
Stud. Martha Green Anne Gavin Dorcas Gray Rev. Nehe. Greenman Mary Grant 2
H
J. M. Z. Harlingen, St. Joseph Hall Richard Hockly, Esquire 2 Elizabeth Honey
Catharine Harrison Samuel Hunt John Houghton Robert Hendrickson Mary Hopkins
Jonathan Hall Michael Henry Samuel Henry 6 Nathaniel Harrison Rev. Benj. Hoyt
The Hon. Col. Isaac Handy, Esquire Rev. Andrew Hunter Capt. Robert Hardy Capt.
John Hamilton Rev. Oliver Heart John Harris Rev. John Harris 6 William Harrison,
sen. James Harris John Harris William Harris William Henry John Hall Francis
Hall Nath. Hazard, Mer. 6 Rev. Samuel Harker Capt. Benj. Handy, Esquire Capt. Sam.
Handy, Esquire Capt. George Handy Robert Handy Thomas Humphries Rev. Hugh Henery 6
Jeremiah Halsay, A.M. 6 William Hampton Catharine Hance John Henderson, Esquire
Thomas Harris Penelopy Haly James Huston John Howy 6 William Henderson Hugh
Hodge Matthew Haly Sarah Hawly Elihu Hall, Esquire Mary Henderson John Huntington,
Stu. Benj. Hermitage
I
Daniel Jones Rev. Timothy Jones 6 James Jauncey John Jackson Sarah Jones
Joseph Johnston Agur Judson Daniel Jones Isaac Jones, Esquire 3 Mary Johnston Paul
Jackson, P. L. 2 James James, Esquire
K
Edward Kesby Robert Ker Gain Kirkpatrick James Kirkpatrick John Kinan Robert
Kennedy Hugh Kennedy Samuel Ker, jun. Joseph Ker Samuel Kennedy Anthony Kelly
Doctor Kennedy 5 Wm. Kirkpatrick, Stud. Daniel Kinleg Margaret Ker Rev. Sam.
Kennedy 6
L
Isaac Lefever Lindford Lardner, Esquire Isaac Leech Samuel Leech Rev. Dan.
Lawrence 6 James Lee John Lyle, Esquire 12 Joan Lucas John Lloyd William Lord
Rachael Lane Eliz. Lane John Little, Esquire 6 Herman Lane 2 Jonathan Lorance
Nathaniel Lorance Ichabod Lewis, Esquire James Lion, Stud. 2 Hannah Lithgow John
Lambart Benjamin Lupton Rev. Thomas Lewis 6 Hugh Linn 6 Samuel Lowdon Elizabeth
Little James Lesly, Stud.
M
Rev. Mr. Martin 6 Samuel Miller Noah Miller Alex. Moore, Esquire 2 John McGalliard
Capt. Alex. Magee Capt. John McPherson William McCalla Rev. James McCrea 30
Peter Monfort John Monfort Rebecca McVeah Rev. Cha. McNight 6 Randal Marshal 1
Andrew Myres John Montgomery Thomas McCraken 6 John McCollum Thomas Miller
Capt. Wm. Murray Daniel McIntire Aaron Matison, jun. James Martin, Esquire 6 James
Macraken Rev. Dav. McGregory 6 Rev. J. Morehead 6 James Mayes 6 William Muir
James McMichen Rev. Jedid. Mills 6 Jedidia Mills, M. A. Elisha Mills, Merch.
Jacob Matison James McCrea 6 William McCrea 6 James McFarland 6 Adam McNeely 2
Nath. Manning, Stu. Capt. Nath. Magee Capt. Na. Manning 12
N
William Norcross 6 Nath. Noyes, Stud. Ebenezer Noyes, Stu. Joshua Noyes, Stu.
Thomas Nevil
O
Rev. Mr. Otterbeine William Olden Thomas Olden Thomas Ogden Joseph Ogden
George Owen John Ord
P
Peter Prall Robert Patterson Lazarus Pine Peter Perine And. Patterson, Mer.
Euphemia Petinger William Covenoven Peterson Sam. Purviance, jun. Zec. Phares
Samuel Poke B. Youngs Prine, Tut. Tho. Pierce, Stu. Sam. Purviance, Mer. Edmond
Physic Hannah Pierson Aquila Pecca Edward Prall Rev. John Peirson Rev. Mr.
Prudden 3 Joseph Peck, Esquire
R
The Honorable John Reading, Esquire Thomas Reves Thankful Robinson John Ross, Esquire
Alex. Randal, Esquire David Roe Rev. Israel Reed 6 Rachael Rattan John Rhea, Mer. 2
John Redman, M.D. 6 Thomas Rogers Sept. Robinson, Esquire 2 Thomas Riggs Sarah
Richison John Rasborough 6 James Reed James Robinson 6 Rev. Wm. Ramsey George
Reading, Esquire Thomas Rickets J. Berrien Ricker, Stu. Lewis Rees Job Ruston, Esquire
Daniel Reese Capt. Dan. Reading Rev. John Rogers 30 Mary Roman Rev. John Roan 2
John Rob James Richy
S
The Hon. Robert Strettle, Esquire Amos Strettle, Mer. Rev. Mr. Spencer Isaac
Smith, A. M. James Stout Capt. Arch. Steward Rev. Michael Slatter 2 Capt. Alex.
Sage 3 Lemuel Swain Benj. Stephens 6 Rev. Wm. Stoy Peter Seyfers Peter Striker
Josias Stanbury Sam. Smith, Mer. Edw. Shippen, Esquire John Smith Jane Sloane Nath.
Sacket Joseph Scroggan Thomas Stanford William Stevens Capt. Wm. Spofford 2
Rev. Robert Smith 6 John Smith Thomas Sharp David Smith, Stud. Stephen Sayre,
Stud. Thomas Smith, Stu. Jasper Smith, Stu. Jared Sexton, Stu. Samuel Spencer,
Stu. Henry Sherburn, Stu. W. Symonds, Mer. 18 David Stinson Jedidiah Snowden
Isaac Snowden Elizabeth Small Nehemiah Smith William Scott John Smith, Mer.
Rev. Caleb Smith 2 Capt. John Spofford
T
William Tully Robert Towers David Thomson Rev. Richard Treat 6 Joshua Thomas
Simon Thomas Jacob Tailor John Taber 6 Isaac Tuttle Henry Thorn Joseph Tatem 2
Benj. Thomson, Esquire Stephen Truesdel Catharine Topin Hugh Thomson Ichab.
Thomkins, Esquire Thomas Talmage Rev. Wm. Tennent 6 John Thomson Sam. Tailor, Stud.
Joseph Tichenor, Stu. Mr. Tate 6
V
Tobias Vanorden, Esquire Fulcher Vanotwick Capt. Wm. Venables Stopher Voorhes
Hend. Voorhes, jun. Patrick Vance Peter Vredenburgh Henry Vanduzer
W
James White John Watkins James Whilden 6 James Ward Capt. Wm. Wallace Jonas
Wright Capt. W. Windsor, Esquire David Wescote Rebecca Wells Sam. Whitewell 6
Gideon Wells Patrick Wilson Doctor Weed John Wikoff, Mer. Rich. Walker, Esquire 6
Abner Wells, Stud. Henry Wells, Stud. Jesse Williams, Stud. John Woodside James
Worrel Charles Williams Peter Wikoff, Mer. Obadiah Wells
Y
William Young Alexander Young
Original Righteousness; A SERMON.
GENESIS 1.27. God created Man in his own Image.


HERE is an Account of the Creation of Man, in which three Particulars are
remarkable, viz. The Time, Author, and Manner. And,

1st, AS to the Time, it was on the Sixth Day after the other Creatures were
made, then Man was formed, to be as it were the End and Compend of them; in him
God designed peculiarly to manifest the Glory of his Wisdom, Mercy, and
Justice: There was a Sort of a Climax or Gradation in the Works of Creation,
from Things less perfect, to Things more so; Man, the noblest Creature of this
lower World, was made last, that the Glory of God, appearing in his other
Works, might be declared by him, who was fitted for that Design: He was made
when all Things were prepared for his Entertainment and Delight, that so he
might be the more induced to celebrate the divine Praise, for so distinguishing
a Benefit. But,

2d, THE Author of his Creation, was the holy Trinity, Three in One, and One in
Three; and God said let us make Man. The Word said, being in the singular
Number, shows the Unity of God's Essence, and the Word God Elohim.
, being in the Plural, shows a Plurality of Persons in the Godhead. But,

3d, THE Manner of Man's Creation was, 1st, With Council; let us make Man. The
Narrative of this is introduced, with a manifest Distinction from the Rest of
the Creation Works: Hitherto only a Word of Command had been given for
producing the other Works; and God said, let there be Light, and there was
Light, etc. But now a Council is called, when Man is to be formed; who, under
GOD, was the Scope of the Rest. Some pretend, that God speaks here, after the
Manner of Princes, in the plural Number, who use to say, we will, and require,
etc. But hereto it may be replied, that this is only the Invention and Practice
of latter Times, and no ways agrees with the Simplicity of the first Ages, or
the Custom of the Hebrews. The Kings of Israel, used to speak of themselves in
the singular Number, 2 Samuel 3.28. and elsewhere, and so did the Eastern
Monarchs too; Ezra 6.8. I, Darius, make a Decree. Ezra 7.21. I, even I,
Artaxerexes, the King, do make a Decree. It is therefore unreasonable to thrust
the Usages of modern Style, into the sacred Scriptures: Besides the Lord does
generally speak of himself in the singular Number, some few Places excepted,
which are designed to signify the Mystery of the Trinity; as particularly, Genesis
3.22. The Lord said, the Man is become as one of us; which shows that there are
more Persons than one in the Godhead. Man was to be a Creature, different from
all that had been hitherto made, Flesh and Spirit, Heaven and Earth, must be
united in him: He must be allied to both Worlds, and therefore the Almighty (as
it were) calls a Council to the making of him; to represent to us his superior
Excellency, as well as the Care of God concerning him.

AND, 2d, Man was made in God's Image, and after his Likeness; these two Words
import the same Thing ( Genesis 5.3.) and represent to us the exact Likeness to
God that was in Man originally; he was certainly a nearer Resemblance, than any
other of the visible Creatures, but yet there ever was, and ever will be, an
infinite Distance between God and him, in respect of Dignity and Excellency,
CHRIST only is the express Image of the Father's Person, being of the same
Nature with him: Man is God's Image only, as the Shadow in the Glass, or the
King's Impress upon the Coin. Now the Image of God in Man, was Threefold, viz.
Natural, Moral, Political. And 1st, The natural Image of God in Man, consists
in the Nature and Faculties of the Soul: The Nature of the Soul was and still
is Spiritual, Simple, Invisible, Immortal, which Properties, do in some
Measure, resemble the Spirituallity, Simplicity, etc. of the supreme Being:
Besides, the Faculties of the Soul, viz. Understanding, Will, and active Power,
do resemble the Mind, Will, and Power of God; add to this, that a Variety of
Faculties in one and the same Soul, seem to shadow forth a Plurality of Persons
in the divine Essence; so that the Soul, considered in the aforesaid Faculties,
is, perhaps, the brightest Looking-Glass in Nature, wherein we may, in some
Sort, behold God.

2d, The political Image of God consists in that Authority and Power of
Government over the lower Creation which God gave to innocent Man; and let them
have Dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and over the Fowls of the Air, and over
all the Earth, and over every creeping Thing that creeps on the Earth. The
Almighty made innocent Man his Viceroy upon Earth; he gave him Authority to
use the inferior Creatures for his Support and Comfort, and to receive Homage
from them: An Evidence of this was their coming to him, and receiving Names
from him as their Lord. Now the Foundation of this Dominion, was the free Gift
of God the Creator, as appears from the Words before recited, the
reasonableness of which is manifest from the Supereminence of Man's Nature to
the other Creatures over which he was to preside; it was fit that that which
was less perfect, should submit to that which was more perfect. And the Mean by
which this Dominion was brought to pass, was the Providence of God, by which
all the Creatures had a Faculty and Inclination to obey Man: And doubtless, the
End was God's Glory, that as Man had received all from God, so he should refer
all the Homage and Service he got from the Creatures to him. But,

3d, THE moral Image of God consists in a habitual Conformity of all the Powers
of the Soul to the whole Will of God, which Solomon calls Uprightness; or, in
those divine Gifts of Knowledge, Righteousness, and Holiness, which were
possessed by them; the Mind was adorned with Wisdom, or the Knowledge of
Things, divine and human, which appeared in our first Parents giving Names to
all the living Creatures, suited to their Natures, and in his knowing, at first
Sight, that Eve was formed out of a Rib of his Side; and indeed, without
Wisdom, he would have been unfit to govern the Creatures, unfit to take
Occasion from them, to glorify the Creator, and so unfit for the Use designed
him, and consequently Evil: Surely therefore the Mind of Adam had a true and
clear Knowledge of divine Things, without Error or Mistake; his Will also was
pliant to the Will of God, without the least Reluctance; Holiness toward God,
and Righteousness toward Man, possessed the Will ( Ephesians. 4.24.) by which it was
disposed to desire what was good, and to receive what was true; and thus, Adam
not only acknowledged and loved his Creator, but was inclined to exercise a
Dominion only, and not a Tyranny over the Creatures subjected to him: And his
Affections were regular, free from inordinate Appetite, ready to obey the
Conduct of his Mind; his Thoughts were free from Vanity, and easily fixed upon
the best Objects; thus beautiful and harmonious was the original State of Man!

NOW, Original Righteousness consisted in, or sprung from all the aforesaid
Particulars; it is called Righteousness, in a large Sense, forasmuch as it
signifies the habitual Conformity of the whole Man to GOD and his Law; it is
termed Original, because it was confered on Adam, as a public Person, or upon
the whole human Nature in him; from whom it would have been propagated to all
his Offspring, if he had stood. It is likewise called Original, by Way of
Distinction, from all that actual Holiness, which has been since confered upon
any of Adam's Offspring. Original Righteousness was no Substance, as ILLIRICUS
dreamed, but a Quality; which was, as it were, diffused through all the
Substance, and therefore it was common to Soul and Body, to the Mind, Will, and
Affections; by this Man had a Capacity of Subjection to God, and of persisting
in Obedience to him; so that he was not obliged by any Necessity of Nature, to
rebel against God, and ruin himself.

IT is a very absurd and dangerous Opinion, which some entertain, from the
Abuse of that Passage of the Apostle Peter, where we are said to be Partakers
of the divine Nature; that Original Righteousness, consisted in Man's having a
Part of the divine Being; for, as this supposes the Almighty to be divisible,
so it makes Man equal to his Maker, both which are blasphemous; all therefore
that is intended by the Phrase, is that good People do partake of holy
Dispositions, resembling the moral Excellencies of Jehovah, but it should be
still remembered, that all the Perfections of Creatures, are finite, dependant,
variable; -- whereas those of God, are independent, invariable, infinite.

THE Scriptures positively declare, that Man was made originally upright,
Ecles. 7.29. Yea good, very good, Genesis 1.31. But how could this be, unless he
had that habitual moral Goodness, which is proper to Man, and necessary to
enable him to love and obey his Creator; surely such as the Tree is, such are
its Fruits, Mat. 7.18.

FARTHER, our being renewed after God (by Conversion) in Knowledge,
Righteousness, and Holiness, Coll. 3.10. Ephesians. 4.23, 24. necessarily supposes,
that the Image of God consists therein, and that this was Man's original State.
It is reasonable to conclude, from the Wisdom, Goodness, and Purity of God,
that Man was made perfect in his Kind, as well as the Angels, John 8.44. Jud. 6
Ver. But how could this be, if he wanted Wisdom, Righteousness, and Holiness?
And indeed, seeing the Want of Holiness in a rational Creature is Sin, if Man
was made so, God would be the Author of Sin. -- The Disorder of the Flesh, or
Law of the Members, warring against the Law of the Mind, the Apostle calls Sin,
Romans 7.20, 23. Now if this was con-created with Man, the Almighty would be the
Author of Sin, which is as absurd, as blasphemous to imagine, of infinite
Pefection, and absolute Purity!

ADAM'S being made a little lower than the Angels, his free Access to God
before his Apostasy, the Fear and Shame he discovered immediately after it, and
his Expulsion from Eden on Account of it, evidently suppose, that he originally
enjoyed God's moral Image. Farther,

WE are informed, that Man was made Male and Female, and this was doubtless for
the Comfort of human Life, and the Propagation of the human Race. Adam was
first formed, which shows the Pre-eminence of his Sex, 1 Timothy 2.11. His Body
was formed of the Dust of the Ground, which is indeed a humbling Consideration,
Dust we are, and unto Dust we must soon return; the Woman was formed of a Rib
of the Side of the Man, to show the near Relation, and tender Affection which
should subsist between them* Mat. 19.5. God made but one Male and Female, that
all Nations being of one Blood, Descendants from one Stock, might thereby be
enduced to love each other, and likewise to show the Unlawfulness of Divorce at
Pleasure, Mat. 19.4, 5. God having made our first Parents, pronounced a
Blessing upon them, in Virtue of which, their Posterity were to extend to the
utmost Corners of the Earth, and continue to the final Period of Time.

BUT before I proceed to the Improvement of this Subject, let me observe
somewhat upon the two constituent Parts of the compound Man, viz. his Body and
Soul; and, 1st, As to the Body, I may say, with the Psalmist, that it is
wonderfully made, if we consider its erect Stature, Symetry, or Use; while the
Beasts have a grovelling Aspect. Man is so formed that he can with Ease
contemplate the Heavens whence he has derived his Original, and such is the
Symetry of the Parts of a human Body, that Architects refer all their
Workmanship to be tried by it, as a Rule. Besides, the Parts are in their Form
and Situation, not only fitted for Beauty, but for all Kinds of Operations,
natural, moral, and spiritual: Add to this, the amazing Variety in human Faces,
where the Compass is so small, the Parts, Figure, and Color the same (which is
necessary to preserve the Honor and Comfort of social Life, and prevent our
Degenerating into a Herd of Beasts.) The Preservation of natural Heat, for so
long a Time, without inflaming the tender Internals; the Circulation of the
Blood, screening the noble Parts, from the Ignoble, by the Diaphragma, and from
external Injuries, by a strong Enclosure.

THE Body of Man being formed, it pleased God to infuse into it an immortal
Soul (Genesis 2.7.) which as to its Nature, is an immaterial, incomplete
Substance, endowed with Understanding and Will, which by its Union with the
Body, is the Cause of a threefold Life to Man. And, 1st, It is a Substance,
not a mere Thought, as Cartese imagined, because Thought is an Action, which
presupposes an Agent; it appears likewise to be a Substance, because it
subsists after the Death of the Body. 2d, It is immaterial, which is evident
from its Operations, it perceives immaterial Things, and that after an
immaterial Manner, by comparing one Thing with another, and infering one Thing
from another. 3d, It is incomplete, in respect of its being ordained for, and
disposed to a Union with the Body, as a Part of the Compound; by which, it
differs from the Being of Angels. 4th, It is endowed with certain Faculties of
Understanding and Will, by which it perceives what is true, and embraces what
is good. 5th, By its Union with the Body, it is the instrumental Cause of that
manifold Life which Man lives, viz. 1st, Vegetative; by which we are nourished,
grow, and propogate our Kind. 2d, Sensitive; by which we discern and judge of
sensible Things, by the Help of the Five outward Senses, Hearing, etc. as well
as of the three inward, viz. Common Sense, Fancy, and Memory. 3d, Rational; by
which we discern spiritual Objects, and are able to reason about them. On the
Account of that threefold Life mentioned, the Soul is termed the Spirit of
Lives, Genesis 2.7. It may be farther observed, that the compound Man was so made,
as to have no direct Tendency to a Dissolution, he would have been preserved
for ever from Death, had he not sinned; and therefore Death is threatened as
the Reward of Sin, Ezekiel. 18.20.

I NEED not add, that the Design of Man's Creation, was doubtless the Glory of
the great God; for that was the End of all his Works, Prove. 6.4. The stupendous
Workmanship of GOD, throughout the vast Universe, was summed up in Man, as a
Compend of the Whole! Man was fitted with a Capacity to Experience the Goodness
of all the Creatures in himself, and to return to God the Glory of it. But I
hasten to the Improvement. And,

1st, THE Consideration of our Creation, should invite our Gratitude to our
Creator, because he has made us, whom he could have left in the State of
Nothing; and especially, because he adorned us with his Image, hereby
distinguishing us from, and advancing us above all the lower Creation, and that
out of pure and unexcited Affection toward us. How holy, and how happy was the
original State of Man, he was not only conformed to the divine Nature, but had
the Enjoyment of the divine Love, in Consequence thereof; both Body and Soul
were beautified with singular Endowments, and enriched with a Variety of
Honors and Delights! O therefore let us esteem, love, and serve our great, our
good Creator, let us remember him from our early Age, Ecle. 12.1. let us speak
of his Goodness, subject ourselves to his Government, and refer our All to his
Glory: This is just, for God has absolute Dominion over us, he is our Potter;
this is grateful, for Jehovah is our Benefactor; this is reasonable, because he
is a Being of infinite Excellency, and hereby we are like to obtain his Favor,
Ps. 103.13.

2d, THE Thoughts of Man's original State, may excite us to bewail our present
apostate Condition, The Crown is fallen from our Heads, woe is us that we have
sinned: -- Our ancient Conformity to God, and Communion with him, are now lost,
and manifold Disorders have seized our whole Frame; the original Crasis of the
Humors of our Bodies is broken, and now they are exposed to all Manner of
Diseases and Deaths, of various Form! Darkness possesses our Minds, Obstinacy
our Wills, and great Irregularity our Affections; we who were at first Lords of
the inferior Creatures, are now become Slaves to them! we are deprived of the
Sweets of the divine Love by Sin, and exposed to the dreadful Displeasure of
our Creator! ( Ephesians. 2.3.) O therefore let us bitterly bewail our present woeful
State! If Rachael, when banished with her Children, from the Jewish Country,
and carried Captive to the Babylonish Borders, did so lament a small Misery,
that she refused to be comforted, shall not we lament, who are banished from
Paradise, disrobed of Innocence, berieved of Happiness, and thrust into a State
of the most miserable Captivity, by our own Default!

3d, THE Thoughts of our primitive Excellency and Happiness, should excite us
with all Earnestness to seek the Recovery of it. Let us remember whence we are
fallen, and do our first Works; it will not avail us to cry, O miserable Man!
without this be added to it, who shall deliver me? If the Woman that lost the
Piece of Silver, light a Candle, swept the House, and sought diligently for it
till she found it; shall not we be diligent, who have lost our All at a Stroke,
especially considering that there is great Hopes of our obtaining it, in the
Way of humble and unwearied Labor; and surely the Good we seek, will
infinitely overbalance our Pains in Quest of it! It may be recovered in Part
in this Life, by Regeneration and Justification, and with Advantage in the Life
to come, by eternal Glorification. But how should we seek it? 1st, By lamenting
our Loss, and especially Sin, the Cause of it. 2d, By embracing the Redeemer by
a living Faith, who is the meritorious Cause of our Restoration, that so we may
be united to him, and made complete in him. 3d, By earnest and unwearied
Labors, let us seek Conformity to God, let us work out the Work of our
Salvation, knowing that we shall reap, if we faint not: To our Labors let us
add many Sighs and Groans, for Freedom from the Bondage of Corruption, that we
may be brought into the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, Romans 8.19, 25. And,

4th, SEEING that there be yet in fallen Man, some remains of the divine Image,
not only of the Natural and Political, but even of the Moral, viz. Some Light
in the Understanding, to distinguish between moral Good and Evil, and some
Propension to moral Good; let us beware that we do not deface them more than
they have been by the original Trespass, lest we be guilty of the boldest
Rebellion, against the most sovereign Authority, as well as the basest
Ingratitude, against the kindest Mercy! Lest we commit the greatest Cruelty
against ourselves, by robbing our Souls of every Thing that is valuable, by
exposing ourselves to the divine Judgments, and that for a Thing of Naught, 1
Cor. 3.17. If any Man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy. The
Apostle Paul informs us, that the Gentile Philosophers were given up to vile
Affections, because when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, Romans 1.
Now his Image is defaced, by every Filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit,
especially by Pride, Unbelief, Disobedience, Ingratitude, Gluttony; by these
our first Parents despoiled themselves and us, of their native Dignity and
Beauty, and brought us to that Misery which we daily feel.

ERRATA.
PAGE 74. Line 1. read, of one. Page 149. Line 6. read, ay. Page 169. Line 28.
read, Place. Page 211. Line ult. read, and. Page 235. Line 1. read, Situation.
Page 248. Line 5. read, banished. Page 248. Line 27. read, so. Page 354. Line
7. read, turpissimus. Page 407. Line 21. read, own.
SERMON I.
ROMANS v. 12. Wherefore as by one Man Sin entered into the World, and Death by
Sin; and so Death passed upon all Men, for that all have sinned.


FORASMUCH as Reason and Experience teach us, that we are (in a moral Respect)
diseased; and seeing, according to the Revelation GOD has graciously given us,
a Physician is provided to heal this Disease; it must therefore be of the last
Importance to know its Nature and Extent, that we may be suitably affected
therewith, and apply to the great Physician in earnest for a Cure, without the
least Delay; which unless we do, we are not like to obtain any Benefit by his
Blood; for the Whole need no Physician, but the Sick; and many shall seek to
enter into the Kingdom of God, and not be able.

NOW the dangerous and mortal DISEASE we labor under, is SIN; which is
twofold, viz. ORIGINAL and ACTUAL; it is the former of these that the Text
under our present Consideration treats; to understand which, let it be
considered; that the Apostle is therein comparing the First and Second Adam, in
respect of the World's being corrupted by the one, and restored by the other.

WHEREFORE it is as if the Apostle had said, seeing Things are so in respect of
the Benefits received by Christ, as I have represented in the preceding
Verses, then it is evident that what was lost by Adam, is restored by CHRIST:
This he proceeds to illustrate, by showing particularly what the Loss was,
which we sustain by our first Parents Trespass, both in respect of Integrity
and Happiness; by one Man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin; here
observe, that Man is the Parent of Corruption; although the Devil sinned before
Man, yet he did not Sin to Man, but to himself; he was indeed the Procurer of
Man's Sin by his Temptations, but not the Committer of it; and therefore it was
not from his Seduction, but Man's Transgression, that Sin entered into the
World.

BUT who was this Man? A. ADAM, and EVE; though these were two in respect of
Sex, yet they were but one by Nature and Marriage; Eve began the Sin, and Adam
finished it; nor does it pass to Posterity till it be finished ( Genesis ii. 17.)
But why is not Eve named? A. Because the Hebrews do not cite Genealogies by
Women, and because Adam was constituted the Parent and Principal of the human
Race, and was one with Eve, not only oeconomically but naturally; for she was
made out of him, and depended upon him: But why is one precisely ^^med? A. That
it might appear the (...), that of one Blood all Nations have proceeded, and
especially that Christ the second Adam, might be the more conveniently opposed
to the first.

SIN entered; the Word is not taken here improperly, for the Punishment of Sin,
as it is in some other Places of Scripture, but properly for moral Impurity,
because it is distinguished from Death, from Punishment; Sin entered into the
World, and Death by Sin: Sin is spoken of in the singular Number, as it is
frequently in the following Verses, to show that one Sin of our first Parents
passed to their Posterity; one Sin of Adam only was natural, the rest were
personal: But what was that one Sin of which the Apostle speaks? A. It was that
actual Sin, which our first Parents committed by eating the forbidden Fruit,
and the Guilt thereof which are charged upon Adam's Posterity, because the
Prohibition did not respect him only, but them also whom he represented; this
is commonly called original Sin imputed; together with the Polution consequent
thereupon, consisting in a want of original Righteousness, and Propensity to
all Evil; this has stained the whole human Nature, as both Scripture and sad
Experience witness, and from this fatal Fountain all actual Evils flow; this
Polution or Depravity, is commonly called Original Sin inherent.

NOW the Apostle assures us, that this Sin of Adam has entered into the World;
by the Word World, we are to understand all the Inhabitants of the World, or
all Men, as the Apostle himself expresses it, in the following Part of the
Verse: The Thing containing, is put for the Persons contained, by a usual
Metonimy; but how did Sin enter into the World? I answer, not by Imitation, for
then it would not pass upon those, that had not sinned after the Similitude of
Adam's Transgression, which the Scriptures assure us it did: It therefore
entered into the World at first by the Trespass of our first Parents, and is
therein continually propagated by natural Generation; as appears by the next
Words of the Text, and so Death passed upon all Men. What Death? A. All that
Death which was opposed, to the threefold Life that Man enjoyed, while in a
State of Innocence, viz. Natural, Spiritual, Eternal. This Interpretation, the
Law of Contraries, and indefinite Form of Expression give Ground for.

NOW surely the Punishment could not pass upon all, without the Cause thereof,
the Sin together with it; for the Judge of all the Earth must needs do right:
And hence we may learn, that Original Sin is propagated after the same Manner,
that Death is, viz. by natural Generation; Men are begotten sinful, and so by
consequence mortal, for by Sin came Death.

IN the following Words of the Text, we have an Account of the reason of the
Propagation of Sin and Death to all Mankind, and it is this, for that all have
sinned; some render the Words, Ephesians o, in which, and so these Words are taken in
many Places of Scripture, Romans 1.2, 3.8. 3. Mat. 18.5. and diverse other Places
which it is needless to mention; and that it is to be taken so in our Text, the
Apostle informs us, by that parallel Place of Scripture, 1 Cor. 15.22. for as
in Adam all die, so in Christ all shall be made alive: This sacred Passage is a
pregnant Proof, that Adam was a Representative of his whole Posterity, and it
may be observed, that the aforesaid Words are so rendered in the Margin of our
Bibles, IN WHOM: But if our Translation be retained, it is much to the same
Sense, for if the Wages of Sin be Death, and such do die, as never committed
actual Sin themselves, as Infants do; then it will follow necessarily, that
they sinned in this one Man, in whose Loins they were; as Levi is said to have
paid Tithes in the Loins of Abram (Heb. 7.9.) and hence it is as expressly and
categorically asserted, in the following Verses ( viz. 15. and 18) as any Thing
can be, that by the Offense of one many are Dead, and that by the Offense of
one, Judgment came on all to Condemnation.

THIS apostolical Conclusion, viz. that by the Offense of one, Judgment has
come upon all Men to Condemnation, or, in other Words, that the Guilt of Adam's
Sin is imputed to all his Offspring, is the important Point, that I would essay
to evince in this Discourse, by Scripture and Reason, and to answer Objections
to the contrary; but previous thereto, give me Leave to offer some
Considerations, that tend to cast Light upon the laboring Subject.

HERE let it be observed, that there are two Things considerable in Sin, viz.
its Guilt and Polution, the former binds us to suffer Punishment while
Impenitent, by the Threatening annexed to the Violation of the Law, viz. that
the Soul that sins shall die, which divine Justice and Truth are engaged to
issue; but the latter, viz. the Polution of Sin, degrades and corrupts the
Soul, by making it (in its general Temper and Disposition) contrary to GOD'S
Nature and Law; the first is removed by Justification, through the
Righteousness of CHRIST, imputed and received by Faith; and the latter by
Regeneration and Sanctification, whereby pious Principles or Habits are infused
and confirmed, through the blessed Influence of the Holy Spirit, cooperating
with the Means of Grace, and Dealings of Providence: Both these Graces are
necessary to Salvation, the one to give a Title to it, and the other to make us
meet to enjoy it; and though they are different, yet they are inseparable; all
that are justified by Faith, are regenerated and sanctified by the Holy Spirit;
for that Faith which justifies, purifies the Heart, and works by Love. In order
to make what I have now offered easy to be understood, by those that are weak
and ignorant, give me Leave to use this humble Simile, viz. supposing a Leprous
Person was condemned to be burnt for some atrocious Crime, the Prince's Pardon
would not cure the Leprosy, no, there must be another Sort of Medicine used to
that Purpose.

BUT what is SIN? I answer in the Words of the Apostle John, that it is a
Transgression of the Law, or a being without the Law, or not conformed to it;
these Things the original Word anomia, signifies.

A LAW in general may be thus described, viz. that it is a Rule of Things to be
done, and avoided, enacted by competent Authority, and enforced by the Sanction
of Rewards and Punishments.

THE Law of GOD in this, differs from the Laws of secular Princes, that it
prescribes Limits to the Temper and Acts of the Mind, as well as to the Speech
and overt Actions of the Life: For the Mind is the Man, the internal Principles
that Men act from, as well as their Views and Frames in acting, are indeed the
chief Things that constitute the Goodness or Badness of Action; and they being
all open to the Eye of God, it is but right, that the Father of Spirits (from
whom the Law proceeds) the just Judge of the Universe* should prescribe Rules
for, take Cognizance of, and reward or punish them according to their different
Natures, and Degrees of Goodness or Malignity: But earthly Potentates having no
Knowledge of the Heart, or Empire over it, are utterly disqualified for so
arduous a Province; and the Intention of civil Laws being only to preserve
external Order and Right in the State, if these Things be observed, its End is
answered: But it is not so in Respect of the Laws of GOD, there the Spring and
Scope of Action, which are concealed from, and impenetrable to human
Cognizance, are principally regarded; there the least Disconformity in the
Temper of the Soul, or in any of its Acts, Dispositions, and Designs, to that
perfect and universal Purity the Law requires of all intelligent Beings, is a
Transgression of the Limits prescribed by it, and therefore Sin.

THE original right of Power among Men, arises either from Generation in
Nature, Preservation in War, or some public Service done to Society: Thus the
Jurisdiction and Dominion of Jehovah over Mankind, is founded in his Propriety
in them, and that arises from his giving to them their Beings, and all their
Benefits; Isa. 44.21. Remember O Israel, for thou art my Servant, I have formed
thee. From hence a supreme Right of Legislation naturally issues; in a Word,
GOD'S right to Rule over us, is founded on Justice, for he has made us, and not
we ourselves, we are the People and Sheep of his Pasture; his absolute
Property: It is also founded on Gratitude and Reason, for from him we have
received innumerable and very valuable Benefits; and the infinite and
transcendant Excellency of his Nature deserves the highest Esteem, and
qualifies him for supreme Rule; hence it appears, that every Sin is unjust,
ungrateful, and irrational, for it robs God of his Right (of the Homage and
Service due to him) violates the Laws of Gratitude, and slights transcendant
Excellency. Now

THE Laws of Religion are of two Kinds, viz. moral and positive; the former are
founded in Reason and Equity, and therefore are immutable and perpetual;
enjoined because they are intrinsically Good; but the latter, viz. positive
Laws, proceed from God's sovereign Pleasure, without regard had to the
intrinsic Goodness and Value of Things, and therefore are good only because
they are enjoined, and alterable by the Authority that enjoined them, being in
themselves indifferent: An Example of the former we have in the moral Law, and
of the latter, in the Precepts to abstain from the Fruit of the Tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil.

MAN, at his first Creation, was subject to the Law of Nature; which contains
these Rules or Maxims concerning moral Good and Evil, which have an intrinsic,
invariable Equity in them, and are the Measure, Standard, and Scale of the
Offices he owes to God, his Neighbor, and himself: This Law is Holy, as it
enjoins an Imitation of those divine Attributes, which are the Source and
Pattern of Purity; Just, as it requires us to give to every one his Due, and,
Good, as it recommends Charity and Beneficence, and is profitable to the
Observer of it; for in keeping this Law, there is a great Reward, even in this
Life.

TO the Law of Nature, was annexed the positive Precept to abstain from eating
the Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge, for important Reasons, viz. to manifest
God's Sovereignty, and to try the Creature's Obedience.

JEHOVAH being the Almighty Creator, is of Consequence the absolute Proprietor,
and Sovereign Lord of all; and therefore Man could have but a secondary right
of Use to his Possessions, founded on the divine Beneficence, and limited by
his Pleasure; for which he is obliged to render Homage: As Princes when they
give Estates to their Subjects, still retain the Royalty, and receive a small
Rent, which though inconsiderable in itself, perhaps but a Barley Corn, is
nevertheless an Acknowledgment of their Sovereignty, and of the Tenants
Dependence on them: Thus it was in regard of the Tree of Knowledge, abstaining
from the Fruit thereof, was a Token of Man's Subjection to, and Dependence on
his great and glorious Sovereign; nor could any Thing be better adapted to try
Obedience, than the Prohibition of what was in itself indifferent, and only
became unlawful by the Creator's Pleasure: For in this View the Precept had no
other Excellency to recommend it, but the Authority or Will of God, and
therefore to abstain was pure Obedience to divine Sovereignty, without any
Motive from the intrinsic Excellency of the Things enjoined, whereby the
Creature's natural Liberty was restrained.

THIS Law of Nature being in a great Degree effaced by the Sin of Man, a new
Edition was given of it upon Mount Sinai, on Tables of Stone, wrote by the
Finger of GOD himself, which is called the moral Law, because it prescribes
Rules for the Conduct of Life, or Regulation of Men's Manners, and likewise to
distinguish it from Laws purely positive: I say, this Law of Nature, or moral
Law, which is the same in Substance, in Conjunction with a positive Precept of
abstaining from the Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge, was delivered to our first
Parents in the Form of a Covenant, which was a Fruit of ineffable Wisdom and
Goodness.

FOR the COVENANT being mutual between GOD and Man, as it gave an Assurance of
the reward to coroberate his Faith, so it was the surest Bond to preserve his
Fidility: It is true, the Precept alone binds by the Authority that imposes it,
but the Consent of the Creature increases and endears the Obligation!

THE Almighty might have demanded the Creature's Obedience to his Sovereign
Pleasure, merely by way of absolute Empire; but he was pleased to deal with Man
in a more condescending, engaging Manner, by using such Arguments to enforce
his Authority, as were adapted to Influence his Reason and Ingenuity, his Fear
and Love!

NOW the Terms of the first Covenant, my Brethren, are rational, for they
establish an inseparable Connection between Sin and Ruin expressly, and between
Duty and Happiness implicitly, as appears by the Sanction, Genesis 2.17. In the
Day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die; in that particular Species of
Sin, the whole Genus was included, according to the Apostle's Exposition; Gal.
3.10. Cursed is every one, that continues not in all Things, that are written
in the Book of the Law to do them: The Death designed was not only a
Dissolution of the vital Union between the Soul and Body, together with all the
painful Preludes which usher in this King of Terrors; but likewise a
Dissolution of the mystical (or spiritual) Union between God and the Soul,
whereby his moral Image, and Communion in his Love were lost; together with a
final Separation from his gracious Presence for ever; under all which our
apostate Nature labors: Thus the Law is interpreted by the Lawgiver, the Soul
that Sins shall die, Ezekiel. 18.4. and elsewhere the Apostle Paul declares, that
the Wages of Sin is Death, but the Gift of GOD eternal Life, through JESUS
CHRIST our Lord (Romans 6.23.) Here observe, that the Apostle speaks of Sin
indefinitely, without any Restriction, and therefore intends every Sin, and
sets the Wages of Sin ( viz. Death) in Contrast with, or Opposition to eternal
Life, and therefore declares by the Antithesis or Opposition, that it is
Eternal; and this is applied in particular to the Sin of Adam, in the last
Verse of the Chapter, from whence our Text is taken, in these memorable Words;
That as Sin reigned unto Death, even so might Grace reign through Righteousness
unto eternal Life, by JESUS CHRIST our Lord: Now inasmuch as the Miseries
consequent upon our Apostasy, are in diverse Verses of this Chapter, set in
Opposition to the Benefits received by Christ, to restrict the Word Death to
that which is Temporal only, is in Effect to deny all the Spiritual and Eternal
Benefits purchased by the Second Adam, which is such a shocking Position, as
tends to overset at once the whole Gospel, and all the Christians Hope and Joy!
and elsewhere we are informed, that the Letter kills, but the Spirit gives
Life, (2 Cor. 3.6.) i. e. the Law condemns the Sinner to eternal Death, but the
Gospel gives eternal Life: Was not this the Design of Christ's coming into the
World, that those who believe in him should not perish, but obtain eternal
Life? (John 3.16.)

AND indeed it is highly reasonable, that eternal Death should be the Wages of
Sin, considering it opposes all the immense Perfections of the Deity, and
violates all the innumerable, endearing and infinite Obligations we are laid
under to serve him, by Reason of his Eminence, and his Love: If the Threatening
of eternal Punishment, has but little Influence upon the most of Men, how much
less would that of Temporary? And if the Sinner who deserves Death, should
enjoy Life, without Satisfaction made for his Offense, divine Wisdom would be
eclipsed, the Rights of Justice infringed, the Purity of GOD disparaged, and
his governing Authority insulted and contemned!

BUT because many have too slight Apprehensions of the Heinousness of our first
Parents Trespass, it may not be improper to observe, that the following awful
Ingredients are contained in it, viz.

1. UNBELIEF, or Distrust of GOD, who had said, that if they Eat of the Fruit
of the Tree of Knowledge, they should surely die; the Truth of which
Declaration they questioned, and so made God a Liar, as the Apostle John
observes, 1 John 5.16. shocking Blasphemy! As Obedience is the Fruit of Faith,
so is Disobedience of Unbelief; and as the Former comes by hearing the Word of
GOD, so the Latter by listening to the Devil.

2. ANOTHER Iniquity included in the Sin of Adam, is a BELIEF of the DEVIL, who
in order to weaken the Faith of our first Parents, suggested that they should
not surely die: Observe, he did not directly oppose the divine Threatening, by
an express Contradiction, for that might have shocked them, but labored slyly
by Degrees to weaken their Assent to it, by saying, ye shall not surely die, as
if he had said, the Execution of the Threatening is not absolutely certain, you
may possibly escape with Impunity, though you do transgress; this Suggestion of
the Father of Lies, they believed, and consequently preferred a Liar, and a
Murderer, before the GOD of Truth and Love!

3. THEY charged the blessed GOD with the greatest Cruelty and Meanness, as
though he ENVIED their HAPPINESS, after all his Benignity, Indulgence and
Gentleness toward them; this was representing him to be like a Devil; the
Enemy suggested, that in the Day they eat thereof, they should be as Gods,
knowing Good and Evil, Genesis 3. this they believed, and were seduced.

4. IN the Sin of Adam, was included amazing ARROGANCE; he who had but just
started out of a State of Nothing, aspired to be a God; not content with the
Image of Jehovah, he affected to rival him in his Attributes, and of
Consequence to usurp his Throne, and grapple with him for his Crown and
Scepter! Strange that a Worm of the Earth who was but of Yesterday, should so
soon forget his humble Original, and contend with the Deity, for his
incommunicable Prerogatives!

5. ANOTHER Ingredient grasped in that many headed HYDRA, is INGRATITUDE; one
of the worst of Evils, the Heinousness of which increases in Proportion to the
Number and Moment of the Benefits slighted by it; the Almighty had shown more
Kindness to Man, than to all his visible Works besides; he made him last of
all, as the Crown to the whole material System, adorned him with his own Image,
seated him in EDEN, a Paradise of Delight; gave him Liberty to eat of the Fruit
of all the Trees thereof, but of one (which he needed not) gave him Power to
obey his Laws, and Communion in his Love; and in fine, advanced him to the
highest Dignity, by making him Lord of the Lower Creation; now in the Midst of
all this rich Profusion of the Divine Benignity, this vast Variety of the most
desirable and valuable Benefits, to violate a Precept so equal and of so easy
Observance, is such a Prodigy of Ingratitude, as is without compare. But,

6. ANOTHER Ingredient included in that pregnant Impiety, is REBELLION against
the Authority of GOD; the Almighty expressly declared his Will, that our first
Parents, should not Eat of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, upon Pain of
Death: Yet they impudently set up their Will against GOD, and preferred their
Pleasure to his; agreeable to that impious and obstinate Maxim, Sic volo, sic
jubeo, stet pro ratione voluntas; My Will and Pleasure shall be Law, and take
the Place of Reason and Argument; in a Word, they made their Necks as an Iron
Sinew, and their Brow Brass! Again,

7. SORDID DISCONTENT, Covetousness, and Robbing of GOD were contained in that
original complicated Trespass: They were dissatisfied with all the Affluence of
Good they enjoyed, they inordinately desired to have more than God gave them,
any how; (per fas nefasque) and did actually take of the Fruit of the Tree of
Knowledge, which they had no right to, without Leave of the Owner, yea contrary
to his express Prohibition. Farther,

8. IT included provoking IDOLATRY, and a haughty Contempt of God's Majesty,
they turned from God to the Creature, loved it more than him, and desired to
have it rather than the Continuance of his Favor: Yea they made an Idol of a
little Fruit, set it up in the Place of God, and preferred it before him, who
is the first Truth, the supreme Good, GOD over all, blessed for ever; they were
not awed by the Greatness of his Power, nor influenced by the Riches of his
Gentleness, of his Love and Goodness; the former did not awake their Fear, nor
the latter excite their Ingenuity; the Thoughts of Jehovah's Presence, and the
Severity of his Threatenings, they insolently despised, and would transgress,
even under the Eye of God; they bid Defiance to Omnipotence, and rushed upon
the thick Bosses of his Bucklers; they mocked at Fear, and were not affrighted,
yea, like the Leviathan, they laughed at the rattling of the Spear, and the
Shield, as if they had an Arm like God, and could Thunder with a Voice like
him; who if he but touch the Mountains they smoke, yea, the Hills tremble at
his Presence. But to proceed,

9. IN the Sin of our first Parents are contained, perfidious BREACH of
COVENANT, and devilish APOSTASY; they had but lately entered into Covenant with
the Divine Majesty, and promised to serve him, and abstain from the forbidden
Fruit; but behold in an Instant, and on a slight Occasion, they break
Friendship with GOD, revolt from his Allegiance, and conspire with the grand
Enemy, against his Crown and Dignity: O horrid Treason, O monstrous Impiety!
Once more,

10. I may add to the aforesaid malignant and crimson Ingredients, grasped in
the Sin of Adam, stupid FOLLY, and bloody CRUELTY, to all his numerous Progeny,
in selling his and their Salvation for a Thing of Naught; in Bartering away the
Favor of GOD, which is better than Life, for the Pleasures of Taste and
Curiosity; what but voluntary Madness, could enduce him to desire that which
should have been the Object of his constant Fear, viz. the Knowledge of Evil,
seeing nothing but the Experience of this, could destroy his Happiness? Thus
Men being in Honor, abode not, but become like the Beasts that perish, (Ps.
49.12). Adam was entrusted with the inexpressibly, important, and precious
Depositum of his own eternal Happiness, and that of all his Numberless
Descendants, in every Clime and Nation, and through every Succession of Time,
to its final Period: This immense Trust of greater Value than Millions of
Worlds, though turned into the finest Gold, and richest Jewels, he knowingly
and wilfully betrayed; and thus he commenced a Murderer before a Parent! Thus
he disenherited all his unhappy Offspring, before they were born! and made them
Slaves, before they knew the Value of Liberty! an Instance this of Perfidy,
without a Parallel; an Instance this of Cruelty, which no Words, no Colors are
sufficient, (adequately) to delineate or express!

AND yet, my Brethren, that Iniquity, with all its Ingredients and
Aggravations, is ours, because committed by our Representative, and foederal
Head, acting in our Room and Place. Wherefore as by one Man Sin entered into
the World, and Death by Sin, and so Death passed upon all Men, for that all
have sinned: O mournful Tragedy, that deserves to be deplored with Tears and
Blood! But because some instead of acknowledging this complicated Guilt, and
bewailing this fatal Source of every Sin and Woe, to which both their Duty and
their Interest oblige them; yet through the Ignorance, Pride, and Deceitfulness
of their Hearts, they dispute or deny the Point, to their own unspeakable
Prejudice; I shall therefore in the following Part of this Discourse, endeavor
to prove the Charge against all the human Race, viz.

THAT THE GUILT OF THE SIN OF ADAM, IS IMPUTED TO ALL HIS OFFSPRING.

THIS appears from the following Places of sacred Scripture, viz. Ephesians. 2.3.
and were by Nature Children of Wrath, even as others; here observe, that there
is a Difference between Nature and Practice; now if we be by Nature Children of
Wrath, we must be by Nature guilty of some Sin that deserves it; for surely the
Judge of all the Earth must needs do right; and what can this natural Evil be,
but the aforesaid Sin of Adam, for from him we derived our Nature, Romans 3.19.
Whatsoever the Law says, it says to those that are under the Law, that every
Mouth may be stopped, and the whole World become guilty before God; compared
with v. 9. for we have before proved, both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all
under Sin; here observe, that the whole World are guilty before GOD; how? not
all of them by actual Sin; for all of them have not committed it, Infants are
incapable of it, and they are a considerable Part of the World; then surely the
Sin of Adam, in Eating the forbidden Fruit, must be imputed or reckoned to all;
see likewise, 1 Cor. 15.21, 22. for since by Man came Death, by Man came also
the Resurrection of the Dead; for as in Adam all die, so in CHRIST shall all be
made alive; now if we compare with this, what the Apostle says elsewhere, viz.
Romans 6.23. for the Wages of Sin is Death: Will it not plainly prove that we are
some how guilty of Adam's Sin? For how else should the Wages due for it, be
inflicted on us? Yea, upon those that have not sinned after the Similitude of
Adam; that is, who have not sinned actually in their own Persons: See Romans
5.13, 14, 15. for until the Law, Sin was in the World, but Sin is not imputed
where there is no Law; the Apostle is there proving, that Sin was imputed,
before the moral Law was given upon Mount Sinai; because Man had the same for
Substance written in his Heart; and adds these Words, nevertheless Death
reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them who had not sinned after the
Similitude of Adam 's Transgression, who is the Figure of him that was to come;
i. e. though the moral Law was not given outwardly by Moses, yet Death, the
Wages of Adam's Sin, reigned over such as did not actually imitate it; the
Apostle certainly points to Infants, in the aforesaid Expression, who die
before the Use of Reason; Death reigns over them, though they have not sinned
after the Similitude of Adam's Transgression; and therefore the Guilt of his
Sin is imputed to them; this is indeed the Drift of the Apostle's reasoning in
our Context, and therefore he calls Adam, a FIGURE of him that was to come; i.
e. of CHRIST; now wherein is the first Adam a FIGURE of the Second, but in
these Things following, viz.

1. IN his being a Covenant Representative, of foederal Head of his natural
Offspring, as Christ is of his Spiritual. And,

2. THAT as by the Sin of the First, Guilt and Death were imputed to, and
inflicted on his natural Offspring, so by the Obedience of the Second,
Righteousness and Life are imputed to, and conferred upon his spiritual
Offspring.

IT appears with the clearest Light and Evidence, from the following Verses,
that what I have said is the Apostle's Scope and Meaning; see Verses 16, 18,
19. For the Judgment was by one to Condemnation, but the free Gift is of many
Offenses to Justification; therefore as by the Offense of one, Judgment came
upon all Men to Condemnation, even so by the Righteousness of one, the free
Gift came upon all to Justification of Life; for as by one Man's Disobedience
many were made Sinners, so by the Obedience of one, shall many be made
Righteous; what can be expressed in plainer and stronger Terms than this Truth
in these Verses, viz. that we are after the same Manner condemned by the Sin of
Adam, as we are justified by the Righteousness of CHRIST? and this the sacred
Scriptures assert to be by Imputation, Romans 4.6. even as David describes the
Blessedness of the Man, unto whom God imputes Righteousness without Works.

THE Antithesis between CHRIST and Adam will not hold, if Adam's Sin be not
imputed to us; for as the Righteousness of Christ is so imputed to Believers,
that every one of them may say truly it is his own; and hence Christ is called
by the Prophet, the Lord our Righteousness; and is said by the Apostle, to be
made of God to us, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption; so
every Child of Adam may sorrowfully say, respecting his Transgression, that
Iniquity is mine, and I am righteously punished for it.

NEITHER is there any Thing unreasonable in the Doctrine of the Imputation of
Adam's Sin to his Posterity, if it be considered, that he had a Capacity to
keep the Covenant made with him; and that the Consequences of his doing so,
which were equal to the Loss that he and his Offspring suffered by his Fall,
would have been as certainly conferred upon them, as if they were personally
obedient.

NAY, we may safely say, that Adam's being constituted the foederal
Representative of his Posterity, had a more probable Tendency to promote their
Interest, than if every one of them had stood for himself personally and
particularly; the Reason is this, Adam had not only as great a Capacity to
stand, and was under as great Obligations to do so upon his own Account, as any
other could for himself; even in this respect, the Cases were equal, the
Chances parallel, but besides this, he had a very important Excitement to
Obedience, as he was a public Representative, which private Persons could not
have, viz. that of securing the Salvation of his whole Offspring by his
Standing, and on the Contrary, involving them in unspeakable Ruin and Misery,
by his Fall.

THIS Argument must be in reason supposed to have considerable Influence upon a
pious and generous Mind, a good Parent is full of Bowels toward his Offspring,
and is apt to be tenderly moved with the Prospect of their Happiness or Misery,
and this Concern is like to be proportioned, to the Nature and Duration of
them, as well as to the Number or Extent of his Descendants, who are deeply
interested in, and whose Fate is determined by those different and contrary
Events; the Consideration of which tends to affect him in a great Degree,
unless his Mind be ignorant, and his Affections irregular, which cannot be
supposed to be the Case of our first Parents, before the abuse of their
Liberty, without contradicting the express Testimony of Scripture, respecting
their original Integrity, and asserting, in Effect, that GOD himself is the
Author of Sin; Consequences absurd and blasphemous! Most certainly, upon the
Hypothesis of a Covenant Transaction with Adam, the first Man, the Father of
the human Species, for his whole Posterity, his Conduct must be big with the
most important Consequences, toward all the human Race! this Consideration
vastly turns the Balance in Favor of Adam's Headship.

WHAT the Apostle says of LEVI, Heb. 7.9, 10. serves to illustrate the Point of
Truth, which I am discoursing upon; it is said in these Verses, that Levi paid
Tithes in, or by Abram, when Melchizedeck met him; while he was yet in the
Loins of his Father; and so, much more, may the Posterity of Adam be reckoned
to have sinned in him, seeing they were not only included in him, as Branches
in the Root, and Members in the Head naturally, but were represented by him
foederally, or in a Covenant Way.

IT should be also observed, that when the Imputation of Adam's Sin is denied,
the principal Foundation of the Propagation of Sin is taken away, nor can any
sufficient Reason be given for the Propagation of Adam's Sin to his Posterity;
I mean the Pollution of it, or, in other Words, Original Sin inherent, if the
Case be so: For surely it is not only a Sin, but a Punishment, to want Original
Righteousness; now Punishment necessarily supposes Sin, for the Guilt of which,
divine Justice inflicts it only; but all have not sinned actually in their own
Persons, as is evident from the Case of Infants, and yet all are punished with
the Loss of God's Image, and therefore the Sin of Adam must be imputed to all
his Posterity; otherwise there is no accounting for the Justice of God, in
suffering this Propagation, which he could easily prevent; it will not remove
the Difficulty to say, that God only suffers one corrupt Creature to beget
another, according to the Law of Nature, as a Lepper begets a Lepper, seeing
that the Almighty could hinder this Propagation of Adam's Sin, by creating them
immediately as the Angels, and many other Ways which we know not; we have no
reason to think that a righteous and good GOD would suffer it, to the
Punishment of Creatures, who are supposed to be entirely innocent.

IF the Guilt of Adam's Sin be not imputed, whence is it that Pollution should
be from thence transmitted to his Posterity, rather than from the particular
Sins of private Parents to their immediate Offspring? And seeing the Souls of
Men are not generated, but immediately created by God, whence is it that they
are disrobed of the Ornaments of Original Righteousness at their Creation, if
Original Sin be not imputed?

NOW that we are polluted from our Birth, with the Stain of Sin, the sacred
Scriptures positively declare, by asserting, that the Imagination of Man's
Heart is evil from his Youth, (Genesis 8.21.) that Man is born like a wild Asses
Colt (Job 11.12.) that none can bring a clean Thing, out of an unclean, not one
(Job 14.4.) that he cannot be clean, who is born of a Woman (Job 25.4.) that we
are shapen in Iniquity, and conceived in Sin (Ps. 51.5.) that he that is born
of the Flesh, is Flesh (John 3.6.) and that the fleshly Mind is Enmity against
God; that before Conversion, all are spiritually blind and dead (1 Cor. 2.14.
Ephesians. 2.1.) that there is a Necessity of being born again (John 3.3.) which
supposes a Corruption in the first Birth, without which a Second would be
needless; and that this new Birth is a Quickening of the Dead (Ephesians. 2.1.) and
farther, that while we are in a State of Nature, we are without spiritual
Strength, and without a Will to spiritual Good ( Romans 5.6. Job 5.40.) and
indeed universal Experience proves this Point, the whole World is corrupt
without so much as one Exception ( Romans 3.10, 11, 12.) nemo sine crimine vivit.

THE Philosophers acknowledged this Corruption in human Nature, nitimur in
vetitum semper Cupimusque negatum, We strive for what is forbidden us, and
desire what is denied us; but knew not how to account for the Cause. Some
accused Nature or Providence because of that, and called her a Stepmother; and
others ascribed it to a fabulous Original, viz. the Opening of the Box of
Pandor; in short, though there evidently appears to be in all an early Bias to
Vice, even from Childhood, for one bad Example, influences more than many good
ones; yet no rational, consistent Account has ever been given of this
hereditary Contagion but in the Bible; and methinks such as do not like that,
should give a better, before they reject it with sovereign Contempt; which I
believe will puzzle them for all their Pride, as it did their more modest,
candid, and sensible Forefathers, the Pagan Masters!

FARTHER, how can the Death of Infants be reasonably reconciled to the Justice
of GOD, without acknowledging the Imputation of Adam's Guilt to them;
especially if it be considered, that Death is represented by God himself, to be
the Wages of Sin, and that it puts a Period to the Creature's Duration here.

TO suppose that the Guilt of Adam's Sin, is only propagated by Imitation, is
to confront the express Testimony of sacred Scripture, which assures us that
Death, and therefore the Sin that procured it, reigned over those that had not
sinned after the Similitude of Adam 's Transgression, (Romans 5.14.) who was the
Figure of him that was to come.

IF Original Sin was only propagated by Imitation, then the Apostle Paul would
never have said, that Sin entered the World by Adam, but by Satan, for he set
the first Example of Sinning.

MOREOVER it cannot, with any Appearance of reason, be thought that Baptism is
administered to Infants, to blot out Sins of Imitation, for they have them not,
and yet the Apostle calls it the Levour of Regeneration, Tit. 3.5. Dia (...)
palingenesias, per lavacrum Regenerationis, Pasor.
Surely if there was no Stain, there would be no need of a Laver to wash in;
and here you may observe, that Infant Baptism is a standing Testimony to the
important Doctrine of Original Sin, and therefore of great Use in the Church of
GOD.

BUT it is objected against what has been said, that the Son shall not bear the
Iniquity of the Father, Ezekiel. 18.4, 20.

A. THIS Passage of Scripture relates to the personal Sins of private Parents,
which should not be imputed to their Offspring, unless they followed their
Footsteps, and not to the Sin of Nature, which all have sinned in Adam, as our
Text asserts.

IT is likewise objected, that Children in Covenant are said to be Holy,
Humble, and that of such is the Kingdom of God.

A. WHATEVER good Properties any Children have, they have them not by Nature,
but by Grace; for by Nature we are all Children of Wrath, even as others, Ephesians.
2.1, 3.

ANOTHER Objection is drawn from these Places, viz. Romans 5.18. as by the
Offense of one, Judgment came upon all Men to Condemnation, even so by the
Righteousness of one, the free Gift came upon all Men to Justification of Life;
and elsewhere, CHRIST is said to take away the Sin of the World (1 Cor. 15.22.)
and we are farther assured, that as in Adam all die, so in CHRIST all shall be
made alive.

A. THE first Place of Scripture, is explained by the following Verse, thus,
viz. that as by one Man's Disobedience many were made Sinners, so by the
Obedience of one, shall many be made Righteous; observe, the Condemnation is
here represented as a past Fact, but the Justification as future, shall be made
Righteous, i. e. when they believe, Romans 4.20, 22, 23, 24. it is said of Abram,
that he staggerd not at the Promise of God through Unbelief, but was strong in
Faith, giving Glory to God; and therefore it was imputed to him for
Righteousness; now it was not written for his sake alone, that it was imputed
to him; but for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him. The
Apostle draws a Parallel between the first and second Adam, which holds good
not only as to the Manner of conveying Death and Life to those they
represented, viz. by Imputation, but also as to the Extent of the Loss and
Benefit to their different Offsprings: The seeming Difficulty is removed, by
considering that Adam was a natural Head of a natural Offspring, and Christ a
spiritual Head of a spiritual Offspring; and hence the first Adam is said to be
of the Earth earthly, and the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven; now as Adam's
Sin reached all his natural Offspring (i. e. all Mankind) so Christ's
Righteousness extends to all his spiritual Seed, viz. all that believe in him
(or are regenerated) and we are assured by express Testimony of Scripture, that
the Righteousness of Christ extends to the Justification of none else, John
3.18. for he that believes not, is condemned already.

AS to Christ's taking away the Sin of the World, we can understand that Place
of Scripture, in Consistency with other Places, and with the Dictates of right
Reason, in no other Sense but this, viz. that Christ takes away the Guilt of
all Sin of every Kind, upon our believing in him, but not before: To suppose
the Guilt of Original Sin is taken away, and that in the mean Time the Guilt of
Actual remains, or that the Guilt of any Sin is removed without Faith, is
antiscriptural, absurd, and eversive of the whole Gospel; for this signifies
that Persons receive saving Benefits by Christ, without a vital Union to him;
and likewise that they are both justified and condemned at the same Time; the
former of which is false, and the latter impossible in the Nature of Things,
see Joh. 15.6. Joh. 3.36.

AND pray observe, that the Words referred to, John 1.29. are in the present
Tense, Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the Sin of the World, (ho
airoon) JESUS CHRIST as the pascal Lamb, a Type of him, to which this Passage
alludes, expiates all the Sins of all that believe in him, of every Nation,
whether Jewish or Gentile, by the Sacrifice of himself, or by transferring
their Guilt upon him, and sustaining the Punishment due for them; which are
here called Sin, in the singular Number, by an Analogy of Number, or Synecdche
of a Part, to signify the Body of Sin and Death, containing all Kinds of
Impiety, to atone for which the Lamb of God was slain ( Romans 6.12.7.24. 1 John
1.7.) the dear Redeemer takes away the Guilt of Sin, by the Merit of his Blood,
and the Dominion of it, by the Power of his Spirit: He takes away, observe it
is a present Thing, a continued Act, which will never be completed till the
End of Time; he is constantly taking away the Guilt and Power of every Sin from
those that believe, by the Intercession of his Blood in Heaven, and the
Influence of his Grace on Earth.

ONCE more, seeing the Place of Scripture in the Objection, refers to the whole
Efficacy of the Sacrifice of Christ, in relation to Sin, it will follow, that
if it is restricted to Original Sin only, then Christ's Satisfaction for Actual
is denied, and if so, then Sinners must satisfy for them themselves or perish;
but how they will pay an infinite Debt, who are but finite and imperfect
Creatures, I cannot conceive; they had best see to it that are immediately
concerned, in the absurd Hypothesis I oppose, before it be too late! But to
proceed,

AS to that Place of Scripture in the Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians, viz.
That as in Adam all die, so in Christ all shall be made alive, it evidently
respects the Resurrection of the Body at the last Day; it speaks not of the
Time present, nor says that they are made alive, but of the Time to come, and
signifies that they shall be made alive; the Apostle in that Chapter, proves
the Resurrection of the Dead, by the Argument of Christ's Resurrection (this is
the Scope of the Place) and shows particularly the Order in which the Dead
shall be raised, v. 22. First those that belong to Christ, then comes the End,
when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to the Father (i. e. in its present
Form of Administration) and indeed to suppose that all are spiritually alive,
is to oppose the express Testimony of Scripture, which declares the Unconverted
to be dead in Sins and Trespasses, and it likewise renders Conversion needless,
because on this Plan Men would be born converted, for what is Conversion but a
Quickening of the Dead (as before observed) or the Infusion of a Principle of
spiritual Life into them? Surely if the first Birth was good, there would be no
need of a Second, and thus the Wisdom of God would have missed the Matter, in
inculcating that important Doctrine to the Jewish Master, who to the reproach
of himself and his Order, was grossly Ignorant of its Nature and Necessity! But
I proceed,

ANOTHER Objection is this, viz. that our Lord told his Disciples, That neither
the blind Man, or his Parents, had sinned, but that the Works of God should be
made manifest in him (Joh. 9.23.)

A. THE Meaning of the Place, is no more than this, that the Almighty did not
inflict that Disorder of Blindness upon the Man, as a Punishment of any
particular Evil committed by him, or his private Parents; but chiefly with
design to manifest his own Power in the Cure of it.

BUT it is farther objected, that the Imputation of Original Sin, is contrary
to the Justice and Truth of GOD.

A. IT is contrary to Justice, to punish him that has sinned in no respect,
either actually or virtually, but it is not unjust to punish those that have
sinned virtually only, or in their Cause, as we have in Adam; the Case is
certainly so, that GOD does punish for that Evil now; and from Fact we may
argue to Right, respecting the Almighty; for surely he does nothing but what he
has a Right to do; add to this, what has been said before, concerning the
reasonableness of Adam's being made a Representative of his Posterity, and the
Objection vanishes.

FARTHER, the Charge of Injustice may be with Advantage retorted upon our
Opponents, who according to their Hypothesis, are obliged to acknowledge, that
the Wages of Sin, viz. Death, are inflicted upon such as are entirely innocent
( viz. Infants) neither guilty of Original or Actual Sin; a Sentiment very
harsh and severe, and manifestly contrary to the Dictates of Reason and Maxims
of Justice: Pray is it not more equitable to believe, that God punishes for
some Sin, though it be Original, than for none at all? Whether it be modest and
consistent, for these Gentlemen to raise a Hu-and-cry of Injustice, against
their Neighbors Opinion, while they are so deep in the Dirt themselves, is
left to others to determine.

NEITHER is it contrary to the Omnicience and Truth of GOD, to reckon him to
have sinned virtually, or interpretatively in his Cause, who has not sinned
actually in his own Person.

IT is again objected, that the Sin of Adam does not exist, and therefore that
it cannot be imputed.

A. ALTHOUGH it does not exist Physically, yet it does exist Morally; though
the Act of Sin be transient, yet the Guilt it contracts is permanent, and
cannot be removed but by the Application of Christ's Righteousness to the Soul.

NEITHER is the following Objection of any Validity, viz. that it is
unreasonable that the Sin which was pardoned in Adam, should be imputed to his
Posterity.

A. THOUGH Adam personated us in sinning, he did not do so in repenting and
believing, by which he obtained Remission; for the State from which he fell,
was natural, and therefore involved all, but the State to which he was restored
was gracious, and supernatural, and therefore concerned his own Person only,
and not his Posterity; for though Adam was constituted the Head or
Representative of his Posterity, in the Covenant of Nature or of Works; yet he
was made no Head or Representative of the Covenant of Grace, by which he was
restored: No; this was the Place of the second Adam.

ANOTHER Objection against the laboring Point is this, that it is not
agreeable to the divine Perfections, for the Almighty to appoint Adam to be the
Representative of his Posterity, without their Consent.

A. SEEING the Plan of the first Covenant was in itself reasonable, and more to
our Advantage, than if every Man had stood for himself personally, as was
observed before; there is no Foundation for the Objection, unless our Opponents
say, that it is unjust for God to confer Benefits upon any without their
Consent, which is ridiculous and absurd. So proper a Person as Adam, the common
Father of all, and consequently the most honorable (in the ordinary Way of
Generation) of all the human Race, could not be found to represent his
Posterity, and therefore had all Mankind existed, it would have been both their
Interest and Duty, to have chose him for their Representative.

BESIDES it should be considered, that the Benefit proposed to Adam in the
Covenant of Nature, viz. a Confirmation of his present State of Happiness, was
what he had no natural Right to, antecedent to the divine Will and Pleasure;
and therefore JEHOVAH might without the Charge of Injustice suspend the Grant
of it, upon a Condition to be performed by him, his Failure in which, might
cause a Forfeiture of the Benefit proposed, both to him and his Descendants,
who cannot be with reason supposed to have a greater Right to it then he.

AND although when our first Parents sinned, we did not exist and consent
actually, yet we existed and consented virtually in our Cause, Progenitor and
foederal Head, in one Adam, as our Text asserts; Wherefore as by one Man Sin
entered into the World, and Death by Sin, and so Death passed upon all Men, for
that all have sinned: But our Opponents modestly give the Lie to the Apostle,
and the Spirit with which he was inspired, and say that all have not sinned.

I might add, that the Covenant of Nature, or of Works, was not INTER PARES,
AMONG EQUALS, but between the Almighty Creator, absolute Proprietor and
Sovereign Lord of all, and poor Worms of the Earth, who are but of Yesterday,
crushed before the Moth, and have no abiding; Creatures whose Goodness extends
not to Immensity and Self-sufficiency; and therefore it is the highest
Insolence for such insignificant Creature, who are as Nothing, and less than
Nothing, and Vanity, to prescribe to their Sovereign, and insist upon the usual
Formalities of human Covenants (among Equals) in transacting with the supreme
Being, who has absolute Empire over them, and whose Beck they are bound by the
strongest Obligations instantly to obey; and therefore, instead of disputing,
they should admire and revere the divine Condecension, in treating with such
Criminals, Inferiors, and Dependants, in a Way that resembles a Covenant
Transaction in any Thing, which is in very Deed, a prodigious Stoop of glorious
Sovereignty, and condescending Majesty!

IT is not contrary, my Brethren, to the Law of Nature, or of Nations, for the
Children of Traitors to suffer for their Crimes; or for the Iniquity of some
public Persons, to be punished in many others; whole Cities and Countries have
suffered on their Account: Was not the Sin of the Amalekites punished in their
Children, by the express Order of God, some Hundreds of Years after it was
committed? (1 Samuel 15.2, 3.) for this a War was to be commenced against them,
from Generation to Generation ( Ex. 17.16.) The Instance of Achan is also
remarkable, for his coveting the Wedge of Gold, he suffered not alone, but his
Sons and Daughters were stoned and burned with Fire, together with himself (
Jos. 7.24, 25.) to what has been said, many Examples might be added, viz. of
the Sons of Saul (2 Samuel 21.) of Jereboam (1 Kings 4.9, 10.) of Ahab (1 Kings
21.21, 23) and others, and hence the Church mourns, Lam. 5.7. our Fathers have
sinned, and we have born their Iniquities; and our Lord himself threatens the
Jews, Mat. 23.35. that upon them should come all the righteous Blood shed upon
the Earth, from Abel to Zecharias, and does not Almighty GOD threaten in the
second Commandment of the moral Law, that he will visit the Sins of the
Fathers, upon the third and fourth Generation of those that hate him?

THOUGH none but the Guilty are punished for their Parents Sins, yet inasmuch
as the Almighty takes Occasion from their Sins to punish their Posterity (in
temporal respects) it plainly shows, that they are in some Sort imputed to
them; and no wonder, seeing the Child is but as it were a Part of the Parent,
clothed in another Skin; and therefore the Almighty being the original
Proprietor, and Lord of all, may afflict the Transgressor in what Part of him
he pleases.

NOR is that Passage in Ezekiel 18.20. to be understood absolutely, that the
Son shall not bear the Iniquity of the Father, for so it would contradict the
moral Law; but it ought to be understood:

1. OF adult Children, who forsake their Parents Sins, as appears from the 19th
Verse of the Chapter.

2. IT respects personal and particular Sins, as was observed before, and not
common and general, in respect of the Character or Influence of the Criminals.

3. IT is not laid down as a general Rule of God's Providence and Justice, to
which the Almighty did always conform his Proceedings in Time past, and was
determined to do so constantly with all People in Time to come, no; we find it
otherwise in the Sanction of the Law, and the Examples before mentioned; the
Words therefore intend a special Favor to the Jewish Church and Nation, viz.
that the Almighty would not deal with them according to the rigor of his
Justice, which he might do, but in order to silence their Cavils against his
Government, he would only in Time coming punish them for their personal
Iniquities; this seems to be the Series and Scope of the Context.

BUT it is Time to proceed to the Improvement of what has been said.

IS the Sin of Adam imputed to us, let us then acknowledge God's Justice in
this Matter, and humble ourselves before him; how awful is the State we are
born in, who are condemned as soon as born! ( Romans 3.19.) you that are
unconverted, know that you are under the Law, and therefore under the Curse,
for breaking of it: For cursed is every one that continues not in all Things
that are written in the Book of the Law to do them; your Mouths are stopped,
your Pleas are silenced, and you cannot get clear of this Sentence, any other
Way but by Faith in Christ.

O Sinners! labor to be sensible of the awful Entail from our first Parents,
and flee for Refuge to the Hope set before you, without the least Delay, for ye
know not what a Day may bring forth.

THE sure Way to get our Wounds not just skinned over, but effectually healed,
is to have them searched and probed to the Bottom; the only Method to have the
Balm of Gilead savingly applied, is to know and feel the Depth of our Disease,
and that speedily, without which, we will not be suitably humbled before God,
nor with due Engagedness, Importunity, and Vehemence seek relief.

IT is an awful Proof of the Degeneracy of human Nature, a Confirmation of the
Doctrine I have been discoursing upon, that many are so proud and vain as to
deny it; they hereby imitate the wicked Example of our first Parents, who after
their Apostasy, labored to lessen and excuse their Impiety, by casting the
Blame upon others, and if that would not do, even upon God himself; The Serpent
beguiled me, said the Woman; the Woman that thou gave me, gave me, and I did
eat, said the Man; as if he had said, it is the Woman's Fault, not mine; but if
that is not a sufficient Apology, God gave me this Woman, and therefore he is
the Author of my Sin and Misery. O horrid, ungrateful Blasphemy! Yea such
follow the Suggestions of Satan himself to our first Parents, in lessenning
their Danger, ye shall not surely die; and act over again their fatal Folly, in
listening to, and believing him: But though thou wash thee with Nitre, and take
thee much Soap, yet thine Iniquity is marked before me, says the Lord God: How
can thou say, I am not polluted? (Jer. 2.22, 23.)

IT is much to be lamented that Men are curious to know every Thing but
themselves, which is nevertheless the most necessary and important Branch of
Knowledge; gnosthe Seauton, know thy self, was said by the Pagans, to be an
Oracle some how dropped from Jupiter; but waving the fabulous, or poetical Part
of their Story, the Moral is an indubitable Axiom: It is certain, from the
united Testimony of Reason and Revelation, that the Knowledge of our selves, is
necessary to humble the pride of our Hearts, to excite us to prize the blessed
Redeemer, and seek after an Interest in him, with unfainting Importunity and
Vehemence, for the Whole need no Physician, but the Sick.

SUCH therefore who labor to hide our hereditary Pravity from our View (which
is at least the Practice of many in this Day of Darkness and Degeneracy, in our
unhappy Nation; may a gracious God pity and pardon them) such who represent
human Nature, in its apostate Circumstances, in an amiable Dress, as having
Light within, sufficient to direct their Conduct in religious Matters, and
Strength to do what is pleasing to God, may probably have a good Design (at
least some of them) to promote a Reformation; which in its Place, is doubtless
necessary, amiable, valuable, and useful to Society; but in the mean Time, they
certainly act an unfriendly Part to the Lord Jesus Christ, and to the best
Interests of Mankind: For these Measures tend to puff up graceless Creatures
with Pride and Vanity; tend to make every one that believes the Figment, a
Pope, or a Pharisee, or both; tend to fix them on the Bottom of their own
selfish, mercenary, superficial Righteousness, and keep them from Christ and
vital Holiness: Sirs, without the Knowledge of ourselves, and of Christ, we
cannot obtain the Foundation of real evangelical Goodness, without which an
outward dead Form of Virtue and Piety, or the irregular Wilds of enthusiastic
Fancy and Mechanism, will not stand us in any Stead in the Day of CHRIST'S
Appearance and Kingdom: For we are assured by divine Authority, that neither
Circumcision or Uncircumcision avails any Thing, but a new Creature; and that
except our Righteousness exceeds that of the Scribes and Pharisees, we shall in
no Case enter into the Kingdom of God.

IT is certainly best, my Brethren, to begin at the Foundation of Religion;
according to our Lord's Direction we should make the Tree good, and then the
Fruit will be good (spontantaneously:) It is as natural as fatal to Mankind,
because made under a Covenant of Works, to seek Righteousness as it were by the
Works of the Law; and with a Zeal, but not according to Knowledge, to go about
to establish their own Righteousness (though some of them falsely call it the
Righteousness of Christ) and thus they refuse to submit to the Mediators
Righteousness, who is the Truth, the Life, and the only Way to the Father.

OF Consequence, therefore, all such as commend human Nature, in its lapsed
State, as before observed, either plainly or mystically, and inconsistently,
while they pretend the Contrary, daub with untempered Mortar, heal the Wounds
of the Daughter of Zion slightly, cry Peace, Peace, where there is no Peace,
sew Pillows to all Arm-holes, with Lies they make the Hearts of the Righteous
sad, whom God would not have made sad, and strengthen the Hands of the Wicked,
that he should not return from his wicked Way, by promising him Life (see Ezekiel.
13.) with Ahab's flattering and false Prophets, they speak comfortably to the
wicked, and prophesy Peace, in Opposition to, and some times Contempt of,
faithful, honest hearted Micaiahs, who in Obedience to their Masters Command,
and in Compassion to the perishing Souls of their fellow Creatures, cry aloud,
and do not spare; but show to Judah their Transgressions, and to the House of
Jacob their Sins; and labor to persuade them, by the Terrors of God, to
forsake them, and fly for refuge to the Hope set before them.

HOW good soever the Intention of the aforesaid DAUBERS may be; yet
notwithstanding, they do, in Fact, oppose the mediatorial Scheme of Salvation
by the Lord Jesus Christ, and deceive the Souls of Men; by such flattering of
ignorant, conceited Mortals, conducted either with much show of Wisdom and
great Address, or with much Appearance of Devotion, real Christianity, and even
Virtue itself are ready to expire, and take their final Farewell of our sinful
and unhappy Land and Nation, and we are returning fast to Popery and Paganism;
but under the pleasing, though groundless Umbrage of Inspiration, or of Wisdom
superior to all that have gone before us (which Compliment will probably and
justly be returned by our wiser Successors) for which the righteous Judgments
of God, have been inflicted upon us in diverse awful Instances, and his Hand is
stretched out still. O may the Almighty bless them to our Repentance and
Reformation, in Principle and Practice; that not only our own Souls may be
saved, but the Ruin of our Land and Nation prevented!

SIRS, How should we admire the Riches of divine Grace, which has provided a
Way by the second Adam's Satisfaction, to justify those that are condemned by
the Sin of the First? O therefore let us hasten to him, by believing, accept of
his Righteousness, and depend entirely upon it, for the Remission of our Sins,
and the Salvation of our Souls! and let us not rest, my Brethren, till we get
the satisfactory Evidences thereof, and having obtained this great Privilege,
let us labor to walk worthy of it, striving to grow in Grace and Usefulness,
for hereby is our Father glorified, that we bring forth much Fruit.

AND especially let us walk humbly, which we should be excited to, by thinking
often upon the unhappy Portion left to us by our Progenitor, as well as the
horrid Ingredients grasped in that monstrous Iniquity which he committed, in
violating the Covenant of Works, and we in him; we should also be watchful and
afraid of Sin, when we consider what infinite Mischief has sprung from one
Trespass of our first Parent, to himself and all his unhappy Progeny!

HAS Adam propagated Death to his Posterity! O that Parents would be entreated
on the Contrary to endeavor to propagate Life to their Posterity, by their
Instructions, Prayers, and Practice; to this, they are obliged by the strongest
Ties and tenderest Endearments. I add no more.

SERMON II.
1 COR. 1.23, 24. But we preach CHRIST crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling
Block, and unto the Greeks Foolishness; but unto them which are called both
Jews and Greeks, CHRIST the Power of GOD, and the WISDOM of GOD.


SIRS,
THE Apostle observes in the preceding Verses, with great Beauty and
Propriety, that in the Wisdom of GOD, the World by Wisdom knew not GOD: The
gentle Sages by the mere dint of Reason and Philosophy, could not Form
consistent Notions of the Supreme Being, or how to obtain his Favor.

A Deluge of the most absurd Politheism and gross Profaneness, overspread the
greatest Part of the Infidel Tribes, before the Light of the Gospel shone among
them; no Object was so despicable, as not to be thought worthy of divine
Honors; no Vice so detestable, as not only to obtain in common Conversation,
but even to be admitted into their religious Rights, and most solemn Acts of
Worship; yea, to give Sanction to the most brutish and crimson Iniquities, they
ascribed them to the Gods they adored, as learned ARNOBIUS observes, with equal
Justice and Elegance.

IT is true, the Corruption was not so universal, but that some noble Souls
raised themselves above the common Level, they bewailed and contemned the
Stupidity and Credulity of the Multitude, yet their Number was small, and the
Efficacy of their singular Sentiments even upon themselves but little; the
Effect of their Discernment was but a State of perpetual SKEPTICISM, a floating
in doubtful Uncertainty between all Opinions, discarding what was manifestly
Wrong, but not fixing their Minds in what was Good and Right.

YEA, in Matters of moral Good and Evil, though some of the Rules they have
left us are truly excellent, yet in many important Things they are very
deficient; there is a deep Silence in their Writings of the Nature and
Obliquity of several Vices, such as Pride, Revenge, and Self-murder, they are
likewise silent about the right Principle of Action, Love to God; the right End
of Action, the Glory of God; the right Mode of Action, Humility, and a
Dependence upon God, for Light, Strength, and Acceptance.

THEY were also at a Loss respecting the Method of regaining the Friendship of
the Almighty when offended, the Certainty of a future State, and the strict
Account they must render of all their Actions to the sovereign Lord and Judge
of the Universe; and are not these Things of inexpressible Importance, the very
governing Principles of a Christian's Conduct? This melancholy Ignorance of the
Pagan Masters, was doubtless the Source of that Uncertainty they bewray in
their Discourses, and such Inconsistency in their Lives, concerning which, one
of the greatest and best Judges among them, viz. TULLY, speaks thus, Do you
think, says he, that these Things, meaning the Precepts of Morality, had any
Influence upon those Men (excepting only a very few) that thought, and wrote,
and disputed about them, no; who is there of all the Philosophers, whose Mind
and Manners were comformable to right Reason, who ever made his Philosophy the
Law and Rule of his Life, and not a mere Boast and Show of his Wit and Parts?
Who observed his own Instructions, and lived in Obedience to his own Precepts?
On the contrary many of them were Slaves to filthy Lusts.

NAY even the Things which they themselves knew, they had not Authority enough
to inculcate upon Men's Minds, with such Impression as to Influence and govern
their Conduct; the Truths they proved by a Train of speculative Reasonings,
were destitute of more sensible Authority to enforce them with Energy in
Practice; the Precepts they proposed wanted Weight, and evidently appeared to
be no more than the Precepts of Men; this was doubtless the Reason that none of
the Philosophers were ever able to work any remarkable Change in the Minds and
Lives of their Hearers; nor does it appear in History that any of the Followers
of SOCRATES, were ever so convinced by his Instructions of the Excellency of
Virtue, and the Certainty and Value of its final Reward, as to be willing to
lay down their Lives for its Sake, as innumerable Disciples of the Lord JESUS
CHRIST have done, with the greatest Gladness and heroic Fortitude.

THE Truth is, the Philosophers themselves were sensible of the Defect of their
own Rules in this particular, and therefore confess, that human Nature was
strangely corrupted, and that this Corruption was a Disease whose Cause they
knew not, and for which they could not find a sufficient Remedy: So that the
great Duties of Religion and Virtue, were proposed by them as Matters of
Speculation, rather than Rules of Practice; not so much urged upon Men's Hearts
and Lives, as proposed to their Admiration.

THIS was apparently the Condition of Mankind without a Revelation; to recover
them out of which Degeneracy, into a State suitable to the original Excellency
of their Nature, a supernatural Discovery of their Duty was plainly necessary;
for if, as has been observed, the Generality of the World were so ignorant and
corrupt, so overrun with Idolatry and Licenciousness; if the best of the
Philosophers were not exempt from the general Infection, and far from Certainty
respecting the Doctrines they pretended to advance; if the Points wherein they
were certain, they were not able to prove clearly to vulgar Understandings, and
those they were able to prove, they had not sufficient Authority to enforce; in
a Word, if there was so much Inconsistency in themselves, as to give Scandal to
others, and so much Depravity in others, as to make them despair of reforming
them, then was there plainly a want of some Revelation to supply these Defects,
and to discover in what Manner and with what Kind of external Service the
blessed God might be acceptably worshipped; a Revelation to discover what
Expiation he would be pleased to accept of for Sin, by which his Honor is
affronted and his Authority opposed; a Revelation to give intelligent Beings an
Assurance of the great Motives of Religion, the Rewards and Punishments of a
future State.

IN fine, some particular Revelation was necessary, to make the whole System of
Christian Doctrine clear and obvious to all Capacities, to add Weight and
Authority to the plainest Precepts, and to furnish Men with extraordinary
Assistance, to enable them to overcome the Corruptions of their Nature; and
indeed without the Assistance of such a Revelation, the wisest of Men were
always of Opinion, that the World could never be reformed; Ye may even give
over, says Socrates, all Hopes of amending Men's Manners for the future, unless
GOD be pleased to send some other Person to instruct you! For whatsoever is set
right, says Plato, in the present ill State of the World, can only be done by
the Interposition of GOD.

THIS condescending and gracious Interposure, appears evidently in the
Christian System, the Plan of Salvation by the Lord Jesus Christ, which though
it be despised by the Ignorant, Inconsiderate, and Prejudiced, is by those that
are awakened out of their Security, and divinely illuminated, experienced to be
indeed and in Truth a glorious Display of the Power of God, and the WISDOM of
GOD; the latter of which let us for a little Space fix our Meditations upon at
present.

THE blessed God, my Brethren, foreseeing Man's Fall, and the Misery consequent
upon it, determined his Recovery in a Way worthy of himself, and suited to the
Circumstances of the apostate Creature, in which his Wisdom is eminently
conspicuous.

THIS will appear by considering the END that God proposed, and the MEANS he
concerted to compass it; all intelligent Agents first propose an End, and then
choose the Means that tend to obtain it; now the more perfect the Understanding
is, the more noble is the End it designs, and the more apt the Means it
prescribes to acquire it.

THE END proposed by the Gospel of the Lord JESUS CHRIST is most excellent,
viz. the GLORY of God, and the Happiness of Mankind, or their Restoration to
his Image and Favor.

THE GLORY of GOD, or the Manifestation of his Attributes, by their Exercise to
the moral World, was his supreme Scope; as God is the best of Beings, of
Consequence his Glory must be the best End, and therefore it is but reasonable
he should aim at it in all his Works; and hence he is said to have made all
Things for himself, and that of him, and through him, and to him are all
Things; seeing he is the Creator and Lord of all, it is but just and right that
he should be the End of all; nothing can be more natural than that what was
borrowed from him, should be directed to him, or his Honor; the Heavens are
therefore said to declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament to show forth his
Hand Work; on this Account the Revelation of the Way to future Happiness, by
the dear, dear Lord JESUS CHRIST, is called, The glorious Gospel of the blessed
God; because it is the clearest Manifestation, the richest Display of the
transcendant Excellency of his adorable Attributes, which was ever given to the
Children of Men; and hence Jehovah is said to magnify his Word (i. e. the Word
of his Grace) above all his Name: The Apostle Paul in his Epistle to the
Corinthians, assures us, that the Ministration of Righteousness exceeds in
Glory; and that under this Dispensation, we all, with open Face, beholding as
in a Glass the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image from Glory to
Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord: In the Gospel we behold the Lord
Jesus Christ, and the harmonious Manifestation of the divine Attributes in the
Scheme of Salvation through him, not under the dark Vail of Types, Shadows, and
Prophesies, as the Jewish Church, but with open Face as in a Glass, and are
thereby gradually transformed into his Image, through the Holy Spirit's
concurring Influence.

TO the aforesaid Manifestation of the divine Attributes, which the Almighty
proposed as his supreme End, we must add the Praise and Thanksgiving of
reasonable Creatures on Account thereof; when intelligent Beings acknowledge
the Displays of God's Excellencies with adoring Reverence, and ardent
Affections, they glorify him; he that offers praise, glorifieth me, says the
Almighty by the Psalmist; and this undoubtedly the blessed God had likewise in
View as his supreme End.

BUT the subordinate End in Redemption, is the Restoration of Man; and this
indeed is inseparably connected with the former, as appears from the Angels
Anthem, Glory to God on High, on Earth Peace, and good Will toward Men: Sin
had broke the sacred Alliance between God and Man, and exposed him to the
divine Displeasure, an inexpressible and incomprehensible Misery; now what is
more becoming the Father of Mercies, the God of Love, than to compassionate and
relieve the Miserable; than to raise from the Depth of ruin many Monuments in
which his Kindness and Benignity might for ever triumph!

TO compass these truly valuable ENDS, divine Wisdom projected the aptest MEANS
possible; which appears in the following easy Light.

THE Misery of apostate Man consisted in the Deprivation of his whole Nature by
Sin, and in his Exposedness to the divine Displeasure on the Account of it,
which was a just and natural Consequent of his crimson Apostasy; and his
Happiness consisted in restoring him to his original Purity and Fellowship with
God, and to the full Enjoyment of him; but the Way to effect this, in
Consistency with the divine Justice, Law, and Government, was a Depth which no
human Understanding could fathom.

THAT God, whose being is LOVE, should show Kindness to the Angels, who never
swerved from his Statutes, is easy to imagine; for though they cannot merit his
Favor, yet they never incurred his Displeasure by Maleconduct; and it must
needs be natural to Jehovah, to Love the Image of his Purity wherever it
appears.

NOR is it hard to conceive, that the Almighty would be inclined to succor an
innocent Creature in Misery; for in this Case, there would be nothing to
obstruct the free Efluxes of his unexhausted Goodness; but how to save a
Creature that is as guilty as miserable by its own criminal Choice, is a
Difficulty too hard to be solved by the Wisdom of Men or Angels. Heaven itself
seemed to be divided on this Occasion. MERCY inclined to save, but JUSTICE
interposed for Satisfaction.

MERCY regarded Man with respect to his Misery, and its Pleas were such as
these, shall the most excellent Creature in the lower World perish, the Fault
not being entirely his? perish for ever, without any Favor! Shall no
Compassion be shown to miserable Mankind, who in their original State, were the
Beauty and Crown of all the numerous Ranks of Being in this inferior System;
shall the malignant Enemy for ever Triumph in the fatal Success of his Perfidy,
and reduce the whole human Race to the most deplorable and remediless Ruin? On
the other Hand, JUSTICE, the Nature of which is, to give to every one his Due,
considered Man as guilty of a most ungrateful, murderous, and pregnant
Iniquity; the Wages of which, agreeable to the Dictates of Reason, and the Law
of God, is DEATH; this divine Attribute remonstrates against showing any Favor
to the unhappy Delinquents; and queries, shall not the Judge of all the Earth
do Right? All the other Attributes seemed to be Attendants on Justice.

THE WISDOM of GOD enforced its ^lea; it being most indecent, that Sin, which
demerits the Execution, should procure the Abrogation of the Law; which would
encourage the Commission of it, without Fear.

THE MAJESTY of GOD was likewise concerned; for it was not becoming excellent
Greatness and absolute Sovereignty, to treat in this humble Manner with
Inferiors and Delinquents, and to offer Pardon to presumptuous, ungrateful
Rebels, before they bow at his Footstool, and make Supplication to their Judge.

THE HOLINESS of GOD confirms and coroborates the Plea of incensed, lesed
Majesty, and urges Justice to execute the Threatening annexed to the Violation
of the Law; for Jehovah is of purer Eyes, than to behold Iniquity: As Purity is
the essential Object of his complacential Will, which he Loves immutably where
ever it is, so by the Law of Contraries, Sin is the eternal Object of his
Hatred; and consequently such as are (with their full Consent) under its
habitual Rule and Government, because of their Connection with it, he will not,
says Job, take the wicked by the Hand, or at all acquit them, as the Prophet
Nahum expresses it: Purity and Pollution, by reason of their contrary Natures,
cannot mix or coaless, but must maintain a perpetual Jar and Discord, till one
or other is destroyed. Farther, SIRS,

THE TRUTH of GOD being plighted in the Covenant of Works, stands engaged to
see to the Execution of the Penalty denounced in Case of Trespass; and if it is
not, the Matter so requiring, divine Truth fails; but that is impossible, and
therefore this Attribute joins issue in the Contest with divine Justice,
Wisdom, Majesty, and Purity, and requires the Execution of the threatened
Punishment upon the Offender himself, or if extraordinarily dispensed with (in
this respect) it must be on such Terms, as the Honor of God's Truth may be
preserved inviolate.

THIS seeming Conflict among the divine Attributes, no created Understanding
could adjust, and find out a Way to reconcile infinite Mercy with inflexible
Justice; a Way to satisfy the Demands of the one, and grant the Requests of the
other: In this Exigency divine WISDOM interposed, and in its unsearchable
Depths devised an EXPEDIENT, to save Man without any Prejudice to the
Perfections of the Deity, without any Injury to his Government over the moral
World, by constituting a Mediator between the guilty Creature and himself, that
by transferring the Punishment on the Surety, Sin might be punished, and the
Sinner saved; here MERCY and JUSTICE salute each other, and shine with equal
Glory and Luster; the latter is fully satisfied, and the former exceedingly
magnified! These amiable Attributes in this mediatorial Plan, join in friendly
Harmony, to promote and secure the penitent and believing Sinners perpetual
Happiness!

NOR is it unbecoming the MAJESTY of God, to accept a returning Sinner, when a
Mediator of infinite Dignity interceeds for him.

THE PURITY of the Almighty, is not in the least Degree disparaged by his
Clemency to Transgressors, seeing the blessed Mediator is a Principle and
Pattern of Holiness, to all that believe in him, and the TRUTH of God engaged
to issue the Threatenings of the broken Law, is by the Sufferings of the Sinners
Surety preserved inviolate: So that all the divine Perfections concur herein,
and express, to the eternal Astonishment and Delight of Men and Angels,
inexpressible Charms, Beauty, and Magnificence!

HERE we may see the Glory of the blessed God, shining in the Face of the
venerable and dear Lord JESUS CHRIST; who can Fathom the unsearchable Depths of
this amazing Wisdom? who can unfold the boundless Riches and Treasures of this
mysterious Prodigy and Miracle of Mercy! this inexpressible, transcendant,
incomprehensible, and glorious Grace and Love? Surely no Understanding either
human or angelical, is equal to this Province; it is only the same infinite
Mind that concerted this illustrious Scheme of Salvation by a Redeemer that can
comprehend it!

THE ANGELS, those great Ministers that attend the Throne of God, stoop down
with the deepest Attention, the strongest Desire, and noblest Pleasure, to
behold the rich and unsearchable Variety of manifold Wisdom and glorious Grace
that is herein contained! But though we cannot comprehend the Depths of
redeeming Goodness, yet we may apprehend so much as to be thereby powerfully
influenced to Admiration, Love, and Obedience! so much as to be thereby excited
to cry out in the Apostle's Language, O the Depth of the Riches, both of the
Knowledge and Wisdom of God, how unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways
past finding out! Surely the Love of Christ passes Knowledge! But more
particularly, dear SIRS,

THE WISDOM of GOD appears eminently, in taking Occasion from the Sin of our
Progenitor, to bring a greater Tribute of Honor to God, and greater Benefit to
Man, than if he had never transgressed; Sin naturally tends to God's Dishonor,
and to the Creature's Ruin; but contrary to its natural Tendency, it is over
ruled by a wise Providence, to be the Occasion of the greatest glory to God,
and good to Man; so that out of the Eater, comes forth Meat, and out of the
Strong, Sweetness; as a Medicine is extracted out of Poison by the Alembick;
or, as the black Ground in a Picture, though in itself it contuminates, yet
when fixed, with Judgment, in its proper Place as a Shade, heightens the Luster
of the brighter Colors, and adds to the Beauty of the whole Piece!

DEAR SIRS, the Glory of God, is more illustriously apparent, in the recovery
of fallen Man, than if he had never sinned; had Adam persevered inviolably in
his Duty and Allegiance to his great Creator and Sovereign, he could only have
been the Subject of divine Goodness, but not in its highest and most endearing
Acts, which are to pity and succor the Guilty and Miserable; had he
transgressed, and Redemption not have taken Place, Justice it is true would
have been honored with a solemn Sacrifice, a solemn Triumph! But Mercy, that
amiable, benign, and indulgent Attribute, would have been veiled with a total
Eclipse! But now the Wisdom of Jehovah in the Redemption of Man appears, by
according these Attributes, and making them shine with rival Charms! The Honor
of Jehovah appears as much in preserving the Authority of his Law, by punishing
our Surety in our room and Place, as by the Exercise of his Mercy in pardoning
the Transgressor!

NOR is it less honorable, my Brethren, to the divine Wisdom, to restore
fallen Man with infinite Advantage; though innocent Man was holy, yet sad
Experience verifies, that he was mutably so; but Holiness in the redeemed shall
be perpetual, eternal: Adam's Stock was in his own Hand, and hence he became a
Bankrupt, but ours is in the Hands of an Almighty Surety, who has undertaken
for us, and will be faithful to his Trust: Justice itself being satisfied,
becomes our Friend, and ascertains our Possession of Paradise: I might add,
that there are Graces to be acted by us in our fallen State, for which there
were no Objects or Occasions in Innocence; such as Compassion to the Miserable,
Forgiveness of Injuries, and Patience; all which being Emblems of the divine
Perfections, must of Consequence be ornamental to, and perfective of our
immortal Souls, in conforming them to the great Pattern and Original of Beauty
and Excellency.

AGAIN, the Wisdom of God appears, in appointing such a MEDIATOR as is suitably
qualified to reconcile God to Man, and Man to God: A Mediator that is God and
Man in one Person, and therefore capable of the Affections and Sentiments of
both the Parties to be reconciled: The Wisdom of the divine Constitution in
appointing a Person to mediate, who is possessed of the divine and human
Natures, appears more particularly from the three Offices he exercises in that
Character, viz. Prophetical, Priestly, and Kingly.

CONSIDERED as a PROPHET, it was necessary that the MEDIATOR should be GOD,
that he might deliver Instructions with more Authority and Efficacy; it is God
alone that can enlighten the Mind, convince the Conscience, teach and change
the Heart!

AND it was likewise necessary, SIRS, that he should be MAN, that he might
converse with us, and convey his Instructions to us, in such a familiar Way as
we could receive; such is the Weakness of our present Frame, that the Majesty
of God's Appearance, occasions a distressing Pannic, and hence, when Israel had
seen some Glimpses of God's Glory and Majesty, at the giving of the Law, they
besought the Lord to speak no more to them in such a Manner, lest they died:
And, no Doubt, Guilt increases our Dread at the Approach of God, and therefore
renders us unfit to attend with due Calmness to his immediate Instructions: An
Instance of which we have in the Prophet, who when he heard the Seraphs shout,
Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts, the Heavens and Earth are full of the
Majesty of his Glory, lamented in this mournful Language, woe is me, I am
undone, for mine Eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts! Infinite Purity,
attended with awful Majesty, so alarms our Fears, as to render us unfit for
Instruction; but the Son of God appearing in our Nature to make Atonement for
Transgressors, the Brightness of his divine Majesty being veiled with the
Mantle of his Humanity, is thereby allayed, and so more accommodated to our
present State of Weakness; hereby we are encouraged to draw near to him, and to
hear with Composure his gentle Instructions, which drop as the Rain, and distill
as the Dew upon the tender Herb.

NOR was the UNION of the divine and human Natures, in the Person of the
Mediator, less necessary, my Brethren, in respect of his PRIESTLY OFFICE; he
must be Man, that the sinning Nature might suffer, and thereby acquire a right
to the Satisfaction made; for our Title to the Benefits of Christ's Sufferings
depends upon our Union to him, which is not only spiritual by Faith, but
natural also; for as the Apostle observes, he who sanctifies, and they who are
sanctified, are all one; i. e. they have Communion in the same Nature: Inasmuch
as Suffering according to the divine Declaration was necessary to atone for
Sin, of which the Deity is incapable, it behoved our High Priest to be MAN,
that he might have a Capacity for it; and that those Sufferings might be of
sufficient Dignity and Value, and the human Nature supported under them, it was
as necessary he should be GOD.

NOR was it less needful, Sirs, that the MEDIATOR should partake of both
Natures, in order to interceed for us as a PRIEST; that so he might have a
sufficient Interest in his Father's Affection, to prevail in his Suits for us,
and at the same Time, be possessed of tender Affections toward us; being the
Son of God, him the Father always hears, and being the Son of Man, he is
touched with the Feeling of our Infirmities; we have therefore Encouragement to
come with Boldness to the Throne of his Grace, to obtain Mercy, and find Grace
to help in Time of Need!

AND is it not also requisite, that the MEDIATOR should be GOD and MAN, in
regard of his KINGLY OFFICE? For unless he be God, how can he apply the Fruits
of his Death to us, disposess the strong Man armed, and subdue us to the
Obedience of Faith?

AND if he had not been Man, how could he have led us into the Way of universal
Holiness, by the Influence of his own Example, which is doubtless an excellent
Method to reform Mankind? It is not only necessary to enact Rules of Virtue by
a kingly Authority, but likewise by Example to make Precepts practicable and
honorable; when brave Generals, though of the noblest Lineage, design to
animate their Armies to heroic Achievements, they voluntarily submit their
Persons to all the humble Offices and Hardships of a State of War; courageously
lead their Troops into the high Places of the Field of Battle, and expose their
Lives to the greatest Perils! This our Lord has done for us, the Captain of our
Salvation, the King of the Church, and Lord of the Universe, has been made
perfect through Sufferings.

ANOTHER Instance, Sirs, of divine WISDOM in the Redemption of Man, by the Lord
Jesus Christ, is in making the Remedy to have some Analogy and Proportion to
the Cause of our Ruin, i. e. as we fell in the first Adam, considered as our
Representative, so we are raised by the Second, considered in the same
Character; as by the Disobedience of one, many were made Sinners, so by the
Obedience of one, many are made Righteous; as Guilt and Death came by the
first, through IMPUTATION to all his natural Offspring, that are united to him
naturally by Existence, so Righteousness and Life come by the second Adam,
through IMPUTATION, to all his spiritual Offspring, that are united to him
spiritually by Faith.

MOREOVER, my Brethren, divine WISDOM is conspicuous in the MANNER whereby our
Redemption is accomplished, viz. by the HUMILIATION of the SON of GOD; by this
Jehovah as it were counter works the Sin of Angels and Men. PRIDE is the
Malignity of every Sin, for by it the Sinner sets up his Will above God; now
that our dear Redeemer might cure the Disease (we labor under) in its original
Source, by the Nature of the Remedy, applied to our Arrogance Humility: Man who
is but a Worm, and crushed before the Moth, was vainly and wickedly guilty of
High Treason, in affecting to be like God; and thus he fell from the State of
Happiness in which he was at first created! And the eternal Son of God, who was
in the Form of God, and counted it not robbery to be equal with him, stooped to
assume the humble Form of a Servant, that by his Sufferings he might restore
fallen Man to his primitive Purity and Bliss; and by his Example correct that
Arrogance, which was the Fountain of his fatal Apostasy, and all its unhappy
Consequences! The Word was made Flesh, to banish the Distance between God and
it; O stupendous Abasement! the Condescension of divine Majesty herein, is
equal to the Contrivance of divine Wisdom; both are indeed incomprehensible,
both inexpressible! So dreadful was the Malignity of our native Arrogance, that
such unparallelled, astonishing Abasement, even of God himself, was necessary
to its Cure; by this our Lord destroyed the first Work of our grand Enemy!

FARTHER, Sirs, the WISDOM of God (in Connection with Almightiness) appears, in
appointing such contemptible, and to Appearance contrary MEANS, to accomplish
such great and glorious Effects; the Way is as wonderful as the Work; that
Christ by dying on the Cross a reputed Malefactor, should be made our eternal
Righteousness; that by Death he should destroy him that had the Power of Death,
and purchase our Life; that by descending into the Grave, he should purchase
our Resurrection from it, and immortal Blessedness, is trury amazing, and
plainly shows that the Thoughts and Ways of God are far above ours, as the
Heavens are above the Earth; strange that immortal Life should spring from
Death, Honor from Ignominy, Healing from Stripes, Blessedness from a Curse!
this is so Contrary to the usual Course of Things, that to render it credible,
it was typified by many Symbols, and foretold by many Prophets before it came
to pass, that when it came, it might be esteemed an Effect of God's eternal
Council, almighty Power, and unsearchable Wisdom: Though Christ crucified be to
the Jews a stumbling Block, and to the Greeks Foolishness, yet to those that
are called, he is the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God! Surely, great is the
Mystery of Godliness, God made manifest in the Flesh; whatever our modern
Exalters of carnal Reason, and Monopolizers of Wisdom, mutter to the Contrary
notwithstanding; these Men say they are Christians, and yet with a Show of
Wisdom, and Pretext of Friendship to Jesus Christ, they presume to confront the
express Testimony of his inspired Apostles, they labor with Art and Address to
rob his Religion of its GRAND PECULIARS, and to substitute polished PAGANISM in
its Place, and would have us to believe the JEST, the JUGGLE, that there is no
material Difference between them; but God forbid, we have not so learned
Christ; while they profess themselves to be wise, they commence Fools, they
become vain in their Imaginations, and their foolish Hearts are darkened; for in
the Wisdom of God, the World by Wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the
Foolishness of Preaching, to save those that believe, i. e. the great Sovereign
and Lord of all, who has a right to do with his own as he pleases, has of his
mere Motion, so ordered the Matter, that by the humble Preaching of the Cross
of Christ, or in other Words, the MEDIATORIAL PLAN of Salvation, by the
Sufferings and Death of the Son of God (which some stumble at, and reckon
inconsistent and foolish) those that believe shall obtain eternal Happiness.
Such who reckon the grand Peculiars of the Religion of JESUS foolish and
absurd, would act a more candid and consistent Part, if they renounced the Name
of Christianity altogether (for what signifies the Name without the Thing) and
openly declared, that they reject the Bible, as a sure and sufficient Guide to
Heaven, and betake themselves to their DAGONS, viz. their CARNAL REASON, and
GRACELESS VIRTUE, to a Dependence on the former as their supreme and sufficient
Guide, in the Matters of Religion* and on the latter as their only Savior; my
Soul come not into their Secret, mine Honor be thou not united! Let Jewish,
Grecian, and British INFIDELS or PAGANS (the most inexcusable of all the rest,
who in the Midst of Light and Day grope in Egyptian Darkness) who in the Pride
and Stoutness of their Hearts, deride and burlesque the mysterious and humble
Doctrines of Christ crucified, as a nonsensial Scheme; yet they never will be
able by all their Art, their Eloquence, and sovereign Contempt, to drive those
that have experienced a gracious Change (a divine Birth) from the Foundation of
their Hope; no, such have an inward Witness, that Christ crucified is the
Wisdom of God, and the Power of God; and in every successive Period, till Time
concludes its Drama, there will be such, who shall not be ashamed of the Gospel
of Christ, but glory in his Cross, as a Badge of Honor; for the Foundation of
God stands sure, JEHOVAH has graciously promised, that the Gates of Hell shall
not prevail against his Church, and that no Weapon formed against her shall
prosper!

BUT to proceed; the divine WISDOM, my Brethren, appears gloriously in forming
the PLAN of the GOSPEL, in such a Manner as at once to provide for the COMFORT
of Men's SOULS, and promote the PURITY of their MANNERS; and this indeed is
inseparable Character of divine Doctrines, that they equally tend to promote
God's Glory and our Benefit; thus as the Way to Blessedness by a Mediator,
effectually secures God's Honor, so it powerfully incites the Sinner's Hope,
Love, and Joy; by representing the blessed God as amiable, benign, and
gracious, by providing a complete Satisfaction to injured Justice, that thus a
Way might be opened, for a liberal, consistent, and honorable Effusion of
divine Goodness, in all its innumerable Instances, in all its various and
valuable Effects, adapted to every changing Scene of Life, adapted to every
Circumstance of the Indigent and Distressed; and sufficient to support,
relieve, yea, refresh and content them, in the Midst of Miseries and Woes; and
under a Train and Complication of the greatest Calamities, which this Bockim,
this State of Exile affords! These primitive and faithful Servants of Christ,
the Apostles, though they were by many reckoned Deceivers, yet they were true,
though they had Nothing, yet they possessed all Things, though they were
Sorrowing, yet they were always Rejoicing! the MEDIATORIAL PLAN shows us how
GOD may be JUST, and yet the JUSTIFIER of HIM THAT BELIEVES IN JESUS, because
of his PROPITIATION. This opens to our View, the unspeakable Gift of the Son of
GOD, and assures us of the Gift of all Things with him in Case we believe; in
particular, this fixes our final Perseverance in Goodness, a crowning Mercy,
upon the impregnable BASIS of the immutable PURPOSE, the Almighty POWER, and
faithful PROMISE of GOD; upon the sacred SURETYSHIP, the complete SATISFACTION,
and perpetual INTERCESSION of the Lord Jesus Christ; and therefore this Gospel
Scheme of Grace and Salvation, opens an unfailing Spring of Joy, and lays a
firm Foundation for our Hope and Trust; this calms the guilty, restless Mind,
and makes it rejoice in the Hope of the Glory of God, with Joy unspeakable and
full of Glory!

AND as the Gospel of Christ provides for our SOLACE, so it incites to
universal PURITY; do not the Sufferings of the Son of GOD for Sin, give us a
dreadful Representation of its Malignity and Danger; seeing nothing less could
make Satisfaction for it, and therefore serve to deter us from it? We may judge
of the Danger of a Disease, by the Difficulty of its Cure; nothing less could
heal our mortal Malady than the Blood of God; and seeing Christ has expressed
such amazing Love to us, does not this tend to beget Love in us to him, and so
constrain us to a voluntary, sincere, and uniform Obedience, from that truly
noble Principle?

NOW if the Gospel of Christ be such as has been described, with what Ardour
should we celebrate the divine Praises, for this Revelation, so worthy of God,
so suited to the Case of fallen Man? The Apostasy of our first Parents was so
fatal to us, that nothing less than infinite Wisdom could find out a sufficient
Remedy!

THERE is no Discovery of this in the Works of Creation, the Heavens and Earth
do indeed prove the Existence of a Supreme Being, by pointing to some of his
adorable Attributes; but cannot represent the Design of Redemption, which has
no Connection with the Existence of Creatures, but hangs altogether upon the
Sovereign Pleasure of God; the Doctrine of the Trinity, which is the Foundation
of the Mediatorial Plan of Salvation, cannot be known by the Frame of the
Universe.

NOR can natural REASON by its utmost Force, attain to the Knowledge of
redeeming Grace and Love; it is true there are some remains of the Law of
Nature in the Heart of Man, some common Notices (rudera Vestigia) of the
Differences between moral Good and Evil, otherwise the World would soon disband
and turn into the wildest Anarchy, the rudest Chaos, and become an ACELDEMA;
though Misery when felt, excites to look out for a Remedy, yet here Reason is
at a Loss, at a Plunge, and quite non-pluss'd: How could the Izraelites
imagine, that by looking to the Brazen Serpent, those that were stung should be
healed? and how can a poor Creature discover, by the mere Dint of his own
Genius, or Light within, the Satisfaction of divine Justice by Jesus Christ?
No, they cannot! and hence it is called a Mystery hid from Ages and
Generations; nay, though the human Mind had never been corrupted, it could not
by the Force of its Reasonings find it out; for this the very ANGELS could not
discover, till it was made known to them by the CHURCH; by the first coming of
Christ, and the Conversion of many to him, the Depths of divine Wisdom were
unvailed.

THE Apostle informs us, that the Case of the Gentiles was extremely dangerous,
their Understandings were darkened, being alienated from the Life of God,
through the Ignorance that is in them, because of the Blindness of their
Hearts: The Apostle Paul declares, that the Ephesians were formerly Darkness,
i. e. while Pagans, and elsewhere he assures us, that the natural Man does not
understand the Things of the Spirit of God, that they are Foolishness to him,
and he cannot discern them, because they are spiritually discerned; and this
was not only the Case of the ruder Sort, but of the more polite and learned;
for, as has been before observed, the World by Wisdom knew not God: Natural
Reason cannot inform us, whether God will pardon any Transgressors at all, or
not, or upon what Terms; it is true the modern Deists, do now trump up a
plausible Scheme of natural Religion, with Design to overset revealed, but are
not so candid as to inform us, that they borrowed their Succors from the
BIBLE; without the Assistance of which, notwithstanding their PRIDE, and
Pretense to PENETRATION (or superior acumen) they would speak as darkly,
doubtfully, and confusedly, as their more ingenious and ingenuous Forefathers,
the Pagan Philosophers, long since.

WHAT a horrid Confusion of Sentiments, what a rude, wild, and dark Chaos
overwhelmed the Pagan World before Christ's coming, in respect of the most
important Points of Religion? Varro declares, that there were among them no
less than Three Hundred different Opinions about the CHIEF GOOD, nor did they
inculcate INTERNAL PURITY, and the Necessity of FORGIVING INJURIES; and the
best of them offered but uncertain Conjectures about the IMMORTALITY of the
SOUL; a View of their Miseries may justly heighten our Value for the Mercies we
enjoy; while many Nations dwell in Darkness, and in the Shadow of Death, the
Dayspring from on High has visited us, and the Sun of Righteousness arisen
with Healing under his Wings upon us: This distinguishing, important, and
unmerited Benefit, should fire our Souls with Love and Gratitude, and stir us
up to the most affectionate Thanksgiving: It is the Prerogative of God to
reveal the Secrets of his Kingdom to whom he pleases; how then can we reflect
upon the divine Goodness toward us, without the warmest Emotion, the most
admiring, grateful Sentiments? Surely, by Nature we are as blind, corrupt, and
perverse as any other Nation, what are we then, that God should be so gracious
to us? If the Publication of the Law to the People of Israel, was justly
reckoned their peculiar Treasure, what then is the Revelation of the Gospel by
the Son of God, which alone discovers our Remedy, and of which there is no
innate Notice in human Nature, nor any given otherwise universally?

CAN this Principle be easily justified, that there is Something in all Mankind
which, if attended to, is sufficient to direct Men to Salvation without the
Scriptures? It is no Matter what this Something be called, whether REASON,
CONSCIENCE, or the LIGHT WITHIN, seeing the Substance intended is the same.

DO not the Scriptures positively declare, that there is no Name given under
Heaven, by which Salvation can be obtained, but the Name of Jesus; that Faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God, that we cannot hear without a
Preacher, that the Heathens are Darkness, without the Covenants of Promise,
without God, that they perish for Lack of Vision, and that all the Unregenerate
before Conviction are blind, dead, possessed with Satan, that the Light in some
is Darkness, and that all Men have not Faith; now how can the aforesaid
Principle agree with those Declarations?

AND do not Millions of Facts (which are stubborn Things) in the Pagan World,
in the present and past Ages, and in various Nations, confirm the aforesaid
Testimony of Scripture? That the PAGANS, whatever Pains they take in their
different Ways of Religion (unless they obtain some Information from the sacred
Scriptures) remain ignorant of the Way of Salvation by Christ.

IF the PAGANS had this Knowledge, is it reasonable to think that they would be
brought to the Profession of what they believe with great Difficulty, in Places
where this Profession is not attended with any Danger? and yet this has often
been the Case, and is so still; and why have so many opposed with great
Vehemence, and without any Sense of Guilt, the Profession of Christianity (with
Saul before his Conversion) if it be so universally known as is supposed? And
why do none, among such vast Multitudes, and during so many Ages, give any
Account of this Matter?

FARTHER, is not one Design of the sacred Scriptures, for Doctrine and
Instruction, to make the Man of God perfect, and thoroughly furnished to every
good Work; now what need is there of this, if there be sufficient Light in
every Man to direct him without it? is it not absurd to say, we need more than
what is sufficient, or that we need more than we need! is not the BIBLE
therefore needless and superfluous, according to this Principle, and is this
Principle safe, that in its Consequences deprives us of our BIBLE?

PRAY is it not the Business of Pastors after God's Heart, to feed the People
with Knowledge and Understanding? and is it not the Design of their Office to
turn Sinners from Darkness to Light? But what need is there of this Institution
at all, what need of any Labors to instruct Mankind, if Men have sufficient
Light without it in themselves? Is not Preaching at any Time or Place, on this
Plan, an Absurdity, a mere Farce? And why did the Apostles take so much Pains
in traveling and preaching? why did they run such Risques, and endure such
Hardships? was it to do a superfluous Business, to teach People what they knew
already, or might know without their Assistance? if so, was this prudent in
them (seeing they carried on no Business of Merchandise or Traffic in their
Travels to enrich themselves) or a good Argument that they had the full
Exercise of their Reason? pray did they suffer Stripes, Imprisonment, or Death,
like wise Men, or Fools, for doing what was needless, judge ye.

UPON this Hypothesis, is it probable, that we shall be duly sensible of the
Value of our religious Privileges, sincerely thankful for them, tenderly
concerned for those that want them, and use Diligence to proselite them to
Christianity, when we judge that they are unnecessary.

BUT to proceed, is not the incomprehensible Mystery of redeeming Wisdom and
Grace, well worthy of our serious Thoughts and Study; seeing it excels all
other Sciences in the Sublimity of its Object, the Certainty of its Principle,
the Efficacy of its Influence, and the Value of its End?

IT is a Doctrine that affects the Soul, with the highest Admiration of the
divine Wisdom, Grace, and Love; and makes us speak in the Psalmist's Language,
how wonderful are thy Thoughts to usward? when the Almighty hereby turns our
Captivity, we are as those that dream; this opens before us the grandest Theme,
that was ever exposed to mortal Eye, or Ear; a Complication of Wonders, the
chief of all the Ways of God; strange that he who fills Heaven and Earth,
should be confined in a Virgin's Womb, that Life should die, and being dead,
revive! that Mercy should triumph, without infringing on the Rights of Justice!

THE Principle of this mysterious Doctrine is immutable, like God the Author
and Object of it; whereas philosophical Sciences are frequently shifting,
almost every one, through Pride and excessive Self-love, is disposed to despise
and pull down what another with much Labor builds up.

AND how precious and powerful is the Influence of this Doctrine, upon those
that believingly receive it? while they behold as in a Glass the Glory of the
Lord, they are transformed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory; this is
eternal Life to know God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent: O let us cry
earnestly to God, that Christ crucified, may be more and more the Wisdom of
God, and the Power of God to us. Amen, Amen; dear Lord JESUS CHRIST, say, AMEN.

SERMON III.
PROVE. 8.17. I Love th^^ that Love me, and those that Seek me early shall find
me.


SOME, by divine WISDOM, in this Chapter, understand that Attribute of the
divine Nature so called, whereby God perfectly knows all Things, and makes
known to Men, what he judges necessary or expedient for them to know; others
understand it of the second Person of the Godhead, who is called the Wisdom of
God, because of the Displays of this Attribute in the Method of Salvation
through his Blood: And indeed some Passages agree better to the former, and
some to the latter Opinion; probably both may be joined together, and the
Chapter may be understood of Christ, considered partly in respect of his Deity,
and partly in regard of his prophetical Office, by which he was to impart the
Mind and Will of God to Mankind, and actually did so.

1. BY revealing it to, and inscribing it on the Mind of Man at his first
Creation, and after his Apostasy, by renewing the effaced and erazed Characters
of the divine Image, in some at their Conversion, by the Finger of his Holy
Spirit, who are hence called his Epistle, written not with Ink, but with the
Spirit of the living God; not in Tables of Stone, but in fleshly Tables of the
Heart, 2 Cor. 3.3. And,

2. BY publishing it to the Prophets and Patriarchs, in the Time of the old
Testament, at sundry Times and in diverse Manners, Heb. 11. And,

3. BY declaring it in his own personal Ministry, and by his Apostles, and
others of his Servants, under the Gospel Dispensation.

I Love them that Love me, i. e. though their Affection be a small and
inconsiderable Thing to me, I kindly accept it, and will recompense it with
Love and Favor; and those that seek me early, shall find me, i. e. those who
in their young Years more especially, from a Principle of Faith unfeigned, and
supreme Respect, endeavor sincerely, and steadily to obey my Laws, before and
above all other Persons and Things, shall find an Interest in my Favor and
Friendship.

IT is only the first Part of the Text, that I purpose now to discourse upon, I
love them that love me: Here let us enquire, what LOVE to the Lord JESUS CHRIST
supposes and implies, and how the blessed JESUS loves such, who love him?

NOW Love to the Lord Jesus Christ, supposes;

1. THE KNOWLEDGE of our want of Love to him, our Enmity against him, and
Inability to love him? For the Disease must be known and felt, before it be
cured.

2. An affecting Discovery of his Amiableness and Excellency, which are the
proper Objects and Incentives of rational Love. And,

3. IT supposes FAITH in him, for Love is the Fruit of Faith, by which it works
( Gal. 5.6.) Now FAITH is the sensible, Sin-sick Sinners, deliberate and
unreserved Consent to embrace Christ, as the free Gift of God to perishing
Mankind, as its Prophet, Priest, and King, under an Impression of its absolute
Need of him in those Offices, and with an entire Dependence upon him for all
needful Relief by them; together with a full and firm Purpose of Heart to
cleave to him, to deny itself, to take up his Cross and follow him ( Joh. 1.12.
Acts 20.22, 23, 24.) And,

4. IT supposes some Sense and Persuasion of his Love to us, without which the
Soul will not go forth with free, grateful, and vehement Sallies toward him:
We love him, says the Apostle John, because he loved us first (1 John 4.19.)
whom having not seen, i. e. by an Eye of Sense, ye Love; yet believing ye
rejoice, with Joy unspeakable* and full of Glory (1 Pet. 1.8.)

FARTHER, Love to the Lord Jesus Christ, implies, Esteem, Desire, Delight, and
Sorrow.

TO such as love him, he is the Chief among Ten Thousand, as the Rose of
Sharon, the Lilly of the Valleys, fairer than the Children of Men, fairer than
the Sons of God, the holy Angels, his Garments smell of Myrrh, Alloes, and
Casia. Farther,

SUCH as love the blessed Jesus, earnestly and insatiably, desire after
Communion in his Love, and Conformity to his Laws; as the Heart, when chased,
pants after the cooling Brooks of Water, so their Hearts pant after God, yea
their Heart and Flesh cry after the living God; as the Psalmists speaks.

AGAIN, sincere Love implies DELIGHT; I sat down under his Shadow, says the
Spouse, with great Delight, and his Fruit was sweet to my Taste, as a Bundle of
Myrrh was my Beloved unto me, he lay all Night betwixt my Breasts.

AND, Sirs, the Sorrow of the loving Soul in the Absence of his Lord, is equal
to his Delight in his Presence: My Soul, says the Spouse, failed when he spoke,
I sought him but I could not find him! O nothing can supply, to Satisfaction,
Christ's room in the Soul! when he is gone, it languishes and moans, in the
Midst of all the Honors, the Pleasures, and Affluence this Earth affords, as
the poor Turtle Dove, when bereaved of its Mate.

AS to the Consequents of Love to the Lord Jesus Christ, I may observe, that
such Persons have admiring Thoughts of the Freeness and Glory of the Grace of
GOD to them in particular, being humbled by near Views of his great Majesty,
and unstained Purity, which in Whiteness out-veighs the driven Snow; and seeing
themselves to be the Chief of Sinners, they are justly amazed, that so glorious
a Sovereign, should take such gracious, such distinguishing Notice of such mean
and vile Creatures as they are, when many of better Accomplishments are passed
by! and are ready to say, in the Psalmists Language, what am I, and what is my
Father's House, that thou have brought me hitherto? and as Jacob, I am not
worthy of the least of all the Mercies, and of all the Truth, which thou have
shown to thy Servant! (Genesis 32.10.)

A Sense of this inspires their Souls with Sentiments of the most ardent
GRATITUDE, which they are at a Loss how to express, and therefore, say, what
shall I render to the Lord, for all his Benefits toward me? under this
Impression, they invite the animate and inanimate Creation, to assist their
grateful Song; and celebrate the divine Honors ( Ps. 148.)

FARTHER, such as love the Lord Jesus in Sincerity, make Conscience of keeping
GOD'S Commands without Exception, in Heart, Speech, and Behavior to the Death
(1 John 5.3.) for this is the Love of God, that we keep his Commandments, and
his Commandments are not grievious; then shall we not be ashamed, when we have
an unfailing Respect to all the divine Precepts.

I may add, that such as love Jesus, are heartily concerned for the Honor of
his Name, and Interests of his Kingdom; and have an unfeigned Love to the
Brethren: The Reproaches of those that reproach him, fall upon them; nor can
they be easy when the Ways of Zion mourn; but on the contrary, when her
Captivity is restored, when poor Sinners are convinced and converted, they are
as those that dream, their Hearts are filled with Gladness, and their Lips with
Laughter; while others either lessen, dispute or deny religious Appearances,
and seem to be a afraid of some Mischief coming upon the Churches by them; but
are easy when Religion has sunk into a dead Form, and is ready to Breath its
last! Sirs, if we do not love our Brother whom we have seen, with a pure Heart
fervently, how can we think that we love God, whom we have not seen!

NOW the Love of Christ to such is unexcited and entirely immerited, he pitied
us when in our Blood, when there was nothing to invite his Respect, when we
were Objects of Loathing and Abhorrence; then he loved us, spread the Skirt of
his Garment over us, and bid us live! O the incomprehensible Glories of his
Grace and Goodness! O the inexpressible Riches, and Freeness of his dear
condescending and amazing Love!

FARTHER, the Love of JESUS is strong and affectionate to his People; they are
his Jewels, his Treasure, as the Apple of his Eye, he accosts them in Terms of
the greatest Endearment, my Love, my Sister, my Dove; they are written on the
Palms of his Hands, and graven as a Seal upon his Heart, for their sakes he
assumed human Nature in its most humble Circumstances, laid down his Life, and
trod the Wine Press of his Father's Wrath alone; he commends his Love to us,
in that while we were yet Sinners, he died for us; yea, he sympathizes with us
in all our Sorrows!

AGAIN, the Love of Christ is effectual, it disposes him to Guide us with his
Eye in our Perplexities, to support us with his Arm under all our Pressures,
and to sanctify and sweeten every of them to us, by his Spirit and his Love! As
he has purchased our Salvation by the Price of his Blood, so he applies it, and
prepares us for the full Enjoyment of it, by his constant Intercession.

ONCE more, the Love of our dear Lord Jesus Christ, is invariable and eternal;
both a part ante, and a part post, as he loved us from everlasting, so he
will love to it; and hence, it is said, that he loved us with an everlasting
Love, and therefore with loving Kindness has he drawn us, i. e. in Time; and
that whom he loves, he loves to the End; he bears with many Weaknesses in his
People, and though he sometimes chastises their Iniquities with Rods, and their
Transgressions with Stripes, yet he will not utterly take away his loving
Kindness from them, or suffer his Faithfulness to fail; though he hides his
Face for a Moment, to try our Faith, or humble our Pride, yet he will return
with everlasting loving Kindness: In this the Love of Christ differs from, and
is much superior to all human Love, which often varies, and is at longest but
of short Duration.

FROM this Subject, we may learn the unhappy and dangerous State of such who
love not the blessed Lord Jesus, such who have not experienced what has been
before said concerning it; for all those are liable to that dreadful Sentence
(1 Cor. 16.22.) if any Man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema
maranatha.

I humbly and earnestly entreat all, but especially young People and Children
(with whom I hope to meet with most Success) to Love the Lord Jesus Christ.

REASON invites you, for he is amiable and excellent in himself; is not
Loveliness the proper Object of Love? now our dear Lord Jesus Christ, is
infinitely, inexpressibly Lovely; he is white and ruddy, the Chiefest among Ten
Thousand, his Loveliness is best near, whereas that of Creatures, in the
present State of Imperfection, appears best at a Distance, like a Picture
coarsely drawn: The Redeemer's Beauty does neither ensnare or fade; for his
Excellency, and our Obligations to him are infinite! But the Beauty of
Creatures fades as the Grass, it is derived, dependent, and limited, and
therefore may be over-valued, to the Neglect of the great Original, from which
all created Excellency proceeds; and compared with which, it is but as a Drop
to the immense Ocean, or a little Dust in the Balance, to the whole Globe of
the Earth! In him there is a Concurrence of all Kinds of Excellency, both
created and uncreated, in the highest Degree of Eminence, without any
Beginning, Wane, or Period: Some Creatures excel in one Grace, and some in
others, for which they deserve our Esteem and Respect, but he excels in all at
once and for ever, he is the ALPHA and OMEGA, Time or Eternity will never mar
his Beauty, or wear and wrinkle in his Brow. And, dear Sirs,

GRATITUDE should likewise constrain you, on Account of his LOVE to poor
Sinners; should not Love incite Love, if not, where is your Ingenuity? are ye
not worse than PUBLICANS, in Neglect of this; for they love those that love
them; worse than PAGANS, for diverse of them had noble Sentiments of Gratitude
to Benefactors, and acted accordingly; yea, worse than BEASTS, for the Ox
knows his Owner, and the Ass his Master's Crib?

BUT not only Reason and Gratitude conspire to invite you, but Interest, your
grand, your eternal Interest calls aloud for your Love to the dear Redeemer; in
case you love him, he will love you in return; and if the everlasting God, who
has made all Nature with a Word, and manages the vast Creation by his BECK, is
for you, it is no Matter who is against you; he will direct your Steps in every
Maze of Life, and make you sweet and safe in his Arms, and under his Wing;
among all its shifting Scenes, its numberless Sorrows and Calamities; and in
due Time bring you to a City that has Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is
God; a City built upon a firm Basis, entirely freed from all the Vicissitudes
of the present State?

DEAR young People and Children, give me Leave to commend my Master to your
Esteem and Acceptance, O he is infinitely great, he is inexpressibly good!
never was there a Master, a Father, a Friend, a Husband like him! what Labors
of Love did he perform, and Sufferings in Name, Body, and Soul did he endure
for us. He who is the eternal GOD, a self-sufficient, independent and glorious
MAJESTY, whom all the ANGELS Worship, and before whose Feet they cast their
Crowns, a BEING to whom our Goodness does not extend; that he should be so
concerned for our Salvation, as though his Happiness depended upon ours, that
he who is Lord of all, should assume the Form of a Servant, that we might be
made the SONS of GOD? that the Majesty of Heaven should come not to be
ministered unto, but to minister, and give his Life a Ransom for many; that he
who is from Eternity, and dwells in the Bosom of ineffable Delight, should
become a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief, that we might drink of the
River of Pleasures that is at his right Hand; that he who was RICH should
become POOR, that we through his Poverty might be made Rich: That the Sword of
God's Wrath should awake against the Man that was his Fellow, that the
Chastisement of our Peace should be laid upon him, that through his Stripes we
might be healed: That the infinite GOD should become MAN, yea, a Worm, a
reproach of Men, exposed to unjust Scandal and Contempt, by those he came to
seek and save; that he should Weep, and Groan, and Bleed, and Die for us! that
he should be deserted by his Father, which occasioned his bloody Agony, and
doleful Outcry on the Cross, Eloi, Eloi, Lama Sabacthani; that he should be sad
and sore amazed, yea, sorrowful even to Death, and hang on the accursed Tree,
between Criminals of the most enormous Kind, as a Spectacle to Heaven and
Earth, who had made both; as if he was fit to be entertained by neither, and
there insulted and derided, in the Midst of his inutterable Anguish; there
pierced in his Hands and Feet with Nails, and his Heart wounded with a Spear,
from whence came Blood and Water, to heal the Nations; his Body having been
before furrowed with Scourges, and his Head pierced with Thorns; so that he was
all over of a bloody Gore! O sad, striking Spectacle! to see the Savior of the
World thus expiring; no Wonder the Earth shook at its Center, the Heavens
gathered Blackness, the Rocks rent, and the Dead awoke at this extraordinary
PHENOMENON, when their CREATOR resigned his Breath, and Life itself died! and
surely, we must be more stupid than inanimate Nature, harder than Rocks, than
Adamants, if we are not moved with the View of such a mournful TRAGEDY, to
which there never was, or ever will be any Parallel! O how astonishing is the
Love and Goodness of JESUS, that he should endure such Sufferings for us, who
are utterly unworthy of his Regard, and unable to requite it, yea, not so much
as desirous of it, till excited by his gracious Influence; that he should
endure for such worthless Creatures, such Rebels, Wretches, Enemies, who are by
Nature possessed of Enmity against him, his Law, his Gospel, his Government,
and covered with the basest Deformity and Pollution, an inexpressible, yea,
incomprehensible WEIGHT of WOE, with unbroken PATIENCE, strong DESIRE, and kind
INTENTION, to purchase for them a HAPPINESS as immerited, as inutterable and
immortal, a Happiness suited to the original DIGNITY of a SOUL, and equal to
its vast DESIRES, and endless DURATION!

AND does this adorable Lord Jesus, use the greatest Earnestness, the humblest
Condescension, the most endearing Importunity, by a Variety of Means, viz. his
Word, Ordinances, Providence, and by the Influences of his Holy Spirit, to
allure us to accept of our own Life and Happiness, to accept of the invaluable
Purchase of his Blood and Death, and does the compassionate Redeemer weep and
groan over us, as over impenitent, unhappy Jerusalem; O that thou had known
in this thy Day, the Things that belong to thy Peace, you will not come unto
me, that ye might have Life; does he cry aloud to us, as in the great Day of
the Feast, if any Man is a-thirst, let him come unto me and drink; come unto me
all ye that Labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest; does the
amiable Majesty of Heaven, knock at the Door of our Hearts, and say, if any Man
will hear my Voice, and open the Door, I will come in and sup with him, and he
with me; does he wait till his Head is wet with the Dew, and his Locks with the
Drops of the Night? O ineffable Prodigy of amazing Godlike dear Goodness! and
will we dare to shut our Ears, against this Charmer's Voice, will we harden our
cruel Hearts, against all the astonishing Stoops of a dying God and Savior,
against all the Yearnings of his tender Bowels, against all the Cries of his
Sufferings, his Tears, his Groans, his Blood, against the Voice of Reason, of
Justice, of Interest, of Ingenuity, and Gratitude, against the eternal
Salvation of our Souls! then is not our Blood upon our own Heads, are we not
self, Soul-Murderers, the greatest Monsters of Ingratitude and Barbarity, the
vilest, basest Wretches upon the Creation, worse than Jews, who lived under a
dark Dispensation, worse than Pagans, who have not the Light we enjoy, yea,
worse than Devils, who never had an Offer of Mercy since their Apostasy! our
Iniquity has no Parallel, no Cloak, no Apology; if I had not come and told
them, says our Savior, they would not have had Sin, but now their Sin remains;
what Damnation does such Wretches deserve? this is the Condemnation, that Light
is come into the World, and Men love Darkness rather than Light, because their
Deeds are Evil; how shall we escape if we neglect so great a Salvation? Surely,
it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha, in the Day of the Lord,
than for us?

MY blessed Master is not only Good and Gracious beyond all Expression, but his
Work is Rational, Honorable, Noble; Holiness is the Beauty of GOD, the
Ornament of human Nature, and Blessing of Society; his Wages are likewise
great; O! his Love is ravishing, it makes the Soul serene and glad in every
Situation, it turns the thickest Darkness into Day, and makes the meanest
Morsel sweet; by this we feel secure in all Dangers and Vicissitudes, and
intrepid in the Midst of the most formidable Enemies; by this the darkest
Glooms of Providence are enlivened, and a Smile put upon the Face of Death; and
if it be so here, what will it be hereafter? for Eye has not seen, nor Ear
heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of Man to conceive, what God has
laid up for those that love him.

WHAT a Father is GOD, how tender, indulgent, and rich; surely, his Children
may expect from him infallible Instruction in Doubts, impregnable Defense in
Dangers, and an everlasting Inheritance, that outweighs in Value Millions of
Worlds! O how desirable is the Lord Jesus Christ, as a Friend, he is All-wise,
knows all the Sorrows of his People, and how to relieve them out of them all:
He is Almighty, able to execute the Designs of his Wisdom against all
Opposition from Earth and Hell; he is Affectionate, willing to exert his Wisdom
and Almightiness in Favor of those who love him: He is every where present, if
we take the Wings of the Morning, and flee to the utmost Ends of the Earth,
ascend the Summit of Carmel, or dive the Ocean's Depths, he is there; his Eye
sees us, and his Arm can help us; whither we are at Home, or Abroad, upon the
Sea or Land, in the City or the Wilderness, we may have his Presence, if it be
not our own Fault! he is Immutable and Immortal, far from the Shadow of Change,
the ALPHA and OMEGA, the Beginning and Ending: Whereas earthly Friends, on the
Contrary, are weak sighted, have short Arms, and are sometimes unkind; either
at Times they mistake our Disease, or are unable to help us, or unwilling if
able; besides they are confined to a Place, very variable and but of short
Continuance.

IF you desire to love the Lord JESUS CHRIST, depart from the Foolish and live,
and walk in the Ways of Understanding; beware of sinning against Light,
encourage God's gracious Motions, attend with Constancy and Seriousness upon
the Means of Grace, bewail your Want of Love, and often meditate upon the
Miseries of that State; Pray earnestly and frequently for this Grace, and O!
consider that Youth is the best Season for Religion, the moulding Age, in which
the opening Mind, and (comparitively) tender Heart, are more ready to receive
worthy Sentiments and pious Impressions, and more like to retain them.

Objection. MY Friends will be Angry. Answer, It Is better they should be so,
than the great GOD; we must forsake Father and Mother, for Christ's Sake, when
called thereto, otherwise we cannot be his Desciples.

Object. 2. I shall suffer Reproach. A. What then? it is without Cause, the
Almighty will bear you up under it, and graciously reward your patient and
cheerful Enduring of it; we must go without the Camp to Christ, bearing his
Reproach; and is it not better to be reproached, than damned?

Object. 3. ALMOST all of my Age neglect Religion. A. More is the Pity! but we
must not follow a Multitude to do Evil, if so, we shall be damned with the
Crowd; no, we should imitate the noble and manly Resolution of Joshua, who in a
Time of great Degeneracy, openly declared in the Presence of the Tribes of
Israel, if it seem evil to you to serve the Lord, choose you this Day whom you
will serve, but as for me and my House we will serve the Lord (Jos. 24.15.)

Object. 4. I shall lose all my Pleasure. A. You will lose no Pleasure that
deserves the Name; as for the Pleasures of Sin, they are brutish, of short
Duration, and followed even in this Life with more Anguish than they yield
Delight! what then will be their Consequences in the Life to come? but in the
Service of God, you will find solid, substantial and satisfactory Comfort, for
Wisdom's Ways are Ways of Pleasantness, and all her Paths are Peace.

Object. 5. SOME that are Religious have little Pleasure. A. That is their own
Fault, it is not owing to their Religion, that they are at any Time sad and
dejected but to their Wandering from the Laws of it, or to their melancholy
Constitution of Body, which is a natural Disease, that does not concern
Religion at all, and therefore should not be cast upon it: So far as any are
religious, they have Ground of Comfort, for Light is sown for the Righteous,
and Gladness for the Upright in Heart; and all Joy without this is mere Madness.

Object. 6. I am now hurried with other Things, I may find a better Season
afterward. A. No it will be worse, your Inclinations to Good will lessen, and
your Obstacles increase; besides you are not certain of a future Season, the
Almighty may say to thee, as to the rich Fool, this Night thy Soul shall be
required of thee; and if you should have Time, you may have no Heart to improve
it, he that is often reproved, and hardens his Neck, shall suddenly be
destroyed, and that without Remedy; pray remember these awful Words of God (
Prove. 1.24, 25, 28.) Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched
out my Hand, and no Man regarded; but ye have set at naught all my Counsel, and
would none of my Reproof, I will also laugh at your Calamity, I will mock when
your Fear comes.

Object. 7. I shall be called a Fool, a Hypocrite, an Enthusiast. A. We must
not lose Credit with God, to get Credit among Men, for this will hurt both our
Credit and Usefulness; it is better to be called a Fool, than to be one; our
greatest WISDOM is to secure our HAPPINESS, by the Use of proper Means in their
due Season: As to the Charge of Hypocrisy, when levelled against early and
sincere Religion, it is unjust, and we shall meet with a gracious Reward for
our patient enduring of it, in this and a future World: If all are Hypocrites,
who are hearty and serious in Religion, then where is true and vital Piety to
be found? surely not among Galeos, Demases, Formalists, and the Herd of the
Profane (Mat. 5.20.) then it must be among those that are in Earnest, or no
where upon Earth; and if no where, then it will follow, that Christ has no
Church Militant, which is absurd and false; he himself has assured us, that the
Gates of Hell shall not prevail against his Church: As to the Charge of
Enthusiasm, it is but a Gingle of Words without a Meaning; it is indeed
Enthusiasm, to make Fancy, Passion, or Impulse, our GUIDE in religions Matters;
but to take the Word of GOD for our Rule, and exercise our Reason in the Use of
all appointed Means to understand it, to have our Minds first informed, and
then our Passions engaged in Proportion to the Importance of Things, cannot be
justly liable to that odious Charge, for without these, our Passions would be
given us in vain, and Religion be but a dead Carcass, which Christ will reject
with Abhorrence! Rev. 3.16.


AND now dear young Ones, what have you against early Religion? can ye be too
soon safe and happy? would it do you any harm to have God to be your Friend and
Father, and Heaven your everlasting Home? wherefore do you spend your Money for
that which is not Bread, and your Labor for that which profits not? what
shall a Person give in Exchange for his Soul, if he should gain the World and
lose the same? why stand ye all the Day idle in the Market Place? why do ye
delay in a Matter of Life and Death? are ye in Suspense which is the best
Master, GOD or the Devil, which the best Work, Sin or Holiness, which the best
Reward, Heaven or Hell, a Place of the greatest Glory and Blessedness, or of
the most exquisite Torment and Misery? why halt ye between two Opinions, if God
be God serve him, or if Baal be God, then follow him? resolve with the
returning Prodigal, that you will arise and go to your Father, and say unto
him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and am no more worthy to be called
thy Child, O make me as one of thy hired Servants: There would be JOY in HEAVEN
at your Conversion, and JOY upon EARTH; O! so blessed, so important an Event
would gladden your Parent's Hearts, if pious, in which Delight I should share;
will you Comfort my Heart, by loving my dear Master speedily, sincerely and
supreamly? O if you will show Kindness to my Master, tell me, and if not, tell
me, that I may turn to the Right Hand or to the Left: O that I knew how to
persuade you, alas, will no Argument have any Influence? then you are the
Causes of your own Ruin: I am loath to leave you without prevailing with you;
what Answer shall I return to my dear Lord that has sent me to woo you? shall I
tell him that some of you are willing to be espoused to him for ever? O may the
Lord grant, for JESUS Sake, that this may be the Case of you all!

AND you, dear Children, I beseech you with Love and Bowels of Tenderness, as
upon my bended Knees, to love the Lord JESUS CHRIST, to pray earnestly for the
Pardon of your Sins, and that God would make you good in your Hearts, by his
Holy Spirit; without which you cannot go to Heaven when you die; it is not,
dear Creatures, too soon for you to be good; no, the sooner the better; if you
think on Christ and love him, you will find more Sweetness than in your Play,
than in your Victuals, yea, more Comfort than in your fine Clothes: You may see
in that good little Book, Mr. JANEWAY'S Token for Children (which I beseech
your Parents to procure you) several Children as young as you, that loved the
Lord, and there are several little Ones, as well as young People, that are now
earnestly seeking God in this Country, and why should not you as well as
others? your Souls are as precious as theirs, God has been as good to you,
Heaven would be as sweet, and Hell will be as bitter if you neglect; why then
will not you try to seek God in Earnest? is it not a Shame for you to be
hard-hearted, thoughtless, and slothful about your Souls, while other little
Ones are weeping over their SINS, and praying to GOD for MERCY? will not it be
dreadful for you to be left behind them, and to be cast off, while GOD is
embracing others in his Arms, and giving them the Kisses of his Love? you are
exceeding bad and naughty in your Hearts, and your Lives are full of Sin, you
cannot go to HEAVEN as you are, till you be made good, and you cannot make your
selves good, it is the Lord only that can make you good, and you have no reason
to hope that he will do so, unless you pray earnestly to him for it, and strive
to be good! you must know, dear little Ones, that you do not deserve this
Favor from him, and that you cannot deserve it by any Thing that you can do;
for you yourselves, and all ye do, are filthy and polluted by Sin, and
therefore you must ask free Mercy, for Christ's Sake!

O consider, that you may never live till you grow big, for the most, by far,
die when they are little, and this may be your Case in a few Days, in a few
Hours; have not you seen Coffins as short as your selves, carried to the Grave?
and would not it be terrible for you to die unconverted, and to burn in Hell
for ever? your being young and little will not keep you from that bad Place, and
from the bad Man, unless you be good your selves before you die.

THE Lord JESUS calls every one of you, dear little Ones, as though he
mentioned you all by your Names, to forsake your Sins and come to him, in these
sweet Words, suffer little Children to come unto me, for of such is the Kingdom
of Heaven; I love them that love me, and those that seek me early shall find
me? O how glad would your poor PARENTS be to see you good? their Hearts are sad
and troubled when they find you do not mind your Book, when you neglect your
Prayers, speak bad Words, break the Sabbath, and keep Company with naughty
Children; O try to be good, and Christ will love you, and all good People Will
love you; out of the Mouths even of such Babes as you, God will ordain Praise;
his Power and Grace in making you good in your Hearts, will appear glorious; by
your early Concern about your Souls, older People would be ashamed of their
Security and Sloth; and you do not know what Good it would do to your poor
Relations; your Brothers, or Sisters, and others, might be hereby turned to
GOD, and saved from Hell; would it do you any Harm, dear little Ones, to have
God to be your Friend and Father, and Portion for ever? O may a gracious God
bless you, dear Children, and help you to love JESUS CHRIST. AMEN.

SERMON IV.
PROVE. 8.17. And those that seek me early shall find me.


BY seeking CHRIST, we are doubtless to understand, our using all appointed
Means to obtain an Interest in his Favor, and Conformity to his Image: The
Expression supposes;

1. OUR Distance from GOD, not LOCAL, in regard of PLACE, for the Almighty is
immense, and every where present by his ESSENCE, but MORAL in respect of
Disposition; the Unregenerate are far from GOD, in respect of Knowledge, Union,
Interest, Communion, and Conformity: They have no such experimental and
influential Knowledge of GOD, and divine Things, as makes the general Frame of
their Minds humble, spiritual, heavenly, and reforms the Tenor of their
Conduct; their Light is generally cold, or but lukewarm, or if there be Heat
with it, it is proud, wild, irregular, and transient, having no abiding good
Effect upon the Heart and Life; this natural Knowledge puffs up silly Souls,
with groundless Conceits of their Seize, and makes some of them so
overbearing and pragmatical, that they are the Bane and Pests of Society, not
fit to be touched with a Pair of Tongs; they often meddle with Things too high
for them, to their Disgrace, and go out of their proper Spheres, as busy Bodies
(who are justly set in Rank and File with Thieves and Murderers) (1 Pet. 4.15.)
making Mischief in the Church and State, and turning all to FLAME and Fury:
Farther, the Unregenerate are far from God, in respect of vital UNION, for they
have no Faith of a saving Kind, otherwise they could not be unconverted: And
without a Union by Faith, the Friendship of GOD, Communion in his Love, and
Conformity to his Image, cannot be attained, for he that believes not, is
condemned already, Faith is by divine Appointment the Medium of Fellowship with
GOD, and the Means of Conformity to him (2 Cor. 3.18.)

2. SEEKING Christ supposes our lost State by Nature; till we find the dear
Redeemer as our Friend and Husband, we our selves are lost, our Time, our
Talents are lost, lost for ever; we are like a Traveller that has lost his
Road, when on an Errand that concerns his LIFE; like a Sheep wandering in a
Desert, amidst Wolves and other Beasts of Prey; like a Ship adrift before a
Tempest, without a Helm, or Compass, in a dark Night, toward a rocky Shore!

BUT, how should Christ be sought in young Years in order to find him, and why?
I answer, he should be sought in the following Manner,

1. BEFORE all other Things; this is the divine Command, seek first the Kingdom
of Heaven, and all other Things shall be added unto you, as this Concern has a
Priority of Dignity and Importance to all others, it consequently deserves a
Priority of Order and Time in our Labors and Pursuits.

2. WITH Importunity, it is our Duty to endeavor to take the Kingdom of Heaven
by Violence and Force; our Lord enjoins us to strive to enter in at the
straight Gate, the original Word is Agonize, and this Precept is enforced by
the following Reason, for many shall seek to enter, and shall not be able:
SALVATION, my Brethren, above all other Things, deserves our most anxious
Inquiries, and earnest Labors; O! if we were wounded in Heart, with the
Apostle Peter's Hearers, we would enquire as they did, what shall we do to be
saved? And,

3. HUMBLY; a Blessing is pronounced by our Lord ( Mat. 5.) upon such as are
poor in Spirit; and that for this Reason, because theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven; to this Man will I look, says the Almighty by the Prophet, who is
poor, and of a contrite Spirit, and trembles at my Word.

4. PENITENTLY bewailing our Offenses, and forsaking of them; let the wicked
Man forsake his Way, and the unrighteous Man his Thoughts, and let him turn
unto God, and he will have Mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will
abundantly pardon; and except ye repent, says the Lord Jesus Christ, ye shall
all likewise perish.

5. BELIEVINGLY; he that comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is a
rewarder of those that unfeignedly seek him: None will make God their Refuge,
unless they believe he exists and is gracious; and hence the Enemy, to prevent
the Flight of awakened Sinners to God in Christ, endeavors to persuade some of
them, that there is no GOD, no CHRIST, or that he is severe and unwilling to
help and save them; Lord if thou will, thou can make me clean.

6. YOUNG Persons should seek perseveringly; they ought to continue seeking
till they obtain, else all their Labor is lost, and their Souls to boot; some
seem to run for a while, but are by-and-by hindered; they begin in the Spirit,
but end in the Flesh: The Almighty complains of the People of Israel, in moving
Language, upon this Account; O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah,
what shall I do unto thee? for thy Goodness is as the Morning Cloud, and as the
early Dew, that soon passes away: It is the End that crowns the Scene; if any
Man draw back, says the Almighty, my Soul shall have no Pleasure in him; O then
let us run so that we may obtain!

7. REGULARLY; pray begin at the right End, and try to lay the Foundation of
Conversion first, before ye pretend to build the Superstructure of Holiness in
Life; the Building will stand the firmer, when the Foundation is well laid
Stabit opus melius, si been fixa Easis.
, ye should search your Wounds by the Law, before ye attempt to get them healed
by the Balm of Gilead; ye should first use proper Means to get the Tree planted
in Christ, before ye expect it will bring forth Fruit to God; nor dream that a
Thorn will bring forth Grapes, or a Thistle Figs; seeing that a corrupt Tree
cannot bring forth good Fruit, be entreated therefore,

1. TO examine your State toward GOD, and that speedily, impartially, and
thoroughly, in order to find out whether ye are justified by the Blood of
Christ, and regenerated by his Spirit; it will signify nothing to Salvation, to
reform the Life, to cleanse the Outside of the Cup and Platter, while the
Inside is overlooked, the Foundation neglected, or supposed to be good without
sufficient Grounds; for all that is built upon a bad Bottom, will come down one
Time or other; see to it therefore, that the Foundation be good, or ye do
nothing to Purpose in Religion: For our LORD positively declares, that except
our Righteousness exceeds that of the Scribes and Pharisees, we shall in no
Case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven (Mat. 5.20.) and we are elsewhere
enjoined to examine ourselves particularly as to the State of our SOULS, 2 Cor.
13.5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the Faith; prove your own selves;
know ye not that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates.

2. JUDGE your selves, that ye be not judged, i. e. in order to prevent the
Condemnation of God, condemn your selves so far as there is Ground for it; and
that not only in respect of your Thoughts, Words, and Actions, but of your
State; this is the Root of the Tree, to which the Ax must be laid; this must be
hewn down before another Foundation be formed, which will not fail you in
Extremity; what will it avail to suffer a deceived Heart to turn you aside, to
feed upon Ashes, and go to ruin with a Lie in your Right Hand? it is foolish
and vain to say, you are rich, and increased in Goods, while you are poor and
miserable, and blind and naked; and yet this, alas for it, is a common Case:
For as SOLOMON observes, there is a Generation that are pure in their own Eyes,
and yet are not cleansed from their Filthiness; there is a Way that seems right
to a Man, the End whereof is the Ways of Death,

HOWEVER you may flatter your selves, the great GOD will judge according to
Truth; pray is it not better to know the worst of your Condition, while there
is an Opportunity to get it remedied? it is not enough to acknowledge you are
Sinners, or to fear you are unconverted, but you must know it, and feel its
Miseries, before you are healed.

IF I ask you, pray how is it between God and your Souls? are you justified or
not? are you converted or not? perhaps you will answer with an Air of
Indifference, I do not know; how, not know what is of the greatest Consequence
for you to know of any Thing else? without this you do not know whether you
should be comforted or terrified, or how to pray or praise, or do any other
Duty of Religion; for you know not what to pray for, or what to be thankful
for: If your State is good, you need the Comfort of it in a World of Change and
Misery, and if bad, to be affected with a View of the Dangers of it, that so
you may prize the Redeemer, and seek him in earnest; for the Whole need no
Physician, but the Sick; the Want of this Knowledge, makes all your religious
Labors, a kind of Chance-medley, a By-business, a Matter of mere Form and
Compliment, that are never like to answer a valuable End; no! by these
ignorant, lukewarm, random Performances, you are like to fix your selves on a
false Bottom, to your utter Ruin!

IF your State could not be known by you, you would have some APOLOGY; but the
Case is not so, it may be known; the Almighty has inserted many Characters of a
Work of Grace in his Word, by which he commands you to try your selves; but you
are either so lazy, that you do not care to be at the Pains to enquire, or
afraid that if you did, you would be uneasy; well, what if you was uneasy for a
little Time, in order to your obtaining true rest, is not this better than to
be eternally tormented in Hell? your Reason must say yes, why then do you act
the Contrary? you take it for granted, either before Trial, or after a very
partial, superficial one, that your Foundation is right, nor do you desire
Assistance in your Inquiries, no you think because you are Fools and blind,
that you have Knowledge enough your selves, to determine that important Point,
upon which your eternal ALL turns; but if you were awakened out of your Sleep,
and saw your Ignorance, Vileness, and the Worth of your Souls, as Peter's
Hearers, and the Jailer did, you would enquire of others, who could direct you,
what you should do to be saved, and that with great Anxiety! as to your Bodies
when in Danger, you will consult a Physician, and a Lawyer about your Estates,
and why so, but because you love and value them? but the Salvation of your poor
SOULS, is a mere Trifle in your Esteem, and therefore you can take that upon
Trust any how! a Proof of which is, your being without any considerable
Uneasiness about them, for Weeks, Months, nay Years; though you do not know
whether you are justified or condemned, cursed or blessed, Children of GOD, or
of the Devil, bound for Heaven or Hell: This, without any other Evidence,
proves to your Faces, that you are in the Gall of Bitterness and Bond of
Iniquity, because you are Flesh; but to bring the Matter to a Point, you may
certainly conclude your State is damnable. If

1. YOU build your Hopes of Happiness upon the uncovenanted Mercies of GOD, you
cannot with Reason expect Salvation merely because of God's MERCY, without
complying with the Terms upon which it is proposed; for if so, the Truth of God
would fail, which is impossible; the God of Mercy has positively declared, that
except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish; that he that believes not,
shall be damned, and that except ye be born again, ye cannot see the Kingdom of
God; or upon the Death of Christ unapplied, unless ye receive Christ and his
Benefits, by that Faith which purifies the Heart, works by Love to GOD and Man,
and overcomes the World, i. e. makes us victorious over the Pleasures, and
Enjoyments of the World, he will no more save us, than Bread uneaten will
nourish a human Body. It is equally vain and destructive to build your Hopes of
Happiness upon the good Opinion of others, or upon outward religious
Privileges, for many who have a Name to live, are dead, and neither
Circumcision or Uncircumcision will avail any Thing, but the new Creature: Nor
is it to any good Purpose, to depend on such Stirrings of Affection, or
Resolutions, as are not followed with an inward Change of the Temper of the
Heart, and a holy Life (Joh. 3.6. 1 Pet. 2.7. Cant. 8.5. Heb. 12.14.) it is
equally perilous to build your Hopes of Happiness upon your own Righteousness,
viz. that you neither mean or do any Body any Harm, that you are better than
you have been, better than many others, and do as God enables you, these are
the Pharisees Grounds ( Luke 18.11.15.) nor is it true, that you do all that
God enables you, you might pray more, and strive more many Ways than you do,
and therefore you build your Hopes upon Falsehood, O awful! and pray remember,
that such as are of the Works of the Law, as ye are, are under the Curse (Gal.
3.10.)

WELL, but perhaps you will acknowledge that such as have no evangelical
Repentance, no saving Faith, shall perish; and that you yourselves want them,
and yet if I immediately ask you again, what if you die this very Day, in the
same State you acknowledge yourselves to be in without a Change, where will
your Souls go? you will tell me in the same Breath, you do not know; (this
answer I have had from many, and therefore I may well speak it) what don't you
know that CHRIST speaks the Truth, when he says, you shall be damned? But I
hope for Mercy; how, against the Truth of GOD, then you hope he will prove a
Liar to save you, that is, cease to be God, for he cannot be a God unless he be
true to his Word? see what Nonsense and Blasphemy you build your Hopes of
Heaven upon; alas, for a miserable, infatuated World!

2. YOU may conclude your State to be bad, if you have not been slain by the Law,
to all Dependence upon your Obedience to it, for Justification before God; I
through the Law, says the Apostle, am dead to the Law, that I might live unto
God.

3. IF the Gospel of Christ has not been opened and applied to you by the Holy
Spirit, so as to approve cordially of this PLAN of Salvation, thirst after the
Mediator, consent to embrace him in all his Offices, as the Gift of God, and
depend upon him entirely for Salvation.

4. IF, in Consequence of this, you have not been brought to Fellowship with
God in the Duties of Religion, i. e. to receive Light, and Life, and Sweetness
from him, and in return to yield yourselves and your All to his Service, with
Admiration, Love, Gratitude, and Resolution, to cleave to him and his Ways to
the Death.

5. IF you are not spiritual and holy in the Bent and general Frame of your
Hearts and Spirits ( John. 3.6.)

6. IF you Love not God for his Holiness, the Beauty of his Nature (as the
Seraphims do, Is. 6.) and his Law, and People, for the same Reason.

7. IF you do not honestly Labor to forsake your Constitution Sins, and to be
holy in all Manner of Conversation ( Mat. 18.8.9.)

8. IF you are not fully determined to forsake Father and Mother, and lose
Name, Estate, and Life for Christ's Sake, and much more to forsake your wicked
Companions ( Mat. 10.37, 38. Prove. 13.20.)

NOW such as find their State to be bad, by these Things I have mentioned, and
yet are secure, I advise and entreat them to meditate upon their Disease and
Danger, a View of which, is most likely to awake and affect them. O consider,
Sirs, you are under the Guilt of the Sin of Adam, in breaking the first
Covenant, and hence it is said, that we are by Nature Children of Wrath (Ephesians.
2.) and that in him all have sinned (Romans 5.12.) ye are exceedingly corrupted
in Heart there are in your Nature an Enmity against God, and continual
Contrariety to all the Precepts of the moral Law, which being constantly in
you, are a Breach of the whole moral Law every Moment; O shocking Thought!
being corrupted Trees, all your Thoughts, Words, and Actions, natural, civil,
and sacred, are more or less sinful, all of them in respect of Form, and many
of them in respect both of Matter and Form; how vast then must the Number of
your Transgressions be? you are guilty of innumerable Neglects of Duty to God,
to Man, and to yourselves? you are accessory to many Sins of others, either by
Neglect of Instruction and Counsel, or by bad Example, or by both, your SINS
are heightened by the Light and Love you have opposed; for hereby God's
Authority and Grace are in a greater Degree contemned. You have in some respect
brought the Guilt of Christ's Blood upon you, crucified him afresh, by behaving
unbecoming your Profession of him, and by slighting his dying Love; now if he
that despised Moses 's Law died without Mercy, of how much sorer Punishment,
suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under Foot the Son of
God (Heb. 10.28, 29.) how shall ye escape, if ye neglect so great Salvation?
this is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and Men love
Darkness rather than Light, because their Deeds are Evil.

AS to your Danger it is inexpressible and amazing, you are condemned by the
Law, because you have broke it, and by the Gospel because you have not complied
with its Terms: Because you say you shall have Peace, though you add
Drunkenness to Thirst, therefore all the Curses of the Book of God are upon you
(Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20.) because you speak Peace, Peace to yourselves, without
Foundation, therefore sudden Destruction shall come upon you, as Travail upon a
Woman with Child, and ye shall not escape; if you persist in your Impiety, the
Almighty will meet you as a Lion or a Bear bereaved of her Whelps, and rent the
Caul from your Hearts! Jehovah pronounces a Woe upon you that are settled on
your Lees, and declares, that he will punish you, while the Goods are in Peace,
the strong Man armed posesses you, you are poor, blind; miserable and naked,
without God, without Hope, without the Covenants of Promise, and upon the very
Brink of Ruin! O think frequently and closely upon Death, Judgment, and the
Torments of Hell: How will ye be able to bear the Sting of Death, and ye know
not how soon ye may be exposed thereto (for in the Midst of Life you are in
Death) O! it is dreadful to have no God to go to, when you turn your Faces to
the Wall, and bid adieu to all your Friends and Enjoyments here; how can ye
endure the Terrors of the last Judgment, when universal Nature shall dissolve
in Flames and Agonies, and be reduced to a Funeral Pile! when you will have no
Friend in Heaven, or Earth, to help you in your Distress, how will ye be able
to look the great Judge in the Face, whose Eyes will be as Flames of Fire, and
his Voice as the Sound of many Waters; when the Heavens and Earth shall flee
from him, and the Great shall cry to the Rocks and Mountains to cover them from
the Lamb that sits on the Throne! what inutterable Anguish will the pronouncing
of your final Sentence produce in your guilty Bosoms, which are now stupid and
senseless as Stones, as Adamants? go ye accursed into everlasting Burnings
prepared for the Devil and his Angels; remember, that Tophet is prepared of old
for you, and that the Wrath of God as a Stream of Brimstone does kindle it; how
can ye endure that devouring Fire, these everlasting Burnings? O consider that
all your past Time, as well as your present is lost, the Word of God is a
Savor of Death unto Death, yea all your Blessings are accursed, and be
entreated to pray earnestly to God to awaken you: But if awakened, flee to
JESUS who is a hiding Place from the Wind, and a Covert from the Tempest, as
Rivers of Waters in a dry Place, and the Shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land.

BUT why should Persons seek GOD in Youth? I answer,

1. God commands it; remember thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth, before the
evil Days come, in which thou will say thou have no Pleasure; and indeed he has
a Right to command it, in Point of Equity, Reason, and Gratitude; for he has
made us, and not we ourselves, we are the People and Sheep of his Pasture, his
absolute Property; and should he not be served by the Works of his Hands? shall
a Man plant a Vinegard, and not Eat of the Fruit of the Vineyard? Besides he is
the highest Excellency, and therefore it is but reasonable, he should be first
loved, and served; and indeed Gratitude confirms the former claims; we are
bound by the Ties of innumerable and invaluable Benefits, preserving,
providing, and redeeming Goodness, to give to God the first of our Love and
Service, which if we decline, we are guilty of the greatest Injustice, Madness
and Ingratitude possible.

2. THE Almighty graciously encourages serving him in young Years; those that
seek me early, shall find me; find me to be their Father, Friend, and Portion,
their everlasting All in All! I will be a Sun to enlighten them in Darkness, a
Shield to protect them in Dangers, and their exceeding great Reward: In this
Argument, your greatest and highest Interest is deeply concerned, which should
have Weight with you, as you profess yourselves to be rational Creatures, and
have the Shape of such.

3. THE more early ye seek God, the more Glory you will bring to his Name, the
more Service you are like to do to his Kingdom among Men, and the clearer
Evidence you will have of your own Sincerity, by turning from Sin in its
Strength: And what greater Motives of Action is it possible to suggest to
inteligent Beings? what can be more noble, than to manifest the Honor of the
most excellent MAJESTY? (the Scope at which he himself aims in all his Works)
what more amiable and benevolent, than to promote the endless Happiness of
immortal Spirits, and that, not only by Words, but by Actions, which have
greater Energy? for the Proverb is just, and verified by innumerable Instances,
that Precepts instruct, but Examples constrain Precepto Docent, exempla cogunt.
, and what can be more comfortable to us, than a Conciousness of our Interest
in the invaluable and perpetual Friendship of the Deity? if these grand
Incentives have no Influence on our Minds, we are lost to all Sense of Honor,
Benevolence, and Interest; we are sunk beneath our Species, into the most
stupid Sort of BRUTES, and have nothing Human left but the Form!

4. AS early Religion is amiable and condecent, like Blossoms in the Spring
Season; so the blessed God is best able to Reward your early Services, in this
and a future World, and will certainly do it: The Degrees of our Happiness
after this Life expires, will be Commensurate to the Degrees and Duration of
our Services and Sufferings in it; and indeed you never will have true Comfort,
till you give your Hearts to God: For he is the Fountain of living Waters, and
Creatures are but broken Cisterns; he is the Substance, and they but fleeting
Shadows, that deceive our Hopes, and fly from our Embraces.

5. THERE is great Danger in Delays, you may for what you know hereby lose your
Souls for ever, and pray what can Balance this Loss? by Delays your Hearts
which are at present hard enough, will be every Day more hardened, the Holy
Spirit more grieved, and Satan's Temptations strengthened; and of Consequence
there will be less and less Probability of your ever turning to God; affecting
Thought! if you wilfully persist in Sin, in Opposition to all the Warnings and
Entreaties you enjoy, the blessed Spirit may soon be provoked to leave you, and
then you are undone for ever! he will not always strive with Man, for that he
also is Flesh: Sunk in Sensuality and Sin ( Genesis 6.3.) O think frequently and
seriously upon these dreadful Words of God ( Hos. 4.17.) Ephraim is joined to
Idols, let him alone (Rev. 22.11.) he that is unjust, let him be unjust still;
and he which is filthy, let him be filthy still; (Ezekiel. 24.13.) in thy
Filthiness is Lewdness; because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged,
thou shall not be purged from thy Filthiness any more, till I have caused my
Fury to rest upon thee. Your Lives are extremely uncertain, you may be slain by
some Accident, or berieved of your Reason in Sickness, if not, you may want
Time, and a Heart to seek God in your expiring Moments; but if you were sure of
both, it would be disingenuous to delay; we beseech you therefore, that ye
would not receive the Grace of God in vain, for behold now is the accepted
Time, behold now is the Day of Salvation; O call upon God while he is near, and
seek him while he may be found; lest, with Esau, ye seek with Tears, when it is
too late to obtain the Blessing; to Day, if ye will hear his Voice, harden not
your Hearts, lest the righteous GOD swear in his Wrath, that ye shall not enter
into his Rest: How dismal was the Case of Saul, when the Philistine-Host came
upon him, and God had forsaken him, and would answer him no more, either by
Urim or by Thummim; and is not the dreadful PARALLEL of this, like to be the
FATE of DELAYING SINNERS, in a short Season?

DEAR young People and Children! I entreat you in the Name and Bowels of the
Lord JESUS CHRIST, to seek GOD early, if you desire to find him, or be found of
him: Others have, witness Josias and Timothy, and why should not you? your
Souls are as precious, and you are at least under equal Engagements, what Harm
would it do you to be soon safe and happy? to have God for your Friend and
Father; the little Difficulties you might be exposed to on a religious Account,
would be infinitely over-balanced by the Love of God, and eternal Life! O then
taste and see that God is good! O be persuaded to seek him in earnest, without
delay; there would be Joy in Heaven, at your Conversion to the divine Majesty,
and Joy among the People of GOD on Earth: O how would your poor Parents Hearts
(if pious) rejoice, on this blessed Occasion; and indeed, this would make my
Heart, even mine, glad! I earnestly beseech you therefore, in the Name of my
dear Master, that you would awake out of your Sleep, haste ye, escape for your
Lives to the dear Redeemer, lest divine Vengeance overtake you, and ye perish
for ever! I entreat you by all the Sufferings of the SON of GOD, by all the
Happiness of HEAVEN, and by all the inutterable and eternal Torments of Tophet,
that burning fiery Furnace, that you would not put me off with a Denial or
Delay, which is the same in Effect: O! is there not one Youth, one Child among
you all, who is ready to say with the Prodigal, I will arise and go to my
Father, and say unto him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and in thy
Sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy Child, make me as one of thine
hired Servants? If any of you are not yet convinced, or but superficially
convinced, O awake and arise from the Dead, that Christ may give you Life; what
meanest thou, O Sleeper, arise, call upon thy God, if so he be will pity thee,
that thou perish not? Labor to get your Convictions deeply fixed in your
Minds, by frequent and serious Meditation upon the manifold and awful Miseries
of your present State; you should be often pondering wherever you are, Night
and Day, O what shall become of my poor Soul? if I die in my present Condition,
I shall certainly be undone for ever; alas, I am unconverted, under the
Condemnation, the Curse, and Wrath of God! all my Time and Talents hitherto
have been lost, and in vain; what are all the Honors, Profits, and Pleasures
of the World to me, if I lose my Soul? O! I had better never have been born;
others take pains about Salvation, and why should not I? how do I know but I
may die this Day, this Hour, and if I do (as I am) all is over with me for
ever! O Lord, have Mercy upon me, open my Eyes, forgive my Sins, and change my
Heart, for Christ's Sake; O how dreadful is it to be eternally damned! O! Sirs,
consider how dismal the Consequences of Conviction expiring before Conversion
will be, this is like Blossoms being nipt before the Fruit are set, it would be
better for such that they had not known the Way of Righteousness, than after
they have known it, to depart from the Holy Commandment, and with the Sow that
was washed, to return to wallowing in the Mire; the latter End with those, is
worse than the Beginning (2 Pet. 2) such as relapse after Conviction, Sin
against greater Light and Mercy, and therefore their Impieties are much
heightened, their Consciences seared as with a hot Iron, and the Spirit of God
quenched, there is therefore much less Hopes of their Conversion than before
they were awakened, for now they are possessed with Seven Devils (Mat. 12.44,
45.)

TO prevent APOSTASY, before you make any Profession of Religion, pray count
the Cost upon the one Hand, and the Reasonableness and Advantages of it upon
the other; and remember that our Lord himself has told you, that if you will be
his Disciples, you must bear his Cross, i. e. not only resolve to endure it
when it comes in the Way of Duty, with Patience, Fortitude, and Cheerfulness,
but actually do so, without meanly shrinking on Account of any Danger
whatsoever; you must go without the Camp to Christ, bearing his Reproach,
forsake the dearest Relations, if they unreasonably oppose your pious Progress,
and not count even your Lives dear to yourselves, that you may finish your
Course with Joy, and not with Grief; upon lower Terms you cannot, in very Deed,
be the Disciples of the holy JESUS.

AND, O let such as are wounded with a Sense of Sin, be entreated to believe in
the Lord Jesus Christ, and they shall be saved: However great and many your
Iniquities be, believe that Jesus is the Son of God, coequal and coeternal
with his Father, able to save to the uttermost all that come to the Father by
him, and that such as do come to him, he will in no wise cast out: Reject
immediately all other Refuges, renounce all other Lords and Lovers, and believe
that JESUS of Nazareth, is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, every way
qualified to relieve you; commit your weary, wounded SOULS into his Hands,
submit to the Terms of his Gospel (viz. Self-denial, taking up the Cross, and
following of him) be willing to be instructed, ruled, and saved by him; depend
entirely on his Mediation, and give him all the Glory of your Salvation; in
this Way you may humbly hope, that he that has wounded you, will heal you, and
that he who has smitten you, will bind you up. AMEN.

SERMON V.
EZEKIEL. 33.11. Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil Ways.


THESE Words contain an important Entreaty, in which the following Particulars
are contained, viz. the AUTHOR, the OBJECT, the MATTER, and MODE. The AUTHOR of
this Entreaty, is the ever blessed GOD; he it is who invites Sinners to turn
from the Evil of their Ways, his Authority over us is absolute and
unquestionable, having made us by his Power, and to him we are under infinite
Obligations, in Point of Reason and Gratitude, because of his supreme Eminence
and Perfection, and the innumerable, invaluable, and immerited Benefits we have
received from him, among which this ENTREATY is one, which is calculated to
promote not his, but our Benefit, for our Goodness does not extend to him, nor
is it any Gain to God that we are righteous. The OBJECT of the Entreaty, is
more immediately and expressly the House of Israel, but indirectly and virtually
all unregenerate Persons of every Age and Nation; for what was written before
Time, was written for our Learning, upon whom the Ends of the World are come;
though the People of Israel professed God's Name, and were outwardly devoted to
his Service; yet many of them had a Temper and Conduct very unsuitable thereto,
and alas, this is the woeful Case of many among us. The MATTER of this
Entreaty, is that they would turn from their evil Ways: The Term is
metaphorical, and alludes to the Posture of Bodies, when it is the very reverse
of what it should be; and therefore serves to represent our Apostasy from God,
as well as the Necessity of our Endeavors after a Change, and the Usefulness
of those Endeavors to obtain it. By our Revolt from the Allegiance due to our
Creator and Sovereign, we have contracted such a Degeneracy, that while
unconverted, we are,

1. DESTITUTE of all spiritual Good, there is no Principle of it in us; in my
Flesh, says the Apostle, there dwells no good Thing; now Christ assures us,
that he that is born of the Flesh, is Flesh; that is corrupted, for there our
Lord opposes Flesh to Spirit: Farther, the God of Truth declares, that the
natural Man is not sick and weak, as the Arminians tell us, but dead; and hence
Conversion is said to be a Quickening or Resurrection of the Dead; us has he
quickened, says the Apostle to the Ephesians, even when we were dead in Sins;
and elsewhere this blessed Change is compared to the Creation of the WORLD; we
are created in Christ Jesus to good Works; now in a dead Man there is not the
least Spark of Life, and before the Creation there was no Matter.

2. IGNORANT of spiritual Good; for we are born stone blind, as well as stark
dead (Rev. 3.17.) because thou say I am rich, and know not that thou art
wretched, and poor, and blind (1 Cor. 2.14.) the natural Man receives not the
Things of the Spirit of God, for they are Foolishness unto him, neither can he
know them, because they are spiritually discerned. Natural Persons are the
blind People that have Eyes, who call Good, Evil, and Evil, Good; the Light
that is in them is Darkness; and hence they are called Darkness in the very
Abstract, as if they were wholly made up of it ( Ephesians. 5.8.) for ye were
sometime Darkness: In this thick Egyptian Darkness; they know not what they are
doing, or where they are going, and are every Moment in Danger of stumbling
into Death and Ruin before they are aware; and yet poor miserable Souls, they
imagine they are Something, when indeed they are Nothing; and that they know
Something, whereas they know Nothing as they ought, and as they must, if ever
they be saved; their Haughtiness must be pulled down, and they made to know to
their Sorrow that they are FOOLS, else they never will be wise.

3. NATURAL Men are utterly impotent, or unable to do any spiritual Good, or in
other Words, what is pleasing to God; without Faith, the Apostle Paul assures
us, we cannot please God, but this natural Men have not; without me, says
Christ, ye can do nothing; now this is the Case of all the Unregenerate, they
have no vital Union to Christ by Faith, otherwise their State and Temper would
be changed; the same Point of Truth the Apostle farther confirms, Romans 5.6. for
when we were yet without Strength, in due Time Christ died for the Ungodly; see
all the Unconverted are ungodly Persons, and without Strength; again seeing
Conversion is a Quickening of the Dead, a new Creation, then it unavoidably
follows, that natural Men and Women can no more do spiritual Good, than a dead
Man can break open his Coffin and walk, or than Nothing can create a World:
Give me Leave to add the Words of our Savior, Mat. 7.18. neither can a corrupt
Tree bring forth good Fruit, and Luke 6.44, 45. for off Thorns Men do not
gather Figs, nor off a Bramble Bush gather ye Grapes: What Christ speaks in
these Verses, evidently relates to the State of the Person; a Person is a good
Tree, in the Sense of our Savior* when he is justified and converted, for then
he is reconciled to God, and has a good Principle of Action communicated, and
being thus made a Friend of God, and having a holy Principle, whatever he does
agreeable to the divine Law, is pleasing to God, through Christ; but before
this, every Man is an Enemy to God, a dead Man, a corrupt Tree, a Thorn, a
Bramble-bush, a Thistle, and therefore cannot bring forth good Fruits, no more
than these can bring forth Grapes and Figs; and yet natural People are puffed
up with a Conceit of their Power, as well as of their Wisdom, they think they
can do great Matters, and upon this false Notion, they Sleep in their Sins,
they secretly imagine that they can do Something at any Time, that shall make
their Salvation certain, and therefore they are easy about the Matter; they
think the ALMIGHTY would be very severe, if he would reject such good Sort of
People as they are, and such pious Works as they do; but, pray remember, that
it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows
Mercy; that we are saved by Grace, not of ourselves, it is the Gift of God, and
that before Conversion, your Works are dead Works, your Grapes wild Grapes, ye
are Enemies to God, dead People, wicked; and therefore all you do, even your
very Prayers, are Abomination; you deserve Damnation for the very best Thing
ever you did in your whole Life: There is dreadful Blasphemy in all your
Doings, for you do nothing for God's Sake, but your own, and thus you make
yourselves your last End, and chief Good, and of Consequence your God; O
horrible Blasphemy! and yet upon these dead, filthy, and blasphemous Works, you
venture your eternal All, O shocking! pray be not offended, I speak nothing but
the very Truth in Love, with design to drive you from a Foundation that will
infallibly ruin you, if you abide by it, and to shut you up to Christ, who is
the only Door of Hope: But I know it is a tender Point I speak upon, graceless
Sinners are as fond of dead Works, and make God's of them, as much as the poor
Man did of his Images, and therefore when they are taken away (in respect of
Dependence) they are apt to complain, as he did, they have taken away my Gods,
and what have I more; ah! that may be, that you have no more to trust to, you
have no experimental Religion, no Application of the Law or Gospel, no Faith in
the dear Redeemer, that purifies the Heart, and works by Love; nothing but do,
do, in your blind, dry, dead Manner; and yet it is a Kindness to you to take
away that false Prop, that Egyptian Reed, which if you continue to depend upon,
will mortally Stab you to the Heart; it is this which keeps you from being
rightly humbled, and from believing in JESUS, just like the wicked Jews, who
had a Zeal, but not according to Knowledge, for going about to establish their
own Righteousness, they have not submitted themselves to the Righteousness of
God, (Romans 10.3.)

WHY Sinners do you thus go to the Law for relief? it is a Ministration of
Death, a Letter that kills, it condemns to eternal Death, all that do not
fulfill it perfectly, and yet depend upon Obedience to it for Justification, in
Whole; or in Part, he that offends in one Point, is guilty of all; he that
continues not in all Things is cursed; by the Deeds of the Law therefore, no
Flesh living can be justified in the Sight of God: The Law which was ordained
to Life, in case of perfect Obedience, i. e. was designed to procure eternal
Life upon that Condition, sentences him that breaks it, to Death; for if
Righteousness had come by the Law, i. e. if it might be obtained by Obedience
to the Law, then Christ had died in vain, for if the Case was so, there would
have been no need of his Death; but the Law was weak through the Flesh, i. e.
unable to Justify us by reason of our Corruption, the proper Use of the Law
therefore, in our fallen State, is to be a Schoolmaster, to bring us to
Christ, that we may be justified by Faith in him; to awake us to a feeling of
our Sin, Misery, and Impotency, by its Precepts, and the Scourge of its Curses,
that so we may be constrained to fly to a MEDIATOR, and rely only on his Merits
for this Purpose; it is added to the Promise, and hence when it is applied by
the Spirit, it convinces of Sin, causes it to revive in our View, and all our
false Hopes by it to die, it works Wrath, fills the awakned Transgressor with
reasonable Terror and Dread of the Wrath of God, for it shuts him up under Sin,
and binds him over to eternal Condemnation. But perhaps it may be objected,
that I speak against the Law of GOD. A. No; I only speak against the Abuse of
the Law; the Law is good, if a Man use it lawfully, only as a Rule of Life, and
as a Schoolmaster to bring him to Christ; but if it be used as a Covenant of
Works, it opposes Christ, and kills the Soul. You preach Despair. A. True; but
not of the Mercy of GOD, through a Redeemer by Faith, but of Justification by
the Works of the Law, this is necessary in order to Faith in Christ; we must
through the Law, become dead to the Law, in that Respect, divorced from the Law
as a Husband, before we be married to Christ; till we are slain by the Law, we
will not wholly depend upon the Mediator, and yet without this there is no
Salvation; we cannot have Mercy through a Mediator, unless we buy without
Money, No, this is impossible, while we depend upon the Law in any Degree; you
cannot build a House partly upon Sand, and partly upon a Rock; the Apostle
speaks fully to this, Gal. 5.4. Christ is become of no Effect to you, whosoever
of you are justified by the Law, ye are fallen from Grace: See those who do
depend in the least Degree upon Obedience to the Law, turn their Backs upon
Christ, and his Grace, are Debtors to the whole Law, and therefore Christ shall
profit them nothing: Such self-righteous Pharisees, of which there are
Multitudes under the Gospel, stand upon their own wretched Bottom, and must
answer for their Millions of Trespasses in their own Persons. It is again
objected, that I disparage good Works, and discourage People from doing them.
A. It is a Mistake; those that believe, should be careful to maintain good
Works, for they are good and profitable unto Men; but Works done before Faith
and Justification, are not good (properly speaking) and it is of such, I have
been discoursing: Works may be of manifold use, though they do not justify;
Gold is good, though it cannot be eaten; nor do I discourage from doing them,
but only from depending upon them, which is fatal to the Souls of Men: We
should Labor as though we could be justified by Works, and yet depend no more
upon them, than if we did nothing. Well, but GOD has promised that if we seek,
we shall find. A. It is a Seeking with Faith, which you have not, which that
Promise is made to; you have no Interest in any one Promise in the Bible, for
all the Promises are yea and amen in Christ; i. e. firm to those who are united
to him, but this is not your Case, ye are without God, without the Covenants of
Promise; how can ye have an Interest in the special and saving Privileges of a
Covenant, when ye have not complied with the Terms on which they are suspended,
this is your Case? But to proceed,

4. NATURAL Men are not only distitute of Good, ignorant of it, and impotent,
but they have a fixed implacable SPITE against it, and its AUTHOR, Romans 8.7.
The carnal Mind is Enmity against God, for it is not subject to the Law of God,
neither indeed can be; our Lord says, that he that is born of the Flesh, is
Flesh; and here the Apostle assures us, that the fleshly Mind is Enmity to God;
both the Terms are indefinite, and therefore universal; they plainly declare,
in their Connection, that the Mind of every Man who has only a fleshly Birth is
Enmity, i. e. is possessed of a high Degree of fixed Spite and Malice; for
abstract Terms, express a high Degree of the Thing spoken of: But against whom
have they this Malice? The Apostle assures us it is the glorious God, the
Author of their Beings, and all their Benefits; it is no Wonder then our
Savior asserted that the wicked JEWS hated him, and his Father also, and
called them Serpents, and a Generation of Vipers, and told them to their Faces,
that they were of their Father the Devil, for his Works they would do: What
worse can you say of the Devil himself, than that he is Enmity against God!
what is it but this Enmity that prejudices the Unregenerate against the
Holiness of God and his Laws? they seem to be pleased with Mercy, but they have
a Grudge against his Holiness, and fain would have the Law relaxed; nor do they
like the Strictness of the Gospel Precepts and Discipline; they will not have
the Man Jesus to rule over them, and say, as those Rebels of old, let us break
their Bands asunder, and cast their Cords from us. It is this Enmity that
inclines them to oppose the Work of God's Spirit in themselves and others,
instead of rejoicing in the Conviction and Conversion of Sinners, they try to
ridicule, slander, and blacken it; to such the Words of faithful Stephen, Acts
7.51. may be justly applied, ye stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in Heart and
Ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost: As your Fathers did, so do ye. It is
this also that inclines them to oppose the People of GOD for their Zeal and
Holiness; so Cain persecuted Abel, because his own Works were evil, and his
Brother's righteous; and indeed in all Ages, he that is born after the Flesh,
persecutes him that is born after the Spirit; if any Man will live godly in
Christ Jesus, he shall suffer Persecution; the World shall hate you, says
CHRIST, because ye are not of it: But the Wicked will not own this, that they
oppose any for their Goodness, O no! it is for some Thing bad, they
hypocritically and falsely pretend, but why then? are not they angry with their
own Crew! O no; they are too near akin! Appologies must be made for them, and
Bearskins put on others: If you will believe Persecutors in every Age, there
never was any such Thing as Persecution upon Earth; and yet it is certain, that
the more holy and useful any Person is, the more he will be hated! and the more
he comes into the Spirit of the World, the more he will be liked ( John 15.19.)
but if the Unregenerate have no Spite against those that are good, why do they
watch so much for their Halting, and why are they pleased at it secretly, and
spread it among their own Company, and why do they charge the whole, with the
Faults of some? but besides this Malice against the glorious God, with which
the Unregenerate are as full as a Snake of Poison. They are,

5. PRONE to all Evil; the Seed and Root of which is in them; as Solomon
observes, Foolishness is bound in the Heart of a Child; it is true there is not
an equal Proneness in all to every Sin; for some by reason of their natural
Temper, Manner of Education, or Custom, are inclined to one Sin, and others to
other Sins, yet all Men are by Nature virtually disposed to all Kinds of Sin;
we are prone to Evil, as the Sparks fly upward; every Sin is formed in our
corrupt Nature, and hence it is called the old Man, the Body of Death, to show
not only its Subtilty and Strength, but that it is complete in its Parts; they
only want Time, Opportunity, Temptation, and the Removal of restraining Grace,
to bring those frozen Snakes to Life and active Fury, and then the Sinner
rushes into the most dreadful Evils ever the Creation saw, with brutish
Violence, as the Horse to the Battle; and if any of us think we would not
commit them in such a Situation, we are like Hazael, ignorant of ourselves;
when the Prophet told him what Barbarity he would commit when made King, he
replied with Indignation, is thy Servant a Dog, that he should do this Thing;
but he did it for all, when advanced: The Blamelesness of some of the
Unregenerate, is (in Comparison) but a sorry Husk, a selfish Skin; like that of
a Rattle-Snake, proceeding not from Love to God, or Regard to his Authority,
no; but from low, selfish Considerations, such as to procure and preserve
Credit among Men, to make their own Consciences easy, and to Purchase, in a
Hackney-way, the Favor of God, by such Truck; and likewise from the want of
Opportunity, Temptation, and the like, otherwise they would run to all Excess
of Riot: Verily, the best of them are but whited Sepulchers, beautiful
outwardly, but within, full of dead Men's Bones, Rottenness and all Uncleanness.

BUT the Matter of the Entreaty, in our Text, turn ye, not only serves to
represent our Apostasy and Corruption, which I have discoursed of: But,

2. THE Necessity of our Endeavors after a Change; the Almighty Addresses us
as intelligent Creatures, though we have no spiritual Life while unconverted,
yet we have natural Reason, and this should be used in the Matters of Religion;
though we cannot do what is spiritually good, yet we may do what is morally so;
though we cannot change our Hearts, yet we may lament our want of a Change, we
may with Seriousness and Frequency ask it of God, ponder upon the Miseries of
such a State, attend upon public Worship, and other outward Duties. And,

3. THESE Endeavors, when we do not trust in them, are useful; for hereby we
obey God's positive Command, strive to enter in at the straight Gate, and
hereby we put ourselves in the Way in which he ordinarily communicates Mercy to
Mankind, Is. 55.7. let the wicked Man forsake his Way: Though we cannot merit
God's Favor by them, or entitle ourselves to any Promise of it, or any way
ascertain our future Happiness by any Goodness of ours, which while
unregenerate (especially) is as filthy Rags, yet in this way there is a
Paradventure of Mercy, Acts 8.22. Repent therefore of this thy Wickedness, and
pray God, if perhaps, the Thought of thine Heart may be forgiven thee? But how
is this Duty to be done? Answer,

1. WE should turn to GOD universally, young and old, Male and Female, White
and Black, Bond and Free, Learned and Unlearned, Rich and Poor, Jer. 25.5. Turn
ye again, every one from his evil Way, and dwell in the Land.

2. SINCERELY, affectionately, and thoroughly, with the whole Heart, with deep
Sorrow for our Sins, in the mean Time, forsaking all our Iniquities, in
Affection and Practice, and turning to all commanded Duty, and to God in Duty;
Joel 2.11, 12, 13. Turn ye even to me, with all your Heart, and with Fasting,
and with Weeping, and with Mourning. The Term from which we are to turn, is our
evil Ways, i. e. such Iniquities as we have made ours by evil Custom, all our
evil Ways without excepting any, no not our Constitution Sin, that Achan must
be slain, that right Eye must be plucked out, or we ruined; nor is it enough to
forsake the outward Practice of Sin, while it is loved and indulged in our
Hearts, no all such are base Pharisees and Hypocrites, whose Righteousness we
must exceed on Pain of Damnation ( Mat. 5.20.) we cannot turn to God with all
our Hearts, without supreme Love to him; and surely such as love the Lord, hate
Evil; the Term to which we come in this Motion, is GOD himself, and all Duty
enjoined only as the Way to him; he is the supreme Scope of our Motions, and
the Rest of our Souls.

3. WE should turn to the Lord speedily, without a Moment's Delay, Jer. 18.
from the 7th, to the 12th Verse; at what Instant I shall speak concerning a
Nation, to pluck up, pull down, and destroy it; if that Nation turn from their
Evil, I will repent of the Evil I thought to do unto them; behold I frame Evil
against you, and devise a Device against you, return ye now every one from his
evil Way, and make your Ways and your Doings good. But the

4. PARTICULAR in the Entreaty is the MODE whereby it is in forced and urged,
and that is an Ingemination or Repetition, Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil
Ways. To affect the Souls of stupid Sinners, the Almighty swears, entreats, and
expostulates. O! such Condescension and Importunity, is enough to melt a Rock;
strange to see the God of infinite Majesty, make such humble Court to
rebellious, ungrateful, and worthless Creatures, and stranger still if posible,
to behold with what Indifference and Slight, they treat all the amazing,
endearing Condescensions of this majestic Grace and Love, in which their own
everlasting Interest is infinitely concerned! Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil
Ways. This Ingemination is doubtless used to signify the absolute CERTAINTY,
and inexpressible MOMENT of the DUTY here recommended, as well as the Sincerity
and Vehemence of God's DESIRE after Sinners Compliance, and the consequent
HAPPINESS here and for ever! it also represents the astonishing Stupidity of
Sinners, who want so much Importunity to induce them to take Pains about, and
accept of their own eternal, as well as temporal Happiness. O mournful
Infatuation!

SIRS, are we corrupted, as was before observed, then how unreasonable are
Pride and Self-dependance for such ignorant and impotent Creatures, who are,
while unregenerate, not only destitute of all Good, but greatly prejudiced
against it, and the glorious Author of it, and prone to every Evil! and how
extremely Necessary is it to prevent our own and our Nation's Ruin, to turn to
God universally, sincerely, affectionately, thoroughly, and speedily, without a
Moments Delay, from all our evil Ways, and to make our Ways and Doings good. To
excite thereto, pray consider, that Time is a valuable Talent you are enjoined
to Redeem by the highest Authority, and that because the Days are Evil, for
every Moment whereof you are accountable, and pray how will you be able to do
this with Honor or Comfort, if ye continue to squander it away upon TRIFLES!
have ye not already lost too much, in the Service of Sin and Satan? and will ye
notwithstanding lose more? O is it not high Time to awake? is not the present
Time the best adapted to the necessary and noble Purposes of Religion and
Salvation, not only because our Improvement of it is an Act of Obedience to
divine Authority, but likewise it is the only sure Time, and that which with
Propriety may be only called ours; the Time passed is elapsed, and cannot be
recalled, and future Time we may never possess! the longer we continue in Sin,
in case we should be afterward converted, which is not probable, our future
Recompense will be lessened in Proportion; for thus we have less Time to
improve ourselves, or profit others, and the Reward will be accordingly; but
such as do refer the Business of Conversion and Salvation to a future Time,
should, methinks, be sure of that Time, otherwise they run a great Risque, for
a small Reward, and fish with a Hook of Gold; but that they cannot be certain
of, because of the Frailty of our present State: Why then do they boast of
Tomorrow, seeing they know not what a Day may bring forth? The Observation of
Solomon is just, because to every Purpose there is a Time and Judgment,
therefore the Misery of Man is great upon him, for Man knows not his Time; as
Birds that are caught in the Snare, so are the Sons of Men snared in an evil
Time, when it comes suddenly upon them! If we turn early and speedily to God,
it will be a Fund of Comfort, by Reflection in after Time, and riper Years;
this good Hezekiah experienced in his Sickness, when other Comforts failed him,
he could appeal to Jehovah, respecting the Integrity of his Conduct. This
Consciousness of Integrity, likewise supported the Apostles under a crowd of
causeless and cruel CALUMNIES, This is our Comfort, even the Testimony of our
Consciences, that in Simplicity and godly Sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom,
but by the Grace of God, we have had our Conversation in the World; of this
even a Pagan could say, Nil conscire sibi nullave pallesere culpa murus aheneus
esto.

BUT on the Contrary, Continuance in Sin, not only treasures up Wrath against
the Day of Wrath, but makes this Life uncomfortable, and that not only to the
Impenitent, whose Souls are troubled like the Ocean, vexed with a Tempest, and
sometimes sweat with Horror, as the Poet justly observes, Tacita sudant
precordia culpa; but even in the Regenerate, a remembrance of former Impieties,
causes Shame, Confusion, and Self-abhorrence ( Ezekiel. 16.61.) very disagreeable
and distressing Sensations! can we fix upon any Point of future Time, better
suited to obtain Conversion to God than the present, no! for the same, or equal
Hindrances that now obstruct us, will continue, and have greater Influence,
being more indulged; he therefore that defers Endeavors to reform his Life, in
Expectation of a more convenient Season afterward, is, as Horace justly
observes, like the Country Man that waited by the River's Side, till it would
have done running, that he might go over dry Shod! qui recte vivendi porogat
horam, rusticus expectat dum defluat amnis. Is not the Business we have to do
for God, ourselves, and others, great and difficult? and is it not therefore
reasonable to begin it speedily, especially considering that the more we honor
God, promote his Kingdom among Men, and the greater Progress we make in
Holiness ourselves, the more God will honor us, and give us not only more of
his Presence in this Life, but also a more distinguished Crown in the next! the
Causes of deffering Conversion to GOD, such as Ignorance, Inattention,
Cowardice, and Negligence, are a reproach to human Nature, and the Consequences
thereof are always distressing, and often ruining to the Souls of Men!
Alexander's Motto is justly applicable to this Point, which is of the last
Importance; Meden anabolominos, Defer nothing. O SIRS! why will ye continue
doing that which you know you must repent of one Time or other, or be lost for
ever? is this wise and rational, judge ye! is not Turning from Sin even now
difficult enough, why then will ye increase the Difficulty by Delays? Sin, by
its low Gratifications, and fair Promises, gradually seduces the Passions, and
they being seduced, darken the Understanding in its Views of divine Things,
hereby a corrupt Biass undiscernably seizes the leading Faculty of the Soul,
which soon commences Advocate for Error and Vice, and by its sophistical
Reasonings and false Colorings, infeebles the religious Resolutions of the
WILL, and weakens the Influence of CONSCIENCE and natural MODESTY, the Guards
of Virtue, and Monitors to Duty, and thus the unarmed Soul is exposed as an
easy Prey to every Enemy, and at last, by a Course of Sinning, contracts such
an Insensibility, that it sits in the Chair of the Scorners, glories in its
Shame, and refuses to blush.

SERMON VI.
EZEKIEL. 33.11. Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil Ways.


CONVERSION being the Foundation of all practical Holiness, it is therefore of
the last Importance and Necessity to the Children of Men; and Sin having
darkened our Views of its Nature, and rendered us insensible of its Necessity,
it is therefore proper to borrow all the Light that Revelation gives concerning
both, and to this End to attend with Seriousness to the various instructive
Representations, whether metaphorical or proper, contained therein, respecting
this Change, among which this of Turning to God deserves special Notice; but
having considered the Import of this Phrase in the preceding Discourse, to
prevent an Expense of your Time, I shall not resume what has been before
observed, but proceed to show, 1. What Persons may attain to without
Conversion. 2. Speak of what is ordinarily preparatory to this Change. 3.
Explain its Nature. And, 4. Represent its Necessity, to escape eternal Death.


I return to the first proposed, which was, to show what Persons may attain to
without Conversion; this should be attended to with the greatest Earnestness
and Care, for if our Seize in Religion, do not exceed what I shall now
mention, we are certainly in a damnable State, and must assuredly perish if we
die so. And,

1. PERSONS without Conversion may profess Christianity; the foolish Virgins
had Lamps, but no Oil in them, Mat. 25. i. e. they made a specious Profession
of Piety, but had no Grace in their Hearts; it is no very difficult Matter for
Persons of a religious Education, to profess CHRIST in a Christian Country.

2. PERSONS may be sound and orthodox in their doctrinal Sentiments, and yet
remain Strangers to the Power of converting Grace. Judas had undoubtebly this
Attainment, otherwise our Savior would not have sent him to instruct others,
and yet notwithstanding continued a Traitor, and went to his own Place: No
doubt sound Principles are in their Place necessary and valuable, but unless
they suitably influence the Heart and Life, they are insufficient to Salvation;
it is therefore vain to depend upon a Form of Knowledge, and of the Truth in
the Law, while the Heart remains unrenewed ( Romans 2.20.)

3. PERSONS may have great Gifts, in respect of Knowledge and Utterance, and
yet be unconverted, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2. Though I speak with the Tongues of Men, and
of Angels, and have not Charity; I am become as a sounding Brass, and a
tinkling Cymbal; and though I have the Gift of Prophesy, and understand all
Mysteries, and all Knowledge, and have no Charity, I am nothing: Knowledge
attended with true Goodness, is amiable and useful, but without it, renders us
more like DEVILS, who are knowing, but wicked Spirits; sanctified Knowledge is
influential and operative, like the Light of the SUN upon the Earth, but the
other is like the Light of the MOON, cold and ineffectual to what is Good, but
friendly to what is Evil: This Sort of Knowledge, puffs up foolish Sinners with
Self-conceit and Prejudice against the Gospel of Christ, and hence it is said,
that not many wise are called, and that Christ crucified, was to the Jews a
stumbling Block, and to the Greeks Foolishness, for in the Wisdom of God, the
World by Wisdom knew not God.

4. THE Unconverted may enjoy many outward Privileges, which though necessary
and valuable in their Place, are insufficient to Salvation, such as Baptism,
the Lord's Supper, hearing the Word of God, a Name among the Living and pious
Ancestors: It is said of Simon Magus* the Sorcerer, Acts 8.13, 23. that he
believed, and was baptized, and yet remained in the Gall of Bitterness, and
Bond of Iniquity; Luke 13.26, 27. It is natural to graceless People to depend
upon Externals and exceeding fatal; the Jews did so of old, their Cry was, The
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, are these; this the Prophet
Jeremiah faithfully opposed, and told them, they trusted in lying Words, for
says he, if ye thoroughly amend your Ways and your Doings, if ye thoroughly
execute Judgment between a Man and his Neighbor, if ye oppress not the
Fatherless and the Widow, and shed not innocent Blood, neither walk after other
Gods to your Hurt, then will I cause you to dwell in this Place, Jer. 7.4, 8.
and elsewhere, he excites them to that inward Purity, which was signified by
outward Ordinances, and which it was indeed their Design to promote, Jer. 4.4.
and in the 9th Chapter of his Book, and 25th Verse; he puts the circumcised
Jews, who had not what was signified by Circumcision, and did not act up to the
Obligations of it, upon a Par with the uncircumcised Gentiles. The Apostle Paul
speaks the same Language, in his Epistle to the Galatians, 6th Chapter, and
15th Verse, and shows the Insufficiency of Externals, without an inward
RENOVATION, for in Christ Jesus, says he, neither Circumcision avails any
Thing, nor Uncircumcision, but a new Creature; and yet the same Apostle speaks
honorably of Circumcision elsewhere, see Romans 3.1, 2, 3. Though natural Men
are inclined to abuse Externals, by depending upon them, while they in the mean
Time want an inward Renovation, yet it is observable, that the Method the
Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles took in this Case, was not to oppose outward
Ordinances absolutely, and to tear them up by the Roots; but only to oppose a
sinful Dependence on them, and Contentment with them, in want of what they
signify, and oblige to; which indeed is very unreasonable, dangerous, and
destructive, a notorious Perversion of the Design of those Institutions, which
was to represent by outward Symbols, spiritual and special Benefits, and to
engage Persons by solemn covenant Transactions, to seek after those Benefits,
and to live up to them. The Institutions themselves, have an Aptness and
Tendency to promote the Good of Mankind when suitably used; and is not every
Thing valuable abused by some, must they therefore be rejected? then we must do
no good Works at all, either of Justice or Mercy, for many rest upon them in
the Room of Christ; nor must we eat and drink any more, for certainly both Food
and Drink are abused by many: The great Pains that some modern Enthusiasts take
to abolish the Observation of some outward Ordinances entirely, is not
agreeable to the Practice of the Prophets, of CHRIST, and his Apostles, who
were surely as much in Earnest to promote inward Holiness as any of them, and
knew better what Methods to take to compass that End: Their Zeal is without
Knowledge, and disproportioned in Degree to the Importance of Things; for if
the Ordinances they oppose were Mistakes, which they will not easily prove, yet
the bare Observance of them, in case they are not depended on, will not ruin
any. It is, no Doubt, a precious PRIVILEGE, and what we have great Reason to
be thankful for to God, when we descend from pious Progenitors, for oftentimes
a Blessing comes upon the Offspring of such, to the third and fourth
Generation, yet when Persons depend upon this, without imitating their good
Examples, yea, when they go on in a contrary Course of Impiety, it is very
abominable, as our Savior observes; agreeable to which, is the following
excellent Saying of a Pagan, What our Ancestors have nobly done, I cannot call
ours Que (...) et proavi, et que non fecimus ipsi, vix ea nostra ecce.
.

5. THE UNCONVERTED may be RESTRAINED from GROSS IMPIETIES, ABIMELECH, a
HEATHEN, was restrained from commiting Wickedness with Abraham's Wife, Genesis
20.6. as a DOG abstains from a BONE he loves, while the WHIP is held over his
Head, so FEAR of REPROACH among Men, FEAR of the Cognizance of the CIVIL LAW,
or of DISTRESS of CONSCIENCE here, and of ETERNAL PUNISHMENT hereafter, or a
MERCENARY VIEW of recommending themselves to the divine Favor, and not LOVE to
GOD, or GOODNESS, keep the Unregenerate from open and scandalous Impieties;
whereas saving Grace in the Regenerate, subdues Sin at the ROOT, and excites an
implacable HATRED in their Souls against it, 2 Cor. 7.11. agreeable to what has
been said, is the following Distich; Odent pecare mali formidine poene odent
pecare boni virtutis amore.

6. THE UNCONVERTED may attain to strict OUTWARD CONFORMITY to the LAW of GOD,
accompanied with a moral Seriousness; they may with Order and Exactness, for a
long Course of Time, perform the Duties of Prayer, hearing the Word, and
keeping the Sabbath; they may be faithful to their Word, and just in their
Dealings with Mankind, and yet be Strangers to a Change of Heart; in a Word,
they may possess the whole Form and Carcass of Piety, without the Life and
Spirit of it: The Apostle Paul, while a Pharisee, was, as to the Law,
blameless, Philip. 3.6. and the young Man in the Gospel, treated our Lord with
Civility and Respect, was solicitous about the Salvation of his Soul, as well
as desirous to know the Way how to obtain it, he was modest and diffident of
his own Knowledge respecting this, and desirous of Information from one who
could give it, and though he had taken a great deal of Pains to obtain eternal
Life, yet he was willing to take more; an amiable, an extraordinary Character,
and yet he wanted the one Thing needful, converting Grace; his Heart was too
much attached to the present World, to be a sincere Follower of the Lord Jesus,
and therefore he left him sorrowing, Mark 10.17, 22.

7. THE UNCONVERTED may Experience a considerable Change in the several Powers
and Passions of their Souls, and yet remain in the Gall of Bitterness: The MIND
may be in a Degree enlightened by the common Operations of the holy Spirit,
Heb. 6.4, 6. the CONSCIENCE awakened by the Terrors of the LORD, Genesis 4.13, 14.
Acts 24.25. the WILL almost persuaded to embrace true Religion; Acts 26.28, 29.
the AFFECTIONS moved toward divine Objects, e. g. they may DESIRE after
Christ, Grace and Glory, John 6.33, 36. Mat. 25.8. Numb. 23.10. DELIGHT in
Christ, and in the Duties of Religion, Mal. 3.19. Mat. 13.20, 21. Is. 58.2.
they may have some LOVE to God, to his Ministers, and People, Jer. 22.1, 13.
Mat. 10.37. Mark 6.20. Mat. 25.8. some HATRED against Sin, Romans 2.22. great
SORROW for Sin; 1 Kings 21.25, 27. Mat. 27.3, 5. some RESOLUTION to forsake
Sin, and to serve God, Numb. 22.18. Deuteronomy. 5.27. some FAITH in, and Dependence
upon God, and confident PERSUASION of his Favor toward them; John 2.23, 24.
Micah 3.11. John 8.54, 55. some FEAR of GOD, Jonah 1.5. and some ZEAL for God,
2 Kings 10.16. Philip 3.6.

SIRS, if the Case be so, as has been represented in this Discourse, then
CONVERSION is not so slight a Matter, so easy a Business as many imagine; no,
straight is the Gate, and narrow is the Way, that leads to Life, and few there
be that find it: Though the Number of Professors, especially in quiet and
peaceable Times, when Profession costs them little or nothing, be as the Sand
of the Sea, yet but a Remnant will be saved: Christ's Flock is indeed but a
little Flock; there is a Generation that are pure in their own Eyes, and yet
are not cleansed from their Filthiness! O what a Multitude of poor Sinners feed
upon Ashes, and know not that there is a Lie in their Right Hand, the End
whereof is the Ways of Death; surely, the Hope of the Hypocrite shall perish,
and be as one that gives up the Ghost; his Confidence shall be rooted out of
his Tabernacle, and he shall be brought before the King of Terrors! unless our
Experiences in Religion exceed the Seize of Hypocrites before mentioned,
we are corrupt Trees, in the Gall of Bitterness, and (so continuing) shall die
eternally! but instead of exceeding them, how many among us fall far short of
them!

MAY HYPOCRITES PROFESS CHRISTIANITY STRICTLY, as the FOOLISH VIRGINS did? what
then shall become of those who even decline this, and treat the very Name of
SAINT with Sneer and Redicule, the King of the Church expressly determines their
Fate, Mark. 8.38. Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me, or of my Words,
in this adulterous and sinful Generation, of him also shall the Son of Man be
ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of his Father, with the holy Angels.

MAY Persons be SOUND in the DOCTRINES of RELIGION, and yet remain Strangers to
converting Grace! how far then are those from it, who not only slight the
Knowledge, and belief of Christian Principles, but are themselves unsound in
them? Judas, the Traitor, exceeds such; remember that we are commanded to
contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, to be valiant for
the Truth upon the Earth, and to reject Heretics after the first and second
Admonition: Pray remember, in particular, these awful Words of the GOD of
Truth, 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. For this Cause God shall send them strong
Delusion, that they should believe a Lie, that they all might be damned, who
believed not the Truth, but had Pleasure in Unrighteousness!

MAY Persons have great GIFTS in respect of KNOWLEDGE, and yet remain
unconverted! then what will become of those who are grossly, and some of them
willingly ignorant, in the Midst of the Means of Light, of those Things that
are of the greatest Importance to them to know; such as the State of their
Souls, the main Principles of Christianity, the Nature of Faith, Repentance and
Conversion? how far are such from Conversion, which begins in Light and
Knowledge, 2 Cor. 4, 6? See the final Doom of such, denounced by God himself!
Is. 27.11. For it is a People of no Understanding, therefore he that made them,
will not have Mercy on them, and he that formed them, will show them no Favor;
and 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, with his
mighty Angels, in flaming Fire, taking Vengeance on them that know not God, who
shall be punished with everlasting Destruction, from the Presence of the Lord,
and from the Glory of his Power!

MAY PERSONS who are UNCONVERTED, enjoy many outward valuable PRIVILEGES, such
as Baptism, the Lord's Supper, hearing the Word of GOD, etc. Then how sinful
and dangerous is the Practice of such who neglect them? if we are Christians,
why do not we take the Badge of his Desciples upon us, and profess our Relation
to him before Men? are we ashamed of our Master? I am sure we have no Reason;
should we not walk in all the Ordinances of God blameless? when Peter's Hearers
were pricked in their Heart by his Sermon, and inquired what they should do, he
advised them to repent and be baptized, every one of them, Acts 2. and even
those that had received the Holy Ghost, were baptized by the Apostle Peter, and
he plainly signifies, that no Body can, with Reason, oppose this Practice; Acts
10.47. and as to those that are baptized, it is a Sin and a Shame for them to
neglect renewing their Covenant with God at the Table of the Lord; this looks
somewhat like retracting, such are guilty of Rebellion, in disobeying the
Command of Christ, to his visible Desciples, Do this in Remembrance of me, and
of Ingratitude against the dearest Love, in that they show not forth the Lord's
Death; and indeed such are cruel to themselves, in omitting a Mean well adapted
to promote their Benefit; and seeing Faith comes by hearing, the Unkindness,
the Folly, and Cruelty of such, who trifle with Opportunities of this Kind,
cannot easily be expressed! nor will the Punishment due for it be easily
endured; for this, among other Abominations, the righteous GOD now threatens to
take away, all our Privileges at a Stroke! Again,

MAY Persons be RESTRAINED from gross CRIMES, and yet be UNCONVERTED, what will
then become of those who go on in a COURSE of GROSS INIQUITIES? Sinners hear
your Sentence, from God himself, 1 Cor. 6, 9, 10. Know ye not, that the
Unrighteous, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, be not deceived, neither
Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effiminate, nor Abusers of
themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor
Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God.

MAY the UNREGENERATE attain a strict FORM of PIETY, and yet be distitute of
the POWER; alas then, what will become of those who have neither Form or Power,
who frequently neglect Prayer, in their Closets and Families, who neglect the
Instruction of their Children and Servants in Religion, and who customarily
break the Sabbath by worldly Discourse? Surely, such come far short of
Pharisees and Hypocrites, and yet our Lord assures us, that we must exceed
them, upon Pain of Damnation, Mat. 5.20.

MAY the Unconverted be enlightened, alas then, how sad is thy Case, O Sinner,
who art in total Darkness, and has never had one Glimpse of Light or Day
shining into thy benighted Soul? whilst thou art in this horrible Darkness,
thou know not whither thou go, and may stumble into Death before thou art
aware; remember, to thy Sorrow, that thou comes short of many Hypocrites!

MAY the Consciences of graceless Sinners be awakened by the Terrors of God,
and they remain still in a State of Death, what then will become of thee,
stupid, secure Transgressor, who has never been roused out of thy Sleep, by all
the Thunders of Sinai, or Allarms of Providence! CAIN and FELIX may make thee
blush and tremble, for wicked as they were, they bid fairer for Heaven than
thee!

MAY the Wills of the Ungodly be in some Measure bowed, how dismal then is the
State, and inexcusable the Course of those hardened Wretches, whose Necks are an
Iron Sinnew, and their Brow Brass! will not Agrippa rise up in Judgment against
them, and condemn them, and may not the Lord Jesus complain over them, as of
the Jews of old ( John 5.40.) ye will not come unto me, that ye may have Life?

DO some of the Unconverted desire after Christ, and delight in him, how far
then are you Galeos from Conversion, who are neither cold, nor hot? surely, the
Lord Jesus will spew you out of his Mouth!

DO some of the Unregenerate esteem and honor pious Ministers, who deal
faithfully with them, and associate with such as are truly Religious; how far
then are those from Conversion, and how unlikely to obtain it, who ungratefully
hate, and falsely asperse honest Ministers, for their Love, and plain Dealing,
which deserves Esteem, and is indeed the Duty of their Office? In this they
imitate wicked, Ahab's unjust Treatment of venerable Elijah, because he did not
prophesy Good of him, which he could not do without being false to his God, and
likewise such who industriously shun the Society of those that retain the
Spirit and Savor of Religion, and treat them with Abuse and ridicule! Herod,
and the foolish Virgins, will rise up against those Pests of Society, and
condemn them! Farther,

DO some of the Unregenerate hate some Sins, resolve to forsake them, and
sorrow for them, then how far from Conversion are such Wretches, who glory in
their Shame, and refuse to blush; whose Breasts are Iron, and their Bowels
Adamant? Balaam, the Conjurer, Judas, the Traitor, and Felix, the Pagan,
reproach such Monsters in human Shape, who are a Scandal to their Species, and
as much outdo Devils in Stupidity, as they come short of Brutes in Gratitude!
the Infernals tremble at what they deride, the Ox and Ass, though destitute of
the Direction of Reason, gratefully know their Owner, and Master's Crib!

HAVE some graceless Persons, a Sort of Faith, Dependence, and Confidence, then
let us take Care we be not deceived, with an Appearance of those Things, that
does not Produce right FRUITS!

DID the Pagan Mariners, the Pagan Ninevites, fear God, and cry to him in a
Storm for Deliverance, and (the Latter of them) reform their Ways! then woe to
us, who pretend to Christianity, if we come short of them in those Duties, in
this Tempest, which is now gathering upon our Land and Nation, yea, and upon
the whole Protestant Body; are we LEVIATHANS, made without Fear, who count
Darts as Stubble, and laugh at the Shaking of the Spear? or are we like the
Horse, who mocketh at Fear, and is not afrightned, though the Quiver rattleth
against him, the glittering Spear, and the Shield? but sooner or later, God
will make us know, that we have an Adversary we are not able to grapple with,
and that it is vain to boast just when we put on the Harness.

SERMON VII.
EZEKIEL. 33.11. Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil Ways.


IN a preceding Sermon, upon this precious Text, I proposed to speak upon four
Heads, which were these, 1. To show what Persons may attain to in Religion
without Conversion, 2. To Discourse of what is ordinarily preparatory to this
Change, 3. To explain its Nature, and 4. Represent its Necessity: It is only
the first of these that has been essayed; I now proceed to the

2. HEAD of Discourse, viz. to treat of what is ordinarily PREPARATORY to a
gracious CHANGE; and that is a Work of Conviction by the holy Spirit, through
the Law, whereby the Sinner is made to see the utter Impossibility of
Justification, by Obedience to it, and is shut up to Christ, as the only Door
of Hope; I through the Law am dead to the Law, says the Apostle Paul, that I
might live unto God; and elsewhere the Law is said to be our Schoolmaster, to
bring us to Christ, that we may be justified by Faith (Gal. 3.24.) this is
effected in the following Manner, viz.

1. THE Law being applied by the holy Spirit to the Soul, convinces of Sin, and
hence it is said, that by the Law is the Knowledge of Sin, and the Apostle Paul
declares of himself, that he had not known Sin but by the Law (Romans 7.7.)
without the Law, says he, Sin was dead, i. e. in my Apprehension, for I was
alive without the Law once, e. g. had a false Hope of the Safety of my State,
was alive to the Law, expected Justification by it; but when the Commandment
came, Sin revived, and I died; when the Law was applied to my Conscience by the
Spirit, I had an affecting View of my Sins, and lost my false Hope of
Righteousness by the Law, and that groundless Cheerfulness that flowed from it!
that the holy Spirit concurs with the Law to this Purpose, appears from John
16.7, 8. and when he is come, he will reprove or convince (Elenchei) the World
of Sin; the Law being the Rule of Action, and Sin being a Transgression of this
Law, it is therefore a fit Mean to convince of Sin, yet it is but a Mean, and
therefore does it not to Purpose, till the holy Spirit opens it by his
Influence, in its spiritual Extent to the Mind, and sets it Home upon the
Heart. Here observe, that the holy Spirit (1.) Convinces of Sin in the Life,
thus it was with Peter's Hearers, while he boldly and faithfully charged upon
them, the Crucifixion of Christ, they were pricked in their Heart (Acts 2.36,
37.) the Guilt of this Sin was fastened upon them, but though Conviction begins
with one Sin, yet it soon discovers many more, which appear, as though ranged in
Battalia, against the Sinner; thus it was with the Woman of Samaria, John 4.29.
come see a Man, that told me all Things that ever I did. (2.) The holy Spirit
convinces of Sin in the Heart, after a Discovery of Sins in the Life, he leads
the Sinner to behold the corrupt Fountain, from which they flow; and indeed the
Wickedness of the Heart is astonishing and inexpressible, it exceeds that of
the Life, as much as a Fountain, the Streams that proceed from it; the Heart is
deceitful, and desperately wicked, who can know it? from it come Murders,
Adulteries, and False-witness: Now the awakened Sinner may see, that there is
not the least Grain of Goodness in his Heart, that he is quite dead in Sin, an
Enemy to God and his Law, shapen in Iniquity, and conceived in Sin; whatever
Sinners dream, the Testimony of God is true, that the fleshly Mind is Enmity
against God (Romans 8.7.) natural Men that are regular in Life, are pleased with
a Notion of their own Goodness, but when their Eyes are opened by the Law and
Spirit of God, to see their Inside, they are frightened at the Sight; for they
plainly find that they are full of implacable Spite against the blessed God,
full of brutish, mean and immoderately selfish Dispositions, mere Monsters in
Iniquity, Mysteries of Sin, and Masses of Abomination! in a Word, awakened
Sinners find, that their selfish, sorry Sort of Goodness, of which they
boasted, and on which they depended, is but like the specious Skin of a
Serpent; and here give me Leave to say, that such as oppose a strong
Representation of the Corruption of human Nature, act the Part of Enemies to
Christ, and the Souls of Men; for till Sinners see their Depravity, they will
not be humble, and flee to the Mediator. (3.) The holy Spirit, by the Law,
convinces the Sinner of a State of Sin; he clearly sees that he is unjustified
and unconverted, and cannot be saved in his present State; the Prodigal saw he
was perishing, before he arose and came to his Father, he felt himself lost and
dead, before he was found and made alive (Luke 15.) The Commandment which was
ordained to Life, I found to be unto Death; for Sin taking Occasion by the
Commandment deceived me, and by it slew me, says the Apostle; when the Law came
with Power and Authority to his Conscience, he was convinced he was a dead Man,
in Law and Fact, i. e. sentenced to eternal Death, and void of spiritual Life,
and therefore was slain to all present and future Dependence upon Obedience to
the Law for Righteousness, or for the Remission of Sins, and a Right to
Salvation, see Romans 7.10, 11. This lays the Ax to the Root of the Tree; the Law
is called the Letter that kills, a Ministration of Death, a Ministration of
Condemnation (1 Cor. 3.6. 1 Cor. 3.7.) because being applied, it kills the
secure Sinners false Hopes of Righteousness, by any Thing that he can do, and
sensibly condemns him in his present State to eternal DEATH; he now sees that
all the Threatenings in the Book of God belong to him, and therefore he applies
them particularly to himself; as the Prophet, his Parable to DAVID; I am the
Man, that these Curses are directed against! he hears his Condemnation
frequently sounded from Mount Ebal!

2. AFTER convincing of Sin in Life, in Heart, and State, as has been observed,
the holy Spirit convinces of the Misery consequent upon it; what Misery? I
answer, the Curse of God, the Wrath of God, and eternal Death; Gal. 3.9, 10. He
that is of the Works of the Law, is under the Curse; for cursed is every one
that continues not in all Things that are written in the Book of the Law to do
them: We are by Nature, Children of Wrath; Ephesians. 2.1: Why? Because we are born
in Sin; Wrath is our Inheritance by Law, for our Violation of the Law; the Soul
that Sins shall die, temporarily, spiritually, and eternally, according to Law!
now the convinced Sinner sees clearly and demonstratively, as the original Word
( John 16.8.) imports, the Misery he is exposed to for Sin, which is (1.) Real,
no melancholy Fancy, but an awful Reality, he knows by the Reflections of his
guilty Conscience, that his Sins have been real, numerous, or rather
numberless, and highly aggravated; and is induced, by a Consciousness of the
Demerit of Sin, and a Belief of the Word of God, to a full Persuasion that the
Wrath of God, and Pains of Damnation, due for Sin, are real, and not to be
trifled with! (2.) He sees this Misery to be great and inexpressible! O how
terrible is it to be cursed and condemned by that GOD who only can bless!
cursed by him who is infinite in Wisdom and Strength, and can execute the
Import of the Curse, against the combined Force of the whole Creation! how
dreadful is his Vengeance in HELL! there is avenging Justice, without the least
Mixture of Mercy; Pain without Ease, and Torment without Rest; an unmixed Cup
of Wrath, continual Suffering, without any Intermission, Allay, or End; the
damned drink large Draughts of the Wine of the Wrath of God, and yet their Cup
is always full, because the Vengeance of God, incensed by Sin, is infinite! But
(3.) The convinced Sinner sees his Misery to be certain, while in a State of
Blindness and Security, he used to flatter himself with the vain and false
Hopes of Heaven, though he went on in his old Course, and kept his old Heart (
Deuteronomy. 29.19.) he spoke Peace, Peace to himself, contrary to the express
Declarations of God's Word, but now he sees that God is holy, just, righteous,
and true, and that he will not be mocked, and cannot be deceived, and therefore
that all the Curses of the Book of God are upon him, and that sudden
Destruction will surely seize him, and he cannot, shall not escape in his
present State! (4.) Convinced Transgressors see their Misery to be just and
everlasting, they see that it is but the bitter Fruit of their own sinful
Doings, it is what they have brought themselves into: Can I blame any so much
as myself, did Satan tempt me, did Sinners entice me, well, but why did I
yield? they could not Force me; it is true, I was born in Sin, but why have I
contentedly continued in that State, and neglected the earnest Use of proper
Means to obtain a Change? yea, strengthened my evil, natural Inclinations, by
wicked Practices; my Mouth is stopped, my Pleas are silenced, and I am guilty
before God; woe unto my Soul, I have rewarded Evil to myself, it shall be ill
with me, for the Reward of my Hands shall be given me; eternal Punishment is no
more than a just Reward for offending in innumerable Instances an infinite GOD,
to whom I am under inexpressible Obligations, and for rejecting a Remedy of
infinite Value, freely offered, and urged with much Condescension and
Importunity! (5.) The convinced Sinner sees his Misery to be eternal, and near,
very near; he sees himself upon the very Verge of Ruin, and knows not but the
next Moment he may be past all Hope; he sees with Concern, that the great and
holy God is angry with him, and his terrible Vengeance ready to be poured upon
him continually, he sees that Heaven is shut against him, that the Earth groans
under the Burden of such a Catiff, and that Hell is ready to meet him at his
coming; he has nothing to depend upon but the abused Patience of God, and the
slender Thread of his Life; and how soon these may come to a Period he knows
not; if the Thread of his Life, which is exposed to Ten Thousand Accidents, be
once cut while he is in this State, he knows that all is over with him for
ever! But the

3d, PARTICULAR included in CONVICTION, is DISTRESS of HEART, or Compunction;
the holy Spirit having convinced the Sinner by the Law, of Sin and Misery, as
before observed, he must needs be deeply affected and distressed with such a
View of Things, which are of so great Moment and Duration, in which his eternal
All is involved; and hence it is said of the Apostle Peter's Hearers ( Acts
2.37.) That they were pricked in their Hearts, they had such acute Pains, as if
a Spear or Dagger was thrust into their Hearts, this distressing Anguish is
elsewhere termed, a breaking up the fallow Ground of the Heart (Jer. 4.3.) a
circumcising of the Heart (Jer. 4.4.) a renting of the Heart; all which
Expressions do evidently import great Grief and Anguish: I may add that
remarkable Passage of Scripture, Romans 8.15. which casts more Light upon the
laboring Point, and gives farther Confirmation to it, Ye have not received the
Spirit of Bondage again to fear, but the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry
Abba, Father: Here observe, that before the holy Spirit gives a Sense of
Adoption, he works in the Hearts of Sinners, by the Ministry of the Law, a
distressing Dread of divine Vengeance, of Death, Judgment, and Hell, by opening
their Eyes to see the Bondage and Slavery, under which they have brought
themselves by their Apostasy, to Sin, Satan, and the Wrath of GOD: It is true,
this Distress is various in different Persons, in respect of Degree and
Duration, the Almighty exercises a glorious Sovereignty herein; but in the
General, it may be said, that the greatest Consolations, and strongest
Assurances, of the divine Favor, follow the deepest Distresses, and that such
as are to be improved in uncommon Services, or exposed to singular Trials,
frequently undergo greater Anguish and Trouble of Mind, than many others, as
preparatory thereto; witness the Apostle Paul, Luther, and Bolton; but if our
Distress by the Law be such, that we die to it (in respect of Dependence) and
consent to embrace the Redeemer, as the Gospel offers him, it is enough, the
End is answered, whether the Distress be more or less!

4. SINNERS being convinced of Sin and Misery, and distressed with a View of
both, are inclined to enquire of GOD and Man, what they should do; convinced
Saul, immediately applied to Christ for Direction, Lord what will thou have me
to do? and the Apostle Peter's awakened Hearers addressed him, and the Rest of
the Apostles, with this Query, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? the Jailer
likewise when convinced, came in trembling, and enquired of Paul and Silas,
what he should do to be saved; convinced Sinners enquire with the utmost
Anxiety and Solicitude, as a Man mortally wounded for a Physician, or as a
condemned Man for a Pardon; such Enquiries show, that they fully believe that
Something is to be done, that they are willing, and determined to do any Thing
within the Compass of their Power, which they may be directed to, without the
least Delay, and that they are at a loss what to do; blind and secure
Transgressors are very wise in their own Eyes, and having no just Value for
their Souls, nor any clear View of their Di^^^^^ and Danger, see no need of
Counsel in such Matters, nor do they desire it; but the Convinced see so much
of their Folly and Treachery, that they do not care to trust their own
Judgment, without Advice, in a Matter of such inexpressible Consequence, and
therefore they ask it, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? And,

5. HAVING enquired, they strive to press into the Kingdom of God, whatever
Crowds of Opposition and Temptation lie in their Way; like the Hearers of John
the Baptist, they Labor to take Salvation by the Violence of Importunity, and
to storm Heaven with Tears and Groans.

6. UPON the utmost TRIAL they can make, they are convinced of the
Insufficiency of all their Endeavors; their Tears and Prayers are polluted
with Sin, all their Works are bad, for they are corrupted, evil Trees; hence
they Despair of Salvation, by their own Wisdom, Power, and Righteousness, they
see their Wisdom is Folly, their Strength Weakness, and their Righteousness
Sin: They now begin to be FOOLS in their own esteem, in order to to be wise;
weak, that they may be made strong, and feel their Unrighteousness, preparatory
to their being made righteous, through Redeemer! the graceless Sinner cannot
obtain Deliverance by any Works of Righteousness that he can do, because
nothing short of sinless Perfection will entitle him to Life, and it is too
late for this, because he has sinned already, and so is a lost Creature, nor is
there any Hopes on Account of any Thing he can do, for he is continually
running deeper into Debt by his Iniquities, he has no right to Mercy of any
Kind, temporal or spiritual, he can claim nothing by the Law, unless he had
fulfilled the Law, and he can claim nothing by Christ, unless he were in
Christ, and thus having no Claim by Law or Gospel, he has no Right to any Thing
he enjoys, his very Life and Soul are forfeited; it is true he is reprieved,
but this is of mere Sovereignty, and may last but for a few Moments; Hell is
his present Due, and he can claim no better, no Forbearance, no Mercy, no not
for one Moment; he lies entirely at the Feet of a sovereign GOD! and yet in the
mean Time, he heartily approves of the Law, by which he is condemned, as Holy,
Just, and Good, both in respect of its Precepts and Penalty. The Children of
Israel, before they took Possession of Canaan, a Type of Heaven, heard the Law
repeated by MOSES, in the Plains of Moab, and signified their hearty
Approbation of it, in its utmost Rigor, by answering Amen, twelve Times
successively, as the Levites denounced the Curse; and thus, before a Sinner
truly comes to Christ, and is by him entitled to the heavenly Canaan, he must
from his Heart approve of the Law, by which he is condemned, as strictly just;
and now having endeavored to open the Nature of Conviction, give me leave to
offer some Considerations, tending to show its Necessity. And,

1. IT appears NECESSARY from the positive DECLARATION of CHRIST, that the
Whole need no Physician, but the Sick (Mat. 9.12.) If it be considered, that
this Speech of our Savior, was designed, as the Context shows, as a Reproof
and Alarm to the Pharisees, a secure and self-righteous Generation; his Meaning
therein, will appear to be this, viz. That self-righteous Sinners, that have
never been alarmed and slain by the Law, applied through the holy Spirit, have
no clear and affecting Views of their absolute Need of the great Physician of
Souls, the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and therefore do not earnestly desire after, or
labor for an Interest in him.

2. THE Necessity of a Work of Conviction, appears from the Invitations (...)
Christ, which are with great Tenderness* directed to Persons in this Condition,
Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will
give you Rest. John 7.37. In that great Day of the Feast, Jesus stood and
cried, Saying if any Man thirst, let him come unto me and drink; now why does
the blessed Jesus put such Honor upon, and give such particular Encouragement
to those that are under this preparatory Distress, if he did not require it,
and approve of it?

3. THE Benedictions of Christ, farther confirm the Point I am discoursing
upon, Mat. 5.3, 4, 6. Blessed are the poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom
of Heaven; blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted; blessed
are they which (...) hunger and thirst after Righteousness, for they shall be
filled; now will any be poor in Spirit, humbled and emptied of a Dependence
upon their own Righteousness, mourn from the Heart over Sin, and earnestly long
after CHRIST'S Righteousness, before they be beaten and bruised by the Hammer
of the Law, and see their Filthiness and Abominations in the Glass of it? no,
never!

4. THE Necessity of Conviction, may be learned from the Curses of CHRIST,
against the secure, Luke 6.25. Woe unto you that are full, for ye shall hunger;
woe unto you that laugh now, for ye shall mourn and weep: The Almighty fills
the Hungry with good Things; that is, the humble, Sin-sick Soul, that has
strong Desires after Christ; but the Rich, the Self-righteous, Self-sufficient,
secure Sinner, who is full of the Conceit of his own Wisdom, Power,
Righteousness, and false Hope, shall be sent empty away; (5.) The same may be
infered, from the Tenor of Christ's Commission, which is to preach good Tidings
to the Meek, to bind up the Brokenhearted, to comfort all that mourn, to give
them Beauty for Ashes, the Oil of Joy for Mourning, and the Garment of Praise;
for a Spirit of Heaviness (Is. 61.) you see Christ has no Commission to preach
good Tidings to the Proud, but to the Meek and Humble; no Commission to heal
the Whole-hearted, or comfort jolly Companions; nor but to bind up the bleeding
Wounds of the Brokenhearted; (6.) The Office of the holy Spirit, gives farther
Light to this Argument, who first convinces of Sin, (...) he comforts (John
16.8, 9.) and first, (...) Spirit of Bondage to Fear, before he is a Spirit of
Adoption. (7.) The same may be gathered from the positive Command of GOD, to
(...) the Heart, to circumcise it, to plow up (...) fallow Ground of it, to
awake out of Sleep, (...) be inflicted, and mourn, and weep, and (...) their
Laughter be turned into Mourning, and their Joy into Heaviness: All which can
imply no less, than that the Secure should use proper Means to affect
themselves with a Sense of Sin and Misery. Of the same Tendency, is the
following Precept, Mark 1.15. The Kingdom of God is at Hand, repent ye, and
believe the Gospel; that is, the gracious Dispensation of God toward Mankind,
in the Gospel, approaches near; lament your Wickedness, reform your Ways, and
comply with Gospel Terms. There is a legal Repentance proceeding from Fear,
that goes before saving Faith, and an Evangelical, proceeding from Love, which
follows after it! (8.) The same may be infered from the Nature of Faith, which
is a flying for Refuge to the Hope set before us, Heb. 6.18. plainly alluding
to the Manslayer, who fled from the Avenger of Blood, to one of the Cities of
Refuge. Again, (9.) The proper Use of the Law, proves the Point under
Consideration, Gal. 3.19. Wherefore then serves the Law, it was added because
of Transgression, i. e. added to the Covenant of Grace, by way of Appendix, to
convince Sinners of their Transgressions, and thus constrain them to comply
with the Terms of the new Covenant, Romans 7.6. But now we are delivered from the
Law, that being dead (or being dead to that) wherein we were held, we should
serve in Newness of Spirit, and not in the Oldness of the Letter; before we
become dead to the Law, through the Law, and embrace the Mediator by Faith, it
fastens us under its Curse, and binds to Damnation, for the Law is not of
Faith, but the Man that does them, i. e. perfectly, shall live in them: The Law
and Faith open different Ways to Heaven, the first by perfect Works, but in
case of the least Failure condemns, the other by Faith in a Mediator, through
his Righteousness imputed; now when we see the first Way shut up by our Sins,
we are constrained to fly to the second for Relief.

THE Necessity of Preparation for Christ must be granted, or the whole Jewish
Dispensation denied, which was designed by the Almighty for this very Purpose;
the whole LAW of MOSES, and the History interspersed of GOD'S Dealings with the
People of Israel in the Wilderness, is admirably suited to represent the Being
and Perfections of God, particularly his Sovereignty and Purity* I am the Lord,
this Jehovah speaks with the Majesty of a God, he shows an (...) Regard to his
Honor, and requires all to love, fear, and obey him, on Pain of Death, if his
Anger waxes hot, the Earth opens (...) the Plague rages, and destroys
Multitudes; or if he is pleased to have Mercy, it is as an absolute Sovereign
over Criminals, that have no Claim; I will have Mercy, on whom I will have
Mercy, and I will have Compassion, on whom I will have Compassion! The Law
teaches that no Mortal can be approved by God, on Account of his own Goodness,
unless he is perfectly holy in Heart and Life, and that the least Defect
exposes to eternal Damnation, and yet at the same Time, obliges to a hearty
Approbation of it; without this, the Jew could not consistently lay his Hands
on the Head of the Sacrifice, and present it to die in his Room; and yet this
was the only Remedy for Transgressors, for without the Shedding of Blood, there
was no Remission; all which was exactly suited to alarm the Jews out of their
Security, to affect them with Views of God's Purity, Sovereignty, and Glory, as
well as with Apprehensions of their Pollution, by Nature and Practice, their
Exposedness on Account of both, to the divine Vengeance, their utter. Inability
to help themselves out of this State, and therefore their absolute Need of the
Blood of Atonement! and indeed unbiassed Reason gives its Suffrage, to what
has been said; for is it fit that a Sinner should be pardoned by God, the
Lawgiver, before he clearly sees he deserves to be punished, and approves of
the Law, by which he is condemned, as holy, just, and good? till a Sinner is
brought to this, he cannot see an absolute Necessity of an Atonement for Sin,
or of his Interest in it, or any Beauty in the Way of Salvation by it, and
therefore cannot come sincerely into this Plan, or in other Words, he cannot
believe in Christ, which is nevertheless, of absolute Necessity to Salvation (
Mark 16.16.) the Sinner must see that Sin has infinite Malignity and Baseness
in it, as it contradicts and affronts all the Perfections of the infinite God,
and breaks through the infinite Obligations of Reason, Justice, and Gratitude,
which we are under to his Love and Service, because of his supreme and
incommunicable Excellency, and by the innumerable and invaluable Benefits we
have received from him, by Creation, Providence, and Redemption; and therefore
that it is highly reasonable, and of infinite Importance, that the great God
should be honored, his Purity made manifest, and the Rights of his Throne
vindicated, by punishing Sin as the Law threatens See this more fully opened,
in a late excellent SERMON of the Reverend and ingenious Mr. BELAMY, upon the
LAW, as a SCHOOLMASTER; to which I acknowledge myself indebted, in this
Argument.
: But the Words of the Apostle, Gal. 3.25. may be objected, For after Faith is
come, we are no longer under a Schoolmaster. A. The Meaning of the Apostle is
undoubtedly this, That under the Gospel, we are no longer under the ceremonial
Law, as a Schoolmaster; Christ the Substance being come, there is no more Need
of the Jewish Shadows that pointed to him; we have now no need to offer the
Blood of Bulls and Goats: But in the mean Time, the Law of Nature requiring
sinless Perfection, on Pain of eternal Death, which was the chief Part of the
Law given at Mount Sinai; was in Force before the Jewish Dispensation
commenced, and will be so to the End of Time, which is a perpetual
Schoolmaster to all the human Race; this Law being built upon the Nature and
Reason of Things, must of Consequence be immutable and perpetual, and hence the
Author of our Religion assures us, that he came not to destroy the Law, and
that till Heaven and Earth pass, one Jot or Tittle shall in no wise pass from
it (Mat. 5.17, 18.) (10.) I may add, That the Necessity of Conviction, is
necessarily supposed by the Tenor of the Gospel, which is to offer a Remedy,
and that freely, Is. 55.1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the Waters;
and he that has no Money, come ye buy and eat; yea, buy Wine and Milk, without
Money, and without Price. Reason teaches that a Remedy supposes a Disease, and
that the Latter must be felt, before the Former be valued and sought in
Earnest, and likewise that before this Remedy be accepted as an Alms, their
Pride and Stoutness must be brought down, by seeing they cannot cure
themselves, and that their Disease is mortal and ruining; our Esteem of the
Value of Benefits, and Gratitude for them, rises in Proportion to the View we
have of our Need, and Unworthiness of them, nor are any, but those who are
acquainted with their own Vileness, disposed to compassionate, and fit to
direct others in like Circumstances. But it is Time to proceed to the
Improvement of this Subject. And,

1. FROM it we may learn the perilous State of the Secure and Unconvinced; such
are (1.) blind, and hence we are informed, that it is the great Design of the
Gospel Ministry, to open Sinners Eyes, and to turn them from Darkness to Light;
if you saw your Sin and Danger, you could no more rest than a Man in a burning
Fire. (2.) You are dead, void of divine Life, wholly dead, otherwise you would
hear the awful Thunders of Sinai, with some Dread of God's Vengeance, with some
Feeling of your woeful Case you would mourn, when the Sword of God's Law is
stabbed into your Hearts, but alas, not one Sigh, not one Groan! (3.) You are
mad, Luke 15, 17. As soon as the PRODIGAL came to himself, he felt he was
perishing, and resolved to go to his Father; and whenever you come to
yourselves, to your Senses, you will have the same Feeling, the same Purpose,
but alas, it is far from it; you are as blind as Moles, and as stupid as
Stones; like Madmen, you wound yourselves mortally in Sport, and sell your
precious Souls to Satan and Damnation, for a Thing of Naught! (4.) You are
condemned and guilty Creatures, John 3.18. He that believes not, is condemned
already, by the great God, to Damnation! Mark 16.16. for breaking the LAW, and
rejecting the REMEDY offered by the GOSPEL: On these Accounts, you are guilty
before GOD, who has said, he will by no Means clear the Guilty! Numb. 14.18.
(5.) You are cursed of the God that made you, which none can revoke but
himself, and which he has declared he will not, except ye repent, Gal. 3.10.
Luke 13.3. Amos 6.1. Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20, 21. (6.) You are possessed of the DEVIL,
and under his Power and Government; his Slaves, Vassals, and Children; Luke
11.21. 2 Timothy 2.26. John 8.44: You are like the Man in the Country of the
Gadareens, possessed with a Legion of Devils, who had his Dwelling among the
Tombs, whom no Man could bind with Chains or Fetters, who was constantly
cutting himself! O shocking Sight! nor will any Bonds bind you to your Duty to
God, and your Souls! no, you violently break them all, and are Day and Night
wounding your Souls to Death! (7.) You are quite out of the Way of Mercy, and
shall certainly be for ever damned, if ye continue so: It is a mere Jest for
you to expect to be converted while you are asleep; in this State, your Hopes
of Happiness are a Delusion of the Devil, your very Blessings accursed, the
Word a Savor of Death unto Death, and the Sacraments Seals of Damnation! The
God of Truth has said, he will find you out, who are settled on your Lees, and
punish you? While you say Peace, Peace, sudden Destruction shall come upon you,
as Travail upon a Woman with Child, and ye shall not escape! Why sleep ye
Sinners on the Top of a Mast, in the Midst of the Sea? why are ye thus secure,
on the Brink of Death and Hell? For God's Sake awake, before it be too late,
before GOD forsakes you, before Death grasps you in its Iron Arms, before the
DEVIL drags you to the infernal Furnace; before ye hear the Groans of the
Damned, and the Fire of Hell flashes in your Faces: What meanest thou, O
Sleeper, arise, call upon thy God, if so be he will pity thee, that thou perish
not! Pray to God to awaken thee, and think often on Death, Judgment, and Hell!
But,

2. FROM this Subject we may learn, the encouraging Situation of the Convinced;
there is now Hope of your Conversion and Salvation; I know you are apt to be
discouraged, and to think it was never so bad with you as now, and that there
never was any Body like you; you are very much mistaken, it is better with you
now than ever, for you are in the Way to Mercy, and Millions have been in this
Case before you: See Christ takes particular Notice of you, he envites and
encourages you, Mat. 11.28. Repent and believe the Gospel; God's Mercy is high,
above your Thoughts, the Grace of Christ is inexpressibly rich and free; do not
be kept from believing, by the Greatness and Number of your Sins, or because
you have not had such deep Distress as some others; remember, that though your
Iniquities be as Crimson and Scarlet, be will make them white as Snow, as soon
as ye believe. AMEN.

SERMON VIII.
EZEKIEL. 33.11. Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil Ways.


THE two Heads that I am now to discourse upon, according to the Order before
proposed, are these, viz. 1, To explain the Nature of Conversion: And, 2. To
represent its Necessity. And,

1. THE NATURE of CONVERSION, may be thus described, viz. that it is a gracious
Renewing of fallen Man, for Christ's Sake, after the moral Image of GOD,
whereby the several Powers and Passions of the Soul, have new Qualities
infused, and free and general Tendencies toward God and divine Things, as
their Element and Center; the Effect of which is, a Conversation agreeable to
the Gospel of CHRIST. Our first Parents were made after the Image of God, which
consists in Knowledge, Righteousness, and Holiness ( Genesis 1.27. Ecle. 7.29.) a
universal Rectitude possessed the whole Soul, with all its Powers and Passions,
the Mind with Ease and Certainty, apprehended what God required; the Will
complied with the Directions of the Mind without Reluctance, and the lower
Passions were obedient to both; thus harmonious was Man in his first State. But
the Apostasy of our first Parents, in violating the Covenant of Works, broke
the aforesaid Harmony, and introduced such a Depravity into the human Soul, as
has both corrupted and misplaced all its Faculties; the Mind is blinded, the
Will obstinate, and the Affections confused, either fixed upon sinful Objects,
or carried toward lawful ones immoderately: The Will, a blind Power, usurps
the Understandings Place, to direct and rule the Soul, and enforces its
arbitrary Dictates by a tyrannical Authority, which is very perilous. The
Vessel must certainly be in great Danger, when a blind and furious Man has the
Direction of the Helm in a Tempest.

NOW Conversion is a Renewing us after the Image of GOD, not the Physical,
consisting in the spiritual Nature of the Soul, for that we never lost, else
our Souls must be anihilated; not the Political, consisting in Dominion over
the lower Creation; Power over other Creatures, is no Doubt a valuable
Privilege, but in the mean Time, no Part of a gracious Change, which may and
often does Subsist without it; it is therefore the moral Image of GOD, we are
renewed after by Conversion, consisting in a Resemblance of God's moral and
communicable Perfections, which are represented in, and recommended by the
moral Law, the invariable Scale of Action. Conversion brings back the several
Powers of the Soul from the Ruins of our Apostasy, and restores them in some
Measure, to their primitive Beauty, Order, and Harmony, for hereby the Mind is
enlightened and enthroned, the Will made pliant, and the Affections rectified.
The first moving Cause of this blessed Change, is the mere Mercy of GOD; We are
born not of the Will of the Flesh, nor of the Will of Man, but of God? it is
not by Works of Righteousness that we have done, but according to his Mercy he
saved us, by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost (Tit.
3.5.) the deserving Cause, is the Blood of Christ, Tit. 3.6. The Apostle
speaking of Regeneration, in the preceding Verse, says, Which he shed on us
abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior; and hence we are said to be
washed from our Sins in his Blood; had he not laid down his Life for Sinners,
they never would be renewed. The instrumental Cause, is the Word of God, 1 Pet.
1.23. Being born again, not of corruptible Seed, but of Incorruptible, by the
Word of God, which lives and abides for ever; and hence we are informed, that
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. The efficient Cause, is
the holy Spirit, and therefore it is called the Renewing of the Holy Ghost;
because by his Influence, he convinces and converts the Sinner from the Evil of
his Ways, to the Wisdom of the Just; without his Operation, neither Law nor
Gospel, however faithfully dispensed, will have any saving Effect upon the
Souls of Men, the dry Bones will never shake: Come therefore from the four
Winds, O Breath, and breathe upon the Slain, that they may live. The final
Cause subordinate, is Holiness of Life; We are created in Christ Jesus unto
good Works, that we may walk in them; before we are converted, we cannot do any
good Works, we are therefore created anew for this very End, that we may do
them: But the final Cause supreme, is the Glory of God's Grace, Ephesians. 1.3, 6.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us
with all spiritual Blessings in Christ, to the Praise of the Glory of his
Grace; he pitied and loved us in our Blood, when we were Objects of Loathing
and Abhorrence, and bid us live; O glorious, O amazing, pure, rich, and
sovereign Grace! But in order to open the important Point under Consideration,
more particularly and fully, let us take a transient View of the several
Qualities infused into the different Powers of the Soul, and the consequent
Change upon them, or good Tendencies thereby produced. I call them Qualities,
to signify that the Essence of the Soul still remains the same, both before and
after Conversion; the Almighty by this Change, does not Form a new Soul, as to
Substance, but only infuses new and different Qualities or Dispositions, by
which the Soul's Powers generally and freely incline to different Objects, from
what they did before: These Qualities are that Principle of spiritual LIFE,
that is instantaniously communicated at Conversion, which the sacred Scriptures
inform us, is a Quickening of the Dead: As natural Life to which this alludes,
is a fixed, abiding Principle of Action, and spreads its Influence through the
whole Frame, this does so likewise, and hence our Savior observes, that he
that drinks of this Water, shall never thirst again; i. e. so as before, after
the Things of this Life, but they shall be in him as a Well of Waters,
springing up to eternal Life. Not like a Land Flood, which is soon dried up by
the Summer Heat, or frozen by the Winter Cold, but like a living Fountain,
whose Waters do not fail, but are both free and permanent: To the same Purpose,
the Converted are said to be Partakers of the divine Nature (1 Pet. 1.4.) i. e.
of holy Dispositions, resembling the divine Nature, in regard both of Purity
and Permanency; their good Dispositions are not a transient Flash, but an
abiding, pious Temper of Soul, as it were another Nature: To the same Purpose,
are these Words of the Apostle ( John 1. Ephesians. 3.9.) Whosoever is born of God,
does not commit Sin (does not go on in a Course of Sin) for his Seed remains
in him. Now the good Qualities infused at Conversion are, especially these
following, viz. (1.) Light in the Mind; as natural Light was one of the first
Things produced in the old Creation (Genesis 1.3.) so spiritual Light is one of
the first in the New, 2 Cor. 4.6. (2.) Pliableness in the Will, to follow the
Guidance of the enlightened Mind; the Necks of Sinners, by Nature are an Iron
Sinnew, and their Brow, Brass; but the Almighty makes his People a willing
People, in the Day of his Power. (3.) Order and Harmony among the Affections,
in following the Leadings of the Mind and Will, on which Account the Spouse is
said to be all glorious within. (4.) Tenderness in the Conscience, when it is
purged from dead Works ( Heb. 9.14.) it rebukes for small Offenses; David's
Heart smote him, because he had cut off Readiness Skirt, 1 Samuel 24.5. and excites
to beware of small Sins, as well as great, yea, to beware of Temptations to
Evil, and the very Appearance of it; the burnt Child dreads the Fire; it stirs
up those that have it, to exert their utmost Labor and Vigilance, to keep
clear of Offense toward God and Man, Acts 24.16. whereas the Consciences of
the Unconverted in general, are large, secure, and mostly silent, unless when
they commit gross and notorious Crimes; for to them that are undefiled and
unbelieving, is nothing pure, but even their Mind and Conscience is defiled.
(5.) Retention of divine Things in the Memory; the converted Person loves the
Sayings of JESUS, more than formerly, and therefore Endeavors more to lay them
up in the Cabinet of his Memory; Thy Word have I bid in my Heart, says the
Psalmist, That I might not Sin against thee, Ps. 119.11. It is true, the Grace
of GOD does not change the natural, but moral Weakness of human Nature, for its
Design is not to heal the Body, but the Soul; and therefore a Person may be
much advanced in Holiness, and yet have but a weak Memory; yet as the Grace of
God assists our Apprehension of Foundation Truths, and fixes our Love upon
them, it must of Consequence make us desirous to retain them, and grieved when
we do not, so that we are like to remember more of them than of any Thing else.
I now proceed to consider the Change in the principal Powers of the Soul, viz.
The Understanding, Will, and Affections, which is the consequent of, and
promoted by the gracious Principles of spiritual Life, infused at Conversion.
And,

1. THE UNDERSTANDING is changed in its Views of Things, Assent to them, and
Estimate concerning them; now he sees the loathsome and abominable Nature of
Sin, so as to bewail it with Bitterness as for a Firstborn, and groan for
Deliverance from it, with the Apostle, O wretched Man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this Body of Sin and Death! He sees with Affection the
transcendent Excellency and peerless Beauty of the Lord Jesus Christ, who is
now to him, as the Apple Tree among the Trees of the Wood, as the Rose of
Sharon, and the Lilly of the Valleys; his Name is as Ointment poured forth, and
his Garments smell of Myrrh, Alloes, and Cassia! He sees in a strong Point of
Light, the Beauty of Holiness; that inward Purity, and outward Circumspection,
which he before imagined to be needless Preciseness, he now looks upon to be
necessary and lovely; he perceives striking Charms in Humility, and honest Zeal
for God, which he never saw before! (2.) The Mind yields a new Assent to them,
not grounded upon Conjecture, Opinion, or historical Credit; but upon the
Application of divine Truths to the Soul, by the holy Spirit, whereby such
pious Impressions are made, as convince him of their divine Original; thus the
natural Atheism of his Heart is healed, and he induced to yield a full and firm
Assent to the absolute Certainty of revealed Religion; he has a Witness within
himself, that it is no cunningly devised Fable, but true, as God is Truth; his
Views of Things, and Assent to them, being altered, it naturally follows; (3.)
That the Estimate will be altered likewise, for that is formed according to the
Apprehension we have of the Nature, Moment, and Certainty of Things, and the
Temper and Character of Persons: Formerly he used to think that Conversion was
but a mere Whim of some melancholy, enthusiastical People, but now he sees it
to be of absolute Necessity, and that notwithstanding of all his good Meanings,
Words, and Works, which he used to think would do great Matters, he must perish
without it: Communion with God he now values, as the Life and Soul of Religion,
which before he used to think was either needless, or enthusiastical* and
dangerous: That noble Zeal for God, that is ready to run any Risque for his
Honor and Kingdom, which he formerly reckoned imprudent Rashness, now he
judges to be amiable and heroic! and on the Contrary, trimming according to the
Customs of Times and Places, in Matters of Religion, with design to get Credit
among the Ungodly, and sleep in a whole Skin, which he was wont to call
Prudence, he now judges to be sneaking Cowardice, and selfish Craft! Formerly
he verily believed that Happiness consisted in Abundance, and therefore he
faithfully sought it, for that End; but now he finds his Faith to be a Falacy,
and that Persons may be perfectly miserable, in the Midst of Affluence! which
can no more satisfy the Mind, than Wind and Gravel the Stomach; he therefore,
with Moses, esteems Reproach for Christ, to be greater Riches than the
Treasures of Egypt, the Treasures of the Universe ( Heb. 11.26.) the truly
Pious, whom he used to reckon, at best, but a silly Sort of People, if not
Enthusiasts and Hypocrites, and therefore despised them; now he values as the
most wise and excellent in the Earth. Farther, the Mercy and Goodness of God,
from whence he encouraged himself in Sin and Security, he now sees and feels to
be the greatest Incentive to Holiness! But to proceed,

2. THE WILL is changed in the following Respects, viz. (1.) In its
Inclinations and Tendencies, these bend toward God, in Christ, freely and
generally, as a Center, from an inward and powerful Principle of Life ( John
4.14.) his Will has an unconstrained and constant Motion, even when outward
Enforcements are taken away; because it acts from an inward and vital Cause (
Ps. 119.112.) but the pious Tendencies of the Unconverted are constrained, and
therefore inconstant, some of them under the Views of Eternity, or some other
Affliction, have weak Motions of the Will toward God ( Ps. 78.34.) but when
the Prospect of Danger is removed, the Motions cease, like that of a Clock when
the Spring is taken away. (2.) The Will is changed in its Choice, its principal
Acts are Assent or Dissent, these are the Hinges upon which it exerts its
receptive or exclusive Powers, according to its Love or Dislike to the Object
proposed; now before Conversion, the Sinner thinks the Terms upon which Christ
is offered too severe, and therefore dislikes them, and rejects him; they will
not come to him, that they might have Life; yea, they keep him without the Door
of their Hearts, till his Head is wet with the Dew, and his Locks with the
Drops of the Night! but the regenerate Person, after having deliberately
considered the Terms upon which Christ and his Benefits are offered to him,
freely and fully consents to them with his Will, and so receives the Son of God
as his Prophet, Priest, and King, yea as his everlasting All in All; and is
hereby actually instated in all the precious Purchase of his Blood, John 1.12.
(3.) It is changed in its Designs and Aims, which are now very different from
what they were before: While in a State of Security, his Designs and Purposes
were for Sin and Self, but now they are for God and his Soul; now he labors as
much to get his Affections dead'ned to the World, as he did before to get great
Possessions in it; now with a single Eye he aims at the Glory of GOD, as his
chief Mark in all his Pursuits, and with an anxious Heart, often contrives what
Measures he shall take to honor him, and promote the despised, but truly noble
Interests of his Kingdom! The Purposes of the Unregenerate respecting Religion,
are weak, partial, and future; they do but half resolve to serve God, and that
not at present, but in some future Point of Time; nor do they resolve to
forsake all Sin, and perform all Duty, but only some, such as are consistent
with their Credit, Ease, and Interest: But the resolves of the Converted are
strong, impartial, and present; his Determination is full and firm to forsake
all Sin immediately, without a Moment's Delay, and to perform every Duty
required, by divine Help, though it should cost him his Life!

3. THE AFFECTIONS of the Soul are changed, viz. Love, Desire, Delight, Sorrow,
Fear, and Hatred, in respect of their Objects and Tendencies; and (1.) The
blessed God, his People, Laws, Image, and Ordinances, are the Objects of his
Love; the supreme Affection of the Converted is fixed on God, in Christ, as
their highest Good and last End, as their complete satisfying, and everlasting
Portion! Lam. 3.24. This Love is strong as Death, which all the Waters of
Affliction, Reproach and Opposition, can never quench, but are rather as Oil,
which makes its dormant Fire break forth into a stronger Flame! they love the
Persons they once despised, and pity those they once admired; nor do they
relish their Company when they are near God; but the Saints appear to them
amiable, vastly preferable to all others, however low and mean they are in
outward Respects, and how much soever they are despised. (2.) The Desires of
the Regenerate run for the most Part, and in the highest Degree, in a spiritual
Channel. They

Frequently long after Communion with, and Conformity to God, in Christ, here,
and the full Enjoyment of him hereafter, from a Sight of his Beauty and
Excellency; to this Purpose, the Psalmist speaks in the following affectionate
Language, My Soul follows hard after thee, my Heart and Flesh cry out for the
living God! (3.) Their chief Delight is in Christ, a Bundle of Myrrh is my
Beloved unto me, I sat under his Shadow with great Delight, and his Fruit was
sweet to my Taste: Whereas before Conversion, their Desires were chiefly and
generally fixed either upon the Honors, Profits, or Pleasures of the present
World; and consequently their chief Delight placed in them. (4.) Their Sorrow
is also changed, as to its Objects; they were wont in their carnal and secure
State, to mourn about worldly Losses and Disappointments, that either they
could not acquire or keep such a Quantity of worldly Substance, as their greedy
Desires longed for; or their Sorrow principally terminated upon the Loss of
their Credit, Relations, or Friends; but now they chiefly mourn over their own
and others Sins, the Absence of God, their Unfruitfulness in Religion, and the
low State of it in the World; for he that is born of the Spirit, is Spirit,
says our Savior, i. e. he is spiritual in the Governing Frame and Temper of
his Soul, and in the general Course of his Affections and Passions. The
Affections are indeed the Pulse of the Soul, by which we may know some Thing of
its Temper and State, as we may of the Body by the Pulse. (5.) The Converted
fear to offend God, even in the least Things, they are afraid of the very
Appearance of Evil (1 These. 5.22.) when tempted they are apt to speak in
Joseph's Language, how shall I do this Wickedness and Sin against God; they see
the Baseness, and feel the Bitterness of Sin, and therefore fear it; and, (6.)
As they fear, so they hate it universally and implacably, and cannot at any
Time fall in Love with it as formerly; I hate every false Way* says the
Psalmist: The Apostle likewise informs us, that he who commits Sin is of the
Devil, i. e. he who goes on in a Course of known Sin allowedly, is a Child of
the Devil; whosoever is born of God, does not commit Sin; why? because his Seed
remains in him, i. e. he has a fixed Principle of Holiness, which inclines
him to hate and shun a Course of Iniquity. Now a necessary EFFECT of the
aforesaid Change, upon the several Powers and Passions of the Soul, is a Change
in the Life; formerly they grovelled in the Earth like Moles, and, being of the
World, they generally speak of it, but now their Conversation is in Heaven, and
their Speech especially, when enlivened, is seasoned with Salt, ministering
Grace to the Hearers; they maintain a continual War with Sin, and sincerely
Labor not only to restrain the outward Act, but to crucify the Principle from
which it flows, and to repress the first Motions of it, as well as to flee from
the very Appearance of Evil; being diffident of their own Strength, and afraid
to offend their God: They that are Christ's, says the Apostle to the Galatians,
have crucified the Flesh, with its Affections and Lusts. I was also upright
before him, says the Psalmist, I kept myself from mine Iniquity! Ps. 18.23. I
now proceed to the

2. GENERAL HEAD proposed, which was to represent the NECESSITY of CONVERSION,
in order to Salvation: This Necessity appears to be absolute, with the
strongest Glare of Light, from the united Testimony of Reason and Revelation.
And,

1. REASON informs us, that Harmony and Pleasure spring from the Suitableness
between the Object and Faculty, and Discord and Pain from the Contrary; now
what Harmony and Pleasure can be expected by the Unconverted, even in HEAVEN
itself, if they had the Misfortune to be brought there in their present State,
seeing the Happiness thereof is Spiritual, and they in their present State
Carnal; the Contrariety between which, is as great as between Fire and Water,
Light and Darkness, Life and Death: But that this melancholy Contrast may be
more distinctly discerned, and more sensibly felt, let us take a transient
Survey of future Happiness, in its several Parts, viz. its Objects, Subjects,
Enjoyments, Business, and Duration. The OBJECT, viz. the blessed GOD, you that
are unconverted, have a fixed Enmity against, and that because of his Holiness,
the Beauty of his Attributes, and the Glory of his Nature, Romans 8.7. The
SUBJECTS of it, the Saints, you hate for the same Reason, an Enmity is fixed
between the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent (Genesis 3.15.) now
what Comfort can you have in Nearness to, and Converse with such? The
ENJOYMENTS of Heaven, viz. the Vision of God, Communion with him, and
Conformity to him, you have a Temper of Heart directly contrary to, the near
and constant View of your almighty Enemy, when all Hope of obtaining his
Friendship expires, would create a great Disgust, and insupportable Terror! and
having no Principle of spiritual Life, you can have no relish for the proper
Food thereof, the Love of God; and as for Holiness, it is the Object of your
Indignation (as was before observed) and in this you imitate the Nature of
Devils! Nor is the Business of Heaven, viz. to praise God, and converse with
Angels and Saints, more agreeable to your Taste; for what Pleasure can there be
in Praise without Love? and what Delight in conversing with those you hate, and
that upon the disagreeable Subject of Religion, Religion! and indeed the
perpetual Duration of this Happiness, is the most dreadful and distressing
Ingredient in it to the Unregenerate; if it lasted but for a Day or so, it
might be born with, though with a good deal of Difficulty and Uneasiness; but
that it should last for ever, without any Hope of Relief, is a shocking
Thought! to be obliged to behold an almighty incensed Enemy for ever, without
so much as Liberty to fly from his Presence, for the least Space of Time, is
dreadful! to converse with the despised Saints, a little now and then, about
divine Things, even in this World, especially if they have much of the Spirit
and Savor of Piety, and deal faithfully with you, is a Burden which most of
you dread, and therefore shun as much as you can; and when you can get
handsomely clear of them, and come among your own Company, you are in your own
Element, you breath freely and rejoice! how then could you endure to be among
them for ever in Heaven, when they are made much more, disagreeable to you, I
mean holy and zealous, and converse almost continually of that Religion, which
you are so frequently sick of now; and together therewith praise God, without a
Moment's Intermission, throughout a vast Eternity, without the least Liberty to
get among those of your own Kidney, and talk about your Beloved, the World,
even for one Moment? how intolerable would this be? just like the Invention of
the Tyrant Mezentius, to tie a dead Man to a Living! As to Communion with God,
you do not understand it, and therefore do not really desire it now (whatever
you may pretend) because according to the Proverb (Ignoti nulla Cupido) Of an
unknown Thing there is no Desire; and how then should you desire it in Heaven?
nay, many of the Unconverted are strongly prejudiced against it, and therefore
give it bad Names, such as Enthusiasm, Disorder, Distraction, and what not that
is bad: The dry Form of Religion, you may possibly make a Shift to endure, but
the Power and Spirit of it you cannot away with, it is an Abomination (to you.)
Now what comfort can you have in the Thoughts either of being made an eternal
Phanatic, against your Wills, or the Companion of such for ever, whom some of
you sincerely contemn! That which still bears harder upon you, if possible, is
the Employment of Heaven, viz. praising God. As to public Worship in this Life,
though Education, Custom, and a historical Faith, may make some of you bear
with a little of it tollerably, in case the Weather and Ways be good, and the
precise Minute be duly observed, but if the usual Minute be a little
transgressed, then all is out of Joint; there is great Uneasiness, great
Longing for the last Word, which is reckoned by far the best that was spoken,
and great Gladness after the Dismission of the Assembly, that you have once
more got happily clear of this Bondage, this Confinement of worshipping God, and
have returned to a Business you like better! but pray are regular Folks, of
such puney Stomachs, fit to go to Heaven? or do you think to go there, and have
any comfort? if so, it is amazing; if you grow tired of a few Hours Worship in
this Life, how will you bear to be tied to it, for Millions of Millions of
Ages, and not have one spare Moment for the Business you love? O pitious Case!
in Heaven there is nothing at all suited to your present Temper, no worldly
Riches to please your earthly Inclinations, no wanton Dalliances to gratify
your brutish Desires, no Parrasites to flatter your Vanity, none of the Seed of
the Serpent to feed your Envy against God and his People, nothing but spiritual
and holy Exercises and Entertainments, in which, for the want of a pious
Principle, you can have no more relish, than the Blind in Pictures, the Deaf in
Music, or Brutes in the Mathematics! you would be grated with its Harmony,
sad and sorrowful in the Midst of all its Joys, and perfectly tired with its
incessant Devotions, as well as terrified with the Prospect of their perpetual
Continuance! in this disagreeable and distressing Situation, where you have
nothing to your liking, you would long to be out from among a Company, and from
Employments you never liked, and get into your own Element, and among your own
Company! that you might have a little Liberty, and not be continually plagued
with Religion; and seeing you could not get them any where else but in Hell,
you would try to fly there for some Shelter, for some Comfort, after so much
Sorrow and Trouble! and though HELL be a Place of terrible Torment, yet even
there you would find some Mixture of comparative Comfort, for there you would
be entirely delivered from conversing with those you hate, and from the
disagreeable Exercises of Holiness; there you would find Spirits of your own
Complexion, and there you may without control, in consort with them, give free
and full Vent to all your Resentments against God, his Ways, and People for
ever! thus it appears plainly, that Happiness for you, in your present State,
even in Heaven itself, is impossible, from the very Nature of Things, according
to the Dictates of Reason, and common Sense; and that either GOD, or you, must
have your Natures changed, or you cannot agree together, and of Consequence
cannot be happy in the Enjoyment of each other. But,

2. To the Testimony of Reason, Revelation gives its Suffrage; by informing us
that we are by Nature in a corrupted State, John 3.6. and likewise that we are
condemned both by the Law, and by the Gospel, for violating the one, and
refusing the Offers of the other ( Gal. 3.10. Mark 16.16.) it cannot be that
any unconverted Person has Faith of a saving Kind, for that would Change his
Heart and Practice, Gal. 5.6. Now there never was any Way opened to Heaven, but
these two, viz. by the Works of the Law, and by the Gospel, both which are shut
up to the Unregenerate: That God, who is absolute Lord of his own Treasures,
and can dispense them to his Creatures, upon what Terms he pleases, has by
positive Constitution made Conversion, or Holiness, which are but different
Words for the same Thing, of absolute Necessity to Salvation, John 3.3. Jesus
answered and said unto him, verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a Man be
born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Heb. 12.14. Without Holiness no
Man shall see the Lord; without this, neither Circumcision, nor Uncircumcision,
will avail any Thing to Salvation (Gal. 6.15.) and indeed, it may be with
Justice asserted, that Conversion has such a Relation to, and Connection with
future Happiness, that it is but a Part, or Beginning of it, differing only in
Degree and Duration, from the Happiness of Heaven; for what is that, but the
Perfection of the Graces, formed and infused in this Life, and the Continuance
and Perfection of that Communion with God, and religious Worship which is here
begun, some Circumstances excepted? The good Man most certainly begins his
Heaven upon Earth, and finishes there what is imperfect here.

BUT it is Time to proceed to some brief IMPROVEMENT of this very important
Subject; seeing the Matter is of so great Moment and Necessity, upon which our
Comfort and Safety, in both World's depend; it is therefore highly Necessary,
to examine with Speed, Care, and Impartiality, the present State of our Souls,
by comparing our Experiences in Religion with what has been already said in
this Discourse, concerning the Nature of a gracious Change, upon the several
Powers and Passions of the Soul, together with the consequent Reformation upon
the outward Conduct. It is true, in the preceding Sermon, I showed that there
may be some Alteration made upon some, or all the Faculties of the
Unregenerate; but that is very defective, and very different from the Change
which I have been now discoursing of, as may appear to every Eye, by the
following Hints (which I offer, to prevent truly pious Persons from being
distressed, without just Cause, respecting the State of their Souls) e. g. the
Light in their Minds puffs up, and is attended with Sloth, whereas the other
habitually humbles the Soul, and excites to practical Holiness. The Resolutions
of the Wills of the Unregenerate, are not humble, present, fixed, and thorough;
they are not fully determined to forsake every Sin, and to do every Duty; No!
they except Constitution Sins, and such Duties as are unfashionable, difficult,
and dangerous to Flesh and Blood; but it is the very reverse with the
Regenerate: The Will of the Unconverted, not being thoroughly turned from Sin
and Self-righteousness to God, in Jesus Christ, makes a Flaw in the Marriage
Contract, and so ruins all! But the Regenerate being slain by the Law, are
honest, and have no reserve in their Closure with the Redeemer, but gladly
accept of him, as the Gift of God, in all his Offices, under a deep Sense of
their absolute Need of him in them all, with a full and firm Purpose, by his
gracious Influence, to cleave to him and his Ways to the Death, though it
should cost them never so dear. As to the Change in the Affections before
expressed, this is observable, that they do not alter the governing Frame and
habitual Temper of the Soul, and make it holy, humble, heavenly; whereas the
other really does so, he that is born of the Flesh, is Flesh, and he that is
born of the Spirit, is Spirit, says our dear Lord. The Regenerate make
Conscience of their Thoughts, they likewise labor to preserve the Savor of
Religion in their Hearts, and to live by leaning on Christ; Sin is their chief
Burden and Progress in Holiness and Usefulness, their chief Desire in general,
really and truly; but it is not so with the Unconverted, their Thoughts are
suffered to run at random, nor do they mind the Savor of Piety, if they can
but keep up the Form, they are likewise Strangers to daily living on the
Offices of Christ, nor are they truly burdened with their Heart-Corruption,
their Unprofitableness, and little Growth in Goodness; for their Religion is
principally calculated for the Meridian of this World: The inward Part with
them is a sorry Thing, a mere Flash! let such who have experienced this
gracious Change described in this Sermon, rejoice in God, whatever your outward
Situalion is, because being by Conversion made his Children, in a saving Sense,
they may with Certainty expect all the Bowels and Assistance, which a Father
should (...) his Children in this Life, and an Inheritance of immense Value in
the Life to come! Your Father has Wisdom, Power, and Tenderness enough to
confer upon you all that you do, and may need in Time and Eternity, and his
Truth is in Pawn, that he will do it.

DEAR BRETHREN, let us therefore live Lives of Thanksgiving and Praise to the
Glory of God, for this Work of his Grace in us, and all other Benefits we have
and do receive from his bounteous Hands; in particular, let us glorify God, by
a Life of Faith in his dear Son, and faithful Word; not staggering at the
Promise; by a Life of Love to his Majesty, our heavenly Father, and to his
Children, our Brethren; by a Life of Humility and Holiness, Learning of Jesus,
to be meek and lowly in Heart; let us be Followers of God, as dear Children,
and walk in Love, imitating the imitable Examples of our great and gracious
Father, laboring to be holy, as he is holy, and merciful, as he is merciful:
And as to the Unconverted, I beseech you, by the Mercies of GOD, to pity your
poor Souls, and to turn from your evil Ways to Jehovah speedily; remember while
you delay this, you are Murderers, Self-Murderers, Soul-Murderers,
Self-Soul-Murderers, your Blood is upon your own Heads, your Destruction is the
Fruit of your own Wickedness and Obstinacy, in rejecting, against your own
Souls, God's repeated Warnings and Invitations, and therefore it is but just
that you should perish, and this you will be obliged to own at last, to God's
Honor, and your own Shame; what unspeakable Anguish will a Reflection upon
this, cause in your Consciences another Day, unless you speedily repent and
reform, before it be too late, too late? O! think often upon the inexpressible
Dangers and Miseries of your present Condition, cry to GOD earnestly and
frequently for converting Grace, attend with Seriousness upon the Means
appointed for that End; and, in particular, O hear now the gracious Call of
God, in our Text, Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil Ways. -- AMEN. AMEN.

SERMON IX.
EZEKIEL. 33.11. Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil Ways; for why will ye die, O
House of ISRAEL?


IN the preceding Verses, we are told, that when a Watchman sees the Sword
come upon a Land, it is his Duty to blow the Trumpet, and warn the People; he
must hear the Word at God's Mouth, and warn them from him; and then whosoever
hears the Sound of the Trumpet, and takes not Warning, if the Sword come and
take him away, his Blood shall be upon his own Head; but he that takes Warning
shall deliver his Soul; but if the Watchman see the Sword come, and blow not
the Trumpet, and the People be not warned, their Blood will be required at the
Watchman's Hand; nevertheless, if the Watchman warn the Wicked of his Way, to
turn from it, if he do not turn from his Way, he shall die in his Iniquity, but
the Watchman has delivered his Soul! The People of Israel, instead of being
humbled by the Judgments of God, and accusing themselves as the Causes thereof,
murmured against God, and accused him of Unkindness and Injustice; they
acknowledged that he had set Life before them, but in the mean Time alleged,
that he had put it out of their Reach, had determined their Destruction, and
therefore did but mock them by his Proposals; they also plead that God's Ways
were not equal, that he was partial in his Providence, and too severe! In
answer to which unjust Cavils, the Prophet was ordered to assure them, in the
most solemn Manner, that the Almighty had no Pleasure in the Destruction of
Sinners, but would rather they should turn and live; and that in case they
repented and reformed, he would readily accept of them, and prevent their ruin;
but if they persisted in their Impiety, after all the Warnings given them,
their ruin must be ascribed to themselves: Death is your own Choice, not mine,
so long as you go on in the Way that leads to it, for whosoever sins against me,
wrongeth his own Soul; he that wilfully chooses Sin, and continues in the
Practice of it, does interpretatively chose Death, which is its Wages and
Consequence: It is therefore owing to your own wicked Will, and not my
Resolution, that ye die; for why will ye die, O House of Israel? These Words
contain God's Lamentation over the People of Israel, and Expostulation with
them; and (1.) The Almighty laments the unhappy Case of that sinful People, who
refused to be reclaimed, by all the Measures he took with them for that
Purpose, both by his Prophets, and Providence; he, as it were, groans over
them, in the most mournful Accents, O House of Israel! as if he had said, it
grieves me to see thy approaching Ruin, O that thou had known in this thy
Day, the Things that belong to thy Peace, before they are hid from thine Eyes:
How shall I give thee up Ephraim, how shall I make thee as Admah, how shall I
set thee as Zeboim; my Heart is turned within me, my Relentings are kindled
together! Speaking after the Manner of Men, the Almighty feels a strong and
tender Reluctance in his Bowels, when he is about to give up with a sinful
People, who profess his Name, and whose Predecessors have been eminent in his
Love and Service: Is it not affecting to hear the glorious God himself thus
addressing, thus lamenting over ungrateful, worthless Impenitents? O House of
Israel! Woe to us, we are harder than Iron, than Adamant, if the Groans, and
repeated Entreaties of a God, do not pierce and persuade our very Souls! (2.)
JEHOVAH expostulates with Transgressors, why will ye die? q. d. why do ye chose
your own Ruin, By walking in the Way of Impiety, that leads to, and issues in
it? are not Sin and Punishment bound together, by such Chains as nothing but
Repentance and Reformation can break? is there any Thing in Sin that will
Balance the Loss you are like to sustain by it? why then do you court
Destruction, without a Covering? why are you bent upon your own Ruin? what
Apology can you form for your Impenitence? will you be your own Murderers, and
imbrue your Hands in your own Blood, after so much Pains have been taken with
you? what mean you poor Creatures, by your present Conduct? why are you so
infatuated, will you defy Omnipotence, and slight all the Riches and
Condescensions of my Patience and Goodness? have you made a Covenant with
Death, an Agreement with Hell? who can screen you from my Indignation, or are
you quite Regardless of it? have you seriously considered the Terrors of a
temporal and eternal Death, that you seem so fond of them, so determined to
obtain them, by your unkind, unreasonable, and cruel Conduct, in giving a deaf
Ear to all the Allurements and Alarms of my Word and Providence; whatever your
deceitful Hearts suggest to the Contrary, you shall die if you persist in your
Iniquities; your Dependencies, Projects, and Attempts, however promising, will
fail you? you shall be distressed and ruined, as a Nation plucked up by the
very Roots; for I am forming Evil against you, and devising a Device against
you? you shall be divorced as a Church, I will not own you any more in that
Relation, because you have behaved unworthy of it, backsliden with a perpetual
Backsliding, and refuse to return; unless you repent and reform, you shall be
utterly deprived of your present Plenty and Liberty, both civil and religious,
which you have ungratefully abused, to Pride and Luxury, to Lukewarmness and
Profaneness, and be subject, you and your Descendants, to a foreign Yoke; there
you shall groan under Poverty and Oppression, during the wretched remains of a
Life that is worse than Death; or if faithful to your Religion, in Exile,
suffer for it; there you will hang your silent Harps upon the Willows, and
deplore your Loss of the Solemnities you now despise and neglect! O Sirs, have
ye no regard to your Religion and Liberty, no regard to the Church and Nation,
no regard to your Honors, Estates, Lives, and to the Lives of your dear
Descendants and Relatives? if you have, show it, by turning to the God from
whom ye have strayed, sincerely and speedily, otherwise your specious
Declarations are but Hypocrisy and Mockery; but God will not be mocked, he that
sows to the Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap Corruption; Turn ye, turn ye, why
will ye die? O Protestants, O Briton's, O Inhabitants of Philadelphia! God is
certainly angry with our poor sinful Nation, see how our Counsels are turned
backwards, see the dreadful Scandal which the righteous GOD has poured upon our
Arms, by Sea and Land; Arms by Sea, which we have as vainly as wickedly boasted
of, and trusted in, as though they could screen us from the Vengeance of God
himself; blasphemous Vanity! see our important Fortresses basely betrayed,
partly by Cowardice, and partly by Indolence and Treachery, into the Hands of
our cruel Enemies, who laugh at us, and insult over our divided State, our weak
Measures, or our sluggish and cowardly Execution of good ones; you see the
Sword is drawn and bathed in the Blood of our Countrymen, how awfully is the
little Skirt or Peninsula we possess, along the Sea Shore, upon this Continent,
begirt by a bold, vigilant and active Enemy, who are determined, with the
prodigious Tribe of their Confederates, united as one Man, under an absolute
Government, to drive us entirely out of this Country, or subject us to their
Papal Yoke? And have they not made large Strides to compass their Design? If
different Measures be not taken by us, and differently executed before long, is
not our Case in a Manner desperate? And Sirs, our Danger is increased, by the
late unnatural and awful Combination formed against diverse Protestant Powers in
Europe, to which they are no Match; and yet notwithstanding of this gathering
Storm, though our Land and Nation tremble, and total Ruin hastens toward us,
many are secure and stupid! what are our Fleets and Armies, except we repent
and reform, but a mere Bubble? Let us then turn to God, if we have any Regard
to him, or to ourselves; any Regard to our King, our Country, our Relations,
Friends, Estates, Liberty, or to our Lives, and our Souls; and then we may
expect Deliverance and Mercy: He will direct to proper Measures, and bless
them; but without this, a Curse and Blast will attend our Enterprises! O
therefore, Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die?

BUT though the Words of our Text, primarily respect temporal and national
Miseries, yet they likewise intend spiritual and eternal; it is Sin that
exposes good Men to Deadness, and many other Miseries in their Minds in this
Life, and this exposes the Impenitent to eternal Death in the next! Turn ye,
turn ye, from your evil Ways, for why will ye die? From the Words I may observe
this Proposition, that persisting in Sin, is unreasonable and ruining; now, in
order to expose the Evil and Danger of this Practice, and persuade to the
Contrary, I shall, agreeable to the Form of the Text, propose some
expostulatory Queries, which I beseech you to give an attentive Ear to, as you
will answer it at the Bar of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, in the Day of his
appearing. And now most gracious GOD, and most merciful Father, assist me, thy
unworthy Servant, to speak as under thine Eye, and in thy Presence, with a
sincere and strong Desire, that poor Sinners may come from their Wanderings to
thy Majesty! O! for Help to speak as though I were never to speak any more!
blessed and dear Lord Jesus Christ, send, O send thy holy Spirit, to set home,
by almighty Influence, upon the Hearts of these thy People, what has been and
may be delivered upon this Subject, that they may indeed turn from their evil
Ways unto God, and be delivered from Ruin! And,

1. DOES not the Text I am discoursing on, plainly declare, that such as do not
turn to God, from the Evil of their Ways, shall die, i. e. not only be exposed
to innumerable Miseries of Mind and Body in this Life, but to eternal Death in
the next? For such Tophet is prepared of old, the Fuel thereof is Fire and much
Wood, the Breath of the Lord as a Stream of Brimstone does kindle it; the
Unregenerate shall not see God, but dwell for ever in a Furnace of Fire, where
our Lord assures us, are weeping, and gnashing of Teeth! The Damned will then
with Bitterness lament their Loss of the Opportunities, and Abuse of the Means
of Salvation! a remembrance of the solemn Warnings, and earnest Invitations
they have had from the faithful Ministers of Christ, will extort Tears from
their Eyes, and Groans from their Hearts! when they consider how they have
rejected them! it will fill them with perpetual Indignation against themselves,
when they review the Pains they have taken to damn their Souls, against the
repeated Remonstrances of God and Man, as well as of their own Consciences, and
that they have sold their Salvation for a Thing of Naught! if Men took as much
Pains to be saved, as they do to be damned, they would probably succeed; if
they set their Faces toward Zion now, and sowed in Tears, they would reap in
Joy; but in Hell their Sorrows are to no Purpose, they will be without Hope,
and without End; O what would the Damned give for the Opportunities they once
had, for the Seasons you now have, and but lightly esteem? O with what
Vehemence would they improve them? hear how DIVES roars and groans, Luke 16. In
Hell he lift up his Eyes, being in Torment, and cried, and said, Father Abram,
have Mercy on me, and send Lazarus that be may dip the Tip of his Finger in
Water and cool my Tongue; for I am tormented in this Flame. That Wrath which
the Damned feel, is infinite, continual, eternal; the Smoke of their Torments
ascends up for ever and ever, nor have they any rest in the Night or Day; a
Gulf is fixed between that awful Place, and the heavenly Paradise, which they
can never pass; after Millions of Ages are elapsed, their Misery is but
beginning; O Eternity, Eternity! how dreadful art thou? Here unregenerate
People have many carnal Comforts, and please themselves with a false Hope; but
there they will be berieved of them all at once, and sink in eternal Despair! O
shocking Thought! is it not worth while, my Friends, to take the utmost Pains,
and that without the least Delay, to escape this Place of Torment?

2. WILL not eternal Life fully recompense all your Pains in quest of it? Yes,
surely; for Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has it entered into the
Heart of Man to conceive the Things which God has prepared for those that Love
him. In the heavenly Paradise, the Glorified see Jehovah as he is, are
perfectly conformed to his Nature, fully enjoy his Love, and for ever celebrate
his Praise; there they are eternally ravished with a naked View of the Beauty
of the divine Attributes; before the transcendant Luster of this supreme
Excellency, the Sun, that glorious Orb of Light, is turned into Darkness, and
the Moon into Blood; the Stars forget their Shining, the Beauty of Men and
Angels fades as the Grass, and appears as mere Deformity! O! the Glory of the
blessed GOD is unparralleled, incomprehensible, overcoming, eternal! a
transient Glimpse of it even in this Life, though through an obscuring Medium,
transports and transforms the Soul, and turns Earth into Heaven; what Effects
then must the immediate and uninterrupted Vision of this produce in a future
State, where Sin and all the Sorrows it has introduced into this lower Globe,
are for ever vanished! the little we now perceive of the Wonders of Creation,
Redemption, and Providence, affects our Minds with a pleasing Admiration; but
when all their Beauties will be at once and for ever opened to our View, with
what Exstasies of Pleasure, of the noblest Kind, shall our Souls be for ever
entertained and satisfied? here much of the Wisdom of Jehovah's Works is hid
from the most curious Enquirer; here God covers with Darkness his Pavillion,
and hides the Face of his Throne; his Footsteps are often in the great Deep,
and we cannot discern them; we see but a small Sketch of the Plan of
Providence, and therefore cannot discover the Connection of its various Parts,
their secret Movements, perfect Harmony, and mutual Subserviency to promote the
grand Design of the whole System, notwithstanding of their apparent
Contrariety! an obscure Emblem of which, we have in the Wheels of a Watch! here
we are so wedded to the Law, and our Faith so weak, that our Apprehensions of
the inexpressible Freeness, Riches, and Glories of redeeming Grace, are at best
but faint and obscure; but in Heaven we shall see its amazing Immenceness, its
Charms and Endearments, and be eternally ravished by the Sight! This, O this!
will be the sweet Subject of everlasting Songs of Praise to God, and the Lamb
that sits upon the Throne! The social Worship, and social Converse of the
Church of the Firstborn, being freed from all Defects, both natural and moral,
must needs yield a Delight to us, in our present State of Darkness,
inconceivable; but that which Crowns the Scene, is that it is eternal eternal;
never will there be any Period to those Enjoyments, or any Fear of it!

3. IS it not then exceeding Abominable, to delay your Conversion to GOD,
whereby you are freed from dying eternally; and made meet for the Enjoyment of
that great Salvation? a Salvation not only great beyond compare, beyond the
utmost Force and Fire of Words, but vastly beyond the utmost Reach of a
Creature's Thoughts; a great Salvation, not only in respect of the Suitableness
and Value of the Benefits thereby possessed, but likewise on Account of the
invaluable Price whereby they were purchased, the absolute Freeness of their
Communication to us, and immortal Duration! To Delay in a Matter of such vast
Moment, is dishonorable to God, hurtful to others, and prejudicial to
yourselves? Hereby you are guilty of Rebelling against his awful and rightful
Authority, who has made and preserves you, and is the great Original of your
Beings, and all your Benefits; he it is who holds the floating Breath in your
Nostrils, and in him you live and move; all the Good you have in Hand or Hope,
entirely hangs on his sovereign Pleasure; this great God commands you to turn
to him speedily, without the least Delay; To Day if ye will hear his Voice,
harden not your Hearts; behold now is the accepted Time, behold now is the Day
of Salvation? and will you confront his Authority, even when it is exerted to
promote your best Interest? will you contemn the Majesty of God, by prefering
the Devil, the World, and your Lusts, before him, by observing their Commands
first, and by giving them the Prime of your Strength and Years, what can be
more base and degenerous? what to prefer the vilest Evil, before the greatest
Good! to prefer the basest Slave, the most cruel Tyrant, and malicious
Murderer, before the great, the rightful Lord of the Universe! before the best,
the most indulgent, and beneficent Master, Father, and Sovereign! You are also
guilty of the most monstrous and ungrateful Ingratitude, against the Mercy of
God, in that instead of improving the Morning of Life, in the Service of its
Author, you abuse it to his Dishonor, by acting the Part of Slaves, and
Drudges to his and your implacable Enemy. Miserable Souls, is this the Way you
requite the good God, for all the innumerable, invaluable, and immerited
Kindnesses, he has without Intermission showered down upon you, from your
infant Age, till now? has he been a barren Wilderness, or a Land of Drought to
you? No! he has graciously made you a Sharon, a Sorek! for which of all his
Kindnesses do you thus treat him! O! has not Jehovah reason to complain of you,
as of Israel of old, I have nourished and brought up Children, and they have
rebelled against me? Will ye thus forsake the Fountain of living Waters, and
hew to yourselves broken Cisterns that can hold no Water! Give Ear, O ye
Heavens, and I will speak, and hear, O Earth, the Words of my Mouth, do ye thus
requite the Lord, O foolish People, and unwise? is he not thy Father that has
bought thee, has he not made thee, and established thee? Farther,

DELAYING in a Matter of such inexpressible Moment, is hurtful to Mankind,
round about you, for what has a more pernicious and ensnaring Influence, than
bad Example? by this you induce others to Sin, encourage them, and harden them
in it, and thereby are like to bring them, and yourselves with them to
Destruction? in this State of Things, your House inclines to Death, and your
Paths to the Dead! the Companions of such Fools shall be destroyed! Supposing
you yourselves should be turned to God afterward, which indeed is improbable,
how could you persuade those you have debauched by your wicked Example, and
perhaps Counsel added to it, to embrace that Piety, which they through your
criminal Influence, have an inveterate Prejudice against? O! if you had any
Love to the Souls of others, and particularly to those of your dear Relations,
would ye thus conspire with the grand Enemy of Mankind, in procuring their
eternal Damnation? what signifies your low, brutish Love to their Bodies, while
you not only basely neglect their noble Souls, but by your irreligious Example,
cruelly corrupt and ruin them! O horrid Impiety! O murderous Madness and
Cruelty! I add no more at present.

SERMON X.
EZEKIEL. 33.11. Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil Ways; for why will ye die, O
House of ISRAEL?


IN the preceding Sermon, after representing the indispensable Necessity of a
general Reformation of Manners, to save our Country and Nation from impending
Ruin: I proposed some expostulatory Queries, respecting the Unreasonableness of
persisting in Sin, and in particular labored to show the Baseness of delaying
Conversion, by observing that it is dishonorable to God, hurtful to others,
and prejudicial to yourselves; the two former Particulars have been already
spoken to.

I now proceeed to say, that Delays in the grand Business of Conversion, are
peculiarly prejudicial to yourselves, for they are contrary to the Practice of
good People, inconsistent, disingenous, foolish, and exceeding perilous. The
Psalmist's Practice was of a very different Kind, I made haste, and delayed
not, said he, to keep thy Commandments. Farther,

A Purpose of defering Conversion and Repentance, is inconsistent with a
Purpose to repent; because it implies a Resolution to continue in Sin for a
Time, which is notorious Rebellion and Hypocrisy; and yet upon this Foundation,
do many make their Consciences easy, and hope for Happiness; the Language of
which Practice is, I will turn to God, when I have finished Business of greater
Consequence, i. e. gratified my Lusts, or made an Estate; I Will serve God when I
have got nothing else to do, or when I can hardly turn upon my Bed; shameful
Speech! But the Apostle Peter informs us, that the primitive Penitents were not
of this Cast, no, the Time past of our Life, say they, may suffice us to have
wrought the Will of the Gentiles; when we walked in Laciviousness, Lusts,
Excess of Wine, Revelings, Banquetings, and abominable Idolatries: It seems the
Pagans had some such Sort of Frollicks as our Dancing Assemblies; ay, but not
in a Time of public Danger and Calamity; no, such they abhorred, they were so
far from encouraging them, that they disapproved of a gay Dress, in a Time of
public Mourning. Non est conveniens (says one of them) Luctibus, ille color;
But when they became Christians, they quit them altogether, at all Times, and
followed a very different Rule, viz. When they were merry they sung Psalms, and
when sorrowful they prayed! How very unworthy then are those of the Christian
Name, nay how much are they sunk below the Pagans, who in a Time of general
Calamity, not only put on the gayest Dress, but even shamelesly go to dancing
Frollicks, when a general Ruin seems to hasten toward their Country and Nation!

BUT deferring Conversion, is not only hypocritical, but disingenuous;
supposing you could be certain of obtaining it at last, it would be base and
disingenuous to treat the Almighty so, as it is not lawful to treat our fellow
Creatures, and so as we would not have God to treat us, as the wise Man
observes, we must not say to our Neighbor, go and come again, and Tomorrow I
will give, when thou have it by thee. Our Desire of God, is that he would hear
us immediately, Ps. 102.2. Incline thine Ear unto me in the Day when I call,
answer me speedily; and shall we use Delays with our Sovereign, in a Matter of
Life and Death? But if ye wilfully defer Conversion to the last, you are so far
from a Certainty or Probability of obtaining Mercy, that there is great Hazard
of being denied; consider what God himself says upon this Head, Prove. 1.24, --
28. Farther,

DELAYS in Matters of eternal Consequence, are the Height of Folly and Madness;
would he not act like a distracted Man, who was bit with a Rattle-Snake, and
would tarry some considerable Time, before he sent for a Physician? is not such
a Person a Self-Murderer, as well as a Madman? and if he dies by this Delay, is
not his Blood upon his own Head? The melancholy Case easily applies itself, if
you will not shut your Eyes, your Ears, your Hearts, which if you do, it is
against your own Life! Again,

DELAYS in the Business of Salvation, are exceeding perilous, and that on many
Accounts; hereby the Number of our Iniquities is increased, for one Sin
naturally leads to, and disposes for the Commission of another; thus an awful
Increase of Guilt is brought upon our miserable Souls, as if we had not enough
already, whose Iniquities rival the Stars for Multitude, and are red as Crimson
in their Aggravations! hereby the Heart is hardened, a sinful Custom
introduced, and vicious Habits strengthened; whereby we are rendered more
averse to God and all Goodness, more prone to every Iniquity, and, of
Consequence, Conversion rendered more hard and difficult. ( Jer. 13.23.) Can
the Ethiopian change his Skin, and the Leopard his Spots, then may ye also
learn to do Good, who are accustomed to do Evil! Hereby the Spirit of God is
grieved and quenched, by whose Influence Sinners are convinced of Sin, and
converted from it; and the Saints sealed to the Day of Redemption ( Ps. 95.78,
11.) Today if you will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts, as in the
Provocation (i. e. by Delays and Continuance in Sin) to whom I swear in my
Wrath, that they should not enter into my Rest. O shocking Sentence! tremble at
it you delaying Impenitents, for it may be soon your own dismal Case! pray
observe, that late Repentance is seldom genuine, there is but one Example of
this in the holy Scriptures, viz. that of the Thief upon the Cross; but one
that none should presume, and yet there is one that none should despair; nor
can it be proved, that he was acquainted with the Christian Religion long
before, and deferred his Repentance, with the View of obtaining Mercy at last
Besides in the Time of Christ's Abasure, miraculous Works were wrought to
demonstrate his Divinity, among which this may be called one.
. O! let delaying Sinners read, and consider that awful Scripture, Mat. 24.48.
ad finem. But if that evil Servant shall say in his Heart, my Lord delayeth his
coming, and shall begin to smite his fellow Servants, and to eat and drink with
the Drunken, the Lord of that Servant, shall come in a Day when he looks not
for him, and in an Hour that he is not aware of, and shall cut him asunder, and
appoint him his Portion with the Hypocrites, there shall be weeping and
gnashing of Teeth! Once more,

DELAYS are exstreamly perilous, because of a threefold Uncertainty, viz. of
Life, of the Means of Grace, and of a divine Blessing upon those Means! What is
your Life, but a Vapor, as the Apostle James with equal Truth and Beauty
observes, which appears for a little Time, and then vanishes away; and
therefore we should work while the Day lasts, for the Night comes, wherein no
Man can work? This solemn Messenger will soon wrap us in its sable Shades, and
bury us in Darkness, Inactivity, and Oblivion; and therefore what our Hands
find to do, especially of a religious Kind, let us do it with all our Might,
seeing there is no Work, Device, or Invention, in the Grave, whither we are all
hastening; every Moment we are upon the Verge of a vast Eternity, and know not
what a Day, an Hour, a Minute may bring forth; we may never live to see the
next Morning's Light, do not therefore depend on your young Years, heat of
Blood, and Strength of Nature; what are these to withstand the Force of
Sickness and Death? Do you not see diverse of your Years removed to Eternity,
who were as likely to live as you, and probably expected to live to advanced
Age as much as you do? But they were disappointed of their Hopes, and may not
you also? And will not the Disappointment be fatal and dreadful, if you
continue to delay? Do not some die in the Bitterness of their Souls, some when
their Breasts are full of Milk, and their Bones moistened with Marrow; some,
though few, in the Wane of Life, when Age has snowed upon them; and by far the
greater Number in the opening Dawn, or full Bloom of Life, when their Souls are
big with secular Expectations and Designs, which the Foot of Death crushes in
an Instant! And though Life gradually wastes away in some, by chronical
Distempers, like a Candle expiring in the Socket, yet are not many snatched off
the Stage of Time, into the invisible World, suddenly and unexpectedly, both to
themselves and others, either by accute Diseases, or surprising Accidents, with
which we are all continually environed, and from which none can with Certainty,
promise themselves an Exemption! Now, is it wise and discreet, my young
Friends, to venture your eternal All, upon such a dreadful Uncertainty? O! for
God's Sake* think seriously upon this before it be too late! But to proceed,

ARE not the Means of Grace uncertain also, in respect of their Continuance
with us? And does not this Truth appear in a striking and awful Light at this
Time, when the holy and dreadful GOD is threatening by his Providence, to take
them entirely away from us for ever, for our ungrateful Slighting of them, and
to leave us under the Curse of Papal or Pagan Darkness! O therefore, while we
have the Light, let us walk in it: We the Ambassadors of Christ, beseech you
also, that you would not receive the Grace of God in vain. And is not a
Blessing on the Means equally uncertain, in case we delay? Conversion is God's
Gift ( Ezekiel. 36.26.) which he confers in his own appointed Time and Way, not
according to our Pleasure; and therefore we should improve every Opportunity,
and gracious Motion we are favored with; for if we will not with Earnestness
perform the outward Duties of Religion while we can, it is just that we shall
not when we would; and indeed this is what you delaying Sinners have Reason to
fear, for God's Spirit will not always strive with Man; call therefore upon God
while he is near, and seek him while he may be found, lest he say to you as to
Ephraim, Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone. If God takes away his holy
Spirit from you, which you are in Danger of every Hour while you delay, your
Case is most miserable and hopeless, it had been better for you, that you had
never been born.

YOUR Delaying looks like a Suspense of Mind which Master to choose. Why Halt
ye between two Opinions? Are ye at a Loss to determine which is the best
Master, GOD or the Devil, which the best Work, Sin or Holiness, which the best
Wages, Heaven or Hell? If not, what mean ye by your Delays? Can that which is
of absolute Necessity be done too soon? Are you ever like to have easier Terms?
Is not God as amiable now as ever he will be, Holiness as necessary and
excellent, your Souls as precious, the Love of Christ as sweet, and Heaven as
valuable? If therefore you do ever intend to turn to GOD, do not play the
Hypocrite: Turn now, or give up Salvation for ever! Rejoice, O young Man, in
thy Youth, and let thy Heart cheer thee in the Days of thy Youth, and walk in
the Ways of thy Heart, and in the Sight of thine Eyes, take thy Swing, and
follow thy vicious Inclinations, but know thou, that for all these Things, God
will bring thee into Judgment! But to proceed,

MAY not the Necessity of Conversion, excite you to seek after it? Ye can
neither behold God here, by an Eye of Faith, or enjoy him hereafter without it,
as our Lord positively assures us, it is of absolute Necessity to future
Happiness, both from the Constitution of God, and the Nature of Things; without
Holiness no Man shall see the Lord (Heb. 12.14.) This is the one Thing needful,
which whosoever chooses, possesses not only the best, but the most necessary
Part; it is certain God is holy, otherwise he could not be absolutely perfect,
and so no God; and it is as certain, that we must be like him in Holiness, else
we can have no Complacence in him, or he in us; for between Contraries, instead
of Harmony, there is Discord and Opposition; without this therefore, we must
give up all Hopes of Happiness for ever. May I not Address you, in the Language
of CHRIST to Martha, Luke 10.41, 42. Martha, Martha, thou art careful and
troubled about many Things, but one Thing is needful. And, SIRS,

MAY not the Excellency of Conversion, excite our Esteem of it, and Desire
after it; this restores the defaced Image of God in us, which is the Beauty of
our reasonable Nature, to some Degree of its primitive Luster, and thereby
capacitates us to answer the Design of our Being, which is to serve and enjoy
our Creator and Redeemer, without this we must be unprofitable here, and
miserable hereafter: If Holiness be the Beauty of God himself, it must of
Consequence be ours, seeing it is our highest Excellency to imitate him; but
that it is so, appears from the Precept, to Worship him in the Beauties of
Holiness, and his Title, glorious in Holiness. Add to this, the Profitableness
of Conversion, which should be a sufficient Motive to labor for it; this
advances us to the highest Honors, and instates us in the most lasting
Benefits; for hereby Jehovah, who is the Fountain of Honor, becomes our
Father, the Lord JESUS CHRIST our Husband, the Cherubims and Seraphims, our
Attendants and Guard, and the Church triumphant and militant, our Brethren; is
it a Matter of no Moment, for poor polluted Dust, Heirs of Hell and Wrath, to
be cleansed from their Deformity, and made the Sons of a King, nay to be made
Kings and Priests to God? Does not the Apostle John, speak with just Surprise,
of this Privilege! 1 John 5.1. Behold what Manner of Love the Father has
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God!

ANOTHER Excitement to seek Conversion, is the Safety it brings Persons to; all
such have God to be their Shield and Sanctuary, their sure Refuge, and
exceeding great Reward; and who then can hurt them, or make them afraid? How
secure and pleasant must their repose be? But before this Change, you are in
Danger of utter Destruction every Minute, and have no Shelter to cover you from
the Vengeance of an angry God. In fine, the Pleasure consequent upon
Conversion, should invite Sinners to labor for it; as the regenerated Person's
Life is the safest, so it is the sweetest Life! ( Prove. 3.17.) Wisdom's Ways
are Ways of Pleasantness, Christ's Yoke is easy, and his Burden light. It is
true, Difficulty and Pain are endured before Conversion, but when the Bias of
the Heart is turned toward God and Holiness, and it feels the Power of a
Savior's Love, he goes on his Way rejoicing, for it must needs be agreeable to
act according to the settled Bent of the Soul; and their Joy is rational,
spiritual, peaceful, perpetual! It is rational and solid, arising from and
confirmed by Consideration and Reflection, and therefore suitable to the Soul,
which is the Seat and Fountain of Reason; whereas the Pleasures of Sin are but
a Flash, the result of a cruel Rape upon the Understanding by Sense; which
according to the Order of God and Nature, should be its Subject. This Joy is
also spiritual, proceeding from the Father of Spirits, and so adapted to the
Soul, which is of an immaterial Nature; but the Pleasures of Sin are gross and
sensual, only suited to gratify the lower Passions and Appetites, which Beasts
possess in common with Men. Farther,

IT is peaceful; the Paths of Wisdom are Peace, as well as Pleasure; whereas
those of Sin, though they gratify a brutal Passion, do produce Pain and
Disorder, and hence it is truly said, that the Way of Transgressors is hard,
they are like the troubled Sea, that casts forth Mire and Dirt! Once more,

THIS Joy is perpetual, at least in State and Habit; Light is sown for the
Righteous, whereas the stolen Pleasures of Sin, cannot be reflected on without
Shame and Horror, unless by Men of reprobate Minds, and seared Consciences. (
Romans 6.11.) What Profit had ye in those Things, of which ye are now ashamed,
for the End of these Things is Death.

THE Joys of Religion are peculiar and noble, in this, that they antidote all
our Fears, and equal our vast Desires and Hopes; being fully persuaded, upon a
good Foundation, that the Creator and Lord of the Universe, is our cordial,
immutable, and immortal Friend, and that he has undertaken to overruled all for
our Good in Time, and to introduce us into his glorious Presence at last, where
is Fullness of Delight for ever; of whom, or of what should we be afraid, having
such Security? shall we fear Man, whose Breath is in his Nostrils, whose
Foundation is in the Dust, and who is crushed before the Moth? No! we need not
fear, though Ten Thousand rise up against us; shall we be slavishly afraid of
awful Phoenomenons, in any Parts of inanimate Nature, or at any Presages, or
actual Beginnings of Revolutions in Kingdoms and Nations? No! God is our Refuge
and Strength, a very present Help in Trouble; therefore we will not fear,
though the Earth be removed, and the Mountains be carried into the Midst of the
Sea, yea though the Waters thereof roar and be troubled.

SERMON XI.
EZEKIEL. 33.11. Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil Ways; for why will ye die.


IN the two preceding Discourses, I first considered this Text in its primary
View, as relating to temporal Miseries, and afterward in its Secondary, as
respecting Eternal; and in order to excite Sinners to seek Conversion, I
endeavored to expostulate with them, by the following Arguments, viz. eternal
Death, eternal Life, the Necessity, the Excellency of Conversion, the
Advantages, Safety, and Sweetness consequent upon it, together with the great
Unreasonableness, and manifold Dangers of Delays, in a Matter of such vast
Moment! What I farther purpose upon this Subject, is to offer more Arguments
and Directions, both to Sinners and Saints: Here observe, that before
Conversion, Sinners are,

1. UNPROFITABLE and lost Creatures, Philem. 1.11. which in Time past was
unprofitable, but now profitable to thee and me: Here it is evident, that the
Unregenerate are unprofitable, they answer not the great End of their Being and
Relations; they are in a Manner good for Nothing, Cumberers of the Ground, the
very Lumber of the Creation; Luke 15.4. This my Son was lost. Ye are lost to
God, he has not that Honor and Service from you, which is due; but in Place
thereof, Disobedience and Reproach! You are lost to the Church of Christ, whose
best Interest you have not at Heart, and cannot suitably promote, nor has the
Church any Ground for Joy in you while such, but of Grief and Sorrow! You are
lost to yourselves, and that in many Respects; your Time is lost, it runs all
to waste, not one Moment of it is rightly improved, to secure your eternal
Salvation. Your State is lost, you must certainly and eternally perish, if you
continue in it till Death; your Talents are lost, prostituted to mean Pursuits,
in Place of substantial Happiness, which as it adds to your Guilt, will
increase your future Misery! Your Schemes and Pursuits are lost, you spend your
Money for that which is not Bread, and your Labor for that which satisfies
not; your Enjoyments are lost, your Prosperity being abused to Pride and
Luxury, is a Snare to your Souls, and fattens you for the Slaughter of divine
Vengeance: ( Prove. 1.32.) Adversity awakes your Envy, or makes you despond, and
thus your Hearts are hardened like Pharaoh's under divine Judgments; O
lamentable Case! The Word and Ordinances are lost upon you, and through your
Abuse, become a Savor of Death to you. The Operations of the holy Spirit being
quenched by your wilful Iniquities are lost. The Benefit of private
Instructions and Entreaties, by the Ministers and People of God are lost, they
have no abiding Impression on your Hearts! The Benefit of a pious Education is
lost! The Advantage of Converse with, and the holy Examples of good Relations,
Friends, and Acquaintance are lost; how will you endure to see them in the
Kingdom of God, and you yourselves shut out? and to hear a Blessing pronounced
on them, and a Curse upon yourselves? And in a Word, your Souls and Bodies will
be for ever lost, unless you turn from your evil Ways to God!

2. YOU are exceeding sinful Creatures, much more so than you are aware of,
your Hearts are deceitful, and desperately wicked, as deceitful as wicked;
grand Cheats, by their Juggling they hide their Wickedness from your View; from
them come Murders, Adulteries, and false Witness, and in them is a fixed
Prejudice against God himself; Romans 8.7. The carnal Mind is Enmity against God,
it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be: The Apostle does
not say it is an Enemy, but in the Abstract, it is Enmity; which heightens the
Sense; an Enemy may be reconciled, as Esau was to Jacob, but Enmity never can;
as Black may be made White, but Blackness cannot; those that are at Enmity,
cross each others Wills, and will not submit to each other; the fleshly Mind is
rebellious in the highest Degree against the Will of God, till it be changed,
and it is impossible it should be otherwise, there is in it a moral Impotency
to Obedience. Enmity, says Mr. Henry, speaks the Sinner to be a Devil of a Man,
it is not only the Alienation of the Soul from God, but the Opposition of the
Soul against God, it rebels against his Authority, thwarts his Designs, opposes
his Interest, spits in his Face, and spurns against his Bowels! The Mind of the
Unregenerate not being subject to the Law of God, must needs be Contrary, and
being Contrary, and that continually, to the whole Law, of Consequence breaks
it every Moment; for what is Contrary to it, must needs be a Violation of it;
hence it appears, that the Unregenerate break the whole Law of God every
Minute, by the evil Frame of their Hearts; for the governing Power of their
natural Enmity to God is never broken, till they are converted: Before this
Change, there is no contrary Principle infused, by which its Dominion should be
crushed; it is true, this Enmity may be for a Time restrained, by a good
natural Temper, and hope of Pardon, or politically concealed to answer some low
End; but when these Restraints are removed, it rages against God himself; as
the Snake when frozen with the Winter Cold, is tame and gentle, but when
warmed, and provoked, will soon show its native Spite against Mankind, and spit
its Poison! But besides this constant Violation of the whole Law of God, in the
Frame of your Spirits, all your Thoughts, Words, and Actions, natural, civil,
and sacred, are Violations of the Law, because you are corrupt Trees, i. e.
unjustified, unconverted Persons; for such, if we believe our Savior, cannot
bring forth good Fruit; hence it is, that every Imagination of the Thoughts of
your Hearts is only Evil continually; and that you yourselves being Evil,
cannot speak good Things; for the same Reason, your Plowing and Prayers are
Sin; how innumerable then must your Iniquities be, and how exceeding heinous?
Indeed, your whole Life is but one continued Trespass! (...) what a dismal
Scene does this open, and yet it is necessary it should be seen and felt, in
order to cure!

3. WHILE unconverted, you are miserable Creatures, poor, blind, and naked,
without real durable and satisfactory Riches, without a clear and affecting
View of the Things that belong to your Peace and Salvation, without Ornament,
without Defense; continually exposed to all the Artillery of Heaven! without
God; you have no Interest in his Friendship, no Communion in his Love; without
the Former you cannot be safe, or without the Latter truly comfortable: As this
World is but a melancholy Dungeon, without the natural Sun, so is the Soul,
without God: You are also without Hope Ephesians. 2.12.
, i. e. a true well grounded Hope; you have indeed a Hope, but it is worse than
none, for it will fail you in Extremity, as a Spider's Web the Person that lays
hold of it, when falling into a Precipice; the Hope of the Hypocrite shall
surely perish, and such are all the Unconverted: You are without the Covenants
of Promise, and hence the Promises are said to be Yea and Amen in Christ, i. e.
firm and steadfast to those that are united to him vitally by Faith, which is
not your Case; for he that has this purifieth himself, even as Christ is pure;
you have therefore no interest in any one Promise in the whole Bible, No! but
in the Threatenings and Executions; every one of which is directed like a
Thunderbolt against you! Yea, the glorious GOD is your Adversary, an almighty
and dreadful One indeed! whom if you do not agree with speedily, while you are
in the Way of Means with him, he will cast you into Prison, from whence you
cannot come, till you pay the utmost Farthing! The Perfections of his Nature
are against you, his Purity abhors you, his Justice demands Satisfaction for
your numberless and crimson Iniquities, his Truth and Power stand engaged to
execute the Threatenings of his Word upon you; so that if you persist in
Impiety, God's Truth must fail, and Omnipotence be overcome, if you be not for
ever ruined! Now seeing God is against you, who is able to save you from his
Resentments? Seeing all Creatures are under his control; and indeed all the
Creation is against you, the Earth groans under you, and Hell gapes for you!
you are every Moment upon the Brink of Ruin, hanging over the infernal Furnace
by the slender Thread of Life, if that be cut, which it is continually liable
to, by innumerable Accidents, you will instantly drop down among Devils, and be
past all Hope for ever! and can you be easy in such a terrible Situation, O
detestable Stupidity! may a gracious God awake you by his Word and Spirit!

4. IS not GOD the Center of the Soul, to bring to which, Conversion is a
necessary Preparative; while the Soul seeks for rest among Creatures, it meets
with innumerable Disappointments, and yet repeats the vain Chase, hoping to
find Satisfaction in some new Object, which it has not tried before; but this
is as wild an Attempt, as to labor with Seriousness to grasp an Armful of our
own Shadow: But when God enlightens the Minds of his People, they turn their
Backs upon Creatures, and fly to him for Satisfaction, wearied with their vain
Pursuits, and speaking in the Language of the Psalmist, return to thy Rest, O
my Soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. See how every Thing in
the great Machine of this lower Globe, inclines to its Center; the Rivers in
their meandrine Courses, run with resistless Eagerness toward the great Ocean,
the Original of Waters: See with what Swiftness light Things fly upwards, and
heavy Bodies sink downwards to their Center; then should not the unregenerate
Sinner say, Is God thy Center, O my Soul! and shall these inanimate Creatures,
which are destitute of the Direction of Reason, exceed thee in their Motion,
who art endowed with it; shall every Thing hasten to its resting Place but
thee? Did Naomi accost her Daughter-in-Law, the Moabitess, in the following
pious and humane Language, My Daughter, shall I not seek rest for thee, that it
may be well with thee? And are we not under greater Obligations to be careful
for the Comfort of our Souls, and to address them in the same Strains? Shall I
not seek rest for thee, O my Soul, under the Wing, and in the Bosom of the
divine Majesty, by Conversion to Jehovah, that it may be well with thee for
ever?

5. IS it not your own Business, to use proper Means in due Season, to secure
future Blessedness? Many are indolent about others Business, that would not be
so about their own; surely this is your own Business, if any Thing is or can be
so; this is what you came into the World to negociate: The proper Use of other
Labors, is only to support you in the Pursuit of this, whatever you get here
goes into your own Treasury, If you are wise in this, you are wise for
yourselves, but if you scorn Advice and Instruction, you alone shall bear it;
it is equally the Folly and Unhappiness of degenerate Mankind, that they
pervert the Order and Use of Things, they enjoy Things that are only to be used
to obtain a higher End, and use Things that are to be enjoyed as the End: They
set their supreme Love upon the Things of this World, while in the mean Time,
the Pursuit of God and Religion is either wholly neglected, or at least made
but a By-Business! Is it not the highest Madness, to suppose that an infinitely
wise Being, would indow us with noble Souls, Substances of a spiritual Nature,
vast Capacity, and immortal Duration, Substances big with the Hopes, or
perplexed with the Fears of Futurity, for no higher Business, than that of the
Emperor Domitian, to catch Flies, or merely to enable us with greater Art to
act the Master Beast, upon the present Theater, in purveighing sensual
Gratifications?

6. IS it not a Business of the greatest Moment, that deeply and tenderly
affects your whole Eternity? For does not Conversion make Men meet for a
Kingdom that is not shaken, a Crown that will never fade? Worldly Things are
valued according to their Duration, and why should not this, compared with
which, they are Shadows that have no abiding? What shall a Man give in Exchange
for his Soul, says our dear Lord, or what is he prosited, if he should gain
the whole World, and lose his own Soul? The whole World is not a sufficient
Compensation for the Loss of it; how much less a small Part of the World, for
which many sell them to Satan, and seem pleased with the Bargain! but the Time
hastens, when they will be sick of it, and bewail their murderous Madness, with
never ending Groans and Lamentations! O do not therefore any longer trifle in a
Business of such inexpressible Importance, lest the dreadful Doom of the
Sluggard be executed upon you, which is mentioned, Mat. 25.26, 30. Cast the
unprofitable Servant into utter Darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing
of Teeth. Though Man is taught more than the Beasts of the Earth, and made
wiser then the Fowls of Heaven, yet such is his present Degeneracy, that he may
learn Instruction of the meanest Insect, and be made ashamed by their Diligence
and Sagacity; the Ant, without a Monitor, by seasonable Labor in the Summer
and Harvest, provides Food for the approaching Winter, and will thou an
intelligent Creature, under so many Advantages, neglect to prepare for the
distressing Time, that will soon come upon thee, I mean that of Sickness and
Death! How long will thou Sleep, O Sluggard, when will thou arise out of thy
Sleep?

7. WOULD it not be your highest Wisdom to seek converting Grace? Are not those
judged wise by Wisdom itself, who consider their latter End? Deuteronomy. 32.28, 29,
30. For they are a Nation void of Counsel, O that they were wise, that they
understood this, that they would consider their latter End! Now can this be
considered to Purpose, without Conversion to God? no surely! How affecting is
it to hear the Almighty lamenting over an ungrateful and foolish People, O that
they were wise! Woe to those stupid Wretches, who refuse to be allured by such
condescending Compassions! The want of this Wisdom makes Men like to the Beasts
that perish, and worse than they; because it is worse for one of a higher
Order, to be like a Beast, than to be one originally; the latter is innocent
and unavoidable, but the former is the Fruit of obstinate Impiety: Is it not a
Fool's Property to want a Heart, when he has a Price to get Wisdom (Prove.
17.16.) Now as it is worse to be like a Brute, than to be one, so it is for the
same Reason, worse to be a spiritual Fool, than a natural one.

8. THE blessed God gives great Encouragement to those that seek Conversion in
earnest, as appears by the following Places of Scripture, Let the wicked Man
forsake his Way, and the unrighteous Man his Thoughts, and let him turn unto
God, and he will have Mercy upon him, and to our God for he will abundantly
pardon; come and let us Reason together, for though your Iniquities be as
Crimson, and as Scarlet, I will make them white as Snow! The Parable of the
Prodigal, is enough to persuade the most Obstinate, and to excite the most
Discouraged to turn to God: No sooner did he begin to turn to his Father, but
immediately he spied him a great Way off, his Bowel, were moved with Compassion
toward him, and he hastened to his Relief; not a Word of his former
Miscarriages is mentioned against him, but on the Contrary, he is treated with
the most compassionate Respect, he came Home between Hope and Fear, Fear of
being rejected, and Hope of being received, but his Father was not only better
to him than his Fears, but better than his Hopes; he was clothed with the best
Robe (the Righteousness of Christ) had a Ring put on his Hand (the Earnest of
the Spirit given him) and Shoes put on his Feet (a Resolution to follow Christ
through all Difficulties.)

9. THY Conversion, O Sinner, would cause Joy in Heaven, as appears from the
Parable of the lost Sheep, Luke 15.4, -- 8. God the Father rejoices in the
Accomplishment of his Love-Designs toward Mankind; God the Son is satisfied
with seeing the Travel of his Soul, and God the Holy Ghost rejoices in
beholding the blessed Issue of his gracious Operations, pursuant to the Purpose
of the Father, and Purchase of the Son! The good Angels are likewise glad,
though those of their Order that sinned, are for ever abandoned, and though
those Sinners that repent are of an inferior Nature, and some of them have been
openly vile, who on their Conversion are made equal to them, and in some
Respects prefered before them (inasmuch as the Redeemer assumed their Nature,
and not that of the Angels, and likewise, in that they are made the Bride of
Christ) yet notwithstanding, the Angels being free from all Envy, and swallowed
up in their Master's Pleasure, rejoice on this Occasion, and gladly become
ministering Spirits to those of the human Race, who are the Heirs of Salvation;
as the Birth of the Redeemer excited those generous and amiable Beings to a
Song of Praise, so the Fruits of his Mediation cannot but be an Addition to
their Joy, which signifies, the full and dispassionate Satisfaction of the
Will, in a Good obtained. But not only the blessed God, and the Church
triumphant, will rejoice on this Occasion, but likewise the sincere Members of
the Church militant; to them, there is no Sight so agreeable on Earth, as to
behold poor Sinners awakened out of their Security, setting their Faces toward
Zion, and weeping as they go; it makes their very Hearts rejoice, to hear them
enquire seriously what they shall do to be saved? Because they know by
Experience, that this is the only Way to obtain Conversion to God; and likewise
because he is hereby glorified, and the Stakes of his Tabernacle with Men
strengthened: When after living Religion has been for a long Time in a
declining State, it pleases Jehovah to revive his Work, and give Efficacy to
his Word, then the upright in Heart are glad, their Mouths are filled with
Laughter, and their Tongues with Singing, then do they acknowledge, even among
the Heathen, that the Lord has done great Things for them! (Ps. 126.1, 2, 3.)
But when a Work of Conversion is at a stand, the Ways of Zion mourn, and her
cordial Friends lament, because should this Scene continue, vital Holiness
would forsake the Earth entirely! It is true, there is a Generation, who treat
such glorious Events with an Air of Indifference, or Invective, they look on
the Instruments of them as pestilent Fellows, and are therefore sorry when such
come among them (as the Jews of Thessalonica were respecting Paul, Acts 17.6.)
and ready to say, away with such Fellows from the Earth (Acts 22.22.) some that
have a Form of Godliness, hate the Power thereof, and if it comes among them,
they are either scared or enraged, like the Pharisees of old, they do not know
what these Things will come to; when a great Door and effectual is opened,
there are generally many Adversaries! But what then, seeing God and his Friends
are pleased, it is enough! The Almighty will support his Servants and People
under such unreasonable Censures, and turn them to their great Advantage in the
Issue! But on this happy Occasion, your own Souls, even yours, will be glad;
and not the less, because you are opposed, but the more, for the Spirit of
Glory and of God will rest upon you; then does Christ speak to you, as to the
Man sick of the Palsy ( Mat. 9.12.) Son be of good Cheer, thy Sins are forgiven
thee. Whatever outward Distresses any are in, yet if their Sins be forgiven,
they have reason to be of good cheer, pleasant, courageous, and confident in
their God; for all is well, and will be well with them for ever: The great and
glorious Jehovah, is their Father, their Friend, their sure Heritage! But
before this, there is no rational Ground for Cheerfulness, but the Contrary;
and therefore the Merriment of the Unregenerate, is but the Laughter of Fools,
and when they take Time to reflect, even in the Midst of it, their Hearts are
sad! What Ground can any Man have for Joy, while God is his Enemy, and Hell his
Portion? surely none at all! But the Time is elapsed, I add no more at present.

SERMON XII.
EZEKIEL. 33.11. Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil Ways; for why will ye die, O
House of ISRAEL.


IN the Forenoon's Sermon, I labored to persuade Sinners to turn to GOD, by
showing that the Unregenerate are lost, sinful, and miserable Creatures; that
God is the Center of the Soul, that seeking Conversion to him, is your own
Business, a Business of the greatest Moment, a Business which it is your
greatest Wisdom to negotiate; that the Almighty gives great Encouragement to
those that are sincerely engaged therein, and that your Conversion would cause
Joy in Heaven, and on Earth. I now proceed to other Excitements. And,

1. THE glorious Jehovah calls you to turn to him, in particular God the
Father, Jer. 18.11. Behold I frame Evil against you, return ye now every one
from his evil Ways, and make your Ways and your Doings good. Our Text is one of
the most moving Entreaties in the whole Bible, which is the Reason I have dwelt
so long upon it, being sincerely desirous to succeed in my Errand. God the Son
also calls, by encouraging Invitations, see Mat. 11.28. John. 6.37. Rev. 3.20.
The sovereign Majesty of Heaven, stands without the Door of thy Heart, O
Sinner, till his Head is wet with the Dew; and bewails thy Unkindness to him,
and Cruelty to thy own Soul. ( John 5.40.) God the Spirit likewise calls you,
by his gracious Operations, which if you continue to oppose, he will forsake
you for ever, Ezekiel. 24. Because I have purged them, and they were not purged,
therefore will I not purge them any more, till I cause my Fury to rest upon
them: The Spirit says come, and will you be so cruel and barbarous as to
resist, to your own Damnation, the compassionate Calls of the God that made
you, the Savior that bought you, and of the holy Spirit that offers to
sanctify you?

2. DOES not the Word of God, in all its Parts, invite you to turn from your
evil Ways to him? There you may see the Beauty of that Goodness to which you
are allured, opened in all its Charms, and the dismal Consequences of rejecting
it displayed, in all its Horrors! There you may see a System of sacred Truths,
sublime, self-consistent, and harmonious, a System strongly connected in all
its Parts, and of the noblest Tendency, to form you to that Purity it enjoins
and recommends. There are just and striking Representations of the Glory and
Grandeur of a God, and all his adorable Attributes, as well as of the Equity of
that Law which he has given, to direct our Sentiments, Dispositions, and
Conduct; a Law that tends as much to support the primitive Dignity of human
Nature, as it does to promote personal and social Happiness! There is a candid,
rational Account of the Apostasy of our first Parents, from that State of
Rectitude and Bliss in which they were created, and of that pregnant Ruin,
which in Consequence of it, came on them and their unhappy Descendants! And
there a Method of Recovery to the divine Purity and Love, through a Mediator,
is proposed, every Way consistent with the Claims of God's Justice, the Dignity
of his Law and Government; a Plan, which while it harmonizes with his Purity
and Veracity, does at the same Time, the highest Honor to his Wisdom and
Grace, in giving them the brightest and richest Displays! For hereby God is
just, and yet the Justifier of him that believes in Jesus: Hereby Occasion is
taken from the Sin of Man, to render divine Justice and Grace the more
illustrious; the Former in the Redeemer's Sufferings, and the Latter in the
Sinner's Forgiveness: Hereby the Believer's Happiness is secured upon a firmer
Basis, than while Man remained in a State of Innocence (by putting his Stock
into the Hands of an almighty Surety) and the Sinner at the same Time, laid
under more endearing Obligations, to grateful Love and universal Holiness, than
ever before! This is a Device worthy of a God, and adapted to the Case of
fallen Man! There are Instances of righteous, but terrible Severity against
enormous Impenitents, to alarm our Fear, and Examples of the mildest Lenity,
and richest Mercy toward returning Prodigals, to allure our Love, and incite
our Hope! In a Word, every Line in the sacred Pages, bespeaks thee for God, and
calls thee to turn to him; and will ye withstand, to your own Ruin, all these
amiable and moving Incentives, of Beauty and Majesty, Severity and Grace! Alas,
have you no Ingenuity, and are ye lost to Fear? will ye shut your Ears, with
the deaf Adder, against the blessed Charmmer's Voice, let him charm never so
wisely? Well Sinners, if ye will not hear God calling now, there will shortly
come a Time, when ye will wish you had, a Time when you will call yourselves,
and not be heard?

3. THE Providence of GOD, loudly calls you to seek converting Grace; should
not God's Mercies lead you to Repentance, and his Judgments upon yourselves, or
others, deter you from Sin, which produces such bitter Effects, even in this
Life, a small Presage of what must be endured in the next: When Sinners slight
the Word of God, he lifts up his awful Rod to awake, and constrain them to give
more earnest Heed to the Instructions and Reproofs of his Word; for as Solomon
observes, the Rod and Reproof give Wisdom (i. e. when attended by divine
Influence) the Rod is for the Back of Fools, and he that spares it, when it is
needed, hates the Child. Some Times the Almighty uses a wicked Nation as a Rod
in his Hand, to chastise his own People for their Degeneracy, and turns it to
their Advantage in the Issue, contrary to the Designs and Expectations of their
Enemies, yea, to their Confusion and Ruin! see Is. 10.5, 6, 7, 12, 25. The
Almighty informs us, by the Prophet Micah (6.9.) that the Rod of God cries to
the City, and that the Men of Wisdom will see God's Name; and he enjoins all to
hear it, and him that appointed it: There is certainly a loud Voice in every
Rod of God, and especially in that which deeply affects a whole Nation and
Country, in their dearest and most important Interests! And the Name of God,
his Wisdom, Sovereignty, and Purity are wrote upon it, in legible Characters;
which good Men see, and learn what God is and requires from what he does, and
act accordingly! But alas, a stupid World see it not, because they do not
consider; God speaks once, yea twice, and they perceive it not; when God's Hand
is lifted up, they do not see his Controversy with them; but in the mean Time,
it is the Duty, the Wisdom, and Interest of all, to hear God's Rod, when it is
approaching toward us, before we feel it, and to awake out of Sleep, to meet
the Lord in the Way of his Judgments; we should consider seriously, that it is
the Lord that has appointed it; whoever be the Instrument, and however unjust,
yet he is God's Sword, his Rod, and it is just, as it comes from him; to him
therefore we must look, above all Instruments, him we must hear, and before him
we must bow; otherwise the Rod will be turned into Iron, and break us to Pieces.

THIS Day is the most gloomy, in respect of our Church and Nation, that ever we
have seen; nor does the Darkness lessen, but increase, and yet alas, there
seems to be no general Sense of this Danger, or of the Sins that procured it;
nor suitable Methods taken in earnest to get them removed: Hear the Prophet's
Direction, upon a parallel Occasion (Joel, 2 Chap.) The Day of the Lord is
great, and very terrible, who can abide it; therefore also now, says the Lord,
turn ye even to me, with all your Heart, with fasting, weeping, and mourning;
for the Lord is gracious and merciful, who knows if he will return and
repent, and leave a Blessing behind him. See also, Jer. 3.12, 13. Go and
proclaim these Words toward the North, and say, return thou backsliding
Israel, says the Lord, and I will not cause mine Anger to fall upon you, for I
am merciful, and will not keep Anger for ever, only acknowledge thine Iniquity,
that thou have transgressed against the Lord thy God.

4. THE faithful Servants of GOD, call upon you to turn to him, and in this
Society you have had the Opportunity of hearing many such, who have with Wisdom
and Warmth wooed you to your Duty, and warned you of your Danger, in case of
neglect, as they are commanded; Is. 58.1. As Ambassadors for Christ, we pray
you in his Stead, to be reconciled to God; we beseech you also, that ye receive
not the Grace of God in vain. You cannot give the faithful Ministers of Christ
so much Pleasure any other Way, as by turning to God, for this they study,
pray, groan and weep; your Conversion would make their Hearts glad, in all
their Labors and Sorrows; nor can you grieve their Spirits so much any other
Way, as by your Obstinacy in Sin: Insuccessfulness makes them some Times
lament, in the Language of the Prophet, Woe is me, I am as those that gather
the Grape Gleanings of the Vintage, the good Man is perished out of the Earth,
there is none upright among Men! And will ye have no Compassion upon those that
Travel in Birth, till Christ be formed in you, or upon your own Souls? O what
will become of you in this Congregation, who have heard, and alas, withstood
the pungent Entreaties of so many pious Ministers! see Zac. 7.11, 12.

5. YOUR pious Relations, cry after you in the most tender Language of Tears
and Sighs, to turn speedily to God! O did you but know their secret Wrestlings
for your Conversion, their Sobs and Lamentations over you, the Damps they feel
in their Hearts, and the Turning of their Bowels, when they think of parting
with you for ever, when they think of the Curse they will hear denounced upon
you, by the great Judge of Quick and Dead, before the vast Assembly of the
Universe (except ye repent) it makes their Blood chill in their Veins, and
their Hearts shudder in their Bodies! O did you but know the Agonies of their
Souls, when they think of the everlasting Torments you must endure among
Devils, you would pity them, and yourselves, and try to turn to God! O if you
knew and considered the secret Pleasure they feel, when they see any
Appearances of your turning to God, you would seriously and speedily labor to
give them the greatest Joy they can have, next to that of the Salvation of
their own Souls!

6. YOUR pious Friends and Acquaintance, invite you to seek converting Grace,
Jer. 50.4, 5. They shall ask the Way to Zion, with their Faces thitherward,
saying, come and let us join ourselves to the Lord, in a perpetual Covenant.
The Grace of God cures the immoderate Selfishness of the Soul, and makes
Persons of a public and noble Spirit, sincerely concerned for the Honor of
God, and Interests of his Kingdom among Men, having a View of the Sinfulness
and Danger of Sin, and of the Value of their own Souls, they are hereby excited
to pity, from the Heart, the Souls of others, who are in a State of Sin, and
earnestly to desire after their Conversion, that Jehovah may be thereby
glorified, and they eternally saved from Wrath and Ruin! No sooner was the
Woman of Samaria converted, but she wanted her Friends and Acquaintances to be
converted too; and therefore she invited them to come and see a Man that told
her all that ever she did. The Grace of God is generous and diffusive, and
increases by Communication, for he that waters others, shall be watered also
himself: Such as have tasted the Sweetness of a Savior's Love, want that the
whole World should partake of the same, and have such a clear View of the
Certainty, Glory, and Importance of Religion, that they think, with young
Melancton, Sinners will not be able to withstand their Arguments and
Entreaties; but upon Trial, they soon, with him, find their Mistake; alas,
others have not the same View of Things, and therefore hear them with
Indifference, which grieves, and almost discourages them to attempt any more.
But Sirs, we should not desist from endeavoring to do Good to Mankind, though
some treat us, and what we speak sincerely for God, with a stupid ungrateful
Neglect, or proud Disdain; yet our dear Lord will accept of, and graciously
Reward our honest Endeavors, and probably bless them to others: O then let our
Speech be seasoned with Salt, ministering Grace to the Hearers; let us not shut
Christ and Religion out of our Conversation, agreeable to the wicked Fashion of
the present Times; but out of the good Treasure of our Hearts, let us bring
forth good Things, that are edifying; this was the Practice of God's People of
old, a Practice which the Almighty highly approves of, see Mal. 3.16, 17. Abhor
therefore the Sentiments and Conduct of the Unregenerate, whose highest View is
themselves, their secular Affairs are the Sum total of their Religion; when
prosperous, they are easy, whether Sinners are converted or not; like the
Snail, they sneak into their Shell, and confine their narrow, grovelling Designs
to it.

7. YOUR Consciences, these Witnesses for God, in your Bosoms, call you to turn
to Jehovah, and tell you that it is now high Time, they set before you a Map of
those Miseries, which you shall quickly feel, if ye continue in your present
State; and will ye be deal to the Warnings of your own Minds? Do not you know
that if your Heart condemns you, God is greater than your Heart, and knows
all Things? 1 John 3.20. Will not your holding the Truth in Unrighteousness, or
in other Words, suppressing and counteracting the Impressions and Directions of
it, prepare Matter for the most tormenting Reflections in the coming World,
when Conscience, however diverted or suppressed now, will have full Liberty to
speak out, and that for ever, and no worldy Business, Amusement, or Comforts,
to divert its Censures; or any false Hope to allay for one Moment, the
Bitterness thereby occasioned through Eternity! Conscience is either the
greatest Friend, or the most formidable Foe, just as it is obeyed or opposed; a
good Conscience will make one bold as a Lion, even in the greatest Dangers, but
a bad one will make Men tremble at the shaking of a Leaf, and fly when none
pursues: In Case of Hypocrisy, Conscience is as a Thousand Witnesses to condemn
us, and hence is that memorable Saying of a Pagan Philosopher, Turpe quod
acturus, te sine test time: In this doleful State of Things, the groundless
Applause of the whole Creation, is an insipid Trifle, that rather reproaches
and distresses, than contents the Mind, when we know it is a mere Fallacy: But
on the other Hand, when we walk uprightly before God, and earnestly labor to
promote the everlasting Good of Mankind, if in return (which is often the Case)
we meet with Abuse and Slander, the Consciousness of our Integrity will Support
us, as it did the Apostles, whose Comfort was the Testimony of their
Consciences, that in Simplicity and godly Sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom,
but by the Grace of God, they had their Conversation in the World; it is little
Matter to us, what Mankind think or say of us, if we have but the Approbation
of GOD, and our own Minds; and truly the greater Part of People, are bad Judges
of Things, for they have but little Leisure or Capacity to form a right
Judgment, and are generally so much biassed by Favor or Prejudice, that they
pass Sentence before Trial: So that it is Unreasonable for any wise Man, to be
either lifted up, or cast down, with their Applause or Censure; for both are
generally the Issue, rather of Affection and Prejudice, than of impartial
Judgment: O! then let us labor to get our Consciences rightly informed by the
Word of God, sprinkled with the Blood of Christ, and washed by the holy Spirit,
and act up to them, then we may with Certainty expect a continual Feast from
them! Again,

8. REASON calls you to turn from Sin to Jehovah, by showing the Necessity and
Equity of this Change; the Enjoyment of a holy GOD, without Holiness, is absurd
and impossible, in the Nature of Things; it is likewise just that the divine
Goodness be acknowledged, and the Powers you have received from God, directed
to him, and employed in his Service; it is also rational, to accept of Gospel
Liberty; in your present State you are disrobed of the Ornaments of Innocence,
confined in the darkest Dungeon, in Bondage to Sin and Satan; but now the
Dayspring from on High visits you, the Sun of Righteousness shines upon you;
now the Gospel proclaims Liberty to the Captive; and will you not accept the
Offer of this everlasting Liberty, purchased by the Blood of God? When Liberty
was proclaimed among the Greeks, after a State of Servitude, they received it
with Transports of Gratitude to their Deliverer, crying aloud, Soter, Soter, a
Savior, a Savior, and will you reject a much more valuable and costly
Liberty? then you deserve no Pity, from GOD or Man!

SERMON XIII.
EZEKIEL. 33.11. Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil Ways; for why will ye die?


IN the last Sermon upon this Subject, I proposed the following Arguments, to
excite Sinners to turn to GOD, viz. the Call of God the Father, Son, and
Spirit; the Call of the Word, Providence, and Ministers of God; the Call of
Relations, Friends, Conscience, and Reason: In Addition to which, give me Leave
to offer the following MOTIVES, viz.

1. THE Pains the dear Lord Jesus Christ took to purchase Salvation for you;
for this End, he willingly assumed human Nature, while covered with the Ruins
of its Apostasy, he came in the Likeness of sinful Flesh; the most high God
took upon him the Form of a Servant, the Consolation of Israel, became a Man of
Sorrows, though he was rich, for our sakes he became poor, that we through his
Poverty might be rich; the Chastisement of our Peace was laid upon him, that
through his Stripes we might be healed; his Life was full of Labor, Sorrow,
and Suffering, his Name was treated with Scandal, and himself with great
Ingratitude, Cruelty, and Contempt, by those he came to seek and save; and in
the mean Time, he bore all with Patience, that he might purchase Salvation for
you, and excited himself to Speed in performing the mediatorial Work, by the
Shortness of the Time he had to do it in; I must, says he, work the Work of
him that sent me while it is Day, for the Night comes wherein no Man can work:
Now did the Lord Jesus Christ labor so hard, and suffer so much from God and
Man, did he sweat great Drops of Blood, through Anguish of Soul, and cry out on
the Cross, Eloi, Eloi, Lama Sabbathani, that he might procure Salvation for us,
and shall we be indolent and careless in applying it to ourselves? O
unaccountable Infatuation! can we look upon the Agonies and Labors of the Son
of God for us, with Indifference and Neglect?

2. THE Pains the DEVIL takes to damn your Souls, should affect you; he goes
about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour; some Times he appears as
a Lion, to terrify us from Duty, and some Times as an Angel, to allure us to
Sin; O how innumerable are his fiery Darts, and deep Devices, if he fails in a
Hundred Attempts, yet he will not desist; but watch for an Opportunity, and try
other Measures; shall Satan take more Pains to damn your Souls, than you to
save them?

3. SEE the Pains, the Generality of Mankind take, about Things of infinitely
lesser Moment; the Merchant spreads his Canvass Wings, and flys across the
boisterous Deep, to the Extremities of the Earth, encompassed with Miseries and
Dangers of various Form; Farmers and Tradesmen rise up early, sit up late, and
eat the Bread of Care and Sorrow; and will not ye be persuaded to take as much
Pains about your Souls, as others about their Bodies and Estates, about an
eternal, as they about a temporal Good? how astonishing is your Madness!

4. SEE the Care and Pains that many take to obtain Salvation, who want your
Advantages, and be ashamed of your Negligence! The Mahomitans pray five Times a
Day, are true to their Word, honest in their Dealings, and keep one Month every
Year as a Fast; but many Christians have no regard to their Word, are
dishonest, do not pray so much as once a Day statedly, nor have kept one Day of
Fasting in their whole Lives. And some of the Pagans have excelled in moral
Virtue, e. g. Seneca, Cato, Socrates; yea, many in diverse Parts of the World,
have taken great Pains in Pilgrimage, and bodily Austerities; e. g. the People
of Narsinga, resort to an Idol in Pilgrimage, in great Numbers, with Ropes
about their Necks, and Knives sticking in their Legs and Arms, and when the
Idol is carried about in Procession, the Pilgrims strive to be crushed to Death
under the Chariot Wheels; a Multitude of Lives have been sacrificed by the
Pagans, in diverse Places, to pacify their Deities; yea, even Parents, contrary
to the strong and tender Ties of Nature, have made theirs beloved Children pass
through the Fire to Moloch. Now, though the Pagans were misguided in their
Severities, yet their Concern for future Happiness, and Labor to obtain it,
may justly put to shame the Secure and Indolent, who by the Gospel have Life
and Immortality brought to Light! Some of the Pharisees, were also eminent in
Virtue and Devotion, e. g. Saul before Conversion, and the young Man in the
Gospel ( Philip. 3.6. Mat. 19.20.) and yet our Righteousness must exceed
theirs, on Pain of Death, Mat. 5.20.

5. SEE how all inanimate Creatures, with the greatest Readiness and Constancy
obey their Creator, Ps. 19. The Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the
Firmament shows his Hand Work, by their Beauty, Order, and Observance of the
Law of their Creation; as immortal and universal Preachers, they objectively
declare the Reality of the divine Existence, and the Glory of his Government;
so exact and regular are the Motions of the heavenly Bodies, that the precise
Minute of Eclipses, may be foretold long before they happen; the Sea also obeys
his Voice, the Hail, Snow, Vapor, and stormy Wind fulfill his Word (Ps. 148.
Mark 4.39.) while you insolently control his Authority! The Trees and Plants
bring forth Flowers and Fruit, according to their Kind, and attain the End of
their Creation, while you are barren, and live in Opposition to the Design of
your Existence; and therefore every Pile of Grass, Flower, and Fruit you
behold, may be an awakening Monitor to you!

6. SEE how irrational Creatures, by a natural Instinct, seek after their
Safety, the sick Dog seeks a purgative Herb to cure himself, the wounded Heart
after Dittany to heal her; but alas, few poor Sinners repair to the great
Physician, for a Leaf from the Tree of Life, to cure their mortal Maladies! O!
should not the Care of those poor Creatures, who are destitute of the Direction
of Reason, excite you, who are endowed with it, to hasten to Christ for
converting Grace, without which you must die in your Wounds? Hear, O Heavens,
and give Ear, O Earth, for the Lord has spoken, I have nourished and brought
up Children, and they have rebelled against me; the Ox knows his Owner, and
the Ass his Master's Crib, but Israel does not know, my People does not
consider, Is. 1.2, 3.

7. HAVE not many in former Times, and do not some even now, who enjoy no
better Advantages than you, press into the Kingdom of God, full of Fear and
Distress about their Souls, crying Night and Day for Mercy! and why should not
you do likewise? Have not you reason to be troubled for your Sins, as well as
others, are not your Souls as precious as theirs? Have you not the same
Encouragement to seek God, and are you not under equal Obligations? What then
do you mean by this horrid Cruelty against your own Souls, in neglecting to
secure their Salvation, by a faithful Improvement of the Seasons of God's
Grace? Jer. 8.20. The Harvest is past, the Summer is ended, and we are not
saved; we have had in this Land, blessed be Jehovah for it, a glorious Harvest
some Years since, wherein many were converted, O! then poor Souls flocked to
Christ, as Doves to their Windows; Multitudes were awak'ned out of Sleep, and
sought Jesus sorrowing; how much was the Word preached, prized, and with what
Eagerness and Delight attended, as often as Opportunities of this Kind
presented, and that not only on the Sabbath, but upon Week Days? Small Matters
would not keep People from hearing, as they do now, nor were they soon tired,
though the Discourse was a little longer then usual; no, they were all
Attention, all Desire, all Delight! But alas, this harvest Season is past and
over, and yet many of you are not saved; the Bellows are burnt, the Lead is
consumed of the Fire, the Founder melts in vain; all Means used to reform you
are to no Purpose, though the Instruments are wasted in their Work; and is
there no Reason to fear the awful Judgment, threatened in the latter Part of the
Words referred to, Jer. 6.29, 30. Reprobate Silver shall Men call them, because
the Lord has rejected them! If you continue to slight all the Warnings and
Invitations given, you are worse in some Respects than Jews, Sodomites, and
Devils; for the Jews and Sodomites had not such Light as ye enjoy, and the
Devils never had an Offer of Mercy after their Apostasy, which you have
repeatedly been favored with, but to no Purpose; Heb. 10.28, 29. He that
despised Moses's Law died without Mercy, under two or three Witnesses, of how
much sorer Punishment suppose ye shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden
under Foot the Son of God; Mat. 11.23, 24. And thou Capernaum which art exalted
unto Heaven, shall be brought down to Hell.

8. WHAT would you lose by turning to God, is it Dishonorable to be related to
the divine Majesty, to the Church of the Firstborn, and to Jesus the Mediator
of the everlasting Covenant? Heb. 12. Is it Dishonorable to be adorned with
the Beauties of Holiness? Ps. 110.3. Is it Uncomfortable to partake of the
Clusters of Canaan, in Communion with a God of infinite All Sufficiency,
Goodness, and Glory? Is it Disadvantageous to be entitled to an unalienable and
everlasting Inheritance, extending infinitely beyond the narrow Circle of the
Creation, and to be enriched with a Jewel of immence Value? Is it a Loss to
enjoy the Friendship and Protection of a God of infinite Power, or to forsake
that which is the Dishonor of your reasonable Nature, and Poison of your
immortal Souls? O Sinners, what hinders your Compliance with the Invitations of
Heaven? Sin is pleasant; true some Sins do please the Senses, but their Fruits
here, and in Hell are bitter, besides these Pleasures are transitory, mean, and
brutish, but those of Religion noble and permanent. I shall be censured by my
Relations and Neighbors, what then, these groundless Reproached will turn to
your Honor and Benefit, Philip. 1.29. Mat. 5.10, 11, 12.

THE Sufferings of this present Life are light, and but for a Moment, not
worthy to be compared with the exceeding great and eternal Weight of Glory in
the Heavens, which is reserved for those that sincerely Love and serve God. I
shall lose some worldly Advantage by the Profession and Practice of Religion.
A. And what if you do, it will be infinitely more than made up to you, by the
Love and Favor of GOD here and hereafter! Why then do not you Endeavor, poor
Sinners, to turn to God? Why will you prefer any temporal Enjoyment, before the
Safety of your Souls? Did it not argue a vile Temper in Esau, to prefer a
Morsel of Bread, before his Birthright, which contained both sacred and civil
Privileges? The World is to you as Jael's Milk to Sisera, as Delilah to
Sampson: Is it not a pity that Men should be such Enemies to themselves, as to
prefer the disguised Vanities of a fading World, to eternal Riches? To seek for
rest among temporal Enjoyments, is as vain as if Israel had endeavored to fix
his Abode in the Wilderness among Serpents and Enemies, or as if Noah had made
the Ark his Home, when the Waters were fallen? Why stand ye so careless and
indolent on the Shore of a vast Eternity, not knowing but the next Tide will
sweep you off, beyond all Hopes of a Remedy, and sink you in the dark Retreats
of Death? Have ye nothing to do for the immortal God, and your deathless Souls?
O speak in the Language of the poor starving Leppers, who sat at the Gate of
Samaria (2 Kings, 7.3, 4.) Why sit we here till we die, if we say we will enter
into the City, the Famine is in the City, and we shall die there, and if we sit
still here we die also; now therefore come and let us fall unto the Host of the
Syrians, if they will save us alive, we shall live, and if they kill us, we
shall but die. If we return to a Course of Sin, we shall surely perish, if we
abide in our present Security and Sloth, we shall perish; come then let us go
to God, in Christ, for converting Grace, he can but deny us, we can but perish:
But if he has Mercy upon us, we shall live, live eternally. Up then Sinners,
awake, arise, and hasten, O hasten to Christ for Life; behold the Treasures of
Heaven are opened, resolve with Queen Esther, to go to the King, and if you
perish, you perish; she resolved to interceed for the Safety of her Nation,
though it should cost her her Life; and should not you for the Salvation of
your Souls? She met with a favorable Reception from an imperious Man ( Est.
5.) and may not you expect this, much more from the God of Love? Sinners are ye
past Feeling? When we represent God's Majesty armed with Vengeance, and casting
with his unbared Arm Thunderbolts of Death, ye are not moved; and when we
represent Jehovah enthroned on Grace, and with importunate, endearing
Condescension, alluring Rebels to accept of Liberty and Life, not only with
Arguments, but with Tears, Groans, and Blood, and yet you are unaffected, be
astonished, ye Heavens, and mourn, O Earth, at this!

SERMON XIV.
EZEKIEL. 33.11. Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil Ways; for why will ye die, O
House of Israel?


I PROCEED to offer some Directions to Sinners and Saints, agreeable to the
Order before proposed, O be entreated to seek Conversion, in the following
Manner.

1. EARLY, Ecles. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth,
while the evil Days come not, nor the Years draw nigh, in which thou will say,
I have no Pleasure; endeavor to fear, love, and serve GOD, with all thy Heart,
in young Years, for he is the Author of thy Life and Being, and of all thy
Benefits; to him thou art under the strongest Obligations, and upon him thou
have a continual Dependence: As Youth is most susceptive of religious
Impressions, so it is best fitted for the Performance of religious Offices; and
as thou owe the best of thy Time and Strength to God, the Giver of both, the
Improvement thereof in his Service, will be most acceptable to him, and most
comfortable to thee; This is the best Provision for old Age, one of the
greatest Comforts of which, is the Remembrance of a well spent Youth: Age has
enough to do with itself, these are Years in which we have no Pleasure, then
with Barsilai, we cannot relish the Delights of Sense, and in the mean Time,
are loaded with bodily Infirmities; our Strength becomes Labor and Sorrow, and
we feel ourselves die by Inches. It is ungrateful to give the Flower of our
Days to the Devil, and reserve the Bran for God, this is to offer the Torn, the
Lame, and the Sick in Sacrifice, for which a Curse is denounced, Mal. 1.14.

2. YOU should seek Conversion to GOD earnestly, as the poor Woman the lost
Piece of Silver, the Lord JESUS CHRIST could not Purchase our Happiness without
great Labor and Agony, and why should we think to get an Interest in it
without Pains? We are enjoined to strive to enter in at the straight Gate, or
to agonize into it, and informed, that many shall seek to enter, and shall not
be able; i. e. doubtless because they do not take Pains enough! The Gate of
Conversion, by which we enter into the Way of true Holiness, is straight, it is
hard to find, and therefore few find it, because it is above Nature, and only
revealed to some, by God the Father: ( Mat. 13.11.) It is likewise hard to be
entered into, for this is contrary to Nature; the Way of Holiness is narrow,
both in respect of Sin and Punishment, so narrow that it will not hold a Man
and unmortified Sin together; unless we pluck out our Right-Eye, and cut off
our Right-Arm, we must be lost for ever: It is also an afflicted Way, through
many Tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of God; and indeed the
Travelers in this Way are few (Luke 12.32.) Though the Number of Israel be as
the Sand of the Sea, but a Remnant is saved (Romans 11.7.) Many are called, but
few chosen. Add to this, that many and powerful Enemies, endeavor to hinder us
in this Work, viz. the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, which must be contended
with; and indeed the Salvation which Conversion makes us meet for, is of so
great Moment, and of such absolute Necessity, that it deserves the greatest
Care and Pains.

3. HUMBLY be persuaded, that notwithstanding of any Thing you have done, or
can do, ye are unprofitable Servants, and that the Lord may justly cast you off
for ever; till you be brought to this, you are not proper Objects of Mercy, you
have no suitable Esteem of it, nor are you disposed to give to God due Glory
for it: The Hungry shall be filled with good Things, but the Rich, the Full in
their own Eyes, shall be sent empty away.

4. YOU should seek converting Grace constantly, until you obtain it ( Luke
15.8.) a Person starving with Hunger would not be contented with asking for
Bread, unless he got what he asked; bare Begging would not satisfy the Cravings
of his hungry Stomach: So neither should ye be satisfied with praying for
Conversion, till you get what ye pray for, nor should you be discouraged
because you obtain not the Answer of your Prayers, so soon as you expected, or
do desire, for the Almighty acts as a Sovereign, in dispensing his Grace to the
Children of Men, to some he gives it sooner, and to others later, just as he
pleases; his Time we ought to wait for with Diligence, Patience, and Hope, for
it is certainly the best Time, and his Mercy, when obtained, will sufficiently
recompense our Pains and Patience in quest of it, and waiting for it! Do not
give over striving and hoping, because Things seem to grow worse with you than
before Conviction; for this is owing partly to that new Light of God's Spirit,
through his Law, now given you, which discovers that Heart-Wickedness which you
were ignorant of before; the more this increases, the more you see of your own
Vileness, from whence you are induced, though without Foundation, to conclude
it grows in you, when it is only your View of it; see Romans 5.20. The Law
entered, that the Offense might abound.

BESIDES, Satan with a malicious Design to discourage you, tries by the Law to
enrage inward Corruption, and to bring it into Act more than ever before, see
Romans 7.8. Sin taking Occasion by the Commandment, wrought in me all Manner of
Concupicence, for without the Law, Sin was dead. While Sinners remain in a
State of Blindness and Security, and please themselves with Dreams of their
present Goodness, and future Happiness, he lets them alone politically, for he
knows while they remain so, he is sure of them, and that if he tempted them, as
he does those that are convinced, they would be probably frightened out of
their Sleep, and he in Danger of losing them; he therefore encourages their
false Hopes, and if they get Half awakened, he labors with all his Might to
lull them a-sleep again, by high Encomiums upon their Goodness, such as these,
that they mean well, never wronged any of a Penny in their Lives, are much
better than many of their Neighbors, and such like; and that there is no need
of such Soul Distress, that if they give way to it, it will perhaps hurt their
Credit, their Senses, their worldly Interest, and it may be, bring them to an
untimely End: But if they get so wounded, that he cannot bring them back to
their former Security, then he tries all the Arts he is Master of, to drive
them to Despair, some of which are such as these, he suggests, 1st, That it is
now worse than ever, that God is more provoked. A. It is false, you are now in
the Way to Mercy, and never were before; see Mat. 11.28. 2d. He says, that no
Body ever had such a wicked Heart, since the Foundation of the World, as you;
never any Body sinned so in Life, nor was ever any in such strange
Circumstances. A. This is the Testimony of the Father of Lies, who was a
Murderer from the Beginning, as Face answers Face in a Glass, so does the Heart
of one Man another. The Almighty has graciously left upon Record in his Word,
diverse Instances of glorious Grace, vouchsafed to the vilest of Sinners, on
purpose to confute this cruel Stratagem of the Enemy of Souls, and to manifest
and magnify the exceeding Riches of his Grace, e. g. Manasses, a Murderer, a
Conjurer, who slighted God in Prosperity, obtained Mercy; and so did Saul, a
Persecutor, Mary Magdalen, a Harlot, the unclean, unrighteous Corinthians, the
idolatrous Ephesians, yea, and even those that actually embrued their Hands in
the Blood of our dear Lord, were washed by the Blood they shed, from their
Guilt in shedding of it! But supposing your Sins were greater in reality than
the Sins of any other, there is no reason to despair of God's Mercy, in case
you endeavor to repent and believe; because it is not according to Works of
Righteousness that we have done, but according to his Mercy that he saves us:
The Blood of Christ is of infinite Value, and cleanses from all Sin, and surely
Sin cannot be of more than infinite Guilt: The greater our Iniquities are, the
more the Riches of God's Grace will be magnified in pardoning them, and this
indeed is the great Design of the Gospel Method of Salvation, Ephesians. 1, 5, 6. 3d,
He injects blasphemous Thoughts into their Minds, in a thick Succession, which
they try to get rid of, but cannot; now Satan artfully and falsely labors to
father those Brats of his malicious Brood upon the Convinced, with design to
drive them to Despair or Distraction; and they, poor Things, are too apt,
through Ignorance, to give Way to the Charge, to their own great Prejudice: But
Friends, put on the Shield of Faith, whereby ye may be able to quench the fiery
Darts of the Wicked; they are called Darts, because of their sudden Injection;
and fiery Ones, because of the Pain they occasion; both which are plain Proofs,
that they are not the Product of your own Nature, for if so, they would be
gradual and agreeable; do not therefore charge upon yourselves, the Sins of the
Devil, or be frightened or troubled about them, let him answer for his own Sins
himself; Temptations that come from without, not consented to by our Wills, are
not our Sins, for thus our Savior was tempted, and yet without Sin. 4th, He
represents God to be all Anger and Revenge against them, inexorable to their
Cries, and that he is only waiting for an Opportunity to destroy them; while
they were in Security, he represented God in too favorable a Dress, as if he
was all Mercy, and no Justice; and now in too severe a one, as all Justice, and
no Mercy: But how can it be, that the Almighty should spare you, when you were
going on with a high Hand against him in Sin, and take this Opportunity to
destroy you, when you are mourning for your Iniquities, and endeavoring to
turn from them to him: No it can never be, for he himself has by his Spirit
stirred you up to this, he that with Compassion heard Ephraim's Moans, hears
yours also, and will help you in due Time. 5th, Satan suggests that the Day of
Grace is past, for, says he, God takes no Notice of your Prayers, and you are
judicially hardened. A. It is no Proof that God takes no Notice of your
Prayers, because you are not immediately answered; the Church complained, that
God had shut out her Prayers, but without Cause; he is not bound to our Times,
the Vision is for an appointed Time, which we must wait for; while you bewail
your Hardness of Heart, it is not judicial; the spiritual, rational, and best
Part of Contrition, consists in the Pliableness of the Will, and not in the
soft Flow of the Affections, which though agreeable, is not essential to
Contrition, but accidental and separable; while you are with Seriousness
endeavoring to mourn over Sin, and turn from it to God, the Day of Grace is so
far from being over with you, that this is the special Season of it; now God is
working by his Word and Spirit upon you, and graciously calling you to his
Arms. 6th, Satan knowing that so soon as ever the poor Sinner embraces Christ,
and depends upon him entirely by Faith, the Match is made, which will endure
for ever, and that then the Sinner will get out of his Clutches; he tries with
all his Might to keep them from Faith, he advises them as a Friend to beware of
presuming, and of being deceived, and to cover this Device, he tells them the
Soul is precious, it would be a great pity to be mistaken, and likewise that
they have been great Sinners, and have not yet been sufficiently humbled and
reformed, to prepare them for believing; without which, it would be rash and
dangerous. A. But for such as feel their Disease, to receive the Gift of God,
and lean upon him for Salvation, is so far from being presumptuous, that it is
a Duty; this is the Commandment, that ye believe in the Name of his Son Jesus
Christ, and to the Performance of this, the dear Redeemer earnestly invites the
Wounded ( John 6.37.) this is therefore the Way to be saved and healed, instead
of being deceived; nor does the sacred Scriptures prescribe any particular
Degree of Humiliation and Reformation, as absolutely necessary, previous to
Faith, only this in general, that we be so sensible of the Danger of Sin, that
we are willing to forsake it, and embrace the Redeemer, as he is offered to us
in the Gospel: It is therefore exceeding dangerous to defer any longer, a
Closure with Christ, on Account of these, or any other Pretenses whatsoever;
let us then come to him as we are, as Sinners, without any Price in our Hands,
and give ourselves up to him for ever, in order to be made righteous and holy
by his Blood and Spirit! 7th, Once more, Satan some Times tempts the Convinced,
to believe that they have committed the unpardonable Sin, and therefore that it
is too late for them to strive; by this Means, through implacable Malice
against God, and the Souls of Men, he labors to drive them to Madness,
Despair, or Self-Murder, and to keep them from Christ: But pray, how should you
be guilty of the unpardonable Sin? Before you were convinced, you could not
commit it, for want of Light, and since you could not, for want of Will; since
you have been awakened, you have been trying to bewail your Offenses, and come
to Christ, which are inconsistent with that Sin, and plainly show you are not
guilty of it; but I have sinned against Light and Mercy, and quenched God's
holy Spirit. A. So have all of adult Age, more or less, and even many of those
that are now in Heaven; witness David, Solomon, Peter, Manasses, yea Paul
himself acknowledges, that what he would not, that he did, even after he was
converted; this Objection concludes too much, and therefore nothing at all: But
I have Enmity against the Father, and the Son. A. What then, this is no more
than all Mankind have naturally, and therefore it proves nothing against you;
pray consider, that the Pharisees, who are charged with this Sin, were
convinced by the miraculous Works which Christ wrought, that he was the
Messiah, and yet contrary to their Consciences, they rejected him, and the Way
of Salvation by him, and from a Habit of Malice, ascribed (openly in Words) his
miraculous Works to the Devil, charged him with diverse Crimes, and persecuted
him, and his Servants, to the Death. These Things you cannot with Justice and
Truth ascribe to yourselves, and therefore the Enemy's Charge is false; and
indeed you show little Judgment in giving heed to it, resist the Devil, and he
will flee from you; be the more frequent and earnest in Prayer, and Satan will
soon be tired, for he does not like to excite you to Devotion; the darkest Time
of the Night, preceeds the Break of Day; in the Mount, God is seen; our
Extremity, is his Opportunity to show Favor; believe in the Lord Jesus Christ,
and ye shall be saved. Amen.

BUT I proceed to offer a Word of Advice to such as are converted. Labor to
love your heavenly Father, bless him for his distinguishing Mercy to you, and
endeavor to live a Life of Thanksgiving and Praise, which as it is the most
pleasant, so it is the most profitable Life; Gratitude for past Mercies, is the
best Method to obtain more: Seek your Father's Honor, by bringing forth much
Fruit to him, for hereby he is glorified; John 15.8. Imitate his Example, by
endeavoring to be Holy, as he is Holy; and Merciful, as he is Merciful; this
will be the best Evidence of your Sonship; obey his Laws with Sincerity and
Steadiness, and then shall ye have no Reason to be ashamed ( Ps. 119.) Submit
with Silence and Reverence to his fatherly Chastnings, as knowing they proceed
from Love, and will issue in your Benefit ( Heb. 12.9, 10.) Depend with
Firmness on your Father's Promise, as knowing it will never fail (2 Cor. 1,
20.) Maintain honorable Sentiments of your Father's Care and Love (Ps.
103.13.) Let Zion lie near your Heart, and engross a Part of your Thoughts and
Cares ( Ps. 137.5.) Grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ; in fine, add to your Faith, Virtue; and to Virtue, Knowledge; and
to Knowledge, Temperance; and to Temperance, Patience; and to Patience,
Godliness; and to Godliness, Brotherly-Kindness; and to Brotherly-Kindness,
Charity. AMEN, AMEN.

SERMON XV.
REV. 22.17. And the Spirit and the Bride say come, and let him that hears
say come, and let him that is a-thirst come, and whosoever will, let him take
the Water of Life freely.


IN these Words is contained a gracious Invitation, in which four Things are
remarkable, viz. the Persons inviting, the Persons invited, the Duty invited
to, and the Mode of the Invitation; each of which, I would discourse upon in
their Order.

1. THE Persons inviting, are the Spirit, the Bride, and him that hears; and,
1st, The Spirit invites poor Sinners to hasten to the Mediator, by his gracious
Influences, through the Word, Ordinances, and Providence of God; by showing
the Reasonableness, Necessity, and Advantages thereof, in a clear and strong
Light to the Mind, and disposing the Soul hereto; without his Operations all
Means are like the Staff of Elijah, and the Pool of Siloam, before the Angel
descended and troubled the Waters, unable to awake the Dead, or heal the
Wounded! 2d, The Bride, i. e. such as are really espoused to Christ, sincerely
and earnestly long after the Conversion of others: They have found by
Experience, the Danger of Sin, and the Sweetness of a Savior's Love; and
therefore bid awakened Sinners, heartily welcome to the dear Redemer. And, 3d,
Him that hears, says come; this Phrase may intend some that wish well to
the Redeemer's Kingdom, but are kept by unbelieving Fears, about the State of
their Souls, from joining with the Church, in sealing Ordinances; even such are
pleased, when they see Sinners flocking to the great Emmanuel, as Doves to
their Windows! And bid them God Speed, at least by the silent, but expressive
Language, of their Looks and Behavior. But the

2. PARTICULAR contained in the Invitation, is the Persons invited; 1st, Him
that is a-thirst; this Character supposes a Sight and Sense of Sin and Misery,
and implies earnest and insatiable Desires after Relief, which are usually
attended with Restlessness and Pain, and followed with vehement and unwearied
Endeavors to obtain Mercy, such pray with Importunity, like convinced Saul,
and press with determined Resolution, into the Kingdom of God, though it be
some Times, through a Crowd of Opposition and Temptation. And, 2d, Whosoever
will, i. e. is willing to forsake all Sin, all Self-Dependance, and accept a
whole Savior, with his Law and Cross, as well as depend entirely on his Blood,
and live to him; every such Person is invited by the blessed God, to come and
take the Water of Life freely; let his outward State be never so poor and mean,
his Sins ever so many, or so great; and his Troubles for them, in his
Apprehension, ever so small? All these are no Hindrances to Remission and
Salvation, in case you believe. The

3. PARTICULAR in the Invitation, is the Duties invited to, which are these,
1st, To come to Christ, and his Benefits, which are doubtless intended by the
Water of Life, in this Text: Now coming to Christ, most certainly signifies,
our believing in him; he therefore that believes that Christ is the Son of God,
the Savior of the World, able and willing to save all that come to the Father
by him; (...) that seriously considers upon the Terms of Self-Denial, taking up
the Cross, and following Christ, that the Gospel offers him, and his Benefits
upon, and fully Consents to them; he that relies upon his Mediation entirely,
for a Right to Happiness, under a Sense of Guilt and Impotency, and commits the
Concerns of his Salvation into his Hands, with Freedom, Desire, and Hope, and
in Consequence hereof, brings forth the Fruits of the Spirit, comes to Christ,
John 1.12, Cant. 8. 2 Timothy 1.12. 2d. The other Duty here recommended, is to
take the Water of Life freely, i. e. to accept of Christ, his Spirit, and
Grace, as the Gift of God's unexcited Mercy, which you do not, nor can deserve,
by any, or all of your Performances, past, present, or future, and which he is
under no Obligation to vouchsafe, either by his Nature or Promise, but may
absolutely deny in Consistency with both, after you have done your utmost: This
is intended by the divine Injunction, of buying Wine and Milk, without Money,
and without Price; the Poor in Spirit are blessed, for theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven: JEHOVAH hears the Cries of the Poor and Needy, nor does he despise the
Prayers of the Destitute; in him the Fatherless find Mercy; i. e. such as feel
themselves to be worthless, helpless, forlorn Orphans, and flee to him for
Relief, shall be graciously received by him. The grand Qualification, is to be
sensible we have none, and come to the blessed Jesus, as condemned Criminals,
for the free Remission of all our Guilt by his Blood; as polluted Lepers, for
cleansing from all our Filthiness by his Spirit; as Orphans, for shelter from
all our Enemies, under his Wing; as Beggars, for an Alms of mere Mercy; as
little Children, to be instructed in all we should believe and do: Unless we
have this Temper of Mind, we cannot depend upon the Mediator entirely, nor are
we disposed to value suitably, and seek intensely, the important Benefits of
his Purchase, or to render to God, the Honor due for them See Romans 9.15, 32.
Ephesians. 1.3, 62, 3.9. Romans 3.23, 28. James 1.18. John 1.13. 2 Timothy 19. Tit. 3.5.
.

The Lord JESUS CHRIST, and his Grace, are in our Text, called WATER OF LIFE,
or compared to a Fountain of Waters, because of some Analogy between them,
which appears in the following Instances; as Water cools in the sultry Heat, so
the Blood of JESUS pacifies the Conscience; as Water quenches the Thirst of the
Body, so does the Grace of Christ that of the Soul; he that drinks of this
living Water shall never Thirst, but it shall be in him as a Well of Water;
(John 4.10, 13, 14.) As Streams of Water are not only beautiful in themselves,
but beautify the Bodies they are applied to, so the dear JESUS is not only in
himself lovely, but he makes his People so, with his Comeliness; as Water runs
freely and steadily from a Fountain, when Land-Floods are either dried up with
the Summer Heat, or frozen with the Winter Cold; so the Grace of Christ, is in
the Souls of his People, as a Fountain of Waters, springing up to eternal Life:
Christ, and his Grace, may be truly called Water of Life, because through this,
he gives a Right to eternal Life, purchased by his Blood, as well as implants
and preserves to the End, a Principle of divine Life, by his Spirit and
Intercession; which makes meet for Eternal! But the

4. PARTICULAR in the Invitation, is the MODE of it. The Invitation is pressed
three Times, in our Text, to show, 1st, The absolute Certainty, and great
MOMENT of the Duty enjoined; our eternal All depends upon it; without Union to
Christ, we can have no Title to his precious Benefits; now FAITH is the Band of
this Union; as Bread, if it be not eaten, will not nourish us, as Raiment not
put on, will not cloth us, as a Medicine unapplied, will not heal us, so
Christ, and his Benefits, will be of no saving Service to us, unless they be
received by FAITH; by this we feed on the Bread of Life, put on the Lord JESUS
CHRIST, and are healed by the Balm of Gilead. Nothing is more frequently
enjoined, and strongly recommended in the sacred Oracles, than this Grace of
Faith; by this we are justified from the Guilt of Sin ( Acts 13.39.) sanctified
from its Stain (2 Cor. 3.18.) adopted into the Family of God ( John 1.12.) and
admitted into Heaven ( John 3.16.) by this we are comforted in all our Sorrows
( Romans 5.2.) in this we should pray ( James 1.6.) by this we should live ( Gal.
2.20.) and in this we should die ( Heb. 11.13.) the total Want of this Christ
absolutely condemns ( John 8.24.) Aversion to this he passionately bewails (
John 5.40.) Weakness in this he sharply reproves ( Luke 24.25.) a great Degree
of this he highly commends ( Mat. 15.22, 29.) Behold, a Woman of Canaan cried
unto him, saying, have Mercy on me, O Lord, thou Son of David, my Daughter is
grievously vexed with a Devil; but he answered her not a Word: And his
Disciples came and besought him, saying, send her away, for she cries after
us: But he answered and said, I am not sent but to the lost Sheep of the House
of Israel; then came she and worshipped him, saying, Lord help me: But he
answered and said, it is not meet to take the Childrens Bread and cast it to
Dogs; and she said truth Lord: Yet the Dogs eat of the Crumbs which fall from
their Master's Table; then Jesus answered and said unto her, O Woman, great is
thy Faith, be it unto thee even as thou will. Here observe, the Petitioner was
a Pagan, the Errand she came upon, was the Cure of her Daughter, who was under
some distressing bodily Distemper, in which Satan had a Hand; this humane and
amiable Parent, sympathized with her poor Child, and came to the Mediator on
her Account, for Help. O! may not the noble Example of this virtuous and devout
Pagan, make those PARENTS, falsely called CHRISTIAN, ashamed, whose Children are
under the Tyranny of the Devil, posting fast to Ruin, and yet neglect to bring
them to Jesus to be healed, as this Canaanite did her Daughter, who petitioned
with Modesty and Vehemence for Mercy in her Behalf, and looked on it as Mercy
to herself! she cried unto him, saying, have Mercy on me, O Lord, and waited
with Patience and Perseverance in the Way of Duty, for the Answer of her Suit,
till she was three Times repulsed! At first Christ was silent, he answered her
not a Word, which was a dark Symptom! and when his Disciples interposed,
perhaps more to befriend themselves than her, being wearied with her
Importunity; he repeats the Repulse, by saying, I am not sent but to the lost
Sheep of the House of Israel: The Door of Mercy seemed to be now quite shut,
yet this poor Woman, the Honor of her Sex, was neither offended nor
discouraged, but renews her Importunity, with increasing Reverence and
Vehemence, then came she and worshipped, saying, Lord help me; a short, but
substantial and humble Prayer: Upon this our Lord gave her a third Repulse,
accompanied with a Reproach, saying, It is not meet to take the Children's
Bread, and cast it to Dogs; this brought her Calamity to the highest Crisis,
for it seemed to be a final Rejection, and that with an Appearance of Contempt;
for our Savior hereby implicitly called her and her Daughter DOGS: Surprising
that the compassionate REDEEMER, whose Speech distills as the Rain and Dew upon
the tender Herb, should speak thus roughly to a humble, importunate Supplicant!
but it was with a kind Intention, to try and manifest her Faith, and render the
Mercy implored, the more agreeable and affecting, when vouchsafed! as well as
to magnify his own Power and Grace in the Issue! But let us attend the
Petitioner's Answer, to the third Repulse; here let us be all Ear, all
Astonishment! and she the Syrophaenician said, truth Lord, yet the Dogs eat of
the Crumbs which fall from their Master's Table: It is, as if she had said,
Lord, I confess, the Jews are Children, and I and my Daughter are DOGS, poor
HEATHENS, no Members of God's visible Kingdom; and that it is unreasonable,
that we who are Dogs, should be served before all the Children are satisfied;
but Lord, I do not presume to ask a full Manifestation of thy Power and
Goodness to the Gentiles, till an Offer of Mercy is made to the lost Sheep of
the House of Israel; I only beg a CRUMB of Mercy for myself and my poor Child,
and Lord, though it is not customary, to give whole Loaves prepared for
Children to Dogs, yet they are permitted to pick up the Crumbs that fall from
their Master's Table, O let us have the same Privilege; I believe Lord thou
have a sufficient Fullness of Grace and Blessing, to satisfy the Children, and
spare us a few Crumbs! What Humility appears in this Answer, in acknowledging
herself to be a Dog? What Modesty, in begging no more but a Crumb? What Faith,
Fervency, and Ingenuity, in bearing up under so many Repulses, in continuing
her Suit notwithstanding of them, and in forming a Plea from a Refusal to
enforce it! The Issue of this Struggle was honorable and comfortable, and
Jesus said unto her, O Woman, great is thy Faith, be it unto thee even as thou will: Hitherto, the dear Redeemer put on a stern Aspect, but now he looks
serene, and speaks like himself, as Joseph, when he made himself known to his
Brethren, saying, I am Joseph! Though diverse Graces shone with uncommon Luster,
in this amiable Lady's heroine and exemplary Conduct; yet the greatest Honor
is put upon her Faith (because this honors God more than any other Grace) the
Greatness of which, appears in her importunate persisting, after so many
Discouragements and Refusals; as Jacob, who wrestled with his God, and
prevailed; she as a Princess, succeeded in her Suit, and obtained the Blessing
she desired! And truly Brethren, the Way to get our Will, is to believe in
Jesus!

ANOTHER Instance of our Savior's commending a great Degree of FAITH, is the
Centurion, who waited upon our Savior, for the Cure of his sick Servant; to
whom our Lord said, he would come and heal him; but this Roman CAPTAIN answered
and said, Lord I am not worthy, that thou should come under my Roof, but
speak the Word only, and my Servant shall be healed; when Jesus heard it, he
marvelled, and said, verily I have not found so great Faith, no not in Israel;
see Mat. 8.8, 10. The Answer of this Gentleman, was truly admirable, full of
singular Humility, Reverence, and Faith: He was loath that our Lord, should put
himself to the Trouble of going to his House, a Favor which he reckoned
himself unworthy of, nor did he think there was the least Necessity of his
personal Presence to effect the Cure: Only speak the Word, said he, and my
Servant shall be healed; he nobly believed, that our Lord, had as absolute
control over Diseases, as he over his Soldiers: An Example of Piety and
Humanity this, worthy the Admiration, and Imitation of all, and especially of
such, who are of the military Order! Once more,

FOR Eminence in this glorious Grace of Faith, an honorable Title and
Encomium, were given to Abraham, and are transmitted to all Generations, as a
Motive and Pattern, to all his spiritual, as well as natural Offspring, Romans
4.17, 22. I have made thee a Father of many Nations; who against Hope (or the
outward Appearance, and general Course of Things) believed in Hope: He
staggered not at the Promise through Unbelief, but was strong in Faith, giving
Glory to God, being fully persuaded, that what he had promised, he was able to
perform. After the Promise of a numerous Posterity, he had no Issue by Sarah,
till they were both so advanced in Years, that it was utterly improbable,
according to the Course of Nature: Twenty Years elapsed, before Isaac was born,
this SON of his aged Years, this Son of his pregnant Hopes, this Son of the
Promise, the Staff of his Age, the Darling of his Heart, his only Son, the Son
whom he loved, he is commanded peremptorily, without any Reason assigned, to
SLAY, and that with his own HAND; O amazing Trial! what unsurmountable
Difficulties attended his Compliance? How could it consist with the moral Law,
which is of invariable Equity? How with Reason, with Humanity, with natural
Affection, with the Promise of GOD to him, the Peace of his own Mind, the Peace
of his Family? How with his Honor, and the Credit of Religion, that he should
slay his Son? But Abram being fully convinced of a divine Warrant,
notwithstanding of all that has been said, prepares for a Compliance, and with
an unparalleled, invincible Firmness of Resolution, begins it; though the Child
put an additional Remora in his Way, by his tender Appellation, and innocent
Query; Father here is the Wood, but where is the Lamb, for a Burnt-Offering?
This Address, in such Circumstances, must pierce an affectionate Parent's
Heart, and make his Bowels turn within him! Yet this extraordinary Man stood
the Shock, and remained immovable; built the Altar, bound his Son, laid him on
it, took the awful Knife, and stretched forth his Hand, to give the fatal
Stroke, at the very Throat of his Isaac! Be astonished, O Heavens, at this, and
wonder, O Earth! here is an act of Faith and Obedience, which deserves to be a
Spectacle to God, Angels, and Men! Abram's Darling, Sarah's Laughter, the
Churches Hope, the Heir of Promise, lies ready to bleed and die, by his own
Father's Hand! Here is an Instance of HEROIC FAITH, that merits everlasting
Admiration and Renown, an Example, that our Duty, our Honor, our Comfort, our
Usefulness, our immortal Interest, conspire to incite us (who profess a
Relation to him) to imitate, with an inviolate, unfainting Firmness, to our
dying Breath!

BUT the Mode of the Invitation, in our Text, is not only designed to signify
the Certainty, and great Moment of the Duty enjoined, of coming to Christ, or
believing in him: But, 2d, The Almighty's Earnestness, to obtain our
Compliance; to this End, Christ Jesus stands at the Door and knocks, saying, if
any Man will hear my Voice, and open the Door, I will come in and Sup with him,
and he with me: Rev. 3.20. With what Terms of Endearment does the blessed Jesus
accost his worthless Bride, to excite her to perform this important Duty? Cant.
4.8. Come with me from Lebanon, my Spouse, look from the Top of Amana, from the
Top of Shenir and Hermon: Cant. 5.2. Open to me my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my
Undefiled, for my Head is filled with the Dew, and my Locks with the Drops of
the Night, waiting for Admission, into the Heart I have formed, and which I
only can satisfy! To this Purpose, God commands, threatens, invites,
encourages, 1 John 3.23. This is the Commandment, that ye believe in the Name
of his Son Jesus Christ, he that believes not is condemned already, he shall
not see Life, but the Wrath of God abides on him; John 3.18, 36. Come unto me
all ye that labor, and are heavy Laden, and I will give you Rest.

BUT the MODE of Invitation, speaks the convinced Sinners great Backwardness to
believe; it is as difficult to persuade a convinced Sinner to believe, as the
Secure to awake: The Secure have many Excuses, e. g. God is merciful, I am not
so bad as many others, nor so bad as I have formerly been myself; I have a good
Heart, thank God, and many good Thoughts, and mean no Harm to any; I have never
wronged a Man of a Penny in my Life, and am no Hypocrite, as many are: On the
Contrary, the Convinced have many Excuses against believing, which is owing to
the following Causes, viz. 1st, To our being born under a Covenant of Works,
the Vessels retain a Tang of the Liquor first put into it; the Law is not of
Faith, but he that does the Things written therein, shall live by them; i. e.
he who personally, perfectly, and perpetually obeys the Law, shall obtain
eternal Life, by his Obedience, without FAITH in a MEDIATOR: But we have broken
the Law, in our first Parents, and therefore Salvation by it, is now rendered
impossible, for we are all condemned for Original Sin, and cursed for the least
Actual, Gal. 3.9, 10. Yet, though this Way be shut up, our natural Desire after
Salvation by it continues. 2d, Another Cause of our Backwardness to Believe, is
our Ignorance of the Gospel Method of Salvation, by Grace; the natural Man does
not understand the Things of the Spirit of God, and in particular, he does not
clearly perceive the Difference, between Salvation by the Law, or by Grace; but
still dreams contrary to God's express Declaration, that it is of him that
wills, and of him that runs, and not of God that shows Mercy. Mere
speculative Knowledge, will not divorce us from the Law, as a Husband; let Men
hear ever so much of the new Covenant Way of Salvation by Grace, they have not
a distinct, affecting View of it, till it be opened to them, by the Word and
Spirit of God, and therefore even when they are awakened, they try to cure
themselves by a more strict and earnest Performance of Duty, and are amazed and
nonplussed, when they find this Method does not answer their Design! They
labor to join the Righteousness of Christ, and their own, and make a patched,
Cloak to screen them from the divine Vengeance; but they may as easily make a
Rope of Sand, or unite Light and Darkness, see Romans 11.5, 6. Gal. 5.4. 3d,
Pride opposes Faith, it goes against the Grain to be beholden to Christ for a
free Cure, haughty Sinners scorn to stoop to the humble State of Beggars, and
therefore try to barter and truck for Salvation with Almighty God, as if they
could keep even Scores with him, or bring Immensity in Debt; they love the
Spider's proud Motto, I am Debtor to myself alone; and hence it is said of the
Jews, Romans 10.3. That being ignorant of God's Righteousness, and going about to
establish their own, they did not submit themselves to the Righteousness of
God. This is the Reason why natural Men spurn with such Indignation against the
Sovereignty of God, and grapple with him for his Throne; they cannot endure to
think of being under his Control: No, instead of that, they will have their
Creator dependant on their Wills forsooth; and obliged to lacky after their
insolent and precarious Nod! and tell smooth Stories, to palliate their
blasphemous Arrogance; as if it was right and reasonable, that they should take
the Reins of Empire, and occupy Jehovah's Place: But Sinners must bow, or be
broken in Pieces, humbled or damned! Is. 28.18, 20. Gal. 2.16. 4th, Another
Cause of Men's Backwardness to believe, is FEAR of PRESUMPTION; presuming of
Mercy out of God's Way, was their Sin before, and the Fear of presuming in the
Way of Duty, is their Sin now: It is, no Doubt, Presumption to expect Mercy, in
the Way of Impiety and Unbelief; but it cannot be Presumption to obey God's
positive Command, and kind Invitation, in believing his faithful Word, and
accepting his gracious Offers: The Devil is as busy to keep the Convinced from
Faith, as the Secure from Conviction; and this he does as an Angel of Light,
under a Cloak of Friendship; to the Secure he says, take care you do not
Despair, and to the Convinced, take care you do not presume, by believing over
hastily, before you are sufficiently prepared for it; and alas, the Misfortune
is, he is sooner believed than the God of Truth! 5th, Another Cause is, EASE in
DUTIES WITHOUT CHRIST; they mourn, pray, resolve, reform, and these Things give
them Ease; but alas, Friends, this is a false Cure: Though these Duties are
good in their Places, as necessary Means to obtain the Favor of God, yet they
are not the End, they are not Christ; we must be acquainted with him, or perish
for ever: The stung Israelites must look on the brazen Serpent, or die in their
Wounds; now, as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, even so must the
Son of Man be lifted up, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but
have eternal Life, John 3.14, 15. If Duties would heal without Christ, then
there was no need of his being sent into the World.

FROM what has been said, we may learn, the Goodness and Love of God, in
providing such a suitable and sufficient Redeemer, for fallen Mankind, and in
using such humble Importunity, to persuade them to accept of him, and Salvation
through him! There is a Balm in Gilead, there is a Physician there, a Fountain
is opened for Sin and Uncleanness, the Man Christ Jesus is a hiding Place from
the Wind, and a Covert from the Tempest, as Rivers of Waters in a dry Place, as
the Shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land (Is. 32.) him the Lord has
anointed, to preach good Tidings to the Meek, to bind up the Brokenhearted,
and proclaim Liberty to the Captives, Is. 61. Poor, miserable, blind, and naked
Sinners, are expressly counseled by Christ himself, to buy of him Gold tried in
the Fire, that they may be rich, white Raiment that they may be clothed, and
to anoint their Eyes with Eye Salve, that they may see, Rev. 3.17, 18. In his
immense, unwasted Fullness, every Blessing is contained, which guilty and
indigent Sinners need, for it has pleased the Father, that in him all Fullness
should dwell. Come then, my guilty Friends, and welcome to an all-sufficient
and compassionate Savior, and consent to be entertained, with the best
Blessings Heaven can afford, a Soul receive, or a God can give, upon free Cost!
When we consider, my Brethren and Sisters, the Value and Duration of this
Provision, the infinite Price whereby it was procured, the Freeness of the
Offer thereof to all, yea the very worst of Mankind, the independent Majesty,
and yet condescending Importunity of the Inviter, together with the Meanness
and Vileness of the Guests; it is enough to transport and ravish us; be
astonished, O Heavens, at this Prodigy of Love and Grace, which is infinitely
too big for the Thoughts or Words of Men and Angels, in Heaven and Earth, for
ever to conceive or express! Behold what Manner of Love is this, that we should
be called the Sons of God! herein is Love, not that we loved God, but that he
loved us, and sent his only begotten Son to be a Propitiation for our Sins! O
the Depth of the Riches, both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God, how
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out!. O the Breadth,
the Length, the Depth, the Height, of the Love of Christ, which passes
Knowledge! And what Gratitude, dear Sirs, does this matchless, gracious Love,
deserve from us, for ever? What a Monster then of Iniquity, must Unbelief be,
that casts a Slight upon all this Love and Grace, thwarts the Design both of
the Law and Gospel, opposes the gracious Purpose of God toward his Elect,
opposes the Purchase of Christ, the Agency of his holy Spirit, opposes all the
Invitations and Promises of the whole Book of God, opposes all the
Dispensations of divine Providence, and makes them, where it habitually
governs, of no effect! O horrid! This, this then is the Sin of Sins, worse than
any other, yea than all the Rest; and hence, when the holy Spirit convinces the
World of Sin, the Iniquity that is only mentioned, is Unbelief, as if there was
no other, to signify that it is the worst of all; as Faith is the cardinal
Grace, so is Unbelief the cardinal Sin; the GENERALISSIMO of all Satan's
Troops, that leads them on to Battle, and ranges them in Battalia, John 16.8,
9. In this Monster are grasped these malignant Ingredients, viz. Rebellion
against the highest Authority, 1 John 3.23. Ingratitude against the richest
Grace and Mercy, Is. 1.2, 3. Blasphemy against supreme Majesty, in charging
Falsehood upon the God of Truth, 1 John 5.10. Madness in contending with
Omnipotence, Murder in fastening the Guilt of all other Sins, and entailing
God's Wrath and Curse upon us for ever, John 3.36. Treason against GOD, and
Confederacy with the Devil; hereby Men enlist under the Colors of the Prince
of Darkness, gratify his Spite, and obey his Orders, in fighting against the
Being, Honor, and Government of God, spitting in his Face, the Seat of Beauty
and Majesty, and despising his Grace and Love And yet this Hydra is quite
overlooked, by the Pagan Schemes of pretended Christianity, which our unhappy
Nation abounds with, in this Day of Degeneracy and Blasphemy!
! I therefore earnestly beseech you to comply with the Invitation, in our Text;
to excite hereto, O consider, the gracious Nature of GOD ( Ex. 34.6.) the dying
Love of God ( Romans 5.8.) his Purpose (Ephesians. 1.6.) Promise (John 6.37.) Power
(Heb. 7.25.) Grace (Is. 43.21, 26.) and Invitations to the Chief of Sinners,
the Wretched, Poor, Blind, and Naked ( Rev. 3.17, 18.) to all that labor and
are heavy laden ( Mat. 11.28.) to all that are a-thirst, and are willing to
come, as our Text assures us. Once more, consider that the Offers of Mercy, are
not by proper SALE, but by free sovereign GIFT, without any Righteousness of
ours as a Price of Purchase; it is called indeed a buying, to show the poor
Sinners Willingness to give all he has, but then that he is sensible his All is
nothing to God, no Price, and therefore he buys as a Beggar without Money, and
takes the Water of Life freely. AMEN.

SERMON XVI.
JEREMIAH 3.22. Return ye backsliding Children, and I will heal your
Backslidings.


NOTWITHSTANDING all the Goodness of GOD, the People of Israel treacherously
departed from him, as an adulterous Wife, from an affectionate Husband; for
which, diverse Calamities were sent upon them, with which, the holy Spirit
graciously cooperating, many had an affecting View, both of their Sin and
Punishment; so that a Voice of Weeping and Supplication was heard in the Places
of public Convention, they affectionately acknowledged their Iniquities, and
earnestly implored Mercy: O! that as we have imitated them in their Sin and
Punishment, we may be enabled to imitate them in their Weeping, Devotion, and
Disposition, to return, to the God from whom we strayed. Verily, Brethren,
there is as great Necessity, that our Places of public Worship should be
BOCHIMS; for our Sins are more heinous, being committed against greater Light
and Love; and divine Justice is certainly disposed to proportion Calamities, to
the Crimes of Offenders, nor is there any Reason to expect a national
Deliverance in Mercy, from the Distresses we feel or fear, without a general
Repentance, and Reformation of Manners: But these, would open a Door of Hope,
and diffuse a Gleam of Light upon our benighted Nation, as on the People of
Israel; for behold, while they bemoan themselves, a gracious God addresses them
in the loving Language of our Text; Return ye backsliding Children, and I will
heal your Backslidings: The Words contain a gracious Invitation, in which four
Things are observable, viz. The Inviter, the blessed GOD; the Persons invited,
the People of Israel; the Duty invited to, returning to God, a Motive to this
proposed, and I will heal your Backslidings. And,

1. THE Inviter is the glorious God, to whose Service, they had bound
themselves by Covenant Engagements; a Being who deserved their supreme Love,
and humblest Homage; because of his supreme Eminence, and communicative
Goodness, in innumerable, immerited, and important Instances!

2. THE Persons invited, more immediately the People of Israel (and mediately
all in their unhappy Circumstances in after Time) here called Children, which
they were in several Respects, viz. by Creation, thus all the human Race are
Children of God, for he has made of one Blood all Nations; by Covenant
Dedication, in this Sense all the Nation of Israel are called God's Son, Ex.
4.22. and some of them were Children, in a special and saving Sense, by
Regeneration and Adoption, the former of which communicates the Disposition of
Children, and the latter enstates in their Privileges! Farther,

THE People of Israel, are here called backsliding Children; the Almighty does
not cast them off, on Account of their Declinings in Religion, though they
perhaps cast off themselves, and are cast off by others, yet the gracious God
owns them to be his Children still, in their lowest State; O amazing, glorious
Goodness! This is Language becoming the God of Love and Grace, for none but a
God would do thus! O poor Backsliders, when you hear the great Jehovah accost
you in this endearing Manner, after all your Wanderings, it is enough to revive
your discouraged Hearts, and dissolve them into the tenderest Contrition; who
would not love and serve so gracious a God, and hope for great and good Things,
from Goodness and Love itself? Here give me Leave to speak of the NATURE,
KINDS, CAUSES, and CONSEQUENCES, of Backsliding in Religion.

1. WE decline in Sentiment, when through the Corruption of our own Nature,
together with the Stratagems of Satan, and artful Colorings of his
Instruments, we depart, in any Degree, from the Simplicity of the Truth, as it
is in Christ, and embrace those Doctrines, which flatter the Pride of Nature,
and tend to fix foolish Sinners, upon the sandy Bottom of their own Wisdom,
Power, and Righteousness, to the Disparagement of Christ, and his Gospel, and
the Ruin of many Souls: Of this Stamp, are Doctrines of a Light in all Mankind,
sufficient to Salvation, without the sacred Scriptures; a free Will, in the
Unregenerate, to do spiritual Good; and of Justification, partly, or wholly, by
Works; add to these, the Arian, Socinian, and Deistical Schemes, whereby many
have with some show of Wisdom, endeavored to banish the grand Peculiars of
Christianity from the Earth; but his Church is built upon a Rock, against which
the Gates of Hell shall not prevail: Wisdom will, in every Age, be justified by
her Children. Corruption in Foundation Principles, when long continued in,
under Advantages of Instruction, is no Doubt, an awful Symptom, of unhumbled
Pride, Self-Ignorance, and Hypocrisy; and hence the Apostle observed, that some
went from them, because they were not of them: Yet it is certain, that truly
pious Persons, may not only err in lesser Points of Truth, which is a common
Case; but may for a Time be dangerously corrupted, in Matters of great
Importance, as appears from the Case of the Galatians, who by the Industry and
Stratagems of false Teachers, were induced, in some Degree, as it would seem,
by the Epistle inscribed to them, to warp in the great Doctrine of
Justification, and to slight the Apostle Paul, who was, under God, a mean of
their Conversion to him; and here it may be observed, that as false Doctrines
favor Decays in Religion, so do the Latter the Former; they are indeed
frequently mutual Causes of each other. Among the other Wickednesses of the
present Age, this is one, that diverse Pretenders to a Monopoly of Wisdom, have
with all their Art and Eloquence, labored to represent the Doctrines of
Religion to be of little or no Consequence, though our Savior declares, that
we are sanctified by them, and Reason itself teaches, that Sentiments have a
Tendency to influence the Mind and Practice; nor is it easy to vindicate the
Conduct of divine Wisdom, in giving us so large a System of Doctrines in the
BIBLE, if they are of no Importance: These Philosophers, by their labored
Harangues, upon a graceless, christless Morality, have almost banished, not
only Christianity, but even moral Virtue (which they pretend a Veneration for)
out of the Church, and World: May God deliver his People from such Pagan
Preachers. There is an easy and natural Gradation, from Arminianism, to
Arianism, and from that to Socinianism, and Deism; and this is the Path that
many have trod in the present Age; let us therefore be afraid of false Doctrine
(especially in important Points) Contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered
to the Saints, and be valiant for the Truth upon the Earth; in the mean Time,
taking care to speak the Truth in Love, and to proportion our Zeal for it, to
the various Degrees of Importance, of the different Truths that compose the
Christian Scheme; lest the righteous God send strong Delusions, and ye believe
a Lie, and be damned, 2 These. 2.11, 12. But,

2. WE Backslide in Disposition and Practice, when we forget our first Love,
and fall from our first Works; i. e. when our Views of divine Things are
darkened, our Love to God and Man abates, and our Labors for God's Kingdom, as
well as for our own Souls are relaxed, either at Times wholly neglected, or
superficially performed; when the Savor of Religion languishes in our Souls,
and we have no Appetite for spiritual Food, but are indifferent whether we
attend upon our Meals or not; and are more ready to carp at the Cookery, than
to eat for our Nourishment, when no generous and pious Projects fire our
Bosoms, and the Reproach of Zion does not trouble us, when we want to feather
our Nests, and sleep in a whole Skin, more than to grow in Holiness, or do
Good; when Credit with blind Folks is a great Matter with us, and we fear the
precious Cross of Christ, when the World looks big in our Eyes, and its People
wise and amiable, while in the mean Time, we neglect and slight the Saints of
God, that are either poor in outward Estate, or through Backsliding, lean in
their Souls, and instead of praying for them, and covering their Faults with a
Mantle of Love, we aggravate their Blunders, and quite forgetful of our own,
unmercifully condemn the State of their Souls.

THE Causes of Backsliding, are either General, or Particular; the general
Causes are the Body of Death within us, and the numberless Devices of Satan, in
concurrence therewith, which for the Sake of Brevity, I shall wave, and proceed
to speak upon the particular Causes, which are principally these following,
viz. 1st, Neglect of the Heart; when Persons take chief Care about the Outside,
and seem easy if that is regular, how wretched soever it is within, and are
rather desirous to have Praise of Man, than of God; this is the Beginning of
Sorrows, for the Heart is the Parent of Action, and when that is not attended
to, every Thing goes wrong; in this Situation, the Soul is like a Watch, when
the Main-Spring is not well set; we are therefore enjoined to keep the Heart
with all Diligence, because out of it are the Issues of Life, Prove. 4.23. 2d,
Another Cause is Sloth, in respect of the secret Duties of Religion, such as
frequent ejaculatory Prayer, and stated Prayer, and Meditation in the Closset,
or a superficial Performance of them: When the Spouse made Excuses about rising
to open to her Lord, he presently withdrew, Cant. 5.3, 6. When we are
negligent, God is grieved, our relish of Religion abates, and we are gradually
carried farther into the Spirit and Practice of the World: This detestable
Iniquity, is at the Root of all Backslidings and Apostacies in Religion, for
the Proverb is true, That nemo repent fit turpistsimus; A Man does not sit in
the Scorners Chair at first, no, he first stands in the Way of Sinners, and
walks in the Council of the Ungodly: O! it is no easy Matter to persevere to
the End, in a Course of religious Diligence; and yet the Savor of Piety cannot
be preserved without it: It is easy to begin well to Appearance, but to
continue (hic Labor, hoc opus) is the grand Difficulty, and yet this is
necessary to crown the Scene; for it is such only, that persevere to the End,
who shall be saved. But, 3d, Another Cause is Unwatchfulness; when we do not
watch against Temptations to Sin, or for Opportunities of doing and receiving
Good; this makes us an easy prey to our vigilant and cruel Enemies, who are
strong and numerous, and we but weak and corrupt: Our Honor and Safety, as
well as the Credit of Religion, do much depend upon our keeping a good
Look-out; unless we are constantly on our Guard, we shall be soon ensnared and
taken by Surprise, to our own Reproach and Loss, and to the Shame and Grief of
those that fear God, who will be wounded through our Sides: This Consideration,
justly moved the Psalmist, to pray earnestly to his God, that none that sought
him should be ashamed on his Account; a very necessary Petition for us all; for
we are in the Body, in great and constant Danger. And, dear Sirs, it would be
much better for us to be hid in the Dust, than to live to the Dishonor of God:
O then let us strictly and steadily observe the important Counsel of our Lord,
to watch and pray, lest we enter into Temptation: While others are only
watching to divert the Company, we should watch for an Opportunity to put in a
Word for God, this would be as Apples of Gold, in Pictures of Silver. 4th,
Another Cause is, Trifling with Opportunities of public Worship; staying at
Home some Times without sufficient Reason, and when they do come, do it not
after earnest Endeavors to get their Hearts in a right Frame, and with serious
Desires to profit; nor do they attend with Engagedness, and afterward labor
to digest what they have heard, by Meditation and Prayer: In such a Course,
nothing can be reasonably expected but Decays; for as the natural Life cannot
be sustained without Food, and that digested, so neither can the Spiritual: The
Word preached, is not only designed to form, but to finish Faith, and perfect
the Body of Christ, Romans 10.17. 1 Pet. 22. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. We should therefore,
as new born Babes, desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that we may grow
thereby, and with Meekness receive it; for unless it be mixed with Faith, it
will not profit us: We should attend, my Brethren, from a Principle of
Obedience to God's Authority, with an Eye to his Glory, and our own eternal
Happiness; for he commands us not to forget the Assembling of ourselves
together, as the Manner of some is, Heb. 10.25. and graciously promises, that
where two or three are gathered together in his Name, he will be in the Midst
of them, Mat. 18.20. and that in all Places where he records his Name, he will
come unto his People, and will bless them, Ex. 20.24. But to proceed, 5th,
Neglect of the frequent Exercise of Repentance and Faith, is doubtless a Cause
of Backsliding; when Persons do not often mourn over their Sins, and oppose
their Constitution Iniquity, they can have no Consciousness of Integrity, or
reasonably expect divine Influence, Mat. 5.29. Romans 8.13. Nor is it less
prejudicial to our Growth in Goodness, to neglect a frequent renewing of our
Consent to the Terms of the New Covenant; and a reallizing by Faith, the
Perfections and Friendship of GOD, and a State of future Glory: We should
frequently exercise Faith, upon divine Objects, and in particular, on the
All Sufficiency of God; he is infinitely more than sufficient to satisfy our
Souls in any Situation, and without him there is none to be had in any, that
deserves the Name; his Love will give Content in Rags, and make Bread and Water
sweet: Faith being the Conduit, whereby all divine Influence is communicated
from Christ to us; it is therefore vain to expect Growth in Goodness, without
the frequent Exercise thereof. 6th, Neglect of living upon the Promises, is
another Cause of Backsliding; the Words of God are not Yea, and Nay, uncertain
like those of Creatures; but Yea, and Amen, of infallible Certainty: The
Promises are designed for the Support of our Faith, that thereby Holiness and
Comfort may be promoted in us, 2 Cor. 7.1. Now when we either do not consider,
or stagger at the Promises, it is no Wonder our Comfort and Progress in
Holiness are marred: The Promises are admirably suited to all the Difficulties
of this present Life; consider in Perplexity, Ps. 32.8. in Danger, Ps. 32.7.
Ps. 91.4. in Want, Philip. 4.19. Is. 33.16. in Sickness, Ps. 41.3. in outward
Distresses, Ps. 46.1. Deuteronomy. 33.27. Romans 8.28. Is. 27.9. Heb. 12.10. under the
Power and Guilt of Sin, Romans 6.14. Hos. 14.2, 4. Is. 1.8, 19. Is. 43.25. if
tempted by Satan, Romans 16.20. under Fears respecting Perseverance, Jer. 32.40.
if dejected, John 16.22. if deserted, Is. 54.7, 8. under Fears respecting
Salvation, John 10.28.

UNTHANKFULNESS to God, for his innumerable Benefits, and neglect of rejoicing
in Christ Jesus, is another Cause of Decays; when we take every Thing by the
worst Handle, are always complaining, and crowd Thanksgiving into a Corner, how
can we grow? Should we not in all Things give Thanks? There is not one
Difficulty that we ever met with, that we could spare without Injury; they are
all suited by infinite Wisdom, in respect of their Kind, Measure, Duration, and
Time of Infliction, to our spiritual Advantage; and what would we have more?
Should we not therefore heartily bless God for them all, seeing they are Fruits
of his fatherly Care and Love, which is not a feminine Fondness, but a
masculine Affection, that prosecutes the properest Measures to compass the Good
of its Object! But how shall I be thankful for Afflictions, seeing I have found
no Good by them. A. Have not you, under them been at Times humbled, as well as
stirred up to pour out Prayers before God, with unusual Importunity, and
resolved to be holy? And are not these Benefits? But if you should reject this
Reply, God's Promise is a sufficient Answer, viz. that they shall work together
for your Good, in his Time, and Way; though no Affliction for the present is
joyous, but grievous, nevertheless it afterward yields the peaceable Fruits of
Righteousness, to those that are exercised therewith; God's Government over the
World is holy and good, he is wise in Counsel, and wonderful in Working? But
how can I rejoice, who am so full of Sin, and of no Use in the World? A. If Sin
be your principal Burden, it does not reign, and therefore you will not be
condemned for it; and if you sincerely desire to be of Use to Mankind, it is an
Argument of true Goodness: It should also be observed, that there are different
Kinds of Service, because of the different Stations in Life we sustain, and the
different Talents we possess; some more eminent, direct, and discernable, and
some less so; yet all acceptable to God, through Christ, and all useful: Though
the Foot has not the Place, or Use of the Eye, yet it is Necessary, and of
Service in the Body. The Kind, Degree, and Times of our Usefulness, are fixed
by the divine Purpose, to which Providence exactly corresponds; Ephesians. 1.11. with
which we should be satisfied; Duty is ours, but Success is God's, and therefore
should be left to him; we may be of more Service by our Prayers, and the silent
Influence of good Examples, than we know of; nor will our future Recompense be
commensurate to our Success, but to our Fidelity in our Master's Service;
though Israel be not gathered, yet if sincere and laborious, we shall be
precious in the Eyes of the Lord: But supposing we are in a great Degree
useless, will Murmuring and Unbelief mend the Matter? No! but make it worse!
for hereby we offend God, and break our Constitutions: Let us therefore be
pleased with God's Providence, and go on in the Way of Duty rejoicing! But my
State is bad, how can I rejoice? A. If you have been slain by the Law, and
embraced the Mediator without reserve, in all his Offices, and in the general
Course of your Lives, are endeavoring to come out of this World, leaning upon
him, if the Temper of your Hearts, is for the most Part spiritual; and you make
Conscience of your Thoughts, Words, and Actions; if you Love all pious People
for Christ's Sake cordially, and are sollicitous to preserve the Savor of
Religion in your Hearts, and to grow in Goodness in Life; notwithstanding of
your Weaknesses, you are vitally united to Christ, he is your Head and Husband,
and therefore whatever Cause you have of Humiliation and Sorrow upon your own
Account, you have Cause to Rejoice in him, for he is your Righteousness and
your Strength, and will be your Song at last.

LET us therefore labor to get more into the Spirit and Liberty of the Gospel,
by avoiding judging of our State in a Time of Desertion, for Objects cannot be
discerned in the Dark, and in that Situation we are in Danger of passing too
severe a Judgment against ourselves, which is very prejudicial both to our
Comfort and Growth, Is. 50.10. Let us beware of condemning the State of our
Souls, because we have not had such a great Degree of Distress as some others,
or such Comforts, Sealings, and Progress in Religion; if we have but the Root
of the Matter, let us go on toward Perfection, Heb. 6.4. to be every now and
then digging up the Foundations of our Hope, and poring too much upon the Law,
tends to damp our Spirits, discourage us in Religion, and keep us always in a
State of Infancy; no, when the Law has done its Work, in Slaying us, it is of
no farther Use but to Guide our Conduct, and humble our Spirits, for our
Violations of it; having felt the Spirit of Bondage to Fear, let us believe in
JESUS, in this we cannot be wrong, for Christ is the End of the Law, for
Righteousness to every one that believes (Romans 10.4.) this is the Commandment
(1 John 3.23.) if we were before wrong, this is the Way to be right, and if
right, to know it: O then let us learn to live by Faith, and not by Sense;
hereby we shall Evidence ourselves to be the genuine Children of Abram, who
staggered not at the Promise, through Unbelief, but was strong in Faith, giving
Glory to God.

ANOTHER Cause of Backsliding, is Cowardice in the Cause of GOD, which is as
offensive to him, as prejudicial to us, Mark 8.38. O let us resign our Names,
Estates, Liberty, and Lives, into the Hands of God, and rejoice in the Hope of
his Glory, bearing with Fortitude and Cheerfulness, Sufferings for his Sake,
from Sinners, or Saints, or from both; in this honest, resolute, and faithful
Course, which is not like to suit well with an ungodly World, or even with
backsliding, degenerate Christians, who have got too much into the Spirit of
it, we may expect that the Spirit of Glory, and of God, will rest upon us.

NEEDLESS associating with graceless People, is doubtless, one Cause of the
present prevailing DEADNESS; depart from the Foolish, and live, and walk in the
Way of Understanding. When we make Companions of the Ungodly, by frequent and
unnecessary Converse, they by their plausible, but selfish show of Moderation
and Prudence, draw away our Hearts from God, and by Degrees bring us into their
Spirit; and indeed the farther we get from God, we like them the better, and no
wonder, for we are like them ourselves: I do not hereby insinuate any Thing
against conversing with them about necessary Business, or in order to their
Cure, for that is commendable.

COVETOUSNESS is also a Cause of the present Degeneracy, Is. 57.17. For the
Iniquity of his Covetousness, I was wroth and smote him, I hid me, and was
wroth. The Bulk of Mankind are fully of Opinion, that Happiness is to be had in
Wealth, if we may judge of their Sentiments, by their Conduct; and therefore
they set their Hearts and Souls upon it, and try to get it with the utmost
Vehemence (per f^s nefasq) by Hook and Crook, as the one Thing needful, and
they make the Business of Religion vail to it; now pious People, in Desertion,
are apt to be influenced by their Example, and for a while to run in the same
Goose-Chace, to their Shame and Loss; it is true, when Persons are first
converted, having near Views of God, and divine Things, the World looks so mean
and contemptible in their Eyes, that they are apt to run to an extreme in
neglecting it, which the Ungodly take good Notice of, and cry out with great
Resentment, they are Idle, they are Idle! Scandalum Magnatum! Great is Dianah
of the Ephesians, the People will be ruined by hearing so many Sermons: But
afterward, when pious People are at a Distance from their God, their Minds are
so blinded, that they regard the World too much, and entertain foolish
Expectations from it, which they find baffled by repeated Experience. -- I may
add,

THAT Pride is a great Cause of Backsliding; when Persons go out of the Places
Providence has put them in, and meddle with Things too high for them, Ps.
133.1. When they refuse that Honor to others which is due, are Masterly and
Censorious, this Iniquity God abhors, and punishes, James 3.1. and 4.6. Is.
65.5. James 2.13.

ANOTHER Cause of Backsliding, is sinning against Light; hereby the Heart is
hardened, and the holy Spirit grieved, who in order to punish this
Heaven-daring Iniquity, withdraws his sealing Influences, Ephesians. 4.30. Farther,

NEGLECT of the Communion of Saints, keeping shy of those that fear God, not
speaking at proper Seasons, in a humble Manner, of our Christian Experiences,
contrary to the Psalmist's Practice, Ps. 66.16. and not associating for Prayer,
and religious Discourse, Mal. 3.16, 17. Again,

NEGLECT of private Fasting, and extraordinary Prayer, in secret, under
Temptations, is a Cause of declining in Religion; extraordinary Circumstances,
require extraordinary Measures, and are not like to be answered without them,
Mat. 9.15. When the Bridegroom shall be taken from them, then shall they fast;
when a Messenger of Satan was sent to buffet Paul, he besought the Lord thrice,
2 Cor. 7.8. I may add,

THE Neglect of frequent and attentive Reading of the holy Scriptures, an Evil,
pregnant with Sin, and Danger, and yet alas, too general among us! Once more,

A glorious Work of God's holy Spirit, in this Land (some Years since) in the
Conviction and Conversion of many Sinners, has been unjustly slandered, and
ungratefully opposed, by which great Injury has been done to the Souls of Men:
Probably one Reason of the Leanness of Soul, that so much obtains, is that,
that Iniquity has not been sufficiently laid to Heart!

NOW the CONSEQUENCES of BACKSLIDING, are DREADFUL, for it makes Life
uncomfortable, unprofitable, and dangerous; without the Sun, this World would
be a melancholy Place, and so it is with those that fear God, when they enjoy
not the Shining of the Sun of Righteousness? What Heart have such to do, or
endure any Thing for God, no! many of them have enough to do, to keep their
Heads above the Water, and are in continual Danger of making Religion, and its
Friends, stink in the Nostrils of the Inhabitants of the Land, by the grossest
Impieties!

TO what Degree and Duration, BACKSLIDING may extend, in such who have the Root
of the Matter in them, the Scripture is silent, only thus far we are informed,
by the Instances of the Churches of Ephesus, and Sardis; that pious People may
for a Time, forget their first Love, and fall from their first Works; and that
the Things that remain, may be ready to die (Rev. 2.3.) that they may fall into
gross Crimes, witness LOT'S Incest and Drunkenness, DAVID'S Adultery and
Murder, SOLOMON'S Sensuallity, and Worshipping false God's; such as ASTORETH,
and MILCOM; and PETER'S Denial of his Master, with Curses, after all his
Confidence; dreadful Instances, yet encouraging to the Wounded, for which
Purpose I now mention them! It is probable, that DAVID continued stupid, after
his Impiety, till NATHAN reproved him, which was Nine Months at least; but how
long Solomon continued in his Wickedness, the Scripture says not, which
Silence, is doubtless designed, to leave a Door of Hope to those, who have
wandered very far, and very long, from God, and to encourage their return to
him! In this dismal Case, many try to tear up their Hopes by the Roots, and are
sorry when they cannot get it effected! By this Method, they are discouraged,
and made to roar, their Moisture is turned into the Drought of Summer, their
Bones broken, and with HEMAN they are almost distracted!

SOME deserted Persons are like a Tree in the Winter, on which you can see
neither Leaves nor Fruit, they get to such a Length of Impiety, that they are
condemned by themselves, and all around them? Was it not strange in pious King
ASSA, who instead of receiving the Prophet's Warning with Meekness, imprisoned
him; and still more strange in JONAH, that he impudently caviled with God
himself about a Trifle, and told him to his Face, he did well to be angry. O
the awful Power of Temptation and Desertion! What Feathers are the best of Men
before their Force? For God's Sake then, let those that stand, take heed lest
they fall. -- But the

3. PARTICULAR in the Invitation, is the Duty invited to; Return, That is,
bewail and abhor your Offenses, and yourselves for them; reform from them
speedily and sincerely, and believe that I am willing and able to help you;
believe that my Grace is not only free at first, but ever after; the Top-Stone
of this spiritual Building, is brought forth not by human Might and Power, but
by the Spirit of the Lord of Hosts, with Shoutings, crying Grace, Grace unto it
(Zac. 4.6, 7.) raise and enlarge your Thoughts of my Goodness, and my Grace,
and Hope in my Mercy, which endures for ever? -- But the

4. PARTICULAR in our Text, is the ENCOURAGEMENT PROPOSED, and I will heal your
Backslidings. This gracious Promise includes Remission of the Guilt of Sin,
Subduction of its Power, and the Comforts of the Holy Spirit; I, for my own
Name's Sake, will blot out your Iniquities, and forgive your Sins, says
Jehovah. He gives Power to the Faint, and to those that have no Might, he
increases Strength: He likewise comforts those that are cast down. Very
memorable are the Words of God by the Prophet Isaiah, I will not contend for
ever, for the Spirit should fail before me; for the Iniquities of his
Covetousness, I was wroth and smote him, and he went on frowardly in the Way of
his Heart: But what follows for such a perverse Behavior? Wrath and Vengeance;
no! be astonished, O my Soul, at the gracious Declaration of God! I have seen
his Ways, and will heal him; I will lead him also, and restore Comfort unto
him, and to his Mourners. The dear Redeemer makes the Bones that are broken to
rejoice, his poor People are as glad as if they had never backslidden: Where
Iniquity has abounded, Grace does sometimes much more abound. Shall we sin that
Grace may abound? The Damnation of such is just.

FROM this Subject we may learn,

1. THE deep Corruption of the best of Men in their Bent to backslide from the
blessed God; Jer. 2.11, 12, 13. Has a Nation changed their Gods, which are yet
no Gods, but my People have changed their Glory, for that which does not
profit. O this should excite the deepest Abasement, and strictest Watch over
ourselves, and the greatest Tenderness over such as have fallen, whom we should
restore with the Spirit of Meekness, considering that we ourselves are also in
the Body; and that it is by mere Mercy that we have been preserved from the
greatest Crimes.

2. WE may learn the glorious Grace of God, inviting such Backsliders to return
in the endearing Manner here expressed; Return ye backsliding Children, and I
will heal your Backslings. O the Breadth, the Length, the Depth, the Height of
the Love of Christ, which passes Knowledge! O the Wonders of his Grace! Let us
therefore who have backslidden, imitate the Example of the Penitents in our
Text, and say, Behold we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God. The
penal Consequences of our Departure from God, are parallel to those of the
People of Israel, and our Obligations to return, more than parallel, because of
the superior Privileges we enjoy. Hark, poor deserted Believers, your
compassionate Father invites you to come to him, and promises to heal your
Backslidings; O godlike, glorious Grace! Alas he does not invite me, for I am
not his. A. You sometimes thought he loved you, and felt Love to him, you
should remember the Hill MIZAR, the Days of God's right Hand, the Word on which
he caused you to hope; for he is the same still, and loves to the End; he does
not disdain to call you Children for all your Wanderings, and why should you
disown your relation to him; no! you should call him, Abba Father, and plead
your relation! It cannot be that I should be a Child of his and backslide so
far. A. You speak without Book; the Almighty has not told you in his Word how
far a Child of his may backslide, and therefore the rule you go by is a Fancy
or Delusion; why will you gratify Satan in rejecting the Wisdom and Goodness of
God against your own Souls? You would honor God, and act more like a Child of
Abraham, if you hoped against Hope. I grow worse and worse, there is no Body
like me. A. What signify these Glooms? We should walk by Faith, and not by
Sense. You do not know others Hearts, else you would think them as bad; but if
the Case was really so, there is no reason for Discouragement, because God's
Grace is free; he will heal your Backslidings, and love you freely: Whether
they be more or less; where he has not limited, you should not. Believe, and be
established.

SERMON XVII.
HOSEA 2.6, 7. Therefore behold I will hedge up thy Way with Thorns, and make a
Wall that she shall not find her Paths: And she shall follow after her Lovers,
but she shall not overtake them; and she shall seek them, but shall not find
them: Then shall she say, I will go and return to my first Husband, for then
was it better with me than now.


THOSE that feared God among the People of Israel are, in the preceding
Verses, enjoined to say to their Brethren, Ammi, and to their Sisters Ruhama:
i. e. Tell them they are my People, and have obtained Mercy; which was indeed
the Case of all of them in respect to external Dedication, and of some in a
saving Sense. In the mean Time they must plead earnestly with their Mother the
Jewish Church and Nation concerning their Idolatries, here justly termed
Whoredoms and Adulteries, because they were Breaches of their Marriage Covenant
with God, and to let them know how displeasing they were to him; that they had
hereby forfeited their right to the Privileges of that relation, and deserved a
Divorce; and that if they did not repent and reform, the Almighty would sue it
out against them. Plead with your Mother, plead, remonstrate plainly and
pungently against the Church to which you are so nearly related, for she is not
my Wife; she is not de jure, by right; she deserves not this Honor, having
forfeited it by Male-conduct, and she shall not belong so de facto, in Fact, if
she persists in violating her Faith, and abusing my Patience by her Lewdness, I
will strip her naked, make her as a Wilderness, and slay her with Thirst: I
will not have Mercy upon her Children, for they be the Children of Whoredoms,
i. e. I will deprive her entirely of all her Comfort, Defense and Ornament, and
expose her and her spurious Descendants to the most distressing and destructive
Calamities! The reasons of this Severity are mentioned in the 5th Verse; For
their Mother has done shamefully; she said I will go after my Lovers, that
give me my Wool and my Flax. She was impudent and resolute in her Impiety; I
will go after my Lovers; and with the greatest Unkindness and Injustice
ascribed to their Influence the Benefits she received from God: But observe
what she proudly calls her Wool and her Flax, as if they were hers more than in
Fee-simple, the Almighty justly calls his, and threatens to recover out of her
Hands; thereby intimating that the Right of Creatures is only a right of Use
(as Tenants at Will) which is by Male-conduct forfeited, and reverts to the
Original Owner, who is by Creation absolute Lord over all Nature. I will hedge
up thy Way with Thorns, and make a Wall that she shall not find her Paths: q.
d. Because this People are so shameless, impetuous and boundless in their
Lusts, I will deal with them as Men do with unruly and rambling Beasts, viz.
Set a Hedge of Thorns about them, i. e. Encompass them with Wars and other
Calami- which shall wound and pierce them, that if they will follow their evil
Courses, they shall have but little Pleasure in them; but if these are
insufficient to restrain them, and they impiously attempt to force their Way
through the Hedge of Thorns: I will make a Wall; i. e. Increase the Number, and
heighten the Degree of their Distresses, and make them insurmountable, that
though they follow after their Lovers they shall not overtake them; they shall
be so environed and immured with a Train of great and growing Calamities, that
even though they attempt to gratify their corrupt Inclinations, they shall not
be able to effect the Design against my Honor and their own Happiness, no more
than they can by a sudden Sally break through or leap over a strong and high
Wall. Such indeed was the Assyrian Army under Salmanezar to the Jews; it cooped
them up in the City of Samaria during the Space of three Years, and at last
stripped them to the Skin, and carried them captive to a strange Country: And
such was Sennacherib, who took all the fenced Cities of Judah (2 Kings 18.) In
the mean Time Encouragement is implied in the Word LEAST, that in case they
abandoned their Impieties, the threatened Judgments would be averted. Then shall
she say, I will go and return to my first Husband: First, both in respect of
Time, of Dignity and Right; for then was it better with me than now: Being
wearied in the Greatness of their Way with fruitless Labor and vain Pursuit,
and being ashamed of their Hopes, like the Troops of Tema, and dispairing of
Help and Satisfaction from their Idols in Time coming, and likewise remembering
the Comfort they formerly had in God, as a Husband; they now resolve to return
to him in earnest, and without Delay. From the Text, I may observe these
Propositions; 1st, That some who are pious, do at Times, greatly decline in
Religion. And, 2d, That to reduce them, the Almighty sends many and great
Afflictions. And, 3d, That when these are sanctified, they dispose them to
return to their first Husband, because it was better with them then, than now.
Having spoken upon the Subject of Backsliding, in the preceding Discourse, I
shall wave the first Proposition entirely, and proceed to the two remaining:
The first of which is,

THAT to reduce pious People from their Wanderings, the Almighty sends many and
great Afflictions upon them, he hedges up their Way with Thorns, and makes a
Wall. He embarrasses the Councils, crosses the Measures, and disappoints the
Expectations of his backsliding People; he at first, lays lesser Sorrows upon
them, in respect of their Names, Bodies, Estates, or Relations, to keep them
from their IDOLS; but if this Method, fails of Success, JEHOVAH sends heavier
Calamities, and raises such Barriers in their Way, as they cannot surmount, to
gratify their perverse Inclinations; which through the dreadful Influence of
long Desertion, and violent Temptation, they are in a Manner bent upon; if his
People Sin against him, he will chastise their Iniquities with Rods, and their
Transgressions with Stripes; if they walk contrary to him, he will walk
contrary to them, and punish them seven Times for their Iniquities. And indeed
no other Method will promote their Interest; for a Series of easy Honor and
Prosperity, in this Situation, would but increase their Pride, Sensuallity, and
Ingratitude: The fatter they grow, the more with Jeshurun, they kick against
the tender Bowels of their Benefactor; and therefore he multiplies Distresses
upon them, until they come to their Senses, humble themselves before him, and
stop in their wicked Career: And some Times they are so sensual and stupid,
that one or two Distresses do not answer the End; but Deep must call unto Deep,
before they awake to purpose, and turn to their God! Well if the Case be so,
that the Design of the Almighty in afflicting us, is to reduce us from our
Wanderings to his Bosom, that he may impart sublimer Sweets, than this Earth
affords; if he chastens us, that we may not be condemned with the World? What
Reason then have we to bless him for his fatherly Love and Care, and submit
without Murmuring to his Rod? We have had Father's of our Flesh, who corrected
us, and we gave them Reverence, shall we not much rather be in Subjection to
the Father of Spirits, and live? Heb. 12. Why should a living Man complain, a
Man for the Punishment of his Sins? Let us then humble ourselves under the
mighty Hand of God, stretched out in personal, domestic, or national
Calamities, that in due Time he may lift us up. I proceed to the

2. PROPOSITION, viz. That when Afflictions are sanctified, they dispose pious
Persons to return to their first Husband, because it was better with them then,
than now. The Truth of this Proposition, is sufficiently evident from the Text.
Here let us enquire, 1st, When Afflictions are sanctified? 2d, What Sort of a
Husband Christ is? 3d, What it is to return to him? And, 4th, Open the Force of
the Spouses Enducement, by showing in Contrast, wherein it appears better to be
near Christ, than to be far from him. I return to the

1. PROPOSED, viz. to show when Afflictions are sanctified. Now this is, 1st,
When we discern GOD to be their AUTHOR; is there any Evil in the City, and I
have not done it, says the Lord (Amos 3.6.) That is, EVIL of PUNISHMENT; for
moral Evil, the Almighty cannot be accessory to, because of his infinite
Purity: We are apt to pore too much upon the immediate Instruments of our
Sorrows, while in the mean Time, we overlook the supreme Director of all
Events, who justly punishes us by them; this foolish Conduct tends to leaven
our Minds with Revenge against our Fellow Creatures, to our own Prejudice; but
when we look above them all to God, and consider that he uses them, as a Rod in
his Hand, to chastise us for our Offenses against him, and that however
unreasonable the Instrument is, God is righteous; this Method calms the Soul.
And, 2d, When we discern our Sins to be their procuring Cause, surely against
me is he turned, says the Church. 3d, When we discern Reformation to be their
Design, and that they come from fatherly Love; whom God loves he chastens, and
scourges every Son he receives, Heb. 12. And, 4th, When we endeavor sincerely
to comply with this Design, by humbling ourselves under God's Hand, confessing
our Sins, and bewailing them, confessing the Righteousness of God's Judgments,
and our Inability to deliver ourselves from them, praying frequently and
earnestly for Forgiveness, Is. 26.16. by resolving and endeavoring to reform
from the Causes of God's Displeasure, without Delay, and with full Purpose of
Heart; in this Way, we may Hope for Relief, upon an infallible Foundation, 2 Chronicles. 7.14. If my People which are called by my Name, shall humble themselves,
and pray, and seek my Face, and turn from their wicked Ways, then will I hear
from Heaven, and forgive their Sin, and heal their Land. When Ahab humbled
himself, though a bad Man, the Almighty took Notice of it, and would not
inflict the Judgments threatened in his Day; and of the Ninivites, it is said,
Jon. 3.10. God saw their Works, that they turned from their evil Way, and
repented of the Evil that he said he would do unto them, and did it not: Now if
the Almighty takes such favorable Notice of the Humiliation and Reformation of
unregenerate Persons, will he not much more of his own People? Yes surely; but
without this, our Miseries will be continued, Hos. 5.15. I proceed to the

2. PROPOSED, which was to enquire, what Sort of a Husband Christ is? The dear
Redeemer is a Husband honorably descended, the Son of God, by Nature, he is
amiable in all Respects, as God, he possesses all his Father's Excellencies; as
Man, he is holy, harmless, undefiled; as Mediator, the hypostatical Union of
the human and divine Natures in his sacred Person, his Offices, his Sufferings
for poor Sinners, and Obedience in their Room and Place, render him wonderful
and amiable; especially when we consider the Fullness and Suitableness of the
one, and the Depth and Design of the other, together with the Majesty of his
Person, and the Meanness and Vileness of those he came to seek and save; he is
inexpressibly rich, besides the Riches of his Godhead, which are immense and
incomprehensible; all Fullness dwells in him as Mediator; he is Lord of the
Universe, and King of the Church; all Nature and Grace are under his Check, and
at his Disposal; he is the Resurrection and the Life, and carries the Keys of
Hell and Death; the Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus
Christ; his spiritual Riches are sublime, satisfactory, eternal! He is an
affectionate Husband, who loved us with an everlasting Love, and therefore with
loving Kindness has drawn us; his Regard to us before Time, is the Source of
all the special Kindnesses he shows us in it: He loved us in our Blood. and bid
us live; and has given the most substantial Expressions of Affection, by
assuming an inferior Nature for us, and enduring therein an accursed Death, by
bearing with innumerable Unkindnesses in us, and after repeated Breaches of
Covenant, by inviting us to his Embraces, thou have played the Harlot with many
Lovers, yet return to me, says the Lord; O glorious Grace and Love! -- As he
is the Wisdom of God, so he is the Power of God, able to break the Bars of
Death, and conquer the Powers of Darkness, able to do abundantly above what we
can ask or think. -- He is a generous Husband, he makes his Bride comely,
through his Comeliness, and though she brings nothing with her but Deformity and
Guilt, he bequeaths upon her a Dowry or more Value than Millions of Worlds! He
is an everlasting Husband, the Alpha and Omega, Death that dissolves the tender
Ties of other Relations, ratifies this; which much commends its Worth. Now to
be married to him, supposes a Divorce from the governing Love, and habitual
Practice of Sin (Ps. 97.10. 1 John 5.18.) as well as from the Law, in respect
of Dependence ( Phil. 3.7.) and such a Discovery of his Excellency, Ability,
and Love, as excites earnest Desires after him ( Philip. 3.8. Mat. 5.6. Acts
11.23.) and implies a deliberate, unreserved Consent, to accept of him as a
Husband, with a fixed Resolve to perform the Duties of a Wife, viz. Love,
Reverence, Obedience, and an inviolate Adherence to the Marriage-Covenant; the
Consequences of which, are Fellowship in his Love, and a conscientious
Endeavor to perform the Duties of Marriage, 1 John, 1.3. Acts 24.16. -- But I
proceed to the

3. PROPOSED, which was to enquire, what it is to return to him. This includes
a clear and distressing Discovery of the Miseries of his Absence, compared with
the Comforts of his Presence; serious Deliberation thereupon, together with an
affectionate Bewailing over our Sins, the Causes of his Departure from us. In
this Case, the awakened Penitent, with Ephraim, bemoans himself, pours out
Floods of Tears, and fills the Air with Sighs and Groans; he determines to
forsake all his Sins in general, and his Constitution Sin in particular, and to
perform all the Duties required of him, at all Adventures; his Soul goes out
after the dear Redeemer, with vehement Sallies, and renews with Freedom its
Consent to the Articles of the Marriage Covenant, and is laborious in
performing the other Duties enjoined, to obtain an Assurance of his Love, and
to walk worthy of it; now this Duty should be done without the least Delay, and
with the most determined Purpose of Heart, and truly that is the Case, when the
holy Spirit discends from on High. The

4. PROPOSED, comes next to be considered, which was to open the Force of the
Spouse's Enducement to return to her Lord; by showing in Contrast the Benefits
of his Presence, and Miseries of his Absence: Or, in other Words, wherein it is
better to be near him, than far from him. In his Presence, we have the
following valuable Benefits, viz. 1st, Rest; those that do believe, says the
Apostle, enter into Rest; they have not only a Right to, and Prospect of Rest
in another World, but possess a Degree of it, amidst the Sorrows and Labors of
this; return to thy Rest, O my Soul, said the Psalmist, for the Lord has dealt
bountifully with thee; he had wandered from his God, and sought for Rest among
Creatures; but being disappointed of his fond Hopes, and tired with his vain
Pursuits, he returns ashamed of his Sin and Folly to his God, and having
obtained the Light of his Countenance, rests under the Shadow of his Wing, and
in the Embraces of his Bosom. 2d, Delight; I sat down under his Shadow with
great Delight, says the Spouse, and his Fruit was sweet to my Taste. There is
some Thing in the Love of Christ, which is exactly suited to the relish of a
renewed Soul; their principle Desires are after Pardon of Sin, Peace with God,
Holiness in Heart and Life, and a well grounded Hope of future Blessedness; all
which, the Love of Christ gives Assurance of, and therefore must needs yield
Delight; other Things flatter, but deceive our Hopes, and can no more satisfy
the Mind, than Gravel the Stomach; but this being spiritual and immense, gives
solid and satisfactory Nourishment to the Soul, as Marrow and Fatness to the
Body. 3d, Wonder; such as have a just View of the Majesty and Purity of God,
and of their own Meanness and Vileness, must needs be astonished at the Love of
Christ, which pulls them back from the Brink of Ruin, and will not suffer them
to destroy themselves! 4th, Praise; the Soul is hereby inclined to return the
most affectionate Gratitude for the divine Goodness, Ps. 103.1. Bless the Lord,
O my Soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy Name. 5th, Joy; having
obtained the Smiles of God, they rejoice in the Hope of his Glory, in the
Purity of his Law, and in the Wisdom, Goodness, and Firmness, of that gracious
Plan, on which their Salvation is secured; by beholding holding the Beauty of
the divine Perfections, their Hearts are enlarged to run in the Path of his
Precepts with Pleasure, they mount up with Wings as Eagles, they run and are
not weary, they walk and do not faint; now their Bowels bleed with
compassionate Tenderness over a perishing World, and their Hearts are big with
generous Desires after their Happiness, and pious Projects how to promote it;
which yield the most sublime and noble Pleasure, are worthy the Dignity of a
human Soul, and become the Design of its Existence. Now they are fearless of
Evil to come, feeling themselves immured in the impregnable Fortress of the
divine Attributes, they are intrepid 'amidst the Wrecks of Nature, and the
Crush of Worlds:' The Strength of the whole Creation, compared with the divine
Immensity, is contemptible, as nothing, yea less than Nothing, and Vanity.

BUT on the Contrary, the People of God, in his Absence, are exposed to the
following Miseries; 1st, They are distressed, like a disjointed Bone, and can
find no true Ease any where, or in any Condition; their Souls pine and languish
in the Midst of Honor and Affluence: What are these Trifles, seeing they
cannot see the King's Face? The Praise of Creatures, is a lean Thing, while God
frowns, and Conscience reproaches; nor can pious People take that brutish
Comfort in worldly Enjoyments which graceless Persons do; though they sleep,
their Hearts wake, and often put them in Mind, how it has been with them, and
how it should be, and what are like to be the dismal Consequences of their
living in such a base Manner; all which mix Wormwood and Gall with their
forbidden Sweets? But the Unregenerate having never had the Experience of
Communion with God, and using little Reflection about their Souls, make a sorry
Shift, to acquire in some Degree, the Happiness of a Brute! 2d, Pious Persons,
when Christ is far off, have little or no Delight in God, or in his Word and
Ways; nay, some wander so far, that the Thoughts of God are a Terror to them,
they either for a Time neglect secret Duties, and some of them Public also, or
else perform them slightly, and soon grow weary in God's Service; they gad
about changing their Way, seeking Comfort here and there in poor Creatures, or
at least some Mitigation of their Grief; while in the mean Time they neglect
God, and keep aloof from him and their own Hearts; but the Rest they seek in
this criminal Course, flees as a Shadow from their Embraces. 3d, Their Eyes
being blinded, they are not affected with the Freeness of God's Grace, nor are
they disposed to praise him, or rejoice in him: No! By their Sloth, and other
Iniquities, they have blotted their Evidences for Heaven, and fear they are
deceived about the State of their Souls: This mixes Vinegar and Nitre with
their Comforts, and increases the Weight of their Woes, fearing they come from
the Wrath of God, and are designed to promote their Destruction; this View of
Things, magnifies their Miseries, and casts a Gloom over the whole Creation.
4th, Having their Evidences for Heaven marred by their Iniquities, they are
consequently full of distressing Fears, which not only hurt their Usefulness,
but destroy their Comfort; they are afraid of the Judgments of God in this
Life, and of Damnation after it expires; afraid of evil Tidings, and of falling
into Sin, to the Scandal of Religion; afraid of being quite useless, of
Poverty, of Sickness, and Death; and yet weary of Life, being neither fit to
live or die; yea when the Power of Melancholy prevails, they tremble at the
Shaking of a Leaf, and antedate their Miseries, by a distrustful Fear of
Futurity; hereby they make imaginary Evils real Ones; as if the Evils of the
present Day were not sufficient, without this Addition, and yet complain of the
Greatness of them: These anxious and distrustful Fears, eat out the Comfort of
their Lives, and bring them, in some Degree, in Bondage to the Law, to Death,
and to the Wrath of God; which shuts their Lips, that they dare not speak for
God, when Necessity requires, and are indeed afraid of speaking to him; this
freezes their very Souls with Melancholy and Dejection; O dark, O dismal
State! Thus Backsliders are snared in the Work of their own Hands, and find the
Way of Transgressors hard: But in this unhappy Situation, they are not only
distressed by Fear, as has been observed, but some Times with Anger against
such as do them real or supposed Injuries, whose Prosperity they ignobly envy;
for a Series of Affliction and Sorrow, naturally tend to sower the Mind, and
whet the Passions, which grow ungovernable: While they overlook divine
Providence, and fix their Thoughts upon the immediate Instruments of their
Miseries, they are carried into extravagant Sallies of Revenge, to their own
equal Torment and Prejudice; like Dogs who bite the Stone, but do not Eye the
Hand that cast it. But the Psalmist's Practice, in the Case of Shimci, was very
different, and is an Example worthy of our Imitation: When that ungrateful Man
cursed his King, in extreme Distress, he kept Possession of his Soul in this
Tempest, and would not suffer his Servant Abishai to slay him; let him curse,
says he, because the Lord has said unto him curse David; 2 Samuel 16.10. i. e.
God has righteously suffered this, as a Punishment of my Sins. Our Passions are
blind and furious Powers, dangerous and ensnaring, if not kept under a strict
Watch, and tight Rein; the good Government of them is as difficult, as it is
comfortable, advantageous, and honorable; he that is slow to anger, says
SOLOMON, is better than the Mighty; and he that rules his Spirit, than he that
takes a City: Such as learn of Christ, to be meek and lowly in Heart, shall
find Rest to their Souls, 5th, When far from Christ, our Blindness,
Sensuallity, Love to the World, and Fear of the Cross of CHRIST, increase; the
holy Spirit is grieved, and withdraws his Influence; by all which, we are in
Danger of coming into carnal Compliances, and of falling into the grossest
Impieties, whereby the Name of God will be more scandalized than we have ever
honored it, which is very distressing!

WHEN the People of GOD are quickened by him, and, with Attention, view these
two different Conditions in Contrast, it is no Wonder they resolve to return to
their first Husband; for by a just Comparison, they find it was infinitely
better with them then, than now. Then they had their Peniels, Bochims, and
Pisgas; then they could wrestle with their God, and prevail; then they could
with Joy and Pleasure, behold the promised Canaan, as their sure Heritage, and
long to be there with God: But now they are involved in Darkness, Guilt, and
Misery, have little Disposition to do Good, and are full of the perplexing
Fears of penal Evil; now their Lives are in a Manner useless to others, and a
Burden to themselves; and this Uneasiness is heighthened, by reflecting on the
Comforts of their former State: Those Things they have in Remembrance, and
therefore their Soul is humbled in them; they put their Mouths in the Dust, if
so be there may be Hope, and mourn in such Language as this, O that it were
with me as in Time past, when his Candle shone upon my Head! O that I knew
where I could find him, that I might come even to his Seat!

FROM what has been said, let us be excited to inquire, 1st, Whether
Afflictions of a personal, or public Kind, have been sanctified to us, in the
Manner before expressed? e. g. Have we discerned God to be their Author, our
Sins to be their procuring Cause, and Reformation their Design? And have we
endeavored to comply with this Design, by humbling ourselves under God's Hand,
by praying to him, by resolving to reform, and by executing this Resolve? If
the Judgments of God upon us, have not hitherto had these salutary Effects, for
God's Sake let us bewail our Sin and Misery, and pray and strive for the
Sanctification of our Sorrows; if we regard either our own Comfort, or Safety,
the Honor of God, the Weal of his Kingdom, or the Deliverance of our Nation
from threatened Ruin! 2d, Let us enquire whether we are married to Christ, or
not? To give Light to this important Inquiry, it is necessary to ask our Souls
the following Questions? Have I been divorced from the governing Love of every
Sin? And from the Law as a Covenant of Works? Have I had such a Discovery of
the Excellency, Ability, and Willingness of Christ to save, as has excited
insatiable Desires after Union to him, as a Husband; Communion in his Love, and
Conformity to his Life? Have I pondered upon the Terms of Marriage, and
consented without reserve to deny myself, take up the Cross of Christ, and
follow him; consented to embrace him in all his Offices, and Relations, with a
fixed Purpose to perform faithfully and constantly to him the Duties of a Wife?
And in Consequence of the aforesaid Closure, have I Fellowship in his Love, and
do I make Conscience of performing the Duties of Marriage? It is with the
utmost Seriousness and Impartiallity, we should examine this Point, my
Brethren, because upon the Decission of it, depends our eternal All. 3d, Let us
enquire, if there be not some among us (who are married to the Lord JESUS
CHRIST) that have backslidden from him, in the Manner before represented? Those
I would earnestly invite and urge to imitate the noble Example mentioned in our
Text; say from the Heart, I will go and return to my first Husband, for then
was it better with me, than now: Thou know by sweet and sad Experience, the
Truth and Force of this Argument; which, methinks, might be sufficient, without
the Addition of any other, to reduce thee from thy Strayings to thy God, thy
Duty, thy Honor, thy Interest, and thy Happiness! I charge thee therefore, in
the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that thou go no farther in those Paths of
Rebellion, Darkness, and Death; return to thy Husband, thy Lord, thy Life, thy
Rest; hearken, he calls, invites, and encourages thee; thou have played the
Harlot with many Lovers, yet return to me, says the Lord, for I am married to
thee; and elsewhere, Return unto me ye backsliding Children, and I will heal
your Backslidings, and love you freely! Why then do you not return? His Arms
are open to embrace you, he is waiting to be gracious to you, and wanting to be
exalted, that he may have Mercy upon you! I cannot return? But cannot you cry
after him, and bewail your Inability, as well as the Causes of his Absence? Has
he not promised to meet those, that wait upon him in his Way? And is not the
Text I am discoursing upon, a gracious Promise? Do therefore honestly, what you
can, and see if he will not help? It is your immediate Duty to mourn over your
Sins, and believe in JESUS; in this Way you cannot be mistaken? The Promise in
our Text, is not limited to this or that Degree of Backsliding: What Warrant
then have you to limit it? But my Sins are so great that I am ashamed to ask
Pardon, and afraid to come near to God. A. Your Shame is an encouraging Sign,
hear how Christ speaks to such, O my Dove, let me see thy Countenance, let me
hear thy Voice, for sweet is thy Voice, and thy Countenance is comely! Consider
for your Encouragement, the following Places of Scripture, Is. 1.18. Is. 35.
Is. 41.10. Is. 43.21, 26. Jer. 31.9, 17, 20. Hos. 11.8, 9. Luke 15.24. and say,
without lingering one Moment, in the Language of our Text, I will go and return
to my first Husband, for then was it better with me, than now. Amen, Amen, dear
Lord JESUS CHRIST, O say, AMEN.

SERMON XVIII.
MAT. 5.46, 47. For if ye love them which love you, what Reward have ye? Do not
even the Publicans the same? And if you salute your Brethren only, WHAT DO YOU
MORE THAN OTHERS? Do not even the Publicans so?


THE PHARISEES were a Sect of People among the Jews, who were very strict in
observing the Ceremonies of that Institution, such as washing before Meat,
making broad their Philacteries, tything Mint, Annis and Cummin; nevertheless
diverse of them were lax in Morals, and covered their Wickedness with a
religious Mask; they neglected the weightier Matters of the Law, such as
Judgment, Mercy and Faith (i. e. Justice, Mercy and Faithfulness) and were
unmerciful and fraudulent in their Dealings with Mankind, made long Prayers to
get a Fame for religion, and thereby have the Estates of Widows and Orphans
committed to their Management, and so devour them: They were also very proud
and censorious, sought Honor of Men immoderately, were industrious in pulling
MOATS out of others Eyes, while there was a BEAM in their own; they boasted of
their own Goodness, and despised those who excelled them in some respects; I
fast twice a Week, I am not as this Publican! And in order to screen their
Wickedness the better from public Observance, they labored to corrupt the Law
by their false Glosses, and make it a Nose of Wax, an Instance of which we have
in our Context, Verse 43. You have heard that it has been said, thou shall
love thy Neighbor and hate thine Enemy; these Words, and hate thine Enemy, are
not in the Law referred to ( Levit. 19.18.) they are either their Addition to
the Law, or false Interpretation of it: In Opposition hereto, our Savior
enjoins his Disciples to love their Enemies, -- and offers several reasons to
enforce this Command, among which this is one mentioned in our Text, viz. that
they should go beyond the Publicans; do not even the Publicans the same? But
who were these PUBLICANS? I answer; they were civil Officers appointed by the
Romans who at that Time had sovereign Dominion over the Jewish State) to gather
the public revenues, the chief Commissioners were Knights and Gentlemen of
Rome, who either farmed out these revenues to others, or employed others under
them in collecting of them: Some that were thus employed were Jews, witness
Matthew and Zaccheus, and some Romans; many of these civil Officers were too
severe in their Exactions, which procured an Odium upon the whole Order, and
hence they are commonly joined in Scripture with Sinners and Harlots. From the
Words of our Text we may observe this Proposition, viz. That the Disciples of
Christ should go beyond Publicans or unregenerate Persons. In opening this
important Point, I purpose to speak to these two Heads, viz. 1. Show in what
Instances we should exceed them; and 2. Why? pious Persons should not be meanly
blended with the Crowd; there should be a visible Distinction between them and
others. And,

1. We should go beyond them in LOVE to our ENEMIES [Verse 44 of this Chap.]
But I say unto you, love your Enemies, by which is intended a Love of
Benevolence, viz. 1. That we esteem what is valuable in them. 2. That we bless
them that curse us; i. e. Treat them with Courtesy, commend what is
Praiseworthy in them, and do not return reviling for reviling; a mean and
vulgar Practice, which every generous Mind should disdain and avoid, in
Imitation of Michael the Archangel, who when contending with Satan about the
Body of Moses, would not offer against him a railing Accusation; for he knew
that degenerate and malignant Spirit had a better Knack at scolding than
himself. 3. That we do good to those that hate us; i. e. Perform the common
Offices of Kindness and Humanity, by relieving them in their pressing
Necessities, as far as we can consistently with the Duty we owe to ourselves
and others, to whom we are under stronger Ties. Romans 12.20. If thine Enemy
hunger, feed him; and if he thirst, give him Drink. -- 4. That we pray for them
that despitefully use us, and persecute us. This Precept not only enjoins that
we be tender of their Names and Bodies, but likewise of their Souls, and pray
earnestly for the Forgiveness of their Sins. This is no Counsel of Perfection,
as the Papists imagine, nor any new Precept, as the Socinians dream; for it is
expressly commanded under the Jewish Dispensation; Prove. 25.21. If thine Enemy
be hungry, give him Bread to eat; and if he be thirsty, give him Water to
drink: In the mean Time we are not obliged to have a Love of Complacence
toward Enemies; for that would be impious, inasmuch as it implies a regard to
Iniquity; nor should we love them in an equal Degree with our Friends, for that
would be ungrateful; nor should we take them into former Intimacy, and make
them the Men of our Council, and thereby give them an Opportunity to mislead
us, for that would be imprudent. Nor are we obliged by this Law always to use
such Silence and Softness as not to express resentment of Injuries at any Time;
for, if so, how did our Savior observe it when he called Herod a Fox? and the
Apostle Paul, when he called Elimas a Child of the Devil, an Enemy of all
Righteousness? The Passion of Anger is not in itself sinful, for it is
implanted in our Nature for valuable Purposes, viz. The Defense of our Persons
and Properties, and we are commanded to be angry, and not to sin; now the Way
to be so, is to be only angry at Sin, or on Account of it, and in Proportion to
its Heinousness; nor should the Sun go down upon our Wrath. i. e. If our Anger
be excessive, as the Word Wrath signifies, it should not be lasting: Anger or
resentment about private Affairs is much more difficult to manage than Anger
about public Matters: Nor does the Precept I am speaking upon oppose our hating
God's Enemies as such; no, in Proportion to our Love is our Zeal (Qui non
zelat, non amat) Do not I hate them that hate thee? said the Psalmist ( Ps.
139.21, 22.) We may seek a due Revenge of God's Honor upon such, though
private revenge is forbidden, because we are not our own Judges; as Members of
Society we have committed that Matter to the Determination of others; and
though we should bear smaller and tolerable Injuries for the Sake of Peace, yet
we are not prohibited by this Precept from going to Law, and seeking
Satisfaction in a Way of public Justice, but with a Mixture of Charity, else we
are unjust to ourselves. Two Arguments are proposed in our Text and Context by
our Savior to enforce this Precept of Love to our Enemies, viz. 1. That we may
resemble God our Father; as he has a common Love which is extended to all
Mankind, in supplying their Necessities with the Light and Warmth of the Sun
and with the Rain, as well as a special Love and Favor, which he exercises
only toward those that are good; so should we, in Imitation of him: Though we
are not obliged to take Enemies into the same Familiarity with others, yet we
should love them in their order; as our Heavenly Father, though he will one Day
have a Satisfaction from Sinners for the Wrongs done to his Majesty, except
they repent, yet in the mean Time he confers upon them the good Things of
common Providence, and on some the Means of Grace: Thus, though we are bound to
seek some Satisfaction for public Injuries to the divine Honor from flagitious
Sinners, and likewise the reparation of private important Injuries against
ourselves in an orderly Way, yet we should love them in Consistency herewith,
that so we may imitate our heavenly Father, and prove ourselves to be his
Children. And, 2. That we may do more than others, For if ye love them that
love you, what Reward have you? Do not even the Publicans the same? And if ye
salute your Brethren only, what do you more than others? q. d. Reason obliges
you who expect a reward from God for what you do, to do something more than
others who know of no such reward, or at least live in no Expectation of it;
and you who condemn others as great Sinners, should do something to exceed
them, both in Offices of Piety toward God, and Charity toward Men: But if you
only show Kindness to your Relations and Countrymen, you do no more than those
you look upon as Heathens. By loving in our Text is doubtless meant doing good
Offices to the Souls and Bodies of others; and by saluting, common Offices of
Kindness, such as enquiring about our Neighbors Health, wishing them well,
etc. The Publicans were grateful and courteous to those that showed them
Kindness, to those they had a Dependence on, and shall we be no better than
they? In doing this we serve our secular Interest, and what reward can we
expect for that, unless a regard to God, and Sense of Duty, carry us farther
than our natural light and secular Advantage! While others only render Good for
Good, we should render Good for Evil; which will speak a nobler Principle than
the most of Men act from: While others carress those of their own Party and
Opinion only, we should not confine our regard to them, but Love our Enemies;
for how can we expect the reward of Christians, if we rise no higher than the
Virtue of Publicans and Pagans? But to proceed. A

2d INSTANCE wherein pious People should exceed others, is, that they be
willing to endure any Kind of Suffering, in Name, Body, Estate, Relations, yea,
and in Respect even of Life itself, rather than sin against GOD; and that they
be not only deliberately and habitually determined to do this, but actually
comply, when called thereto by divine Providence; this is included in the Cross
of Christ, without taking up which, we cannot be his Disciples: When we might
either escape Suffering, or get a Deliverance from it, by sinning against God,
and we refuse; this goes beyond the Reach of Publicans, Pharisees, and
Hypocrites; for such will judge it prudent to sin, rather than suffer, but the
true Disciple of Christ, is of the brave Spirit of those Worthies mentioned,
Heb. 11.33, 36. Who, through Faith, were tortured, not accepting Deliverance,
that they might obtain a better Resurrection! No, They nobly scorned to obtain
Deliverance in a mean and sinful Way, they would rather suffer all the Torment
that the Wit and Malice of Men could invent and inflict.

3d, That they do Duties that are like to bring Suffering upon them. Duties
that may be easily misconstrued, Duties that are generally neglected, and
perhaps despised in the Times and Places they live in: To do these, in such a
Situation, when they plainly appear to be required of us, from regard to God's
commanding Authority, and a Principle of Love to his Majesty, without
consulting with Flesh and Blood, is truly noble, and goes beyond the Reach of
the whole Tribe of Hypocrites; they are only for Duties that are fashionable,
cheap, and of easy Performance; such as will either gain them Credit, or at
least consist with it, as well as with their Ease and Interest; they think they
can manage Matters with such PRUDENCE, as to get to Heaven without the Cross of
Christ, which is a new Way that he and his Apostles never trod; but pious Men,
with DAVID, will resolutely obey the Commands of GOD, though they know they
will be reckoned more vile upon this Account, and stand up for the Truths of
God, with ATHANASIUS, and LUTHER, though Thousands oppose them. And,

4th, WE should rejoice in the Prospect of Sufferings for Righteousness Sake,
and under them; esteeming it a great Honor and Privilege. This was the Temper
of MOSES, he prefered the Reproach of Christ before all the Treasures of Egypt.
This was the SPIRIT of the APOSTLES, and PRIMITIVE CHRISTIANS, they took
Pleasure in Tribulations, when publicly whipped (a Punishment scandalous when for
Sin, but glorious when for Christ) they rejoiced that they were counted worthy
to suffer Shame for Christ's Name's Sake; when they were in Stocks and Prisons,
they sung the Praises of their God, witness PAUL and SILAS; though they were
sorrowing, i. e. had some afflictive Sense of their outward Miseries, yet they
were always rejoicing: The believing HEBREWS, took joyfully the Spoiling of
their Goods, as knowing that they had in Heaven, a far better and enduring
Substance! But contrariwise Hypocrites want to suffer as little as possible for
Christ, and are glad when by their sneaking Compliances, they can escape his
precious Cross!

5th, WE should be merciful to others Failings, and severe against our own.
While we aggravate highly, and censure freely, our own Iniquities (and indeed
this is but right, for we know more of our own Perverseness, than of any Body's
else) we should at the same Time excuse, as far as we justly can, the Blunders
of our Brethren; for Charity covers a Multitude of Sins, thinks no Evil, is
kind, and does not rejoice in Iniquity, but in the Truth; takes not up readily,
or with Pleasure, an evil Report of our Neighbor, far less spreads it; this is
amiable and truly excellent. This is beyond the Line of Hypocrites, for such
have the Eyes of ARGUS abroad to spy Moats in others Eyes, but are as blind as
Moles at Home, and do not discern their own Beams! Such are unreasonably
jealous, and cruelly censorious, in respect of others, but very favorable to
their own Iniquities; these they hide as a sweet Morsel under their Tongues,
and spare, as Saul, the Fattest of the Cattle: But the sincere Man honestly
endeavors to pluck out his Right-Eye, cut of his Right-Arm, and to keep
himself from his Iniquity; this is to be honest indeed, and to go beyond the
whole Herd of Hypocrites.

6th, WE should make Conscience of our Thoughts and secret Behavior, which are
hid from the View of our Fellow Creatures; we should endeavor to keep the
Heart with all Diligence, which is the Parent of Action; suppressing bad
Thoughts, and corrupt Workings; and encouraging good ones, taking Care and
Pains about our Passions and Aims, that they be regular and sincere; and
striving by the Practice of secret Duties, to preserve the Savor of Religion
in our Souls. This is to do more than Hypocrites; for their chief Care is to
cleanse the Outside of the Cup and Platter; if they have but the Form of Piety,
they mind not the Spirit of it, their Hearts are like the Sluggard's Field.

7th, WE should receive Reproof with Meekness and Love; Let the Righteous smite
me, said DAVID, it shall be a Kindness: This is a lovely and profitable Temper
of Mind, but Hypocrites are of the proud and stubborn Spirit of wicked AHAB,
who hated MICAJAH, because he never prophesied Good of him, but Evil, 1 Kings,
22.8.

8th, WE should not allow ourselves in the Neglect of the least Duty, but in
the mean Time, most careful of, and concerned for the Greatest; this is but
rational, to Proportion the Degree of our Zeal to the Importance of Things, and
far less should we allow ourselves in the Neglect of a whole Table of the Law,
no! we should render to Caesar the Things that are Caesar's, and to God the
Things that are God's: This is to do more then others, to this the Practice of
the Pharisees was opposed, They tythed Mint, Annis and Cummin, but neglected
the weightier Matters of the Law; they seemed diligent in observing some Duties
of the first Table, but were at the same Time negligent of those of the Second.

9th, WE ought to be afraid of the least Evil, yea of the Appearance of Evil,
and yet in the mean Time, most afraid of the greatest Evil; this is highly
reasonable, for the greater the Sin is, it involves us in a higher Degree of
Guilt, and exposes to more awful Punishments: But the Hypocrite, either
knowingly connives at little Sins, or while he pretends to scruple them,
wilfully commits Great; thus the Pharisees strained at a Gnat, and swallowed a
Cammel; scrupled eating with unwashen Hands, and plucking Ears of Corn on the
Sabbaoth-Day, in a Case of Necessity, but did not scruple the Neglect of
Judgment, Mercy, and Faith.

10th, WE should be humble in Prosperity, and cheerful in Adversity; this is to
do more than others, when Prosperity humbles us, and inclines us to speak in
David's Language, What am I, that thou have brought me hitherto? And when, with
the Prophet Habackuk, we rejoice though there be no Fruit in the Vine! But
Hypocrites, in Prosperity, kick with the Heel of Disdain against God and Man,
They say they are Lords, they will come no more to God, their Tongues are their
own, and who is Lord over them? They scorn to be bound by the Rules of Religion
and Decency, and say with those Rebels of old, in the Spirit of KORAH, Let us
break their Bands asunder, and cast their Cords from us? In Adversity they fret
and murmur, and are excessively dejected, like the Man berieved of his Images,
They have taken away my Gods, and what have I more? -- Again,

WE should make God's Glory the chief End of all our Actions, his Service the
chief Business and Delight of our Lives, and all our secular Concerns buckle
thereto; this, in some Degree, is the Attainment of every good Man, his Eye is
single, RELIGION is his ELEMENT, and therefore he cannot but Delight in it, it
has the Throne of his Soul, all other Things vail to it; he does hot only aim
at God's Honor in sacred Actions, but even in natural and civil; e. g. he
Eats, and Drinks out of Obedience to God's Command, and that he may have
Strength to serve him; this is to do more than Hypocrites, they aim at
themselves chiefly, they pray and fast to themselves, and not to God, because
Self is the principal Motive thereof; their chief Delight is in some earthly
Thing, though they falsely pretend otherwise; the World is their main Business,
great is Dianah of the Ephesians; and therefore Religion must stoop to it,
secret Prayer, Family Prayer, reading the Scriptures, secret Meditation, and
Self-examination, must be turned out of Doors, either wholly, or in part; and
that frequently, through the Hurries of Worshipping this Godess, they have no
Time to do that for which all their Time was given them; they are of the Earth,
earthly; they are born only of the Flesh, and therefore are Flesh; there is
this or that Business of Importance (as it is termed) to be done, and the
Trifle of Religion and Salvation, must be laid aside, to make Way for it: But
what shall a Man give in Exchange for his Soul, if he should gain the World,
and lose the same? Wherefore do you spend your Money, for that which is not
Bread? Farther,

WE should own and associate with pious People, even when they are despised and
persecuted, and appear for God's Truths and Cause, when they are at the lowest
Ebb, generally opposed and contemned; Heb. 11.24, 25. By Faith, Moses refused
to be called the Son of Pharoah's Daughter, choosing rather to suffer
Affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a
Season? And though Christianity was every were spoken against, yet the
Apostles, and primitive Christians, openly professed it, and even after they
were beaten, they did not go to the Great and Wicked to curry-favour of them,
but to their own poor afflicted Company; will Hypocrites do this? No! When
Distresses and Persecutions come, they fall off like the Leaves in Autumn, they
are offended at this and that, and go where they may sleep in a whole Skin;
their fair Blossoms are now withered, when a Time of Temptation comes, not
having a good Root in them, they fall away? They go from God's People, because
they were not of them; Demas has forsaken us, having loved this present World?
Demas no doubt told another Story, and gave a plausible Apology why he left
them; but the Truth is, his Heart was naught! But to proceed,

WE should likewise be cool in our own Cause, and warm in God's; thus was
Moses, he was one of the meekest Men upon Earth, in his own Matters, his Spirit
kept calm (for the most Part) under the insolent, ungrateful Treatment, he met
with from Korah, and his Companions, so far as the Affronts concerned himself;
but yet the Indignation of this meek Man was inflamed at the Sight of the Calf,
so that he broke the Tables of Stone. And though the Apostle PAUL, was very
patient in enduring personal Injuries, yet when ELIMAS endeavored to keep the
Deputy from the Faith, he addressed the Impostor with the most pointed, flaming
Language, O full of all Subtilty, thou Child of the Devil, thou Enemy of all
Righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the right Ways of the Lord? Acts
13.10. But Hypocrites are the very reverse, cool in God's Cause, and fire-hot
in their own; they can hear God's Name, People, and Work, blasphemed and
ridiculed, without any Resentment; but when their Names are reproached, or
their Interest affected, they are mere FURIES.

WE should likewise perform extraordinary Duties in extraordinary Cases; e. g.
When such as have the Root of the Matter in them, have greatly declined in
Religion, so that the Things that remain, are ready to die; or in Case of
violent Temptations, private or public Dangers, some Thing more than usual
should be done, to remove these Diseases and Distresses; such as Fasting, and
extraordinary Prayer, otherwise the Mean is not suited to the Case, and so not
like to answer the End; these Duties are positively enjoined by the Almighty,
Mark 2.20. But the Days will come, when the Bridegroom shall be taken away from
them, and then shall they Fast? In Times of public Calamity, the Almighty
enjoins his People to turn to him, with all their Hearts, and with Weeping,
Fasting, and Mourning. In this Way we may expect that the Lord will be jealous
for his Land, and pity his People, Joel 2.13, 18. But Hypocrites and
Enthusiasts, love their Ease and their Bellies too well, to perform with due
Attention and Seriousness, these difficult and self-denying Duties, and
therefore frame sorry, senseless Excuses to evade them, such as Fasting from
Sin, being enjoined under this Dispensation, which supposes that Sin is the
proper Food of the Soul, and that it was lawful to live upon it, under the old
Testament? Ay, it is glorious Spirituality, to fast with a full Belly! and
despise Dominion, even when exerted for the public Weal. Farther,

WE should be humble in Heart, Speech, Dress, and Behavior; looking upon
ourselves to be the Least of all Saints, and being willing that others should
think so too, and be prefered before us; a Garb not suited to our Station in
Life, is no Ornament, but a Reproach, a Badge of our Pride and Folly, which
should make us ashamed; it is like a Jewel in a Swine's Snout. Humility, my
Brethren, is the most amiable Ornament, this will keep us from meddling with
Things too high for us, and dispose us to mind our own Business, not judging
another Man's Servant; this is doing more than others: If such a Temper and
Behavior generally obtained, what a comfortable World would this be, how
sweet, how profitable Society! but when the Contrary, viz. a proud, censorious,
domineering Spirit prevails, no Comfort or Benefit is to be expected; when
Persons of a lower Sphere assume the Officers Place, and refuse to be subject
to Order and Regimen, in the STATE, or ARMY, nothing but Confusion insues, and
Ruin at the Heels of it.

PRIDE was doubtless the Cause of the Rebellion of KORAH, and his Accomplices,
against MOSES and AARON; whose leveling Scheme was artfully introduced, Ye take
too much upon you, said they, wherefore lift you up yourselves above the
Congregation of the Lord! Numb. 16th Chap. Without Peace, there can be no
Comfort in SOCIETY, and without Order, there can be no Peace; now without
Officers, and a Subjection to their reasonable Determinations, how can Order be
maintained? Almighty GOD has therefore appointed Rulers in the State, and in
the Church, and positively enjoined the People to honor and obey them; such
therefore who fear God, should beware of opposing the Order he has prescribed,
and endeavor to keep the Unity of the Spirit, in the Bond of Peace? No Doubt,
both Rulers and Ruled, are liable to Mistakes in Sentiment and Conduct; now in
Case of Complaint, there is no other equitable Way to issue it, but by
submitting the Matter of Difference to the Decission of proper Judges, for it
is unreasonable in Society for Parties to be Judges in their own Cause; this
tends to overthrow entirely the Foundations of all Order and Government, and
make Disputes perpetual. Nor is there any Thing in the Principles of Liberty
rightly understood, that opposes a regular Government in the Church or State;
no, it is so far from this, that it is a necessary Mean to promote and preserve
it, and is founded upon the Principles of it; e. g. If it be right and just,
that one Man should think for himself, it is at least equally so, for a Body of
Men as such; to say that the Number of Men, or Authority wherewith they are
vested, should lessen their Privileges, is to oppose not only the express
Declarations of the sacred Scriptures, but the plainest Dictates of Reason and
common Sense.

WE should be also singular in Goodness, in a Time of prevailing Degeneracy;
the dead Fish swims with the Stream, but the Living against it: JOSHUA was
singular in a very corrupt Age, in a resolute Observance of Family Worship, and
so should we; If ye think it Evil to serve the Lord, said he, choose ye whom ye
will serve; but as for me, and my House, we will serve the Lord, Jos. 24. How
will Parents and Masters, that neglect reading the holy Scriptures daily to
their poor Children and Servants, and praying with them and for them, as well
as instructing them, get clear at last of the Charge of Blood, the Blood of
their Childrens and Servants Souls? Do they not barbarously betray their Charge
into the Hands of Satan, and therefore may be called Murderers, and Haters of
their own Offspring! What will become of this miserable Town and Country, if
Families continue to be thus neglected? Are we not, in a Course of Time, like
to degenerate into Libertines, and mere Pagans, if Popery be not crammed down
our Throats by the French? ABRAHAM took care of the Instruction of his
Children, and was commended for it by JEHOVAH; now, if we desire to Evidence
ourselves to be his Children, and to partake of his Blessing and Commendation,
let us imitate his Example: NEHEMIAH was also singular, in laboring with great
Pains and Magnanimity, to promote the Sanctification of the Sabbath in his
Day; let us endeavor, my Brethren, thus far to imitate his Example, as to be
strict in the Observation of the Sabbath ourselves, and use our Influence with
those under our Care, that they also may keep it holy; if we avoid, as we
ought, speaking our own Words, and seeking our own Pleasure that holy Day, we
shall certainly go beyond many others, and find the Comfort and Benefit of
doing so; how notoriously the Sabbath is profaned among us by worldly
Discourse and otherwise, you all know, and therefore its no Wonder the
Judgments of God have come upon us. Be not conformed to this World, abhor false
and flattering Compliments, and spending much Time in trifling Discourse,
without any serious Attempt to make those wiser and better ye converse with,
which is the wicked Custom of the present Age; and why should we decline all
Discourse about experimental Religion? Do you think this Silence and Shyness is
like to promote Christ's Kingdom among us? No, by no Means! Come, said the
PSALMIST, and I Will tell you what the Lord has done for my Soul? O may a
gracious God revive those that fear him among us, and incline them to speak
often one to another, humbly, freely, and savourily, about divine Things, and
to meet together to pray to God, and praise him: It is an Argument of our
Leanness, that such Meetings are so poorly attended, and that in a Time of so
great Danger. Publicans show more Zeal for their shameless Frolicks, than some
Professors among us for the Worship of God; this is Matter of equal Reproach
and Lamentation! Once more,

WE should be deeply and tenderly concerned, for our poor graceless Relations,
for the CHURCH and NATION; should we not, with Abraham, cry to God, that
Ishmael may live before him? If our Souls were suitably affected with a View of
the Glory of God, the Worth of Souls, and the Vastness of Eternity, would we
suffer our Relations to go on securely, from Year to Year, in their Blood,
toward everlasting Ruin, without one faithful Warning? Alas, for our Unbelief,
Stupidity, and Cruelty! How dwells the Love of God in us, who are no more
concerned for his Glory? How Love to our dear Relations, who so trifle with
their everlasting Happiness or Misery? Do we verily believe the Religion we
profess, if so, why do not We act like it? If we sincerely, humbly, and
repeatedly endeavored after vehement Cries to God, who knows but we might be
the Means of bringing some of our dear Relations to him? O how blessed would
this be! Simple Words, honestly, humbly, and seasonably spoken, have been the
Means of bringing many Souls to God; surely every pious Person, should try to
bring at least one with him to Heaven: You should not leave all this Work to
Ministers, for you have a Charge, as well as they; faithful Endeavors of this
Kind, would yield us the noblest Delight, which Success would increase! As to
the Church in its present low State, should not our Hearts be tenderly
concerned? Many in the British Dominions have forsaken the principal Doctrines
of Christianity, the Power of Piety languishes; the Ministry of the Word, is
generally like a miscarrying Womb, and dry Breasts; diverse pious People
removed, and but few converted of late, and all this in a Time of awful
Judgments! O should not these Considerations excite us to speak in the
Prophet's Language, For Jerusalem's Sake, I will not hold my Peace, and for
Zion's Sake, I will not be silent, until the Righteousness thereof go forth as
Brightness, and the Salvation thereof as a Lamp that burns? And in regard of
the Nation, how do our Enemies triumph over us? God is certainly angry with us,
and threatens to take away our civil and religious Liberties at a Stroke, and
yet we remain generally stupid and unreformed, do not regard the Opperation of
his Hand, or turn to him that smites us. O let us cry between the Porch and the
Altar, that God would spare his Heritage, and not give them up to Reproach! I
proceed to the

2d PROPOSED, which was to give the REASONS of this POINT; here observe, that
GOD REQUIRES IT OF US, What do ye more than others? He also EXPECTS IT, and
that reasonably; for what could he have done more for his Vineyard than he has
done? And he comes Year after Year seeking Fruit; which if he does not find,
what can such CUMBERERS of the GROUND expect, but to be CUT DOWN? Is it not
just and reasonable, that Fruit be proportioned to the Means of Fruitfulness?
Hereby God's Name will be honored; John 15.8. Herein is my Father glorified,
that ye bear much Fruit: And hereby God's Kingdom will be promoted. Such a Life
will incline us hereto, and give Weight and Authority to our Words. In this
Way, WE ourselves shall FIND REST to our SOULS, and enjoy a Heaven upon Earth.
The Reason why we have so little Comfort in Religion, is because we are no more
religious. Weak Grace is difficult to be discerned by ourselves and others, and
the Evidences of it are easily darkened, but it is not so when Grace is strong:
Besides the Lord will not be behind-hand with us in this Life, he will
graciously Reward his Peoples Painfulness and Fidelity in his Service; he will
give them more frequent Views of that immortal Blessedness, to which they are
hastening, and in which they shall be for ever instated, after a few Moments
are elapsed.

WE Profess more, and have promised more than others, and therefore it is but
reasonable and decent, that we do more. -- WE expect more, and therefore should
do more, if not, our Expectations are irrational. -- WE know more than others,
and therefore should exceed them in Practice; without this our superior
Intelligence answers no valuable End, but is a Loss, instead of a Benefit: For
he that knows his Master's Will, and does it not, shall be beaten with double
Stripes. -- OTHERS expect more of us, who if they are disappointed, are
prejudiced against Religion, and induced to believe that there is nothing in
it, but Words and Pretenses. In fine, hereby our future Happiness will be
increased, the Degrees of which will be proportioned to our Advances in
Holiness here, Luke 19.16.17.

FROM what has been said, we should be excited to propose this solemn Question
to ourselves, What do we more than others? Do we exceed them in the Instances
before mentioned, or not? Wherein do we live above the Rate of the Children of
this World? Alas, is there not Cause of Mourning and Complaint? Are we not
carnal, and do we not walk as Men? Below the Character of Christians? Our
Leanness, our Leanness, testifies against us; the gracious God has taken much
Pains with us, by his Word, Ordinances, Providence, and Spirit, but to how
little Purpose? Where is our Growth in Grace, our abundant Life, our much
Fruit? What have we done for God, and his Kingdom, in all the Space that he has
given us? What Ignorance, Pride, Peevishness, rash Judging, Selfishness? What
Backbitings, Swellings, and Tumults do abound? How little Love to God and Man?
How little Faith, Holiness, Humility, Heavenliness, Mercy, Meekness,
Forbearance? O that my Head was Waters, and mine Eyes a Fountain of Tears, that
I might weep Day and Night, for my own Sins, Weakness, Unfruitfulness, and for
the Sins of others! Alas, our Time and Talents, have been in a Manner lost, and
the Almighty has been watering an almost dry Stick; except we speedily repent
and reform, there is Reason to fear, that the righteous God will take away the
Hedge of this Vineyard, and let it be eaten up; and break the Wall thereof, and
let it be trodden down. O let us remember and apply the Threatening of the King
of the Church, the faithful and true Witness against the Churches of EPHESUS
and SARDIS, Nevertheless, I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left
thy first Love. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and
do the first Works; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy
Candlestick out of his Place, except thou repent. Remember therefore how thou
have received and heard, and hold fast, and repent. If therefore thou shall not
watch, I will come on thee as a Thief, and thou shall not know what Hour I will
come upon thee. (Rev. 2.4, 5. and 3 Chap. 3 Ver.) We are now loudly called
upon, by the JUDGMENTS of GOD, to humble ourselves before him, and reform what
is amiss in our Conduct. In one Word, SIRS, Heaven and Earth, God and Man, our
own Interest, and that of the Church and Nation, concur to invite and urge us
to grow in Grace, and do more than others. Which may GOD of his Mercy, help us
to comply with. AMEN, and AMEN.

FINIS.

