THE LIBERTY OF THE SPIRIT AND OF THE FLESH DISTINGUISHED. In an ADDRESS to
those Captives in Spirit among the People called QUAKERS, who are commonly
called Libertines.

By JOHN RUTTY, An unworthy Member of that COMMUNITY.

Ask for the old Paths, where is the good Way, and walk therein, and ye shall
find Rest for your Souls; but they said, We will not walk therein.

Jer. vi. 16. Woe to the rebellious Children, says the Lord, that take Counsel,
but not of me -- that walk to go down into Egypt, and have not asked at my
Mouth, to strengthen themselves in the Strength of Pharaoh, and to trust in the
Shadow of Egypt. Therefore shall the Strength of Pharaoh be your Shame, and the
Trust in the Shadow of Egypt your Confusion.

Isa. xxx. 1, 2, 3. For, Brethren, ye have been called unto Liberty; only use
not Liberty for an Occasion to the Flesh.

Gal. v. 13. DUBLIN, Printed: PHILADELPHIA, Reprinted by B. FRANKLIN, and D.
HALL. 1759.

THE INTRODUCTION.
BY LIBERTY, I understand a Freedom of Spirit to act and speak according to the
Light and Conviction received, whether agreeably to the Custom of the Land
wherein we live, or not. By Bondage, I understand a Want of that Liberty, or a
servile Subjection to the prevailing Fashions of the Times as such, even when
either we believe them to be repugnant to Justice and Truth, or neglect to
enquire whether they be so or not, although strongly called on so to do by the
Examples and Precepts of our Forefathers, and the singular Education they have
given us: And according to this Account, I apprehend that those whom we
commonly call Libertines in our Society, ought to be ranked among the Captives.

In these Lands, indeed, we are favored, far beyond many of our Neighbors,
with the Liberty of worshipping God according to our respective Persuasions,
and our civil Rights and Liberties are in a great Measure secured to us, and
many among us profess great Zeal to maintain and preserve these inviolable, who
yet, in Reality, if they examine themselves impartially, will be found not a
Whit better than Slaves to a certain most potent Idol, whose Sway is more
despotic and more universal than that of any Monarch upon Earth; that is to
say, the God or Spirit of this World.

This Address comes from one who has long groaned under the Bondage of this
Spirit, and who consequently is not void of a Sympathy with such as may be
under the like Circumstances, and wishes for them the like Redemption and
Participation of the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, after which he
himself aspires.

Now, in the Language of Scripture, the Spirit of this World is placed in
Opposition to the Spirit of GOD, as in these Expressions of the Apostle Paul: 1
Cor. ii. 12.
Now we have received not the Spirit of this World, but the Spirit which is of
GOD, that we might know the Things that are freely given us of GOD: And again,
2 Cor. iv 4.
The God of this World blinded the Eyes of those from whom the Light of the
glorious Gospel was hid formerly; and the Children of this World are
distinguished from the Children of Light by the Lip of Truth Luke xvi. 8.
.

The View given in this little Tract of the prevailing Fashions of the Lands we
live in, affords to me a strong Evidence of the Corruption of the Heart of Man,
and that amidst all our Boasts of Liberty and Reformation, the World still lies
in Wickedness; that many still continue to walk in the broad Way; and that but
a Few have learned to walk in that strait Path which leads to Life; and so the
Advice of the Apostle, Romans xii. 2.
Be not conformed formed to this World, but be ye transformed by the renewing
of your Mind, remains to be very wholesome and applicable to us at this Day.

The Jews of old boasted of their being Abraham's Children, and in Bondage to
no Man, but the Lip of Truth pronounced them Slaves to Sin; and indeed, although
Christ our Lord was anointed to preach Deliverance to the Captives Luke iv.
, it is to be doubted that but few who bear his Name have obtained the happy
Experience of being entirely set at Liberty from a Vassalage to the Spirit of
this World; on the contrary, that this Spirit has captivated and blinded
Multitudes of those called Christians, is too evident in our daily
Conversation, from the enchanting or delusive Power of the prevailing Fashion
of the Times, whereby it gives a false Luster to many absurd, hurtful and
wicked Practices, and (even as some called Evil good Isaiah v. 20.
, and Good evil, and put Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness, so this)
frequently represents Wrong for Right, and Right for Wrong, and blinds Men both
as to their temporal and spiritual Interest; and he that dares to be truly Wise
and Virtuous, in Opposition to the Torrent of the Times, is commonly the Object
of Scorn; in order to avoid which, the Many run down with the Stream.

To show that this is the Case in diverse Instances peculiarly affecting our
religious Society, is the Design of this Address, and to represent to those who
are proper Objects of this Admonition, the Misery and Folly of their present
State and Conduct, as being inconsistent not only with the Precepts of Holy
Scripture, but the Maxims of sound Reason, and such as clash even with their
temporal Interest, and to convince them that they are not only Slaves, but
Fools also, even as long as they hug their Chains, and do not sigh and groan
for Deliverance.

That there is a gross and palpable Declension among the present Generation of
the People called Quakers, from the Spirit and Practices of their Predecessors,
is abundantly manifest in the several Instances to be hereafter minutely
specified: Nor indeed to those who know how to trace Effects from their Causes,
is this at all to be wondered at, these Transgressions being no other than the
genuine Productions of the native Soil, the Heart of Man, that has not been
subjected to the Discipline of the Holy Cross.

To dare to oppose the modish Inundation of the Follies and Extravagancies of
the Times, requires a Fortitude not born with us, but such as must be acquired
by no small Share of spiritual Industry, and indeed a Power more than human.

Wherefore I bow the Knee to the God and Father of Spirits, that he who is
Omnipotent, Omnipresent, and infinitely good, may vouchsafe so far to
cooperate with these my feeble Endeavors, as to enlighten the Understandings,
and bend the Wills of those poor Captives to the World's Spirit and Ways, who
dare not do otherwise than run with the Multitude, and that he may influence
them to a Way of thinking and acting agreeable to the Examples and Precepts of
their Fathers, even by the Operation of the same Power and Spirit which
animated them in their Christian Conflict, being well aware, that nothing short
of the same Power which raised up, can preserve us a Society to the Glory of
GOD, who has called us, as he did the primitive Christians formerly, unto Gal.
v. 13.
Liberty.

In the mean time, as I am here treating with mere carnal Men, who are no
otherwise Quakers than by mere Accident, and rather indeed by Reluctance than
Choice, who have little or no Relish for the sublime Truths of the Gospel, who
vainly flatter themselves with the Conceit of Liberty, good Sense, the free
Exercise of their rational Faculties, and just Apprehensions of their own
temporal Interest and Honor, I shall endeavor to reason with them upon their
own Principles, even as Babes are to be fed with Milk, being unable to bear
stronger Meat: For indeed, if one were to speak to such merely of Self-denial
and Mortification, or of the glorious Privileges of the free Citizens of the
New-Jerusalem, or of the Vanity of all worldly Enjoyments, or of the Joys of
Heaven, reserved for those who bear the Cross here; or were one to affirm, with
great Truth, that this People with whom they profess Fellowship, are signalized
by two special Marks of the Favor of Divine Providence, viz. in the raising up
a Ministry agreeable to Christ's own Appointment, and in establishing Christian
Discipline among us, it is very probable he might meet with no better Treatment
than that which Felix the Governor gave Paul the Apostle, in these Words, Go
thy Way, Acts xxiv. 25.
and when I have a convenient Season, I will call for thee.

But if one speak to them, of Liberty, and of temporal Honor and Interest, and
of the Consistency of their Conduct with sound Reason and good Sense, they may,
perhaps, vouchsafe to lend an Ear; for which Reason the chief Tendency of this
Work is to show them that their Conduct is neither consistent with Liberty,
sound Policy and good Sense, nor with their own temporal Honor and Interest;
and if once the sandy Foundation upon which they have been building comes to be
shaken, they may possibly think of digging deeper for a better, which is what
has been very frequently, earnestly and justly recommended to them by our
Brethren of the Ministry.

And indeed it must be owned, that a mere Conformity to the Traditions of the
Elders in exterior Matters, is far from entitling any Man to the Kingdom of
Heaven, and so is every Thing short of Regeneration John iii.
, according to our Lord's Doctrine, and besides a Nonconformity to this World,
Romans xii. 2.
we must be transformed by the Renewing of our Mind, agreeably to the Precept
of the Apostle.

In the mean time, it will abundantly appear in the Sequel, that our Ancestors
have pointed out to us the plain high Road to Health, Tranquillity of Mind, and
the Preservation, if not Increase, of our outward Estates.

It was not however the Policy of this World, or a mere Principle of Parsimony
that led them into these Things, but a clear Illumination of Mind, by which
they saw the Vanity, Folly and Wickedness of the World in many of their
Practices, and therefore conscientiously declined them, and as now at length,
through the persevering Constancy of the Faithful, through a considerable Series of
Time, the Prejudices of the People are in a great Measure overcome, and many
sober Persons of other Societies begin to be convinced of the Reasonableness of
many of our Practices, and even to recommend them as most consistent with the
strictest Justice and Prudence, the present reigning Degeneracy of those who
are yet called by our Name, becomes very unseasonable, and, like the Conduct of
the Spies of old, Numbers xiii.
who brought up an evil Report of the Land of Canaan, tends to discourage the
Progress of the Reformation, or the Spreading of that Light and Truth which,
through the Favor of Providence, has dawned among us.

That Purity and Simplicity of Manners, consisting in the Renounciation of the
Superfluities and Vanities of the World, by which our Elders were, and the
Faithful still are, distinguished, was no affected Singularity, nor was it any
other than the Result of a Conformity to the Doctrine and Precepts of Christ
and his Apostles, and perfectly agreeable to the Idea given us in the
New Testament, of the Estimate proper to be made of the State of Man in this
World as a transient Habitation, a Stage of Probation and Preparation for a
better and happier State, as appears from the following Texts: Lay not up for
yourselves Treasures upon Earth, etc. Take Mat. vi.
no Thought what ye shall eat, what ye shall drink, or wherewithal ye shall be
clothed (for after all these Things do the Gentiles seek) but seek ye first
the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and all these Things shall be added
unto you. We have no continuing City here, but seek one to come Heb. xiii. 14.
. And, to me, says the Apostle Paul, to live Philip. i.
is Christ, and to die is Gain, and I am in a Strait betwixt two, having a
Desire to depart, and be with Christ, which is far better; nevertheless, to
abide in the Flesh is more needful for you. And Christians are represented as
Pilgrims, Strangers and Sojourners here 1 Pet. ii. 11.
. And Christ says, John v. 44.
How can ye believe who receive Honor from one another, and seek not the
Honor that comes from GOD only? And the Apostle James, that the Friendship of
the World is Enmity with GOD James iv. 4.
, and whosoever will be a Friend of the World, is the Enemy of GOD.

Hence it is evident, that all such who would, in earnest, copy after the
primitive Pattern, ought to renounce the surfeiting Cares, superfluous Profits,
vain Pleasures and Honors of this World.

It must be owned, that the Course of this World is not steered according to
such Maxims, and that among the Professors of Christianity, there are but few
who are found in the Exercise of a Self-denial perfectly consistent herewith;
and the Distinction which our Lord himself made between the Children Luke xvi 8.
of this World, and the Children of Light, holds good to this Day.

We are indeed told by a celebrated and ingenious Writer of the last Age, of a
certain obscure Set of Men called Pietists, whose Character and Conduct
appears to be in a good Measure conformable to the above Precepts and Maxims of
the New Testament, according to the following Description he has given of them,
viz. "They Addison's Travels to Italy.
pretend to great Refinements as to what regards the Practice of Christianity;
they retire much from the Conversation of the World; they sink themselves into
an entire Repose and Tranquillity of Mind, and in a State of Silence attend the
secret Illapse and Flowings in of the Holy Spirit; they retrench themselves
within the Conveniences, and Necessities of Life, and avoid, as much as
possible, what the World calls innocent Pleasures, lest they should have their
Affections tainted with any Sensuality, and diverted from the Love of Him who
is to be the only Comfort, Repose and Delight of their whole Being."

Such a Description quadrates well with the Account given us of the Conduct and
Disposition of our faithful Elders in the Beginning, viz. "That they Penn's
Rise and Progress of the People called Quakers.
recommended Silence by their Example, having very few Words upon all
Occasions. They sought Solitude, but, when in Company, they would neither use
nor hear unnecessary or unlawful Discourses; whereby they preserved their Minds
pure and undisturbed from unprofitable Thoughts and Diversions." And agreeable
to this Observation are those prudential and salutary Cautions given forth from
some of our National Meetings against needless Visits, Familiarity and
Friendship with Persons of other Professions, as frequently proving a Snare to
weak Minds, and tending to draw them into a Conformity to the World in its
Corruptons Israel, by divine Direction ( Numbers xxiii. 9.) was to dwell alone,
and not to be reckoned among the Nations; but when they deviated from this
Counsel, and dwelt among the Canaanites, Hittites, etc. and took their
Daughters to be their Wives, and gave their Daughters to their Sons, they
served other Gods, forgot the Lord their God, and served Baalim and the Groves.
Judges iii. 5, 6, 7. vi. 1, etc.
.

And it is well known that this People did ever from the Beginning
conscientiously decline the Use of the customary Recreations and Pastimes of
the Age, and condemn the vain Pomps and Superfluities of the World in Eating,
Drinking, Apparel, Furniture, and even in Trading, A Treatise of Christian
Discipline, published in Dublin, 1753.
as unbecoming the Character of a People called of GOD out of the Corruptions
of the World, and to shine as Lights to the Conviction of a degenerate Age of
professed Christians; and what does all this amount to, either in this or the
beforementioned People, or any other? Truly, not to a Whit more than a faithful
Adherence to the above mentioned Precepts, Sentiments, and Conduct of Christ
and his Apostles, whose Followers we all profess to be.

But to return to the Consideration of sound Policy and good Sense, temporal
Advantage, Liberty and Honor; the Saying of the Apostle, that Godliness is
profitable to all Things 1 Timothy iv. 8.
, having the Promise of this Life, and of that which is to come, and of the
wise Man, Prove. iii. 16.
that Wisdom carries in her Right Hand Length of Days, and in her Left Riches
and Honor, are, perhaps, in no Case more applicable than to the Consequences
of a faithful Adherence to the wholesome Traditions of our Forefathers; for
Health of Body, Tranquillity of Mind, and an Improvement of Estate, are the
genuine Effects of Temperance and Frugality; as, on the contrary, Diseases both
of Body and Mind, and outward Poverty, by the Justice and Wisdom of that
Supreme Providence, which presides over all Events, in both the moral and
natural World, are entailed upon the vain Affectation of the modish Excesses
and Superfluities of the Times; and if we, as a People, had adhered more
strictly to the primitive Example and Precept in respest of those Things,
whilst, at the same time, according to the inviolable Dictates of sound
Morality, we had exercised a proper Industry in our outward Concerns, we had
been, in a more general Manner than we now are, in that which, in Scripture, is
pronounced to be the more blessed State, viz. or being able rather to give than
receive Acts xx. 35.
.

Next, as to the Points of Honor and Liberty, upon which some of these Men
seem to value themselves; for my Part, I know of no greater Honor to a Man
than to maintain an uniform, consistent Character in a Conduct agreeable to his
Profession; but, on the other Hand, to profess and behave as a Christian
Freeman in some Respects, and put on the evident Badges of Slavery in others,
is a Hotch-potch Character, ridiculous in itself, to which may not unfitly be
applied the Comparison whereby the Prophet represented the State of Ephraim,
viz. Hosea vii. 8
Ephraim has mixed himself among the People: He is a Cake not turned, viz.
partly raw, and partly baked.

Our faithful Elders bravely asserted, and steadily maintained their Christian
Right and Liberty of declining many of those Customs of the World, which were,
and are, destructive both of Health and Wealth; and moreover, by their steady
Perseverance, have rendered the Path so easy to us their Successors, that very
little Hardship now attends a strict and faithful Adherence to their wholesome
Traditions; so that if any of us be now deprived of our Rights and Liberties in
these Respects, it must betray an extraordinary Degree of Cowardice,
complicated with great Folly, even that whilst Liberty is offered, we should
prefer Slavery; and the Mark of Infamy which, under the Law, was set upon such
as chose a State of outward Slavery, when Liberty was offered them, viz. Exodus
xxi. 6.
That their Masters should bore their Ears through with an Awl, and they should
serve them for ever, is a fit Representation not only of the Reproach due to
(but of the dreadful Entailment of perpetual spiritual Slavery on) those who
persist in refusing Christian Liberty when offered to them.

Upon the whole; as an uniform, consistent, faithful Conduit, agreeable to our
peculiar Profession, tends to preserve us out of the Corruptions of the World,
and to distinguish us a City set on a Hill that could not be hid Matthew. v. 14.
; on the contrary, the Tendency of the Conduct of the modern Liberties, so
called, is, to dissolve and destroy all Distinctions peculiar to this Society,
to pull down the Hedge, and destroy the Fence of Christian Discipline, by which
we should be preserved, as a Garden enclosed, from many noxious Things, to
which others are exposed, to blend and confound our Language and Manners This
is notoriously the Case at present with net a few who are called by our Name,
who resemble the Children of those Jews that had married Wives of Ashdod, etc.
contrary to God's Command, that they spoke Half the Language of the Jews, and
Half that of Ashdod. Nehem. xiii.
with those of the World, and why? The moving Cause is clear, viz. to
ingratiate themselves with, and render themselves acceptable to, the World (and
indeed such are as much Children of this World as others) according to the
Saying of our Lord to his Disciples: John xv.
If ye were of the World, the World would love its own, but because ye are not
of the World, but I have chosen you out of the World, therefore the World
hates you.

Now, therefore, O ye degenerate Children, and Despisers of your own Mercies,
ponder the Path of your Feet, even your Backslidings from the Footsteps of your
Forefathers, and turn about in due Time, and consider what befell a People
formerly, who when they knew Romans i. 21.22.23, 24.
GOD, glorified him not as GOD, neither were thankful, but became vain in their
Imaginations, and their foolish Heart was darkened, professing themselves to be
wise, they became Fools, etc. whom GOD gave up to Uncleanness, through the Lusts
of their own Hearts; I say, turn about now in due Time, lest a like dreadful
Desertion should also attend you, and a Fate analagous to that of those who
were called the Children Matthew. viii.
of the Kingdom formerly, viz. that they should be cast out whilst others
should come from the East, and from the West, and sit down with Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of GOD.

I earnestly wish that such of the Rich and Great, into whose Hands this
Address may come, may in an especial Manner be favored with a feeling Sense of
the Justness of the Admonitions herein contained, because as to the Splendour
and Gaiety of living, and indeed in most Cases, these are the Fashion-makers,
whom the meaner People blindly follow, and therefore are doubly guilty, as
being not only Captives themselves, but leading others into the same State.

But before I proceed to the Work itself, it seems necessary to obviate one
Objection that I am well aware will be made against the whole Tenor of it, viz.

Obj. Here is a great Pother about exterior Matters, in all which it is very
possible for a Man to be exact, even to a Tittle, and yet have no Right to the
Kingdom of Heaven: And this is beginning at the wrong End, the Outside instead
of the Inside: regulate this last, and a Regulation of the other will
immediately follow. I answer first, that I freely grant that nothing short of
Regeneration can give Admittance into the Kingdom of GOD; and that although I
have said many Things to evince that the Spirit of the World is a Spirit of
Error and Delusion, yet I must own, in the Language of the beloved Disciple 1
John v.
, that "Whatsoever (and indeed nothing but what) is born of GOD overcomes the
World, and that this is the Victory that overcomes the World, even our Faith,"
which is the Gift of God Ephesians. ii. 8.
.

But, in the mean time, I do not apprehend that this discharges either Parents
from a Vigilance over their Children, or Elders from an Oversight of the Flock,
in respect to these exterior Matters.

As to the New Birth, and the Gift of Faith, it is not in the Power of the
Parent to convey these to his Children, but yet this should not hinder him from
conveying to them what he can.

Now here is, in the Supposition implied in the Objection, a Parent who has
himself happily experienced the Advantages of a Life and Conversation conducted
in the Ways of Truth and Simplicity, Temperance, Sobriety and Frugality, and of
an Education exempting him from many Snares and Temptations to Vice, to which
many others are exposed.

Shall a Parent thus situated abandon his Offspring during a State of Minority,
Ignorance and Weakness, to Nature, or to corrupt Company, and if viciously
inclined (as indeed the Seeds of Evil soon appear even in Children) put no
Yoke, or lay no Restraint, and exercise no Discipline on him in his Youth? This
would be a Neglect condemned by all wise Nations; and, on the contrary, it is
allowed to be the indispensible Duty of Parents to train up their Children in
the Way wherein they ought hereafter to walk, to recommend to them the
Sweetness of Virtue, and keep them out of the Road to Vice as much as possible,
by Instructions, by Example, by Encouragements, and Restraints properly
exercised: By this Means, in the more tractable Dispositions, the Practice of
Virtue will become familiar, or at least good Habits will be contracted, and
our Youth will be kept out of the Way of those many Temptations which daily
captivate the giddy Multitude, and they will be more capable of better and
higher Impressions, than if, by an early Indulgence of a Conformity to the
modish Corruptions of a degenerate Age, evil Habits had been contracted, very
difficult to be afterward overcome.

Now if such be the Duty of Parents with Regard to their Offspring, undoubtedly
Ministers and Elders ought to countenance and cooperate with these Endeavors,
those especially whom the Holy Ghost has now, as formerly, made Overseers, not
neglecting to recommend higher and nobler Principles of Action than mere
Education and Tradition; and when the Religion of our Education becomes the
Religion of our Judgment and Choice; when we, and those of the succeeding Ages,
become thoroughly convinced that a faithful Adherence to the wholesome
Traditions of our Elders, animated by the Spirit that established them, is
highly conducive to the Good of both Body and Mind, and our solid Comfort and
Happiness both in this World and the next, there may be good Grounds for hoping
that a Succession will be maintained, and preserved in the same glorious Path,
from one Generation to another, to the End of the World. Amen.

P. S. Since the first rough Draught of this Tract was finished, some
additional Hints on the Subject of Recreations, and elsewhere, were given me by
a dear Brother, James Gough, which I have accordingly adopted, and do hereby
acknowledge.

THE LIBERTY OF THE SPIRIT AND OF THE FLESH DISTINGUISHED
SECT. I. Of Recreations.
AN inordinate and unlawful Pursuit of either Pleasure, Profit or Honor,
according to the various Dispositions and Temptations attending different Men,
seems to be the chief Obstacle in their Way to solid Comfort and Happiness in
this World, and that which is to come.

As a religious Society, we are distinguished by proposing to our Members
certain Limitations to these several Pursuits, to demonstrate the Expediency
whereof is the Tendency of this Address.

I shall begin with Pleasure; and here, the present Conduct of some, who, by
their frequenting our Assemblies, seem to be willing to be deemed in Communion
with us, seems to render it necessary to represent unto them the Self-denial of
our Ancestors with regard to the vain Pastimes of the Age they lived in,
together with the Advantages attending it, in order that such who fall into a
Conformity to the Practices of the World in these Respects, may consider how
far this is consistent with Prudence and sound Policy.

Now it is certain that they ever did, and the Faithful among them still do,
maintain a perpetual Controversy against these Things, as deeming them
inconsistent with the Character of the Christian Sojourner, who, according to
the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. i. 17.
ought to pass his Time in this World, in Fear, and not study Arts to pass away
that Time which flies away so fast of itself, and is but a Span, bearing no
Proportion to that everlasting Duration, the Happiness or Misery annexed to
which depends on the Use we make of it, even of the short Space allotted us in
this World.

Hence they renounced not only Prize-fighting, Bull-baiting, Cock-fighting,
Gaming To these might be added the frequenting of Horse-races, a Practice
particularly cautioned against, even of late, as being attended with diverse
Temptations and Snares, from the unsuitable Company, idle and vain Discourses,
and sometimes Gaming practiced on this Occasion, utterly inconsistent with our
peculiar Character and Profession.
, and other such like Instances of squandering away our precious Moments as are
condemned by the more sober and civilized of other Societies, but also diverse
other Recreations, so called, of a more refined Kind, which by diverse of those
who call themselves polite and well-bred, according to the Maxims of the Spirit
of this World, are reckoned fine Qualifications: Thus they never deemed Dancing
to be any Part of Christian Education; on the contrary, that Snares and
Dangers, with regard to the spiritual Life, lay hid under the specious
Pretenses of Learning a graceful Motion of the Body; and although it may be
alleged in Behalf of Hunting, that it is a natural and lawful Exercise, yet I
find, among the Records of our Elders, that as they had a Sense of its Tendency
sometimes to draw into Company that might be hurtful to our Youth, they have
not been wanting to give Cautions on this Head: Nor moreover, were they
burdened with the Expense of teaching their Children to chant to the Sound of
the Viol, or of furnishing them with Amos vi 5, 6.
Instruments of Music, like those of old, who were not grieved at the
Affliction of Joseph, being led to a superior Harmony, even that in Conduct and
Actions; which is grateful in the Ears of GOD and good Men: And as to the
modish, promiscuous Assemblies of Men and Women at Balls and Consorts of Music,
wherein diverse modern Christians seem to have given full License to their Women
to be Gadders abroad, they ever did, and still do judge with the Apostle, Titus
ii. 5.
that their Women should be Keepers at Home, as most consistent with the
spiritual, as well as temporal Interest and good Economy of their Families.

Nor again did it enter into their Hearts to learn to Fence or Fight, their
Warfare being spiritual, and their heavenly Captain having taught them to
forgive Injuries.

Next, as to the Entertainments of the Theater or Stage Plays, which at this
Time engross so great a Share of the precious Time of many, to the Scandal of
the Christian Profession, and which have of late found Admittance into
Countries, which formerly would have banished their Actors with Scorn as
Vagabonds (which they are deemed to be by Law, as I am informed) to these, I
say, our Ancestors were utter Strangers, ever declaring against them (and with
great Justice is the same Admonition continued in the general Epistle of the
yearly Meeting of London 1748, 1749) as Nurseries of Vice and Debauchery, in
which Light they have also of late been considered by diverse of the more
serious Persons of other Societies An eminent Author, not of our Communion,
observes on this very Occasion, that Pleasure is, in some Sort, more pernicious
than direct Vice, because Vice has naturally some Horror in it, but Pleasure,
under the Color of being harmless, stupifies and besots.
.

Now, what was the Advantage of all this Singularity and Self-denial? I answer,
very great, on a temporal as well as spiritual Account, as they not only by
this Means saved to themselves a great Deal of Time for Meditation and
spiritual Exercises, and were exempted from the Snares and Temptations
attending the several Practices above mentioned, but moreover, also saved a
considerable Share of outward Treasure, which is squandered away on these
Occasions, that might be applied to much better Purposes, and had more Time for
a sober, honorable, and industrious Application to their secular Concerns,
which of Consequence was crowned with better Success, even in the Acquisition
of the Riches of this World.

Shall now any of the Descendants of these Men, who are enjoying the Fruits of
their Industry and Frugality, wax wanton, and, being intoxicated with the
Spirit of this World, embrace those Things which their Forefathers with so much
Reason abhorred? Such shall reap the genuine Fruits of their own Doings; for
besides the Loss that both Body and Soul sustain hereby, this shall also prove
a Moth to their Estates, and outward Poverty must undoubtedly, by the just
Determination of Providence, prove frequently the Consequence of the unbounded
Gratification of that Eye which is not satisfied with seeing, and of that Ear
which is not filled with hearing Eccles. i. 8.
.

SECT. II. Of Superfluities in Meats, Drinks, Apparel and Furniture.
THE true, or just and lawful Ends of Meat, Drink, Apparel and Furniture, are
to preserve Life and Health, to cover our Nakedness, and defend us from the
Injuries of the Weather: And, through the Goodness of Providence, ample Means are
furnished us, and, for the most Part, may be procured sufficient for answering
those Ends; but if Men will not be content with the bountiful Provision of GOD
in Nature, nor know how to prize any Thing but what comes from far, and costs
them dear; and if such be the prevailing Taste and Mode of a Country set up by
the Rich and Great, those of middle and inferior Stations, whose Wills have not
been subdued by the Discipline of the holy Cross, so far as to enable them to
reject and deny, but who on the contrary are embracing that Maxim, that it were
better to be out of the World than out of the Fashion, will often find
Difficulties enough in procuring to themselves what they may vainly imagine to
be the Conveniences of Life, or, in other Terms, to eat, drink and dress, as
others do.

And indeed such, at this present Time, is notoriously the Case of these
Countries, where even the lower Class of the People will not sit down to their
Breakfast without Supplies from both the Indies, and where the Drink, designed
by Nature chiefly as a Vehicle for our Food, often costs more than the Meat,
and must, in a great Measure, be imported from Abroad, as also no small Part of
the Clothing of the Body, and Furniture of our Houses.

By this Means a great Variety of imaginary Wants is created, and Cares and
Toils, in Proportion, are entailed on the middle and lower Classes of Mankind,
and sometimes the Properties of their Neighbors are invaded, in order to
supply these imaginary Wants.

Now, amidst such a general overflowing of Luxury among the People, it seems to
be well worthy the Consideration of such, who, in their Language and Garb,
carry about them the Badges of a Profession of being set at Liberty from a
Bondage to the Spirit of this World, how far they have shone as Lights in a
dark and corrupt Age, (even as a City set on a Hill that Matthew. v. 14.
could not be hid) by an uniform Conduct agreeable to such a Profession.

And first, with respect to Superfluities in Eating and Drinking: Certain it
is, that various and costly Meats, Drinks and Sauces, are not only a Breach of
that Precept, Take Matthew. vi.
no Thought what ye shall eat, and what ye shall drink, but also as
inconsistent with our peculiar Profession, as Lace and Embroidery in Apparel;
and, moreover, besides the superfluous Expenses common to both, are peculiarly
injurious to Health, even to that of both Body and Mind, as being Provocatives
to Intemperance, and productive of all the ill Effects, both natural and moral,
entailed upon such Indulgences.

And here it would seem utterly inexcusable to pass by in Silence, a certain
lately introduced, and now greatly prevailing Fashion, viz. that of drinking
spirituous Liquors, in Behalf of which whatever may be alleged of their Use as
a Medicine, it is most certain, that the ordinary Use of them, challenges the
first Rank among Superfluities, in drinking, to be condemned, as being highly
injurious to our Bodies, Souls and Estates: And were we as a People thoroughly
possessed of the true Spirit of Christian Moderation, we should be no less
distinguished, by a peculiar Self-denial and Abstinence, in this, than in other
Respects; and I observe with Pleasure, among the many salutary Counsels from
Time to Time transmitted to us by that Honorable Assembly, the yearly Meeting
of London, we have a particular Caution against this growing and dangerous
Evil, in the Year 1754.

It appears from the Writings of our Elders, that Fasting was not unfrequently
practiced by them as they were occasionally and voluntarily led thereinto, by
the heavenly Wisdom; a Practice also frequent in the primitive Church, and on
many Occasions highly conducive to the Health of both Body and Mind, though it
seems, of late Years, to be much out of Use; nor indeed has the Temperance and
Moderation suitable to our Profession always manifested itself in the spreading
of our Tables, but Pomp and Orientation too frequently been consulted on this
Occasion; of which it seems not unnecessary to specify one signal Instance,
because many are Sufferers by it, viz. that although by Virtue of our Education
we enjoy an Exemption from the vain and superfluous Expenses attending Births
and Burials, yet at Marriages many of us, notwithstanding the reiterated
Precepts given forth to the contrary, are remarkably more profuse than our
Neighbors, and many of the poorer Sort are led on blindly, in this, as in
other Cases, by the Example of the Rich and Great, to such Excesses as are not
only inconsistent with our Christian Testimony, but very hurtful to their
temporal Interest.

Beside this, there is a certain particular Instance, both of Superfluity and
Unseasonableness, with regard to Eating and Drinking, which seems not unworthy
of some Animadversion in this Place.

It was a Statute enjoined by GOD himself to Aaron and his Sons, and to remain
in Force for ever throughout their Generations, Ye Levit. x. 9.
shall not drink Wine nor strong Drink, when ye go into the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, lest ye die; and the Reason subjoined in the following Verses,
viz. that they might put Difference between holy and unholy, between clean and
unlean, and might teach the Children of Israel all the Statutes which the Lord
had spoken, is applicable also in Christian Congregations, and to all
Intemperance in Eating and Drinking on such Occasions; nor is a calm Serenity
of Mind, undisturbed by the Fumes of Indigestion and Excess, less necessary to
those who are to learn divine Truths, than to those who are to teach them.

Upon this Principle, it was an ancient Custom to eat and drink sparingly
before a Meeting for divine Worship, a Custom from which I observe with Concern
too many to deviate to their own private Hurt, as well as that of their
Families, and particularly of their Servants, who by Reason of the Provision
they must make for their Masters Bellies, are obliged to stay at Home; and this
I take to be one Cause of the Irreligion and Dissoluteness of Servants, greatly
complained of; and if some of the Servants of our Community, should more
peculiarly suffer on this Account, it were not to be wondered at, because these
(notwithstanding diverse wholesome Advices to the contrary) are too much
deprived of those Opportunities for spiritual Improvement, and it is to be
doubted have but rarely any other Some worthy Elders have placed the Use of
Tobacco, among Superfluities, and indeed the ordinary Use of it, has no better
Authority for its Support than several other Things here spoken of, viz.
Fashion. It is far more frequently injurious than conducive to Health, and the
intemperate and unseasonable Use of that as well as every other Gift of Nature,
is to be condemned; and such undoubtedly is the Introduction of it in the Use
of Snuff without Necessity into our Meetings for Worship, as interrupting the
awful Solemnity proper to that Occasion.

This indeed is one of those Things, which some Men call little, but when it
comes in Competition with our Duty to God, and our Souls, it ceases to be such
in the View of enlightened and enlivened Minds.


.

There is moreover one Practice extremely frequent in these Countries which has
such a Connection with Superfluity in Drinking, as to be a great Provocative to
it, and from which the Privilege we enjoy of a happy Exemption, by Virtue of
our Education, is undoubtedly highly to be valued; that is to say, what is
called Drinking of Healths, by as great a Solecism in Speech, as it is an
Absurdity in Practice; and as it sometimes happens, that some weak Brethren are
betrayed into mean Compliances in this Respect, I shall particularly consider
it.

About the Time of the Restoration, George Fox met with a good Deal of Trouble
for declining to drink, even the King's Health, which being then commonly urged
as a Test of Loyalty, he as wisely, as meekly, answered, that Men ought to
drink for their own Healths: But our Countrymen, of late, have made much
farther Advances in this Affair, by a Contrivance of certain Words, expressive
of several of their Wishes, as of Prosperity, or Success, to this, that, and
the other Person, or Undertaking, to be pronounced over each Glass, and these
sometimes greatly multiplied, whereby they allure both themselves and others to
drinking to Excess, more effectually than the mere Liquor, without this
Enchantment annexed to it, were able to do; I say, drinking to Excess, a Vice
which need not be promoted by these studied Arts, being the reigning Sin of
these Nations, which is daily spreading its doleful Ravages over the Souls,
Bodies, and Estates of Men of all Stations; and hence sometimes Quarrels ensue,
besides the Abuse of GOD's good Gifts; and some of those, who are herein
concerned, sometimes prove a Kind of Martyrs to Belial, even drinking what they
call other Men's Health and Prosperity, at the Loss and Destruction of their own.

Now it is a peculiar Happiness to those of our Profession, that by an
established Rule, this Practice is utterly declined among us. It is true, we
are hereby rendered very unfit Associates for these Men, and in some Measure,
excluded from much of that Society, which a corrupt Age calls Good-Fellowship;
but this, in the View of wise Men, is so far from being a Loss, that it is a
Means of considerable Gain to them, with Respect to the Preservation of the
Health of Body and Mind, and the Saving of Time and outward Treasure, all which
are shamefully, not to say, wickedly, squandered away on this Occasion.

As to Superfluities in Apparel, the like Observations that have been made with
respect to eating and drinking, may also justly be applied to an inordinate
Curiosity with respect to what we shall put on, as being not only an express
Breach of the above mentioned Precept of our Lord, Take no Thought what ye
shall eat, what ye shall drink, or wherewithal ye shall be clothed, but in a
People who have set out with a Profession of regarding only the just and lawful
Ends of Clothing, the Use and real Service, and not the Pomp and Ostentation
annexed hereunto, and of being at Liberty from a servile Compliance with the
everfleeting Fashions of the Times; in such a People I say, an inordinate
Curiosity in Apparel, and much more an awkward and affected Mimickry of the
mere prevailing Fashion, as such, is not only a ridiculous Inconsistency, and
an Argument of a servile Subjection to the Spirit of this World, but is also
attended with no small Profusion of Expense, besides Care and precious Time,
very capable of being better applied, all which they are entitled to an
Exemption from, both by the Precepts and Examples of their Predecessors.

We are indeed still distinguished from our Neighbors by a peculiar Simplicity
in our Garb, but notwithstanding all the Precepts that have been given forth to
the contrary, an Affectation of the Ways of the World frequently betrays itself
among many of our Profession: It is true, Gold and Silver Lace have not as yet
found Admittance, but the same Thing cannot be affirmed of splendid Ribbons,
and some other Things, which of late frequently disgrace our religious
Assemblies, the Introduction of which, however, impartially examined, will
appear to proceed from the same Spirit and Origin as the other, being
calculated neither to answer the lawful Design of Apparel, nor the awful Ends
of religious Meetings, but for Ostentation.

Before I dismiss the Consideration of Superfluity in Apparel, I shall consider
one gross and palpable Instance thereof, viz. that Distinction of Habit which
is used by some as a Token of Mourning for the Dead, a Custom of no more Use to
the Dead, than those Garlands with which some affect to adorn their Graves, and
a superfluous Expense and Burden on the Living, even on such who dare not do
otherwise than submit to the Ordinances of that Idol, Fashion, although many of
the thinking Part of them, would be very glad of such a Privilege of an
Exemption from it as we by Virtue of our Education enjoy.

Wherefore, that any under our Profession should manifest a strong Disposition
to creep into this Practice; betrays both great Stupidity, and want of a Sense
of the Value of the Liberty purchased for them by their Ancestors, and at the
same time a slavish Subjection to the Spirit of the World, the Folly of which
is peculiarly aggravated by its being voluntary, and of their own choosing.

Such, who fall into this mean Compliance, dare not say, that it proceeds from
a greater Degree of Affection they have for their deceased Relations, than
these had for theirs, whilst they never wore this Mark of Sorrow: And if it be
supposed that the Deceased have made a happy Change, it is contrary to the
Advice of the Apostle, to be sorry as those who have no Hope 1 Thessalonians. iv. 13.
; but if otherwise, they dare not say, that the wearing of black Vestures will
influence the righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth, to reverse his Decree;
wherefore this Appearance results in, and appears to be no other than, an
affected Conformity to Fashion, as such.

It is, moreover, an Appearance at this Juncture particularly unseasonable,
even when judicious Persons of other Societies are groaning under, and some of
them ridiculing the vain and superfluous Pomps attending Funerals, and tends to
erase and destroy the good Impressions which, by our Means, might otherwise be
made on the more thinking and impartial Observers, so that such, who thus
deviate from the Simplicity proper to their Profession in this Respect, may be
deemed a Kind of dark Lanthorns, tending to stop the Progress of the Light of
Reformation: And this also, in common with many other Instances of Degeneracy
from the primitive Example, tends to outward Poverty; and these Consequences
are chargeable chiefly on the Rich and Great, as Fashion-makers, whom the lower
Ranks are very prone blindly to follow, though in Opposition to their own
Interest.

These Observations may also be applied to the Furniture of Houses, which,
according to the modish, luxurious Taste of the present Times, proves a heavy
Piece of Drudgery to some poor Men, who dare not do otherwise than submit their
Necks to the Yoke of the aforesaid Tyrant; Fashion; but that such, who in some
Instances profess themselves to be called out of the Corruptions of the World,
and who, by Virtue of their Education, are entitled to the Privilege of an
Exemption from a Conformity of this Sort, should manifest a strong Affectation
of, and be voluntarily led into, some of the most pompous and expensive Parts
of Furniture, such as large Looking-glasses, curious Tables; Pictures, Prints,
Portraitures or other Representations hung up, not for real Service, but mere
Ostentation, is, in my View, a strong Evidence; how far the God or Spirit of
this World is able to blind Men, both with regard to a just Sense of the true
Honor due to an uniform, consistent Character and Conduct, and of their own
temporal Interest.

SECT. III. Of Superfluity in Trading.
IT has been insinuated by some critical Observers, not much to the Credit of
our People, that although we are distinguished from our Neighbors, by
retrenching some particular Superfluities in Garb and Furniture, yet that in
Point of the Pursuit of Riches, we are not distinguished by a correspondent
Moderation, but are as inordinate, and not a Whit less covetous than others:
And indeed, to vindicate all who conform to our Rules, in Point of Garb, and
external Appearance, from this Charge, were a Task I would not undertake; and
moreover, as Covetousness is ordinarily disguised by the specious Cloaks of
Industry and Frugality, it becomes less obvious to that clear Discovery, and
just Censure, to which other Vices are exposed.

Nevertheless, I am assured, from a diligent Search into the Records of the
Sense and Judgment of the Elders, particularly those of this Nation, that they
were ever steady, not only in the Persuasion that Superfluity in Trading and
Farming was equally dangerous and entangling, or rather more peculiarly so, to
the Christian Soldier 2 Timothy ii. 4.
, than the Superfluities above mentioned; but, moreover, that in their Meetings
of Conference they did not neglect to enquire how far their Brethren did
maintain the Christian Testimony GOD had called them to bear, in this as well
as in other Respects, declaring, that the inordinate Pursuit of worldly Riches
and Grandeur, tended to darken the Minds, and alienate the Affections of Men
from the spiritual Riches; and that the Cares and Encumbrances of this Life,
choked the good Seed, and hindered it from bringing forth Fruit, and
admonishing such as appeared to be overwhelmed therewith) and indeed with a
great Deal of Reason.

For our peculiar Profession entitles us to an Exemption from those Occasions
of Expense above mentioned, consisting in diverse Superfluities in Meats,
Drinks, Apparel, Furniture, and Recreations, which captivate others, from a
blind Devotion to that Idol, Fashion, to whose Yoke they dare not but submit
their Necks; but, to a People thus professing and maintaining a Conduct
agreeable to such a Profession, large Trades and Farms, and great Multiplicity
of Business, were quite unnecessary, and indeed among such a People, could
naturally have no other Effect, than to accumulate Wealth, without having the
common Opportunities of spending it, and consequently to lay a strong
Temptation before an Offspring, who, in a State of Nature, are no better than
the mere Sons of fallen Adam, to shake off their religious Profession, in
order, with the less Restraint, to gratify their carnal Appetites, according to
the vain Spirit, and Course of this World and accordingly this has been the
Door at which great Numbers, not to say the greater Part of the Descendants of
the Rich and Great, have gone The divine Wisdom clearly pointed out the like
Danger attending his chosen People Israel, formerly, who when they should be
possessed of Vineyards and Olive Trees, which they planted not, and should have
eaten and be full, then (says God by his Servant Moses) beware lest thou
forget the Lord, which brought thee forth out of the Land of Egypt, from the
House of Bondage.
out: An Event of which the Elders had a very clear Foresight, and accordingly
took Care to forewarn us, by their timely and seasonable Admonitions, against
the inordinate Pursuit of the Riches and Grandeur of the World, as being the
great and dangerous Engine, contrived by the Power of Darkness, for our
Destruction as a Christian Society.

The Truth of this Observation has been amply ratified, by the Experience of
the succeeding Times; many, not Proof against the Temptations annexed to the
Affluence of outward Riches, having openly gone out from us, not being of us,
as the Apostle John expresses himself, whilst some others, who are only of this
Profession accidentally, and would in Reality rather be of another, manifest an
Inconsistency in their Conduct, indulging themselves in some Favorite
Excesses, whilst, on temporal Considerations, they have a little retrenched
themselves in others, where the Cross can be borne with little Trouble.

Others indeed there are, who have not yet attained unto that universal and
uniform Freedom of Spirit, which they earnestly desire and pray for (among whom
I may rank myself) but yet are honestly making some successful Advances toward
the primitive Pattern of true Christian Moderation, and some I hope there are,
who have attained to it, that tread in the Footsteps of their Fathers, and are
clothed with the same Spirit, and can say with Authority, as the primitive
Christians did, So walk as ye have us for an Phil. iii. 17.
Example.

Now, for the Encouragement of these two last, and for the Conviction of the
first, let it be observed, that the Saying of the Apostle, 1 Timothy iv. 8.
that Godliness is profitable to all Things, having the Promise of the Life
that now is, and of that which is to come, seems never to be more effectually
verified, than by a strict Adherence to the genuine Tenor of this Profession,
considered in its just Extent and Dignity, viz. as being an Exemption not only
from the superfluous and expensive Pleasures, but also from the inordinate
Cares and Anxieties of this Life; a Situation highly to be prized, as affording
Opportunities for religious Retirement and Meditation, and Freedom from many
Snares and Temptations, into which others precipitate themselves, and attended
with that Peace, Tranquillity, and Consolation of Mind, which the Captives to
the World's Spirit and Fashions are Strangers unto; according to the Saying of
our Lord to his Disciples, John xiv.
My Peace I give unto you, not as the World gives, give I: And, moreover, the
prudent Industry, accompanied with that Frugality which is practiced by all
that hold this Profession in Sincerity, is the shortest Way of growing even
temporally rich, and whilst a Little is enough to a good Man thus
circumstanced, he has often more to spare for the Relief of the Distressed,
than those who grasp after, and sometimes get an Abundance, yet are Strangers
to the Science of keeping it, but squander it away in a servile Compliance to
the modish Extravagancies of the Age.

O happy People then, if wise enough to prize the Lot assigned you, and unto
whom might justly be applied those Epithets and Titles of Honor, incomparably
more valuable than all the Pomp and Pageantry of this World (provided you
forfeited not the proper Conditions) with which the Apostle Peter dignified the
primitive Believers scattered through diverse Parts of Asia, viz. 1 Pet. ii. 9, 10.
Ye are a chosen Generation, a peculiar People; that ye should show forth, the
Praises of him who has called you out of Darkness into his mavelous Light,
which, in Time past, were not a People, but are now the People of GOD: And to
whom the Blessing pronounced upon outward Israel formerly, seems also, by no
strained Analogy, to be not less applicable, even as a People whom GOD has
also brought forth out of spiritual Egypt, or the House of Bondage, viz. Numb.
xxiv.
How goodly are thy Tents, O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles, O Israel!

I am, however, well aware of a strong Objection, which will be advanced
against all this earnest Recommendation of Frugality, to be practiced upon a
civil as well as religious Principle, viz. "We have, partly by the Industry of
our Parents, and partly by our own, acquired a good Deal of outward Treasure,
which, that it should circulate among the People, is necessary for the public
Good; but if we should retrench our Expenses in the Manner here proposed, how
shall we spend our Money?"

I answer, not in manifesting an Affectation of every Novelty in the Splendor
and Gaiety of Apparel and Equipage, and so by your Example, leading the Poor
into Captivity, to their great Loss or Ruin; nor in pampering the Flesh in a
Variety of costly Meats and Drinks, to the Prejudice of your Healths; nor in a
Pursuit of such Recreations, as tend to debauch both Body and Mind; but,
according to the Exhortation of the Apostle, 1 Timothy vi. 18.
Be rich in good Works, and lay hold of the Leisure your Circumstances afford
for Meditation and spiritual Improvements; and, at all Opportunities, let your
Treasure be devoted to the Good of the Community, both civil and religious, and
to the Promotion of an honest Industry, and the Improvement of useful Arts
among the Poor, as well as succouring them in their Distresses; innumerable
holy Arts of doing which, a Heart possessed of Christian Charity, regulated by
Prudence, will not fail abundantly to dictate unto you.

SECT. IV. Of the vain Honors of this World.
HAVING so far considered the Self-denial of our Forefathers, in Relation to
the Pleasures and Profits, I shall next consider the same Thing, in Reference
to the Honors of this World.

Previous to this, it seems worth remarking, that if we be able to make a
proper Estimate with regard to the spiritual Life, it will appear to us a
peculiarly happy Circumstance, that, by our religious Profession, we are
excluded from all those Posts of Honor and Profit under the Government; which
afford ample Provision for many others, since by this Exclusion many of us are
necessitated to exercise the Arts of Industry, in order to the Support of our
Families, and so put in a Way of being preserved from, Idleness, the Mother of
Vice; and although, in Consequence hereof, we may not suddenly grow rich, yet we
have generally enough to supply our real Wants, and enable us to live
consistently with our Profession, of renouncing Superfluities of all Kinds,
which if we do, many Snares and Temptations attending Affluence are cut off,
and we have the more Leisure and Opportunity for Meditation, and other
spiritual Exercises, and laying up Treasure in Heaven.

And as, in Consequence of our Profession, we are in a great Measure excluded
from receiving the Honors of this World, so likewise are we, by the same
Profession, restrained from giving the same to others.

Now the Objects of worldly Honor, are splendid Apparel and Equipage, empty
Titles, and large Revenues, these being the Things which, as William Penn No
Cross, No Crown.
observes, the Children of the World worship; and indeed so inordinate is the
Veneration paid to Men on Account of these Qualifications, that many downright
Lies are daily told, the Rules of Grammar and good Sense are violated, and
those Marks of Respect, which are proper to Almighty GOD, are given to mortal
Men like ourselves; Practices which, how much soever they may have received a
Sanction from Custom, are in our View by no Means to be justified, which
nevertheless, because some of this Profession have sometimes been shamed into,
I shall proceed minutely to consider, in order to convict them, in this Case
also, of a servile Obedience to the Spirit and Maxims of this Worlds in
Opposition to the Examples and Precepts of holy Men, recorded in Scripture.

The first Instance of worldly Honor I shall consider, which we
conscientiously deny to give, is in the Use of flattering Titles.

The above mentioned Author reprehends the modern Professors of Christianity,
as widely deviating from the Simplicity of the more early Ages, both among
Jews, Heathens and Christians, who were never wont to distinguish their Saints
and Heroes by the Title of Lord, as Lord Noah, Lord Daniel, Lord Peter, Lord
Paul, Lord Solon, Lord Cato, etc. whilst we are very lavish in bestowing not
only these, but many other splendid Epithets, such as your Excellency, your
Grace, Honorable, and Right Honorable, Worshipful, etc. respectively
appropriated to certain Persons among us by a licentious Use of Speech, from no
better Authority than that of the Custom of the Country, without considering
whether these Titles be justly given or no, or whether to Persons really
possessed of the Qualities ascribed to them, or not: And he that refuses to
give these Titles is deemed squeamish or superstitious, notwithstanding that
the inviolable Rules of sound Morality, as well as the Precepts of Scripture
Ephesians. iv. 25.
, enjoin every Man to put away Lying, and speak the Truth to his Neighbor.

Next, as the Honor of the Hat and Knee, certain mean and pitiful Compliances,
that are beginning to creep in among us, not only the Men, with respect to the
Hat, but even among some of the female Sex, who, though they have less Temptation
to such a Deviation, have learned to bend the Knee; I say, these mean and
pitiful Compliances, although inconsistent, and self-contradictory in many of
those who fall into them, who sometimes give, and sometimes refuse these Marks
of Reverence to mortal Men, which by their Ancestors were ever deemed proper to
Almighty GOD only, seem to render it not unseasonable to enter into a somewhat
minute Consideration hereof.

In these Countries, indeed, Kings, and even Bishops, must be approached on the
Knee, which is no better than a confounding, or making no Difference between,
the outward Marks of Reverence paid unto mortal Man, and which were ever, both
under the Old and New Testament, paid unto Almighty GOD, and who indeed has
expressly appropriated this outward Mark of Adoration and Submission to himself,
in the following Texts: Unto me every Knee shall bow Isaiah xlv. 23.8, 10, 11.
. As I Romans xiv, 11. Philip. ii. 5, 6*
live, says the Lord, every Knee shall bow to me. Christ Jesus, who being in
the Form of GOD, thought it not Robbery to be equal with GOD, but being found
in Fashion as a Man, he humbled himself and became obedient unto Death, even
unto the Death of the Cross; wherefore GOD also has exalted him, and given him
a Name which is above every Name, that, at the Name of JESUS every Knee should
bow, of Things in Heaven, and Things in Earth, and Things under the Earth, and
that every Tongue shall confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord.

And we find that Peter, the Apostle, refused to accept of this Mark of Respect
paid him by Cornelius; for Acts x.
as Peter was coming in, when Cornelius met him, and fell down at his Feet, and
worshipped him, Peter took him up, saying, Stand up, I also am a Man. And the
Angel refused it from the Apostle John; for when Rev. xix.
John fell at the Feet of the Angel, to worship him, the Angel said, See thou
do it not: I am thy Fellow Servants, and of thy Brethren that have the Testimony
of JESUS; worship GOD.

If any should here allege, we do not bend the Knee with an Intent to worship
Men, Worship being proper to Almighty GOD only; then let them reject the Word
Worshipful from among the Titles they give to mortal Men, and, when they have
done that, let them consider how far it is fit to give to mortal Man that
which, both by the Writings of the Old and New Testament, and the Practice of
all Ages, is allowed to be a proper Mark of Adoration.

The like may be said concerning uncovering the Head, in Testimony of Respect
to mortal Man, an Appearance ever deemed proper to the Exercise of public
divine Worship, or of the spiritual Gifts of Praying, [and Prophesying or
Preaching in the Church] even from the Days of the Apostle Paul 1 Cor. xi.
unto this Time.

Such are the Grounds of our Sentiments and Practice in these Cases; and our
Elders, for the Singularity of their Conduct, in conscientiously declining to
uncover their Heads, in Token of Respect to mortal Men, were sometimes fined
and imprisoned; a Singularity supported by weighty Reasons, the Validity
whereof appeared by the Test it proved, and by the Discovery it made, of the
Pride and Rage of vain Man, who would not be content with less Tokens of
Honor, than those which we apprehend to be proper to Almighty GOD only.

And since our Forefathers, by their Constancy and Perseverance in this
Instance of Self-denial, have so far wearied out the Spirit of Opposition and
Persecution, which had been raised on these Occasions, as to have rendered the
same Sort of Conduct easy to us their Successors, what but a slavish Subjection
to the ill grounded Maxims and Spirit of this World, is the Cause that induces
any under our Denomination, who have been so taught, and so believed, to mean
Compliances in these Respects?

But, to return to the Use of flattering Titles; it seems absolutely necessary
to take Notice of one of those which is the most common, and such as most
frequently occurs in the daily Addresses of almost all Mankind to one another
in these Countries, where Custom has ordained that we must not ordinarily
accost, nor speak of, or to, any one, whether he be our Superior, or our Equal,
or perhaps our Inferior, by his distinguishing Name of John, Thomas, etc.
without annexing to it some Title of Mastership, Dominion or Lordship, viz.
those of Master, Mistress, Sir, or Madam, or rather Ma Dame, i. e. My Lady,
this last Term being borrowed from the French (a Nation far more distinguished
by their Affectation of Compliments, than by their Sincerity) whom we are too
fond of imitating; nor in Writing, conclude our Letters, without subscribing
ourselves Humble Servants to the Person to whom we write; and indeed such is
the enchanting Power of the Spirit of this World in this Case, that it
frequently proves, in common Conversation, no small Degree of Self-denial, to
adhere to the Simplicity of calling every one by their distinguishing Name,
without annexing one of these flattering Epithets to it; and accordingly great
Numbers of those who bear our Name are daily, in this Instance also, betrayed
and shamed into mean Compliances; or, in other Terms, a servile Subjection to
the Spirit and Maxims of a depraved Age.

For indeed, how minute and trivial soever this Affair may appear to some, and
how much soever long established Custom may seem to have given a Sanction to
this Licentiousness in Speech, Custom can never alter the Nature of Things, or
render that to be Truth which is Falsehood, or make it just to call him Master,
who is not such.

And moreover Christ, whom we call our Lord, says both to his Disciples, and
to the Multitude, Matthew. xxiii
Be ye not called Rabbi, or Master, for one is your Master, even Christ, and
all ye are Brethren; and indeed among Christian Brethren, the Word Brother or
Friend, is not only the proper Appellative, but most consistent with the
primitive Way of speaking; for Jesus John xv.
calls his Disciples Friends, and John, the beloved Disciple, called his
Christian Brethren by the same Name; and the early Christians refused to give
the Emperor the Title of Dominus, as being an Appellative proper to GOD, but
with us almost all are Domini, or Masters; which, as applied to the several
Individuals of the same Family, with the distinguishing Name of each, is both a
needless, and, for the most Part, unjust Multiplication of Words, and used
without the distinguishing Name of each Individual, is confounding the several
Members of the same Family together.

The Conclusion therefore is clear, that when any of us (who are thus
convinced, not by mere Tradition, but by the Reasons on which the Tradition is
founded) fall into the Practice of the World in this Case, it is an Evidence
that our Souls are yet in Bondage to the Spirit of this World, whose false
Maxims we want Courage and Honesty to contradict.

Another strong Instance of the despotic Sway of that Idol, Fashion, and than
which a stronger can hardly be given, is that absurd Innovation in our
Language, which now almost universally prevails, viz. that no single Person
must be accosted but by a Term originally and properly expressive of more than
One; so that, as the Edicts of Princes are commonly given forth in the first
Person plural, in the Terms, We command, and Our royal Pleasure is, etc. the
like Air of Grandeur must also be transferred to private Persons, in the Use of
the second Person plural, instead of the second Person singular; and so far
established is this Custom, in this Age of boasted Potiteness, that he who
dares to decline it, is liable to be deemed either a mere Clown, or
ridiculously squeamish and superstitious.

And, indeed, I make no Scruple of acknowledging, that the Custom of the
Country we live in, where it neither clashes with the Rules of good Sense, nor
Virtue, ought scarcely to be departed from, and that affected Singularities, in
Speech or Manners, are rather an Evidence of Pride, than of Christian Virtue;
but if the Custom be such as does not answer the just Ends of Speech, but tends
to introduce Ambiguity or Confusion into our Language, or if it has been not
only originally introduced, but is still supported by the Pride and Vanity of
Man, then the declining of such a Custom, from such a Persuasion, becomes an
Instance of Self-denial and Christian Courage, even in daring to oppose the
established Fashion of a mistaken and depraved Age.

Now, that this is really the Case with respect to the Use of the Word You, as
applied to a single Person, is evident from the Confusion of the singular and
plural Number thereby made, and its Tendency to rob our Language of the
Pronouns Thou and Thee, peculiarly and distinguishingly expressive of the
singular Number, whilst the Word You is equivocal, and, according to the modern
Corruption, equally applicable to One, and to more than one, a Licentiousness
of Speech, inconsistent with the Design thereof.

And moreover, that this Corruption of Speech has been supported by the Pride
of vain Man, appears from the rough and harm Treatment our Forefathers at first
met with, on Account of their Adherence to the Use of the Words Thou and Thee,
whilst at the same time it was universally acknowledged, that the Use of those
Words was most consistent with the awful Solemnity and Reverence proper to our
Addresses to Almighty GOD; and accordingly they are retained in the established
Forms of Prayer; and yet an Inferior, or a Beggar might be, and still is,
frequently thus accosted, but the accosting of an Equal or Superior in this
Manner, was, and still is, by many deemed Rudeness, and accordingly was
frequently answered by contemptuous Speeches and Reproaches, a sure Test of
that Pride and Vanity which ought not to be gratified, but humbled, and than
which indeed scarce any Thing can be more absurd, even that Men should resent,
as an Indignity, their being addressed in that very Language, in which they
themselves address the great Sovereign of the Universe.

Such were and are the Sentiments and Demeanor of our Ancestors, and all their
faithful Successors; and such are the Grounds of our Singularity in this Case:
Wherefore, the mean Compliances which of later Days have greatly prevailed
among those who otherwise profess themselves to be of our Community, who vary
their Language according to their Company, and are ashamed to accost Strangers
according to the primitive Simplicity; are Evidences of a Servility and Bondage
to the Spirit of this World, and betray a Want of that Christian Fortitude,
which did and would support under popular Contempt and Reproaches I am Informed
that this Corruption of Speech was first introduced in the declining State of
the Roman Empire, and that the first notable Instance of it occurs about the
fourth Century, in the Reign of the Emperors Valentinian and Valens, when
Valens was addressed in these Term: "Domino Valenti Gothico, maximo, perpetuo
and augusto" "To the Lord Valens, most great, perpetual and august;" as may be
seen in Eutropius's Abridgment of the Roman History, where also (Chap. xii.
Book 1.) the Words Tranquilitas vestra are applied to the Emperor, the Titles
of Mansuetudo (Clemency) and several others, having (as the learned Annotator,
though not of our Community, observes) been applied to the Emperors, as his
Majesty is now a Days to Kings and that these Titles were introduced not long
before these Times, by the sordid Flattery of the People, and the Want of Sense
and Modesty in the Emperors, who tamely suffered themselves to be addressed in
such Kind of Language, as was proper only to the Deity; the old Greeks and
Romans (as the same Author observes) having been wholly Strangers to any Thing
of this Kind: Upon which it is obvious to remark, that those of our Society who
in these Instances fail into mean Compliances, whilst they profess themselves
to be of the strictest Christians, do herein follow no better an Example than
that of the most corrupt and degenerate Heathens.
.

But before I dismiss this Article, it seems to me absolutely necessary to take
Notice of a certain culpable Piece of Delicacy, or Inconsistency, peculiar to
ourselves, and the rather because indeed it is what but very few of us are
entirely clear of; an Inconsistency that shows we are not gone above half Way
in our professed Reformation of the Corruption of Speech we complain of, I mean
in the Use of the Word Thee for Thou.

It is true, in thus speaking we are right as to Number, but quite erroneous
and ungrammatical as to Case, viz. in putting the Accusative for the
Nominative, and therefore such who are guilty of this Inconsistency, have no
Right to defend themselves by the Argument of Propriety of Speech.

Some, in Excuse for the Prevalence of this Impropriety in Speech, have
alleged, that it has been so long established by Custom, and the Example of
their Parents and Associates, that some may be supposed not to know the
Difference, which indeed is an Argument that a long continued Custom may
establish a Corruption in Speech; but that it ought so to do, is utterly
contrary to the whole Tenor of our Profession, in other obvious Instances, as
well as what we condemn in our Neighbors, in their Use of the Word You, who
therefore have accordingly retorted our Argument upon us, viz. that we
ourselves also are guilty of an equal Impropriety, in substituting Thee for
Thou, and from the same Principle which we condemn in them, viz. an imaginary
superior Softness of the Term Thee; and indeed I confess, I know of no
effectual Answer to this Objection, but mending our Conduct accordingly.

But I cannot yet be persuaded, that mere Ignorance is the Cause of this
Inconsistency of Speech peculiar to us; for even our Grammarians and Scholars
(to their peculiar Shame be it said) are frequently as guilty of it, as those
who are ignorant of the Rules of Grammar; and, moreover, it is observable, that
diverse of those, who decline the Use of the Word Thou in their Conversation, do
yet in their Letters and Writings (where there is more Room for Deliberation,
and less Shame of the Cross, than in Conversation) take Care to insert it in
its proper Place. And lastly, that an Acquaintance with the Rules of Grammar,
is not essential to the understanding the respective proper Use of the Words
Thou and Thee, is evident from the Practice of those Country People, who not
having been corrupted by this Piece of false Politeness, do yet in their daily
Conversations make Use of them respectively, with the utmost Propriety.

APPENDIX. Concerning the Denomination of the Days of the Week and Months.
I SHALL, here subjoin a few Remarks on another Peculiarity of Language, which
our Ancestors did, and all their faithful Successors still do, hold themselves
conscientiously engaged to maintain, which I apprehend will stand the Test of
the severest Examination among, all that are Christians in Sincerity: I mean
their Denominations of the Days of the Week, and of the Months, according to
the numerical Order of First, Second, Third, etc. agreeable to the Style of the
Holy Scriptures, and not from the heathenish Idols, a Practice, which how far
it is consistent with a serious Profession of Christianity, deserves to be
considered.

For, indeed, the very Dedication of the Days of the Week to heathenish Idols,
is, in Effect, allowing the Existence of, and paying a tacit Homage to, such
imaginary Being, and consequently an implicit Denying of the only one true GOD:
And many of the Months have also their Names from the same Kind of Idols; and
the Appellations of July and August, from the Roman Emperors, Julius Caesar,
and Augustus, are scarce a Whit more defensible than those of January, March,
May, etc. for July and August were not the established Denominations of the two
first-mentioned Months, but Quintilis and Sextilis, or the fifth and sixth
Months, until the Heathens began to pay an extravagant, even an idolatrous
Respect to their Emperors (as it is certain from several Passages in Horace,
and other Heathen Authors, they did) and then they denominated these two Months
from their new-coined Deities, as they had done the other from their old Ones
For further Satisfaction in this Point, see an Epistle from the Meeting for
Sufferings in London, published in 1751.
.

And as to the four last Months of the Year, according to the New Style,
established by Act of Parliament, viz. those called September, October,
November and December, we have now more Reason than ever to persevere in
distinguishing these, as well as the rest of the Months, according to their
numerical Order; for although the Legislature has not thought fit to change the
Names of the Months last mentioned, yet whether to call that which, in Reality,
is the Ninth [in Succession from the first Month in the Year called January] by
the Latin Name of September, indicating the Seventh, and the Tenth by the Name
of October, indicating the Eighth, the Eleventh by the Name of November,
indicating the Ninth, and the Twelfth by the Name of December, indicating the
Tenth; or whether to call those Months respectively and simply, the Ninth,
Tenth, Eleventh and Twelfth, be most consistent with common Sense, and
Propriety of Language, let all Men judge.

Wherefore, as long as it remains to be a Truth, that heathenish Idolatry ought
to be discountenanced and denied among Christians, and as long as Truth and
Simplicity, and the Ends of Speech are best maintained, by giving the
Denominations to the Months and Days of the Week, according to their numerical
Order of First, Second, etc. so long ought we not to be ashamed of, but adhere
to, the Tradition of our Elders in this Case; a Tradition so highly consistent
both with Reason, and a sincere Profession of Christianity, that it will be no
Rashness to affirm, that such who have been thus wholesomely taught and
instructed, and yet daily, in their Conversation and Writings, deviate from the
Example of their Forefathers, do, in this Instance, as well as the others above
enumerated, manifest a servile Disposition of Mind, and a mean Obsequiousness
to the prevailing Fashion of the Times, or the corrupt Usages of heathenizing
Christians in this Case.

N. B. I am not unaware, that with respect to the several Articles of Language
and outward Demeanor above specified, many will object, that here is too great
a Stress laid upon small Matters, and that Words are of no Signification, but
according to the Ideas affixed to them by Custom; to which I answer,

1 st, By denying the Charge, having already expressly acknowledged, that a mere
Conformity to the Traditions of the Elders, in exterior Matters, is far from
entitling a Man to the Kingdom of Heaven, or indeed any Thing short of
Regeneration, or a Renovation of Mind, which, undoubtedly is the best Basis
whereon to build an outward Regularity of Conduct, and which is, above all
other Things, to be recommended, as it frequently is by our worthy Brethren of
the Ministry; but the principal Design of this Address from a Person in a lower
Station is, to reason with those called Libertines upon their own Principles,
and beat them out of their present strong Holds, in order, and with an earnest
Desire, that they may lie open to better and higher Impressions, which
undoubtedly the present Generation greatly wants.

2 dly, That the Instances of Conformity to the World here censured, are
absolutely Matters of small Importance, is denied; for whatever they may be to
such as have never considered them, to those who have duly considered them, and
are convinced that they are repugnant to Truth and sound Reason, they cease to
be small Matters. Now in a People who, in the several Particulars above
mentioned, are distinguished from the rest of the World, not to have considered
the true Grounds on which such Distinction is founded, is both a culpable Piece
of Negligence, and an Argument of great Stupidity; but in many others, not to
say the Greater Part of those who conform to the World in these Respects, the
true Origin of such Conformity seems to be a Corruption rather of the Heart
than of the Head, viz. a Mind that dares not to proceed in the right Way, when
it is contrary to the Ways of the World; a Mind not fortified to undergo the
Contradictions and Contempt of Scoffers, in which View these mean Compliances
are no longer to be deemed Matters of small Importance, since a Demeanor
opposite to Conviction, never can be so.

3 dly, As the Practices here censured are of a corrupt Original, so are they
of an evil Tendency, even to reconcile to that Friendship which the Apostle
James says, is Enmity with GOD; and such who indulge themselves therein, may
do well to remember the Saying of the wise Man: He that, despises small
Things, shall fall by Little and Little. Ecclesiasticus xix. 1.

SECT. V. Of the Payment of Tithes.
THE present Conduct of some under this Profession, seems to render it
necessary to add a few Remarks on this Head, even as another strong Instance of
the little Sense that possesses their Minds, of the Dignity of their religious
Education, and its Tendency to establish them in the Enjoyment of Christian
Liberty.

It is no small temporal Privilege to us, as a Society, that both our Law and
our Gospel are free. As to the first, it is well known that most of our
Differences are to be determined among ourselves, agreeably to the Sense of the
Apostle 1 Cor. vi.
, who utterly condemns one Brother going to Law with another; that the
Prosecution of Lawsuits, even with Strangers, without great Necessity, is a
Breach of one of our wholesome Precepts. And as to the second, that the
Taxation of the People by Tithes, is no other than a Jewish Yoke of Bondage, as
being a Part of the Jewish ceremonial Law, abolished by the coming of CHRIST,
and his Death on the Cross; and consequently, that the Paying of them for the
Support of a professed Christian Ministry, is in Effect to deny the coming and
suffering (or which amounts to the same Thing, to deny the Efficacy of the
coming and suffering) of CHRIST in the Flesh, has been the declared Sense of
this People from the Beginning; as also, that to contribute to the Support of a
Hireling Ministry, established upon a human and worldly Foundation, is in
Effect an Acknowledgment of the Validity of their Call and Authority, which we
deny; and these were the Grounds of the Refusal of our Ancestors to pay Tithes,
or Priests Wages, in these Gospel Times, which was therefore called their
Christian Testimony For further Satisfaction in this Point, the Reader may have
Recourse to Anthony Pearson's Great Case of Tithes, lately republished with
some important Additions.
, which both they did, and all their faithful Successors still do, deem
themselves conscientiously engaged to bear, and inviolably adhere unto,
whatever outward Sufferings might or may attend on this Account, which indeed
were very severe in the Beginning; nevertheless, they deemed this their
Christian Testimony, this holding forth a Light to an Age of professed
Christians, who had deviated from the Simplicity and Liberty of the Gospel, to
be of more real Value and Importance, than outward Riches, Liberty, or even
Life itself, having sometimes been deprived of all three, rather than decline
to maintain this Testimony, by paying Tithes, as may be seen in Joseph Besse's
Account of their early Sufferings.

But indeed such a Conduct as this is not at all agreeable to the carnal Mind,
which having no Relish of the Beauty and Importance of this Testimony, prefers
outward Ease, and leads into mean Compliances, and Connivances at others in
paying for them, contrary to the Advice and Judgment of the Body; not indeed
from a Conviction of the Justness of the Demand, but to decline the greater
Expense and Trouble of a Distress, or spoiling of their Goods, and much more a
Prison: And this seems to be the true Origin of the Unfaithfulness of many on
this Account, as want of Consideration may be in others.

Now, it is manifest that the Liberty which such seek, is that of the Flesh,
and not of the Spirit, and the Tendency of their Conduct is not only to injure
the Christian Reputation of the Society, and weaken the Testimony of the
Faithful, but to continue and perpetuate Slavery on themselves and their
Posterity.

And moreover, such a Declension from the Footsteps of our Ancestors, is very
unseasonable at this present Juncture, when Light and Liberty are beginning to
appear "In New England, where our Friends formerly underwent grievous,
Sufferings, a Law is lately made, exempting Friends from paying either to the
established Ministers, or to the repairing of their Worship houses." Yearly
Meeting Epistle, A D. 1^^3.
, and when, through the Steadiness and Constancy of our Predecessors, the
strictest Adherence to this our Christian Testimony is rendered comparatively
easy, when the Claim of the divine Right of Tithes is given up by the more
moderate, even of the Clergy themselves, and when divine Providence is raising
up and establishing a free Ministry, agreeable to CHRIST's own Appointment,
Matthew. x. 8.
Freely ye have received, freely give; I say, that at such a Time the
Descendants of those Men who were instrumental to bring about these great
Events, should so far deviate from the primitive Spirit and Example, as either
to connive at the Payment of Tithes, by others on their Behalf, or directly to
pay Tithes, seems to betray little Sense of the Privilege of their Education,
and as little Zeal for carrying on the great Work of Reformation, and
Deliverance from the aforesaid Yoke of Bondage, so happily begun; and such a
Conduct viewed in all its Consequences, appears to me to manifest a Degree of
Stupidity, not inferior to that of those above observed, who, when Liberty was
offered them, chose to be Slaves, whose Punishment, what it was, may be seen in
the Text Exodus xxi. 6.
.

SECT. VI. Of the Observation of the Days, called Holy Days.
ANOTHER Instance of Christian Liberty, which was bravely asserted by our
Ancestors, and which they purchased, and transmitted to us, at the Loss of
their outward: Ease and Treasure, in the diverse Sufferings and Hardships they
underwent from an ungodly Rubble, on this Account, and ought not to be lightly
esteemed, is the Liberty of following our honest Occupations on those Days, to
which Superstition has affixed the Name of Holy, the Observation of which is
not only a Mark of Bondage, in the Sense of the Apostle Gal. iv. 9, 10.
, but greatly perverted and profaned in lewd and riotous Practices, to the no
small Scandal of the Christian Profession; and moreover, to consider this
Matter with a View to secular Policy, by the Multiplication of these Days, the
State is robbed of so many Days of the Labor of the Poor, and many Families
are impoverished by this Means, as diverse Protestants have openly declared, and
of which some, even of the Popish Governments, are at length become so
sensible, that they have begun to abridge them.

At such a Time then, how unseasonable, how dishonorable is it, and how little
Zeal for carrying on the Work of Reformation does it show, that any of us
should, by a mean Compliance, or Connivance, weaken that Christian Testimony
our faithful Elders were conscientiously engaged to bear in this Respect, even
when other People are beginning to manifest a Disposition to acknowledge the
Expediency and Reasonableness of their Conduct, on these Occasions?

Nor, moreover, was it only against those Days called Church Holy Days, but
also those called State Holy Days, viz. such as are set apart for public
Rejoicings, on the Account of Victories obtained over our outward Enemies, and
such like Occasions, that our Elders, and all their faithful Successors, had,
and have, a Christian Testimony to bear, these last being attended with diverse
Vanities, inconsistent with the whole Tenor of our Prosession, and in our View
with the Gravity becoming Christians on these, and all other, Occasions; such
as Bonefires and Illuminations, and the Conduct usually accompanying them, with
Excess of Drinking, and sometimes diverse bodily Mischiefs.

Now an Exemption from Practices of this Sort, is another of the Privileges of
our Society; for which Reason, a Compliance with the Custom on these Occasions,
in any of our Profession, is not only a Mark of that same Servility of Spirit,
which has been above traced in other Instances, but is also more peculiarly
condemnable in such, as it tends to expose, and, in some late Instances,
actually has exposed those who stand their Ground in a faithful Adherence to
our Christian Testimony, in this Respect, to the greater Sufferings from the
Outrages of a licentious Rabble; and whereas Unity is the Strength of Society,
the Conduct of these tends to weaken the Testimony of the Faithful, and
represent as as a House divided against itself, so that such deserve no better
Character than that of false Brethren.

DUBLIN, the 19th of the 6th Month 1756.
FINIS.

