Mr. Fish's Election SERMON, May, 1760.

CHRIST JESUS the Physician, and his Blood the (...) recommended for the
Healing of a diseased People

IN A SERMON PREACHED before the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the Colony of Connecticut,
at Hartford, on the Day of their Anniversary Election, May 8. 1760.

By Joseph Fish, A. M. Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in Stonington.

Jer. 17. 14. Heal me O LORD, and I shall be healed: Save me and I shall be
Saved: for thou art my Praise. Passages prepared, but omitted at the Delivery,
here take their proper Places; with this Character [] including of them.

NEW LONDON: Printed and Sold by TIMOTHY GREEN, Printer to the Colony of
Connecticut, 1760.

At a General Assembly of the GOVERNOR and COMPANY of the Colony of
Connecticut, Holden at Hartford, on the second Thursday of May, Anno Domini,
1760.
ORDERED, That HEZEKIAH HUNTINGTON, Esquire; and Mr. SIMEON MINOR, return the
Thanks of this Assembly to the Reverend Mr. JOSEPH FISH* For his SERMON
delivered before this Assembly on the 8th Instant, And desire a Copy thereof
that it may be Printed.

George Wyllys, Secr.

An Election SERMON.
JEREMIAH, viii. 22. IS there no Balm in Gilead? is there no Physician there?
Why then is not the Health of the Daughter of my People recovered.
THIS is a Day of the Gladness of our Heart, on Account of that great and
comprehensive Blessing of FREEDOM, which now, in a peculiar manner, exect
itself, animating all the Members of Society and smiling in every Countenance,
While LIBERTY stretches forth her Hand, without Control, to give her Suffiages
for Men to rule us in the Fear of GOD.

WE also Sing of Mercy, in the gracious smiles of Providence upon the important
undertakings of our Hands. Our Work and our Warfare are crowned with remarkable
Success. The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we are glad.

AND under all these temporal Advantages, we are blessed with numberless
spiritual Blessings, in heavenly Places in CHRIST. Our Eyes behold our
Teachers, and our Ears hear the joyful Sound. All which are Arguments of
Praise; and hopeful Symptoms of a healthy State.

IT may therefore seem a little grating, at such a Time, to hear of Physicians
and Medicines, implying Diseases, Wounds and Bruises, that endanger the L^^e.
Surely, the whole need not the Physician. And are we not in perfect Health?
What Tokens of Sickness or Danger does the Preacher discover, in the Daughter
of Zion, whose Countenance looks so fair and flourishing?

THE Answer is obvious: they appear in our ungrateful Returns to the Father of
Mercy's for all his Benefits unto us. We are highly exalted, on account of
Privileges: -- flushed with Successes past, and confident of more to come;
whilst we are laden with Iniquity and wrapped up in Security.

OUR Case too nearly resembles that of the Jews, in the Days of our Prophet.
They were GOD's peculiar People: and he had long indulged them as Children: fed
them to the full, with every Kind of Blessing. But, in return, they filled
Jerusalem, the holy City, with their Abominations: such as Adultery,
Uncleanness, Idolatry, Oppression, Murder and Blood: all which cried for
Vengeance.

KING Josiah did every thing, that became a pious Prince to reform them. He
turned to God himself with all his Heart and Soul. And, in his Zeal for God,
exerted his Authority and spread his Influence abroad, throughout his Dominions,
obliging his People to keep a Solemn Passover, to renew their Covenant, and to
reform their evil Manners. But the Searcher of Hearts discovered their
Hypocrisy, and complained of it, Jer. 3. 10.
Judah has not returned unto me with her whole Heart, but seignedly, says the
Lord. Therefore God determined to remove her out of his sight. 2 Kings 23. 27.


UPON Josiah's Death, they bid Defiance to Heaven, and returned to their former
Wickedness, like the Dog to his Vomit. Jeremiah reproved them, and solemnly
warned them of their Danger. Jer. 4. 20.
Destruction upon Destruction is cried, for the whole Land is spoiled: Assuring
them of Protection, upon their Amendment.

BUT they regarded not his Threatenings not hearkened to his Entreaties: but
flattered themselves, that neither Famine nor Sword should reach them. Jer. 5.
12.


MOVED with Pity at the Sight of his guilty People, insensible of their Danger,
on the Borders of Destruction, the holy Prophet lamented over them, and gave
his Sorrows vent in these pathetick Strains. Cont. ver. 18, -- 21.
When I would comfort my self against sorrow, my heart is faint in me. Behold
the voice of the cry of the Daughter of my People. The harvest is past, the
summer is ended and we are not saved. For the hurt of the daughter of my People
am I hurt. It is for my Country, and especially for the Church of God, that I
am thus deeply affected. Thus the Prophet bewailed the dying state of
Jerusalem, which he preferred above his chief Joy. And now, as the symptoms of
Death increase, the Man of God, like a tender Father, distressed for his first
Born, and unwilling to give up all his hope, looks round upon his Friends, with
all the marks of Agony in his Countenance; or directs his Eyes to Heaven, and
powers out his Soul in the servent Expressions of my Text, Is there no Balm in
Gilead? is there no Physician there? why then is not the Health of the Daughter
of my People recovered? They seem to be the last efforts of a generous Soul,
under the deepest Concern to save a diseased People, insensible of their
Danger, on the Brink of Ruin.

And may import, either

1. THAT there is very little hope of saving them from utter Destruction. That
there is either no Remedy for their Disease, or else no skillful Physician to
apply it. Or rather,

2. THAT their Disease is not in its nature incurable, neither is there any
want of Means or Physicians. Mount Gilead is near at hand; and that is a Place
abounding with Balm or Rosin, whose peculiar Property is "to dissolve Hardness
and to clear and close up Wounds;" and so is a fit Emblem of the softening
Grace of God; or the cleansing Blood of Jesus Christ, the great Physician,
which is shadowed ^orth by the Blood of their Sacrifices. They have also the
Law of the Lord, which is perfect, conver^ing the Soul: and Prophets to show
them the Counsel of God; and to plead with them, that they may turn and (...):
besides Magistrates, whose B^si^e^^ it should be to reform them. It Is not
therefore for want of physic or a Physician, that the Daughter of Zion
languishes and dies: but rather because she refuses the Means and Method of
Cure.

ON the whol^, The words do plainly ^^^imate, the most imminent Danger* by
reason of some threatening Disease; implied in the Prophets earnest Enquiry
after B^lm and a Physician; showing his deep Concern, to recover the Health of
his People; And, I think, do naturally point out the following Heads of
Discourse: which, by divine Help, I shall endeavor to open and improve.

I. SHOW what Diseases or evil Habits are imminently dangerous, threatening
estruction to a People. II. THE Physician and the healing Remedy for such
Diseases. III. THE deep Concern which all the Members of Community and
especially such as are in places of Trust, should manifest in seeking the
Public Health. IV. Make Application.
First, I am to show, what Diseases or evil Habits are imminently dangerous,
threatening Destruction to a People. They are such as these,

1 A Selfish Spirit, or the prevalence of Self Love. This pernicious Principle,
took place with our original Defection from God. When Man for sook the Lord, he
lost sight of the only Object of his Happiness, retired into himself, and made
himself the Object of his Love, and the Center of all his Desires and Actions.
And if so, the Principle of Self Love, bears a universal sway, exercising
Dominion over all the humane Race, until renewed by the Grace of God, and
directed by his holy Spirit. But lest we mistake the Principle, and call Good,
Evil; let us attend to our Savior's Teaching; upon the head of Self Love, Mat.
22. 39. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. So then, we may and ought to
love ourselves. Our Lord allows of it, or takes it for granted. This is a
Principle founded in humane Nature: not to be rooted out, but refined* by the
Grace of God. And so is not, simply considered, any Fault or Disease. But then;
remember thou have a Neighbor, that thou art related to Society; the Bond of
which is Love. And therefore, thou shall love thy Neighbor, as well as thy
self. Which seems plainly to intimate, that our Lord does not here speak of
loving our selves merely as individual, made to dwell alone; but as we stand
connected with our fellow-men, as Members of a public Body, or Community, whose
Happiness he would have us promote, with the warmest Intention. And as Love is
productive of every kind Office, therefore consider, how thou love thy self.
Sincerely, -- fervently, -- invariably, -- and then go and do likewise to thy
Neighbor: not only to One but All. Love all the Members of that Body, of which
thou also art a Member. This is due to the Public. And here is the Rule or
Measure, by which thou art to render to thy Neighbor his Due. Love him as thy
self. So that Love is a social Grace, planted in the humane Soul, not merely
for our own Happiness, but for the good of others also. But when a Man views
himself, as an Individual Only, and not as a Member of Society; and thereupon
consults nothing but his Own personal Interest, not regarding the Interest of
the Body: or if he lends his Assistance to his Neighbor, it is with this
ultimate View, that himself alone may finally reap the Advantage. Such a Man is
guilty of that criminal selfishness which I here speak of. And this is a most
dangerous Disease, threatening Destruction to the People where it reigns. The
Apostle to Timothy, speaks of it, as such 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2. In the last days
perilous Times shall come; for Men shall be Lovers of their Own selves. These
are perilous Times indeed, when the generality of Men living upon Earth, shall
be left to the Power of self love; forgetting their Relation to the Body, shall
every one seek his own private Interest and not another: When, through
Covetousness, Malice and Envy, they shall never rest, 'till they have murdered
the public Interest and buried that out of sight, which should have been the
great Object of their Attention and the Height of their Ambition to Secure. A
moments Attention to the actings of this narrow, fordid Principle* will
discover the Danger of it. For they that are actuated by such a Spirit, have
this only Object in View, viz. their own personal Interest; not as it is
included in the public, or common good, but as separate from it. And
accordingly the Schemes they Project and the Measures they Pursue, are from the
some Principle, and for the same End, even self Interest. Now, let us View all
the Members of a Body, or Society, (and why not One as well as another, and all
as well as One,) influenced by this selfish Principle, and see what dreadful
work they will make. For their Interest being opposite to each Other, (which
must be the Case, on the present Hypothesis,) it follows, that there will be a
perpetual clashing, among Individuals, in their respective Measures and Means,
to attain their private Ends, (for the Interest of One is the Injury of
another, where self reigns,) and then, all their Measures will interfere with
the public Interest: for this they have all agreed to sacrifice to self. What
then becomes of the Community? that Body of People which were united together
for social Purposes? why, it is demolished. This Tabernacle i^ spoiled, and all
its Cords are broken. And what becomes of the selfish Man at last? Why, however
insensible he may be of the issue, he oversetts the Building, and like Sampson,
(in a better Cause,) is cashed himself, by its Fall. For, by promoting himself,
to the injury of the Public, he sensibly weakens the hands of that Body, yea
disarms it or all its Power, (as far as he is of any consequence*) and so
deprives himself of that protection and strength, which the Community, had he
not dissolved its Bonds, would have exerted to his Defense, in a time of
extremity, which he as an Individual, can no longer avoid nor endure. Mark the
end then, of the selfish Man; to whom the Psalmists words may be applied, Psalm
7 15. 16.
He made a Pit, and dug it, and is fallen into the ditch which he made* His
mischief shall return upon his own Head, and his violent dealing shall come
down upon his own Pate.

2 A party spirit is a dangerous Evil. This originates from self, or is only
the same spirit, acting in a different form and carrying a wider breadth. But
then, every Sect or Party of Men, professing the same Opinion, ought not to be
looked upon, as Party spirited, in any bad sense, merely for their uniting in
sentiments, that differ from the rest, or other part of the Community. For,
every Man has a natural, unalienable Right to think and see for himself. And if
he is conscientious, he will be at Pains to find out Truth: which having found,
to his satisfaction, must be dear to him. He therefore with his Brethren of the
same Opinion, ought, as honest Men, to be zealous for those Truths, in
proportion to the Importance of them. Sects or Parties, in this Sense, as they
are unavoidable, so they may not be hurtful to the Body. They don't threaten
the public safety, provided all Parties duly consider themselves as equally
related to the Public; and do tenderly affect one another as Parts and Members
of the same Body; holding up the public Health in constant View, as a Matter of
the highest Importance, and the End of all their Pursuits. Such a generous
Spirit as this, which is no ways inconsistent with Parties, simply considered,
will secure the public good, and, at the same time, the Peace and safety of all
Parties and Individuals. But when a Party or Number of Men, unite to carry on a
particular Design, either without any Regard to the public Health, or unhappy
mistaking themselves for the Public, and thence concluding that nothing is of
general Benefit but what favors their party-Interest: In consequence of which
their Strength and Zeal is put forth in promoting, not the real good of the
Public, but of their own Party, to the crushing of their dissenting Brethren,
as if they were not Members in common of the same Body, This, I apprehend is to
be Party Spirited in an evil Sense, and is of most pernicious Consequence. This
affords continual Matter for the working of Envy, Malice and Bitterness, the
Fruit of which is Discord, Strife and Divisions which give the most fatal
Wounds to the Common Wealth. This is for a House or Kingdom to be divided
against itself, which our Lord assures us cannot stand.

WHEN Parties are actuated by such a narrow, contracted Spirit, each of them
pursuing their respective Interests, separate from the public Good, and
regardless of its Fate, their Conduct is as unnatural and tends as directly to
the Destruction of a People, as if the Fingers of the Right Hand should
militate against those of the Left; and both Hands, in their zealous strife,
neglect the Defense of the Body, when a drawn Sword is pointed at the Heart.

SHOULD any plead, that the Constitution is weak, the Government bad, and the
Rulers tyrannical, all this wont legitimate a party Spirit, nor justify its
ruling, so long as there is a public, common Good; upon the securing of which,
the safety of Individuals, under such a Government, may be obtained.

THE holy Religion, that GOD has taught his People, is of such a generous
Temper, that it not only forbids their touching the public Peace, but requires
them to seek and promote it (even under an idolatrous and tyrannical
Magistrate. Hear the Direction and Charge of the GOD of Israel to that People,
in the Babylonish Captivity. Jer 29 7.
And seek the Peace of the City whether I have caused you to be carried away
Captives and pray unto the Lord for it: for in the Peace thereof shall ye have
Peace All Parties and ^^ct^, however they may differ in Sentiments, as to other
Matters, are hereby taught to be tender of the public Safety of any State, that
gives them Protection. "Every Passenger is concerned in the safety of the
Ship". How unreasonable then, as well as hurtful, is the Indulgence of a party
Spirit, in a well founded christian Government?

3. A murmuring Spirit threatens Destruction to a People. "To murmur, is to
speak against a Person or thing, out of Dislike, Impatience or Discontent."
implying an injurious Reflection upon the great Governor of the World. This was
one of the crying Sins among the Jews. But not peculiar to them. It Is found,
too frequently, among the Professing People of GOD, in all Ages of the World.
Many complain of the difficult Times they live in; -- not by way of humble
mourning for the wickedness of them; but with a manifest Air of Impatience and
Discontent under their Trials.

BUT this Spirit commonly exerts itself against the Rulers of God's People,
both of a civil and sacred Order. Either they take too much upon them; or they
are seeking their own Honor, Ease and Profit, and care not what becomes of the
People, are Censures very liberally dealt out, against the Rulers; though like
Nehemiah, they are really come to seek the Welfare of Israel.

BUT this is a threatening Disease -- For Murmurers are commonly fond of
Company. They Will endeavor to instill the same Notions into Others, which they
themselves indulge: -- Willing to spread the Infection through the whole Body.
From whence a general Dis-affection arises among People. The public Peace is
Disturbed. The Duty's of our respective Stations are neglected. The Cords of
Union are broke; and Society on the point of being disbanded. -- The Influence
of Rulers is hereby Obstructed, -- their Authority weakened, and their Hearts
discouraged. Under which Trials, if they are not meeker than Moses, they will
be provoked to Speak Unadvisedly with their Lips. All which tends to kindle the
Anger of GOD against a People.

THUS when they Murmured against Moses and Aaron, the Lord resented the Affront
as offered to himself: and accordingly took Vengeance upon the Murmuring
Israelites. Their Carcases fell in the Wilderness; or they died of the
Pestilence and Plague. Numb. 14. 29, 37.

Now these things happened to them for Ensamples, and they are written for our
admonition, says Paul. 1 Cor. 10, 11.
Therefore the Apostle solemnly warned Christians against this daring
presumptuous Sin, ver. 10. neither murmur ye as some of them also murmured, and
were destroyed of the Destroyer.

4. A Spirit of Evil surmising. This is for a Man to imagine, or uncharitably
Suspect some evil thing against his Neighbor, when he has no rational Evidence
or ground to support it. Directly contrary to the Law of GOD, Zech. 8. 17.
Let none of you imagine Evil in your heart against his Neighbor: which thing
I hate says the Lord.

[The Mischief that it does, both in Church and State is manifest; in that when
Neighbors are possessed with this foul Spirit of Evil Surmising, their
Countenance toward each other is soon changed: their Affections grow cold:
their mutual Confidence is shaken, and all the Cords of Friendship broke. For
it is cruel as the Grave. This mischief it does, while it remains imprisoned
within the narrow bounds of a man's Own heart. But it will not be confined, --
It breaks out and runs at large.]

FOR a Surmising Spirit, is an unruly Evil, full of deadly Poison. It will
venture to cast its venomous Darts at the Wisest, the Greatest and best of Men,
in Church and State; to the ruining of their Characters and Usefulness in the
World. There may be nothing at first, perhaps, but a simple surmise. Or a word
that was spoken, may be mistaken; or an Action done, may be misreprented: and
then a surmising spirit has Art and Ill Nature enough to dress it up in the
blackest Colors, ready for the Use of a slandering Tongue. It Is reported as
something real and very criminal. It passes current from Hand to Hand,
increasing as it goes; until it becomes an horrible thing, no longer to be
endured. -- Upon this the clamor of Tongues is raised against the Man of
Character and Station: and whether he be really innocent or guilty, it makes no
odds, -- they have no Leisure nor Will to enquire after Truth: but lift up
their Voices, with one accord, and cry "away with such a one from the Earth" --
Away with him from his Seat of Honor and Trust; for it is not fitting that he
should live in it any longer.

HOWEVER they may be awed with the Presence of Superiors, and afraid of
speaking to their Faces; they are not ashamed to surmise the hardest things
against them, nor yet to report the black Falsehood; if they may do it with
Impunity, or under the shadow of a multitude. They stick not to revile the
Gods, nor to curse the Rulers of the People. So presumptuous are they and self
willed, they are not afraid to speak Evil of Dignities. By this Means the
Community is Wounded in her Head, -- deprived of her most able and useful
Members and Weakened in all her Parts: besides the Curse of GOD that falls upon
surmising Hearts and reviling Tongues. Psalm 120. 4.
Behold how great a matter a little Fire kindles!

5. CARNAL Confidence, or trusting in the Creature, is another dangerous
Disease. --.

[When People look no higher than to creature Refuge, fetching all their Hope
and Spirit from such feeble things as themselves and Creatures about them, it is
evident they do then cast off the Lord, and foolishly trust in their own
sufficiency. Then the wise Man glories in his Wisdom, the mighty Man in his
Might, and the Rich Man in his Riches; in Contempt of the Prohibition Jer 9. 23.
And this forebodes the Rum of a People. For Prove. 16. 18*
Pride goes before a Destruction, and an haughty Spirit before a Fall.

To cast off our Dependence upon GOD, who rules in the kingdom of Men, and to
place it upon Creatures, Advantages, Means, and Instruments, which the Lord
gave us, and which he holds in his Hands, is such an horrid Affront to the
Majesty of Heaven, that his Honor calls for the highest Resentment. Hear him
sending such Offenders back to their Idols Judges 10. 13, 14.
Ye have forsaken me and served othor gods. Wherefore I will deliver you no
more. Go and cry unto the gods which you have chosen; let them deliver you in
the time of your Tribulation. For when Creatures and Circumstances promised you
fair, you turned your Back unto Me and not your Face* then you neglected, yea
slighted the alliance of Heaven: and how can you think that the GOD whom you
despised, will now arise and save you, when distress and anguish is come upon
you?]

IN a word, there is nothing upon Record that appears more provoking to GOD,
than for his people to put their Confidence in any thing short of himself. Hear
with what a Spirit of Indignation he makes Anger known, upon such a Provocation
as this. Jer. 17. 5, 6.
Thus says the Lord, cursed be the Man that puts his Trust in Man, and
makes Flesh his Arm, and whose Heart Departs from the Lord. He shall be like
the Heath in the Desert. As a Heath, "a worthless shrub, the product of barren
Ground, his Comforts shall all fail him and his Hopes be blasted". Very
seasonable then is the Counsel of the Psalmist, Psalm. 146. 3.
Put not your Trust in Princes, nor in the son Man, in whom there is no help.

6. THE Growth of Vice and Wickedness under Gospel Light and Grace, in Contempt
of Judgments and Mercies, is another Dangerous symptom.

[THE Light of the Gospel is sent down from the great Son of Righteousness, to
enrich the Minds of Men with the Knowledge of GOD's Will, -- to show them the
Beauty of Holiness and the Deformity of Sin, -- the Happiness of One and the
Miseries of the Other. The Grace of the Gospel brings Salvation to the chief of
Sinners; presenting of them with free Pardon and Justification, through the Blood
and Righteousness of Christ. The Judgments of GOD are executed, in Token of his
Anger, and to wake up the guilty, secure Sinner, that he may learn
Righteousness, and flee from wrath to come. The tender Mercies of divine
Providence, are designed to draw us to Obedience, as with the Cords of Men and
Bonds of Love. All which Designs are Worthy of GOD.]

Now, if under all these Advantages and powerful Motives to Holiness, People
can find a Heart to practice Wickedness, -- Giving in to Covetousness,
Injustice, Oppression and Fraud, -- Indulging the Lusts of the Flesh,
Intemperance, Gluttony and Drunkenness, or Excess of Wine, -- Wallowing in
Uncleanness, Chambering and Wantonness, -- Foaming out their own shame, by
horrid Swearing, foul and filthy Language* Lying, Stealing, with many other
works of Darkness: and to complete the Catalogue, are hardy enough to trample
under Foot the Law of the Sabbath, bidding Farewell to all Religion. If such
things as these are found prevailing among a privileged People, it is certain
that their Destruction hastens on apace, -- there is out another step betwixt
them and Death. For these are capital Vices, showing that the Guilty are
abandoned to Ingratitude and Presumption.

AND, besides the Physical Tendency of these Vices to destroy a People; as they
exhaust the substance, -- enfeeble the Body, -- enervate the Powers of the
Mind, and many ways unfit Men for the respective Services, which they Owe to
the Public, as Members of the same Body.

(Besides all this,) --

THE Wrath of Almighty GOD hangs over their Heads: his Justice is Armed 'with
Vengeance at them, and nothing but Destruction from the Lord, is cried against
them, through out the Scriptures. -- Hark! how the Thunders roar against such
heaven daring Sinners, Jer. 5. 9.
Shall I not Visit for these things? says the Lord: shall not my Soul be
avenged on such a Nation as this? Job 31. 3.
Is not Destruction to the Wicked and a strange Punishment to the Workers of
Iniquity? Psalm. 11. 6.
Upon the Wicked GOD shall rain Snares, Fire and Brimstone and an horrible
Tempest: this shall be the Portion of their Cup. Those are not empty Menaces,
but awful Realities. If any are disposed to make light of them, give Ear I pray
you, once more, for the GOD of Heaven speaks Psalm 50. 22.
Now consider this ye that forget GOD, left I tear you in pieces and there be
none to deliver. Therefore, Ephesians. 5. 6.
Let no man deceive you, with vain words: for because of these things comes
the wrath of GOD upon the Children of Disobedience. Upon the whole, They that
drown themselves in sensuality, shall be drowned in Destruction and Perdition,
with all ungodly Men.

7. Ult. SECURITY and Insensibility of Danger, under all these and other like
threatening symptoms, is it self the most threatening of all. When People are not
awakned to Righteousness and true Holiness of Life, by awful Rebukes, signal
Mercies and precious Means of Grace, they stand, upon Scripture Record, as
marked out for Judgment, according to their respective evil Habits.

WOE to them that are at Ease in Zion, Amos 6. 1.
is the General Sentence of the Law, against the Professors of Religion, that
dwell carelessly, boasting of their Privileges and covenant Relation to GOD,
crying the Temple of the Lord.

To such as have a Name to live and are dead, the Lord has said, If thou shall
not watch, I will come upon thee as a Thief and thou shall not Know what Hour I
will come upon thee, Rev. 3, 1, 3


IF they are neither cold nor hot but lukewarm, Settled down in a State of
Indifference; easy without the Life and Power of Godliness, they are so loath
some to the LORD JESUS, that he resolves, I will spew them out of my Mouth.
Rev. 3. 15, 16.


WHEN the openly vicious and profane are fool hardy enough to bless themselve
in their Heart, saying we shall have Peace, though we walk in the Imagination
of our Heart, adding Drunkenness to Thirst, Deuteronomy, 29 19.
It Is certain their Destruction is nigh and unavoidable. For Prove. 29. 1.
He that being often reproved hardneth his neck shall suddenly be destroyed and
that without Remedy.

Finally, WHEN the general Cry of a sinful People is, Peace, -- Peace and
Safety, then sudden Destruction comes upon them, as Travel up on a Woman with
Child, and they shall not escape. 1 Thef. 5. 3. Thus threatening, upon a People,
is the Disease of carnal Security, under Loads of Guilt, either in the midst of
Judgments or when surrounded with Mercies. Their Sickness seems then to have
reached the last stage: nor can they continue long, unless some able Physician,
with a sovereign Medicine may be speedily obtained.

This brings me to the,

Second general Head, -- I am now to Show you the Physician and the healing
Remedy for such Diseases. In whatever Sense the Scriptures speaks of Healing,
we find, that GOD assumes to himself the Character of Physician or Healer. Is
the Body sick or wounded? I am the Lord that heals thee. Exodus 15. 26.
Or is the Soul distressed? He heals the broken in Heart and binds up their
wounds. Psalm. 147. 3.
Is Zion sick -- both Church and State diseased? I will restore Health unto
thee, and I will heal thee of thy wounds, says the Lord. Jer. 30* (...)
So that Healing is the work of GOD. He is the Health of our Countenance. But
this is particularly ascribed to CHRIST, the Son of GOD and Savior of his
People. Mal 4. 2.
The Sun of Righteousness shall arise, with Healing in his Wings. This with all
reason, is allowed to be spoken o^ CHRIST JESUS: Very agreeable to what the
Prophet Isaiah had said, Isa 53. 5.
With his stripes we are healed. Which is applied to CHRIST by the Apostle, 1
Pet. 2. 24.
Who his own self bare our sins in his own Body on the Tree, -- by whose
stripes ye were healed* So that CHRIST JESUS is the great Physician, the Healer
of his People. And it is as plain that his Blood is the Balm or Medicine, by
which he performs the Cure. For says the Prophet, it is with his stripes, that
he heals; -- implying his Blood and Sufferings for our sins. As the Apostle
explains it, 1 John 1. 7.
The Blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us from all sin. -- We may hence
conclude that our Prophet had a higher Look than to the Top of Gilead, when he
cried for Balm and sought a Physician to heal the Daughter of his People; whose
Sickness was, more especially, of a Spiritual and Political Nature. Doubtless
the words are designed to point us to the Lord Jesus, as the only Physician,
and to his Blood, as the Balm or only Remedy for the healing of a Sinful
People. It Is true, there are other Means and Instruments, of special Service,
in these spiritual Cases: but they are all in Subordination to Christ. They
heal, only as they help the Patient to Christ, or lead him to the Open Fountain
of his Blood; without which there is no Remission or healing of Sin.

But how the Lord Jesus heals his People with his Blood? is a proper Enquiry,
in this place, and must be Answered.

HAVING, in our nature, performed a sinless Obedience to all the Commands of
GOD, CHRIST JESUS, in our Behalf, submitted to Death; Death including the whole
of that Punishment, which, by Law, was due to the Transgressors of it. For Romans
4. 25.
He was delivered for our Offenses. Hereby he paid the Debt which, by Law, we
owed to the Justice of God. And hence it is said, Act. 20. 28.
That he has purchased the Church with his own blood. Purchased it; made full
Payment, full Satisfaction, for all her Debts or Offenses, occasioned by Sin.
And as an Evidence that he had thus Satisfied the Law and Justice of God, by
his Blood or Death, he comes forth of Prison, is set at Liberty: behold he
rises from the Dead! therefore, with the greatest Propriety, the Apostle adds,
-- And was raised again for our Justification. By his Resurrection he was
discharged, and we in him: so that there is no condemnation remaining to them
that are in Christ Jesus. Now, upon our heartily receiving of him, as he is
offered in the Gospel; even as our Passover, sacrificed for us 1 Cor. 5. 7.
We are justified by his Blood, Romans 5. 9.
And fully acquitted by his Resurrection. In that he is now, made unto us of
God Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
His perfect Righteousness becomes Ours; and so we are Complete in him, Col. 2.
80.
Hereby we are effectually healed of that Mortal wound, the Guilt of sin. For
Pardon of Sin is Health to the Soul.

AND now, Believers are not their own, but his, bought with a Price. He
therefore takes them under his Government: Sets up his Kingdom in the Heart; by
giving them his holy Spirit, to dwell in them and walk in them. 2 Cor. 6. 16.
Who by the powerful Application of Divine Truth, Subdues or crucifies the
Flesh with its Affections and Lusts. Works in them to Will and to do, of his
own good Pleasure* -- Purging the Conscience from dead works to serve the
living GOD. And so they are healed of another Mortal Disease, The Power and
Dominion of Sin, which they were under while strangers to Christ: and to which
they shall never more return: being secured by the Promise of GOD, Romans 6. 14.
Sin shall not have Dominion over you. Being kept by the Power of God, through
Faith unto Salvation. 1 Pet. 1 5.


AND finally, they are, by the same Physician and Means, healed of the Remains
of Sin, through a Work of Sanctification carried on, by the Spirit of Grace, who
enables them to cleanse themselves from all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, --
Purifying themselves as God is pure, until they are meet to partake of the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light. When such great things as these are done,
by the Lord, our Healer, an effectual stroke is given to the Healing, or
preventing, of all particular Maladies, that threaten Destruction to a People.
For now they partake of the divine Nature, 2 Pet 2 4.
Having received of Christ's Fullness, Grace for Grace. Joh. 1 16.
whereby they are conformed to the Image of Christ, Romans 8 29.
whole Spirit they have, Romans 8. 9.
Ruling in their Hearts, Col. 3 15.
And Producing the same mind in them which was also in Christ Jesus. Phill. 2.
5.
Particularly, Hereby they are cured of that Mean, Selfish, Party Spirit, that
bore such a powerful sway before. For the Spirit of Christ in them is full of
Love and Benevolence: teaching and enabling those, in whom he dwells, to love
their Neighbor as themselves: to love their Enemies with Pity and their
Brethren with Complacency; which disposes them to do good to all Men. This
Spirit enlarges their Tho'ts, with respect to Community, and gives them to
view themselves and Neighbors as one Body, and every one Members, one of
another, Romans 12. 5. The Effect of which is, that the Members have the same
Care one for another, 1 Cor. 12. 25. Looking not every Man on his own things,
but every Man also on the things of others. According to that Command, Phil. 2.
4. And thus I think it is plain, that a Spirit of Self Love, Party Zeal and
cruel Enmity, which enslaved the Mind, and spoiled the Society of all her
Peace, is cast out by the Spirit of Christ: It cannot live where this loving
generous Spirit of Christ reigns: which, like the Sun in the Firmament, sends
forth its benign Influences, upon good and bad; willing to make all about us
happy. Again,

THIS Spirit anoints their Eyes and gives them to see the Hand of God, in all
Events of Providence; and sweetly disposes them to acquiesce in, or submit to
all that he does, as wisest and best, upon the whole: and hereby a Murmuring
Spirit is put to silence. -- Above all things they put on Charity, the Bond of
Perfectness, Col. 3^ 1^.
Which thinks no Evil, rejoices not in Iniquity, but hops all things, 1
Cor. 13* 5, 6, 7.
whereby a Spirit of Evil Surmising is effectually prevented or healed. For
Charity covers a multitude of sins. -- Moreover, They have been so
effectually convinced of their own Nothingness; together with the Uncertainty
and Insufficiency of all creature Aids; and of the absolute Dependence of all
Events upon the Sovereign Pleasure and Agency of Heaven, that they have
learned, not to glory in Wisdom, Strength or Riches, but only in the Lord; and
so are delivered from Carnal Confidence.

Once more,

A Sight of the divine Perfections, in the lovely Face of Jesus, showing forth
the Beauty of Holiness; accompanied with the substantial Pleasures of true
Godliness, has given them such an Abhorrence of Vice and Wickedness, that they
could not find a Heart to indulge it, even if they might do it with Impunity.
How can I do this great Wickedness, and sin against God: And thus of all other
evil Diseases, whereby the Destruction of a People is threatened. -- They are
healed by this great Physician from Heaven, whose name was called JESUS,
because he saves his People from their Sins, Matthew. 1. 21.
With the precious Balm of his Blood, the Gospel Catholicon, or universal
Remedy. -- Hence the true People of God, -- the Children and Followers of his
Son, have learned thus to pray, Jer. 17. 14.
Heal us O Lord, and we shall be healed: save us and we shall be saved.

I am now come to the last general Head proposed. Which was to show

Thirdly, THE deep Concern which all the Members of Community, and especially
such as are in Places of Trust, should manifest in seeking the Public Health.

[THAT Man is a dependant Creature, not only upon GOD his Creator, but also
upon his Fellow Men: being formed, not to live and act alone; but in Fellowship
with his Brethren: all united together, in a Body or Community, by certain
Bonds: held and directed by certain Laws and Rules; under the Influence and
Authority of proper Officers; in a just and beautiful Gradation, from the Head
to the Foot: and this for the well Being of the whole Body, and the Safety, as
well as Comfort of every Individual, is a Subject that has been so often
handled upon this Occasion: and the Necessity of it, especially in our lapsed
state, so well supported, that I need do no more than mention it. And from
hence it appears, that every Member of this important Body, should hold himself
Obliged to put on a Public Spirit, and to exert himself, upon all Occasions, to
promote its Welfare. For the Safety and Welfare of the Public, is, not only his
Own, out his Neighbors, his Friends, his Childrens. In that there is such a
close Connection between the Body and its Members, that if the Body be well or
sick, the Members must be proportionably affected. Now, let the Regard which we
have, or should have for our Neighbors Welfare, be added to that which we have
for our Own, and the Argument, for a public spirit, will be doubly strong. And
will yet gather strength, when we View every Individual, of the whole Body,
happy or miserable, according as it fares with the Public. So that a true Lover
of Mankind, will prefer the public Good and Safety, above his Own, personally
and separately considered, as much as the whole Body is preferable to any one
of its Members. And this not only justifies, but inspirits a truly generous
Soul, a real Friend of the Public, to sacrifice, not only his own Ease and
Profit, but his Life to his Country's Service; when the safety, or welfare of
the Community demands it of him. As it was with Noah, in the Time of the Flood,
-- the Safety and Well Being of Noah, his Family and of every living Creature
that was with him, depended upon the Preservation of the Ark. If that was kept
above Water, entire and in a due Position; they were all safe: If it sunk, or
was dashed in pieces, by the Waves; they all perished: Therefore the
Preservation of the Ark was of greater Importance, and, very justly, a Matter
of deeper Concern with every Member of the Family, than barely the Preservation
of himself, as separate from the Ark. -- So in the Case before us: Our whole
Interest and Safety is embarked in the Public Welfare. And therefore that the
Public may be preserved safe, in Health and Prosperity, is a Matter of such
Vast Importance, as justly demands the first Concern of every incorporated
Member. -- But then, the higher any Ones Station is in the Body; the larger is
his Sphere of Action; the more numerous are the Branches of his Duty, and the
more extensive is his Influence. So that his Opportunities and Advantages to do
good, are in Proportion to the Place he sustains: And on the Other hand, his
Failure of Duty, must be proportionably hurtful to the Public, as his Station
is higher than his Brethrens. Which shows, that from the Head of a Nation or
Province, down to the Master of a Family, our Concern for the Public Good
should rise according to the Place which we Occupy. For Reason and Experience
teach, that Public Weal or Woe, depends, very much, upon the good or ill
Behavior of those, that are trusted with her Treasures* and that have the Care
of conducting the whole Body, as united together, or as it excites and acts in
it is several Parts.

OF such a Concern, for the Welfare of Zion and the Civil State, we have an
Instance before us; in the Prophet Jeremiah. After his most vigorous Endeavors
to save them from Ruin, had proved unsuccessfull, he fell into Tears and
lamented their pitiful Case: As in the Words immediately following our Text.
Chapt 9. 1. Oh that my Head were Waters, and mine Eyes a Fountain of Tears,
that I may weep day and night for the slain of the Daughter of my People. --
Let us feel and act the Patriot, like him, and show our deep Concern, this Day,
for the Welfare of Zion, as well as of the State; for the Health of both is
threatened, and in danger of being lost] Which brings me to the

APPLICATION.
I. FROM what has been said, it appears that we are a diseased People, -- in a
sickly, decaying State. There can be no doubt of this, if the symptoms that
have been described, are really to be found upon us. And I am very willing to
stand corrected, if I mistake the Object, when I fix the Charge of such
Disorders, upon the People, whom we this Day represent. If we say that we are
innocent: what means then, the Lowing of the Oxen that we bear? Are not the
Fruits of Selfishness and Party Zeal, Murmuring, Evil Surmizing and Bitterness,
too evidently on the growing hand? Our Bowels begin to be pained with these
Diseases; and there is danger lest they end in such Convulsions, as will shake
our noble Frame to Pieces. Besides the filthy Vices that are rampart in the
Land; bidding Defiance to Heaven and humane Laws, discover that Multitudes are
under the Power and Dominion of Sin. Surely the spirit of a dead Sleep must be
poured out upon us, if we do not feel, and tremble at, such Maladies as these.

Nevertheless,

II. WE may see great Cause of Thankfulness to GOD, for his Wonderful Mercies,
amidst our crying Sins. It well becomes the Sick to speak of the Mercies of GOD
toward them, in the time of their Affliction. We should therefore bless the
Lord, that under all the threatening symptoms that attend us, we are not only
spared, but indulged with a thousand Blessings; which Gratitude obliges me to
mention, though time would fail me to enumerate.

How shall we utter the Mercies of GOD's Goodness to our Land, in setting up
his Standard against our Enemies, when they broke in upon us like a Flood. When
the Sorrows of Death compassed (...) about and the Floods of Ungodly Men
(terrified and) made us afraid, then, in our Distress. we called upon the Lord,
and cried unto our GOD. Lord save us for thy Mercies sake. Give us Help from
Trouble, for the Help of Man is vain. He heard our voice out of his Temple,
above, and our Cry came before him even into his Ears. -- Then did GOD arise
and Scatter our Enemies: he made them that hated us to flee before us He either
sent Faintness into their Hearts, so that the Sound of a shaken Leaf did Chase
them: Or if they met our Troops in the Field, they were smitten down before
them. The Plains of Abraham can testify, that there the stout hearted were
spoiled. They slept their sleep and none of the Men of Might could find their
Hands. The Lord has brought us, through a Field of Blood, into the strong City
QUEBIC, the Capital of our Enemies Country; to set up his own Worship there,
where Saints and Images had been long adored. A glorious, but a costly
Acquisition! Glorious; as it was Obtained by unequal Numbers, with a Firmness
and Resolution, scarcely to be equalled. Costly, as the Blood and Life of the
bravest General was precious. The Favor of GOD to this Land, in sending over
that accomplished Officer, The Gallant WOLF, to defend our Country, is so
great and Distinguishing, that, methinks, all Heaven is listening to hear our
Acclamations this Day, even Songs of Praise from an Obliged People. And with
equal Attention does Heaven look for the flowing of our Tears, at the Loss of
one so full of Merit, and so justly esteemed. How is he fallen, in the Bloom of
Life! Unripe of Years, -- Old in Counsel, Experience and Exploits. He fell! at
the Head of his Troops, commanding with the Wisdom of an Angel, both for their
Security and certain Victory; with such an Ardour of Spirit, as made him even
forget that himself was Mortal.

O Daughters of Jerusalem! Weep ye over WOLF, the the young, the generous and
the tender hearted Man! the bold, intrepid Warrior: who under GOD, has saved
you from barbarous Hands, and your little Ones from being dashed against the
Stones. And let us all, with grateful Hearts, unite, in raising, over his
Grave, a Monument, that shall endure, when Statutes of Marble and Brass shall
be moulder'd into Dust: by showing to our Children and the Generation to come,
the Praises of the Lord: and his Wonderful Works that he has done, Psalm. 78. 4.
by the Hand of this Mighty Man: that the Generation, which is yet unborn, may
arise and declare them to their Children, v. 6.
carefully handing down his precious name to the latest Ages, that his Memory
may never perish.

BUT blessed be the Lord of Host: -- though WOLF is dead, yet AMHERST lives to
command our Forces; rich in all the Furniture of an Accomplished General: whom
let indulgent Heaven long preserve.

I cannot now speak of Health and Plenty, and all the Riches of Gospel Grace,
with Numberless other Blessings, that Heaven is raining down upon us: which,
did we rightly improve, to the Glory of GOD, the Giver, we might, this Day
congratulate our Country in the Language of Moses to Israel, Deuteronomy. 33 29
Happy art thou, O New England! who is like unto thee, O People saved by the
Lord, the Shield of thy Help and the Sword of thy Excellency! Glory to the
Great Indulgent Being, who has bid his Patience Wait the Returns of another
Anniversary; which opens with so fair a Prospect, on many Accounts; giving of
us some ground to hope, that Heaven has farther Designs of Mercy toward Us.

BUT there are awful Signs of Judgment before us, as well as of Mercy: which
constrains us to Rejoice with Trembling For

III. FROM what we have heard, it appears that there are many threatening
symptoms upon us. There is Danger of GOD's Heavy Judgments* for our ungrateful
Abuse of his Mercies. The Judgments of Heaven upon the Land, for several Years
together, in Earthquakes, Sickness and Wars, have been the most Awful and
Awakening, that either We or our Fathers* perhaps, have ever known. And yet we
have not learned Righteousness, nor turned from our Sins. And the Mercy of GOD,
in delivering of us from so many Dangers and Deaths, has certainly been as
great as the Judgments themselves which we have survived* And yet his Goodness
has been so far from lea^^ing of us to Repentance, that, like Pharaoh King of
Egypt, When we saw that there was Respit we hardened our Hearts against him.
And now, after all, in the midst of Blessings, (not without Judgments,) we are
setting ^own in carnal Security, glorying in our own Sufficiency and boasting
of Signal Successes. -- So that our Sin, at this Day, is loaded with th^se two
fearful Aggravations, Presumption and Ingratitude. The former bids Defiance to
the Vengeance of God, and the latter despises the Riches of his Goodness.

And now: What can we expect in return for such a foolish and even brutish
Requital of the blessed God? If Mercy and Kindness will not melt us, nor
Judgment deter us from Sinning, we may expect that Wrath from the Lord will
soon go forth to Devour us. Surely a People are never in greater Danger of
speedy Destruction, than when they harden under Judgments and wax Wanton with
Mercies. For as the Earth which drinks in the Rain that comes often upon it,
but bears Thorns and Briars, is rejected, and is nigh unto Cursing. Heb. 6.
7, 8.
So it is with a People that contemn the Judgments and abuse the Mercies of the
Lord: -- Some Curse of God is ready to fall upon them. The holy Scriptures
teach us to Reason thus. Ezra 9. 13, 14.
Seeing that thou our God have punished us less than our Iniquities deserve,
and have given us such Deliverance as this. Should we again break thy
Commandments, would thou not be Angry with us, till thou had consumed us,
so that there should be no Remnant nor Escaping?

['Tis certainly provoking to God, to see his his People so Careless, as we
are, in general, under his solemn, remarkable Goings. Mal. 2* 2.
If ye will not lay it to Heart, to give Glory unto my Name, says the Lord of
Hosts, I will even send a Curse upon you and I will Curse your Blessings: yea I
have Cursed them already; because ye do not lay it to Heart. Since it is not
for our Righteousness, that the Lord has so remarkably Blessed us: but he has
pityed and spared us, for his own Name sake; Therefore, as Joshua admonished
Israel, Joshua 23, 15*
It shall come to pass, that as all good things are come upon us, so shall the
Lord bring upon us all evil things, until he has destroyed us.] And Chap 24.
20.
If ye forsake the Lord and serve strange Gods, then he will turn and do you
hurt and consume you, after that he has done you good. Thus we see our Danger.
-- It remains then, that we all wake up and show our Zeal for God, and Regard
for our own and others Safety, by promoring a speedy and thorough Reformation.
-- Which leads to another Use,

IV. Our Text and Discourse teach us that it is the Duty of every one, in our
respective Places, to seek earnestly after the Recovery of public Health.
Though CHRIST is the only Physician, and his Blood the healing Remedy* yet our
GOD honors the Great and the Small, among his People, with the Office of
Helpers together with Him: and reproves such as do not come in to the Help of
the LORD, in a work that so nearly concerns them. Wherefore, as in repaiting
the Walls of Jerusalem, all Ranks of Men were engaged in the work* from their
excellent Governor, down to Mechanics, and common Laborers, so should we be
all Hands at Work, in healing and reforming every Disorder; that Sin has
brought upon the Community whose dangerous Sickness calls aloud for speedy Help.

I would therefore humbly address the Counsel of Heaven this day, to the whole
Congregation: and more especially to the Legislative Body of this People:
beseeching their powerful Assistance in healing, i. e. reforming the dangerous
Evils that have been described, and all others that prevail against us. And

I. TO the Honorable, the GOVERNOR, DEPUTY GOVERNOR, and ASSISTANTS of the
Colony.

You are very sensible, my honored Fathers* that your Relation to the Body
leads you, very naturally, to view your selves in a Twofold Light. As Rulers,
set to govern and direct the People. you have the Care of the whole Community
upon you: which must fill your Minds with a deep Concern for their Welfare. But
then, as Men, you are Members of the same Body, which, as Magistrates you
govern: and so, are subject to the same Laws, bound to the same Duty, and
liable to the same Diseases with your Brethren: which makes you stand in need
of the same Physician and Remedy as they do. -- Now both these Characters, of
Rulers and Members, meeting in the same Person, brings a double Portion of Care
and Concern upon you, for the Health of the Public. -- 'T was therefore with
good Reason that Jethro advised his Son Moses, Exodus 18. 21.
To provide out of all the People, Able Men, such as fear GOD, Men of Truth;
Hating Covetousness, and to place such over them, to be Rulers. And such it
behooves you, Sirs, to be, both for your Own and People's safety. For should
Rulers be carried away with Covetousness and Love of themselves: Should they
warp from the Truth, or be corrupted with the Vices of the Times: and, under
all their Own and Peoples Guilt, should they fall asleep in their Chairs,
insensible of Danger; what a deplorable Situation would the dependant Body be
in! Should they unhappily err in Judgment, or stumble and fail, with the whole
Community upon their Shoulders, our Life or Limbs would be in imminent Danger.

IT therefore concerns you, Honored Sirs, to take good heed to your selves, in
the first Place; that, like Obadiah, you fear the LORD greatly: -- Trust in him
firmly and walk Closely with him: that you yourselves may be in perfect Health,
and better able to minister to your diseased People: lest they say, Physician,
heal thy self. To strengthen your Hands and engage your Hearts in this
important work of Reforming what is amiss among us, it may be of great Service,
that you daily think of the lofty Titles and awful Characters, with which you
are honored in the Scriptures. I have said ye are gods, says the Psalmist, To
remind you of the constant, tender Care you should take of your Peoples Health:
And to suggest, that, for Wisdom, Righteousness, Impartiality* and Steady
Conduct, your Administration, should be a lively Image and Transcript of GOD's
unerring Government of the World.

YOU are also Revengers to execute wrath upon him that does evil. Which being
executed with Solemnity, in the Fear of GOD, will make you a Terror to evil
doers: and at the same time the Guardians of the Innocent: and upon the whole,
the Ministers of GOD for good to his People.

BUT that which adds the greatest weight to Rulers Administrations is, Their
Godly Example. They should be holy as GOD is holy, and merciful as GOD is. This
will convince their People, that they themselves believe that what they require
of them, are sacred Realities. -- Matters of the highest Importance.

IT also becomes our Civil Fathers to be Zealous in the work of Reformation.
Your Peoples Sins should deeply affect your Hearts, and make you resolve, if
possible, to heal them. But if unsucces^full after all; you should spread their
Case before the Lord, and become fervent Intercessors for them before the
Throne of Grace. Thus did Moses, David, Ezra, Nehemiah and other godly Rulers.
And though your Sword may not reach the Heart of Sin, nor convert Sinners to GOD,
yet your Prayers may reach Heaven and enter into the Ears of the Lord: Who has
many a Time repented of the Evil which he though it to do unto his People, for
their Sins, and done it not; in answer to the godly Rulers Prayers. Exodus 32.
14.

[YOU'LL please, my very Honored Fathers, to consider, how dependant we all
are upon you. Though guilty of much undutiful Carriage toward you, -- like
peevish Children are too apt to murmur and complain, -- to raise Parties
against you: and boldly rush upon the Point of your Sword, by daring Impieties,
yet our Eyes are upon you for Succor and Protection. We run to you for Help,
in all our Straits, as Children to their Fathers. We hover about you in times
of Danger, that we may be sheltered under your Wing. -- We look upon you, as
the most noble Parts of the Body, -- the most honorable among the Members. You
are our Eyes to see for us, -- to espy Danger, and choose out our way of
Escape: -- Our Head to plan and contrive for our Welfare: -- Our Ears to hear
the Complaints of the Oppressed: -- Our Hands and Arms to Defend us. In a word,
Sirs, You are our very Heart to feel our Wants and to devise liberal things for
us. -- Therefore let not our ungrateful Carriage to GOD and You be punished
with your neglect of us, in this our Sickly, dying State: but let our Danger
and our Woe excite your most servent endeavors and draw forth the best of your;
Skill to heal and save us: that you may ever live in our Hearts as, under GOD,
the Deliverers of a People, on the Brink of Ruin.]

YOU are very Sansible of the Danger that attends the Community, at this Day,
not only on Account of the common Vices of Sensuality and Profaneness, that
bring GOD's Judgments upon us; but also by reason of a Selfish, dividing,
party-Spirit; that strives to make it is way through the Land: threatening like a
Bear, to rend us in Pieces. And your Honors are not only in Danger by it, but
in Danger of it. For if this Evil Spirit prevails and becomes reputable, your
Posts of Honor and Trust will not be hold by Merit, nor lost for want of
Abilities to ^^ll them. Should the Freemen of the Colony be actuated by a Party
Spirit, they will become as Sovereign as Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon; whom
they will they will kill, and whom they will they will keep alive, to promote their
party Interest. Therefore, take heed my Fathers, that you connive not at any
Iniquity, merely to favor a Party, and to gain their Voice in Elections: but
nobly scorn the Suffrages of those that would set you up, not for the public
Good, but only to Serve a Turn.

LET the Health of the Community be the grand Object of your Attention; and
pursue it, in all the ways of Righteousness, whether you meet the Frowns or
Smiles of the multitude: who will be ashamed when they see you incapable of
being corrupted -- As gods therefore, be Wise, -- be Patient, -- Steady, bold
and valiant for the Truth, respecting the public Good: and leave the Event with
GOD, whose Eyes are upon the faithful of the Land: and you shall not loose your
Reward. Then will you live desired, at least by the best of your People, and
die lamented. We shall rejoice in your Light and rest securely under your
Shadow, while you live: and when you leave us, by Death, our Tears shall
Witness, how precious your Memory is held and how carefully preserved. -- As a
Proof of our high Esteem and Affection for such pious, steady and faithful
Rulers, the Whole Country joins you, Our Honored Fathers, in Condoling Your
Loss and Ours, by the awful Breach that GOD has made upon the Magistracy, in
the Death of that truly Great and Worthy Man, the Honorable ROGER WOLCOTT,
junr. Esquire; As He was one of our Principal Pillars of State, we felt the Shock
of his Fall; and shall long mourn his Departure, with a grateful Sense of his
eminent Services: in Memory of which his Merit constrains me to say, (as I
conclude I may with all Simplicity,) that,

HE was endowed from on high with a Genius and Abilities, Surpassing the common
Size, -- of considerable Reading and Acquirements, -- thoroughly Studied in the
Law, -- well acquainted with the Interest and Welfare of the Colony and a last
Friend to it, -- an able Statesman and worthy Patriot. -- In these elevated
Stations of Honor and Trust He held in the Government, He acquitted himself
very honorably to himself, and to the admiring Acceptance and great Advantage
of the Public, -- Of unstai^ed Probity and Integrity, -- inflexible to Ill and
obstinately just, -- free from Artifice and Disguise, frank, open hearted, and
determined in speaking and acting for the public Good, -- his steady Soul not
warped or turned aside from the grand Point in View, the public Good, by the
Frowns or Smiles of the unthinking Multitude. And, what Spreads a Glory over
his Character, he was esteemed a Gentleman of real unaffected Religion. -- But
his Breath was in his Nostrils, -- he could not, with all his Furniture, resist
the King of Terrors. Behold the Lord of Hosts has taken away the Judge, -- the
Prudent, -- the honorable Man and the Counselor. Isa. 3. 2 3.
GOD grant that he may live, as to all his Accomplishments, in his Successor:
And may a double Portion of the good Spirit rest upon all our Worthy
Magistrates: who are to remember that they also are Mortal and Accountable to
the Judge of all. -- Men of such enlarged Hearts and capacious, steady Minds as
He, are absolutely needed at the Helm, in this tempestuous Season. And Such we
trust, your Honors will more Abundantly prove your selves than ever. -- The
Greatness of your Souls will appear, with a shining Luster, in a Christian
Fortitude, and Resignation to the Sovereign Disposer of the Lot, -- meeting
afresh the Honors of the Day, without Elation: or the Neglect of an Obliged
People, as free from Perturbation or Pressure of Spirit.

II. THE Address may be directed to the Honorable House of Representatives.

GENTLEMEN: The Wounds of the Body, in its distant and various parts, are well
known to you all. And as they should deeply Affect your Hearts, so they call
for your speedy and Fervent Assistance.

YOU, Sirs, may do much for the healing of our Diseases, and that in many ways.
-- Volum^^ of Good Laws for the suppressing of Vice and reforming Disorders,
will fail of their End, if the Execution of them falls into Unskillful or
Unfaithful Hands. And this is too often the Case, in some of your Towns: which
makes the Wicked so bold and impudent; walking as if there was no Law nor
Authority over them.

IT therefore concerns You, Worthy Sirs, to propose and choose such Men Only
for the Commission of the Peace, in your respective Counties and Towns, as are,
not only equal to the Post, for Abilities, but Men that truly fear God, and
are not afraid of the Face of Man. They should be Men of great and approved
Sobriety, walking Steadily in all GOD's Ordinances: that their Sentence against
Transgressors may fall with Weight and Terror. And such as have been criminally
delinquent, in times past, should be faithfully reproved by you, and reclaimed,
or dismissed from their Places: least* Iniquity* encouraged by their Example,
should boldly contemn the Authority of their Office.

ONCE more, Gentlemen; Consider the Character in which you appear at the
General Assembly -- REPRESENTATIVES of the FREEMEN or Towns that send you:
plainly suggesting, that your Business here, is not merely to promote your
personal Honor or Interest, -- that is what you gave up to the Public, when
you accepted the Choice. You are therefore to look at the Health of your
Constituents, -- the Towns from which you come: and seek the Welfare of those
Societies. And yet a more important Object rises here in your View, The Good of
the whole Community or Colony, of which your Towns are but Parts or Members, as
you your selves are of them. Yea, the Welfare of the whole Country and Kingdom,
is to be thought of and promoted by you. And if the Freemen acted with
Understanding and worthy of their Character, in their Appointment of you to
this Trust, they gave up the particular Interest of their Towns, and lodged it
in your Hands, to be managed in such a Manner, at and by the Assembly, as
should be judged most for the Health of the whole Body. Therefore, on the
whole, I beseech you to cast off a narrow, contracted Spirit, -- spread your
Thoughts abroad through the whole Community: and, with deep Concern, endeavor
to recover the Health, (both in Church and State,) of a Diseased and
languishing People.

III. To the Freemen of the Colony -- I beseech your earnest Attention, that,
if possible, our Health may be recovered.

[VERY great and precious are your Privileges, both civil and religious. If
once they are lost, they cannot be gotten for Gold, neither shall Silver be
weighed for the Price of them. Job. 28. 15.
See that you rightly understand wherein they consist, that you may teach the
Knowledge of them to your Children, for their early Improvement.]

IT IS of vast Importance. Gentlemen, that you Seriously consider the Relation
you stand in to the whole Body -- that you are Members of a most Valuable
Community* and so, Members one of another; bound by solemn Bonds to promote the
best Good of the Public. -- And then, with great Attention, endeavor to inform
and assure yourselves, What is the Public Good, what is really for the Health
of the Body, the People in general. And that which is So, must be the Object of
your Pursuit. For this you must give up your personal Interest, whereinsoever
it interferes with the public: accounting of it your greatest Happiness and
Safety, that the Body, of which you are Members, is in perfect Health. -- This
will prevent or cure you of a Party Spirit, which, if it rises to a reigning
Power among us, (as there is great Danger) will prove as certain Death to the
Body, as a Mortification in the Bowels.

BEWARE that you Indulge not an evil Surmise against any one. Give not
yourselves up entirely to the Influence of Others: not carelessly act upon
Vulgar Report, but be at Pains to acquaint yourselves with Persons and Things,
that you may not act in the Dark. And then, with sound Judgment, and from a
Principle of Conscience, Choose you out and keep in Posts of Trust, such Men,
to rule over you and to represent you, as you do soberly believe will serve the
true Interest of the Public, with the greatest Fidelity and to the best
Advantage.

IN a word: be always tender of the Public, -- the Colony's Interest. -- This
is a beautiful and respectable Government: Second to none perhaps, in
New England, for Situation, Liberty, public Credit, Royal Favor, Religion and
many Other Advantages. Let us therefore take Heed, that we don't mar the
Beauty nor tarnish the Glory of such a comely Body, by abusing our Liberties: I
beseech you beware least you besmear this lovely Face, with the infernal Spot^
of Discord, Strife and Division, the cursed Offspring of Enmity and a narrow
selfish Spirit, fermenting into a party Zeal.

ONCE more, be careful and make Conscience of appointing Such to the town
Offices of Grandjury-Men, Tithing men, etc. in your respective Towns, as shall
be faithful in their Places, -- Watching over and informing against notorious
Offenders. For it is greatly Owing to the criminal Neglect of such Officers,
that Wickedness so openly abounds in many Parts of the Land.

IV. To Heads of Families. -- It nearly concerns you, to be zealous, in helping
of us to reform the Evils of the Day. Families are little Nurseries of
Learning, Piety and good Manners, or of Ignorance, Profanity and Impudence.
Here we are formed to do much Good, or equal Hurt to the Community, of which we
are Members. And therefore the greatest Care is incumbent upon Heads of
Families, to teach and rule their Houses well. But alas for them! many are so
Void of Knowledge and Skill, in the whole Affair of good Education, as it lies,
not only in Teaching, but Governing and Disciplining their Houses; and so
insensible of the vast Importance of it, that their Children, being neglected,
come forth into the World, destitute of all good Furniture to Serve either God
or their Country. Others that know better, are, many of them, criminally
Slothful and Negligent. -- So that through the Weakness of some and the
Carelessness of other Parents, We have but an uncomfortable Prospect, as to a
great Part of the rising Generation; more especially in some Parts of the Land.
For Zion's Sake then, I beseech all of you, that are Parents, and Masters of
Houses, Awake and come in to the Help of the Lord. Put forth your most zealous
Endeavors to reform the threatening Evils that are daily growing up before your
Eyes. -- Think, how inconsistent it is, with the tender Love you feel for your
Children, that you do so little for their best Good in this Life, or for their
future, eternal Happiness.

Many Parents and Masters of Families, would, I believe, do more and better, if
they knew how; and were sensible that a good Family-Education, in the true
Meaning and full Extent of it, is almost The All, as to their own and the
public Health. But, as I apprehend, they want further Means to awake their
Attention and Zeal, in this Affair, as also to guide them in the Work. I would
therefore return to the General Assembly as Fathers of the Land, and humbly
propose,

WHETHER it is not a Matter, weighty eno' to employ your serious Thoughts
afresh, that something further be done for the Help of Families, that their
Children may be trained up in the Way they should go? -- And to this End, take
leave to propose, that a short, plain and easy Treatise upon the Subject of
Education and Family Government, might be speedily prepared: And such a Number
of the Books distributed to each Town, that every Family may have One, and the
Poor have them gratis.

V. I may not pass by our Worthy Colonels and Officers in the Army; Who have
precious Opportunities, and many singular Advantages, to Reform the Vices of
the Field, and thereby to do much at Healing the Land.

HONORED and much esteemed Gentlemen: Your Loyalty to your earthly Sovereign
is inindisputable; -- Your Zeal in your Country's Service is known to us all,
and gratefully acknowledged; your Courage and Bravery of Spirit has been tried
and proved: and finally you are Professors of our Holy Religion. -- It Is
therefore justly expected of you, and we beseech you, Gentlemen, with all your
accomplishments, to help us in reforming the Manners of our dear Brethren and
precious Sons, who are committed to your care. Improve the Advantages of your
high Rank in subduing the Vices of the Army.

You worthily resent the Affronts that are offered to your Persons, and are
sensibly moved when your own Honor is touched. You very justly punish
Rebellion and Disloyalty, with Stripes, Confinement or Death, as a wholesome
and necessary Discipline. But what are these Offenses against your Persons,
Offices or earthly Sovereign, compared with the horrid Affronts that are daily
offered to the GOD of Heaven, the King of Zion, by the filthy Blasphemys and
daring Impieties of our ^^med Soldiers? -- Therefore, as Gentlemen of true
Honor and greatness of Soul, it becomes you to manifest the highest Resentment
for Injuries done to your GOD, the King of Kings. It will be nobly done of you,
if, rising above the Fear of Man, you make your Zeal and Courage known among
the Troops, in reproving and scourging out the Immoralities of the Army. For
hereby you will conquer the most numerous and formidable Enemies that we have
to fear. And then, if you fall in Battle with the common foe, it will be in a
Blaze of Glory: Or if you return Victorious from the Field, it will be with
double Honor to your selves, and with the greatest rejoicings to us; who, with
Gladness of Heart, will join you in Songs of Triumph for Enemies Conquered and
Vices Subdued.

VI. THE Discourse may* with the greatest Propriety, be addressed to the
Ministers of the Gospel.

MY Reverend and Dearly beloved Brethren. Since we by Office, are set to Watch
for Men's Souls, As accountable to GOD for them, We above all Men in the World,
should be concerned for their Health; And especially at such a Day as this,
when Multitudes are even Wounded to Death, but insensible of their Danger; Yea,
when gray Hairs are here and upon the People and they know it not. -- What can
we do for the Health of the Daughter of Zion? Surely Our best Offices are both
her Due and our Duty. To this I would say, that as ever we mean to heal and
save a Diseased People, we must in the first place,

1. Preach GOD's Word faithfully. -- GOD's Word of Truth, as revealed in the
Scriptures, is the great Instrument or Means, in the Hand of his Ministers, by
which they perform all their Cures. Hereby Sinners are converted, Jam. 1. 18.
and Saints Sanctified, John 14. 19.
But then, divine Truths are healing, only as they bring Sinners to CHRIST, the
great Physician, as before observed. And in Order to persuade Souls to CHRIST
for healing, they must be made sensible that they are Sick. For the Whole need
not the Physician, (such wont come to CHRIST) but they that are Sick -- Our
first Concern therefore should be, to convince People of their Sickness, -- to
open their Wounds, show them their Disease, and make them sensible of their
absolute need of CHRIST to heal them. This is done by showing them, from the
Word of GOD, their lost Estate by Nature. That they are not only Guilty of
breaking the Whole Law* in Practice, but that they are by Nature an Unclean
Thing. [That they are not as Adam when he came first out of the Hand of GOD,
bearing his Image in Holiness: but as Adam in his fallen State; bearing an
Image opposite to that in which Man was created: as is fairly intimated Genesis 5.
1, 3. And so that their Nature, in this fallen State, is] wholly corrupt,
interwoven with Lusts, -- averse to GOD and Holiness, having no good thing
dwelling in them. We must labor to convince them, as the Scriptures declare,
that they are without Righteousness and Strength, -- utterly unable to help
themselves, and as unworthy of any Help or Favor from GOD: And so, that they
lie at Mercy, -- Sovereign Mercy.

ON the whole, Sinners must be shown, that this Corrupt Nature, called, The Old
Man, must be crucified with CHRIST, and this Body of Sin destroyed, or elle
they can never be delivered from the service of Sin, as St. Paul Insisted, Romans
6, 6. And finally, that all this is done by the Mighty* Power of GOD; as the
same Apostle teaches, Ephesians. 2. 10. We are his Workmanship, created in CHRIST
JESUS to good Works. Thus deep must we make the Incision, -- open the Wound to
the Bottom, -- show them the Plague of the Heart and Nature, that they may feel
themselves undone. -- Sick unto Death. Then will CHRIST JESUS be precious to
their Souls, when we preach his Unsearchable Riches and display the Fullness of
his Grace. [This is the gospel Method of healing diseased Souls. -- These the
foundation Principles, upon which alone we may hope to effect a thorough,
lasting Reformation. For the Tree must be made good, or it cannot bring forth
good Fruit, as our Savior teaches. If a clean Heart be not Created in Men,
their Unmortified Lusts will have Vent; break out and corrupt all their Doing.]
In Vain do we attempt to persuade Men to Holiness of Life, and press them to
Obey the Commandments of GOD, without leading of them to the Rock that is
higher than they; to CHRIST JESUS for Strength. -- To little Purpose do we arm
our selves with strong Reasons or summon all the Force of Rhetoric, in
declaiming against the Vices of the times, without plunging the Sword of Truth
into the Sinners Heart, and Opening to him the Fountain of Corruption that lies
within. This ought we to do, and not to leave the other undone. -- One might as
well expect to subdue the Shrubs only under Plain, only by nipping off the Buds
in the Spring, as to heal a vicious People of their mortal Diseases, by working
perpetually upon their immoral Practices alone, without opening the Nature, and
pressing the Necessity of the New Birth, or an inward Work of the Spirit of
Grace. -- Or if we grant that Sinners may be persuaded into an external
Reformation, merely by the Force of Argument and Entreaty, without an inward
Crucifixion of the Old Man; as possibly they might, for a while: yet this would
be but to heal the Hurt of the Daughter of God's People slightly, Jer. 6. 14.
there would be no room to cry Peace, Peace, for that. To cleanse the outside,
while the Heart within remains diseased, full of Putrefying Sores, is to bestow
much Labor and Cost to little Purpose: even like the Applying of costly
Plasters to Pimples in the Skin, when the whole Mass of Blood is corrupted.
Let that be purged, and these Eruptions will die away. -- How happy would it
be, my Brethren, if all that preach the Gospel of CHRIST every where, (or that
profess to do it,) did Speak the some thing and were perfectly joined together
in the same Mind and in the same Judgment, respecting those Things? -- Sinners,
of Every Class, could then find no Place for Shelter nor Ease: -- go where they
would, they would meet the pointed Arrows of GOD's Word, pricking of them in the
Heart, and could find no Rest for their Souls, until they found it in CHRIST:
Which is the great Design of the Gospel Ministry. -- Once more,

[2 ly As ever we would Heal our diseased People, we must Practice as well as
Preach the Gospel of CHRIST. Take Heed to ourselves that we breath nothing but
the Spirit of the Gospel, in the whole of our Conversation. -- We should always
remember that we are the Ministers of the Meek and lowly JESUS* Upon whom the
Holy Spirit descended like a Dove: in Consequence of which, when he was reviled
He reviled not again. He bore the greatest Indignities with the utmost
Patience, and managed all his Disputes, against the worst of Men, without any
heat of Temper, or indecent Reflections. His Gentleness made him great. -- Now,
if we are his true Ministers, we have drunk a Measure of the same Spirit, --
are formed into the same Temper and have learned to talk in his Language. And,
with this Armor on, we need not fear. Such a mild and gentle Spirit is the
best Defense against the rough and boisterous Sons of Violence. They cannot
pierce this Coat of Mail, -- this Clothing of Humility, if we keep it close
about us; no, not with their most in venomed Arrows. Therefore did CHRIST JESUS
expressly charge his Disciples, when he sent them forth, to be wise as Serpents
and harmless as Doves. Take with you the Wisdom of the Serpent, but leave his
Poison and his Sting. Instead of that, take the Innocence and Sweetness of the
Dove, which has no Gall, -- no Bitterness to Vent against her Aggressors. This
truly great and noble Spirit, though despicable in the Eyes of the World, will
make us as bold as Lions in our Masters Cause: And, at the same time, enable
us, the most effectually, to heal the Wounds, with which the Daughter of Zion
is now bleeding to Death. -- How entirely out of Character, then, do we the
Ministers of CHRIST behave, when Our Conversation, Preaching, or Writings, are
animated with an untender Spirit, and indecorated with hard Expressions or
unkind Reflections. Surely, we do then walk naked, and they see our shame* Too
much of this has appeared, in some of our late Pamphlets: which, had it not
been for the Author's Names, could hardly have been charged upon such worthy
Ministers of our Meek and gentle Lord. -- I meddle not with the Disputes
themselves, -- it is enough for me to lament them! -- But the Spirit with which
some of them have been managed, is evidently so unlike to CHRIST's Spirit; --
so destitute of Love and Gentleness: Yea, so full of Harshness and Severity,
that I am persuaded Religion has been more wounded thereby, than it could have
been by the Faults or unhappy things themselves that occasioned those Disputes.
And this, I hope will justify me in attempting to heal my Brethren of this
Infirmity; that the Cause of CHRIST may suffer no more, for want of his kind
and generous Spirit in defending of it. -- As Moses said to Aaron, his Brother,
in the Affair of the Calf; What did this People unto Thee, that thou have
brought so great a Sin upon them? So let me be indulged the Question, Dear
Brethren, What have any done to provoke you, thus to Strip yourselves of your
Priestly Garments, and cloth yourselves in so rough a Dress, -- a Founder's
Habit. -- Have any invaded the Rights of Conscience, or the Liberty of Churches
and Societies? What then? Must we take up carnal Weapons to defend the sacred
Cause? Is not the Sword of the Spirit our best Defense? Solid Arguments and
Scriptures, well adapted, are like a Munition of Rocks.

IF any have laid aside the Gentleman and the Christian; and Abused the Public
with Raillery instead of Reason; Let us remember and imitate the Angel when he
was disputing with Satan: He dare not bring a railing Accusation. -- Had this
been lawful; yet he forbore. He knew with whom he had to do. -- If any have
uttered Falsehoods. -- Let us show them their Error, in a friendly manner; with
Politeness of Speech: and make them ashamed. In a word; if any have done wrong;
yea grievously stepped aside, -- It certainly becomes us to put on Charity,
where there is any Room for it, and suppose it was an Error of Judgment, in our
Brethren, to which we are all liable: and then, how easy, yea how pleasant a
thing is it, for us, with all Kindness and Gentleness of Spirit, to show them
their Mistake, -- to set them in the right way, as one would a Weary Traveller,
that has unhappily missed his Road?

ON the Who (My dearly beloved Brethren; let us remember our Station in the
Church of GOD* We are set in public View, for Examples to the Believers, in
Word, in Conversation, in Churity, in SPIRIT, in Faith, in Purity. And as such,
let us earnestly endeavor to recover the Peace of Jerusalem, -- healing the
Breaches that are mad^ in her Walls. Whoever has unhappily or wickedly kindled
the Fire. (...) threatens the Devastation of our Spiritual Buildings and Civil
Community, let not the Ministers of JESUS run up and blow the Coals: but, on
the contrary, exert our selves, with Diligence and Zeal, to extinguish the
Flames. This may hopefully be done, by the well placed Engines of Prudence,
Moderation, Meekness, Love Unfeigned or fervent Charity, and forgiving one
Another.

LET me therefore beseech you, my good Brethren, by he Meekness and Gentleness
of CHRIST, to put on as Men of GOD, that rich and glorious Furniture, which
Paul recommended to Timothy, 1 Timothy 5. 11, 12.
viz. Righteousness, Godliness, Faith, L^^^, Patience, Meekness* -- that with
this Armor of Light, we may so fight the good Fight of Faith, as to lay hold
on eternal Life.].

VII. ult. I would close the Discourse with a word of Exhortation to the whole
Audience.

I beseech you all, b^ the Bowels of our Compassionate Lord, who shed his most
precious Blood, for the healing of all Nations, that you would each one, in
your respective Stations, immediately do something, at the important work of
Reforming what is amiss, both in your selves and others: that the whole Land,
may, if possible, be healed at one* and as 'twere a Nation born in a Day.

GOD has been justly ^ngry with us, and has smitten us for our Sins. But for
all that (...) has done, because we are unreformed, (...) Anger is not turned
away from us, but his H^n^ is stretched out still. He waits the Event of this
Day: -- this Season of Grace: yea waits to be gracious. And is ready to be
pacified toward us. Only confess your Sins (...) GOD and forsake them:
repairing to the Fountain o^ his Grace for Pardon and Cleansing: and you shall
find, that though he has wounded he will heal you, though he has smitten he will
(...) you up. Believe it; there is not one Soul of us all, but what is wounded
with Sin. or has some Disease that is threatening. If any are pure in their own
Eyes, it is a Sign that they are not washed from their Filthiness. GOD's own
Children have such Remains of Sin and Death upon them, and so much Filth about
them, that they had need to cry with David, purge me with Hyssop, and I shall
be clean, wash me and I shall be whiter than Snow. And Christless Sinners have
all the Guilt and Filth upon them, which they brought into the World with them,
and all that they have since contracted: and so are actually dying of their
Diseases: Yea the Pangs of Eternal Death are ready to seize them.

BUT let your Maladies of Soul be what they will, -- never so many, -- never so
aggravated, -- Old, Stubborn, uncommon and distressing, there is Help for you in
JESUS CHRIST, the great Physician: His Balm, his Blood, applied by Faith, will
heal you all. He is a Physician of a Thousand (...)* There Is none like Him. He
Undertakes for All that come. Bids them Welcome, -- treats them with the Utmost
Tenderness and Heals them effectually. None ever dyed in his Hands. And all
this freely. -- without Money without Price.

AND finally, He this day invites you all to come and be healed. Isa. 1. 18.
Come now and let us reason together says the LORD; though your Sins he as
Scarlet, They shall be as white as Snow: though they be red like Crimson they
shall be as Wool.

AMEN.
FINIS.

