Mr. Dunbar's SERMON On the Anniversary Election of Counselors, May 28. 1760.

The Presence of GOD with his People, their only Safety and Happiness.

A DISCOURSE Delivered at BOSTON, In the Presence of His EXCELLENCY the
GOVERNOR, THOMAS POWNALL, Esquire His Honor the Lieutenant Governor, The
Honorable His Majesty's COUNCIL, AND House of REPRESENTATIVES, Of the Province
of the Massachusetts Bay in NEW ENGLAND; May 28. 1760. The Day for the Election
of His Majesty's COUNCIL, for the Province.

The Paragraph and Addresses within such Marks [] were for Brevity omitted in
Preaching.

By SAMUEL DUNBAR, A. M. Pastor of the first Church in Stoughton.

BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND, by Order of the Honorable House of
REPRESENTATIVES. 1760.

In the House of Representatives, May 29. 1760. On a Motion made and seconded,
VOted, That Mr. Bailey, Mr. Foster, and Mr. Ropes, be a Committee to return
the Thanks of this House to the Rev. Samuel Dunbar, for his Sermon Preached
Yesterday, before the General Court, being the Anniversary for the Election of
Counselors; and desire a Copy thereof for the Press.

Attest Roland Cotton, Cler. Dom. Rep.

AN Election SERMON.
2 CHRONICLES. XV. 1, 2. And the spirit of God came upon Azariah, the son of Oded.
And he went out to meet Asa, and said unto him, Hear ye me, Asa, and all Judah
and Benjamin, The Lord is with you, while ye be with him; and if ye seek him,
he will be found of you; but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you.


THE Occasion of this divine Message to King Asa, and his Army, was the
complete victory, which, through help of God, and in answer to humble, believing
prayer, they had very lately obtained over the huge and formidable Army of
Aethiopians, who had invaded their Territories. -- Asa, as a wise and martial
Prince, led forth his Army to put a stop to their progress, and set the battle
in array: and, as a godly and religious prince, sought to God for help and
success. He led them into the field of battle to fight; before the battle, he
led them to the throne of Grace to pray, to obtain mercy, and find grace to
help them, in this time of need and danger. He lift up a cry to God, e're he
gave the shout for the battle: -- That battle, that work is begun well, and
like to succeed well, which is prefaced with holy, humble prayer. -- Asa cried
unto the Lord his God: It was a cry of Faith, rather than of Fear. His prayer
was short, but fervent; a Prayer of Faith, effectual and prevalent: it entered
into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath, found a gracious acceptance, and obtained
divine help. God fought for them; and by them; gave their Enemies a total
Overthrow. -- Through faith and prayer, out of weakness, they were made strong,
waxed valiant in fight, and put to flight this vast Army of Aliens.

Something similar have been the exercise, the practice, and the experience of
the people of God in these British American Provinces and Colonies. -- Envious
and ambitious enemies made encroachments upon our King's territories, and
erected several strong Forts in them, to enable them to keep what they had got,
and to win more. To oppose their further progress, and to drive them off from
their unjust possessions, we mustered, and sent forth our Forces; and our
gracious Sovereign, pitying us, sent brave Troops to assist us; but we, not
trusting to an arm of flesh, not to our numbers nor strength, not to our Sword
nor Bow, like godly Asa, cried to the Lord our God; we fasted and wept, and
made supplication to him; and, blessed be God, he turned not away our prayer
nor his mercy from us; but has maintained our right, and given us a series of
signal Successes.

King Asa, and his victorious army were now returning in triumph, from the
field of battle, to Jerusalem, laden and enriched with the spoils of their
enemies: doubtless greatly affected with the goodness of God, for the victory
they had won: their tho'ts might be much employed as to the advantages, they
should make of it, to the kingdom. Perhaps they might also be too much disposed
to applaud themselves and one another, for their skill, and bravery, and
success, and so take to themselves that glory, which was due to God: however
these things were, God sent a prophet to meet them, and to deliver them a
message from him.

The manner of the prophet's address was plain, and earnest, and authoritative:
he used no pompous titles of honor, no fulsome compliments, no ceremonious
congratulations, not flattering applauses. He came upon a more important
errand, and with a holy zeal and vehemence delivered it: nor did he in a mean
servile manner, beg leave to speak, or favor to be heard: but, coming in the
name of God, and with a Message from him, he demanded their reverent attention:
Hear ye me, Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin. -- When God speaks by the Mouth of
a prophet, it becomes the greatest men, the highest in Dignity and Power, to
attend with the deepest humility and reverence, to hear what God the Lord has
to say unto them: considering that, how high soever they are above other men,
they are infinitely more beneath the most high God: nor should they take it in
disdain, if God's prophet, at such a time, give them not those honorary titles,
which other men do.

The message was partly monitory to them of their duty and interest: The Lord
is with you, while ye are with him, and if ye seek him, he will be found of
you: and partly minatory; but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you: and
partly memorative, to call afresh to their minds, that, before the battle, they
were with God, in humble fervent prayer, and in the battle God was with them by
his providence and power: before the battle they sought God, in the battle God
was a present help: they prayed, God heard; they believed, and were
established, were prospered: the victory they had gained, was owing more to
God's presence and blessing, than to their prowess and swords. -- From the
experience they had had of God's being with them, in the way of mercy and help,
while they were with him, in the way of duty and trust, he showed them what
their duty and interest still were, even still to be with God, and he will
still be with them. -- Their enemies were worsted, either fled or destroyed:
there was no more war in the land: yet still they needed the divine presence
and blessing, to direct their national affairs, and to prosper their public
Concerns: he let them know, that the Continuance of God's gracious presence
with them, depended upon their dutiful presence with him: and assured them from
God, that so long as they should be with God, God would be with them; but
withal assured them, that if they forsook God, God would in like manner,
forsake them. As they behaved toward God, in respect of duty and obedience,
God* would deal with them, in respect of the ways of providence.

This divine Message, I humbly conceive, is seasonable, and instructive to us,
in our circumstances, as it was to them, in their's.

The experience, which we, the Lord's people, in this land, have had, of the
happiness of engaging and enjoying the presence of God with our Armies, should
make us careful not to forfeit it by any sinful departure from God; and
conscientious in our abiding with God, that he may still abide with us. Still
we have need of the divine presence and help: we have not yet put off the
harness, nor has our land rest from war. Again our Troops are gone forth, and
we may expect to hear of garments rolled in blood. The presence of God is as
necessary for the success of our Arms this Year, as it was the last: and if God
go forth with our Armies, they will be prospered.

As to the expert, the indefatigable, the magnanimous General, who led on his
valiant Army to battle last year; and that under the greatest disadvantages,
and with the utmost difficulty and hazard, but with an invincible resolution
and courage, and a superior conduct, against the vastly greater Number of his
enemies; and who quickly scattered destruction among them, put them to the
rout, and chased them before him: this super-eminent General, the glorious
WOLF, can be with us no more; he greatly fell in the last and conquering
battle, and died in the bed of honor, fighting like an Hero, in the service of
his King, and in the defense of his subjects. -- But though WOLF, the dear, the
brave, the bold, leader of his Troops, can no more stand in the front of the
battle, nor give his orders, nor by his words and example, fire their spirits,
and make them undaunted, amidst the terrors and tumults of the fight; yet God
lives, and still we may have his favorable presence; this is infinitely more,
infinitely better: this made our slain General, such an every way accomplished
one: this can raise up, and give us other Generals, of equal skill and conduct,
of equal zeal and fidelity, of equal fortitude and success. And if God be with
our Troops, we may hope he will: -- yea, blessed be God, he has: though one is
taken, another is left: a General who enjoyed the presence of God with him, in
the Reduction of Louisbourg, the pride and trust of our enemies, a General,
whose very name struck such terror into them, the last year, that they quickly
abandoned their strong Forts, at his approach, and betook themselves to
inglorious flight -- AMHERST, the wary, the valiant, the victorious, is still
left unto us.

The presence of God is equally necessary and beneficial, for the Governor, as
the General; for the Court, as the Camp; for the field of husbandry, as the
field of battle; in peace, as in war; and for the wise and successful
management of affairs at home, as abroad: and our enjoyment of it turns upon
our being with God.

There are two heads of discourse before me; viz. 1. That the presence of God
with his people, is their only safety and happiness. 2. That their enjoying the
presence of God with them, depends upon their being with God.

I. The presence of God with his People, is their only safety and happiness.

The presence of God may be considered, as his natural and essential presence:
this is general and universal, absolutely necessary for upholding in being, all
creatures, in all worlds. In respect of this, God is the God of all the earth,
and has the absolute ordering and disposing of all things, in the kingdoms of
men, according to his own will, with sovereign dominion, and irresistible
power. -- Or, as his glorious, and majestic presence, which is peculiar to the
heavenly world: there God dwells in the habitation of his holiness, and sits
upon the throne of his glory: Angels standing in his presence, and doing
homage: -- or, as his judicial, vindictive presence, by which the damned in
hell are punished with everlasting destruction, from the glory of his power --
or, as his spiritual, gracious presence: which is peculiar to his church and
saints in this world: this accomplishes for them, the everlasting purposes of
his grace and mercy in Jesus Christ, and blesses them with all spiritual
blessings, in heavenly things in him -- or, as his special providential
presence, which also is peculiar to his professing people: in respect of this,
he is with them, sometimes in judicial dispensations, correcting them for, and
recovering them from their degeneracies from him, and the ways of holiness: and
sometimes in merciful dispensations, prospering them in their public concerns,
and giving them all outward blessings richly to enjoy: health in their
habitations, plenty in their substance, peace in there borders; and in case of
war, success to their Arms.

This favorable providential presence of God with his people, considered as a
people, is that presence of God, which the text more especially, if not only,
relates to. -- This God vouchsafes to them, for the sake of Christ, the great
Mediator, through whom he comes nigh to them, and they are made nigh to him.

The safety and peace, the prosperity and happiness of God's people, depends
wholly upon this presence of God with them. This performs many great and
distinguishing acts of kindness and mercy for them: for where God is thus with
his people, he is for them, espouses their cause, consults their welfare, and
promotes their happiness. His right hand, and his arm, and the light of his
countenance, do great things for them, because he has a favor to them.

This presence of God with his people preserves them in their greatest
sufferings and dangers: when like a bush on fire, flames threaten them with
immediate destruction, they are not consumed: but according to the greatness of
God's power and pity, he preserves them, when to themselves they seem appointed
to perish. By this, the three Jewish Worthies were preserved, in the midst of
the burning fiery furnace; and Daniel in the lions den; in the mount the Lord
is seen.

This delivers them, in their lowest and most desperate circumstances. When
they are surrounded with difficulties and dangers, and reduced to the greatest
streights: when they have neither wisdom to contrive, nor power to effect, any
way of escape, but, as to any visible means, all hope of being saved is gone;
Now is God's times to work: Now will I arise, says the Lord, and set them in
safety. Providence wonderfully steps in, and opens a door of hope and help to
them. So it did for Israel in delivering them from Egyptian bondage: then God
went forth for the salvation of his people: yea, he rode upon his horses and
chariots of salvation, made speed to help and save them. -- Miraculous
appearances and operations of providence, for the deliverance of God's
oppressed, endangered people, may not now be expected; yet God has very strange
and unthought of ways, to accomplish deliverance for them: as we see, in the
deliverance of God's people, from their Babylonish captivity, and also in the
days of Esther.

This lays restraint upon their envious and malicious enemies: -- sometimes
upon their spirits; though they envy them their enjoyments, and would fain
deprive them of them, they cannot find an heart to do it. Thus though the enemies
of Israel coveted the good land, God had given them, yet when all the males
went up to the feast of the Lord, to Jerusalem, and left their borders exposed
to their incursions and depredations, God put such a restraint upon their
spirits, that no man then desired their land. When a man's, when a people's,
ways please the Lord, he makes even their enemies to be at peace with them. --
Sometimes upon their Tongues; that not so much as a Dog shall move his tongue
against them: as Balaam, who loved the wages of unrighteousness, though hired
with great rewards, could not curse Israel -- And sometimes upon their Hands;
though they seemingly have them in their power, and are provoked enough to
destroy them, and have resolved to do it, yet their hands are, as it were,
bound; they cannot execute their bloody purposes. So, when the sons of Jacob,
treacherously and cruelly murdered the Shechemites, the terror of God was upon
the cities round about, that they should not pursue after them, nor avenge
themselves upon them.

This defeats the mischievous plots and devices of their enemies against them.
When their enemies conspire their ruin, and dig deep to hide their counsels;
and when they imagine, they have brought their matters to bear, and are
confident of their success, providence lays rubs in their way, and frustrates
their machinations: their deep-lay'd plots, and long labored Schemes prove
abortive: and God's people escape, as a bird out of the snare of the fowler.
Thus Haman's plot for the destruction of God's people, ended in disappointment:
and so did the horrible, the hellish Powder Plot in the English nation,
intended to blow up at once, and in a moment, the King and Parliament: when it
was ripened, and just upon the point of execution, it was strangely discovered,
and timously prevented. -- Yea, Providence often brings that mischief, upon the
enemies of God's people, which they devised and intended against them: they are
snared in the work of their own hands, and their designed mischief returns upon
their own heads. -- So Haman handsell'd the Gallows, he had prepared for
Mordecai.

This supplies them, with the comforts of life, so that they want no good
thing. This gives them Rain in due season and measure: makes their fields, such
as the Lord has blessed, to yield their fruits in plenty; so that their barns
are filled with substance, their presses burst out with new wine, and their
garners are full, affording all manner of store; they have plenty, variety,
dainties. -- If at any time they seem to be cut short, and fear want of bread,
and cleanness of teeth, the good providence of God finds out ways for their
supply, and prevents them with the blessings of goodness. It was a wonderful
work of God, for Israel in the wilderness, a land not sown, that for forty
years together, they had supplies brought them, from day to day.

This directs them in all their darkness, and points out to them, the path of
duty, the way of safety. When in some critical conjunctures, they are wholly at
a loss, and, like Jehoshaphat, know not what to do; when they are perplexed in
their minds, and hemmed in on every side with difficulties and perils, and can
see no way to surmount, or escape them, providence, by some unexpected turns,
opens a new scene, and shows them plainly the way, wherein they should go. God
often gives his people direction, as to their present duty and safety, by an
uncommon coincidence of things in providence; so that whosoever is wise, and
observes them, may understand the loving kindness of the Lord. So God guided
his people in the wilderness, and led them in a right way, in all their removes.

This protects them, from all enemies and dangers, and is as a wall of fire,
round about them, to keep them from harm. When their enemies confederate
against them, unite their counsels to deceive them, and their forces to destroy
them, and thunder out their boasts and threats to terrify them; and when they
themselves are sensible of their own inability to withstand, or defeat them,
and, according to human view, must fall sacrifices to their rage and cruelty;
then God repents him for his servants when he sees they have no power: then
providence undertakes for them, interposes, and powerfully protects them: their
enemies are scattered in the imagination of their hearts, and their hands are
not able to execute their purposes and threats: So God defended Jerusalem from
the numerous army, and proud threatenings of the Assyrian Monarch. -- So God
saved England in former days from the formidable Armada of the Spaniards, --
and the last year from the threatened, and perhaps really intended, Invasion of
the French: -- and but a few Years ago, he saved New England from the powerful
Armament of their French enemies, who came into these American seas. -- The
ancient famous Cloud, the symbol of God's presence, served to Israel, for
protection, as well as direction. God's presence is to his people, a Sun and a
Shield; a Shield to defend them, as well as a Sun to comfort and direct them.

This gives them success, in all their Affairs. Success does not constantly
follow the probability of second causes. The Race is not always to the swift,
nor the battle to the strong. Oft-times the best human counsels are turned into
foolishness, the wisest measures are disconcerted, the greatest preparations
brought to nothing, and the cunningest politicians befooled; while on the other
hand, weak and contemptible means are prospered, and the most improbable, meet
with the greatest success. This is entirely owing to the divine governing
providence. But when God is present with his people, he orders all things well
for them, and prospers all their lawful undertakings. The smiles of God upon
them, make every thing flourishing -- God's presence makes their land
healthful, their fields fruitful, their merchandise gainful, and their armies
successful: as in this last instance, we see by the great victory Asa obtained
over his enemies -- and may see in the repeated victories of our English fleets
and armies, over our French enemies -- and in the admirable success of our
Arms, in this quarter of the world, by the reduction of so many of the strong
and important Fortresses of our enemies, and even of their Capital city.

This repairs the ruins, brought upon them, by the judgments of providence.
When God's professing people forsake him, apostatize from his worship, and live
in a presumptuous disobedience to his laws, it is necessary, for the
vindication of the righteousness and holiness and honor of the divine
government, that God testify his displeasure against them, and punish them,
with judicial dispensations. And when he does this, he often breaks them with
breach upon breach, till he brings them very low. But he means not to make a
full end of them, but to renew them to repentance, and to recover them from
their declensions. When therefore they repent, and turn to him that smites
them, he becomes to them a repairer of the breaches, and a restorer of paths to
dwell in: and builds them up, as he had plucked them down. -- Thus did he to his
ancient people: he raised up the tabernacle of David, that was fallen, and
closed up the breaches thereof, and raised up the ruins thereof, and built them
as in the days of old. -- So did he by the great City, London, when, an hundred
years ago, great part of it was laid in rubbish by devouring flames -- So did
he by this great Town, Boston, when, near forty nine years since, this part of
it, and the Meeting House, which stood in this place, and the Townhouse, and
many other buildings along this street, on both sides of it, were laid in
ashes. God being-graciously present with his people, the ruins in a few years
were repaired, and that with great advantage and splendour -- and so will he
again the dreadful desolations, made in it by the late Fire, if he be
graciously present with them.

This turns all the evils they meet with into real kindnesses to them.
Providence has a vast reach, and by seemingly contrary methods, promotes the
good of God's people: and when they are ready to say, all these things are
against us, they are meant for good, tend to it, and terminate in it. -- So the
Lord being with Joseph, all the hard things he met with, were the direct way to
his future preferment and greatness. -- So God sent some of his people into
captivity, in the land of the Chaldeans, for their good. -- So the repeated
disasters we met with, in the beginning of this war, have been overruled for
our advantage. -- God brings his people low, in order to exalt them the higher.

Finally,

This favorable providential presence of God with his people, builds his
House, and appoints the Ordinances of his Worship, among them. -- Where God is
with his people, and walks among them, he sets his Tabernacle among them, as he
did among his people Israel. He institutes symbols of his gracious spiritual
presence with them, to be means of keeping up a spiritual communion with him,
and of conveying spitual blessings to them; that so the common blessings of
providence may be sanctified to them, by the special blessings of grace.

These are some of the special providential favors, which God bestows upon his
people, according to their varied circumstances, when he is graciously present
with them. -- Upon a review of them, who will not say with the renowned Jewish
Lawgiver, What nation is there so great, who has God so nigh unto them in all
things that we call upon him for? Happy art thou, O Israel, who is like unto
thee, O people saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and the sword of
thine excellency? -- And with the devout king of Israel, Happy is that people,
that is in such a case; yea happy is that people, whose God is the Lord. --
What wise people would not desire to be, and to continue, such a happy people?
to know the means, and use them, to be such?

This brings me to the second Head of discourse, viz. That God's people's
enjoyment of this favorable providential presence of God with them, depends
upon their being with God. -- The text assures us, that this is the only way to
this felicity: The Lord is with you, while ye are with him, and no longer; for
if ye forsake him, he will forsake you. Their obediential presence with God is
the only condition, the only qualification of God's gracious providential
presence with them.

All men, even they, who know not God, and are without God in the world, are
yet with God, i. e. in his presence, under his inspection, and the government of
his providence. They are encompassed with the divine immensity, and in God they
live, and move, and have their being. -- But as God's presence with his people
signifies something more, than his essential presence, and universal
providence, even his voluntary, chosen, and gracious presence, so their
presence with God, signifies something else, and something more, than this
natural and necessary presence with him, even their voluntary, chosen, and
dutiful presence. Their presence with God must correspond to his presence with
them, be as a kind of counterpart to it; and answer to it, as the wax to the
seal.

As God's being with his people is his being for them, taking care of them, and
dispensing favors to them; so their being with God, is their being for God,
owning his cause, pursuing his interest, doing his will, and advancing his
glory. God's gracious providential presence with them performs great acts of
favor for them, and their obediential presence with God, lies in performing
religious duties to him. -- It implies in it, their keeping covenant with God.
-- Their covenant relation to God constitutes them his peculiar people: and
brings them into a state of nearness to him; for they, that are strangers from
the covenant, are afar off from God: and their keeping covenant with God, being
steadfast in it, abstaining from all sins forbidden, and doing all required
duties, believing all revealed truths, and walking in all the commandments and
ordinances of the Lord; and in all designing his glory, is their being with
God. -- So also is their eying God in all providential dispensations. -- When
they look through second causes, and above visible instruments, and see the
sovereign providence of God in all events, and adore the divine wisdom and
goodness, power and righteousness, truth and faithfulness, in them, and compose
themselves to a behavior, comporting with them, they are with God. -- When
they express a dutiful submission to, and a fiducial dependence upon God in all
their wants, and fears, and dangers: -- when they maintain a prayerful frame of
spirit, seeking of God the supply of their wants, direction in their streights,
deliverance from their dangers, protection from their enemies, and other
judgments, success in their enterprises, and a blessing upon their labors: --
when they excite themselves to a thankful praising God for all his benefits: --
when they endeavor a wise and good improvement of all God's dealings toward
them: -- and when they conscienciously walk in obedience to his commands: --
then may they be said to be with God, and not to forsake him.

God's people being thus with him, God will be with them. -- Not as if their
being with God merited his being with them. By no means: for after all, they
are unprofitable servants: and there are so many sinful imperfections attending
them, in their abiding with God, such as, distrust and impatience, carnal
confidence and undue dependence upon themselves or others, or means, neglect of
humble believing prayer, or of holy thankful praises, that God might justly
withdraw from them, and deny them his gracious presence. But, these infirmities
notwithstanding, his people may humbly hope for his presence and blessing; for
God is not strict to mark iniquity, where he sees sincerity.

This hope they may build upon the gracious promise of God: the text carries
the emphasis of a promise in it: and God expressly promised his people, that if
they would walk in his statutes, and keep his commandments, and do them, i. e.
if they would be with him, he would walk among them, and be their God: i. e.
would be graciously with them. This promise God has ever made good to his
people: they ever found that, when they were with God in the way of duty, God
was with them in the way of providential mercy: and God will not now suffer his
faithfulness to fail.

Besides, the great concernment of God's glory secures his favorable presence
with them, while they are with him. Should God forsake his people, while they
keep near to him; should he deny them the blessings, and load them with the
judgments, of providence, while they are faithful in his covenant, and
steadfast, and unmovable, and always abounding in works of obedience to him;
the wicked world would take occasion to blaspheme his name, as well as insult
his people. They would say, Where is now your God? and upbraid them with his
want of love to them, or care of them, or power to help them. Therefore, for
the glory of his great name, he will not forsake them, while they abide with
him. God's glory is his supreme end; and the advancement of this is the great
Design, he is carrying on in the world.

What remains is an Application; which I shall attempt, by way of Address to
several Orders of men amongst us. My incapacity for, as well as my
unacquaintedness with, polite, courtly Address, and its unsuitableness to my
function, and the sacred Desk, will, I trust, obtain an easy pardon, for my
plainness of speech; and the example of our prophet, I conceive, will justify
me in it.

As your EXCELLENCY is, as yet, in the first and chief seat of Government over
us, justice and decency require me, in the first place, to direct an Address to
YOU: an Address of a Minister of Jesus Christ, reminding of duty, and exciting
to it.

SIR,

It was the providence of God, which advanced you to the exalted station, you
are now in. God is the Judge; he puts down one, and sets up another; he
removes one, and replaces another. -- You are indeed greatly indebted to the
KING, for his royal favor and Commission, but more to GOD, for the King's
Heart was in the hand of the Lord. God, by his special providence, was with you
in your Exaltation: -- and from the Addresses of both Houses of the last
Assembly, and from the Addresses of the Freeholders and Merchants of this
Metropolis, in which they bear public, and most honorable, Testimonies to your
Excellency's Administration, in respect of the wisdom and integrity, the
clemency and tenderness of it, and of your constant views to the public good,
and the spirited and successful measures you have taken to promote it; and of
your tender care of our Trade; we gather, that God has been with you in your
Administration, as he was with young King Solomon, to give you a wise and
understanding heart, to rule and judge his people: -- and from the favor you
have found in the sight of the King, in your preferment to a more advantageous
Command, we see, that God is still with you. Oh, does not this favorable
providential presence of God, which you have so evidently enjoyed, lay you
under the strongest Obligations to be, and to abide with God, in all the duties
of religion, and in all the important affairs of your Government?

Duty and gratitude to the King's Majesty, for his repeated royal favors to
you, worldly policy, and self-interest, oblige you to be often with him, by
your letters, to his great Ministers, to know his royal pleasure, to receive
his instructions and orders, and to acquaint him with the state and affairs of
his subjects. Do not duty and gratitude to the most high God, for providential
favors to you; and do not spiritual wisdom, and your best interest, equally,
at least, oblige you to be with him, for the continuance, and increase of
political and divine wisdom, for the right management in your high office, and
great trust, and for procuring his blessing to your self, and your
Administration? -- Sir, you are equally God's Minister, as the King's Governor.

Our gracious Sovereign, like godly King Asa, is with God, as we gather from
his royal pious Proclamations: -- with God, in humble supplications, to implore
his blessing and help: -- with God, in thankful praises, to give him the glory
of his favors: and we see that God is with him, as he was with Asa, in-the
remarkable success, he has given to his Fleets and Armies, and the great
Victories, which by them he has obtained over his proud enemies, in one part of
the world and another. -- This pious example of the King, is worthy the closest
imitation of his Representative.

Your relation to us, as our Governor, will soon cease: but you will need the
divine presence, for a worthy and successful conduct, in the Government you are
appointed to; especially as it is embarrass'd with peculiar difficulties and
dangers from perfidious and bloody Indians. Would you have the gracious
presence of God go along with you, and abide with you; you must then be with
God.

If you are with God, acknowledge your dependence upon him, put your trust in
him, supplicate his direction and blessing, and design his glory: God will be
with you, to support you under the public burdens, to guide you by his counsel,
to make you faithful in your trust, to defend you from enemies, if any you
have, to prosper your Administration, to make you acceptable to the King, and
to your People; to think upon you for good, and to reward you for your faithful
services to his people. God's presence with you will add luster to your
dignity; this will command reverence to your person, and obedience to your
government. -- And what is infinitely more and better, than even this gracious
providential presence of God with you, if by faith and prayer, and a holy life,
you are with God, God will vouchsafe to you, his gracious spiritual presence,
and bless you with spiritual blessings: and when you die out of this world,
(for though you are an earthly God, you must die like a man) he will, through the
merits of Christ, receive you into his immediate glorious presence in heaven,
and bestow inconceivably higher honors on you there, than ever he did in this
world: he will set you upon a more glorious throne, and crown you with a richer
crown, than even your Royal Master himself is now possessed of.

[But it is fit, and safe to be told the worst, as well as best: therefore
permit me, Sir, in patience, and without offense, to add, what our prophet said
to a great king, his own king, and a godly king; if you forsake God, which God
forbid, he will forsake you: if you neglect and reject him, he will do so by
you; and make as light account of you, as you can of him. -- Yea, and as was
threatened to a great prince, though you were the signet upon his right hand, he
would pluck you thence, and cast you off for ever; for the mouth of the Lord
has spoken it, and spoke it to the chief Ruler of his people; Them that honor
me, I will honor: and they, that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed. --
Wherefore, let king David's advice, or rather charge, to his royal son and
successor, be acceptable to you, and his arguments* have their due weight: And
thou, Solomon, my son, know thou the God of thy father, and serve him with a
perfect heart, and a willing mind; if thou seek him, he will be found of thee*
but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever.]

Your removal, excellent Sir, from this seat of Government, will be in a short
time: The ancient form of blessing was, The Lord be with thee. A greater
blessing we cannot wish you, than that God's presence may go with you, when he
carries you hence. This blessing we wish you, this day, out of the House of the
Lord.

In the next place, I shall offer an Address, to the honorable, his Majesty's
COUNCIL, and the House of REPRESENTATIVES; and that with a like plainness of
speech.

Sirs,

God, in his providence, has devolved upon YOU a great share, as of the
honors, so of the cares and burdens of the Government: you are as the eyes and
hands of this people, to see and to act for them. You are entrusted with our
most valuable privileges, civil and religious: and, according to your
management of them, we are like to be a happy or miserable people. -- Very
important therefore, is your trust and your work; and requires superior
intellectual and moral endowments for the faithful discharge and performance of
the same. -- Will you not then be with God, who says, Counsel is mine, and
sound wisdom: with God, who gives wisdom to the wise, and knowledge to them
that know understanding. -- It was the wisdom, honor and safety of Judah, that
Judah yet rules with God, and is faithful with the Saints. It will be no less
yours, to be and to do so to.

You are piously beginning the great affairs of the year with God, in the
religious exercises of his house, into which you have called us. Your care must
be to be with God in the Courthouse too; or your being with him here will be
but base hypocritical flattery, and an affront to that God, who will not be
mocked.

Would you be with God in the Elections of the present day, you must, according
to your best judgment, choose such as God will approve. -- As to us your
subjects, you are at liberty to choose into the king's Council whom you please:
not so as to God. He has given you the Character of those, that shall rule his
people, and a charge to make choice of such: you are therefore bound in
conscience to God, as well as honor to the King, and fidelity to this people,
to do your best to elect such; and to provide out of all the people, able men,
men of sense and substance; such as fear God; men of virtue and piety; men of
truth, hating coveteousness; men of fidelity, generosity, and a public spirit:
for the God of Israel has said, and the rock of Israel spoke; he that rules
over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God.

If, in the elections of this day, you have no regard to the intellectual
powers, moral characters and qualifications of men: if from fear or favor,
from party spirit or any sinister views, you knowingly make choice of those who
want them; you will forsake God, and act without, or rather against, him; and
give him just occasion to complain of you, as of his people of old; they have
set up Kings, but not by me, not by my direction and order, nor according to my
will: they have made princes, and I knew it not: I approved it not. In this
case, can you expect God's gracious presence with you? and if you forsake God
the first day* and in the chief business of the day; and which has such an
interesting influence upon all the succeeding businesses of the year, will it
not bode ill to you, and to your people? -- But we hope better things; and
that, as you are, now, and here, beginning with God, you will abide with him
through the important elections of the day; and also through all the future
Sessions of the year; and that in the great and weighty affairs, that come
before you, you will seek to God for that knowledge, that will make you
understanding in the times, and enable you to know the true interests of your
people, and the best methods to promote them; and for that fidelity and
resolution, that will embolden you to pursue them, and for the divine blessing
to prosper them.

Should you, from a vain conceit of your own wisdom and sufficiency, forsake
God, and ask neither his counsel nor blessing; or do it only in a formal,
customary, complimental manner; you may justly fear, that God will forsake you,
turn you over into the hands of your own counsels, leave you to the darkness
and lusts of your own minds, mingle a perverse spirit in the midst of you,
suffer parties to be formed, dissentions to prevail, and passion,
self-interest, and a party spirit, rather than reason, justice, and a public
spirit, to influence and govern you. In this case, your counsols will be
carried headlong; and, in all probability, be extremely prejudicial, if not
fatal, to the Commonwealth.

Sirs,

God will be with you, in your Assemblies, whether you be with him or no:
judicially, if not graciously. He will be an Inspecter, an Observer, a Judge.
However unaccountable you may be to your people, you must give account to him.
Bear it in mind then, and act under the solemn realizing thought of it, that
God stands in the congregation of the mighty: He judges among the Gods.

Would it not be though it, without the limits of my present call, I would, in a
few words, address the Honorable the Judges in our Courts of Judicature, and
the Honored the Justices in our Towns and Counties.

Sirs,

The names, the estates, the liberties* and even the lives of the subjects, are
deeply interested in your Judgments: high is your office, awful is your work:
and in some cases, attended with peculiar difficulties, perhaps temptations.
You need not only the Laws of the land for your directory, but wisdom, fidelity
and courage, to make a right and just application of them. -- You are to hear
the cause of your brethren, and to judge righteously, between every man and his
brother; not to respect persons in judgment, but to hear the small as well as
the great; and not be afraid of the faces of men; for the judgment is the
Lord's. You must take heed, therefore, what you do; for you judge not for man,
but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment. -- Wherefore be you with
God, and let the fear of the Lord be upon you. Put on righteousness, and let it
cloth you, and your judgment will be as a robe* and a diadem: your greatest
comfort, your brightest ornament. God will own and honor you; men will fear
and reverence you. -- But if you forsake God in the judgment, and judge after
the sight of your eyes, respect persons and not causes, receive bribes, use
partiality, justify the wicked, and condemn the righteous, you will be an
abomination to the Lord, and the abhorrence of his people.

Remember, Sirs, that though now you sit upon the Bench, you must one Day stand
at the Bar. If you have been with God in the judgment, and studied to do
justice, to discountenance vice, and to encourage virtue, you will be acquitted
in the great Audit day; and Christ, the Judge, will confer inexpressible honor
upon you; will take you to be Assessors with him, and you shall judge the
World, yea Angels. -- But, if you have forsaken God, and been unjust Judges, woe
unto you, a more severe and tremendous sentence will be past upon you, than you
ever past upon the most flagitious criminal. -- Now therefore, be instructed,
ye judges of the earth, and serve the Lord with fear.

The text leads me particularly to Address the Gentlemen of the Military order
and life: but, as they have willingly, and generously offered themselves, to
the service, and defense of their Country, and are gone to the help of the
Lord, to the help of the Lord, against the mighty, and to jeopard their lives
in the high places of the field. I forbear -- Only let our hearts be toward
them, our good wishes follow them, and our fervent prayers be to God for them.

My Reverend Fathers and Brethren, will not, I trust, take it amiss, if, upon
this occasion, one of the least, and most unworthy, of their Order, presumes,
by a word of Address, to stir up their pure minds by way of remembrance;
notwithstanding we expect a Sermon to morrow: for even we have need of line
upon line.

My Fathers and Brethren,

God, in his providence, has separated us, from the congregation of his people,
to come near to him, to stand before him, and to minister in the holy things of
his house. To us are committed the oracles of God, the ministry of the word,
the administration of the Sacraments, and the charge of precious Souls: And who
is suffcient for these things? -- Of all men in the world, we have need to be
with God, and to give ourselves to prayer, imploring his Spirit, to (...)
spiritual understanding in the myste^^^^ (...) the gospel, and to lead us into
all truth: -- his presence, to animate us in our holy work, and to carry us
above all the discouragements we meet with, from the carnality and unbelief of
our own hearts, from the temptations of satan, from the little visible success
of our labors, from the unkindness of our people, and from the oppositions of
an ungodly world: his help, to support us under our burdens, and to strengthen
us to make full proof of our ministry: -- and his blessing upon our labors,
that we may preach so, as to save our selves, and them that hear us. -- We had
need be with God in our preaching, that we deliver to our people none other
things than what we have received from the Lord, and plainly taught in his
word; that we keep back nothing that is profitable, nor shun to declare the
whole counsel of God: and that we do not offer to the Lord that which cost us
nothing, nor utter rashly before him, the sudden, undigested conceptions of our
minds. -- We should be with God in our lives, and like Noah that antediluvian
preacher of righteousness, walk with God, and be exemplary in faith and purity,
and all the virtues of a holy life; that all may take knowledge of us, that we
have been, and are with God. -- If we are thus with God, we may hope, he will
be graciously present with us, to assist, instruct, encourage, and succeed us,
in our ministerial work. We have that gracious promise of our divine Master to
rely upon, and plead, Lo, I am with you always: and when we have served our
generation, according to his will, and are not suffered to continue by reason
of death, he will take us into his immediate presence in glory; for he has
said, Where I am, there also shall my servant be: -- and having, through Grace,
been instrumental of turning many to righteousness, we shall shine as the
brightness of the Firmament, and as the Stars for ever and ever.

But, if we forsake God, become strangers to prayer, and ashamed of the gospel
of Christ, and the Religion of the Bible: if we trust to the strength of our
own reason, and the imaginary greatness of our learning; and preach for
doctrines, the unscriptural conceits of our own brains, or the erroneous
notions of others; if we corrupt the word of God, and preach another Gospel; if
we neglect or mislead the souls committed to our charge; and, by the badness of
our lives, contradict and frustrate the end of our ministry, we have reason to
fear, that God will forsake us utterly; and abandon us to the giddiness and
wildness of our own fancies, to the blindness and pride of our own natural
reason, to a reprobate mind, and to the delusions of satan: and that, having
been wandering stars, the blackness of darkness for ever will be reserved for
us; and that, in that outer darkness, we shall have our miserable portion, but
just punishment, and be the subjects of a greater damnation.

Finally,

I would address a Word to this whole People: Hear ye me, all Judah and
Benjamin: hear this all ye people, and give ear all ye inhabitants of the land:
and, if I might do it without presumption and offense, I would use the pathetic
words of Moses; and set your hearts to all the words, which, from God's word, I
testify among you this day; for it is not a vain thing for you, because it is
your life. Your peace and safety, your prosperity and happiness, your life,
your all turns upon it: The Lord is with you, while ye be with him; if ye seek
him, he will be found of you, but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you.

If ye be with God, become a praying and religious people, acting up to your
covenant relation and engagements to him, walking in all holy obedience to his
laws, and attendance upon his worship and ordinances; God will be with you, and
give you the tokens of his gracious presence, in providential mercies. The name
of your land will be Jehovah Shammah, the Lord is there. God's presence with
you, will be your surest defense, your highest glory, your truest felicity. --
This will derive a blessing upon all your labors, husbandry, merchandise,
fishery, and whatever you set your hands unto. -- and upon all your enjoyments.
This will make your Governor a Nehemiah, seeking your prosperity; this will
give you wise and faithful Rulers, skilful and upright Judges, zealous and
godly Magistrates; and will make your officers peace, and your exactors
righteousness* this will give you holy and orthodox Ministers, pure and
peaceable Churches, learned and flourishing Academies; and, in time of war,
valiant Soldiers and victorious Armies. Yea, if you are indeed religiously with
God, he will afford his gracious spiritual presence with his word and
ordinances; this will make you a holy, as his providential presence will make
you, a happy people. Then your righteousness will go forth as brightness, and
your salvation, as a lamp that burns: they will be conspicuous and comfortable.

But if you forsake God, cost off your dependence upon him, and refuse
subjection to him: if you apostatize from his truths and ways and worship; if
you disregard his interest and glory, God will forsake you; you will become the
people of his wrath, and may fear, he will write Lo-ammi upon you, disown you,
reject you, break down the hedge he has set about you; and open a gap for
ruinous judgments to rush in upon you; that as he has loaded you with benefits,
he will heap mischiefs upon you. Woe unto you, it God depart from you: with him
goes all good. Sinning Judah and Benjamin at length found it so; and so may you
too.

To prevent then the misery of a departed God, and to enjoy the blessedness of
a graciously present God, Oh be ye with God! And, because this people have
backslidden from God, with a grievous backsliding, are become loose in their
principles, and vicious in their lives; a people laden with iniquity; Oh return
to God, by a hearty repentance, and through reformation, and abide with him, in
the ways of obedience, that God may abide with you, in the ways of mercy. Then
his salvation will be (...) you, and glory will dwell in your land.

To conclude,

Let us all, let persons of every order and condition, realize it, that the
gracious presence of God with us, is the one thing needful, the
all-comprehending blessing: and, by a conscientious walking with God, let us
engage it with us. -- The presence of God makes heaven itself such a holy and
blessed place: the more of God's presence we have with us, the more like heaven
will it make our land, in point of true holiness and true happiness* -- Let us
then, with Israel, deprecate, God forbid, we should forsake the (...): and with
them deliberately resolve, Nay, but we will serve the Lord; and with (...),
earnestly pray, The Lord our God be with us, as he was with our fathers; let
him not leave us, nor forsake us. AMEN: And let all the people say, AMEN.

FINIS.

