A DISCOURSE Concerning the CONVERSION OF THE HEATHEN AMERICANS, AND The final
Propagation of CHRISTIANITY and the SCIENCES to the Ends of the Earth. IN TWO
PARTS.

PART I. Preached before a voluntary CONVENTION of the EPISCOPAL Clergy of
Pennsylvania, and Places adjacent, at Philadelphia, May 2d, 1760; and published
at their joint Request. PART II. Preached before the Trustees, Masters and
Scholars of the College and Academy of Philadelphia, at the first anniversary
Commencement.
BY WILLIAM SMITH, D. D. Provost of the said College and Academy.

PHILADELPHIA; Printed by W. DUNLAP, MDCCLX.

TO The most Reverend, His GRACE, THOMAS Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
President; AND To all the honorable and venerable Members, Of the SOCIETY For
propagating the Gospel in foreign Parts.
My LORDS and GENTLEMEN,
AFTER the many excellent Sermons that have been preached and published by the
members of your body, on the Propagation of Christ's religion, through the
untutored parts of the earth, the present publication may be thought to argue
some degree of presumption. And this consideration, added to the difficulty of
saying any thing new or interesting, on a subject so fully handled by many of
the brightest ornaments of our church, would have deterred the author from
letting the first Part of this Discourse appear in print; if, on the other
hand, he had not been encouraged therein, by the express desire of his brethren
who heard it, and the Hopes that his situation in America may have enabled him
to place some particular points in a light, perhaps, somewhat new.

WITH respect to the second Part, it may be thought a very needless labor to
attempt a proof -- That the interests of Christianity will be advanced, by
promoting the interests of Science. But it has been the author's misfortune,
in his endeavors for the latter, to meet with men, who seeming to consider the
advancement of Knowledge and free Enquiry as unfriendly to their illiberal
System, have set themselves up, with rage almost Gothic, to stiffle the infant
Sciences here. For this reason, he thought he could not do a better service
than endeavor to show them at large that they were, in effect, waging war, not
only with every thing elegant and useful in life, but even with the extension
of our Common Christianity and the best interests of our species! And if, in
the prosecution of this design, he has been led into a more particular
Analysis of the sciences than some may judge needful in a discourse of this
kind, he hopes the circumstances of the case will be his plea.

HE cannot conclude without taking this opportunity of expressing his gratitude
to the venerable society in general, for the honor done him by their body; and
to sundry illustrious Members in particular for the countenance and protection
shown him, at a time when their countenance and protection stood him in much
stead.

Philadelphia, August 8th, 1760. The Author.

Philadelphia, May 2d, 1760.
AGREED,

THAT the Thanks of this Convention be given to the Rev. Doctor WILLIAM SMITH,
President of the same, for his excellent Sermon preached this Day before them;
and that he be requested to print the said Sermon.

GEORGE CRAIG, PHILIP READING, WILLIAM STURGEON, HUGH NEILL, SAMUEL COOK,
THOMAS BARTON, ROBERT M'KEAN, CHARLES INGLIS, JACOB DUCHE.
ALTHOUGH my bodily Indisposition prevented my hearing this Sermon, yet from
the Account I have received of it, I heartily join with my Rev. Brethren, in
their Request for printing it.

ROBERT JENNEY.

A SERMON, etc.
PSALM ii. 8. Ask of me and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.
"IF you would make the soul of man great and good (says a sublime Dr. Burnet
in his Theory.
writer) give her large and extensive prospects of the immensity of God's
works, and of his inexhausted Wisdom and Goodness."

NOW, those divine attributes of Wisdom and Goodness are no where more
gloriously displayed than in the Gospel Dispensation, and in those mavelous
Revolutions and Workings of Providence, which the Almighty has performed, and
will yet perform, for the Salvation of mankind, and the final extension of his
Son's kingdom to the ends of the earth.

WELCOME, therefore, thrice welcome the holy Scriptures, those living oracles
of God, which can lend a clue to our meditations, and conduct them, by divine
Grace, through these awfully improving subjects. Here is the "Mystery which was
hid from ages and from generations, but which God at length manifested to his
Saints, with a promise that the riches of the glory thereof should be made
known among the Gentiles." Colossians i. 26, 27.


THIS latter part of the Gospel Dispensation, which relates to the final
conversion of the Gentiles, even to the uttermost parts of the earth, is that
which, by the words of my text, and the present occasion of our meeting, I am
more immediately led to consider. And, in doing this, I shall, by divine
assistance, pursue the following Method.

First, I SHALL endeavor to show, from the general voice of Prophecy -- That
it is the gracious purpose of God, in his own good time, to bring the Heathen
around us to the knowledge of his blessed Gospel, through the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Secondly, I SHALL make some remarks on the present situation of things on this
continent with respect to the Gospel-oeconomy, and the probability of a speedy
accomplishment of the Prophecies which relate to the final conversion of the
nations.

Lastly, FROM this view of things, I shall offer an humble Address to you, my
Brethren, who are employed as instruments in the hand of God for carrying on
this great work of Conversion, by the Preaching of the Gospel in places that
heretofore "sat in darkness and the shadow of death!"

YOU see here, what a large field is opened; and would to God that I were
endued with gifts and powers sufficient to acquit myself therein agreeable to
your expectations. But I know the vast, the glorious importance of the subjects
proposed; and I feel my own weakness. I beseech you, therefore, to send forth
your prayers for me to the throne of grace, that these subjects may not suffer
in my hands; and that I may be enabled to speak as becomes one called to the
present office.

I AM, in the First place, then, to consider the general voice of prophecy,
with respect to the Conversion of the Heathen around us. And among many other
illustrious predictions of this event, the words of my text, and the verses
preceding it, are full and strong.

"WHY do the Heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? -- Yet have I
set my king upon my holy hill of Sion. -- Thou art my son; this day have I
begotten thee. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession." The
meaning of which is, according to all the commentators --

THOU art my son Jesus! This day have I anointed thee king over all the world,
which thou have purposed to redeem. Go on; complete the great eternal scheme,
and thereby establish for thyself a kingdom of everlasting holiness. In vain
shall the nations rage. In vain shall their proud leaders, Herod, Pontius
Pilate, the Pharisees and rulers of Israel, combine themselves against thee. In
vain shall they seek to dethrone thee, to cut thee off from the earth, and to
crush thy kingdom in its birth. My eternal purposes are fixed. The right hand
of my power shall be thy strength and guide. It shall defeat all the
machinations of thy enemies, and raise thee even from the habitations of the
dead, to thine inheritance in the mansions of glory. There shall thou dwell for
ever, and whatever thou shall ask of me thou shall receive, till the Heathen
become thine inheritance, and the very ends of the earth thy possession.

HEREIN we see a most striking Prediction concerning the propagation and final
extension of Christ's kingdom to the very remotest nations of the world. And
indeed there is a beautiful harmony among all the prophetic writers, relative
to the same event.

THE venerable Patriarch Jacob, in blessing his son Judah, gives an early
intimation thereof; and tells him that the scepter should not depart from his
family till the immortal SHILOH should come, who was to erect an everlasting
kingdom, unto whom the gathering of the people was to be. Genesis xlix. 10.


BUT of all the Prophetic writers, the sublime Isaiah seems to have been
favored with the fullest view of the Gospel-state, from the very birth of the
Messiah to that glorious period, whereof we are now speaking, when the
"kingdoms of this world shall become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ." For this reason he has been called the Evangelical prophet, and has
delivered many noble predictions concerning the extension of the Gospel, and
the final conversion of the nations.

"THE Isaiah xi. 9. 10.
earth, says he, in a language peculiarly striking and emphatical, shall be
full of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea. And in that day
there shall be a root of Jesse which shall stand for an ensign of the people;
to it shall the Gentiles seek, and his rest shall be glorious."

AND again the spirit of God, speaking by the same Prophet concerning the
Messiah says, "It Chapter xlix. 6.
is a light thing for thee, [or a small part of thy undertaking] that Thou [the
savior of the world] should be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob,
and to restore the preserved of Israel. I will also give thee for a light to
the GENTILES, that thou may be my salvation unto the end of the earth."

INDEED, the last chapters of this book are only one continued prediction of
this period, and the glorious circumstances attending it.

"I AM found, says he, of them that sought me not. I said, behold me, behold me
to a nation that was not called by my name. Chapter lxv. 1.
"

NAY he even gives a Geographical division of the quarters of the world that
were to receive the Gospel, wherein he has included the whole Four.

"I WILL send those that escape of them, says he, to Tarshish, Pull and Lud that
draw the bow, to Tubal and Javan, to the Isles afar off that have not heard my
fame nor seen my glory; and they shall declare my glory among the Gentiles.
Chapter lxvi. 19.


Now, according to our learned Commentators, Tarshish denotes the East, Pull and
Lud the South, Tubal and Javan the North, and the Isles the West. For, in holy
scripture, the Isles, the Sea, and the West are frequently put for one another;
so that "the islands afar off which have not heard of God's fame, nor seen his
glory," may well be understood to comprehend this American continent, or
West Indies generally so called, as the learned Dr. Lowth has observed in his
accurate commentary upon this passage.

To the same purpose speaks the prophet Jeremiah, in his sixteenth chapter.
Intending to reproach the Jews for their absurdity in apostatizing from the
true God, after they had once known him, he tells them that, to their great
disgrace, a time would come when the very Heathen themselves, who had never
heard the name of God, would come to him even from the uttermost parts of the
earth; and confess that the gods which they had worshipped were no gods at all,
but that they and their fathers had inherited Lies from the beginning, and put
their trust in things that profited not.

"O Jeremiah xvi. 19. 20.
Lord, my strength and my fortress and my refuge in the day of affliction; the
Gentiles shall come unto thee from the ends of the earth, and shall say, Surely
our fathers have inherited lies and vanity, and things wherein there is no
profit. Shall a man make gods unto himself, and they are no gods?"

LET us hear also the prophet Daniel. Daniel ii. 44.
"The Lord God of heaven shall set up a kingdom which shall break in pieces and
consume all those kingdoms (i. e. the four monarchies) and it shall stand for
ever and ever. vii. 13, 14.
Behold, one like the son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and there was
given him dominion and glory and a kingdom that all people and nations and
languages should serve him."

IN like manner speaks Malachi. "From Malachi i. 11.
the Rising of the Sun to the Going-down of the same, my name shall be great
among the Gentiles; and in every place incense shall be offered unto my name,
and a pure offering; for my name shall be great among the Heathen." All which
is confirmed, with the utmost solemnity by the angel's sound in the revelation,
and the great voices from heaven, declaring --

"THAT the kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of
his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever." Rev. xi. 15.


Now, although these Prophecies may, in part, have had their completion, by the
vast rapidity with which the Gospel spread itself into almost every known
corner of the old world, soon after our Savior's Ascension into heaven, yet,
methinks, it is impossible that they should ever have their full accomplishment
without the conversion of the Indian Natives around us, and the propagation of
Christ's kingdom to the remotest parts of this continent. We have many of the
strongest arguments to induce this belief. For, in the first place, none of
these Texts, which I have read, put any shorter limit to the spreading of the
Gospel than the Ends of the Earth, and from the Rising of the Sun to the
Going-down of the same. And secondly our Savior himself, that last and
greatest of all the Prophets, has expressly told us that "Jerusalem Luke xxi. 22.
shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, till the times of the Gentiles be
fulfilled." Now Jerusalem is still trodden down by the Gentiles, and See Dr.
Newton's Dissertations No. XX.
consequently their times are not yet fulfilled.

WE believe, therefore, on the most solid principles, that there is reserved by
Providence some future period or crisis in the Gospel-oeconomy, for a more
remarkable and final fulfilling of the Gentiles, even to the ends of the earth;
and that it is the great and gracious purpose of God, in that day, to manifest
himself to the 'Heathen around us, and bring them to the knowledge of his
blessed Gospel, through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ;" which was the first
thing I proposed to show.

BUT here Infidelity usually urges the following questions, viz.

IF such be the intention of God, and so great the efficacy of his Gospel; what
must become of those who have sat so long in darkness and the shadow of death?
And why does he so long delay the accomplishment of his own eternal promises?

REVERENCE to the supreme Lord of heaven and earth, it might have been hoped,
would have secured the advocates of the Christian Revelation against questions
of such high presumption. For who shall say unto the Almighty, what do thou?
Or what man, of mortal descent, shall hope to unfold those secret reasons of
divine conduct, which eternal wisdom has not thought fit to reveal?

AS for us, we shall only reply in general that as "Those Romans ii. 12.
who have sinned in the Law shall be judged by the Law, so those who have
sinned without the Law [if they perish] shall perish without it." As the spirit
of God has not thought fit to declare how far the Satisfaction of CHRIST will
be applied to those who never heard of his name, we must not presume to be wise
above what is written. The nations that sit in darkness and the shadow of death
must be left to God's uncovenanted Mercies, to judge them according to the
measure of Knowledge and Light which they have received. The Tribunal of the
Almighty is erected upon infinite Wisdom, Justice and Goodness -- and infinite
Wisdom, Justice and Goodness cannot commit Error or Wrong!

WITH respect to the second question -- "Why does the Almighty so long delay
the accomplishment of his own gracious promises?" We must answer much in the
same general manner. Known unto God, and him alone, are all his counsels from
the foundation of the world. Some Conjectures, however, we may humbly offer on
this head, without incurring the charge of presumption.

EXCEPT in extraordinary cases, the supreme Being seems to conduct all his
operations by general laws; and, both in the Natural and Moral world, the
advances to Perfection are gradual and progressive. The Law and the Prophets,
which were of old, were but a faint and mysterious Revelation of the will of
God, compared to the full blaze of the Gospel, whereby his whole Acts xx. 27.
council shone forth at last to mankind. The Lord spoke once in thunders and
lightnings from Mount Sinai, Exodus xix. 16.
but now leaves the conversion of nations to the ordinary methods of his
providence. God did not give the Christian revelation itself, till the Sea some
fine remarks on this head by Dr. Robertson* the celebrated author of the
history of Scotland, in his sermon before the society in Scotland for
propagating Christian Knowledge.
Roman ambition had brought almost the whole (...) to a kind of similarity of
language and manners, and had opened such an intercourse between distant
nations, as made that one of the most favorable periods for spreading a new
Religion. Countries were now accessible that had before been unknown; and
universal peace, added to universal subjection to one common Empire, gave the
disciples of Christ and first preachers of the Gospel a great advantage in
traveling from Clime to Clime.

NOW, who knows but almighty wisdom may have predetermined a period similar to
this, in the situation of affairs in this New World, for spreading his glorious
Gospel to the remotest parts of it?

AND the consideration of this leads me to the Second head of my discourse;
which was "to make some remarks on the situation of things on this Continent,
with respect to the Gospel-oeconomy, and the probability of a speedy
accomplishment of the Prophecies which relate to the fulfilling of the
Gentiles, and final Conversion of the Nations."

AND here what a series of remarkable circumstances claim our most devout
attention? Reasoning upon moral as upon natural things, what a beautiful
analogy shall we find among all the operations of divine Providence?

THE Sun, the glorious Luminary of Day, comes forth from his chambers of the
East, and, rejoicing to run his course, carries Light and Heat and Joy through
the nations to the remotest parts of the West, and returns to the place from
whence he came. In like manner it does appear that the Light of the glorious
Gospel is to proceed, till it has carried one bright Day over all the
habitable world; and then will come the end of things. The inspired Writers, we
have already seen, love to speak of the propagation of Christianity, under this
figure; as proceeding from the Rising to the setting of the Sun; and this
course we find it has pursued.

IN the primitive ages of Simplicity, the first indications of Divine* Will
were given to the Patriarchs of mankind in the Eastern parts of the world, by
God himself, conversing with them face to face, as they tended their flocks, or
journeyed on from pasture to pasture. This was the Dawn of things. Soon
afterward followed the Law, and then the Prophets, advancing nearer and nearer
to a full and perfect Revelation, till at last it broke forth in its Meridian
glory, by the coming of the son of God, at that period already re erred to,
when the situation of the world had prepared the way for its more effectual
reception. The Wisdom of God was visible in all this; and soon did the
Christian Religion spread itself Westward, till it reached the vast Atlantic
ocean, and the Isles of the Gentiles, where the posterity of Japhet dwelt.

NOW among these Isles, or places on the Ocean, or Western parts, as they are
indifferently phrased, GREAT BRITAIN, our Mother Country, that ultima Thule of
the ancients, bore a principal figure. Early was the Gospel preached in her, if
not by the Apostles themselves, yet certainly by some of their followers, in
their days, and before the destruction of Jerusalem. There is some probability
that the gospel was preached in Great Britain by St. Simon the apostle, there
is much greater probability that it was preached there by St. Paul; and there
is absolute certainty that it was planted there in their Days. Eusebius says
that the apostles preached in all the world, and some of them passed beyond the
Ocean, even to the Britannic (...) -- trans (...) evasisse, ad cas insulas quae
Britannicae (...). Demons. Evang. lib. 3.

And Theodoret, among the nations converted by the apostles, reckons
particularly the Britons; -- neque solum Romanos, sed et Britannos, atque, ut
semel di^am, omne hominum genus. Sermon. 9. See Dr. Newton, Dissertation XVIII.




HERE the matter rested. This was the first State of the Gospel-progress. To
the Westward of Britain the ancients seem to have known nothing. They
considered these islands as the ends of the world; and extensive as the Roman
empire was at our Savior's coming, this American continent, more extensive
than it all, lay entirely hid from their knowledge, and seems to have been
reserved as the stage of a second remarkable period in the Gospel-progress. Not
a vestige, therefore, of Christianity was propagated hither, till after it had
kept possession of the Old World, in various forms and under various
corruptions, for at least fifteen centuries. But, at the expiration of that
period, it pleased God to open the way to the discovery of new countries, which
likewise opened the way to the establishment of the Gospel in them. For it is
obvious to remark, that the nations, which were raised up for this purpose,
were those among whom Christianity was openly professed, and consequently they
carried their religion along with them. Being likewise superior to all the rest
of the world in the arts of Commerce and every improvement of civil life, they
were the fittest to explore new settlements, conciliate the affections of the
natives, and push their discoveries to the greatest extent. This they did with
remarkable zeal and success; and, though it must be confessed that they have made
use of the advantages which they enjoyed, chiefly for the secular purposes of
extending their Empire and Commerce, yet they have not been altogether
negligent of the propagation of the sacred Religion which they profess.

IN this divine work, our Mother Country, one of the purest branches of the
Christian-church, always foremost in every pious and humane undertaking, has
signally exerted herself. In her, even in an age wherein Christianity has lost
much of its influence on the lives of men, many public Societies have been
formed, and noble contributions made, with the glorious view of extending the
Knowledge of God over this vast untutored Continent. At the head of these is
justly placed that venerable society, incorporated for propagating the gospel
in foreign parts, in whose service most of you, my brethren, have the Honor to
be employed, and for promoting whose pious designs we are now voluntarily
assembled together. This august and venerable body consists of the principal
dignitaries of our church, sundry of the prime nobility of the nation, and many
other pious persons of every degree. It has subsisted for near fourscore of
years, and, by the providence of God, has been remarkably enabled to support
the great and growing expense incident to such an undertaking.

TWO objects have most worthily employed the attention of this Society; the
first to provide for the administration of religious ordinances among our own
Colonists themselves, who have hitherto been generally too thinly settled to be
able to support a regular ministry without such assistance; and secondly to win
over the Heathen-natives to the knowledge of God, and a firm attachment to our
national interest. These two designs, however much evil men may strive to
separate them, must necessarily go hand in hand. Should the Society employ
themselves wholly to the business of converting the Indian natives from
Heathenism, while they suffered their own colonies to degenerate into a state
little better than that Heathenism itself, the attempt would be equally vain
and unjust. For it would be to little purpose for us to send out Missionaries
among them to persuade them to embrace our Religion, unless the fruits and
"Light of our Religion should so shine before them, that they seeing our good
works may glorify our father which is in heaven. Matthew v. 16.
"

THE support, therefore, of Christianity among ourselves, and the propagation
of it among our Heathen Neighbors, are but different parts of the same
undertaking; and though we have not hitherto had any great success in the latter,
yet it is our duty to continue our best endeavors. For who knows either the
particular time when, or the means by which, the Lord may be pleased to
accomplish his own divine Promises?

THE Conversion of nations has often, before now, been brought about when but
least expected; and by means which, to human foresight, seemed the least
probable. One single Savage, fully convinced of the Truth of Christianity, and
truly animated by its sublime spirit, may perhaps, through the power of the
living God, at some future period, be rendered an Apostle to the rest, and an
instrument of turning thousands from the ways of Darkness and the "power of
Satan, to the mavelous light of Christ, that they may receive forgiveness of
sins, and an inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in
Him." Acts xxvi. 1^.


INNUMERABLE methods, besides this, are in the providence of that God, whose
power who shall tell? And it is impossible but, in his own appointed time, he
must give the promised blessing to the pious endeavors which are continually
used for the propagation of his Gospel in this Western world.

MANY obstacles, which formerly lay in the way of this great work, seem now to
be almost entirely removed. We were, heretofore, but a small people, possessing
an inconsiderable spot of this Continent. Our access to the heathen nations was
difficult and dangerous. Our knowledge of their country was but very limited;
and the arts of our busy enemies had sown many prejudices among them to our
disadvantage.

BUT now the case is much altered. We are become a great and growing people;
extending, and likely to extend, our, empire far over this continent. The
present war, which we shortsighted mortals considered as one of the greatest
evils, is like to be productive of the best of consequences. With the deepest
adoration, we behold the hand of Providence in it. A series of unlooked-for
successes has blessed our arms, for which we and our posterity, throughout all
generations, ought to offer up continual Hymns of gratitude and praise to the
Giver of all victory. The Protestant interest in America has now received such
signal advantages, and obtained such sure footing, that we trust neither the
machinations of its inveterate enemies, nor even the gates of hell itself,
shall ever prevail against it. Our credit with the Indian natives begins to
stand in a high point of light. A more thorough knowledge of their country and
manners is obtained than ever we had before. Strong fortifications are fixed,
which will always facilitate our access to them. The attention of all ranks of
men is now more turned to the prosecution of our interests on this continent
than ever was known at any former period; and if it shall please God to direct
the hearts of our Rulers to a Peace which may in any degree be answerable to
our former successes, then will be the time when we may expect to see
Christianity propagated to advantage.

BY our connexions with our Mother Country, and the productions of our own
happy climate, we are the only people of all the European nations, settled in
America, that are able to feed the Hungry and cloth the Naked. When our
enemies shall be confined within their due bounds, we shall thus have obtained
a more natural and lasting dominion over the Heathen natives of this continent
by our Arts and Manufactures, than the Romans did over the old world by the
terror of their arms. Every river, creek, inlet, lake and settlement, will be
open to our Commerce; and when we stretch forth food and raiment, and practice
the other arts of Humanity, to the glad inhabitants, it is hoped that we shall
not be wanting to stretch forth also the bread Old Hakluyt, in his dedication
to Sir Francis Walsingham, has a fine thought to this purpose; which shows that
our endeavors for the propagation of Christianity in these parts, are only a
necessary result of our first plan in making new discoveries; and that our
Public Faith, in conjunction with our Duty to our God, engages us to the
continuance of these endeavors.

"For mine own part I take our traffic with the borne naturalles, (meaning the
Indians) as a pledge of God's further favor, both unto us and them; but to
them especially, unto whose doors, I doubt not, in time shall be by us carried
the incomparable Treasure of the Truth of Christianity and of the Gospel, while
we use and exercise common Trade with their merchants."


of life to their famished souls. The present spirit and disposition of our
nation give us a well-grounded assurance that the means will never be wanting
for carrying on such benevolent purposes; and when all these things shall
conspire, we may trust that the promised period, for the fulfilling of the
Gentiles, and thorough conversion of the Nations, even to these remotest parts
of the earth, cannot be far off.

ONE circumstance more, which bears (...) most favorable aspect toward the
accomplishment of this event, ought not escape our notice. It is the spirit
which now displays itself, through these American colonies, for the founding
seminaries of Learning and the advancement of useful Science. Such pious
designs as these, aided and improved by a preached Gospel and the divine
blessing, cannot fail of spreading the rays of heavenly knowledge far over this
untutored continent. The consideration of this has ever been an interesting
topic with me; and, therefore, I thought it worthy of being particularly
handled on a former public occasion. It would be needless to repeat any thing I
then said. The The discourse here referred to was delivered before the
Trustees, Masters, Students and Scholars of the college and academy of
Philadelphia at the first anniversary Commencement in that place, with a view
to show the great and intimate connection, between the advancement of the
Sciences, and the propagation of Christ's Gospel. It was first printed in
London, and being on the same text with this discourse is now added as a second
and finishing Part thereof, with the alteration only of a few sentences of the
introduction.
discourse delivered at that time is in your hands, and the arguments there
adduced, added to those now laid before you, will be sufficient to establish
the "probability of a speedy accomplishment of the prophecies which relate to
the final Conversion of the nations;" which was my second Head.

I proceed, therefore, in the last place, "from this view of things, to offer
an humble Address to you, my brethren, who are employed as instruments in the
hand of God, for carrying on this great work of conversion, by the preaching of
the Gospel in places that heretofore sat in Darkness and the shadow of Death."

AND this part of my subject I enter upon with that diffidence and humiliation
of heart, which become one who is speaking to men of known capacities and
integrity; and among whom are sundry of my seniors in the sacred office of the
ministry. Besides this, a series of necessary avocations has, for some years
past, drawn a considerable part of my attention from the immediate study of
that Divine Science, which both duty and inclination would induce me chiefly to
cultivate; and nothing but your express injunctions, added to a persuasion that
it will not be necessary for me to say much on this subject, could give me the
Freedom to proceed.

IS it so, then, my brethren, that God has chosen the British nation, above
all others, to settle the most important part of this continent? Has he
prospered their arms, and extended their empire in the most signal manner,
through a series of hazardous events? Does he seem to have purposed through us
the extension of his everlasting gospel to the ends of the world, and are you
charged with the ministration of that blessed Gospel, and severally capable of
contributing somewhat, under divine assistance, to the hastening of that happy
period, wherein "the Knowledge of the Lord shall cover the whole earth as the
waters cover the sea?" Are these things so; and can we ever be without the most
animating motives to support and encourage us in so great a work, how
inconsiderable soever the temporal advantages may be, which are annexed to the
discharge of it? Considered in this light, how divinely important does your
MISSION appear? Whilst others are proposing, and justly proposing, to
themselves the Palm of high renown, for bravely subduing and maintaining a rich
and spacious country for the name of Britain and Liberty, we may consider
ourselves, even in a still higher light, as subduing it to the name of CHRIST,
and adding it to his everlasting Kingdom! compared to this, the glory of
temporal conquests and foundations is but unsubstantial air, and short-lived
renown.

IN so noble a work, therefore, the conduct of that first of Missionaries, the
great Apostle of the Gentiles, our illustrious predecessor in the business of
preaching the Gospel among uncultivated nations, ought to be our rule and
model. "When it pleased God, says he, to reveal his Son in me, that I might
preach him among the Heathen, immediately I conferred not with flesh and
blood." This zealous servant of Christ had formed a just idea of the work he
had undertaken, and considered it as a field wherein he was to encounter many
difficulties, and reap but few worldly advantages. He therefore proposes to
himself advantages of a more durable nature, and strives to raise himself above
this world, and all its clogs and attachments. For this end, he holds daily
intercourse with the Father of Spirits, and was frequent in prayer and
meditation. And certainly if ever men ought to be serious, humble, abstracted
from worldly embarrassments, and dependent upon divine assistance in any office
or trust in this world, it ought to be in the Exercise of the Ministry, and
dispensation of the glorious Gospel; for who is of himself sufficient for these
things?

BUT together with Seriousness, Prayer, Meditation, and dependence upon God, an
ardent Zeal and Fervor of Spirit are most necessary qualifications. In any
undertaking, where the world has but few advantages to solicit perseverance,
nay where many inconveniences must necessarily be surmounted, it is well for a
man to have within himself a fervent principle of action. Indeed, indifference
in the discharge of any duty is a great error, but in things of the highest
moment it is unpardonable. It was a severe rebuke to one of the churches, that
she was lukewarm; for which she was threatened to be spued out. Rev. iii. 15.
"I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot. I would thou were cold
or hot," says the spirit of God to her. Whoever considers the immense value of
human souls; whoever is impressed with a just sense of our present degeneracy;
whoever contemplates the vast goodness of God, and believes the Gospel to be
the produce of the greatest Love which heaven could show, or a corrupt world
receive -- must needs be inanimate indeed, not to glow with an unquenchable
ardor for its universal extension to all the sons of men!

TOGETHER with zeal for Religion, "pure and undefiled before God and the
father," James i. 27.
a zeal for Civil Liberty, its inseparable companion, will be truly
commendable. It is the peculiar glory of the British Nation to strive not only
to enlighten, but to ennoble, the Human Race; not only to break asunder those
spiritual Fetters which the Dominion of ANTICHRIST has established over the
Souls of men, but likewise to let the oppressed go FREE, and to strike off
those bodily Fetters under which so great a part of the human Species groans.

IN so righteous a cause, it becomes the Ministers of God's Word, which is
founded on Liberty both of Body and Mind, to stand among the warmest Champions;
and therefore should ever another period come, when a cruel enemy is advancing
to rob us of all that we account dear and sacred, let us cry aloud and spare
not. Being placed on the walls of our Sion, and glowing sublimely with the
spirit of Gospel Truth and Freedom, let us be earnest with our country, as we
have been heretofore, warning, exhorting and animating all around us to "play
the men for the people and cities of our God." 2 Samuel x. 12.


THIS is agreeable to the injunctions of our benevolent superiors in such cases
delivered to us. We are charged to enforce Loyalty, public Spirit, Submission
to just government, and the Payment of necessary tribute and taxes. Designing
men may insinuate, as they have done, that this is going beyond our sphere, and
they may oppose and injure us by every device in their power. But ten thousand
such attempts and insinuations ought not to deter us from our duty. Our Civil
and Religious rights are inseparably connected; and whatever hurts or destroys
the former, must, in the issue, hurt or destroy the latter.

BUT further, to a commendable Zeal in every thing praiseworthy, we must add
Prudence and Decorum of conduct; and, above all, a generous Spirit of
Forbearance, Toleration, and Charity to our Protestant brethren of other
denominations. These are Duties peculiarly incumbent on the Ministers of so
benevolent a Religion as that of JESUS, and so generous a Church as that of
England. Matters of Conscience come not under human cognizance. The catholic
and free spirit of the British Government and Protestant religion disdains to
erect a tyranny over the minds of men, or to reign over uninformed zeal.
Religion can be founded on nothing else but every man's private conviction.
It Is to God, in the end, that we must all answer; and from our own consciences,
in the mean time, that we must receive remorse or satisfaction. Another man
cannot interfere, nor feel for us, nor judge for us, in this matter.

ONE thing further is absolutely necessary for us as Ministers of God's word;
and that is great care and industry in the composition of our Sermons. We have
many eyes upon us; and certainly it is treating a sensible audience with a very
great degree of disrespect, for any man to step into a pulpit to entertain them
with what bears all the marks of want of Study and Care.

"IT is an unseasonable piece of Vanity (says a learned Bishop Burnet.
prelate of our church) for any preachers to offer their own crudities, till
they have well digested and ripened them. I wish the Majesty of the Pulpit were
more looked to, and that no sermons were offered from thence, but such as
should make the hearer both wiser and better."

WE do, however, readily acknowledge that a man vitally good, much with God,
rich in grace, fervent in spirit, a master of literature and expression,
powerful in Eloquence, and, above all, mighty in the Scriptures, may be well
warranted, as circumstances may require, to speak without any immediate study
or preparation. But, in a general way, this method argues so much want of care
and deference; it is withal so dangerous in its use; and these divine Gifts
mentioned above fall so seldom to the share of any one man, and it is moreover
so easy to mistake or substitute the wild Ebullitions of a heated Imagination;
(...) Pharisaical Pride, in their room, that our church supposes no preaching
of this sort. And whatever a man of the most extraordinary graces and talents
may be able to do in an unpremeditated manner, he will certainly do much more
by study, meditation and accurate composition.

GREAT care is also requisite in the choice of our subjects. The whole circle
of Gospel Truths is before us; but some require to be more frequently pressed
home than others. Subjects of Litigation, however, and points of Controversy,
are to be avoided; unless in times of extremest danger, when Fundamentals and
Essentials may be attacked.

SOME men there are who, in their preaching, betray a mavelous Littleness of
Genius, and Barrenness of matter. They are ever upon minute distinctions,
Party-Shibboleths, perplexing definitions, and nice modes; ten thousand of
which, if put in the balance with true Religion, and the weightier matters of
the Law, would not weigh a single grain, especially when attended (as they
generally are) with Revilings and Cursings and Anathemas against all others
differing the least in persuasion, to the ^^each of that HEAVENLY Charity,
which is the very essence of Christ's Gospel, and height of religious
perfection. We may well suspect such men to be but Smatterers in the Divine
Science of Religion, much like those bold Pretenders in the other sciences, who
finding it a work of hard labor to obtain a thorough knowledge of their
profession, or, peradventure, not having the capacity for it, are therefore
obliged to hide their own ignorance and supply the want of real skill, by
arrogant pretensions to some new discovery, or an affected singularity in the
treatment of some common points.

BUT not so the man of comprehensive knowledge. Not so the Preacher who has a
clear and glowing view of his Master's religion in general. He will not
endeavor to divide and perplex mankind by vain and insignificant distinctions,
but to unite and animate them all in the exercise of true vital and evangelical
piety. He will not multiply notions, or delight to dwell on triffles, that tend
to sow animosities and create confusions among the same Species; but to enforce
universal Virtue, and light up the lamp of heavenly Charity, to adorn and gild
this gloomy vale of life.

SUCH a one will first endeavor to obtain for himself, just and elevated
notions of the supreme Being, together with a masculine devotion of heart, by
approaching in frequent acts of contemplation to the fountain of all grace; and
what he himself is, he will strive to make others be. When he steps into the
pulpit, he will carry no schemes or views thither with him that are short of
his Master's Glory. He will appear as one standing in the presence of the great
Jehovah, glowing for the good of his species, and impressed with the vast
consequence of eternity. On every subject, he will speak what he feels, and
strive to make others feel what he speaks.

BUT, in his more solemn addresses, when he finds it more particularly
necessary to reluminate the dying spirit of Freedom and Religion here on earth;
or when the glorious prospects of a better world, or the awful mysteries of
Redeeming Love, are his theme, he will then be great indeed! He will seem all
on fire. His very face will speak a soul of rapture. He will be borne along
with a winged ardor of Genius, pouring forth a torrent of sacred Eloquence,
which some will call Enthusiasm; but, if it must be called so, it will be the
noble Enthusiasm of Truth and Reason -- a pure and transcendent flame, bearing
all down before it, and burning still clearer and stronger to the very last --

THE fallen and sinful estate of man; the Grace and Goodness of God; the
wonders of his Love; Christ crucified; the Purity of his everlasting Gospel;
Charity and Virtue; Righteousness, Temperance and a Judgment to come, together
with an eternity afterward -- who, my brethren, that has these subjects before
him, would stoop to any thing of trivial moment, or disgrace them by a crude
and unworthy management?

MAY the God of heaven give all of us the grace of his holy spirit to manage
them as we ought, and conduct us in every other part of our duty, " Ephesians. iv.
12.
for the edifying the body of Christ." May we strive, in our several spheres,
with an earnest contention of soul, for the establishment of genuine piety,
according to the true Gospel-simplicity. May our Lives be a convincing argument
to the Heathen around us, that our Religion is something more than a name, and
that we are in good earnest ourselves, concerning that which we would persuade
them to embrace!

PART II. Delivered See the Note Page 22.
before the Trustees, Masters, and Scholars of the College and Academy of
Philadelphia, at the first anniversary Commencement in that place.
PSALM ii. 8. Ask of me and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.
A full explanation of this text, compared with sundry others, that foretell the
final Conversion of the Heathen, and seem to have a particular reference to our
situation on this Continent, has been already attempted.

CHRISTIANITY, we observed, was first revealed in the Eastern Parts of the
world. Like the sun, there it rose; and, like him, advancing Westward through
the nations, diffused light and love and joy, wherever it came. At length, it
crossed the vast Atlantic; and, in the settlement of these colonies, a way was
opened for adding a large inheritance to the Kingdom of Jesus, in the remotest
parts of the West.

IT IS true that no great progress has hitherto been made in this work. There
is yet an immense depth of this continent, whose forlorn inhabitants never had
any opportunity "to hear the glad tidings of salvation;" and, of those who have
been blessed with such an opportunity, few, very few, have turned a listening ear
to the joyful sound.

BUT " 2 Corinthians. i. 20.
the Promises of God in Christ are all Yea and ^^^en." A careful examination of
his revealed word has thoroughly fixed our belief that the time will come,
when the Heathen around us shall be gathered into his fold, under the great
shepherd and bishop of souls. Nay many auspicious circumstances in the present
situation of things on this continent, already enumerated, give us reason to
expect that the accomplishment of this event is now not far remote. And oh!
What a triumphant consideration is this, to those who believe the Gospel of
Jesus "to be the power of God unto salvation?"

NOW, one of those circumstances, which was but slightly mentioned before, I
have at present the most favorable opportunity of considering more at large. It
is "the spirit which displays itself, through these American colonies, for the
founding seminaries of Learning; and the great influence which the advancement
of the Sciences has on the advancement of Christ's Gospel.

IN order to do justice to this subject, it will be necessary to give some
account of the Human Sciences, as well as of the sublime Science of
Christianity; to show the subserviency of the former to the advancement of the
latter, and thereby to engage your continued favor and protection of this
infant seminary. And that I may proceed with the greater precision and
clearness, l shall recur to first principles.

IF we consult the constitution of our nature, we shall find ourselves, in
every pursuit, actuated by the desire of Happiness, and determined to account
every thing more or less valuable, as it contributes more or less to that end.

HAPPINESS, however, is a complex thing, compounded of many ingredients; and
the road to attain it has its labyrinths and windings, not to be traveled, but
with caution and foresight. For man, being made up of soul and body, sustains a
double relation, and is capable of a double kind of pleasure; there being a
variety of objects suited to the variety of his affections, passions and
tempers, when in their sound moral state. His Happiness, therefore, must
evidently depend on making a right estimate of these objects, and maintaining
this sound temperament of constitution; so as to pursue each of them with a
degree of force commensurate to their respective values, or tendencies to give
pleasure.

HENCE, then, whatever enables a man to make a right estimate of things, and to
frame his conduct agreeably, must be considered as an engine of his happiness,
and is to be valued proportionably. It follows, therefore, that those
researches which bring him acquainted with himself, the ends, uses and measures
of his several powers and movements, together with the ends and uses of the
various objects with which he stands connected, must be a main spring of his
happiness; and, in this view, may be denominated his true Wisdom, the first and
great Philosophy; or that glorious System of Knowledge, which gives him his
chief pre-heminence over the brutes, and exalts him to the supreme perfection
and highest enjoyment of his nature!

OTHER Sciences may have their use, as matters of ornament or amusement. But
whenever they interfere with this grand Science of Life and Manners, they are
to be disregarded as empty triffles; subjects at best but of vain curiosity, or
unavailing speculation.

I SHALL, therefore, endeavor to distinguish the True from the False, the
spurious parts of Knowledge from those of genuine growth, by pointing out to you
the essential branches of this great Master-science. In doing this, let us
never lose sight of the fundamental principle already laid down, namely that
every part of knowledge, (humane knowledge I speak of) derives its value from its
tendency to inform us --

"Quid sumus, et quidnam victuri gignimur -- " What we are, and whither
destined; what our constitution and connexions; and what our duties in
consequence thereof.

WHOEVER sets out on this enquiry will, in the first instance, be struck with
the vastness of the undertaking, and the insufficiency of his own abilities.
Human nature, and the various natures around it, are a copious subject. Life is
short, and each man's own experience too scanty to trace for himself the
relations and fitness of things; to examine into all Moral and Physical
Qualities; and, from thence, to deduce the Rules of Conduct, and ascertain the
true Path of Happiness. Like a traveller in a strange country, he will,
therefore, be glad to enquire his way of others; and make all possible use of
the experience of those who, with honor and success, have traveled the path of
life before him. He will endeavor to avail himself equally of the good and bad
fortune of those whose course is finished, and strive to bring all Antiquity
under Contribution to him for wisdom.

BUT how could this be done, if there were not some method of preserving, and
possessing ourselves of, the experience of others? And here we see the use of
Languages and Writing. Nevertheless an acquaintance with all sorts of languages
would be almost as difficult an acquisition, as the particular examination of
all sorts of things. Hence then, it became necessary for the Learned to fix on
some Universal Language or Languages, as the grand channel or instrument of
conveying their experiences, observations and conclusions, concerning the
conduct of life and the truth of things.

NOW Greek and Latin have been chosen for these purposes, on several
substantial accounts. For, not to mention that many of the noblest productions
of ancient genius were originally written in these languages, it is to be
observed that dead languages are more durable, and less fluctuating, than
living ones; and, besides this, living nations, jealous of each other, would
think it too great a mark of distinction to choose the language of any
particular nation among them, as the grand channel of knowledge and experience.

WE see, then, that an acquaintance with what is called the Learned Languages
is still justly considered as a part of liberal education, and a necessary
introduction to the Sciences. For, though words, abstractly considered, cannot in
themselves add to our knowledge, yet as the Means of Conveying and acquiring
knowledge, they will be studied by all those who, to their own experience, would
add the experience of those who have lived in former ages; or, living in the
present, can no otherwise reader the fruits of their enquiries useful to
mankind, than by Language and Writing. The author found it necessary to be thus
particular in explaining the use of the Learned Languages; some regarding them
as a needless part of education, and others considering them as all the
education necessary to a scholar: Opinions equally prejudicial to the
advancement of Sound Knowledge. Under this head, it is obvious that he means to
include History, both natural and civil; i. e. whatever can be obtained from
the Experience of others.


NEVERTHELESS, a person, who knows himself endued with reason and
understanding, will not be content to take his knowledge entirely at second
hand. On subjects so important as the nature and fitness of things, and the
Summum Bonum of man, he will not rely wholly on a Historical knowledge, founded
on the Experience and Testimony of others; however much his labors may be
shortened thereby. He will think it is his duty to examine for himself, and to
acquire a Moral and Physical knowledge; founded on his own Experience and
Observation.

THIS is what we call Philosophy in general; comprehending in it the knowledge
of all things Human and Divine, so far as they can be made the objects of our
present enquiries. Now, the genuine branches of this Philosophy, or great
system of practical Wisdom, together with the necessary instrumental parts
thereof, may be included under the following general heads; it appearing to me
that the nature of things admits of no more.

1. LANGUAGES, etc. which have been already mentioned rather as an Instrument
or Means of Science, than a Branch thereof.

2. LOGIC and Metaphysics, or the Science of the Human mind; unfolding its
powers and directing its operations and reasonings.

3. NATURAL Philosophy, Mathematics, and the rest of her beautiful train of
subservient arts, investigating the Physical properties of Body; explaining the
various phenomenon of Nature; and teaching us to render her subservient to the
ease and ornament of Life.

4. MORAL Philosophy; applying all the above to the business and bosoms of men;
deducing the laws of our conduct from our situation in life and connexions with
the Beings around us; settling the whole Economy of the will and Affections;
establishing the predominancy of Reason and Conscience; and guiding us to
Happiness, through the practice of Virtue.

5. RHETORIC, or the art of masterly Composition, just Elocution, and sound
Criticism; teaching us how to cloth our wisdom in the most amiable and
inviting garb; how to give life and spirit to our Ideas, and make our knowledge
of the greatest benefit to ourselves and others; and lastly, how to enjoy those
pure intellectual pleasures, resulting from a just taste for polite Letters,
and a true relish for the sprightly Wit, the rich Fancy, the noble Pathos, and
the mavelous Sublime, shining forth in the works of the most celebrated
Poets, Philosophers, Historians and Orators, with beauties ever pleasing, ever
new.

THIS last mentioned part of literary accomplishment, like the first, I grant,
is to be considered rather as an Instrument, than a Branch, of Science. But if
the above definition be just, you will not wonder that we separate it from
Languages, as being of much higher nature than they; and even place the study
of it after all the other Sciences, seeing they are necessary and subservient
to its perfection.

THE materials of every work must go before the work itself; and Composition,
from one's own stock, can hardly be begun before Philosophy and the Sciences
have enriched the understanding, ripened the judgment and furnished the
Materials or Topics.

WERE any further arguments necessary to justify this disposition of Rhetoric
and Composition, I might quote the authority of the greatest master Longinus.
which antiquity can boast. In the beginning of his inimitable Treatise on the
Sublime, he does not propose his noble precepts of fine writing to raw youths,
to be read with the rules of grammar, but (...); that is (as I understand the
words) "men conversant in public life," who have laid a foundation in the
Sciences, and whose business it is now become to Think, Speak, Write and Act
for the General Good.

THESE are the capital branches of Human Science, as taught in every liberal
institution; and were there no connection between them and the knowledge of
Christ's religion, or did we stop short at the former without bringing them
home to the latter; we should then indeed be building up to ourselves
structures of emptiness on foundations of rottenness. But it is impossible that
ever Sciences, so liberal as those mentioned above, tending so directly to
elevate and enlarge the mind, should be at enmity to the divine Science of
Christianity, and the great mystery of Godliness; that sublimest system of
Philosophy, into which even the Angels themselves desire to be further
initiated! A little learning, as a great Bacon.
genius expresses it, may indeed make men mad; but large draughts thereof
sobers them again. Such an acquaintance with the sciences, as is described
above, will be so far from damping the ardor of religious knowledge, that it
will be more and more inflamed thereby; which is a most convincing argument of
the strong and immediate connection between them.

WERE it necessary to be particular on this head, I might mention the example
of the greatest and best Philosophers of every age; who have always been the
most devout men. Far from being puffed up with the pride of human Learning, or
"ashamed of the Gospel of Christ," they have made it their glory, and
acknowledge it to contain the only infallible rules of their conduct in this
life, and the only foundation of their hope in that which is to come. It is
said of the great Sir Isaac Newton, that, though he entered further into the
depths of Philosophy than ever mortal before him, yet he accounted the
Scriptures of God to be the most sublime Philosophy; and never mentioned his
Creator's name without an awful pause of adoration, wonder and self-abasement!

THE further we push our enquiries into nature, the more we shall be convinced
of the greatness of its author, and the insufficiency of unenlightened Reason.
We shall find many things of the utmost importance for us to know, which yet
will baffle all our efforts, and elude our most eager researches. The creation
and various revolutions of the world; the fall and redemption of man; the last
judgment and an immortality to come; are subjects in which no human wisdom
could instruct us, unless the Lord had been pleased to reveal himself
concerning them.

AND yet what is all the Philosophy in the world compared to a knowledge in
these points? Where is its sublimity, or what is its significancy to us, if it
affords us no infallible rule of duty at present, and no ground of hope
hereafter? If it leaves us in the dark concerning our own original, the means
of salvation from sin and misery, and the immortal state of our souls in the
untried periods of eternity?

WHAT joy, then, must it yield a sincere Enquirer, to be sufficiently informed
upon these important subjects, by a revelation from God himself? Can he neglect
or despise such an awful system? Or will he not rather take it to his bosom,
search into its depths, and reverence it as "containing the words of eternal
life," and being the richest legacy which heaven could give, or earth receive?

SUCH a Revelation and such a Legacy are the Scriptures of God. In all the
simplicity of truth and beauties of majesty, they deliver those rules by which
we are to live here and be judged hereafter. Containing doctrines the most
rational and exalted, precepts the most humane and important, a style the most
rich and persuasive, abounding in all the variety of tropes and figures, and
"sharper than a two-edged Sword," the scriptures are calculated to seize and
purify the affections; to enlighten and exalt the understanding* to alarm and
rouse the conscience; to confirm our hopes and remove our fears; to banish
superstition and cast down the idols of the nations; to mitigate lawless power
and humanize the rage of barbarism; and to call men off from a vain dependence
on external ceremonies to a trust in the Living God, obedience to his moral
laws, repentance for past offenses, an acceptable and manly devotion of heart,
a longing after immortality, an union with the divine nature, and an exaltation
to the life of angels and felicity unspeakable!

EVERY thing which human reason would desire to know is fully brought to light
in the Gospel. Here the Origin, Connexions and Duties of man are amply
described! Here his departure from his first Innocence and rectitude, the
degradation of his nature, and all the mavelous workings of omnipotence to
reclaim and save him, are distinctly recorded! Here we see the Prophets
prophesying for his sake, the old world drowned, another fitted up, and last of
all the Lord of Glory descending from heaven, to accomplish the amazing Plan of
Redemption, and restore him to divine favor! Here also Life and Immortality
are brought to light, and the Future displayed! Here the solemnity of the last
Judgment, and the astonishing scenes of the general Consummation, are laid
before us! Here Death is disarmed of his Sting, and the Grave of Victory! Here
the gates of immortality are set open -- and Oh! what an unutterable weight of
Glory beyond --

SAY, then, ye Wise Ones of the earth! ye Sages, ye Philosophers, or by
whatever other names ye would be called! say now, what is the amount of your
knowledge, if it resolves you not on such subjects as these? Can an acquaintance
with human Science render you indifferent to such an exalted system of heavenly
Wisdom as this? Surely not. The one will only inflame your thirst for the
other, and make you pursue it as the finishing and most durable part of the
whole.

"FOR, whether there be Tongues, they shall cease; or whether there be
Knowledge, it shall vanish away." This vain world itself, all its gay scenes,
every thing that we account wise or curious in it, shall come to an end and
please no more. But the sublime subjects of the Gospel will still be New. They
will be the object of our endless enquiries, and constitute a Philosophy, the
Mavelous of which eternity cannot exhaust, not the longest period of duration
bring to decay.

AND now, having shown the subserviency of Human Science to the advancement of
Christianity, and that a liberal education is a means of spreading a thirst for
heavenly wisdom; what need I add more to bespeak your continued favor and
protection of this Seminary? Surely it cannot be indifferent to us, whether the
knowledge of Christ and his blessed Gospel shall be spread over this continent,
or not? Surely it cannot be indifferent to us, whether our own children should
be bred up in ignorance; or whether they shall shine in every moral excellence,
the glory of their country and a light to the world around them? We must know
the relation in which we stand to them, and the account which we shall one day
be required to give of their tender years.

FOR whatever business a man may be designed, a liberal education will not only
prepare him for that, but also for a life of general virtue. -- If intended for
the noble Profession of the Law, to be the protectors of the innocent and the
advocates of justice; the best foundation will be a love of humanity, and a
thorough knowledge of the laws of nature, and general rights of mankind. If for
the service of the state, the same will hold good. The man best acquainted with
the nature of civil government, the just bounds of authority and submission,
and the universal principles of equity and virtue, will always be the ablest
Politician and firmest Patriot. Again, if intended to follow the healing art of
Physic, the knowledge of Mathematics and the various branches of Natural
Philosophy, will be the best introduction. If proposed for the Ministry of the
blessed Gospel, every human Science ought to lend its aid, and kindle a love of
wisdom.

IF other arguments were necessary to induce you to the cultivation of knowledge
and the support of such useful seminaries as this, I might display to you the
wonderful change which the Sciences have produced in the state of every
country, where they have been received. Though they have not been able wholly to
eradicate Tyranny, yet they have always checked and mitigated its influence;
inspiring humanity, love of moral excellency, and every softer virtue.

BUT why should I bring instances from other countries, when one of the most
illustrious is before our eyes? This polished and flourishing City! what was it
fourscore years ago? Even its foundations were not then laid; and in their
place was one depth of gloomy wilderness! This very spot, this Seat of the
Muses -- where I have now the honor to stand, the preaching the Gospel of
Jesus, surrounded with men excelling in every valuable accomplishment, and
youths rising after their great example -- had I seen it then, what should I
have found it? A spot rank with weeds perhaps, or the obscure retreat of some
lawless and gloomy savage!

O GLORIOUS change! O happy day! that now beholds the Sciences planted where
barbarity was before! that now sees this Restitution at length brought to such
perfection, as to extend the Laurel to its first worthy sons! how ought such
advances in knowledge to rejoice every heart among us; but especially those
whose pious labors have contributed eminently to that end.

OH! heaven born Wisdom, and thou divine Science! proceed, still proceed! let
other seminaries such as this rise, where other deserts now extend; and, beyond
these, let others and still others rise, through the remotest depths of this
continent; till Christ's kingdom is made universal, and "the Heathen be given
him for an inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for a possession!"


