Mr. Rowland's Farewell SERMON, Preached at PLAINFIELD, May 3. 1761.

Ministers of CHRIST freed from Blood-Guiltiness, by dispensing all the Counsel
of GOD. A FAREWEL-SERMON, Preached at PLAINFIELD, May 3. 1761. OCCASIONED BY
THE LONG DIFFERENCES THAT HAVE THERE SUBSISTED. Published at the Desire of many
that heard it.

By David S. Rowland, A. M.

"Am I therefore become your Enemy, because I tell you the Truth."

PAUL. "They who oppose the Attempts of some, to introduce Corruption and
Confusion in the Church, will have many an unkind Reflection thrown upon them,
and experience the Severity of Censure, for a Conduct which merits the justest
Approbation. -- They fondly mistake the voice of Prejudice for that of
Conscience. -- While some, with a pitiable Mixture of Arrogance and Ignorance,
judge one another, and us, we are concerned rather to secure that Praise of
GOD, which will be heard and felt, by the Soul, with the highest Rapture, and
silence every Echo of human Applause or Censure."

DODDRIDGE. BOSTON: Printed by Benjamin Mecom, at the New Printing-Office, near
the TOWNHOUSE.

To the READER.
IT is natural for persons, when they take a discourse into their hands, on the
occasion of the following, to enquire after the cause or reason that has given
rise to it. To be very particular and minute in the detail would be too
tedious. The following may serve to satisfy the candid and impartial inquirer.

The author's situation has been peculiarly difficult, even from his first
acquaintance with the place, especially by reason of the long difficulties and
divisions that have there subsisted, which were risen to a great height in the
days of his honored predecessor, The Rev. Mr. JOSEPH COIT.
and were the unhappy means of bringing his gray hairs with sorrow to the
grave. These difficulties and divisions that have and still subsist, were
occasioned by that spirit of discord, sown by the arch-enemy in many of our
parishes; whence many have undertaken, with freedom, to censure the
constitution of the government, and the more common method of ministerial
support; exclaiming with vehemence against the churches, as being Antichrist
and Babylon; the rulers as ruling for Baol, and their teachers as teaching for
lucre, etc. etc. etc.

This spirit of rancour, bitterness, and division having made a most prodigious
progress, many minds were prejudiced, and these prejudices industriously
propagated, that there were but few whose minds were not soured by this leaven
of wickedness, and became cold in their affections to the ministry. These
things rendered the author's support extremely difficult, there being no way to
attain it but by mere dint of law; a method the author tried many years, with
reluctance. There being no prospect of times being better, and the society
signifying their desire, or willingness, of their pastor's being dismissed from
his pastoral relation, the motion was made to the church, who at first
manifested their unwillingness to concur, being united and in full charity with
their pastor; but considering, upon a review, that the ministerial support was
from the society in conjunction with the church, -- that they could not proceed
but in consort, -- they passed a vote (though with very great reluctance, being
in full charity, as it is expressed in their vote) for the dismission of their
reverend pastor, and empowered him, in their names, to send to an
ecclesiastical council for that purpose; which council, in their result,
express themselves as follows.

"Considering the many and great difficulties which have long subsisted in this
place, and the deep-rooted (tho, as we believe ill-grounded) prejudices which
are in the minds of so many against their present pastor, and the little
prospect of his being longer useful in this place when so great a majority
appear desireous of his removal, (as also Mr. Rowland's earnest desire to be
removed) think it best that his pastoral relation to this people be dissolved;
and therefore do (tho with reluctance) dissolve the pastoral relation between
the rev. Mr. Rowland and the first society and the church in Plainfield. As
there have been no charges, of any kind, exhibited against Mr. Rowland, so we
freely declare that we know nothing, of any kind, respecting him, that can be
any disqualification for the work of the gospel ministry; and do very
cordially* recommend him to any part of the christian church where providence
may open a door to his future usefulness."

A FAREWEL-SERMON.
ACTS XX, 25 -- 27. And now behold, I know that ye all among whom I have gone,
preaching the kingdom of God, shall see my face no more.

Therefore I take you to record, that I am pure from the blood of all men.

For I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God.


THE words now read, are a part of St. Paul's farewel-sermon, delivered to the
elders of the church of Ephesus, one of the noted churches, in the Lesser Asia,
of which we have an account in the book of the revelation of St. John. Rev. 2.
beg. --
some interpreters suppose the words, though immediately directed to the elders
of the church, were yet designed to include the whole church. Calvin in Loc.
However it is evident the apostle spent considerable time at Ephesus, that his
conduct and behavior was well known both to ministers and people, preaching
the gospel to them, and laboring for their salvation, not only in their
public synagogues, but also in their private houses, from house to house, as
ver. 20. This holy apostle was indefatigable in his labors, and never did,
through sloth negligence, or weak timidity, sacrifice a good conscience. He faced
dangers and defied censure, was ready not only to be bound, but also to die,
for the name and honor of Christ; and when bonds and afflictions awaited him,
he made no account of them, not esteeming his very life precious to himself on
such an occasion, that he might faithfully and joyfully finish his course as a
christian, and an apostle, and fulfill the ministry which he had recieved of the
Lord Jesus, even to testify the truth, and urge the importance of the glorious
gospel of the free and abundant grace of God; a dispensation infinitely
glorious, in which the abundant grace of God shines with a luster not to be
equaled, to which we are all indebted, infinitely indebted, ministers and
people, far beyond the returns we can ever make. The apostle gloried in the
doctrines of the cross of Christ, as they contained the most illustrious
display of divine grace, and were the power of God to the salvation of all that
believe, to the Jew first, and also to the Greek Romans i, 16. --
. The apostle was so far from being ashamed of the gospel of Christ that he
gloried in it; and the important truths of it he endeavored to press upon the
minds of those to whom he preached; and at Ephesus he kept back nothing that
was profitable unto them V. 20, 21. continued. --
; testifying, both to Jews and Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith
toward our Lord Jesus Christ. And now being about to take his leave of them,
he addresses them as in the words of my text: And now behold I know that ye
all, my dear brethren, among whom I have gone, shall see my face no more. The
words are a Hebraism, for, ye shall not all see my face any more Pool's Synop
in loc.
. Some suppose that the apostle had it intimated particularly to him that he
should no more come to Ephesus, and therefore never have an opportunity of
seeing them to whom he was now addressing himself in the most tender and
affectionate manner; Doddridge in Loc. and his note on v. 27.
therefore he sent for them that he might take his solemn farewell of them, and
to testify to them all, that if any of them perish, yet he should be clear from
the blood of all men. I testify to you, and God is my witness that I have
labored for your salvation, and the salvation of all that heard me, and have
not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God. He suppressed nothing
that was advantageous or that would promote their edification; he did not avoid
nor shun, from any consideration whatsoever, declaring all the counsel of God;
he did not withhold or disguise any important truth, nor decline the open
publication of it for fear of displeasing those to whom it ought to be
declared: But, on the contrary, he delivered the counsel, or will of God, with
the greatest sincerity and unreservedness; opening and enforcing the important
truths relating to our redemption, by Christ, and the way to eternal happiness
with him, in the most plain and faithful manner; not regarding the censure and
contempt he might incur from the enemies of christianity; deaf to censure, to
applause unelate, resolute in the face of dangers, and inflexible to every
motive of ease and security, he pursued the arduous work he had undertaken,
and, like the saints of old, loved not his life to the death Rev. xii, 11.
, that is, he exposed himself to the greatest dangers, and met death in the
glorious conflict; but he fell to rise, triumph and reign.

But in pursuing the design in view, I shall only take notice of two things in
general; where I shall endeavor,

I. To show you when a minister may be said to shun declaring all the counsel
of God.

II. Consider some things included and necessarily implied in declaring all the
counsel of God.

Then I shall make some improvement suitable to our circumstances in the
prospect of our parting.

First then, I am to show you when a minister may be said to shun declaring all
the counsel of God.

He who dare make the most sacred things serve to gratify his own, or the
humors of others, or as a cloak to color over his pride and avarice, is in
the most pitiable and unhappy condition. It is a crime too many have been
guilty of, trifling with things in their nature sacred, and a profanation
unpardonable, were it not that infinite mercy had been exercised in behalf of
the greatest sinners, even the chief 1 Timothy i.15.
. Happy had it been for many had the ordinances of Christ never been
prostituted to the most base and mercenary views for promoting secular
interest, and inordinate cravings of a selfish mind; and it would still be more
happy, were there no such pernicious and destructive principle prevalent, or so
much as to be found in this world; and though it is what may not be expected in
the present state, to be perfectly free from such an infelicity; yet it is the
design of the gospel of the grace of God to purify and refine men, to fit and
prepare them for the most noble services in the present state, and to conduct
them to a better; to free them, while here, from those evils, and to deliver
them from those false biases to which they are so incident; to prompt them to
act in the most disinterested manner, with a suitable regard to the honor and
glory of God, the welfare of their own, and the souls of others. Men that are
in a state of slavery to their lusts, cannot well avoid being slaves to the
humors of others; and it is a thousand to one, if such do not sacrifice a good
conscience through weak timidity, and fear of giving offense. -- The apostle had
not so learned Christ; therefore spoke the word with all freedom and boldness,
without fear or affection to any man, whether they would hear or whether they
would forbear, conscious that he was to God a sweet savor of Christ, in them
that perish, and in them that are saved, to the one a savor of life, unto
life, but to the other a savor of death unto death. 2 Cor. ii, 15, 16.


Here I shall mention two or three things.

1. A minister may be said to shun declaring all the counsel of God when he
don't deliver the doctrines of Christ in a plain and intelligible manner, when
he endeavors to conceal himself under unintelligible phrases, and an uncertain
manner of expressing himself, that his hearers are at a loss to know what the
plain design of his expressions import. -- The doctrines of Christ are of the
last concern to mankind; their well-being and blessedness nearly, yea
necessarily depends upon their being well understood; without this kind of
knowledge the heart cannot be good Prove. xix, 2.
, there can be no enjoyment of the chief good, no well-grounded hope of eternal
life. -- If the opportunities enjoyed for instruction are doubtful and
uncertain what hope of reaping profit and advantage from them? The style in
which a minister addresses his audience, ought not on the one hand to be jejune
and flat, so as to render his administrations contemptible, nor on the other
hand, too florid and bombast, that they cannot be recieved by persons of an
ordinary size: he ought rather to study a graceful decent and plain method of
communicating, that his words, fitly spoken, may be like apples of Gold in
pictures of silver Prove. xxv, 11.
. The apostle Paul plainly intimates to us this as his manner of preaching 1
Cor. ii, 1* 4.
; And I, brethren, when I came to you, came not with excellency of speech or of
wisdom, declaring unto you the testimony of God; my speech and my preaching was
not with enticeing words of men's wisdom, but in demonstration of the spirit,
and of power; not with wisdom of words, lest the cross of Christ should be made
of none effect. The apostle lets the Corinthians know that his aim and manner
among them, even from the beginning, was not with the pomp of language, no, far
very far from affecting such a method to engage their affections, he kept in
view the great design of the gospel, which was admirably calculated to stain
the pride of human glory; he had no need of affecting the sublimity and
subtilty made use of among the Greeks of that age; the gospel needed not any
ornaments of human invention, nor could the labored charms of eloquence or
philosophy give luster or emphasis to it: he therefore endeavored to exhibit
it in as intelligible a method as he could; treating it as coming from God: in
such a manner should the ministers of Christ address themselves to their
people, then might they, with juster reason, hope for the happy success of
their administrations, and that their hearers might grow in grace and in the
knowledge of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ. 2 Pet. iii, 18.


The knowledge of things divine is, in its nature, the most excellent, and most
directly tends to the welfare and happiness of such as are made effectually
acquainted with them, that to prevent, and embarrass the truths of God, by a
doubtful and unintelligible method of explication is an evil almost
unpardonable.

2. A minister may be said to shun declaring all the counsel of God when he
makes use of uncertain and ambiguous words or phrases in his explication of
gospel truths. This being the case, it looks like artifice and design, a method
to conceal himself from censure and entitle himself to a good living. To make
use of uncertain modes of expression, and certain phrases to which there is no
fixed determinate ideas, or, least, they are ambiguous and doubtful, may be
understood in a proper or less proper sense, which leaves the hearer in a state
of suspense and uncertainty what the speaker intends; this is supposed in
withholding a full declaration of the will of God; it is to disguise it, that
it may appear what it really is not, to shun and avoid representing of it, in
its native simplicity Vid. Leigh's Critica Sacra.
. If the preacher study an artful method of communicating himself, and
frequently make use of ambiguous terms in his explication of some of the
doctrines of the gospel, will not his hearers suspect whether he believe them
or not, or, if he does, that he esteems them of little importance, mere
speculation! and, of course, they, with an air of indifference if not of
contempt treat the most important realities! -- This is a character unworthy a
minister of the gospel, an ambassador of the Lord of hosts. A simplicity of
expression, as well as manners, free from force formality hypocricy and deceit,
is the proper characteristick of such as preach the gospel; and an honest
upright and unreserv'd method of communicating and enforceing the truth of the
gospel ought to be very eminent and conspicuous in them. This the apostle Paul
proposes as the real and genuine character of christianity, its natural and
proper effect; and it was the consciousness he had of his own integrity,
plain-heartedness, freedom from deceit and guile that animated him in the
discharge of his embassy amidst the clamours and reproaches thrown upon him by
sons of malice slander and falsehood: Our rejoicing (says he) is this, the
testimony of our conscience that in simplicity with godly sincerity 2 Cor. i,
12.
, maintaining a sense of the divine presence and inspection (the surest guard
unto unfeigned integrity) we live in the world. -- This holy apostle studied
always the most artless method of conduct, at all times and in all places; he
abhorred the notion of deceit and guile, as methods below the christian and the
apostle 2 Cor. xii, 16. This text has been shamefully perverted by some, when
they have improved it to justify the low artifices they have used to bring
others to their faith and practice. The apostle mentions it as an invidious
insinuation of his adversaries, and speaks of it with abhorrence.
. The secret conciousness of his integrity supported him, in the most
courageous efforts, animated him in the midst of dangers, and gave him a
fortitude of mind suited to the dignity, and difficulties of his office. In his
enforceing the truths and duties of the gospel, he behaved in the most
unaffected manner: Our exhortation (says he) was not of deceit, or of
uncleanness, nor in guile 1 These. ii, 3.
; it was not founded on any principles of deceit, he had no mercenary or
sensual purposes to serve, there was nothing of guile or craftiness, no
under-handedness, nothing that could fear the detection of the strictest
scrutiny, all was fair open simple and artless.

3. A minister may be said to shun declaring all the counsel of God when he
withholds the truth, or any part of the truth, through fear, or affection to the
person of any man.

It is the apostolic character of a minister of Jesus Christ, that he pleases
not man, but God. -- Do I (says the apostle) seek to please men? for if I yet
please men, I should not be the servant of Christ Gal. i, 10.
. He that complies with the prejudices, sooths the humors, and flatters the
vanity of his hearers, deserves not the name of a christian, much less of a
minister; for he that acts as an ambassador of the prince of peace, must not in
the discharge of his embassy be influenced by the censure, or applause of
mortals, whose breath goes forth and they are no more, nor should he by any
means study an accommodation to the taste and prejudices of sensual minds: --
it is much becoming his character and office to labor at all times, to secure,
above all things, the approbation of God, who tries the heart, with the
greatest exactness and care 1 These. ii, 4.
: We speak not (says the apostle) as pleasing men, but God, -- nor did we
(says he) deal in flattering words "to insinuate ourselves into your
affections, and sooth you in your sins, as ye well know, nor had we recourse to
a pretense of piety to promote the schemes of covetousness, often artfully
conducted under the covert of religious zeal: God is our witness, that we were
far above every thing of this kind, and made all such views our first sacrifice
to the glory of his name, and propagation of his gospel* nor did we seek glory
or applause of men, such among whom we have labored and conversed Doddridge's
Paraphrase.
." No, these views are far, very far, from influencing the minds of the
ministers of Christ, though oftentimes they get much illwill and hatred by it.
Unhappy indeed must it be for the church of Christ if any who minister at God's
altar should sacrifice truth to the affection, or favor of men. This would
most certainly be a threatening omen to the church, as it is the first step
toward giving up all revealed religion: if a part may be so profanely
sacrificed, why may not the whole? -- How unreasonable and wicked, even to a
prodigy, such fear, or condescension! Our hearers have almost as many tastes as
complections; but they are like men sick with a fever, who cannot relish the
most proper food, for the nourishment of the body, or the disordered stomach
that hankers for that which is most unnatural and hurtful. -- One censures the
preacher because he imagines he is too rigid in the doctrine of man's apostasy
by the first Adam, -- too much insists upon the moral impotency of mankind;
another, because he fancies he is little short of blasphemy, in his explication
of the decrees of God, that therein he saps the very foundation of the sinner's
endeavors after grace and holiness; -- others, because they suppose that he is
too stiff in his notions of the free justification of a sinner before God, by
the perfect righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, efficacious grace, etc. --
some, because he don't insist enough upon topics of the like nature; --
others, because he don't particularly and sufficiently display the
excellencies, and recommend the profit and advantages of moral virtue: -- one
cavils at his dress, another at his air: -- some because he writes and reads
his discourses, and some because he is able to do it: -- one because he is flat
and lifeless, another because he has too much fervor and pathos. Thus they go
on in a circle of uneasiness, as restless as the troubled sea, discovering a
childish temper and disposition, never pleased but when humoured. If every
minute part of their minister's conduct whether in public private or domestic
life, don't quadrate with their notions, he is no minister for them, be his
morals and doctrines as unexceptionable as the gospel. -- He that undertakes
the task of gratifying the humors of his hearers, will never be able to
perform it. He that sets out to please one or all will be sure to please none
at all; for it is as easy for a man to serve God and mammon, as for a minister
of Jesus Christ to serve the humors, the peculiarities of his people, and
discharge, suitably discharge the duties of his sacred office. The servant of
the Lord should be well-studied and fixed in the doctrines of the gospel, not
hesitating, or in the least wavering; not afraid or ashamed to own and
recommend the truths of the gospel; -- and well established in the various
parts and branches of his office; then, with unwearied diligence, to pursue the
duties of his calling, leaving the event. -- They should cry aloud and spare
not, lift up their voice like a trumpet Is. v, 8, 1.
, be Boanerges, sons of thunder, to awaken and alarm sleepy sinners, and stop
bold transgressors in their full career to endless misery and ruin, and,
Barnabas-like, sons of consolation, to comfort such as mourn in Zion, to raise
up the bowed down, to strengthen the hands and encourage the hearts of the
people of God, Is. iv, 1, 2.
keeping the main end of their embassy in view, doing nothing by partiality in
favor of one more than another, according to the inducements of private
interest, friendship, or affection, whether they will hear or whether they will
forbear, that they may know that there has been a prophet among them Exek. ii,
5.
. But,

II. I am to consider some things included and necessarily implied in declaring
all the counsel of God.

A minister's declaring all the counsel of God, must suppose that he lays
before his people the whole system of divine truths, relating to the being,
perfections and providence of God, our fall by the first, and recovery by the
second Adam; these truths are necessary to our well understanding the terms of
the gospel, and way to eternal life and happiness, by Jesus Christ; nothing
should be kept back or disguised for fear of giving offense. It too often
happens that a minister's plain and pungent method of address gives offense,
though it be with the utmost prudence* both in air and expression No small degree
of wisdom and prudence ought to be used in our addresses that are plain and
pungent, for I am very far from thinking that it consists in a bold imperious
and domineering method of treating our fellow-men, as though they were beasts
of burden, obliged to bear whatever in laid upon them, or mere machines to be
set in motion by vehement exclamations.
, especialy when it crosses some humor, or inclination, some prejudice in
favor of their peculiar set of thoughts. Regardless of private interest or
affection should he who acts as a minister of the prince of peace, speak the
word with all freedom and boldness, as he ought to speak. It will be
impracticable for me to go over all the particular branches that naturally
suggest themselves under this head; I shall, with as much brevity as may be,
and time will allow, touch at a few. --

1. It must suppose a suitable illustration of the being and perfections of the
divine nature. That God is, is the first article in the christian creed. He
that comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them
that diligently seek him Heb. xi.6.
. Religion is wholly founded upon the doctrine of the one infinitely glorious,
perfect and all-sufficient being, who has made the heavens, and the earth, and
all things that in them are, by the word of his power. Thus it is said, He has
made the earth by his power, he has established the world by his wisdom, and
stretched out the heavens by his discretion. When he utters his voice there
is a multitude of waters in the heavens, and he causes the vapors to ascend
from the ends of the earth: He makes lightnings with rain, and brings forth
the wind out of his treasures Jer. x, 12, 13.
. This righteous being is the sole object of religious worship and homage, as
in himself he is the most excellent being, capable, from the infinite source of
good in himself, to communicate to the needy circumstances of his creatures,
and whose infinite compassion and pity has moved him to provide for the relief
of fallen ruined man, a savior and sacrifice all-sufficient. It is a theme
suitable to the sacred desk seasonably to discant upon the perfections of the
divine nature whether natural or moral, that our esteem of him may be raised
and our obligations of obedience be enforced. -- O Lord my God thou art very
great; who stretchest out the heavens as a curtain, who coverest thyself with
light, as with a garment: Psalm. civ, 1, 2.
who stretchest out the north over the empty space, and hangest the earth upon
nothing Job xxvi, 7.
: seek him that makes the seven stars and orion and turns the shadow in the
morning and makes the day dark with night Amos v, 8.
: -- The heavens declare the glory of God, the firmament shows his handy
work. Day unto day utters speech, night unto night shows knowledge: there
is no speech nor language where their voice is not heard; their line is gone
out into all the earth, and their words to the end of the world Psalm. xix, 1-4.
.

2. It must suppose, that we endeavor to impress the minds of our hearers with
a suitable sense of the agency of God in all providential events. It is
extremely natural for mankind to misjudge things, and call them what they be
not; so to attribute the most surprising events merely to the skill prudence
and sagacity of themselves or others, or those unmeaning words Fate or Chance;
and by such a mistaken view of things they eclipse the glory of the divine
agency, that divine agency which produces every event by a secret but powerful
influence upon second causes operating for such purposes. Now these mistakes
men so naturaly run into should be corrected, and a firm unshaken belief of the
divine providence established.

He that created all things by the word of his power, upholds and disposes
them, according to his wisdom, and by the same word of his power: Heb. i.3.
he alone is independent and self-sufficient, therefore the idea of a creature
implies dependence; that which depends upon God for being must for its
continuance in being. There is an unremitted exertion of divine power, called
the divine manutention, by which we live move and act: accordingly the apostle
observes that it is in Him we live, in him we move, in him we have our being,
and in him are all our ways. Acts xvii, 28.
-- God is said, according to the fixed laws of nature, to preserve his
creatures by the instrumentality of second causes. Thus our life is supported
by the air in which we breath and the food by which we are nourished. Those
numberless things which tend to our comfort, are communicated to us by second
causes, under the direction of a wise providence, which it is as much to be
ascribed to, as though produced without any such means. God is said to give food
to all flesh: Psalm. cxxxvi, 25.
and with respect to the brutal creation, it is said, These all wait upon thee,
thou give them their meat in due season, that thou give them they gather;
thou openest thine hand, they are filled with good. Ps. civ, 27, 28.


How many great and surprising events are produced by what are called second
causes? this supposes a first, by which all others are guided and directed!
this can be no creature, since it is peculiar to the Glorious God; all act
under his influence, his providence, the greatest and the least are equally
under the influence of his providence, and dependent upon Him. He does
according to his will in the army of heaven, as also among the countless
inhabitants of the earth. Dan. iv, 25.
In brief, the whole frame of nature is supported by Him, the elements and
meteors are subject to his appointment, fire and hail, snow and vapor and
stormy winds fulfill his word. He looks to the ends of the earth, and sees
under the whole heaven to make the weight of the winds and the weight of the
waters by measure; when he made a decree for the rain and a way for the
lightning of the thunder Psalm. cxlviii, 8.
.

To which might be subjoind, the providence of God is eminently seen in sending
afflictions and troubles for the advantage of his people that he may withdraw
man from his purpose, and hide pride from him Job xxxiii, 17.
. -- The surprising events of war are according to his wise direction, be
gives the soldier his martial genius and teaches his hands to war, and his
fingers to fight; 2 Samuel xxii, 35.
he gives hardiness and fortitude, or sends faintness and timidity.

3. It supposes that we endeavor to affect our hearers with a sense of their
fallen helpless circumstances; that by one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin, and so death passed upon all, for that all have sinned. To. v, 12.
The corruption and impotence of human nature are facts so stubborn, being
established by the universal experience of mankind, in all generations, that it
is vain to dispute what appears so evident. Yet, as to the rise of moral evil,
there have been many warm and disadvantageous controversies; yet there have
been some which have thrown much light before our eyes, manifesting these
important truths of God, and guarding us against the dangers we are exposed to
by false judging.

If we attend closely to the account the sacred pages give us of this matter,
and judge of them in the most plain easy and intelligible manner, without
force, sophistry, or allegory, we must conclude we have guilt derived to us
from our feederal head, Adam: by the offense of this one, many are made
sinners, To. v. 19.
they become obnoxious to death, exposed to the anger and wrath of almighty
God, in time and in eternity. The demerit of sin is everlasting punishment,
because it is a conspiracy against a being of infinite perfection. The ways of
sin is death, and (according to the antetheses in the text) it must be eternal
death: for (says the apostle) The gift of God is eternal life; therefore the
ways of sin must be eternal death. To. vi, ult.
Thus exposed are we every day and moment we live, and yet stupidly unaffected
with our danger; blind and cannot see afar off; Pet. i, 9.
incapable of rescuing ourselves from our unhappy circumstances; Joh. xv* 5.
in restless pursuit of vanity, grasping for fleeting shadows; amusing
ourselves with toys, and the empty name of honor; with the uncertain riches of
time, and the beast-like pleasures of sense. The heart of the sons of men is
full of evil, and madness is in their heart while they live, and after that
they go to the dead Ecl. ix, 3.
. It is necessary that the sinner have his case plainly represented to him that
he might be affected with his state and condition, excited to flee from the
wrath to come, and lay hold of eternal life. If the sinner be not sensible of
his need of an interest in the favor of God, he will never seek after it.
Seeking after God, supposes the loss of him. If the sinner never sees, never
feels his need of Christ, he will never seek pardon and help from him. The
whole need not the physician, but the sick, and Christ came to call sinners to
repentance. Mat. ix, 12.
By the terrors of the law, as well as the invitations of the gospel, should
sinners be persuaded to accept of offered mercy.

4. The sinners minds should be impressed and their hearts affected with a
sense of the glorious excellency of the person of Jesus Christ; his sufficiency
and ability to save to the uttermost all that come unto the father by him,
seeing he ever lives to make intercession for the children of men. Heb. vii,
25.
This person is adorned with the most amiable and attractive glories; He is
God, as well as man, united by an ineffable union; He is the true God, John v.
22.
as well as real man. The word was God. John i.1.
By the prophets he is styled the wonderful counseler, the mighty God, the
everlasting father, prince of peace Is. ix, 6.
: And though he was possessed of infinite divine perfections, which the
scriptures attribute to him, such as infinite power and wisdom, being in the
form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God; but made himself of
no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the
likeness of sinful men; and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled
himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. Col. i,
16, and Col. iii, 6, 7, 8.
By the obedience and death of Christ, there is a complete sacrifice offered,
and satisfaction made, to the law and justice of God. He was well furnished,
and fitted, for the weighty and important undertaking; his nature was innocent,
his life a perfect transcript of the divine law, and his death cruel and
ignominious; these were necessary to furnish him, to make a complete and
perfect sacrifice; these were eminent and conspicuous in him; and hence he is
said to have appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself; Heb. x, 26.
and to have borne the sins of many, when God laid on him the iniquity of us
all. Isa. liii, 6.
Hence it is that his blood cleanses from all sin 1 John i, 7.
whether original or actual; by him we are justified, and from him we receive a
righteousness complete and perfect. -- This glorious, this divine person offers
himself to sinners in the gospel, assures them of his readiness to accept all
that come to him: Him (says the redeemer) that comes to me, I will no wise
cast out Joh. vi, 37.
. Of the immutability of his promises, and the necessity of holiness to meeten
them for happiness.

5. The necessity of a change of heart and life, in order to happiness either
present or future, the method of our acceptance with God, should be deeply
impressed upon the minds and hearts of poor sinners. However contrary to the
pride and self-sufficiency of the carnal heart it is, to go out of himself to
another for justification and life, even to the son of God, who is the Lord our
righteousness Jer. xxiii, 6.
; yet being a truth so sufficiently warranted, so repeatedly and earnestly
recommended by the holy ghost, it need be much insisted upon and pressed by the
most powerful arguments and motives, not only that gainsayers might be put to
silence, but that sinners might be encouraged and persuaded to commit their
souls into his hands, who is able to keep that which is committed to him
against the day of the Lord. 2 Timothy i, 12.
The way to obtain acceptance with the father, is by his son the Lord Jesus
Christ, through whom sinful man may have remission of sins and inheritance among
them that are sanctified. But such are the circumstances of sinners, that none
will come to the son, unless drawn by the father; John vi, 44.
by the powerful and efficacious influences of his spirit and grace they must
be drawn, or they will never come to Christ: their natural tempers are so
opposite to the temper of the gospel and their minds so infatuated with sensual
enjoyments, that unless they are taught the necessity and advantage of especial
saving grace they will never pursue the business of their salvation in earnest.
By the teachings of the divine spirit, they are led to see the necessity of
renewing grace, and that unless they are born again, they cannot see the
kingdom of God. John iii, 37.
Now they will cry after knowledge, and lift up their voice for understanding:
seek her as silver, and search for her as for hid treasures. Prove. ii, 3, 4.
The distressed sinner can have no rest, no quiet, while a dreadful sound is in
his ears, as Eliphaz expresses it, Job xv, 21.
The sound of his own damnation. He makes the important inquiry of the
trembling jailor, What shall I do to be saved? Acts xvi, 30, 31.
the answer is ready, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall be saved.
By faith we lay hold of, and receive Christ, and so are said to be justified by
faith, not as the meritorious cause of our justification, for that alone is the
merit and righteousness of Christ, but as the instrumental. This faith must not
be dead and unactive but lively and operative, bringing forth the fruits of
righteousness and holiness. We are therefore said to be renewed in our inward
man, after the image of God, in knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness.
Ephesians. i, 10. and iv, 24.
Sanctification and true holiness are necessary qualifications for happiness:
Blessed are they that do his commandments, they have a right to the tree of
life, and may enter in through the gates into the City. Rev. xxii, 14.
Wherefore,

6. It must suppose that we enforce the necessity of holiness, as preparatory
to final happiness; that without holiness no man shall see the Lord. Heb. xii,
14.
Such who name the name of Christ indeed, must depart from iniquity; they are
not to be conformed to this world its sinful customs and maxims, but to be
transformed by the renewing of their minds, that they may prove what is that
good, acceptable, and perfect will of God. Romans xii, 2.
It becomes them to mortify every lust, every sinful passion and appetite, to
live above the world, while they are in it, and necessarily conversant with
objects here below; to realize invisible and eternal realities, and act under a
sense of our obligations to God, and dependence upon him. They must endeavor a
faithful discharge of every personal and relative duty; to exercise themselves
to prayer, study of God's word, a strict observation of the sabbath, a careful
attendance on all ordinances. In brief, they must, to maintain their character,
perform every private and social duty, yea execise themselves to sobriety
temperance charity truth and righteousness, perfecting holiness in the fear of
the Lord; or (to use the words of the inspired writer) do justice, love mercy
and walk humbly with God. Mic. vi, 8.
-- This as a brief specimen.

Thus may the servant of the Lord declare the whole counsel of his God, and so
save himself from blood-guiltiness. Thus says the prophet, Son of man, I have
made thee a watchman to the house of Israel: therefore hear the word at my
mouth, and give them warning from me. When I say to the wicked, Thou shall
surely die, and thou give him not warning nor speak to warn the wicked
from his wicked way, to save his life; the same wicked man shall die in his
iniquity, but his blood will I require at thine hand. Yet if thou warn the
wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall
die in his iniquity; thou have delivered thy soul. Ezekiel. iii, 17, 18, 19.


I pass to some improvement of my subject.

1. What has been observed may serve to show us wherein the unfaithfulness of a
minister principally consists; it is not in neglecting some peculiar things,
supposed necessary by some, and on which they may lay great weight, though they
have no express warrant from the word of God to justify them in their
peremptory assertions: but when he witholds the truth, and don't deliver it
with that plainness and simplicity the gospel requires; when he keeps back
something that might be for the profit and advantage of his hearers, there can
be no motive or excuse suffiicent to justify such a neglect. It is the
principal and main branch of the ministerial office to declare all the counsel
of God, to understand what is most conducive to the good of the people;
wherefore he is to study to show himself approved to God, a workman that
needs not be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth. 2 Timothy ii, 15.
He who performs this embassy with a careless indifferency, or only with a view
to serve himself and gratify the humors of his hearers; he who, through fear of
some and affection to others, dare not speak, in plain and intelligible
language, the great truths and important duties of religion, and entertains his
audience with empty harangues, or with noisy ignorance, designed to raise their
affections, rather than inform their judgments; that amuses his hearers with
ridiculous tales, and a clamourous sound without any meaning, this is to
profane the sacred office, and to be guilty in such an important branch of it,
as renders him criminally negligent. What an awful and tremendous account will
the unfaithful steward be called to at last, when he leaves his clay-tenement
and enters the unknown somewhere! what a heavy sinking doom may he justly
expect! separated and forever banished from the presence, the enjoyment of God,
the chief the all-sufficient good; the society and happy employment of angels
and saints, who before the throne of God join the sacred songs of praise to God
and the Lamb! -- What anguish and horror shall they feel when deprived of every
good, and supported to bear the most acute pain horror and anguish; and when
all the opportunities they have enjoyed, all the prayers, sermons, and
invitations made to others, shall serve but to enhance to aggrivate their own
misery and torment!

2. We hence see wherein the duty of the ministers of Christ principally
consists: it is expressed by the apostle, by not shunning to declare all the
counsel of God. That minister that acts his part well, that faithfully
discharges his embassy, will, in an open free unreserved manner, apply the
truths of the gospel, according to their nature and importance. To preach the
gospel is to preach Christ; and to preach Christ is to preach his word. This is
the solemn charge given to ministers, Preach the word: be instant in season and
out of season: reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long-suffering and doctrine. 2 Timothy iv, 2.
Preaching the gospel is the great duty, the principal branch of the
ministerial work, and all other things should be done in subserviency to it. It
is first in the commission, Go, teach all nations; Mat. xxviii.19.
or (as it is expressed by another of the evangelists) Go, preach the gospel to
every creature Mat. xvi, 15.
. Ministers are Christ's heralds, and in the execution of their office, they
are to proclaim the awful terrors of God's firey law, in the surprising accents
of Sinai's dreadful thunder, to awaken the secure, to alarm the lethargic. They
must cry aloud and not spare, lift up their voice like a trumpet and show God's
people their transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins Is. lviii, 1.
. He must sound the jubilee trumpet of the gospel, and proclaim liberty to
captives, the opening of the prison door to them that are bound; proclaiming
the acceptable year of the Lord and the day of vengeance of our God, comfort
all that mourn Is. lxi, 1, 2.
.

Some are bold and impudent enough to say, that preaching the gospel is the
least part of the ministerial office; but such are wise above what is written.
The apostle St. Paul, who well understood the duties of his office, had views
of things very different from such dictators: he esteemed it the principal
branch of his office, as an apostle and minister. He says, Christ sent me not
to baptize, i. e. not so much to baptize, as to preach the gospel 1 Cor. i, 17.
. This he considered as his principal, his main business, by which he was to
bring persons to that faith which would entitle them to the blessings of the
gospel. By preaching the gospel men's eyes were to be opened, and they turned
from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may
receive remission of sins, and inheritance among them that are sanctified Acts
xxvi, 17, 18.
. This is the grand design of the gospel, the important end in view, and the
medium for its accomplishment is preaching all the counsel of God. If such as
make the objection, mean only the delivery of a discourse, it is just: but it
must be remembered that preaching the gospel necessarily includes every thing
requisite to it, as reading, study, meditation, and prayer, and when it is
considered in its necessary connection, it is, as it will appear in this view,
the grand, the most important part of the ministerial function. The
unscriptural and unreasonable notion that too many have of a minister's
spending a great part, if not all his time in visits, is at most but a
discretionary business, except in cases of sickness, and the like; it is
discretionary because there is no positive command for it, and there being no
positive command for it, it must be left, as it is, to the ministers own
discretion, and not anoanother's; and performed as his leisure will admit and
prudence dictates. A practice of this business, in ordinary cases, would, I
presume, be more likely to be disserviceable than beneficial. And as it is nor
an essential branch of the ministerial office, and not strictly enjoined in
common cases* so he must be determined by the knowledge he has of persons and
their circumstances, and so conducting he is accountable to none. But in
preaching the gospel he ought to lay himself out in the best manner, and exert
himself most vigorously, that he may save himself and those that hear him, 1
Cor. ix, 27.
preach the gospel like a workman that needs not to be ashamed, which
requires much pains labor sweat and toil. To be well furnished with the most
proper and wholesome food for the soul, calls for the greatest attention and
care. There are other things that belong to the ministerial office, such as
ordination and dispensing the censures of the church. But preaching the gospel
ought to be the first thing in view, as this is the method instituted by
infinite wisdom for the salvation of precious and immortal souls. It has
pleased God, by the preaching of the gospel, to save them that believe 1 Cor.
i, 21.
: therefore being the instituted means of salvation, by which men are brought
to faith, repentance and final happiness, it should be first in our esteem, and
prosecuted with the utmost ardour of mind.

3. It must certainly give a minister comfort and satisfaction in the near
approach of death, or a separation from his people, to have a consciousness of
his not having shunned to declare all the counsel of God. At such times will
they most surely recollect, and call to mind their past behavior and conduct;
and if, upon the most narrow search and scrutiny, they can find they have acted
in the discharge of their embassy as stewards of the manifold grace of God,
though their sercives have been attended with weakness, and much imperfection,
they are safe and secure; though malice and envy, prejudice and ill will may
slander and defame them, they stand firm in their integrity, and as unmoved as
the rock against which the angry waves dash, and retire with shame. Our
rejoicing, is this, the testimony of our conscience, that "our aims in religion
have been noble, and our conduct simple and uniform; -- then may we look upon
the applauses or the censures of men as comparatively a very light matter." We
aim at pleasing God rather than man, and in the discharge of our important work
to gain his approbation; and tho this be principal with us, we, upon a careful
review, find a thousand deficiencies to humble us before God; for these we
implore his pardon and forgiveness, as also our people's. We are, as other our
fellow-men, while clothed with mortality, imperfect; so also must be our best
services, that it is by the grace of God we obtain mercy to be faithful, and
pure from the blood of souls: Oh! that we might ever be successful, that at
last we might shine as the brightness of the firmament, and having turned many
to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever. Dan. xii, 3.
With such a divine temper of mind may we meet the most threatening evils and
dangers, yea, death itself shall be disarmed, and the saying that is written
come to pass; Death is swallowed up in victory. O death! where is thy sting? O
grave! where is thy victory? Isa. xxv, 8. 1 Cor. xv, 54, 55.


This consciousness, I have mentioned, gives satisfaction in the near approach
of a minister's separation from his people. Things are brought to such a pass,
that the relation that has so long subsisted between myself and this church and
people, must soon be dissolved My relation to the church and people in
Plainfield, commenced March 17, A. D. 1747-8, and continued to the 6th day of
May, A. D. 1761 -- thirteen years.
: in which time we have often met in the sanctuary of the Lord, not only on
those seasons sacred and set apart for his worship and service, but on
occasional opportunities in his house, and in private houses, as from house to
house, where the word of the Lord has been spoken to you; and you warned
counseled and directed, fed and comforted: but now, it seems, these happy
seasons are hastening to a period. I have spent the prime and flower of my days
in the ministry among you, and I hope and trust with an upright endeavor to
answer the great ends of my ministry. I have not kept back or witheld from you
any thing that, upon the most mature deliberation, I could think would be
profitable, but have labored to declare all the counsel of God. This I have
aimed at, however imperfect my services have been. It has been matter of grief
and mourning to me, they have been so imperfect and so unsuccessful. How often
have I come to this sacred place with trembling, and retired with shame! yet
here (may not I say?) I Have enjoyed many of the plesante^^ hours of my life. It
has been an unspeakable pleasure to preach to you the unsearchable riches of
Christ; -- to represent to you the glory of his person; -- the sufficiency of
his mediation; -- his readiness and earnest desire for the salvation of poor
perishing sinners: -- To enforce upon you the arguments and motives of the word
of God, to induce you to comply with the offers of salvation. I have
endeavored to impress your minds with a sense of your danger out of Christ, of
his readiness to receive you upon your application to him, and to bestow all
that good upon you that you need. He gives grace and glory and witholds no good
from his servants, his promises he will faithfully accomplish, for in Christ
they are all yea and amen. Furthermore I have endeavored to enforce upon you,
a cordial and unfeigned obedience to the laws of Christ, as your bounden duty,
as creatures of God, made upheld and preserved by him, and as evidential of
your union to, and interest in him; subjection to civil magistracy for the
Lord's sake; a careful discharge of personal and domestic duties; a strict
observation of the Lord's day, etc. -- I have visited you in your times of
sickness, and on your mourning occasions; and have endeavored to suggest to
your minds, at such times and on such occasions, the most suitable thoughts and
meditations, to assist and help you to honor God in your afflictions, and that
you might reap the advantage and profit of them to your souls. On your days of
humiliation I have endeavored to lead your minds to a serious reflection upon
those things which, in their own nature, portend evil and threaten God's people
with wasting and desolating judgments, and to persuade you to reform every
evil, to convince you of your dependence upon a divine providence. On your
seasons of praise I have attempted to lead in your solemn devotion, to assist
your minds with the greatness of the mercy you enjoyed, that your goodness your
righteousness have not procured the favors you were celebrating, but the great
mercy and goodness of God: he rules in the kingdoms of men, and does his
pleasure without control; he does wonderful things, his right hand and his
holy arm gets him the victory.

4. We hence see that where all the counsel of God is declared, finally
impenitent sinners must be left inexcusable. If the ministers of Christ are
pure from the blood of souls, because they have not shunned to declare all the
counsel of God, then their blood must rest upon their own heads; and in what
awful circumstances will the sinner at last be found, who has had advantages of
attaining the knowledge of God, and his son Jesus Christ, but has neglected and
misimproved them! It had been better for such gospel-despisers they had never
been born; they shall mourn, at the last, when their harvest is past and their
summer ended, and when they are convinced, by woeful experience, that it is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, who will be to such as
are found out of Christ a consuming fire. Heb. xii, 29.
O! how will they abide the coming of their judge, when he shall make his
appearance, in flames of devouring fire, taking vengeance on them that know not
God, and obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall be punished
with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and the glory of
his power! 2 These. i, 8, 9.
such who remain deaf to the voice of mercy and irreclaimable in the paths of
iniquity, shall be covered with shame and confusion in the day of final
account, for they shall have no plea, no excuse for their sin John xv, 22.
and if they who despised Moses's law, died without mercy, of how much sorer
punishment shall they be thought worthy who have trampled under foot the son of
God, and counted the blood of the covenant an unholy thing? Heb. x, 28, 29.
It will be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon, Sodom and Gomorrah, than for
such gospel-despisers; Math. xi, 24.
as their privileges and advantages have been greater, more eminent, so their
condemnation, their misery will be more terrible and severe. How confounding,
how cutting, what keen remorse and anguish must they feel, when they reflect
upon the seasons of grace they enjoyed, but misimproved, when all the calls
warnings and invitations of mercy shall lie with amazing weight upon them and
serve only to aggravate and enhance their misery and torment. Sinners may now
have a thousand shifts and evasions to prevent the efficacy of the word, these
they imagine are sufficient to justify them in their sloth and negligence, but,
in the awful day of account, they will all vanish and disappear; speechless and
confounded shall they stand, waiting their doom; glad would they be might the
mountains and rocks fall upon them, and hide them from the face of him that
sits upon the throne, and from the wrath of the lamb, when the great day of
his wrath is come, and none are able to stand. Rev. vi, 16, 17.
They who have set at naught all the counsel of God, and would none of his
reproof, shall, in the day of their deepest distress, call upon God, but he
will not answer; no, he will laugh at their calamity, and mock when their fear
comes, when their fear comes as desolation, and their destruction as a
whirlwind, when distress and anguish comes upon them. Prove. i, 26, 27, 28.
Then shall they mourn when their flesh and their bodies are consumed, in the
bitterest accents, with moans enough to pierce the hardest adamant, and say,
How have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof! and have not
obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined my ear to them that instructed
me! Prove. v, 11, 12.


5. I now proceed to a use of exhortation, with suitable counsel and direction.
And in the first place, to such as are in the state of unrenewed nature,
alienated from God, and enemies to him by wicked works.

Your state and condition, O sinners! is infinitely hazardous, however
insensible you may be of it; there is but a step between you and the world of
spirits, where they have no rest day nor night. Rev. xiv, 11.
-- It Is the brittle thread of life that sustains you, and prevents you from
immediately sinking into endless despair and misery. Should God's patience be
worn out, should he cut short the thread of life, into what a hopeless and
miserable condition must you immediately plunge? what raging despair would you
be filled with, to find yourself surrounded with insulting devils, those
ghastly, those horrid fiends, whose rage and malice will add to your torment?
How feeble, how helpless a prey will you feel yourself, when the omnipotent God
shall pour forth upon you the strength of his battle, and the arrows of the
almighty shall drink up your spirits? Job vi, 4.


With what seriousness should you now think of your present state, in the midst
of darkness, without spiritual life, though in the valley of vision, where the
rays of divine light and life diffuse themselves all around, on every side of
you? How earnest should you be that you might, through him who is the
resurrection and the life, John vi, 25.
be quickened and made spiritually alive, obtain that meetness and preparation
necessary for the enjoyment of God, both here and hereafter? Give yourself no
rest till you obtain a well-grounded hope of your reconciliation to God, and
interest in his favor; endeavor, at all times, to have your minds impressed
with the importance and necessity of the renovation of your natures, and the
sanctification of all the powers and faculties of your souls. Remember, fix it
in your minds, that unless you are born again you cannot see the kingdom of
God. John iii.3.
The temper of your minds are so diametrically opposite to the purity and
holiness of God, that unless you are made new creatures, 2 Cor. v, 17.
created anew in Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians. ii, 10.
the business, the blessedness of heaven will be no satisfaction to you, you
cannot relish its sublime joys, nor taste any sweetness in its superlative
excellency. How sad and dreadful must it be to live and die unacquainted with
those things in which consists your highest interest, which is your truest
happiness? To spend your days in vanity, and your years in the pursuit of the
filth, and dross of time, is a piece of madness, which will be repented of when
it is too late. You were made for nobler ends, and capable of a more exalted
happiness, than is to be obtained within the contracted limits of time: The
enjoyments of the world are a good, if they may be called by that name, that
are not suited to, nor commensurate with, the soul's duration. Every enjoyment
of life is tastless, and can yield no comfort to a soul that is conscious of
its real estimation; vanity will they write on every thing below the sun. The
enjoyments of time when spun out to their utmost length, are but as a point, a
mere nothing, when compared with eternity, they are inadequate to the desires
of an immortal spirit. Nothing short of a good in its nature perfect, and in
its duration eternal, can satisfy the cravings of the soul. What madness what
folly must the sinner be guilty of who spends his money for that which is not
bread, and his labor for that which satisfies not; Isa. lv, 2.
who pursues with the most restless desires the fading and uncertain enjoyments
of time, and when they are, in any measure, attained, they do but frustrate his
expectation and disappoint his hope; like his shadow, when pursued with the
greatest diligence, and restless anxiety, continues at the same distance, or
should he attempt to grasp it, would find himself mortified with the reflection
of having embraced an empty nothing. Think, O Sinner! what must be the issue of
your folly, if you go on in your pursuit of vanity, neglect of God and
religion; what can you you expect, what can you hope for? Can you be so stupid
as to flatter yourself that you shall come off with impunity? It is but a vain
dream, a fruitless imagination; for says God, I will bring every work into
judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good or whether it be evil.
Eccle. xii, ult.
God will call the sinner to a reckoning, and render a recompense to every
transgression; they shall hear, with the utmost shame and confusion, the
heart-sinking sentence, Go, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the
devil and his angels! Math. xxv, 41.
Can you now think of it without shuddering at the thought! does not the
consideration of it make your blood run cold in your veins, and your heart even
to faint and die within you! O let it rouse you from your sloth and security,
excite you, without delay, to flee from the wrath to come! Since your eternal
all is at stake, bestir yourself in good earnest; escape, for thy life, to the
city of refuge; linger not a moment, lest the Lord rain, upon your head, snares
fire and brimstone and an horrible tempest, which shall be the portion of your
cup. Ps. xi, 6.
Now, sinner, it is a finding time, therefore seek the Lord while he may be
found, and call upon him while he is near. Isa. lv, 6.
God is now coming near to you by his providence, but especially by his word
and ordinances, by the checks of your conscience and the strivings of his
spirit; seek after him then that his lost image may be restored in your soul,
seek earnestly, with unwearied diligence, till the sun of righteousness arise
in your dark and benighted minds, with healing in his wings. Mal. iv, 2.


God, in his infinite kindness and pity to ruined fallen man, is using a
variety of methods, that they might be recovered from the paths of the
destroyer; therefore, O sinner! it is that he speaks to you in the language of
terror, and threatens you with ruin and misery, if you continue in your sins:
he comes to you in thunder and lightning, and speaks in the voice of awful
majesty, denouncing his curses against the impenitent sinner, to awaken his
fear, and to excite his earnest and unwearied endeavors for pardon and
reconciliation: nor does he appear in the terrors of a sin-avenging God only,
but comes dressed in the garments of salvation, and proclaims himself
reconcilable to rebel man, through the son of his love. In Jesus Christ all
fullness dwells, a fullness of all gifts, and of every grace, yea, even all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily: by this divine person it has pleased the father
to reconcile all things to himself, i. e. to the purposes of his glory; having
made peace by the blood of his cross, Col. i, 19, 20, 21.
that they who are enemies and alienated in their minds to the blessed God, by
wicked works, may now he reconciled to himself and to his church and people,
and be made heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ Romans viii, 17.
of an inheritance that is incorruptible and undefiled, that fades not away,
reserved in the heavens. 1 Pet. i, 4.
Christ, while on earth, was unwearied in pressing this treaty of
reconciliation; he used every argument and motive to induce and persuade sinful
man to a compliance with the grace of the gospel; he, as God's herald,
proclaimed this treaty, and urged the sinner's compliance. In the last day,
that great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst,
let him come to me and drink, etc. John vii, 37, 38.
And when he ascended up on high, he gave gifts to men; and especially, with a
view that this treaty might be carried on, he gave some evangelists and
teachers, for the perfecting of the saints for the work of the ministry, for
the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of faith and
of the knowledge of the son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
fullness of Christ. Ephesians. iv, 11, 12, 13.
The design of these invaluable gifts of God, was that a succession of such
should be raised up, who might urge on this treaty. Thus God is, by them, from
time to time, entreating sinners to be reconciled to God. Ministers, having a
divine investiture, according to the order of the gospel, are ambassadors for
Christ; and, agreeably hereunto, the apostle says, We are ambassadors for
Christ, as though God did beseech you by us: we pray you, in Christ's stead, be
ye reconciled to God. 2 Cor. v, 20.
And that the great and important ends of our embassy may be effectually
answered, we denounce the awful curses of God's law, in the most terrible
manner, against presumptuous sinners, and assure them from a divine authority,
By a divine authority, is the proper and scriptural method of coming to our
people. We are to gain their assent by evincing the truths we deliver, by a
THUS SAYS THE LORD. A method very diverse from that which some bold intruders,
and impious invaders of the ministerial office, have taken, who challenge the
assent of their hearers by a Thus says their great Capital I; -- " I have
experienced it, I know it, I feel it"; etc. "therefore you must receive it, or
be damned." -- Thus they freely deal out their Egotisms, as tho they were of
divine original. A method most unreasonable and fulsom to a judicious hearer.
that, unless they repent, they must perish Luke xiii, 3.
and lie down in everlasting sorrow; that by the terrors of the Lord we
persuade men. 2 Cor. v, 11.
We endeavor to affect their minds with a deep sense of their lost and
perishing circumstances without a vital union to Christ; and of the excellency
of his person, the glory of his offices, the fullness of his grace, the
sufficiency of his merit, the stability of his promises, of the comfort and
satisfaction of obedience to his law; that wisdom's ways are ways of
pleasantness and all her paths peace; Prove. iii, 17.
and by the happifiing vision and fruition of God in his everlasting kingdom.
We plead with them by the strivings of the divine spirit, and the privileges of
the church, which unitedly concur in this treaty; The spirit and the bride say
Come! Rev. xxii, 17.


This being the design of the ministerial mission, let me urge this treaty, and
persuade you to be reconciled to God. Be entreated no longer to refuse and
reject the kind messages of mercy, that are brought you. The opportunities and
advantages you have enjoyed are distinguishingly great: God could not have done
more for you than he has done; Isa. v, beg.
he has given his son, his only son, his word, spirit, ministers, for your
conversion, consolation and salvation; he has given you time and opportunities,
that these important ends might be answered: and will you not be persuaded to
accept of his offered salvation. Now is the accepted time, behold now is the
day of salvation. 2 Cor. vi, 2.
O sinner, hearken and incline your ear to the offers of pardon and salvation
that have been, and now are brought to you!

I come to you (now I am closing the scene of my ministry among you) as a
petitioner and messenger of the Lord of hosts; and what I principally request
is, that you cast from you all your transgressions, whereby you have
transgressed, and make you a new heart, and a new spitit; for why will ye die?
Ezekiel. xviii, 31, 32.
You may be assured that God takes no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but
had rather that he should turn and live. What say you, sinner, to this? Think
seriously what answer you will give before I leave you. If you will deal kindly
and truly with my master, tell me, and if not tell me, Genesis xxiv, 49.
that I may know what answer to return to him that sent me. Give no occasion to
that complaint, The bellows are burnt, the lead is consumed of the fire; the
founder melts in vain, for the wicked are not plucked away. Jer. vi, 29.
Will it not be matter of joy to angels and saints, that you consent to accept
of offered salvation? will it not give a new accession of joy to the hosts of
heaven? for it is said, There is joy in the presence of the angels of God, over
one sinner that repents. Luke xv, 10.
The news of a sinner's conversion to God shall be wafted to the regions of
immortality, shall catch from breast to breast 'till the whole choir shall
unitedly shout songs of praise to the riches of redeeming grace. It will give
you the most surprising change in your views and pursuits, and yield you a
pleasure surpassing the most excellent delights in this life; yea, a joy
unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. i, 8.
O then be entreated to make the trial! awake sinner, awake, and bethink
thyself, and consider the worth, the importance of these things of which I am
speaking: your all is at stake, and who would not bestir himself to save his
all. To excite you, consider how short and uncertain your time of life is; in
its utmost extent it is but a span, and bears no proportion to eternity; it is
but a turn or two on the theater of time, and we disappear, are no more, lie
forget among the silent dead. The royal psalmist contemplating the state of
man, his stay in this world, compares life to a morning-flower which is cut
down er'e the evening and withered; and when considered in its full length, it
is soon cut of, and we flee away. (...) xc, 3, 10.
And as it is short, so it is uncertain; we have no lease of life, for any
season or period; death spares no age, nor sex, the great and the small, the
old and the young, prince and peasant must fall before this formidable enemy
and lie undistinguished in the grave! How many have we seen of every age, cut
down by death; and how many by a sudden and untimely death? O! how distressing
must it be to have the shadows of that dark and gloomy evening spreads its
sable curtains while you are in full pursuit of sin and vanity! are you
advanced in age, and have you lived mindful of the principal work and business
for which you was sent into the world? and is your time reduced even to a very
point! what diligence and care are you called to the exercise of? Whatever
your hand finds to do, do it with all your might, for in the grave there is
no device work or knowledge. Eccl. ix, 10.
Are you in youthful vigor? you have no security from the arrest of death. O,
my young hearers, remember now your creator in the day of thy youth, before the
evil days come, and the years draw near when your souls shall say they have no
pleasure in them. Eccl. xii, 1.
renounce your youthful lust and vanities, for know that in the end they will
be bitterness; in hell all the sugar will be melted off, wherein the pill of
your sins and temptations is wrapped, and then the note you will sing will be that
of the emperor, O quantum ob quantillum! O what an eternity of pain have I for
an inch of pleasure, or an ell of sinful delight!" Evank's farewel-sermon.
The pleasures, the gaities of time attract your minds and engage your
attention in the most eager pursuit of them, but you should remember, that tho
you roll them as a sweet morsel under your tongue, they will in the end bite
like a serpent and sting like an adder. And how unreasonable and wicked is it,
even to a prodigy, that you should spend the prime and flower of your days in
the service of the Devil, and hope to turn off God with your old age. Death may
close the scene, and unexpectedly put a period to your opportunities; then
shall you, as you do now of me, take your farewell of sabbaths, ordinances, and
ministers, and happiness forever.

But further, your seasons of grace may soon be over: It may be before your
life comes to a period. When God provoked with the daring impieties of the
antediluvian age said concerning them, My spirit shall not always strive with
man; Genesis vi, 3.
and when the church of Israel, God's covenant and chosen people, wore him out
with their wickedness, wearied his patience, he threatened he would take away
his hedge and wall, and lay them waste; and, to complete their calamity and
misery he would command the clouds that they rain no rain upon them. Is. v, 6.
That God may, according to the method of his judicial procedure, pronounce
that heavy doom that awaits the finally impenitent, against the despisers of
his grace and ordinances, and say, He that is unjust, let him be unjust still:
and he that is filthy, let him be filthy still. Rev. xxii, 11.
How affecting the consideration, to be given up of God to a hard heart, and a
stupid conscience! to be sealed down to damnation! O let your flesh tremble for
fear of God, and be afraid of his judgments! Psalm. cxix, 120.
The work is great and of the last importance; it is a great and weighty
employ; it consists in the renovation of your nature, called the new creature,
2 Cor. v, 17.
the mortification of your lusts, a living above the world, a living by faith
on the son God.

Your attachment to present enjoyments is great, lusts strong, enemies
powerful, that the whole armor of God is necessary. Now it is of the highest
importance that you engage in this weighty business, and commit your souls to
Christ in the way of well-doing. 1 Pet. iv, 19.
Your well-being in time, and future happiness depend upon it, which alone is a
consideration sufficient to engage each one in the pursuit thereof. When Moses
was enforceing upon Israel a wise observance of the commands of God, he does it
by this very consideration, Set your hearts unto all the words, which I testify
among you this day, which ye shall command your children to observe to do, for
it is not a vain thing for you; because it is your life. Deuteronomy. xxxii, 46, 47.


The mercy of God is infinitely free. The exercise of divine mercy and grace
toward sinners, was the purchase of the blood of the son of God, 1 Pet. i, 19.
and in that respect it was a dear-bought ransom, yet to sinners it is free,
infinitely free. Such as have no equivalent are invited to him. Ho! every one
that thirsts come ye to the waters; and he that has no money, come ye buy
and eat; yea, come buy wine and milk without money and without price. Isa. lv,
1.
This is agreeable to the language of the new testament; our blessed savior
publicly proclaimed it in the face of the world, If any man thirst, let him
come to me and drink; (...) vii, 37.
let his outward circumstances be never so base and contemptible, if he thirst
for pardon and an interest in the favor of God, upon his application to
Christ, they shall be freely communicated to him. The spirit of God, this day
in the ministry of his word, cries Come, and whosoever will, let him come and
take of the waters of life freely. Rev. xxii, 17.
Wherefore, sinner, come now to this glorious all-sufficient savior. Are any
of you groaning under the burden and weight of your sins, weary and heavy
laden? come and you shall have rest to your souls: Math. xi, 28.
his blood cleanses from all sin, 1 John i, 7.
Are you poor? come to him and he will enrich you; he is filled with the
fullness of the Godhead bodily; he has blessings as pure and refined as gold
tried in the fire, and you shall be rich indeed! R. iii, 18.
-- Are you naked to your shame? his righteousness is a garment, which will not
only cover your shame, but be your ornament your richest dress, and in which
you may appear before God, the holy angels and spirits of just men made
perfect. Are you blind? apply his sovereign eye salve, that you may see and
judge of the worth and excellency of spiritual objects. -- Christ, the
compassionate savior, stands waiting that he may enrich you with every
spiritual good. Behold (says he) I stand at the door and knock: if any man
hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him
and he with me. Chapter iii, v. 20.


Seriously reflect upon what will be the issue of your folly, if you neglect
the salvation offered you in the gospel. A neglect in this weighty and
momentous affair will be attended with the most distressing and fatal
consequences. When God enters into judgment, no flesh living can stand in his
sight, for he has said, The soul that sins shall die; and if y^^ believe not on
the son of God, ye shall die in your sins, under the power and dominion of
them; for He that believes not (says the unerring spirit of God) shall be
damned, Mark xvi, 16.
i. e. he shall be condemned, by the righteous judgment of God, the future and
everlasting punishment, and shall (to his dreadful experience) find that gospel
which he has despised, to be a savor of death to him. Who can bear the thought
of being separated forever from the presence and enjoyment of God the chief
good, and made everlastingly miserable! this shall be the portion of their cup.
Psalm. xi, 6.
The day is hastening when the most amazing scene shall be opened to view; it
shall be ushered in, in the most awful and surprising manner; the heavens shall
gather blackness and darkness, thunder and storm shall prelude the solemn
season, when the Lord shall descend from heaven, with a shout, with the voice
of the archangel and the trump of God, whose blast shall awake the sleeping
dead, and unite the long divided parts of human nature, with amazing wonder;
and summon them before the impartial tribunal of heaven, when they shall
receive their doom, Go, ye cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the devil
and his angels! Mat. xxv, 41.
O who can bear to hear this heart-rending sentence! who can sustain the weight
of God's infinite wrath! what heart can endure, or what hands be strong in the
day when God shall deal with them. Ez. xxii, 14.
Their pain and anguish shall be the most excruciating, which shall extort the
bitterest accents of horror and despair. If the anguish of a single member,
though the smallest, put us into such a condition, that we have no quiet, no
rest, what then will it be, when all our powers of body and minds shall share
their part, being filled with the wrath of God! The anguish shall not only be
most intense but without intermission, without end. It is fire that can never
be quenched; the smoke of their torment shall ascend forever and ever, and they
have no rest, day nor night. Rev. xiv, 11.
The sinner's heart might justly sink within him to think of lying in that
state of torment forever. O eternity! eternity! how dreadful the sound! --

Either of these considerations, singly and alone, one would think, were
sufficient to rouse the most supine careless sinner, and make him, with the
trembling jailor, to cry out What shall I do to be saved! But when they are
taken conjointly, how forceable, how alarming! O let every sinner in this
assembly ponder them in his mind, and improve them according to their nature
and importance! Your neglect will but render your case the more affecting and
distressing. With what tears of compassion did the blessed redeemer weep over
obstinate despisers of his mercy and grace? When he beheld the city, he wept
over it, saying, If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the
things of thy peace. Luke xix, 41.
The words are expressive of an ardent wish, Oh that thou had known, thou
unhappy sinner, whoever thou art, the things of thy peace! Let it now appear
real to you, and as though you saw the brinish tears flowing from the eyes, and
trickling down the cheeks of the redeemer; deeply affected with your obstinacy,
and wilful refusal of offered mercy. Is he not lamenting over you, as over
Jerusalem of old, and saying, Oh Plainfield! Plainfield! thou that despises
the means for thy conversion and salvation, how often would I have gathered thy
children together unto me; and yet ye would not hearken to my compassionate
calls, but have hardened your hearts against my love, and repaid me with
contempt hatred and persecution!

To prevent the fatal effect of sin, endeavor to abstain from every known
evil. Let the wicked forsake his way and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and
let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy on him, and to our God for
he will abundantly pardon. Is. lv, 7.
Consider sin in its nature and consequences, and let it excite the unclean to
renounce, with abhorrence, his beastly pleasures; the profane to abandon his
oaths and execrations; the intemperate to leave his cups; and the unrighteous
his fraud and knavery. Practice every known duty. Take the word of God for your
only rule and directory; study it, and make it the man of your counsel. Apply
to the throne of grace with unwearied Diligence. God will be sought to by you,
Ezekiel. xxxvi, 37.2
for the bestowment of grace and salvation. Attend his ordinances as the
appointed and instituted means of salvation. Entertain an high and reverend
esteem for his sabbath and worship, and let no small thing divert you
attendance. Avoid, as you tender your comfort and safety, schismatical
conventicles, as being subversive of the order beauty and harmony of the
gospel. Look to the energy of the divine spirit for the effectual application
of the means of grace. Then shall you grow in grace and in the knowledge of our
Lord and savior Jesus Christ.

In the next place, let the people of God be exhorted to a wise improvement of
present opportunities. Let the word of God dwell in you in all utterance and
knowledge, and make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. Pet. i, 8.
"Content not yourselves with any partial seize in the christian life,
nor let that which should turn into grace spirit and life, turn all into notion
and talk. Too many think all is well, if their heads be filled, and their
tongues tipped with what should transform their souls and govern their lives."
How Is Bless. p. 169.
Evidence the power of divine grace in your hearts, by a conscientious
discharge of every personal and relative duty; perfecting holiness in the fear
of the Lord. 2 Cor. vii, 1
Exercise yourselves in the duty of prayer, not only in public, but in private
and secret prayer. Let your houses be Bethels, where morning and evening
sacrifice is performed. Retain always an high and reverend esteem for the
sabbaths and worship of God, as these are noble means, in the hand of the
divine spirit, of forming your minds to the noble services of virtue and
unfeigned piety. Sabbath-sanctity has a very great and eminent influence upon
us, and is of vast service to mankind in general. -- Honor the ministers of
Christ as his ambassadors, who, for the sake of their office, are worthy of
double honor; 1 Timothy v, 17.
let their feet, their very footsteps, be beautiful, that preach the gospel of
peace and bring you tidings of good things. Is. lii* 7.
They are men, like yourselves, and subject to numberless imperfections, as
well as a dissolution of the human frame; so that you see the treasure is in
earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may appear to be of God, and
not of us. 2 Cor. iv, 7.
Esteem them as precious gifts of Christ, a legacy he has bequeathed his
church out of his tender care and concern for it: Esteem their office too
sacred to be invaded by pride and ignorance. It must be a bold piece of
presumption to break open the sacred enclosure, and a wickedness like that of
Korah, Dathan and Abiram, who invaded the priests office,* which though God don't
punish in so visible a manner, yet will, no doubt, with judicial blindness and
stupefaction, by giving them up to believe a lie, that they may be damned.
Detest such a wickedness, and prevent its spread as much as you can. Stand fast
in the faith. Quit you like men. Be strong. Never content yourselves without
the stated administration of gospel ordinances, according to divine
institution. Look to him who is the lord of the harvest, that he would give you
a pastor after his heart, that may feed you with knowledge and understanding.
Believe his promises, rely upon his faithfulness, and trust in his mercy; then
shall neither tribulation nor distress nor persecution nor famine nor nakedness
nor peril nor sword nor death nor life nor angels nor any other creature
separate you from the Love of Christ.

To Conclude. -- Let us all seriously think of the solemn change that is
hastening upon us, when we that are now in the house of God, uniting in our
prayers and religious homage, shall be stretched in the dust of death, and our
souls must enter the world of unbodied spirits, to appear before the judge of
all the earth. It is but a little while, and he that shall come, will come and
not tarry. May we, when Christ who is our life shall appear, appear with him in
glory. May we enter the new Jerusalem that is above, riding as in a triumphant
chariot, be honored by God, and the holy angels, and join the blessed society
in their songs of praise to the sacred three in one. There shall crowns of
unfading glory encircle our victorious brows; there shall palms adorn our
hands, songs of victory and triumph shall dwell on our tongues; and we shall be
free from sighing, and tears shall forever be wiped from our eyes. That this
may be the happy portion of each in this assembly, is the fervent wish and
unfeigned desire of him who now bids you his hearty Farewell. Finally, brethren,
Farewell. -- Be perfect. Be of good comfort. Be of one mind. Live in peace, and
the God of love and peace shall be with you. 2 Cor. xiii, 11.


AMEN.

