THE COURT OF FANCY; A POEM.

BY THOMAS GODFREY.

And as Imagination bodies forth
The Forms of Things unknown; the Poet's Pen
Turns them to Shape, and gives to airy Nothing
A local Habitation, and a Name.
SHAKESPEARE. PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by WILLIAM DUNLAP, M,DCC,LXII.

ADVERTISEMENT, by the EDITOR.
WHEN the Author of the following Poem returned to this City, he was concerned
to find that several incorrect Copies of his first Plan had been handed about;
and was under some Apprehension, lest it should fall into the Hands of some
one, who (biassed by Novelty) might publish it in that immature State, in his
Absence. This, added to the Expectations, the Authors of the American MAGAZINE
have given the Public, of receiving it one Day from the Press, have induced
him to furnish a Copy to be submitted to their Candor, sooner than he
otherwise intended. He would not however permit it to be published, without an
Acknowledgment, that he took the Hint of the Transition, from the Court of
Fancy to that of Delusion, from Chaucer's Change from the House of Fame, to
that of Rumor; and that in describing the Walls of the Court of Fancy, he had
his Eye on the Description of the Temple of Fame.

THE COURT OF FANCY.
'TWAS sultry Noon, impatient of the Heat
I sought the Covert of a close Retreat:
Soft by a bubbling Fountain was I laid,
And over my Head the spreading Branches played;
When gentle Slumber stole upon my Eyes,
And busy Fiction bid this Vision rise.
METHOUGHT I pensive unattended stood,
Wrapped in the Horrors of a desert Wood:
Old Night and Silence spread their Sway around,
And not a Breeze disturbed the Dread profound.
To break the Wild, and gain the neighboring Plain,
Often I essayed, and often essayed in vain;
Still in intricate Mazes round I run.
And ever ended where I first begun.
While thus I laboring strove t'explore my Way,
Bright on my Sense broke unexpected Day.
Retiring Night in haste withdrew her Shade,
And sudden Morn shone through the opening Glade:
No more the Scene a desert Wild appeared,
A smiling Grove its vernal Honors reared;
While Sweetness on the balmy Breezes hung,
And all around a joyful Mattin rung.
Soft was the Strain as Zephyr in the Grove,
Or purling Streams that through the Meadows rove.
Now wild in Air the varying Strain is tossed,
In distant Echoes then the Sound is lost;
Again revived, and lo! the willing Trees
Rise to the powerful Numbers by Degrees:
Trees now no more, robbed of their verdant Bloom,
They shine Supporters of a spacious Dome,
The Wood to bright transparent Crystal changed,
High fluted Columns rise in Order ranged.
So to the magic of Amphion's Lyre
Stones Motion found, and Theban Walls aspire;
To the soft Sound the nodding Forest rise,
And gilded Turrets glitter in the Skies.
Each wondering God bends from his heavenly Seat
To view what powerful Music could complete.
HIGH on a Mountain was the Pile disclosed,
And spreading Limes th'ascending Walks composed;
While far below the waving Woods declined,
Their verdant Tops bowed with the gentle Wind.
Bright varying Novelty produced Delight,
And Majesty and Beauty charmed the Sight
Such are the Scenes which Poets sweetly sing,
By Fancy taught to strike the trembling String.
Here Fancy's Fane, near to the blessed Abode
Of all her kindred GODS, superior stood.
Dome upon Dome it sparkl'd from on high,
It Is lofty Top lost in the azure Sky.
By Fiction's Hand the amazing Pile was reared,
In every Part stupendous Skill appeared,
In beautiful Disorder yet complete,
The Structure shone irregular and great:
The noble Frontispiece of antique Mold
Glittered with Gems, and blazed with burnished Gold.
Now through the sounding Vaults, self opening rung
The massy Gates on golden Hinges hung:
All the bright Structure was disclosed to View,
Magnificent with Beauty ever new!
Trembling I stood absorbed in dread Surprise,
And sudden Glory dimmed my aching Eyes.
Unnumber'd Pillars all around were placed,
Their Capitals with artful Sculpture graced;
Wide round the Roof a fictious Sky was raised,
A glorious Sun in the Meridian blazed,
Whose dazz'ling Beams on the rich Columns play,
And all around diffuse immortal Day;
A shining Phaenix on the effusive Rays
Fixed his aspiring Eye, with steady Gaze.
Beneath appeared a checkered Pavement bright
With sparkling Jaspanyx and Chrysolite:
Around, raised by creating Fiction's Hand,
Gay visionary Scenes in Order stand;
Quick at her touch, the obedient Figures rose,
And various Tales the glowr'ing Walls compose.
HERE mighty Jove amidst assembled GODS,
Raised on his starry Throne majestic Nods;
On his right Hand the dreadful Fates were seen,
And on his left was placed his haughty Queen.
There the pale Tyrant of the dreary Coasts,
Sways with his powerful Scepter fleeting Ghosts.
Blue Neptune scours along his watery Reign,
Now lifts the Waves aloft, now styles the raging Main.
Perched on a lofty Rock Aeolus stands,
And holds the Winds in strong coercive Bands.
Here the bright Queen of Beauty stood confessed;
There angry Mars in martial Honors dressed.
Alcides next appeared with warrior Pride,
The Lion's Spoil descending over his Side:
The watchful Dragon at his Feet was lain,
The Lernean Hydra, and dire Centaurs slain.
Here glowed Diana eager in the Chase,
And there Minerva shone with sober Grace.
There with the madning Rout close at his Heels
Young Bacchus jolly God, triumphant reels.
Gay Maia's Son high mounted on the Wind,
Cuts through the Air, and leaves the Clouds behind.
TOWARD the rosy East, great Mithra shone,
Bright in the Glories of a rising Sun.
Beneath in solemn Pomp with Hands uprear'd,
In flowing Robes the Magi all appeared.
Here the sage Zoroaster.
Bactrian poised his magic Wand,
Obedient Genii wait his dread Command.
There Thammuz lay, while from the gaping Wound
Poured (...) Stream, and sanguin'd all the Ground.
Amidst his impious Vot'ries Chemos stood,
And horrid Moloch smeared with Infant Blood.
NORTHWARD fierce Woden stood with Terrors crowned,
And angry Thor threw heedless Thunder round.
Fair Friga with her lovely Train was seen,
The beauteous Rival of the Paphian Queen.
Old Merlin strikes the Lyre, the wondering Throng
Around attend to his prophetic Song.
FAR southward wild disordered Forms arise,
Monkies and Serpents raised to Deities:
Mad superstitious Egypt these revered,
And to the hideous Tribe their Prayers preferred.
Maimed Memnon there seems on his Harp to play,
And hail Osiris bringing on the Day.
Pale Isis Crescent faintly glimmers here,
And barking Anubis presents the Year.
GAY sportive Fawns adorned the distant Scene,
In antic Measures skipping over the Green.
There Sea Nymphs wanton on the watery Gleam,
Ride on the Waves, or cut the yielding Stream.
Here the pale Sibyls range their mystic Leaves,
And Aetna with the laboring Cyclops heaves.
There craggy Rocks the Sons of Titan tear,
And Mountains shaggy Roots tremendous rear,
And threaten Jove with the promiscuous War.
BOLD Phaeton here urges his Request,
Ambitious Joy swells his presumptuous Breast,
Elate in Thought he mounts (...) Car,
The Sire attends; each Look denotes Despair:
Nor could the Parent's Tears the Youth restrain,
He laughs at Fear, and daring takes the Rein.
The fiery Steeds with glowing Ardor rise,
Nor heed his Hand, but wander through the Skies:
Now Thunders roll, pale Lightnings play around,
And the rash Boy soon felt the burning Wound.
PYGMALION there the Statue seems to move.
Assisted by the powerful Queen of Love;
With Rapture fired, to his exalting Breast
The animated Stone he fondly pressed.
Transported on each shining Feature gazed,
Now softened into Life, and saw amazed,
Awakened into Sense, her Eye Balls roll,
And heaving Breasts bespeak the entering Soul;
Saw on her Cheeks the rosy Tincture burn,
And felt her Lips the ravished Kiss return.
FAMED Daedalus here wings the midway Air,
And sighing sees his Son disdain his Care.
Young Icarus on spreading Pinions rose,
And scorned the Path his wary Sire had chose;
For Heaven the aspiring Boy his Flight begun,
But felt the Ardor of too near a Sun;
The tempered Wax before the scorching Ray
Melted, and lo! The loosened Wings gave Way:
And while his Father's Name his Accents gave,
Fell from the Height, and sunk beneath the Wave.
DIANA's Rage there hapless Acteon feels.
And sees his Hounds pursuing at his Heels;
Changed to a Stag, he bounds along the Plain,
In vain his Speed, he flies from Death in vain.
ELYSIUM next disclosed its blissful Bowers
With heavenly Fruitage decked, and radiant Flowers;
Celestial Amaranth eternal bloomed,
And the bright Plains with odorous Scents prefum'd:
Through the gay Meads an amber Current rolled,
Over Sands resplendent as Arabia's Gold:
On whose green Banks the happy shades reclined,
Quaff its sweet Streams, and leave their Cares behind.
WHATEVER Dreamer dreamed, or Poet sung.
Or lying Fable with her double Tongue
Told the believing World, here now appear,
Delusions all; for when approaching near
They shun the View, and shrink to empty Air.
HIGH in the Midst raised on her rolling Throne,
Sublimely eminent bright FANCY shone;
A glittering Tiara her Temples bound,
Rich set with sparkling Rubies all around;
Her azure Eyes rolled with majestic Grace,
And Youth eternal bloomed upon her Face;
A radiant bough, Ensign of her Command,
Of polished Gold, waved in her lilly Hand,
The same the Sibyl to Aeneas gave,
When the bold Trojan crossed the stygian Wave.
In silver Traces fixed unto her Car,
Four snowy Swans proud of the imperial Fair
Winged lightly on: Each in gay Beauty dressed
Smoothed the soft Plumage that adorned her Breast:
Sacred to her the lucent Chariot drew,
Or whether wildly through the Air she flew,
Or whether to the dreary Shades of Night
Oppressed with Gloom she downward bent her Flight;
Or proud aspiring sought the blessed Abodes,
And boldly shot among the assembled Gods.
ON her right Hand appeared the joyful Nine,
And on her left the Graces all divine:
Young infant Love soft on her Breast reclined,
And with his Mother's glowing Beauty shined
Her favorite Sons were ranged in Order round,
In three bright Bands with deathless Laurels crowned.
Great (...) here enjoyed superior Day,
Illuminated by bright Fancy's Ray.
(...) there whose magic Hand could give
Form to the Mass, and bid the Fiction live.
Timotheus next, whose animating Lyre
Cold Grief could charm, and thoughtless Rage inspire.
CLOSE at her Feet, a Bard in Rapture lost
Was placed, and wildly round his Eye Balls tossed.
Great Fancy was the Theme, the soothing Strain
In Floods of Pleasure thrilled through every Vein.
Thus, while the trembling Notes ascend on high,
He sung: Indulgent Queen of every Joy,
What Raptures fill the Breast thou do inspire,
The Lover's Transport, and the Poet's Fire!
At thy Command obedient Pleasure bends,
And rosy Beauty to thy Call attends;
The fanning Gales shall swelling spread thy Fame,
And echoing Groves resound thy glorious Name.
WHILE thus around my Eyes I wildly threw,
From Charm to Charm, and did each Wonder view,
Pleased on the heavenly Ravishment to gaze,
Rose with the Strain, or wantoned in the Blaze:
Her awful Silence the bright Goddess broke,
And frowning, thus in angry Mood she spoke.
Come thou, vain Mortal, here with searching Eye
Into the Secrets of our Court to pry!
What rash Presumption swells thy youthful Breast,
That in our Presence thus you have rudely pressed?
TREMBLING I kneeled, with Fear my Tongue was tied
A Space, when Speech regained, I thus replied.
With lowly Reverence I hither came,
Not to deride, but to adore thy Name;
To thee I ever dedicate my Song,
To hail thy Glories 'midst this suppliant Throng.
THEN from her shining Seat the heavenly Maid
Sweet smiling, thus in softened Accents said:
Then have thy Wish, here Mortal, take this Lyre.
Strike bold the Strings, and sing as I inspire.
Humbly I bowed, her mild Commands obeyed.
And careless over the Lyre my Fingers laid,
And soon with wild poetic Rage possessed
All my Frame shook, and laboring heaved my Breast;
By Fancy fired, enraptured thus I sung,
Whilst all around redoubling echoes rung.
ZEPHYR attend, or whether through the Grove
Soft whispering, you the leafy Branches move,
Or shaking Dulcet Dew-drops from each Flower,
Wide through the Plain vou spread the fragrant Shower;
Or whether Sylvia, panting in some Shade,
In tender Accents woos thee to her Aid;
No more in amorous sporting spend the Day,
No longer wanton on her Bosom play;
Fancy commands, obey the regal Fair,
Fancy commands! quick all your Wings prepare!
From the Sun's early Dawn, till where again
He sets his Glories in the azure Main;
Through every Clime her royal Mandate bear,
And bid Mankind to her bright Court repair.
Hear Earth's Inhabitants ye Mortals hear,
And let attentive Wonder fix each Ear:
Fancy invites, nor let her ask in vain,
Come, taste her heavenly Sweets, and hail her Reign!
ZEPHYR obedient on his Wings conveyed
The joyful Summons, warbling through the Glade;
Swiftly he swept along the spicy Vale,
Caught all its Sweets, and in a balmy Gale,
Gently he stole on the fond Lover's Ear,
And in loud Accents bid the Warrior hear.
FROM different Climes the thronging Nations come,
And rush promiscuously into the Dome;
Prostrate before her Throne their Hands they rear,
And to the Goddess loud prefer their Prayer.
Confused they all demand her promised Joys,
While the long Vaults resou^'^ their clamorous Noise.
As when loud Billows break upon the Shore,
Or over the opposing Rocks the Torrents roar.
Her glitt'rnig Branch impatient round she swung,
And instant Silence seized each babbling Tongue:
Abashed they trembling stood, and seemed to be
Transfixed in mute Insensibility.
Quick was dispersed each wild tumultuous Sound,
And the sort Breezes all were hushed around.
NOW swiftly forward false Delusion came,
Wrapped in a fulvid Cloud appeared the Dame.
Thin was her Form, in airy Garments dressed,
And grotesque Figures flamed upon her Vest;
In her right Hand, she held a magic Glass,
From whence around reflected Glories pass;
Blind by the subtle Rays, the giddy Crowd
Rush wildly from the Dome, and shout aloud:
The Few remain, whom Fancy did inspire,
Yet undeceived by vain Delusion's Fire.
A TROOP of shining Forms the next came on,
Foremost bright Nature's aweful Goddess shone.
Fair Truth she led in spotless white arrayed,
And pleasing Beauty, sweet celestial Maids,
Where Truth and Nature aid the great Design,
Beauty attends, and makes it all divine.
SWEET Poesy was seen their Steps behind,
With golden Tresses sporting in the Wind;
In careless Plaits did her bright Garments flow,
And nodding Laurels waved around her Brow:
Sweetly she struck the String, and sweetly sung,
The attentive Tribe on the soft Accent hung.
It Is here is to sing who great in Arms excel,
Who bravely conquered, or who glorious fell;
Heroes in Verse still gain a deathless Name,
And ceaseless Ages their Renown proclaim.
Often to Philosophy she lends her Aid,
And treads the Sage's solitary Shade:
Her great first Task is nobly to inspire
The human Soul with Virtue's sacred Fire.
THEN (...) forward moved in Garlands dressed,
The Rainbow's varied Tints adorned her Vest.
Great Nature's Rival -- quick (...) her Command.
Beauty attends, and aids her powerful Hand;
At her creative Touch gay Fictions glow.
Bright Tulips bloom, and opening Roses blow:
The Canvas see, what pleasing Prospects rise!
What varying Beauty strikes our wondering Lies!
Chilled Winter's wastes, or Spring's delightful Green,
Hot Summer's Pride, or Autumn's yellow Scene:
Here Lawns are spread, there towering Forests wave,
The Heights we fear, or wish the cooling Lave.
HER blooming Sister in her Hand she led,
Joy in her Eye, fair Sculpture heav'n-taught Maid:
It Is here is to stone, a mimic Life to give,
Heroes and Sages at her Call revive;
See flowery Orators with outstretch'd Hand
Addressed to speak, in glowing Marble stand!
SUDDEN I heard soft Sounds, a pleasing Strain,
Music advanced with all her heavn'ly Train;
Sweetly enraptured, then my Pulse beat high,
And my Breast glowed, fraught with unusual Joy.
It Is Harmony can every Passion move,
Give Sorrow ease, or melt the Soul to Love;
Exulting Pleasure to her Call attends,
Even stormy Rage to powerful Music bends.
WITH Turrets crowned bright Architecture shone,
The lovely Maid, with easy Steps came on;
Graceful her Mein, her Looks celestial shined,
Where Majesty and softning Beauty joined
At her Command see lofty Piles ascend,
Columns aspire, triumphal Arches bend.
ASTRONOMY with proud aspiring Eye,
Gazed on the glowing Beauties of the Sky.
Her Vest with glittering Stars was spangled over,
And in her Hand a Telescope she bore,
With this she marks the rolling Planets Way,
Or where portentous Comets dreadful stray.
THOUGH last not least Philosophy was seen,
Slow was her Step, and awful was her Mien;
A Volume open in her Hand she held,
With Nature's Law the ample Page was filled:
It Is here is great Nature's wondrous Depths t'explore,
Or to the Gods in heavenly Rapture soar.
WITH these bright Fancy's Sons their Hours employ,
Pursue their Lore, and taste each rising Joy.
NOW suddenly the Scene was changed again,
And brought to View Delusion's spreading Reign;
There intermingl'd Hills and Rocks were seen,
Here shady Groves and flowery Lawns between.
Full in the Front a lofty Pile was reared,
The Architecture old and rude appeared.
Delusion here resides, within confined
Gay fictions lurk, and Dreams of every Kind.
Constant as Waters roll or Flames ascend,
Hither their Course the rising Vapors bend;
Dressed by her Hand they shine with mimic Bloom,
Or at her Word their Nothingness resume:
But still from Fancy all her Power she draws,
Bows to her Name, and owns her sacred Laws.
Some in light Dreams the sleeping Senses move,
And led by them, the Thoughts unsettled rove:
Others more bold, majestic Portments take,
And Plague delighted those who dream awake:
Such are the Dreams of those who thirst for Power,
The superstitious, and a Thousand more.
Others usurp the Features of the Dead,
And shake the Torch around the Murth'rer's Bed;
Affright the Vigil, or in wanton Mirth
Make Fools seek hidden Treasures in the Earth,
Or lead the weary Traveller awry,
Or rising Flame Amazement in the Sky.
NOW with the Crowd Delusion forward came,
A Troop of Phantoms fluttered round the Dame;
In Bands the Throng she instantly divides,
A Phantom over every Band presides.
FOREMOST a bright majestic Form appeared,
And in her Hand the honored Fasces reared:
Forward she strode with more than virgin Pace,
And lear'd upon the Crowd, with haughty Grace;
Power was her Name, assuming selfish Pride,
And glittering Pomp attended by her Side.
Her favorite Son high on a Seat she placed,
With mimic Gems and glassy Bawbles graced:
Close by his Side was seated winkl'd Care,
While Envy viewed him with malicious Stare;
Sternly he eyed around the servile Throng,
While loud Acclaim proceeded from each Tongue;
But from the giddy Height devolving soon,
Reproach, Contempt and Shame is on him thrown.
Eager another mounts the Chair of Power,
And shines the empty Pageant of an Hour.
DAME Superstition was the next came on,
Bright on her Head the gilded Mitre shone,
Varying her Aspect, now she raised her Eye,
And seemed bewildered with extatic Joy;
Then sudden Gloom her Countenance depressed,
Tears rolled apace, and Sorrow heaved her Breast;
Now calm again, she silent viewed around
The prostrate Crowd bent humbly to the Ground:
Then caught with sudden Rage she hurled about
Her thundering Anathema among the Rour.
AN aged wrinkl'd Hag the next appeared,
Four mouldring Turrets over her Temples reared.
In Rows like Beads the faithful Medals tied,
In ornamental Rust adorned her Side:
A broken Column of an ancient Date
She dragged, and sinking seemed beneath the Weight;
The Column all admire, the Medals more,
"The Inscription value, but the Rust adore."
THE next to her approached a reverend Dame,
In Trophies great from Insects torn she came;
With stately Step she trod the Plain along,
And threw her Treasure 'midst the admiring Throng:
Forward with Joy, each curious Mortal sprang,
This caught a gaudy Wing, and that a pointed Fang.
BEFORE the giddy Throng, which now advanced,
With mincing Step gay disolution danced;
Then sudden stopped, and staring on the Crowd
She frowned, then smiled, and giggl'd out aloud;
The numerous Throng attending round the Fair,
Mimick'd her Gestures, and assumed her Air.
A Crowd of Mortals here with wondering Eyes,
All pale and trembling gazed upon the Skies,
Where on blue Plains opposing Hosts engage,
While Shouts are heard, and all the Battle's rage;
Amidst the Throng, stood cold and heartless Fear,
The Fall of Nations whispering in each Ear.
HERE pallid Specter gleam'd, and there were seen
The fairy Train in Gambols on the Green:
Through miry Ways the Rustic journeys round,
Nor dares presuming tread the hallowed Ground:
Dire Ills await the Wretch, so fable sings,
Or pinched all over, or pierced with thousand Stings.
THE Structure entering, as around I threw
My wondering Eyes, gay Forms arose to View,
False Pleasure here the borrowed Form of Joy
Assumed, and rolled around her sparkling Eye:
But who allured by her enchanting Song,
From Virtue shrinks, and mingles with her Throng,
Soon sees her Beauties fade, and to his Eyes
Deformity and sad Disease arise.
IN a dark Corner hell-born Jealousy,
A Wan and haggard Spright, I did espy;
Watchful she rolled her ghastly Eyes around,
And cautious trod, to catch the whispering Sound:
Her Heart forever deathless Vultures tear,
And by her Side stalk Anguish and Despair:
Cursed is the Wretch with her dire Rage possessed,
When fancied Ills destroy his wonted Rest.
PALE Avarice appeared with Looks of Care,
And clasped her Bags with never-ceasing Fear;
Close following her a wretched Spectre came,
With tattered Garments, Poverty her Name,
In vain her Search t'elude still Avarice strives,
Amidst her Store in endless Want she lives.
FALSE Honor here I saw all gayly dressed,
Glass were her Beads, and tinsel'd was her Vest,
Formed in barbaric Ages, rude her Mien,
And in her Hand the sanguin'd Sword was seen;
Not stained like Patriots in their Country's Cause,
To save Religion, or support the Laws:
In private Strife the Crimson Torrents flow,
Their Country wounded by each fatal Blow.
WITH checkered hood Dissembling stood behind.
And Falsehood coining lies to cheat Mankind;
While with smooth Art deceitful Faery
Addressed the Ear of listening Vanity.
THE Gloom was now disclosed, where Spleen remains,
Stored with unnumber'd Ills and varied Pains;
As powerful Fancy works, here Mortals are
Transformed to Glass, or China's brittle Ware,
Oppressed by Spleen, no longer Joy they know,
For ever tortured with imagined Woe.
AS thus I onward moved with wandering Pace,
And viewed the varied Wonders of the Place;
Just Heaven, I cried, oh! Give me to restrain
Imagination with a steady Rein!
Though often she leads through Pleasure's flowr'y Ways,
In Errors thorny Paths she sometimes strays.
Let me my Hours with solid Judgment spend,
Nor to Delusion's airy Dreams attend;
By Reason guided we shall only know
Those heavenly Joys which Fancy can bestow.
FINIS.

