The best Art of Dress: Or, Early Piety most amiable and ornamental.

A SERMON, Preached at Lexington, TO A religious Society of young Men, On
Lord's Day Evening Sept. 13. 1761.

By JONAS CLARKE, A.M. Pastor of the Church in Lexington.

Whom shall he teach knowledge? And whom shall he make to understand doctrine?
-- Them that are weaned from the milk, and drawn from the breasts: For precept
must be upon precept, precept upon precept, line upon line, line upon line,
here a little and there a little. Isai. 28. 9, 10. BOSTON: Printed by D. and J.
KNEELAND, opposite to the Prison in Queen Street. M,DCC,LXII.

To the Children and Youth of my Pastoral Charge.
DEARLY BELOVED,
THE ensuing Discourse, at first preached at the request of some, and now
published at the desire of many of you, is dedicated to you ALL, as a small
token of my sincere love, and of my best wishes for the welfare and happiness
of your precious and immortal souls.

THAT that, which pleased you in the hearing, may, by the grace of GOD, profit
you in the reading; -- That you may be early sound walking in the Truth, built
up in the most holy Faith, and adorned with every grace and virtue of the holy
Spirit; and that you may be for a Name, a Praise and a Glory upon Earth, and
have a place at the right hand of Christ, in Heaven, at last; is the hearty
desire and earnest prayer of,

Your sincere Friend, And servant for Jesus's Sake, J. Clarke.

To the Reader,
THE following discourse was composed in haste, and preached without the least
thought of its ever being made more public: But at the repeated requests of
many young people in Lexington, the Author has at last consented to the
printing of it, hoping that it may, by the blessing of Heaven, be of some
service to some of the rising Generation, at least in his own Town. -- If it
should fall into the hands of any that did not hear it, it is taken for granted
the candid and judicious Reader will consider the occasion and design of it,
and to whom it was more especially addressed; and then he hopes to find an easy
pardon, for that plainness of speech, and freedom of expression, as well as for
some repetitions, he has used in it.

The best Art of Dress: Or, Early Piety most amiable and ornamental.
PROVE. I. 9. For they shall be an Ornament of Grace unto thy Head, and Chains
about thy Neck.
AS it is a time in which mankind in general are much concerned to be adorned
with the most agreeable ornaments, and dressed in the best fashion; and as it
is the earnest enquiry of many of our young people in special, -- How we shall
dress -- how shall we adorn ourselves, so as to appear most amiable and
engaging, most lovely and endearing, to each other, and to the world? -- So,
willing to please and conform myself to the humors and inclinations of my
young friends, as far as can be supposed consistent with the glory of God, and
the honor and interest of my Master and LORD, I have now chosen a subject,
which naturally leads me to answer this important enquiry. -- A subject, which
leads me to tell you, O young people, what ornaments will adorn you, what
fashion will become you, and in what garb you will appear with the greatest
advantage to each other, and to the world; and, what is more than all what will
render you, at the same time, amiable in the sight of the great and glorious
GOD of heaven and earth! -- For once, then, be persuaded to attend and learn
the best fashion from the pulpit, and the art of dress from the word of GOD.

THE evident design of the royal penman, in writing the book of proverbs, was
to instruct all, but especially young people and children, in the words of
wisdom and understanding. And as he was endowed with a spirit of wisdom
superior to his fellow-men, the holy Spirit, not willing that his wisdom should
die with him, has graciously preserved these excellent remains of it, that we,
by attending to and practicing his directions, might be made wise unto
salvation. And as, by the manner of address herein used, it is evident, that
these instructions were intended for his own children, as well as other young
people: So in our context he informs them what true wisdom and understanding
consisted in. The fear of the LORD is the beginning of knowledge: but fools
despise wisdom and instruction. Ver. 7.
He then goes on to direct them how to obtain the true wisdom, even by
attending to the instructions given them by their parents or teachers. My son,
says he, hear the instruction of thy father, and forsake not the law of thy
mother. Ver. 8.
And for a motive to excite them to a cordial compliance with this advice, he
tells them how amiable and beautiful these seize will render such as are
possessed of them; as in the words before us. -- For they shall be an ornament
of grace unto thy head, and chains about thy neck.

By this the wise man intends to recommend early piety and godliness, as what
is most amiable and ornamental; and as what would make them appear with much
greater advantage, than any external ornaments whatever: And the clothing of
virtue and religion (if the expression may be admitted,) as what would be most
becoming on young people, both in the fight of GOD and men.

HEREIN, therefore, appears the great and real excellency of virtue and
religion, as they answer all the reasonable desires of mankind in all their
pursuits, and make them happy in the good esteem of GOD and men.

PEOPLE are much for the fashion, and young people for those ornaments which
they think beautiful and excellent, and they are apt to set much by them, and
value themselves highly upon them, when obtained. -- Can a maid (says the
Prophet) forget her ornaments, or a bride her arise? Jer. 2. 32.
Now the royal penman, wisely considering this fatal fondness for things vain
and trilling, and considering also that crowns for the head, chains for the
neck, and the like, were the richest and choicest ornaments of that day, under
these striking metaphors, endeavors to represent how graceful and ornamental
the early practice of virtue and religion would be, to such as were prevailed
upon to engage in it, in youth or childhood. -- My son hear the instruction of
thy father, and forsake not the law of thy mother: For they shall be an
ornament of grace unto thy head, and chains about thy neck. -- As if he had
said -- Be advised, O ye children and young people, now in youth, which is the
best time, to make yourselves for life, for eternity, to hearken to the
instructions of those that teach you the doctrines and duties of religion, and
wisely attend to the law of the LORD, for they, the precepts and doctrines of
the law of GOD, when sincerely and constantly attended to and put in practice,
shall be infinitely more beautiful and becoming than all other ornaments,
however dear and excellent; yea, they shall be even as an ornament of grace to
your heads, and infinitely more amiable and engaging than chains about your
necks. -- This will, therefore, be your highest wisdom and greatest glory.

AND now, that the wise man was entirely right in his sentiments, and just in
his conclusion, in the text, will be abundantly evident, if we only consider
these two things, viz.

FIRST, That true piety, or godliness, is, in itself, the greatest excellency
of man. -- -- And,

SECONDLY, That it is most amiable and ornamental in young people.

To illustrate and improve these two propositions, is, therefore, the design of
the ensuing discourse. -- And I cannot but hope, that, by the blessing of GOD,
when these truths are well weighed and applied, you will all, with one consent,
be led to aspire after that art of dress, which consists not in that outward
adorning of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of
apparel; but in the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible,
even in that adorning, which in the sight of GOD is of great price. 1 Pet. 3.
3, 4.
Then will you be amiable in the sight of GOD, and all good men; and even
sinners and profane persons, who are, of course, enemies to the godly, will not
have it in their power to deprive you of true beauty, amiableness and
excellency; but, "like the rising light," your beauties shall shine with
increasing luster, till they arrive at the meridian of perfection in eternal
glory! Prove. 4. 18.
-- But not to digress -- --

WE are, in the first place, to prove, that true piety, or godliness, is, in
itself, the greatest excellency of man.

I SUPPOSE, that it will be readily admitted by all, that seriously weigh and
consider the nature and reason of things, in themselves and consequences, that
whatever recommends us to the favor of GOD, and renders us acceptable to him,
must be in itself, most excellent and worthy: -- For nothing, but what is
intrinsically excellent, can be supposed to be so acceptable with that GOD, who
is most perfectly acquainted with the nature and value of things, and esteems
or disregards, as they are either valuable or worthless.

Now, that true piety does indeed recommend us to GOD, will be readily
acknowledged, by all who consider, that it is this alone which renders us fit
for his favor, and worthy his acceptance: -- For it is only by this, that we
are conformed to his will and image, made holy and humble, and meet to receive
the tokens of his love. And hence it is the express declaration of GOD himself,
-- To this man will I look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit,
and trembles at my word. Isai. 66. 2.
This poor, humble and contrite spirit is the true, genuine spirit of piety and
is not, cannot be, found in any, but such as are pious and godly, but such as
tremble at GOD's word. -- And therefore, since only such, and none but such, as
are possessed of this excellent spirit, that the GOD of heaven looks on with
any complacency or delight: We safely conclude, that true piety recommends us
to GOD, and is, of consequence, the greatest excellency and perfection of man.
Piety is here used in the most extensive sen of the word, as including the
whole of religion; so that it ought not to be concluded, from what is here
asserted, that the author supposes the performance of the duties of religion to
be a meritorious cause of acceptance with GOD: But, on the contrary, it is
taken for granted, that in the practice of true piety, all due deference is
paid to the method of grace and terms of acceptance, fully pointed out to us in
GOD's holy word.


EXTERNAL beauty, great riches, and the like, may make us admired and revered
by a crowd of stupid, unthinking mortals, like ourselves; but will be far, very
far, from rendering us glorious, or (...) acceptable in the eyes of GOD, or good
men. inward beauty and excellence, inward worth and glory, are the only
qualifications which will render you beloved by GOD, or worthy respect and
esteem from men. -- "The king's daughter," the church, "is all glorious
within," being adorned with the virtues and graces of the holy spirit; and this
is of more consequence to render her amiable to her LORD and King, even Christ,
than her clothing, tho of wrought gold and needle work," Psalm. 45. 13. 14.
-- than all external show, pomp or grandeur. And hence it is, that the Saints
are (fitly) called, "The excellent ones of the earth." Psalm. 16. 3.


ON the other hand; admit the wicked are possessed of ever so many external
virtues, beauties or accomplishments, they have no beauty or comeliness in the
sight of GOD; but so far from being beautiful or precious, are the pious and
godly are, they are even (...) detestable, those whom GOD's soul hates and
(...). -- So that, whether we consider piety, as it appears in the character of
those who sincerely practice it, or its opposite, in the conduct and character
of those who do not; it evinces the truth of the proposition proposed to be
considered. Which leads us, as proposed, in the next place,

SECONDLY, To show, that piety is most amiable and ornamental in young people.

THE virtues and graces of the blessed Spirit, appearing in the godly lives of
those that are young, may be fitly said, in the language of the text, to be "an
ornament of grace to the head, and chains about the neck." For it is not easy
to conceive of, much less to express, the inimitable beauties and invaluable
excellencies of a godly youth. The apostle John therefore, with very good
reason, said -- "I have no greater joy than to hear that my Children walk in
the truth;" 3 John 4 Ver.
-- are truly religious in the morning of life. -- In short, had we the
strength of Sampson, the beauty of Abjalom, 2 Samuel 14. 25.
the wisdom of Solomon, and the eloquence of Ezekiel, and a thousand other
human perfections, all these things would not render us so beautiful, so
pleasing and so acceptable in the sight of GOD, as the early practice of virtue
and religion. -- One spark of true grace, the least degree of true piety, would
more than balance, would infinitely outweigh them all! -- But that you may be
fully convinced of the truth of what is here asserted, it may not be improper
to descend to particulars, under this head, and offer a few things to your
serious consideration. And,

1st, HERE, true piety will cover the spots and deformities of the soul, which
have been (...) by sin, and render it amiable and lovely; and therefore the
earlier practiced, the more graceful and ornamental.

THE soul of man, though noble and excellent, pure and unspotted in its
original make and formation, is depraved and deformed, polluted and defiled by
reason of sin. -- Sin has wounded and disfigured its beautiful features and
excellencies; so that it is absolutely necessary that something be done in
order to cover and conceal, or rather take away, these spots and blemishes,
contracted by sin, and to restore beauty and amiableness to the features of the
soul. And this can be effected no other way, but by the grace of GOD ruling in
the heart and governing in the life, and influencing to the practice of piety
and virtue, according to the dictates of the divine word. Or, in other words,
we can take no better method to bring about this happy change of deformity for
beauty, than to devote ourselves, sincerely and without the least reserve, to
the practice of virtue and religion.

WE are quickly sensible of our natural imperfections, sagacious in finding out
deformities in our bodies and disfigurements in our features, and are wise to
conceal them from the eye of the world: -- Yea, and this is one great reason,
why we are generally so fond of dress and ornaments. -- But why so backward, so
blind and so unconcerned about the deformities sin has caused in our souls, the
nobler part? -- Is it not, because we do not consider, that virtue and religion
will not only cover a multitude of sins, conceal the innumerable spots which
are contracted by sin, and remove the deformities with which our souls are
disfigured, but also adorn them, and render them truly beautiful and amiable?
-- Surely if we realized these things, we could not (one would think) rest
contented, while we appeared so hateful and odious, in the sight of GOD and all
good men.

SIN, as we hinted above, has wounded and disfigured the beautiful features of
the soul: -- But true piety will rectify these deformities, and restore the
beauties of it. The robes of the Saints are often compared to fine linen, white
and clean: -- That "righteousness," therefore, "which is of GOD by faith in
Christ Jesus," Phil. 3. 9.
will thoroughly cleanse the soul from these spots and deformities, and
sanctifying grace will take away all these blemishes and imperfections, and set
a new face on things in it; so that, from being spotted and defiled, deformed
and polluted by sin, by the sincere practice of true piety and religion, it
will become fair and beautiful, white and clean, and be found "without spot, or
wrinkle, or any such thing." Ephesians. 5. 27.
-- O how graceful then, and how ornamental must this be in youth, which is so
often defiled and disgraced by unclean and polluting sins! -- But,

2dly, ANOTHER reason, why early piety is so truly amiable, is, because it is
of the utmost importance to our happiness, as immortal beings, that we thus
devote ourselves to the service of GOD.

IT is the soul that is the principal excellency of man. It is this excellent
and immortal spirit, which is in man, that gives him the pre-eminence to the
beasts of the field; this which makes him capable of serving and enjoying his
Maker, and this which made him so highly valued by Christ, as to induce him to
give such an invaluable price, as his own most precious blood, for his
redemption. -- Now if we are slothful and negligent about our souls, and do
not, in the practice of piety and virtue, seek to have them adorned with the
graces and virtues of the blessed Spirit, we lose all right and title to this
distinguishing pre-eminence, and sink beneath the very beasts that perish. But
if we wisely care for our souls, and early assert our right of superiority,
and, by the practice of godliness, keep up the order of things and our dignity
in the creation; then do we take the best and most effectual method to honor
our Creator and Redeemer, and to secure our own everlasting glory and
happiness. -- But I pass to observe --

3dly, THAT true piety renders men like their Father, which is in heaven: And
therefore the sooner it is practiced, the greater the glory. It was the glory,
as well as happiness of Adam, before the Fall, that he was created "in the
image of GOD, and after his likeness." Genesis 1. 26.
And for this reason, whenever this glorious image of the blessed GOD, is
repaired and restored in sinful men, it is their glory, it is their excellency:
And, the sooner this is done, the more glorious, the more happy. -- -- "The
boary bead," says the wise man, "is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way
of righteousness." Prove. 16. 31.
-- How very glorious then is this crown, when found upon the head of a youth,
who, in the morning of (...), is found walking in the way of righteousness! --
Surely that is, that must be, our greatest excellency, which early demonstrates
us to be "the sons and daughters of the LORD Almighty:" 2 Cor. 6. 18.
And we may, in a much higher sense, say of every such youth, as was said once
of the brethren of Gideon; "Each one of them resembles the Children of a King!"
Judge. 8. 18.


4thly, ANOTHER consideration, which argues, that early piety is most amiable
and ornamental, is, that this is what GOD himself approves of and takes great
delight in.

GOD is a Being that loves righteousness, and hates iniquity: He takes pleasure
in them that fear him, and hope in his mercy: Yea, and the upright are his
delight. This is evident from many passages of the sacred scriptures; but what
puts it beyond all dispute, as to early piety, is his own declaration, in which
he expressly says, for our encouragement hereto, -- "I love than that love me;
and those that seek me early shall find me." Prove. 8, 17.
-- Which abundantly manifests, how pleasing it is to GOD, to have the
Beginning of life devoted to his service.

As ornaments are put on to make persons appear lovely, and attracting to
others: So, if any would have the great GOD early take delight in them, the
only way is to begin early in the practice of virtue and religion, early to
seek and serve the LORD. Agreeably we find, that the early piety of Samuel,
Josiah, Timothy, and others, rendered them, as the word of GOD informs us,
objects of the divine complacency and delight.

WHEN Jesus beheld the young man, who had been sober and virtuous from his
youth up, it is said, He loved Him, Mar. 10. 21.
as one that bid fair for the kingdom of GOD. And surely, if he loved him for
his morality, he will love you for your piety: For this has a greater
excellency. -- And don't you desire to be beloved by Christ! -- Don't you
desire to be interested in the favor of GOD, thro'a Blessed Redeemer! -- But
not to enlarge here. -- We must proceed to observe -- --

5thly, THAT early piety is the best ornament for a youth, as we are not
exposed thereby to those vanities and temptations, to which we are often
subjected by others. Ornaments in dress and appearance, as far as decent and
becoming christians, are far from being disallowed by the word of GOD: -- But
here is the evil and the iniquity of them, -- We are apt (especially in youth)
to be proud of them, to set our hearts upon them; and so they prove snares to
our souls, incentives to our lusts, and moths to our precious time, which ought
to be more freely and fully devoted to GOD and his service. But now, as to the
ornaments of early piety, they are not only free from all these vanities and
temptations, but excellent preventives against them. For they, that wisely
adhere to the advice of our LORD, who exhorts us to "watch and pray," never
need to fear being "led into temptation;" Mat. 26. 41.
or, at least, they have reason to hope, that they shall not be taken with any
temptation, but such as are common to men: For "GOD is faithful," -- says St.
Paul, -- "who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but
will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear
it." 1 Cor. 10. 13.


6thly, WE may take notice further here, that the ornaments of true piety are
the most lasting ornaments; and therefore, the sooner we are possessed of them,
the greater our happiness. Whether it is beauty or strength, sprightliness or
wit; -- whether it is the external ornaments of dress and fashion; or whatever
it is that youth are apt to value and plume themselves upon; at best, these
things are all uncertain, and will quickly fail and vanish away. -- It is easy
with him, who gave, to take away, or cause them all "to consume like a moth."
-- A fit of sickness, a sudden casualty, or a Blast from the LORD, may quickly
destroy them: And then, where is their boasting, where their joy! -- It is a
world of disappointments in which we live; and therefore, tho to day we have
riches and pleasure, and the ornaments of life at command; yet to morrow,
perhaps, an end is put to the pleasing dream, -- we are stripped of all! -- At
farthest, when we die, we must leave these vanities behind us, and bid an
everlasting adieu to all the pleasures and ornaments of the present life! --
But no casualty, no unforeseen event, no Blast from the LORD shall ever deprive
us of the solid pleasures of religion, of the amiable ornaments of early piety:
-- But early beautified with the virtues and graces of the Blessed Spirit, in
youth engaged and confirmed in the service of the LORD, and adorned with the
graceful ornaments of religion, the increasing beauties of early piety will
neither fade in death, nor consume in the grave, but continue to flourish in
unfading bloom, through all the scenes of an endless Eternity.

AND therefore, though we have not so much of the beauty and bravery of the
ornaments of dress and fashion, as others; yet, if we have the grace of GOD,
and the witness of our consciences, that we have feared the LORD from our
youth, we have the true wisdom, which is the true riches, and a title to the
"durable riches and righteousness," and to the unfading glories of the
celestial world, which GOD has in store for them that love him; and these
"shall be an ornament of grace to our head," and infinitely prefer able to
"chains" of gold "about our neck:" For these shall make our faces to shine,
even when the Heavens shall be no more. -- -- O let not our youth, then, boast
or plume themselves in this, that, or the other beautiful perfection, or
ornament; but let them, that glory, glory in this, that they know the LORD, and
have early devoted themselves to his service and glory! Jer. 9. 23, 24.
-- But once more, -- --

7thly, WE may observe, that early piety is peculiarly amiable and ornamental,
as it is very rare and seldom that we have instances of it. Was it the general
practice of the children and youth of GOD's people, as soon as they came to
years of moral action, and had capacities of knowing GOD, religion and their
duty, to devote themselves to the Fear and Service of God, and sincerely to
engage in the practice of virtue and religion, it would not be so difficult,
humanely speaking, to put on those beautiful ornaments of early piety. But
since, in order to this, they must stem the torrent, not only of their own
lusts and passions, vicious inclinations and vile affections, but also the same
in most, or all their intimates and companions, it renders it peculiarly
difficult to become truly religious in youth.

SINCE then, the difficulties to be surmounted, in order to the practice of
early piety, are truly great and numerous, it argues an excellent taste, a
solid judgment, an ardent as well as holy zeal, and a firm and persevering
resolution, in such as are truly pious and godly in the morning of life; and
that even above their years: Of consequence therefore, as piety in such appears
in the melt amiable and advantageous light; so, in proportion to these
difficulties, does the beauty, of the ornaments of early piety, shine with an
embellished luster upon them. And hence it is recorded 1 Kin. 14. 13.
to the honor of Jeroboam's son abijah, that "in him there was found some good
thing toward the LORD GOD of Israel, even in the house of Jeroboam! -- In like
manner, when, in "an evil and an adulterous generation," Mat. 12. 39.
there are a few which separate themselves from the wicked, set themselves to
seek and serve the LORD, and in youth engage in the practice of religion, the
early piety of such must be allowed to appear most beautiful, most amiable. --
The Rarity of that, which is in itself so amiable and excellent, renders it (if
possible) still more beautiful and engaging.

IN short, and to sum up all in a word: -- There is every possible argument,
from reason and scripture, of duty and interest, to prove, "that early piety is
most amiable, advantageous and ornamental: As it preserves the godly youth from
innumerable fatal evils, which the profane and thotless contract and subject
themselves to; and as it will save them many bitter reflections, which others
must make upon themselves for their folly and madness, in unreasonable delays,
when they come to be "ashamed, yea, even confounded, because they bear the
reproach of their youth:" Jer. 31, 19
-- But more especially, as those, who "remember their Creator in the days of
their youth," Eccles 12 1.
do, hereby, put on the most beautiful ornaments in the best time, and secure
to themselves the richest and most glorious rewards at last: For unto such will
be given "an ornament of grace and a crown of glory," which shall never sade
away! -- But this for the illustration of the two general heads, proposed to be
spoken to under the words. -- We pass now to make some practical reflections,
by way of -- --

IMPROVEMENT.
I. WHAT we have heard of the very great excellency of piety, as in itself
considered, teaches the very great blindness and folly of all such as do not
see beauty and amiableness enough in it, to engage them to become truly pious
and sincerely religious. The great design of religion, even from the beginning,
was to lead men to perfection and happiness. And that it is well adapted to
this end, must be admitted by all, who seriously weigh and consider the
precepts, requirements and promises of it. -- How blind, how foolish must we
be, then, not to be charmed and engaged to a ready compliance with the divine
doctrines and duties of it? -- Is it not because, as is intimated in sacred
writ of others, who rejected the counsel of GOD to their own confusion, -- is
it not because we see no beauty nor comeliness in Christ, and his blessed
doctrines, that we should desire them? Isai 53. 2.
-- -- Verily, my brethren, if this is our unhappy state, we may certify
ourselves, that it is because "the God of this world bath blinded the eyes of
our minds, that we should not see the light of the truth, 2 Cor. 4. 4.
stopped our ears that we should not hear the moving Calls of religion, and
hardened our hearts that we should not receive and embrace the instructions of
Wisdom: For if the beauty of holiness, the amiableness of piety, and the
advantages of religion are hid, they are hid to them that are lost -- lost to
all sense of reason and duty, -- of interest and hapiness! -- -- O let these
things, then, be seriously attended to and considered by us; and let every
person, of every age and character, be exhorted to search and see, whether what
has been now offered does not severely reprove them of this Blindness, of this
Folly and Madness! -- But, -- --

II. As this discourse was more especially designed for the awakening and
instruction of young people; let what has been said, serve as a reproof to all
such as have been ashamed of becoming religious betimes, -- to all such as have
been ashamed to "remember their Creator in the days of their youth:" Eccles.
12. 1.
-- Yea, and such are severely reproved hereby. -- For is early piety, indeed,
most amiable, most advantageous, most ornamental -- How strange, how surprising
is it, that those, who are most desirous of being amiable, and most fond of
engaging ornaments, should be ashamed of, and so stupid as to reject the most
engaging ornaments! -- What, my friends! -- ashamed of your ornaments, your
beauty, your glory! -- "Can a maid, says the Prophet, forget her ornaments, or
a bride her attire?" Jer. 2. 32.
-- Would this be strange, and surprising? And is it not more strange, and a
matter of still greater astonishment, that you, who are sons and Daughters of
Zion, should forget, or even be ashamed of that alone, which would render you
worthy your character, and worthy the love of GOD, or the esteem of men? -- Are
there any of this character, now before the LORD, let me entreat them, as they
value their best interest and happiness, for once seriously to consider the
words of him, who said -- Whosoever -- shall be ashamed of me, and of my words
in this adulterous and sinful generation; of him also shall the Son of Man be
ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father, with the holy angels. Mar.
8. 38.
Again,

III. WHAT has been said is matter of encouragement to all, who have began in
youth to fear, to seek and serve the LORD; -- that have been persuaded early to
seek after "the ornaments of grace and the crown of glory," in the sincere
practice of virtue and holiness. Notwithstanding the great degeneracy of the
present times, it is to be hoped, that there are some, who are seeking the
blessed and glorious ornaments of early piety, we have been speaking of, in the
preceding discourse; who, like the seven thousand in Israel, 1 Kin. 19. 18.
of old, have neither bowed the Knee to Baal, nor any other God, but are
sincere worshippers of the living and true GOD, who seek to know his will, and
to conform themselves to it.

PARTICULARLY, may we not hope that you, my young Brethren, at whose desire and
upon whose account (more especially) we are now assembled in GOD's house, are,
this day, witnesses for GOD, that religion is amiable and ornamental; -- and
that it is your greatest concern and highest happiness, to seek and secure to
yourselves that ornament of grace, and that crown of glory, which Wisdom has
promised to her children? Let what has been offered, then, serve to confirm and
encourage you, though few in number, still to continue steadfast in the work of
the LORD: And, by so much the more you meet with discouragements from within
and from without, by so much the more be exhorted to be steadfast in GOD's holy
Covenant, resting upon the promises and encouragements of his sacred word. --
Realize the amiableness and advantages of early piety; and remembering -- yea,
being confident of this very thing, that He which has begun a good work in
you, is able to perform it until the day of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1. 6.
be exhorted to follow on to know the LORD, and to labor after true Grace,
that spiritual adorning, which, in the sight of GOD, is of great price.

You have heard, -- you have seen, by what has been said, in the preceding
discourse, that there is nothing more ornamental, nothing more graceful, than
early piety. -- This is spoken for your encouragement -- But then, least you
should think, that I applaud you and censure others, you will permit me to deal
plainly with you: -- For I mean not to flatter, but only to encourage the
practice of those things, that are excellent and praiseworthy. And therefore,
at the same time, that I endeavor to excite in you an holy ambition to appear
eminent in the service of the LORD, let me caution and warn you to be faithful
and persevering, -- faithful in the internal, as well as external part of
religion; -- and that you serve the LORD with a perfect heart and willing mind,
as well as by an external compliance with your duty. -- They, and they only,
will have a right to the ornament of grace and crown of glory, who are found
sincere and without spot. O be advised, then, to deal faithfully with
yourselves, make diligent search, yea, and frequent researches into your
hearts, that you may see what are the springs of action, in your setting
yourselves to seek and serve the LORD. -- Satan is a subtle adversary,
frequently transforms himself into an angel of light, and, under the guise of
religion, ensnares and entraps many unwary souls, and leads them captive at his
will, when he could circumvent them no other way. -- Search and examine
critically, then, whether, after all your pretenses in religion, this is not
your unhappy case? -- Particularly, ask yourselves, whether you have not, even
in your meetings for the service of GOD, aimed more at distinction and notice
among Men, than at the honor and glory of GOD, in the good of your precious
and immortal souls? -- Whether Pride and Vanity are not at the bottom of all
your religious services? -- Verily, Brethren, you are in no small danger from
this quarter; and, alas for you! -- If you are taken in this snare, GOD only
knows how fatal it may prove: -- "The end of these things is (oftentimes)
Death!" -- If you have acted from these principles and with these views, in
forming yourselves into a religious Society, and in meeting together, from time
to time, for religious service, you are so far from being the more acceptable
to GOD, that you are more odious and detestable: And instead of claiming a
right to the ornaments of early piety, you have rendered yourselves utterly
unworthy of them. -- Be advised and exhorted, therefore, as you value your
soul's best interest, and as you hope to obtain the rewards of early piety, in
a crown of life, which shall never fade away, to see to it, that you are really
and truly what you pretend to be; and that you be found faithful in the service
of the LORD. Then will you find that the rewards of religion are great, and the
crown of early piety glorious. But if otherwise; -- then will your expectations
be cut off, and your hopes, like that of the hypocrite, will fail you, when GOD
shall take away your souls. Job 8, 13, 14. and 27. 8.


To the end, therefore, that you be neither deceived nor disappointed, be much
and earnest in prayer to the GOD of all grace, for all needed direction and
assistance, that you may be able, by grace and strength derived from him, to
know him and serve him in sincerity and in truth.

AND, to quicken you in all branches of your duty, be persuaded to think much
upon Death, which will put a period to your working time; upon the judgment, in
which you must be most strictly and impartially tried, and upon Eternity, in
which you must receive according as your conduct has been in this state of
probation; -- that, having your minds duly impressed with these important
things, you may hereby be excited to sidelity and perseverance in that work of
the LORD, in which you have so early and so cheerfully engaged. Thus will you
ensure the ornaments of religion, the smiles of a reconciled GOD, and your own
best interest, for the life that now is, and that which is to come. -- To this
purpose, I leave with you the remarkable words of King David, in his dying
charge to Solomon, which are well worthy your most serious attention and
observation. -- And Thou Solomon my Son, know thou the GOD of thy father, and
serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind: For the LORD searches
all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts: If thou
seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou forsakest him, he will cast
thee off FOR EVER. 1 Chronicles. 28. 9.


AND now, to draw toward a close; -- let me press it upon this whole assembly,
but especially upon the young people, as a concern of the last importance, to
labor after the ornaments of grace, the crown of glory, in the sincere
practice of piety and virtue. -- This will be profitable, this will be indeed
for our honor and ornament, both in the life that now is, and that which is to
come. -- And is there nothing will persuade us to secure our own happiness and
glory? -- Surely, if we could but realize the infinite amiableness of religion,
and the odiousness of the contrary (one would think) we could not but be
persuaded to turn to the LORD, and that with our whole hearts, and not with
seigned lips.

FOR once then, my young Friends, be persuaded to consider your solly and
danger, in neglecting the concerns of religion and your souls. -- Your Folly,
in despising that, which would be your greatest ornament, and which would bring
you to the most substantial glory and happiness, in neglecting the fear of the
LORD and the service of GOD, which would, in the most effectual manner,
recommend you to your Maker and Redeemer, and, at the same time, render you
beautiful and engaging in the eyes of the world of mankind in general, and of
one another in particular. -- Your danger, in neglecting that, which alone will
preserve you from the rage and power of all your enemies, whether men or
devils, and secure you from the avenging wrath of almighty GOD, which
constantly awaits you, while you remain in sin, estranged from GOD by wicked
works. -- Suffer me then, O ye Sons and Daughters of Zion, to repeat it to you
-- There is no earthly garb, no fashionable dress, in which you can appear so
beautiful and to so great advantage, as in the white robes of that
"righteousness, which is of GOD by faith in Christ Jesus!" Phil. 3. 9.
-- No ornaments will adorn you like those of early piety and virtue! --
Surely, if you had but ears to hear the arguments and motives to a religious
life, if you had eyes to see the beauty of holiness and amiableness of
religion, you could not (one would think) any longer withstand the calls of
GOD, in his word, and the endearing invitations of Christ, in his gospel, to
become truly religious. Permit me then, in fidelity to my LORD, and in love to
your precious and immortal souls, to reason and expostulate with you a little,
in his Name; and to "pray you, in Christ's stead, to be reconciled unto GOD." 2
Cor. 5. 20.


WHAT is it, my Brethren, that stumbles you, what is it that prevents you, that
you will not be persuaded to engage in the service of GOD, that you will not
give your names to Christ? -- Is there any thing unreasonable in the demands of
GOD? -- Is there any thing unprofitable in the service of Christ? Or is there
any thing contrary to, or inconsistent with, your best interest, in the
dictates of the holy Spirit, that you are unwilling to hearken to them? -- Or,
on the other hand, is the service of sin and Satan, of the world and your
lusts, so much more easy, pleasant and profitable, that you are afraid you
shall be losers by engaging sincerely in the service of GOD? -- Do ye seek for
pleasure in your pursuits? -- Here is the most refined pleasure: For "the ways
of wisdom are ways of pleasantness, and All her paths are peace." Prove. 3. 17.
-- Do ye seek those things that are for honor, beauty and ornament? -- That
you may appear with dignity and advantage, in the eye of the world? -- Lo, the
promises of wisdom are -- Exalt her, and she shall promote thee: She shall
bring thee to honor, when thou do embrace her. She shall give to thine head
an ornament of grace: A crown of glory shall she deliver to thee. Prove. 4. 8, 9.
-- -- Or what is there further, that you seek, -- that you can in reason
desire? -- Is it profit or gain, riches or long life? -- Lo, The merchandise of
wisdom [of religion] is better than the merchandise of silver, and the gain
thereof than fine gold: She is more precious than rubies; and all the things
thou can desire are not to be compared unto her: Length of days is in her
right hand; and in her left hand riches and honor. Prove. 3. 14.
-- Yea more, "Godliness," which is the true wisdom, is profitable unto ALL
THINGS, having the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to
come. I Tim. 4. 8.
-- So that there is nothing, which you can desire, or in reason with for, but
what you have the most rational and solid assurance of obtaining, if you will
but be persuaded to devote yourselves to GOD and his most reasonable service --
if you will become truly religious now in your youth. -- And is not this as
pleasing a prospect, as you can expect, or as any you have in your view? -- --

BUT, if this representation fails to awaken, to charm and engage you to become
religious; yet I beg you would calmly view the other side with the eye of your
Reason, and you will quickly find, that there is nothing in the practice of
sin, in the ways of ungodliness, or in the pleasures of iniquity, that a
reasonable and immortal being could hope for; no satisfaction, no pleasures
worthy your possession, much less your anxious pursuit: But, on the other hand,
every thing to raise your fear and dread, every necessary to complete your
Misery, for soul and body, for time and eternity! -- Here then is the
difference: -- 'Religion is altogether amiable and lovely; and leads you to
perfection and glory.' -- 'Ungodliness is altogether loathsome and destructive;
and leads you to shame and misery.' -- Which then will you choose? Will you
still persist in sin, forseit the most amiable ornaments, and expose yourselves
to the most fatal punishments? -- Alas! alas! Why will ye be so obstinate and
fool-bardy in rebellion, and that to the forfeiture of your own mercies, and to
the incurring of the most awful and distressing judgments? -- O my Friends, be
persuaded, I entreat you, before you finally bar the gates of heaven against
yourselves, before you plunge yourselves headlong into a Gulf of eternal
misery, to stop your career, to consider your ways, and turn your feet into the
testimonies of the LORD! -- And surely, this will be your wisdom, and this your
glory.

AND for encouragement consider, GOD is ready to pardon, if you repent and
return; for he is "gracious and merciful, slow to anger and abundant in
goodness:" -- And Christ is ready to receive you upon the easiest terms; for it
is "He, who, like a shepherd, gathers the lambs of his Flock with his arm,
and carries them in his bosom." Isai. 40. 11.
-- Yea, and this day He is weeping over such of you, as still persist in sin,
and reject his tenders of mercy, saying as of the rebellious inhabitants of
Jerusalem, of old, -- "How often would I have gathered you," the Children --
you, the Lambs of my Flock, "even as an hen gathers her chickens under her
wings; and ye would not!" Mat. 23. 37.
Be entreated then, once at length, to hearken to his voice, to turn at his
reproof, to fly to his arms and to get under the shadow of his wings, that you
may be saved with an everlasting salvation. Then shall ye know the excellency
of religion, and the value of his love; -- and then shall ye be beautiful,
honorable and excellent: And, to adopt the words of the holy Psalmist -- Then
shall our sons be as plants grown up in their youth; and then shall our
daughters be as corner-stones, polished after the similitude of a palace. --
Happy is that people that is in such a case; yea, happy is that people whose
GOD is the LORD! Psalm. 144. 12, 15.


AND to this end, I cannot but recommend to you young Men, for your imitation,
the laudable example of this Society of your Brethren, which has been formed
for the noble purposes of religion. And tho I would be far from supposing, that
early piety, religion and the fear of GOD are confined to such societies; yet I
cannot but hope and believe, that such societies, and such meetings, under the
grace of GOD, have been the means of reviving, preserving and promoting the
interests of religion in many places; and I trust such a practice has not been
without its happy effects even in this.

THIS practice, according to the best information I have had, has been
countenanced and encouraged, by the good people of this land, ever since the
first settlement of it by the English unto this day; and that by some of the
best of Ministers, and the best of Men in the Country. -- Yea, and (if I am not
mistaken) some of the most eminent Ministers of the Gospel, to the praise and
glory of GOD, have acknowledged the benefit they have received, and the
proficiency they have made, in such Schools of Christ. And tho, in this
degenerate age, this practice is too much out of fashion; yet I cannot but
encourage it, as a thing good in itself, and as what would be much for the
glory of GOD, for the honor of Christ, and for the interest of precious and
immortal souls.

SUFFER me then, to propose it to your most serious consideration, -- Whether
it would not be for your advantage, instruction and edification to join with
these your Brethren, in this Society, in the pleasant and profitable work of
seeking and serving the LORD? -- Whether you would not spend the remainder of
the Sabbath, after the public exercises were over, more to advantage than you
have hitherto done? -- Whether you would not, in this School of Christ, be
likely to learn some lessons of instruction, which you would not have so good
advantage to learn any where else? -- And whether these exercises of Prayer,
reading the Scriptures and books agreeable thereto would not have an happy
tendency to lead and assist you in your more private meditations and addresses
to subjects, thoughts, words and expressions, more agreeable to truth, and to
the word of GOD, which is a general transcript of his nature and perfections,
and of our duty resulting therefrom? -- --

PARTICULARLY, would'nt these exercises of reading, prayer, etc. in the
presence of your Brethren, be of peculiar advantage to you, to prepare you to
act your part well as Christians and Heads of families, when you come to be
settled in the world; -- to furnish you with decent expressions, to assist you
in a readiness of thought and utterance, when called upon to offer morning and
evening sacrifices to GOD, in your own houses, to instruct your families, and
the like? -- Next to a total disregard of GOD and religion, the chief reasons,
why the great duty of family prayer is so frequently neglected, are first, a
consciousness of our unacquaintedness with the duty of prayer, and then, a fear
that we shall not express ourselves with decency and propriety before others:
And so, through pride and ignorance, the duty is neglected. Now attending these
meetings, and bearing a part in them, with seriousness and devotion, would, in
part, at least, if not wholly remove these difficulties, and have an happy
tendency to prepare us for like duties in our own houses and families; and of
consequence have a good tendency to promote the interest of religion, in our
hearts and lives, ever afterward.

BUT, perhaps, you look upon these things at a great distance; and are ready to
say It will be many years before we shall have the care of families, if ever we
have; and it will be time enough then to acquaint ourselves with these duties,
when we are called to put them in practice. For the present, we are under no
necessity to perplex ourselves about them. Left some such suggestions as these
should take off the force and conclusiveness of this agreement, I shall not
rest the matter here, but beg you would seriously weigh one consideration more:
-- And that is, Whether you have not good reason to hope for the divine
Blessing upon you, in attending these religious exercises, that have been
recommended to you? -- Surely you will none of you say, that securing the
Blessing of GOD is a duty at a distance, which does not call for your attention
Now! -- And that you have at least some encouragement of obtaining the divine
blessing in this way, is, at least, probable from many promises in scripture:
-- Particularly, have we not some encouragement of this, in the words of our
LORD, who has expressly said -- "where two or three are gathered together in my
name, there am I in the midst of them." Mat. 18. 20. It is readily
acknowledged, that by the connection this text stands in to the context, it
seems to have a primary reference to the promised presence of Christ with his
disciples, in the regular exercise of the discipline of his house the Church:
But yet, it is humbly conceived, that, without any unnatural force, it will not
only bear the construction here given it, but ought to be improved, as a most
encouraging promise of the Redeemer's presence and blessing attending the
social prayer of all his true diciples and followers, in private as well as
public.
Surely, there is something in this promise, which may serve not only to
countenance you, but also to encourage you, to hope for the divine blessing in
such a laudable practice.

THESE things, then, are proposed to your most serious consideration: -- I
entreat you, as you value your soul's best interest, to given them their due
weight in your minds, and calmly judge for yourselves what is right for you to
do in this matter, and then order your conduct accordingly. -- --

BUT whatever is the result of your deliberation, as to this, there is one
thing, which demands your attention, and I pray you for GOD's sake and your own
souls sake to think much upon it, and to realize, that the day, the important
day, is hastening upon us, when "we must all appear before the judgment seat of
Christ," to give an account of all our talents and privileges, of all the
means and seasons of grace, "and receive the things done in the body, according
to what we have done, whether it be good or bad." I Cor. 5. 10.
-- To be ready for this awful day is therefore of the greatest importance to
you, and to us all. O let this when be our greatest concern!

AND now, that you, and I, and all of us may be able to give up our account
"with joy did not with grief," and that we "may be found of our Judge in peace,
without spot, and blameless" at his coming and kingdom. 2 Pet. 3. 14.
-- GOD of his infinite mercy grant for his mercy's sake in Christ Jesus!

AMEN.

