ODE, ON THE LATE GLORIOUS SUCCESSES OF HIS MAJESTY'S ARMS, AND PRESENT
GREATNESS OF THE ENGLISH NATION.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by WILLIAM DUNLAP, M, DCC, LXII.

PREFACE.
THE intent of the following ODE was to furnish the Public with a short
Entertainment -- The Author thinks he need say little more, than that he
respectfully submits it to their Candor.

IF it should be so fortunate as to please, and answer the Design, it will
increase the Pleasure of the Writer; if otherwise, the less that is said in its
behalf, will certainly be most agreeable to the Reader.

HEROIC STANZAS, On the late glorious Successes, etc.
I.
HAIL sacred Muse! Thou Harbinger of Fame,
To Britain's Glory raise the lofty Rhyme;
A pleasing Task her greatness to proclaim,
And stamp her Honors on the Page of Time!
II.
For sure the Praises of her warlike Train
To the harmonious sounding Lyre belong;
For them, sweet Clio! Through the rapturous Strain
Pour the rich Tide of Melody along!
III.
As when the Monarchs of the bestial Race
Triumphant rove the sterile lybian Sand,
The Tiger fierce, and Pard they lordly Chase,
Nor dare the Flocks their dreadful Rage withstand.
IV.
Or as the Sovereigns of the briny Flood
Imperial sway their azure liquid Plain,
Before them fly the fearful sinny Brood,
And all confess their wide extended Reign.
V.
So when Britannia's conquering Powers appear,
Her Ensign blazing on the embattl'd Field,
Heart-struck with Awe, and chilled with instant Fear,
Her Foes inglorious sly, or trembling yield.
VI.
If her bold Fleet, in gallant trim arrayed,
Rolls over the boundless Bosom of the Deep,
At her red Cross, her Enemies dismayed,
With eager Speed the foamy Billows sweep.
VII.
Not Carthage old for opulence renowned,
Nor Tire thrice noted for her purple Dye,
Through Fame's proud Trump with Britain's Isle shall sound,
Nor with her Trade and powerful Navy vie.
VIII.
Here Is is rich Commerce to Earth's distant End,
If India yields her aromatic Store,
Or Persia's Looms their silken Beauties blend,
Or Peru's Mines produce the glittering Ore;
IX.
True to her Port, her numerous Vessels bear
Their costly Freights, from each prolific Soil,
Soft Persia's Silks and India's Spice they share,
And golden Treasures gain without the Toil.
X.
Well does Britannia take the noble Ways
Which ancient Rome victoriously pursued,
At home her People's peerless Worth to raise,
While by her Arms abroad the Foe's subdued.
XI.
This infant World now boasts the British Name,
(Small are the Tracts which Gallia's Sons command,
Lessened is proud Iberia's ample Claim,)
Won by the valor of her martial Band.
XII.
Yon Isles that fair inlay the western Main,
Like Gems beset in Neptune's azure bound,
On Stars that deck the blue etherial Plain,
The glorious Feats of Britain's Chiefs resound;
XIII.
There on the fragrant Billow-beaten Shore
From Ocean's lap soft ambergris is rolled,
Delicious Sweets, each Grove diffusing over
Of Fruit The Orange.
Hesperian, bright with bloomy Gold!
XIV.
Still may Britannia's martial Sons proceed,
Till Chili tremble at her Thunder's roar!
Till rich The famous Silver Mountain of that Name, in Peru.
Potosi at the daring Deed
Shall shake with panic for her gorgeous Store!
XV.
But whither would the wandering Muse essay?
Lost in the glory of a sumptuous Theme!
To narrower Bounds new-point the glowing Lay,
Sweet as Castalia's wildly warbling Stream!
XVI.
Nor deem those Acts unworthy of the Lyre
That recent deck the radiant Roll of Fame,
Heroic Deeds, heroic Songs inspire,
And fill the Bard with all the Warrior's Flame:
XVII.
For sure one Passion of the Ray divine,
Fired the young Drufus and the tuneful Horace.
Swain;
This born, in Arms conspicuously to shine,
And That, to blaze it in the immortal Strain.
XVIII.
Then boldly wing O Muse, thy airy Flight,
Where Martinico's towering Wonders rise,
Behold the Tumults of the thickest Fight,
Where ardent Warriors burn for glory's Prize!
XIX.
See the brave Youths, as breathes the Trump of War,
Tremendous rushing on the armed Foe!
Loud mingled Shouts assail the frighted Air,
And over the Field the crimson Currents flow.
XX.
Intrepid Chiefs their fiery Steeds impel,
Where glows the fury of the Battle dire,
Where shrill-voic'd Clamor lifts her stunning Yell,
And ghastly Terror rolls her Eyes of Fire.
XXI.
The unwarlike Foe as Britain's Chiefs advance,
Fly to the Hills, or shrink to dreary Caves;
Over them black Horror shakes her Iron Lance,
And Desolation's baleful Banner waves.
XXII.
So when the princely Eagles sail the Sky,
If ought of meaner Fowl oppose their Way,
Soon driven headlong from the Realms on high,
Disastrous, vanquished on the Earth they lay.
XXIII.
Thus do her Sons the dastard Gaul subdue --
As late her Band by valiant MONCKTON led,
When through the western Air Victoria flew,
And round his Brows triumphant Garlandsshed.
XXIV.
Nor here the current of her Glory ends:
Stout Moro's doomed to feel her martial Rage;
From her high Walls the vet'ran Chiefs she sends,
With Albion's Troop the manly Fight to wage.
XXV.
But what avails her vigorous Combat all?
Weak are her Wiles, her numerous Efforts vain!
Sure are her Towers and Battlements to fall,
With wasteful Ruin on the carnag'd Plain.
XXVI.
Brave ALBEMARLE bright Wreathes of Glory crown,
Due to his Conduct through the Scenes of War;
Ages unborn shall speak his high Renown,
And Sires shall tell it to their infants Ear;
XXVII.
Pleased shall they say, "The Chief our Fathers led
"Where haughty Moro's towering Pride aspired,
"He over the Field Havannah's Grandeur spread,
"Her Ramparts crushed, and warlike Castles fired."
XXVIII.
Nor blush sweet Muse, thy Chaplet to bestow
On him who led the gallant Sons of Spain,
Endeared with Virtue or in Friend or Foe,
Whether in Britain's or Iberia's Train.
XXIX.
So fought Rome's Hero, Africanus bold,
And so the dauntless Hannibal withstood,
Till Latium's Chief his powerful Force controlled,
And lav'd his Courser's Hoofs in punic Blood.
XXX.
Thus shine the Acts of each succeeding Day --
Illustrious GEORGE, with blooming Honors crowned,
In early Youth a glorious Race to sway,
In Arms victorious, as for Arts renowned!
XXXI.
Give way ye Wonders of an ancient Date!
Enough have lived old Cressy and Poitiers;
Henry and Edward long have shone in State,
And Alfred's Name subdued a waste of Years!
XXXII.
These once over Europe spread their Terrors wide --
This famed for foiling cruel Danish Rage,
For virtuous Deeds and Learning's chiefest Pride,
And those for conquests of a later Age.
XXXIII.
But now new Worlds our Monarch's Scepter own;
What though the Deep disjoins the distant Land?
The Sea his Empire, and his Isle the Throne,
From whence to us he sends his mild Command!
XXXIV.
Far over this Tract of rich productive Soil
(No more the Region of a barbarous Race)
His power extends, and Wisdom deigns to smile,
And shed her Influence through its ample Space.
XXXV.
Here the good Swain is blessed with fertile Fields,
Each wealthy Harvest nods with golden Grain,
Each fragrant Grove its varied Fruitage yields,
And Hills are whitened with the fleecy Train.
XXXVI.
O would the Muses, sweet celestial Maids!
In this fair Land vouchsafe to fix their Seat,
Not losing Thespia's ever pleasing Shades
Should the harmonious Sisters ever regret.
XXXVII.
Much do we need their Aid, and sacred Lore,
To virtuous Acts to animate the Soul,
The great Idea in the Breast to pour,
And all the giddy Passions to control!
XXXVIII.
To brand proud Folly, and bold Vice chastise,
To teach that Wealth is transitory Bliss,
To laud the Just, the venal Knave despise,
And show that Virtue is true Happiness!
XXXIX
Such are the Maxims of parnassian Kind,
With purest Counsels to amend the Heart,
Et prodesse volunt et delectare poetae. Hor.
Delight should ever be with instruction joined,
Exalted Wisdom's Lessons to impart.
XL.
Nor think, ye Nine! a savage Race to meet,
Of ruthless Mortals wrapped in Ignorance,
Men ye will find with social worth replete,
Blessed with the Seeds of Virtue and of Sense.
XLI.
If golden Industry can charm your Train,
Each Art mechanic, and fair Trade we boast.
If martial Feats can fix your tuneful Reign,
Our Youths are tutored in Britannia's Host.
XLII.
To such a People with rich Plenty crowned,
Haste ye bright Choir! O haste ye graceful Band!
A Task delightful sure it will be found,
To form their Paths by your refining Hand.
XLIII.
For when the Sparks of Genius heedless rise,
Nor formed by Precept is the human Breast,
The Talents all their heavenly Use disguise,
And rankling Weeds the genial Soul infest.
XLIV.
But in the Sallies of a youthful Song
Spend not the Counsels of experienced Age,
These, let the sapient Sires of Verse prolong,
Skilled in the Dictates of the hoary Sage.
XLV.
For thee, thy Country's Honors to proclaim
In Strains mellifluous, is Bliss supreme!
To see the Efforts of the Muse's Flame,
Far, far surpassed by the glorious Theme!
FINIS.

