ADVICE to a Young Tradesman. Written by an Old One. [Sold at the New
Printing-Office, in BOSTON.]
To my Friend A. B. As you have desired it of me, I write the following Hints,
which have been of Service to me, and may, if observed, be so to you.
REmember that TIME is Money. He that can earn ten Shillings a Day by his
Labor, and goes abroad or sits idle one Half of that Day, though he spends but
Sixpence during his Diversion or Idleness, ought not to reckon that the only
Expense; he has really spent, or rather thrown away, five Shillings besides.

Remember that CREDIT is Money. If a Man lets his Money lie in my Hands after
it is due, he gives me the Interest, or so much as I can make of it during that
Time. This Amounts to a considerable Sum where a Man has good and large Credit,
and makes good Use of it.

Remember that Money is of a prolific generating Nature. Money can beget Money,
and its Off spring can beget more; and so on. Five Shillings turned, is Six
turned again, it is Seven and Three Pence; and so on till it becomes an hundred
Pounds. The more there is of it, the more it produces every Turning; so that
the Profits rise quicker and quicker. He that kills a breeding Sow, destroys
all her Offspring to the thousandth Generation. He that murders a Crown,
destroys all it might have produced, even Scores of Pounds.

Remember that Six Pounds a Year, is but a Groat a Day. For this little Sum
(which may be daily wasted, either in Time or Expense, unperceived) a Man of
Credit may, on his own Security, have the constant Possession and Use of an
Hundred Pounds. So much in Stock briskly turned by an industrious Man, produces
great Advantage.

Remember this Saying -- The good Play Master is Lord of another Man's Purse. He
that is known to pay punctually and exactly to the Time he promises, may at any
Time, and on any Occasion, raise all the Money his Friends can spare. This is
sometimes of great Use. After Industry and Frugality, Nothing contributes more
to the Raising a young Man in the World than Punctuality and Justice in all his
Dealings: Therefore never keep borrowed Money an Hour beyond the Time you
promised, lest a Disappointment shuts up your Friend's Purse forever.

The most trifling Actions that affect a Man's Credit, are to be regarded. The
Sound of your Hammer at Five in the Morning or Nine at Night, heard by a
Creditor, makes him easy Six Months longer. But if he sees you at a Billiard
Table, or hears your Voice in a Tavern, when you should be at Work, he sends
for his Money the next Day. Finer Clothes than he or his Wife wears, or greater
Expense in any Particular than he affords himself, shocks his Pride, and he
duns you to humble you. Creditors are a Kind of People that have the sharpest
Eyes and Ears, as well as the best Memories of any in the World.

Good-natured Creditors (and such One would always deal with if One could) feel
Pain when they are obliged to ask for Money. Spare them that Pain, and they
will love you. When you receive a Sum of Money, divide it among them (if you
can possibly spare the Whole) in Proportion to your Debts. Don't be ashamed of
paying a small Sum, because you owe a greater. Money, more or less, is always
welcome; and your Creditor had rather be at the Trouble of receiving Ten Pounds
voluntarily brought him, though at ten different Times or Payments, than be
obliged to go ten Times to demand it, before he can receive it in a Lump. It
shows, besides, that you are mindful of what you owe; it makes you appear a
careful as well as an honest Man; and that still increases your Credit.

Be ever virtuous: Soon or late you will find
Reward and Satisfaction to your Mind.
Beware of thinking all your own that you possess, and of living accordingly.
It Is a Mistake that many People who have Credit fall into. To prevent this,
keep an exact Account for some Time, both of your Expenses and your Incomes. If
you take the Pains at first to mention Particulars, it will have this good
Effect; you will discover how wonderfully small trifling Expenses mount up to
large Sums, and will discern what might have been, and may for the Future be
saved, without occasioning any great Inconvenience.

Be encouraged to Diligence in your Calling, and trust in Providence. Establish
a Character as an honest and faithful, as well as skilful Workman, and you need
not fear the Want of Employment. Industry pays Debts, while Despair increases
them. Something doing, something coming. Industry is sure of Profit.

Do not despair; but strive to do your best.
No more's required: Let Heaven make out the Rest.
In short, the Way to Wealth, if you desire it, is as plain as the Way to
Market. It depends chiefly on two Words, INDUSTRY and FRUGALITY; that is, Waste
neither Time nor Money, but make the best Use of both. Without Industry and
Frugality nothing will do, and with them every Thing. He that gets all he can
honestly, and saves all he gets (necessary Expenses excepted) will certainly
become RICH -- If that Being who governs the World, to whom all should look for
a Blessing on their honest Endeavors, does not, in his wise Providence,
otherwise determine.


