SCIENCE. A POEM.

BY FRANCIS HOPKINSON, Esquire

Doctrina sed Vim promovet insitam.
Rectique Cultus Pectora roborant.
HOR. PHILADELPHIA: Printed by WILLIAM DUNLAP, in Market-Street MDCCLXII.

To the Honorable JAMES HAMILTON, Esquire William Allen, Richard Peter's, Benjamin
Franklin, William Coleman, Alexander Stedman, William Plumsted, Edward Shippen,
Thomas Willing, William Coxe, Abraham Tailor, Benjamin Chew, Thomas
Cadwallader, Joseph Turner, and Thomas Leech, Esquires. Dr. Thomas Bond, Dr.
Phineas Bond, Dr. William Shippen, Thomas White, Philip Sing, John Inglis,
Samuel McCall, Gentlemen; and the Reverend Mr. Jacob Duche, Trustees of the
COLLEGE and ACADEMY of PHILADELPHIA. AND TO The Reverend William Smith, D. D.
Provost, the Reverend Francis Alison, D. D. Vice-Provost, the Reverend Ebenezer
Kinnersly, M. A. John Beveridge, M. A. and Hugh Williamson, M. A. Professors in
the said COLLEGE. GENTLEMEN,
IT is not without great Expectations from your Candor and Indulgence, that I
am encouraged to lay this little Poem at your Feet.

I do not flatter myself that your Institution will hereby derive any
additional Luster; but only take this Opportunity of publicly acknowledging my
Affection and Gratitude to that Seat of SCIENCE.

May all your Undertakings for its Advancement meet with more than expected
Success: And may it never want Friends to support it with equal Zeal, but
greater Abilities than I can boast.

I am, GENTLEMEN, Your most obliged humble Servant, F. H.

SCIENCE. A POEM.
THOU Goddess often invoked! who loves to stray
With light-wing'd FANCY through th'Elysian Way:
Whether it chance to please the youthful Queen,
With airy Step to grace the rural Scene;
Or softly languish through the breezy Grove,
In all the dying tenderness of Love;
Or, Moonlight wandering by the Surf-beat Shore,
Attend the Waters melancholy Roar --
Thou who can bid the eager Spirit rise,
And dip her Plumage in the dewy Skies;
Once more propitious to my Prayer attend!
Once more, CELESTIAL MUSE! thy Influence lend.
FAIR SCIENCE softning, with reforming Hand,
The native Rudeness of a barbarous Land;
Her radiant Throne, uprais'd by Power divine;
Her numerous Sons low bending at her Shrine
I sing -- Oh could my artless Numbers seem
To flow inspired, and equal to my Theme!
YE Friends of Learning patronize my Song,
To You the tributary Strains belong.
But chiefly THOU, beneath whose gentle Sway
The Muse delights to swell the pleasing Lay;
Glad Science THEE shall her MAECENAS hail,
Wisdom shall smile, and heavenly Truth prevail.
IN yonder Dome -- it boasts no pompous Name,
Yet not the less shall swell the Page of Fame --
In yonder Dome, with modest Beauty crowned,
Whose sober Walls it is ample Area bound,
Bright Sicence dwells -- how honored the Retreat
Where Science deigns to fix her favorite Seat!
High from her Throne she beams celestial Day,
And distant Lands confess th'enliv'ning Ray:
The Graces ever in her Presence stand,
And Virtue blooms beneath her nursing Hand.
THERE first her youthful Vot'ry learns to please
By just Expression, and becoming Ease --
Delightful Task! with early Care to teach,
His lisping Tongue, Propriety of Speech --
See on the Stage the little Hero stands
With Eyes uplifted, and extended Hands:
Or from his Lips Pope's liquid Numbers flow
In Streams mellifluous -- see the conscious Glow
Burns on his Cheek; perhaps the Strains inspire
The infant Raptures of poetic Fire;
Perhaps it is Modesty, with native Grace
Bids rising Blushes tinge his youthful Face:
Or now the Force of Eloquence he tries,
And Attic Lightnings kindle in his Eyes;
Methinks I see the deep-touch'd Senate glow,
Whilst mimic Thunders threaten from his Brow:
Or now his infant Tongue, in borrowed Lays,
Swells the smooth Tribute of his MAKER'S Praise;
See all the Ardor of the Saint expressed,
As if the Numbers fired his little Breast.
What Joy to hear, what Rapture to behold
The graceful Bard -- so young and yet so bold
In Virtue's Cause -- bright Truth shall soon inspire
The lively Ardors of a real Fire.
BUT now glad Science to his riper Age
Unlocks the Treasures of the Classic Page.
Sweet Heliconian Draughts enrich his Soul;
From the pure Stream he drinks without Control.
Virgil for him awakes the tuneful Lyre;
And lavish Pindar pours out all his Fire --
Pious Aeneas! who attends thy Woe
But deeply feels the sympathetic Glow?
Through every Page engaging Virtues shine,
And frequent Precepts grace each moral Line.
Whilst Horace leads the Lyric Muse along,
With careless Ease attunes the pleasing Song;
Th'unlabour'd Thought, harmoniously expressed,
Gives gayer Transports to the youthful Breast.
Homer more boldly strikes the Epic String --
Swift are we born upon his rapid Wing
Where bleeding Heroes stain th'empurpled Ground,
And angry Gods are heard in Thunder round.
Now fearless grown the Student loves t'engage
More arduous Heights -- the Mathematic Page
Invites his riper Reason to explore
The mazy Windings of her subtle Lore:
The pleasing Toil delights th'enquiring Youth,
And Science guides him to th'entangled Truth.
AT length behold to his astonished Eye,
Nature's vast Volume all expanded lie.
From each Effect, he strives to know the Cause,
And deeply searches her mysterious Laws.
Earth, Air nor Sea, nor Heaven's extended Space
Can bound the Search of Man's aspiring Race.
Upward he lifts the Astronomic Eye,
Surveys those Worlds of Light that roll on High;
Mid Suns and blazing Stars he dares to rove,
And learns the important Laws by which they move;
Sits in the Center, wrapped in Thought profound,
And views the radiant System rolling round.
To REASON's Eye there shall the Cause appear
Why various Seasons form the changing Year.
SPRING first, in Mantle green, and Garlands gay,
Sweet Smelling as she passes, leads the Way;
With breezy Call awakes each rural Sound,
And fills with Music, Woods and Valleys round.
Then Summer comes light-clad in glowing Red,
Whilst the thick Foliage nods around her Head;
With lavish Bounty from her Lap she pours
Luxuriant Gifts of Herbage, Fruit and Flowers.
In yellow Garb, see Autumn next appear,
To crown with Plenty the rejoicing Year;
Over new reaped Fields with airy Step she roves,
And paints with various Hue the fading Groves.
Then boisterous Winter howls along the Plain,
Affrighted Vegetation shrinks again
Back into Earth -- Woods, Hills and Valleys stand
Stripped of their Pride by his relentless Hand;
In icy Bonds he holds the Water's Fall,
And in his snowy Mantle wraps them all.
THUS shall his Eye important Truths pursue,
And in HIS Works the Great CREATOR view.
The painted Birds that wing the liquid Sky;
The varied Flowers that glow with grateful Dye;
The clustring Fruits that smile in Plenty round;
The Herbs medicinal that strew the Ground;
ALL must the Philosophic Bosom move
To Wonder, Gratitude and glowing Love.
AND now the Pupil takes his boldest Flight;
See him adventrous scale the towering Height
Of Ethic Learning -- more extensive Fields,
More pleasing Views the boundless Prospect yields.
His Searches now pursue a nobler Plan;
Now comes that grand Enquiry -- WHAT IS MAN?
How formed? By whom? -- Thence shall he learn to know
From his Connections, what great Duties flow!
What Powers are given those Duties to fulfill;
How form the Judgment; How direct the Will.
When Passion to indulge; when to restrain;
And how his HAPPINESS SUPREME obtain;
What is the Nature of his NOBLER PART;
Why with Ambition throbs his anxious Heart
To draw the Midnight Curtains of the Tomb,
And look for Judgment, and a World to come.
WHAT Joys from such important Knowledge flow;
See in his Visage conscious Virtue glow.
His Views enlarge; enlightened is his Mind;
More warm his Heart; his Passions more refined;
RELIGION kindles her celestial Ray;
And TRUTH breaks on him in a Flood of Day. --
PIERIAN MUSE! thy Favor still prolong,
And let thy Presence animate my Song! --
NOW Science joys to call the Youth her own,
And crowns with Laurel her adopted Son:
His Alma Matter now prepares to shed
Her rich Rewards on his distinguished Head.
The vaulted Roof, the rising Anthems rend,
And pressing Crowds the solemn Scene attend.
Prepared for Action now he takes the Field,
And Speculation must to Practice yield.
High on the Stage, and graceful to the View --
"Adieu! dear Seat of Bliss, he cries, Adieu!"
Pathetic Sorrows in his Bosom swell,
And, with reluctant Voice, he sighs a last Farewell.
WHAT means my trembling Pulse and throbbing Breast?
Why is the Scene to me so strong expressed?
Fancy again renews the awful Rite;
Th'encircling Audience swims before my Sight.
Once more my Heart beats quick with anxious Fear;
Once more methinks the solemn Charge I hear --
THIS Passage alludes to the Charge delivered by the Provost to the Candidates
for Degrees, at the first anniversary Commencement.
"Go forth my Sons, our first, our early Pride!
"Through Life's dark Maze, be Virtue still your Guide:
"Without RELIGION Learning is but vain,
"And fruitless Toil, Philosophy to gain:
" It Is not sufficient that the Right you know,
"Your Conduct ever must your Knowledge show.
"Should injured FREEDOM for Assistance cry,
"Nor Eye, nor Ear, nor Hand, nor Heart deny;
"With pious Zeal upraise her drooping Head:
"THERE IS naught but VICE and TYRANNY to dread." --
BLESSED Institution! Nurse of Liberty!
My Heart, my grateful Heart shall burn for thee.
No common Pride I boast, no common Joy,
That thy Instructions did my Youth employ:
Though not the first among thy Sons I prove,
Yet well I feel I Am not the last in Love.
Oh may thou still in Wealth and Power increase,
And let thy sacred Influence never cease!
IT must be so, prophetic Fancy cries,
See other Popes, and other Shakespears rise;
Each sage Philosopher, each learned Divine,
And patriot Worthies, an illustrious Line:
All those, who nobly fill Fame's ample Page
Again revive to grace a future Age --
Blessed Institution hail! methinks I see
The shining Throng ascribe their Birth to THEE.
THOU Schuylkill, from whose Clifts I love to view
Thy gurgling Stream it is rocky Way pursue,
Shall own ^^e Change -- the savage Yell no more
With rougher Sounds shall rend thy rugged Shore.
Oh let thy Groves their richest Beauties wear,
And for approaching happier Times prepare.
ALONG thy Banks the pensive Bard shall stray,
Sweep the sweet Lyre, and wake the tuneful Lay;
Echo shall love to catch the melting Sound,
And bid it soften all thy Rocks around.
Even now thy flowery Paths I see him tread,
And pluck thy Laurels to adorn his Head:
How shall thy Waves elate flow proudly by,
And grow more turgid, but to catch his Eye.
Thy rural Scenes shall flourish in his Song,
And each romantic Height his Strains prolong.
THERE, whilst his Breast with sacred Ardor burns,
RELIGION, JUSTICE, LIBERTY, by Turns,
And SCIENCE too, in more harmonious Strains,
Shall sweetly warble to the Woods and Plains.
PERHAPS the Bard, when highest Noon prevails,
Beneath some Shade shall court refreshing Gales;
And, whilst his wandering Fancy roves more free,
May chance to think on earlier Times, and me --
Presumptuous Thought! shall my unpracticed Lay
Be born in Safety down Time's rapid Way;
And still the Rocks of Criticism fly,
Or fearless pass Oblivion's Quicksands by.
Enough for me, if, with the least Regard,
The Friends of Science shall my Song reward.
No speedy Death my artless Strains shall know,
Nor without Honor will my Numbers flow,
If thus indulgent THEY shall not refuse
To smile propitious on my humble Muse.
FINIS.

