Dr. Sewall's SERMON ON THE REDUCTION OF THE HAVANNAH.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE THURSDAY-LECTURE in BOSTON, September 16, 1762.
BEFORE THE Great and General Court Of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in
New England. ON THE Joyful News of the Reduction of the HAVANNAH.

By JOSEPH SEWALL, D.D. Colleague Pastor of the South Church in said Town.

MATT. VI. 13. Thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory, for ever.
AMEN.

BOSTON; NEW ENGLAND: Printed by JOHN DRAPER, Printer to His Excellency the
GOVERNOR, and the Honorable His Majesty's COUNCIL: AND, By EDES and GILL,
Printers to the Honorable HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES. 1762.

In Council, September 17, 1762.
HIS Excellency having moved to the Board, That the Thanks of this Court be
given to the Reverend Doctor SEWALL, for his Sermon preached Yesterday before
them, at the Public Lecture, on Occasion of the Success of His Majesty's Arms
in the Reduction of the HAVANNAH.

Ordered, That ANDREW OLIVER, and THOMAS HUBBARD, Esqrs with such as the
Honorable House shall join, be a Committee to wait on Dr. SEWALL, with the
Thanks of the Court accordingly, and desire a Copy thereof for the Press.

Sent down for Concurrence, A. OLIVER, Secr'y.

In the House of Representatives,
READ and Concurred, and Mr. TYLER, Col. PHILLIPS, and Mr. CUSHING are joined
in the Affair.

TIMOTHY RU^^^^ES, Speak'r. Consented to, FRA. BERNARD. Copy Attest. A. OLIVER,
Secr'y.

The Power, Glory and Victory are the LORD'S.
1 CHRONICLES. XXIX. 11. Thine, O LORD, is the Greatness, and the Power, and the
Glory, and the Victory, and the Majesty: for all that is in the Heaven and in
the Earth, is thine; thine is the Kingdom, O LORD, and thou art exalted as Head
above all.


IN the Verse foregoing, we have King David's devout Ascription of Blessing and
Praise to the Lord God of Israel, for the liberal free will Offerings of the
Princes toward building the Temple: In the Text he declares that this God who
was the Object of his Praise, is immensely great, and incomprehensively
glorious. Thine, O Lord, is the Greatness -- In the Original, it is Jehovah,
the self-existing, and eternal God, who has his Being and Perfections in and of
himself, independently; and is the first Cause, and last End of all Things.

I SHALL consider the Words as they lie in the Text.

I. THE Greatness is the Lord's. And that in a singular Manner and transcendent
Degree. God is infinite in his Being and all adorable Perfections. Great is the
Lord, and greatly to be praised; and his Greatness is unsearchable, Psalm.
145.3. The Nations when compared with him, are as a Drop of a Bucket, as the
small Dust of the Balance: yea all Nations before him are as Nothing, and they
are counted to him less than Nothing and Vanity. Isai. 40.15, -- 17.
He is immense, and Omnipresent. The divine Essence is above and beyond the
Universe of created Beings. The Heaven and the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain
him. 1 King. 8.27.
He is eternal, and unchangeable With him is no Variableness, nor Shadow of
Turning. Jam. 1.17.
And as to those Attributes in which Creatures may resemble him, they are in
God original, essential, and without Limits; and so are predicated of him in an
appropriate Sense. Agreeably our Lord said, Mat. 19.17. There is none Good but
one, that is God. And, God is said to be only wise. He is in the Abstract
Goodness, Wisdom, etc. Accordingly we have that Challenge made to Job 11.7 --
9. Can thou by searching find out God? can thou find out the Almighty unto
Perfection? It is as high as Heaven, what can thou do? deeper than Hell, what
can thou know? The Measure thereof is longer than the Earth, and broader than
the Sea. And indeed his Works of Creation, Providence and Redemption, bear
clear Signatures of the divine Greatness. He made great Lights. Genesis 1.16.
He overthrew the Egyptians in the Greatness of his Excellency. Exodus 15.7.
And in our Redemption by Jesus Christ, he pardons great Transgressions, and
bestows on his People great Salvation; so that it is said, Heb. 2.3. How shall
we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation, Upon the whole, there is abundant
Reason to ascribe Greatness to our God, Deuteronomy. 32.3.

II. The Power is the Lord's. Psalm. 62, 11. God has spoken once; twice have I
heard this, that Power belongs unto God, Consider Power as it may signify
Authority: So it belongs to God, and that in a singular Manner. God is the most
High, over all, God blessed forever. He is the high and lofty One, that
dwells in the high and holy Place, Isai. 57.15. As he made all Things, so he
has an absolute Right to govern and dispose of them, according to his sovereign
Will. He is exalted above all Principalities and Powers, Thrones and Dominions.
And is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. 1 Timothy 6.15. God is higher than the highest, and his Dominion rules over all. He
is above his and his People's Enemies, even in those Things wherein they deal
most proudly.

AGAIN, Consider Power as it signifies Strength, and Ability to work all
Things, and in this Sense it belongs to God, and that in a superlative Degree,
Dan. 4.35. And all the Inhabitants of the Earth are reputed as nothing: And he
does according to his Will in the Army of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of
the Earth: And none can stay his Hand, or say unto him, What do thou? He
works all Things after the Counsel of his own Will; Ephesians. 1.11.
his Counsel shall stand, and none can disannul it; this almighty Being made,
upholds and governs the World, by the Word of his Power. Psalm. 33.9. He spoke,
and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast. He acts above, yea contrary
to the ordinary Course of Nature, in Miracles. In Hezekiah's Day, at his
Command the Sun returned back ten Degrees, by which it was gone down. Isai.
37.8.
When he forbid, the Fire had no Power over the Bodies of Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abednego, though the Furnace was heated seven Times. Dan. 3.27.
God raises the Dead, and calls the Things that are not as though they were.
The fallen Angels are called Powers, Ephesians. 6.12. But our Lord is stronger than
that strong One, and spoils him of his Goods. He gave his Apostles Power over
Devils, Luke 9.1. And when he pleases, he converts Sinners according to the
exceeding Greatness of his Power: Turns them from Darkness unto Light, and from
the Power of Satan unto God. And he makes use of frail Men as Instruments in
this great Work, that the Excellency of the Power may appear to be of God. And
then God maintains the Work of his Grace in them against all Opposition from
Earth and Hell, 1 Pet. 1.5. Who are kept by the Power of God through Faith unto
Salvation. In a Word, God is Omnipotent, and there is no Strength can prevail
against him. With God all Things are possible, nothing hard or difficult. And
this Power is never exhausted, or in the least diminished. Isai. 40.28, 29.
Have thou not known? Have thou not heard, that the everlasting God, the Lord,
the Creator of the Ends of the Earth faints not, neither is weary? there is
no searching of his Understanding. He gives Power to the faint; and to them
that have no Might, he increases Strength. O let us then submit to his Will in
all Things, acknowledging that he is the Potter, and we are the Clay. Let us
hear and obey that Word, Genesis 17.1. I am the Almighty God; walk before me, and
be thou perfect. And as this glorious God has given all Power to the Son as
Mediator, let us depend on him as able to save to the uttermost all that come
unto God by him. Let us praise him, saying, Thine is the Kingdom, and the Power
and the Glory, forever, Amen. Matthew. 6.13. Which brings me to the third Head of
our Discourse.

III. The Glory is the Lord's. Glory is the Excellency of a Being whereby it is
worthy of Praise. A worthy Author gives this Description. "Glory is a singular
and high Opinion which one conceives of the Excellency and Worthiness of
another. The Hebrew Word signifies Weightiness, or Gravity" Wilson's Christ.
Dict.
Thus David and Solomon were glorious Kings. Thus King David says of the
Temple, the House which is to be built for the Lord, must be exceeding
magnifical, of Fame and of Glory, throughout all Countries. 1 Chronicles. 22.5. But
then the glorious Beauty of the Creature is a fading Flower which soon mingleth
with the Dust; whereas the glorious Excellencies of God are infinite and
eternal, and therefore He alone is worthy to be praised in a, religious Manner.
We must bow down and worship him, when we ascribe Glory and Praise to his great
Name. There Is God's essential Glory, which is the infinite Fullness and
Perfection of his divine Nature. This is ever the same, and can receive no
Addition, even from the highest Praises of Angels, Neh. 9.5. And blessed be thy
glorious Name, which is exalted above all Blessing and Praise. God dwells in
Light inaccessible and full of Glory. But then, his declarative Glory is
manifested in his Word and Works. All his Works praise him, as they afford
Matter and Occasion to intelligent Beings to attend this Duty; and all his
Saints bless him, and speak of the Glory of his Kingdom, and talk of his Power.
Psalm. 145.10, 11.
Psalm. 19.1. The Heavens declare the Glory of God: and the Firmament shows
his handy Work. Accordingly we read, that when the Foundations of the Earth
were laid, the Morning Stars sang together, and the Sons of God shouted for
Joy, Job 38.7.
i.e. the blessed Angels called Morning Stars, "because of their excellent
Luster." Sons of God, because made in the Image of God their Creator. Thus we
must also ascribe to God the Glory of his Works of Providence, and of
Redemption. When the Angels bro't the good Tidings of the Birth of our Savior,
Christ the Lord, they praised God saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on
Earth Peace, good Will toward Men. Luke 2.14. When Moses prayed that God would
show him his Glory, he declares that he could not see his Face and live; and
that, while his Glory passed by, he would cover him with his Hand, and then
take away his Hand, that he might see his back Parts Exodus 23.22, 23.
. And accordingly, The Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed, The Lord, the
Lord God, merciful and gracious, long suffering, and abundant in Goodness and
Truth; keeping Mercy for Thousands, forgiving Iniquity, and Transgression, and
Sin, and that will by no Means clear the guilty. Exodus 34.6, 7. We must then
celebrate the transcendent Excellencies of the Lord of Glory, and so sacrifice
Praise, as to glorify God, and pay the Tribute of Honor due to his Name;
acknowledging that there is none like unto him, none that may be compared with
him. Rev. 5.13. And every Creature which is in Heaven, and on the Earth, and
under the Earth, and such as are in the Sea, and all that are in them, heard I,
saying, Blessing, and Honor, and Glory, and Power be unto him that sits
upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. But we may speak further
of this, under the last Head, which treats of the divine Majesty.

IV. THE Victory is the Lord's. Prove. 21.31. The Horse is prepared against the
Day of Battle; but Safety is of the Lord. Margin, Victory. He is the God of
Armies, the Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in Battle. Psalm. 24.8.
The Lord of Hosts holds the Events of War in his Almighty Hand, so that the
Race is not to the swift, nor the Battle to the strong; but Time and Chance
happen to them all. Eccl. 9.11.
There are certain Incidents which God overrules to give Success to the weaker
Side. 1 Samuel 14.6. There is no Restraint to the Lord, to save by many or by
few. Was there Time, I might here speak of our spiritual Warfare, and show that
God gives his People the Victory over their ghostly Enemies. The Almighty
ordained Strength out of the Mouth of Babes, when he sent forth his Apostles
and other Ministers, to set up his Kingdom on the Ruins of Satan's usurped
Dominion: The Weapons of their Warfare were mighty through God, for pulling
down the strong Holds of the Evil One, and for subduing a considerable Part of
the then know World, to the Obedience of Faith. The Lord triumphed over
Principalities and Powers, over the Lusts of Men, and the strong Prejudices of
Education; so that the Rulers of the Darkness of this World fled before the
Light of the glorious Gospel, accompanied with the divine Spirit, as the Shades
of Night before the rising Sun. But to return, and consider War in a literal
Sense, as managed by Arms of Flesh, and we shall find that God has in a
wonderful Manner broken the Enemies and Oppressors of his People, and delivered
them from those that were too strong for them. Thus when Pharaoh pursued his
ancient People whom he brought forth out of Egygt with a mighty Hand, and
outstretched Arm; the God of Israel divided the Red Sea, and gave his People a
safe Passage through it, as on dry Ground; and overthrew their Enemies. The
Depths covered them, they sank to the Bottom as a Stone. Then sang Moses, and
the Children of Israel; the Lord triumphed gloriously: the Horse and his Rider
has he thrown into the Sea. Exodus 15.1. Ver. 6. Thy right Hand, O Lord, is
become glorious in Power: thy right Hand, O Lord, has dashed in Pieces the
Enemy. Ver. 10, 11. Thou did blow with thy Wind, the Sea covered them: they
sank as Lead in the mighty Waters. Who is like unto thee, O Lord, amongst the
Gods? Who is like thee, glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises, doing
Wonders. In like Manner, God opened a Way for his People through Jordan, into the
Land of Canaan, and subdued Nations greater and mightier than they. The mighty
Redeemer appeared to Joshua when entered Canaan, in humane Shape, and as Captain
of the Lord's Host. Under this divine Person, and encouraged by his Presence,
this victorious General marched at the Head of the Armies of Israel. The Walls
of Jericho miraculously fell before them, as by an Earthquake; they enter the
open Breaches, and destroy it. After this the Sun stood still at Joshua's
Prayer, and hasted not to go down for about a whole Day, until the People had
avenged themselves upon their Enemies. See Joshua 3.5, 6, 10 Chapter
God's People accordingly acknowledged that it was the Lord who did drive out
the Heathen with his Hand, and planted them. Hear their Song, Psalm. 44.3. For
they got not the Land in Possession by their own Sword, neither did their own
Arm save them: but thy right Hand, and thine Arm, and the Light of thy
Countenance, because thou had a Favor unto them. Thus the Royal Psalmist
David, when delivered from his Enemies, praises the Name of the Lord. The Lord
is my Deliverer, my Strength, and the Horn of my Salvation; and gives God the
Glory of his military Virtues and Success, Psalm. 18.34, 35. He teaches my
Hands to War, so that a Bow of Steel is broken by mine Arms. Thou have also
given me the Shield of thy Salvation: and thy right Hand has holden me up, and
thy Gentleness has made me great. In like Manner, They that had gotten the
Victory over Antichrist, sing the Song of Moses the Servant of God, and the
Song of the Lamb, saying, Great and mavelous are thy Works, Lord God
almighty; just and true are thy Ways, thou King of Saints, Rev. 15.3. And in
the 19th Chapter 1, 2. And after these Things I heard a great Voice of much People
in Heaven, saying, Alleluia; Salvation, and Glory, and Honor, and Power unto
the Lord our God: For true and righteous are his Judgments; for he has judged
the great Whore, i.e. idolatrous Rome.

V. THE Majesty is the Lord's. With God is terrible Majesty, Job 37.22. Majesty
to be reverene'd and adored with all Humility. Dominion and Fear are with him.
The Splendour of some earthly Princes has been glorious but none to be compared
with the Lord. When the Prophet had a Vision of the Lord in his Glory, we read,
Isai. 6.1 -- 3. I saw the Lord sitting upon a Throne, high and lifted up, and
his Train filled the Temple: Above it stood the Seraphims; each one had six
Wings; with Twain he covered his Face, and with Twain he covered his Feet, and
with Twain he did fly. And one cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy
is the Lord of Hosts, the whole Earth is full of his Glory. The Most High is
clothed with Honor and Majesty; He covers himself with Light as with a
Garment, Psalm. 104.1, 2.
yea, such is the insufferable Brightness of the divine Majesty, that he dwells
in the Light which no Man can approach unto, whom no Man has seen, nor can
see. 1 Timothy 6.16
When the Son of God, the second Person in the adorable Trinity, appeared to
Saul, it was in Light above the Brightness of the Sun; he fell to the Earth,
and it should seem was struck blind. Act. 9.
And when he appeare'd to John, his Countenance was as the Sun shines in his
Strength; and when he saw him, he fell at his Feet as dead. Rev. 1.16, 17.
It is in Condescension to our present Weakness, that he holds back the Face
of his Throne, and spreads his Cloud upon it. Job 26 9.
Otherwise such Luster would dazzle our Sight, and overpower us. It is said in
the Context, 29th Ver. The Lord magnified Solomon exceedingly, and bestowed on
him such Royal Majesty as had not been on any King before him in Israel. But
behold a greater than Solomon is here; one whose glorious Majesty infinitely
excells; so that to him is ascribed Glory and Majesty, both now and ever. Jude
25. O that we may have a believing Sight of this King in his Glory, and pay him
the divine Honors which are his due; for he has said, Them that Honor me, I
will honor. 1 Samuel 2.^0.
But as for such as despise him, they shall be desirous to go into the Clefts
of the Rocks for Fear of the Lord, and for the Glory of his Majesty, when the
great Day of his Wrath is come. And this brings me to the

APPLICATION.
USE 1. LEARN that God is worthy of our highest Esteem, and strongest Love.

JEHOVAH is truly Optimus Maximus, the best and the greatest. Yea, he is
infinitely great and good; so that we may well cry out with Admiration, How
great is his Goodness, how great is his Beauty! Agreeably our Lord and Lawgiver
teaches us, Thou shall Love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all
thy Soul, and with all thy Mind. This is the first and great Commandment,
Matthew. 22.37, 38. God is Light, in whom is no Darkness at all: The Father of
Lights, from whom every good Gift, and every perfect Gift, comes down. And if
we behold him in the Light of Revelation, and as he manifests himself to us in
his Son, the Brightness of the Father's Glory, he appears to be a suitable and
alsufficient Good, to whom the apostate Sons of fallen Adam may return, so as
to find Rest and full Contentment in him. O let us then beseech the Father of
Glory to give us the Spirit of Wisdom in the Knowledge of him; that we may now
say as Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon
Earth that I desire besides thee. And that beholding as in a Glass the Glory of
the Lord, we may be changed into his Image from Glory to Glory, as by the
Spirit of the Lord. 2 Cor. 3.18.
And that when many say, who will show us good? we may from our Hearts say,
Lord lift thou up the Light of thy Countenance upon us. Thus God will put
Gladness into our Hearts, more than in the Time that their Corn and their Wine
increased. And when we behold his Face in Righteousness, we shall be forever
satisfied with his Likeness. For He is the Light of Heaven, Rev. 21.23. And the
City had no Need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it: for the Glory
of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the Light thereof. In his Presence is
Fullness of Joy, at his right Hand are Pleasures for ever more.

USE 2. Is the Greatness and Power the Lord's? Then we ought to fear this
glorious and fearful Name, the Lord our God. The Thunder of his Power who can
understand? Surely none can comprehend it. Let us then hear and obey that Word,
Isai. 8.13, 14. Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your Fear,
and let him be your Dread. And he shall be for a Sanctuary. And those Words of
our Savior Jesus Christ, Matthew. 10.28. And fear not them which kill the Body,
but are not able to kill the Soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy
both Soul and Body in Hell. O it is a fearful Thing to fall into the Hands of
the living God, as a Judge and Avenger of Sin! But our Lord Jesus Christ, though
in the Form of God, took upon him the Form of a Servant, and became obedient
unto Death, the Death of the Cross, that he might deliver us from Sin and the
Curse: wherefore God has highly exalted him. The Father of Glory declares, I
set my King on my holy Hill of Zion; and that such as refuse to submit to his
righteous and equal Scepter, must be broken to Pieces as with a Rod of Iron.
Psalm. 2.
Yea, when our Lord and Judge shall fall upon them in the Day of his Wrath, he
will grind them to Powder. Matthew. 21.44.
O let the Sinners in Zion then be afraid, cast down the Weapons of your
Rebellion, and cry for Mercy! Seek Reconciliation with God through the Blood of
Christ's Cross: For he is our Peace. When Solomon had considered the Vanity of
all Things under the Sun, he says, Let us hear the Conclusion of the whole
Matter, Fear God and keep his Commandments: for this is the whole Duty of Man,
Eccl. 12.13. Hebrew, the whole of Man. It is "his whole Work and Business, his
whole Perfection and Happiness." Mr. Pool.
And if we thus fear God, we need fear nothing else with any Amazement, Psalm.
46.1.2. God is our Refuge and Strength, a very present Help in Trouble:
Therefore will not we fear, though the Earth be removed, and though the
Mountains be carried into the Midst of the Sea.

USE 3. Then we should trust in the Lord, and fly to his Name as to our strong
Tower, in all Times of threatening Danger.

GOD is a present Help to his People, ever near, ever able to deliver them. His
Hand is not shortened, that it cannot save; neither his Ear heavy, that it
cannot hear. Therefore the same Prophet says to us, Trust ye in the Lord
forever; for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting Strength, Isai. 26.4. Hebrew,
The Rock of Ages: And He is to his People as the Shadow of a great Rock in a
weary Land. Accordingly, the Man is cursed that trusts in Man, and makes
Flesh his Arm: The Man is blessed that trusts in the Lord, and whose Hope the
Lord is Jer. 17.5.7.
. Let such then as fear the Lord be encouraged to trust in the Lord; for He is
their Help, and their Shield.

USE 4. Is GOD a Being of adorable Perfections, then happy is the Person, happy
the People whose God is the Lord. Psalm. 146.5. Happy is he that has the God of
Jacob for his Help, whose Hope is in the Lord his God. In a particular Manner,
God promised his ancient People, that if they kept his Commandment, five should
chase an hundred, and an hundred put ten thousand to flight. Lev. 27.8.
Now God is with his People while they are with him, and walk before him as his
obedient People. This is then to grasp all Rules of Policy in one, to secure
the Almighty on our Side; for if God be for us, who shall be against us? Then
we may boldly say, The Lord is my Helper, I will not fear what Man can do unto
me. Hebr. 13.6. O let us then continue instant in Prayer to God, that He would
pour out his Spirit upon us from on high, and write his Laws upon our Hearts,
that we may put away those provoking Sins which separate between us and our
God; and that we may serve him in Holiness and Righteousness before him all the
Days of our Life. Then the God of Armies would still ride upon the Heaven for
our Help, and in his Excellency on the Sky; and it should be said to us as to
his People of old, Deuteronomy. 33.29. Happy art thou, O Israel: Who is like unto
thee, O People saved by the Lord, the Shield of thy Help, and who is the Sword
of thy Excellency! And thine Enemies shall be found Liars unto thee, and thou
shall tread upon their high Places.

USE 5, and last. THEN when God prospers the military Enterprises of his
People, and crowns them with the desired Success, we should give the Glory to
Him; and devoutly say, Thine, O Lord, is the Greatness, and the Power, and the
Glory, and the Victory, and the Majesty. We should sing the Praises of the most
High, as Exodus 15.1, 2. Then sang Moses and the Children of Israel this Song
unto the Lord, and spoke, saying, I will sing unto the Lord, for He has
triumphed gloriously; the Horse and his Rider has he thrown into the Sea. The
Lord is my Strength and Song, and he is become my Salvation. O that we could go
on, and say as follows in the latter Part of the 2d Verse, He is my God, and I
will prepare Him an Habitation; my Fathers God, and I will exalt Him. Then we
might hope, that the Lord of Hosts would give us further Occasion to give
Thanks unto his holy Name, and to triumph in his Praise.

WHEN Austria and France were united with Russia and Sweden against the King of
PRUSSIA, and the Armies under him; there was a strong Combination against the
Protestant Interest: But behold the Lord who cuts off the Spirit of Princes,
and takes away their Breath as He pleases, sets up another Head over that vast
Empire, who favors our Cause. A seasonable Interpostion of divine Providence!
And we are informed, that Sweden also is brought to Terms of Reconciliation.
However, the Alliance appeared formidable, when the Wealth and Forces of Spain
were added to the Powers of Austria and France, those great Supporters of
Antichrist. Accordingly, the Day after War was proclaimed with Spain, our
honored Rulers, being in General Court assembled, met with us in the House of
God, April 15, last, to seek Direction and Help from God in this important
Conjuncture. And now in less than half a Year, the Great and General Court
again assemble with God's People in the House of Prayer, to unite with us, and
lead in Songs of Praise to the God of Victory for signal Successes lately
granted against France and Spain.

We have an authentic Account, that the accomplished General Prince FERDINAND,
though much inferior in Numbers, yet by a superior Reach of military Conduct and
Skill, surprised and encompassed the French Army, and put them to flight; and
such of them as boldly opposed their Pursuit, though the Flower of the French
Infantry, were blasted, and in a great Measure cut to Pieces, or made
Prisoners: Our Joy is the greater in that the valiant Lord GRANBY, who
commanded the English Troops, had a great Share in the Victory. We praise the
Lord, the God of Salvation, Exodus 15.3, The Lord is a Man of War: The Lord is
his Name. Our Joy is much increased by the great and good News of the Conquest
of the HAVANNAH, HAVANA, a Port-Town of the Island of CUBA in AMERICA. A
capacious Harbor, of very difficult Access to an Enemy, having a narrow
Entrance, well defended by Forts and Platforms of great Guns. Here the Galleons
from PORTO-BELLO and VERA CRUZ rendezvous on their Return to SPAIN. Salmon's
Gazetteer.

CUBA -- 300 Leagues in length, and generally between 20 and 30 Leagues broad.
They have great Rains and Tempests usally in July and August. [How kind and
merciful was GOD to Us! that these were so far restrained while our Forces
besieged the City] The Havannah says the same Author, is situated at the North
West Part of the Island. Salmon's Modern History.


a rich City in Spanish America, very strongly fortified, and resolutely
defended by numerous Forces. A City of great Importance, it being the Key which
opens a Communication between Old and New Spain, where, it is said, the Enemy
lay up vast Treasures from Mexico and Peru, till they have a convenient
Opportunity for transportation. Accordingly, we have an Account of great Sums
of Money already found, from which our Forces, under the General Lord
ALBERMARLE, and Admiral POCOCKE, we hope will reap a rich Reward of their great
Toils and Valor. By this Conquest, our Enemies are also greatly weakened as to
their Naval Force, Nine Ships of the Line being taken, others sunk to defend
the Harbor, others on the Stocks, or lately launched; together with great
naval and other military Stores.

Let us then sacrifice Praise to the GOD of Armies, who has led our victorious
Troops into this strong City, of which our Enemies were ready to boast, as if
it was invincible, The Royal Psalmist inquired, Who will bring me into the
strong City: who will lead me into Edom? Wilt not Thou, O God? Psalm 108.10, 11.
Yes, surely. This is the Lord's Doing, it is mavelous in our Eves. Who is
like unto Thee, O Lord, fearful in Praises, doing Wonders. Thy right Hand, O
Lord, is become Glorious in Power; Thy right Hand, O Lord, bath dashed in
Pieces the Enemy.

MAY we be directed to make a wise Improvement of such remarkable Appearances
of God for us! May the Lord preserve us from Pride, and all carnal Confidence
in an Arm of Flesh! Let us humble ourselves under the mighty Hand of God, and
with deep Abasement acknowledge our own Sinfulness and great Unworthiness,
saying, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us; but unto thy Name give Glory. Psalm
115.1.
While we render due civil Praise to the brave Commanders and Soldiers, whom
God has made Instruments in this glorious Work, let our religious Praises
ascend to GOD by JESUS CHRIST, our great High Priest. O may we yield to him,
the God of Salvation, not only the Fruit of our Lips; but the Love of our
Hearts, and the Obedience of our Lives. O may his Gaodness lead us to
Repentance, and we not be suffered to abuse the Riches of it, and so to
treasure up Wrath. May we by his Spirit be formed as a peculiar People to show
forth his Praise. Thus we may hope further to see the Good of his Chosen, to
rejoice with the Gladness of his Nation, and to glory with his Inheritance.

AND now let us pray for all in Authority; that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable Life, in all Godliness and Honesty. Let us pray for the KING as
supreme, that the Father of Lights would furnish him with all Royal Gifts and
Graces; clothe his Enemies with Shame; but upon Him may the Crown flourish. The
Lord build his Servant a sure House! Let us pray that our honored Rulers under
him, may lead in the necessary Work of Reformation by their Authority, and by
their Example. Yea, let us lift up a Prayer to the Father of Glory, that the
Kingdom of his dear Son may be set up throughout the World, and that He, whose
Right it is, would take to himself his great Power and Reign: May He ride forth
conquering, and to conquer, until the Kingdoms of this World shall become the
Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; that these uttermost Parts of the
Earth may be given to him for his Possession, and the Natives of the Wilderness
bow before him as his willing People in the Day of his Power. Thus may Asia and
Africa, Europe and America join in Songs of Praise to our glorious Lord, and
enjoy the Blessings of his Kingdom, Righteousness and Peace, and Joy in the
Holy Ghost. I close with those Words in the 72d Psalm, which treats ultimately
and principally of the Glory of CHRIST'S Kingdom, the great Antitype, Verses
18th, and 19th, Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who only does
wondrous Things. And blessed be his glorious Name for ever; and let the whole
Earth be filled with his Glory. AMEN and AMEN.


