An Eclogue Occasioned by the Death of the Reverend ALEXANDER CUMMING, A. M.

On the 25th of August A. D. 1763. Aetat. 37.

The sweet Remembrance of the Just
Shall flourish when he sleeps in Dust.
Psalm 112.6. T. and. B. BOSTON: Printed by D and J. Kneeland, for J EDWARDS,
in Cornhill. MDCCLXIII

The Argument.
FLorio and Albinus, two young Gentlemen of good Education, and Admirers of the
Deceased, had retired for (...). In a pleasant Morning Walk, they chance to
meet on the summit of a gently rising Hill; their mutual Salutation, introduces
a short Discourse on the Beauties of the Country which is suddenly interrupted
by the Sight of a Tree which had been shattered by the Lightning. Admiration of
the Phenomenon gives Occasion to Florio to communicate to his Friend the News
of a far more awful and surprising (...) of Providence, in the Removal of their
once beloved and worthy Pastor by Death. Albinus is surprised, but recollecting
a remarkable Dream, emblematical of the Occurrence he relates it to Florio, who
full of Grief laments the Life of so great and good a Man; while Albinus
represents the infinite Advantage to himself by the Change, and his Admission
into the Society of the Blessed: After which they join in a sacred Ode,
expressive of their Resignation to divine Providence.

The Eclogue is formed partly on the Plan of Virgil 's Daphnis.

An Eclogue.
ALBINUS. "SWeet is the Breath of Morn." The fragrant Air
Dispensing balm: Sweets, and odorous Gales,
Filled with melodious Notes, of warbling Birds
Invites me, from my downy Couch to rise;
And on this gently rising Hill to walk.
Here let me muse, and from this Top survey
The pleasing Landschape, Nature spreads around. --
But yonder comes my Florio; I Will advance,
And bend my Steps to meet him. -- Hail, my Friend,
I bid you welcome to this rural Seat.

FLORIO. All hail, my Friend, I wish you Health and Peace;
May Heaven's first Blessings rest upon your Head.

ALBINUS. How Nature smiles! This is the lovely Time
For Contemplation, and sublime Delights.
See how the Clouds disperse, the orient Blush
Proclaims the Approach of the bright Lamp of Day.
What beauteous Verdure covers all the Ground!
How pleasing to behold those Flocks, that graze
On yonder Lawn! to see the ripening Fruits
Expand their ruddy Bosoms to the South,
Adorn the Trees, and load their bending Boughs!

FLORIO. Such Pleasures do the Sons of Sloth forego,
And those who live immured in smoaky Towns
At this delightful Season. --

ALBINUS. -- What is that
Obtrudes itself upon my wondering Eyes?
Observe it is shattered Trunk! it is broken Boughs!

FLORIO. This Trunk, my Friend, was once a stately Oak,
Sublime, it reared it is verdant Top above
The lofty Cedars which around it grew*
Deep rooted in the Earth, it mocked the Blasts
Of bell'wing Storms, and jarring Elements:
But not long since, upon a gloomy Day,
When Heaven's Artillery began to roar,
And forky Lightnings glar'd around the Sky;
A fiery Shaft, winged with impetuous Speed
Flashed from the warring Clouds, and darted down
Upon the Summit of this towering Oak;
Rent it is strong Trunk, and marred it is lofty Pride,
And, instantaneous, felled it to the Dust.

ALBINUS. O wondrous Force! that in a Moment could
Shatter the towering Monarch of the Grove,
And cleave it is knotty Trunk, amazing Power!

FLORIO. Amazing Power indeed! how wondrous then
That Arm, which guides the unerring Shafts of Death?
O my Albinus, would these Tears permit,
A far more awful Stroke I could relate,
And more surprising Frown of Providence
Than what stands here presented to our View.

ALBINUS. Declare, my Florio, what is the mournful Cause
Of this so sad Commotion in your Breast;
For never did your Countenance before
Discover such deep Woe, and heartfelt Grief.
What sad Catastrophe affects you thus?

FLORIO. Last Night, returning from my Evening Walk
Calm and composed, I met a neighboring Swain
Returning from the Town; into my Hands
He gave a Letter, and strait bid adieu. --
Black was the Seal, Omen lugubrious!
Scarce had I opened the yielding Folds, when lo!
These piercing Words presented to my View,
" Cumming is dead. -- O had ten thousand Swords
Been darted through my Soul; their sharpest Pain
I had deemed Pleasure, when compared with this. --

ALBINUS. Is Cumming gone, and left a World in Tears?
Amazing News! it thrills my inmost Soul!

FLORIO. Had then ten thousand Thunders burst at once,
And through the Concave roared their horrid Peal;
The Shock I could have borne with seeming Ease;
But this, my Friend, is insupportable.

ALBINUS. Repine not, O my Florio, but submit;
It Is Heaven that gives, and Heaven that takes away.
Some sudden ill, my Phant'sy did presage
Had happened to Mankind: For as I lay,
Last Night, invelop'd in the Arms of Sleep,
A sudden Vision on my Phant'sy poured,
Methought I gazing stood, and viewed the Heavens
With all their starry Glories shining fair,
Though past their Midnight Splendour; when behold!
As towered the East I turned my wandering Eye,
Twinkling, the Morning Star sunk from it is Orb,
And in a Moment vanished from my Sight!
I gazed astounded, wondering what might be
The Cause of this so rare Phenomenon.
When lo! a shining Seraph strait appeared,
(Immortal Beauty sparkled in his Face.)
And thus addressed me: 'Cease, fond Man, to gaze,
'Thy mortal Skill can never comprehend
'JEHOVAH'S deep, unfathomable Ways.
'This heavenly Visitant, although it shone
'With such surpassing, splendid Radiance,
'Yet by ungrateful Man was scarcely owned;
'Base Man would sleep, and by it is chearing Beams
'Would never be enlightened, nor receive
'The Emanations of it is heavenly Light.
'Therefore the almighty GOD at length saw fit
'To take it thus, from this ungrateful Earth;
'And now it is gone to illumin higher Worlds,
'To blaze in higher Spheres, to deck sublimer Skies.'

FLORIO. If ought could mitigate my heartfelt Grief,
That Thought alone, methinks would be sufficient:
Yet who can estimate the Loss we bear?
Not five swift circumvolving Suns have rolled
Their annual Orbits, round our dreary Globe,
Since PRINCE, the great, the good, the learned, the wise,
Descended to the silent Shades of Death. The Rev. THOMAS PRINCE A. M. to whom
Mr. CUMMING immediately succeeded, departed this Life Oct. 22. 1758. Ae 72.

Mankind deplored his Fall. Scarce had we now
Emerg'd out of that Gulf of general Woe,
And worthily repaired the mighty Breach; The Rev. Mr. CUMMING, whose Death is
the Subject of this Performance, was installed Pastor of the Old South Church
in Boston, Colleague with the Rev. Dr. SEWALL, Feb. 25. 1761.

The King of Terrors visits us again*
And moves our Candlestick out of his Place.
" Cumming is dead." No more that sacred Dome
With his harmonious Accents shall resound:
No more those glorious, evangelic Truths,
On which his Faith, and Hope were firmly built,
With such celestial Pathos, shall devolve
From his persuasive Tongue. Often have I stood,
And joined with him in ardent Prayer to Heaven;
Till I have almost seen his active Soul,
With inward Fervor, and Devotion fired
Burst through its feeble Tenement of Clay,
And wing its Flight up to the Throne of God.
But now, alas! no longer shall I hear
Those ardent Breathings. His pure Hands no more
Shall break the Bread of Life, unto our Souls.
Lament, and mourn, ye poor bereaved Flock;
Your Beauty's withered, and your Glory fled.

ALBINUS. Lament no more, my Friend, but change the Scene;
He does but sleep awhile, he is not dead:
Has not the great IMMANUAL declared
" John 11.26.
He that believes in me shall never die"?
What though the Grave his mortal Part consume?
His disembodied Spirit still survives,
Released from the frail Prison of his Flesh,
And to the Spirits of Just Men has fled.
We only part, till the great rising Day;
When this corruptible shall change its Mould,
This mortal put on Immortality;
And Earth, and Seas resign their sleeping Dead.
Why mourn we then? why would we wish him back
Into this gloomy Vale of Tears again?
He Is far removed from Pain, and Sorrow now,
Where Anguish, Grief and Death can never wound:
No Calumny his spotless Soul can reach:
Nor warm Opponents ever disturb his Peace* --
Let not the mourning Flock too sorely grieve;
Yet SEWALL lives, and from his aged Lips
Dispenses heavenly Truths, with holy Zeal:
May his important Life be yet prolonged,
And late, to Heaven his dove-like Soul ascend.

FLORIO. Benighted World! robbed of such glorious Light!

ALBINUS. It Is our's, in Duty to submit to Heaven,
And humbly acquiesce in GOD'S Decree.
But now the Sun has risen from the Main,
And bends his Course towered the meridian Sky:
Haste, let us part before his calid Rays
Diffuse their sultry Influence through the Air.
But first, it is fit, with Reverence and Awe
Our humblest Adorations, to present
To Heaven's almighty King. --

FLORIO. -- Begin, my Friend,
The sacred Task, while I devoutly join.

ALBINUS. Almighty King, who reign'st above,
Eternal Source of Truth and Love,
And Lord of all below,
With Reverence, and religious Fear
Permit thy Suppliants to draw near,
And at thy Feet to bow.
Thy sovereign Fiat formed us first;
Thy Breath can blow us into Dust,
Frail, sinful, mortal Clay:
It Is thine undoubted Right to give
Those earthly Blessings we receive,
And thine to take away.
All things are under thy Control,
Eternal Wisdom rules the whole,
"Educing good from ill:"
Submissive, therefore, we resign;
Our Wills are swallowed up in thine,
In thy most holy Will.
In Heaven above thy Will is done;
Archangels stand around thy Throne,
Thy Counsels to fulfill:
Adoring, at thy Feet they fall;
Confess thee Sovereign Lord of all,
And execute thy Will.
Lord, may we join the heavenly Throng;
May Mortals learn the angelic Song,
Who dwell beneath the Sun;
May every Tongue thy Praise proclaim;
This be the universal Theme,
JEHOVAH'S Will be done.

THE END.

