Spiritual Ignorance causes Men to counter-act their doctrinal Knowledge.

A DISCOURSE From ACTS xiii. 27.

By ISAAC BACKUS, Pastor of a Church of CHRIST, in Middleborough.

TIT. i. 16. They profess that they know God; but in Works they deny him.

PROVIDENCE, in NEW ENGLAND: Printed and sold by WILLIAM GODDARD, at the Sign
of SHAKESPEARE'S Head. M.DCC.LXIII.

A DISCOURSE, etc.
ACTS xiii, 47. F^t^ that dwell at Jerusalem, and their Rulers, because they
(...) of the Prophets (...) are read (...) S^, they have fulfilled the^^ (...)
him.


THE great Apostle of the Gentiles in his Travels with his Companions, coming
to A^ti^ in P^s^a^a, they went into the Jewish Synagogue, and found them more
candid than many of their Brethren elsewhere: For, after going through their
usual Forms, they set open the Door for them to speak. P^ readily accepts the
Motion, and after beckoning for Audience, he briefly runs over many remarkable
Things recorded in the sacred History, concerning their Nation, from their
Bondage in Egypt, to David's Advancement to be King over them; whom GOD raised
up to be a great Deliverer and Ruler of his People, and who was a remarkable
Type of Jesus, the Savior and King of Israel, who was to come of David's Line.
H^then proceeds directly to declare that this p^mised Savior was actually
come; John having first, ^^cording to the Prophecy, prepared his Way* and so in
a short and comprehens^e Meth^d he comes to the great Business which his Heart
was chiefly (...) viz. to hold forth Salvation to them through this glorious
Redeemer. And to move them to a re^ Acceptance of these great Blessings, he
sets before them the melancholy Example (...) the Inhabita^s and Rulers of
Jer^, who through the Ignorance and Perverseness had condemn^ and crucified him
who came just ac^^^^ng to the Prophets Predictions: (...) they (...) Jerusalem,
and the Rulers, (...) him not, nor yet the (...) the^ of the Prophets which are
read (...) ^th-Day, they have fulfilled them in con^g him.

WHICH Words, as well as the other Scriptures, were written for our Learning
and Admonition, in these Ends of the World. In order therefore to improve them
for our Advantage, let us,

I. Take a brief Survey of the Voices of the Prophets of the Old Testament,
which were exactly fulfilled in Jesus.

II. Consider the Reason why the Jews did not receive him, though they had so
often heard these plain Predictions.

I. LET us take a ^f Survey of the Voices of the Prophe^^ of the Old Testament,
which were exactly fulfilled (...).

AND (...), as to the (...) seemed most puzzling to that People, namely, that
real Divinity should be un^ to (...), and for which they condemned (...) as a
Blasph^^^, because that he (...) a M^ (...) GOD. J^^. x. 33, and xix. ^.
Yet how plainly (...) the Prophets speak to this P^? (...) speaks of a
Virgin's conceiving and bringing f^t^ Son, whose Name should be called
IMMANUEL, which signifies GOD with us. And he further declares that this Child,
should be called -- The MIGHTY GOD, the EVERLASTING (...). I^a. vii. 14, and
ix. ^. Mat. i. 23.
Jeremiah tells of GOD'S raising to (...) a righteous Branch whose Name should
be called, The LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. Jer. xxiii. ^, 6.
M^ says his G^gs forth have b^ f^ of Old, fr^ (...) M^. v. 2.
and Zeckar^h Z^ch. xiii. 7.
calls him GOD'S F^. Genesis xvii. 7, and xxii. 18. ^l. iii. 1^.
All which could never be t^ of any mere Creature; and yet it is counted
Bla^ng, by those who had often heard all (...), and much more of the like
Nature, for him to assert his Godhead.

THEN as to his t^ing human Nature, He was to come of the Posterity of Abraham,
and make good the ultimate Reach of the Promise concerning his Seed^. The Tribe
is also foretold: Good old Jacob, when he on his Deathbed blessed his Children
concerning Things to come, told them that the Scepter should not depart from
Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his Feet, until Mil^h came, unto whom the
Gathering of the People should be. G^^. xlix. 1^.
The Family of David is likewise named. He is the (...) ^^tter spoken of, to
spring from J^s^e and David's Root. (...). xi. 1. J^r. xxiii. 5.
Yea, and Micah foretells the Place where he should be born, even ^^th^, the
Town of David's Nativity. The Region where he chiefly acted in his public
Ministry (...) pointed out, even the Land of Zebu^on and N^ (...). ^. 2.
, upon the Seacoasts in Galile^ Is^. ix. 1, 2. M^. iv.
.

THAT which the Jews took great Offense at, viz. the M^ess of his outward
Appearance, the Prophets are very plain upon. He shall gr^w up (...) a Root out
of a dry Ground: He ^a^ (...) ^m (...) ^liness: He is despised and rejected of
Men, a Man of Sorrows, and (...) with Grief Isa. l^^^. 11.
. Our Lord exactly answered th^se Descriptions; and yet, so blind were that
People, that these Proofs of his being the Messiah, they took to be Evidences
that he was not.

(...) to pass much that might be observed in his Life, I shall h^n toward his
Death. That (...) drawing near, he rides into Jerusalem (...) to the Prophecy,
in Triumph, and yet, (...) sitting upon an Ass, and upon a Colt the Fool of an
Ass Z^^h. ix. ^. Mat. xxi. 5.
. And entering the Temple, he overturns Things there, and appears so plainly in
Word and Deed against their Corruptions, that they could no longer endure him;
and yet they could not prevail against him, 'till a professed Friend of his
offered to betray him, that the Scripture might be fulfilled; He that eats
Bread with me, has lift up his Heel against me^: Psa. xli. 9. Joh. xiii. 18.
The Price which they gave for him is expressly told by the Prophet, namely
Thirty Pieces of Silver: And so is the Use that it was afterward put to, even
to buy the ^otter's F^h^ Z^^h. xi. 12, 13. Mat. xxvi. 15, and xxvii. 9, 10.
. The dreadful Treatment that our Savior met with from his Persecutors, and
his P^ under it, is scarce more clearly, ^^^^^^ingly described by the Evang^,
than by the Prophets. They speak of (...) ^k being (...), his Face spit upon,
his H^nds and (...), and ^e pierced. His h^ ^all and Vinegar given him is
foretold; and so is the Soldier* ^ing his Garments and ^ing ^o^s upon his
Ves^re: The Insults of the P^s are likewise described. He trusted on the Lord,
(...) deliver him, etc. and so is Christ's Meekness as a Lamb under all this.
And David s^ts down the very Words which he used on the Cross; My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? Psa. xxii. 1, 8, 16, 18, and lxix. 21. Isa. l. 6,
and liii. 7, 8. Mich. v. 1. Z^^h. xii. 10. Mat. xxvi. ^3, 67, and xxvii. 34,
35, 43, 46.
They show the quick Dispatch which was made: He was taken from Prison and from
J^g^, and who shall declare his Generation? for (...) was (...) out of the Land
of the Living. Yet his Soul was not left in Hell, neither did his Flesh see
Corruption: But he ar^se, and also ascended on high, and lead Captivity
Captive, etc. Psa. xvi. 10. and lxviii. 13. Acts ii. 31.


THESE are some of the Voices of the Prophets concerning the Messiah, which the
Jews were then looking for: And why did not they receive him, when he so
exactly answered these Descriptions? The Answer is plain in the Text; therefore
we proceed:

II. To consider the Reason why they did not receive him, though they had so
often heard these plain Predictions; which was, Because they knew him not, nor
the Voices of the Prophets; 'twas their Ignorance of GOD and his Word.

BUT were they really ignorant? Why it seems that they knew so much about the
Time of the Messiah's coming, that they were in great Expectation of him about
that Season: They knew that he was to be the Son of David; and could tell He^^d
that he was to be born in Bethlehem Luke iii. 15. Mat. ii. 5, and xxii. 42.
. And they expected that he would be a great Deliverer and Savior of their
People: But their Misery was that they were ignorant of the spiritual Nature of
these great Things. They knew him not; were ignorant of the Nature and
Perfections of the Deity. They had not learnt what Joshua taught their Fathers,
viz. Ye cannot serve the Lord for he is an holy God Josh. xxiv. 19.
. Nor had such a View of his Holiness as Isaiah, which made him cry out, Woe is
me, for I am undone, because I am a Man of unclean Lips, and I dwell in the
midst of a People of unclean Lips: For mine Eyes have seen the King, the Lord
of Hosts. And he had a living Application from off GOD'S Altar, to purge away
his Sin, in order to his going forth on GOD'S Errand Isa. vi.
. No, they did not think their standing to be such before GOD, but that if they
had good Instructions, and good Motives, they might obtain Salvation, without
supernatural Help: Hence one of them that discovered a high Esteem of Christ,
and came kneeling to him; his Inquiry was, What shall I DO that I may inherit
eternal Life? Man. x. 17.
The Jews had such an Opinion of their Doings, that they did not believe that
they needed an Almighty Helper, and therefore stumbled at his asserting his
Godhead: And I have often thought that one ma^^ Reason why any in these Times
deny Christ's Divinity, is because they don't see their Case to be so wretched
as to want an infinite Savior.

FURTHER, they knew not the Voices of the Prophets; though they read much in
the Prophets Writings, they did not understand their Meaning; but formed
earthly Conceptions of heavenly Things. Thus, for Instance, when they read of
Christ's coming as the King of Israel* they looked for one that would deliver
them from their outward Enemies, and raise their Nation above all the Kingdoms
round about: Hence the Pharisees demanded of Jesus, When the Kingdom of God
should come? But he replied, The Kingdom of God comes not with Observation;
neither shall they say lo here, or lo there (...) xvii. 20, 21.
. i. e. GOD'S Kingdom comes not with outward Show, like earthly one's, that
Observers might say, Lo here comes our King with his Retinue, or there he
appears in his Glory. No says our Savior, For behold the Kingdom of God is
within you. His Kingdom is of an inward and spiritual Nature.

THE Evangelist John sets the Case in a very clear Light; he shows that when
Jesus came to his own People, they received him not: But those which did
receive him, were those, Which were born not of Blood, nor of the Will of the
Flesh, nor of the Will of Man, but of God. They being divinely enlightened,
beheld his Glory, the Glory as of the only-begotten of the Father, full of
Grace and Truth Joh. i. 11, ^14.
. While others who were trusting in their Blood Relation to Abraham, and in
their free Will Power, saw no Form nor Comeliness in him. Thus it appears, that
their Ignorance of the Nature and Perfections of the Divine Being, and
consequently of their own unlikeness to him, and wretched Condition before him;
and so not being sensible of what a Salvation they needed, was the great Cause
of their rejecting, and crucifying the Lord of Glory. Now in these Things, they
were willingly, nay, many of them wilfully ignorant, by which they brought upon
themselves dreadful Guilt and amazing Ruin: Which shocking Example was justly
set forth by the Apostle, as a Warning to the Jews at Antioch, not to do the
like; and it ought likewise seriously to be regarded by each of our Souls:
Which may lead us to some particular Improvement of the Hints that have been
given. And,

1. How should these Things teach us to prize and regard the holy Scriptures?
In them alone is clearly discovered how we have destroyed ourselves, and where
our Help is found. The Author, the Nature, and the Glory of our Salvation is
there revealed, as the Light of Nature, and all the Wisdom of this World could
never have found it out. And as these good News are glorious in themselves; so
they are to be depended upon by us. Nothing confirms Prophecy like the exact
Accomplishment of the Things predicted. This was the ancient Rule which GOD
gave to Israel, to know his Prophets by Deuteronomy. xviii. 22.
. O, how convincing then are the Evidences that we have of the Verity of the
Bible! None but Men divinely inspired could tell Hundreds, or Thousands of
Years before Hand, so many great Things; yea, and minute Circumstances too,
concerning the Birth, Life and Death of our Savior, as were written by the
Prophets, and are testified by the Apostles, and many other Witnesses, in the
New Testament Here let me observe, that Dr. Gill in his Exposition of the
New Testament, has clearly shown from the ancient Jewish Writings, that while
they show their Blasphemy and Malice against Christ, they undesignedly give
their Testimony to many Facts concerning him: For they own that there was such
a Person as Jesus, or Jesu (as they in Co^t^^^^ call him) the Son of Mary, the
Wife of Joseph; that he was born in Bethlehem; that he was once in Egypt; that
he lived many Years in Nazareth, and hence they frequently call him a Nazare^^.
They mention John the Baptist* They speak of Judas's betraying of him; and that
when his Disciples saw he was taken, they ran away. They say the Elders of
Jerusalem smote him with Whips, and put a Crown of Thorns upon his Head, and
that he was put to Death because he was ^igh to the Kingdom. These, with some
other Things they mention, though they would represent him to be the worst of
Men.
. And as certainly as those Things which were spoken concerning Christ's
Obedience and Sufferings are accomplished, so surely will all that is said
about the Glory* which should follow be fulfilled: Yea, every Promise, and
every Threatening in GOD'S sacred Book, shall finally take Place in their full
Extent, to the eternal Glory of the Divine Being, and the complete Happiness or
Misery of all the human Race. O, what Madness then are all such guilty of, who
disregard and run on contrary to the divine Oracles in their Lives and
Conversations! Such Behavior is like running upon the Point of a Sword, to
which GOD'S Word is frequently compared. To such I would cry, as Paul did to
the Jailor, Do thyself no Harm Act. xvi. 28.
.

2. HENCE, see the Necessity of the Aids of the divine Spirit, in order to
understand and improve the Scriptures as we ought. Many now, as well as
formerly, are forward to cry up human Reason and Accomplishments; and to look
upon such as (...) not a (...) Share thereof, as Persons in^ pa^le of
understanding and improving the sacred Writings ari^ht. [ This People who
knows not the Law (...) ^ursed J^. vii. 49.
] But that Saying remains as true now as heretofore* The World by W^om knew not
God: And that if any Man seems to be wi^e in this World, (...) must become a
Fool, in order to be truly wise 1 Cor. i. 21, and iii. 18.
. i. e. He must be sensible of, and acknowledge his own Ignorance and Folly
before GOD, and gladly yield to and embrace the Teachings and Influences of the
Holy Spirit: That Spirit of Truth which guides into all Truth Joh. xvi. 13.
. Saint Stephen su^ up the fatal Error of the Jews thus, Ye stiff-necked and
^r^ised in Heart and ^r^, ye do always resist the HOLY GHOST: As your Fathers
did, so do ye Acts vii. 51.
.

THE Necessity and Importance of the Help of the Divine Spirit, may further
appear from two Considerations.

FIRST. From the Imperfection of the Ideas which we form concerning Things that
we are not acquainted with. How rarely do any Person^ ^ad Places, Persons or
Things to agree with the Conceptions which they have formed of them from verbal
or written Descriptions! And if our Apprehensions are so dull about earthly
Things, that are out of the Circle of our particular Acquaintance; how confused
and false will our Notions be of heavenly Things, without the Teachings of the
Holy Ghost! 1 Cor. ii. 11.
The Reason why the natural Man cannot know them, is, because they are
spiritually discerned: The Apostle uses a very striking Similitude to
illustrate this Case, For, says he, what Man knows the Things of a Man, save
the Spirit of Man which is in him? even so the Things of God knows NO Men,
but the Spirit of God 1 Cor. ii. 11.
. Which shows that his Teachings are as needful for the true Knowledge of the
Things of GOD, as the Use of our intellectual Powers are in order to be
conscious of Things within us.

SECONDLY. The Wise give wrong Judgment when their Minds are byased. A Gift
does blind the Eyes of the Wise, and pervert the Words of the Righteous Deuteronomy.
xvi. 19.
. Now Pride, Self Love, Self-Interest, the Frowns or Favors of the World, and
Abundance of other Things, like Fogs, arise often in the Mind to prevent a just
View of Things: Nay, says the Apostle James, Do ye think that the Scripture
says in vain, the Spirit that dwells in us lusts to Envy? What then is the
Remedy against this great Evil? Why, He gives more Grace; wherefore he says,
God resists the Proud, but gives Grace unto the Humble James iv. 5, 6.
.

3. IF the Influences and In-dwelling of the holy Spirit is so needful for all,
how essentially necessary must it be for a Gospel Minister? The Teachers of the
Jewish Church were (at least some of them) Men of no small Capacities and
Acquirements: CHRIST calls them the Wise and prudent Mat. xi. 23.
. But their Hearts not being right with GOD, the greater their Gifts, the more
Mischief they did; and so it generally proves to be with such Men, in all
Generations. -- Among many Things that might be named to illustrate this Point,
I shall fix upon this, viz. Ministers are Christ's Ambassadors, to treat with
Souls in his Name about being reconciled to GOD 2 Cor. v. 20.
. Well, should any Person now, when a Treaty is proposed, to labor for to
reconcile the Powers at War, advance this as a Rule, that in making choice of
Ambassadors to act for our King and Nation in these great Affairs, that if any
Persons can be found who have large Gifts, and are well versed in the
Languages, History, and political Affairs of the Nations concerned, then it is
no essential Thing, whether in Heart they are Friends to our Nation or to its
Enemies Here note, that I speak nothing against human Learning in itself, but
only of the Place some give it; and to use the Comparison that Mr. Keach did,
eighty Years ago: Human Learning may be a good Handmaid to Religion; but if
like Hagar, she must needs be Mistress, then cast her out.
. How would such a one be looked upon, and treated? I believe I need not
answer; others would do it fast enough. And what Reason can be given why
supreme Love to Christ and his Cause, is not as necessary in his Ambassador as
in King George's?

SHOULD it be said that a Person may have a good moral Character, and a Desire
to promote others' Salvation, though he be not regenerated himself. I reply,
that our Lord declares, that He that is not with me, is against me; and he that
gathers not with me, scatters abroad Mat. xii. 30.
. All are either real Friends or Enemies to Christ, and those who don't view
the Case to be so, have not true Ideas of the Controversy which subsists
between GOD and Man; and therefore are very unfit Persons to have the Ministry
of Reconciliation committed to them. -- But say many, "we cannot know who are
converted, and who not; for GOD only searches the Heart." ANSWER. He only sees
what the inward Dispositions of Men's Minds are toward our King and Nation, as
well as toward Heaven; but will any argue from thence that we cannot know who
are our Friends, and who not? -- It will likely be replied, that indeed we may
form a Judgment sufficient to act upon; yet possibly we may be mistaken after
all. Well, when that is allowed, still how is it improved? Why, in civil and
political Concerns, the Danger of being imposed upon, makes Men more careful;
so that if there are Counterfeits abroad, they don't conclude that they will take
no mo^ Money; nor on the other Hand, that they will take all that comes: No; but
they look more critically after the distinguishing Marks of the true Coin: And
why will not Men be as wise about Things spiritual and heavenly? I know no
better Reason for it than this, viz. That Things below have more Place and
deeper Influence, generally, on Men's Minds, than Things above. And I wish
there was no Reason to complain, even in this Land of Gospel Light, that some
who claim the Power of introducing Men into the Ministry; yet neglect even to
examine their Candidates whether they are regenerated or no; as though that was
so small a Part of their Qualifications, that it was not worth inquiring after.
Be astonished O ye Heavens at this!

4. HENCE see something of the Cause why Jesus in his spiritual coming, is
often treated by many Professors of Christianity, much as his Person was by the
Jews; namely, because their Eyes are blinded as to the Nature of spiritual
Things, so that when GOD appears to work effectually for the Salvation of
Souls, they make strange of it, or boldly fight against it; and yet think that
they would not appear against a good Work, no more than the Jews thought they
would in Christ's Time. Joh. x. 33.

MANY when they read, that God has chosen the foolish Things of the World to
confound the Wise, yea, and the weak, base and despised Things of the World,
has he chosen to the End, That no Flesh should g^y in his Presence 1 Cor. i.
27, -29.
: They readily allow that 'twas right for him to deal thus in those Times,
because that the Jewish Leaders, and Gentile Philosophers, had a very false
Conceit of their own Wisdom and Goodness: But they do not suppose any other but
that their Opinion of themselves is just, and cannot think that Christ will make
Use of Instruments and Means, now to promote his Cause, which look foolish,
weak and despicable in their Eyes. Just so the Pharisees of old looked upon the
Conduct of their Fathers. Mat. xxiii. 29, -31. Which should be a Warning to us
all to beware of Self-Conceit.

PRESIDENT Edwards observed twenty Years ago, in his Thoughts which he
published, of the Work of GOD then in New England, that the Error of those that
opposed the Work (where their Error lay in the Understanding, and not in the
Disposition) consisted chiefly in these three Things, viz.

1. In their judging of the Work, by the Means and Manner of its being
introduced, and not by the Nature of the Work itself. 2. In their not making
the Scriptures their only Rule to try it by. And, 3. Their not distinguishing
between the Good and the Bad; but condemning All, because they found some
Things wrong.
AND he observes that many make use of History, old Customs, if not their own
Experiences too, as Rules to judge of the Work by, instead of the divine
Oracles.

THESE Observations I think are undeniable in themselves, and are also as
worthy of Notice now, as then; which was one Cause of my setting of them down
here; and another was, because of what I have heard and seen of late.

AFTER great Declensions and Stupidity, and the awful prevailing of Iniquity in
our Land, the Lord has been pleased in infinite Mercy to revive his Work in
various Places Particularly in Middleborough, and the Borders of some Towns
adjoining; where the Work began last May, and has prevailed so far, that not
less than Threescore have been thought to be converted since then. I am not so
unacquainted with Mankind as to be insensible how ready many are to say, "You
don't know who are converted, etc." But, I shall beg Leave to reply, in the
Words of the late President Davies, when speaking of the Work in, Virginia,
viz. I claim no Infallibility; but I must, not under the modest Pretense of
renouncing it, scruple a Matter attested with all possible Evidences, and so
rush into Skepticism. If I could form no Judgment of so public a Work, I would
renounce my Function this Moment, for with what Face can I pretend to promote a
divine Work in the Conversion of Men, if I cannot have any satisfying Knowledge
of it, when it appears. -- State of Dissenters in Virginia, p. 28, printed at
Boston, 1751. Something of the same Work that has been among us, has appeared
lately in R^^obeth, Attl^borough, Coventry, Norwich, Lyme, Brimfield, Enfield,
Saffe^d, and some other Places. January 7, 1763.
: And yet great Numbers both of Ministers and People, treat it either with
Disregard, or Opposition; notwithstanding the Evidences of its being a divine
Work are such as these: Namely, Many that formerly scarce showed any Regard to
Religion, and rarely attended public Worship, now rarely neglect any stated or
occasional Opportunity to hear the Gospel preached; great Numbers of young
People who were before bent upon V^ity, now show more Engagement and Delight in
religious Exercises, public and private, than ever they did in their merry
Meetings: -- Some intemperate Persons are become sober and regular in their
Conduct; many that were inordinately bent after the World, are brought to
lament their Folly in pursuing earthly Things in neglect of heavenly; Numbers
which had old Grudges are reconciled, etc.

THOSE who are looked upon to be converted, though many Circumstances of their
Change are very various; yet all agree in acknowledging the Purity and
Strictness of the divine Law, and that their Hearts as well as Lives have been
filled with Sin, and from thence give in to the Justice of GOD in their
Condemnation: And hold their Justification to be entirely by Christ's
Righteousness, received by Faith: Yet a View of that is so far from making them
careless in their Behavior, that they discover an earnest Desire to know and
conform to all Christ's Commands and Ordinances; they show much Love to God's
People, earnest Concern for the Salvation of Souls, and the like. Indeed I am
far from thinking that there has been no Intermixture of Things that are not
good; though from the most careful Observations that I have been able to make,
I really believe that this Work has been more clear from such Things than the
Work was twenty-one Years ago: Particularly, the Impressions that have been
made, either of a sorrowful or joyful Nature, have been more upon the
Understanding, and less on the Imagination, now than then: Hence, I have heard
of no Trances among us; also, Christians have been more solemn in their Joys,
and less bitter in their Zeal, than in the former Work. Nay, the Case is so
clear, that I should not be afraid to defy all Men to show fuller Proofs of
that is being the Work of God's Spirit which prevailed then in the Land, than
have appeared among us in the Year past; unless they think this to be so, to
wit. That the Instruments and Subjects of that Work were more accounted of in
the World than these now; and if that be the Case, then I would only desire
such to look back again upon the Jews' Conduct toward CHRIST, and take Warning.

SOME, I know are ready to say, "Don't go so fast, but wait and see how Things
will turn out." As if when, The Dayspring from on high has visited us Luke i.
78.
; it could not be known from the Night till afterward, or as if such heavenly
Visitations are not to be acknowledged and rejoiced in till we know how others
will improve them. The Jews waited to see how Things would turn out, and what
did they find: Why, they see many that followed Christ for a While, forsake
him? They saw one betray him, and others deny him, etc. And then they were
confirmed that it was all a Delusion; and, O Soul! ^ost thou covet their Lot?
GOD had said long before, I will choose their Delusions, and will bring their
Fears upon them; because when I called none did answer; when I spoke, they did
not hear: But they did Evil before mine Eyes, and CHOSE that in which I
delighted not. Isa. ^xvi. 4.
Can thou read this, delaying Soul, and not tremble? When GOD called they
chose not to regard; and he le^t them to be deluded and perish. O, therefore
embrace the first Calls without Delay!

ONCE more*

5. OUR Subject may inform us of one main Reason why Men's Practice often
contradicts their Profession; namely, because they are ignorant of the Nature
of the Principles they profess, or at least don't duly view them in their
Conduct. And alas! how full is the World of such Things? I shall name a few
Instances.

PROTESTANTS in general, profess that the Scriptures are the only perfect Rule
to decide all Controversies; and yet we often find, that when any Principle or
old Custom is brought into Dispute, Recourse is presently had to the old
Fathers, and if a Number of good Men on one Side, and bad ones on the other can
be reckoned up* the Scale is presently turned, and the Point decided. Indeed, I
am far from slighting pious Predecessors, but would follow them as far as they
did Christ; yet to make use of them as Authorities sufficient to shut off any
clear Light from the divine Oracles, which they did not see, is really to
injure their Characters, as well as our own Souls.

AGAIN, it is generally held that all Saints are imperfect in this Life; and
yet, if a Person who has professed to have the In-dwelling of the Holy Spirit,
happens to have his Judgment altered afterward in any Point in Religion, I
have heard that Promise, The Spirit of Truth will guide you into all Truth John
xvi. 13.
, improved as an Evidence that either they had not the Spirit then, or else
were in an Error now; which is as much as to say, that when a Person is under
the Operation of the Divine Spirit, his Judgment is then perfect; yea, and that
he must never have any more Reformation in Principles. All that the Spirit
teaches, is Truth; but he does not teach us all Truth at once; for the Just
walk in that Path that shines more and more unto the perfect Day Prove. iv. 18.
.

HOW often have we seen Persons that would cry out at others assuming GOD'S
Prerogative in searching the Heart, when perhaps they had no better Ground for
their Charge, than only the Person's dealing plainly with others for Evil that
they discovered; and yet they very soo^ would not stick to declare that those
which they complained of were deluded by the Devil!

PRIDE is generally condemned in Word, and if any who were not introduced into
the Ministry in the common Way of the Land, attempt to preach the Gospel, many
are ready to say to them as Elieb did to David, I know thy Pride, and the
Naughtiness of thine Heart 1 Samuel xvii. 28.
; but they don't seem to suspect that Pride moves them to claim the Prerogative
of introducing whom they think proper, and of forbiding all that follow not
them, though it was that Principle which made Christ's Disciples attempt such a
Practice formerly Mar. ix. 33* etc.
. Nay, according to the Behavior of many in these Things, it looks as though
they thought that Youths being pampered up at College, and then being set over
large Congregations, and to live in a great Deal of worldly Grandeur, secured
them from being lifted up with Pride; and then falling into the Condemnation of
the Devil, 1 Timothy iii. 6.
more than other Men. The ancient Exhortation to every Man, was Not to think of
himself more highly than he ought to think; but to think soberly, according as
GOD has dealt to every Man the Measure of Faith Romans xii. 3.
. But now let a Man have never so much Knowledge of the Doctrines of Faith, or
Experience of the Grace of Faith, and preach never so clearly; yea, and with
never so much Success too; yet if he is not introduced in the Way mentioned
above, how many are there that think they have sufficient Warrant to reject him?

WHILE I am writing of these Things, I can (as it were) hear some say, "Take
Care, you will bring the Ministry into Contempt?" I answer no, I would fain
secure them from it, by laboring for a Reformation; for I believe each one
will find that Saying true, sooner or later, Whosoever ex^lteth himself shall
be abased; and he that humbles himself shall be exalted Luke xiv. 11.
. And GOD'S Dealings toward his People in New England for twenty Years back,
have been wonderfully calculated, like his Dispensations toward Israel in the
Wilderness, To humble them, and ^o prove them, to know what was in their Heart,
whether they would keep his Commandments or no Deuteronomy. viii ^.
.

THEREFORE to proceed,

HOW many have there been among us, who have professed to have such Love to
Christ and his Cause, that they would die for him, rather than deny him; who
yet have acted quite otherwise when Trials came on? But there is no End to
enumerate Particulars, no Sect, nor Order of Men, are free of this dreadful
Evil, of saying one Thing and doing another; though some are much more guilty
of it than others: And the Consideration hereof, is enough to abase all Flesh
before GOD. And before I leave this Head, let me observe, that there is one
Sort of People who strangely think themselves free of this Charge, of saying
one Thing and practicing another, because they don't profess Religion at all.
They will exclaim at a high Rate against the Hypocrisy of Professors, and
declare that they would not be guilty of mocking GOD as they do, upon no
Account. Now here seems to be an Acknowledgment of the Divine Omniscience, and
a Regard to Uprightness before him; and yet, at the same Time, they don't so
much as pretend to regard his Authority, nor submit to his Government. Thus a
professed Regard to GOD, makes them disregard him; and while they explode
Deceit and Self-Righteousness, sadly discover Marks of both: For while the
Pharisee tells of his Fastings and Performances, these boast of their honest
Hearts, and I believe many of them depend as much upon their Honesty, as others
do upon their Duties. But are they really honest? They say they abhor
Self-Righteousness, and it seems that they would not pretend to pray to GOD,
because their Prayers would not be acceptable; that is, they will not come to
him, because they find no Good in themselves to bring. What amazing Things are
here! Here are Men that would not mock GOD, and yet live in open Contempt of
his Service; they say they have honest Hearts, but will not so much as confess
their Iniquities to him, whom they have provoked, nor seek his Mercy. O
Heaven-daring Madness!

THUS it appears, that Men are so far from avoiding Inconsistences, by
disregarding Religion, that they involve themselves the deeper in Confusion and
Guilt, and run in the high Road to eternal Ruin; while Professors are far from
being excusable, in not practicing agreeable to their Profession. But one Way
of Peace and Happiness therefore remains, which is to fly to the Blood of
Christ, to purge our Consciences from dead Works, that we may serve the living
God Heb. ix. 14.
; and so to abide in him as the Branch does in the Vine, that we may bring
forth much Fruit John xv.
.

BEFORE I conclude, I would set down a few Words of Advice, to my own Soul as
well as others, which if rightly regarded, will afford much Help against the
Evils mainly spoken of in this Discourse.

1st. LET us meditate much upon the Perfections of GOD, especially his
Omniscience and Omnipresence; that he fills all Places, and sees all Things. A
realizing View hereof, will wonderfully guard the Soul against all Deceit, as
well as other Vices. When David had been devoutly contemplating upon these
Things, it led him to renounce the Ways of wicked Men, and to cry to GOD to
search his Heart and Thoughts, and see if there was any Way of Wickedness in
him, and lead him in the Way everlasting Psa. cxxxix.
.

2d. LET us often review our Ways, and compare our Profession and Practice
together; and endeavor to set ourselves as Spectators, critically to observe
how our Conduct may appear to others. But because Self is so apt to blind us;
therefore,

3d. LET us prize and improve the faithful Reproofs of our Fellow Christians.
When the Man after GOD'S own Heart, had been crying to the Lord, that his Lips
and Heart might be kept from wicked Works, as believing Prayer engages the Soul
to wait for an Answer, in the Way of using the best Means to obtain the Thing
requested; so he names this as a great Help in the Case, viz. Let the Righteous
smite me, it shall be a Kindness; and let him reprove me, it shall be an
excellent Oil which shall not break my Head Psalm. cxli. 3, -5.
. Solomon tells us, that open Rebuke is better than secret Love; while he that
hates Reproof is brutish, and shall die Prove. xxvii. 5; and xii. 1; and xv. 10.
.

UPON the Whole, since the Jews trusted upon their outward Privileges, and
rested in their outward Forms, and thought, because of them, that their Case
was safe, though their Hearts and Lives were contrary thereto; but were so far
mistaken, that for these Things, and their rejecting the Savior, they brought
upon themselves and Posterity, such Woes as never befell any other People: May
our Souls take effectual Warning, not to rest in any Thing short of a Union
with, and Conformity to Jesus Christ.

AND by all Means let us take Heed, that we do not treat this heavenly Friend
as the Jews did heretofore. His coming is always contrary to Nature: The
Prophet puts the Question in old Time thus, Who may abide the Day of his
coming? and who shall stand when he appears? for he is like a Refiner's Fire,
and like Fullers Soap Mal. iii. 2.
. But shall we regard our Dross and Filth, more than his Presence and
Blessings? No, but may all set open Doors that the KING OF GLORY may come in.
AMEN.

To fill a vacant Page, here is inserted a Hymn, from Mr. WALLIN'S Evangelical
Hymns, just reprinted in Boston.
1
BEware, my Soul, the Tempter's Train;
He takes his Circuit round,
And first tries small Sins, glad to gain
Though but an Inch of Ground.
2
If his Device shall once prevail
To captivate the Mind,
His second Wile will scarcely fail
Greater Success to find*
3
He is thy Enemy avowed;
His Aim is to devour:
A Duty left, a Sin allowed,
Is his successful Hour.
4
The Place thy Follies to him give
Will Pain and Sorrow cost;
Though Grace from Christ thou shall receive
To balance what is lost.
5
The Serpent's Craft is by Degrees
On Hypocrites to gain,
'Till in their foul Apostacies
He can all Ends obtain.
6
Sin once indulged pollutes the Heart,
And breaks the Bonds of Peace;
The holy Spirit will depart,
Divine Communion cease.
7
Then, O my Soul, thy Ground maintain;
Courageously resist;
If steadfast thou thy Faith retain,
The Tempter will desist.
8
For Satan flies the Christian Shield;
Nor can his Sword endure:
By Faith stand fast; O never yield;
Thy Conquest is secure.
FINIS.

