THE TRUE QUAKER, REPROVEING THE FALSE ONE. OR Them that would be counted
QUAKERS, and are not: So set forth BY JOHN BUFFIN, former Bookseller in the
Jerseys, and Pennsylvania.

Being his THIRD IMPRESION.

I will praise and Extol the most High both Day and Night,
Who has give me Understanding to oppose the Liar and the Hiprocrite.
Philadelphia, printed for the Author according to Copy. 1764.

The TRUE QUAKER, and c.
THE true Quaker, is loving, kind and respectful to all his Fellow Mortals, the
false ones, or them that would be called Quakers and are not so: Are proud and
high minded, greedy after Gain, fond of Places of Profit and Honor; -- and
when they are got therein, they are very apt to begin to Lord it over their
Fellow Creatures: Nay! and to blame them without a just Cause and belie them
also I think.

THE true Quaker cannot have Unity with such and likewise finds a Necessity
to reprove them, or show his Dislike to them; nay! let it be in what Society of
People it may be in the World.

FOR let it be in what Society of People it may, the true hearted honest People
cannot have Unity with them.

I have often considered the End and Tendency of Talebearing, Wispering and
Backbiting, and have observed the evil Fruits and Effects thereof among Friends
Neighbors and Relations.

IT is not possible for Neighbors, Friends and Relations, nor for any Society
of People to live together in Unity, Friendship and good Neighborhood, while
there goes up and down a Talebearer among them, a Wisperer among them; they
are Numbered by St. Paul in his Epistle, Romans chap. the first verse the 29,
30. With the worst of Sinners, and Slomons Testimony is: That the false Witness
that speaks Lies, and him that sows Discord among Brethren, is one of the
Six Things that God hates; and is an Abomination to him, Proverbs the 6, 19. So
they are Authors of much Mischief, and are in inconsistant with Peace, and
where these Sort of Evildoers are entertained, their Words make Wounds not
easily cured or made up.

No Man living has it in his Power to say, that he can preserve his
Reputation, while there are so many evil Tongues in the World ready to blast
the fairest Character, and so many Ears open ready to receive the Report.

Though Floods does rise and Winds does blow.
I think my Ankerage is good below.
There is some that refuses to give me a moderate hearing,
And prevert justice into domineering.
But grant that those can conquer those that can cheat
It Is phrase absurd to call a Villain great.
Who wickedly is wise or madly Brain,
Is but the more a Fool the more a Knave.
Know then this Truth, enough for Man to know
Virtue alone is Happiness below,
Seeming Devotion does but gild the Knave;
That is neither honest, just nor brave:
But where Religion does with Virtue join,
It makes a Hero like an Angel shine.
As Peter Harvey said my Countinance shows that I was no Friend:

I own I am no Friends to Talebearers, Backbiters and such,
And an Enemy to Liars, Thieves, Swearers and Drunkards as much.
A great Man from Town laments my Condition, that I am gone a stray,
But was so ignorant he could not tell me which way.
The Twenty-eight of the Fifth Month 1764.
Friends if to print the Truth is a Crime or Breach in our Discipline, it is
more then ever I know of, for if Men of deep or large Understanding be hindered
by Men that may not have so large, seems to me not to be reasonable; and Men
of less Understanding, may cast their Mite into the Treasury without being
hindered,

BUT if any Print, that which is wrong or false, I think the Law, Reason, and
Decipline is or ought to be open against them.

But my Cause is something wide from that, for I saw no way to clear myself of
those Falsehoods and Lies, but by printing; for after I had sent so many Letters
to some of them, to come and clear Matters that they had charged, or accused me
wrongfully, they would not.

If you turn me off, and look on my Writings and sayings as Envious and vain,
I know not, but that it will make me write Dream or print again.
I desire that in you may enter a serious Thought,
And consider the Builder mentioned in Scripture was set at naught,
I would have you to think or understand:
That a Prophet is not in account in his own Land.
I will bow before the most high GOD, whom I have fallen short to, and not to
Man, that I have given no just Cause of any Offense to the best of my
Understanding.

The vile Condition of base Men is such,
That a good Name to others does begrudge;
The Lord is only my Support and him that does me feed,
Then how can I lack any thing whereof I stand in Need.
The Truth may meet Reproach, but never can,
Be overcome by Devils or by Man.
Though at me you may scoff and deride
I hope to follow my righteous Guide.
Some short Account of one of the Boys Behavior toward me, that my Cows Milk
help to breed up one Summer; For after he grew up, I gave him several Favors
and Kindnesses; But at last he began to take Things, or encroach on me, and
signified he would have them, and if hindered him, he would clap a Writ on my
Back: But whether he applied for a Writ I know not: But he made his Complaints
to some others that thought they had Authority, but had not.

Them that are so proud and base,
As to be belie me to my Face.
I think they will not be slack,
Of doing of it behind my Back.
And them that are so bold as to brazen out one lie,
Will hardly forbear, and let all the rest go by;
You have treated me as if I was one of the worst of Men
Is the reason these Writings is wrote by my Pen,
I think with me it has happened or come to pass,
Like to the Man and his Son that was leading of an Ass;
It is like a staf-stay or Support in old Age;
That I have not in others Affairs medl'd or engage
But the proud hecterings threatenings of some has been such
That they have Lorded it over me with proud hectering very much,
One was so high learned, conceited or proud the was pleased to say;
That by my Countinance, he saw I was no Friend,
That they were too slack, or they had turned me away
It has pleased God to give me Understanding, so Wise and so Brave;
That I can reprove a Liar, Hectering, Back-biter and Knave.
Our great LORD and Lawgiver, said to his Followers: In the world you shall
have Trouble, but in me Peace.

BUT my Case or Complaint is of false Brethren, them that Charged or accuse me
falsely, and instead of endeavoring to put a Stop or hinder them, that has
encroached on my Rights and Privileges, they have encouraged them therein.

HE that wrote the History of the Devil, said the Devil is got into Men very
much now adays; -- I think so too -- otherwise I should not have been accused
falsely, so often as I have been.

As our valuable Friend Thomas Choakly preached that the Devils Kingdom was a
tottering Kingdom, though it had a many Props; so I intend to give some blows
at that great Prop; -- lying, -- That which I take to be one of the biggest of
them.

I think my Kinsman Peter Harvey, is very much to blame, for looking through
the wrong end of the Magnifying-Glass so often, to wit. When he looks at
other People's faults. -- And Edward Catril was as much to blame for looking
through it; -- when Peter handed it to him to look at my Faults. -- For by that
and Prejudice in his Mind was the Reason that he Thought that he saw a great
Fault, when there was none.

I am one whom prosperous Lot extoles not high,

Nor much discomposed by cross Adversity.

I am in some hopes my Kinsman Harvey, and Catril, White and Wollman, has done
throwing their Squibs at me; for they are as still as my School Boys.

Touching my Reputation.
THOUGH I have loved my Reputation and have been vigilant, not to lose or
impair it by my own default or neglect; yet I have looked upon it as a pretty
Thing, a Thing that the Devil aims to hit in a special Manner. -- A Thing that
is much in the Power of a false Report, a mistake. -- Notwithstanding all my
Care I am at the Mercy of others, without GOD'S wonderful Overruling
Providence. And as my Reputation is the Esteem that others have of me; so that
Esteem may be blemished without my default. -- I have therefore always taken
this Care, not to set my heart upon my Reputation. I will use all Fidelity and
honesty and take care it shall not be lost by my Default. And if
notwithstanding all this my Repution be soiled by evil or envious Men or
Angels; I will patiently bear it and content myself with the Serenity of my own
Conscience.

Query. But Buffin is there no Balm in Gilead, Buffins ANSWER, Yes: But my
Controversy is with them that is for healing or Skinning a Wound over and not
search it to the Bottom; the which I cannot no ways consent unto; for I think
they are Surgeons of no Value, so I am forced to contend with them.

I could give you a large Account, how there are some that are going to make
Use of that knoty hollow deceitful Tree that I mentioned in my first Book, for
all Pillar in a great House or Church. But I think, they that choose that have
no better Judgment then I had formerly, when I saw but one Side of it, or it
is a Sign that good Stuff is scarce.

It seems to me by KING SOLOMON sayings, there are two Sorts of Fools. I
think them, that are proud lorded over their Fellow Creatures and belie them,
are one Sort

And as some in our Soceity has gone wide from that humble meek Spirit, that
our former Friends were in the Practice off. I find it my Duty to reprove such;
and I hope it will be of some Service or Benefit to them, that are unborn, as
well as to some now adays. And as the great Man from Town, said to me, that I
was of an envious and malicious Spirit; and Peter Harvey sent me Word, that if
I was in a Strait for Money to go on with printing, he would help me to some.
So both of them was Encouragement for me to go on with Printing; as for my
being of a malicious Spirit, I say so far as I know myself I, am not

BUT find myself deeply engaged to reprove them, that has encroached on my
Land, done their utmost endeavor to defame my Reputation, and belie me also.

EXPLANATION of my being a Surgeon; is that some has been very urgent in
persuading of me to burn all my Writings and Printings, the which is a Thing I
cannot anyways consent unto: until some that has blamed me without a Cause,
and charged me falsely; are brought to own their Fault, or make out their
Charge against me to be true; that which I compare to healing a Wound over, and
not search, or cleanse it at the bottom.

As for William Jones and his Children, they not saying what Part of my Book
they could not understand; so I cannot Explain it to them: But I am able to
Explain all to Men of Understanding.

My Friends I here think proper to mention some few Verses out of the History
of the Devil: -- And are as follows:

When the Devil for weighty dispatches,
Wanted Messenges cunning and bold
He pased by the beautiful Faces,
And picked out the ugly and old.
Of these he made Warlicks and Witches,
To run of his Errands by Night;
'Till the over-wrought hag-ridden wretches,
Were as fit as the Devil to fright.
But whoever has been his adviser,
As his Kingdom increases in Growth;
He now takes his Measures much wiser
And Traficks with beauty and Youth.
Disguised in the wanton and witty,
He haunts both the Church and the Court;
And sometimes he visits the City,
Where all the best Christians Resort.
Thus dressed up in full Masquarade,
He the bolder can range up and down;
For he better can drive on his Trade,
In any ones Name than his own.
My Lucrebations concerning S. S.
He lives about North-East from me, so you may guess.
To wit, for several Years past I have been very Conversent with him, and
thought he was my real Friend. But alas! He was so much inclined to hold with
the strongest Side, (as he thought) or rather with the Multitude: -- Though the
Truth is always the strongest.

I will praise and extole the most High, who has fed me with food convenient;
and preserved me out of many Dangers: Who has favored me with a good
Understanding, down to this very Day.

I desire to leave something as a Caution to the next Age, that they may be
careful how they Lord it over their Fellow Creatures: Least they should be as
badly off as they that has strove to degrade my Reputation.

It is a Comfort now in old Age, that I have not been fond, or proud of Places
of Honor, or Profit; though I have been in several Offices, both in Church and
State, -- or Town duties: And so far as I know myself I have not been lifted up
in my Mind, -- when I had them, but zealously concerned that I might be
faithful therein. I remember when the Meeting requested of my Brother in-Law
John Harvey to take the Office of Overseer of our little Meeting, that he was
very loath, and said that he was not a quarter fit or it. -- I think his Son is
not half a quarter fit for that weighty Affair. -- I soon spoke from his proud
hectering and false Expressions to me, and concerning me soon after that he was
put in the Office of Overseer.

My Friends, -- I here acquaint you of some few of Peter Harvey's quibbling
Answers to some of my 13 -- Queries that I requested him to Answer, being
mostly Subjects that he had blamed me. -- The Remainder of them, I omit now for
Brevity, they may be seen at my House in Writing. After a considerable deal of
Pains taken by me, to bring him, he came, and said he came, because he had said
that he would meet me, and not on any other Account.

My first Query, why I may not ask a reasonable Price for my Bricks without
being blamed by thee, and at the same Time blamed me for not telling of a Lie.

His Answer to the first Query was, if evil or wicked Men ask an unreasonable
price of a Neighbor for a Thing that he wants? he would leave it to any but
Knaves or Fools to be Judge whether it was right or no, twice said over.

Second Query, why I may not leave a Smith that I look on no better then a
Thief without being blamed by thee?

His Answer. As the Smith was a poor Man, I ought not to leave him, my Custom
might be of Service or Benefit to him, and my leaving of him, might be a Hurt
to his Reputation.

Query the 5th. What Reason can thou give, for Charging me of being hard
hearted one First Day, just after we came out of Meeting, in the Hearing of
other People?

Answer the 5th. It might be as well if he had not said it: His Reason Was he
saw, I looked angry.

7th. Query, What Reason can thou give for comparing me to a dum Devil, and say
at the same Time, that you had been too slack or you had turned me off before
now.

The seventh Answer. His Reason, that I would not speak to him once, with an
Account of Thomas Middleton and his Son in Laws differing.

Query the 8th. What Reason can thou give for saying another Time that I was no
better then a dum Devil.

His Reason, that I was of a dark, dark, dark Spirit; no other Reason.

The Tenth Ouery, I desire to know whether thou has done thy endeavor to
bring Edward Catril, to make out his false Charge against me.

Answer, He had asked him to come, but he refused.

The Twelfth Query, Please to make appear wherein I have ever wronged Man,
Woman or Child in my Life, if thou can.

He and his Friend said, they did not Charge me of wronging any Body.

The foregoing, are some of Peter Harveys Equivocating quibbling Answers to
some of my Queries on the 30th. of the 10th. Month, 1762.

How glad could I have been, to live in Peace and Love with all my Fellow
Mortals. But I could not, by being blamed so often without a Cause, and
denounced also.

Though wicked Men does thrive and flourish,
Sin will confound them which they nourish.
An Hipocrite without all Mockings,
Is like sore Legs within silk Stockings.
It is said in the History, that the Devil does not know what is to come, (I
think so too) or at least he did not let Edward Catril know, that I would print
his and others Falsehoods, though some of his Servants makes great Pretense
thereunto, as Fortunetelling, etc. etc. And I think he deceived Peter Harvey,
when he caused him to say, that I was of a dark, dark, dark Spirit, and that he
saw by my Countenance that I was no Friend, etc. etc.

I have seen Edward Catril loitering about the Street several Times, it is
said, if the Devil finds a Man idle, he will set him on Work: I think he set
Catril at Work, when he said that which was false of me; Tattler, why don't
thou tell Peter Harvey of it: Buffin he heard him say it, and did nor blame him
for it.

A short discourse between S -- S. and P -- H -- S said Buffin had advertised
for printing the third Time P. -- If he does print he must he disowned spedily.
S -- that wont do, for he has charged one in your Meeting with Lying, let them
be brought Face to Face first; and clear up that first, before you complain to
the Meeting against him again.

It was enough formerly in New England, if one said thee to on Person, to send
him to Prison and whip him also: It was enough in old England formerly, if one
would not pull off his Hat nor take the Oath, to send him to Prison and punish
them also: And now in Degree, it is almost as bad among some of us, or I
should not have been blamed for asking a reasonable Price for what I had to
tell, nor for Leaving a Smith I misliked nor complaint made against me to the
Meeting, for hindering one for Encroaching on my Land, nor have been compared
to a dum Devil, nor have been threatened to be dackt of my Portion if it was in
his Power so to do, nor be judged by my Countenance that I was no Friend.

It is said, in addresing a Person hold not thy Mouth so near him as to bedew
him with thy Breath: Yet Edward Catril had no more Manners the first Time he
came to my House, as to hold his Mouth so near mine, that his Breath was
intolerable to be boren by me, and several others almost as bad; especially,
when that Word dum Devil came out against me.

It cannot be reasonably expected that I should have much edifying or doctrinal
Work, I being called chiefly to reprove Talebearers, Whisperers, Backbiters and
Liars.

I look on it, that there is a Disscretionary Power to be made use of in
Discipline; but I heard a Friend preach, that some would stick to Discipline so
close, that they would merely split a Hair: But none has ever made it appear
to me, wherein I has ever made a Breach in Discipline, though I think myself
able to make it appear wherein several has falsely accused me, or at least I
know it to be so.

The true Christians, their Minds are lowly, humble, mild, meek and wise,
They will not Lie, nor pride exalt their Eyes.
Their Conduct is prudent mixed with Love,
Good Words and Works fulfill their Day,
They join the Serpent with the Dove.
But Cast the Sting away.
Conformity is in high account now adays, but let our Zeal for Conformity be
never so great; it is he, that orders his Conversation a right that shall see
the Salvation of GOD, and not to pin our Faith on others Sleeves as compared to.

A short Discourse between a Doctor and a Lawyer. Doctor, I think Peter Harvey
and Catril, are got Purs proud, if I had them to physic and purge, I would
endeavor to Remedy that. Lawyer, it Buffin would employ me, I would endeavor
to drean them both; especially for calling his Writings Libels, and defaming
the Tittle of his Land. Tattler, I think Buffin will have a Writ on Catrils
Back if they turn him off as Harvey has it. And as for Harvey, I think he has
paid him pretty well for his Falsehoods, to wit, in his Printing. As Peter said
to Buffin that the Philadelphia Friends thought Catril and Noble were as
notable Friends as any we had amongst us. I think if there is no notabler
Friends among us, then they are, I think the Lord will not spare us long, if
they conduct to others as they have done to Buffin, O! that I could find some
faithful upright zealous honest Men, that would do their utmost Endeavor to
find out the Lying deceitful Men, and bring them to Justice that keep snarling
at me, because I oppose them in their Lying.

But I think of late such Men are almost as rare,
As black Swans, with Stream white Crows in Air.
Or at least what I find of them, I never yet could find out the Reason of
their Defaming my Reputation, the Tittle of my Land and belying me also.

I was a Man formerly that entertained a many notable public Friends and
others at my House, and was willing to spend and be spent: And now I am as
willing to spent and be spent, in Reproving some of this new false Generation
that has belyed me.

I have been obraided of having one Foot in the Grave some Years ago; I now
acquaint you, he that said so, has got one Eye in the Grave comparatively
speaking.

I understand that Peter Harvey would have sent to the Monthly Meeting in
Writing, that all was well at our small Meeting, only some received John
Buffins Books. But some that had a little more Sense would not allow of it.

So my Friends, I knowing Time is short to all of us on this teristical Globe,
I am willing to leave some Thing after in my Days are over in this World, that
People may be careful and not to lord it over these Fellow Mortals.

My Friends, I had some Seeds of a fine Fruit, as reported, that came from
Philadelphia, that was extoled for healing new or old Wounds or Sores; but alas
my Friends! I found no more help or benefit by them, then I did by the two
extoled Friends that came from thence, though that Fruit did me no Harm, though
I think the other has or would if they could. One asked me whether I did not
preach sometimes? and another, why I did not preach? I think I do of late by
Books. But my Lot is mostly in the way of Reproof to them in our Society, as
has been the Lot of public Friends formerly as well as of late.

My Friends, I here acquaint you that I was a married Man 38 Year and Nine
Months, I don't remember that my Wife gave me a cross or angry Word in any of
that Time; and she was a hansom notable and industrious Woman, and could talk
as well as others, though some Women thought she could not by Reason, she did
not scold sometimes.

As Peter Harvey said to me, that my Countenance showed I was no Friend, I
think that there was somebody saw as far into him, or he ought not to have
wrote on his Gate; this is the Way to Judas his House, nor to have wrote on the
other Side of the Road: This is the Way to Peter Harveys brason GODS.

My Scholars are not come to their Speech again, neither have they turned me
out of the School as yet. So no more Account of them, until the next.

Mansfield, Burlington County, West-Jersey, the 30th. of the 7th. Month, 1764.
JOHN BUFFIN.

FINIS.

