A DIALOGUE, BETWEEN ANDREW TRUEMAN, AND THOMAS ZEALOT; About the killing the
Indians AT CANNESTOGOE AND LONCASTER.

Andrew and Thomas. And. WHAR have you been aw this Time, Tom?


T. Whar I have been! Whar you should have been too, Andrew, fechting the Lord's
Battles, and killing the Indians at Lancaster and Cannestogoe.


A. How money did you kill at Cannestogoe.


T. Ane and Twunty.


A. Hoot Man, there were but twunty awthegether, and fourteen of them were in
the Goal.


T. I tell you, we shot six and a we ane, that was in the Squaw's Belly; we
sculped three; we tomhawked three; we roasted three and a we ane; and three
and a we ane we gave to the Hogs; and is not that ane and twunty you Fool.


A. How money did you kill in the Gaol!


T. We kilt them aw, men women and weans.


A. Did you count them?


T. No faith! I staid in the Street, for Fear of them De'ils, the Highlandmen.


A. Were not you frechtened to facht so money Indians?


T. Indeed were we: But we did no' let them fecht Us. We kilt them at the
Manor just as they getting out of their Beds in the Morning: And the Gued
Folks of Lancaster had taken away aw the Guns, Tomhawks, and long Knives, from
them, that were in the Goal.


A. How money were you?


T. Not quiet fifteen hundred: But if any Body had mislested us, we would have
been joined by five Thousand, that would have foucht the Quackers, as well as
the Heathens.


A. But did you think it recht, Tom, to kill the Women and the Weans?


T. Some of us did not, as soon as auld Saunders Kent that (you know he has
been an Elder this thirty Year) when he gaid about Duty, the Night before, he
sung the 137 Psalm, where it says, happy surely shall he be, they tender little
ones, who shall lay hold upon, and them shall dash against the Stones. And he
read the 15. Chapter of 1 Samuel.


A. So you did all this in the Name of the Lord.


T. Aye, to be sure. We were aw Presbyterians. But that wild Chiel, Charly
Breulluchan shot an Indian's Doug, while auld Saunder's was saying Grace till
half a Pint of Whusky. I doubt he has the Pope, or the Heegh-Kirk in his Guts.


A. I am afraid all this is wrong. I am a Presbyterian, you know, as well as
yourself. But I would fain hope that I am a Christian also. Jesus Christ is the
Prince of Peace, and has taught us the Doctrine of forgiving even our Enemies,
as we expect that our heavenly Father will forgive us. I am afraid that you
have done amiss. Many Things were permitted to the Jews because of the Hardness
of their Hearts, which the Light of the Gospel has discovered to be wrong. But
even the Jews paid the greatest Regard to their Treaties. And these Indians by
Treaties have been acknowledged to be our Friends.

The Gibeonites were spared on Account of the public Faith plighted to them,
tho obtained by Fraud and Falsehood. And tho Schechem had committed a Crime for
which he ought to have suffered Death: Yet after Peace was made, we find the
good old Patriarch Jacob, on his Deathbed, bitterly cursing his Sons, for
breaking the Peace. Instruments of Cruelty are in your Habitations. O my Soul
come not thou into your Secrets, unto your Assembly, mine Honor, be not thou
united: For in your Anger you have slain Man, and in yourself will you houghed
Cattle. Cursed be your Anger, for it was fierce; and your Wrath for it was
cruel. I pray that you may not be dispersed or scattered in the true Israel of
GOD.



