A NARRATIVE OF THE LATE MASSACRES, IN LANCASTER COUNTY, OF A Number of
INDIANS, FRIENDS of this PROVINCE, By PERSONS Unknown. With some Observations
on the same.

Printed in the Year M,DCC,LXIV.

A NARRATIVE, etc.
THESE Indians were the Remains of a Tribe of the Six Nations, settled at
Conestogoe, and thence called Conestogoe Indians. On the first Arrival of the
English in Pennsylvania, Messengers from this Tribe came to welcome them, with
Presents of Venison, Corn and Skins; and the whole Tribe entered into a Treaty
of Friendship with the first Proprietor, WILLIAM PENN, which was to last as
long as the Sun should shine, or the Waters run in the Rivers.

This Treaty has been since frequently renewed, and the Chain brightened, as
they express it, from time to time. It has never been violated, on their Part
or ours, till now. As their Lands by Degrees were mostly purchased, and the
Settlements of the White People began to surround them, the Proprietor assigned
them Lands on the Manor of Conestogoe, which they might not part with; there
they have lived many Years in Friendship with their White Neighbors, who loved
them for their peaceable inoffensive Behavior.

It has always been observed that Indians, settled in the Neighborhood of
White People, do not increase, but diminish continually. This Tribe accordingly
went on diminishing, till there remained in their Town on the Manor, but 20
Persons, viz. 7 Men, 5 Women, and 8 Children, Boys and Girls.

Of these, Shehaes was a very old Man, having assisted at the second Treaty
held with them, by Mr. PENN, in 1701, and ever since continued a faithful and
affectionate Friend to the English; he is said to have been an exceeding good
Man, considering his Education, being naturally of a most kind benevolent
Temper.

Peggy was Shehaes's Daughter; she worked for her aged Father, continuing to
live with him, though married, and attended him with filial Duty and Tenderness.

John was another good old Man; his Son Harry helped to support him.

George and Will Soc were two Brothers, both young Men.

John Smith, a valuable young Man, of the Cayuga Nation, who became acquainted
with Peggy, Shehaes's Daughter, some few Years since, married her, and settled
in that Family. They had one Child, about three Years old.

Betty, a harmless old Woman; and her Son Peter, a likely young Lad.

Sally, whose Indian Name was Wyanjoy, a Woman much esteemed by all that knew
her, for her prudent and good Behavior in some very trying Situations of Life.
She was a truly good and an amiable Woman, had no Children of her own, but a
distant Relation dying; she had taken a Child of that Relation's, to bring up
as her own, and performed toward it all the Duties of an affectionate Parent.

The Reader will observe, that many of their Names are English. It is common
with the Indians that have an Affection for the English, to give themselves,
and their Children, the Names of such English Persons as they particularly
esteem.

This little Society continued the Custom they had begun, when more numerous,
of addressing every new Governor, and every Descendant of the first Proprietor,
welcoming him to the Province, assuring him of their Fidelity, and praying a
Continuance of that Favor and Protection they had hitherto experienced. They
had accordingly sent up an Address of this Kind to our present Governor, on his
Arrival; but the same was scarce delivered, when the unfortunate Catastrophe
happened, which we are about to relate.

On Wednesday, the 14th of December, 1763, Fifty-seven Men, from some of our
Frontier Townships, who had projected the Destruction of this little
Commonwealth, came, all well-mounted, and armed with Firelocks, Hangers and
Hatchets, having traveled through the Country in the Night, to Conestogoe
Manor. There they surrounded the small Village of Indian Huts, and just at
Break of Day broke into them all at once. Only three Men, two Women, and a
young Boy, were found at home, the rest being out among the neighboring White
People, some to sell the Baskets, Brooms and Bowls they manufactured, and
others on other Occasions. These poor defenseless Creatures were immediately
fired upon, stabbed and hatcheted to Death! The good Shehaes, among the rest,
cut to Pieces in his Bed. All of them were scalped, and otherwise horribly
mangled. Then their Huts were set on Fire, and most of them burnt down. When
the Troop, pleased with their own Conduct and Bravery, but enraged that any of
the poor Indians had escaped the Massacre, rode off, and in small Parties, by
different Roads, went home.

The universal Concern of the neighboring White People on hearing of this
Event, and the Lamentations of the younger Indians, when they returned and saw
the Desolation, and the butchered half-burnt Bodies of their murdered Parents,
and other Relations, cannot well be expressed.

The Magistrates of Lancaster sent out to collect the remaining Indians,
brought them into the Town for their better Security against any farther
Attempt; and it is said condoled with them on the Misfortune that had happened,
took them by the Hand, comforted and promised them Protection. -- They were all
put into the Workhouse, a strong Building, as the Place of greatest Safety.

When the shocking News arrived in Town, a Proclamation was issued by the
Governor, in the following Terms, viz.

WHEREAS I have received Information, That on Wednesday, the Fourteenth Day of
this Month, a Number of People, armed, and mounted on Horseback, unlawfully
assembled together, and went to the Indian Town in the Conestogoe Manor, in
Lancaster County, and without the least Reason or Provocation, in cool Blood,
barbarously killed six of the Indians settled there, and burnt and destroyed
all their Houses and Effects: And whereas so cruel and inhuman an Act,
committed in the Heart of this Province on the said Indians, who have lived
peaceably and inoffensively among us, during all our late Troubles, and for
many Years before, and were justly considered as under the Protection of this
Government and its Laws, calls loudly for the vigorous Exertion of the Civil
Authority, to detect the Offenders, and bring them to condign Punishment; I
have therefore, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Council, thought fit
to issue this Proclamation, and do hereby strictly charge and enjoin all
Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, Constables, Officers Civil and Military, and all
other His Majesty's liege Subjects within this Province, to make diligent
Search and Enquiry after the Authors and Perpetrators of the said Crime, their
Abettors and Accomplices, and to use all possible Means to apprehend and secure
them in some of the public Goals of this Province, that they may be brought to
their Trials, and be proceeded against according to Law.

And whereas a Number of other Indians, who lately lived on or near the
Frontiers of this Province, being willing and desirous to preserve and continue
the ancient Friendship which heretofore subsisted between them and the good
People of this Province, have, at their own earnest Request, been removed from
their Habitations, and brought into the County of Philadelphia, and seated, for
the present, for their better Security, on the Province-Island, and in other
Places in the Neighborhood of the City of Philadelphia, where Provision is
made for them at the public Expense; I do therefore hereby strictly forbid all
Persons whatsoever, to molest or injure any of the said Indians, as they will
answer the contrary at their Peril.

GIVEN under my Hand, and the Great Seal of the said Province, at Philadelphia,
the Twenty-second Day of December, Anno Domini One Thousand Seven Hundred and
Sixty-three, and in the Fourth Year of His Majesty's Reign. JOHN PENN.
By His Honor's Command, JOSEPH SHIPPEN, jun. Secretary.

GOD Save the KING.
Notwithstanding this Proclamation, those cruel Men again assembled themselves,
and hearing that the remaining fourteen Indians were in the Workhouse at
Lancaster, they suddenly appeared in that Town, on the 27th of December. Fifty
of them, armed as before, dismounting, went directly to the Workhouse, and by
Violence broke open the Door, and entered with the utmost Fury in their
Countenances. -- When the poor Wretches saw they had no Protection nigh, nor
could possibly escape, and being without the least Weapon for Defense, they
divided into their little Families, the Children clinging to the Parents; they
fell on their Knees, protested their Innocence, declared their Love to the
English, and that, in their whole Lives, they had never done them Injury; and
in this Posture they all received the Hatchet! -- Men, Women and little
Children -- were every one inhumanly murdered! -- in cold Blood!

The barbarous Men who committed the atrocious Fact, in Defiance of Government,
of all Laws human and divine, and to the eternal Disgrace of their Country and
Color, then mounted their Horses, huzza'd in Triumph, as if they had gained a
Victory, and rode off -- unmolested!

The Bodies of the Murdered were then brought out and exposed in the Street,
till a Hole could be made in the Earth, to receive and cover them.

But the Wickedness cannot be covered, the Guilt will lie on the whole Land,
till Justice is done on the Murderers. THE BLOOD OF THE INNOCENT WILL CRY TO
HEAVEN FOR VENGEANCE.

It is said that Shehaes, being before told, that it was to be feared some
English might come from the Frontier into the Country, and murder him and his
People; he replied, It is impossible: There are Indians, indeed, in the Woods,
who would kill me and mine, if they could get at us, for my Friendship to the
English; but the English will wrap me in their Matchcoat, and secure me from
all Danger. How unfortunately was he mistaken!

Another Proclamation has been issued, offering a great Reward for apprehending
the Murderers, in the following Terms, viz.

WHEREAS on the Twenty-second Day of December last, I issued a Proclamation for
the apprehending and bringing to Justice, a Number of Persons, who, in
Violation of the Public Faith, and in Defiance of all Law, had inhumanly killed
six of the Indians, who had lived in Conestogoe Manor, for the Course of many
Years, peaceably and inoffensively, under the Ptotection of this Government, on
Lands assigned to them for their Habitation; notwithstanding which, I have
received Information, that on the Twenty-seventh of the same Month, a large
Party of armed Men again assembled and met together in a riotous and tumultuous
Manner, in the County of Lancaster, and proceeded to the Town of Lancaster,
where they violently broke open the Workhouse, and butchered and put to Death
fourteen of the said Conestogoe Indians, Men, Women and Children, who had been
taken under the immediate Care and Protection of the Magistrates of the said
County, and lodged for their better Security in the said Workhouse, till they
should be more effectually provided for by Order of the Government. And whereas
common Justice loudly demands, and the Laws of the Land (upon the Preservation
of which not only the Liberty and Security of every Individual, but the Being
of the Government itself depend) require that the above Offenders should be
brought condign Punishment; I have therefore, by and with the Advice of the
Council, published this Proclamation, and do hereby strictly charge and command
all Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, Constables, Officers Civil and Military, and
all other His Majesty's faithful and liege Subjects within this Province, to
make diligent Search and Enquiry after the Authors and Perpecators of the said
last mentioned Offense, their Abettors and Accomplices, and that they use all
possible Means to apprehend and secure them in some, of the public Goals of
this Province, to be dealt with according to Law.

And I do hereby further promise and engage, that any Person or Persons, who
shall apprehend and secure, or cause to be apprehended and secured, any Three
of the Ringleaders of the said Party, and prosecute them to Conviction, shall
have and receive for each; the public Reward of Two Hundred Pounds; and any
Acomplice, not concerned in the immediate shedding the Blood of the said
Indians, who shall make Discovery of any or either of the said Ringleaders, and
apprehend and prosecute them to Conviction, shall, over and above the said
Reward, have all the Weight and Influence of the Government, for obtaining His
Majesty's Pardon for his Offense.

GIVEN under my Hand, and the Great Seal of the said Province, at Philadelphia,
the Second Day of January, in the Fourth Year of His Majesty's Reign, and in
the Year of our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-four. JOHN PENN.
By His Honor's Command, JOSEPH SHIPPEN, jun. Secretary.

GOD Save the KING.
These Proclamations have as yet produced no Discovery; the Murderers having
given out such Threatenings against those that disapprove their Proceedings,
that the whole County seems to be in Terror, and no one durst speak what he
knows; even the Letters from thence are unsigned, in which any Dislike is
expressed of the Rioters.

There are some (I am ashamed to hear it) who would extenuate the enormous
Wickedness of these Actions, by saying, The Inhabitants of the Frontiers are
exasperated with the Murder of their Relations, by the Enemy Indians, in the
present War. It is possible; -- but though this might justify their going out
into the Woods, to seek for those Enemies, and avenge upon them those Murders;
it can never justify their turning in to the Heart of the Country, to murder
their Friends.

If an Indian injures me, does it follow that I may revenge that Injury on all
Indians? It is well known that Indians are of different Tribes, Nations and
Languages, as well as the White People: In Europe, if the French, who are White
People, should injure the Dutch, are they to revenge it on the English, because
they too are White People? The only Crime of these poor Wretches seems to have
been, that they had a reddish brown Skin, and black Hair; and some People of
that Sort, it seems, had murdered some of our Relations. If it be right to kill
Men for such a Reason, then, should any Man, with a freckled Face and red Hair,
kill a Wife or Child of mine, it would be right for me to revenge it, by
killing all the freckled red-haired Men, Women and Children, I could afterward
any where meet with.

But it seems these People think they have a better Justification; nothing less
than the Word of God. With the Scriptures in their Hands and Mouths, they can
set at naught that express Command, Thou shall do no Murder; and justify their
Wickedness, by the Command given Joshua to destroy the Heathen. Horrid
Perversion of Scripture and of Religion! to father the worst of Crimes on the
God of Peace and Love! -- Even the Jews, to whom that particular Commission was
directed, spared the Gibeonites, on Account of their Faith once given. The
Faith of this Government has been frequently given to those Indians; -- but
that did not avail them with People who despise Government.

We pretend to be Christians, and, from the superior Light we enjoy, ought to
exceed Heathens, Turks, Saracens, Moors, Negroes and Indians, in the Knowledge
and Practice of what is right. I will endeavor to show, by a few Examples from
Books and History, the Sense those People have had of such Actions.

HOMER wrote his Poem, called the Odyssey, some Hundred Years before the Birth
of Christ. He frequently speaks of what he calls not only the Duties, but the
sacred Rites of Hospitality, (exercised toward Strangers, while in our House
or Territory) as including, besides all the common Circumstances of
Entertainment, full Safety and Protection of Person, from all Danger of Life,
from all Injuries, and even Insults. The Rites of Hospitality were called
sacred, because the Stranger, the Poor and the Weak, when they applied for
Protection and Relief, were, from the Religion of those Times, supposed to be
sent by the Deity to try the Goodness of Men, and that he would avenge the
Injuries they might receive, where they ought to have been protected. -- These
Sentiments therefore influenced the Manners of all Ranks of People, even the
meanest; for we find that when Ulysses came, as a poor Stranger, to the Hut of
Eumaeus, the Swineherd, and his great Dogs ran out to tear the ragged Man,
Eumaeus drove them away with Stones; and Unhappy Stranger! (thus the faithful
Swain
Began, with Accent gracious and humane)
What Sorrow had been mine, if at my Gate
Thy reverend Age had met a shameful Fate?
-- But enter this my homely Roof, and see
Our Woods not void of Hospitality.
He said, and seconding the kind Request,
With friendly Step precedes the unknown Guest.
A shaggy Goat's soft Hide beneath him spread,
And with fresh Rushes heaped an ample Bed.
Joy touched the Hero's tender Soul, to find
So just Reception from a Heart so kind:
And oh, ye Gods! with all your Blessings grace
(He thus broke forth) this Friend of human Race!
The Swain replied. It never was our guise
To slight the Poor, or aught humane despise.
For Jove unfolds the hospitable Door,
It Is Jove that sends the Stranger and the Poor.


These Heathen People thought, that after a Breach of the Rites of Hospitality,
a Curse from Heaven would attend them in every thing they did, and even their
honest Industry in their Callings would fail of Success. -- Thus when Ulysses
tells Eumaeus, who doubted the Truth of what he related, If I deceive you in
this, I should deserve Death, and I consent that you shall put me to Death;
Eumaeus rejects the Proposal, as what would be attended with both Infamy and
Misfortune, saying ironically, Doubtless, oh Guest! great Laud and Praise were
mine,
If, after social Rites and Gifts bestowed,
I stained my Hospitable Hearth with Blood.
How would the Gods my righteous Toils succeed,
And bless the Hand that made a Stranger bleed?
No more. --


Even an open Enemy, in the Heat of Battle, throwing down his Arms, submitting
to his Foe, and asking Life and Protection, was supposed to acquire an
immediate Right to that Protection. Thus one describes his being saved, when
his Party was defeated.

We turned to Flight; the gathering Vengeance spread
On all Parts round, and Heaps on Heaps lie dead.
-- The radiant Helmet from my Brows unlac'd,
And lo on Earth my Shield and Javelin cast,
I meet the Monarch with a Suppliant's Face,
Approach his Chariot, and his Knees embrace.
He heard, he saved, he placed me at his Side;
My State he pitied, and my Tears he dried;
Restrained the Rage the vengeful Foe expressed,
And turned the deadly Weapons from my Breast.
Pious to guard the Hospitable Rite,
And fearing Jove, whom Mercy's Works delight.
The Suitors of Penelope are by the same ancient Poet described as a Set of
lawless Men, who were regardless of the sacred Rites of Hospitality. And
therefore when the Queen was informed they were slain, and that by Ulysses,
she, not believing that Ulysses was returned, says, Ah no! -- some God the
Suitors Deaths decreed,
Some God descends, and by his Hand they bleed:
Blind, to contemn the Stranger's righteous Cause,
And violate all hospitable Laws!
-- The Powers they defied;
But Heaven is just, and by a God they died.


Thus much for the Sentiments of the ancient Heathens. -- As for the Turks, it
is recorded in the Life of Mahomet, the Founder of their Reliligion, That
Khaled, one of his Captains, having divided a Number of Prisoners between
himself and those that were with him, he commanded the Hands of his own
Prisoners to be tied behind them, and then, in a most cruel and brutal Manner,
put them to the Sword; but he could not prevail on his Men to massacre their
Captives, because in Fight they had laid down their Arms, submitted, and
demanded Protection. Mahomet, when the Account was brought to him, applauded
the Men for their Humanity; but said to Khaled, with great Indignation, Oh
Khaled, thou Butcher; cease to molest me with thy Wickedness. -- If thou
possessedst a Heap of Gold as large in Mount Obod, and should expend it all
in God's Cause, thy Merit would not efface the Guilt incurred by the Murder of
the meanest of those poor Captives.

Among the Arabs or Saracens, though it was lawful to put to Death a Prisoner
taken in Battle, if he had made himself obnoxious by his former Wickedness, yet
this could not be done after he had once eaten Bread, or drank Water, while in
their Hands. Hence we read in the History of the Wars of the Holy Land, that
when the Franks had suffered a great Defeat from Saladin, and among the
Prisoners were the King of Jerusalem, and Arnold, a famous Christian Captain,
who had been very cruel to the Saracens; these two being brought before the
Soltan, he placed the King on his right Hand, and Arnold on his left; and then
presented the King with a Cup of Water, who immediately drank to Arnold; but
when Arnold was about to receive the Cup, the Soltan interrupted, saying, I
will not suffer this wicked Man to drink, as that, according to the laudable
and generous Custom of the Arabs, would secure him his Life.

That the same laudable and generous Custom still prevails among the
Mahometans, appears from the Account but last Year published of his Travels by
Mr. Bell of Antermony, who accompanied the Czar Peter the Great, in his Journey
to Derbent through Daggestan. The Religion of the Daggestans, says he, is
generally Mohammedan, some following the Sect of Osman, others that of Haly.
Their Language for the most Part is Turkish, or rather a Dialect of the Arabic,
though many of them speak also the Persian Language. One Article I cannot omit
concerning their Laws of Hospitality, which is, if their greatest Enemy comes
under their Roof for Protection, the Landlord, of what Condition soever, is
obliged to keep him safe, from all Manner of Harm or Violence, during his Abode
with him, and even to conduct him safely through his Territories to a Place of
Security. --

From the Saracens this same Custom obtained among the Moors of Africa; was by
them brought into Spain, and there long sacredly observed. The Spanish
Historians record with Applause one famous Instance of it. While the Moors
governed there, and the Spaniards were mixed with them, a Spanish Cavalier, in
a sudden Quarrel, slew a young Moorish Gentleman, and fled. His Pursuers soon
lost Sight of him, for he had, unperceived, thrown himself over a Garden Wall.
The Owner, a Moor, happening to be in his Garden, was addressed by the Spaniard
on his Knees, who acquainted him with his Case, and implored Concealment. Eat
this, said the Moor, giving him Half a Peach; you now know that you may confide
in my Protection. He then locked him up in his Garden Apartment, telling him,
that as soon as it was Night he would provide for his Escape to a Place of more
Safety. -- The Moor then went into his House, where he had scarce seated
himself, when a great Crowd, with loud Lamentations, came to his Gate, bringing
the Corpse of his Son, that had just been killed by a Spaniard. When the first
Shock of Surprise was a little over, he learnt, from the Description given,
that the fatal Deed was done by the Person then in his Power. He mentioned this
to no One; but as soon as it was dark, retired to his Garden Apartment, as if
to grieve alone, giving Orders that none should follow him. There accosting the
Spaniard, he said, Christian, the Person you have killed, is my Son: His Body
is now in my House. You ought to suffer; but you have eaten with me, and I have
given you my Faith, which must not be broken. Follow me. -- He then led the
astonished Spaniard to his Stables, mounted him on one of his fleetest Horses,
and said, Fly far while the Night can cover you. You will be safe in the
Morning. You are indeed guilty of my Son's Blood, but God is just and good, and
I thank him that I am innocent of yours, and that my Faith given is preserved.

The Spaniards caught from the Moors this Punto of Honor, the Effects of which
remain, in a great Degree, to this Day. So that when there is Fear of a War
about to break out between England and Spain, an English Merchant there, who
apprehends the Confiscation of his Goods as the Goods of an Enemy, thinks them
safe, if he can get a Spaniard to take Charge of them; for the Spaniard secures
them as his own, and, faithfully redelivers them, or pays the Value, whenever
the Englishman can safely demand it.

Justice to that Nation, though lately our Enemies, and hardly yet our (...)
Friends, obliges me, on this Occasion, not to omit mentioning an Instance of
Spanish Honor, which cannot but be still fresh in the Memory of many yet
living. In 1746, when we were hot War with Spain, the Elizabeth, of London,
Captain William Edwards, coming through the Gulf from Jamaica, richly laden,
met with a most violent Storm, in which the Ship sprung a Leak, that obliged
them, for the Saving of their Lives, to run her into the Havannah. The Captain
went on Shore, directly waited on the Governor, told the Occasion of his
putting in, and that he surrendered his Ship as a Prize, and himself and his
Men as Prisoners of War, only requesting good Quarter. No, Sir, replied the
Spanish Governor, If we had taken you in fair War at Sea, or approaching our
Coast with hostile Intentions, your Ship would then have been a Prize, and your
People Prisoners. But when distressed by a Tempest, you come into our Ports for
the Safety of your Lives, we, though Enemies, being Men, are bound as such, by
the Laws of Humanity, to afford Relief to distressed Men, who ask it of us. We
cannot, even against our Enemies, take Advantage of an Act of God. You have
Leave therefore to unload your Ship, if that be necessary, to stop the Leak;
you may refit here, and traffic so far as shall be necessary to pay the
Charges; you may then depart, and I will give you a Pass, to be in Force till
you are beyond Bermuda. If after that you are taken, you will then be a Prize,
but now you are only a Stranger, and have a Stranger's Right to Safety and
Protection. -- The Ship accordingly departed, and arrived safe in London.

Will it be permitted me to adduce, on this Occasion, an Instance of the like
Honor in a poor unenlightened African Negroe. I find it in Capt. Seagrave's
Account of his Voyage to Guinea. He relates that a New England Sloop, trading
there in 1752, left their second Mate, William Murray, sick on Shore, and
sailed without him. Murray was at the House of a Black, name Cudjoe, with whom
he had contracted an Acquaintance during their Trade. He recovered, and the
Sloop being gone, he continued with his black Friend, till some other
Opportunity should offer of his getting home. In the mean while, a Dutch Ship
came into the Road, and some of the Blacks going on board her, were
treacherously seized, and carried off as Slaves. Their Relations and Friends,
transported with sudden Rage, ran to the House of Cudjoe to take Revenge, by
killing Murray. Cudjoe stopped them at the Door, and demanded what they wanted?
The White Man, said they, have carried away our Brothers and Sons, and we will
kill all White Men; -- give us the White Man that you keep in your House, for
we will kill him. Nay, said Cudjoe; the White Men that carried away your
Brothers are bad Men, kill them when you can catch them; but this White Man is
a good Man, and you must not kill him. -- But he is a White Man, they cried;
the White Men are all bad; we will kill them all. -- Nay, says he, you must not
kill a Man, that has done no Harm, only for being white. This Man is my Friend,
my House is his Fort, and I am his Soldier. I must fight for him. You must kill
me, before you can kill him. -- What good Man will ever come again under my
Roof, if I let my Floor be stained with a good Man's Blood! -- The Negroes
seeing his Resolution, and being convinced by his Discourse that they were
wrong, went away ashamed. In a few Days Murray ventured abroad again with
Cudjoe, when several of them took him by the Hand, and told him they were glad
they had not killed him; for as he was a good (meaning an innocent) Man, their
God would have been angry, and would have spoiled their Fishing. -- I relate
this, says Captain Seagrave, to show, that some among these dark People have a
strong Sense of Justice and Honor, and that even the most brutal among them
are capable of feeling the Force of Reason, and of being influenced by a Fear
of God (if the Knowledge of the true God could be introduced among them) since
even the Fear of a false God, when their Rage subsided, was not without its
good Effect.

Now I am about to mention something of Indians, I beg that I may not be
understood as framing Apologies for all Indians. I am far from desiring to
lessen the laudable Spirit of Resentment in my Countrymen against those now at
War with us, so far as it is justified by their Perfidy and Inhumanity. -- I
would only observe that the Six Nations, as a Body, have kept Faith with the
English ever since we knew them, now near an Hundred Years; and that the
governing Part of those People have had Notions of Honor, whatever may be the
Case with the Rumdebauched, Trader-corrupted Vagabonds and Thieves on
Sasquehannah and the Ohio, at present in Arms against us. -- As a Proof of that
Honor, I shall only mention one well-known recent Fact. When six Catawba
Deputies, under the Care of Colonel Bull, of Charlestown, went by Permission
into the Mohawks Country, to sue for and treat of Peace for their Nation, they
soon found the Six Nations highly exasperated, and the Peace at that Time
impracticable: They were therefore in Fear for their own Persons, and
apprehended that they should be killed in their Way back to New York; which
being made known to the Mohawk Chiefs, by Colonel Bull, one of them, by Order
of the Council, made this Speech to the Catawbas: --

Strangers and Enemies,
While you are in this Country, blow away all Fear out of your Breasts; change
the black Streak of Paint on your Cheek for a red One, and let your Faces shine
with Bear's-Grease: You are safer here than if you were at home. The Six
Nations will not defile their own Land with the Blood of Men that come unarmed
to ask for Peace. We shall send a Guard with you, to see you safe out of our
Territories. So far you shall have Peace, but no farther. Get home to your own
Country, and there take Care of yourselves, for there we intend to come and
kill you.

The Catawbas came away unhurt accordingly.

It is also well known, that just before the late War broke out, when our
Traders first went among the Plankeshaw Indians, a Tribe of the Twightwees,
they found the Principle of giving Protection to Strangers in full Force; for
the French coming with their Indians to the Plankeshaw Town, and demanding that
those Traders and their Goods should be delivered up; -- the Plankeshaws
replied, the English were come there upon their Invitation, and they could not
do so base a Thing. But the French insisting on it, the Plankeshaws took Arms
in Defense of their Guests, and a Number of them, with their old Chief, lost
their Lives in the Cause; the French at last prevailing by superior Force only.

I will not dissemble that numberless Stories have been raised and spread
abroad, against not only the poor Wretches that are murdered, but also against
the Hundred and Forty christianized Indians, still threatened to be murdered;
all which Stories are well known, by those who know the Indians best, to be
pure Inventions, contrived by bad People, either to excite each other to join
in the Murder, or since it was committed, to justify it; and believed only by
the Weak and Credulous. I call thus publicly on the Makers and Venders of
these Accusations to produce their Evidence. Let them satisfy the Public that
even Will Soc, the most obnoxious of all that Tribe, was really guilty of those
Offenses against us which they lay to his Charge. But if he was, ought he not
to have been fairly tried? He lived under our Laws, and was subject to them; he
was in our Hands, and might easily have been prosecuted; was it English Justice
to condemn and execute him unheard? Conscious of his own Innocence, he did not
endeavor to hide himself when the Door of the Workhouse, his Sanctuary, was
breaking open; I will meet them, says he, for they are my Brothers. These
Brothers of his shot him down at the Door, while the Word Brothers was still
between his Teeth! -- But if Will Soc was a bad Man, what had poor old Shehaes
done? what could he or the other poor old Men and Women do? What had little
Boys and Girls done; what could Children of a Year old, Babes at the Breast,
what could they do, that they too must be shot and hatcheted? -- Horrid to
relate! -- and in their Parents Arms! This is done by no civilized Nation in
Europe. Do we come to America to learn and practice the Manners of Barbarians?
But this, Barbarians as they are, they practice against their Enemies only, not
against their Friends. --

These poor People have been always our Friends. Their Fathers received ours,
when Strangers here, with Kindness and Hospitality. Behold the Return we have
made them! -- When we grew more numerous and powerful, they put themselves
under our Protection. See, in the mangled Corpses of the last Remains of the
Tribe, how effectually we have afforded it to them! --

Unhappy People! to have lived in such Times, and by such Neighbors! -- We
have seen, that they would have been safer among the ancient Heathens, with
whom the Rites of Hospitality were sacred. -- They would have been considered
as Guests of the Public, and the Religion of the Country would have operated
in their Favor. But our Frontier People call themselves Christians! -- They
would have been safer, if they had submitted to the Turks; for ever since
Mahomet's Reproof to Khaled, even the cruel Turks, never kill Prisoners in cold
Blood. These were not even Prisoners: -- But what is the Example of Turks to
Scripture Christians? -- They would have been safer, though they had been taken
in actual War against the Saracens, if they had once drank Water with them.
These were not taken in War against us, and have drank with us, and we with
them, for Fourscore Years. -- But shall we compare Saracens to Christians? --
They would have been safer among the Moors in Spain, though they had been
Murderers of Sons; if Faith had once been pledged to them, and a Promise of
Protection given. But these have had the Faith of the English given to them
many Times by the Government, and, in Reliance on that Faith, they lived among
us, and gave us the Opportunity of murdering them. -- However, what was
honorable in Moors, may not be a Rule to us; for we are Christians! -- They
would have been safer it seems among Popish Spaniards, even if Enemies, and
delivered into their Hands by a Tempest. These were not Enemies; they were born
among us, and yet we have killed them all. -- But shall we imitate idolatrous
Papists, we that are enlightened Protestants? -- They would even have been
safer among the Negroes of Africa, where at least one manly Soul would have
been found, with Sense, Spirit and Humanity enough, to stand in their Defense:
-- But shall Whitemen and Christians act like a Pagan Negroe? -- In short it
appears, that they would have been safe in any Part of the known World, --
except in the Neighborhood of the CHRISTIAN WHITE SAVAGES of Peckstang and
Donegall! --

O ye unhappy Perpetrators of this horrid Wickedness! Reflect a Moment on the
Mischief ye have done, the Disgrace ye have brought on your Country, on your
Religion, and your Bible, on your Families and Children! Think on the
Destruction of your captivated Country-folks (now among the wild Indians) which
probably may follow, in Resentment of your Barbarity! Think on the Wrath of the
United Five Nations, hitherto our Friends, but now provoked by your murdering
one of their Tribes, in Danger of becoming our bitter Enemies. -- Think of the
mild and good Government you have so audaciously insulted; the Laws of your
King, your Country, and your GOD, that you have broken; the infamous Death that
hangs over your Heads: -- For JUSTICE, though slow, will come at last. -- All
good People every where detest your Actions. -- You have imbrued your Hands in
innocent Blood; how will you make them clean? -- The dying Shrieks and Groans
of the Murdered, will often sound in your Ears: Their Specter will sometimes
attend you, and affright even your innocent Children! -- Fly where you will,
your Consciences will go with you: -- Talking in your Sleep shall betray you,
in the Delirium of a Fever you yourselves shall make your own Wickedness known.

One Hundred and Forty peaceable Indians yet remain in this Government. They
have, by Christian Missionaries, been brought over to a Liking, at least, of
our Religion; some of them lately left their Nation which is now at War with
us, because they did not choose to join with them in their Depredations; and to
show their Confidence in us, and to give us an equal Confidence in them, they
have brought and put into our Hands their Wives and Children. Others have lived
long among us in Northampton County, and most of their Children have been born
there. These are all now trembling for their Lives. They have been hurried from
Place to Place for Safety, now concealed in Corners, then sent out of the
Province, refused a Passage through a neighboring Colony, and returned, not
unkindly perhaps, but disgracefully, on our Hands. O Pennsylvania! once
renowned for Kindness to Strangers, shall the Clamours of a few mean Niggards
about the Expense of this Public Hospitality, an Expense that will not cost
the noisy Wretches Sixpence a Piece (and what is the Expense of the poor
Maintenance we afford them, compared to the Expense they might occasion if in
Arms against us) shall so senseless a Clamor, I say, force you to turn out of
your Doors these unhappy Guests, who have offended their own Country-folks by
their Affection for you, who, confiding in your Goodness, have put themselves
under your Protection? Those whom you have disarmed to satisfy groundless
Suspicions, will you leave them exposed to the armed Madmen of your Country? --
Unmanly Men! who are not ashamed to come with Weapons against the Unarmed, to
use the Sword against Women, and the Bayonet against young Children; and who
have already given such bloody Proofs of their Inhumanity and Cruelty. -- Let
us rouse ourselves, for Shame, and redeem the Honor of our Province from the
Contempt of its Neighbors; let all good Men join heartily and unanimously in
Support of the Laws, and in strengthening the Hands of Government; that JUSTICE
may be done, the Wicked punished, and the Innocent protected; otherwise we can,
as a People, expect no Blessing from Heaven, there will be no Security for our
Persons or Properties; Anarchy and Confusion will prevail over all, and
Violence, without Judgment, dispose of every Thing.

When I mention the Baseness of the Murderers, in the Use they made of Arms, I
cannot, I ought not to forget, the very different Behavior of brave Men and
true Soldiers, of which this melancholy Occasion has afforded us fresh
Instances. The Royal Highlanders have, in the Course of this War, suffered as
much as any other Corpse, and have frequently had their Ranks thinn'd by an
Indian Enemy; yet they did not for this retain a brutal undistinguishing
Resentment against all Indians, Friends as well as Foes. But a Company of them
happening to be here, when the 140 poor Indians above mentioned were thought in
too much Danger to stay longer in the Province, cheerfully undertook to protect
and escort them to New York, which they executed (as far as that Government
would permit the Indians to come) with Fidelity and Honor; and their Captain
Robinson, is justly applauded and honored by all sensible and good People, for
the Care, Tenderness and Humanity, with which he treated those unhappy
Fugitives, during their March in this severe Season. General Gage, too, has
approved of his Officer's Conduct, and, as I hear, ordered him to remain with
the Indians at Amboy, and continue his Protection to them, till another Body of
the King's Forces could be sent to relieve his Company, and escort their Charge
back in Safety to Philadelphia, where his Excellency has had the Goodness to
direct those Forces to remain for some Time, under the Orders of our Governor,
for the Security of the Indians; the Troops of this Province being at present
necessarily posted on the Frontier. Such just and generous Actions endear the
Military to the Civil Power, and impress the Minds of all the Discerning with a
still greater Respect for our national Government. -- I shall conclude with
observing, that Cowards can handle Arms, can strike where they are sure to meet
with no Return, can wound, mangle and murder; but it belongs to brave Men to
spare, and to protect; for, as the Poet says, -- Mercy still sways the Brave.

FINIS.

