A BATTLE! A BATTLE! A BATTLE of SQUIRT Where no Man is killed And no Man is
hurt!

To the TUNE of three blue BEANS, in a blue BLADDER; RATTLE BLADDER, RATTLE!

A BATTLE! A BATTLE! A BATTLE of SQUIRT, WHERE NO MAN IS KILLED, AND NO MAN IS
HURT!

To the TUNE of three blue BEANS, in a blue BLADDER; RATTLE BLADDER RATTLE.

To which is added, The Quaker's Address, AND THE SCHOOL-BOY'S ANSWER To an
insolent FELLOW

Who accused him of STEALING his CHERRIES.

Tuta frequensque Via est, per Amici fallere Nomen
Tuta frequensque licet sit Via, Crimen habet.
OVID. It Is safe and common, in a Friend's Disguise,
To mask Hypocrisy, Deceit and Lies:
As (...) and common as the Thing might be,
The Poet thought it was rank Villainy.
Sold by EDWARD MEREFIELD, at the Corner of Arch-Street, and opposite the
Church-Burying-Ground, in Philadelphia. 1764.

A BATTLE, A BATTLE, etc.
IN Days of Yore, our Annals say,
The Saints would sit at home and pray,
But not vouchsafe to stir an Inch
Or lend Assistance at a Pinch;
Though for their King's and Country's good;
Stiff to their Text the Quakers stood.
FOR Feuds and Quarrels they abhor 'em,
The LORD will fight their Battles for 'em.
In this of late they were so stanch
As not to move against the French.
The few that did they roughly handle,
And curse with Bell, with Book and Candle.
THEY read 'em out, and ranked 'em in
A Class they called the Men of Sin.
But now the Case is altered quite,
And what was wrong, is changed to Right.
These very Drones, these sluggish Cattle,
Prepare their Guns and Swords for Battle.
So Acts the sly perfidious Bat,
Sometimes for this side, sometimes that.
WHEN first Duke Mushroom silence broke,
And thus in croaking Accents spoke.
When Dangers threaten, it is mere Nonsense,
To talk of such a Thing as Conscience:
Conscience a Net has ever been,
To catch religious Woodcocks in:
But (as it is most just and fit)
Was made for us, not we for it.
To be contracted, or stretched wide,
As were the Thongs of Dido's Hide.
And he whose is too great or small
Must answer for just none at all.
WHERE Quaker Notions lead the Way,
Conscience implicit must obey.
For we, just like three Legs in Man,
Quocunque jeceris, will stand:
And have a Salve for every Sore,
What can a Mortal wish for more?
Henceforth let two and two make six,
Or any Number you shall fix:
Let no one contradict you when
You say in four are Units ten:
For plain it is, and sure's a Gun,
Four contain four, three, two and One.
OF human Pride, though it may savor,
Let us exert our own endeavor;
Nor like our Fathers stand like Posts,
And leave all to the Lord of Hosts.
Our Happiness for ought we know
May be, durante Placito,
AND he may think he is done enough
Nor longer will stand by the Stuff;
Therefore for future, be it known,
We'll not confide in GOD alone,
But show the World that we inherit
The Arm of Flesh, with Sword and Spirit.
WHEN we begin, we'll on Pel Mel
And drive the Paxton Dogs to H -- l
But, hark! the Horn sounds an Express
From B, from R, from H, and S.
The Paxton Boys are coming down,
To kill us all, and burn the Town.
To Arms, to Arms with one Accord,
The Sword of Quakers and the Lord!
Let no one stand with hands in Pocket
Each Meeting Door -- quick, quick unlock it!
Be all our Forces hither led,
With beating Drums, and Colors spread.
LET Trumpets sound, and Hautboys play,
And set the Battle in Array;
Nor absent be the Pipe and Tabor,
To cheer your hearts, and ease your Labor:
Cock up your Hats, look fierce and trim
Not wear the horizontal Brim,
The House of Prayer be made a Den
Not of vile Thieves, but armed Men:
Though it is indeed a Profanation
Which we must expiate with Lustration.
But such the present Time requires
And such are all the Friends Desires
Fill Bumpers then, of Rum or' Arrack
We'll drink Success to the new Barrack;
He said, they all approved the Cause
And in full concert groaned Applause.
NOW News arrived that Paxton Men,
Were come within nine Miles or ten;
The City's filled with Sighs and Groans
Tales of raw heads, and bloody Bones;
While some take heart and go to meet
The Fiends they heard had cloven Feet.
THEY came, they saw, they found 'em civil
With no intent of Harm or Evil
But humbly to request Redress
For cruel Indians Wickedness;
And to expose a Jugler's Box,
Contrived by P -- n and F -- x
By which, they with a Magic Trick
Could show white Folks as black's Oldnick
And what is as wonderful again,
Make Indian Villains honest Men.
AND thus they charge most wicked Facts on
The worthy bleeding Men of Paxton.
But with our Foes hold strickt Alliance
And bid all Government Defiance.
For what care they? good Furs and Skins
Will hide a Multitude of Sins.
REDRESS is promised, They content
Paid off their Hosts, and home they went.
THESE, these are they, who always chose
T'engage their King's and Country's Foes
Whose Grandsires too were bravely willing
To fight or die at Ineskilling.
Go on good Lads! and scorn what is base,
And live, to enjoy Health, Wealth and Peace
BUT who from henceforth will believe
That Babes of Grace cannot deceive?
Since outward Sanctity is made
A Cloak for all the Quaker Trade
To called Religion would blaspheme,
That sacred venerable Name.
But now I drop my weary Pen,
Till a new Theme calls for it again,
FINIS.
THE QUAKERS ADDRESS, AND THE School-Boy's ANSWER, to an insolent FELLOW. Who
accused him of STEALING his CHERRIES
MAY't please the high and Mighty P --
The very best of all good Men;
We prostrate as in bounden Duty,
Beg leave to adore thy sacred Shoe-tye,
Because thee have vouchsaf't to grant
Those Papers which the Friends did want:
Which Papers we have now in View,
And find there is nothing in 'em true;
Wrote by bad Folks of the Frontier,
All false, malicious and severe;
To stir up People of no Letters
And make us odious to our Betters.
WHEREFORE we pray that thee will hear us
And when that is done no Doubt will clear us.
OUR People, Friend, as thee must know,
Above a hundred Years ago
(For it is so long a Period since
That our Religion did commence)
Were never found such stupid Sots,
As to delight in Blood and Plots;
Nor can their worst of Foes remember
They liked the Month thee call November.
Tumults and Quarrels Friends abhor 'em
Others may fight their Battles for 'em
While they can sit at home in ease,
And eat Plum-pudding as they please.
THEIR Conduct was so very winning,
They gained a Liberty of sinning
Plain Scripture then they might deny
And not be asked a Reason why.
YET these good Creatures, now and then
Were hardly used by cruel Men;
And underwent hard Blows and Knocks
The Cart, the Pillory and Stocks;
Yet no one of them then turned Buffer,
But thought it Honor great, to suffer.
AT length a pious chosen Band
Came here, and left their native Land;
Here while they live, they with Applause,
Both frame, and execute the Laws.
With Indians they had Coalition,
Happy, thrice happy their Condition;
While Heaven did their Endeavors bless,
Who fertile made a Wilderness.
BUT now alas! with Pain and Grief
('It Is what we think past all Relief)
We have observed our Power is lost
And others want to rule the Roast.
Intestine Feuds and Wars take Place
Of Concord, Unity and Peace.
And thus we see, what is very strange
All Things, but, our old Tenets change.
We have for ever careful been,
Not to be often caught in Sin,
And still kept up in our Society
A great appearance of true Piety:
And to be sure we never thought
The Sin lay most in being caught.
LET whatsoever Monarch reign
Passive Obedience we maintain.
To Men in Power we show our Distance.
And aid the King by Non-Assistance.
BUT yet it cannot be always fitting
To bring Disputes into our Meeting,
As whether Friends, upon Occasion,
And when they hear of an Invasion,
May not take Arms, in their Defense,
And yet preserve their Innocence.
WE have learned many (when at School)
Exceptions to a special Rule,
By which it is plain, they may be right
Whether they do, or do not fight.
And so we hope there is no Transgression
Although they are of our Profession.
BY a vile false Insinuation
(...) an unsigned Declaration,
To give their Spleen and Malice vent,
These Fellows, Things misrepresent,
Who in a hostile Mood came down
To Butcher us, and burn the Town.
AWAY with all their Tricks and Quirks
Of Records found in County Birks;
It Is naught but sham and vile Pretense
To blacken spotless Innocence.
How dare they say we tyrannize?
And are mere Wolves, in Lambs Disguise
Our Conduct sure they do not know,
Or else it is base to use us so.
FOR us, we value not a Louse,
A Seat in the Assembly House:
We would have all our Friends resign,
If their Authority decline.
And since they cannot, rule alone
Divide a Share of Power with none.
To this of late some made Pretense
And were thought Men of Consequence.
For why should we be ever neglected
Who Have Right t'elect or be elected.
And never was a Place of Profit,
But we bore all the Burden of it.
THROUGH all the Province it is well known
We have no Interest of our own,
But strive to make the Sorrows less,
Of Wretches that are in Distress.
WE beg thy Patience, Friend, to hear
And lend us one, if not each Ear.
THERE goes about a cook't up Story,
In which the wicked ones do glory;
That we, when Paxton Men came down
Conveyed six Indians out of Town;
And for this very Reason, viz:
That they might not discern the Phiz
Of every individual Savage,
Guilty of Murder or of Ravage.
THUS our good Name they would destroy
By Testimony of a Boy,
Who now is no where to be found,
Either above or under Ground:
And neither of us all can tell,
If he be gone to Heaven or Hell.
This we affirm, but will not swear,
Before Recorder or the May'r.
If thee, our Faith and Honor try
Thee 'll find we will not trick or lie.
The SCHOOL-BOY'S ANSWER, etc
Hold, hold thy Gab proud Is -- I go no further
We know our Duty not to Steal or Murder;
The Laws of God had thy Son understood,
His Hands had never been imbrued in Blood,
Nor thou bought off with thy ill gotten Polf,
That which thou richly do deserve thy self
Though He escaped, yet will the lasting Stain,
On thee and thy Posterity remain.
FINIS.
KING WAMPUM.

OR HARM WATCH, HARM CATCH.

And the Lord departed from Is -- l, and behold He went a Whoreing after his
own Invention until his abominable Iniquity was found out.

Sold by EDWARD MEREFIELD, at the Corner of Arch-Street, and opposite the
Church-Burying-Ground, in Philadelphia. 1764.

KING WAMPUM, etc.
ASSIST me, Muse, the Man to paint
Who whilom was an Outside Saint,
And thought by many to inherit
A double Portion of the Spirit.
But Satan often will prevail
Over human Flesh, that is proud and frail;
And when the pious go astray,
The Devil's in the Fault not they.
WHEN Chosen Men, assembled were.
To stop the Ravages of War,
That all Hostilities might cease,
By a fixed, firm and lasting Peace;
Attended here our Hero came,
In Hopes to eternize his Name;
And, ever fond of Pomp and Show,
Usurps the Place of Plenipoe.
THIS was not right, and that was wrong,
In one Opinion never long;
He all their measures so perplexed,
They knew not what they should do next.
So amongst the Sons of God of old
The Devil came, as we are told.
AT length a pregnant Squaw he spies,
Which made his lustful Passions rise;
Fain, very fain he would be at her
And now his Chops began to Water
He quits the Assembly on a sudden
(For hungry Dogs love dirty Pudding)
My Love, my Dove! my fairest Queen!
Thy Husband's Works are plainly seen,
But yet with Reason I suppose,
Thy Child will never have a Nose,
Unless thee get some faithful Friend
Who will his kind Assistance lend,
And none more ready is than I,
His plastic Faculty to try.
To whom the Queen thy Words are civil,
And sure, thy Actions cannot be Evil.
This said, he needs no more to woo her,
But without saying Grace, falls to her.
The Deed performed, (how great, how strange
'Twixt fore and after is the Change!)
He views her in a different Light,
Disdains her Duds, and woeful Plight;
And (what is not wonderful to tell)
The Bears Grease warmed offends his Smell,
The wanton Goat forsook his Face
Which you at other Times might trace:
Nor did that proud disdainful Sneer
In any Feature now appear.
BUT now alas! what is to be done?
His Watch is gone as sure's a Gun!
For while he did this clever Jobb
She dived her Hand into his Fob
And thence most cleanly did convey
His Watch of Gold, as People say
In vain he searches here and there,
For it was thrust the Lord knows where.
He storms, he raves, (some say he swore)
And called her stinking nasty Whore;
Thee impudent! Thee saucy Huzzy!
Whilst I rubbed up thy Tuzzy Muzzy
Thee stols't my Watch! The Squaw replies,
With Anger in her Voice and Eyes;
Why all this Noise and silly Pother?
Does not one Trick deserve another?
HE who means Harm, Harm often catches,
He who makes Noses, may make Watches,
MORAL.
BY this you see it is just and fit,
The Biter always should be bit.
FINIS.

