THE PAXTONIADE. A POEM.

BY CHRISTOPHER GYMNAST, Esqr

With the Prolegomena and Exercitations of SCRIBLERUS.

PRINTED in the Year, 1764.

THE PREFACE.
Most courteous Reader;
AS our learned and much respected Friend, Christopher Gymnast, Esqr has to us
transmitted an Euphemic Poem, setting forth in Manner most ample, the heroique
Actions of a Number of his worthy Countryman, and with all becoming Modesty, of
the same desired our hyperritical Opinion; BE IT KNOWN therefore, that WE,
having especial Regard, as well to that laudable Spirit, which has extimulated
our good Friend, to rescue from the Iron Jaws of Obscurity such Praeclara
facinora, such Deeds of more than Cervantique-Heroism, as that most eximious
Manner, in which he has executed a Purpose, so kind and generous, have thought
proper to recommend, to thy Notice these benevolent Exercitations of our
learned Friend. And if, gentle Reader, thy Heart is delectated with seeing
Merit meet its just Reward, which we have no Reason to scruple, we doubt not,
but this little Tract will to thy Paecordium administer abundant Delectation.
Amice Lector, vale.

SCRIBLERUS.

WHEN Peace with the Indans was almost concluded,
And the life-mowing Sword, which was very much blooded,
Tired out with hard Labor, and hewing down men,
Was like to be put in its Scabard again;
Some Lads, of whose Courage no Mortal can doubt,
Who Is Brav'ry and Valor admits no Dispute,
Having long lived in Paxton, and had many Swingings
From merciless, savage, and barbarous Indians,
Straitway did resolve! before the Land was at ease,
And all our affairs were in quiet and Peace,
To leave their houses, their wives, and Peas-porridge,
And give a remarkable proof of their Courage:
A proof, which without farther harshing or mincing,
Might be to the world most full and convincing.
Though some, we confess, do most strongly suspect,
(And they are men of good Sense and sound Intelect)
That their Revd. S -- d -- n set them to Work,
To promote the advantage and good of the K -- k;
Knowing wisely that if a thing's well intended,
No matter by what evil means it is defended.
But as learned Commentators have not yet decided,
Whether K -- k or their Valor in Council presided;
We leave it, as many before us have done,
And by your good leave, gentle Reader, Go on.
RESOLVING therefore, as before I was saying,
Their Plan to perform without farther delaying;
In a numerous Assembly they fixed on and chose
Two well-gifted men, of their spiritual house;
Who, filled up to the Brim with internal Lights,
Might guide and direct them in dark foggy Nights;
Which Lights, for some reasons most obvious and plain,
Are apparent to none but their own Brethren.
They chose these two men to direct in the work,
Who'd been Elders for thirty long Years of the K -- k;
The one hight O'Haro, the other O'Rigan,
Who feared neither Turk, Jew, Christian, or Pagan:
Whom though on Account of some unhappy flaws
In their outward behavior, the hard-hearted Laws
Had sentenced, to seek in these western Plantations
A better reception and kind habitations;
Notwithstanding I say this cruel rejection,
Yet still for the K -- k they retained their affection;
And by her instructions were most fitly trained
To perform with eclat, such a glorious Command.
As hawks that are wont less birds to infest,
And bare home the prey to the young in their nest,
Teach them in their turn the birds to invade,
And depend for support on the very same trade.
Doubt not, Gentle Reader, thou art very much surprised at this subitaneous
change in our Poets versification; but hear what he says in vindication of his
Conduct: If a man says, he begins a Journey in a Chair, but finds the roads so
intollerably muddy that he can proceed no faster than a barefooted pilgrim on
the Sand, and besides, is perhaps equally tired with his vehicle, is it not
lawful for him to swap his Chair for the first Horse he can meet with, and ride
him to the end of his Journey! Scriblerus.
THIS being done with nimble speed,
O'Haro mounted on his Steed,
(Descendant of that self-same Ass,
That bore his Grandsire Hudib^^s.)
And from that same exalted Station,
Pronounced an hortory Oration:
For he was cunning as a fox,
Had read over Calvin and Dan Nox;
A man of most profound Discerning
Well versed in P -- n Learnig.
So after heming thrice, to clear
His Throat, and banish thoughts of fear;
And of the mob obtaining Silence,
He thus went on -- 'Dear Sirs, awhile since,
"Ye know as how the indian Rabble
"With practices, unwarrantable
"Did come upon our quiet Borders,
"And there commit most desperate murders;
"Did tomhawk, butcher, wound and cripple,
"With cruel Rage, the Lord's own People;
"Did war most implacable wage
"With God's own chosen heritage:
"Did from our Brethren take their lives,
"And kill our Children, kine and Wives,
"Now, Sirs, I ween it is but right,
"That we upon these Cananites,
"Without delay should Vengeance take,
"Both for our own, and the K -- k's sake:
"Should totally destroy the heathen,
"And never till we have killed 'em leave 'em; --
"Destroy them quite frae out the Land; --
"And for it we have God's Command.
"We should do him muckle Pleasure
"As ye in your Books may read at leisure.
HE paused -- as Orators are used,
And from his pocket quick produced,
A friendly Vase well stored and filled
With good old wisky twice distilled,
And having refreshed his inward man.
Went on with his harranque again.
"Is It not, my Brethren, a pretty Story
"That we who are the Land's chief Glory,
"Who are in the number of God's elected;
"Should slighted thus be and neglected?
"That we, who are the only Gospel Church,
"Should thus be left here in the lurch:
"Whilst our most antichristian foes
"Whose trade is war and hardy blows,
"(At least while some of the same Color,
"With those who'e caused us all this Dolor)
"In Matchcoats warm and blankets dressed,
"Are by the Q -- rs much caressed.
"And live in peace by good warm fires,
"And have the extent of their desires?
"Shall we put by such treatment base?
"By N^^, we wont!" -- And broke his Vase.
"Seeing then we have such good cause to hate 'em,
"what I intend's to extirpate 'em:
"To suffer them no more to thrive,
"And leave nor Root nor branch alive;
"But should we madly leave our wives
"And Children, and expose our lives
"In search of these wh' infest our borders,
"And perpretate such cruel murders;
"It is most likely by King Harry,
"That we should in the end misscarry.
"I deem therefore the wisest course is
"That those who have beasts should mount their horses,
"And those who have none should march on foot,
"With as much quickness as will suit,
"To where those heathen, nothing fearful,
"That we will on their front and rear fall,
"Enjoy SWEET OTIUM in their Cotts,
"And dwell securely in their Hutts.
"And as they have nothing to defend them,
"We'll quickly to their own place send them!"
At this the rabble bellowed loud,
And horrid Echos filled the wood:
You Would thought you heard old Etna moan,
And from her inmost entrails groan;
Or else the terrifying yell
Of all the D --, confined in --,
And this satanic salutation,
Was to express their approbation.
How they with fortitude most stout,
Courage and Valor resolute,
Marched on with Center, Rear and Van,
To execute their glorious Plan:
And how they took severe revenge
Of those who'd no means of defense
And how they marched with all their men,
To G -- n Town and back again:
These are subjects which we intend to
Discuss at large in the following Canto. --
FINIS.

