OF SACRED POETRY AND MUSIC. A DISCOURSE AT CHRIST-CHURCH, CAMBRIDGE, AT THE
OPENING OF THE ORGAN, ON TUESDAY, XXI AUGUST, MDCCLXIV.

BY EAST APTHORP, M. A. MISSIONARY AT CAMBRIDGE.

Quis ignorant, musicen tantum jam illis antiquis temporibus non studii modo,
verum etiam venerationis, habuisse; ut iidem, musici et vates et sapientes
judicarentur? -- Musicen cum divinarum rerum cognitione esse conjunctam.
QUINCTILIAN. lib. 1. c. x. BOSTON PRINTED BY GREEN AND RUSSELL. MDCCLXIV.

TO THE HONORABLE JOHN TEMPLE, ESQUIRE, HIS MAJESTY's LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOUR OF
THE PROVINCE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE IN AMERICA; A BENEFACTOR TO THE CHURCH AT
CAMBRIDGE, AND A FRIEND OF THE AUTHOR: THIS SERMON IS GRATEFULLY INSCRIBED BY
HIS OBLIGED SERVANT EAST APTHORP.

A PRAYER.
O GOD, the father of lights, author of truth and virtue, from whom descends
every good and perfect gift; we most humbly beseech thee, through the mediation
of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, favorably with thy mercy to hear our prayers, and
grant all our petitions agreeable to thy will. For the merits of thine only SON,
accept our unworthiness; give us true Repentance, and pardon all our Sins.

Receive our thanks and praises to thy Divine Majesty, for thine infinite Power
exerted with perfect Wisdom and Goodness. We admire and celebrate the
unspeakable glories and perfections of thy nature: and extol thy goodness to
the children of men, in making us the highest order of beings in the world we
inhabit, capable of loving and adoring Thee. We venerate thy bounteous
Providence, in continually protecting and supporting us. Above all, we labor
to express our thanks and praise, for thy love to a sinful and apostate world,
in restoring to us again the means of grace and hope of glory, through the
redemption in CHRIST JESUS. Grant, that we may henceforth express our sense of
thy transcendent love to us, by loving thee above all things, and all mankind
for thy sake. Dispose our hearts, by thy powerful grace, to sympathize with the
miseries and relieve the wants of the poor and afflicted; and to perform with
sincerity all the duties of Justice and Charity: by Faithfulness, Friendship
and Affection to one another, by subjection for conscience sake to our
Governors in Church and State, by Christian unity and religious Concord.

Bless and prosper the reformed Churches, especially the Church of England, and
its supreme head on earth, our sovereign Lord the King. So dispose and govern
his heart, that he may ever seek thy honor and glory, and preserve thy people
in wealth, peace and godliness. Bless our most gracious Queen, his Royal
Highness the Prince, and all the royal Family; endue them with thy HOLY SPIRIT,
and prosper them with all happiness. Bless the Nobility, Clergy and Magistracy;
especially the Governor of this Province; that in his administration he may
ever promote the public virtue, liberty, and peace of the people committed to
his trust. Favor and protect our Nation and our Country in all the blessings
of pure and undefiled Religion. And to this Congregation here before thee give
thy heavenly grace, that we may obtain acceptance with thee through JESUS
CHRIST; and may walk worthy of the high vocation, wherewith we are called: that
harmonizing our minds to Peace and Love, we may continue united in one body
under CHRIST our Head, in Faith and Charity, Worship and Government. Be
propitious to This and all our sincere attempts and endeavors to offer thee
our praise and honor: and grant, that in the use of all outward means of
devotion, for the advancement of thy worship, we may always consider the end;
and to our external homage, may unite our inmost affections, and all the powers
of our souls, to adore and celebrate Thee: that in all our works, words, and
thoughts, we may glorify thy holy name, and finally by thy mercy obtain
everlasting life, through JESUS CHRIST our LORD: who has taught us thus to
pray.

OUR FATHER, which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come; thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven: Give us this day our daily bread;
and forgive us our trespasses, us we forgive them that trespass against us; and
lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from evil: for thine is the
kingdom, and the power and the glory, for ever and ever. AMEN.

OF SACRED POETRY AND MUSIC.
EPHESIANS. V. 19. Speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs,
singing and making melody in your heart to the LORD.
EPHESUS, a maritime city of Ionia, renowned for its opulence, commerce, and
superstitions, was a place of the greatest resort of any in the province of
Asia: and business, curiosity, or religion drew thither men of all characters
and conditions. In this idolatrous city, St. Paul undertook to plant the
Christian Church ACTS XIX. XX.
: and notwithstanding the great opposition he met with, the word of GOD
mightily grew and prevailed; so that all they which dwelt in Asia, heard the
word of the LORD JESUS, both Jews and Greeks. To such a mixture of converts
from different nations, sects and superstitions, St. Paul addresses this
Epistle; and, with consummate art and judgment, adapts his manner of writing to
their peculiar circumstances. There being so great a diversity in the former
state and opinions of those, who had become his converts; some from Judaism,
others from Idolatry; some from the schools of science and philosophy; others,
who had been addicted to magic and the curious arts of Superstition: the
learned and judicious Apostle every where adapts his address to their several
manners and prejudices; and labors especially, to combine in one body and in
one communion, in the unity of the spirit and in the bond of Peace, men who had
no common principle of union or charity, but what they derived from their
Christian profession. He illustrates this religious union by an allegory CHAPTER
II. 20 -- 22. III. 18. IV. 16.
borrowed from the order and symmetry of the celebrated temple at Ephesus; an
allusion, which must have made a striking impression on his converts, to show
the moral harmony and spiritual beauty, which results from the unity of the
whole Church of CHRIST. In pursuing this topic of Unity, which is principally
kept in sight through the whole Epistle; he inlarges, in the III first
Chapters, on the transcendent privileges of the Christian Church, into which
men of all nations and characters were freely admitted, as into a school of
virtue, and CHAPTER 1. 3, 5, 10.
'blessed with all spiritual blessings,' that in the dispensation of the
fullness of times (a well known periphrasis for the revelation of the Gospel)
GOD might gather together in One all things in CHRIST: being chosen in him,
before the foundation of the world, that they should be henceforth holy and
without blame before him in love; predestined unto the adoption of children
by JESUS CHRIST. In consequence of these general privileges of Redemption, in
the latter part of the Epistle he exhorts them to walk worthy of the vocation,
wherewith they were called; and descends to many admirable precepts for the
conduct of the Christian life in all its relations. That of the text, as
applicable to the solemnity of this place and time, shall be particularly
opened and enlarged upon. It is only so far connected with the context, as it
is part of an address to the Ephesian converts, instead of their former vain
conversation, to substitute manners becoming their new and holy profession. Ye
WERE sometimes darkness; but NOW are ye light in the LORD: WALK as children of
light -- See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools but as wise,
redeeming the time: that is, making up by an extraordinary diligence in
Christian sanctification, for the time lost in a state of gentilism. He then
exhorts them to temperance and sobriety, in opposition to their heathen
revellings; Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess, or luxury and riot: and
teaches them to regulate their mirth by the Christian standard. But be filled
with the SPIRIT, speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual
songs, SINGING and MAKING MELODY in your heart to the LORD.

BY being filled with the spirit, the Apostle intimates, what he explains more
at large in his Epistles to the Corinthians, that the Psalmody or sacred Poetry
of the Christian Church was then the effect of divine Inspiration; being one of
the charismata or spiritual gifts of the HOLY GHOST: a gift of temporary use
and continuance, like those of languages, miracles, and unpremeditated prayer.
As such, they are plainly connected in that passage to the Corinthians; I will
PRAY with the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also; I will SING
with the spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also 1 COR. XIV. 15.
. In the same chapter, the Apostle speaking of the abuse of the gift of
Tongues, and the regulation of it by the dictates of Reason, borrows an
illustration from musical instruments, which seems to intimate the use of them
in the psalmody of that Church ver. 7. See also REV. V. 8. XIV. 2. The martyr
Ignatius has the like allusion, to illustrate the Christian union, by figures
taken from Musical harmony. Epist. ad Ephesians. ^. 4.
.

THE English Expression in the text, speaking to yourselves, does not, I think,
convey the sense of the Apostle, or indeed any other good sense. Lalountes
eautois or en eautois, is literally, speaking between yourselves, that is,
alternately, in the manner in which we recite our Psalms. This sense is well
expressed in an invaluable Epistle of PLINY the consul Lib. x. epist. 97, de
Christianis.
; who gives this noble testimony of the Christian worship. Soliti stato die
ante lucem convenire, carmenque CHRISTO quasi DEO dicere secum invicem. They
used to meet on a stated day, before light, and sing an hymn to CHRIST as GOD,
alternately. The secum invicem of PLINY is the en eautois of the Apostle. This
interpretation is confirmed by a parallel passage to the Colossians: COLOSS.
III. 16, where eautois is used for allelois, as in Ephesians. IV. 32. and in the
text.
Let the word of GOD dwell in you richly in all wisdom; teaching and
admonishing ONE ANOTHER, in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs; singing with
grace in your hearts to the LORD.

IN both places, this distinction of the sacred poetry into psalms, hymns, and
spiritual songs, seems to be taken from the different kinds of poetic
composition in the old testament, which are distinguished by these several
titles. The psalm answers to the mizmor of the Hebrews; hymns, to their
Tehillim, or praises; and songs, to their Shirim or Odes. The epithet of
spiritual either implies their being dictated by the HOLY SPIRIT; or their
distinction from the profane and libertine songs, used in the heathen rites and
festivities.

SINGING and MAKING MELODY in your hearts to the LORD -- where the propriety of
the words, adontes kai psallontes, seems to express both vocal and instrumental
music. Of the first, there is no doubt of its having always obtained in the
worship of Christians; the latter, as a matter of Fact, is not so certain,
though, as a matter of right and lawfulness, it is clear enough from this and
other texts, and from several arguments which confirm this position. The words
psallo used in this text, properly signifies to sing to an instrument; and is
appropriated rather to the striking of chords, as in the lute or harp, than to
the accompaniment of the voice. But the lawful use of instrumental music in our
Churches, does not depend merely on the argument drawn from this etymology:
though without this appropriation of the words, singing to the voice, and
making melody, to the instruments, the text will unavoidably labor with a
distinction without a difference: an inaccuracy seldom to be found in the holy
writings, wherein a more exact propriety of words, is, I think, observable,
than in any other ancient books.

IT is well known that in the Grecian and Ionian cities, Music was so much in
vogue, that a man was reckoned ill-bred, who could not touch an instrument. All
their poetry, especially of the lyric kind, and in the rites of Religion, was
accompanied with music: And universally among the ancients, poetry and music
were inseparable Hendecasyllaborum volumen -- legitur, describitur, cantatur
etiam, et a Graecis quoque, -- nunc cithara nunc lyra personatur.' PLIN. lib.
VII. epist. 4. vid. CORNEL. NEPOT. in praefat. et in vit. EPAM. n. 1, 2. CIC.
Tusc. 1. 2.
. From which we may draw a very probable conclusion, that the Ephesian converts
were permitted by the Apostle to accompany their psalms and hymns, with such
kinds of instruments, as were then in use: mere singing, without the grace of
harmony and modulation by the lute or other instruments, being almost entirely
unknown to antiquity.

HAVING thus commented on the text, I proceed to confirm this interpretation,
by enquiring into the origin of Poetry and Music, and their application to
Religion.

POETRY is the child of Admiration. Our nobler passions, when strongly excited
by wonder and surprise, vent themselves in elevated sentiments and figurative
language. Invention, Enthusiasm, and Sublimity of style form the essence of
Poetry Ingenium cui sit, cui Men's divinior, atque Os
Magna sonaturum --
HORAT. lib. 1. sat. IV. 43.
; and as these are connected most intimately with our ideas of the Divinity,
Religion is the natural source of Poetry. Among the Greeks, (the most poetical
nation in the world, except the Hebrews) the first efforts of poetry, were the
praises of the gods, in hymns of thankfulness for fruitful seasons and the
harvest or vintage. Among the Hebrews, the inventors of poetry, it had a still
nobler origin, and a truer application: being always consecrated to Religion,
and having never degenerated like that of other nations, to inferior purposes.
The poetry of the Hebrews, being dictated by a real Inspiration, came to its
perfection at once; and with the noblest enthusiasm and sublimity of style and
sentiment, has all the artifice of an exact though simple versification. The
most ancient regular poems that are preserved entire in the scriptures, are
those of Moses at the passage of the Red Sea, Exodus XV. and near the end of his
life, Deuteronomy. XXXII. and perhaps the XCth Psalm. But fragments of much greater
antiquity are interspersed in the Pentateuch. It is particularly noted, that
the song at the passage of the Red Sea was performed by chorusses of men and
women; and accompanied with dancing and instruments.

AS the Poetry of Scripture makes so large a part of the Old Testament; I will
offer a few observations on such books and pieces, as are strictly poetical,
not only in the elevation of style and sentiment, but in the cadence and
versification. This every where consists of iambic or trochaic measures,
corresponding to the numbers and accent of our English poetry: being not
distinguished from prose, by the length or shortness of feet and syllables, but
solely by the regular accent, and harmonious cadence. The figures that most
abound in the Hebrew poetry are the antithesis and the pleonasm or climax. Most
of the verses consist of two members, the latter of which is often an
amplification or opposition to the former; and is usually a key to the true
interpretation of obscurer passages. This artifice in the composition is one
reason, that the fire and spirit of the Hebrew poetry cannot be extinguished in
the most literal and prosaic version. Our own language seems very happily
adapted to express, in a kind of measured prose Should the Church be blessed
with a new English version of the Scriptures, or with an exact and critical
correction of the present Translation: together with a more just division of
the Chapters and Paragraphs; might it not add to the perspicuity and elegance
of the poetical books, to dispose them according to the Hebrew meter,
stiche-wise or in versicles; as in Dr. Grabe's edition of the Septuagint, and
as in Bishop Hare's hebrew edition of the Psalms, and Dr. Grey's, of Job,
Proverbs, etc?
, the peculiar genius of Eastern poetry.

BESIDES the lyric poems of Moses, which were wrote 1500 years before Homer, we
have in the Book of Judges. Chapter V. the triumphant song of Deborah and Barak, on
the defeat of the Midianites. In this and several other pieces of the same
character ISAIAH XIV. 3 -- 27. XXXXIII.
, we may discern that generous spirit of liberty, that love of their country
and hatred of tyranny, which the Greeks admired in the odes of Alcaeus Pugnas,
et exactos tyrannos. HORAT.
. In the first book of Samuel, we have the grateful song of Hannah, the model
of the magnificat. The funeral elegy of David on Saul and Jonathan, breathes
that martial and generous spirit, with which a brave man praises the bravery
and friendship of those unfortunate princes.

DAVID is confessed on all hands to have excelled in every kind of Poetry,
whether descriptive, plaintive, or sublime: and his Psalms have been the most
instructive lessons of Piety, to the Jewish and Christian Church.

SOLOMON has allegorized in his Canticles, under pastoral images, the love of
GOD to his Church and its Union with CHRIST: an interpretation countenanced by
the whole analogy of Scripture PSALM. XLV. EPHESIANS. V. 32. MATTHEW. IX. 15. XXV. 1.
and passim.
.

HIS Proverbs are a didactic poem, of very different characters: the first part
(chapter I -- IX) splendid and magnificent, in the images and diction; suitable to
the divine person, the Wisdom or Spirit of GOD, whose powers and properties are
the subject of it. In the rest of the work, he descends to moral instructions,
generally couched in sententious aphorisms, and sometimes interspersed with
poetic ornaments.

IN this review of the Hebrew poetry, it would be unpardonable to omit the book
of JOB: which all agree to be the far noblest dramatic poem, that is any where
extant; though there is a great diversity of opinions, both as to the scope and
antiquity of it. It certainly has internal marks of very high antiquity; and
has no allusions, either to the religion or policy of mankind, later than the
Exodus, and the times of Moses. If I were to adopt any particular conjecture,
concerning the design of it: besides giving an example of JAM. V. 11.
Virtue patiently contending with Adversity; teaching the doctrine of an Chapter
VIII. 20. comp. with IX. 22.
unequal Providence in this Life; and containing a complete idea of natural Chapter
XXXI.
Religion: we may suppose the great Moral of it to teach us, that Man cannot be
justified, or accepted by GOD, merely on account of his own Virtues: it being
the fault of Job, which GOD reproves, to be righteous in his own eyes, and
justify himself rather than GOD Chapter XXXII. 1, 2.
. Surely thou have spoken in mine hearing,
And I have heard the voice of thy words:
"I am clean, without transgression;
"I am innocent, neither is there iniquity in me Chapter XXXIII. 8, 9.
.
His Friends were faulty in denying or disputing the sincerity, and Job in
pleading the merit of his virtues. To complete the great moral of the poem, to
withdraw man from his purpose, and hide Pride from man ibid. v. 17.
; some passages strongly point out the justifier of him which believes ROMANS
III. 26.
, the REDEEMER of mankind. If there be a messenger with him,
An interpreter Melitz: an Ambassador or Mediator. 2 CHR. XXXII. 31. 'who
negotiates Friendship between two parties.' TAILOR. rad. 947. 4.
, one among a thousand,
To show unto man GOD' s uprightness;
Then He is gracious unto him, and says,
Deliver him from going down to the pit;
I have found a ransom.
XXXIII. 23. 24. AS the pride of virtue was the error and offense of Job; so
his submission and humility reconciles him to GOD. Wherefore I abhor myself,
And repent in dust and ashes.
XLII. 6.

IT would detain us too long from another topic, if we were to run over and
characterize the several poems that occur in the writings of the Prophets. In
ISAIAH (exclusive of that inspiration, which is above all comparison) we have
all the majesty of Homer; in JEREMIAH, all the pathos of Euripides; in EZEKIEL,
the terrible graces of AEschylus: and in the short prophecies of JOEL, NAHUM,
and HABAKKUK, all the pomp and rapture of Pindar. With what a martial apparatus
is the GOD of Israel described, taking vengeance on kingdoms, and subverting
empires! with what majesty, controuling his own creation! The LORD has his way
in the whirlwind and the storm:
And the clouds are the dust of his feet --
The earth is burned at his presence.
NAHUM. chapter I. The chariots rage in the streets,
They justle one against another;
They seem like torches, they run like lightenings.
ib. chapter II. His glory covers the heavens,
And the earth is full of his praise --
Before him went the pestilence --
He stood, and measured the earth --
The Sun and Moon stood still in their habitation;
At the light of thine arrows they went;
At the gleams of the This very poetic expression, which is frequent in SS. is
commonly lost in our translation, by an inelegant periphrasis. The Septuagint
is in this place equally elegant and literal: phengos astrapes oplon sou. Of
the description of NAHUM, that of the lyric poet is only fit to express our
admiration, not to come in competition with it.

Jam nunc minaci murmr cornuum
Perstringit aures; jam litui strepunt:
Jam fulgor armorum fugaces
Terret equos equitumque vultus.
HOR. l. II. od. i.
lightening of thy spear.
HABAK. chapter II.

MUSIC is among the earliest inventions of the arts of life: being assigned by
Moses to one of the sons of Lamech: as the introduction of property [ mikneh]
is ascribed to another of the same race. Jubal was the father [or, inventor of
musical instruments, and the teacher] of all such, as handle the harp and organ
GENESIS IV. 21.
. It is impossible to conjecture what kinds of instruments these were. The
Organ, as we term it, has a name expressive of the charms of sweet and
delightful sounds TAYLOR's Hebr. Conc in Gnugab. rad 1317.
. The first specimen of poetry seems to be those obscure metrical verses (for
such they are) of Lamech to his wives, in the same chapter GENESIS IV. 23, 24.
. The harp and timbrel are often mentioned in the subsequent history. But the
music as well as poetry of the Hebrews, seems to have attained its perfection,
under that great master and patron of both, King David. The wonderful effects
of his music on the evil spirit of Saul, which was probably a deep and rooted
melancholy, show that it was 'able to chase all sorrow but despair'.


TO judge of the improvements of this fine art, let us take a cursory view of
David's regulation of it, for the service of GOD's tabernacle. In the books of
Chronicles we find 4000 Levites, divided into courses, under 288 eminent
masters, that were instructed in the songs of the LORD, appointed to praise the
LORD with musical instruments of GOD CHRONIC. b. I. c. XVI. 42. XXIII. 5. XXV.
7.
. These are some of them specified by name, such as psalteries, harps, cymbals,
cornets, trumpets, etc. from the number and variety of which, it is probable,
that the Hebrew music was of great compass and harmony; suitable in majesty and
grace, to the exquisite elegance and sublimity of their poetry. It appears from
the CXXXVIIth psalm, that the Jews in their captivity were highly esteemed for
their music by their Conquerors; and we read that 200 musicians of both sexes
returned with Ezra from Babylon EZRA II. 65.
.

NO nation seems more to have cultivated this art, than the Jews: though
wonders are told us of the Grecian music, which was under the regulation of
their Legislators, and of great influence on the public manners POLYBIUS,
ascribes the ferocity of the Cynaethians, and the humane and hospitable
disposition of the other Arcadians, chiefly to the neglect of music among the
former, and the esteem and practice of it among the rest. From this instance we
may conjecture, that Music might be applied with good effect to civilize our
American Indians, If ever (in the words of that sage historian) GOD should
hereafter bless them with better sentiments, and turn their minds toward such
discipline, as may soften and improve their manners; and especially to Music:
by which means alone, they can ever hope to be divested of that brutal
fierceness, by which they have been so long distinguished. Hampton's POLYBIUS,
B. IV. chapter iii.
; being adapted to inspire the noblest sentiments, and animate the citizens
with a martial and patriot spirit. Besides these civil purposes, the Hebrews
consecrated it in a peculiar manner to the worship of GOD. We find the
Psalmists, especially David, on all occasions exerting, in the praises of GOD,
the combined powers of Music and Poetry; whatever in harmony or song could
sooth the ear, and kindle the heart to holiest raptures: Awake, my glory,
awake, lute and harp;
I myself will awake right early.
Psalm. LVII. CVIII. IN the CLth psalm he calls upon all nature, animate and
inanimate, to praise the LORD; and on man, to praise him with the sound of the
trumpet, with the psaltery and harp, with the timbrel and dance, with stringed
instruments and organs, with loud and high-sounding cymbals. Let every thing
that has breath praise the LORD. Let all the powers of the soul, and that
sense of harmony which GOD has impressed on the ear, be employed in their
utmost exertion, to celebrate the author of melody itself.

THE fine arts, not only of Music and Poetry, but those of Architecture,
Sculpture, and Painting, the powers of Eloquence, and every true expression of
taste and genius, are all undoubtedly derived from GOD. This is as evident from
Reason as from Revelation. There can be no instance of intelligence in man, but
what is derived from an intelligent cause. In the Jewish worship, the
Tabernacle and Temple, with all their rich ornaments; becoming those palaces of
the KING of Kings, and the majesty of the Theocracy; were finished on the
models given by GOD himself. Yet an opinion seems to have taken deep root in
the minds of serious persons, that what are properly called the fine arts, are
almost incompatible with the Christian life, and a heavenly temper. The reason
of which hard censure is, I suppose, that these arts have generally been so
grossly perverted to the gratification of pride and luxury, and a profane
voluptuousness. Thus, the noble powers of Poetry have been in many instances
debased to the vilest purposes: Music has been the attendant of revelling and
licentious excesses: Sculpture and Painting, in pagan and papal countries, have
lent their aid to superstition and idolatry: Eloquence, Taste, and Genius have
been profaned, to flatter the pomp, or varnish the deformity of vice. The abuse
has in a manner desecrated all the arts of Elegance, and made good men piously
averse to them. Yet in themselves, and under just regulations, they are
friendly to virtue, and a source of happiness.

To retrieve the just esteem of the fine arts, by making them subservient to
Religion and Virtue, is the truest application of taste and genius. Wealth,
when it increases beyond the wants and conveniences of Society, if it is not
vented on the Elegant arts, will be perverted to the grosser pleasures of vice
and luxury. This seems to be the present case of England, where these arts are
even necessary, to check or divert every species of corruption. But in our own
Country, it must be discerned, that we are so far from that opulence, which
demands the cultivation of the finer arts, that the more sparingly they are
introduced among us, the longer shall we secure the simplicity and frugality of
our manners. What we do attempt of this kind, cannot better be applied, than to
the service and ornament of Religion.

IT is natural to object, that the arguments for splendor and elegance, in the
buildings, music, and other decorations relating to Religion, being derived
from Jewish institutions, are of no force when applied to the Christian
worship. Yet there seems to be something not so easily abrogated in the
immediate appointments of GOD himself: and those, not (like many of the Jewish
rites) of temporary use and application, but suitable to the general frame of
human nature; and no less apt at present, than in Solomon's temple, to raise in
our hearts religious affections, and elevate the Soul to GOD.

WE find the prophet Elisha, when ruffled by his interview with the King of
Israel, calming his troubled spirits with music: and when the minstrel played,
the hand of the LORD came upon him KINGS b. II. chapter III. 15.
. Such should be the effect of sacred music in our churches; it should calm the
agitations of our minds, it should compose our spirits, and lift up our hearts
to GOD, in an holy cheerfulness and serenity. GOD loves not a dull and
melancholy spirit. Much of that dejection, we see in some religious people, is
the sorrow of the world that works death; or is the effect of wrong
apprehensions. We are commanded to 'Rejoice evermore.' Rejoice in the LORD
always, and again I say, Rejoice. Phil. IV. 4. Much more might be alleged, to
prove that the true Christian spirit, is a spirit of alacrity and cheerfulness,
of serenity and joy: a spirit, as different from that dejection and stupid
sadness, which good men sometimes mistake for the temper of the gospel; as it
is from the laughter of fools, which, like the crackling of thorns, is but a
short-lived momentary blaze, that expires in a flash of mirth. The Christian
temper is a perfect acquiescence and reliance on GOD, through CHRIST. To the
faithful and virtuous this opens the happiest prospects; which, though
sometimes thrown into shades, every where brighten on the distant view. The
Faith, the Hopes, the Duties of a Christian support him in that calm, that
peaceful, that delightful elevation of Soul, which, I suppose, is the immediate
effect of religious music, on those who attend to it with right affections.

MUSIC, when rightly applied, is a powerful aid to a devout and holy temper: it
is as powerful, when misapplied, to efface every serious impression. How much
then is it the duty of those, who practice this divine art in our churches, to
regulate their performance by the purpose of it? and, instead of indulging
themselves in any unbecoming levities of composition or execution, to practice
that grave and sober melody, which may compose and fix the mind in a serene and
holy cheerfulness; those soft and pathetic airs, which melt the heart to
penitence; or those high and solemn strains, which raise the soul in adoration
to GOD?

OUR incomparable HOOKER, in his laws of Ecclesiastical polity BOOK V.. 38.
, thus regulates the use and performance of sacred music. In church-music,
curiosity and ostentation of art, wanton or light or unsuitable harmony; such
as only pleases the ear, and does not naturally serve to the very kind and
degree of those impressions, which the matter that goes with it leaves, or is
apt to leave, in men's minds; does rather blemish and disgrace that we do, than
add either beauty or furtherance unto it. -- The faults prevented, the force
and efficacy of the thing itself -- is in truth most admirable.

THE same great author expresses, in very eloquent terms, the powers and
application of this divine art. Music has an admirable facility to express and
represent to the mind, more inwardly than any other sensible mean, the very
standing, rising and falling, the very steps and inflections every way, the
turns and varieties of all passions, whereunto the mind is subject. -- In
harmony, the very image and character of virtue and vice is perceived, the mind
delighted with their resemblances, and brought by having them often iterated,
into a love of the things themselves. For which cause, there is nothing more
contagious and pestilent, than some kinds of harmony; than some, nothing more
strong and potent unto good. -- At the hearing of some, we are more inclined
unto sorrow and heaviness; of some, more mollified and softened in mind; one
kind, apter to stay and settle us; another, to move and stir our affections.
There is, that draws to a mavelous grave and sober mediocrity; there is
also, that carries, as it were, into extacies, filling the mind with an
heavenly joy, and, for the time, in a manner severing it from the body. So that
-- the very harmony of sounds, carried from the ear to the spiritual faculties
of our souls, is by a native puissance and efficacy, greatly available, to
bring to a perfect temper whatsoever is there troubled; apt, as well to quicken
the spirits, as to allay that which is too eager; sovereign against melancholy
and despair: forceable to draw forth tears of devotion, if the mind be such as
can yield them; able both to move and to moderate all affections. -- In which
considerations, the Church of CHRIST does likewise at this present day retain
it; as an ornament to GOD's service, and an help to our own devotion.

IT must however be observed, that, in early times, the Christian psalmody,
agreeable to the depressed and persecuted state of the church, must have been
very plain and simple: and perhaps for several ages, especially in the western
parts, without instrumental accompaniments; the Organ in particular having not
been introduced into churches, 'till the XIIth Century. Yet the same reason
speaks for instrumental as for vocal music; its native efficacy to excite the
best affections, and through the passions, to reach the understanding. But in
all our oblations of Prayer or Praise especially in those of psalmody and
music, which are most liable to this defect; let us be ever careful, that our
sacrifice be not without a heart: and in your love of melody, do not neglect
the affections of the Soul, and the rational sentiments of Christian piety,
without which the best performances of Church-music are but harmonious trifles.
'GOD is the king of all the earth; sing ye praises with understanding PSALM.
XLVII. 7.
. On this maxim, those who have a taste for this heavenly art, may aid the
piety of thought with the powers of sound: and they who are less susceptible of
its impressions, may still express in their devotions, the music of a
well-tuned Soul, 'singing and making melody in their hearts to the LORD.'
Though we need not be insensible to the advantages which may be derived to
Religion from the decent splendor of its public ministrations, where the
ornaments of Music and other hightenings of divine worship are accessible: yet
that Devotion is too delicate and fastidious, that cannot subsist without them;
that cannot, within itself, in the recesses of the heart, and abstracted from
all external accommodations, find sufficient resources of interior Piety.

THUS have I adventured to make some observations, on a subject, of which I
know but little of the theory, and less of the practice; and in which, I give
up my own indifference to Church-music, to the taste of those who have finer
feelings, and a higher opinion of its subserviency to devotion. I need not use
any arguments, to engage your goodnature, to assist our new and burdened
Society, by your liberality toward this ornamental part of our service. I am
not ashamed to be an importunate solicitor, where a public interest is
concerned; the interest of a Church, which, I hope, will be a KTHMA EC AEI, a
perpetual benefit to our Country. But where there is a ready mind, Importunity
is unnecessary; and would be some disparagement to that inclination, favor and
promptness, which is the fairest recommendation of your free will offerings. He
that gives, let him do it with simplicity, and a ready mind; for GOD loves a
cheerful giver ROMANS XII. 8. 2 COR. VIII. 19. IX. 7.
. Every occasion, that calls our benevolence into act, improves the habit of
it: and I hope, this days solemnity will have a still more extensive influence
on our charity, by conciliating our hearts and minds to one another,
harmonizing our affections, and disposing us to cherish and exercise that love
to our Country, to our Church and Government, toward all men and all
christians, which terminates in the love of GOD: that Christ may dwell in our
hearts by Faith: that being rooted and grounded in love, we may be able to know
the love of Christ, which passes knowledge, that we may be filled with all the
fullness of GOD EPHESIANS. III. 17 -- 21.
.

NOW unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly, above all that we ask or
think, according to the power that works in us; unto him be glory in the
church by CHRIST JESUS, throughout all ages, world without end AMEN.


