THE PAXTON BOYS, A FARCE.

Translated from the Original French,

BY a Native of DONEGALL.

Printed in the Year, MDCCLXIV.

SCENE Opens.
The Inhabitants alarmed for several Days past. 12 o'Clock at Night.

(Enter Express.) THUMP, thump, thump, yoho, rouse, rouse, get up to Arms, to
Arms.

Citizen. Who Is there, what noise is that, what do you want?


Expr. Get up, up, up to Arms, where does the G -- r live.


Citiz. What Is the Matter! Friend, stop, stop, alittle. 'ill show you what is
the Matter, what is the Matter.


Exp. I must see the G -- r, I cannot stav.


Citiz. Stop, stop, I pray you what means this, I Am coming, I Will show you
what is the Matter, I Will go with you, stop, stop.


SCENE. II.
Rap, rap, at the G -- r's Door (gets admittance.)

Exp. Call the G -- r.


Servant. He Is coming Sir.


Gov. What Is your business Friend.


Exp. Sir the Paxtons are coming.


Gov. Where are they.


Exp. About Eighteen Miles of Sir.


Gov. How do you know.


Exp. I saw them Sir.


Gov. When did you see them.


Exp. About three hours ago Sir.


Gov. What Road are they coming.


Exp. The Germantown Road Sir.


Gov. How many are they.


Exp. As near as I could guess about 1500 Sir.


Gov. Servants, Go alarm the City, ring the Bells, alarm the Watch, alarm the
Constables.


Serve. Yes Sir.


Gov. Knock at the Inhabitants Doors and desire them to repair to the
Courthouse.


Serve. Yes Sir,

(Exit Express and Servants)
Watchman. Thump, thump, Rap, rap, rap, ket up* ket up.


Citizens. What Is the Matter.


Watch. I ton't no.


Citiz. Is there Fire, where is it, where is it.


Watchm. No, no, tish no Fire, the G -- r sais you must ket up top of the
Court-Howshe.

Thump Thump Thump along, (Exit Watchmen.) The Cause invites in Crowds we fly,
To join the Noisy routfull cry;
What Joys from Cares and Plagues all Day,
To hye to the Courthouse, hark away:
The Brisk, the Bold, the Young, the Gay,
All hye to the Courthouse, hark away.
The brisk, the bold, etc.

SCENE III.
The Citizens all in Arms, the Company's formed, the Artillery ready, every
Thing in order, waiting impatiently for their coming.

(Enter the second Express.) Gov. What news Friend.


Exp. Sir they are within twelve Miles.


Gov. Officers.


Offic. Sir.


Gov. Order your Men to Load.


Offic. Yes Sir.


Gov. Cap. -- n March your Company and join the Barracks.


Capt. Yes Sir.

The Barracks prepared to receive them, the Citizens impatient for Action.


(Enter First Artillery Man) First Artill. Man. They say they are a Parcel of
ragged Arse tatterdemalion Fellows.


W. -- e. Your mistaken, they are stout Fellows.


Second Artillery Man. Are they, and do they really intend to come forward.


W. -- e. Yes indeed do they.


First Artill. Man. Well we are ready for them, come when they will.


2d. Artill. We'll give them a dose I Will warrant you.


1st. Artill. By heavens will we.


W. -- e. You Will find yourselves mistaken.


2d. Artill. May be so.


W. -- e. Five and twenty of them supped at my House, and tarried with me all
Night on there way hitherward.


1st. Artill. More shame for you to entertain such Guests.


W. -- e. I think not so, they had business with me.


1st. Artill. I suppose so, it was Plotting business, D -- le business.


W. -- e. No Matter, they are stout Fellows and as well equipt, I tell you.


1st. Artill. Well they may be so, we are not afraid of them, who cares.


W. -- e. Why there are 1500 of them mostly Six Foot high, and scarce a Man
among them, but will hit a Mark 150 yards of, to the greatest nicety.


2d. Artill. There are many of us can do that too.


W. -- e. I Am sure 50 of them would drive you all into Delaware.


1st. Artill. I much question that, and for your Part, you ought to be H -- d,
for encouraging Rioters, you a Maker of L -- s your the D -- l.


W. -- e. You should have more regard to my Age, do you know sirrah who I am.


1st. Artill. No D -- n me, nor I don't care, you're an old Sc -- l.


One of the Crowd. This has been the Language of that old R -- l these several
Days past.


Another of the Crowd. I heard him several Times endeavor to discourage the
Citizens while on Duty.


1st. Artill. The Governor should be informed of it.


2d. Artill. 'Ill go and inform him of it by G -- d.


(Exit W. -- e.) SCENE IV.
The Crowd. Here they come, Here they are all on Horseback.


3d. Artill. Where are they, where are they, stand clear, stand clear, make
Room: Zounds make Room, where are the Thieves s'blood stand clear, lets have a
Knock at them.


The Crowd. Here they are, they are come.


3d. Artill. By heavens I Will slash some of them, stand clear, where are the
Thieves.


2d. Artill. Point the Guns, make Room, hand the Cartridges, light the Match,
load away.

The Crowd scampering away, Helter Skeiter, one tumbling over another.


Officers. Prime.


Soldiers. All Prim'd.


Officers. Rest your Firelocks, Shoulder, Present.


Soldiers. Give us Orders to fire.


Officers. Don't fire till the Word Gentlemen.


The Crow'd. A false alarm, a false alarm, it is the Dutch Company of Butchers,
it is the Dutch Company of Troopers, Friends, Friends, Friends, etc.


Officers. Recover your Arms, Shoulder.


3d. Artill. Well enough by the Lord, it is well enough by Heavens, I was ready
for them, the Thieves.

The hurly burly, subsided, advance Troopers with sound of Trumpet.

(Exit Butchers.) (Happy Butchers, you were not butchered.)

A Glorious Parade through the City, Night comes on, some Guard while others
rest after their Fatigue.


SCENE V.
Day Light appears. Enter 1st. Pressbyterian. Good Morrow Brother, well what
News this Morning.


2d. Press. Is it possible you can be ignorant, or be an idle Spectator of what
we and your Brethren are doing.


1st. Pres. No Brother God forbid, I am not an idle Spectator, nor am I
ignorant of the Matter, but when I asked you that Question, I did not know but
you might inform me of something that is new, or advise with me what is further
to be done, for my Part you cannot entertain any doubt but agreeable to my
Forefathers Oliverian Spirit, I would freely Sacrifice my Life and Fortune for
this Cause, rather than those Misecrants of the Established Church of England,
or those R -- ls the Q -- s, should continue longer at the head of Government,
it vexes me to the Soul to see those heathen Enemies. openly Protected by them,
against the Law of Nature, the Law of Reason, and the Law of God.


2d. Pres. Ay so it does me Brother, but I Am in hopes, as we have taken no
little Pains, that Things will shortly take another turn, you know when the Arm
of God is with us, and our Counsels, we need not fear what Man can do unto us.


1st. Pres. That Is true Brother? Life and all for this glorious Cause.


2d. Pres. Stop Brother do not be so openly, Zealous and loud, possibly we may
be overheard, you will do well to consider how the Case stands, let us go
Circumspectly to Work.


1st. Pres. How the Case stands; I have it, so much at Heart, I don't care who
hears me, this is my Sentiments and I Will dye by it.


2d. P. Would to God all our Brethren were such Godly Zealous Men as you are,
then I am sure, we should carry the Point, but never fear, what we cannot do by
force, we must do by Policy, and you know Olivers Schemes took Effect; more
through Policy and Cunning than Force, we must keep on our Guard, or we shall
be in the sudds.


1st. P. You say right, do you continue to Plan and we will execute, it seems
to me Providence will favor us by furnishing us, with such wise Counselors as
you? Now we are Happy? Now we go on Triumphantly, let us Extipate those People,
Root and Branch, and not leave one Soul alive, than will be fulfilled (what the
Scripture says) we shall be all of one Mind, happy then shall we be, Thrice
happy, Thrice:


2d. P. Hold I pray you, be silent, let not thy too Untimely Zeal, carry thee
such lengths now, be cautious, we have Planned Matters well, I think they
cannot fail.


1st. P. Well! Brother I Will take thy Advice? God grant us success.


2. P. We have been long and privately contriving this Matter, a few hours will
decide it, it is humanly impossible it can prove Abortive.


1st. P. Those Words inspire me with fresh Vigor an i Zeal? Rejoice my Soul?
Courage? Courage.


2d. P. Pray, pray, pray, consider it is Time enough for those Pious
ejaculations, I see thy Spirit is enlivened, but consider, have Patience awhile.


1st. P. Well I will endeavor so to do, but it is almost impossible, it is a
hard Task, assist me ye Powers to stifle my Zeal, afew Moments longer, I will.


2d. P. Therein you will do well.


1st. P. I had almost forgot to tell you that I understood Yesterday our
Brethren at Germontown was a little disheartened, I took the Opportunity to
Ride up there, I distributed a Quantity of Powder and Balls, amongst them, and
not a small Sum of Money out of my own Pocket, to enable them to bear their
Expenses, I told them they might depend on Assistance from their Brethren in
Philadelphia if necessary, and delivered them several Letters from our Friends
here: It gave them new life, they were all Unaminous in coming down, I rejoiced
to hear it? Oh 'twas a blessed meeting I promised them they should be farther
supplied with Cash to carry Things on successfully; and after spending the best
Part of this Morning in Prayer with them, I took a friendly leave of them for a
while, so Brother; you see I have not been idle, and hope I have been of some
Service to the Cause.


2d. P. How worthy art thou among Saints, thou art good; thy Charity will be
r^warded Fourfold.


1st. P. This is not all Brother, I have been collecting from our Brethren
here, and have met with extraordinary success. I have got already in Cash Two
Thousand Pounds, and Subscriptions to near One thousand Pounds more, some were
so free to give, they opened their Baggs, and let me take out what I pleased.


2d. P. O glorious? What a Spirit is here! Thou will be rewarded twenty Fold.


1st. P. A Godly Spirit? Oh! that it may continue, ours is the Cause, the Cause
of Glory, the Cause of Religion, a Righteous Cause, the Cause of:


2d. P. Hold, hold, here is somebody coming.


1st. P. Not a word more, I Am done I Am silent.


SCENE VI.
(Enter Quaker) Quaker. Well Friends, how do do this Morning, what News,
methinks you seem bewildered, your Countenance betrays some ^ear at those
Vagabonds coming down.


1st. P. Fear, what do you mean by fear, possibly you may have most Reason to
fear ^hortly.


2d. P. (aside) you will certainly spoil all.


Quaker. Thou seem angry, I don't understand thee a right Friend, explain
thyself, why I should be more afraid hereafter than thee.


1st. P. I don't choose it at Present: Stay till the Time comes.


Qua. What Time, thou talkest Misterious? What Time, I cannot divine thy
meaning, thou talkest in unintelligible dark Characters.


1st. P. You may think as you will, I will satisfy you no further now.


Qua. Thou seem to be possessed of a Spirit of Madness, I can scarce have
Patience with thee.


1st. P. I am not so mad as you, you seem to have the Spirit of the D -- l in
you.


2d. P. Sir excuse my Friend, he is a little out of humor this Morning, he was
disturbed of his Rest last Night.


Qua. Ay, ay, I suppose he was at Germantown last Night, giving them Vagrants
Counsel, was he not.


1st. P. No Matter it is none of your business.


Qua. It is Matter, I shall take notice of thee.


1st. P. Ay, and so shall I of you.


Qua. -- Was I in Power I Would let thee know,
Thou should not dare to babble so;
I think thou do deserve the Gallows,
As much or more than those Paxton fellows.

1st. P. It Is more likely you will get there first.


Qua. Ay if thou had thy will.


1st. P. Nothing more certain.


Qua. It Is plain from thy Discourse that thou and thine Intends to pour out thy
Vials of Wrath and D -- sh -- ss on the Inhabitants of this City, and those
Innocents they have taken into their Protection, thou and thy Friends are one
of the seven Plagues, thou have the Mark of the Beast.


1st. P. Oh had they but one Neck (as a worthy Roman said) that I might lop
them off at one chop.


Qua. O! wretched Barbarity.


1st. P. Blessed shall that Man be called,
That takes thy Children young;
To dash their Bones against the Stones*
That lie in the Streets among.

Qua. My Soul shudders at the Thought.


1st. P. Begone.


Qua. Is that the Language of thy Heart,
O wicked, wicked wretch thou art.

1st. P. Away! Away.


Qua. Oh! Lancaster, Lancaster, the blood of murdered Innocents cry out for
Vengeance? Oh! Presbyterians, Presbyterians, who shall deliver thee from the
Wrath to come.


1st. P. Away, Away, with all such pusilanimous Fellows.


Qua. Shocking, shocking, I can hear no more.


SCENE VII.
(Enter Churchman.) Qua. Friend how do thou do, give me thy Hand.


Chur. Sir, I am glad to see you, how do you do, are you not well, you look a
little discomposed.


Qua. Ay well I may -- no wonder, I have been much flustrated, I have been Ill
treated by my Neighbor P -- I never took him to be the Man I now find he is.


Chur. Why Sir, I hope he has not treated you ill.


Qua. Worse than I ever was treated, by any one I Am sure, worse than ever I was
treated in my life.


Chur. I am very sorry for it indeed, perhaps he was only joking.


Qua. No no, it was a true joke.


Chur. Is it possible that he was in Earnest.


Qua. Yes we were both in Earnest.


Chur. Upon what Account pray.


Qua. Upon the present Disturbances.


Chur. Surely does he take their Parts.


Qua. Yes and very Violently.


Chur. You surprise me.


Qua. He does openly and avowedly, and is so brazen in it I could scarce keep
my Hands off of him.


Chur. You astonish me, but it is best as it is.


Qua. He has gone so far in it and spoke so much in their favor, that I think
it, is little better than Treason* I am sure the Law could take hold of him for
it; and I think I shall not be satisfied until I have made a proper Report of
the Matter, when these present Disturbances are a little settled.


Chur. I make no doubt but he is to blame, pass it over now and take another
Opportunity to call him before his betters, I dare say he will receive but
little Countenance, our M -- s are all good Subjects, hearty in the Cause of
Liberty and supporting the Constitutions, and doubt not but, they will make
Public examples of any that dare oppose them.


Qua. It Is a Mercy they are so, or I am sure we should be put in a deplorable
Situation, but we ought to be Thankful.


Chur. Here is a fine Sight to see these Troops, I think they make a handsome
Appearance.


Qua. So they do Friend, it rejoices my Heart to see those Drums and Colors
displayed, and such Numbers of Men met armed together, for the support of
Government, and to prevent Inhuman Masacre.


1st. P. You may change your note before to Morrow-Morning.


Qua. I doubt thy Words, but how comes it to pass, there are so few of thy Sect
among them, from what thou have already said, it is plain the Countenances
Rioters, and possibly when they come will join them.


1st. P. With all my Soul.


Qua. I thought so, thou go about to destroy the best of Kings, and the best
of Governments.


1st. P. How will you prove that.


Qua. By thy Words and Actions.


1st. P. You talk like a Fool.


Qua. Thee talks and acts like one, in not agreeing with me and all good Men,
that we are Governed by the best of Kings, and how dare thee say to the
contrary, thou Disenter.


1st. P. And so are(...)er, and how dare you find fault with me for being the
same with yourself in that Particular.


Qua. But my Disenting does not proceed from any dislike to the King, or the
Government, but from a Religious scruple of Conscience in bearing Arms, but
thou art a Desenter from the wickedness of thy heart, like the fallen Angels,
and let me tell thee, that unless thou mends thy ways, thy Condition may be
like unto theirs.


1st. P. Do you say we are governed by the best of Kings.


Qua. Yes verily I do.


1st. P. And why then do not you take up Arms to support that King and his
Government.


Qua. I have never done it yet against the common Enemy, but when there is a
real necessity as there appears to be now, thou shall be convinced that I will
carry Arms and fight too; and chastize such Wretches as thou art with thy
bloody persecuting Principles, who art not worthy to live in a free Government:
Then will I remember New England and make thee tremble.


(Churchman.) 2d. Churchman. They are come, they are come.


1st. P. God be thanked.


Qua. Than it is Time to Arm, and do thou attack me if thou dares, and thou
shall find that I have Courage and Strength sufficient, to trample thee under
my Feet Stir then good People be not still nor quiet,
Rouse up yourselves take Arms and quell the Riot;
Such Wildfire Chaps may, dangerous Mischeifs raise.
And ^er unthinking People in a blaze.



P. S. Should they Attempt, or be mad enough to come down again, it is probable
I may change the FARCE into a TRAGEY-COMEDY.

FINIS.

