REMARKS UPON THE Delineated PRESBYTERIAN PLAYED HOB WITH OR CLOTHES FOR A
STARK NAKED AUTHOR.

O Tempora; O Mores. PHILADELPHIA Printed and sold by ANTHONY ARMBRUSTER, at
the German and English PRINTING OFFICE; in Moravian-Alley. 1764.

REMARKS etc.
SUCH is the present afflicting Situation of Affairs, and such the universal
Prevalence of Animosity, that each Man seems to have obtained his SUMMUM BONUM,
when by all the Arts of a Sophist, he can lay hold of any Means, (no Matter how
base) to wound his Neighbor's Reputation. A recent and glaring Instance of
this detracting Spirit, we have had in a late scandalous Phamphlet, entitled
The Author of QUAKER UNMASKED stripped stark naked, or the DELINEATED
PRESBYTERIAN played Hob with; where a Gentleman of unblemished Morals is openly
and audaciously insulted and proclaimed to the World to be an unjust and
deceiving Man.

This grovling Performance is written with neither Spirit nor Judgment; and
contains nothing to recommend it to the Perusal of any candid, unbigotted
Person, save that it tends to show the malevolent Author of it in his proper
Colors; to wit, a Disturber of the public Tranquillity and a Pest of Society,
But to proceed; -- my Design, at present, is neither to defend the Conduct of
the Presbyterians nor the Quakers; but solely to vindicate that Gentleman, from
the villainous Aspersions of his designing Enemies; and in this Undertaking, I
shall appear justifiable in the Eyes of all, unbiased by Prejudice.

-- Absentem qui rodit Amicum;
Qui non defendit, alio culpante; solutos
Qui captat Risus Homimum, Famamque Dicacis;
Fingere qui non visa potest; commissa tacere
Qui nequit: hic Niger est;
HOR: Our ingenious Pamphleteer, when he sat down to compose his elaborate and
learned Treatise, seems to have intended to do all the Mischief in his Power;
and being regardless of the sacred Laws of Speech, (for he deals in the
mavelous) and having no other Method to give Vent to his Malice, he without
Reason or Provocation charges a Person entirely innocent of the Fact, with
being the Author of a late Piece, entitled "QUAKER UNMASKED," and taking it
for granted that he was the Man, thence draws this sagacious and infallible
Inference, that therefore he is a Liar. The Gentleman so grossly abused, was no
Doubt supposed by our Author, to have wrote the Pamphlet he pretends to
animadvert upon; and now nicely does he do it! First with ushering in his
Lampoon by deriding another Gentleman, whose prudent Behavior in the late
unhappy Disturbances, I leave to cooler Times to determine. But that I may
detain your Attentions no longer, shall with all the Brevity possible, convince
you, by a few Remaks on that libellous Lampoon, which I just now spoke of, that
the Author of it has acted an unmanly and ungenerous Part. If any Man among
you (save St. James) seem to be religious and bridleth not his Tongue, but
deceives his two Heart; this Man's Religion is vain.

What favorable Sentiments can you entertain of him, who, upon a bare,
groundless Supposition, would endeavor to blast the Reputation of a fellow
Creature? Do not your Hearts tell you, such a Man as this is and must of
Necessity be a Villain? surely they do. Why then Mr. Pamphleteer labors under
this Disadvantage; for his whole Performance is one continued Piece of
Detraction. The Faults he lays to the Charge of that Gentlemen of whom he has
had the Impudence to speak so freely, are all invented by Malice, with a Design
to rob him of his honest Fame; but his Character is too well established to be
sullied by the invidious Representations of every vagabond Quill-Driver. Our
Author accuses him of being a Promoter of Discord, and a bad Member of Society;
but these are Faults which cannot, with the least Appearance of Justice, be
attributed to him; that he has his Failings as a Man I allow: for Imperfection
is the grand Characteristic of sublunary Beings; and as the Poet says,

The ruling Passion, be it what it will,
The ruling Passion governs Nature still.
Let us now consider what he says next. I sincerely hope that the Sentiments of
Abhorence of your infamous Piece, which I shall express, will be of so much
Service to you, that you will never hereafter prostitute your Pen to any such
base Purposes for the sake of any Party whatever at the Expense of Truth; nor
to vindicate the Actions of a Set of Murderers and Rioters, destitute of the
Principles of Humanity. Now supposing this Gentleman to have wrote that
infamous Piece, (the contrary of which I affirm) in what Part of it does he
countenance Murderers and Rioters? Is it when he tells us he would, by no means
attempt to justify the killing of Indians while under the Protection of the
Government? Or was it when we were in such Confusion, upon the first Alarm, of
the Paxton People being on the Road armed, whose Intentions were not supposed
to be the best; at which Time he cheerfully offered himself to go meet them,
and stop their Progress if possible? Or was it at Germantown, when he
expostulated, advised, threatened and used his utmost Interest to prevail with
them to return to their respective Habitations? -- Thus you see, we have fairly
convicted Mr. Delineator of a notorious Falsehood.

Page the seventh he tell us it is impossible you can recover your usual Credit
but by a sincere and public Acknowledgment, that you were prompted thereto by
Envy, Hatred and Malice, and that the Father of Lies was your Dictator. -- I
can hardly keep my Patience to hear him talk at so ridiculous a Rate; surely
our Author has not wrote himself to such a Pitch of Vanity, as to imagine that
his ungrammatical Scribbling will destroy the least Part of that Gentleman's
unspotted Fame; his Life and Manners will refute all he has advanced; and with
Confidence I say it, his Virtues are full Proof against all his malicious
Inventions; and for him to undertake to censure and condemn the conduct of one
so much his superior, only exposes his own Weakness and renders him liable to
be compared to the Puppy who barked at the Moon.

Page the 9th. I know, from your Youth, that you were capable to excogitate
Lies with a better Grace, than any of your Schoolmates, who have often employed
you to save their Posteriors from the Ceremony of the Birch. Concerning this
Assertion, I shall not pretend to say a great deal; save, that our Pamphleteer
has paid a greatful Acknowledgement for past Favors; for how he comes to be
so particularly acquainted with that Gentleman's Benevolence, in saving his
School-fellows from a Whipping, unless Experience has taught him, I shall not
venture to decide.

But let us read a little further. You ha^^ lied in Order to injure the
spotless Charter of Individuals. This is a most flagr^^^ Untruth. Who were
those People whom he ^^lified? if he had known he would have mentioned them;
but as he has not, I shall concl^^^ that there were no such Persons; and of
Consequence, this Assertion is extremely wick^^ and without Foundation.

It would be a needless Task, and trespass^^ upon your Indulgence to make any
further marks upon this Performance, after such ^^^dent Proof, that its Author
paid no Regar^ (...) Truth, as may be seen throughout the who^^. I shall
therefore dismiss it with saying, t^^^ ^ intend no Affront to any Party
whatever, that nothing but so injured a Cause could (...) induced me to take up
my Pen, as Writing (...) far from my Thoughts.

PHILO-VERITATE
Fourth-Street.
FINIS.

