REMARKS ON THE QUAKER UNMASKED; Or PLAIN TRUTH found to be PLAIN FALSEHOOD:
Humbly addressed to the Candid.

Awed by no Shame, by no respect controlled,
In Scandal busy, in Reproaches bold:
With Witty Malice, studious to defame;
Scorn all his Joy. --
POPE'S ILIAD, Lib. 11. Improbis Hominis est Mendacio fallere. PHILADELPHIA:
Printed and sold by John Morris, opposite the Three Reapers, in Third-Street.

REMARKS, etc.
THERE has lately appeared a Pamphlet, called the Quaker Unmasked, or Plain
Truth, a very well wrote Piece indeed, and would be still better, had not the
Author made the Hyperbole, his darling Trope.

A Piece of this nature must certainly astonish the discerning, or them who
were present at the late alarming and interesting Affair, and who had an
Opportunity of seeing the Rioter's Friends sloth and inactivity in endeavoring
to suppress, and their Unanimity, and Zeal in forwarding and encourageing the
unprecedented and lawless proceedings of an ignorant and enthusiastic Mob.

There has several Pieces appeared in public, on the Occasion; but a Piece
from that side of the Question appearing, was thought impossible, without it
was one that would be composed of Apoligies for, and Palliations of the late
intriguing Conduct of a rigid subverting Society in this City; but instead of
that, after favoring the Cause in private, to espouse it in public, is
surprising to every body, and plainly indicates the most depravid Ignorance, or
that uncommon Audacity, that the Lenity of a Government to ungrateful Monsters
is too often productive of.

It has been observed by the Proprietors of Negroes, that there is something
so peculiar in their Disposition, that they cannot bear Indulgence; these
People I look upon to be under the same unhappy Circumstances, not that I would
suppose it so in their original Dispositions, but owing to the Effect their
Principles have, for they are, and have always been (though under the mildest of
Governments) a Set of uneasy, discontented, and innovating People.

But Philadelphia boasts of better Men than they; Men, who when Occasion calls,
are ready to take up Arms in Opposition to the Enemies of her Welfare. Yet some
of these are called Incendiaries, who are not only enraged themselves, at their
dear Friends the Indians, being slain, but would have all the World of their
Temper. Now, what Interest can the saving the Lives of the Indians be to the Q
-- rs, or what Disadvantage can accrue to them from their Death, I cannot
conceive, neither has our Author (after several low and impertinent
Insinuations) be able to determine.

Those that did take up Arms, I am fully convinced, had no other View in it,
than the Welfare of the City, and Persons acting by the Principle of
Partriotism, make this their incumbent Duty, not only to be possessed of this
Principle themselves, but make (as much as in them lies) Proselytes to it, or
in our noble Author's Words, would have all the World of their Temper.

As for the Narrative of the Massacre, etc. it is a Pamphlet that will bear a
recommendation to the Perusal of every candid Person, as there is in it that
Pathos, that will rouse the Christian in the Reader, and excite in him an
endeavor to prevent the effusion of human Blood. And the Author is, as the
Work shows him to be, a Gentleman of Integrity, of impartial Judgment, and of
Sentiments untainted by infectious P -- y.

These compassionate and merciful Christians, so easily affected with Pity for
Indians, would not grant a single Farthing for the Relief of their Fellow
Subjects. This assertion is certainly false, and against known Truths (but it
is needless to pick out Paragraphs that are false, when there is not a Truth in
the whole) for though there were no Charity Sermons preached, and no ostentatious
Collection made in Public, yet it is well known that there were considerable
Sums collected and distributed among the truly necessitous; but perhaps this
Assertion proceeds from their being none distributed at Germantown, a place
where some People made all their Charity center.

Let us impartially next consider Quakers with Respect to Government. Can it be
consistent that a Person who declares that his Conscience by divine Inspiration
forbids him to have any Hand in shedding Blood, should be entrusted as a
Representative for People, who look upon themselves to be obliged by the Laws
of God, the Laws of Nature, and the Laws of their King and Country to take up
Arms to defend themselves, and punish those who would deprive them of Life and
Property. If Q -- rs are under those Circumstances, so improper to represent a
People, (between whose Sentiments there is so great a Contrast) why are they
chosen as such? They have never obtained their Seats in the House of Assembly
by either any secret or understanding Means, or any open violent Measure, but
so far from that, what few are in the House, have been annually, by public
Advertisments, declaring their desire of resigning, and requesting the Election
of others in their Room: If there are so many Disadvantages flow from their
being Members of a legislative Body, why is not their request complied with? I
am certain it cannot be alleged, that the Numbers of Q -- rs in this Province
make a Majority of its inhabitants, nor can it be owing to the Paucity of their
avowed Enemies the Pr -- ns (for unhappy for it, it swarms with them) but their
Constituents, upon probation, seeing the happy Effects of their upright Conduct
in every public Trust, executive as well as legislative, have always
endeavored (though contrary to their Inclinations) still to keep them possessed
of it. And I doubt not but this very railer, when the Anniversary Day of
Election comes about, (after an impartial Consideration of their
unexceptionable Conduct, and a serious Reflection on the Incapacity of their
Enemies) will be the foremost in opposing their removal; for his present
Indignation, is only owing to a little Heat of Blood, occasioned by the
Miscarriage of a late Project.

But it has been proved, by a very circumstantial Oath of a young Man, who
has since very unaccountably disappeared, etc. What a bitter Innuendo is that!
But People's knowledge of every Circumstance relative to it, makes the
Invective contained in it, recoil with the greater Force upon them. O unhappy
Predestination! whom I suppose it was intended to screen and defend. -- And
believe me my Countrymen, those who would be privy to an Intention of Murder,
and would assist, when they thought Opportunity favored the putting the
Intention in Execution, would perpetrate a Murder, and rather than their
diabolical Schemes should prove abortive in any Point, would work upon the
Inexperience of a Youth to commit an Act, that will unavoidably redound to the
Infamy of his Instigators. Our Author I believe studies Solomon a good deal, as
he seems to be well versed in the Art of composing Proverbs. -- It is a Pity he
had not some of his Wisdom too. Here follows an excellent one; To govern is
absolutely repugnant to the avowed Principles of Quakers. To be governed is
absolutely repugnant to the avowed principles of Pr -- ns. Now, to sum up the
Character of the aforementioned Pamphlet, I think it is really an elegant and
perfect Work, and so many found Truths interspersed throughout the whole Piece,
makes it still more amiable; and upon the whole makes up what Longinus calls
the Sublime. Although I think the Poet has drawn the Author's Character in the
following Lines.

-- He loves Books:
Not that he has a Scruple more of Learning,
Than will suffice him to say Grace; but like
Some piteous Cowards, who are often though it valiant,
For keeping store of weapons in their Chamber(...)
He loves to be esteemed a Doctor by his Volum(...)
GLAPTHORNE. And so after wishing that private anim(...)ties may subside, and
public Factions lo(...) their existence, shall conclude with (...) Hume says
thereon. Factions subvert (...)vernment, render Laws impotent, and (...) gets
the fiercest Animosities among Me(...) the same Nation, who ought to give
(...)tual assistance and protection to each ot(...) And what should render the
Found(...) Parties more odious is, the Difficult extirpating these Parties,
who once (...) taken Rise in any State. They natu(...) propagate themselves for
many Centu(...) and seldom end but by the total Dissol(...) of that Government,
in which the(...) (...) planted. They are besides, seeds w(...) grow most
plentifully in rich Soils; though despotic Governments are not free from them, it
must be confessed, they rise more easily, and propagate (...) selves faster in
free Governments.

PHILADELPHIEN
Market-Street, March 16, 1764.

