JOURNAL OF THE SOUTHERN CONGRESS, AT AUGUSTA IN GEORGIA, 1763.

JOURNAL OF THE CONGRESS OF THE FOUR SOUTHERN GOVERNORS, AND THE SUPERINTENDENT
OF THAT DISTRICT, WITH THE FIVE NATIONS OF INDIANS, AT AUGUSTA, 1763.

SOUTH CAROLINA. CHARLESTOWN: PRINTED BY PETER TIMOTHY, M, DCC, LXIV.

JOURNAL of the proceedings of the SOUTHERN CONGRESS at Augusta: from the
arrival of the several GOVERNORS at Charlestown, South Carolina, the first day
of October, to their return to the same place, etc. the twenty-first day of
November, 1763.
SATURDAY October 1st, 1763.
ARRIVED his excellency Arthur Dobbs, Governor Dobbs arrives.
Esquire governor, etc. etc. of North Carolina, at Charlestown.

And on monday the 3d arrived his honor Francis Fauquier, Lieut. governor
Fauquier arrives.
Esquire lieutenant governor of Virginia; pursuant to orders they had respectively
received from his majesty, signified by his principal secretary of state, to be
present at a congress appointed to be held by the southern governors, with the
Chicasah, Chactah, Creek, Cherokee and Catawba Indians, at Augusta, or
elsewhere.

TUESDAY October 4th.
PRESENT, Their excellencies Governor THOMAS BOON, Governor ARTHUR DOBBS,
His honor lieutenant governor FRANCIS FAUQUIER, And, JOHN STUART, Esquire
superintendent of Indian affairs.


IT was agreed, to give notice to his excellency governor James Wright, It is
determined to send an express to gov. Wright.
of the inconveniences attending a journey, by land or water, to Augusta, to
the respective governors: for the more full explanation of which the letter
referred to is as follows, viz.

Charlestown, South Carolina, October 4th, 1763. SIR,
WE take the earliest opportunity after our being met together to give your
excellency notice of it; and this we look upon to be the more necessary since
our conversing upon the subject of a future congress has occasioned an
alteration of the place of meeting. An alteration of place proposed.
A change in every respect so much more convenient to us, will, we flatter
ourselves, not be otherwise to you; the distance will, we understand, be the
same, and the accommodations no doubt better: It was the intention of some of
us to have gone up Savannah river by water, but the tediousness of that passage
has deterred us, Difficulty of going by water,
as the difficulty, if not impracticability, Or by land, to Augusta.
of conveying ourselves, and the necessary conveniences, by land, has made us
lay aside all thoughts of this also. The behavior of some of the Indians to
the king's subjects, And the ill behavior of the Indians, point out the
propriety of the alteration.
and their ill disposition toward one another, points out too the propriety,
of assembling them at some place where they will be under a greater check and
control, than they would be in so straggling and ill-settled a place as
Augusta: but with regard to the Indians themselves, we imagine the alteration
will not be disagreeable; they were before apprised that Augusta was pitched
upon, Smallpox in Carolina, the reason why Augusta was at first proposed.
because the smallpox was in Carolina; that disorder having long since ceased,
will be reason therefore sufficient to assign for the change of place. The
Chactahs, That obstacle now removed.
Chicasahs and Catawbas, are not at all likely to make objections; the
Cherokees are extremely averse to going to Augusta; and if the Creeks should
entertain any jealousy, the superintendent will no doubt be able to convince
them, that nothing is intended by the change of place, but to render the
meeting more commodious to the governors, some of which have already come a
great way, and will suffer unavoidably by proceeding farther. Capt. Stuart will
either lodge the presents at Augusta, or order them back again, as may appear
to him the most proper, when he has sounded the Indians on this subject. We
should have been glad, if time would have permitted to have known your
sentiments upon this alteration; but the day appointed draws so near, that
capt. Stuart thinks it proper to set off on thursday, in order to be ready to
receive such Indians as may arrive. We are,

With great regard, Sir, Your most obedient and Most humble servants, THOMAS
BOON, ARTHUR DOBBS, FRANCIS FAUQUIER, JOHN STUART.


His excellent governor Wright.

It was also further agreed, The superintendent to proceed to Augusta, and
conduct the Indians to Dorchester,
that Mr. Stuart should proceed to Augusta, and collect what Indians were
there, and conduct them to Dorchester. From a representation that the goods
ordered up the river Savannah, Where the congress is now appointed to be held.
from the lowness of it, could not possibly arrive there; and from a
supposition that the Indians might be disgusted, at not receiving the presents
in the usual manner, Lowness of Savannah river, a reason for the Change of
place.
and at the usual time, the finishing of the congress; it was agreed, and
accordingly ordered, that the said goods should be stopped, and ordered to
Dorchester.

Presents ordered to Dorchester.
Resolved, that Fenwicke Bull be secretary to the future congress. Secretary
appointed.


FRIDAY October 14th.
THIS day, per the scout-boat, arrived a letter from governor James Wright,
Letter from gov. Wright.
in answer to that wrote to him of the 4th instant, and is as follows, viz.

Savannah in Georgia, 8th October, 1763. GENTLEMEN,
I HAVE just received yours of the 4th instant, acquainting me with an intended
alteration of the place of meeting to hold the future congress. The change, if
to be in Charlestown, is certainly more convenient and agreeable to you, and
it ever gives me pleasure, when, in executing any part of my duty, I can do it
in such manner as may be most agreeable to those concerned; though I must
observe, that the difficulties thrown in the way, I conceive (on a trial) would
not have proved so great as represented or imagined. Who represents Augusta as
a pl^nti^^.
The place affords sufficient houses, plenty of provisions, and accommodations
of every kind, though not so elegant as in Charlestown. As to any particular
convenience or inconvenience to myself, I set that quite out of the question
where his majesty's service interferes; and although some, very few, of the
upper Creek have misbehaved lately, yet I am fully persuaded, the meeting at
Augusta would have been perfectly safe, and all parties secure from danger. I
wish the Creeks, etc. And safe pl^^^.
may be prevailed on to proceed any further than Augusta, but doubt very much
whether they will. Mr. Stuart, in his letter to me, does not mention the least
difficulty or objection made by the Cherokees against Augusta, but that they
had received his invitation with the greatest cordiality and joy. And I should
suppose the Chactahs and Chicasahs would have no objections to a saving of
three hundred miles traveling. You have omitted to mention the place, only in
a postscript say, "the Indians will be ordered to Dorchester." The time I
presume is now uncertain; but, when you are pleased to inform me of that and
the place, I shall certainly attend, if health permits. And proposes to attend,
when the time, etc. is (...).
With respect to any reasons that may be given to the Indians, or directions
about the presents, or my sentiments on the propriety of the alteration, it is
needless for me to give any opinion on matters predetermined. I shall only say,
that I still think the king's intentions might be more effectually executed at
Augusta. I am, with great regard, Gentlemen,

Your most obedient and Most humble servant, JAMES WRIGHT.

Their excellencies Thomas Boon and Arthur Dobbs, (...) the honorable Francis
Fauquier, Esquire and John Stuart, Esquire

Which letter being read, Answer to gov. Wright agreed on.
in the presence of their excellencies Thomas Boon and Arthur Dobbs, Esqrs.
and the honorable Francis Fauquier, Esquire the following answer was wrote, agreed
to, and dispatched by two opportunities.

Letter to governor Wright.
Charlestown, South Carolina, 14th October, 1763. SIR,
WE have this morning been favored with your letter of the 8th instant, upon
which we think it just necessary to observe, that Augusta, its accommodations
and security, must have been misrepresented to us; and besides, that the
getting there at all, Difficulty of geting to Augusts very great.
with the least degree of convenience to ourselves, was scarce possible. Mr.
Stuart might have omitted acquainting your excellency with the disinclination
of the Cherokees to meet at Augusta, The Cherokees disinclined to meet there,
and propose Saludy old-town for the congress.
in consequence of two of their nation being killed by the Creeks; but they
expressed it strongly to him, proposed Saludy old-town for the congress, and
determined to wait on the path in hopes of an alteration of place. We are in
great hopes, that the late outrages committed by the upper Creeks are not the
acts of the nation in general; Observations on the conduct of the Creek Indians.
but, if the generality were well inclined, they would either prevent, or
punish, such frequent repetitions of insolence and murder. A letter of the 4th
instant, which governor Boon has received from Augusta, Information received
that the Upper-Creeks would not come at all.
says, that none of the Creeks will be there, at the congress; if this was
their resolution before the place of meeting was changed, it looks as if they
could not hope, that their offenses would be forgiven them: With regard to the
Chactahs and Chicasahs, they are already on their route; Indians in general
(...) not d^stance (...) expectation (...).
we all know, that two or three hundred miles to an Indian, is nothing, when he
is in expectation of either rewards or revenge; and they frequently come that
distance uninvited, and upon an uncertainty. We before declared, how agreeable
it would have been to us, to have consulted you upon the alteration, if time
would have permitted: We now express our hopes, that your arrival here, or in
Dorchester, the place appointed for the congress, will be as soon as possible,
that every thing may be concerted previous to the coming of the Indians; and we
flatter ourselves, that, by the assistance we shall be able to give each other,
that the king's instructions wlll be executed faithfully, effectually, and with
dispatch. We are,

With great regard, Sir, Your most obedient and Most humble servants, THOMAS
BOON, ARTHUR DOBBS, FRANCIS FAUQUIER.


His excellency governor James Wright.

SATURDAY, October 15th.
THIS day a letter arrived, by express, from his excellency James Wright, Esquire
governor, etc, of Georgia: the underwritten is copy thereof.

Lett^^ from governor Wright.
Savannah in Georgia, 11th October, 1763. GENTLEMEN,
LAST night I received a letter, sent by an express, from Augusta, informing
me, He says, the Wolf king is gone to Pensacola -- a bad omen*
that the Wolf king was gone to Pensacola, to make some demands relative to the
ceded lands; and giving an account of the situation of affairs in the upper
Creeks, which, to say no more, I think have not a very pleasing aspect, Calls
his council, on the present critical situation of Indian affairs.
and made me determine to call the gentlemen of the council together, for their
opinion on the present appearance of things amongst the Indians, and what may
be most proper to be done, for his majesty's service in general, and the safety
of this province in particular, in case Mr. Stuart cannot prevail on the Creeks
to proceed to Dorchester or Charlestown. My last, by Joyner, I wrote
immediately on the receipt of yours, on a supposition, and in hopes, that Mr.
Stuart might prevail with the Creeks to proceed down: but, on the receipt of my
letters last night, I began to reflect more fully on the consequence of their
refusing to go any further; and the more I reflect on the critical situation of
affairs with these Indians, Much evil to be expected, if the Indians return in
disgust.
the more I am convinced of the danger that, in all probability, will attend
their returning home disgusted; and I very much fear they will not go down to
Dorchester; they are not in a situation or humor to follow orders. -- Nay, I
am apprehensive, if they should hear of an intention to carry them down to
Charlestown, they will not come even to Augusta, and therefore I have now
wrote to lieutenant Barnard and Mr. Galphin, desiring them to give Mr. Stuart
their best assistance in the affair -- Gentlemen at a distance, may not see or
consider this matter in the light it strikes me; and a Creek war, may be as
little felt in Virginia, as the northern massacres are in this province; our
commiseration is of little service to those who feel and suffer; even North and
South Carolina would feel little or nothing of (...) rupture with the Creeks,
in comparison of this province: I must therefore consider this matter in a more
serious light than you may; and, it is to be presumed, I am better acquainted
with their situation, and our own, than gentlemen at a greater distance. And
his majesty's council are unanimously and clearly of opinion, The council
advise him to meet the savages at Augusta.
that, should the Creek Indians refuse to go down to Charlestown, and return
back from Augusta displeased, at this critical conjuncture, it might be
productive of the worst consequences, to his majesty's service in general, and
the safety of this province in particular; and therefore, in order to prevent,
if possible, the dangers that may attend their returning disgusted, have
advised me, in case the Indians refuse to proceed to Charlestown, to meet them
at Augusta, as the best, if not the only, method, to prevent further
misunderstandings with them, and to promote his majesty's most gracious
intentions, and establishing peace and friendship with them on a more firm
basis.

This advice entirely coincides with my own opinion; and I judge it altogether
expedient for me to go up to Augusta to meet them, He agrees with his council
in that point.
in case they will not proceed to Charlestown, and can be prevailed on to wait
at Augusta.

I send a person express to acquaint your excellencies with this matter. If the
Indians in general go to Charlestown, I shall attend the congress there: If
they will not go, it then seems absolutely necessary for me to proceed to
Augusta, where I shall give them a talk; And proposes to give the Indians a
talk there, and also a share of presents.
and proceed further with them, according as I find them authorized by the
nation or not, and as things may be circumstanced; in which Mr. Stuart may join
if he pleases. If this event should happen, I doubt not but you will join in
opinion, that a proportion of the presents his majesty has been graciously
pleased to send out on this occasion, will be necessary to give them. I have
sent an express to Augusta, and wrote to Mr. Stuart on the subject. The bearer
has orders to wait a day for any commands you may have. I am,

With great regard, Your excellencies Most obedient and Most humble servant,
JAMES WRIGHT.

Their excellencies Thomas Boon and Arthur Dobbs, Esqrs. and the honorable
Francis Fauquier, Esquire

And at four o'clock in the afternoon, the following answer was sent, by the
said express:

Letter to governor Wright.
Charlestown, South Carolina, 15th October, 1763. SIR,
WE are this moment favored with your letter of the 11th, by express; and,
after having seriously considered it, find no fresh intelligence but what our
letter of yesterday observed upon; nor conceive a difficulty or objection to be
started by the Creeks, The Creeks objection to meet at Dorchester, balanced by
the Cherokees disliking Augusta.
against coming to Dorchester, but what may, and, according to our information,
will be urged by the Cherokees, against their going to Augusta; this, in great
measure, induced us to change the place appointed. The superintendent, The
superintendent, supposed to be the best judge of the disposition of Indians,
approved the change of place.
who is supposed to know the disposition of Indians in general, and from whom
we are supposed to receive the information regarding them, so far from
advancing reasons against, concurred in, the alteration of place; and we have
no sort of doubt, but he will be able to reconcile the lower Creeks (for the
upper will not come at all) to the meeting being held at Dorchester, Gov.
Wright requested to cooperate with the superintendent to entreat the Indians
to come to Dorchester.
especially if you should think it advisable to go to Augusta and give him
your assistance, as that will effectually prevent any ill-designing low people
from instilling jealousies into the Creeks, merely because i^ may be more
beneficial to them to have the congress at Augusta. You may observe, Sir, that
they are not in a humor to follow orders: But if the Creeks, or any, after so
solemn an invitation on the part of four provinces, should be either refractory
or sulky, we cannot think, they should be either caressed or indulged. On the
service we are now ordered by the king, The service of the congress described.
it is our duty, and intention, to promote the security and advantage of every
colony concerned; nor can this be more effectually done, as we conceive, than
by convincing each nation of Indians, that the four southern governors act in
concurrence; every expression of kindness will have additional weight, and the
danger of breaking with us will be evidently greater; and this is certainly the
spirit of the king's intentions: we therefore must beg you to exert your
influence with the Creeks, that the congress may, as it was intended, be
general. We have not heard from Mr. Stuart since he left this place, so that,
at present, we may presume, he sees no further objection, though apprised of
all Indian intelligence. We send him a copy of your letter, that, when
acquainted with your doubts, he may be more attentive to remove every suspicion
or umbrage.

We are, With great regard, Sir, Your excellency's Most obedient and Most
humble servants, THOMAS BOON, ARTHUR DOBBS, FRANCIS FAUQUIER.


His excellency James Wright, Esquire.

At the same time it was agreed, to write to John Stuart, Esquire and is as follows:

Letter to Mr. Stuart.
Charlestown, South Carolina, 15th October, 1763. SIR,
WE enclose you a copy of a letter we have wrote this morning, in answer to one
received from governor Wright, which is also sent you: the sight of both will
be a clue to you, how to conduct yourself in the removing every umbrage that
may have been taken by, or given to, the Creeks. We depend on your using your
utmost influence, in bringing all the invited Indians to the congress at
Dorchester, and we have requested Mr. Wright to cooperate with you. It is a
material part of your duty, to discover and preve^^ the ill effects of private
tamperings, and insinuations thrown out to Indians; and to take care, as far as
you are able, that they listen to nothing but what is to be said to them by the
persons appointed by the king. You will no doubt set the coming of the two
distant governors in its full light and force, and that the sentiments of four
provinces will be upon this occasion communicated to them publicly, solemnly,
and in presence of one another, that every nation may be apprized of the king's
gracious intention toward them.

We are, Sir, Your most humble servants, THOMAS BOON, ARTHUR DOBBS, FRANCIS
FAUQUIER.


John Stuart, Esquire superintendent of Indian affairs in the southern department,
at Augusta.

WEDNESDAY, October 18th.
YESTERDAY in the evening arrived an express from John Stuart, Esquire
superintendent, etc. with the following letter, talk, etc.

Letter from Mr. Stuart.
Letter from Mr. Stuart, to his excellency Thomas Boon, Esquire
Fort Augusta, 15th October, 1763. SIR,
I GOT to this fort the 11th current, Only 60 Indians (Catawbas) at Augusta,
the 11th of October.
where I found no other Indians than about sixty Catawbas, including women and
children, who had been here about two days before my arrival. On the
thirteenth, in the morning, I received a letter, by express, from lieutenant
Tailor, dated 10th, referring me to the intelligence contained in the enclosed
letter to your excellency, and which I imagine contains full accounts of what
passes in that nation. I likewise send a duplicate of the talk sent here from
the lower Creeks, by the messenger of whom Mr. Campbell wrote you, Little hopes
of getting the savages to Dorchester.
with lieutenant Barnard's answer; by which your excellency, and the other
governors, will be able to judge of their temper, and which gave me bad hopes
of success in endeavoring to persuade them to go further. An upper Creek
warrior, etc. arrive 14th Oct and with them the Chicasah leader, and a
principal headman of the Chactahs.
Yesterday in the morning, the upper Creek warrior Mustisicah, with the second
man of the Tuckabatchies, and a number of their followers, came here; with them
were, the leader of the Chicasahs, Pia-mattah; one considerable leading man of
the Chactah nation called Red-Shoes, and about twenty Chicasahs of note, and
their followers: Colbert, who had arrived some days before them, informed me,
that his reception, in the Chactah nation, had been most friendly; that many of
the most considerable amongst them had determined to accompany him down, but
upon receiving news that two of their people were killed by the Creeks, Two
Chactahs killed by the Creeks.
none thought proper to venture except this Red-Shoes. Colbert adds, that the
treatment which he and the Chicasahs received, Creeks insolent to the Chicasahs
and Colbert their interpreter
in their way through the Creek nation, was extremely insolent, and had made
those Indians extremely anxious to return home; accordingly, they pressed me
much to dispatch them: I invited them to come to the fort this day, Chicasahs,
Creeks and Catawbas acquainted with the change of place.
with the Catawbas and Creeks; I acquainted them with the alteration of the
place of meeting proposed, and the reasons for it. The Chicasah leader said, he
had come a great way upon my invitation, and found himself disappointed;
Chicasah leader refuses to go further, yet not displeased.
that he was too much tired to go any farther, and should return without taking
any thing amiss; that such accidents were often not to be avoided; that he was
glad he had seen me; and whenever he should promise me any thing, I might
depend upon meeting with no disappointment. The next who spoke, was the second
man of the Creeks, who said, that he had come punctually at the time, and to
the place of appointment, and expected to have seen the governors; that it was
their hunting season, when they should have been in the woods providing for
their families, but that their time was taken up in this visit, which they
should not think lost, if I would deliver the king's talk to them, and dispatch
them immediately; that several of their own people had promised to attend the
meeting, who were not come, but that it seemed to be the present prevailing
custom for men to speak with two tongues. I repeated the reasons for altering
the place of meeting, which I enlarged upon as much as the subject would admit,
and desired they would let me know, after considering the affair maturely,
whether or not they would go to Dorchester: they did not hesitate a moment, but
positively refused to go one step further. Creeks also refuse to go further.
I then asked, if they would stay here 'till the return of a messenger I should
send to the governors? this, with great difficulty, the Creeks were prevailed
upon to consent to: they have agreed to wait here ten days, At last agree to
wait ten days for the return of an express.
at the expiration of which time, if they do not see the governors, or receive
the king's message from me, they are infallibly to go away. Lieutenant Barnard
sends an express to governor Wright, who will be acquainted with what has
passed, about the time this reaches your excellency's hands. The bearer,
Kalteisen, ^as undertaken to carry this with the greatest dispatch, and by him
I beg to be favored with your determination. By all the intelligence I can
pick up from the traders, the Creeks were never more disposed to a rupture, The
Creeks seem disposed for war.
than at this time; and as those who are now here, and who are supposed to be
the best affected to us of any, are so jealous, there cannot be any room to
hope, that others, who are hourly expected here, will consent to go down to
Dorchester: they are conscious of their bad behavior, Their Past ill behavior
makes them afraid to trust themselves further in the set^lements.
and (upon Indian principles) do not choose to put themselves any more in our
power, by going further into the settlements. The Wolf, and a deputation of
leading men, A party of them gone to Pensacola, to prescribe bounds to the
English there.
are now gone to Pensacola, to circumscribe the limits of the garrison within
such a narrow compass as will hardly allow them garden room.

The Chicasahs knew the determination of the Creeks to go no farther than this
place (as all the Indians had received intimation of the alteration proposed,
They were before apprized of the alteration of place.
and had consulted upon it, before they spoke with me). Pia mattah considered,
that, Chieasah leader's remark, in case the Creeks should return disgusted.
if the Creeks should return disgusted, it would be dangerous for him and his
people to remain here, and return through their country after them; it was from
this consideration that he refused to go down, although he has many other
objections of seeming weight, which, however, I should have got the better of,
if this material one had not occurred.

I find it absolutely impracticable to satisfy these Indians now here,
Impossible to satisfy the Indians (...) Sir Jeffery Amherst's allowance of
provisions.
with the allowance of provisions stipulated by Sir Jeffery Amherst. They have
always been used to a very different treatment; and such an innovation,
introduced by me, would give a very unfavourable impression of me at my first
entrance on the execution of my office; besides, they would be disgusted, Such
an innovation, at this time, would be dangerous.
and would probably go off; which I would by all possible means avoid, 'till I
am made acquainted with the determination of yourself and the other governors,
it being the general opinion of people here, that, in such an event, a Creek
war would immediately take place, and by the intelligence I can procure I think
it probable they are right.

Matters being in this situation, I have not sent any directions for the boats
with the presents to return, because that may be done in sufficient time, after
the return of the express, for them to be at Dorchester, if any congress do
take place there. I have the honor of being, with the greatest respect, Sir,

Your excellency's Most obedient and Most humble servant, His excellency Thomas
Boon, Esquire

JOHN STUART.

Copy of the lower Creeks talk, alluded to in Mr. Stuart's letter.
16th September, 1763.
Talk from the lower Creeks.
WE, headmen of the lower Creeks has heard bad talks, and are desirous to hear
the truth. When we were young men, the governor of Charlestown always spoke
good and friendly to us, and told us that the path should be straight and white
to the nation; and it is our desire it should so continue, They make
professions of friendship to the English.
and to let the governors see our good intentions. We, headmen of the lower
towns, will still hold the English fast by the hand; it is the great God above
that gave us the knowledge so to do. We have heard a word amongst us, which has
put us in a fright, and don't know what to do 'till we hear the truth. But are
alarmed at some bad talks spread among them.
We were intending down to Augusta, 'till this news came up amongst us; for we
saw the great king's talk, and it was a very good one; we all got together to
hear it, and, agreeable to the white people's desire, we intended to go down;
it was not we lower towns only that were sent for, it was all the English
friends, the upper towns, the Chicasahs, Chactahs, etc. We hear the upper towns
does not intend to go down; and we are afraid, that if only we lower towns go,
we might be detained 'till the upper towns came down, And afraid to lose their
horses.
and thereby might lose our horses. These three rivers are all one people, and
the upper towns does not want to go down; but we don't throw away the white
people's talk; and we desire the governors to send us word, Therefore desire to
be dispatched.
whether we lower towns may be dispatched when we go down. When the governors
sees this talk, they may consider, and think that we have some reason for not
coming down at the time appointed. It seems you keep your talk very private,
but there is nothing to be hid from we red people: there was a red man from the
Tuckabatchies went down with the white people, and when he got to Augusta, the
white people desired him to go back immediately, and he came away according to
their desire; as he returned back, he overtook a gang of pack-horses, and kept
company with them to the Oakmuljees, and a white man told him several things,
but whether it be true or not we cannot tell; this man that brings us this
news, is an old man, and would not tell lies: we have heard, They suspect that
the governors want their lands.
that the governor of Charlestown intends to buy our lands from us, as far as
Ogeechie, and as high up as Broad-River; and the governor of Savannah intends
to buy from us, as far as the fork of Alatamaha; and the governor of
North Carolina intends to buy as far as the Okonies: we lower people desired
this man not to speak of this to any of the towns where the murder was
committed, but keep it secret 'till we heard the truth: and we have sent down a
red man with the white man, and we desire that the red man and white man may be
paid for their trouble.

All at present from Your friends, Indian ALECK, Cussitahs. HOYANEY, Cheehaws.
WHITE-CABIN, ditto. WAR KING, ditto. SCOTCHMAN, Cussitahs.



Lieutenant Barnard's talk to captain Aleck, Hoyaney, White Cabin, War King,
Scotchman, and other headmen and warriors of the lower Creek towns.

THE talk you sent by Samuel Thomas and one of your own people, Lieut,
Barnard's Answer to the lower Creeks talk.
I shall forward to the governors by the first opportunity: but as you require
an answer forthwith, I acquaint you, that there is not one word of truth
Endeavors to assure them, that the bad talks they have heard are all false.
in what you have heard. You have seen the great king's talk, and say it is a
good one; hold fast by that, and you will have nothing to fear. The great king
Exhorts them to hold fast the great king's.
is desirous of making you a happy people; and the governors and beloved men
who are to meet you at Augusta, invite you, with all their other friends and
brothers of the red people, to convince you of his good intentions, and not to
ask for your lands; they don't want any of your lands: you see it is the great
king's talk, that you shall keep your lands, and you may rely on his word,
Declares that their lands are not wanted
he never alters.

You Will soon be convinced, when you see the governors and beloved men at the
meeting, that they only want to brighten the chain of friendship with their
friends and brothers the red people, and to give them a few presents, Reminds
them that they are to receive presents.
to let them see that the great king remembers his red people as well as his
white children.

Continue in your first mind, come down and see the governors; And entreats
them to meet the governors.
they will be here at the time appointed; your hearts will be glad, and you
will return home with joy.

You must not give ear to such talks, they are made by bad designing people;
the white people will never throw you away, but continue your fast friends for
ever.

From your friend, etc.


PRESENT, Their excellencies Governor THOMAS BOON, Their excellencies Governor
ARTHUR DOBBS, And, His honor lieutenant governor FRANCIS FAUQUIER,


Mr. Stuart's letter, Creek talk, and Mr. Barnard's reply, being read, the
following letter and talk were agreed on, and sent by an express, in answer,
etc.

Charlestown, South Carolina, 18th October, 1763. SIR,
WE last night received your letter of the 15th instant, Letter to Mr. Stuart.
and are sorry you meet with any difficulty in bringing the Indians down to
Dorchester. From your account, we have little reason to suppose, that the
congress will be general, and if that is the case, it cannot be so effectual as
was intended: But, The governors resolve, in spite of all difficulties, to go
by land to Augusta.
that we may be liable to no blame, in spite of the inconveniences which
present themselves on every side, in spite of the impossibility which Kalteisen
represents of getting a wagon to Augusta, we have resolved to set out as soon
as possible; and give you this information by express, that the Indians now
there may wait with less impatience. As those with you knew several nations
were to be invited, could they think it probable, that all would be punctual to
the time? the Cherokees were not at Fort Prince-George the 10th; Must wait the
return of Col. Randolph's vessel from Georgia;
and though we must wait the return of Col. Randolph's vessel, we apprehend,
that some Indians will be after us at Augusta: for the satisfaction of those
now assembled, we enclose a talk, which you will deliver them, and use your
endeavors to prevail upon them to stay 'till our arrival; but if you cannot
succeed, we must beg you to let us know by express, that we may not, by
proceeding to Augusta, encounter difficulties, and suffer inconvenience, Yet
propose to (...) out on monday October 24th.
to no purpose. We hope to set out by monday at farthest, and are,

SIR, Your most humble servants, THOMAS BOON, ARTHUR DOBBS, FRANCIS FAUQUIER.

We have detained Mr. Kalteison, to conduct us to Augusta.



John Stuart, Esquire superintendent of Indian affairs in the southern department,
at Augusta.

Copy of the talk enclosed to Mr. Stuart, for the Indians at Augusta.

Talk to detain the Indians at Augusta, 'till the governors arrive there.
WE, the governors to the great King George, of his colonies of South and
North Carolina, and Virginia, entertained hopes of seeing our brothers of the
Indians nations at Dorchester in South Carolina, there to brighten the chain of
friendship between the white and red men, according to the directions we have
received from the great king, our common father, for that purpose: which chain
we are desirous to hold fast by one end; and if you are inclined to lay strong
hold on the other, nothing hereafter will be able to break a single link of it,
and our friendship will last, as long as the sun shall shine, or the waters
flow. And to convince you, that our talk is straight, and that we do not talk
with double tongues, we are determined to set out to meet you at Augusta, since
you find the difficulties so great to come so near to Charlestown: no
difficulties can stop us, the great king's appointed governors, from executing
his orders.

We have been informed of the evil news you have heard, And an assurance given,
that there is no intention to get their lands from them.
that the governors intended to possess your lands. We take this opportunity to
assure you, in the king's name, that you have been misled, by ignorant people,
who do not know the great king's intention, which has been communicated to us,
his officers; and that no such intention is harbored in the breast of any of
us. The great king's design, in ordering all his governors to act in concert as
one man, and in inviting all the nations bordering on these colonies, to hear
his talk, was directly contrary to what you have heard; for we shall there
declare, that your lands will not be taken from you; and this is to be done
before you all, and not in secret, that no nation of Indians may be ignorant of
his gracious intentions, and of his fatherly care of the red as well as the
white. We have sent this talk previous to our coming, but which we shall follow
immediately, to convince you of our sincerity, and to induce you to remain at
Augusta, till our arrival; that the great king's orders may be strictly
complied with.

Done at Charlestown, South Carolina, 18th of October, 1763. THOMAS BOON,
ARTHUR DOBBS, FRANCIS FAUQUIER.

By their Excellencies command, FENWICKE BULL, secretary.


And then the under written letter was sent, by express, to his excellency
governor Wright.

Charlestown, South Carolina, 18th October, 1763. SIR,
HAVING last night received a letter from Mr. Stuart, mentioning the
dis-inclination of the Indians, now assembled at Augusta, Letter to governor
Wright, to acquaint him of the resolution of the other governors to meet him at
Augusts
to proceed downwards to Dorchester; that nothing may be wanting on our parts,
to fulfill his majesty's directions, we have agreed to set out for Augusta by
monday at farthest.

And, as Mr. Stuart informs us, that you are apprized, by lieutenant Barnard,
of the Indians resolution to come no further, we take it for granted we shall
meet you at Augusta.

We are, With great regard, Sir, Your Excellency's Most obedient and Most
humble servants, THOMAS BOON, ARTHUR DOBBS, FRANCIS FAUQUIER.


His excellency James Wright, Esquire

The ways and means to raise the supplies to pay contingencies, such as
expresses, etc. etc. etc. being debated and duly considered, An expedient
approved for raising money to defray the contingent charged of this congress.
an expedient was approved of, which the following letter fully explains, viz.

Charlestown, South Carolina, 18th October, 1763. SIR,
WE have this day drawn a bill of exchange on you, for one hundred pounds
sterling, at thirty days sight, in favor of Robert Raper, Esquire in consequence
of your letter of the 11th June, to governor Boon, regarding the Indian
presents, which arrived safe; presuming that, by this time, you are in cash for
their amount, and that the residue of the money given for this service remains
in your hands. If we should be mistaken, we beg you will present our bills to
the secretary of state, that they be duly honored; for no other method is
pointed out to us how we should defray the contingencies of this southern
congress*

We are, Sir, Your very humble servants, THOMAS BOON, ARTHUR DOBBS, FRANCIS
FAUQUIER.


Mr. Samuel Smith, merchant, Cateaton-street, London.

Bill drawn on Mr. Samuel Smith, in London.
Excha. L. 100 sterling. Charlestown, 18th Oct. 1763. SIR,
AT thirty days sight, pay this first of our exchange (second and third of the
same tenor and date not paid) to Robert Raper, Esquire or his order, the sum of one
hundred pounds sterling, being for value received of him, for the contingencies
to the southern congress.

We are, Sir, Your humble servants, THOMAS BOON, ARTHUR DOBBS, FRANCIS
FAUQUIER.


To Mr. Samuel Smith, Cateaton-street, London.
Which bill being ordered to be sold, The bill sold, and money vested in F.
Bull, who is appointed treasurer.
the secretary, Fenwicke Bull, did sell the same to Mr. Raper, for seven
hundred and twenty-one pounds currency, the present price of exchange; and the
said money was ordered to be vested in the hands of the said Fenwick Bull, as
treasurer, to enable him to answer contingent demands relative to this southern
congress, and that he be accountable for the same.

THURSDAY, October 20th.
ARRIVED Col. Randolph from Georgia, Col. Randolph arrived from Georgia.
in the scout-boat, and brought the following letter from his excellency James
Wright:

Letter from governor Wright.
Savannah, 18th October, 1763. GENTLEMEN,
I HAD the honor to receive yours of the 14th instant last night, by colonel
Randolph, and another this morning by Joyner. And had the Indians proceeded
down to Dorchester, I should have set off immediately for Charlestown, in
order to have contributed, to the utmost of my power, every thing that might
appear necessary on the occasion: but this morning I received letters from
Augusta, in which Mr. Stuart acquaints me, That, after explaining to the
Indians the motives that induced the governors to alter the place of meeting,
he put the question, The Indians flatly refuse to proceed to Dorchester.
whether or not they would proceed to Dorchester? to which both the Chicasahs
and Creeks answered flatly in the negative; that he then desired to know, if
they would wait the return of an express, which he would immediately dispatch
to the governors? which they also at first refused, but, after much persuasion,
he had prevailed on them to wait the ten days; at the expiration of which time
they will undoubtedly go away, if none of the governors get there.

I am therefore to acquaint your excellencies, Mr. Wright therefore continues
determined for Augusta.
that, agreeable to what I wrote you in my last, I shall proceed to Augusta,
instead of doing myself the pleasure of waiting upon you in Charlestown.

I am, With great regard, Gentlemen, Your excellencies Most obedient and Most
humble servant, JAMES WRIGHT.

Their excellencies Thomas Boon and Arthur Dobbs, Esqrs. and the honorable
Francis Fauquier, Esquire

Letter from Mr. Stuart.
Fort Augusta, 20th October, 1763. GENTLEMEN,
LAST night I was honored with your excellencies letter of 15th current,
enclosing a copy of governor Wright's letter of 11th and your answer; and
before now governor Boon must have received my letter of 16th, by express, in
which I fully informed him of my transactions with the Indians, Lower Creeks
and Cherokees expected at Augusts 20th of October.
and of their absolute refusal to proceed to Dorchester. The lower Creeks and
Cherokees will be here this day, being only a few miles off. The upper Creeks,
of whom a considerable number are here, Upper Creeks persist in their
resolution, which governs the Chicasahs.
remain firm in their determination to proceed no further into the settlements,
and their resolution will determine the Chicasahs.

A regard to your excellencies convenience, induced me to acquiese in your
proposal of altering the place of meeting, and to use my utmost endeavors to
reconcile the Indians to that measure, Mr. Stuart suspects the Indians to be
privately tampered with by the traders.
although I then expressed a doubt of being able to prevail on the Creeks to
proceed further into the settlements, having had no intelligence from the upper
Creeks, Chactahs, and Chicasahs, or answer to the invitation I sent them, on
the part, and by order, of the king, to meet your excellencies and me, upon the
special service we have in charge. I could not be certain of success, and I did
not doubt but your excellencies had resolved on the measures to be pursued by
you in case of a disappointment. I am conscious of having done my duty, by
endeavoring to remove their jealousies, and using every argument that occurred
to me, to induce them to proceed. If the Indians be privately tampered with
(which I suspect) it must be by the traders, the very channel through which I
am obliged to converse with them. My best endeavors to engage the good offices
of the traders, And doubts his own influence as superintendent.
on this occasion, have and shall not be wanting; but my influence may possibly
be very insufficient, for, as matters are now situated, they have nothing to
fear or hope from my authority as superintendent: but perhaps Mr. Wright's
endeavors may be more efficacious, and I learn that he is soon expected.

Upon the whole, as I shall use all possible means to accomplish what I came
about, if I fail, I hope to be free from censure and blame.

I have the honor of being, with the greatest respect, Gentlemen, Your
excellency's Most obedient and Most humble servant, JOHN STUART.
Their excellencies Thomas Boon, Arthur Dobbs, and Francis Fauquier, Esqurs.
P. S. The Cherokees are just arrived. I am sorry to hear, that a boat with some
presents on board her is sunk in this river: A boat with presents sunk in
Savannah-river.
I send down two boats to lighten the rest, which are said to be too deep
loaded; which, however, shall not prevent any directions you may think fit to
send, relative to the presents, being complied with.




Another letter from the superintendent.
Fort Augusta, 23d October, 1763. GENTLEMEN,
On the 21st, late at night, I had the honor of receiving your excellencies
letter of 18th instant. Creeks and Chicasahs will not go one step further.
I am sorry to acquaint you, that my endeavors to carry the Indians to
Dorchester have proved unsuccessful. The Creeks and Chicasahs will not hear of
going one step further. About seventy upper Creeks at Augusta.
Of the upper Creeks, there are now here about seventy, including some women.
There will be a few from the lower towns of that nation, who are now at Mr.
Galphin's.

Agreeable to your excellencies desire, The superintendent convenes the Indians
at the Creek camp, and delivers them the governors talk.
I went yesterday to the Creek camp, where I convened the Chicasahs, Catawbas,
and the Chactaw king. I delivered to them your excellencies talk, and, having
waited some time, desired to know their answer: They told me, they had no
particular answer to give; that they had heard your talk, and should think of
it. They are dilatory in giving an answer.
I was surprised at the indifferent dissatisfied behavior of the Creeks; but I
soon after discovered the cause; the Interpreter came to me ^n less than an
hour after I left them, and acquainted me, that all the Creeks were setting out
on their return home: The Creeks resolve to go home.
One of their nation, who, Their motive discovered.
for many years, had resided in the Chicasah camp near th^^ place, went to his
country men yesterday in the morning, and told them, that we had determined to
take revenge for the late murders committed by the Mortar, and that some
particular people amongst them were pitched upon as the sacrifice; they were
naturally alarmed, and would have all gone off without my knowing the reason,
if the affair had not been made known to us by the Chicasah leader. By
Pis-mattah the Chicasah leader.
I immediately sent for some of their headmen, Headmen of the Cree^^ s^^^ for,
to be undeceived.
who I endeavored to convince, that what had been told them was false; and
desired, that the Indian from whom they had received their information, should
be brought to the fort this forenoon, that I may have an opportunity of talking
to him before their faces: I look for him in less than an hour.

The Cherokees are all arrived, The Cherokees all arrived, about 3^0.
about three hundred, including women and Reason why the Great-war^ior is not
among them.
children; almost all the headmen in the upper and lower towns are amongst
them. The Great-Warrior sends word, by the Little Carpenter, that the Creeks
have bad intentions, and that his presence at home is absolutely necessary, to
prevent his young men from going to war against them; that this is the true
cause of his not being here, and not any jealousy or doubt of his personal
safety.

The Indians being perpetually going and coming, The total number of Indians at
Augusta not quite certain.
I cannot be exact as to numbers, but think there are five hundred or more,
including the lower Chicasahs.

If your excellencies have any particular commands, I shall, with the greatest
cheerfulness, execute them, being,

With the greatest respect, Gentlemen, Your excellency's Most obedient and Most
humble servant, JOHN STUART.

Their excellencies Thomas Boon, Arthur Dobbs, and Francis Fauquier, Esqrs.

Copy of Mr. Colbert's journal, as enclosed in the superintendent's letter to
the governors, viz.

Augusta, July 13th, 1763. I SET out with an express for the upper Creeks,
Colbert's Journal.
Chactahs, and Chicasahs:

19th. I arrived in the Oakchoys, and called all the headmen of the upper
Creeks together, and was well treated there by pointing their guns at me.

23d. I set out for the Chactah nation. On the way I met with Mr. John Buckles,
and three Chactahs, one of which went back with me.

29th. I arrived in the Chactah nation; and on my arrival I called all the
headmen of the Chactahs together, and there delivered my message: but none of
the headmen of the French party would come to hear it. The talk was very
agreeable to them of the English party, and they all with one consent agreed to
come down.

August 3d. I arrived in the Chicasah nation. Two days before my arrival there,
A Chactah killed by the Creeks.
there came a Chactah fellow from the Breed camp, giving an account, that the
Creeks had killed the Chactah that went to the Breed camp with Mr. Buckles, The
Chicasah kill three French men, a Indian women, and take a negro boy.
and that he, the same fellow, narrowly made his escape. Four Chicasahs that
had been at war, and having strayed from the rest of their gang, came on a camp
of people, and killed three Frenchmen and two Indian women, and took a negro
boy alive.

On the 5th of August. I had a talk with the headmen of the Chicasahs, and they
were all agreed thereto.

12th. A runner came to me from the Chactahs, and acquainted me, that none of
them would go down, on account of the Creeks being at war with them.

13th. This day I sent a runner back. And on the 22d I received an answer, that
none of them would go down, by reason of the Creeks killing one of their
people, and threatening destruction to them all; and that, if they should go
down, it might be a detriment to their brethren the Chicasahs, for which reason
they referred it, and concluded to go to war, to take satisfaction for the man
The Chicasahs determine to go to war against the Creeks.
they lost.

August 25th. Three traders killed by the Creeks, and their goods taken.
News came from the Creeks, that three white men were killed, and all their
goods taken; and that the Mortar threatened to kill every white man that should
come up to the Chicasah nation.

28th. A headman came from the Chactahs, and desired the Chicasahs to act for
them as they would for themselves, and the Chactahs would stand to every thing
or proposal, the same as if they themselves were present. The Chactahs request
the Chicasahs to act for them at the congress.


30th. The Chicasahs held a council, whether it was proper for them to go down
or no; and, after five days deliberation, they concluded to go down, and
pitched on the seventh day of September for their setting off.

September 17th. The Creeks threaten to kill the Chicasahs.
I arrived at the Breed camp, and there met with very bad talks, hearing of the
Creeks threatening to kill the Chicasahs.

23d. I set out from the Breed camp.

25th. I arrived in the Waukakoes, with the Chicasahs, and was well treated
there.

26th. I arrived in the Oakchoys, with the Chicasahs. And there I invited the
Oakchoy king down: Oakchoy king's reason for not attending the governors.
All the reason he had for his not coming, was, that the governor would not
send him a negro boy, to mind his stock while he came to see the governor.

27th. The Chicasahs had a talk in the Oakchoy square, giving very good talks:
And the Oakchoy king told the Chicasahs, that if it was good talks that the
governors gave below, it would be better times than ever has been; but if bad
talks, he would not cut his land in pieces and give it away to the white people
for nothing.

WEDNESDAY, November 2d, 1763.
ARRIVED at fort Moore on Savannah river, Governors Boon, Dobbs. and Fauquier,
arrive from Charlestown, at fort Moore
in the province of South Carolina, their excellencies Thomas Boon, Arthur
Dobbs, and the honorable Francis Fauquier, Esqrs. etc. etc. etc. from
Charlestown; when their excellencies sent over to Augusta, Governor Wright
Informed thereof, etc.
to his excellency governor Wright, to inform him of their arrival, and that
they proposed to meet him the next day, at the king's fort in Augusta, at ten
o'clock in the morning, to proceed to business.

And his excellency governor Wright, They agree to meet at Augusta tomorrow.
by return of the said messenger, informed their excellencies of his readiness
to meet them agreeable to their proposal.

AUGUSTA in GEORGIA, THURSDAY November 3d, H. 10.
PRESENT, The governors (...) at Augusta.
Their excellencies governors JAMES WRIGHT, THOMAS BOON, ARTHUR DOBBS,
His honor lieutenant governor FRANCIS FAUQUIER, with JOHN STUART, Esquire
superintendent, etc. of southern Indian affairs.


A TALK was prepared, A talk prepared, agreed to, and engrossed, to be
delivered to the Indians
agreed on, and ordered to be engrossed. And the several interpreters were
ordered to inform the respective Indians, that the congress would be opened the
next day, being friday the 4th, at ten in the morning.

At which time the governors attended to give their talk: But the upper Creeks,
Request of the upper Creeks.
having a desire to consult the lower Creeks, requested that it might be
postponed 'till saturday the 5th, at the same hour and place: Which delay,
however extraordinary, as they were only to hear, they were notwithstanding
gratified in.

AUGUSTA, SATURDAY November 5th.
PRESENT Esqrs.
Their excellencies
JAMES WRIGHT, ARTHUR DOBBS, THOMAS BOON,
His honor FRANCIS FAUQUIER, And, JOHN STUART,
INDIANS.
Upper and lower CHICASAHS
HOPAYAMATAHAH POUCHERIMATAHAH HOUPASTUBAH PIAMATAH HOPAYAMINGO HOURATIMATAHAH
HOPAYAMINGO (Jockey's son) And twenty more warriors.
CHACTAHS.
RED-SHOES CHAPP HOMAH.
Upper and lower CREEKS.
Capt. ALECK SYMPOYAFFEE BOHOTCHER, SAUSECHAW BOYSON^CKA HILLIBEESUNAGA
FIRMICHO POYHUCHER POYHUCHEE And their followers.
Cherokees.
Over Hills
ATTAKULLAKULLA OUSTENEKA PRINCE of CHOTIH WILLANAWAH ONATOI SKIAGUSTA of
Chotih MOITOI,
Lower towns
TIFTOWIH of Keehowee The WOLF HOUKONATA MANKILLER of Keehowee Good WARRIOR of
^statowih Young WARRIOR of ditto WARRIOR of Tuxoweh, etc.
WILL, headman of Whatogah, etc. etc. etc. Middle Settlement
Col. AIRS And his followers. CATAWBAS.
Total number of Indians about seven hundred. Interpreters
James Colbert, for the Chicasahs and Chactahs. John Butler, James Beamer, John
Watts, for the Cherokees. Stephen Forest, John Proctor, for the Creeks.



And they being sworn, Col. Airs, the Catawba chief, was allowed to interpret
for his nation.

THE conference was opened by governor Wright, The congress opened by governor
Wright.
in consequence of its being held in his own province. He observed to the
Indians, that the day was fair, and hoped that the talks would not prove
otherwise; that the several governors had pitched upon capt. Stuart to deliver
their sentiments; that they were agreed upon the declarations to be made to the
Indians; and desired them to pay attention to what Mr. Stuart uttered,
Attention to Mr. Stuart recommended.
as they were the words of all the governors. And each respective governor, for
himself, desired the Indians to look upon what Mr. Stuart said, as said by the
respective governor himself. Mr. Stuart accordingly begun as follows:

Talk to the Indians.
Friends and brothers,
WE are come here in the name, and by the command of the great King George,
who, under God, the master and giver of breath, is your and our common father
and protector.

The talk you are now to hear, Commanded by the king.
is from the great king, and ordered to be delivered to you by four governors
of different provinces, Superintendent to be regarded as the mouth of the four
governors.
and the superintendent, who is equally connected with all; for this reason, he
is pitched upon to be our mouth.

Our words, Their unanimity.
our hearts, our intentions are the same; as our respective provinces join
together, so are our interests inseparable.

No conference was ever intended to be more general, Conference Intended to be
general;
none more friendly.

This is not a partial meeting of one nation of Indians, Not a partial one.
with one governor; but the great king's good disposition toward his red
children, is to be communicated to you, in the presence of one another.

His goodness is as extensive as the dominions he possesses; Great goodness of
the king to the Indians.
at a time when he has nothing to apprehend from any enemies, he opens his arms
to receive his red children; Who have been deceived by.
and he does it the rather at this juncture, as he knows the insinuations and
falsehoods, which have been formerly circulated among you, by the perfidious and
cruel French.

We desire you to recollect, And dupes to the French.
in how many instances they have misled and deceived you; you well remember
their lies, and have been the dupes of their promises.

They are never easy, The French restless mischievous incendiaries.
unless engaged in mischief themselves, or when engaging others; incapable of
supplying your wants, they endeavor to detach you, from your best and only
friends the English.

The great king, The great king's intentions explained
who wishes to extend the commerce of his subjects, to live in peace and
friendship, and relieve the distress of all mankind, bore with uncommon
patience, His patience with the French,
the repeated insults and excessive cruelties, which the French alone could
perpetrate; to cruelty they added treachery and perfidy: fair speeches were in
their mouths, Who are not to be trusted.
but mischief in their hearts; and when they did not act openly themselves,
they deceived and instigated the red people to outrages, which could only end
in separating them from the white people, with whom they ought, for the
advantage of both, to be united.

At length, His moderation described.
when the great king saw his moderation disregarded, his children plundered and
destroyed, and that the French were resolved to contend with him for
superiority, that one country in short, could not hold them both: he then
exerted himself like a man; And his power, in soon subduing the French and
Spaniards.
and, in a short time, defeated and humbled that perfidious enemy, and also the
Spaniards, who, by the fatal and mischievious practices of the French, had been
involved in the quarrel.

The king has now given peace to both nations; He gives them peace.
and to prevent the revival of such disturbances and troubles, by repetitions
of such dangerous proceedings, and for this purpose only, And fixes their
boundaries.
he insisted, in the treaty of peace, that the French and Spaniards should be
removed beyond the river Missisippi, that the Indians and white people may,
hereafter, live in peace and brotherly friendship together: It will be your
faults, Fault of the Indians, If they do not live in peace with the English.
if this does not happen, for we are authorized by the great king, to give you
the most substantial proofs of our good intentions, and desire to live like
brothers with you.

If you bring the same friendly disposition, what can you desire more, than a
repetition of the assurances already given you, Indians lands not to be invaded.
by the king's orders, with regard to your lands; which we now from our hearts
confirm.

Do we not act like friends and brothers, when we declare, that all past
offenses shall be buried in oblivion and forgivenness; All past offenses
forgiven.
and this we do, because we are persuaded, that the French imposed on your
credulity, and deceived you.

Do you wish for any thing more, The Indians shall have plenty of goods but
must protect the traders.
than to be plentifully supplied with goods, by the white people, who alone can
supply you; this we promise you, but it must also depend on yourselves, for
those nations where traders reside, must provide for their security, or no man
will stay with them.

Besides this, Justice promised them upon all occasions.
we engage as far as we can for ourselves, and those under our control, to
manifest an attention to your interests, and a readiness to do you justice upon
all occasions.

Lastly, And the forts ceded to us, shall be employed for their protection.
we promise you faithfully and solemnly, that those forts now ceded to us by
the French, shall be employed for your protection, assistance and convenience;
and for the better carrying on trade with you, by which we all shall be
benefitted.

Consider now like wise men, The Indians admonished to consider of the
Indulgences shown them.
whether this is the language of ill designing people; whether there is any
occasion at this time, to make you such friendly assurances, unless it was our
intention to keep our words.

The white people value themselves on speaking truth; The congress ordered to
be so general, to prevent jealousies.
but to give still greater weight to what we say, the great king has thought
proper, as we observed before, that his four governors and the superintendent,
from a great distance, should utter the same words, at the same time; and to
remove every umbrage or jealousy, that you should all hear them, in presence of
one another, and bear testimony for one another, in case we should ever act
contrary to our declarations.

Given at Augusta in the province of Georgia, 5th of November 1763. JAMES
WRIGHT, THOMAS BOON, ARTHUR DOBBS, FRANCIS FAUQUIER, JOHN STUART.

By order of their Excellencies, FENWICKE BULL, secretary.
His excellency James Wright, Assistant secr^^^ry appointed.
Esquire informed the other governors, that, if their secretary, Fenwicke Bull, was
in want of an assistant, to copy talks or any business relative to the
congress, he had with him an able gentleman, Mr. Box, secretary for Indian
affairs in his province of Georgia; and he was, for the sake of dispatch,
employed accordingly.

And then the congress was adjourned to monday the 7th November, Congress
adjourned to Nov. 7th.
eleven o'clock in the morning, at which time the Indians promised to give
their talk.

Indian talks.
The TALKS of the CHICASAH, Upper and Lower CREEK, CHACTAH, CHEROKEE, and
CATAWBA INDIANS, to their excellencies JAMES WRIGHT, Esquire governor of GEORGIA,
ARTHUR DOBBS, Esquire governor of NORTH CAROLINA, THOMAS BOON, Esquire governor of
SOUTH CAROLINA, The hon. FRANCIS FAUQUIER, Esquire lieut. governor of VIRGINIA, And
JOHN STUART, Esquire agent and superintendent of southern Indian affairs,
At fort Augusta, monday the 7th and tuesday the 8th of November, 1763.
James Colbert, interpreter for the Chicasahs.

PIAMATAH, The Chicasahs.
a Chicasah leader, delivered himself to the following effect:

That he had been here a long time, and would give his talk first, and then
give leave to the Creeks; that the day was at length come on which he hoped to
see his dearly beloved brother of Charles Town, They rejoice to see the
governors.
and also the other governors; and now the day is come he will give his talk.
That he is come to return thanks for the services already done them; Return
thanks for past favors.
and says, if it had not been for the assistance of their excellencies, he
should not have been here at this time: He was the man that sent express, when
in want of things, and is ready to give any proofs of his attachment to the
English; Are ready to give any proofs of the^r attachment to the English.
you must not look on him as on other Indian nations, And though few, are
faithful.
for he is true and trusty; he and his, are few, but faithful: That he has no
fault to find, as none has been found with them; that we have of late heard of
no mischief being done by the Chicasahs; that he looks on the white people and
them as one; that they are as good friends as if they had sucked one breast.
Although his skin is not white, his heart is so, and as much so as any white
man. He has now done on that subject, and will proceed to something else.

He wants not to imitate other Indian nations, Disapprove the conduct of other
indians.
and declares he cannot do without the white people, and that he believes it is
the same case with all the red people: He cannot find out the reason why other
red people are not as he is, Reasons assigned for the frequent disturbances
that happen between the white and red people.
he leaves it to the governors to find it; yet he will give you his sentiments,
viz. He and every one with him are of opinion, that so many white men being
among the Indians, as traders, is the occasion thereof, and he thinks in time
it may be his case to act like other red people; the great numbers of traders
create disturbances between the red and the white people; he has a very great
regard for the white people, but they have not for one another. This is from
his heart, and he hopes to be believed; the young people may become outrageous,
and mischief he done, because the traders will not stay in one place, and
before he can interpose, harm may happen; he hopes not to be doubted as to the
truth, he therefore desires, The headmen referred to.
that the headmen may be asked, and they will confirm what he says.

He never saw either of the governors, yet was always in their interest, as
having heard well of them, and is willing to convince them in any shape. They
desire an answer*
He has now given his talk, and would be glad of an answer.

Which request being considered, Which is promised them.
he was desired to proceed, and he should have an answer to the whole at once.
He then went on as follows, viz.

"Many white people go through his towns to trade with the Chactahs, They
desire the number of traders may be lessened,
he would not have the whole stopped, the number only lessened."

And upon his being asked, The name two, whom they would have continued,
what number would be sussicient to supply his own towns? he replied, "Heyrider
and John Brown were enough, and he desired no more."

POUCHIMATAHAH, the second man of the Chicasahs, then said, "It is not out of
any Ill Will to other traders, but that the two above mentioned have always
been with them; he is heartily glad to see his brothers here in health; and
that he only reminded his brother Piamatah relative to the above two traders."

Stephen Forest, interpreter for the Creeks.

CAPTAIN ALECK, The Creek's talk.
for the upper and lower Creeks, delivered himself thus,

He is glad to see you all here, and having received a good talk, will now give
his, viz.

Capt. Aleck spoke for the whole nation, being au^horised by the absent as well
as present.
It is not his own speech, but of the whole nation, put into his mouth by them;
the talk is much the same as formerly given, there is no need of variariation;
all the headmen, upper and lower, have given their talk, and heard that of the
governors with satissaction; and as for the absentees of the Creeks, they have
sent word they will abide by the proceedings of those present. To (...)
. Formerly they had a good talk from the great king George, and such shall
always remain with them; that the lower towns were always well inclined; and as
for the white people, he desires they may remain quiet among them.

TELLETCHER, Second Creek describes boundaries.
, the second Creek, then declared, "That the red people were formerly ignorant,
but God Almighty, and the king of England, had made them otherways; and
proposed, that the lands above the rocks, should remain unsettled; and that the
line, between the white people and the Indians hunting grounds, should run from
the rock, down to Savannah river; and the other way, from the said rock to Mr.
Galphin's cowpen; from thence to the lower ford on Ogeechie river, hear the
settlement of one Lambert; and from thence to cross to Sancta Sevilla, to the
Alatamaha river.

An Injunction,
Little-River by no means to be settled, but from thence. He talks nothing but
good talks, and hopes none others will, that the children in the place
described may grow up and flourish: The white people may settle the inside of
the river St. John's to Augustine.

The English to keep within the bounds that were prescribed to the Spaniards.
St. John's (a marsh) the Spaniards only possessed, the English must not exceed
the same bounds, as from thence is their hunting grounds: he has described the
bounds of the lands to the white people, and hopes they will make no
encroachments upon them.

And then Captain ALECK said, Aleck complains of his lands being run out.
, "That the lands he was settled upon, was run out, and as the governor of
Georgia knew nothing of it, he desires to know from the four governors, the
reasons of it." Then

TELLETCHER said, Bounds of Pensacola, and
That no settlement should be made by the white people at Pensacola, but within
the ebbing and flowing of the tide.

Mobile, described.
Mobile to be settled in the same manner, the tide to determine the line.

Traders to the Chicasahs not to be interrupted.
The path shall be kept open to the traders that are peaceable, of the Breed
(or Chicasah) nation: he is very glad to see the governors, and gives a good
talk, and hopes it will be received as such.

SYMPOYAFFEE (or Fool Harry) then said, Trading in the woods complained of.
, "As the governors had heard the rest of his nation, he hoped they would hear
him. And then desired them not to suffer any people to trade in the woods, but
to go into the towns to trade; no rum to be sold to the Indians in the woods,
Selling rum there a pernicious practice
because the young people there got drunk, and disposed of their skins for that
commodity, and so were rendered unable to pay their debts to the traders in the
nation, which frequently occasioned quarrels and mischief among them. Causes
quarrels, etc
, He speaks boldly before the whites and red, and that the reds often lend
runners for rum, which he desires may be prevented; and if the governors will
not forwarn the white people, If continued, the venders will suffer.
he will not kill them, but he will take all they have from them, and ask them
if they are French or Spaniards."

The YOUNG TWIN said, Young-Twin mentions his father, returns his commission,
gives his reason, and professes friendship.
"His father was a great man, he behaved well. When he died the white people
thought proper to receive him, eight years since, and none but bad talks have
been since then, because he was a boy. A commission was given him for peace,
but as blood has been spilt, he desires to return his commission, as he is not
minded in the nation, being young: 'though he gives up his commission, yet he
will hold his hand out to the white people."

MICOHATCHEE, Micohatchee produces his commission.
a Coweta king, informed, "That his brother died on the path, and that he went
to Savannah, and governor Wright gave him a commission, which he produced."

MUSTISIKAH, Creek talks end.
having declared to the same effect, finished the Creeks talk.

Capt. Chactahs talk.
. Colbert, interpreter for the Chactah's.

RED-SHOES declared, Red-Shoes declares himself a new friend
"He was a new friend, his talk is not long and he hopes 'twill be accepted.
The invitation sent us by the four governors and the great king, was received
cheerfully, and intended to be complied with by the whole nation; And affirms
his own and his nation's attachment to the English.
but an accident happened on the path, which prevented their coming down; he is
now come to affirm his attachment. He always was faithful, the peace between
the Chicasahs and him has been faithfully kept. Now he wants his nation to be
under the English, as well as other red people; and as a proof of his
sincerity, any thing required of their nation, he will, to the utmost of his
power, comply with."

Cherokees talk.
John Watts, interpreter for the Cherokee's.

JUDD'S-FRIEND desires he may be listened to, Judd's-Friend produces a
certificate of his having been in England, etc.
This is the day appointed, as well by the great being above as by the
governors; he is now as well with his red brothers as the white people; and
desires, the governors and Capt. Stuart may see the testimonial the great King
George presented to him in England, he has and always will take care of the
same; (which testimonial, is a certificate of his having been at the peace of
Williamsburgh in Virginia, and obtained leave to go home to England in a man of
war, was graciously received there, and sent back again in a ship of war.)

And then the PRINCE of Chotih said, Prince of Chotih desires the governors to
smoke before he begins.
"Now you governors are all here, and captain Stuart, he desires you will all
smoke, and then he will give his talk." And when they had all smoaked with him,
he proceeded and said, "Now you beloved men are met together; he is a beloved
man as well as you; he knows nothing that may happen, Says it is his house at
Chotih where the good talks are given
the being above only knows; he has a house at Chotih, where the beloved talks
are made, and all the warriors may hear; he has made a path from Chotih to the
English, he hopes nothing will ever spoil it; he gave a string of beads with
three knots, Gives a particular string of heads.
and said, the middle knot represented Fort Prince-George, the one end his town
of Chotih, the other Charlestown, and he hopes the talks and paths will always
be straight; the king George has sent a good talk, the path shall always be
kept straight to hear good talks."

Then ATTAKULLAKULLA, the Little-Carpenter, observed, "That it was a great
while since he heard the invitation, The Little-Carpenter speaks.
but he is now come, and will give his talk. You are all acquainted with his
good opinion of king George, and there is no need of repetition. 'Twas at his
own town he heard this invitation, Gives beads.
and he is now come, and is glad to see the several nations." (He gave a string
of beads) and then said. Mentions the cause of the Great-Warrior's absence.
The Great Warrior had a talk with him before he came away, but he is now gone
down the river to look after his people. The Great-Warrior sent beads, as a
testimony of his friendship for the white people, and good intentions toward
them. Presents beads from him.
(Gives the Warrior's beads.) Chotih is the beloved town, and there is none
other but good talks, he hopes to hear none else. He lives at the farthest
towns, and all that passes between the governors and him shall he remembered,
and the path kept straight. This is the day that the great being above made for
this purpose, and that we below know nothing. The great king sends his
messengers with all necessaries, and he hopes will always continue to supply
them. (Gives a belt of wampum.)

Some of the young men have been rogues, but it is over, and he hopes the
governors will forget it; he will endeavor it shall be no more repeated; he
pities all in distress, and will do all in his power to help them. (Gives
another belt of wampum.)

He hopes you are unanimous; he has lost some of his people, but as you
forgive, he will: He promises you, to make reparation for future injuries, and
hopes, you will do the same, and that there may be no more bad talks. (Gives a
string of beads.)

His (Over-Hills) brothers have sent down a string of beads with their talk,
which shall be a good one.

As we came along, many of the warriors of the Valley were at a loss to know,
Delivers a message and beads, from the Valley.
what the invitation meant, and they have sent beads to be informed. He has but
one tongue, and hopes that there will be none but good talks. He has lost Over
Hills men and Lower-Towns, yet he hopes the children now will grow up in peace.
(Gives a string of beads.)

It is very rare at his town to see any goods brought amongst them, which
distresses them much; Complains of the want of goods.
he expects to see goods brought amongst them, that they may purchase with
their skins, etc. As his people are now a hunting, if the traders will come
with goods, Promises safety to traders.
they shall with safety; if any thing happens, 'twill be supposed to be done by
the Northward Indians, enemies to the Cherokees as well as white people.

He is now to beg leave, Requests that traders may be sent over the mountains.
that a trade may be carried on over the mountains, and a price set on the
goods. Some people did come from Virginia, but had exhorbitant prices,
Complains of impositions by the Virginians. And,
and got their skins almost for nothing; they being in distress, he took little
notice then, as he was soon to see you; he did not know, Desires to know if
they are encouraged by the governors.
but that the governors had given such orders as respected the prices; but as
he was present before the governors, he wanted the matter cleared up. And then
he,

ATTAKULLAKULLA, Gives a talk to the Indians.
gave a talk to the several Indian nations, viz.

He has now met all the red people of various nations, and will now give his
talk to them. He has heard a many lies from the Coosahs, and that way, but he
is now intending to make the path straight. He says, the governors, by the
great king's orders, sent for them all together, and not to dwell together in
e^^i^y, but like friends and brothers.

He desires all people here will remove blocks that may obstruct the path to
and from Chotih. Recommends peace in future.
He says, the beloved headman of Chotih sits under a white flag, and wishes to
preserve it from blood, and any one who may make it otherwise will be found
out. He says, in the spring of the year some of his people a hunting, were
killed among the Creeks (not by desire of the beloved men) but it will be no
more thought on; as he hopes they will not be guilty of the like again, Some
late murders committed by the Creeks, forgiven.
he or his people bear no ill will to the Southward Indians, but the Northward
Indians are troublesome; when any mischief is done, they are always sure to
find out who they are, An idle notion.
as a little bird always tells from the top of a tree. He has no more to say,
but promises to keep clean his path in future, and hopes they will do the same.
(Gave a string of beads.)

The PRINCE of Chotih presented a pipe and some tobacco, Chotih's token of
friendship for the English.
as a testimony of friendship between the Cherokees and white people.

Captain ALECK, The Creeks complain of the stealing of horses.
a Creek, mentioned "The frequent stealing of horses, by both the Creeks and
white people, and proposed the preventing it for the future."

Colonel AIRS, chief of the Catawbas,

SAID (in English) Catawbas talk.
He always minds the white people. The king Georg's talk, and four governors,
are all good. To day all the people meet here* he hears all the red people and
white right well, and they talk good. (Gives a string of beads.) They approve
the present talks of the white and red people.
These are white beads all, none black; all for King George, and four
governors: They all send a talk, a good talk to the red people. He and his
people are as white men, and is well pleased with what he has heard; he did and
will keep it to his heart; he goes to sleep and rises, but never looses the
talk of the white people; the Catawbas and he are all of one mind. All the
Indians that are now good, their children should be suffered to grow up. He has
very little to say; he lives among the white people and came to hear the talks
of others. Col. Airs values his commission from the English and despises the
French.
He holds fast his commission, receives none from the French, and in
consequence of his commission from his brethren the white people, he came to
hear the talks of others.

"He informed the governors, his lands was spoiled; he had lost a great deal,
both by scarcity of buffaloes and deer; they have spoiled him one hundred miles
every way, Complains of encroachments.
and never paid him; his hunting land formerly extended to Pedee, Broad-River,
etc. but now is driven quite to the Catawba nation: If he could kill any deer,
he would carry the meat to his family, and the skins to the white people; but
no deer are now to be had. He wants fifteen miles on each side his town, free
from any encroachments of the white people, who will not suffer him to cut
trees to build withal, but keep all to themselves."

After having finished his talk to the governors, he presented strings of white
beads to each of the nations of Indians, Give beads to each nation of Indians.
in which he desired them to observe there was not one black one amongst them,
and that he presented them as tokens of the friendship he professed for them
all, and which he desired might continue.

AUGUSTA, TUESDAY November 8th.
PRESENT Their excellencies the Governors, Superintendent, Interpreters,
Indians, etc. as at the congress yesterday.

THE reply to the Indians requiring more time than was expected, Indians
informed that replies to their talks would be delivered next day.
the governors informed them, that it should be delivered the next day, being
the 9th, at eleven o'clock in the morning: But in the mean time, In the mean
time the governors were willing to hear any thing they had to say further.
if any of the tribes of Indians had any thing to add to their former talks,
the governors were ready to hear them; when

ALECK, a Creek Indian (by the interpreter) said, "The four governors here are
all beloved, Aleck acknowledges the ^^oudness of the great king's talk.
and he is appointed to speak: He says, half of his body is English, and half
Indian, therefore he holds both by the hands: The talk the governors gave was
in writing, he cannot write, yet his heart is the same in inclination. He now
speaks for the upper, middle, and lower towns, and acknowledges that the king
was good in giving such a talk."

SECOND CREEK added, "As the king has been so good as to forgive, and give them
a good talk, As does another Creek Indian.
he is in hopes the children will grow up without interruption on either side;
there is a road to Charlestown, and the line of Ogeechie is the line for the
white people to grow between." And then

ALECK resumed, and said, "To prevent any future disturbances, He again
describes boundaries.
the upper part of the Ogeechies shall be the hunting grounds; beneath that
free for the white people. First when this country was settled, Savannah river
was the boundary, Threatens to seize ne^ro (...) and^* that (...) into the
Indian country.
and any negro, horse, etc. that strayed beyond the same, was returned for a
gratuity formerly agreed on; but now the Ogeechie is the boundary, any negro,
horse, cattle, etc. that exceeds such bounds, he declares openly, and in the
presence of all the governors, he will seize and keep." He is replied to on
that head, and satisfied.
They were then reminded, that the gratuity formerly offered, for returning
such negroes, etc. still subsisted, upon which they agreed to comply with the
terms.

ATTAKULLAKULLA, or the Little-Carpenter, by Watts the interpreter, Little
Carpenter describes boundaries*
said, "Many white people are assembled here, and he is very glad to see them.
White people are settled beyond the Long-Canes, they may stay there, but must
proceed no farther. The white people and his are as one, and when they meet in
hunting, good behavior may be by and between both. The lands toward Virginia,
must not be settled nearer the Cherokees than the southward of New-River;
hunting is their trade, and they have no other way of getting a living. (Gave a
string of beads.) Now he is before the governors, Again desires traders.
he desires they will order traders to his town; there is a plentiful store at
Keehowee, but it is a long way from him, and it is very hard work to carry
leather over the mountains, Reason why.
and a long way for the women to fetch any small matter; he desires good
traders, staid men, not young rioting fellows who commit disturbances; Number
requested.
eight traders will be sufficient, and to have them placed in the towns. (Gave
a string of beads and wampum.) He desired to have traders sent him from
Virginia." Desires some from Virginia.
When he was desired to explain, whether he did not address the (...)
governors, he replied, A question put to him.
"That one or more traders might come from each, His answer.
therefore he addressed the four governors; and as king George has ordered him
goods, he hoped the governors would send them accordingly. He has now done, and
will be glad to be on his journey home, as soon as their excellencies please to
dispatch him."

SALLOUIH, the Young-Warrior of Estatowih (Beamer his interpreter) said, "He
had heard the talk from the great king George. That the people of his nation
had been often at Charlestown to hear talks, he never was, therefore he came
to see the governors. He never is inclined to be at meetings, but is well
pleased with what he has heard, Young Warrior of Estatowih is pleased with what
he has heard.
and hopes the governors are also. As the warriors are now done, he will speak,
and begs to be heard. He says, some time ago 'twas cloudy, all was darkness,
but is now clear; and he hopes all will be forgiven, Promises to be a friend in
future, to the English.
and then nothing offensive shall be more repeated: the great king George, in
pity, has taken them into favor, and as the day is bright and clear, he hopes
it will ever be so on the path. The warriors who have been in England had a
right to speak first, but now he informs, that his heart is as firm to the
English as ever in his life; he sees all around his friends, both red and white
people. That the white people of Georgia were the first that gave them goods
after the war, Also requests goods from Charlestown.
he now hopes to have a supply from Charlestown; there is goods at Keehowee
plenty, but people who live eight or ten miles distant, and want trifles, Gives
his reason.
find it hard to send or go to Keehowee for them. The lines run out between the
English and them he is satisfied with, And is satisfied with the lines.
though they are small for his people; the white people settled at or near
Long-Canes he desires not to remove, but none more to settle nearer the
Cherokees." After reminding again concerning the traders, he declared he had
finished his talk, and gave a string of beads.

Fort AUGUSTA, WEDNESDAY November 9th.
AT a full congress of the Governors, Superintendent, Indians, etc. the replies
were delivered as follows.

ANSWER of the several governors and the superintendent, Reply to the Chicasahs
talk.
to Pia-Mattah the Chicasah leader's talk.

Friend, brother, and ally,

WE, Their conduct approved.
the several governors and superintendent, are extremely pleased with the talk
you delivered the day before yesterday; as our eldest brother you began
replying, and gave an example to the other Indians; your talk was as strait,
and as grateful, as your conduct has been for these many years; we acknowledge
your fidelity; we have had repeated proofs it, and we hope that by this meeting
the chain of friendship, which has long united us, will receive additional
strength and brightness.

The words you have uttered are those of a wise and generous man; and such as
experience has taught you; you observe, that you cannot do without the white
people; this is most certainly true* but it is as certain, that by preserving
your heart entirely English, by making their enemies, your enemies, and their
friends, your friends, you have felt no wants whatever; the great king has
liberally supplied you, No difficulties (...) obstruct their being supplied by
the English while they behave well.
he has convinced you, that let his children be ever so remote, let seas, or
mountains separate them, that as long as they behave as faithfully as you have
done, they never will be cast off. You say that the number of traders which
pass through your country to the Chactahs, Their objection to the number of
traders answered.
and the too great number which trade with your people, breed disturbances,
which you may not always be at hand to prevent. You now shall have a reply to
both those remarks. By the cession of Mobile to the English, the Chactah trade
will be carried on from thence, because it will be more convenient to both
English and Indians, so that from this time you will have no complaints of that
kind to make. Your other request, that Heyrider and Brown only should traffic
among you, has been considered by us as your friends, and we are persuaded that
some white man for his own interest has imposed upon you. Reasons given why a
few will not be advantageous for them.
You may believe us as the great king's beloved men, that where the trade is in
few hands the prices of goods are always higher; but if you give a preference
to the traders you have mentioned, you are under no obligation to buy goods of
others; if Heyrider and Brown are your friends, deal with them only; but they
are more likely to continue to use you well, when you have other traders to
resort to, in case they abuse you. This advice comes from us all, and we give
it, because we esteem and value you. We have nothing further to add, but that
you may safely rely on the continuance of that friendship and assistance which
the great king has always given you.

With which they seemed satisfied.

Previous to the answer to the Creeks, Forest (the interpreter) being desired
to ask Capt. Aleck, on behalf of himself and brothers, if he understood the
line as settled yesterday? he answered in the affirmative. Then the reply was
proceeded on, viz.

Friends and brothers, Reply to the Creeks*


IN reply to the answer of you the Creek Indians to the great king's talk, the
governors and superintendent say, that your repea^ed assurances, that your
hearts, Their answer approved.
and the hearts of your whole people (for whom you speak) are strait and good
toward the great king George and his subjects, they receive cordially; and
that such friendly declarations as these duly observed on your parts, you may
depend shall be properly regarded by us, who will continue to exercise the
king's great benevolence and goodness to you agreeable to his talk given you at
our first meeting.

The complaint made of straggling people going about the woods between Augusta
and the Creek country, Stragglers selling rum, etc. in the woods, to be
suppressed.
and carrying rum and other things to trade with such Indians as they may meet
with when hunting, is a mischief that we are sensible of, and what we are very
desirous of putting a stop to; and you may be assured, that every thing which
can be done shall, in order to prevent such practices. You have also mentioned,
that if any negroes run away, or horses or cattle stray, into your grounds,
that you will seize upon them and keep them; Negroes, horses, etc. must not be
seized by the Creeks.
but, with respect to these two points, you must recollect, and well remember,
the treaties and agreements you have formerly entered into with the white
people, and that you are not to do any mischief or damage to them, They are
adm^nishe^ not to take satisfaction of the English themselves, but complain to
the governors.
or take away their property, or take any satisfaction yourselves against the
white people; but if you think you receive any injury, you are to make your
complaint to the governor of the province, who will always be ready to hear
you, and do you justice; and this is the method you must observe, and not
attempt to do any mischief to the white people, or take away the goods and
horses of such as you may find trading in the woods, for that would be contrary
to your former engagements, which are still binding, and must be observed and
kept; but you must complain against them to the governor; and you well
remember, that, by a former treaty, you They are reminded of rewards allowed
for taking up negroes, etc.
are allowed a reward for taking up negroes that run away from their masters,
and you will still be rewarded for taking up any such. You know it is very
difficult to prevent negroes from running away, and cattle and horses from
rambling, and it would be unjust in you to claim them as your own for straying
into your lands, at the same time you may be assured that the utmost care will
be taken to prevent it.

And here we think it necessary to observe, that great complaints have been
made by the traders, Charged with stealing traders horses,
that some of you have stolen their horses, (...) refuse to deliver them when
found in your possession; also by several of the inhabitants, that you wantonly
kill their cattle, And wantonly killing cattle.
and that, even since the holding of the congress, several cattle in this
neighborhood have been wantonly shot, and the carcasses left on the spot. If
these things be true, it is not agreeable to the friendly declarations made by
you, and we expect that nothing more of this sort be done for the future.

We have examined the commission delivered by Togulkie, and have heard and
believe, The governors will not interfere in the choice of emperors, but
approve them when chosen.
that his father was a great king and warrior in the Creek country, and we hope
Togulkie may be so too; but we shall not interfere with you in the choice or
appointment of your emperors or kings, but whenever you shall agree amongst
yourselves upon the election or choice of an emperor, we shall be ready to
confirm such choice.

Capt. Aleck has mentioned a claim to his settlement at Sancta Sevilla, which
he says has been run out; Aleck's charge of encroaching on his land, answered.
as to which the governors observe, that they know of no survey being made on
any settlement of his; that if any such thing is done, it is without their
privity; and, if the lands are really his, nothing that has been done can
affect his property, but he will continue to enjoy them.

You have proposed enlarging and extending the boundaries or limits of the
lands to the westward, His proposal to enlarge the western boundary.
which may be settled by the white people; and this you declare to be, And
reasons why.
in gratitude and return for the great clemency and generosity shown to you by
his majesty, and which in his name we agree to accept of: So that, for the
future, the settlements of the white people are to extend up Savannah river to
Little river, and back to the fork of Little river, and from the fork of Little
river to the ends of the south branch of Briar creek, and down that branch to
the Lower-Creek path, and along the Lower-Creek path to the main stream of
Ogeechie river, and down the main stream of that river just below the path
leading from Mount-Pleasant, and from thence in a strait line cross to Sancta
Sevilla on the Alatamaha river, and from thence to the southward as far as
Georgia extends or may be extended, to remain to be regulated, The enlargement
described.
agreeable to former treaties, and his majesty's royal instruction, a copy of
which was lately sent to you; and this matter may be more particularly
mentioned and described in the treaty which we shall now propose to be made
between us.

Upon an explanation of the boundary line in the talk to them, they were again
asked, if they clearly understood it? to which they all, and the Wolf king in
particular, answered in the affirmative.

"And as to what you have mentioned about the lands to the southward of
Georgia, near St. Augustine, Pensacola and Mobile; these are matters that the
great king has not empowered us to talk with you about: he has appointed
governors for those countries, who will soon come over and be there; and we
shall acquaint them with what you have said, and must leave you to talk with
them and settle that matter, for we cannot do any thing in it."

REPLY to Red Shoes, the Chactah leader (Colbert interpreter.) Reply to the
Chactahs.


Friend and brother,

YOUR talk was but short, but we are well satisfied with it; we are sorry for
any accident which prevented more of your people from complying with the great
king's invitation; as they are not come, you must be more careful to remember
what you have heard, and to relate it to your nation; Admonished to remember
what they have heard.
you desire to be under the English as the other red people are; do you behave
as well as faithful as the Chicasahs, your friends, and you will meet with the
same treatment from the English; probably long before you get home, plenty of
English goods will be in your nation; in your transactions with the white
people, And advised to copy the Chicasahs.
take the Chicasahs for your pattern, they have reaped the advantage of our
friendship, and we sincerely hope that your whole nation will embrace the
offers of good will which we have made you, and that one heart only may be in
the bosoms of the white people and the Chactahs.

With this talk Red-Shoes was well pleased.

REPLY to the Cherokees (Watts interpreter.) Reply to the Cherokees.


Cherokee friends and brothers,

THE governors and superintendent observe with pleasure the good disposition
with which you are come to this meeting, Their behaviors applauded.
apparent in your talks and in your countenances; and the just sense you show
of the great king's kind and fatherly intentions to you and all his red people
and children.

In your answers to the talk delivered from him, you mention two points, to
each of which you will now receive particular answers. The first relates to the
trade carried on between the white people and your towns; the other to the
lands on which the white people are settled. As to the trade, you have goods
sent among you by almost all the colonies over which we preside; Reasons why
few traders go amongst them.
but the prices you are inclined to give for goods are so small, that few
traders choose to carry goods into your towns: You must consider, that if
traders do not make an advantage of their goods, they will not carry them; you
would do the same yourselves.

The trade of South Carolina stands on another footing. And why a factory was
settled at Keehowee.
At the time the path into your towns was but lately cleared from blood; to
preserve it clean, to prevent the same mischiefs from being repeated, which had
been occasioned by the madness of your young men, and the misbehaviour of our
traders, a factory was settled at Keehowee, and a trader whom we can depend
upon for using you well established there; Keehowee a plentiful and cheap place
for goods.
plenty of goods are constantly kept for your supply, and the price as low or
lower than any private trader can afford them: This regulation the province of
South Carolina cannot alter, because it has been laid before the king; it is in
his power, and in his alone, to make an alteration; and until this is done,
South Carolina has not the power of lending private traders.

In North Carolina there are no Indian traders at all, No Indian traders from
North Carolina.
either to your nation or any other.

And as to Virginia, Virginia traders at liberty to go among them or not.
the traders there are free to carry up their goods or not, as they find their
advantage. There are no laws to compel them to go, or to They cannot be
compelled.
restrain them from going. Every man carries up his goods as he thinks proper,
and sets such prices upon them, as he judges will answer his expense in
carrying them up into your towns. You are also free to purchase them or not, as
you approve of the prices set upon them. And all we have to add on this subject
is, that the government of Virginia sets no prices on the goods sent up to you,
but leaves you and the traders to agree upon the price in such manner as is
suitable to you both.

We shall now come to the other point relative to lands. You have complained of
settlements being made on the part of Virginia to the westward of the New
river, and desire no further settlements may be made there. In order to comply
strictly with the great king's instructions, copies of which you have among
you, and that we may in no shape deceive you, we will explain the state of
those settlements.

By a former governor, Lands run out explained.
and above twenty since, a large grant of lands in that part of the country was
made to one col. Patten, who under that grant sold out parcels of the land to
people who settled there: In these settlements you have acquiesced without
complaint to this time, as they are at a great distance from your country.
Another large grant was also made by the great king just before the breaking
out of the war with the French; but those disturbances prevented many persons
settling under that grant, No intrusion upon them made or intended.
and by the king's late instructions to the governor of Virginia no land can be
granted even so far as the eastern banks of that river. And in obedience to
that instruction not a foot has been since granted upon that river, so that you
have nothing further to apprehend on that account. And we now take this
opportunity to confirm you in your security, by assuring you, that on the
return of the governor of Virginia into his colony, all treaties will be
carefully examined, and punctually observed, and you may depend on strict
justice being done to you. It is possible, some idle persons may sit down on
lands without any authority whatever: Any idle people settling upon them to be
removed on complaint made.
But this you ought not to consider as an act of the government, which does not
nor ever will countenance and protect people settling in that manner, but
heartily concur with you in removing them on complaint made by you to the
governor for that purpose.

In relation to the settlements above Long Canes in South Carolina, those
settlements were allowed and agreed to in the treaty of peace signed at the
close of the last war, by lieutenant governor Bull and Attakullakuila, between
the white people and your nation.

And then the interpreters were ordered to inform the several nations of
Indians, The Indians informed of presents sent (...) to ^e dist^ibuted amongst
them.
that the great king had sent them presents, as a mark of his esteem for them;
and that the four governors and superintendent should agree in the
distribution, and the superintendent would then deliver them.

REPLY to the Catawbas. Reply to the Catawbas.


Col. Airs, and brothers of the Catawbas,

IT gives us great pleasure and satisfaction, to find that the good talk which
we gave you from our great king, and father of both his white and red children,
is so satisf^ctory to you. As you have always been fast friends to all his
white children, so our king and father holds out his arms to receive and
protect you from all your enemies; and is very sensible of your constant love
and friendship for all your white brothers: And you may be assured of his
confirming to you, all your just claims to your lands and hunting grounds,
pursuant to the agreement made between your nation, and his governor of South
Carolina, and Mr. Atkin his supe^intendent of Indian affairs, upon your having
a fort built for your protection from your enemies, when you deserted your old
towns; which was then agreed upon, on both sides, to be a square of fifteen
miles, to be laid out on both sides of the Catawba river, and part of the line
was actually surveyed.

If you stand to your former agreement, Their hunting ^r^u^d^ to be secu^ed to
them.
your lands shall be immediately surveyed and marked out for your use; but it
you do not, your claim must be undecided, 'till our great king's pieasure is
known on the other side the water.

The talk being given to the Indians, the Cherokees acknowledged, of their own
accord, that they had claimed more than were their hunting grounds, Cherokees
confess they have clai^ed more lands than belong to them.
and what they now desired, was, that they might not be molested in hunting as
far as the spring head of Holston river. They desired the governors to write to
Mr. Wilkinson at Keehowee, to send goods from thence to Estatowih; to which it
was replied, that the governors had it not in their power, the great king had
ordered it otherwise.

The Catawhas, The Catawhas are promis^d an immediate survey of their lands.
upon appearing satisfied with the line of fifteen miles square, were informed,
that a new survey should be made, and when the line was run the people settled
within should be removed, and no new warrants granted them, or any others to
settle within those limits: Upon which they desired a new line would be run out
immediately.

The Catawbas being asked, And they choose col. Airs for their emperor.
if they approved Colonel Airs as their chief or emperor? answered
unanimously, yes. In consequence of such their declaration, the governors and
superintendent accepted him.

Then the question was put to the respective chiefs of the several tribes of
Indians, A treaty of peace proposed and agreed to.
whether in consequence of their good professions toward the English, they
were inclined to enter into a treaty of peace, etc. and in writing for that
purpose? and they all consenting thereto, were informed, that on the morrow,
being the 10th of November, they were to assemble at the same place, at eleven
o'clock, when such a treaty should be ready, to be signed by the governors,
superintendent, and them.

The prince of Chotih made overtures of peace and friendship to Pia-Mattah,
Overtures of peace made by the Cherokees, to the Chicasahs,
the chief Chicasah; which being accepted, the prince of Chotih gave him a
string of white beads.

The Young-Warrior and Tistowih (Cherokees) had friendly talks with Mustisicah
and Fool-Harry, And the Creeks.
two Creeks, and gave beads to each of them.

Preamble to the treaty.
AT a Congress held at Augusta, in the province of Georgia, on the tenth day of
November, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and sixty-three,
by their excellencies JAMES WRIGHT, Esquire governor of Georgia, ARTHUR DOBBS, Esquire
governor of North Carolina, THOMAS BOON, Esquire governor of South Carolina, the
honorable FRANCIS FAUQUIER, lieutenant governor of Virginia, and JOHN STUART,
Esquire agent and superintendent of southern Indian affairs. A TREATY for the
preservation and continuance of a firm and perfect peace and friendship,
between his Most Sacred Majesty GEORGE the Third, by the grace of God, of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, KING, defender of the faith, and so forth;
and the several INDIANS chiefs herein named, who are authorized by the kings,
headmen, and warriors of the CHICASAHS, upper and lower CREEKS, CHACTAHS,
CHEROKEES, and CATAWBAS, for and in behalf of themselves, and their several
nations and tribes.
ARTICLE I.
THAT a perfect and perpetual peace and sincere friendship shall be continued,
between his majesty King George the third and all his subjects, and the several
nations and tribes of Indians herein mentioned, that is to say, the Chicasahs,
The white people to be secure upon all accounts whatever.
upper and lower Creeks, Chactahs, Cherokees, and Catawbas; and each nation of
Indians hereby, respectively, engages to give the utmost attention to preserve
and maintain peace and friendship between their people and the king of
Great Britain and his subjects, and shall not commit or permit any kind of
hostilities, injury or damage whatsoever against them, from henceforth, and for
any cause, or under any pretense whatsoever. And for laying the strongest and
purest foundation for a perfect and perpetual peace and friendship, his most
sacred majesty has been graciously pleased to pardon and forgive all past
offenses and injuries. And hereby declares, there shall be a general oblivion
of all crimes, Indians forgives all past offenses.
offenses and injuries that may have been heretofore committed or done by any
of the said Indian parties.

ARTICLE II.
The subjects (...) the great king George, and the aforesaid several nations of
Indians, shall for ever hereafter be looked upon as one people. They and the
English to be one people.
And the several governors and superintendent engage, that they will encourage
persons to furnish and supply the several nations and tribes of Indians
aforesaid, Goods are promised them.
with all sorts of goods usually carried amongst them, in the manner which they
now are, and which will be sufficient to answer all their wants.

In consideration whereof, the Indian parties, on their part, severally engage,
in the most solemn manner, that the traders, and others who may go amongst
them, And they promise to protect traders.
shall be perfectly safe and secure, in their several persons and effects, and
shall not, on any account or pretense whatever, be molested or disturbed,
whilst in any of the Indian towns or nations, or on their journey to or from
the nations.

ARTICLE III.
The English governors and superintendent engage, for themselves and their
successors, Justice promised to the Indians.
as far as they can, that they will always give due attention to the interest
of the Indians, and will be ready, on all occasions, to do them full and ample
justice. And the several Indian parties, do expressly promise and engage, for
themselves severally, and for their several nations and tribes, The Indians
promise the same to the English;
pursuant to the full right and power which they have so to do, that they will,
in all cases, and upon all occasions, do full and ample justice to the English;
and will use their utmost endeavors, to prevent any of their people from
giving any disturbance, or doing any damage, to them, in the settlements or
elsewhere as aforesaid, either by stealing their horses, killing their cattle,
or otherwise, or by doing them any personal hurt or injury; and that, if any
damage be done as aforesaid, To make satisfaction;
satisfaction shall be made for the same to the party injured; and that, if any
Indian or Indians whatever, shall hereafter murder or kill a white man, the
offender or offenders shall, without any delay, excuse, or pretense whatever,
And to put Indian murderers to death, without delay.
be immediately put to death, in a public manner, in the presence of at least
two of the English who may be in the neighborhood where the offense is
committed.

And if any white man shall kill or murder an Indian, White murderers likewise
to suffer death.
such white man shall be tried for the offense, in the same manner as if he had
murdered a white man, and if found guilty, shall be executed accordingly, in
the presence of some of the relations of the Indian who may be murdered, if
they choose to be present.

ARTICLE IV.
Whereas doubts and disputes have frequently happened on account of
encroachments, The Creeks, to prevent future disputes about lands, fix new
boundaries, here described.
or supposed encroachments, committed by the English inhabitants of Georgia, on
the lands or hunting grounds reserved and claimed by the Creek Indians for
their own use: Wherefore, to prevent any mistakes, doubts, or disputes for the
future, and in consideration of the great marks of clemency and friendship
extended to us the said Creek Indians, we, the kings, headmen and warriors of
the several nations and towns of both upper and lower Creeks, by virtue, and in
pursuance, of the full right and power which we now have and are possessed of
have consented and agreed, that, for the future, the boundary between the
English settlements and our lands and hunting grounds, shall be known and
settled by a line extending up Savannah river to Little river, and back to the
fork of Little river and from the fork of Little river to the ends of the south
branch of Briar creek, and down that branch to the lower Creek path, and along
the lower Creek path to the main stream of Ogeechie river, and down the main
stream of that river just below the path leading from Mount-Pleasant, and from
thence in a straight line cross to Sancta Sevilla on the Alatamaha river, and
from thence to the southward as far as Georgia extends, or may be extended, to
remain to be regulated, agreeable to former treaties, and his majesty's royal
instruction, a copy of which was lately sent to you.

And we the Catawba headmen and warriors, in confirmation of an agreement
heretofore entered into with the white people, The Catawbas satisfied with the
land to be run out for them*
declare, that we will remain satisfied with the tract of land of fifteen miles
square, a survey of which, by our consent, and at our request, has been already
begun; and the respective governors and superintendent, on their parts, promise
and engage, that the aforesaid survey shall be completed, and that the
Catawbas shall not, in any respect, Be molested by any of the king's subjects,
within the said lines, but shall be indulged in the usual manner of hunting
elsewhere.

And we do, Creeks confirm to the English all the lands within the limits
already described.
by these presents, give, grant, and confirm, unto his most sacred majesty king
George the third, all such lands whatsoever, as we the said Creek Indians have,
at any time heretofore, been possessed of, or claimed, as our hunting grounds,
which lie between the sea, the river Savannah, and the lines herein before
mentioned and described, to hold the same unto the great king George and his
successors for ever. And we do fully and absolutely agree, that, from
henceforth, the above lines and boundary, shall be the mark of division of
lands between the English and us the Creek Indians, And promise not to molest
the English within th^se limits.
notwithstanding any former agreement or boundary to the contrary; and that we
will not disturb the English in their settlements or otherwise within the lines
aforesaid.

In consideration whereof, it is agreed on the part of his majesty king George,
The English not to settle to the westward of th^se limits.
that none of his subjects shall settle upon, or disturb the Indians in, the
grounds or lands to the westward of the lines herein before described; and that
if any shall presume to do so, then, on complaint made by the Indians, the
party shall be proceeded against for the same, and punished according to the
laws of the English.

In testimony whereof, we the underwritten have signed this present treaty, and
put to it the seals of our arms, the day and year abovewritten, and the several
kings and chiefs of the several nations and tribes of Indians, have also set
their hands and seals to the same, at the time and place aforesaid.

JAMES WRIGHT, Governor of GEORGIA (L.S.) ARTHUR DOBBS, Governor of NORTH
CAROLINA (L.S.) THOMAS BOON, Governor of SOUTH CAROLINA (L.S.) FRANCIS
FAUQUIER, Lieutenant governor of VIRGINIA (L.S.) JOHN STUART, Superintendent
south District (L.S) PIAMATTAH his mark (L.S.) Capt. ALECK his mark (L.S.)
SYMPOYAFFEE his mark (L.S.) HOUTLIPOAHATCHIE his mark (L.S.) NEALUCOSEAPQUO his
mark (L.S.) Chechaw MICO his mark (L.S.) CHURAHUMASTOBY his mark (L.S.)
ATTAKULLAKULLA his mark (L.S.) KETTAGUSTA of Chotih, his mark (L.S.) Skiagusta
OUSTENECKA his mark (L.S.) Colonel AIRS his mark ( L.S.) TUCKSIKUNG his mark
(L.S.) SEROWIH his mark (L.S.) ECKOUIH his mark (L.S.) TIFTOWIH his mark (L.S.)
The WOLF his mark (L.S.) WILLANAWAH his mark (L.S.) MOYTOY his mark (L.S.)
CHISCOTALONY his mark (L.S.) CLOKOWETAS his mark (L.S.)

By the command of Esqrs.
Their excellencies
JAMES WRIGHT, ARTHUR DOBBS, THOMAS BOON,
The honorable FRANCIS FAUQUIER,
And, JOHN STUART, Esquire superintendent.

FINWICKE BULL, secretary to the congtess.

The ratification of peace and friendship being signed, Congress ended.
finished the general congress: At which time the guns at Fort Augusta were
discharged, as they were at the opening of the congress.

The Indians were informed, The Indians informed when and by whom the p^^sents
would be distributed
that the presents would begin to be distributed to them the following day, by
their beloved man the superintendent, with which they appearing satisfied,
their excellencies and the superintendent withdrew into the said fort of
Augusta, and ordered the following letter to be engrossed, and sent to the
secretary of state, viz.

Augusta in Georgia, 10th November, 1763. MY LORD,
IN obedience to the king's commands, Letter to the secretary of state
signified to us severally by your lordship, by letter of the 16th of March, we
have met the different chiefs of the Chicasahs, Cherokees, Creeks, Chactahs and
Catawbas, and have used our utmost endeavors to carry his majesty's intentions
into execution.

The removal of the French and Spaniards from the ceded places, which your
lordship meant the Indians should be apprized of by us, they were before
acquainted with; this was unavoidable; the dispatching of invitations to
nations so remote as the Chactahs and Chicasahs, necessarily took up a great
deal of time, their consultations upon them not much less, and their journey
hither still more; however, my lord, we do not apprehend, that their receiving
the above intelligence from other hands has been detrimental to the king's
service. The Chicasahs, ever faithful to the British interest, are perfectly
satisfied with the change. The Chactah leader, now in confederacy with the
Chicasahs, had before made repeated offers of declaring against the French,
provided he was supplied with English goods; and seems well pleased with the
neighborhood of the English, whose assistance he had before courted: We have,
in our reply to him, given him reason to expect, that, by the time he reaches
home, there will be traders in his nation by the way of Mobile; and we beg
leave to recommend to your lordship, that the Chactahs be supplied with goods
from that quarter, as a measure necessary to confirm them in their present
professions, and to render them independent of the Creeks, against whom they
may be a very useful check when their supplies are no longer so precarious, as
they now are by passing through the Creek country. The Creeks had been
represented to be very ill disposed, the murders they had committed were
frequent, and even subsequent to the receipt of your lordship's letter; and
even since the holding of the congress, though amply supplied with provision,
they have been accused of wantonly killing the people's (...)* yet their talks
have been more friendly than we expected, and their voluntary offer of an
augmentation of boundary to Georgia, upon the king's forgivenness of all past
injuries being signified to them, supposing their professions sincere, and the
chiefs of consequence enough to act for the whole nation, which they declare
they do, is certainly as strong a proof as they can at present give of their
good will, it will be necessary, however, to mention to your lordship, that we
have been privately cautioned, by the leader of the Chicasahs, against
confiding in the Creek professions; he says he knows them, that nothing done
here will be confirmed by the absent leaders, in comparison of whom the present
chiefs are inconsiderable: The Cherokees, in their intelligence, have gone
still farther, but as they seem on the point of a war with the Creeks, their
testimony is to be suspected. Though the talks will convey to your lordship our
opinions of the different dispositions or the Indians, yet we thought necessary
to add thus much, and to acquaint your lordship, that the Cherokees seem very
pacific, but mortified at the refusal of traders from South Carolina, which the
act now in force there prevents their being gratified with. And we beg leave to
observe to your lordship on this head, that the general promise of goods which
we have made, by the king's orders, to the respective Indians, requires such a
performance as it is impossible, circumstanced as we are, to be answerable for,
for we have no coercive power over traders. Your lordship will pardon us for
suggesting, that there never was a time more seasonable, for the establishing
the commerce with Indians, upon a general, safe, equitable footing, and which
we are afraid will never be done by respective provinces. The Catawbas boundary
as before agreed upon, is now confirmed, and they are well satisfied with it.
Permit us to refer your lordship, for all further particulars of the congress,
to the original papers which we shall have the honor of transmitting with the
utmost dispatch, and to hope that we have faithfully executed the king's
commands, and approved ourselves,

My Lord, Your Lordship's Most obedient and Most humble servants, JAMES WRIGHT,
ARTHUR DOBBS, THOMAS BOON, FRANCIS FAUQUIER, JOHN STUART.


To the Earl of Egremont, his majesty's principal secretary of state for the
southern department, etc. etc. etc.

Then the secretary being ordered to withdraw, Mr. Box's gratuity for assisting
the secretary.
their excellencies, etc. were pleased to agree, that he should out of the fund
in his hands, pay Mr. Box the sum of ten pounds and ten shillings, sterling,
for assisting Fenwicke Bull, their said secretary at the congress: And that the
said Fenwicke Bull should, from the said fund, pay himself fifty-two pounds and
ten shillings, sterling, The secratary's.
as a gratuity for the executing his office; Particulars ordered to his care.
at the same time ordering him to write a fair copy, with marginal notes, etc.
with all possible dispatch after his arrival in Charlestown, to be forwarded
to the earl of Egremont, his majesty's principal secretary of state for the
southern district, etc. etc. etc. and also that he procure fifty copies of the
same to be printed, from the said journal, Fifty coples of the journal to be
printed.
for the use of the secretary of state, To whom to be distributed.
Sir Jeffery Amherst, the four governors, superintendent, etc. who attended at
the said congress, and that they be also sent to the Northward American
governors, and those of the new ceded places, that they may be informed of the
proceedings at the said congress.

Letter to governor Wright.
Charlestown, South Carolina, 21st Nov^^^^r, 1763. SIR,
SINCE we had the pleasure of seeing you, governor Boon has received a letter
from Mr. Samuel Smith, of London, merchant, acquainting him, that he had a
balance in his hands, from the money issued by the treasury, amounting to three
hundred and fifty-four pounds, A new fund.
two shillings, and eleven pence, over and above the cost and charges of the
presents, which he was ready to pay to governor Boone's order, toward the
expense of distributing the presents, and contingencies of the congress. We
have therefore agreed to draw for the whole, to add forty seven pounds and ten
shillings to the gratification of fifty guineas already agreed to be given to
Mr. Bull, Part thereof applied as a farther gratuity to the secretary.
in consequence of our thinking, that he will have much more trouble than we at
first imagined, Reason why.
and it will be necessary he should take a good deal of pains with the papers
to be transmitted to the secretary of state; the remainder will be deposited in
the hands of the superintendant, to be applied toward the incidental expenses
of the congress. The remainder to be put into the superintendent's hands.
We should have been glad to have had your concurrence, but as this fresh step
appears perfectly reasonable to us, we have no doubt but that it will be
equally agreeable to you.

And are, Sir, with great regard, Your excellency's Most obedient and Most
humble servants, THOMAS BOON, ARTHUR DOBBS, FRANCIS FAUQUIER,


His excellency James Wright, Esquire

Charlestown, South Carolina, 21st November, 1763. SIR,
IN consequence of your letter of advice dated the 10th of August, Letter to
Mr. Samuel Smith, merch. in London.
to his excellency governor Boon, we have this day drawn three bills of
exchange on you for the balance, viz. One at thirty days, in favor of the
honorable Francis Fauquier, Esquire for L 50: 0: 0 One at thirty days sight, in
favor of William Stead, for 100: 0: 0 One at ditto, in favor of William
Stead, for 104: 2:11 Sterling L 254: 2: 11
amounting to two hundred and fifty-four pounds, two shillings, and eleven
pence, sterling, which be pleased to honor.

We are, Sir, Your most humble servants, THOMAS BOON, ARTHUR DOBBS, FRANCIS
FAUQUIER.


Mr. Samuel Smith, Cateaton-street, London.

AFAIR Copy of the journal at Augusts, transcribed by FINWICKE BULL, secretary.


