AN ACCOUNT OF THE COLLEGE OF NEW JERSEY.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE COLLEGE OF NEW JERSEY.

In which are described the methods of government, modes of instruction, manner
and expenses of living in the same, etc.

With a Prospect of the College neatly engraved.

Published, by order of the TRUSTEES, for the information of the public;
particularly of the friends and benefactors of the institution, in Europe and
America.

WOODBRIDGE, in New Jersey: Printed by JAMES PARKER, 1764.

AN ACCOUNT, etc.
THE Importance of the liberal education of youth, both to church and state,
and the necessity of public schools and colleges for that end, is now so
universally acknowledged, as to render an enlargement upon it unnecessary, by
way of introduction to the following account. The main design of this
publication, is to acquaint the world, with the rise, progress, and present
state of the COLLEGE OF NEW JERSEY, which for some Years past, has been an
Object of public Attention.

THE great disadvantages, this, and the contiguous provinces lay under, some
years ago, for want of such an institution, are well known. The distance of the
british universities, and the expenses attending an education abroad, were, to
the american colonists, insuperable obstacles. The two colleges of New England,
and that of Virginia, then the only seats of learning, in the wide-extended
british empire in America, were too remote from each other, to extend their
influence through these intermediate colonies. Hence, in point of literature, a
large tract of a well-peopled country, necessarily lay rude and uncultivated.

AS the colonies increased, the exigencies of affairs, both of an
ecclesiastical and political nature, became more and more urgent. Religious
societies were annually formed, in various places; and had they long continued
vacant, or been supplied with an ignorant illiterate clergy, christianity
itself, in a course of years, might have become extinct among them. Affairs of
state also became more embarrassed for want of proper direction, and a
competent number of men of letters, to fill the various political offices. The
bench, the bar, and seats of legislation, required such accomplishments, as are
seldom the spontaneous growth of nature, unimproved by education.

YET, even in this dark period, there were not wanting several gentlemen, both
of the civil and sacred character, who, forming a just estimate of the
importance of learning, exerted their utmost efforts, to plant and cherish it
in the province of New Jersey. After some disappointments and fruitless
attempts, application was at length made to his excellency Jonathan Belcher,
Esquire at that time governor of the province, and, in the year 1748, he was
pleased, with the approbation of his majesty's council, to grant a CHARTER,
incorporating sundry gentlemen of the clergy and laity, to the number of
twenty-three, as trustees; investing them with such powers, as were requisite
to carry the design into execution, and constituting his majesty's governor for
the time being, ex officio, their president.

THAT the constitution of this college, is founded upon a free and catholic
bottom, and calculated for the equal and general advantage, of every religious
denomination of protestants, will clearly appear, by the following extract from
this charter; AND WHEREAS by the fundamental Concessions made at the first
Settlement of New Jersey, by the Lord Berkely and Sir George Carteret then
Proprietors it was among other things conceded and granted that no Freemen
within the said Province should at any time be molested punished disquieted or
called in Question for any Difference of Opinion or Practice in Matters of
religious Concernment who do not actually disturb the Peace of the said
Province they behaving themselves peaceably and quietly and not using this
Liberty to Licenciousness nor to the civil Injury or outward Disturbance of
others WHEREFORE and for that the said Petitioners have also expressed their
earnest Desire that those of every religious Denomination may have free and
equal Liberty and Advantage of Education in the said College any different
Sentiments in Religion notwithstanding etc. etc. The world has here the
strongest attestation, of the liberal principles, not only of the government in
granting, but also of the petitioners themselves in their application for a
charter. The views of the latter, extended to the common benefit, of all their
protestant brethren. Indeed, had they been otherwise disposed, the constitution
happily disables them, from ever perverting the institution, to any narrow or
sinister purposes: For the charter further contains the following clause, And
we do further will give and grant unto the Trustees of the said College that
they and their Successors or the major part of any thirteen of them which shall
convene for that Purpose may make and they are hereby fully empowered to make
and establish such Ordinances Orders and Laws as may tend to the good and
wholesome Government of the said College and all the Students and several
Officers and Ministers thereof and to the public Benefit of the same not
repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of our Realm of Great Britain or of this our
Province of New Jersey and not excluding any Person of any religious
Denomination whatsoever from free and equal Liberty and Advantage of Education
or from any of the Liberties Immunities or Privileges of the said College on
Account of his or their being of a religious Profession different from the said
Trustees of the said College etc.

IF any unfavourable representations, have been any where made of this
institution, as an illiberal scheme, contrived to subserve the contracted
interests of a religious party, it manifestly appears, from the above view of
its fundamental constitution, that they are untrue and groundless. And, from
its management hitherto, which is no secret, it may be affirmed in the face of
the world, that the execution has been as fair, impartial, and generous, as the
plan upon which it was originally founded.

THUS were the trustees possessed of a naked charter, without any fund at all
to accomplish the undertaking. This, in the eyes of some, gave it the
appearance of an idle chimerical project. Their only resource, indeed, under
the smiles of Heaven, was in the beneficence of the advocates and friends of
learning. After various solicitations in America, the contributions, though often
generous and worthy of grateful acknowledgment, were found by no means adequate
to the execution of so extensive a design. Therefore, in the year 1753, two
gentlemen were sent as agents to Great Britain, and Ireland, to solicit
additional benefactions. There the institution was honored, beyond the most
sanguine expectations, with the approbation and liberality of several political
and ecclesiastical bodies; and of many private persons of the nobility and
gentry, among the laity and clergy of various denominations.

THE students, in the mean time, who, in the beginning, were few in number,
lived dispersed in private lodgings, in the town of Newark; at which place, the
college was first opened; the public academical exercises being generally
performed in the county courthouse. The difficulties and danger of these
circumstances, both with regard to the morals and literary improvement of the
youth, could scarcely have been encountered so long, had it not been for the
indefatigable industry and vigilance of Mr. PRESIDENT BURR, the first who
officiated in that station. And it was much owing to his unremitted zeal and
activity, that this college so suddenly rose to such a flourishing condition.

THE trustees, thus generously assisted, immediately set about erecting a
building, in which the students might be boarded as well as taught, and live
always under the inspection of the college officers, more sequestered from the
various temptations, attending a promiscuous converse with the world, that
theater of folly and dissipation. The little village of Princeton was fixed
upon, as the most convenient situation; being near the center of the colony, on
the public road between New York and Philadelphia, and not inferior in the
salubrity of its air, to any village upon the continent.

THE edifice being nearly finished, and considered as sacred to liberty and
revolution-principles, was denominated NASSAU-HALL, from that great deliverer
of Britain, and assertor of protestant liberty, K. WILLIAM the IIId, prince of
Orange and Nassau. It will accommodate about 147 students, computing three to a
chamber. These are 20 feet square, having two large closets, with a window in
each, for retirement. It has also an elegant hall, of genteel workmanship,
being a square of near 40 feet, with a neatly finished front gallery. Here is a
small, though exceeding good organ, which was obtained by a voluntary
subscription: Opposite to which, and of the same height, is erected a stage,
for the use of the students, in their public exhibitions. It is also
ornamented, on one side, with a portrait of his late majesty, at full length;
and, on the other, with a like picture, (and above it the family-arms neatly
carved and gilt,) of his excellency governor BELCHER. These were bequeathed by
the latter to this college. The library, which is on the second floor, is a
spacious room, furnished at present with about 1200 volumes, all which have
been the gifts of the patrons and friends of the institution, both in Europe
and America. There is, on the lower story, a commodious dining hall, large
enough to accommodate as many as the house will contain, together with a large
kitchen, steward's apartments, etc. The whole structure, which is of durable
stone, having a neat cupola on its top, makes a hansome appearance; and is
esteemed to be the most conveniently plan'd for the purposes of a college, of
any in North America; being designed and executed by that approved architect
Mr. Robert Smith, of Philadelphia.

IN the year 1757, the students, to about the number of 70, removed from
Newark, the house being then so far completed, as to be ready for their
reception. Experience soon taught the society, the superior convenience of
their new circumstances. The numbers increased very fast. The country became
more and more convinced of the importance of learning, in general, and the
utility of such a seat of education in particular; both from the regularity of
its administration, and the figure which several of its sons already made, in
the various literary professions. But it was not long before it suffered, what
was then looked upon, as an almost irretrievable loss. For this same year died,
universally deplored, Mr. PRESIDENT BURR. The following epitaph, which justly
delineates his character, is inscribed on a marble tomb, erected by the
college, to his memory.

M. S.
Reverendi admodum Viri,
AARONIS BURR, A. M. Collegii Neo-Caesariensis Proesidis,
Natus apud Fairfield, Connecticutensium IV Januarii,
A. D. MDCCXVI. S. V.
Honesta in eadem Colonia Familia oriundus
Collegio Yalensi innutritus,
Novarcoe Sacris initiatus MDCCXXXVIII.
Annos circiter viginti pastorali Munere
Fideliter functus.
Collegii N. C. Proesidium MDCCXLVIII accepit,
In Nassoviae Aulam sub Finem MDCCLVI translatus.
Defunctus in hoc Vico XXIV Septembris
A. D. MDCCLVII, S. N.
Aetatis XLII. Eheu quam brevis!
Huic Marmori subjicitur, quod mori potuit;
Quod immortale, vendicarunt Coeli.
Quoeris Viator qualis quantusque fuit?
Perpaucis accipe.
Vir Corpore parvo ac tenui
Studiis Vigiliis assiduisque laboribus
Macro.
Sagacitate, Perspicuitate, Agilitate,
Ac Solertia, (si fas dicere)
Plusquam humana, pene
Angelica.
Anima ferme totus.
Omnigena Literatura instructus,
Theologia proestantior:
Concionator volubilis, suavis et suadus:
Orator facundus.
Moribus facilis, candidus (...) jucundus,
Vita egregie liberalis ac beneficus:
Supra vero omnia emicuerunt
Pietas ac Benevolentia,
Sed ah! quanta et quota Ingenii,
Industriae, Prudentiae, Patientiae,
Caeterarumque omnium Virtutum
Exemplaria,
Marmoris sepulchralis Angustia
Reticebit.
Multum desideratus, multum
Dilectus,
Humani Generis Deliciae,
O! Infandum sui Desiderium,
Gemit Ecclesia, plorat
Academia,
At Coelum plaudit, dum ille
Ingreditur.
In Gaudium Domini
Dulce loquentis,
Euge bone et fidelis
Serve!
Abi Viator tuam respice Finem*

Few men were possessed, in an equal degree, of such an assemblage of superior
talents. He seemed to be peculiarly formed, for that important sphere of
action, which was assigned him in the latter part of his life. But the reader
may see the lineaments of his character drawn, in striking colors, by a
masterly hand, in a funeral eulogium, published soon after his decease. By
WILLIAM LIVINGSTON, Esquire
The same year died also his excellency governor BELCHER, who continued, to the
last, a zealous patron of religion and learning. His library, consisting of 474
volumes, together with several other useful and ornamental articles, he left to
this college, of which he was himself the founder.

THE REV. MR. JONATHAN EDWARDS succeeded to the presidentship. Great were the
expectations of the public, from the administration of a clergyman of his very
distinguished rank in the literary world. But in a few days after his arrival
at Nassau-Hall, he was seized with a mortal distemper: And it pleased the
sovereign of the universe to call him from this stage of action, before he
could apply his skilful hand to the work, which his predecessor had so
dexterously forwarded.

THUS a vacancy again ensued, which continued near eighteen months; when the
Rev. Mr. SAMUEL DAVIES, of Virginia, was chosen to the Office: A gentleman,
well known on both sides the atlantic; but who was, perhaps, no where more
esteemed and beloved than at Nassau-Hall; His fine talents, added not a little,
to the dignity and reputation of the society, which received many improvements,
from his ingenuity and polite taste. The repeated strokes it had lately
suffered, in the loss of two such excellent heads, extremely affected the
well-wishers to the interests of virtue and literature. But the cloud now
seemed to be dispersed, and all things to revive within. For, though, in the
vacancy of the chair, there always had been one of the board of trustees,
appointed to act, pro tempore, yet, it is reasonable to suppose, that as to any
new improvements in the education of the youth, matters were, in a great
measure, at a stand. -- But how uncertain are human things! How precarious the
most elevated hopes! In the month of February, 1761, this brilliant genius, in
the midst of his rising reputation and growing usefulness, suddenly resigned
his breath, to the inconsolable grief of the whole society, and universal
lamentation of all good men.

SOON after his death, the Rev. Dr. SAMUEL FINLEY, was elected to the
president's chair: a gentleman, who for many years, had distinguished himself
in the management of a private academy at Nottingham in Pensylvania; and in the
month of July following, he arrived at NASSAU-HALL, and entered upon his
office. As to the happiness of this succession, the present flourishing state
of the college, the general diligence of the youth in their literary pursuits,
and the internal harmony and good order so observable in the society, are
sufficient attestations.

WE shall now give the world some account of the modes of government and
instruction, together with the whole plan of education, the manner and expenses
of boarding, the circumstances of the fund, and whatever else may be requisite
to exhibit a view of the present state of the institution.

IT would be unnecessary and tedious, to trouble the reader, with a minute
detail of all the private laws and statutes, which have been made, from time to
time, for the better regulation of its members. They are intended, in general,
to settle the terms of admission, to prescribe the duties, and adjust the
powers of the officers, who are universally accountable to the trustees: and
especially to direct the conduct and studies of the youth; and to restrain them
from such liberties and indulgencies, as would tend to corrupt their morals, or
alienate their minds from a steady application. In these regulations, it has
been the design to fix upon a medium, between too great a licentiousness on the
one hand, or an excessive precision on the other. The penalties are generally
of the more humane kind; such as are at once expressive of compassion to the
offender, and indignation at the offense; such as are adapted to work upon the
nobler principles of humanity, and to move the more honorable springs of good
order and submission to government. The laws indeed authorize the infliction of
pecuniary mulcts, according to the practice of other colleges; but they are
seldom executed, as it would seem to be punishing the parents for the offenses
of the children. It cannot be recollected, that there have been above three or
four sines imposed, for upwards of three years last past; nor even one, since
Dr. FINLEY has presided. And in those few singular cases, it was done, rather
for the sake of variety, as another particular method, of fixing a brand of
odium upon a bad action, than as a pecuniary punishment. A small fine will
answer that end, as well as a larger.

IN the exercise of discipline, the more usual process is this. -- The
president or tutors, separately or in conjunction, privately reason with the
offender, in order to make him sensible of his ill conduct; and endeavor, by
their manner of address, to convince him, that in their proceedings against
him, they are actuated from motives of sincere regard to his own welfare, and
that their severity is not the effect of moroseness, ill nature, or personal
resentment. If the offense charged, be denied, evidences are adduced in proof
of it. But if the youth discovers an ingenuous temper, by an open frank
acknowledgment, such a disposition is encouraged, by a mitigation of the
punishment. On the other hand, all low and dishonest artifices, particularly
lying and wilful equivocation, are resented as the highest aggravations. In the
result, if found guilty, according to the nature of the offense, he is
dismissed either with a private reprimand, or required to submit to a public
formal admonition; -- or, to make a penitent confession in the hail, before the
whole house; -- or, deprived of some of the peculiar privileges of his class;
-- or, for some limited time, prohibited a free conversation with his fellow
students, and admission into their chambers, as unworthy of their society; --
or, suspended from residence, and all the privileges of the college, until the
matter be laid before a committee of six of the trustees. In these several
kinds and degrees of punishment, an impartial regard is had, not only to the
nature of the offense, but also to the disposition, age, rank in college,
habitual conduct, and other circumstances of the offender. Suspension is the
highest censure the president and tutors can inflict. The power of expulsion is
vested in any six of the trustees convened; who, having had no connections with
the offender, cannot be suspected of prepossession or partiality. It may not be
amiss, in this place to remark, that among one hundred and twenty pupils, who,
for this year past, have been under the care of the immediate governors of the
college, there have been but very few, whose conduct has rendered them
obnoxious even to the milder methods of punishment. This is mentioned,
particularly, in due respect to the gentleman who now presides; government
being the most difficult and delicate part of the presidental office. To teach
a classic author, or system of philosophy is a much easier task, than to govern
a society of youth, in the gay and volatile period of life, when the passions
are predominant, and reason but in a forming state; a society, collected from
almost all the several colonies on this continent, educated in different
manners, with different views, and an endless variety of tempers and
circumstances. To govern such a society, so as at once to command their
veneration, and conciliate their love: To grant every innocent liberty, and, at
the same time, to restrain from every ensnaring indulgence: To habituate them
to subjection, and yet maintain their respective ranks without insolence or
servility: To cherish a sense of honor, without self-sufficiency and
arrogance: In a word, to inspire them with such principles, and form them to
such a conduct, as will prepare for sustaining more extensive connections, with
the grand community of mankind; and introduce them on the theater of the world,
as useful servants of their country. -- This is the task, the arduous task, of
a governor of the college: To which, how few are equal!

AS to the branches of literature taught here, they are the same with those
which are made parts of education in the European colleges, save only such, as
may be occasioned by the infancy of this institution. The students are divided
into four distinct classes, which are called the Freshman, the Sophomore, the
Junior, and the Senior. In each of these, they continue one year; giving and
receiving, in their turns, those tokens of respect and subjection, which belong
to their standings; in order to preserve a due subordination. The Freshman year
is spent in the latin and greek languages, particularly in reading Horace,
Cicero's Orations, the Greek Testament, Lucian's dialogues, and Xenophon's
Cyropaedia. In the Sophomore year, they still prosecute the study of the
languages, particularly Homer, Longinus, etc; and enter upon the sciences,
geography, rhetoric, logic, and the mathematics. They continue their
mathematical studies throughout the Junior year; and also pass through a course
of natural and moral philosophy, metaphysics, chronology, etc. and the greater
number, especially such as are educating for the service of the church, are
initiated into the hebrew. As to this so unhappily unpopular language, no
constraint is laid upon the youth to the study of it. But it is to be wished,
it may soon be more universally esteemed, a useful and important acquisition,
as we are told it already is, among the politest literati in Europe. It opens
an inexhaustible fund of criticism, both to the divine, and the poet. But the
reader is referred to Mr. Addison, Spec. vol. 6. N. 405, where are displayed
the superior beauties of the sacred poesy. -- To return, the Senior year is
entirely employed in reviews and composition. They now revise the most
improving parts of the latin and greek classics, part of the hebrew bible, and
all the arts and sciences. The weekly course of disputation is continued, which
which was also carried on through the preceding year. They discuss two or
three theses in a week; some in the syllogistic, and others in the forensic
manner, alternately; the forensic being always performed in the english tongue.
A series of questions is also prepared, on the principal subjects of natural
and revealed religion. These are delivered publicly, on sundays, before a
promiscuous congregation, as well as the college, in order to habituate them
early to face an assembly, as also for other important and religious ends, to
which they are found conducive. There is likewise a monthly oration-day, when
harrangues, or orations of their own composition, are pronounced before a mixed
auditory. All these compositions before mentioned, are critically examined with
respect to the language, orthography, pointing, capitalizing, with the other
minutiae, as well as more material properties of accurate writing.

BESIDE these exercises in writing and speaking, most of which are proper to
the Senior class, on every monday three, and on the other evenings of the week,
excepting saturdays and sundays, two out of each of the three inferior classes,
in rotation, pronounce declamations of their own composing, on the stage. These
too are previously examined and corrected, and occasion taken from them, early
to form a taste for good writing. The same classes also, in rotation, three on
tuesday evenings, and two on the other evenings, with the exceptions just
mentioned, pronounce, in like manner, such select pieces from Cicero,
Demosthenes, Livy, and other ancient authors; and from Shakespeare, Milton,
Addison, and such illustrious moderns, as are best adapted to display the
various passions, and exemplify the graces of utterance and gesture. A good
address, and agreeable elocution, are accomplishments so ingratiating, and so
necessary to render a public speaker, especially, popular; and consequently
useful, that they are esteemed here, as considerable parts of education, in the
cultivation of which no little pains are employed.

THE classics are taught, for the three first years, in nearer the usual method
of grammar schools, than in the last. The students then revise them,
principally as examples of fine composition. They first give a more literal
translation of a paragraph, afterward the sense in a paraphrase of their own,
and then criticize upon the beauties of the author: In which work they are
assisted by the president. No authors are read more particularly with this
view, than Homer, Horace, and especially Longinus -- "Whose own example
strengthens all his laws,
"And is himself the great sublime he draws.


EACH class recites twice a day; and have always free access to their teachers,
to solve any difficulties that may occur. The bell rings for morning prayer at
six o'clock, when the senior class read off a chapter from the original into
english. The president then proposes a few critical questions upon it, which,
after their concise answers, he illustrates more at large. The times of
relaxation from study, are about one hour in the morning, two at noon, and
three in the evening: And in these are included the public meals. Evening
prayer is always introduced with psalmody; and care is taken to improve the
youth in the art of sacred music.

THE usual method of instruction in the sciences is this. -- The pupils
frequently and deliberately read over such a portion of the author, they are
studying, on a particular science, as it is judged, they can be able thoroughly
to impress upon their memories. When they attend their recitations, the tutor
proposes questions on every particular they have been reading. After they have
given, in their turns, such answers, as show their general acquaintance with
the subject, he explains it more at large; allows them to propose any
difficulties; and takes pains to discover whether his explications be fully
comprehended. Advantages, which are seldom attainable, in the usual method of
teaching by lecture.

IN the instruction of the youth, care is taken to cherish a spirit of liberty,
and free enquiry; and not only to permit, but even encourage their right of
private judgment, without presuming to dictate with an air of infallability, or
demanding an implicit assent to the decisions of the preceptor.

THE Senior, Junior, and (toward the conclusion of their year) the Sophomore
classes, are allowed the free use of the college library, that they may make
excursions beyond the limits of their stated studies, into the unbounded and
variegated fields of knowledge; and, especially, to assist them in preparing
their disputations, and other compositions. But the comparatively small
assortment of modern authors, in the library, is one of those remediless
disadvantages, this institution must lie under, until its funds will afford an
enlargement. The present collection entirely consists of the donations of the
charitable, both in Europe and America. However, should the trustees themselves
remain incapable of making additions; it is yet encouraging, that valuable
benefactions of this sort are still, now and then received. Gentlemen who are
liberally disposed, but know not what books the library is already possessed
of, may peruse the catalogue, lately published, for the information of the
public in this matter. --

BUT to proceed -- On the third Wednesday in August annually, the Senior class
are examined by the trustees, the college officers, and other gentlemen of
learning then present, throughout all the branches of literature, they have
been here taught. And if approved, as worthy of academical honors, the
president assigns them the parts, they are respectively to perform at the
anniversary commencement; the general proceedings of which, are so publicly
known, as to superceed all necessity of description. They are then graduated
Bachelors of Arts. After an interval of three years, they are usually admitted
to the Master's degree. But to this latter, the terms of admission, for these
few years past, have not been so lax and indeterminate as formerly. In the year
1760, the trustees made a resolve upon this head, which it may not be improper
to insert here, as it stands recorded in in the minutes of their proceedings,
and is as follows. --

THE conferring academical Honors, was intended as an Incentive to a laudable
Ambition in Study, and as a Reward of literary Merit. And the different Degrees
of these honorary Distinctions, conferred successively, at different periods,
suppose a proportioned Increase of literary Merit; and consequently a
sufficient Time of Residence in College, for the further Prosecution of Study;
and a proper previous Examination to discover the Improvement of the
Candidates. But when promiscuously distributed, as cursory Formalities after
the usual Time, without any previous Evidence of suitable Qualifications, they
sink into Contempt, as insignificant Ceremonies; and no longer answer their
original Design. Therefore the Trustees determine to admit none to the Degree
of Master of Arts, but upon the following Terms.

ALL Candidates for a Master's Degree, shall reside in or near the College, at
least one Week immediately preceding that Commencement, at which they expect
to receive their Degrees: during which Time, they shall submit to the Laws and
Orders of the College: and on the Tuesday Morning, immediately preceding the
last Wednesday of September, (on which Day the Anniversary Commencement is
held,) they shall attend in the College, in order to pass such an Examination,
as the Trustees, then present, shall think necessary; especially in such
Branches of Literature, as have a more direct Connection with that Profession
of Life, which they have entered upon, or have in View; whether Divinity, Law,
or Physic. And shall make such Preparations for the Commencement, as the
Officers of the College shall judge proper.

AS so short a Residence can be an intolerable Inconvenience to but very few,
and will render a second Degree a real Honor, the Trustees will not dispense
with it in ordinary Cases. Yet as the Circumstances of some Persons, of
sufficient Accomplishments, may render them incapable of Residence, they are to
inform the President by Letter, some convenient Time before the Commencement,
at which they intend to offer themselves Candidates, of the Reasons of their
Incapacity, that the Trustees may judge, whether they are sufficient for a
Dispensation for the whole, or any Part of the Time required.

THIS law, as is declared in another place, extends also to the bachelors from
other colleges, who stand candidates for a higher degree, than they have yet
been admitted to. Graduates from other colleges, upon producing their diplomas,
or other sufficient testimonials, are admitted AD EUNDEM, without any previous
examination: But then, it is inserted in their diplomas, and publicly declared
by the president, to be conferred HONORIS CAUSA, according to the practice of
some universities abroad. And with regard to all. -- None are admitted without
testimonials of their good moral conduct, while absent, signed by two or more
gentlemen of note and veracity, in the place where they have resided; or,
unless recommended by one of the trustees, or college officers, from personal
knowledge.

AS to admission into the several classes, these are the regulations. --
Candidates for admission into the lowest or freshman-class, must be capable of
composing grammatical latin, translating Virgil, Cicero's Orations, and the
four evangelists in greek, and, by a late order, must understand the principal
rules of vulgar arithmetic. Candidates for any of the higher classes, are not
only previously examined, but recite a fortnight upon trial, in that particular
class for which they offer themselves; and are then fixed in that, or a lower,
as they happen to be judged qualified: But, unless in very singular and
extraordinary cases, none are received after the junior year.

BESIDE these examinations for admission into the respective classes, and the
last examination of the senior class, previous to their obtaining the first
collegiate honors; the three inferior classes, at the end of every year, are
examined in such of the classics, arts and sciences, as they have studied, in
order for admission into the next: And such as are found unqualified, are not
allowed to rise in the usual course. These, in like manner as the last
examination of the senior-class, are attended upon by the president and tutors,
in conjunction with any other gentlemen of liberal education, who choose to be
present. Dr. Finley has also instituted quarterly examinations of the three
classes, before mentioned: But these are not so universal as the former, being
restricted only to what they have studied, during the quarter. They have been
found to answer excellent purposes; for thereby, the instructors can easily
observe the gradual progress each one makes; and are thence enabled, either to
encourage or warn them, as their several cases require. Hence also, as it may
be imagined, it has not a little conduced, to the assiduity and carefulness of
the students, in their daily preparations.

THERE is a grammar school annexed to the college, as a nursery for it, under
the general inspection of the president, though not a part of the original
constitution. This was first set up by president BURR, and has been handed down
to his successors, the trustees taking it under their patronage, during the
several vacancies in that office. Besides the latin and greek languages, into
which the youth are here initiated, they have been also early taught the graces
of a good delivery, and spent a small portion of every day in improving their
handwriting; for which purpose, a proper attendant has been hitherto
provided. But this expedient being found by experience not fully to answer
those purposes, it was lately judged proper that an english school should be
also established, for the sole intention of teaching young lads to write well,
to cipher, and to pronounce and read the english tongue with accuracy and
precision. The trustees, in consequence, have engaged in their service, a young
gentleman, peculiarly well accomplished as a teacher; who has now opened this
school; which, in like manner with the grammar school, is put under the general
superintendency of the president of the College.

INTO these schools, there are no other terms of admission, than the payment of
twenty shillings, entrance money; according to the custom of most academies.
Standing institutions of this nature must have masters to support and manage
them, whether there be few or many scholars, hence the propriety and necessity
of requiring something additional at their entrance. The case is somewhat
similar also in the college; the officers of which are, in a great measure,
supported from the tuition money; the fund being quite inadequate to that
purpose. But what is here previously paid, is not so properly entrance money,
as a small acknowledgment for the dispensation, in regard to the proper charges
of the foregoing year or years, which, according to the custom of other
colleges, ought to have been spent here. This is required of those only, who at
their first coming, enter into the Sophomore or Junior classes: For later, none
are received, unless in very singular cases, as has been already mentioned. At
entering into the former, twenty shillings is paid, being the fourth part of
the tuition money for the preceding year: And on admission into the latter,
forty shillings, the fourth part of same, for the two foregoing years.

WE come now to give some account of the manner, together with the expenses of
boarding. It is true, so minute a detail of the little affairs of a college,
affords but a dry and unentertaining story: And a relation of the economy of a
kitchen and dining room, would be still more low and vulgar. But as the
judicious reader must be sensible, that a proper regulation of these matters,
is of more consequence to such a community, than a thousand things that would
make a more shining figure in description; it is presumed, that some account of
them may be expected; and then he will excuse the dullness of the narrative, for
the sake of the importance of the information, to those especially, who may
incline to educate their sons at this college.

IT is the business of the steward to provide all necessaries for the use of
the society, to employ cooks and other servants to cleanse the chambers, make
the beds, etc. The tutors, and all the students, and sometimes the president,
eat together in the dining hall, always seated according to rank and seniority.
No private meals are allowed in their chambers, except with express license on
special occasions. Tea and coffee are served up for breakfast. At dinner, they
have, in turn, almost all the variety of fish and flesh the country here
affords, and sometimes pyes; every dish of the same sort, and alike dressed, on
one day; but with as great difference, as to the kinds of provision, and manner
of cookery, on different days, as the market, and other circumstances will
admit. Indeed, no luxurious dainties, or costly delicacies can be looked for
among the viands of a college, where health and economy are alone consulted in
the furniture of the tables. These, however, are plentifully supplied, without
weight or measure allowance: And the meals are conducted with regularity and
decorum; waiters being constantly in attendance. The general table-drink is
small-beer or cider. For supper, milk only is the standing allowance; chocolate
is sometimes served as a change. Some of the young gentlemen choose, at times,
and are indulged, to make a dish of tea in their apartments, provided it be
done after evening prayer; that the time spent therein, may not interfere with
the hours of study; except in cases of indisposition, or other circumstances,
which are previously laid before one of the officers, in order to a permit. But
this is an article wholly of private expense.

THE annual charge of education, including tuition money, chamber rent,
steward's salary, servants wages, washing, firewood, and candles, with
contingencies, may amount, communibus annis, to about twenty five pounds six
shillings lawful money of New Jersey; for the market rises and falls; and on
some of those articles, the expenses are arbitrary. Hence frugality in the
student, may sometimes, without meanness, reduce the account. The particulars,
as they stand, for the most part, in the steward's books, are here specified,
and charged upon an average.

Tuition-money L 4 0 0 Boarding, steward's salary, and servants wages inclusive
15 0 0 Chamber rent 1 0 0 Washing 3 0 0 Wood and candles 2 0 0 Contingent
charges 0 6 0

THOUGH this institution has succeeded, beyond the expectation of its warmest
friends, notwithstanding the severe shocks it received, by the death of three
presidents, in so quick succession; and its unsettled state, till the chair was
filled; yet it still labors under several deficiencies, which nothing but the
beneficent hand of charity can relieve. With mathematical instruments, and an
apparatus for experiments in natural philosophy, it is but very indifferently
furnished. The library wants many of the most approved modern writers, as has
been already hinted. It would be also of eminent service, had it revenues ample
enough, to support professors in some of the distinct branches of literature;
who might each make a figure in his own province, could his studies and
instructions be confined to his peculiar department. A professor of divinity,
especially, for the benefit of the theological students, would be of singular
utility. At present, there are three tutors, besides the president. To these,
the college fund, can as yet, afford but scanty livings; the tutors
particularly, unless they assume a vow of celibacy, are unable to continue in
their offices for life. Hence it happens, that when a young gentleman has, by
study and experience, thoroughly qualified himself for the employment, he often
resigns it; and the trustees are then obliged to elect another, perhaps out
equally fit for it. Affluent revenues are, indeed, too often fatal snares to
political bodies, as well as individuals. And should a professorship be
converted into a money-jobb, or lucrative post, and the salaries be so
considerable as to become objects of avarice and ambition to unworthy men, it
might be a much greater misfortune to the society, than its present indigent
state. Hence an income, just sufficient to supply the abovementioned defects,
and to afford such livings to a proper number of tutors or professors, as would
enable them, decently to maintain their families, seems only to be desirable
and requisite.

THE fund, until within about a year past, has not much exceeded 1300 l. but
from a lottery, which was generously set on foot by a number of gentlemen in
Philadelphia, in favor of the institution, it was increased to nearly 2800 l.
the neat produce of the same, after necessary charges, and losses which usually
happen, besides what was disbursed to pay urgent debts, being about 1500 l.
Exclusive of the annual support of officers, the expenses from other quarters
are not inconsiderable; nay, do yearly increase, as the number of students
increase. The trustees have been obliged to complete the chambers of one whole
story of the building, which were at first left unfinished, not being then
wanted; and to build a large kitchen, with servants apartments, both to answer
its peculiar intention, and, at the same time, to leave more room for lodgings
in the college itself. This too still remains without a proper enclosure of its
courtyard and back grounds; which would greatly add to the beauty, as well as
real convenience of the hall. In the plate hereunto annexed, the courtyard is
represented as enclosed by a pale-sence, in like manner with that of the
president's house: But this is done only from the fancy of the engraver.
These, together with several other mediums of expense, will unavoidably
exhaust all the cash, that can possibly be spared from its slender fund. Hence,
is easily seen, the impossibility under present circumstances, of making new
additions or improvements, either in regard to books, an apparatus, or
establishment of professorships. Indeed, from the countenance of the general
assembly of this province, in passing an act for a lottery of three thousand
pounds, for the benefit of this college, some good addition will probably be
made to its revenues. But the returns of this lottery, which was lately drawn,
are not yet made; the accounts being still unsettled. However, much greater
losses have accrued therein, than might have been reasonably expected,
especially from the very unfortunate issue of the tickets left, on the risque
of the college, at the time of drawing. So that the managers have reason to
think, that, on the close of their books, the clear profits will not much
exceed l. 2200. Such an accession can only enable the trustees, to make some
addition, perhaps, to the annual allowances of the college officers; though not
such as will be sufficient to retain them for life, in the character of
professors, much less to maintain a greater number. Besides, it is not
improbable, that by the time they reap the interest of it, another building may
become necessary: For an addition of 25 or 30 students more would fill the
present house, in such a manner, as that by no possible contrivance, it could
be made to contain a greater number, with any tolerable convenience or comfort.
And should the numbers increase, in the same proportion they have done, for
these three years past, (which is as 50 to 70) the necessity of such additional
building, will be no distant event. This, however, would be a work impossible
to be carried into execution, upon the strength of the present funds.

BUT beside the occasions of public encouragement abovementioned, and the many
private benefactions received, since the foundation of this seminary; it is
matter of pleasure to acquaint its friends, that, not long since, a very
generous legacy was ordered in the will of the late col. Alford, of
Charlestown, in the Massachusetts Bay: The sum designed for this college, is
not yet precisely ascertained, that being left to the discretion of his
executors: It is presumed however, from good intelligence, that the
appropriation here will not be less in value than l. 500 sterling. Benefactions
of this sort are peculiarly honorable, -- an indubitable indication of a warm
regard for the interests of learning, and of the testator's high sense of the
utility of this seat of education in particular. No actions of a man's life are
more memorable, than his deeds of liberality, before the hour of death; when
chiefly he considers, what distribution of the gifts of Heaven, may be most
agreeable to the will of his divine benefactor. May providence excite an
emulation in the breasts of others, among the virtuous and opulent, to follow
an example of such laudable and christian benevolence: A benevolence, which
will extend its influence to remote posterity, and advance the genuine felicity
of their country, when they are received into everlasting habitations, and are
triumphing in the enjoyment of a glorious RECOMPENSE OF REWARD.

THUS is exhibited a faithful account of the origin and present state of the
college of New Jersey: -- A college, originally designed for the promotion of
the general interests of christianity, as well as the cultivation of human
science. This end therefore is kept in view, in all the instructions and modes
of discipline: To inculcate or even recommend the discriminating opinions of
any one protestant denomination in preference to another, is carefully avoided.
In those matters, the students are left without any bias offered to their
private judgments; and are always allowed, without restraint, to attend the
religious worship of any protestant society, whenever they have opportunity.

UPON the whole, it is presumed it must appear manifest upon reflection, to
every serious observer, that providence has, in a peculiar manner,
superintended the affairs of this nursery, from its foundation to the present
time. And indeed, it is esteemed by its directors their highest honor and
happiness, that the almighty has vouchsafed so remarkably to countenance and
succeed their undertaking, and thereby to encourage their humble expectations
of his continued benediction. To the singular favor of Heaven, on the means of
instruction here used, it must be gratefully ascribed, that many youth who have
come to Nassau-Hall for education, without any just sense of the obligations
either of natural or revealed religion, have been here effectually reformed,
become men of solid and rational piety, and now appear upon the stage of public
action, employing their talents to the honor of the supreme Bestower, and in
promoting the good of mankind. Hence the managers of this seminary are
emboldened to hope, that while the original design of its establishment is
steadily pursued, the same indulgent providence which has hitherto supported
it, amidst the reproaches of envy, and the oppositions of malice, will still
raise up benefactors to supply its deficiencies; and succeed their
disinterested endeavors to train up our youth in the paths of piety and
erudition, for the future service of their country, in any civil or
ecclesiastical employments.

FINIS.
Proper Forms of Donation to the College by Will.
Of Chattels personal.
Item, I A. B. do hereby give and bequeath the Sum of (...) unto the Trustees
of the College of New Jersey, commonly called Nassau-Hall, the same to be paid
within (...) months next after my Decease; and to be applied to the Uses and
Purposes of the said College.

Of real Estate.
I A. B. do give and devise unto the Trustees of the College of New Jersey,
commonly called Nassau-Hall, and to their Successors forever, all that certain
Message and Tract of Land, etc.




