THE QUAKERS ASSISTING To preserve the LIVES of the Indians in the BARRACKS,
VINDICATED And proved to be consistent with Reason, agreeable to our Law, has
an inseparable Connection with the Law of God, and exactly agreeable with the
Principles of the People called Quakers.

Matthew Chap. 5, verse 11. Blessed are you, when Men shall revile you and
persecute you, and shall say all manner of Evil against you falsely for my Sake;
rejoice and be exceeding glad: For great is your Reward in Heaven, ye are the
Light of the World. A City that is set on an Hill, cannot be hid.

Pert love with her by joint Commission Rules,
In this capacious Realm of idle Fools,
Who by false Hearts and popular Deceits,
The careless fond unthinking Mortal cheats. POMFRET.
For to demand some Questions since there be,
So few as you I think stained with Cruelty,
Is he not merceless that without shame,
Does rob his Neighbor of his honest Name.
G. W. Philadelphia: Printed by Anthony Armbruster, in Moravian Alley, 1764.

THE late Rebellion in the back Inhabitants has been the Occasion of a Number
of Pamphlets being wrote and spread in this Colony, some of which I have seen;
the first was the Narrative; which I Will venture to say is a good Thing. Then
comes the Quaker Unmasked, a Pamphlet I set no more Store by that, than I do by
the Principles of the writer:' In answer to that another was wrote, 'titled the
Presbyterian Looking-Glass, which shows a great deal of ingenuity accompanied
with found Reasons for the public good.

AND I am sorrry the Author made his Period where he did, had he carried his
discourse so far as to have cleared that Matter with regard to the Quakers
assisting the Loyal Citizens to save the Lives of those Indians then in the
Barracks; I should not put Pen to Paper on the Subject.

ALTHOUGH I am not one of that Society myself yet I have a Love for them as I
have for all other good People that were so well adorned with Christian Zeal
and Piety toward GOD; to join as one Man in defense of his righteous Law';
which forbids the shedding of Innocent Blood. -- Because every Person is deemed
innocent in the Eye of the Law* until he is proved Guilty.

I shall quote some of the Mosaic Law or Laws of GOD, as they stand upon holy
Record. -- And by the Valitidy of those Laws I presume to try that Act of
Cruelty committed on the Indian at Lancaster by some of the back Settlers --
the first Law I find given to Man by the great Legislator was to Noah soon
after he came out of the Ark with his Family.

"WHO so sheddeth Man's blood, by Man his blood shall be shed. -- Genesis.
Chap. 9, 6. -- This Law is very explicit and condemns all such who
premeditates the Death of his fellow Creature, and executes it Voluntarily in
cool blood, for it is not possible to construe it otherwise, as there is a
positive Command with Directions, how a Murderer shall be put to Death, -- not
in the malignant Nature of fallen Man, at their own Option, no but quite
otherwise; if you will read the 25th Chapter of Numbers, you will find that the
Goodness of GOD is there displayed in a wonderful Manner, you will see that he
has there given the Law in the most tender and extensive Terms. Not only to the
true born Jew, but to the Stranger and to the Sojourner amongst them I see no
Difference: but an equal Privilege to both -- The Jews were commanded to build
six Cities, three on each Side on the Jordan, which were to be called Cities of
Refuge. -- Those were to be an Asylum or Place of Safty unto every Person that
had slain a Man: -- When once fled to those Cities they were not to be punished
in any Sort until they were brougt to their Trial before the Judges, which I
suppose to be the Sandhackrum so called, which was composed of seventy Men: by
which all Matters of Consequence were determined. And when these Judges were
seated in the Hall of Judgment, they could not pass Sentence upon the Evidence
of one Person, but at least there must be two Witnesses to take the Life of one
Man. Who so kills any Person, the Murderer shall be put to death by the Mouth
of a Witness. But one Witness shall not testify against any one Person to
cause him to die. -- The Law is so particularly regardful of Strangers, I
cannot with Satisfaction omit the Asserting some more of it. -- which has an
inseparable Connection with that blessed Command of our Savior* which is. --
Do unto all Men as thou would have them do unto thee, for that is the whole Law
and the Prophets. The Law speaking of Strangers in Exo. Chap. 22. verse 22,
says, thou shallt neither vex a Stranger nor oppress him: And conceive to
give it the greater Censure on their Minds; the Lord tells them: For ye were
Strangers in the Land of Egypt. And if a Stranger sojourn with thee in your
Land, ye shall not vex them. But the Stranger that dwells with you, shall be
unto you as one born amongst you, and thou shall love him as theyself. Lev.
19.33. Upon the Whole I must conclude that the Privileges in the civil
Government of the jewish Nation was as tender to Strangers, and as regardful of
their Happiness as that of the Seed of Abraham. -- I have coated the Laws,
though but a part of those, which promise Protection to Strangers and
Sojourners equal to those of our own Nation. Were not Men corrupted by ill
Principles in Education, and bidding Defiance to Laws, both Moral and Divine,
-- I question whether there is any Nation of People in the World at this Time
or indeed ever has been: But what has had something of divine Law impressed upon
their Minds in such strong Terms, that they have fell upon Measures of some
Sort to deter every Person from the executing that horrid Crime; but if
perpetrated to punish the Criminal even with Death. -- Cain Cried out my
punishment is greater than I can bare, -- There was no outward Law to punish
him, -- What then? An inward Conviction. A wounded Conscience. -- He first
envied his Brother, and then murdered him the same with Lameck. Genesis iv. verse
23, He said unto his Wives Adah Zillah, hear my Voice ye Wives of Lameck,
harken unto my Speech; for I have slain a Man to my wounding, and a young Man
to my Hurt. We read no outward Law at that Time, it being (if the Word may be
allowed) in the Infancy of Time before the civil Power was so well established
as afterward. The Apostle Paul tells us, that there was some of the Gentiles,
who had not the Law, were a Law unto themselves, -- But why don't every
Christian believe it? if he deserves that Name, for my part, I am confident in
that Belief: -- And I likewise believe, that where the Apostle is speaking of
the Gentiles being endowed with the Spirit of Grace, that they by strictly
adhering to that in themselves, walked as orderly as those that had the Law of
Moses, -- obeying of which is a peculiar Advantage to every Man; a Blessing
that cannot be taken from him while he himself is zealous for his own Good* But
if a Man neglects his Duty, and abandons himself to Wickedness, I believe in
Time it may cease striving with him: When Men give themselves to lying Evils,
and by Degree give way to immoral Acts, they become dark and fenseless to any
Good; and are willing to perpetrate any Crime to serve their Humors, if it be
even Murder itself. But those People, although, they have forsaken the Gifts of
Grace they cannot fly from a guilty Conscience, they have broken the Law of
God, their Punishment is such, that they cannot give themselves Ease* neither
can they receive it from another, there is a continual Knawing, as though their
Bowels were rent in pieces, with Sights of Sorrow, and perpetual Griefs, that
cannot be uttered: A woeful Feeling of the Pains of Hell, and no Relief to be
had, but by delivering themselves up to Justice, and praying to God for Mercy,
desiring that he in his Goodness would admit of that Sacrifice: And make it
acceptable to him, viz. The Life of the Body as an Atonement for the Sins of
the Soul. For Blood it defiles the Land and the Land cannot be cleansed of the
Blood that is shed therein, but by the Blood of him that shed it: -- Numbers
35, v. 33. Here we see how explicit God is respecting Murder how than is it,
or can it be possible that a Christian can here tell of so horrid a Crime as
that committed at Lancaster without the deepest Sorrow mixed with Resentment;
how can a solid thinking Man help saying, that had I been there at the Time,
when the Banditti came, I could have given my All to have saved the Life of
those Indians. "A Man lay down his Life for his Friend says Christ." But do
call them Indians Innocent, how is it possible that Indians can it be innocent?
I answer, they were innocent, for they had never been convicted by the Laws of
God or Man, nor I believe suspected by their Neighbors. They had a just Right
to all the Privileges and Advantages necessary to their Occasions. Why not,
they were certainly our Neighbors dwelling on Lands of their own: But if only
Sojourners, we live enjoined by the Royal Law, to take necessary Care that they
are not Sufferers by us, and that they receive no ill at our Hands, but must
love them as ourselves. Here my Brethren I have produced a Part of those
heavenly Statutes, which are binding to us any Part of the Royal Laws; and by
the Sanction of these very Laws, I shall prove that the Quakers Assisting the
good People of Philadelphia, or His Honors the Governors Request to preserve
the Lives of the Indians then in the Barracks, is consistent with Reason,
agreeable to our Laws, has an inseparable Connection with the Law of God, and
not repugnant to the Rules of their Society,. In the first Place, I consider
God as the alone Source from whence all Good comes. It may be said, that he
has manifested himself two Ways. The one by his Prophets and holy Men, in
former Ages, who received his Law for the establishment, the Happiness and the
Tranquillity of Mankind in their several Stations of Life. And in the next
Place by his holy Spirit, which convinces to us. Nay it is a plain and
undeniable Truth that we must regulate our Lives and Manners agreeable to the
abovesaid Laws, or we cannot be Christians. -- No nor we cannot be Heathens,
unless be of the most abanded and reprobate Sort, which will cry out with Cain
and Lamach, I have killed my Brother, I have killed my Neighbor, I am hurt, I
am wounded, my Torment is greater then I can bear. I assert it to be impossible
for a faithful Christian to be out of the Reach of this Law, while he is on
this Side of Eternity, it is ingrafted in him in such a manner that he cannot
serve God and Family, omits that, which is the most assential part of his Duty
in civil Society, viz. The Safety or Preservation of his Fellow Creatures Life,
then I conclude, that the spiritual instinct, which the animal part has a
Sympathy which binds the whole Creature to act for the Safety of his Neighbor
as that of himself, -- if any Man, denies this at the same Time he denies God
-- But still the Quakers are blamed, -- I ask for what? (...) says the
Unmasker, they have diviated from their Principles: -- I ask what their
Principles are? Surely not to murder their Neighbors in cool Blood: -- No
says the Unmasker, that is not my Meaning, -- Then I ask what? they have
foresook their Principles, -- Here it seems as though I should answer for
him, and say that when my Brethren were coming down from Lancaster under Arms
to kill the Indians* and endeavored to send a Report by their Agents, that
their Number was seven Times more then they realy were; -- Then the Quakers
joined with the other Citizens, some in getting the Cannon to the Barraks, some
few I suppose, carried Muskets, and were as active as any others in Helping to
keep the Indians from being murdered: -- Alas; is this the chief Basis on
which their monstrous Mould Hill is build. why all this is exactly genuine, and
agreeable to the best Saints principlels on Earth, those Indians had fled to
the City of Refuge they had made the Barracks their Asylum, they were to be
protected by the Royal Law, -- Then I say that every loyal Subject (present) in
the Kingdom of Christ were bligated to lend their Assistance, -- But why are
the Quakers blamed more than any other Denomination, seeing the Church,
Annabaptist and even the Romans joined as one Man, whose Minister as I have
been told, cautioned his Hearers with whatever you do, don't join the Rebels,
but if you act, let it be in behalf of the Province, this was true Loyalty. Of
all Denomination of People that dwells upon the Earth, he that fears God,
i. e. pays a just Regard to his Laws, and works Righteousness, shall be
saved. I think there is no prudent Man that will say all they have done for it;
was no other than in Obedience to the Law of Heaven in building a City of
Refuge, to secure their Neighbors from premeditated Murder, because they have
had Experience in the Instance of Lancaster, that Walls build with Hands, could
be a Place of no Safety, neither do I conceive that any other Measures would
have succeeded, but by honestly acting as the royal Law directs. -- Hour, this
I am sure, there is no one can make it appear inconsistent with the strictest
Rules of Justice. -- And under the Blessing of Heaven, it answered all the good
Purposes desired -- Surely there is not one has Reason to find Fault with a
Building, which when erected suits the Builders purpose -- But this Building is
of a more worthy and elegant Nature -- This was built by God his Laws were the
Materials and the loyal Citzens of Philadelphia, were his Workman. blessed is
the Man that knows his Masters Will and does it, blessed are you, when men
shall revile, and persecute you, and shall say all Manner of Evil against you,
falsely for my Sake, Matt. 1, 11. Well this is the very Situation my beloved
Citizens, that you are in. -- This Unmasker has been gathering of filth and
flinging at you for some weeks past but for want of skill or steady hand he has
bespatterd his own Garments, that he realy appears to be a dirty Fellow --
Although he seems to point his Shaft at the Quakers: Notwithstanding the
prudent Reader will undoubtedly see that the vindictive Spirit stops not, here
the Unmasker reveals the Quakers for acting, because they are Principled
against war both offensive and defensive. -- Let that be the case, -- their
Principles still remain untoucht in that particular, for here is no War amongst
Men that I know of, but Nation against Nation or the King and Parliament one
against the other, which is called a civil War, -- shall this be called a War,
when a Number of ill minded Men collected into a Body, and threaten Destruction
to their Neighbors in the same Province, I say, shall this be called War, no
it is not War; it is an insulting Act of Rioters and no other, -- then where is
the War on the other Side of the Question, can any Nation or People defend
themselves in that of actual defensive war, when there is no Oponent, what a
fallacious way of Argument is this, besides, can it be thought morraly possible
that any religious Society of People, could supprese such an act of Cruelty in
Speculation for they could never think it would be perpetrated, is that a
sufficient Reason for a Society to establish a Rule, whereby every member, thus
acting must be disowned, -- we'll suppose the Case is as follows -- why not a
Member of that Society must ever use any Endeavors, even to save the Life of a
tender Mother or a sucking Infant, least he should be thrown over the Hedge.
One of the Prophets speaking in the Name of the Lord, concerning Isreal's
offering their Children to Molac. says, "I never thought of such a thing,
neither has it entered into my Heart." There is no religious Society in the
known World that can make such a Rule to forbid themselves assisting in saving
the Lives of their fellow Creatures; let the Number of the Destroyers be small
or great: But there is no such Rule. Then I ask, how it is possible to deviate
from or transgress a Rule, which has no Being under Heaven. The Apostle Paul
says, "where there is no Law, there is no Transgression." I am well assured
this Unmasker would have had as much Reason to have blamed the good People of
the City, if they had clapped the Indians in the Workhouse-Yard and secured them
there, as to have defended them at the Barracks, the odds is none in fact, the
stone Walls would then have been their Asyalum. As in the other the Number of
Men with their Preparation, was their City of Refuge, but our Workhouse could
have been no more a Place of Safety to them Indians, than Lancaster Workhouse
to their Brethren; I understand the fundamental of the Quakers Principles, are
to be guided and directed in this Life by the Spirit of God: well if so, that
holy Spirit that gave the abovementioned Law, was the Spirit of the same God,
-- then I am sure there is not any thing can or will argue in stronger terms
for their tender Principles than their honorable Procedures in Philadelphia, --
for God is the same, his Spirit ehe same, his Rule and Sovereignty the same: --
then whatever Men opposes or vilifeyes their Principles in this Race, must
disregard the Law, despise the Spirit that gave it, and bid Defiance to the God
of all Flesh. I ask our Unmasker if he is the Man.

PHILANTHROPOS.
P. S. I look upon this Pamphleteer to be a very injudicious Man to caluminate
a Society of religious People in the Manner he has the Quakers, but this may
be only his Mask, for I think it is evident by the Scope of his writing, that he
hates his King, his Governor and even his Country too, under the present
Constitution, as ill as he hates the Quakers: -- And if Oppurtunity served his
Inclination would unmask himself, with as much zeal as he has the Quakers, with
Bitterness of Mind.: I have never been told by any moderate Man, be of what
Society he might, that the Quakers have ever been a troublesome restless People
under any Government, although I believe they have suffered the most of any
religious Society now in the World, and that for Conscience sake only; how
zealously steady were they at the Time that King Charles the First and Oliver,
when in the Hight of all the Quarrel; -- Did the Quakers ever riot, Mutiny or
plot against the Government. No but bore every Revolution with Meekness and
Fortitude; in the Times of their Persecutions, when their Meetings were broken
up by Officers, themselves thrown into nasty Dungeons, others suffered a
Confiscation of their whole Estate, some died in Prison: in short every way
afflicted, that Malice could think of, and the chief Instigators of this were
Men as like our Unmasker, as a Cock is like a Dunghill Foul, and after all
those Persecutions, Sufferings and Trials, these peaceable People have
undergone; the Unmasker seems to want them to have been Rebels to their God and
their King, and sacrifice their most righteous Principles to have paved the Way
for his Brethren, who intended to offer the Blood of the Indians in the
Barracks for a Peace Offering to their great God Presbytery, -- But thank
Fortune he know them better by this Time, and may plainly see that there is
more Loyalty by nine Degrees in the Quakers, than in himself and all his
Adherents, he tells us he has been unmasking the Quakers, if that be so, he has
neglected the Beam in his own Eye, while he has been peeping for a Mote in his
Neighbors; for I Will venture to say, not only his Mask is put off, he is almost
stripped to the Buff. I think there is but one spoted Garment to cover his Body,
one pluck more strips him, don't mistake me my Brethren, it is not my Work or
at least, but Part of it. It Is those Gentlemen the Authors of the Looking-Glass
and the Quakers vindicated, that used their Neighbor in that Manner. Hour
stripping a Man is not Murder. etc.



Judgment.
When this appears in the Land,
I Am surely judged you will see,
One that does for the Quakers stand,
And must their Creature be.
Contentment.
IN do you rather be a Servant to the brave,
Than to a Tyrant or a Tyrants Slave,
I choose a Life therefore in peace to dwell,
Be clear of Tyrants and their noisy Hell.
The Bitter venom that those do indite,
From the dark Regions of the infernal Night.
Has spread ev' from the Earth to the Sky,
But must again to the Dark Regions fly,
Justice.
I have presumed my Neighbors Cause to plea
By act of Justice thus to Interceede,
And vindicate the Actions of the Brave,
Who ventured all their Neighbors Lives to save
The Blessing of the Gods on them may fall,
When Tyrants shall be destitute of all,
And those poor Creatures that now vent in Pride
The Time may come that the'll be laid aside,
Mercy.
Those Actions that are worthy of all praise*
The heavy Hands and drooping Hearts will raise
And help their Thoughts that they ascend on high
To the blessed Region through the Starry Sky,
And there implore the Fountain of all good,
To put a stop to the shedding of Man's blood,
Where no Conviction can be pleased upon,
Nor no Transgresion that they have ever done.
Love.
My fellow Subjects let us join and pray,
Unto that GOD that Rules both Night and Day,
That he be pleased to put away the Cause,
Why wicked Men do break his Righteous Laws,
And give Repentance to the Sinner great,
That does his Laws and blessed Statutes break,
That in this World they may Repentance find,
And not hereafter be to Hell resigned.
FINIS.

