THE TIMES A POEM.

To -- --
SIR,
SEEING thou art the undoubted assertor, supporter and protector of all our
religious and civil liberties, neither the world nor you will, I presume, think
the following Poem unaptly addressed to so distinguished a character -- Is it
not you who have always boldly stood in defense of the liberties of this people
against the encroachments of the prerogative, or the evil designs of wicked and
corrupt men to destroy them? -- Is it not you who have council'd again and
again a prudent acquiescence to that greatest of blessings the S -- p A -- t,
rather than a bold and noble opposition, like an uncommon patriot not
preferring your own interest to the loss of your country's love? -- Is it not
you who with a patriotism unparalleled proposed and supported the bold and
manly word Privilege, against the pusillanimous one, Rights, in a certain
spirited address? -- Is it not you who contrived, framed and got passed into a
law the W-rd-n A -- t, by which agreeable to the liberty wherewith Christ has
made us free, we are not pharisaically denied the free use of the air and our
limbs, or the free enjoyment of the benign influence of the Sun which shines as
bright on that day, which is set apart for social worship and religious
converse, as on any other? -- Is it not you who in a populous assembly asserted
in support of the same Act, that the Sabbath was no where so remissly kept as
in this town, an assertion as remarkable for its truth as for the
unhypocritical gravity with which it was delivered? -- In short you are so
continually exerting your abilities in defense of our just rights, liberties
and immunities both religious and civil in this way, that it would be endless
to enumerate them -- I shall therefore take my leave of you with wishing, that
the just reward of such unfeigned regard for religion and your native country,
without one interested view to popularity or HONOR, which you have experienced
in this life may prepare you for the smiles of Him who abhors hypocrisy,
slavery and tyranny. --

I am your humble Servant, The AUTHOR.

THE TIMES. A POEM.
By an AMERICAN.
Omnes profecto liberi libentius
Sumus, quam servimus.
Plaut. in Captivis. POLLIO be kind! nor chide an early crime,
Spawn of chagrine, and labored waste of time;
This heart misguides me with a bent so strong,
It mocks restraint, and boldly errs in song:
Thus crimes indulged such vigorous growth obtain,
Your friendly caution frowns rebuke in vain.
It Is not great Churchill's ghost that claims your ear,
For even ghosts of wit are strangers here;
That patriot-soul to other climes removed,
Well-pleased enjoys that liberty he loved;
No pang resents for W -- to exile driven,
Exults that worth and Pratt are dear to heaven:
Young sure it is not, from whose honey'd lays
Streams a rank surfeit of redundant praise;
For guilt like his what genius shall atone?
D -- n the foul verse that daubs a Stuart's throne.
Cursed lack of genius, or thou soon should know,
This humble cot conceals a tyrant's foe;
By nature artless, unimprov'd by pains,
No favor courts me, and no fear restrains,
Wild as the soil, and as the heavens severe,
All rudely rough, and wretchedly sincere;
Whose frowning stars have thrown me God knows where
A wild exotic neighbor to the bear;
One glebe supports us, brethren cubs we run,
Shoot into form, as fostered by the sun;
No tutoring hand the tender sapling trained,
Through walks of science, nor his growth sustained;
Such fruit he yields, luxuriant wildings bear,
Course as the earth, and unconfined as air:
No Muse I court, an alien to the Nine,
Thou chaste instructress, NATURE! thou art mine;
Come, blessed parent, mistress, muse and guide,
With thee permit me wander side by side;
Smit with thy charms, my earliest joy I trace,
Fondly enamored of thy angel face;
Succeeding labors smother not the flame,
Still, still the dear attachment lives the same.
No idle task the earliest MUSE began,
But marked the morals, ever she praised the man;
To struggling worth supplied no feeble aid,
And wove the honest wreath for virtue's head,
Uncourtly grave, or through the lessened page
Shed wisdom's lore, and humaniz'd the age;
Poured wholesome treasures from her magic tongue,
Instructed, ruled, corrected, blessed, by song:
How changed! how lost! in these degenerate days,
She stuns me with the clamor of her praise:
Is there a villain eminent in state,
Without one gleam of merit? -- she will create;
Is there a scoundrel, has that scoundrel gold?
There the full tide of panegyrick's rolled;
From venal quills shall stream the sugared shower,
And bronze the wretched Lordling -- if in power:
Stamp me that blockhead, which (kind heaven be blessed)
My maker formed my temper to detest,
If sacred numbers I again desert,
The native byas of an honest heart;
Basely to truckle to a wretch in rule,
Or spread a feast for Gods, to cram a fool;
Not for a Monarch would I forge a lie,
To nestle in the sunshine of his eye:
The paths of error if in youth I trod,
Dressed a gay idol in the garb of God,
The pageant shrinks, I weep my folly past,
Heaven frown me dead, but there I Have sinned my last:
G -- e, scarce one lustrum numbers out its days,
Since every tongue was busy in thy praise;
(O make it nameless in the tale of time,
Nor consecrate to ages such a crime;
We loved him, love him still, by heavens do more,
But make us B -- h subjects, we'll adore)
Successful WAR had added wide domain,
And crowded oceans scarce his fleets (...),
United Gaul and Spain his easy prey,
And but compact to give their realms away;
Wherever he bids, consenting B -- s fly,
For G -- e they conquer, or for G -- e they die;
Bless the glad hour, the glorious strife approve,
That sounds his glory, and proclaims their love:
Ah sad reverse! with doubling sighs I speak,
A flood of sorrow coursing down my cheek,
The salient heart for G -- forgets to bound,
Dark disaffection sheds her gloom around;
Fair LIBERTY our soul's most darling prize,
A bleeding victim flits before our eyes:
Was it for this our great forefathers rode,
Over a vast ocean to this bleak abode!
When liberty was into contest brought,
And loss of life was but a second thought;
By pious violence rejected thence,
To try the utmost stretch of providence;
The DEEP, unconscious of the furrowing keel,
Essayed the tempest to rebuke their zeal;
The tawny natives and inclement sky
Put on their terrors, and command to fly;
They mock at danger; what can those appall!
To whom fair LIBERTY is all in all.
See the new world their purchase, blessed domain,
Where lordly tyrants never forged the chain;
The prize of valor, and the gift of prayer,
Hear this and redden each degenerate heir!
Is it for you their honor to betray?
And give the harvest of their blood away?
Look back with reverence, awed to just esteem,
Preserve the blessings handed down from them;
If not, look forwards, look with deep despair,
And dread the curses of your beggared heir:
What bosom beats not, when such themes excite?
Be men, be gods, be stubborn in the right.
Where am I hurried? POLLIO, I forbear,
Again I Am calm, and claim thy sober ear;
To independence bend the filial knee,
And kiss her sister sage economy.
Economy you frown! "O hide our shame!
"'It Is vile profusion's ministerial name,
"To pinch the farmer groaning at the press,
"Commission leeches to adopt the peace;
"That peace obtained, S -- h armies to augment,
"And sink the nation's credit two per cent;
"With barren S -- h bards the (...) to load,
"Both place and pension partially bestowed;
"Nay more, the cave of famine to translate
"Within the purlieus of the R -- l gate;
"While brats from northern hills, full, bat'ning lie,
"Their meagre southern masters pining by."
Peace, peace, my POLLIO! sluice thy sorrows here;
Thy country's ghost now points thee to its bier;
Of foreign wrongs, and unfelt woes no more,
While dogs cry havoc on thy natal shore;
Yon funeral torch November 1st.
that dimly gilds my cell*
Comes fraught with mischiefs, terrible to tell;
It dawns in fables -- too officious ray!
Yet, yet compassionately roll away;
All, all is over, but anguish, slavery, fear,
The chains already clanking in my ear;
O Death! though awful, but prevent this blow;
No more you are censured for the human foe;
Over life's last ebbs, thy dregs of sorrow fling,
Point all my pangs, and stab with every sting;
I Will bless the alternative, if not a slave,
And scorn the wretch who trembles at the grave.
Art thou persuaded, for a moment cool,
That nature made thee slave, and marked thee fool,
That what we won by hardy war, was given,
That non-resistance is secure of heaven;
That persecution in our infant state,
Was nursing kind compassion in the GREAT;
That emigration was not to secure
Our liberties, but to enslave the more;
That charters, privileges, patents, powers,
Were our's till now, and now no longer our's;
To claim exemption by the charter-seal,
Will rashly violate the commonweal;
Juries are nusances, and Traffic worse,
And to be blind, sagacity of course;
The STAMP and LAND TAX are as blessings meant,
And opposition is our free consent;
That where we are not, we most surely are,
That wrong is right, black white, and foul is fair;
That M-nsf -- ld's honest, and that Pitt's a knave,
That Pratt's a villain, and that Wilkes's a slave;
That godlike Temple is not greatly good,
Nor B -- e a rigid Jacobite by blood;
That sordid Gr -- v -- le lately is become
The patron of our liberties at home,
(For whom, now hear me gods! be hell inflamed,
And murderers of their country doubly d -- d)
Now stretch thy pliant faith, adopt this creed,
And be a J-r-d Jng-rs-l An ingenious S -- -p D-str-b-t-r who modestly asserted
in the p-bl-c papers that the S -- -p A -- t was designed to make A -- r-ca
happy by her indulgent Mother, and that it would certainly prove so, if his
country would suffer him to continue in office.
indeed;
If not you are wretched, crawling in the dust,
Condemned, despised, and herded with the just:
Frown honest SATYR! menace what you will,
Rogues rise luxuriant, and defeat you still;
Fatigued with numbers, and oppressed with gall,
One general curse must overwhelm them all:
But O ye vilest vile, detested FEW!
Eager, intent, and potent to undo;
Come out ye parricides! here take your stand,
Your solemn condemnation is at hand;
Behold your crimes, and tremblingly await
The grumbling thunder of your country's hate;
Accursed as ye are! how durst ye bring
An injured people to distrust their K --?
Accursed as ye are, how could ye dare,
To lisp delusion in your M -- h's ear?
How do I laugh, when such vain coxcombs lour,
Some grave pretense of dread, from lawless power;
To hear a scribbling fry, beneath my hate,
Adopt the fraud, and sanctify deceit;
With mean importance, point regardless stings,
To aid injustice menace mighty things;
Nay to such heights of insolence they are flown,
The knaves crave shelter underneath a throne;
A throne all-gracious, such is GEORGE's praise,
Nor shall oppression blast his sacred bays.
Witness ye Fathers! whose protracted time,
Fruitful of story, chronicles the clime;
These howling Deserts, hospitably tame,
Erst snatched ye, martyrs, from the hungry flame;
'Twas heaven's own cause, beneath whose sheltering power
Ye grew the wonder of the present hour;
With anxious car we have drank your piteous tale,
Where woes unnumber'd long and loud prevail;
Here savage demons sporting with your pains*
There boding mischief in a Stuart reigns;
Mark the glad era, when prevailing foes,
The state's fell harples, doubling woes on woes,
Had winged destruction -- VENGEANCE slept no more.
But flung the tyrant from the British shore:
Learn hence ye minions! reverence to the law,
Salvation died not with the great NASSAU.
And shall such sons, from such distinguished sires,
Nurtured to hardships, heirs of all their fires,
Shall they, O pang of heart! thus tamely bear,
Who stalk erect, and toss their heads in air?
Let beasts of burden meanly woo the chain,
WE talk of masters with a proud disdain.
"Prithee forbear rash youth! conceal thy fears,
"A modest silence best becomes thy years;
"Submit, be prudent -- in some future hour,
"You Will feel the iron-gripe of ruthless power:"
Truce spawn of phlegm! thy frozen heart conceal,
Benumbed, unerring, and unapt to feel;
No deed of glory can that soul entice,
Involved in adamantince walls of ice;
Within that bosom is a nook so warm,
That vice or virtue kindles to a storm?
Could nature ever lure thee into sin?
Or bursts of passion thaw the frost within?
Thou happy Cynick! still thy senses lull,
Profoundly cautious, and supinely dull;
And should some hero start his rash career,
Excentric to thy lazy, drowsy sphere;
Be wondrous wise, thy frigid temper bless,
That never wrought thee to a bold excess:
Call truth a libel, treason, honest zeal,
So strange is virtue, and so few can feel;
Call Churchill blockhead, Freedom, madness, rage,
Call injured Wilkes, a monster of the age;
To make me blessed, unite this lay with those,
And then, then kindly rate yourselves my foes.
Fop, witling, favorite, ft -- pm -- n, tyrant, tool,
Or all those mighty names in one, thou fool!
Let mean ambition, fordid lust of pride,
League thee vile Pander! to a tyrant's side;
Sport with thy country's groans, and be the first*
To stab the bosom which a traitor nursed;
Rifle the womb, and on those bowels prey,
To plague mankind, that spawned thee into day
Be eminent, thy little soul exert,
And call forth all the rancour of thy heart:
But should the eye of merit on the lour,
(Though lowly crushed beneath the wheel of power).
Thou art my pity, monster! I forgive,
And beg one only curse, that thou may live.
Where lies our remedy, in humble prayer?
Our lordly butchers have forgot to hear;
It Is rank rebellion, rashness to complain,
And all submission tighter tugs the chain:
Go ask your heart, your honest heart regard,
And manumission is your sure reward;
Would thou be blessed, thy sovereign pride lay by,
To tyrant custom give the hardy lie;
Yon shagg will warm thee, in thy country fleece
Sleeps independence lined with balmy peace;
Would thou be blessed? be diligent! be wise!
And make a chaste sufficiency suffice:
Ye lovely fair! whom heaven's best charms array,
The proud Sultana's of some future day;
Sweet as ye are, complete in every grace,
That spreads angelic softness over the face;
Go ply the loom -- there lies the happy art,
By new avenues to attack the heart;
With labors of your own, but deck those charms,
We'll rush with transport to your blissful arms.
Amid this wreck -- from all aspersions clear,
Nay blush not Peter, honest truths to hear;
Base adulation never stained my lay,
But modest merit must be brought to day;
What though thy great DESERT mounts far above
The mean expression of thy country's love;
In praise like thine, the rustic muse will soar,
Then damned to endless silence -- sing no more.
"With great contempt of power, alone to stand,
"Thy life, and spotless honors in thine hand;
"To wage unequal wars -- and dare the worst,
"And if thy country perish, perish first;
"With pious vigilance the state to guard,
"And eminent in virtue, shun reward;
"No force of avarice warps thy steady heart,
"To meanness, falsehood, or dishonest art;
"A tyrant's mandate, thy supreme disdain,
"Our last, best bulwark in a Sc -- sh r -- n."
These are the honors we to fame consign,
Nay blush not Peter -- these are surely thine.
To close -- dread sovereign at whose sacred seat,
Justice and Mercy, spotless maidens meet;
GEORGE! Parent! King! our Guardian, Glory, Pride,
And thou fair REGENT! blooming by his side!
Thy offspring pleads a parent's fostering care,
Reject not, frown not, but in mercy spare;
Besprent with dust, the lowly suppliant lies,
A helpless, guiltless, injured sacrifice:
If ever our infant efforts could delight,
Or growing worth found favor in thy sight,
If warm affection due returns may plead,
Or faith unshaken ever intercede;
With modest boldness we thy smiles demand,
Nor with salvation from another hand;
Deprest, not helpless, while a BRUNSWICK reigns,
Whose righteous scepter, no injustice stains.
FINIS.

