Liberty and Property vindicated, and the St -- pm-n burnt. A DISCOURSE
Occasionally made, On burning the Effigy of the St -- pm-n, in New London, in
the Colony of Connecticut.

By a Friend to the Liberty of his Country.

Published by desire of some of the Hearers, in the Year 1765.

The Epistle Dedicatory, To the Honorable Gentlemen who are about to pay the St
-- pm-n a Visit, in defense of Liberty and Property.
May it please your Honors,
THIS great work requires the joint assistance of many hands, and calls aloud
for the concurrence of every christian; and all who bear that honorable title,
may be assistant therein, one way or the other, whether it be by their advice,
their prayers, or their purse: But to promote the same in the most expeditious
manner, it is wished that such a glorious undertaking were made a general
concern, and a proper fund raised by subscription, for defraying the charges
arising upon the emergency, which remains to be done. I being fully sensible of
the merit of your cause, heartily wish you success in your undertakings; at the
same time beg leave to advise you that the following DISCOURSE is humbly
dedicated to your honors, by

Your honors most humble and devoted servant, Elizaphan of Parnach, of
Zebulun's Tribe,

Liberty and Property vindicated, And the St -- pm-n burnt.
Introduction, or the Preface.
GIVE audience all ye people, hear my words, O ye wise men, give ear unto me,
ye that have knowledge; for the ear tries words, as the mouth tastes meat:
Hear me therefore, O ye mothers in Israel, and children, and depart not from
the words of my mouth.

Suffer me a little and I will show you that I have yet to speak in behalf of
God and my country.

But first I have an apology to make to the reverend doctors of divinity and
others who may dispute my authority to undertake a matter of such immense
importance; being one of Zebulun, or of the sea-fareing tribe, whose calling is
upon the mighty waters, quite remote from the royal priesthood.

To such I answer with the language of Elibu the son of Barachel the Buzite,
when he waited for an answer from riper age, to reprove Job; I thought days
should speak, and multitude of years teach wisdom; but when I had waited, they
spoke not, but stood still, and answered no more: Then I though it I would answer
my part by showing my opinion; for I am full of matter, and the spirit within
me constrains me to show my opinion, morally, as I am no Dr. of divinity; yet
am I a dear lover of morality, in its clearest shining light, being destitute
of which, no man can make any pretensions to that which is divine. -- And
without intruding upon gentlemen of that holy order, I shall proceed to speak
to the words selected out of sacred history for our present entertainment; --
Which you may find written, EXODUS, xxxii chap. 7th and 8th verses, And the
Lord said unto Moses, get thee down, for thy people which thou broughtest out
of the land of Egypt, have corrupted themselves; they have turned aside quickly
out of the way which I commanded them, they have made a molten calf, and have
worshipped it, and sacrificed thereunto, and said, these be thy gods O Israel,
which have bro't thee up out of the land of Egypt.



IN speaking unto which words, I shall enquire into and explain the words of
the text in regard to primitive times, and compare the time present with them,
to see how nearly they agree in regard to moral conduct, and draw a few
inferences from both, and apply them to your serious consideration; and
conclude with a word or two of advice to all concerned in affairs of immense
importance. And,

1st. My brethren it would be tautology in me to rehearse the history of the
patriarch Moses to you, knowing you, or most of you to be the children of pious
parents, well educated, and bro't up in the fear of the Lord, as I look upon
none of you to be ignorant of the birth, childhood and education of him; you
have read, and your parents have told you the many wonders wrought by Moses, in
bringing his brethren out of the land of Egypt, and out of the house of
bondage, (he being endowed with a strong and sincere regard for the Israelites,
and pity for all under that heavy yoke) how that in honor, truth and fidelity,
he led his countrymen until he came to Mount Sinai, where he was called of God
up into the Mount, and commenced lawgiver from the King of kings; and as this
is the highest pitch of honor that can be conferred upon man, I shall omit
saying any more of the patriarch Moses, but enquire into what happened in his
absence from the people.

Moses, in his absence, left the care of the people to Aaron, for their guide:
The poor people missing their first leader, little though it he was gone their
prime minister to the King of kings, and was consulting for their everlasting
welfare: Being ignorant of this, they asked Aaron to make them gods to go
before them, for they didn't know what became of the man that bro't them out of
the land of Egypt.

Aaron being fond of government, and not having the fear of God before his
eyes, he yielded to the people's request, made a calf, worshipped and
sacrificed thereunto; which is the corruption spoken of in my text, which
kindled the anger of the Lord to speak unto Moses in the manner he did, when in
the mount, saying, Get thee down, etc. as in the text.

My brethren, having found the author and finisher of the calf, let us enquire
into the manner of their worshipping and sacrificing thereunto, in regard to
which, I don't conceive that they had any set modes of worship, as at this day,
for being left of God's teacher, they fell into all manner of error and
confusion, singing and dancing round their molten clalf, or calves (Indian
like) proclaiming, These be thy Gods, O Israel. This was the noise which Joshua
heard, coming with Moses out of the mount, he said, It is not the voice of them
which shout for mastery, neither is it the voice of them that cry for being
overcome, but the noise of them that sing, do I hear. This was their way of
worship, and their sacrifice was much worse.

Every man brake off the golden earrings, which were in their own or their
wives and childrens ears, and bro't them unto Aaron, and Aaron received them at
their hands, and fashioned it with a graving tool; and after he had finished
the calf, he built an alter, and proclaimed a feast to the Lord, and the people
brought burnt offerings and peace offerings, sat down to eat and drink, and
arose up to play. Thus they went on until Aaron had stripped them of every
thing valuable, and made them naked to their shame among their enemies. -- But
Moses drew near unto the camp, saw their unwarrantable proceeding; he saw the
calf and the danceing, and his anger waxed hot; and he took the calf which they
had made, and burnt it in the fire (perhaps a sacred bon-fire which they were
danceing round) ready made, as I don't read that Moses kindled a fire for the
purpose; and when he had burnt the calf, he ground it to powder, and strowed it
upon the water. Our text informs us that this corruption happened suddenly, and
contrary to God's command, which caused many plagues to fall upon the people,
(which I shall not take notice of at present, as time would fail me): Therefore
I must hasten to compare the times present with the former. And

1st. Can we find a Moses in this evil day which we live in? I answer, an equal
to Moses upon, all accounts, is not to be found on earth, but yet we may find a
man of a true patriarch spirit, who may resemble him in many things. And I
think we may dare to nominate secretary PIT to be our Moses, every way
qualified, morally, as Moses was, to lead a people; being endowed with honor,
love, truth and fidelity; and in knowledge of things appertaining to this day,
Pit must exceed Moses, (as Moses is not, neither does any man know of his
sepulcher to this day.)

However, Pit was our prime minister, under whose ministry we flourished; he
was the planner of every operation in time of war, which proved successful to
us in these American wilds: When he was at the helm our country-ship was well
steared; the hearts of the people were made glad, and rejoiced in songs of
victory and triumph over their barbarous and savage enemies, the Indians, and
their associates, the French natives of Canada, and the borders adjacent: By
the blessing of God, and Pitt's superior knowledge and prudent management of
affairs in America, the howling wilderness was stopped in immense silence; and
a period was put to the most inhumane massacres, which was so frequently heard
of amongst us.

Thus the dark, gloomy, melancholy scenes were over, and every thing seemed to
appear with a smiling aspect in all quarters of the world, as well as in
North America. Thus secretary PIT, taking Moses of old for his example,
conducted gloriously, which will redown to his honor in ages to come. -- But O
poor Americans, thy friend being fatigued with the noise of a corrupt set of
people, left the helm to the steerage of E -- l B -- e, who is an emblem of the
primitive Aaron, leading the people into all manner of corruption; as I shall
endeavor to demonstrate by what happened soon afterward: For as Aaron led the
people into corruption soon after Moses went into the Mount, so B -- e is said
to lead the people into mischief, (soon after Pit leaves the helm) by his bad
steerage, etc.

No sooner B -- e takes hold of the helm but there is a wide difference in
government, every action which should tend to promote the freedom of Britons,
is most notoriously made use of to enslave and plague them.

What happens to us in this day, may be said to be worse than Egyptian bondage,
for the Hebrews had nothing to subsist upon, of their own, while in bondage,
and therefore could expect nothing but to labor hard for a livelihood: But
with us my brethren, it is not so; for we had won by conquest, and had great
things in possession. But alas! what we seemed to have is taken away from us,
and gave to the enemies of Britain -- all the conquest and victories gained in
the West Indies, which were of an immense value, together with the free cod
fishery; (which was of as much or more consequence to them than their Romish
creed; for without fish they could not perform the articles of their belief);
all this and more, given up to the nations which waged war against us, in a
time when we were under no obligations to make peace with, (on any terms) much
less insignificant ones.

I say given up without any valuable consideration, for mere nothing that I can
suggest, but only to have it said by our enemies that slavery becomes Britons
more than the enemies to Britain: (who it was that so craftily befriended the
Romish establishment it is hard for any one to say; but I am well assured that
secretary Pit had but little or no hand in it; suffer me to tell you, that the
whole western world feels the effects of the maugre terms of peace); I call
them maugre, because we are like to be starved and cut short of allowance by
the means -- See imposition upon imposition is crowded upon us; and to crown
all corruption, the ST -- PM -- N is coming among us, who is an emblem of the
molten calf, made by Aaron of old in the wilderness; see the manner of his
coming, and the errand come upon, and you will join with me in sentiments that
he is the beast spoken of in my text, and whosoever worships or sacrifices unto
him will be brought to nakedness and shame, as the Hebrews was of old.

The critics will perhaps quere, How a man can be an emblem of a beast? To
such I answer, That I don't mean in bodily shape, but he may be said to be like
unto a beast by having a beastly disposition; as indecency, ingratitude, etc.
is said to be brutish (in man): and we read That man in honor abiding not, is
like the beast that perish. If this be true, this very identical St -- pm-n was
chosen repr -- ive to this colony, he was honored and preferred before any of
his function, he was sent on an important errand to England; his grand design
and business was to present the colony's humble thanks to the king and
parliament, etc. of Great Britain, for their paternal care over us in the late
war, and thankfully to acknowledge every instance of favor received from them
by the colony; also to represent the true state of the constitution of the
government; and to make known the extreme poverty which we were reduced to by
the calamities of a long war, and our inability of making a meet restitution
for their goodness at present (any more than as dutiful subjects ought, so do
we, possess hearts full of gratitude.)

He also was to pray for the continuation of our rights and liberties, as at
the first, and for the security of our properties as at the beginning, without
the least encroachment on our charter: But my brethren, upon his arrival in
Europe, he inhumanly forgot the place of his nativity, and (as it is laid) most
ungratefully betrayed the liberty of his country; and for the sake of a post in
the government, of no great value, he commenced executioner to the death
warrant of it. As Eliphaz said to Job, Should a wise man utter vain knowledge,
and fill his belly with the east wind.

Surely my brethren, the ear of that eastern world had a great effect upon him,
his belly being filled with the east wind, puffed him up with pride and
arrogance, that he thought himself and countrymen rich as Caesar, forgetting
the important errand of the government's humble address; uttering swelling
words of vain knowledge, when in company with the B -- efy'd gentry, saying,
that the colony was able to bare taxation, etc. joined with them in killing his
country, and commenced executioner himself, to serve his countrymen, as he
says. (But as executioner you must mind) O country kill country, O calf, beast,
and antidote against liberty. For it is not possible that he can be the man
which was chosen to represent our cause, and plead for our freedom; but thou
art the beast that is returned with a yoke of bondage to put upon our necks,
saying we are able to bear all this and more, uttering swelling words of vain
knowledge, by misrepresentations and wrong calculations, filling our papers
full of the confusion and noise of the brute.

Instead of coming home with answers of peace, lenity and good will toward us,
he comes inhumanly with a variety of st -- p duties, and very deeply laden'd
with impositions upon us, proclaiming sacrifice, sacrifice unto me, according
to the decree past, bring your silver and your gold, (for I know not the paper
money of your colony); if you are destitute of hard money, you must bring the
extravagancy of your colony. O daughters of Connecticut, you must sacrifice
your gold beads, jewels, earrings, etc. until you are made bare and naked to
your shame (for the beast's sake) for the calf or st -- pm-n will make sterling
of all.

O Connecticut, Connecticut, where is your charter boasted of for ages past (if
the beast is worshipped your charter is void) and the government put upon the
beast's shoulder (who is an ill bred beast nursed and brought up to devour you)
which must be acknowledged by every friend to liberty and property.

By comparing, I find the times present to be in some measure parallel with the
former, if there is any difference it is against us, we being more imposed upon
than our fathers.

I must proceed to draw a few inferences from what has been said.

Is It. From what we have heard we may learn the humane frailty of man, and when
I am exclaiming against others, I do not excuse my self, for I am subject to
many; we not only learn the humane frailty of man, but also the folly of laying
too much stress or dependence on his conduct: Applied to this colony, has it
not been the case in regard to the St -- pm-n? I hope not entirely so: if it
has been the case, I don't wonder that he proves a curse to us rather than a
blessing; For it is written, cursed is man that trusts in man, and that
makes flesh his arm. But least I should go beyond my sphere I must stick to
morality.

And,

IIdly, We may learn from the train of impositions received from the mother
country, the folly in glorying in the roast beef of Old England, since we are
so notoriously flog'd with the spit: A little supe-maugre with contentment, is
preferable to roast beef and plumb pudding, since we are like to pay so dear
for the roast.

For being called Englishmen without having the privileges of Englishmen, is
like unto a man in a gibbet, with dainties set before him, which would refresh
him and satisfy his craving appetite* if he could come at them, but being
debarred of that privilege, they only serve for an aggravation to his hunger.

O my poor brethren in the gibbet of America, that cannot come at the dainties
of Europe, I pity you with all my heart and soul.

IIIdly, Have we learned that corruption is at the helm, and that our country
ship is badly steered? This also teaches us that the watch must be called and
the helm relieved by a better man.

O PIT, is it your watch upon deck? (turn out) take the helm from B -- e, for
he has nigh over set us at times: he has carried such taught sail in the
squals of impositions that our sails are wore threadbare: See the hurricane of
stamp duties coming on, shorten sail timely, down with top-gallant-mast, yards
and sails of pride and vain glory, in with all small kites, and see every thing
snug to stand the storm, like a bold seaman, (bend new courses to the yards)
and for God's sake don't lay us a-troy, for we have been tried sufficiently. If
the gale comes on very hard put before the wind, for the safety of the ship and
our lives. Scud her manfully until the pernicious gale is over and the
mountainous sea of corruption is ran down, or is broken to pieces by a gentle
breeze of liberty, arising to refresh our wearied souls, which have been so
long fatigued with the thoughts of approaching slavery.

IVthly, Have we found a calf to be sacrificed to, in this our day? Let us all,
every living soul here present, or that lives within the precinct, or of
hearing the noise of the beast, take example by that worthy patriarch Moses of
old, and make a sacrifice of the calf, rather than to sacrifice thereunto --
Burn it in the fire, grind it to powder, and strew it upon the ocean, that the
fi^^^y nautiousness of the beast may be cleansed from the earth, and that our
plagues and impositions may not be made wonderful.

Time would fail to tell you of Shadrech, Meshach and Abednego in the fiery
furnace, Daniel in the lion's den, and many other worthies, who have been
faithful in bearing testimony against unjust decrees, etc. and have been
protected by heaven in it their cause being just in the sight of God. For woe
unto them that decree unrighteous decrees. My brethren, fear not the face of
man, in regard to justice and equity: Keep truth of your side, let the world do
what they will: I speak freely unto you all, for I am not afraid, if I loose my
head, I cannot loose my gown or cassock.

A word or two of advice to all concerned in this affair of grand importance,
and I have done.

First of all, my brethren, my advice to you is, to fear God above all things,
honor and love the King and his friends, detest and loath his enemies,
especially his private ones: If you see or hear of any corruption in his
ministry, bear testimony against it; for it is treason in subjects for to keep
silent when they see their prince dishonored; and if by wrong representations
of any corrupt person or persons his subjects become grieved, impoverished or
cut short of their liberty or privileges, let such subjects make known their
grievance that they may be relieved, for whatsoever tends to the poverty of
subjects, by means of the enemies to freedom, is a disgrace to a monarch* For
poor subjects cannot make a rich king.

O freemen of the colony of Connecticut! stand fast in the liberties granted
you by your royal charter.

Plead the injustice of any that means to infringe upon you, by curtailing the
rights and privileges once given you freely, without any design to take them
from you again (without your conduct could be deemed rebellious): and my
opinion is, that it cannot be counted rebelling, for the freemen of this colony
to stand for their absolute rights* and defend them (as a man would his own
house when insulted): For I see no difference in regard to the possession of
either, whether it be by deed of gift or deed of sale. -- Therefore, if any man
in this colony, has, for the sake of filthy lucre, misrepresented matters, so
that ye are grieved, or are like to be cut short of the privileges enjoyed for
many years past.

Go, one and all, go to such a man, and make him sensible of his error, if he
will be convinced of his folly (forgive him) but if he wilfully persists in his
wickedness, use him in such a manner that he will be glad to conform to the
truth; and if he is in any post that unjustly grinds the face of the poor, or
that contributes to your slavery, ask him peaceably to resign it, and if he
refuses to, use him in such a manner that he will be glad to do any thing for a
quiet life, For Britons never must be slaves. And as we read, that he which
being often reproved, hardens his neck shall suddenly be destroyed, and that
without remedy, Therefore take care of Mr. St -- pm-n, alias the molten calf.
AMEN.

A few verses on the occasion, to the former Minister PIT.
FOR Americans relief, appear kind Mister Pit,
Who eat naught of your beef, though flog'd with the spit;
Intercept that old t -- f, the Sc -- m-n's favorite toast,
That feasteth on the beef, and do not pay the roast:
Pray take wit in thy wrath, when met for our relief;
Sc -- m-n you know love broth, pray let us taste the beef.
To the KING.
Long live great GEORGE our King, in peace and harmony,
Of his fame we will sing, if we have liberty;
But if cut short of that, we cannot raise our voice,
For hearts full of regret, sure never can rejoice.
FINIS.

