A LETTER, FROM Batista Angeloni, Who resided many Years in LONDON, To his
Friend MANZONI. Wherein the QUAKERS are politically and religiously considered.
To which is added, The Cloven-Foot discovered.

REM FACIAS -- QUOCUNQUE MODO REM. EPHRATA: Reprinted, and sold by several
Store-Keepers in the County of LANCASTER.

A LETTER, FROM Batista Angeloni to Manzoni.
Dear Sir,
NOTHING has less truth in it than what Voltaire and abbe le Bland have said
relating to the Quakers in this kingdom: it is plain from what the first has
written, that he either was never in their company, or did not attend to their
customs. He describes one of these gentry, with whom he dined, as taking off
his hat, and asking a benediction on his repast; in which he must be absolutely
mistaken: it being the established maxim of this sect, never to perform that
ceremony. A Quaker asks no blessing from heaven before he eats, and has not
gratitude enough to return thanks after he is filled. To say the truth, those
of the church of England do both in a becoming manner.

If it was the spirit of religious enthusiasm that actuated the first Quakers;
it is a spirit of another kind, which reigns amongst them at present. If
simplicity of dress, and simplicity of speech, arose from the humble
consideration of human nature, in the beginning; it is love of singularity,
pride, and personal advantage, which has taken possession of their hearts, and
which continues their dress and manners in this age.

No creature on this globe has half the arrogance of a Quaker; he accosts the
king with Friend George, the minister with Neighbor William, and this without
the least reluctance, distrust of himself, or mark of confusion. What can argue
greater insolence than this of meeting those persons, upon equal terms, and
treating them with the utmost familiarity, whose characters all the world agree
to revere? the son of a Quaker has more confident assurance at ten years old,
than the wildest officer of the king's guards at twenty-five.

They call themselves Christians, but I know not what title they have to that
appellation; there is no sacrament in use in their religion: in fact, they seem
to be a set of fatalists, who agree to call that cause which moves them to
action, a something proceeding from the spirit. I have heard it affirmed in
their company, that the resurrection of the body is not an article of their
faith, if they have any at all.

As their number is but small, they draw advantage from that circumstance,
being all united in the general interest of the sect. They are almost all in
trade, and therefore once in the year they meet in several towns in England, to
know the state of those parts of the country: to those places of rendezvous one
or more of the Quakers of the towns within two hundred miles always come. At
this time their real design of meeting is concealed, by praying and preaching;
it is a religious act to the eye, but a political one at the heart; every
Quaker who assembles brings the state of the Trade of that town from whence he
comes along with him; the particular business of every grocer, mercer, and
other tradesman; his industry, manner of living, and expenses: by this means
the wholesale dealers of London, Bristol, and other great towns, are acquainted
with the characters and commerce of all the tradesmen in the kingdom: they know
whether their business is such as that they may be safely trusted with goods,
if industry, and all other requisites for thriving in trade, are observed in
their affairs.

Thus the Quakers in the lesser towns and cities of England are spies on the
actions of the inhabitants, and preserve their sect from losses in trade. And
for this reason they endeavor to establish one of that persuasion in every
town, if there are none already, who may bring annual intelligence.

Singularity to most people's apprehension stands in the place of merit; a
gimcrack in shell-philosophy will lay out twenty guineas for a shell that is
singular, and without a fellow, though ugly and ill shapen; at the same time he
will not give a farthing for that which has the most elegant shape and greatest
diversity of colors, if the species is numerous. Thus it is not beauty, but
singularity which makes it esteemed.

It is the same thing amongst men; a Quaker with his singularity of dress,
self-sufficient behavior, laconic style, and air of riches, the last of which
he never fails to insinuate to all his customers, catches the eyes of tradesmen
in the country; the apparent probity and power of selling cheap because
wealthy, create him business; men in the country are desirous of talking with
such a man, and thus deal with him from that singularity in him, and that
whimsical disposition in themselves.

The Quakers are extremely punctual and honest in trifles, conscious that men
wear out their characters before they make their fortune, who proceed otherwise
in trades where riches are gotten by degrees.

But, in matters of consequence, the right of the thing is not the question;
the power of obtaining it by artifice is the only object to be considered; and,
if a fortune can be made at once, there is little hesitation about the manner
how.

Is it not a little surprising, that a set of men of such principles as the
Quakers profess, could be suffered to take root in any nation? notwithstanding
they have covered all the political maxims which they adopt, by the veil of
religion. In the last rebellion which happened in England, they openly avowed
that their principles would not allow them to oppose it. This was nothing to be
remarked in a Quaker, and drew no sarcasm on the sect: yet a man of the
established church would have been stigmatized for a Jacobite, that had
declared any thing like this.

Their religion, it seems, will not suffer them to bear arms, What can be more
ridiculous than this principle, to a man who knows human nature, except the
people who indulge them in this humor?

What right have any set of men to the protection of a government in times of
peace, who will not assist with every power they possess to defend their
country in times of war? their taxes are not greater than other peoples.

Are the catholics more ridiculous in indulging monks amongst them without
contributing to save their country by arms, than the Britons in permitting a
sect amongst themselves, who openly avow that their religion will not suffer
them to defend their country?

Another indulgence their obstinacy has procured them is this; they are
suffered to affirm before a magistrate that which all other subjects of this
crown are obliged to depose upon oath on the Evangelists. In order to observe
the effect of this sufferance, I have frequently attended trials where these
people have been witnesses, and through the whole course of my observation I have
never found them give an explicit answer when it could make against their
friends; nay, the chicanery and search of the council could not draw an answer
which was not filled with ambiguities.

Their cause of demanding this privilege is the most convincing reason for its
not being allowed them; it is evident they imagine that there is something more
obligatory, sacred and binding in an oath, than in an affirmation: therefore
since all the individuals of a nation ought to be under the same influence and
apprehension in the administration of an oath, it was extremely ill understood
to grant this liberty of affirmation to any set of men whatever. It is a road
that leads to injustice; it is injustice itself, that one man should be
subjected to the terrors of eternal punishment, for the breach of that which
another only conceives as something of a common nature.

That the legislature and the Quakers themselves conceive an affirmation to be
of an inferior obligation on the person who takes it, to that of an oath, is
certain: no man whatever crime he is guilty of, can be executed on the
affirmation of a Quaker; and no Quaker has refused taking his oath to the
execution of one that has roused his righteous spirit, by robbing him. Thus the
legislature thinks it an indulgence, and not equally obligatory, by making this
difference in cases of life and death.

The Quaker who takes the common oaths of the country, in cases of being
robbed, cannot at other times plead conscience against it with justice; because
either his conscience admits of doing what it knows to be wrong on these
occasions, or he screens himself from what he thinks to be right in others, and
has no real exception against.

For these reasons if he is suffered to take his affirmation in cases of
property, he should not be indulged to take his oath in those of life and
death. He ought to adhere to his conscience throughout, and not change the
nature of the obligation as his interest and inclination permit him. In truth,
it is a weakness to excuse a set of men from oaths in those instances, where
all others of the kingdom are obliged to take them.

Such are the Quakers: I leave you to decide if they are that simple primitive
people which Voltaire and abbe le Bland have told you; have they not found
means to obtain advantages which savor of refined cunning, and secure
themselves in safety behind the mask of religion whilst the nation is fighting
their battles?

The celebrated system of P***, which has been so much praised and for so
little reason, is absolutely impracticable amongst men: indeed it is easy to
preserve peace with the Indians, who are purchased by small presents to
continue it; but can they buy off the French, who are preparing to increase
their dominions in America? will the spirit of meekness serve them in that
case? and what has been said with respect to their indulging all religions
amongst them, is not true, the catholics are excepted: the ill effects of a
general naturalization is sensibly felt amongst them, the Germans being at
present so numerous that they preserve their language, laws, education, and
interest separate, which is no small inconveniency to the country; and would as
probably live under a French, as an English government.

I am yours mostly affectionately.

The Cloven-Foot discovered.
REM FACIAS -- QUOCUNQUE MODO REM.
Pray, worthy FNIENDS! observe the Text,
Get Money first, and Virtue next. --
Naught makes our Carolina Curs
To bark and lie, but Skins and Furs.
GO on good Christians, never spare
To give your Indians Clothes to wear;
Send 'em good Beef, and Pork, and Bread,
Guns, Powder, Flints and store of Lead,
To Shoot your Neighbors through the Head;
Devoutly then, make Affirmation,
You're Friends to George and British Nation;
Encourage every friendly Savage,
To murder, burn, destroy and ravage;
Fathers and Mothers here maintain,
Whose Sons add Numbers to the slain,
Of Scotch and Irish let them kill
As many Thousands as they will,
That you may lord it over the Land,
And have the whole and sole command.
Leave back Inhabitants to starve,
No Love, no Pity they deserve;
Let Orphan's Tears, and Widow's Cries,
Implore in vain your Ears and Eyes;
Pass ruthless by, enjoy their Groans,
And force 'em to make Bread of Stones.
What! would THEE have us then to fight,
When Conscience tells us it is not right?
No I would not, but yet God knows,
To murder us you arm our Foes.
So he that wears his Eyes may note
The But her often binds a Goat,
And leaves his man to cut his Throat.
It Is Sin, your Conscience too will say,
In Tongue unknown to preach or pray;
Yet, you can hear an Indian bellow,
And praise him for a pious Fellow,
Though what he means you cannot tell,
Nor if he talks of Heaven or Hell.
Thus, what you one time disavow,
You at another will allow.
In many things change but the Name,
Quakers and Indians are the same; --
I don't say all, for there are such
That honest are, even of the Dutch;
But those who the Indian's Cause maintain,
Would take the Part of bloody Cain,
And sell their very Souls for Gain.
[To the Gentlemen at Pittsburg.]
But you brave Heroes! you who dare,
Against the Infidels make War,
With righteous Vengeance them pursue.
Spare none of all the hellish Crew;
Consign them to the Shades below,
Your slaughtered Friends demand the blow.
So may kind Heaven your Actions bless,
And crown you ALWAYS with Success.
FINIS.

