Primitive Physic: OR, AN EASY AND NATURAL METHOD OF CURING MOST DISEASES.

By JOHN WESTLEY.

Homo sum: humani nihil (...) The TWELFTH EDITION, corrected and (...)

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by Andrew Steuart, at the Bible-in-Heart in
(...)-street. 1764.

THE PREFACE.
WHEN MAN came first out of the Hands of the great CREATOR, clothed in Bod^ as
well as in Soul, with Immortality and Inco^ruption, there was no Place for
Physic, or t^ Art of Healing. As he knew no Sin, so h^ knew no Pain, no
Sickness, Weakness, or bodily Disorder. The Habitation wherein the angelick
Mind, the Divinae Particula Aurae abode, although originally formed out of the
Dust of the Earth, was liable to no Decay. It had no Seeds of Corruption or
Dissolution within itself. And there was nothing without to injure it: Heaven
and Earth, and all the Hosts of them, were mild, benign and friendly to human
Nature. The entire Creation was at Peace with Man, so long as Man was at Peace
with his Creator. So that well might the Morning Stars sing together, and all
the Sons of GOD shout for Joy.

2. But since Man rebelled against the Sovereign of Heaven and Earth, how
entirely is the Scene changed? The incorruptible Frame has put on Corruption,
the Immortal has put on Mortality. The Seeds of Weakness and Pain, of Sickness
and Death, are now lodged in our inmost Substance: Whence a thousand Disorders
continually spring, even without the Aid of external Violence. And how is the
Number of these increased, by every Thing round about us? The Heavens, the
Earth, and all Things contained therein, conspire to punish the Rebels against
their Creator. The Sun and Moon shed unwholesome Influences from above; the
Earth exhales poisonous Damps from beneath: The Beasts of the Field, the Birds
of the Air, the Fishes of the Sea, are in a State of Hostility: The Air itself,
that surrounds us on every Side, is replete with the Shafts of Death: Yea, the
Food we eat, daily saps the Foundation of the Life, which cannot be sustained
without it. So has the LORD of All secured the Execution of his Decree, Dust
thou art, and unto Dust shall thou return.

3. But can there Nothing be found to lessen those Inconveniences, which
cannot be wholly removed? To soften the Evils of Life, and prevent in Part the
Sickness and Pain to which we are continually exposed? Without Question there
may. One grand Preventive of Pain and Sickness of various Kinds, seems
intimated by the great Author of Nature, in the very Sentence that intails
Death upon us: "In the Sweat of thy Face shall thou eat Bread, 'til thou return
to the Ground." The Power of Exercise, both to preserve and restore Health, is
greater than can well be conceived: Especially in those who add Temperance
thereto; who, if they do not confine themselves altogether to eat either Bread,
or the Herb of the Field, (which GOD does not require them to do) yet steadily
observe both that Kind and Measure of Food. which Experience shows to be most
friendly to Health and Strength.

4. It Is probable PHYSIC, as well as RELIGION, was in the first Ages chiefly
traditional: Every Father delivering down to his Sons, what he had himself in
like Manner received, concerning the Manner of healing both outward Hurts, and
the Diseases incident to each Climate, and the Medicines which were of the
greatest Efficacy for the Cure of each Disorder. It Is certain, this is the
Method wherein the Art of Healing is preserved among the Americans, to this
Day. Their Diseases, indeed, are exceeding few; nor do they often occur, by
Reason of their continual Exercise, and ('til of late, universal) Temperance.
But if any is sick, or bit by a Serpent, or torn by a wild Beast, the Fathers
immediately tell their Children what Remedy to apply. And it is rare, that the
Patient suffers long; those Medicines being quick, as well as generally
infaliible.

5. Hence perhaps it was that the Ancients, not only of Greece and Rome, but
even of barbarous Nations, usually assigned Physic a Divine Original. And
indeed it was a natural Thought, That He who had taught it to the very Beasts
and Birds, the Cretan Stag, the Egyptian Ibis, could not be wanting to teach
Man; Sanctius his Animal, mentisque capacius altae: Yea, sometimes, even by
those meaner Creatures: For it was easy to infer, "If this will heal that
Creature, whose Flesh is nearly of the same Texture with mine, then in a
parallel Case it will heal me." The Trial was made. The Cure was wrought. And
Experience and Physic grew up together.

6. And has not the Author of Nature taught us the Use of many other Medicines,
but what is vulgarly termed Accident? Thus one walking some Years since in a
Grove of Pines, at a Time when many in the neighboring Town were afflicted
with a Kind of new Distemper, little Sores in the Inside of the Mouth, a Drop
of natural Gum fell from one of the Trees on the Book which he was reading.
This he took up, and thoughtlesly applied to one of those sore Places. Finding
the Pain immediately cease, he applied it to another, which was also presently
healed. The same Remedy he afterward imparted to others, and it did not fail
to heal any that applied it. And doubtless numberless Remedies have been thus
casually discovered in every Age and Nation.

7. Thus far Physic was wholly founded on Experiment. The European, as well as
the American, said to his Neighbor, Are you sick? Drink the Juice of this
Herb, and your Sickness will be at an End. Are you in a burning Heat? Leap into
that River, and then sweat 'til you are well. Has the Snake bitten you? Chew,
and apply that Root, and the Poison will not hurt you. Thus ancient Men, having
a little Experience, joined with common Sense, and common Humanity, cured both
themselves and their Neighbors, of most of the Distempers to which every
Nation was subject.

8. But in Process of Time, Men of a philosophical Turn were not satisfied with
this. They began to enquire, How they might account for these Things? How such
Medicines wrought such Effects? They examined the human Body, and all its
Parts; the Nature of the Flesh, Veins, Arteries, Nerves; the Structure of the
Brain, Heart, Lungs, Stomach, Bowels; with the Springs of the several Animal
Functions. They explored the several Kinds of Animal and Mineral, as well as
Vegetable Substances. And hence the whole Order of Physic which had obtained
to that Time, came gradually to be inverted. Men of Learning began to set
Experience aside; to build Physic upon Hypothesis; to form Theories of
Diseases and their Cure, and to substitute these in the Place of Experiments.

9. As Theories increased, simple Medicines were more and more disregarded and
disused: 'til, in a Course of Years, the greater Part of them were forgotten,
at least in the politer Nations. In the Room of these, Abundance of new Ones
were introduced, by reasoning, speculative Men; and those more and more
difficult to be applied, as being more remote from common Observation. Hence
Rules for the Application of these, and Medical Books, were immensely
multiplied; 'til at length Physic became an abstruse Science, quite out of the
Reach of ordinary Men.

10. Physicians now began to be had in Admiration, as Persons who were
something more than human. And Profit attended their Employ, as well as Honor;
so that they had now two weighty Reasons for keeping the Bulk of Mankind at a
Distance, that they might not pry into the Mysteries of the Profession. To this
End they increased those Difficulties by Design, which began in a Manner by
Accident. They filled their Writings with Abundance of Technical Terms, utterly
unintelligible to plain Men. They affected to deliver their Rules, and to
reason upon them, in an abstruse and philosophical Manner. They represented the
critical Knowledge of Anatomy, Natural Philosophy, (and what not? Some of them
insisting on that of Astronomy and Astrology too) as necessarily previous to
the understanding the Art of Healing. Those who understood only, How to restore
the Sick to Health, they branded with the Name of Empiricks. They introduced
into Practice, Abundance of compound Medicines, consisting of so many
Ingredients, that it was scarce possible for common People to know which it was
that wrought a Cure: Abundance of Exoticks, neither the Nature nor Names of
which their own Countrymen understood: Of Chymicals, such as they neither had
Skill, nor Fortune, nor Time, to prepare: Yea, and of dangerous Ones, such as
they could not use without hazarding Life, but by the Advice of a Physician.
And thus both their Honor and Gain were secured; a vast Majority of Mankind
being utterly cut off from helping either themselves or their Neighbors, or
once daring to attempt it.

11. Yet there have not been wanting from Time to Time, some Lovers of Mankind,
who have endeavored (even contrary to their own Interest) to reduce Physic to
its ancient Standdard: Who have labored to explode out of it all Hypotheses,
and fine-spun Theories, and to make it a plain intelligible Thing, as it was in
the Beginning; having no more Mystery in it than this, "Such a Medicine removes
such a Pain." These have demonstrably shown, That neither the Knowledge of
Astrology, Astronomy, Natural Philosophy, nor even Anatomy itself, is
absolutely necessary to the quick and effectual Cure of most Diseases incident
to human Bodies: Nor yet any Chemical, or Exotic, or Compound Medicine, but a
single Plant or Fruit duly applied. So that every Man of common Sense (unless
in some rare Cases) may prescribe either to himself or his Neighbor; and may
be very secure from doing Harm, even where he can do no Good.

12. Even to the last Age there was something of this Kind done, particularly
by the great and good Dr. Sydenham: And in the present, by his Pupil Dr. Dover,
who has pointed out simple Medicines for many Diseases. And some such may be
found in the Writings of the learned and ingenious Dr. Cheyne: Who doubtless
would have communicated many more to the World, but for the melancholy Reason
he gave one of his Friends, that pressed him with some Passages in his Works,
which too much countenanced the modern Practice, "O Sir, We must do something
to oblige the Faculty, or they will tear us in Pieces."

13. Without any Regard to this, without any Concern about the obliging or
disobliging any Man living, a mean Hand has made here some little Attempt
toward a plain and easy Way of curing most Diseases. I have only consulted
herein, Experience, common Sense, and the common Interest of Mankind. And
supposing they can be cured this easy Way, who would desire to use any other?
Who would not wish to have a Physician always in his House, and one that
attends without Fee or Reward? To be able (unless in some few complicated
Cases) to prescribe to his Family, as well as himself?

14. If it be said, But what Need is there of such an Attempt? I answer, The
greatest that can possibly be conceived. Is it not needful in the highest
Degree, to rescue Men from the Jaws of Destruction? From wasting their
Fortunes, as Thousands have done, and continue to do daily* From pining away in
Sickness and Pain, either through the Ignorance or Knavery of Physicians? Yea,
and many Times throwing away their Lives, after their Health, and Time, and
Substance?

Is it enquired, But are there not Books enough already, on every Part of the
Art of Medicine? Yes, too many, ten Times over, considering how little to the
Purpose the far greater Part of them speak. But beside this, they are too dear
for poor Men to buy, and too hard for plain Men to understand. Do you say, But
there are enough of these Collections of Receipts. Where? I have not seen One
yet, either in our own or any other Tongue, which contains only safe and cheap
and easy Medicines. In all that have yet fallen into my Hands, I find many dear
and many far-fetched Medicines; many of of so dangerous a Kind, as a prudent
Man would never meddle with. And against the greater Part of those Medicines
there is a further Objection: They consist of too many Ingredients. The common
Method of compounding and decompounding Medicines, can never be reconciled to
common Sense. Experience shows, That one Thing will cure most Disorders, at
least as well as twenty put together. Then why do you add the other nineteen?
Only to swell the Apothecary's Bill: Nay, possible, on purpose to prolong the
Distemper, that the Doctor and he may divide the Spoil

But admitting there is some Quality in the Medicine proposed, which has Need
to be corrected: Will not one Thing correct it, as well as twenty? It is
probable, much better. And if not, there is Sufficiency of other. Medicines,
which need no such Correction.

How often, by thus compounding Medicines of opposite Qualities, is the Virtue
of both utterly destroyed? Nay, how often do those joined together destroy
Life, which single might have preserved it? This occasioned that Caution of the
great Boerhaave, against mixing Things without evident Necessity, and without
full Proof of the Effect they will produce when joined together, as well as of
that they produced when asunder: Seeing (as he observes) several Things, which
separately taken, are safe and powerful Medicines, when compounded not only
lose their former Powers, but commence a strong and deadly Poison.

15. As to the Manner of using the Medicines here set down, I should advise as
soon as you know your Distemper, (which is very easy, unless in a Complication
of Disorders, and then you would do well to apply to a Physician that fears
GOD) First, use the first of the Remedies for that Disease which occurs in the
ensuing Collection; unless some other of them be easier to be had, and then it
may do just as well.) Secondly, After a competent Time, if it takes no Effect,
use the second, the third, and so on. I have purposely set down (in most Cases)
several Remedies for each Disorder; not only because All are not equally easy
to be procured at all Times and in all Places: But likewise because the
Medicine which cures one Man, will not always cure another of the same
Distemper. Nor will it cure the same Man at all Times. Therefore it was
necessary to have a Variety. However, I have subjoined the Letter I to those
Medicines, which are said to be infallible. -- Thirdly, Observe all the Time
the greatest Exactness in your Regimen, or manner of Living. Abstain from all
mixed, or all high seasoned Food. Use plain Diet, easy of Digestion: And this as
sparingly as you can, consistent with Ease and Strength. Drink only Water, if
it agrees with your Stomach; if not, good clear Small-beer. Use as much
Exercise daily, in the open Air, as you can without Weariness. Sup at Six or
Seven on the lightest Food: Go to Bed early, and rise betimes, To persevere
with Steadiness in this Course, is often more than half the Cure. Above all,
add to the rest, (for it is not Labor lost) that old, unfashionable Medicine,
PRAYER. And have Faith in GOD, who "kills and makes alive, who brings down
to the Grave and brings up."

16. For the Sake of those who desire, through the Blessing of GOD, to retain
the Health which they have recovered, I have added a few plain easy Rules,
chiefly transcribed from Dr. Cheyne.

I. 1. The Air we breathe is of great Consequence to our Health. Those who have
been long abroad in Easterly or Northerly Winds, should drink some thin and
warm Liquor going to Bed: or a Draught of Toast and Water.

2. Tender People should have those who lie with them or are much about them,
sound, sweet and healthy.

3. Every one that would preserve Health, should be as clean and sweet as
possible in their Houses, Clothes, and Furniture.

II. 1. The great Rule of Eating and Drinking is, To suit the Quality and
Quantity of Food to the Strength of our Degestion; to take always such a Sort
and such a Measure of Food, as sits light and easy on the Stomach.

2. All pickled, or smoaked, or salted Food, and all high-season'd is
unwholesome.

3. Nothing conduces more to Health, than Abstinence and plain Food, with due
Labor.

4. For studious Persons, about eight Ounces of Animal Food, and twelve of
Vegetable in twenty-four Hours is sufficient.

5. Water is the wholsomest of all Drinks; quickens the Appetite and
strengthens the Digestion most.

6. Strong, and more especially spirituous Liquors, are a certain though slow
Poison.

7. Experience shows, there is no Manner of Danger, in leaving them off all at
once.

8. Strong Liquors do not prevent the Mischiefs of a Surfeit, nor carry it off
so safely as Water.

9. Malt Liquors (except clear Small bear of a due Age) are exceeding hurtful
to tender Persons.

10. Coffee and Tea are extremely hurtful to Persons who have weak Nerves.

III. 1. Tender Persons should eat very light Suppers; and that two or three
Hours before going to Bed.

2. They ought constantly to go to Bed about Nine, and rise at Four or Five.

IV. 1. A due Degree of Exercise is indispensably necessary to Health and long
Life.

2. Walking is the best Exercise for those who are able to bear it. Riding for
those who are not. The open Air, when the Weather is fair, contributes much to
the Benefit of Exercise.

3. We may strengthen any weak Part of the Body by constant Exercise. Thus the
Lungs may be strengthened by loud speaking, or walking up an easy Ascent. The
Arms or Hams by strongly rubbing them daily.

4. The Studious ought to have stated Times for Exercise, at least two or three
Hours a Day: The one half of this before Dinner, the other before going to Bed.

5. They should frequently shave, and frequently wash their Feet.

6. Those who read or write much, should learn to do it standing; otherwise it
will impare their Health.

7. The fewer Clothes any one uses, by Day or Night, the hardier he will be.

8. Exercise, first, should be always on an empty Stomach; secondly, should
never be continued to Weariness; thirdly, after it, we should take Care to cool
by Degrees. Otherwise we shall catch Cold.

9. The Flesh-brush is a most useful Exercise especially to strengthen any Part
that is weak.

10. Cold-bathings is a great Advantage to Health. It prevents Abundance of
Diseases. It promotes Perspiration, helps the Circulation of the Blood, and
prevents the Danger of catching Cold. Tender People should pour Water upon the
Head before they go in, and walk in, swiftly. To jump in with the Head
foremost, is too great a Shock to Nature.

V. 1. Costiveness cannot long consist with Health. Therefore Care should be
taken to remove it at the Beginning; and when it is removed, to prevent its
Return, by soft, cool, opening Diet.

2. Obstructed Perspiration (vulgarly called catching Cold) is one great Source
of Diseases. Whenever there appears the least Sign of this let it be removed by
gentle Sweats.

VI. 1. The Passions have a greater Influence on Health than most People are
aware of.

2. All violent and sudden Passions dispose to, or actually throw People into
acute Diseases.

3. The slow and lasting Passions, such as Grief and hopeless Love, bring on
chronical Diseases.

4. 'Till the Passion which caused the Disease is calmed, Medicine is applied
in vain.

5. The Love of GOD, as it is the sovereign Remedy of all Miseries, so in
particular it effectually prevents all the bodily Disorders the Passions
introduce, by keeping the Passions themselves within due Bounds. And by the
unspeakable Joy and perfect Calm, Serenity and Tranquillity it gives the Mind,
it becomes the most powerful of all the Means of Health and long Life.

LONDON June 11, 1759.
POSTSCRIPT.
1. IT was a great Surprise to the Editor of the following Collection, that
there was so swift and large a Demand for it; that nine Impressions were called
for in four or five Years; and that it was not only republished by the
Booksellers in a neighboring Nation, but also inserted by Parts in their
public Papers, and so propagated through the whole Kingdom. This encouraged him
carefully to revise the whole, and to publish it again, with several
Alterations, which it is hoped may make it of greater Use to those who love
common Sense and common Honesty.

2. Those Alterations are still in Pursuance of my first Design, To set down
cheap, and safe, and easy Medicines; easy to be known, easy to be procured, and
easy to be applied by plain unlettered Men. Accordingly, I have ommitted a
considerable Number which, though cheap and safe, were not so common or well
known; and have added almost an equal Number, to which that Objection cannot be
made: which are not only of small Price, and extremely safe, but likewise
easily to be found, if not in every House or Yard, yet in every Town, and
almost every Village throughout the Kingdom.

3. It is because they are not safe, but extremely dangerous, that I have
omitted (together with Antimony) the four Herculean Medicines, Opium, Except in
One Instance.
the Bark, Except in One Instance.
Steel, and the various Preparations of Quicksilver. Herculean indeed! Far too
strong for common Men to grapple with. How many fatal Effects have these
produced, even in the Hands of no ordinary Physicians? With regard to four of
these, the Instances are glaring and undeniable. And whereas Quicksilver, the
fifth, is in its native Form, as innocent as Bread or Water, has not the Art
been discov^'d, so to prepare it, as to make it the most ^dly of all Poisons?
These Physicians have justly termed edged Tools. But they have not yet taught
them to wound at a Distance: And honest Men are under no Necessity of touching
them, or coming within their Reach.

4. Instead of these, I have once more ventured to recommend to Men of plain
unbiassed Reason, such Remedies as Air, Water, Milk, Whey, Honey, Treacle,
Salt, Vinegar, and common English Herbs, with a few foreign Medicines, almost
equally cheap, safe and common. And this I have done on that Principle, whereby
I desire to be governed in all my Actions, "Whatsoever ye would that Men should
do unto you the same do unto them."

5. At the Request of many Persons, I have likewise added plain Definitions of
most Distempers; not indeed accurate or philosophical Difinitions, but such as
are suited to Men of ordinary Capacities, and as may just enable them, in
common, simple Cases, to distinguish one Disease from another. In uncommon or
complicated Diseases, or where Life is more immediately in Danger I again
advise every Man, with out Delay, to apply to a Physician that fears GOD*

BRISTOL, Oct. 16, 1755.
A COLLECTION. OF RECEIPTS.
1 Abortion, (to prevent.)
1. USE daily a Decoction of Lignum Guaiacum.

2. For an Ague. An Ague is, An Intermitting Fever, each Fit of which is
preceded by a cold Shivering, and goes off in a Sweat.

2. Go into the Cold Bath just before the Cold Fit.

3. Or. take a Handful of Groundsell, shred it small, put it into a Paper Bag,
four Inches square, pricking that Side which is to be next the Skin, full of
Holes. Cover this with a thin Linen, and wear it on the Pit of the Stomach,
renewing it two Hours before the Fit: Tried.

4. Or, apply a Handful of Yarrow in like Manner:

5. Or, a large Onion slit:

6. Or, boil Yarrow in new Milk, 'till it is tender enough to spread as a
Plaster. An Hour before the cold Fit, apply this to the Wrists, and let it be
on 'till the hot Fit is over. If another Fit comes, use a fresh Plaster: this
often cures a Quartan.

7. Or, drink a Quart of cold Water, just before the cold Fit. Then go to Bed
and sweat:

8. Or, make six middling Pills of Cobwebs, Take one a little before the cold
Fit: Two a little before the next Fit: The other three, if Need be, a little
before the third Fit. I never knew this fail:

9. Or, two Tea-spoonfuls of Sal Prunellae an Hour before the Fit. It commonly
cures in thrice taking:

10. Or, a Teasspoonful of Spirits of Hartshorn, in a Glass of Water:

11. Or, eat a Lemon, Rind and all:

12. Or, drink a Pint of Decoction of Camomile, sweetened with Treacle. Take it
warm in Bed, and sweat two Hours.

IT is proper to take a gentle Vomit before you use any of these Medicines. If
this is taken two Hours before the Fit is expected it generally prevents that
Fit, and sometimes cures an Ague: Especially in Children. -- It is also proper
to repeat the Medicine (whatever it be) about a Week after, in order to prevent
a Relapse.

3. A Tertian Ague. That is an Ague which returns every other Day. -- In this
use light and sparing Diet on the Day between.

13. Boil a Handful of Ribwort in Whey. Drink this warm an Hour before the Fit
comes, and lie down and sweat.:

14. Or, use the Cold Bath. (Unless you are of an advanced Age, or extremely
weak) But when you use this, on any Account whatever, it is proper,

1. To bleed or purge, before you begin;

2. To go in cool; to immerge at once; to stay in only two or three Minutes,
(or less at first.)

3. Never to bathe on a full stomach:

4. To bathe twice or thrice a Week at least, 'till you have bathed nine or ten
Times:

5. To sweat immediately after it (going to Bed) in Palsies Rickets, and all
Diseases wherein the Nerves are obstructed:

6. You may use yourself to it, without any Danger, by beginning in May, and at
first just plunging in, and coming out immediately. Though many have begun in
Winter, without any Inconvenience.

4. A Quarian Ague. That is, an Ague which misses two Days coming on Monday
(suppose) and again on Thursday.

15. Apply to the Suture of the Head, when the Fit is coming, Wall July
Flowers, beating together Leaves and Flowers with a little Salt. Keep it on
'till the hot Fit is over. Repeat this if need be.

16. Use strong Exercise (as Riding or Walking, as far as you can bear it) an
Hour or two before the Fit. If possible, continue it 'till the Fit begins. This
alone will frequently cure.

17. Or, apply to the Wrists a Plaster of Turpentine: Or of bruised Garlic:

18. Or, of bruised Pepper, mixed with Treacle.

5. St. Anthony's Fire. St. Anthony's Fire is a Fever attended with a red and
painful Swelling, full of Pimples, which afterward turn into small Blisters,
on the Face or some other Part of the Body. The sooner the Eruption is, the
less Danger. -- Let your Diet be only Water Gruel, or Barley-Broth, with
roasled Apples

19. Take a Glass of Tar-Water warm in Bed, every Hour washing the Part with
the same.

Tar-Water is made thus. -- Put a Gallon of cold Water to a Quart of Norway
Tar. Stir them together with a flat Stick for five or six Minutes. After it has
stood covered for three Days, pour off the Water clear, bottle and cork it.

20. Or, drink a Pint of Seawater every Morning for seven Days. It seldom
fails.

21. Or, take a Decoction of Elder-Leaves, as a Sweat;

22. Or, of wild Thyme, applying to the Part a Cloth dipped in Lime Water, mixed
with a little camphorated Spirits of Wine.

Limewater is made thus. -- Infuse a Pound of good quick Lime, in six Quarts
of Spring Water for twenty-four Hours. Decant and keep it for Use.

23. Or, take two or three gentle Purges. No acute Fever bears repeated Purges
better than this, especially when it affects the Head.

Or, (using the Internal Medicine at the same Time) apply a Plaster of Venice
Treacle:

25. Or, wash it with Water wherein Bran is boiled:

26. Or, boil a Handful of Sage, two Handfulls of Elderleaves (or Bark) and an
Ounce of Alum in two Quarts of Forge Water, to a Pint. Anoint with this every
Night.

6. The Apoplexy. An Apolexy is, A total Loss of all Senses, and voluntary
Motion, commonly attended with a strong Pulse, hard Breathing and Snorting.

27. To prevent, use the Cold Bath, and drink only Water.

28. In the Fit, blow Powder of white Helebore up the Nose, and fix a Cupping
Glass, without scarifying, to the Nape of the Neck and another to each
Shoulder. But send for a good Physician immediately.

29. If the Fit be soon after a Meal, do not bleed, but vomit.

30. Rub the Head, Feet, and Hands strongly, and let two strong Men carry the
Patient upright, backwards and forwards about the Room.

31. A Seton in the Neck, with low Diet, has often prevented a Relapse.

7 Canine Apetite. An insatiable Desire of Eating.

32. "If it be without Vomiting, is often cured by a small Bit of Bread dipped in
Wine, and applied to the Nostrils." Dr. Schomberg.

8 The Asthma. An Asthma is Difficulty of Breathing, from a Disorder in the
Lunge. In the common (or moist) Asthma, the Patient spits much.

33. Take a Pint of cold Water every Night, as you lie down in Bed:

34. Or, a Pint of cold Water every Morning, washing the Head therein
immediately after and using the Cold Bath once a Fortnight:

35. Or, half a Pint of Tar-Water twice a Day:

36. Or, drink a Pint of Seawater every Morning:

37. Or, live a Fortnight on boiled Carrots only. It seldom fails.

38. Or, a Spoonful of Nettle-juica, mixed with clarified Honey

39. Or, take an ounce of Quicksilver every Morning, and a Spoonful of the Gas
of Sulpher, in a large Glass of Spring Water at Five in the Evening, and at
Bedtime, 'till you are well. I

40. For present Relief, Vomit with a Quart or more of warm Water. The more you
drink of it the better.

Do this whenever you find any Motion to vomit, and take Care always to keep
your Body open.

9. A Dry Convulsive Asthma.
41. Juice of Radishes relieves much; so does

42. A Cup of strong Coffee.

43. Or, Garlic, either raw or preserved, or in Syrup:

44. Or, Tea made with Hyssop, Ground Ivy, Daisy-Flowers and Liquorish:

45. Drink a Pint of new Milk Morning and Evening. -- That has cured an
inveterate Asthma.

46. Use the Cold Bath thrice a Week:

47. Or, beat fine Saffron small, and take eight or ten Grains every Night:

48. Or, dry and powder a Toad. Make it into small Pills, and take one every
Hour 'till the Convulsions cease.

49. In any Asthma, the best Drink is Apple-Water.

10. To cure Baldness.
50. Rub the Part Morning and Evening, with Onions, 'till it is red; and rub it
afterward with Honey.

11. Bleeding at the Nose (to prevent.)
51. Drink Whey largely eve^^ Morning, and eat Raisins much

52. Or, apply to the N^ behind and on each Side, a Cloth dipped in cold-Water:

53. Or, wash the Temples, Nose and Neck with Vinegar:

54. Or, chew Nettle-Root, spitting out the Juice:

55. Hold a red-hot Poker under the Nose:

56. Or, steep a Linen Rag in sharp Vinegar, burn it, and blow it up the Nose
with a Quill.

12. Bleeding of a Wound.
57. Make tight Ligatures on the Arms:

58. Or, apply Top of Nettles bruised:

59. Or, Leaves of All-heal bruised: I.

60. Or, spread the Ashes of a Linen Cloth thick on another Linen Cloth, and
apply it:

61. Or, strew on it the Ashes of a Linen Rag, dipped in sharp Vinegar and ^t:

62. Or take (...) Puff-Balls. Break them warily and save the Powder. Strew
this on the Wound and bind it on. I -- This will absolutely stop the Bleeding
of an amputated Limb without any Cantery.

13. Spitting Blood.
63. Take half a pint of stewed Prunes, at lying down for two or three Nights:

64. Or, a Glass of Decoction of Onions:

65. Or, four Spoonfuls of Juice of Nettles every Morning; and a large Cup of
Decoction of Nettles at Night for a Week:

66. Take frequently a spoonful of the Juice of Nettles and Plantain Leaves,
mixed and sweetened with Sugar Candy:

67. Or, three Spoonfuls of Sage-juice in a little Honey. This presently stops
either spitting or vomiting Blood:

68. Or, half a Tea-spoonful of Barbados Tar on a Lump of Loaf Sugar at night.
It commonly cures at Once.

14. Vomiting Blood.
69. Take three Spoonfuls of Sage-juice in Honey.

70. Or, two Spoonfuls of Nettle-juice. -- (This also dissolves Blood
coagulated in the Stomach.)

71. Or, one Spoonful of the Juice of Quinces:

72. Or, a Quarter of a Pint of Decoction of Nettles and Plantane two or three
Times a Day.

15. To dissolve coagulated Blood.
73. Bind on the Part for some Hours a Paste made of Black Soap and Crumbs of
white Bread:

74. Or, grated Root of Burdock spread on a Rag: Renew this twice a Day.

16. Boils.
75. Apply a little Venice Turpentine:

76. Or, a Plaster of Honey and Wheat-Flour:

77. Or, of Figs:

78. Or, a little Saffron in a white Bread Poultis. -- It Is proper to purge
also.

17. Hard Breasts.
79. Apply Turnips roasted 'till soft, then mash'd and mixed with a little Oil
of Roses. Change this twice a Day, keeping the Breast very warm with Flannel.

18. Sore Breasts and swelled.
80. Boil a Handful of Camomile and as much Mallows in Milk and Water. Foment
with it between (...) Flannels as hot as can be borne every twelve Hours. I
also dissolves any Knob or Swelling in any Part.

19. A Bruise.
81. Immediately apply Treacle spread on brown Paper:

82. Or, clarified Honey:

83. Or, rub it with one Spoonful of Oil of Turpentine and two of Neats-foot
Oil:

84. Or, apply a plaster of chopped Parsley mixed with Butter:

85. Or, a Fomentation of Verjuice and Camomile Flowers

20. To prevent Swelling from a Bruise.
86. Immediately apply a Cloth, five or six Times double, dipped in cold Water,
and new dipped when it grows warm.

21. To cure a swelling from a Bruise.
87. Foment it half an Hour, Morning and Evening, wit^ Cloths dipped in Water, as
hot as you can bear:

88. Or, apply Sea-weed.

22. A Burn or Scald.
89. Immediately plunge the Part into cold Water. Keep it in an Hour, if not
well before. Perhaps four or five Hours:

90. Or, if the part cannot be dipped, apply a Cloth four Times doubled, dipped in
cold Water, changing it when it grows warm:

91. Or, apply a bruised Onion:

92. Or, Tincture of Myrrh:

93. Or, Oil and Parsley stamped together:

94. Or, apply Oil, and strew on it powdered Ginger,

23. A deep Burn or Scald.
95. Apply black Varnish with a Feather 'till it is well:

96. Or, inner Rind of Elder well mixed with fresh Butter. When this is bound on
with a Rag, plunge the Part into cold Water. This will suspend the Pain 'till
the Medicine heals.

24. A Cancer in the Breast. A Cancer is an hard, round, uneven, painful
Swelling, of a blackish or leaden Color, the Veins round which seem ready to
burst. It comes commonly at first with a Swelling about as big as a Pea, which
does not at first give much Pain, nor change the Color of the Skin.

97. Use the Cold Bath. (This has cured many.) This has cured Mrs. Bates of
Leicestershire, of a Cancer in her Breast, a Consumption, a Sciatica, and
Rheumatism, which she had near twenty Years. -- She bathed daily for a Month
and drank only Water.

Generally where Cold Bathing is necessary to cure any Disease, Water drinking
is so, to prevent a Relapse.

98. If it be not broke, apply a piece of Sheet-lead beat very thin, and
pricked full of Pin-holes, for Days or Weeks to the whole Breast. -- Purges
should be added every third or fourth Day:

99. Or, take a mellow Apple, cut off the Top, take out the Core, fill the Hole
with Hog's Grease; then cover it with the Top and roast the Apple thoroughly,
take off the Paring, beat the Pap well, spread it thick on Linen, and lay it
warm on the sore, putting a bladder over it. -- Change this every twelve or
twenty-four Hours:

100. Take Horses-Spurs and dry them by the Fire 'till they will beat to a
Powder. Sift and infuse two Drams in two Quarts of Ale; drink half a Pint every
six Hours, new Milk warm -- It has scured many.

101. Or, Apply Goose-dung and Celandine beat well together, and spread on a
fine Rag. It will both cleanse and heal the Sore.

102. Or a Poultis of wild Parsnips; Flowers, Leaves and Stalks, changing it
Morning and Evening.

103. Or, live three Months on Apples and Applewater:

104. Or, take half a Dram of Venice-Soap twice a Day:

405. Or, take Brimstone and Gas of Sulphur, as Art. 39. -- This has cured one
far advanced in Years.

25. A Cancer in any other Part.
106. Apply red Onions bruised:

107. Or, make a Plaster of Roch-Allum, Vinegar and Honey equal Quantities,
with Wheat-flour. Change it every twelve Hours. It often cures in three or four
Days:

108. Or, stamp the Flowers, Leaves and Stalks of wild Parsnips, and apply them
as a Plaster, changing it every twelve Hours. It usually cures in a few Days.

26. Cancer in the Mouth.
109. Boil a few Leaves of Succory, Plantane and Rue, with a Spoonful of Honey,
for a Quarter of an Hour. Gargle with it often in an Hour. I.

110. Or, with Vinegar and Honey wherein half an Ounce of Roch-Allum is boiled:

111. Or, take an Ounce of Flour of Sulphur, and half an Ounce of Roch-Allum
finely powdered. Mix these well together with pure Honey, and apply often.

27. Chilblains (to prevent.)
112. Wear Flannel Socks:

113. Or, wash the Hands with Flour of Mustard.

28. Chilblains (to cure.)
114. Apply Salt and Onions pounded together:

115. Or, a Poultis of roasted Onions hot. Keep it on two or three Days, if not
cured sooner:

116. Or, hot Turnip-parings roasted, changing them twice or thrice a Day.

117. Wash them (if broke) with Tincture of Myrrh in a little Water.

29. Chin-Cough or Hooping-Cough.
118. Use the Cold Bath daily:

119. Or, rub the Feet thoroughly with Hog's-lard, before the Fire, at going to
Bed, and keep the Child warm therein:

120. Or, rub the Back at lying down with old Rum. It seldom fails.

121. Or, give a spoonful of Juice of Pennyroyal mixed with brown Sugar Candy,
twice a Day:

122. Or, half a Pint of Milk warm from the Cow with the Quantity of a nutmeg
of Conserve of Roses dissolved in it every Morning.

30. Cholrea Morbus, i. e. Flux and Vomiting.
123. Drink two or three Quarts of cold Water, if strong; of warm Water, if
weak:

124. Or, boil a Chicken an Hour in two Gallons of Water, and drink of this
'till the Vomiting ceases.

31. Chopped Hands (to prevent.)
125. Wash them with Flour of Mustard: I

126. Or, in Bran and Water boiled together:

127. To cure, wash with soft Soap mixed with red Sand:

128. Apply Oil of Myrrh.

32. Chopped Lips.
129. Apply a little Sal Prunellae.

33. A Cold.
130. Drink a Pint of cold Water lying down in Bed:

131. Or a Spoonful of Treacle in half a Pint of Water:

132. Or, to one Spoonful of Oatmeal and one Spoonful of Honey, add a Piece of
Butter of the Bigness of a Nutmeg: Pour on gradually near a Pint of boiling
Water; drink this lying down in Bed.

34. A Cold in the Head.
133. Pare very thin the yellow Rind of an Orange. Roll it up inside out and
thrust a Roll into each Nostril.

35. The Colic (in the Fit.)
134. Drink a Pint of cold Water:

135. Or a Quart of warm Water:

136. Or, as largely as possible of warm Tar-Water:

137. Or, a Pint of Water in which a red hot Flint is quenched:

138. Or, drink largely of Camomile-Tea:

139. Or, of Decoction of Mallows:

140. Or take thirty Drops of Spirit of Turpentine, in a Glass of Water:

141. Or from two Scruples to half a Dram of Yellow-peel of Oranges powdered,
in a Glass of Water:

142. Or beat together into a Cake one Part of stoned Raisins of the Sun, and
three Parts of Juniper-B^rries; eat more or less according to the Pain:

143. Or, take from forty to a hundred Drops of Oil of Anise-seed, on a Lump of
Sugar:

144. Or, apply outwardly a Bag of hot Oats.

36. Colic in Children.
145. Give a Scruple of powdered Anise-seed in their Meat.

37. A Billious Colic. This is generally attended with vomiting a greenish or
a frothy Matter, with a feverish Heat, violent Thirst, a bitter Taste in the
Mouth, and little and high-colored Urine.

146. Give a Spoonful of sweet Oil every Hour. -- This has cured one, judged to
be at the Point of Death.

147. Or, boil an Ounce of bruised Anise-seed in two Quarts of Water, 'till
half is boiled away. When it is cool, infuse an Ounce of Manna, and four Drams
of Glauber's Salts. Drink as much of it as you can.

38. An Habitual Colic.
148. Wear a thin soft Flannel on the Part.

39. An Hysteric Colic. Is attended with a violent Pain about the Pit of the
Stomach, with great sinking of the Spirits, and often with greenish Vomitings.

149. Mrs. Watts, by using the Cold Bath two and twenty Times in a Month, was
entirely cured of an Hysteric Colic, Fits, and convulsive Motions, continual
Sweatings and Vomiting, wandering Pains in her Limbs and total Loss of Appetite.

150. In the Fit, drink half a Pint of Water with a little Wheat-flour in it,
and a Spoonful of Vinegar:

151. Or a Glass full of Vinegar:

152. Or take 20, 30 or 40 Drops of Balsam of Peru in fine Sugar: If need be,
take this twice or thrice a Day:

153. Or, in Extremity, boil three Ounces of Burdock-Seed in Water, which give
as a Clyster:

154. Or, five Grains of Laudanam, in any proper Clyster, which thus injected
gives instant Ease.

40. A Nervous Colic. This is frequently termed the dry Belly-ach, It often
continues several Days, with little Urine, and obstinate Costiveness.

155. Use the Cold Bath daily for a Month:

156. Or, take Quicksilver and Gas of Sulphur, daily for a Month: As Art. 39.

41. Colic from the Fumes of Lead, or White Lead, Verdigrease, etc.
157. In the fit, drink fresh melted Butter, and then vomit with warm Water.

158. Or, give Clysters of Oil or fat Broth.

159. To prevent or cure, breakfast daily on fat Broth, and use Oil of sweet
Almonds frequently and largely.

42. A Consumption.
160. Cold Bathing has cured many deep Consumptions.

161. One in a deep Consumption was advised to drink nothing but Water and eat
nothing but Water Gruel, without Salt or Sugar. In three Months Time he was
perfectly well.

162. Take on Food but new Butter-Milk, churn'd in a Bottle, and White Bread.
-- I have known this successful:

163. Or, boil two Handfuls of Sorrel in a Pint of Whey. Strain it, and drink a
Glass thrice a Day:

164. Or take a Spoonful of Syrup of Fox-glove, Morning and Evening:

165. Or, turn a Pint of skim'd Milk with half a Pint of small Beer. Boil in
this Whey, about twenty Ivy-leaves, and two or three Sprigs of Hyssop. Drink
half over Night, the rest in the Morning. Do this if needful for two Months
daily. -- This has cured in a desperate Case.

166. Or, take a Cow-heel from the Tripe-house ready dressed, two Quarts of new
Milk, two Ounces of Hartshorn-shavings two Ounces of Ising-glass, a Quarter of
a Pound of Sugar Candy, and a Race of Ginger. Put all these in a Pot; and set
them in an Oven after the Bread is drawn. Let it continue there 'till the Oven
is near cold; and let the Patient live on this. -- I have known this cure a
deep consumption more than once.

167. Or, every Morning cut up a little Turf of fresh Earth, and, lying down,
breath into the Hole for a Quarter of an Hour. -- I have known a deep
Consumption cured thus.

168. Or, take half a Pint of skim'd Milk* put one Spoonful of the best Rum,
sweetened with a little Sugar or Sugar of Roses; take it new Milk warm, lying
in Bed an Hour after it: And use for common Drink eight Parts Water, three
Parts skim'd Milk, one Part Rum, sweetened with a little Sugar.

169. "Mr. Masters of Evesham, was so far gone in a Consumption, that he could
not stand alone. I advised him to lose six Ounces of Blood, every Day for a
Fortnight, if he lived so long; and then every other Day; then every third Day;
then every fifth Day, for the same Time. In three Months he was well." -- Dr.
Dover.

170. Or, throw Frankincense on burning Coals, and receive the Smoke daily
through a proper Tube into the Lungs:

^71. Or smoke Bals^^ of Tulo, like Tobacco.

43. Convulsions.
172. Use the Cold Bath:

173. Or, take a Tea-spoonful of Valerian-root powdered in a Cup of Water every
Evening:

174. Or, half a Dram of Misselto powdered, every six Hours ^nking after it a
Draught of strong Infusion thereof.

44. Convulsions in Children.
175. Scrape Piony Roots fresh dug. Apply what you have scraped off to the
Soles of the Feet. It helps immediately.

45. Convulsions in the Bowels of Children.
176. Give a Child a Quarter old, a Spoonful of the Pellitory of the Wall, two
or three Times a Day. It goes through at once, but purges no more. Use Syrup, if
Juice cannot be had.

46. Corns (to prevent.)
177. Wash the Feet often in cold Water.

47. Corns (to cure.)
178. Apply fresh every Morning the Yeast of small Beer, spread on a Rag:

179. Or boil the Juice of Radishes, 'till it is thick enough to spread as a
Plaster. Shift it as it grows dry:

180. Or, cleanse from Earth the Root and Herb of Houseleek; crush it with your
Fingers and apply it. Renew it every three Hours, for twenty four Hours: I.

181. Or, apply fresh Ivy-leaves daily, and in fifteen Days they will drop out.

48. Costiveness.
182. Rise early every Morning:

183. Or, boil in a Pint and half of Broth, half a Handful of Mallow-leaves
chopped: Strain this and drink it before you eat any Thing else. Do this
frequently if needful:

184. Or, breakfast twice a Week or oftener, on Water Gruel with Currants:

185. Or take the Bigness of a large Nutmeg of Cream of Tartar, mixed with
Honey, as often as you need.

49. A Cough.
186. Drink a Pint and a half of cold Water lying down in Bed:

187. Or mix on Ounce of Linseed Oil, with an Ounce of white Sugar Candy
powdered, and take a Tea-spoonful whenever the Cough comes:

188. Or, make a Hole through a Lemon and fill it with Honey. Roast it, and catch
the Juice. Take a Tea-spoonful of this frequently:

189. Every Cough is a dry Cough at first. As long as it continues so, it may
be cured by chewing immediately after you cough, the Quantity of a Pepper-corn
of Peruvian-Bark. Swallow your Spittle as long as it is bitter, and then spit
out the Wood. If you cough again, do this again. It very seldom fails to cure
any dry Cough.

50. An Astmatick Cough.
190. Take Spanish Liquorice two Ounces, Salt of Tartar half an Ounce: Boil the
Liquorice in three Pints of Water to a Quart. -- Add the Salt to it when it is
Blood warm. Drink two Spoonfuls of this every two Hours. -- It seldom fails.

51. A Consumptive Cough.
191. Slit ten or twelve Raisins of the Sun, take out the Stones, and fill them
up with the small tender Tops of Rue. Take these early every Morning, fasting
two or three Hours after:

192. Or, boil a Pound of Raisins stoned in a Quart of old Verjuice to about a
Pint. Then add a Pound of brown Sugar Candy, and let it simmer into a Syrup.
Take near a Spoonful every three or four Hours.

193. To stop it for a Time, at lying down keep a little stick Liquorish shaved
like Horseradish, between the Cheek and the Gums. -- I believe this never
fails.

52. A Convulsive Cough.
194. Eat preserved Walnuts:

195. Or, boil a Handful of Bay Leaves in Milk, turn this with white Wine, and
drink a Draught of the Whey often.

53. An Inveterate Cough.
196. Wash the Head in cold Water every Morning:

197. Or, use the Cold Bath. -- It seldom fails:

198. Or, take half a Pint of Decoction of Onions Morning and Evening;

199. Or, a Spoonful of Juice of Onions:

200. Or, take peeled Turnips three Pounds, Sugar one Pound, put them in an
Earthen Pot close covered for twenty-four Hours. Strain the Juice and take two
or three Spoonfuls Morning and Evening:

201. Or, mix the Juice of boiled Turnips with fine powdered Sugar candy, 'till
it is a Kind of Syrup. Swallow a little of it Drop by Drop from Time to Time:

202. Or, take a Spoonful of Syrup of Horehound Morning and Evening:

203. Or, put a Scruple of Sperma-Ceti into the Yolk of a new laid Egg, and sup
it up in the Morning fasting.

54. A Pleuritick Cough.
204. Powder an Ounce of Sperma-Ceti fine. Work it in a Marble Mortar with the
Yolk of a new-laid Egg. Mix them in white Wine, and take a small Glass every
three Hours.

55. A Tickling Cough.
205. Drink Water whitened with Oatmeal four Times a Day:

206. Or, keep a Piece of Barley-Sugar or Sugar Candy constantly in your Mouth.

56. Violent Coughing from a sharp thin Rheum.
207. Work into old Conserve of Roses, as much as you can of pure Olibanum,
powdered as fine as possible. Take a Bolus of this twice or thrice a Day. It
eases presently, and cures in two or three Weeks:

208. Or, use Milk-diet as much as possible.

57. The Cramp (to prevent.)
209. Tie your Garter tight under your Knee at going to Bed:

210. Or be electrified through the Part which uses to be affected. This
generally prevents it for a Month Sometimes for a Twelve Month.

58. The Cramp (to cure.)
211. Stretch out the Limb immediately:

212. Or stretch out the opposite Arm and clench the Fist:

213. Or, chafe the Part with Hungary-Water:

214. Or, with rectified Spirits of Wine:

215. Or, apply boiled Nettles hot:

216. Or, take half a Pint of Tar-water Morning and Evening.

59. A Cut.
217. Keep it closed with your Thumb a Quarter of an Hour. Then double a Rag
five or six Times; dip it in cold Water, and bind it on.

60. Deafness.
218. Be electrified through the Ear:

219. Or, use the Cold Bath:

220. Or, drop into the Ear a Tea-spoonful of salt Water:

221. Or, of Juice of Ground Ivy:

222, Or, three or four Drops of Onion-juice at lying down, and stop it with a
little Wool.

61. Deafness from Wa^.
223. Syringe the Ear with warm Sage-tea:

224. Or, put in wild Mint bruised, with the Juice, changing it often.

62. Deafness with Headache and Buzzing in the Head.
225. Peel a Clove of Garlic; dip it in Honey, and put it into your Ear at
Night with a little black Wool. Lie with that Ear uppermost. Put the same in
the other Ear the next Night. Do this, if need be, eight or ten Days.

63. A Settled Deafness.
226. Take a red Onion, pick out the Core; fill up the Place with Oil of
roasted Almonds. Let it stand a Night: then bruise and strain it. Drop three or
four Drops into the Ear, Morning and Evening, and stop it with black Wool.

64. To cause an easy Delivery.
227. Peel, slice and fry a large white Onion in two or three Spoonfuls of the
best Oil, till it is tender, Boil this with half a Glass of Water: Strain and
drink it in the Morning fasting, for two or three Weeks before the Time of
Childbirth.

65. A Diabetes. A Diabetes is a frequent and large Discharge of pale Urine,
attended with constant Thirst, and a Wastng of the whole Body.

228. Drink Wine boiled with Ginger, as much and as often as your Strength will
bear. Let your Drink be Milk and Water. All Milk Meats are good:

229. Or, drink three or four Times a Day a Quarter of a Pint of Alum
Posset Drink. -- Putting three Drams of Alum to four Pints of Milk. -- It
seldom fails to cure in eight or ten Days. Dr. Mead.

66. The Dropsy. A Dropsy is, a preternatural Collection of Water, in the Head,
Breast, Belly, or all over the Body. It is attended with a continual Thrist.
The Part swelled pits, if you press it with your Finger. The Urine is pale and
little.

230. Use the Cold Bath daily, after purging:

23^. Or, drink nothing but Lemonade: i. e. Lemon, Sugar and Water:

232. Or, take as much as lies on a Sixpence of powdered Lawrel-leaves, every
second and third Day. It works both Ways.

233. Or, mix half an Ounce of Amber with a Quart of Wine Vinegar. Heat a Brick
(only red hot) and put it into a Tub. Pour them upon it, and hold the Parts
swelled over the Smoke, covering the Tub close, to keep in the Smoke. The Water
will come out incredibly, and the Patient be cured:

234. Or, cover the whole Belly with a large new Sponge dipped in strong
Limewater, and then squeezed out. This bound on, often cures, even without any
sensible Evacuation of Water:

235. Or, apply green Dock-leaves to the Joints and Soles of the Feet, changing
them once a Day*

236. Or, abstain from all drink for thirty Days. To ease your Thirst hold
often on your Tongue, a thin small Slice of toasted Bread dipped in Brandy;
(...), wash the Mouth with Juice of Lemons.

237. Tar-water drank twice a day has cured many:

238. Or, eat a Crust of Bread every Morning fasting:

239. Or, drink half a Pint of Seawater, Morning and Evening:

240. Or, mix a Pound of the coarsest Sugar with a Pint of Juice of Pellitory
of the Wall bruised in a Marble Mortar. Boil it as long as any Scum rises. When
cool, bottle and cork it. If very bad, take three Spoonfuls at Night, and two
in the Morning. -- It seldom sails:

241. Take a Spoonful of the Juice of Artichoke-leaves, Morning and Evening:

242. Or, three Spoonfuls of the Juice of Leeks and Elder-leaves: I.

243. Or, half a Pint of Decoction of Butchers Broom, intermixing Purges twice
or thrice a Week. The proper Purges is ten Grains of Jalap with six of powdered
Ginger. It may be increased or l^ssn'd according to the Strength of the Patient:

244. Or, take a Spoonful of whole Mustard Seed, Night and Morning, and drink
on it half a Pint of Decoction of green Broom-tops. This works both by Stool
and Urine:

245. Or, boil two Handfuls of Elder-roots in a Quart of Water. Strain it and
drink a large Glass thrice a Day for thirty Days. It frequently cures in that
Time.

67. The Ear-Ach.
246. Rub the Ear hard for a Quarter of an Hour:

247. Or, be electrified:

248. Or, apply to it a hot Roll:

249. Or, put in a roasted Fig, as hot as may be:

250. Or, blow the Smoke of Tobacco strongly into it:

251. Or, drop in Juice of Goose-Grease.

68. Ear-Ach from Cold.
252. Boil Rue, or Rosemary, or Garlic, and let the Steam go into the Ear
through a Funnel.

69. Ear-Ach from Heat.
253. Apply Cloths four Times doubled and dipped in cold Water, changing them
when warm, for half an Hour.

70. Ear-Ach from Worms.
254. Drop in warm Milk, and it brings them out:

255. Or, Juice of Wormwood, which kills them:

256. Or, Oil of bitter Almonds.

71. Noise in the Ears.
257. Drop in Juice of Onions:

258. Or, fill them with with bruised Hyssop.

72. Hard Wax in the Ear.
259. Is best dissolved by warm Water.

73. Eyes blear'd.
260. Drop into them Juice of Crab Apples.

74. A Blood-shot Eye.
261. Apply Linen Rags dipped in cold Water for two or three Hours:

262. Or, blow in white Sugar Candy finely powdered:

263. Or, apply boiled Hyssop as a Poultis. -- This has a wonderful Efficacy.

75. A Bruise in the Eye.
264. Apply as a Plaster Conserve of Roses:

265. Or, a Paste of black Soap and white Bread Crumbs. But take Care it get not
into the Eye.

76. Burning Eyes, or hot Rheum.
266. Apply a thick Apple-paring, lying down in Bed.

77. Clouds flying before the Eyes.
267. Take a Dram of powdered Betony every Morning.

78. Blindness.
268. Is often cured by Cold Bathing:

269. Or, by electrifying.

79. Eyes dim or decayed.
270. Use Eyebright Tea daily:

271. Or, powdered Eye bright, both in Meat and Drink.

80. Dull Sight.
272. Drop in two or three Drops of Juice of rotten Apples often.

81. Films.
273. Dry Zebethum Occidentals; i. e. Stercus humanum. slowly; powder it fine,
and blow it into the Eye twice or thrice a Day:

274. Or, mix Juice of Ground Ivy with a little Honey, and two or three Grains
of Bay Salt. Drop it in Morning and Evening.

82. Hot or Sharp Humors.
275. Beat the White of an Egg into Water, in which mix fine Sugar, and drop it
into the Eye:

276. Or drop in Juice of Daisies Morning and Evening:

277. Or, boil a Handful of Bramble-leaves with a little Alum in a Quart of
Spring Water to a Pint* Drop this frequently into the Eye. This likewise
speedily cures any Sores.

83. Eyes inflamed.
278. Apply as a Poultis boiled, roasted or rotten Apples warm:

279. Or, Wormwood-tops with the Yolk of an Egg: This will hardly fail.

280. Or, beat up the White of an Egg with two Spoonfuls of white Rose Water
into a white Froth. Apply this on a fine Rag, changing it so that it may not
grow dry, till the Eye is well.

84. A Lachrymal Fistula. This Disorder in the inner Corner of the Eye, causes
the Tears to flow involuntarily.

281. Apply a Poultis of fine leaves of Rue:

282. Wash the Eye Morning and Evening with a Decoction of Quince-leaves:

283. Or, take a Dram of Betony-leaves powdered daily.

85. Pearl in the Eye.
284. Apply a Drop of Juice of Celandine with a Feather thrice a Day:

285. Or, of three-leav'd Grass. It commonly cures in seven Days.

86. White Specks in the Eye.
286. Going to Bed, put a little Ear Wax on the Speck. -- This has cured many:

287. Or, a Drop of the Juice of Fennel:

288. Or, of Ivy-juice: Afterward blow in a little powdered Loaf-sugar.

87. An excellent Eye-Water.
289. Heat half an Ounce of Lapis Caliminaris red hot, and quench it in half a
Pint of French white Wine, and as much white Rose Water: Then Pound it small
and infuse it. Shake the Bottle when you use it. It cures Soreness, Weakness,
and most Diseases of the Eye. I have known it cure total Blindness.

88. Another.
290. Infuse in Limewater a Dram of Sal Ammoniac powdered, for twelve Hours;
then strain and keep it for Use. This also cures most Disorders in the Eyes.

89. Another.
291. Boil very lightly one Spoonful of white Copperas scraped and three
Spoonfuls of white Salt, in three Pints of Spring Water. When cold bottle it in
large Vials without straining. Take up the Vial softly, and put a Drop or two
in the Eye Morning and Evening.

It answers the Intention of almost all the proceeding Medicines: It takes away
Redness or any Soreness whatever (...) cures Pearls, Rheums, and often
Blindness itself.

90. Weak Eyes.
292. Moisten the Eyelids Morning and Evening with comphorated Spirits of Wine,
keeping them shut.

293. Wash the Head daily with cold Water.

91. The Falling Sickness. In the Falling Sickness the Patient falls to the
Ground, either quite s^ff, or con^ed all over utterly senseless gnashing his
Teeth, and ^aming at the Mouth.

294. Be electrified:

295. Or use the cold Bath for a Month daily:

296. Or, take a Tea-spoonful of Piony Root dried and grated fine, Morning and
Evening for three Months:

297. Or, Take a Spoonful of the Juice or Rue, Morning and Evening for a Month:

298. Or, half a Pint of Decoction of Lignum Guaia^^m, Morning and Evening: I.

299. Or, of Tar water for three Months:

300. Or, take four Drops of Laudanam fasting, for six or seven Mornings:

301. Or, use an entire Milk Diet for three Months. It seldom fails:

302. Or, take half a Dram of powdered Misselto every six Hours, drinking after
it a strong Infusion or Misselto: I.

303. Or, the Quantity of a Nutmeg of Conserve of white Piony Root, daily for
three Months:

304. In the Fit, blow up the Nose a little powdered Ginger^

305. Or, Leaves of Assarahacco powdered.

92. The Falling of the Fundament.
306. Apply a Cloth covered thick with Brick Dust:

307. Or, boil a Handful of red Rose Leaves in a Quarter of a Pint of red Wine:
Dip a Cloth in it, and apply i^ as hot as can be borne. Do this 'till all is
used.

93. A Falling down of the Womb.
308. May be cured in the Manner last mentioned.

94. A Fever.
309. Drink a Pint and Half of ^old Water lying down in Bed; I never knew it do
Hurt:

310. Or, a large Glass of Tar-water warm, every Hour:

311. The best of all Juleps in a Fever, is this: Toast a large thin Slice of
Bread, without Burning; put it hot into a Pint of cold Water; then set it on
the Fire till it is pretty hot. In a dry Heat it may be given cold; in a moist
Heat warm; the move largely the better:

312. Or, for a Change, use Pippin or Wood-s^rrel Tea; Or, Pippin Posset Drink:
Or Wood Sorrel Posset Drink:

313. Or, Decoction of Violet-leaves:

314. Or, of Strawberry-leaves:

315. To prevent catching any infectious Fever, do not breath near the Face of
the sick Person, neither swallow your Spittle while in the Room.

95. A Burning Fever.
316. Stamp a Handful of Leaves of Woodbine; put fair Water to it, and use it
cold as a Clyster. It commonly cures in an Hour:

317. Or, smear the Wrists, five or six Inches long with warm Treacle, and
cover it with brown Paper.

96. A Continual Fever.
318. If not very violent, take a Dram of Sal Prunellae, every four Hours, in
warm Water, till it abates.

97. A Hectic Fever.
319. Drink only thin Water Gruel, or boiled Milk and Water. The more you drink
the better.

98. A High Fever.
320. Attended with a Delirium and Vigilia, has been cured by p^^nging into
cold Water; which is a safe and sure Remedy in the Beginning of any Fever.

321. Such a Delirium is often cured by applying warm Lamb's Lungs to the Head.

99. An intermitting Fever.
322. Drink warm Lemonade in the Beginn^ of every ^it^ (...) in a few Days:

323. Or, take a Tea-spoonful of Oil of Sulphur in a Cup of Balm Tea, once or
twice a Day.

100. A Fever with Pains in the Limbs.
324. Take twenty Drops of Spirit of Hartshorn in a Cup of Water twice or
thrice in twenty four Hours:

325. Or, in strong Camomile Tea, lying down in Bed.

101. A Rash Fever.
326. Drink every Hour a spoonful of Juice of Ground Ivy. It cures in
twenty-four Hours.

Use the Decoction, when you have not the Juice.

102. A Slow Fever.
327. Use the cold Bath for two or three Weeks daily.

103. A Fistula.
328. Grind an Ounce of Mercury Sublimate, in a Glass Mortar, with a Glass
Pestle, as fine as possible. Put it into a Glass Bottle, and pour on it two
Quarts of pure Spring Water. Cork it close, and for six Days shake it well
every Hour. Then let it settle for twenty-four Hours. Pour it off clear; filter
it in a Glass Funnel; and keep it for Use close stopped. Put a Spoonful of this
Water in a Vial, and add two Spoonfuls of pure Spring Water: Shake them well
together, and drink it fasting. It works both by Vomit and by Stool, but very
safely. Keep yourself very warm, and walk as much as you can. The first Time
neither eat nor drink 'till two Hours after it has done working. Take this
every other Day. In forty Days this will also cure any Cancer, any old Sore, or
King's Evil, broken or unbroken. After the first or second Vomit you may use
Water Gruel, as in other Vomits. -- Very weak Persons should not use this.

104. A Flux.
329. Use the cold Bath daily, and drink a Draught of Water from the Spring:

330. Or, ^it over Camomile-Flowers boiled in Milk:

331 Or, receive the Smoke of Turpentine cast on burning Coals. This cures also
the Bloody Flux, and the Falling of the Fundament:

332. Or drink two or three Quarts of warm Water:

333. Or, put a large brown Toast into three Quarts of Water, with a Dram of
Cochineal, and a Dram of Salt of Wormwood. Drink it all in as short Time as you
conveniently can. This rarely fails to cure all Fluxes, Cholera Morbus, yea,
and Inflammations of the Bow^:

33^. Or, take a Spoonful of P^^ntai^d bruised, Morning and Evening, 'till it
stops:

33^. Or, the Leaves of it boiled in small Broth:

3^^. Or, three or four Ounces of (...) Juice:

3^^. Or, a small Nutmeg powdered in the Yolk of an Egg:

33^. Or, a Dram of the Seed of Flux-weed in two or three Spoonfuls of Broth: I*

33^. Or, ten Grains of Ipecacuanah three Mornings succesfully.

105. A Bloody Flux.
3^^. Apply a Supp^^^ory of Linen dipped in Aqua Vitae:

3^^. Or. drink cold Water as largely as possible, taking nothing else on the
(...) stops:

3^^. Or, take a large Apple, and at the Top pick out all the Core, and all up
the Place with a Piece of Honeycomb; (^he Honey being strained out) roast the
Apple in Embers and eat it, and this will stop the Flux immediately:

3^^. Or, thirty Grains of powdered Root of Glad-win at (...) or thrice a Week:
It is just as good as Rhub^b in mo^ Ca^es:

3^^. Or, D^coction of Primrose-leaves Morning and Evening:

3^^. Or, g^ted Rhubarb, as much as lies on a Shilling, with half as much of of
grated Nutmeg, in a Glass of white Wine, ^ing down every other Night.

106. The Gout in the Stomach.
346. "Dissolve two Drams of Venice Treacle in a Glass of Mountain. After
drinking it go to Bed. You will be easier in two Hours, and well in sixteen."
Dr. Dover.

34^. Boil a Pug^l of Tansey in a Quarter of a Pint of Mountain. Drink it in
Bed. I believe this never (...)

3^^. To prevent its Return, dissolve half an Ounce of Ga^ Gua^ (...) two
Ounces of Sal Volatile Take a Tea-spoonful (...) every Morning, in a Glass of
Spring Water

This helps any sharp Pain in the Stomach. Dr Boerhaave. 107. The Gout in the
Foot or Hand.
349. Apply a raw lean Beef-steak. Change it once in twelve Hour, till cured.

108. The Gout in any Limb. Regard not them (...), The Gout ought not to be
cured. They mean^ ^ca^. I kn^ (...) not by their regular Prescriptions.

350. Rub the Part with warm Treacle, and then bind on a Flannel smeared
therewith. Repeat this if Need be, once in twelve Hours. This has cured an
inveterate Gout:

351. Or, Dry Sage in the Sun for a Day. Apply this, and in one Night it will
ease the Pain.

352. Or at Six in the Evening, undress and wrap yourself up in Blankets. --
Then put your Legs up to the Knees in Water, as hot as you can bear it. As it
cools. let hot Water be poured in. so as to keep you in a strong Sweat till
te^. Then go into a Bed well warmed and sweat till Morning. -- I have known
this to cure an inveterate Gout.

109. The Gravel.
353. Eat largely of Spinach:

354. Or, drink largely of warm Water sweetened with Honey^

355. Or, of Peach have Tea:

356. Or, of Pellitory of the Wall Tea, so sweetened:

357. Or, infuse an Ounce of wild Parsley Seeds in a Pint of white Wine for
twelve Days. Drink a Glass of it fasting three Mornings.

110. The Creen Sickness.
358. Take an Ounce of Quicksilver every Morning, -- As Art. 39.

359. Or, a Cup of of Decoction of Lignum Guaiacum, Morning and Evening.

111. To kill Animalcula that cause the Gums to waste away from the Teeth.
360. Gargle thrice a Day with Salt and Water.

112. The Headache.
361. Rub the Head for a Quarter of an Hour:

362. Or, be electrified:

363. Or, apply to each Temple the thin yellow Rind of a Lemon, newly pared off:

364. Or, pour into the Palm of the Hand a little Brandy, with some Zist of
Lemon, and hold it to the Forehead:

365. Or, if you have catched Cold, boil a Handful of Rosemary in a Quart of
Water Put this in a Mug, and hold your Head (covered with a Napkin) over the
Steam, as hot as you can bear. Repeat this 'till the Pain ceases.

366, Or, drop Juice of Pimper^ell into the Ear:

367. Or, snuff up the Nose camphorated Spirits of Lavender:

368. Or, Juice of Ground Ivy: I.

369. Or, a little Juice of Horse Radish:

370. Or, drink half a Pint of strong Decoction of Ground Ivy: Morning and
Evening.

113. A Chronical Headache.
371. Keep your Feet in warm Water a Quarter of an Hour before you go to Bed;
for two or three Weeks:

372. Or, wear tender Hemlock-leaves, under the Feet, changing them daily:

373. Or, order a Tea-kettle of cold Water to be poured on your Head every
Morning in a slender Stream:

374. Or, apply to the Head bruised Cummin-seed, fried with an Egg:

375. Or, take a large Tea-cup full of Cardus Tea without Sugar fasting for six
or seven Mornings:

376. Or, boil Wood-betony in new Milk and strain it. Breakfast on this five or
six Weeks. I.

114. Headache from Heat.
377. Apply to the Forehead Cloths dipped in cold Water for an Hour:

378. Or, beat white Poppy-seed to Powder; mix this with Yolks of Eggs, and
apply it to the Temples and Forehead.

115. A Nervous Headache.
379. Dry and powder an Ounce of Marjoram and half an Ounce of Assarabacca; mix
them, and take them as Snuff, keeping the Ears and Throat warm. This is of
great Use, even in a Cancer:

380. Or, take half a Dram of powdered Marum Morning and Evening in any Liquid.

116. An Hemicrania. (...) Headache which affects but one Side of the Head.

381. Use cold Bathing:

382. Or, apply to that Part of the Head shaved, a Plaster that will stick:
with a Hole cut in the Middle of it, as big as an Halfpenny: Place over that
Hole Leaves of Ranunculus, bruised and very moist. It is a gentle Blister.

117. Stoppage in the Head.
383. Snuff up Juice of Primrose, keeping the Head warm.

118. The Heart-Burning, A (...) ^ing Pain at the Orifice of the Stomach,

384. Drink a Pint of cold Water:

385. Or, drink slowly of of decoction of Camomile Flowers:

386. Or, chew five or six Pepper Corns a little; then swallow them:

387. Or, take six Almonds and twelve raw Peace and eat them together:

388. Sometimes a Vomit is needful, of Ipecacuhana, or Cardus Tea.

119. The Hiccup.
389. Swallow a Mouthful of Water, stopping the Mouth and Ears:

390. O^ (...) any Thing that makes you sneeze:

391. Or, a little ^anded Ginger:

392. Or, two or three preserved Damsons.

120. Hoarseness.
393. Rub the Soles of the Feet before the Fire, with Garlic and Lard well
beaten together, over Night. The Hoarseness will be gone next Day:

394. Or, take a Pint of cold Water lying down:

395. Or instead of Supper eat an Apple, and drink half a Pint of Water

396. Or, swallow slowly the Juice of Radishes:

397. Or, take a spoonful of Sage juice Morning and Evening.

121. Hypocondriac and Hysteric Disorders.
398. Use cold Bathing:

399. Or, take an Ounce of Quicksilver every Morning.

122. The Jaundice.
400. Wear Leaves of Celandine upon and under the Feet:

401. Or, take a small Pill of Castile Soap every Morning for eight or ten Days:

402. Or, as much as lies on a Shilling of calcined Egg-shells, three Mornings
fasting; and walk till you sweat:

403. Or, half a pint of strong Decoction of Nettles:

404. Or, boil a large Burdock root in two Quarts of Water to three Pints. Let
it soak therein for twenty four Hours covered close. Drink a Draught of this
three or four Times. and it will not fail.

123. The Jaundice in Children.
405. Take half an Ounce of fine Rhubarb, powdered. Mix with it thoroughly, by
long beating two Handfuls of good well cleansed Currants. Of this give a
Tea-spoonful every Morning.

124. The Iliac Passion. In this violent Kind of Cholic the Extrements art
thrown (...) Mouth in vomiting.

406. Apply warm Flannel soaked in Spirits of Wine:

407. Or, hold a live Puppy constantly on the Belly. -- Dr. Sydenham.

408. Or immerge up to the Breast in the warm Bath:

409. Or, take a Decoction of the Seed of Dill in Oil and Water, and then a Bit
of Bread dipped in Water:

410. Or, Ounce by Ounce, a Pound or a Pound and a half of Quicksilver.

125. An Impostume,
411. Put the White of two Leeks in a wet Cloth, and so roast them in Ashes,
but not too much. Stamp them in a Mortar with a little Hog's Grease. Spread it
thick Plaster-wise, and apply, changing it every Hour, 'till all the Matter be
come out, which it will be in three Times. I.

126. Pain in the Joints.
412. Drink Decoction of Herb Robert, and apply it as a Poultis.

127. The Itch. This Distemper is nothing but a Kind of very small Lice which
burrow under the Skin. Therefore inward Medicines are absolutely nee^less. Is
it possible any Physician should be ignorant of this.

413. Wash the Parts affected with strong Rum:

414. Or, with strong Decoction of Dock-root for nine or ten Days:

415. Or, of Hyssop, four or five Days:

416. Or, anoint them with black Soap:

417. Or, steep a shirt half an Hour in a Quart of Water mixed with half an
Ounce of powdered Brimstone. Dry it slowly, and wear it five or six Days.
Sometimes it needs repeating:

418. Or, mix Powder of white Helebore with Cream for three Days. -- Anoint the
Joints three Mornings and Evenings. -- It seldom fails.

419. Or, mix a little fine Bay Salt, and as much Flour of Brimstone, with a
little sweet Oil. Rub it well in the Palm^ of the Hands, and dry it in. -- It
commonly cures in three Days.

420. Or, beat together the Juice of two or three Lemons, with the same
Quantity of Oil of Roses. Anoint the Parts affected. It cures in two or three
Times using:

421. Or, mix an Ounce of Ginger finely powdered with a Quarter of a Pound of
fresh Butter. Use it Morning and Evening. -- It cures in four or five Days.

128. The King's Evil. It commonly appears first, by the Thickness of the Lips;
then come hard swellings, in the Neck chiefly; then running Sores*

422. Take as much Cream of Tartar as lies on a Sixpence, every Morning and
Evening:

423. Or, drink for six Weeks half a Pint of a strong Decoction of Devils-hit:

424. Or, of Ground Ivy:

425. Or, of dead Nettles:

426. Or, of ^olts-foot: Mean time, apply the Herb beaten up with powdered
Linseed and Hog's-lard, to the Sores, renewing it twice a Day:

427. Or, use Limewater for common Drink:

428. Or, the Diet-drink mentioned Art. 538. -- I have known this cure one
whose Breast was as full of Holes as an Honeycomb:

429. Or, set a Quart of Honey by the Fire to melt. When it is cold, strew into
it a Pound and a half of Quicklime beat very fine, and searsed through a Hair
Sieve. Stir this about till it boil up of itself into a hard Lump. Beat this
when cold very fine, and searse it, as before. Take of this as much as lies on
a Shilling in a Glass of Water every Morning fasting; an Hour before Breakfast,
at four in the Afternoon, and at going to Bed:

430. Or, take two Spoonfuls of Juice of Water Parsnips, with two Spoonfuls of
Milk, every Morning fasting, for the six Summer Months. Two Hours after,
breakfast on Water Gruel with a little Bread,

It cures the Scurvey in three Months.

129. Stoppage in the Kidneys.
431. Take twelve Grains of Salt of Amber in a little Water.

130. The Legs inflamed.
432. Apply Fullers Earth spread on brown Paper: It seldom fails.

433. Or, boiled Turnips mixed with Mutton-suet:

434. Or, rub them with warm Juice of Plantane.

131. Legs sore and running.
435. Wash them in Brandy and apply Elder-leaves, changing them twice a Day.
This will dry up all the Sores, though the Leg were like an Honeycomb. --
Proved.

132. The Leprosy. In this Disease the Skin in many Parts is covered with
rough, whitish, scaly Pustules, and if these are rubbed off, with a Kind of
scaly Scurf.

436. Use the cold-Bath:

437. Or, wash in the Sea often and long:

4^^. Or, wash the Parts with Juice of Calamint:

4^^. Or, mix well an Ounce of Pomatum, a Dram of powdered Brimstone, and half
an Ounce of Sal Prunelae; and anoint the Parts so long as there is Need:

44^. Or, add a Pint of Juice of Houseleek, and half a Pint of Verjuice, to a
Pint and half of Posset drink. Drink up this in twenty four Hours. -- It cures
also the Quinsey, and all Sorts of white Swellings on the Joints:

44^. Or, drink for a Month a Decoction of Elm-Bark Morning and Evening.

133. The Lethargy.
442. Snuff strong Vinegar up the Nose:

443. Or, Powder of white Hellibore:

444. Or, take half a Pint of Decoction of Savoury, Morning and Evening:

445. Or, of Infusion of Water-Creffes.

134. Lice (to kill.)
446. Sprinkle Spanish Snuff over the Head:

447. Or, wash it with a Decoction of Amaranth.

135. For one seemingly killed with Lightning, or a Damp, or Suffocated.
448. Plunge him immediately into cold Water:

449. Or, blow strongly with Bellows down his Throat. -- This may recover a
Person seemingly drowned.

136. Lues Venerea.
450. Take an Ounce of Quicksilver every Morning, and a Spoonful of Gas of
Sulphur in a Glass of Water at Five in the Afternoon. I have known a Person
cured by this, when supposed to be at the Point of Death, who had been infected
by a foul Nurse, before she was a Year old. -- I insert this for the Sake of
such innocent Sufferers.

137. Lunacy.
451. Give Decoction of Agrimony four Times a Day:

452. Or, rub the Head several Times a Day with Vinegar, in which
Ground-Ivy-leaves have been infused:

453. Or, boil Juice of Ground Ivy with sweet Oil and White Wine into an
Ointment. Shave the Head, anoint it therewith, and chafe it in warm, every
other Day for three Weeks. Bruise also the Leaves and bind them on the Head,
and give three Spoonfuls of the Juice warm every Morning. -- This generally
cures Melancholy.

138. Raging Madness. It is a sre Rule, that all Madmen are Cowards, and may be
conquered by binding only, without beating. -- Dr. Mead.

454. Apply to the Head Cloths dipped in cold Water:

455. Or, set the Patient with his Head under a great Waterfall, as long as his
Strength will bear: Or, pour Water on his Head out of a Tea-kettle:

456. Or, let him eat nothing but Apples for a Month.

139. The Bite of a mad Dog.
457. Apply Ashes of Trefoil mixed with Hog's-lard. This has cured one that was
bit on the Nose:

458. Or, plunge into cold Water daily for twenty Days, and keep as long under
it as possible. This has cured, even after the Hydrophobia was begun: If this
is really a Nervous Disorder, what Wonder, if it should be cured by Cold
Bathing?


459. Galen says, none ever failed of a Cure who took two Spoonfuls of Ashes of
Craw-Fish daily for forty Days:

460. Or, apply Juice of Dracuntia mixed with Vinegar, outwardly, and drink of
the same Morning and Evening, five or six Days:

461. Mix powdered Liver-wort four Drams, black Pepper two Drams. Divide this
into four Parts, and take one in warm Milk for four Mornings fasting.

140. The Measles. This Distemper is always preceded by a violent Cough, often
fourteen Days before the red Spots come out.

462. Drink only thin Water Gruel, or Milk and Water, the more the better; or,
Toast and Water:

463. If the Cough be very troublesome, take frequently a Spoonful of
Barley-Water sweetened with Oil of sweet Almonds newly drawn, mixed with Syrup
of Maidenhair:

464. After the Measles, for some Weeks, take Care of catching Cold, use light
Diet, and drink Barley-water instead of Malt-drink.

141. Menses Obstructed.
465. Take half a Pint of strong Decoction of Pennyroyal every night at going
to Bed:

466. Or, a Spoonful of Juice of Syrup of Brook-lime, Morning and Evening:

467. Or, a Tea-spoonful of Columbine-seeds powdered, thrice a Day:

468. Or, boil five large Heads of Hemp in a Pint of Water to half. Strain it,
and drink it going to Bed two or three Nights. It seldom fails.

469. Or, take from eight to twelve Grains of Colomel, in a Pill, for two or
three Nights taking Care not to catch Cold. It vomits and purges.

470. Or, burn a little Sulphur of Antimony on a Chafing Dish of Coals, and
receive the Smoke by a Funnel. In a few Minutes it will take Effect.

Let any of these Medicines be used at the regular Time as near as can be
judged.

142. Menses Nimii.
471. Drink nothing but cold Water. with a Spoonful of fine Flour stirred in
it. At the Time drink a Glass of the coldest Water you can get, and apply a
thick Cloth dipped in cold Water:

472. Or, put the Feet into cold Water:

473. Or apply a Sponge dipped in Red Wine and Vinegar:

474. Or, bleed in the Arm. Stop the Orifice often with the Finger, and then
let it bleed again:

475. Or, boil four or five Leaves of Red Holy Oak in a Pint of Milk, with a
small Quantity of Sugar. Drink this in the Morning; if the Person can afford
it, she may add a Tea-spoonful of Balm of Gilead: -- This does not often fail:

476. Or, after a small Rubarb Purge, boil the Peel of seven Seville Oranges in
three Pints of Spring Water to a Quart. Take ten Spoonfuls sweetened with white
Sugar, four Times a Day:

477. Or, use daily Decoction, Syrup, or Powder of Horsetail, Nettles, or
Plantane.

143. To resolve Coagulated Milk.
478. Cover the Woman with with a Table-cloth, and hold a Pan of hot Water just
under her Breast; then stroke it three or four Minutes. Do this twice a Day
'till it is cured.

144. To increase Milk.
479. Drink a Pint of Water going to Bed:

480. Or, drink largely of Pottage made with Lentils.

145. To make Milk agree with the Stomach.
481. If it lie heavy, put a little Salt in it; if it curdle, Sugar. For
bilious Persons, mix it with Water.

146. Nervous Disorders.
482. Are of two Kinds; 1. Those which proceed from the Nerves being compressed
by the Swelling of the muscular Flesh: Or, 2. When the Nerves themselves are
disordered In the former Case, Temperance and Abstemiousness will generally
cure: In the latter, when the Nerves perform their Office too languidly, a GOOD
AIR is the first requisite. The Patient also should rise early, and as soon as
the Dew is off the Ground, walk: Let his Breakfast be Mother of Thyme-Tea,
gathered in June, using half as much as we do of common Tea. It should be drunk
with the finest Sugar; and Cream may be added if he please: Coffee must be
avoided. When the Nerves are too sensible, let the Person breathe a proper Air.
Let him eat Veal, Chickens, or Mutton. Vegetables should be eat sparingly; the
most innocent is the French Bean whilst young, and the best Root the Turnip.
Wine should be avoided carefully: So should all Sauces. Sometimes he may
breakfast upon a Quarter of an Ounce of the Powder of Valerian-root infused in
hot Water, to which he may add Cream and Sugar. Tea is not proper. When the
Person finds an uncommon Oppression, let him take a large Spoonful of the
Tincture of Valerian-root.

The Tincture should be made thus. Cut to Pieces six Ounces of wild
Valerian-root gathered in June, and fresh dried. Bruise it by a few strokes in
a Mortar, that the Pieces may be split, but it should not be beat into a
Powder: Put this into a Quart of strong white Wine; cork the Bottle and let it
stand three Weeks, shaking it every Day; then press it out and filtre the
Tincture through Paper.

483. Take also as much as will lie on a Shilling of the Powder of Misleto,
twice a Day, when the Stomach is most empty, fasting two Hours after it; then
once a Day, and afterward every other, or every third Day, 'till there is no
more Need of Medicines.

Let this Plant be gathered in May, and the Leaves and Bark dried carefully in
the free Air, without Sea, till they are b^ittle. Let them then be reduced to a
fine Powder, and kept in that Form. Dr. Uvedale. 484. But I am firmly
persuaded, there is no Remedy in Nature for Nervous, Disorders of every Kind,
comparable to the proper and constant Use of the Electrical Machine.

147. An old stubborn Pain in the Back.
485. Steep Root of Water-Fern in Water, till the Water becomes thick and
clammy. Then rub the Parts therewith Morning and Evening.

148. The Palsy. A Palsy is the Loss of Motion or Feeling, or both in any
particular Part of the Body.

486. Use the cold Bath, if you are under Fifty, rubbing and sweating after it:

487. Or, shred white Onions, and bake then gently in an earthen Pot, 'till
they are soft. Spread a thick Plaster of this, and apply it to the benumbed
Part, all over the Side, if need be. I.

488. Or, take Tar-water, Morning and Evening:

489. Or, boil white and red Sage, a Handful of each in a Quart of white Wine.
Strain and bottle in. Take a small Glass Morning and Evening. This helps all
Nervous Disorders.

490. Or apply to the Parts boiled Sage-leaves hot: and drink Decoction of Sage
Morning and Evening:

491. Or, of Water-dock, applying the boiled leaves.

149. Palsy of the Hands.
492. Wash them often in Decoction of Sage as hot as you can bear:

493. Or boil a Handful of Elder leaves, and two or three Spoonfuls of
Mustard Seed in a Quart of Water. Wash often in this, as hot as may be.

150. Palsy of the Mouth.
494. After Purging well, chew Mustard seed often:

495. Or, hold in your Mouth half an Ounce of Spirit of Lavender:

496. Or, gargle with Juice of Wood-sage.

151. Palsy from working with white Lead or Verdigrease.
497. Use warm Baths and a Milk Diet.

152. The Palpitation or Beating of the Heart.
498. Drink a Pint of cold Water:

499. Or, apply outwardly a Rag dipped in Vinegar:

500. Or, be electrified:

501. Or, take a Decoction of Mother-wort every Night.

153. The Piles (to prevent.)
502. Wash the Parts often with cold Water.

154. The Piles (to cure.)
503. Apply warm Treacle:

504. Or, of Tobacco-leaf steeped in Water twenty-four Hours:

505. Or, a Poultis of boiled Brook-Lime. It seldom fails:

506. Or, a bruised Onion skinned; or roasted in Ashes. It perfectly cures the
dry Piles:

507. Or, Leeks fried in Butter:

508. Or, Varnish. It perfectly cures both the blind and bleeding Piles. I.

155. The Inward Piles.
509. Drink largely of Treacle and Water:

510. Drink a Spoonful of Juice of Yarrow, or, of Leeks, three or four
Mornings. I.

156. The Plague (to prevent.)
511. Eat Marigold Flowers daily, as a Sallad, with Oil and Vinegar:

512. Or, a little of the tops of Rue with Bread and Butter, every Morning:

513. Or, infuse Rue, Sage, Mint, Rosemary, Wormwood, of each a Handful, in two
Quarts of the sharpest Vinegar, over warm Embers for eight Days. Then strain it
through a Flannel, and add half an Ounce of Camphire, dissolved in three Ounces
of rectified Spirits of Wine. With this wash the Lo^s, Face, and Mouth, and
snuff a little up the Nose when you go abroad. Smell to a Sponge dipped therein,
when you approach infected Persons or Places.

157. The Plague (to cure.)
514. Cold Water alone, drank largely, has cured it:

515. Or, an Ounce or two of the juice of Marigolds.

516. Or, take a Dram of Angelica powdered, every six Hours. It is a strong
Sweat:

517. Or, after bleeding fifty or sixty Ounces, drink very largely of Water
sharpened with Spirit of Vitriol.

518. Or a Draught of Brine as soon as seized; sweat in Bed; take no other
Drink for some Hours.

519. Use Lemon-juice largely in every Thing.

158. The Pleurisy. A Pleurisy is a Fever attended with a violent Pain in the
Side, and a Pulse remarkably hard.

520. Apply to the Side Onions roasted in the Embers, mixed with Cream:

521. Or, take out the Core of an Apple, fill it with white Frankincense; stop
it close with the Piece you cut out, and roast it in Ashes. Mash and eat it. I.

522. Or, a Glass of Tar-water, warm every half Hour:

523. Or, of Decoction of Nettles; and apply the Herb, hot, as a Poultis:

524. Or, a Plaster of Flour of Brimstone and White of an Egg.

159. To one Poisoned
525. Give one or two Drams of distilled Verdigrease. It vomits in an Instant.

160. A Prick or Cut that festers.
526. Apply Turpentine.

161. An easy Purge.
527. Drink a Pint of warmish Water fasting, walking after ^t:

528. Or, infuse from half a Dram to two Dram^ of Damask Rose-Leaves dried, in
half a Pint of warm Water for twelve Hours:

529. Or, infuse three Drams of Sena, and a Scruple of Salt of Tartar, in half
a Pint of River Water for twelve Hours. Then strain and take it in the Morning.

162. A stronger Purge.
530. Drink half a Pint of strong Decoction of Dock-Root:

531. Or, two Drams of the powdered Root of Monks Rhubarb, with a Scruple of
Ginger.

163. The Quinsy. The Quinsy is (...) Fever attended with Difficulty of
Swallowing, and often Breathi^

532. Apply a large White-bread Toast, half an Inch thick-dipt in Brandy, to
the crown of the Head till it dries.

533. Or, drink a Quart of cold Water lying down in Bed:

534. Or, swallow slowly white Rose Water, mixed with Syrup of Mulberries:

535. Or, Juice or Jelly of black Currants, or Decoction of the Leaves or Bark.
I. -- (See likewise Art. 592.)

164. The Rheumatism. Rheumatic^ (...) are generally most violent as soon as
you are warm in Bed.

536. Use the cold Bath, with Rubbing and Sweating:

537. Or, rub in warm Treacle, and apply to the Part a brown Paper smeared
therewith: Change it in twelve Hours:

538. Or, drink very largely of warm Water in Bed:

539. Or, Tar-water Morning and and Evening:

540. Or, steep six or seven Cloves of Garlic in half a Pint of white Wine.
Drink it lying down. It sweats, and frequently cures at once:

541. Or, mix Flour of Brimstone with Honey, equal Quantities. Take three
Tea-spoonfuls at Night, two in the Morning; and one afterward Morning and
Evening, till cured. This succeeds oftener than any Remedy I have found:

542. Or, take Morning and Evening as much Lignum Guaiacum powdered, as lies on
a Shilling:

543. Or as much Flou^ of Sulphur, washing it down with a Decoction of Lignum
Guaiacum:

544. Or, live on New Milk Whey and white Bread for fourteen Days. This has
cured in a desperate Case.

165. To restore the Strength after a Rheumatism.
545. Make a strong Broth of Cow-heels, and wash the Parts with it warm twice a
Day. It has restored one who was quite a Cripple, having no Strength left
either in his Leg, Thigh, or Loins.

166. The Rickets (to prevent or cure.)
546. Wash the Child every Morning in cold Water.

167. Ring-Worms.
547. Rub them with Oil of Paper:

548. Or with Juice of House-leek:

549. Or, wash them with Decoction of Soap-wort; or Hungary-water camphorated.

168. Running at the Nose.
550. Snuff up a Tea-spoonful of Spirit of Hartshorn.

169. A Rupture.
551. Take Agrimony, Spleenwort, Solomon's Seal, Strawberry-roots, a Handful
each; pick and wash them well; stamp and boil them two Hours, in two Quarts of
white Wine in a Vessel close stopped. Strain and drink a large Glass of this
every Morning, and an Hour after drink another. It commonly cures in a
Fortnight. A good Truss mean Time is of great Use.

170. A Fresh Rupture.
552. Take Decoction of Plantane-leaves, Morning and Evening:

553. Or, dry a Spoonful of Plantane-seed (...) the Fire; boil it in Milk, and
take half a Pint every Morning.

171. A Rupture in Children.
554. Boil a Spoonful of Egg-shells dried in an Oven and powdered, in a Pint of
Milk to three Quarters of a Pint. Feed the Child constantly with Bread boiled
in this Milk.

172. A Windy Rupture.
555. Warm Cow Dung well. Spread it thick on Leather, strowing some
Cummin-seeds on it, and apply it hot. When cold put on a new one. It commonly
cures a Child (keeping his Bed) in two Days.

173. A Scald Head.
556. Anoint it with Barbados Tar.

174. The Sciatica. The Sciatica is a violent Pain in the Hip, chiefly in the
Joint of the Thigh Bone.

557. Is certainly cured by taking a Purge in a few Hours after it begins:

558. Or, use cold Bathing, and sweat, together with the Flesh-brush twice a
Day.

559. Or, apply Leaves of Ranunculus bruised, for six Hours.

560. "Many have been cured in four or five Days, only by drinking half a Pint
of cold Water daily, in the Morning, and at Four in the Afternoon."

561. Or, apply pounded Roots of Burdock and of Elicompane cold. This usually
cures, if kept on twenty-four Hours; but it gives Pain:

562 Or, boil Nettles till soft. Foment with the Liquor, then apply the Herb as
a Poultis. -- I have known this cure a Sciatica of forty five Years standing.

563. Or, boil Calamint; apply this as a Poultis, shifting it daily. Mean-time
drink a Decoction of it Morning and Evening.

564. Or, apply Flannels dipped in stale Lie, boiled with Salt as hot as you can
bear, for an Hour.

175. Inflammations or Swellings of the Scrotum.
565. Wash it thrice a Day with strong Decoction of Agrimony.

176. A Scorbutic Atrophy. Such a Degree of the Scurvy, as causes the Flesh to
waste away, like a Consumption.

566. Use cold Bathing: Which also cures all

177. Scorbutic Pains.

178. Scorbutic Sores.
567. Put half a Pound of fresh shaved Lignum-vitae and half an Ounce of Sena
into on Earthen Pot, that holds six Quarts. Add five Quarts of soft Water, and
lute the Pot close. Set this in a Kettle of cold Water, and put it over a Fire,
till it has boiled three Hours. Let it stand in the Kettle till cold. When it
has stood one Night drink daily half a Pint, new Milk warm, fasting, and at
four in the Afternoon. Wash with a little of it. In three Months all the Sores
will be dried up.

179. The Scurvy The Scurvy is known by Heaviness of Body, Weariness,
Rottenness of Gums, and yellow, lead or viole^ colour^d Spots on the ^^gs.

568. Live on Turnips for a Month:

569. Or, an entire Milk Diet, for six Months:

570. Or, take Tar-water Morning and Evening, for three Months:

571. Or, Infusion of Horseradish:

572. Or, Decoction of great Water-Dock.

573. Or, three Spoonfuls of Nettle Juice every Morning:

574. Or, infuse dried Dock-roots in your common Drink:

575. Or, use Infusion or Powder of Wall-rue, Morning and Evening. -- See Art.
430.

576. Or, pound into a Pulp Sevil Oranges sliced, Rind and all, and Powder
Sugar equal Quantities. Take a Teaspoonful three or four Times a Day. I.

577. Water and Garden Cresses, Mustard, and Juice of Scurvy Grass help in a
cold Scurvy:

578. When there is a continual salt Taste in the Mouth, take a Pint of
Limewater Morning and Evening.

180. A Broken Shin.
579. Bind a dry Oak-leaf upon it.

181. The Shingles. A Kind of Ring-Worm, which incircles the Body, like a Belt,
of an Hand's Breadth.

580. Drink a Pint of Seawater every Morning for a Week; toward the Close,
bathe also.

182. Sickishness in the Morning.
581. Eat nothing after Six in the Evening.

183. Skin rubbed off.
582. Apply pounded Self-heal. -- It seldom needs repeating.

184. Small Pox.
583. Drink largely of Toast and Water:

584. Or, let your constant Drink be Milk and Water mixed.

585. The best Food is Milk and Apples:

586. Or, Bread dipped in Milk and Water.

587. Take care to have a free, pure, and cool Air. Therefore open the Casement
every Day, only do not let it chill the Patient.

588. If they strike in, and Convulsions follow, drink a Pint of cold Water
immediately. This instantly stops the Convulsions, and drives out the Pock.

185. A Sore Mouth.
589. Apply the White of an Egg, beat up with Loaf-sugar.

590. Or, gargle with Juice of Cinquefoil.

186. A Sore Throat.
591. Take a Pint of cold Water, lying down in Bed:

592. Or, apply a Chin-stay of roasted Figs:

593. Or, a Flannel sprinkled with Spirits of Hartshorn to the Throat, and rub
Hungary water on the Top of the Head:

594. Or, gargle with Rose Water, and Syrup of Mulberries:

595. Or, snuff a little Honey up the Nose.

596. An old sore Throat was cured by living wholly on Apples and Apple-water.

187. A Sprain.
597. Hold the Part in very cold Water for two Hours:

598. Or, apply Cloths dipped therein, four Times doubled, for two Hours,
changing them as they grow warm:

599. Or, bathe it in good Crab-verjuice:

600. Or, stoop it with one Spoonful of Brandy, to one of Vinegar, and four of
Water:

601. Or, boil Bran in Wine Vinegar to a Poultis. Apply this warm, and renew it
once in twelve Hours:

602. Or, boil eight Ounces of Castile-soap and as much Bay Salt in four Quarts
of Water. Put the Part sprained into this for half an Hour; or, foment with it:

603. Or, mix a little Turpentine with Flour and the Yolk of an Egg; and apply
it as a Plaster. This cures in a desperate Case.

604. Weakness remaining after a Sprain, is cured by fomenting the Part daily
with Beef-Brine.

188. A venomous Sting.
605. Apply a little Venice Treacle:

606. Or, a Poultis of bruised Plantane and Honey.

607. Or, take inwardly, one Dram of black Currant-leaves powdered. It is an an
excellent Counter-poison.

189. The Sting of a Be.
608. Apply Honey.

190. The Sting of a Nettle.
609. Rub the Part with Juice of Nettles.

191. The Sting of a Wasp.
610. Rub the Part with bruised Leaves of House-leek:

611. Or, of Water-crosses:

612. Or, of Rue:

613. Or, apply Venice Treacle.

192. The Sting of a Be or Wasp in the Eye.
614. Apply Carduus bruised, with the White of an Egg. Renew it if it grows dry.

193. A Stich in the Side.
615. Apply Treacle spread on a hot Toast.

194. Frequent or violent Stitches.
616. Drink Decoction of Nettles, and apply the Herbs hot:

617. Or, boil two or three Sprigs of Pennyroyal in a Pint of Milk. Drink the
Milk, and apply a Poultis of the Herbs hot:

618. Or, take a Tea-spoonful of Irish Slate finely powdered.

195. Accidental Sickness, or Pain in the Stomach.
619. Vomit with a Quart or more of warm Water. Do this twice or thrice,
omitting a Day between.

196. Pain in the Stomach from bad Digestion.
620. Take fasting, or in the Fit, half a Pint of Camomile Tea. Do this five or
six Mornings:

621. Or, drink the Juice of half a large Lemon immediately after Dinner every
Day: -- Dr. Mead.

622. Or, from twenty to forty Drops of Elixir of Vitriol in Sage Tea, twice or
thrice a Day:

623. Or, in the Fit, a Glass full of Vinegar.

197. Choleric, Hot Pains in the Stomach.
624. Take half a Pint of the Decoction of Ground Ivy, with a Tea-spoonful of
the Powder of it, five or six Mornings. I.

198. Coldness in the Stomach.
625. Take a Spoonful of the Syrup of the Juice of Garduus Benedictus, fasting
for three or four Mornings. I.

199. Pain in the Stomach, with Coldness and Wind.
626. Swallow five or six Corns of white Pepper, for six or seven Mornings.

200. The Stone (to prevent.)
627. Eat a thin Slice of dry Bread every Morning:

628. Or drink a Pint of warm Water daily just before Dinner. After discharging
one Stone, this will prevent the generating of another.

629. Stoop down, and raise yourself up again. If you feel Pain, as if cut
through the Middle, the Pain is not from the Stone, but Rheumatism.

630. Beware of Costiveness. Use no violent Diuretics. Mead is a proper Drink.

631. In the Fit, slice a large Onion; pour half a Pint of warm Water upon it.
After it has stood twelve Hours, drink the Water. Do this every Morning till
you are well.

201. In a Raging Fit.
632. Beat Onions into a Pulp, and apply them as a Poultis, Part to the Back,
and Part to each Groin. It gives speedy Ease in the most racking Pain:

633. Or, give a Clyster with Oil of Turpentine.

202. The Stone (to ease or cure.)
634. Take Decoction of Agrimony Morning and Evening.

635. Or of Camomile.

636. Or, boil half a Pound of Parsnips in a Quart of Water. Drink a Glass of
this Morning and Evening, and use no other Drink all the Day. -- It usually
cures in six Weeks:

637. Or, take daily four Pints of Limewater, made by pouring four Quarts of
Water on a Pound of fresh calcined Oyster-shells and Cockle-shells.

638. "Or, take Morning and Evening a Tea-Spoonful of Onions calcined into
white Ashes, in white Wine. An Ounce will often dissolve the Stone."

639. Or, take a Tea-spoonful of Violet-seed powdered, Morning and Evening. It
both wastes the Stone, and brings it away:

640. Or, burn the dried Shells of Kidney-Beans to Powder. Put two
Tea-spoonfuls of this into a half Pint Tea-pot. Pour boiling Water on it at
Night. In the Morning pour it off clear, warm it again, and drink it sweetened
with Honey. Do this daily every other Fortnight till cured.

203. The Stone in the Kidneys.
641. Use the cold Bath: Or, drink half a Pint of Water every Morning:

642. Or, Decoction of Speedwell largely.

204. Stoppage in the Kidneys.
643. Take Decoction of Juice or Syrup of Ground Ivy, Morning and Evening:

644. Or, of Pellitory of the Wall:

645. Or, of Juice of Radishes:

646. Or, half a Pint of Tar-water.

205. The Stranguary.
647. Use the cold Bath:

648. Or, drink largely of Decoction of Turnips sweetened with Honey.

649. Or, of warm Lemonade: I.

650. Or, of Decoction of Mallows:

651. Or of Decoction of red Nettle-seed:

652. Or, take a Tea-spoonful of calcined Egg-shells, Morning and Evening.

206. Sunburn, (smarting.)
653. Wash the Face with Sage-tea.

207. To stop prvfuse Sweating.
654. Drink largely of cold Water.

208. Swelled Glands in the Neck.
655. Take half a Pint of Seawater every other Day.

209. Swelled Legs.
656. Bathe them every Morning in cold Water, and take an easy Purge twice a
Week:

658. Or, take Wormwood, Southerwood and Rue, stamp them together, and fry them
in Honey, till they grow dry: Then apply them as hot as you can bear.

210. A Swelled Throat.
659. Gargle with Decoction of Nettles:

660. Or, of Primrose-leaves.

211. A white Swelling (on the Joints.)
661. Hold the Part half an Hour every Morning, under the St^ that falls from a
Mill; or under a Pump or Cock. -- This cures also any Pains in the Joints. It
seldom fails.

662. Or, apply a Poultis of Wormwood fried with Hogs Lard.

212. To dissolve white or hard Swellings.
663. Take white Roses, Elder Flowers, Leaves of Fox-glove and of St. John's
Wort, a Handful each: Mix with Hogs-Lard, and make an Ointment.

213. To fasten the Teeth.
664. Chew often Roots of Brook-Lime:

665. Or, put powdered Alum the Quantity of a Nutmeg, in a Quart of Spring
Water, for twenty-four Hours. Then strain the Water and gargle with it:

666. Or, boil so much of Alum therein. Strain and keep it for Use:

667. Or, gargle often with Phyllyrea leaves boiled with a little Alum, in
Forge-water.

214. To clean the Teeth.
668. Rub them with Ashes of burnt Bread.

215. To prevent the Toothache.
669. Wash the Mouth with cold Water every Morning.

670. Or, rub the Teeth often with Tobacco Ashes.

216. To cure the Toothache.
671. Be electrified through the Tooth:

672. Or, rub the Cheek a Quarter of an Hour:

673. Or, put a Clove of Garlic into the Ear:

674. Or, Parsley much bruised, with a little Bay Salt:

675. Or, a Piece of Plantane-root, fresh dug up, and washed:

676. Or, lay roasted Parings of Turnips, as hot as may be, behind the Ear:

677. Or, put a Leaf of Betony, bruised up the Nose:

678. Or, lay bruised or boiled Nettles to the Cheek:

679. Or, a Bag filled with hot Camomile Flowers:

680. Or, lay a Clove of Garlic on the Tooth:

681. Or, chew the Root of the yellow Water Flower de Luc^s I.

682. Or, gargle with Decoction of Mulberry Leaves:

683. Or, put into the hollow Tooth, a little Cotton, dipped in Lucatell's Balsam:

684. Or, a Drop or two of Oil of Cloves on Cotton:

685. Or, dissolve a Dram of crude Sal Ammoniac in two Drams of Lemon-juice:
Wet Cotton herein and apply:

686. Or, apply to the Cheek Gum Tacamahac spread on Silk:

687. Or, keep the Feet in warm Water, and rub them well with Bran, just before
Bedtime:

688. Or, take an Ounce of Rob of Elder in Broth, and gargle with it.

217. Pain in the Testicles.
689. Apply Pellitory of the Wall beaten up into a Poultis changing it Morning
and Evening.

218. To draw out Thorns, Splinters and Bones.
690. Apply Nettle Roots and Salt:

691. Or, Turpentine spread on Leather.

219. The Thrush. Little, whitish Ulcers in the Mouth.

692. Mix Juice of of Celandine with Honey, to the Thickness of Cream. Infuse a
little powdered Saffron. Let this simmer a while and scum it. Apply it (when
needed) with a Feather. At the same Time give eight or ten Grains of Rhubarb.

220. Torpor (or Numbness) of the Limbs.
693. Use the cold Bath, with Rubbing and Sweating.

221. Twisting of the Guts.
694. Many at the Point of Death have been cured by taking one, two or three
Pounds of Quicksilver in Water -- Pareus.

222. The Tympany or Windy Dropsy.
695. Use the cold Bath, with Purges intermixed:

696. Or, mix the Juice of Leeks and of Elder. Take two or three Spoonfuls of
this Morning and Evening.

223. A Vein or Sinew cut.
697. Apply the inner green Rind of Hazle fresh scraped.

224. The Vertigo or Swimming in the Head.
698. Take a Vomit or two:

699. Or, use the cold Bath for a Month:

700. Or, drop Juice of Pimpernell into the Ear Morning and Evening.

701. Or, in a May Morning, about Sunrise, snuff up daily the Dew that is on
Mallow Leaves:

702. Or, apply to the Top of the Head, shaven, a Plaster of Flour of
Brimstone, and white of Eggs:

703. Or, drink Morning and Evening half a Pint of Decoction of Primrose-root:
I.

704. Or, of Sage washing also the Head, therewith:

705. Or, take every Morning half a Dram of Mustard Seed.

225. Vigilia, Inability to Sleep.
706. Apply to the Forehead for two Hours, Cloths four Times doubled, and dipped
in cold Water. I have known this applied to a lying-in Woman, and her Life
saved thereby:

707. Or, use the cold Bath. -- It cures even in desperate Cases:

708. Or, apply to the Head Leaves of water Lillies:

709. Or, a Poultis of Henbane and Poppy seed, beaten together:

710. Or, use small Doses of Camphire. It is both safer and surer than Opium.

226. Bite of a Viper or a Rattle-Snake.
711. Rub the Place immediately with common Oil. Quere, Would not the same cure
the Bite of a mad Dog? Would it not be worth while, to make the Trial on a Dog?

227. To prevent the Bite of a Viper.
712. Rub the Hands with Juice of Radishes.

228. An Ulcer.
713. Dry and powder a Walnut Leaf, and strew it on, and lay another Walnut
Leaf on that:

714. Or, boil Walnut-tree Leaves in Water, with a little Sugar. Apply a Cloth
dipped in this, changing it once in two Days.

229. An Inward Ulcer.
715. Drink Tar-water Morning and Evening:

716. Or, Decoction of Pimpernel.

230. Ulcer in the Bladder or Kidneys.
717. Take Decoction of Agrimony, thrice a Day:

718. Or, Decoction, Powder, or Syrup of Horse-tail.

231. A Fistulous Ulcer.
719. Apply Wood Betony bruised, changing it daily:

720. Or, Leaves of Water Dock bruised.

232. A Bleeding Varicous Ulcer in the Leg.
721. Was cured only by constant cold Bathing.

233. A Malignant Ulcer.
722. Foment Morning and Evening, with a Decoction of Mint. Then sprinkle on it
finely powdered Rue:

723. Or, apply Juice of Pimpernel boiled with the Herb.

234. A Stubborn Ulcer.
724. Burn to Ashes (but not too long) the gross Stalks on which the red
Coleworts grow. Make a Plaster with this and fresh Butter. Change it once a
Day.

725. Or, apply a Poultis of boiled Parsnips. This will cure even when the Bone
is foul.

235. An easy and safe Vomit.
726. Boil half a Handful of Artichoke-leaves in a Quart of Water. The more you
drink of warm Water after it the better:

727. Or, a Dram and a half of Primrose Root powdered: It is best if gathered
in August.

728. Or, infuse three Drams of Radish-seed in a Quart of warm Water for twelve
Hours. Squeeze off the Water, and take it.

236. To stop Vomiting.
729. If the Vomiting be not the Effect of a Medicine: after every Vomiting
drink a Pint of warm Water:

730. Or, apply a large Onion slit, to the Pit of the Stomach: I.

731. Or, take a Spoonful of Lemon-juice and six Grains of Salt of Wormwood:

732. Or, infuse an Ounce of Quicksilver in a large Glass full of Water for
twenty four Hours. Then drink the Water: I.

237. Bloody Urine.
733. Take a Quarter of a Pint of Sheeps Milk twice a Day:

734. Or, half a Pint of Decoction of Agrimony:

735. Or, of Decoction of Yarrow.

238. Urine by Drops with Heat and Pain.
736. Drink nothing but Lemonade:

737. Or, beat up the Pulp of five or six roasted Apples with near a Quart of
Water. Take it at lying down. It commonly cures before Morning.

239. Involuntary Urine.
738. Use the cold Bath:

739. Or, take a Tea-spoonful of powdered Agrimony in a little Water, Morning
and Evening.

740. Or, a Quarter of a Pint of Allum-Posset-Drink every Night.

240. Sharp Urine.
741. Take two Spoonfuls of fresh Juice of Ground Ivy.

241. Suppression of Urine.
742. Drink largely of warm Lemonade:

743. Or, take a Spoonful of Juice of Lemons, sweetened with Syrup of Violets:

744. Or, a Spoonful of Juice of Radishes:

745. Or, two Spoonfuls of Juice of Onions:

242. Uvula inflamed. This is usually called the Palate of the Mouth.

746. Gargle with a Decoction of beaten Hemp Seed:

747. Or, with Decoction of Dandelion.

243. Uvula relaxed.
748. Bruise the Veins of a Cabbage-leaf, and lay it hot on the Crown of the
Head. Repeat, if needed, in two Hours: I.

749. Or, gargle with Decoction of Water Dock:

750. Or, with Infusion of Mustard Seed:

244. Warts.
751. Rub them daily with a Radish:

752. Or, with Juice of Dandelion:

753. Or, of Marigold-Flowers:

754. Or, Water in which Sal Ammoniac is dissolved.

245. The Whites.
755. Feed sparingly. Use Exercise constantly. Sleep moderately but never lying
on your Back.

756. First bleed. Then purge thrice with twenty Grains of Rhubarb and five of
Calomel:

757. Or, boil four or five ^ves of the white Holy Oak, in a Pint of Milk with
a li^ ^ar. Then add a Tea-spoonful of Balm of Gilead. Drink this every Morning.
I.

758. Make Venice Turpentine, Flour and fine Sugar, equal Quantities, into
small Pills. Take three or four of these Morning and Evening. This also cures
most Pain in the Back:

759. Or, Quicksilver and Gas of Sulphur, as for an Asthma. This seldom fails:

760. Or, after Purging, take about fifteen Grains of Ceruse of Antimony in
white Wine, twice or thrice a Day.

246. A Whitlow.
761. Apply a Poultis of chewed Bread. Shift it once a Day:

762. Or, a Plaster of Ground Ivy stamped.

247. Weakness in the Ankles.
763. Hold them in cold Water a Quarter of an Hour, Morning and Evening.

248. Worms. A Child may be known to have the Worms, by Chillness, Paleness,
hollow Eyes, Itching of the Nose, Starting in Sleep, and an unusally stinking
Breath. -- Worms are never found in Children who live wholly on Milk.

764. Take a Spoonful of Salt in a Glass of Water every Morning:

765. Or, a Dram and Half of Nitre in in Broth: I.

766. Or, a Spoonful of Juice of Spear-mint:

767. Or, of Juice of Lemons:

768. Or, a Glass of Onion-water:

769 Or, boil an Ounce of Quicksilver in half a Pint of Spring Water. Use this
for common Drink:

770. Or, take two Tea-spoonfuls of Worm-seed mixed with Treacle for six
Mornings:

771. Or, a Dram of powdered Fern-root, boiled in Mead. This kills both the
flat and round Worms. Repeat the Medicine from Time to Time.

249. Flat Worms.
772. Take Filingr of Tin and red Coral, of each an equal Quantity: Pound them
together into a very fine Powder: Of which one Dram, made into a Bolus with
Conserve of the Tops of Sea-worm-wood, is to be taken twice a Day.

250. Wounds.
773. Apply Juice or Powder of Yarrow. I.

774. Or, bind Leaves of Ground Ivy upon it:

775. Or, bruised Hyssop, with a little Sugar:

776. Or, Wood-betony bruised. This quickly heals even cut Veins and Sinews, or
draws out Thorns or Splinters.

777. Keep the Part in cold Water for an Hour, keeping the Wound closed with
your Thumb. Then bind on the thin Skin of an Egg-shell, for Days or Weeks, till
it fall of itself Regard not though it prick or shoot for a Time.

251. Inward Wounds.
778. Infuse Yarrow twelve Hours in warm Water. Take a Cup of this four Times a
Day. I.

252. Putrid Wounds.
779. Wash them Morning and Evening with warm Decoction of Agrimony. If they
heal too soon, and a Matter gather underneath, apply a Poultis of the Leaves
pounded, changing them once a Day, till well.

253. Wounded Tendons.
780. Boil Comfrey Roots to a thick Mucilage, and apply this as a Poultis,
changing it once a Day.

COLD BATHING Cures Young Children of
CONVULSIONS, Coughs, Cutaneous Inflammations, Pimples, and Scabs, Gravel,
Gripes, Inflammations of the Ears, Navel or Mouth, Rickets, Suppression of
Urine, Vomiting, Want of Sleep,
It prevents the Growth of Hereditary Apoplexies, Asthma's, Blindness,
Consumptions, Deafness, Deliria, Gout, King's Evil, Melancholy, Palsies,
Rheumatism, Stone.


It cures every Nervous, And this, I apprehend, accounts for its frequently
curing the Bite of a mad Dog; especially if it be repeated for twenty-five or
thirty Days successively.
and every Paralitick Disorder: in particular, The Asthma, Ague of every Sort,
Atrophy, Blindness,* Cancer, Chorea Sancti Viti, Chin-cough, Coagulated Blood
after Bruises,* Consumptions, Convulsions, Coughs, Complication of Distempers,
Convulsive Pains,* Deafness,* Dropsy, Epilepsy, Flour Albus, Violent Fevers,
Gout (running) Hectic Fevers, Hemicrania, Hysteric Pains,* Incubus,
Inflammations,* Involuntary Stool, or Urine,* Lameness, (Old) Leprosy,
Lethargy, Loss of Apetite,* of Smell,* Speech,* Taste,* Nephritick Pains,
Palpitation of the Heart, Pain in the Back, Joints,* Stomach, Rheumatisms,*
Rupture, Suffocations, Sciatica,* Surfeits, (at the Beginning) Scorbutic
Pains,* Swelling on the Joints, Stone in the Kidneys, Torpor of the Limbs, even
when the Use of them is lost, Tetanus, Tympany, Vertigo, St. Vitus' Dance,
Vigilia, Varicous Ulcers,


But in all Cases where the Nerves are obstructed, (such as those marked thus*)
you should go to Bed immediately after, and sweat.

It Is often useful, to use the hot Bath a few Days before you use the Cold.

Wise Parents should dip their Children in cold Water every Morning, till they
are three Quarters old; and afterward, their Hands and their Feet.

N. B. No Child shall ever be swathed tight. It lays the Foundation for many
Diseases. -- It Is best to wean a Child at about seven Months old. They should
lie in the Cradle at least a Year. No wise Parent should suffer a Child to
drink any Tea; (at least, till it is ten or twelve Years old) or to taste Spice
or Sugar. Milk, Milk-porridge, and Water Gruel are the proper Breakfast for
Children.

Washing the Head every Morning in cold Water, prevents Rheums, and cures
Coughs, old Head-achs, and sore Eyes.

Water-drinking prevents Apoplexies, Asthma's, Convulsions, Gout, Hysteric
Fits, Madness, Palsies, Stone, Trembling,


To this Children should be bred up from their Cradles.

Electrifying in a proper Manner, cures St. Anthony's Fire, Blindness, Blood
extravasated, Bronchacele, Coldness in the Feet, Contractions of the Limbs,
Cramp, Deafness, Falling Sickness, Feet violently disordered, Felons, Fistula
Laery malis, Fits, Ganglions, Gout, Headache, Inflammations, King's Evil,*
Knots in the Flesh, Lameness, Leprosy, Mortifications, Pain in the Stomach,
Palpitation of the Heart, Palsy, Rheumatism, Ring-Worms, Sciatica, Shingles,
Sprain, Surfeit, Swelling of all Sorts, Throat sore, Toothache, Wen.


Nor have I yet known one single Instance, wherein it has done Harm: So that I
cannot but doubt the Veracity of those which have affirmed the contrary.

Fasting Spittle outwardly applied every Morning, has sometimes relieved, and
sometimes cured Blindness, Co^^s, (mixed with chewed Bread and applied every
Morning) Cuts, (fresh) Deafness, Eye lids, red and inflamed, Scorbutic
Tetters, Sore Legs, Warts,


Taken inwardly, it relieves or cures Asthma's, Cancers, Falling Sickness,
Gout, Gravel, King's Evil, Leprosy, Palsy, Rheumatism, Scurvy, Stone, Swelled
Liver,


The best Way is, to eat about an Ounce of hard Bread or Sea-biscuit, every
Morning; fasting two or three Hours after. This should be done in stubborn
Cases, for a Month or six Weeks.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
1. ABORTION, (to prevent) Page 19 2. For an Ague ibid. 3. A Tertian Ague 20 4.
A Quartan Ague 21 5. St. Anthony's Fire ibid. 6. Apoplexy 22 7. Canine Apetite
ibid. 8. Asthma ibid. 9. A Dry Convulsive Asthma 23 10. To cure Baldness ibid.
11. Bleeding at the Nose (to prevent) ibid. 12. Bleeding of a Wound ibid. 13.
Spitting Blood 24 14. Vomiting Blood ibid. 15. To dissolve coagulated Blood
ibid. 16. Boils ibid. 17. Hard Breasts 25 18. Sore Breasts and swelled ibid.
19. A Bruise ibid. 20. To prevent Swelling from a Bruise ibid. 21. To cure a
Swelling from a Bruise ibid. 22. A Burn or Scald ibid. 23. A deep Burn or Scald
26 24. A Cancer in the Breast ibid. 25. A Cancer in any other Part 27 26. A
Cancer in the Mouth ibid. 27. Chilblains (to prevent) ibid. 28. Chilblains (to
cure) ibid. 29. Chin-Cough or Hooping-Cough ibid. 30. Cholerea Morbus, i. e.
Flux and Vomiting 28 31. Chopped Hands (to prevent) ibid. 32. Chopped Lips ibid.
33. A Cold ibid. 34. A Cold in the Head ibid. 35. The Colic (in the Fit) 29
36. Colic in Children ibid. 37. A Billious Colic ibid. 38. An Habitual Colic
29 39. An Hysteric Colic ibid. 40. A Nervous Colic 30 41. Colic from Fumes
of Lead, or White-Lead, Verdigrease ibid. 42. A Consumption i^id. 43.
Convulsions 31 44. Convulsions in Children 3^ 45. Convulsions in the Bowels of
Children ibid. 46. Corns (to prevent) ibid. 47. Corns (to cure) ibid. 48.
Costiveness ibid. 49. A Cough ibid. 50. Astmatick Cough 33 51. A Consumptive
Cough ibid. 52. A Convulsive Cough ibid. 53. An Inveterate Cough ibid. 54. A
Pleuritick Cough 34 55. A Tickling Cough ibid. 56. Violent Coughing from sharp,
thin Rheum ibid. 57. The Cramp (to prevent) ibid. 58. The Cramp (to cure) ibid.
59. A Cut 35 60. Deafness ibid. 61. Deafness from Wax ibid. 62. Deafness with
Headache, and Buzzing in the Head ibid. 63. Settled Deafness ibid. 64. To cause
an easy Delivery. 36 65. The Diabetes ibid. 66. The Dropsy ibid. 67. The
Ear-Ach 37 68. Ear-Ach from Cold ibid. 69. Ear-Ach from Heat 38 70. Ear-Ach
from Worms ibid. 71. Noise in the Ears ibid. 72. Hard Wax in the Ear ibid. 73.
Eyes blear'd ibid. 74. Blood-shot Eye ibid. 75. A Bruise in the Eye ibid. 76.
Burning Eyes, or hot Rheum ibid. 77. Clouds flying before the Eyes ibid. 78.
Blindness 39 79. Eyes dim or decayed ibid. 80. Dull Sight ibid. 81. Films ibid.
82 Hot, or sharp Humors ibid. 83. Eyes inflamed ibid. 84. A Lachrymal Fistula
ibid. 85. Pearl in the Eye 40 86. White Specks in the Eye ibid. 87. An
excellent Eye-Water ibid. 88. Another ibid. 89. Another ibid. 9^. Weak Eyes 41
9^. Fa^ing Sickness ibid. 9^. Fall^ of the Fundament ibid. 9^. Fa^^ing (...) of
the Womb ibid. 94. A Fever ibid. 95. A Burning Fever 4^ 96. A C^nual Fever
ibid. 97. A Hectic Fever. ibid. 98. A High Fever. ibid. 99. An Intermiting
Fever ibid. 100. A Fever with Pains in the Limbs 43 101. A Rash Fever ibid.
102. A slow Fever ibid. 103. A F^stula ibid. 104. A Flux. ibid. 105. A Bloody
Flux 44 106. The Gout in the Stomach ibid. 107. The Gout in the Foot or Hand 45
108. The Gout in any other Limb ibid. 109. The Gravel ibid. 110. The Green
Sickness ibid. 111. To Kill Animalcula that cause the Gums to waste away from
the Teeth 46 112. The Head ach ibid. 113. A Chronical Headache ibid. 114.
Headache from Heat 47 115 A Nervous Headache ibid. 116. An H^micrania ibid.
117. Stoppage in the Head 47 118. The Heart-Burning ibid. 119. The Hiceup ibid.
120. Hoarseness 48 121. Hypochondriac and Hysteric Disorde^ ibid. 122. The
Jaundice ibid. 123. The Jaundice in Children ibid. 124. The Iliac Passion ibid.
125. An Impostume 49 126. Pain in the Joints. ibid. 127. The Itch ibid. 128.
The King's Evil 50 129. Stoppage in the Kidneys ibid. 130. Legs inflamed 51
131. Legs sore and running ibid. 132. The Leprosy ibid. ^^^. The Lethargy ibid.
^^^. Lice (to kill ibid. 135. For one seemingly killed with Lightning, or a
Damp, or Suffocated 52 136. Lues Venerea ibid. 137. Lunacy ibid. 138. Raging
Madness ibid. 139. Bite of a Mad Dog ibid. 140. The Measles 53 141. Menses
Obstructed ibid. 142. Menses Nimii 54 143. To resolve Coagulated Milk ibid.
144. To increase Milk ibid. 145. To make Milk agree with the Stomach ibid. 146.
Nervous Disorders 55 147. An old stubborn Pain in the Back 56 148. The Palsy
ibid. 149. Palsy of the Hands ibid. 150. Palsy of the Mouth ibid. 151. Palsy
from working with white Lead or Verdigrease 57 152. The Palpitation or Beating
of the Heart ibid. 153. The Piles (to prevent) ibid. 154. The Piles (to cure)
ibid. 155. The inward Piles ibid 156. The Plague (to prevent) 57 157. The
Plague (to cure) 58 158. The Pleurisy ibid. 159. To one Poisoned ibid. 160. A
Prick or Cut that festers ibid. 161. An easy Purge ibid. 162. A stronger Purge
59 163. The Quinsy ibid. 164. The Rheumatism ibid. 165. To restore Strength
after a Rheumatism 60. 166. Rickets (to prevent or cure) ibid. 167. Ring-Worms
ibid. 168. Running at the Nose ibid. 169. A Rupture ibid. 170. A Fresh Rupture
ibid. 171. A Rupture in Children 61 172. A Windy Rupture ibid. 173. A Scald
Head ibid. 174. The Sciatica ibid. 175. Inflammations or Swellings of the
Scrotum 62 176. A Scorbutic Atrophy ibid. 177. Scorbutic Pains ibid. 178.
Scorbutic Sores ibid. 179. The Scurvy ibid. 180. A broken Shin 63 181. The
Shingles ibid. 182. Sickishue^s in the Morning ibid. 183. Skin rubbed off ibid.
184. Smallpox ibid. 185. A Sore Mouth ibid. 186. A Sore Throat 64 187. A
Sprain ibid. 188. A venomous Sting ibid. 189. The Sting of a Be ibid. 190. The
Sting of a Nettle ibid. 191. The Sting of a Wasp 65 192. The Sting of a Be or
Wasp in the Eye ibid. 193. A Stich in the Side ibid. 194. Frequent or violent
Stiches ibid. 195. Accidental Sickness, or Pain in the Stomach 65 196. Pain in
the Stomach from bad Digestion ibid. 197. Choleric, Hot Pains in the Stomach
ibid. 198. Coldness in the Stomach 66 199. Pain in the Stomach, with coldness
and Wind ibid. 200. The Stone (to prevent) ibid. 201. In a Raging Fit ibid.
202. The Stone (to ease or cure) ibid. 203. The Stone in the Kidneys ibid. 204.
Stoppage in the Kidneys ibid. 205. The Stranguary ibid. 206. Sunburn (smarting)
ibid. 207. To stop profuse Sweating ibid. 208. Swelled Glands in the Neck 68
209. Swelled Legs ibid. 210. A Swelled Throat ibid. 211. A white Swelling (on
the Joints) ibid. 212. To dissolve white or hard Swellings ibid. 213. To fasten
the Teeth ibid. 214. To clean the Teeth ibid. 215. To prevent the Toothache 69
216. To cure the Toothache ibid. 217. Pain in the Testicles ibid. 218. To draw
out Thorns, Splinters and Bones ibid. 219. The Thrush 70 220. Torpor (or
Numbness) of the Limbs ibid. 221. Twisting of the Guts ibid. 222. The Tympany
or Windy Dropsy ibid. 223. A Vein or Sinew cut ibid. 224. Vertigo or Swimming
in the Head ibid. 225. Vigilia, Inability to Sleep 71 226. Bite of a Viper or
Rattle Snake ibid. 227. To prevent the Bite of a Viper ibid. 228. An Ulcer
ibid. 229. An Inward Ulcer ibid. 230. Ulcer in the Bladder or Kidneys ibid.
231. A Fistulous Ulcer ibid. 232. A Bleeding Varicious Ulcer in the Leg 72 233.
A Malignant Ulcer ibid. 234. A Stubborn Ulcer ibid. 235. An easy and safe Vomit
7^ 236. To stop Vomiting ibid. 237. Bloody Urine ibid. 238. Urine by Drops with
Heat and Pain 73 239. Involuntary Urine ibid. 240. Sharp Urine ibid. 241.
Suppression of Urine ibid. 242. Uvula inflamed ibid. 243. Uvula relaxed ibid.
244. Warts ibid. 245. The Whites 74 246. A Whitlow ibid. 247. Weakness in the
Ankles ibid. 248. Worms ibid. 249. Flat Worms 75 250. Wounds ibid. 251. Inward
Wounds ibid. 252. Putrid Wounds ibid. 253. Wounded Tendons ibid.

