MARTIS, 29 Die OCTOBRIS, A. D. 1765. In the House of REPRESENTATIVES.
ACcording to the Order of the Day, there being a very full House, the
following Draft, which had been laid on the Table was particularly considered,
and thereupon Voted.

Whereas the just Rights of His Majesty's Subjects of this Province, derived to
them from the British Constitution, as well as the Royal Charter, have been
lately drawn into Question: In order to ascertain the same, this House do
UNANIMOUSLY come into the following Resolves.

1. Resolved, That there are certain essential Rights of the British
Constitution of Government which are founded in the Law of God and Nature, and
are the common Rights of Mankind -- Therefore

2. Resolved, That the Inhabitants of this Province are unalienably entitled to
those essential Rights in common with all Men: And that no Law of Society can
consistent with the Law of God and Nature divest them of those Rights.

3. Resolved, That no Man can justly take the Property of another without his
Consent: And that upon this Principal the Right of Representation in the same
Body, which exercises the Power of making Laws for levying Taxes, which is one
of the main Pillars of the British Constitution, is evidently founded.

4. Resolved, That this inherent Right, together with all other, essential
Rights, Liberties, Privileges and Immunities, of the People of Great Britain,
have been fully confirmed to them by Magna Charta, and by former and later Acts
of Parliament.

5. Resolved, That His Majesty's Subjects in America, are in Reason and common
Sense, entitled to the same Extent of Liberty, with His Majesty's Subjects in
Britain.

6. Resolved, That by the Declaration of the Royal Charter of this Province,
the Inhabitants are entitled, to all the Rights, Liberties, and Immunities of
free and natural Subjects of Great Britain, to all Intents, Purposes and
Constructions whatever.

7. Resolved, That the Inhabitants of this Province appear to be entitled to
all the Rights aforementioned, by an Act of Parliament 13th of GEO. 2d.

8. Resolved, That those Rights do belong to the Inhabitants of this Province,
upon Principles of common Justice; their Ancestors, having settled this Country
at their sole Expense; and their Posterity, having constantly approved
themselves most loyal and faithful Subjects of Great Britain.

9. Resolved, That every Individual in the Colonies, is as advantageous to
Great Britain, as if he were in Great Britain, and held to pay his full
Proportion of Taxes there: And as the Inhabitants of this Province, pay their
full Proportion of Taxes, for the Support of his Majesty's Government here, it
is unreasonable for them to be called upon, to pay any Part of the Charges of
the Government there.

10. Resolved, That the Inhabitants of this Province are not, and never have
been, represented in the Parliament of Great Britain: And that such a
Representation there, as the Subjects in Britain, do actually and rightfully
enjoy, is impracticable for the Subjects in America: -- And further, That in
the Opinion of this House, the several subordinate Powers of Legislation in
America, were constituted upon the Apprehensions of this Impracticability.

11. Resolved, That the only Method, whereby the constitutional Rights of the
Subjects of this Province can be secure, consistent with a Subordination to the
supreme Power of Great Britain, is by the continued Exercise of such Powers of
Government as are granted in the Royal Charter, and a firm Adherence to the
Privileges of the same.

12. Resolved, as a just Conclusion from some of the foregoing Resolves, That
all Acts made, by any Power whatever* other than the General Assembly of this
Province, imposing Taxes on the Inhabitants are Infringements of our inherent
and unalienable Rights, as Men and British Subjects: and render void the most
valuable Declarations of our Charter.

13. Resolved, That the Extension of the Powers of the Court of Admiralty
within this Province, is a most violent Infraction of the Right of Trials by
Juries. -- A Right, which this House upon the Principles of their British
Ancestors, hold most dear and sacred; it being the only Security of the Lives,
Liberties and Properties of his Majesty's Subjects here.

14. Resolved, That this House owe the strictest Allegiance to his Most Sacred
Majesty King GEORGE the Third: That they have the greatest Veneration for the
Parliament: And that they will, after the Example of all their Predecessors,
from the Settlement of this Country, exert themselves to their utmost, in
supporting his Majesty's Authority in the Province, -- in promoting the true
Happiness of his Subjects: and in enlarging the Extent of his Dominion.

Ordered, That all the foregoing Resolves be kept in the Records of this House;
that a just Sense of Liberty, and the firm Sentiments of Loyalty may be
transmitted to Posterity.


