SPECIMEN OF DIVINE TRUTHS, Fitted for the Use of those, of various Capacities,
who desire to prepare themselves for a due CONFESSION of their FAITH.

By the Rev. Mr. A. HELLENBROECK, Late Minister of the Gospel at ROTTERDAM.

Translated from the Dutch, for the Use of the Reformed Protestant Dutch
Church, of the City of New York.

NEW YORK: Printed by JOHN HOLT, opposite the Exchange. MDCCLXV.

THIS TRANSLATION of A. Hellenbroek's SPECIMEN OF DIVINE TRUTHS, etc. having
first been examined, compared and approved of by the Consistory of the Reformed
Protestant Dutch Church of the City of New York, is by them recommended for the
Use of their Congregation, and printed by their Order.

September, 16, 1765. JOANNES RITZEMA. V. D. M. P. T. Proes.

THE PREFACE Of the AUTHOR.
DEARLY BELOVED.
I.
FOrasmuch as your whole Devotion ought to be spiritual, so must likewise this
salutary Work of Catechizing; and because this is done by many with so little,
yea, without any Spirituality, we desire to give you some brief Directions how
you are to behave in a becoming Manner, as in the Sight of God, before, at, and
after catechizing; praying that the Lord will enable you to apprehend, desire,
and practice the same.

II.
In the first Place, your Views ought to be pure; to learn to know, to obey and
glorify God, to edify one another, and to further your own Salvation, (which we
hope you may have good Grounds to expect) let the Frame of your Hearts be
humble, and seek to be convinced of your natural Ignorance, and Inability in
Spiritual Things.

Let this fill you with an holy Shame, and excite in you a true Desire to be
delivered from these Things, and to be conformable to the Image of God in true
Wisdom, be ye therefore subject to this Way of Instruction, and to the
Discretion of your Minister in Respect to his Orders and Directions, for those
who learn, ought by all Means to be obedient herein, according to Heb. 13.17.
"Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit yourselves"; And that, our
Lord would have done, in Respect even to the Pharisees and Scribes, Matt. 23.3.
"All therefore whatever they bid you, that observe and do."

III.
Furthermore, you are several Ways to prepare yourselves; above all Things draw
nigh to God in Prayer, and therein let your Desires be in the following Order:
That besides the Things beforementioned, the Lord may give you a clear
Understanding to comprehend Matters; a sanctified Judgment to value them; a
strong Memory, to remember them; and an unwearied Desire and Diligence, to
improve therein; a settled Attention, to understand the Questions and Answers;
a ready Utterance, with other Qualifications, in order to express Matters
according to the Truth and Worth thereof; as likewise, the Guidance of the Holy
Spirit, to apprehend the Excellence and Glory of those Things; and finally that
the Lord may incline and move your Hearts, agreeable to the Subject treated on.
Endeavor to learn some short and comprehensive Book of Inctruction by Heart,
which may afterward serve as a Foundation for farther Instruction.

Learn also to get perfectly by Heart, the most necessary Passages of
Scripture; in your Preparations, use yourself to get a distinct Apprehension in
your Understanding and Memory, of the Things you are to answer; and to that End
study a little upon each Matter: Make it your Practice to meditate upon them,
so that when you come to catechize, you may know what you understand, and what
not, and to what you are more particularly to give Attention; hence it will
appear, that you have not learned to repeat it without Understanding.

Let him that has made some Progress, read another Book on the same Subject;
but in reading other Books keep this Rule, that you read not many Books, but
read one Book often; being thus prepared, go out with a dependent Heart,
trusting in the Lord; and to this End, maintain continually on your Mind, a
lively Sense of this, viz. That without the Divine Assistance, you will not be
fit for any Word or Duty; but that with his Assistance, you shall enjoy all
those required Qualifications, and their Effects.

IV.
Expecting thus the Favor of the Lord, go to the Place of Catechizing, with a
Mind ready and desirous to make Profession; and give Account as in the Presence
of God, of the Knowledge the Lord has given you; yea, with a Design by these
Means, to advance in Knowledge and Sanctification.

Being there, let Gravity be so conspicuous in your whole Deportment, that
others may observe that the Presence of God, and the Weight of his Divine
Truths, impress your Soul.

And offer both Soul and Body to the Lord, solemnly desiring, that the Lord may
so dispose and govern thee, as may be most to his Glory and thy Salvation.

V.
Beware of interrupting, contradicting, or cross-questioning thy Minister; lest
thou should seem to pretend to be his Master, or through thy Self-Conceit,
endeavor to bring his Person and Service into Disrespect.

But endeavor carefully to attend to his Questions, to understand them, and
when he has propounded the Question, then answer; but when the Minister begins
to speak again, you must be silent, and not continue speaking with him.

In Regard to the Manner of thy Expression, take Heed of Affectation, of
speaking inarticulately or heedlessly; but on the contrary, take Care to speak
with a Voice sufficiently loud and clear, so that not only the Minister and the
Person speaking, but all present, may understand; every one speaking in his
natural Tone of Voice, though with Reverence, slow, and grave, according to the
Nature and Weight of the Matter.

VI.
This being so in general, we are further to notice, how you are to behave in
several Circumstances; and first, when you are questioned, and God enables you
to answer; acknowledge that it is from him, and in Humility render him Thanks
for the same; but if you have not answered well, be not discouraged, and don't
resolve to cease catechizing; but remember, that you come to that Duty not as
one who knows every Thing, but as a Learner, who desires to know these
Things; be not altogether silent, that wastes Time, makes the Minister
concerned, and seems to reflect upon the Importance of the Question; but say,
either that you know it not, or what you apprehend to be the meaning; and show
your Desire of receiving Information from the Minister; in Respect to God,
acknowledge your Ignorance, and your Obligation to know those Things; Pray for
the Forgiveness of the Sins of Ignorance, and for Increase of true Wisdom.

Endeavor to quicken your Heart in the Use of Means for further Instruction,
endeavor to understand what the Minister says in explaining the Subject, thank
God for his Goodness in sending you such a Minister or Ministers, by whose
Means the Lord is pleased to teach you that which you know not, and yet
necessarily must know; and endeavor for the Future, better to prepare thyself.

VII.
When others are questioned, think not then what you shall be asked, but rather
what would I have answered thereon, and endeavor to understand what is said in
Explication thereof; if others know that, do not envy them, but thank God for
the Gifts and Wisdom bestowed on them, and desire to be equal to them.

If they know it not, do not despise nor ridicule them; don't boast nor exalt
thyself, least the Lord also put thee to Silence or Confusion, when thou
answerest; but pray for them, that God may grant them more Light, Desire,
Memory, Boldness, and Ability; and animate and encourage them hereto, as much
as in you lies.

VIII.
Finally, Catechizing being finished, here also the End must crown the Work.

Let Pride and Vanity be far from thee, it is very unbecoming that young People
should come from such Exercise as from a vain idle Place, entertaining
themselves with laughing, and in this laughing and sporting, exalting
themselves and despising others, repeating what they themselves knew or did not
know, speaking thereof in a disrespectful Manner; so that such People show
their own Folly, and prevent the Freedom of others.

But on the Contrary, let Sobriety and Gravity be your Ornaments; go alone or
with one another to your Houses, ponder on the Subject you have heard, search
as in the Divine Presence, how you have behaved at Catechizing. Be not content
that your Ears only have heard, but endeavor after an hearty Experience of
those Things.

Thank God for what you have had an Opportunity of hearing, and speaking;
endeavor to preserve it in thy Heart and Memory, yea even on Paper, in Order
to make Use thereof occasionally; to that End, pray God for the Grace of his
Holy Spirit, to preserve and bring those Things to your Remembrance.

IX.
And above all, it is thy Duty to show, that those Truths you have made
Profession of, do not consist in Words but in Power; and that, in an Holy
Conversation, forasmuch as it is a Doctrine leading to Godliness.

Speak not of these Things only in the Catechize, but let Heart and Mouth be
filled therewith, in Order also to speak thereof at every Opportunity; seek to
be an Example to others in Doctrine, Rebuking, Direction, Comforting and
Sanctification.

Thus beloved Learner, we have set before you some of those Matters, which you
are to practice in regard to Catechizing; may God enable you to practice this
Duty to his Glory, to the Ornament of his Church, Edification of others, and to
thine own Salvation.

SPECIMEN OF Divine Truths, etc.
CHAP. I. Of the Knowledge of GOD.
1. Quest. WHENCE do we know that there is a God?

Answer From Nature and the Scriptures.

2. Of how many Sorts is the Knowledge of God from Nature?

Ans. Of two Sorts; 1 An internal or innate, 2 An external or acquired
Knowledge.

3. Quest. What is the internal or innate Knowledge?

A. That which is natural in the Hearts of all Men Romans 1.19. Because that
which may be known of God is manifest in them, for God has showed it unto them.

4. Q. How can there be such an innate Knowledge, since there are Fools who say
in their Hearts there is no God? Ps. 14.1.

A. It is wishing rather than believing that there is no God.

5. Q. What is the external or acquired Knowledge?

A. It is that which we learn from the Creatures without us, Ps. 19.1, 2. The
Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows his Handiwork. Day
unto Day utters Speech, and Night unto Night shows Knowledge.

6. Q. How can we conclude from the Creatures, that there-must be a God?

A. Because they cannot be, nor exist of themselves, but must necessarily be
created, and continually upheld by God. Job 12.9. Who, knows not in all
these, that the Hand of the Lord has wrought this.

7. Q. Is this natural Knowledge sufficient to Salvation?

A. No.

8. Q. Why not.

A. Because we thereby cannot know Christ.

9. Q. Is the Knowledge of Christ so necessary to Salvation?

A. Yes, John 17.3. This is eternal Life that they might know thee the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

10. Q. Whence must we attain this saving Knowledge?

A. From the Scriptures. 2 Pet. 1.19. We have also a more sure Word of
Prophecy; whereunto ye do well that ye take Heed, as unto a Light shining in a
dark Place, until the Day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your Hearts.

CHAP. II. Of the SCRIPTURES.
1. Quest. WHAT do you understand by the Scriptures?

A. The written Word of God. John 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye
think ye have eternal Life, and they are they which testify of me. 2 Timothy 3.15.
And that from a Child thou have known the Holy Scriptures, which are able to
make thee wise to Salvation, through Faith, which is in Christ Jesus.

2. Q. Has there always been a written Word?

A. No: Before the Time of Moses the Word was not written.

3. Q. How did God then make known his Word?

A. By Speech and Revelation to the Fathers. Genesis 18.1. And the LORD appeared
unto Abraham in the Plains of Mamre, and He sat in the Tent Door in the Heat of
the Day. Chap. 28.12. And he dreamed and behold a Ladder set upon the Earth and
the Top of it reached unto Heaven: And behold the Angels of God ascending and
descending on it.

4. Q. How did they then preserve that among themselves?

A. By Tradition of the Fathers to the Children. Genesis 18.19. For I know him,
that he will command his Children and his Household after him, and they shall
keep the Way of the Lord to do Justice and Judgment; that the Lord may bring
upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him.

5. Q. How could that be done then, better than now?

A. Because then Men lived longer, were fewer in Number, God revealed himself
more frequently, and the Wiles of Satan were fewer.

6. Q. Who has caused the Scriptures to be written?

A. God. 2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and is
profitable for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness.

7. Q. By whom has he caused them to be written?

A. The Old Testament by the Prophets, and the New Testament by the Evangelists
and Apostles. Exodus 17.14. And the Lord said unto Moses, write this for a
Memorial in a Book, and rehearse it in the Ears of Joshua, Rev. 1 19. Write the
Things which thou have seen, and the Things which are, and the Things which
shall be hereafter.

8. Q. By whom were they inspired, in writing this?

A. By the Holy Ghost: 2 Pet. 1.21. For the Prophecy came not in old Time by
the Will of Man: But Holy Men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

9. Q. Could they not err in writing the Scriptures?

A. No: The Holy Spirit has led them in all Truth, John 16.13. Howbeit when
he, the Spirit of Truth, is come, he will guide you into all Truth, for he
shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear that shall he speak,
and he will show you Things to come.

10. Q. How many Testaments are there in the Scriptures?

A. Two; the Old and New Testament. 2 Cor. 3.14. But their Minds were blinded;
for until this Day remains the same Vail untaken away, in the reading of the
Old Teflament; which Vail is done away in Christ. Heb. 9.15. And for this
Cause, he is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by Means of Death, for the
Redemption of the Trangressions that were under the first Testament, they which
are called might receive the Promise of eternal Inheritance.

11. Q. In what Language is the Old Testament written?

A. In the Hebrew, and a small Part in the Chaldean Language.

12. Q. In what Language is the New Testament written?

A. In the Greek.

13. Q. Is the whole Scripture a divine Book?

A. Yes: Because such Things are therein contained which can only be of God.

14. Q. What Things are these?

A. Mysteries, such as the Holy Trinity; the Creation of all Things out of
nothing in six Days; that Jesus is God-Man, the Mediator, etc and Prophecies of
Things to come duly fulfilled, both as to Time and Place.

15. Q. Are not the Apocryphal Books the Word of God?

A. No: Because they contain Things which are fabulous, and repugnant to the
Word of God: For which Reason they were never acknowledged as divine, by the
Jewish Church unto whom the Oracles of God were committed, Romans 3.2.

16. Q. Are the Scriptures perfect or imperfect?

A. They are perfect, Ps. 19.7. The LAW of the LORD is PERFECT converting the
Soul, the TESTIMONY of the LORD is SURE making wise the simple.

17. Q. Is no Part of the Scriptures lost or falsified?

A. No: They are as entire as ever they have been, Matt. 5.18. For verily I say
unto you till Heaven and Earth pass, one Jot or one Tittle shall in no wise
pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled.

18. Q. Need we to have Traditions of Men, besides the Scriptures?

A. No: The Scriptures alone are sufficient. Matt. 15.9. But in vain do they
worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men.

19. Q. Are the Scriptures clear or obscure?

A. They are clear in those Things that are necessary to Salvation. Ps.
119.105. Thy Word is a Light for my Feet, and a Lamp for my Path.

20. Q. Why then does the Apostle Peter say, that in the Epistles of Paul are
some Things hard to be understood. 2 Pet. 3.16.

A. The Truth of a Thing although in itself clearly revealed may be hard to be
understood, thus it is with all Mysteries, as the Holy Trinity, etc.

21. Q. May and must we read the Scriptures?

A. Certainly yes. John 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for, in them ye think ye
have eternal Life, and they are they which testify of me.

22. Q. How must we read and search the Scriptures?

A. First in the Fear of God, Ps. 111.10. The Fear of the LORD is the beginning
of Wisdom: A good Understanding have all they that do his Commandments; his
Praise endures for ever. 2dly. With a praying Heart, Ps. 119.18. Open thou
mine Eyes that I may behold wondrous Things out of thy Law. 3dly. With
Reverence, Isaiah 66.2 and 5, But to this Man will I look, even to him that is
poor and of a contrite Spirit, and trembles at my Word. Hear ye the Word of
the Lord ye that tremble at his Word, your Brethren that hated you, that cast
you out for my Name's Sake, said let the Lord be glorified: But he shall appear
to your Joy, and they shall be ashamed. 4thly. With Attention and Spiritual
Judgment, 1 Cor. 2.13. Which Things also we speak, not in the Words which Man's
Wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual Things
with Spiritual.

CHAP. III. Of GOD.
i. In General.
1. Quest. WHAT is God?

A. A perfect, and an infinite Spirit. John 4.24. God is a Spirit, and they
that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in truth. Matt. 5.48. Be ye
therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect.

2. Q. How can that be, as the Scriptures ascribe to him Eyes, Ears, Hands, and
other bodily Members?

A. All this must be understood improperly, as meaning such Perfections in God
as have some Analogy with the Use of those human Members.

3. Q Wherein must God be known?

A. 1. In his Being. 2. In his Names. 3. In his Attributes. 4. In his Person.

4. Q. May we ascribe Being or Essence to God?

A. Yes: Though not in a corporal Sense. Prove. 8.14. Council is mine and sound
Wisdom (or as it may be rendered, Essence) I am Understanding, I have Strength.

5. Q. How many Gods are there?

A. But one God. 1 Timothy 2.5. For there is one God and one Mediator between God
and Man, the Man Christ Jesus.

6. Q. Nevertheless God speaks, in the first Command, of other Gods; Exodus 20.3.

A. Not that there are other Gods in reality; but such as are made and held for
such by Men, 1 Cor. 8.5, 6. For though there be that are Gods, whether in
Heaven or in Earth (as there be Gods many and Lords many) But to us there is
but ONE GOD, the Father, of whom are all Things, and we in him; and one Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom are all Things, and we by him.

ii. Of GOD's Names.
1. Quest. Has God Need of Names, in the Manner Men have?

A. No; For there is none like unto him. Genesis 32.29. And Jacob asked him, and
said, tell me I pray thee thy Name: And he said wherefore is it that thou do
ask after my Name? and he blessed him there. Judges 13.18. And the Angel of the
Lord said unto him, why ask thou thus after my Name, seeing it is secret?

2. Q. To what End have Men Names?

A. To distinguish them from other Men, who are their Equals.

3. Q Why then are Names ascribed to God?

A. First; To distinguish him from Idols; 2dly. Also thereby to make known
something of himself to us.

4. Q. Are then all the Names ascribed to God significant?

A. Yes.

5. Q. Which are the two Names most commonly given him?

A. The Name of God, and the Name of Lord.

6. Q. Is not the Name God, only the Name of a certain Office?

A. No; But the Name of the Divine Essence itself; He is by Nature God, in
Opposition to the Idols. Gal. 4.8. When ye knew not God, ye did Service unto
them which by Nature are no Gods.

7. Q. Is not the Name of God given to Angels and Magistrates? Ps. 82.6 I have
said ye are Gods, and ye are all Children of the Most High.

A. When these Names are thus used, they must be understood in an improper
Sense.

8. Q. Which is God's chiefest or greatest Name?

A. The Name of Jehovah or Lord.

9. Q. Can this Name be given to a Creature?

A. No; Isaiah 42.8. I am the Lord, that is my Name, and my Glory will I not
give to another, neither my Praise to graven Images.

10. Q. Does this Name imply something so great, that it cannot be given to a
Creature?

A. Yes; It signifies the Being or Existence, the Unchangeableness and
Faithfulness of God. Exodus 3.14. And God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM; and
he said, thus shall thou say unto the Children of Israel, I AM has sent me
unto you. Chap. 6.3. And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob,
by the Name of God Almighty, but by my Name JEHOVAH was I not known unto them.

11. Q. May Christ be called Jehovah?

A. Yes; Because he also is true God. Jer. 23.6. In his Days Judah shall be
saved, and Israel shall dwell safely; and this is his Name whereby he shall be
called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS.

iii. Of GOD's Attributes.
1. Quest. Are God's Attributes distinct from himself?

A. No: They are God himself; therefore he is called the Light, 1 John 1.5.
This then is the Message which we have heard of him, and declare unto you, that
God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all, Life, Truth, and Love, 1 John
4.8. He that loves not, knows not God, for God is Love, Even Holiness
itself; to swear by his Holiness, and swearing by himself is one and the same.
Amos 4.2. The Lord God has sworn by his Holiness, that lo the Day shall come
upon you, that he will take you away with Hooks, and your Posterity with
Fishbooks. Compared with Heb. 6.13. For when God made Promise to Abraham,
because he could swear by no greater he swear by HIMSELF.

2. Q. Are God's Attributes different and distinct from each other?

A. Not in God; For in him all is infinite Perfection; But they are
distinguished only according to our Manner of Comprehension, and according to
the several Exercises of God's Perfections concerning the Creatures.

3. Q. How are God's Attributes, or Properties thus generally distinguished?

A. Into incommunicable and communicable Properties, Genesis 1.26. And God said,
let us make Man in our Image. after our Likeness: 2 Pet. 1.4. Whereby are given
unto us exceeding great and precious Promises: That by these you might be made
Partakers of the divine Nature. 1 John 3.2. Beloved now are we the Sons of God,
and it does not yet appear what we shall be: But we know that when we shall
appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is.

4. Q. Which are the incommunicable?

A. The Independency, Simplicity, Eternity, Omnipresence, Unchangeableness of
God.

5. Q. Why do you call them incommunicable?

A. Because there is not the least Resemblance of them in any Creature.

6. Q. What is God's Independency?

A. That he is Self existent. Genesis 17.1. I am the Almighty God, walk before me,
and be thou perfect.

7. Q. What is God's Simplicity?

A. That all in God is one without Composition of different Sorts. Deuteronomy. 6.4.
Hear, O! Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord.

8. Q. What is God's Eternity?

A. That he is, 1. Without Beginning. 2. Without Succession or Difference of
Time. 3. Without End. Ps. 90.2. Before the Mountains were brought forth, or
ever thou had formed the Earth and the World, from Everlasting to Everlasting
thou art God.

9. Q. Does it belong to God's Eternity, that there is no Succession of Time
with him?

A. Yes: For one Day is with the Lord as a thousand Years, and a thousand Years
as one Day. 2 Pet. 3.8.

10. Q. Where is God?

A. Every where present. Jer. 23.23, 24. Am I a God at Hand, says the Lord,
and not a God after off? Can any hide himself in secret Places, that I shall
not see him, says the Lord: Do I not fill Heaven and Earth? says the Lord.

11. Q. Must this be understood only of his Operations, or of his Essence.

A. It must be understood both as to his Essence and Opperations, which cannot
be separated, because he works by Virtue of his Essence or Being. Acts 17.27.
That they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after him, and find
him, though he be not far from every one of us.

12. Q. Why is God said to be particularly in Heaven?

A. Because he there shows forth his Glory more than any where else. Isaiah
66.1. Thus says the Lord, the Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is my
Footstool; where is the House that ye build me, and where is the Place of my
rest?

13. Q Is God changeable or unchargeable?

A. Unchangeable, Malachi 3.6. For I am the Lord, I change not: Therefore ye
Sons of Jacob are not consumed.

14. Q. Nevertheless, Repentance is ascribed unto God; Genesis 6.6. It repented
the Lord that he had made Man on the Earth, and it grieved him at his Heart.

A. This Repentance in God is only a Change in his Work: Not in his Will and
Being, Numb. 23.19. God is not a Man that he should lie, neither the Son of Man
that he should repent: Has he said and shall he not do it? or has he spoken
and shall he not make it good?

15. Q. Change of Place is also ascribed unto him, as that he descended, came
to, and went from certain Places? Genesis 11.5. The Lord came down to see the City
and the Tower which the Children of Men builded?

A. This is only a Change in a more or less Manifestation of his divine
Presence, though not in his essential Presence itself.

16. Q. Which are the communicable Attributes of God?

A. The following are generally accounted such, to wit, God's Knowledge, Will
and Power, his Goodness, Grace, Mercy and Patience.

17. Q. Why are these called communicable?

A. Because there is some faint Resemblance of them in the Creatures; although
as they are in God they are infinite, and so incommunicable.

18. Q. What is God's Knowledge?

A. It is that divine Perfection, whereby he knows all Things in himself from
Eternity, in the most perfect Manner. Acts 15.18. Known unto God are all his
Works from the Beginning of the World.

19. Q. What is the Object of God's Knowledge?

A. All Things: He is therefore Omniscient, 1 John 3.20. For if our Hearts
condemn us, God is more than our Hearts, and knows all Things. Ps. 147.4. He
tells the Number of the Stars: He calls them all by their Names.

20. Q. Does God know all future and possible Things?

A. Yes: Ps. 139.2. Thou know my down-sitting, and mine up-rising, thou
understandest my Thoughts after off.

21. Q. Does he know them by Virtue of a preceding Decree, or by Way of a
mediate Knowledge, as it is called?

A. He knows them by Virtue of his Decrees; and with an absolute Certainty
that they shall take Place.

22. Q. How is the Will of God distinguished?

A. Into his Will in his Decree, and his Will in his Precept; or in other
Words; into his secret, and revealed Will.

23. Q. What do you mean by God's Will in his Decree?

A. God's eternal Purpose, according to which he does all Things in Time. Ephesians.
1.11. In whom also we have obtained an Inheritance, being predestined
according to the Purpose of him who works all Things after the Council of his
own Will.

24. Q. What is God's preceptive or revealed Will?

A. It is that which he has prescribed in his Word as a Rule for us, and which
it is his Will we should obey, Romans 12.2. Be not conformed to this World, but
be ye transformed by the renewing of your Mind, that you may prove what is that
good, and acceptable, and perfect Will of God.

25. Q. By which of these two must we be regulated?

A. According to his preceptive Will: for the Will of God in his Decree is
unknown to us. Deuteronomy. 29.29. The secret Things belong unto the Lord our God: But
those Things which are revealed belong unto us and to our Children for ever,
that we may do all the Words of this Law.

26. Q. What is the Justice of God?

A. It is that divine Perfection by which he does hate and punish all Sin. Ps.
5.4.5, 6. For thou art not a God that has Pleasure in Wickedness: Neither
shall Evil dwell with thee. The foolish shall not stand in thy Sight, thou
hate all Workers of Iniquity. Thou shall destroy them that speak leasing: The
Lord will abhor the bloody and deceitful Man.

27. Q. Must God of Necessity punish all Sin?

A. Yes, Romans 1.32. Who knowing the Judgment of God that they which commit such
Things are worthy of Death, not only do the same, but have Pleasure in them
that do them.

28. Q. Is God under any Constraint?

A. No, but when we say God must, we mean he wills with the most perfect
Freedom. Heb. 1.13. Thou art of purer Eyes than to behold Evil, and can not
look on Iniquity: Wherefore look thou upon them that deal treacherously, and
hold thy Tongue when the Wicked devoureth the Man that is more righteous
than he.

29. But cannot God dispense with his Justice, at least in some Measure?

A. No, for then he would deny himself; for his Justice is God himself. Exodus
34.6, 7. And the Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed, the Lord, the Lord
God merciful and gracious, long-suffering and abundant in Goodness and
Truth-Keeping Mercy for Thousands, forgiving Iniquity and Transgression and
Sin, and that will BY NO MEANS CLEAR THE GUILTY; visiting the Iniquity of the
Fathers upon the Children, and upon the Children's Children unto the third and
fourth Generation.

30. Q. But God however forgiveth Believers the Guilt and Punishment of Sins?

A. Then God's Justice is already satisfied in Christ, who has borne the
Punishment of Sins for them. Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have Redemption through his
Blood, the Forgiveness of ins, according to the Riches of his Grace.

31. Q. Of what Kind is God's Power.

A. It is an Almighty Power, Matt. 19.26. But Jesus beheld them, and said unto
them, with Men this is impossible, but with God all Things are possible;

32. Q. Can God die, sin, etc.

A. No: For that would be no Power, but an Inability.

33. Q. What is God's Goodness?

A. In general his Benevolence toward his Creatures. Ps. 4.6 7. There be many
that say, who will show us any Good: Lord list thou up the Light of thy
Countenance upon us. Thou have put Gladness in my Heart, more than in the Time
that their Corn and their Wine increased* More particularly the Exercises of
his Beneficence and Love toward his Creatures, toward Man, and more
especially toward his Saints, Ps. 36.6. O Lord, thou preservest Man and Beast.
John 3.16. For God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life.

34. Q. What is God's Grace?

A. It is that divine Goodness whereby he does Good to his Creatures, without
any Regard to their Merits.

35. Q. How many Kinds of Grace are there?

A. There are two Sorts, general toward all, Matt. 5.45. For he makes his Sun
to rise on the Evil and on the Good, and sends Rain on the Just and Unjust.
or special and saving, toward the Elect only. Romans 3.24 Being justified freely
by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ: Matt. 11.25. At
that Time Jesus answered and said, I thank thee O Father, Lord of Heaven and
Earth: because thou have hid these Things from the Wise and Prudent, and bast
revealed them unto Babes, Genesis 6.8. But Noah found Grace in the Eyes of the
Lord; and Luke 1.30. And the Angel said unto her, fear not Mary, for thou have
found Favor with God. And this Grace is preventing, opperating, and following.

36. Q. What is God's Mercy?

A. It is that divine Goodness toward the miserable elect Sinner, by which he
actually restores him to a State of Grace, through the Mediator Jesus Christ.
Exodus 34.6. And the Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed the LORD, the
LORD GOD, merciful and gracious, long suffering, and abundant in Goodness and
Truth. Ephesians. 2.4. But God, who is rich in Mercy, for his great Love wherewith he
loved us.

37. Q. What is God's Patience, or Long suffering?

A. It is that divine Goodness, whereby he defers the just Punishment of Sin,
in order to the Conversion of the Elect, and the Conviction of the Reprobate.
Romans 2.4. Or despisest thou the Riches of his Goodness, and Forbearance and
Long-Suffering; not knowing that the Goodness of God leads thee to Repentance.

38. Q What is God's Sovereignty?

A. It is God's supreme Authority above all Creatures. Jer. 10 6, 7. Forasmuch
as there is none like unto thee, O LORD, thou art great, and thy Name is great
in Might. Who would not fear thee, O King of Nations? for to thee does it
appertain: Forasmuch as among all the Wisemen of the Nations, And in all their
Kingdoms there is none like unto thee. Chap. 18.6. O House of Israel, cannot I
do with you as this Potter? says the Lord. Behold as the Clay is in the
Potter's Hand, so are ye in mine Hand, O House of Israel. Romans 9.18 and 20.
Therefore has he Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, and whom he will he
hardens. Nay but O Man, who art thou that reply against God? shall the
Thing formed say unto him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus?

iv. Of the Trinity.
1. Quest. How many Persons are there in the Godhead?

A. Three; The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

2. Q. May we use the Word Trinity.

A. Yes; For it is Scriptural, 1 John 5.7. For there are three that bear Record
in Heaven, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and these THREE are ONE.

3. Q. May we here also use the Word Person?

A. Yes, for we also find it in Scripture, Heb. 1.3. Who being the Brightness
of his Glory, and the express Image of his PERSON.

4. Q. Can the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity be proved from Nature?

A. No: But only from Scripture, for it is a Mystery above the Reach of, though
not contrary to Nature.

5. Q. How do we prove the Holy Trinity from Scripture?

A. 1. Out of the Old. 2. Out of the New Testament.

6. Q. How is it proved out of the Old Testament?

A. 1 From such Scriptures where God speaks of himself in the plural Number.
Genesis 1.26. God said let us make Man, in OUR Image, after OUR Likeness.

2. From such Scriptures where Distinction is made between God and God, Lord
and Lord, Ps. 45.7. Thou love Righteousness and hate Wickedness, therefore
God thy God has anointed thee with the Oil of Gladness above thy Fellows. Ps.
110.1. The Lord has said unto my Lord, sit thou at my Right Hand, until I make
thine Enemies thy Footstool.

3. From such Scriptures where the three Persons are expressly named and
distinguished. Ps. 33.6. By the WORD of the LORD the Heavens were made, and by
the BREATH, (or Spirit) of his Mouth, all the Host of them.

7. Q. How do you prove the Holy Trinity from the New Testament?

A. From 1 John 5.7. For There are three that bear Record in Heaven, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and these Three are One. Also from the
Institution of Baptism, Matt. 28.19, Go ye therefore and teach all Nations,
baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost: teaching them to observe all Things, whatsoever I have commanded you.

Also from the Baptism of our Lord, Matt. 3, the Son was baptized, the Father
spoke from Heaven, and the Spirit of God descended like a Dove.

8. Q. Wherein are the three Persons one?

A. In Essence.

9. Q. Wherein are they three?

A. In Persons.

10. Q. Are they then personally distinct?

A. Yes; by Personal Properties or Manner of subsisting.

11. Q. Which is the personal Property of the Father?

A. That he as Father, subsists of himself.

12. Q. Which is the personal Property of the Son?

A. That he is generated of the Father; Ps, 2, 7, I will declare the Decree,
thou art my Son, this Day have I begotten thee.

13. Q. Which is the personal Property of the Holy Ghost?

A. That he proceeds from the Father and the Son, John 15 26, But when the
Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit
of Truth, which proceeds from the Father, he shall testify of me.

14. Q. Why do you call these personal, and not essential Properties?

A. Because they are not proper to the whole Essence, but only each to one
Person.

15. Q. When is the Son generated of the Father?

A. From Eternity, Prove. 8.24. When there were no Depths I was brought forth:
When there were no Fountains abounding with Water.

16. Q. Why is it then said, Ps. 2.7. This Day have I begotten Thee?

A. In God is nothing else but one eternal and unchangeable Day.

17. Q. Is then the Son the proper and natural Son of God?

A. Yes: John 1.18. No Man has seen God at any Time, the only begotten Son,
which is in the Bosom of the Father, has declared him.

18. Q. Why is the second Person properly called the Son of God?

A. Because from Eternity to Eternity, the Father communicates to the Son, the
same divine Essence, John 26.6. For as the Father has Life in himself, so has
be given to the Son to have Life in himself. Col. 1.15. Who is the Image of the
invisible God, the first born of every Creature. Col. 2.9. For in him dwells
all the Fullness of the Godhead bodily. Heb. 1.3. Who being the Brightness of
his Glory, and the express Image of his Person, and upholding all Things by the
Word of his Power, when he had by himself purged our Sins, sat down on the
Right Hand of the Majesty on high.

19. Q. Did not he then become the Son of God by his Birth of the Virgin Mary,
or by his Mediatorship?

A. No; for he was the Son of God before. Gal. 4.4. But when the Fullness of the
Time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law.

20. Q. Does the Holy Ghost proceed only from the Father?

A. No: But also from the Son, he is therefore called the Spirit of Christ.
Romans 8.9. But ye are not in the Flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the
Spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is
none of his. AND THE SPIRIT OF THE SON. Gal. 4.6. And because ye are Sons, God
has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your Hearts, crying, Ahba, Father.

21. Q. Is not the Holy Ghost, only a Power, or Attribute of God?

A. No: But an actual Person, having Understanding and Will. 1 Cor. 2.10. For
the Spirit searches all Things, yea the deep Things of God. Chap. 12.11. But
all these works that one and the self-same Spirit, dividing to every Man
severally as he will. He also appeared at the Baptism of Christ, Matt. 3.16.
And Jesus when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the Water: And lo,
the Heavens were opened unto him, and be saw the SPIRIT of GOD descending like
a Dove, and lighting upon him.

22. Q. Is he also a distinct Person?

A. Yes; He is expressly called, another, John 14.16, 17. And I will pray the
Father, and he shall give you another Comforter that he may abide with you for
ever; even the Spirit of Truth.

23. Q. Whence do you prove, that the Son and the Holy Ghost are God as well as
the Father?

A. 1st. From their divine Names. 2d. Their divine Attributes. 3. Their divine
Works, and 4thly. From their divine Honor.

24. Prove that divine Names are given to the Son?

A. First; The Name of Lord or Jehovah, Jer. 23.6. In his Days Judah shall he
saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is his Name whereby he shall be
called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS.

2dly. The Name of God, 1 John 5.20. And we know that the Son of God is come,
and has given us an Understanding, that we may know him that is true: And we
are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the TRUE GOD,
AND ETERNAL LIFE.

25. Q Prove that the Name of God is given to the Holy Ghost?

A. Acts 5.3, 4. But Peter said, Ananias, Why has Satan filled thine Heart to
lie to the Holy Ghost, and to keep back Part of the Price of the Land? While it
remained, was it not thine own? and after it was sold, was it not in thine own
Power? Why have thou conceived this Thing in thy Heart? THOU HAVE NOT LIED UNTO
MEN, BUT UNTO GOD.

26. Q. Prove that a divine Attribute is ascribed to the Son?

A. Eternity. Micah 5.2. But thou Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little
among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall come forth unto me, that is
to be a Ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been from of old, from
everlasting.

27. Q. Prove that a divine Attribute is ascribed to the Holy Ghost?

A. Omnipresence, Ps. 139.7. Whither shall I go from thy SPIRIT? Or whither
shall I flee from thy Presence?

28. Q. What divine Works are ascribed to the Son and Holy Ghost?

A. The Works of Creation and Preservation. Ps. 33.6. By the WORD of the Lord
were the Heavens made: And all the Host of them by the BREATH (or Spirit) of
his Mouth.

29. Q. What divine Honor is commanded to be given them?

A. To be baptized in their Name, to believe in them, and to worship them. 2
Cor. 13.14. The Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the
Communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all. Amen.

30. Q. Is this Doctrine necessary to Salvation?

A. Yes: Because we thereby learn to know God rightly, and seek Reconciliation
with the Father as Judge, in the Satisfaction of the Son, through the Operation
of the Holy Spirit. John 6.44. No Man can come to me, except the Father which
has sent me draw him: And I will raise him up at the last Day. 1 John 1.3.
That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye also may have
Fellowship with us: And truly our Fellowship is with the Father, and with his
Son Jesus Christ.

CHAP. IV. Of GOD's Decrees.
1. Quest. ARE God's Decrees any Thing distinct from God?

A. No: They are the decreeing God himself, so that his Understanding and Will
are exercised in determining Things without him.

2. Q When has God formed his Decrees?

A. From Eternity. Acts 15.18. Known unto God are all his Works from the
Beginning of the World (or from Eternity).

3. Q Are the Decrees of God free?

A. Yes, Matt. 11.26. Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy Sight.

4. Q. Are they wise Decrees?

A. Yes: Romans 11.33. O the Depth of the Riches, both of the Wisdom and
Knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding
out!

5. Q. Are they changeable?

A. No they are unchangeable. Isaiah 46.10. Declaring the End from the
Beginning, and from ancient Times the Things that are not yet done, saying MY
COUNSEL SHALL STAND, AND I WILL DO ALL MY PLEASURE.

6. Q. To what do the Decrees of God extend?

A. They extend to all Things. Ephesians. 1.11. In whom also we have obtained an
Inheritance, being predestined according to the Purpose of him who works
ALL THINGS, AFTER THE COUNSEL OF HIS OWN WILL.

7. Q. Are there conditional Degrees, which depend on the free Will of Man?

A. No; But there are such as depend on a Condition, wherein God has also
decreed, and which he himself infallibly brings about; Thus (for Instance) God
had decreed to save Peter on Condition of Faith and Repentance, but at the same
Time God had decreed in due Time to work; and actually wrought Faith and
Repentance in him.

Of Predestination.
1. Q. Has God decreed who shall be saved, and who not?

A. Yes

2. Q. How is that Decree called?

A. Predestination or Fore-ordaining. Romans 8.30. Moreover whom he did
predestinate, them he also called; and whom he called he also justified; and
whom he justified, them he also glorified.

3. How many Acts of God must we therein take Notice of?

A. Two, Election and Reprobation. 1 These. 5.9. God has not appointed us to
Wrath, but to obtain Salvation through Jesus Christ our Lord.

4. Q. When did God make this Election?

A. From Eternity. Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in him before the
Foundation of the World, that we should be Holy and without Blame before him in
Love.

5. Q. Is this general, are all Men elected?

A. No; the smallest Number, Matt. 20.16. Many are called but few are chosen.

6. Q. Is this Election concerning certain Individual Persons, known to God by
Name?

A. Yes; Romans 9.13. Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated.

7. Q. What is the Reason of God's choosing the one and not the other.

A. Only Gods free and sovereign Pleasure. Romans 9.13. Therefore he has Mercy
on whom he will have Mercy, and whom he will he hardens.

8. Q. Is it not then on Account of foreseen Faith or good Works?

A. No. It is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that
shows Mercy. Romans 9.16.

9. Q. Is there no Severity or Injustice in this?

A. No; For God could very justly have let all Mankind perish.

10. Q. Is this Election changeable?

A. No; It is unchangeable. Romans 9.11. For the Children being not yet born,
neither having done any Good or Evil, that the Purpose of God according to
Election might stand, not of Works but of him that calls.

11. Q. Does it not follow from hence that it is all one how we live?

A. No; For God has decreed the Means, as well as the End. Romans 8.29, 30. For
whom he did foreknow he also did predestinate to be conformed to the Image of
his Son, that he might be the first born among many Brethren. Moreover whom he
did predestinate, them he also called, and whom he called, them he also
justified: And whom he justified, them he also glorified.

12. Q. What if an Elect Person should refuse to use the Means?

A. God gives them an hearty Desire to will the Use of Means, Phil. 2.13. For
it is God that works in you, both to will and to do of his good Pleasure.

13. Q. What are the Signs of Election?

A. Faith, Hope, and Love. 1 These. 1.3.4. Remembering without ceasing, your Work
of Faith and Labor of Love, and Patience of Hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, in
the Sight of God, and our Father: Knowing Brethren, Beloved, your Election of
God.

14. Q. To what End does this Doctrine of Predestination serve?

A. It serves to the Glory of God, in his supreme Sovereignty, Independency,
Wisdom, Grace, Righteousness and Truth. Romans 11.33. O the Depth of the Riches,
both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his Judgments,
and his Ways past finding out. And for humbling of Man, Romans 9.20, 21. Nay but,
O Man who art thou that reply against God? shall the Thing formed say to him
that formed it, why have thou made me thus? Has not the Potter Power over the
Clay of the same Lump to make one Vessel unto Honor and another unto
Dishonor? 1 Cor. 4.7. For who makes thee to differ from another? And what
have thou thou did not receive? Now if thou did receive it, why do thou
glory as if thou had not received it?

CHAP. V. Of the Counsel of Peace.
1. Quest. HOW could God fore-ordain some of the fallen Race of Man to
Salvation, seeing he can have no Communion with the Sinner?

A. To do this consistently with his Holiness and Justice, Christ from Eternity
interposed as Surety between God and the Sinner; which Treaty (or Contract) is
improperly called the Covenant of Redemption, or Counsel of Peace?

2. Q. What do you understand by the Counsel of Peace?

A. The Will of the Father from Eternity to redeem the Elect through the
Sufferings of Christ, and the Will of the Son, giving himself as a surety for
the Elect.

3. Q. Has there been such a Contract from Eternity between the Father and the
Son?

A. Yes; To that Purpose Divines cite. Ps. 2.7, 8. I will declare the Decree:
The Lord has said unto me, thou art my Son, this Day have I begotten thee. Ask
of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance, and the utmost
Parts of the Earth for thy Possession. Luke 22.29. I appoint unto you a
Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me.

4. Q. How many Things are to be observed in this Counsel of Peace?

A. Two Things; First, the contracting Parties; and 2dly. The Work of each
Party.

5. Q. In what Character does the Father there appear?

A. In the Character of an absolute Lord, who treats with his Son concerning
Suretyship in behalf of the Elect, which he was not obliged to accept.

6. Q. In what Character did the Son appear?

A. Of Surety and Mediator, who was about to bring himself under an Obligation
to satisfy for the Sins of the Elect.

7. Q. What did the Father do in the Counsel of Peace?

A. The Father demanded of his Son all that was necessary for the Redemption of
the Elect; which demand is the Father's external Will. John 6.39. And this is
the Father's Will which has sent me, that of all which he has given me, I
should lose nothing, but should raise it up again the last Day.

8. Q. Did the Father make any Promises to the Son?

A. Yes; He allotted the Son a certain Seed, over whom he should be King and
Head John 17.9. I pray for them; I pray not for the World, but for them which
thou have given me, for they were thine.

9. Q. Is there any Thing more done by the Father?

A. Yes: God the Father has confirmed this Promise to the Son by an Oath. Ps.
110.4. The Lord has sworn, and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever
after the Order of Melchizedech.

10. Q. What was done by the Son in this Contract?

A. Christ on his Part assented to his Father's Demand, and undertook to
satisfy fully for the Elect. Ps. 40.7, 8. Then said Ilo I come: In the Volume
of the Book it is written of me: I delight to do thy Will, O my God: Yea thy
Law is written within my Heart.

11. Q. What has the Son of God done besides this?

A. He made also a Demand, to wit; That he should have the Elect for his
Heritage, Ps. 2.8. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine
Inheritance, and the utmost Parts of the Earth for thy Possession.

CHAP. VI. Of the Creation.
1. Quest. DOES God also execute his Decrees?

A. Yes; From the Beginning of Time (...) his Works.

2. Q. Of how many Sorts are his Works in Time?

A. Of two Sorts; His Works of Nature, and his Works of Grace.

3. Q. Of how many Sorts are his Works of Nature?

A. Also of two Sorts: The Work of Creation, and the Work of Providence.

4. Q. What is it to create?

A. To produce something by an Almighty Act of the simple Will. Rev. 4.11. Thou
art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power: For thou have
created all Things, and for thy Pleasure they are, and were created.

5. Q. Who is the Creator of all Things?

A. The one only God, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Genesis 1.1, 2. In
the Beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth, and the Earth was without
Form and void, and Darkness was upon the Face of the Deep, and the Spirit of
God moved upon the Face of the Waters. Ps. 33.6.

6. Q. When did God create all Things?

A. In the Beginning of Time.

7. Q. Of what are all Things created?

A. Of nothing. Romans 4.17. And calls those Things which be not, as though
they were.

8. Q. Where do we read the History of the Creation?

A. In the first Chapter of Genesis.

9. Q. In what Space of Time did God create all Things?

A. In an Instant as to the Matter, and in six Days as to the disposing of them
in Order.

10. Q. Are Angels also created?

A. Yes: Ps. 104.4. Who makes his Angels Spirits, his Ministers a flaming Fire.

11. Q. What are Angels?

A. Ministering Spirits sent forth to Minister for them who shall be Heirs of
Salvation. Heb. 1.14.

12. Q. When were they created?

A. Probably on the first Day; For when the Earth was founded, then the Morning
Stars sang together, and all the Sons of God shouted. Job. 38.6, 7.

13. Q. How did God create the Angels, Good or Evil?

A. Good; For, God saw all that he had made, and behold it was very good. Genesis
1.31.

14. Q. Did they all continue good?

A. No; Some of them apostatized, and became Devils in Hell. Jude ver. 6. And
the Angels which kept not their first Estate but left their own Habitation, he
has reserved in everlasting Chains under Darkness, unto the Judgment of the
great Day.

15. Q. Who were the first of the Human Race?

A. Adam and Eve.

16. Q. Whence did God create Adam?

A. From the Earth. Genesis 2.7.

17. Q. Whence did he create Eve?

A. From a Rib of Adam. Ver. 21.22.

18. Of how many Parts does Man consist?

A. Of two Parts; Soul and Body.

19. Q. Were their Souls also created in the Manner just mentioned?

A. No; Their Souls proceeded immediately from God; Who breathed in them the
Breath of Life, and thus man became a living Soul. Genesis 2.7.

20. Q. What is the Soul?

A. An immortal Spirit; By which we enjoy Life, and exercise Reason.

21. Q. What did God do on the seventh Day?

A. He rested thereon, and sanctified it, Genesis 2.3.

22. Q. Was God weary with creating?

A. No; The Creator of the Ends of the Earth faints not, neither is weary.
Isaiah 40.28.

23. Q. What then is the meaning of these Words, that he rested?

A. That he ceased to create.

24. Q To what End has God created the World?

A. The Lord has made all Things for himself, that is, to his own Glory. Prove.
16.4.

CHAP. VII. Of Providence.
1. Quest. DOES God cease from all Work concerning the Creation?

A. No: There is still a continual Operation of Divine Providence. John 5.17.
My Father works hitherto, and I work.

2. Q. In how many Acts does Gods Providence consist?

A. In three: In Upholding, Cooperating, and Governing.

3. Q. What is Upholding?

A. It is the Almighty Power of God, whereby he causes all Things to continue
in Existence. Heb. 1.3. Who upholdeth all Things by the Word of his Power.

4. Q. What is divine Cooperation?

A. The Almighty Power of God, whereby he influences all the Motions and
Opperations of his Creatures. 1 Cor. 12.6. And there are Diversities of
Operations, but it is the same God that works all in all.

5. Q. What is the divine Government?

A. It is the Almighty Power of God, whereby he does direct every Thing to a
certain determined End. Ps. 93.1. The Lord reigns, he is clothed with
Majesty, the Lord is clothed with Strength, wherewith he has girded himself:
The World also is established that it cannot be moved.

6. Q. Does the Providence of God extend over all Things?

A. Yes: Ephesians. 1.11. Being predestined according to the Purpose of him who
works all Things after the Counsel of his own Will.

7. Q. Does it extend even to small Things?

A. Yes: The Hairs of your Head are all numbered. Matt. 10.30.

8. Q. Is it not to the Dishonor of God to care for such mean Things?

A. No: 1 Because it is no Dishonor to God that he has created them: 2.
Because he thereby neglects nothing of greater Moment: 3dly. Because he often
thereby executes Matters of the greatest Importance.

9. Q. Does the divine Providence extend to those Things which happen
accidentally, as we say?

A. Yes. The Lot is cast into the Lap, but the whole disposing thereof is from
the Lord. Prove. 16.33.

10. Q. Does any Thing happen by Chance?

A. Not as to God, but only in our Apprehension of Things.

11. Q Does God's Providence also concern Life and Death?

A. Yes: The Time thereof is also determined by him. Job. 14.5. Seeing his Days
are determined, the Number of his Months are with thee, thou have appointed his
Bounds that he cannot pass.

12. Q. Can a Man lengthen or shorten his Time of Life?

A. Not in Respect to God, but only in Respect to Man.

13. Q. Is it not then in vain to use Means to preserve Life?

A. No: God has also decreed those Means to that End, and he also gives Man a
willing Mind to use them.

14. Q. Does God's Providence also direct the most voluntary Things?

A. Yes; It even directs the very Thoughts. Prove. 21.1. The King's Heart is in
the Hand of the Lord, as Rivers of Water, he turns it whither so ever he will.

15. But don't that take away the Freedom of Man's Will?

A. No; For this governing or directing is no Force upon, but the inclining the
Will which acts freely.

16. Q. Does the Providence of God concern itself also about Sin?

A. Yes; He permits it, limits and directs it to a certain End. Genesis 50.20. But
as for you ye thought Evil against me, but God meant it unto good, to bring to
pass, as it is this Day, to save much People alive.

17. Q. Is God the Author of Sin?

A. No; A holy God cannot be the Author of any Thing that is sinful, he hates
and punishes Sin.

18. Q. Does God work that which is good?

A. Yes. 2 Cor 3.5. Not that we are sufficient of ourselves, to think any Thing
as of ourselves, but our Sufficiency is of God.

19. Q. Does God once for all give Power to do Good, or must we be influenced
in each particular Action?

A. We must receive his Influence in each particular Action, exciting us, and
cooperating with us, to that End. Phil. 2.13. For it is God which works in
you, both to will and to do of his good Pleasure.

20. Q In what Respects is the Doctrine of Providence profitable?

A. It teaches the People of God Patience in Adversity, and Thankfulness in
Prosperity, and (...) in God in Respect to future Things. Job 1.21.22. naked
came I out of my Mother's Womb, and naked shall I return thither; The LORD gave
and the LORD has taken away, blessed be the Name of the LORD. In all this Job
sinned not, nor charged God foolishly. Genesis 32 10. I am not worthy of the least
of all the Mercies and of the Truth, which thou bast showed unto thy Servants;
for with my Staff I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two Bands.
Job. 13.15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him, but I will maintain
mine own Ways before him.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Covenant of Works.
1. Quest. DOES God use any particular Way in governing Man?

A. Yes; For God governs him by Way of a Covenant.

2. Q. How many Covenants are there?

A. Two; a Covenant of Works, and a Covenant of Grace.

3. Q. When was the Covenant of Works made?

A. Before the Fall.

4. Q. With whom did God make this Covenant?

A. With Adam, and in him as the Head, with all his Posterity.

5. Q. What was God's Demand in the Covenant of Works?

A Perfect Obedience to the Law.

6. Q. What is this Law?

A. The Law of Love, that we love God with all our Might, and our Neighbors as
ourselves.

7. Q. How came Adam to the Knowledge of this Law?

A. It was implanted in his Heart by God.

8. Q. What did God promise in the Covenant of Works?

A. Eternal Life.

9. Q. Was this Promise confirmed by any Sacrament?

A. Yes, by the Tree of Life.

10. Q. What did God threaten in that Covenant?

A. Death.

11. Q. Did God also add a Command to prove Man?

A. Yes; Not to eat of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. Genesis 2.17. But
of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, thou shall not eat of it, for in the
Day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die.

CHAP. IX. Of the Image of God.
1. Quest. COULD Man keep that Covenant?

A. Yes; For God had created Man capable of keeping.

2. Q. How did God create Man?

A. Good and upright.

3. Q. Was he not created in a mere natural State, or in a Medium between Good
and Evil?

A. No; But in actual and moral Rectitude. Ecl. 7.29. Lo, this only have I
found, that God has made Man upright, but they have sought out many Inventions.

4. Q. After what Image did God create Man?

A. After his own Image. Genesis 1.27.

5. Q. Wherein did that Image consist?

A. In Knowledge, Righteousness, and Holiness.

6. Q. Not in the outward Form of the Body?

A. No; For God is a Spirit.

7. Q. Not in the Dominion over the Creatures?

A. No; That is only a Consequence of God's Image, and shall have no Place in
Heaven, where nevertheless God's Image in his People shall be perfectly
complete.

8. Q. Prove that the Image of God consisted in Knowledge?

A. Col. 3.10. And having put on the new Man, which is renewed IN KNOWLEDGE,
after the Image of him that created him.

9. Q. Prove that the Image of God consisted in Righteousness and Holiness?

A. Ephesians. 4.24. And that ye put on the new Man, which after God is created in
Righteousness and true Holiness.

10. Q. Was Adam with that Image mortal?

A. No, but immortal; For Death was only threatened in Case of Sin. Genesis 2.17.
In the Day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die.

CHAP. X. Of SIN.
i. Of Adam's Fall.
1. Quest. HAS Man still that Image?

A. No; He has lost it through Sin?

2. Q. What was the first Sin of Man?

A. Eating of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil.

3. Q. Where did that Tree stand?

A. In Paradise.

Q. What Fruit grew thereon?

A. That is unknown.

5. Q. Who eat thereof first, Adam or Eve?

A. Eve.

6. Q. By whom was she deceived?

A. By the Devil, through the Means of a Serpent. Genesis 3.1 to 7. Now the
Serpent was more subtle than any Beast of the Field, which the Lord God had
made: And he said unto the Woman, yea has God said ye shall not eat of every
Tree of the Garden? And the Woman said unto the Serpent, we may eat of the
Fruit of the Trees of the Garden: But of the Fruit of the Tree, which is in the
Midst of the Garden, God has said, ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye
touch it, lest ye die. And the Serpent said unto the Woman, ye shall not surely
die, for God does know, that in the Day ye eat thereof, then your Eyes shall be
opened; And ye shall be as Gods, knowing Good and Evil. And when the Woman saw
that the Tree was good for Food, and that it was pleasant to the Eyes, and a
Tree to be desired to make one wise; she took of the Fruit thereof and did eat,
and gave also unto her Husband with her, and he did eat. And the Eyes of them
both were opened, and they knew that they were naked: And they sewed Fig leaves
together, and made themselves Aprons. Rev. 12.9. And the great Dragon was cast
out, that old Serpent called the Devil and Satan, which deceives the whole
World. John 8.44. Ye are of your Father, the Devil, and the Lusts of your
Father ye will do: He was a Murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the
Truth, because there is no Truth in him. When he speaks a Lie, he speaks of
his own: For he is a Liar, and the Father of it.

7. Q. What did he make them believe?

A. That they should not die, but be as Gods, knowing Good and Evil.

8. Q. By whom was Adam deluded?

A. By Eve, who gave to him and he did eat.

9. Q. Where do we read the History of the Fall?

A. In Genesis Chap. 3.

10. Q. What were the Consequences of this Sin, to Adam and Eve?

A. 1st. The Loss of the Divine Image. 2dly. The Feeling that they were naked.
3dly. Horror of Conscience. 4thly. Expulsion from Paradise: and 5thly, Death.

ii. Of Original Sin.
1. Quest. Does Adam's Sin also extend to us?

A. Yes; It is imputed to us.

2. Q. Why?

A. Because Adam was the Head of the Covenant, and therein considered as
Representative of all his Posterity. Romans 5.12. Wherefore, as by one Man Sin
entered into the World, and Death by Sin, and so Death passed upon all Men, for
that all have sinned.

3. Q. What Sin do we derive from Adam?

A. Original Sin. Ps. 51.5. Behold I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did my
Mother conceive me.

4. Q How many Sorts of Sin are there?

A. Two Sorts; Original and Actual Sins.

5. Q. How does Original Sin become ours?

A. By Imputation and by Entailment.

6. Q. By whom is Adam's Sin imputed to us?

A. By God.

7. Q. What does he impute to us?

A. The Guilt of Sin. Romans 5.19. For as by one Man's Disobedience many were
made Sinners: So by the Obedience of one, shall many be made righteous 1 Cor.
15.22. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.

8. Q. What is entailed on us?

A. The Pollution of Sin. Job. 14.4. Who can bring a clean Thing out of an
unclean? Not one.

9. Q. From whom?

A. From our Parents.

10. Q. What is the Guilt of Sin?

A. The Obligation to Punishment for the Sin of Adam. Romans 5.12 and 18.
Wherefore, as by one Man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin, and so
Death passed upon all Men, for that all have sinned. Therefore, as by the
Offense of one, Judgment came upon all Men to Condemnation: Even so by the
Righteousness of one, the free Gift came upon all Men, unto Justification of
Life.

11. Q. What is the Pollution of Sin?

A. It is that inherent Corruption, which spreads itself through the whole Man.
Genesis 8.21. For the Imagination of Man's Heart is Evil from his Youth Romans 6.12,
13. Let not Sin therefore reign in your mortal Body, that ye should obey it in
the Lusts thereof. Neither yield ye your Members as Instruments of
Unrighteousness unto Sin; But yield yourselves unto God, as those that are
alive from the Dead; And your Members as Instruments of Righteousness unto God.

12. Q. Have all Men Original Sin?

A. All: Except Christ. John 3.6. That which is born of Flesh is Flesh.

13. Q. Why had Christ no original Sin?

A. Because he was conceived by the Holy Ghost. Luke 1.35. And the Angel
answered and said unto her; The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the Power
of the highest shall overshadow thee, therefore that Holy Thing that shall be
born of thee, shall be called the Son of God.

iii. Of Actual Sin, and the Punishment of Sin.
1. Quest. Have all Men also Actual Sins?

A. Yes; James 3.2. In many Things we offend all.

2. Q. How do we commit them?

A. In Thoughts, Words, and Deeds. Prove. 6.18. An Heart that devises wicked
Imaginations, Feet that be swift running to Mischief. Matt. 12.36. But I say
unto you, that every idle Word that Men shall speak, they shall give Account
thereof in the Day of Judgment. Chap. 15.19. Out of the Heart proceed evil
Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, False Witness, Blasphemies.

3. Q. Are all Men by Nature in a State of Misery?

A. Yes.

4. Q. Wherein does the Misery of Man consist?

A. In three Things; In Sin, in his Inability to help himself, and in
Punishment.

5. Q. Is Man then while under Sin, also spiritually without Strength?

A. Yes, with Respect to spiritual Good. Romans 8.7. The carnal Mind is Enmity
against God: For it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be.

6. Q. But has not Man a Freedom of Will, or a natural Power in himself to
spiritual Good?

A. No: Ephesians. 2.1. And you has he quickened, who were dead in Trespasses and
Sins.

7. Q. Are not then all Commands, Threatenings, and Promises of God, in vain?

A. No; They are Means, whereby God will excite Man as a rational Creature, to
his Duty.

8. Q. What is the Punishment of Sin?

A. Death. Romans 6.23. The Wages of Sin is Death.

9. Q. How many Kinds of Death are there?

A. Three Kinds; Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal.

10. Q. What is Temporal Death?

A. A Separation of Soul and Body.

11. Q. What is spiritual Death?

A. 1. A Separation from God's Favor. 2. An Impotency under Sin. Isaiah 59.2.
Your Iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your Sins have hid
his Face from you, that he will not hear. Ephesians. 2.1. And you he has quickened,
who were dead in Trespasses and Sins.

12. Q. What is eternal Death?

A. An eternal Punishment in Hell, Rev. 14.11. The Smoke of their Torment
ascends up for ever and ever.

13. Q. Do all Sinners merit such Punishment?

A. Yes; Even the least of them. Gal. 3.10. For as many as are of the Works of
the Law, are under the Curse: For it is written, cursed is every one that
continues not in all Things, which are written in the Book of the Law to do
them.

14. Q. Are there then no pardonable Sins?

A. Alone in Christ; (the Sin against the Holy Ghost only excepted) but none
are pardonable considered in themselves. James 2.10. For whosoever shall keep
the whole Law, and yet offend in one Point, he is guilty of all. Deuteronomy. 27.26.
Cursed be he that confirms not all the Words of this Law to do them: And all
the People shall say, AMEN.

15. Q. Is the Covenant of Works abolished through Sin?

A. Yes, in Respect to its Power to justify.

16. Q. What do you infer from the Fall of Man?

A. That next to Satan there is no Creature more unhappy than a natural Man.

CHAP. XI. Of the Covenant of Grace.
1. Quest. IS there another Covenant established in the Room of the Covenant of
Works?

A. Yes: The Covenant of Grace.

2. Q. When was it established?

A. Immediately after the Fall. Genesis 3.15. I will put Enmity between thee and
the Woman, and between thy Seed and her Seed, it shall bruise thy Head, and
thou shall bruise his Heel.

3. Q. What is the Covenant of Grace?

A. The Covenant of Grace is, that Method by which God in Christ becomes the
Sinner's Property, and the Sinner the Property of God. Jer. 31.33. But this
shall be the Covenant that I will make with the House of Israel, after those
Days, says the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward Parts, and write it in
their Hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be my People.

4. Q. With whom is it established?

A. Only with the Elect Sinner. Ezekiel. 16.6. And when I passed by thee, and saw
thee polluted in thine own Blood, I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy
Blood; Live, yea, I said unto thee when thou wast in thy Blood, live.

5. Q. What does God require in this Covenant?

A. That which God requires in, is also a Promise of the Covenant; Namely,
Faith in Christ. Hos. 2.20. I will even betroth thee unto me in Faithfulness,
and thou shall know the Lord. Hab. 2.4. But the Just shall live by his Faith.
Ps. 27.8. When thou said, seek ye my Face, my Heart said unto thee, thy Face
Lord, will I seek.

6. Q. What does God promise therein?

A. Grace here, and eternal Life hereafter. Acts 16.31. Believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, thou and thy House.

7. Q. Is this Covenant in all Ages essentially the same?

A. Yes.

8. Q. Were then Believers under the Old Testament Partakers of all the real
Benefits of the Covenant of Grace?

A. Yes; For Christ Jesus is the same Yesterday and to Day and for ever. Heb.
13.8.

9. Q. How does the Sinner enter into this Covenant?

A. God does first draw near the Sinner, when he invites and beseeches him with
Love. 2 Cor. 5.20. Now we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech
you by us: We pray you in Christ's Stead, be ye reconciled to God. With the
greatest Earnestness and Uprightness, Ezekiel 38.11. Say unto them as I live says
the Lord God, I have no Pleasure in the Death of the Wicked, but that the
Wicked turn from his Way and live, turn ye, turn ye from your Evil Ways: For
why will ye die O House of Israel. And solving all their Difficulties, Isaiah
55.2. Wherefore do ye spend Money for that which is not Bread, and your Labor
for that which satisfies not? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat that which
is Good, and let your Soul delight itself in Fatness.

10. Q. What follows such an Invitation?

A. Hereby God draws the Sinner with Cords of a Man, and Bands of Love. Hos.
11.4.

11. Q. What does the called Sinner on his Part?

A. He receives the LORD as his GOD, and wholly surrenders himself to him as
his Property, Cant. 2.16. My beloved is mine and I am his, be feeds among the
Lillies.

12. Q. What are the Properties of this Consent?

A. The Sinner performs this Solemnly, Freely, Humbly, Faithfully, Uprightly,
with a full Consent as well to the Demands as to the Promises of the Covenant,
Ps. 51.6. Behold thou desire Truth in the inward Parts: And in the hidden
Part thou shall make me to know Wisdom.

13. Q. What are the Effects of this Consent?

A. God remembereth his Covenant for ever. Ps. 105.8. He has remembered his
Covenant for ever, the Word which he commanded to a Thousand Generations. And
those in Covenant have a Right to ask for all Things that are necessary to Life
and Salvation. Ps. 74.19, 20, 21. O deliver not the Soul of thy Turtle dove
unto the Multitude of the Wicked forget not the Congregation of the Poor for
ever. Have Respect unto the Covenant: For the dark Places of the Earth are full
of the Habitations of Cruelty. O let not the Oppressed return ashamed: Let the
Poor and Needy praise thy Name.

CHAP. XII. Of the Mediator of the Covenant.
1. Quest. WHO is the Mediator of this Covenant?

A. The Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Timothy 2.5. For there is one Mediator between God
and Man, the Man Christ Jesus.

2. Q. Is he only a Mediator of Intercession, or also of Reconciliation?

A. Also of Reconciliation, for thus it follows in the Text; Who gave himself a
Ransom for all. 1 Timothy 2.6.

3. Q. Is Jesus the true Mediator or Messiah who was to come?

A. Yes; For in him is fulfilled all that was foretold of the Messiah.

4. Q. Did he appear in due Time?

A. Yes; Before the Scepter was departed from Judah, and the Lawgiver from
between his Feet, Genesis 49.10. 2dly. While the second Temple stood, according to
Hag. 2.2. and 3dly, When the 70 Weeks were about expired. Dan. 9.

5. Q. Wherein is the Mediator to be known?

A. First in his Names. 2dly. In his Offices. 3dly. In his Natures. 4thly. In
his States; and 5thly, In his Benefits.

i. Of the Name Jesus.
1. Quest. Which are his most peculiar Names.

A. They are two, to wit, Jesus and Christ; the first an Hebrew, the other a
Greek Name.

2. Q. What does the Name of Jesus signify?

A. A Savior, Matt. 1.21. Thou shall call his Name JESUS: For he shall SAVE
his People from their Sins.

3. Q. What is it to save?

A. To redeem from the greatest Evil, and to restore to the supreme Good.

4. Q. By what Means does Christ do this?

A. By Merit and actual Application.

5. Q. Has Christ merited Salvation?

A. Yes; Heb. 5.9. And being made perfect he became an Author of Salvation,
unto all them that obey him.

6. Q. Does he actually apply this Salvation?

A. Yes; John 10.28. I give unto them eternal Life, and they shall never
perish, neither shall any pluck them cut of my Hand.

7. Q. Can Merit and Application be separated in this Work of Salvation?

A. No; He surely applies this Salvation to all those for whom he has merited
it Isaiah 53 11. He shall see the Travail of his Soul, and shall be satisfied:
By his Knowledge shall my righteous Servant justify mary; for he shall bear
their Iniquities.

8. Q. Does this Application depend on ourselves?

A. No; But on the powerful Operation of the Divine Grace.

ii. Of the Name Christ.
1. Quest. What does the Name Christ signify?

A. Anointed.

2. Q. How is that Name in Hebrew?

A. Mesias, John 1.41, We have found the MESIAS which is, being interpretted,
CHRIST.

3. Q. In how many Things does this anointing consist?

A. In two Things; In his Appointment, and in his Qualification to his
Mediatorship.

4. Q. Who has appointed and qualified him?

A. God the Father.

5. Q. When was he appointed?

A. From Eternity. Prove. 8.23. I was set up (or anointed) from everlasting,
from the Beginning, or ever the Earth was.

6. Q. According to what Nature was he appointed?

A. Both according to his divine and human Nature.

7. Q, When was he qualified?

A. In the fullness of Time. Gal. 4.4.

8. Q. In what Nature was he qualified?

A. In his human Nature, for as to his divine Nature he cannot be said to be
made fit.

9. Q. Why is his being appointed, called an anointing?

A. Because under the Old Testament, men were ordained to certain Offices by
anointing.

10. Q. Why is his being fitted or qualified, called an anointing.

A. Because God by that anointing sometimes rendered such Persons fit for their
several Offices.

11. Q. Wherewith is Christ anointed or qualified?

A. With the Holy Ghost. Acts 10.38. How God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with
the Holy Ghost, and with Power; who went about doing good, and healing all that
were oppressed of the Devil: For God was with him.

12. Q. What peculiar Gifts of the Holy Ghost are communicated to him?

A. Wisdom, Power, and Holiness.

13. Q. Wherein did he manifest his Wisdom?

A. In his Doctrine. Matt. 7.28, 29. When Jesus had ended these sayings, the
People were astonished at his Doctrine, for he taught them as one having
Authority, and not as the Scribes.

14. Q. Wherein did his Power appear?

A. In his Miracles. Luke 24.19. Concerning Jesus of Nazareth, which was a
Prophet, mighty in Deed and Word, before God and all the People.

15. Q. Wherein consisted his Holiness?

A. In that he had no Sin.

16. Q. Had he no original Sin?

A. No: Luke 1.35. And the Angel answered and said unto her, the Holy Ghost
shall come upon thee, and the Power of the Highest shall overshadow thee:
Therefore also that HOLY Thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the
Son of God.

17. Q. Had he no actual Sins?

A. No; John 8.46. Which of you convinces me of Sin?

18. Q. Was it necessary that he should be without Sin?

A. Certainly; For one who himself was a Sinner could not satisfy for another.
Heb. 7.26. For such an high Priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled,
separate from Sinners, and made higher than the Heavens.

iii. Of his Offices.
1. Quest. To how many Offices is Christ anointed.

A. To three; To wit, the Office of a Prophet of a Priest and of a King.

2. Q. Was he prefigured in these Offices in the Old Testament?

A. Yes; By anointed Prophets, Priests and Kings.

3. Q. Were all these three Offices necessary in him?

A. Yes.

4. Q. Why must he be a Prophet?

A. To enlighten our Ignorance.

5. Q. Why a Priest?

A. To reconcile our Guilt.

6. Why our King.

A. To redeem us from the Slavery of Sin and (...).

A. Of his Prophetical Office.
1. Quest. Was he promised as a Prophet?

A. Yes; Deuteronomy. 18.15. The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from
the Midst of thee, of thy Brethren, like unto me; unto him shall ye hearken.

2. Q. What does he as Prophet?

A. He teaches us.

3. Q. What does he teach us?

A. He teaches us the Way of Salvation. Isaiah 61.1, 2, 3. The Spirit of the
Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me to preach good Tidings
unto the Meek, he has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim
Liberty to the Captives, and the opening of the Prison to them that are bound:
To proclaim the acceptable Year of the Lord, and the Day of Vengeance of our
God, to comfort all that mourn: To appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to
give unto them Beauty for Ashes, the Oil of Joy for Mourning, the Garment of
Praise for the Spirit of Heaviness; that they may be called Trees of
Righteousness, the planting of the Lord that he might be glofied.

4. Q. Whereby does he teach us?

A. Externally by his Word, and internally by his Spirit. Acts 16.14. And a
certain Woman named Lydia, a Seller of Purple, of the City of Thyatira, which
worshipped God, heard us: Whose Heart the Lord opened, that she attended on the
Words which were spoken by Paul.

5. Q. Was Christ a Prophet under the Old Testament?

A. Yes; The Prophets of those Times have also spoken by the Spirit of Christ
which was in them. 1 Pet. 1.11. Searching what, or what Manner of Time the
Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, when it testified beforehand
the Sufferings of Christ, and the Glory that should follow.

6. Q. Has he ever taught in his own Person.

A. Yes: When he was in the Flesh on Earth. John 17.6. I have manifested thy
Name unto the Men which thou gave me out of the World. Thine they were, and
thou gave them me, and they have kept thy Word. Acts 1.3. To whom also he
showed himself alive after his Passion, by many infallible Proofs, being seen
of them forty Days, and speaking of the Things pertaining to the Kingdom of God.

7. Q. Is he now, after his Ascension, still a Prophet?

A. Yes; He does now teach by means of Pastors and Teachers, whom he has
appointed. Ephesians. 4.11. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers.

8. Q. Does he himself then cease to teach?

A. He himself and he alone always has, and still does teach by his Spirit.
Isaiah 59.21. As for me this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord, my
Spirit that is upon thee, and my Words which I have put in thy Mouth, shall not
depart out of thy Mouth, nor out of the Mouth of thy Seed, nor out of the Mouth
of thy Seed's Seed, says the Lord, henceforth and forever.

B. Of his Priestly Office.
1. Quest. Was he also promised as a Priest?

A. Yes, Ps. 110.4. The Lord has sworn, and will not repent, thou art a Priest
forever after the Order of Melchisedek.

2. Q. What is the meaning of this Scripture?

A. First, That he alone is Priest. 2. An eternal Priest.

3. Q. How does he execute the office of a Priest?

A. By offering Sacrifice; and making Intercession.

4. Q. What has he offered?

A. Himself. Heb. 9.14. How much more shall the Blood of Christ, who through
the eternal Spirit, offered HIMSELF without Spot to God, purge your Consciences
from dead Works to serve the living God.

5. Q. When was this offering made?

A. During his whole sufferings, but especially on the Cross. 1 Pet. 2.24. Who
his own self bare our Sins in his own Body on the Tree, that we being dead to
Sin, should live unto Righteousness: By whose Stripes ye were healed.

6. Q. To whom has he offered himself?

A. To his Father.

7. Q. For whom has he offered himself?

A. For all the Elect.

8. Q. Was his Sacrifice a true Sacrifice of Reconciliation?

A. Yes; Heb. 10.14. For by one offering he has perfected for ever them that
are sanctified.

9. Q. What is his Intercession?

A. That he continually presents his Merits unto his Father, and thereon
demands the Salvation of his People. John 17.24. Father I will that they also
whom thou have given me be with me where I am, that they may behold my Glory,
which thou have given me; for thou lovedst me before the Foundation of the
World.

10. Q. Where does he thus interceed?

A. In Heaven. Romans 8.34. Christ -- who is at the Right Hand of God, who also
makes Intercession for us.

11. Q. For whom?

A. Only for the Elect. John 17.9. I pray for them: I pray not for the World,
but for those which thou have given me, for they were thine.

12. Q. Is there more than one Mediator of Intercession?

A. No: 1 John 2.1. My little Children, these Things write I unto you, that ye
sin not, and if any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ,
the righteous, and he is the Propitiation for our Sins.

13. Q. Are not the Angels or Saints our Intercessors in Heaven?

A. No; First, They know not our Necessities; Secondly, Cannot hear our
Prayers; nor, Thirdly, Have they made Satisfaction for us, for the Sake of
which they might make a Demand.

C Of his Kingly Office.
1. Quest. Was Christ also promised as King?

A, Yes: Ps. 2.6. Yet have I set my King upon my Holy Hill of Zion.

2. Q. What does he perform as King?

A. He does rule and defend his People.

3. Q. Whereby does he rule them?

A. By his Word and Spirit. Ps. 43.3. O send out thy LIGHT and thy TRUTH; let
them lead me, let them bring me unto thy holy Hill, and to thy Tabernacles.

4. Q. Against whom does he protect them?

A. Against their spiritual and carnal Enemies. John 10.28.29. I give unto them
eternal Life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of
my Hand. My Father which gave them me is greater than all; And none is able to
pluck them out of my Father's Hand.

5. Q. Is he an earthly King?

A. No; But a spiritual and heavenly King. John 18.36. Jesus answered, my
Kingdom is not of this World: If my Kingdom were of this World, then would my
Servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews; But now is my
Kingdom not from hence.

6. Q. Was he also a King under the Old Testament?

A. Yes; For he has even then as King defended and given Laws to his Church.
Isaiah 33.22. For the Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is
our King, he will save us.

7. Q. How long is he King?

A. For ever. Luke 1.33. He shall reign over the House of Jacob for ever, and
of his Kingdom there shall be no end.

8. Q. Why are believers called Christians?

A. Because they are partakers of Christ's anointing, 1 John 2.20, and 27. But
ye have an Unction from the Holy One, and ye know all Things. Ver. 27. But the
anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you: And ye need not that
any Man teach you: But as the same anointing teaches you of all Things, and is
truth, and is no lie: And even as it has taught you ye shall abide in him. 1
Pet. 2.9. But ye are a chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, an Holy Nation, a
peculiar People, that ye should show forth the Praises of him, who has called
you out of Darkness to his mavelous Light.

iv. Of his Natures.
1. Quest. How many Natures has Christ?

A. Two; A divine and human Nature. 1 Timothy 3.16. And without Controversy, great
is the Mystery of Godliness: God was manifest in the Flesh.

2. Q. Was that foretold?

A. Yes; Isaiah 9.6. For unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and
the Government shall be upon his Shoulders: And his Name shall be called
wonderful, Counselor, the mighty (...), the everlasting Father, the Prince of
Peace:

3. Q. Is he very God?

A. Yes; 1 John 5.20. And we know that the Son of God is come, and has given
us an understanding, that we may know him that is true, and we are in him that
is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ, this is the true God and eternal Life.

4. Q. Which of the three Persons is he according to his Godhead?

A. The second Person or the Son. Gal. 4.4. But when the fullness of the Time
was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law.

5. Q. Is he also very Man?

A. Yes; 1 Timothy 2.5. For there is one God and one Mediator between God and Men,
the Man Christ Jesus.

6. Q. Of how many Parts does his human Nature consist?

A. Of two; Soul and Body.

7. Q. Did not his Godhead supply the Place of a human Soul?

A. No; For he has suffered in his Soul. Matt. 26.38. Then says he unto them,
my Soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto Death: Tarry ye here, and watch with
me.

8. Q. Why must he be God?

A. To support the human Nature in bearing the infinite Wrath of God; And to
add an infinite Value to his Merits. Isaiah 63.1, 2, 3. Who is he that comes
from Edom, with died Garments from Bozrah? This that is glorious in his
Apparel, traveling in the Greatness of his Strength? I that speak in
Righteousness mighty to save. Wherefore art thou red in thine Apparel, and thy
Garments like him that treads the Wine-fat? I have trodden the Wine Press
alone, and of the People there was none with me: For I will tread them in mine
Anger; and trample them in my Fury, and their Blood shall be sprinkled upon my
Garments, and I will stain all my Raiment.

9. Q. Why must he be Man?

A. In order to be in a Capacity to suffer and die?

10. Q. Are the two Natures in Christ united?

A. Yes: So as to make but one Person.

11. Q. How is this Union brought about?

A. By the divine Person taking upon him the human Nature. Phil. 2.7. But made
himself of no Reputation, and took upon him the Form of a Servant, and was made
in the Likeness of Men.

12. Q. Is not then the Godhead changed into the human Nature?

A. No: He remained God.

13. Q. But yet it is written, John 1.14. The Word is made Flesh?

A. The Word made, (or being made) don't import an essential Change, Gal. 3.13.
'Christ being made a Curse for us', which cannot signify he was changed into a
Curse.

14. Q. Are not the two Natures intermixed in one?

A. No; They remain two Natures even after their Union.

15. Q. Are then the two Natures also two Persons?

A. No: But one Person.

16. Q. Are not some of the divine Properties transferred to the human Nature.

A. No; Each Nature retains its distinct Properties.

v. Of his States.
1. Quest. How many States must we distinguish in Christ?

A. Two: A State of Humiliation, and a State of Exaltation, Ps. 110.7. He shall
drink of the Brook in the Way: Therefore shall he lift up his Head.

2. Q. Were they both necessary?

A. Yes; In the State of Humiliation it was necessary he should purchase
Salvation: And apply it in the State of Exaltation.

3. Q. Which are the Degrees of his Humiliation?

A. First, His humble Birth, Secondly, His Sufferings. Thirdly, His Death.
Fourthly, His Burial. Fifthly, Descending into Hell.

4. Q. Which are the Degrees of his Exaltation?

A. First, His Resurrection. Secondly, His Ascension into Heaven. Thirdly his
sitting at the Right Hand of God. Fourthly, His coming again to Judgment.

Of the Degrees of his Humiliation.
A. Of his humble Birth.
1. Quest. Of whom was he born?

A. Of the Virgin Mary, Isaiah 7.14. Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a
Son, and shall call his Name IMMANUEL.

2. Q. By whom was he conceived?

A. By the Power of the Holy Ghost. Luke 1.35. And the Angel answered and said
unto her, the Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the Power of the Highest
shall overshadow thee: Therefore also that Holy Thing which shall be born of
thee, shall be called the Son of God.

3. Q. Was he born of the Flesh and Blood of the Virgin Mary.

A. Yes; Gal. 4.4. But when the Fullness of the Time was come, God sent forth
his Son made of a Woman, made under the Law.

4. Q. Has he not brought his Substance, or his Flesh and Blood from Heaven?

A. No: He received it of the Virgin Mary, and not before.

5. Q. But it is written, He that ascended is the same that descended. Ephesians.
4.9, 10.

A. The same Person though not according to the same Nature; for according to
his human Nature he has ascended, but according to his his Divinity he
descended, manifesting himself in the Flesh.

6. Q. Where was he born?

A. In Bethlehem, Micha 5.2. But thou Bethlebem Ephratah, though thou be little
among the Tribes of Judah, yet out of thee shall come forth unto me, that is to
be a Ruler in Israel: Whose going forth have been of old from everlasting.

The accomplishment whereof we read in the History of his Birth in the 2d of
Luke.

B. His Sufferings.
1. Q. Were the Sufferings of Christ necessary?

A. Yes; For they were foretold. Ps. 22. Isaiah 53. Ps. 8. and Dan. 9.

2. Q. How long did his Sufferings continue.

A. From the beginning of his Life even to his Death. 2 Cor. 8.9. For ye know
the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet, for your
Sakes he became poor, that ye, through his Poverty might be rich. Phil. 2.8.
And being found in Fashion as a Man, he humbled himself and became obedient
unto death, even the Death of the Cross.

3. Q. In what did he suffer.

A. In Soul and Body, Matt. 26. -- 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his ownself bare our Sins
in his own Body on the Tree, that we being dead to Sin, should live unto
Righteousness, by whose Stripes ye were healed.

4. Q. Did he suffer immediately after his Birth?

A. Yes; He suffered painful Circumcision on the eight Day.

5. Q. Why was Christ circumcised?

A. Among other Reasons, because he should have the Sign of Abraham's Seed.

6. Q. Has he suffered more?

A. Yes; He was brought up in a poor despised Condition, and also his whole
Life Time he endured the Hatred, Malice, and Persecutions of his Enemies.

7. Q. When were his Sufferings most severe?

A. At the End of his Life: Read the Circumstances thereof, Matt. 26th and 27th
Chapters.

8. Q, Under what Judge did he suffer?

A. Under Pontius Pilate.

C. His Death.
1. Q. What Death did he die?

A. The Death of the Cross. Phil. 2.8. He became obedient unto Death, even the
Death of Cross.

2. Q. Was his Crucifixion also foretold?

A. Yes* Ps. 22.16. For Dogs have compassed me, the Assembly of the Wicked have
enclosed me; They pierced my Hands and Feet.

3. Q. Had not that Death any aggravating Circumstances?

A. Yes; 1st. It was a scandalous. 2dly. A painful, and 3dly. An accursed Death.

4. Q. Why did he die such an accursed Death?

A. To redeem us from the Curse, Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the
Curse of the Law; being made a Curse for us; For it is written, cursed is every
one that hangs on a Tree.

5. Q. Where was Christ crucified?

A. On the Mount Golgotha; Between two Thieves.

6. Q. Was his Death also a necessary part of his Sufferings?

A. Yes; Because Death was threatened as a Punishment of Sin, and Christ was to
take away all Punishment.

D. Of his Burial.
1. Quest. Who buried Christ?

A. Joseph of Arimathea, and Nicodemus.

2. Q. Where was he buried?

A. In a new Grave hewn out of a Rock.

3. Q. Why was he buried?

A. To assure us that he was really dead.

4. Q. Was his Burial also foretold?

A. Yes; Isaiah 53.9. And he made his Grave with the wicked, and with the Rich
in his Death.

E. His descending into Hell
1. Quest. What is meant by his descending into Hell?

A. That he suffered hellish Torments in his Soul.

2. Q. When did he suffer them?

A. Especially in the Garden of Gethsemana, and on the Cross.

3. Q. How did he complain in Gethsemana?

A. 'My Soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto Death.' Matt. 26.28.

4. Q. And what on the Cross?

A. ELI, ELI, LAMA, SABACHTHANI, that is, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me. Matt. 27.46.

5. Q. Did he not personally descend into Hell?

A. Not at all; For while he was dead, his body was in the Tomb, and his Soul
in Heaven. Luke 23.43. And Jesus said unto him, verily I say unto thee, Today
shall thou be with me in Paradise.

6. Q. Was then his Descent into Hell accomplished before his Death?

A. Yes; During the Time of his Bodily Sufferings.

7. Q. Were the Sufferings of his Soul also necessary?

A. Yes; Because we have also sinned in our Souls.

F. Of the End of his Humiliation.
His Satisfaction.
1. Quest. Has Christ in his State of Humiliation, satisfied the Divine
Justice?

A. Yes; Isaiah 53.4. Surely he has borne our Griefs, and carried our Sorrows,
yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted.

2. Q. Wherein does this Satisfaction consist?

A. In two Parts. 1st. In obeying the Law, and 2dly. In suffering the
Punishment?

3. Q. Is the doing or obeying the Law part of his Satisfaction?

A. Yes; Romans 5.19. For as by one Man's Disobedience many were made Sinners. So
by the Obedience of one many shall be made righteous.

4. Q. Is his Suffering the Punishment due to Sin, also part of this
Satisfaction?

A. Yes; Isaiah 53.5. But he was wounded for our Transgressions, he was bruised
for our Iniquities: The Chastisement of our Peace was upon him, and with his
Stripes we are healed.

5. Q. Was not the suffering the Punishment alone sufficient to merit or
satisfy for us?

A. No; Suffering the Punishment could only free from Punishment; but could
give no Right to eternal Life; that was only promised upon obeying the Law, Do
this and thou shall live.

6. Q. Was a Satisfaction necessary?

A. Yes; 1st. From the Nature of divine Justice, which could not forgive Sins
unpunished or unsatisfied. 2dly. By Virtue of his Truth, which expressly has
declared this.

7. Q. Is there in this Satisfaction an absolute Reconciliation made, or did
Christ only merit a possibility of being saved?

A. An actual, absolute, and personal Reconciliation is made, 2 Cor. 5.19. God
was in Christ, reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing their
Trespasses unto them, and has committed unto us the Word of Reconciliation.

8. Q. For whom has Christ satisfied?

A. For the Elect only.

9. Q. Did he not die for all Men?

A. No; But only for his People, Matt. 1.21. And she shall bring forth a Son,
and thou shall call his Name, JESUS for he shall save his PEOPLE from their
Sins. For his Sheep, John 10.11. I am the good Shepherd, the good Shepherd
gives his Life for the SHEEP. For his Church, Acts 20.28. Take heed therefore
unto yourselves, and to all the Flock, over the which the Holy Ghost has made
you Overseers, to feed the CHURCH OF GOD, WHICH HE HAS PURCHASED WITH HIS OWN
BLOOD.

10. Q. How then are we to understand what we often find in Scripture that
Christ died for the World and for all Men?

A. We are to understand by such Expressions, all the Elect in the World, or
the Gentile World, together with the Jews under the New Testament; or Men of
all Ranks and Degrees.

11. Q. What are the Effects of this Reconciliation?

A. 1st. God is now reconciled with the Elect Sinner. 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in
Christ, reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing their Trespasses unto
them, and has committed unto us the Word of Reconciliation, and 2dly. He
receives a Right to eternal Life. Gal. 4.4, 5. When the Fullness of the Time was
come, God sent forth his Son made of a Woman, made under the Law, to redeem
them that were under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of Sons.

12. Q. Has every one a Right to believe that Jesus Christ has satisfied for
him?

A, No; But only those who receive him as the meriting, opperating, moving, and
exemplary Cause of their spiritual Life. Titus 2.14. Who gave himself for us,
that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify unto himself, a peculiar
People, zealous of good Works. John 12.24. Verily, Verily I say unto you,
except a Corn of Wheat fall into the Ground and die, it abides alone; But if
it die it brings forth much Fruit. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. For the Love of Christ
constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all
dead: And that he died for all, that they which live, should not benceforth
live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again. Romans
6.5. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his DEATH, we
shall be also in the Likeness of his RESURRECTION.

Of the State and Degrees of Christ's Exaltation.
A. His Resurrection.
1. Quest. Was it necessary that Christ should rise from the Dead?

A. Yes; Ps. 16.10. Thou shall not leave my Soul in Hell, nor suffer thine Holy
One to see Corruption.

2. Q. What certainty have we of his Resurrection?

A. 1st. The Testimony of Angels, and the Watchmen. 2dly. The many Appearances
of the Lord Jesus to the Women and Disciples, prove the certainty of his
Resurrection?

3. Q. Is his Resurrection of any Advantage to us?

A. Yes; An Assurance of our spiritual and bodily Resurrection, and of his
having in all Things fully satisfied. Romans 4.25. Who was delivered for our
Offenses, and raised again for our Justification.

4. Q. By whose Power did he arise?

A. By his Father's, and his own divine Power, being raised by his Father, and
having arose by himself. Acts 2.24. Whom God has raised up, having loosed the
Pains of Death: Because it was not possible that he should be holden of it.
John 2.19. Jesus answered and said unto them, destroy this Temple, and in three
Days I will raise it up.

5. Q. On what Day did he arise?

A. On the third Day after his Death.

6. Q. By whom was that prefigured?

A. By Jonas, who was three Days and three Nights in the Whale's Belly, so
should likewise the Son of Man be three Days, and three Nights in the Midst of
the Earth, Matt. 12.40.

7. Q. On what Day was he buried, and on what Day did he arise.

A. He was buried on Friday Evening, and arose again on Sunday Morning.

8. Q. But these are not three whole Days and Nights?

A. The Parts of these Days must be accounted for the whole of them.

9. Q. Who are Partakers of Christ's Resurrection?

A. Those who know the Power of Christ's Resurrection. Phil. 3.10. That I may
know him, and the Power of his Resurrection, and the Fellowship of his
Sufferings, being made conformable unto his Death.

B. His Ascension.
1. Quest. How many Days did Christ remain on Earth after his Resurrection?

A. Forty Days. Acts 1.3. To whom also he showed himself alive after his
Passion, by many infallible Proofs being seen of them forty Days, and speaking
of the Things pertaining to the Kingdom of God.

2. Q. To what End?

A. 1st. The more fully to prove the Certainty of his Resurrection. 2dly. And
further to instruct his Disciples in certain Matters.

3. Q. What Degree of Exaltation did then follow?

A. His Ascension into Heaven.

4. Q. Was that also foretold?

A. Yes; Ps. 68.18. Thou have ascended on high thou have led Captive Captivity:
Thou have received Gifts for Men: Yea, for the Rebellious, also; that the Lord
God might dwell among them.

5. Q. Are there Witnesses for his Acension?

A. Yes; The Angels and Disciples of our Lord, Acts 1.

6. Q. Was his Ascension into Heaven necessary?

A. Yes; 1st. There to rule as King. 2dly. To interceed for his People. 3dly.
At last there to receive them unto himself.

7. Q. From what Place did Christ ascend?

A. From the Mount of Olives without Jerusalem.

8. Q. Whither is Christ ascended?

A. To the third Heavens, Ephesians. 4.10. He that descended is the same also that
ascended up far above all Heavens, that he might fill all Things.

9. Q. In what Manner did he ascend?

A. Truly, visibly, and locally. John 16.28. I came forth from the Father, and
am come into the World: Again I leave the World and go to the Father. Acts
3.21. Whom the Heavens must receive until the Times of the Restitution of all
Things, which God has spoken by the Mouth of all his Holy Prophets, since the
World began.

10. Q. Is not his human Nature at his Ascension become omnipresent?

A. No; Matt. 26.11. The Poor you have always with you, but me you have not
always.

11. Q. Who can comfort themselves with Christ's Ascension into Heaven?

A. Those who are risen with Christ unto Newness of Life, Col. 3.1. If ye then
be risen with Christ, seek those Things which are above, where Christ sits
on the Right Hand of God.

C. His sitting at the Right Hand of God.
1. Quest. Was it also foretold that Christ should sit at the Right Hand of God?

A. Yes; Ps. 110.1. The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my Right Hand until
I make thine Enemies thy Footstool.

3. Q. Is that fulfilled in Jesus?

A. Yes; Stephen saw him standing at the Right Hand of God. Acts 7.26.

3. Q. What is intimated to us by his sitting at the Right Hand of God?

A. His Exaltation to supreme Power and Glory. Heb. 1.3. Who being the
Brightness of his Glory and the express Image of his Person, and upholding all
Things by the Word of his Power, when he had by himself purged our Sins, sat
down at the Right Hand of the Majesty on high.

4. Q. Is this Expression to be understood literally?

A. No; For God being a Spirit has properly no Right Hand.

5. Q. What Benefit is this glorious Exaltation to us?

A. Ps. 68.18. He has led Captive Captivity, he has received Gifts for Men,
yea for the rebellious also, that the Lord God might dwell among them.

CHAP. XIII. Of Vocation.
1. Quest. To what End is Christ thus exalted?

A. To apply his Benefits to us.

2. Q. How may Christ's Benefits be distinctly considered?

A. Christ's Benefits may be considered as of two Kinds, 1st. Such as are
bestowed in this Life; 2dly. Such as shall be conferred in the Life to come.

3. Q. Which are the Benefits bestowed in this Life?

A. The principal or chief are these: Vocation, Justification, and
Sanctification.

4. Q. What Benefits shall be conferred in the Life to come?

A. The Resurrection, final Judgment, and eternal Life.

5. Q. Is there more than one Sort of calling?

A. Yes there is an external, and an internal, or effectual calling.

6. Q. How are Sinners externally called?

A. By the Word of God, Prove. 9.3 to 6. She has sent forth her Maidens, she
cries upon the highest Places of the City: Whosoever is simple let him turn in
hither: As for him that wants Understanding she says to him, come eat of my
Bread, and drink of the Wine which I have mingled. Forsake the Foolish and
live, and go in the Way of Understanding.

7. Q. How are they effectually called?

A. By the Spirit of God, Jer. 31.33 But this shall be the Covenant that I will
make with the House of Israel, after those Days says the Lord, I will put my
Law in their inward Parts, and write it in their Hearts, and will be their God,
and they shall be my People.

8. Q. Who are externally or outwardly called?

A. All Sorts of Men, even those who are not elected, Matt. 20.16. -- For many
are called but few are chosen.

9. Q. Is then the external Call general?

A. Among Christians indeed it is, but not throughout the the whole World.

10. Q. But is not this Call now more general than it was under the Old
Testament?

A. Yes; For then it was confined to the Jews, but now extends also to the
Gentile Nations.

11. Q. Is there no saving Call in Nature?

A. No: For Nature is ignorant of Christ, and without him there is no Salvation.

12. Q. Is not external calling sufficient to Conversion?

A. No; It is in vain though Paul plant and Apollos water, it is God that
gives the Increase. 1 Cor. 3.7.

13. Q. What must still be added to the external Call?

A. The internal, or effectual Call as is exemplified in Lydia, Acts 16.14.
Whose Heart the Lord opened, that she attended unto the Things that were spoken
of Paul.

14. Q. Who are they that are internally called?

A. Only the Elect, Romans 8.30. Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also
called; And whom he called, them he also justified; And whom he justified them
he also glorified.

15. Q. What is internal calling?

A. It is a powerful Change in the whole Man?

16. Q. Is there then any Thing to be changed in Man?

A. Yes; The Understanding, Will, Affections, and Conversation.

17. Q. How are they by Nature?

A. The Understanding is darkened, the Will is perverse, the Affections
irregular, and the Conversation sinful. Ephesians. 4.18. Having the Understanding
darkened being alienated from the Life of God, through Ignorance that is in
them, because of the Blindness of their Hearts. Romans 8.7. Because the carnal
Mind is Enmity against God, for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither
indeed can be. Jude ver. 12.13. These are Spots in your Feasts of Charity, when
they feast with you, feeding themselves without Fear: Clouds they are without
Water, carried about of Winds; Trees whose Fruit withers, without Fruit,
twice dead plucked up by the Roots, raging Waves of the Sea, foaming out their
own Shame; Wandering Stars, to whom is reserved the Blackness of Darkness
forever. Titus 3.3. For we ourselves also were sometimes foolish, difobedient,
deceived, serving diverse Lusts, and Pleasures, living in Malice and Envy,
hateful and hating one another.

18. Q. What is then the Effect of this internal calling?

A. The Understanding is enlightened to know God in his Work of Salvation,
Jesus in his precious Excellencies, and themselves in their Depravity; being
justly exposed to the Curse. 1 Cor. 2, 12, 13. Now we have received, not the
Spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the
Things which are freely given us of God. Which Things also we speak, not in
Words, which Man's Wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches,
comparing spiritual Things with spiritual. The Will is inclined to serve and
glorify God. Romans 7.15. For that which I do I allow not: For what I would that
do I not, but what I hate that do I.

The Affections are cleansed to hate Sin, and on the contrary to love God as
the supreme Good, to have a Desire after Holiness, etc. Romans 6.19. -- For as
you have yielded your Members Servants to Uncleanness and to Iniquity, unto
Iniquity: Even so now yield your Members Servants to Righteousness unto
Holiness. And the whole Conversation is sanctified.

19. Q. Is this internal calling powerful?

A. Yes; It has an irresistible Power. Ephesians. 1.19, 20. And what is the
exceeding Greatness of his Power to usward, who believe, according to the
working of his Power; which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the
dead, and set him in Heaven at his own Right Hand in heavenly Places.

20. Q. Is any Thing more done herein than a persuading the Man by moral
Arguments?

A. Yes, there is an inward inclining of the Will. Phil. 2 13. For it is God
which works in you, both to will and to do of his good Pleasure.

21. Q. Does God then compel Men?

A. No; But he makes them willing. Cant. 1.4, Draw me, we will run after thee:
The King has brought me into his Chambers: We will be glad and rejoice in
thee, we will remember thy Love more than Wine: the upright love thee,

22. Q. How is this powerful Effect of the internal calling expressed in
Scripture?

A. It is called a CREATION; We are his Workmanship CREATED in Christ Jesus to
good Works, Ephesians. 2.10. also a DRAWING, no Man can come to me except the Father
who sent me DRAW him. John 6.44.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Church.
1. Quest. DOES Christ also by Means of this calling gather a Church?

A. Yes.

2. Q. Where is that Church?

A. Here on Earth, and in Heaven.

3. Q. How is the Church on Earth called?

A. The Church militant; Because it has a continual Warfare. Romans 7.23. But I
see another Law in my Members, warring against the Law of my Mind, and bringing
me into Captivity to the Law of Sin, which is in my Members.

4. Q. With whom?

A. With the World, the Devil, and our own Flesh.

5. Q. How is the Church in Heaven called?

A. The Church triumphant; Because it has completely conquered. Rev. 7.14. --
17.

6. Q. Are they then two different Churches?

A. No; They are only two distinct Parts of one and the same Church. Ephesians. 1.10.
That in the Dispensation of the Fullness of Time, he might gather together in
one, all Things in Christ, both which are in Heaven, and which are on Earth.

7. Q. Is there more than one Church?

A. No; Cant. 6.9. My Dove, my undefiled is but ONE, she is the only one of her
Mother, she is the choice one of her that bare her. The Church in all Ages and
in all Places is one and the same Church.

8. Q. Is there always a Church?

A. Yes; Matt. 16.18. And I say unto thee that thou art Peter, and upon this
Rock I will build my Church: And the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.

9. Q. Is the Church always equally visible?

A. No; The Church can be outwardly invisible in Times of Persecution.

10. Q. Is the Church then nevertheless in being?

A. Yes, as in the Times of Elijah, when he supposed that he alone was left,
though there were seven Thousand who had not bowed their Knees to Baal, 1 Kings
19.

11. Q. Who is the Head of the Church?

A. Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 5.23. For the Husband is the Head of the Wife, even as
Christ is the Head of the Church; and he is the Savior of the Body.

12. Q. Is not the Pope of Rome the Head of the Church?

A. No: But he is the Antichrist.

13. Q. How do you prove that?

A. Because in him is fulfilled that which was foretold of Antichrist. 2 These.
2.1, to the 11 ver. Now we beseech you, Brethren, by the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him, that ye be not soon
shaken in Mind, or be troubled, neither by Spirit: nor by Word, nor by Letter,
as from us, as that the Day of Christ is at Hand, let no Man deceive you by any
Means: For that Day shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and
that Man of Sin be revealed, the Son of Perdition: Who opposes and exalts
himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God
sits in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God. Remember ye not,
that when I was yet with you, I told you these Things? And now ye know what
withholdeth, that he might be revealed in his Time. For the Mystery of Iniquity
does already work; only he who now lets will let, until he be taken out of
the Way. And then shall that wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume
with the Spirit of his Mouth, and shall destroy with the Brightness of his
coming: Even him whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all Power and
Signs, and lying Wonders, and with all Deceiveableness of Unrighteousness, in
them that perish, because they received not the Love of the Truth, that they
might be saved. And for this Cause God shall send them strong Delusions that
they should believe a Lie.

14. Q. What are the Marks of the True Church?

A. The pure preaching of the Word of God, and the right Administration of the
Sacraments. John 8.31. Then Jesus said to those Jews which believed on him, if
ye continue in my Word, then ye are my Disciples indeed. Acts 2.42. And they
continued steadfastly in the Apostle's Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking
of Bread, and in Prayers.

15. Q. Is not Antiquity a Mark of the Church?

A. No; For the Kingdom of Satan is also ancient.

16. Q. Is the Multitude of People a Mark?

A. No; For Christ's Church is but a small Flock, Luke 12.32.

17. Q. Is not worldly Prosperity a Mark?

A. No; John 16.33. In the World ye shall have Tribulation, but be of good
Cheer, I have overcome the World.

18. Q. Wherein does the Power of the Church consist?

A. In the Exercise of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven?

19. Q. How many Keys are there?

A. Two: The preaching of the Gospel, and Christian Discipline, Matt. 28.19,
20. Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe all
Things whatsoever I have commanded you. Chap. 18.18. Verily I say unto you,
whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven: And whatsoever ye
shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven.

20. Q. Is it sufficient to be a visible Member of the Church?

A. No; We must examine ourselves whether we be living Members thereof.

CHAP. XV. Of Justification.
1. Quest. ARE those who are internally called, also justified?

A. Yes; Romans 8.30. Whom he did predestinate, them be also called; and whom he
called, them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified.

2. Q. What is Justification?

A. The being absolved from Guilt and Punishment, and the having a Right to
eternal Life, freely given. Romans 4.7. Blessed are they whose Iniquities are
forgiven, and whose Sins are covered. Chap. 5.19. For as by one Man's
Disobedience many were made Sinners, so by the Obedience of one shall many be
made righteous.

3. Q. Is there a Distinction between Justification and Sanctification?

A. 1. Justification is an Act without us: but Sanctification is a Work within
us. 2. Justification takes away the Guilt, and Sanctification the filth of
Sin. 3. Justification is perfect at once, but Sanctification in this Life is
only in Part.

4. Q. Are we not by Justification inwardly changed?

A. No; That is effected in Sanctification.

5. Q. Is not Justification the Infusion of Righteousness?

A, No; It is only a Sentence or Absolution in Behalf of, or concerning a
Person, as is done by Judges in Courts of Justice among Men.

6. Q. Is it taken in this Sense in Scripture?

A. Yes; Thus it is opposed to Condemnation. Pro. 17.15. He that justifies the
wicked, and he that condemns the Just, even they both are Abomination to the
Lord.

7. Q. Is it used in this Sense, when the Justification of a Sinner before God
is spoken of.

A. Yes: Romans 8.33, 34. Who shall lay any Thing to the Charge of God's Elect?
It is God that justifies who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died,
yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the Right Hand of God, who also
makes Intercession for us.

8. Q. Who is it then that absolves or justifies us?

A. God the Father, who herein sustains the Character of a Judge, Isaiah 43.25.
I even I am he that blotteth out thy Transgressions, for mine own Sake, and
will not remember thy Sins.

9. Q. What Character does the Son sustain in this Matter?

A. That of Advocate and Mediator; for whose Sake we are justified?

10. Q. And what Character does the Holy Ghost sustain?

A, That of one who seals, making known and sealing to us our Justification.

11. Q. Can we then be assured of our Justification?

A. Yes; Romans 8.16. The Spirit itself bears Witness with our Spirit, that we
are the Children of God.

12. Q. From what are we justified?

A. From all Sins without Distinction.

13. Q. For whose Sake are we justified?

A. Only for the Sake of Christ, Romans 3.24. Being justified freely by his
Grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ.

14. Q. Are we not justified on Account of our own Works?

A. No; Romans 3.28. Therefore we conclude that a Man is justified by Faith,
without the Deeds of the Law.

15. Q. Why can we not be justified for our own Works?

A. Because the best of them are imperfect, and therefore cannot satisfy the
Justice of God. James 3.2. For in many Things we offend all, if any Man offend
not in Word, the same is a perfect Man, and able also to bridle the whole Body.
Isaiah 64.6. But we are all as an unclean Thing, and all our Righteousnesses
are as filthy Rags, and we do all fade as a Leaf, and our Iniquities like the
Wind, have taken us away.

16. Q. But in Order to our being justified by the Merits of Christ, must they
not become ours?

A. Most certainly they must. Jer. 23.6. In his Days Judah shall be saved, and
Israel shall dwell safely; And this is his Name whereby he shall be called, THE
LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. 1 Cor. 1.30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of
God is made unto us Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and
Redemption.

7. Q. How do they become ours?

A. By being imputed, and received by us.

18. Q. Who does impute them to us?

A. God, by a gracious Gift. Romans 3.24. Being justified freely, by his Grace,
through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus.

19. How do we receive that Righteousness?

A. By Faith Phil 3.9. And be found in him not having mine own Righteousness
which is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith in Christ, the
Righteousness which is of God by Faith.

20. Q. Are we justified for our Faith?

A. No; The Scripture says that we are justified by Faith, and through Faith,
but never for Faith.

21. Q. In what Light is Faith here to be considered?

A. As a Hand or Instrument whereby we receive the Merits of Christ. John 1.12.
But as many as received him, to them gave he Power to become the Sons of God,
even to them that believe on his Name.

CHAP. XVI. Of Faith.
1. Quest. HOW many Kinds of Faith are there?

A. Four Kinds; An historical Faith, a temporary Faith, a Faith of Miracles,
and a Saving Faith.

2. Q. What is an historical Faith?

A. It is a bare Assent to a known Truth.

3. Q. Is this a good Faith?

A. It is necessary, though not sufficient. James 2.19. Thou believe that
there is one God, thou do well: The Devils also believe and tremble.

4. Q. What is a Temporary Faith?

A. It is an Assent and Profession of the Truth for a Time, with some Degree of
outward Satisfaction. Matt. 13.20, 21. But he that received the Seed into stony
Places, the same is he that hears the Word, and anon with Joy receives it:
Yet has not any Root in himself, but dureth for a while: For when Tribulation
or Persecution arises because of the Word, by and by he is offended.

5. Q. What is the Faith of Miracles?

A. It is a strong Persuasion, that a Miracle shall be performed, either by us,
or in us. 1 Cor. 13.2. -- And though I have all Faith, so that I could remove
Mountains, and have no Charity, I am nothing. Matt. 8.10. Jesus said verily I
say unto you, I have not sound so great a Faith, no not Israel.

6. Q. When did that Faith take Place?

A. In that Age of the Church, when the working of Miracles were common.

7. Q. Is this Faith of Miracles saving?

A. No: As appears from 1 Cor. 13.2. And though I have all Faith, so that I
could remove Mountains, and have no Charity, I am nothing.

8. Q. In how many Things does saving Faith consist?

A. In three Things; In Knowledge, Assent, and Trust. Isaiah 53.11. -- By his
Knowledge shall my righteous Servant justify many; For he shall bear their
Iniquities. John 3.33. He that has received his Testimony, has set to his
Seal that God is true. Isaiah 27.5. Or let him take hold of my Strength that he
may make Peace with me, and he shall make Peace with me.

9. Q. Is not an implicit or blind Faith without Knowledge sufficient?

A. No; John 17.3. And this is Life eternal, that they might know thee the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

10. Q. Which is the principal and properly justifying Act of Faith?

A. It is an Act of the Soul, whereby it does heartily will and desire, that
not only the Promises of the Gospel may be true in themselves; but also such an
Act, whereby it does desire and actually receive the Lord Jesus with the most
cordial Affection, as the only Cause of Salvation, with Denial of Self, and all
other Creatures. John 1.12. But as many as received him, to them gave he Power
to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name.

11. Q. What are the Effects of the justifying Act of Faith?

A. The particular and certain Application of the Promises of the Gospel, and
the Lord Jesus, to the very Person of every Believer. Gal. 2.20. I am crucified
with Christ and I live; Yet not I but Christ lives in me: And the Life which I
now live in the Flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of God, who loved me and
gave himself for me. A comfortable Sense of this, every Believer does not enjoy
at all Times, by Reason of the Temptations of Satan, the Accusations of the
Law, and Delusions of the Flesh, But to attain this, every one ought to
endeavor, who truly receive Jesus Christ.

12. Q. Can and must Believers be assured of the Reality of their Faith?

A. They can be assured. 2 Timothy 1.12. For I know whom I have believed, and am
persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against
that Day. And they ought to endeavor after it. 2 Cor. 13 5. Examine yourselves
whether you be in the Faith, prove your ownselves, know ye not your ownselves,
how that Christ Jesus is in you, except ye be Reprobates.

13. Q. Who works this Faith in us?

A. The Holy Ghost. Gal. 5.22. But the Fruit of the Spirit is -- Faith.

14. Q By what Means.

A. By the Word. Romans 10.17. So then Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by
the Word of God.

15. Q. Cannot we believe of ourselves?

A. No; Ephesians. 2.8. For by Grace ye are saved through Faith, and that not of
yourselves; It is the Gift of God.

CHAP. XVII. Of Sanctification.
1. Quest. ARE those who are justified also sanctified?

A. Yes; For these are inseparable, as 1 Cor. 1.30. But of him are ye in Christ
Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom, and Righteousness, and
Sanctification, and Redemption.

2. Q. What is Sanctification?

A. A Renovation of the whole Man.

3. Q. Is it not only a Change of the outward Actions?

A. No: But also of the Inward-Man. Romans 12 2. Be not conformed to this World:
But be ye transformed by the renewing of your Mind, that ye may prove what is
that good, and acceptable, and perfect Will of God

4. Q. Does not an external Change flow from this?

A. Yes; In the whole Conversation. 1 Tess. 5.23. The very God of Peace
sanctisy you wholly: And I pray God your whole Spirit and Soul, and Body be
preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord.

5. Q. Who works Sanctification in us?

A. God through his Spirit. Lev. 20.8. And ^e shall keep my Statutes, and do
them, I am the Lord which sanctify you. 1 Cor. 6.11. And such were some of you;
But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of
the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.

6. Q. Is Sanctification necessary?

A. Yes; Heb. 12.14. Follow Peace with all Men and Holiness, without which no
Man shall see the Lord.

7. Q. Is Sanctification perfect in this Life?

A. No; It is only in Part, and imperfect. Phil. 3.12. Not as though I had
already attained, either were already perfect: But I follow after, if that I
may apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus.

8. Q. Is Sanctification equally great in all Believers?

A. No; It has its several Degrees, in the one greater, in the other less.
Ephesians. 4.13. Till we all come in the Unity of Faith, and of the Knowledge of the
Son of God, unto a perfect Man, unto the Measure of the Stature of the Fullness
of Christ.

9. Q. Is it also changeable?

A. Yes; Sanctification is subject to Increase and Decrease in one and the same
Person.

10. Q. Can we totally loose it?

A. No; Where the Grace of God is once begun, there it does continue.

11. Q. Is there then no Apostasy of Saints?

A. No: They may fall, but cannot fall away. 1 Pet. 1.5. Who are kept by the
Power of God, through Faith, unto Salvation, ready to be revealed in the last
Time.

12. Q. How do the People of God make Progress in Sanctification?

A. When by the Grace of the Holy Spirit, they put away every inward and
outward Hindrance, and depending on the Power of Christ, diligently use all the
appointed Means to perfect their Sanctification.

Of Good Works.
1. Quest. What are the Fruits of Faith and Sanctification?

A. Good Works; James 2.18. A Man may say thou have Faith, and I have Works:
Show me thy Faith without thy Works, and I will show thee my Faith by my Works.
Gal. 5.6. For in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision, nor Uncircumcision avails
any Thing, but Faith which works by LOVE.

2. Q. What are good Works?

A. 1st. Those that are done of Faith; 2dly. According to the Law of God; and
3dly. To his Glory.

3. Q. Prove that they must be done of Faith?

A. Heb. 11.6. But without Faith it is impossible to please him: For he that
comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that
diligently seek him.

4. Q. Prove that they must be done according to the Law of God?

A. Matt. 15.9. In vain they do worship me, teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men.

5. Q. Prove that they must be done to the Honor and Glory of God?

A. 1 Cor. 10.31. Therefore whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do
all to the Glory of God.

6. Q. Must we do good Works?

A. Yes; Let your Light so shine before Men, that they may see your good Works,
and glorify your Father which is in Heaven. Matt. 5.16.

7. Q. Can such good Works merit Heaven?

A. No; Christ alone has merited that for us.

8. Q. Why not.?

A. Because they are imperfect. Isaiah 64.6. But we are all as an unclean
Thing, and all our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags, and we all fade as a
Leaf, and our Iniquities, like the Wind have taken us away. Luke 17.10. When
you have done all those Things which are commanded you, say we are unprofitable
Servants: We have done that which was our Duty to do.

9. Q. Why must we then do good Works?

A. 1st. To glorify God by them. 2dly. To edify our Neighbors: and 3dly. That
we may be assured of our Faith.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Law of God.
1. Quest. HOW many Kinds of Laws did God give unto Israel?

A. Three; 1st. The Moral. 2dly. The Political or Civil, and 3dly. The
ceremonial Law. Lev. 18.5. Ye shall therefore keep my Statutes, and my
Judgments; Which if a Man do he shall live in them: I am the Lord.

2. Q. Which of these three are still in force?

A. The moral Law which is eternal. Matt. 5. 17 -- 19: Think not that I am come
to destroy the Law or the Prophets; I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill,
for verily I say unto you till Heaven and Earth shall pass, one Jot or one
Tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law till all be fulfilled. Whosoever
therefore shall break one of the least of these Commandments and shall teach
Men so, shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven: But whosoever shall
do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven.

3. Q. When were the others abrogated?

A. At the beginning of the New Testament. Acts 15.10. Now therefore why tempt
ye God, to put a Yoke upon the Neck of the Disciples, which neither our Fathers
nor we were able to bear. Gal. 5.2, 3. Behold I Paul say unto you, that if ye
be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. For I testify again, to every
Man that is circumcised, that he is a Debtor to the whole Law.

4. Q. How many Commands are contained in the moral Law?

A. Ten Commands.

5. Q. How many Tables?

A. Two Tables.

6. Q. What does the first Table require?

A. Supreme Love to God.

7. Q. What does the second Table require?

A. To love our Neighbors as ourselves. Matt. 22.40. On these two Commands
hang all the Law and the Prophets.

8. Q. How many Commands are there in each Table?

A. There are four Commands in the first, and six in the second Table.

9. Q. Where was that Law given?

A. On Mount Sinai. Gal. 4.25. For this Agar is Mount Sinai in Arabia, and
answers to Jerusalem which now is, and is in Bondage with her Children.

10. Q. When was it given?

A. Soon after the Departure of the Children of Israel out of Egypt.

11. Q. Is not this Law enlarged by Christ under the New Testament?

A. No: This Law is so perfect that nothing can be added thereunto?

12. Q. Can we perfectly keep this Law?

A. No; James 3.2. For in many Things we offend all. If any Man offend not in
Word, the same is a perfect Man, and able also to bridle the whole Body.

13. Q. Repeat that Law?

A. I am the Lord thy God which have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, etc.

14. Q. When we see our Weakness and Inability by this Law, to what must it
excite us?

A. To Prayer. Ps. 119.4, 5. Lord thou have commanded us to keep thy Precepts
diligently, O that my Ways were directed to keep thy Statutes.

CHAP. XIX. Of Prayer.
1. Quest. IS Prayer necessary?

A. Yes: It is a Means to obtain that which God has commanded. Ps. 50.15. Call
upon me in the Day of Trouble: I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.

2. Q. To whom must we pray?

A. To God only; Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve. Matt. 4.10.

3. Q. May we not worship Saints or Angels?

A. No; That Honor belongs not unto them, neither do they know us. Isaiah
42.8. I am the Lord, that is my Name, and my Glory will I not give to another,
neither my Praise to graven Images. Col. 2.18. Let no Man beguile you of your
Reward, in a voluntary Humility, and worshipping of Angels, intruding into those
Things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly Mind.

4. Q. How must we pray?

A. With a holy Frame of Mind, and a grave and reverend Posture of Body.

5. Q. For what must we pray?

A. For spiritual and temporal Necessaries. Matt. 6.9, 13. Prove. 30.8, 9.

6. Q. Has Christ given an Example?

A. Yes: In the Lord's Prayer, Matt. 6.9, 13.

7. Q. Which is that Prayer?

A. Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

CHAP. XX. Of the Sacraments.
1. Quest. WHAT Means has God appointed for promoting Sanctification in his
People?

A. The Word and Sacraments.

2. Q What are Sacraments?

A. They are Signs and Seals of God's Grace, Romans 4.11. And he received the
Sign of Circumcision, a Seal of the Righteousness of the Faith, which he had
yet being uncircumcised; that he might be the Father of all them that believe,
though they be not circumcised; that Righteousness might be imputed unto them
also.

3. Q. Which were the principal Sacraments of the Old Testament?

A. Circumcision and the Passover.

4. Q. On what Day were the Children circumcised?

A. On the eighth Day.

5. Q. When was circumcision instituted?

A. In the Days of Abraham. Genesis 17,

6. Q. When was the Passover instituted?

A. In the Days of Moses: In the Night when Israel went out of Egypt. Exodus 12.

7. Q. What did they eat at the Passover?

A. A Lamb.

8. Q. To whom did this allude?

A, To Christ 1 Cor. 5.7. -- For even Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us.

9. Q. How long did these Sacraments continue?

A. To the Times of the New Testament.

10. Q. How many Sacraments are there under the New Testament?

A. Two; Holy Baptism, and the Holy Supper.

11. Q. Who has instituted them?

A. Christ, Matt. 26 and Chap. 28.

i. Of Holy Baptism.
1. Quest. Wherewith do we Baptize?

A. With Water.

2. Q. Must the Water be mixed with any Thing else?

A. No; It must be only simple Water.

3. Q. What does the Water signify?

A. The Blood and Spirit of Christ. Heb. 12.24. To Jesus the Mediator of the
New Covenant, and to the Blood of Sprinkling that speaks better Things than
that of Abel. 1 Pet. 1.2. Elect according to the Foreknowledge of God the
Father, through the Sanctification of the Spirit unto Obedience, and Sprinkling
of the Blood of Jesus Christ.

4. Q. What Use is made of the Water?

A. The Person to be baptized is immersed therein, or sprinkled therewith.

5. Q. What does Immersion or Springling with Water signify?

A. The washing away of Sin, through the Blood and Spirit of Christ. Ezeck.
36.25. Then will I sprinkle clean Water upon you, and ye shall be clean: From
all your Filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you.

6. Q. How many Benefits are there sealed in Baptism?

A. Two; Justification through the Blood of Christ, and Sanctification by his
Spirit.

7. Q. Can Water itself wash away Sin?

A. No; The Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all Sins. 1 John
1.7.

8. Q. In whose Name are we baptized?

A. In the Name of the Father, and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. Matt.
28.19.

9. Q. May any one baptize in Time of Need?

A. No: But only those who are sent to reach. Matt. 28.19. Go ye therefore and
teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe all Things whatsoever I have
commanded you.

10. Q. Are Children also to be baptized?

A. Yes, the Promise is to you and to your Children, Acts 2.39.

11. Q. Is Baptism necessary?

A. Yes; By Virtue of the Command of Christ.

12. Q. Does Salvation absolutely depend thereon?

A. No; God never binds his Grace to the Sacraments.

13. Q. How often must we be baptized?

A. But once: Even as we can be born but once; For Baptism is a Sacrament of
Birth and Admission into the Church, which can be done but once.

14. Q. What is the Duty of baptized Persons?

A. They must examine themselves whether they have wholly dedicated themselves
(agreeable to their baptismal Vows) to God the Father Son and Holy Ghost.

ii. Of the Holy Supper.
1. Quest. Why do we go often to the Lord's Supper?

A. Because it is a Sacrament of a continual Nourishment in the Faith.

2. Q. Why is it called a Supper?

A. Because Christ instituted it in the Night.

3. Q. When has he instituted it?

A. In that Night when he was betrayed. Matt. 26.

4. Q. What are the visible Sings in the Lord's Supper?

A. Bread and Wine.

5. Q. What Sort of Bread?

A. Common nourishing Bread.

6. Q. May we not use Wafers in this Supper?

A. No; For they don't sufficiently denote the spiritual Nourishment.

7. Q. What does the Bread in this Supper signify?

A. The Body of Christ. 1 Cor. 11.24. And when he had given Thanks, he brake
it, and said, take eat; this is my Body, which is broken for you: Do this in
Remembrance of me.

8. Q. Must the Bread be also broken?

A. Yes; To signify that the Body of Christ is broken for us.

9. Q. What Sort of Wine is to be used in the Lord's Supper?

A. That is indifferent.

10. Q. Must it be mixed with Water?

A. No; That is no where commanded.

11. Q. What does the Wine signify?

A. The Blood of Christ. 1 Cor, 11.25. After the same Manner also he took the
Cup, when he had supped, saying; This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood;
This do ye as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me.

12. Q. What does the pouring forth of the Wine signify?

A. That the Blood of Christ is shed for us.

13. Q. Is not Bread alone sufficient in the Holy Supper?

A. No; For Christ also took the Cup, and gave Thanks, and gave it to them,
saying, drink ye all of it. Matt 26.27.

14. Q. Is that to be understood of all Believers in common?

A. Yes: Let a Man examine himself, and so eat of this Bread and drink of this
Cup. 1 Cor. 11.28.

15. Q. Is Christ bodily present in the Elements of this Supper?

A. No; His human Nature is only in Heaven. Acts 3.21. Whom the Heavens must
receive until the Times of Restitution of all Things, which God has spoken by
the Mouth of all his Holy Prophets since the World began.

16. Q. Are not Bread and Wine changed into his Flesh and Blood?

A. No: They remain Bread and Wine even after the Blessing or Consecration.

17. Q. How then can Christ say: This is my Body?

A. The meaning is, This does signify my Body?

18. Q. Does the Scripture often speak thus?

A. Yes; Frequently. 1 Cor. 10.4. The Rock was Christ. That is to say, it did
signify Christ.

19. Q. Cannot we then eat and drink Christ himself?

A. Not Corporally; but Spiritually.

20. Q. What is it to eat Christ spiritually?

A. To receive him by Faith.

21. Q. For whom is this Holy Supper instituted?

A. Only for Believers.

22. Q. Not for Children?

A. No; Because they cannot examine themselves.

23. Q. Concerning what Particulars must we examine ourselves?

A. 1st. Whether we sincerely repent of our Sins. 2d. Whether we believe in
Christ. 3d. Whether we express this Faith in an Holy Conversation.

CHAP. XXI. Of Man's latter End.
1. Quest. SHALL Man always live?

A. No; 'It is appointed for Man once to die, and then the Judgment." Heb 9.27.

2. Q. Does then the whole of Man die?

A. No; For the Soul is immortal. Matt. 10.28. Fear not them which kill the
Body, but are not able to kill the Soul; But rather fear him which is able to
destroy both Soul and Body in Hell.

3. Q. How many Placesare there for the Soul after Death?

A. Only two; Hell or Heaven. Matt. 7.13.14. Enter ye in at the Strait Gate;
For wide is the Gate, and broad is the Way, that leads to Destruction, and
many there be that go in thereat: Because strait is the Gate and narrow is the
Way which leads unto Life, and few there be that find it.

4. Q. Do the Souls go there immediately after Death?

A. Yes; As appears in the Cases of Lazarus and the Rich Man; The Rich Man
IMMEDIATELY lifted up his Eyes in Hell; and Lazarus was carried in Abraham's
Bosom. Luke 16.23.23.

5. Q. Is there no Purgatory.

A. No; Rev. 14.13. And I heard a Voice from Heaven, saying unto me, write,
blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, from henceforth: Yea, says the
Spirit, that they may rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow them,
The penitent Thief went immediately to Heaven without Purgatory. Luke 23.43 And
Jesus said unto him, verily I say unto thee, this Day shall thou be with me in
Paradise.

i. Of the Resurrection.
1. Quest. Shall there be a Resurrection?

A. Yes; Both of the Just and Unjust. Acts 24.15.

2. Q. When?

A. At the last Day.

3. Q. Who shall raise them?

A. God.

4. Q. Shall the Wicked also arise?

A. Yes; The Hour is coming in which all that are in the Grave shall bear his
Voice, and shall come forth, they that have done good unto the Resurrection of
Life, and they that have done Evil unto the Resurrection of Damnation. John
5.28, 29.

5. Q. With what Bodies shall they rise?

A. With the same Bodies; otherwise it would be no Resurrection but a new
Creation; This was the Expectation of Job; I know that my Redeemer lives, and
that he shall stand at the latter Day upon the Earth, and though after my Skin,
Worms destroy this Body, yet in my Flesh shall I see God: Whom I shall see for
myself, and mine Eyes shall behold, and not another; though my Reins be
consumed within me. Job. 19.25, 26, 27.

6. Q. But is this possible?

A. Yes: 'With God all Things are possible.' It would seem still more imposible
to create the World of nothing.

7. Q. Shall not these Bodies be changed?

A. Not in their Essence, but only in their Qualities.

8. Q. In what Qualities will they be changed?

A. This Corruption must put on Incorruption, and this Mortal must put on
Immortality. 1 Cor. 15.53.

ii. Of the final Judgment.
1. Quest. What shall follow the Resurrection?

A. The final Judgment.

2. Q. Shall there be a final Judgment?

A. Yes; Acts 17.31. He has appointed a Day, in the which he will judge the
World in Righteousness by that Man whom he has ordained: Whereof he has given
assurance unto all Men, in that he has raised him from the dead.

3. Q. Who shall be the Judge?

A. Christ our Savior. who shall visibly appear in his human Nature.

4. Q. Where shall that Judgment be?

A. In the Clouds of Heaven. Matt. 26.64. Nevertheless I say unto you,
hereafter shall ye see the Son of Man, sitting on the Right of Power, and
coming in the Clouds of Heaven.

5. Q. When?

A. Of that Day and Hour knows no Man, nor the Angels in Heaven, nor the Son,
but the Father only. Mark 13.32.

6. Q. Who shall be judged?

A. All Men, 2 Cor. 5.10. We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, that every one may receive the Things done in his Body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or bad

7. Q. How shall mankind be divided?

A. Into two Multitudes; the Wicked and the Righteous.

8. Q. Where shall Christ place them?

A. The wicked on his left and the righteous on his right Hand.

9. Q. What shall he say unto the wicked?

A. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels, Matt. 25.41.

10. Q. What shall he say unto the Righteous?

A. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from
the foundation of the World. Matt. 25.34.

iii. Of eternal Life.
1. Quest. What shall follow this Judgment?

A. Eternal Life or eternal Damnation.

2. Q. Where shall the wicked suffer this Damnation?

A. In Hell, Luke 16.23. And the Rich Man also died, and was buried, and in
Hell he lift up his Eyes being in Torments.

3. Q. How long shall this Torment endure?

A. FOR EVER. And these shall go into everlasting Punishment. Matt. 25.46.

4. Q. But shall not Damnation be an Annihilation of the whole Man, or end in
Time?

A. No; It will be a felt Punishment without End, Mark 9.44. Where their Worm
dies not, and the Fire is not quenched.

5. Q. Where shall eternal Life be enjoyed?

A. In Heaven, Luke 6.23. Rejoice in that Day and leap for Joy; for behold your
Reward is great in Heaven.

6. Q. How long shall it be enjoyed?

A. Also forever, the Righteous go into EVERLASTING Life. Matt. 25.46.

7. Q. Wherein shall it consist?

A. In an eternal Enjoyment of God with perfect Satisfaction and Delight. Ps.
16.11. Thou shall show me the Path of Life; Fullness of Joy is in thy Presence,
at thy Right Hand there are Pleasures for evermore.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 17, Line 13, for Unchangeableness read And Unchangeableness. Page 20,
Line 19, for Heb. 1.13, read Habacuck 1.13. Page 28, Line 20, for Degrees, read
Decrees. Page 32, Line 4, for External read Eternal.
THE CONTENTS.
Chap. I. OF the Knowledge of God Page 9 Chap. II. Of the Scriptures Page 10
Chap. III. Of God Page 14 i. In General Page -- ii. Of his Names Page 15 iii.
Of his Attributes Page 16 iv. Of the Trinity Page 22
Chap. IV. Of God's Decrees Page 27 Of Predestination Page 28
Chap. V. Of the Counsel of Peace Page 31 Chap. VI. Of Creation Page 32 Chap.
VII. Of Providence Page 35 Chap. VIII. Of the Covenant Works Page 37 Chap. IX.
Of the Image of God Page 38 X. Of Sin Page 40 i. Of Adam's Fall Page -- ii. Of
original Sin Page 41 iii. Of Actual Sin and the Punishment of Sin Page 43
Chap. XI. Of the Covenant of Grace Page 45 Chap. XII. Of the Mediator of the
Covenant Page 47 i. Of the Name Jesus Page 48 ii. Of the Name Christ Page 49
iii. Of his Offices Page 51 A Of his prophetical Office Page -- B His Priestly
Office Page 53 C His Kingly Office Page 54 iv. Of his Natures Page 55 v. Of his
States Page 57 Of the Degrees of his Humiliation Page 58 A His humble Birth
Page -- B His Suffering Page 59 C His Death Page 60 D His Burial Page -- E His
descending into Hell Page 61 F The End or Design of his Humiliation Page -- His
Satisfaction Page -- Of the Degrees of his Exaltation Page 64 A His
Resurrection Page -- B His Ascension Page 65 C His sitting at the Right Hand of
God Page 67
Chap. XII. Of Vocation or Calling Page -- Chap. XIV Of the Church Page 71
Chap. XV. Of Justification Page 74 Chap. XVI. Of Faith Page 67 Chap. XVII. Of
Sanctification Page 79 Of good Works Page 81 Chap. XVIII. Of the Law of God
Page 82 Chap. XIX. Of Prayer Page 84 Chap. XX. Of the Sacramens Page 85 i. Of
Baptism Page 86 ii. The Lord's Supper Page 87
Chap. XXI. Of Man's latter End Page 90 i. Of the Resurrection Page 91 ii. The
final Judgment Page -- iii. Eternal Life. Page 93


