A HUMBLE ATTEMPT AT SCURRILITY: IN IMITATION OF Those Great MASTERS of the
ART, The Rev. Dr. S -- th; the Rev. Dr. Al -- n; the Rev. Mr. Ew-n; the
Irreverend D. J. D-ve, and the Heroic J -- n D -- n, Esquire BEING A FULL ANSWER TO
THE OBSERVATIONS ON Mr. H -- s's ADVERTISEMENT.

By JACK RETORT, Student in Scurrility.

QUILSYLVANIA: Printed, 1765.

TO The most renowned, most formidable, and most tremendous KNIGHT, GIANT, and
GRAND CALUMNIATOR-GENERAL, of the Province of Quilsylvania, etc. etc.
MOST DREADFUL SIR,
PERMIT me to approach your IMMENSITY with the first Attempt of a young Genius,
ambitious of distinguishing himself in that most noble and most honorable of
all Arts -- the ART OF CALUMNY.

THE Voice of Mankind would condemn me, were I, on this Occasion, to solicit
the Patronage of any other than "You, SIR, the great CALUMNIATOR of the
Province, whose dire Delight was ever in the Carnage of Characters, and who,
like some GIANT in Romance, sit viewing, with horrid Pleasure, the mangled
Limbs of murdered Reputations strow'd all around your Castle."

TO you, Sir, are we indebted for those Volumes of unparalled Obloquy and
Slander, which have so largely contributed to the Happiness of this flourishing
Province. -- Not that you deigned to write yourself (though so highly capable)
but that you graciously promoted Writing in others.

SPEAKING, Sir, is your Excellence! Your Mouth alone can utter more true
genuine Detraction in one Hour, than all the learned Doctors of the College
(assisted by the decent Mr. D-ve and the magnanimous Mr. D -- n) can discharge
from their calumniating Pens in a Fortnight.

LET a Man but dare to appear even in Defense of the Character of his Friend,
his Relation, or himself; and, in an Instant, you besmear and cover him with
such a thick Slime of Slander, that was it not for that powerful Menstruum
called TRUTH, he would scarcely ever become so cleansed as to be known again by
his former Acquaintance.

SUCH are the happy Effects of your Voyages to England in your youthful, and
later Days! For such are the Advantages which have resulted to you from a close
Attendance on the Lectures of those celebrated Mistresses of our Art, the --
NAIADS of BILLINGSGATE!

I am fully sensible, Sir, that this Performance will, in Point of pure
unadulterated Scurrility, fall far short of those excellent Pieces which your
Patronage has lately been the Means of procuring for the Benefit of Society.
Should it, however, be the happy Means of my obtaining your Protection and
Encouragement, I cannot but flatter myself that I may, fired with Emulation,
hereafter rival the Sentiment-Dresser-General himself!

THE Observations on Mr. H -- s's Advertisement, though highly seasoned with
Scurrility, are yet vastly inferior in that Respect to the Answer to Mr. F --
n's Remarks. For this Reason I chose the former for the Subject of my first
Essay, hoping that if I should be so lucky as to succeed in imitating That, I
might in Time rise to an Imitation of the other.

UNPARDONABLE would it be, Sir, were I to pass over in Silence the Obligations
you have conferred on all British America, in so wisely and bravely daring the
Ministry and Parliament to burden us with Taxes. The good Effects of this
Policy are now most sensibly felt, and must ever be held in grateful
Remembrance.

NOR should I forget to mention, how much this Province is peculiarly beholden
to you for the Introduction of Clubs, Corruption and Perjury at our annual
Elections; than which nothing could have been better adapted for the
Preservation of that valuable Part of our Privileges.

AS well might I omit to acknowledge the Services you have rendered this
Country, in promoting the Cultivation of the fine Arts. The Public Spirit, and
Liberality of the famous Society in England, are no ways comparable to what you
have exerted and shown on this Account. The Art of Engraving, in particular,
which was thought to be on its Decline among Britons, has, by your generous
Bounty, and under your Auspices, been lately carried to a Height of Perfection
unknown to the most able Masters, ancient or modern.

SUFFER me likewise, Sir, to congratulate you and the Public, on your
new-form'd Alliance with that SCUNK OF SCURRILITY D -- d J -- s D-ve! From an
Union of such kindred Souls what Blessings may not be expected!

Our ART must flourish to its full Extent,

When D-ve shall write what Al -- n shall invent!

But, Sir, such is your unbounded Benevolence of Soul, that, not contented with
bestowing Favors on British America in general, you have even extended your
Obligations to the declared Enemies of your King and Country! -- generously
supplying them in the Time of their Distress with Warlike Stores and Provisions.

NOR have you, Sir, been more attentive to that Precept of the Gospel, Love
your Enemies, than you have to that Observation of St. Peter's, Charity covers
a Multitude of Sins: For though your Charities have in Reality bore no Proportion
to what many others have performed, (your and their respective Estates
considered) yet have you, by your Wisdom and Skill in spreading them abroad, so
covered many of your Vices, that they are scarcely observable to any but
Persons of nice Discernment and Penetration.

HERE, Sir, were I to tread in the beaten Track of Dedicators, I should mention
your great Knowledge in Law, Physic and Divinity, the Mathematics, Natural and
Experimental Philosophy, and, above all, the profound Science of Politics! Nor
should I fail to express my Hopes that you would suffer yourself to be
prevailed upon to oblige the World with the Publication of some of those
excellent Treatises which your leisure Hours have produced on those Subjects.

THIS Flattery might perhaps be agreeable to some of the inferior Race of
Mortals, who are apt to value themselves on the Reputation of possessing Useful
Knowledge: But Beings of your Order, I am persuaded, would be far better
pleased to hear themselves complimented on their great Skill in the NOBLE ART
OF CALUMNY, than celebrated as Masters of every Branch of Erudition.

ALLOW me, Sir, though you are generally so obligingly condescending as to save
others the Trouble of sounding your Praise, just to observe, That your
Politeness is equal with your Wit -- Your Merit equal with your Understanding
-- Your Love of Truth equal with your Love of Mr. Fr -- n.

I have the Honor to be, with the profoundest Respect,

Most dreadful Sir, Your most confounded and most humble Servant JACK RETORT.

PREFACE.
IT is generally expected from an Author, that he should preface his
Performance, in order to acquaint his Readers with the Nature of the Work they
are about to enter upon, and his Motive for writing. These may be easily
collected from the Title Page, and the following Prologue of Fielding's, which
I give the Reader as it is adapted to my Purpose, and as I doubt not but he
will be far better pleased to have some good Poetry of that Author's, than any
Thing I can furnish.

PROLOGUE to the Coffee-House Politician, or the JUSTICE caught in his own TRAP.
IN ancient Greece, the infant Muse's School,
Where Vice first felt the Pen of Ridicule,
With honest Freedom and impartial Blows,
The Muse attacked each Vice as it arose:
No Grandeur could the mighty Villain screen
From the just Satyr of the comic Scene:
No Titles could the daring Poet cool,
Nor save the great- great honorable Fool.
They spared not even the Aggressor's Name,
And public Villainy felt public Shame.
Long has this generous Method been disused,
For Vice has grown too great to be abused;
By Power defended from the piercing Dart,
It reigns and triumphs in the Judge's Heart,
While Beaux, and Cits, and Squires, our Scenes afford,
Justice preserves the Rogues who wield her Sword;
All Satyr against her Tribunal's quashed,
Nor lash the Bards, for fear of being lashed.
But the heroic Muse who sings to Night,
Through these neglected Tracks attempts her Flight:
Vice clothed with Power, she combats with her Pen,
And fearless, dares the LION in his Den.
Then only Reverence to Power is due,
When public Welfare is its only View:
But when the Champions, whom the Public arm
For their own Good with Power, attempt their Harm,
He sure must meet the general Applause,
Who against those Traitors fights the public Cause.
And while these Scenes the conscious Knave displease,
Who feels within the Criminal he sees,
The incorrupt and good must smile, to find
No Mark for Satyr in his generous Mind.
As to any other Motive I had in writing, I can with Truth assure my Reader,
that I should not have thought of putting Pen to Paper on this Subject, after
perusing what Mr. H -- published in Answer to Part of the Observations on his
Advertisement, had I not been stimulated thereto by the Appearance of a Print
published by the Pr -- ry Party a few Days after, with a View of blackening the
Reputations of some of the most valuable Men in the Community.

When I was credibly informed, that the chief Magistrate of Quilsylvania was
principally instrumental in obtaining that extraordinary Production, and that
he even gave the Author a considerable Sum of Money to enable him to bring his
Performance into the World, though that very Author was well known to have
frequently lampoon'd him and his Adherents, I could not but promise myself,
that should I likewise be able to succeed in lashing them severely, he might
also think it proper to buy me over to his Party, and afford me that
Encouragement and Assistance which are so necessary to a young Author of
slender Fortune.

When I first formed the Resolution of attacking the Ch -- f and his Party, it
was my Purpose to endeavor to use the Weapons of delicate Satire and Ridicule;
but upon considering the Nature of the Bodies I was about to assault, I was
soon convinced that I might as well attempt to penetrate into the Heart of a
Butcher's Block with a Razor. -- Besides, as those incomparable Masters, whom I
have taken for my Pattern; have so well succeeded by the Use of the Cleaver
alone, it would be very imprudent in me were I to make my first Attempt with
any other Weapon.

A FULL ANSWER, etc.
-- Pudet haec Opprobria nobis
Et dici potuisse, et non potuisse refelli.
Ovid. To hear an open Slander, is a Curse,
But not to find an Answer is a worse.
Dryden. What Is Sauce for the Gander is good for the Goose.

D. J. Dove altered.
IT seems then, that not one Man can be found among the whole Pr -- ry Faction,
who will appear openly, and acknowledge himself the Author of the Answer to Mr.
F's Remarks, or even undertake to support the Facts therein alleged. From the
Proofs they had repeatedly given of what, for the Sake of murdering
Reputations, they could do, it was the general received Opinion, that there was
nothing in their Power, which might have a Chance of contributing to that End,
but what some of them would do. But we were it seems mistaken, and it is a
Piece of Justice due to them that we should confess it to the Public. Neither
the great Giant himself, nor even any of his Vassals of the Col -- ge or Cor --
n, are yet so lost to all Sense of Shame as publicly to avow a Performance of
so vile and infamous a Nature. It is extraordinary, but as it is true, they
ought to have Credit for so much unexpected Goodness.

BUT how has the Goliath of the Philistines extricated himself from the
Challenge of little David? Alas, in a manner very unbecoming so great a Giant!
When neither Threats or Entreaties could prevail on a single Son of Sedition to
stand forth in his Behalf, and front the Danger, he meanly condescends to act
the Part of a Quack-Doctor!

BEHOLD, a Jack-Pudding or Merry-Andrew is provided! -- He mounts the Stage,
properly accoutred in his Mask and Fool's- Cap; jumps -- dances -- capers --
jingles his Bells -- laughs -- grins -- and chatters like a Monkey -- when he
has climbed so high as to show his naked Posteriors: Sometimes we see him
lolling out his Tongue and making game at the gaping Multitude, and sometimes
doing the like at the very worthy Doctor himself; who, poor Soul, being busily
employed in dispensing the Papers and Pacquets of poisonous Drugs which he had
got prepared for the Purpose, is not the least sensible of the ridiculous
Figure he makes.

WITH your Leave, Gentle Reader, we will open one of these Papers, examine its
Contents, and analyze the Composition.

WE find then, in the first Place, that Mr. H -- s, for very substantial
Reasons, is supposed not to be the Author of his Challenge. What those
substantial Reasons may be, we are, however left to guess till we come to the
last Paragraph, where it is intimated, that he is not capable of writing an
Advertisement. Suppose this to be really the Case (which, by the Bye, no one
the least acquainted with Mr. H -- s will admit) pray, is it the less his
Challenge on that Account? Does not his publishing it with his Name affixed,
make it as much his Challenge as if he penned or indicted every Syllable? Is not
the famous, or rather infamous, Protest, considered as the Protest of Mr. A --
n and the other Subscribers, though it is well known to be drawn up by the pitiful
This conceited Coxcomb had the Impertinence, in speaking of Mr. F -- n in the
House, to say that he really "PITIED the poor Man!"
Mr. D -- n, revised, corrected and amended by the Rev.
Sentiment-dresser-General of the Pr -- ry Party? -- And, after all, why is Mr.
H -- s to be supposed not capable of writing an Advertisement? Surely it cannot
be said that any extraordinary Genius or Abilities are necessary for such a
Purpose, since we have, in the very News-paper containing Mr. H -- s Challenge,
an Advertisement wrote by Messrs. Al -- n and T -- er. These respectable
Gentlemen, it seems, being about to leave off their Business of Boiling and
Baking, have advertised for Sale the Pots, Pans, and other Utensils belonging
to their Trade. As it is become so fashionable with the Pr -- ry Faction, to
estimate a Man's present Fitness for public Affairs, by what may have been his
former Occupation, I would humbly recommend to those Dablers in Politics, the
learned Doctors of the C -- ge, to ascertain whether a Baker of Bread is not as
likely to make a good Politician as a Baker of Sugar: And when their Hands are
in, I wish they would likewise settle to which the Preference ought to be given
in Point of "Rank" -- Whether to the Man who furnishes us with a Necessary of
Life, or he that procures us a Luxury? The Case is indeed intricate, and will
require a deal of Consideration, but I trust those Sages are equal to the Task.


IF therefore Mr. H -- s is really not capable of wording an Advertisement, and
is ambitious of acquiring that very profound Knowledge, he has now the happiest
Opportunity that could possibly have offered. Let him resolve but to take
Pattern by the learned Messrs. Al -- n and Tu -- er (...) and he will find that
he has little more to do than to provide himself with a large Quantity of WITHS
to tie his Words and Sentences together: The rest will follow easy enough. For
Example, TO BE SOLD, the Copper Boilers, Copper Coolers and Pans -- with a
large Number of Moulds and Drips -- with every other Material ready for
carrying on the Business; -- together with the Still-House -- with the Worms
and Tubs -- with a large Shed, etc.

EVERY Author has his Admirers, and it is not improbable but there may be, among
Messrs. Al -- n and T -- r's Readers, some who will fancy they see great
Beauties in their Performance; nor should it be wondered at, if some Academical
Haberdashers of Nouns and Pronouns, should undertake to convince us, that so
much Clearness and classical Elegance of Style, never before entered into a
Composition of so trivial a Nature.

We are told, among other Things offered by Way of Excuse for the Author of the
Answer not avowing his Performance, that the subscribing political Papers has
not been a common Practice either here or in the Mother Country, nor would it
be a convenient One. -- What the common Practice in the Mother Country may be,
with regard to political Papers, I can say nothing of my own Knowledge, as I
never was there. But I look upon the Paper in question to be not so much a
political as a personal Paper: Far the greatest Part of it consists of personal
Reflections against Mr. F -- n. Now, I am told by those who have resided in
England, that it is very uncommon there to attack in Print a Person's private
Character on account of any Difference in Sentiments about public Affairs; and
that Wilkes and Churchill are almost the only Dealers in that dirty Business
who have appeared there for many Years. The first of these we find, has on that
Account been outlawed by King, Lords, and Commons; and the second held in
Detestation by every good Man throughout the King's Dominions. Nor can I find
that the Practice was ever introduced into this Country, till the very Revd.
Dr. S -- h made his Appearance, and we all know what great Veneration and
Esteem he has thereby acquired. -- It is therefore not to be wondered at, if
Persons of their Stamp should not think it convenient to be known to the
Public.

But the Cause of Liberty (we are told) would often be left to suffer, if her
Advocates were obliged to expose their Names to the Clamor of Party or the
Resentment of Power. In so glorious a Cause as that of Liberty, no Man ought to
be afraid to stand forth. Those who have rendered it the greatest Services have
ever been such as most openly appeared in its Behalf. But why should our
Author, of all Men, be afraid of the Clamor of Party, or the "Resentment of
Power," since, according to his own Account, five Sixths of the People of this
Province who have seen his Answer have decided in its Favor, and since he is
assured of having most of the Officers in the Executive Part of Government on
his Side? -- For they that hold Commissions must not dare, it seems, to act
otherwise than as they are directed.

IT is said, however, that almost all Mr. F's political Pieces have appeared
without a Name, such as, his Preface to Mr. G -- y's Speech, his Cool Thoughts,
his Narrative, his Historical Review, and many more, in which he has taken
great Freedom with the Characters of others. But, to have shown that Mr. F --
n's Conduct was similar to our Author's, he should have (...) an Instance of
that Gentleman's having published an anonymous Answer to some Piece that had
been published with the Writer's Name subscribed, and had therein attacked the
said Writer's private Character. As to the Pieces mentioned, they are very far
from proving any Thing to the Point.

HIS Preface is an anonymous Answer to Parson Pe -- rs's, Parson S -- th's,
Parson Al -- on's, and Parson Ew -- n's anonymous Preface to what was called
Mr. Dic -- n's Speech. Yet though he was greatly reflected upon in their Preface,
he has but just named the first as it were, and of the second all that he has
said, which is any Ways personal, is, " S -- h that Poisoner of other Men's
Characters." And, when it is considered how long Mr. F -- n had patiently borne
with that prostitute Writer's Attack on his Character, it is surprising he let
him off so gently. The other two Rev. Assassins he has not so much as mentioned
in any Thing he has yet wrote.

HIS Cool Thoughts do not contain one single Thing relative to any Man's
Character in the Province, but is a mere Answer to such Objections as had been
made against a Royal Government.

HIS Narrative -- Is that too to be thrown in his Teeth! And can Pr -- ry
Partisans mention the Word NARRATIVE without Confusion! Does that contain the
minutest Reflection on any but those who have fixed an indelible Stain on their
Country, their Religion, on Humanity itself? -- the horrid Murderers of
innocent Men, Women, and Babes, who were at the very Time under their
Protection! Was it not expressly wrote to spirit up the People to defend the G
-- r, who was insulted and threatened, and to strengthen the Powers of
Government which were despised and trampled upon? Was it not highly approved of
by the G -- r, Mr. H -- n, the At -- y Gen -- I, Mr. Pe -- rs, and every Pr --
ry Minion in the Province? Did not even the haughty Pr -- r himself deign to
praise it, and commend Mr. F -- n's Conduct on the Occasion to his Friends in
England? Nay, did not the rancorous great Giant for once check the Overflowing
of his Gall, and vent a Grunt of Approbation? Did not his Letters from England
greatly condemn the Conduct of the Rioters and their Abettors? And, after he
returned, did he not daily bellow out in the Coffee-House the Necessity there
was, for the Honor of the Province, to bring those Murderers to Justice, till
it was hinted to him that he had best be silent or he would endanger his
Election? Did not the G -- r in a manner throw himself upon Mr. F -- n and his
Friends for Protection; and did not they extricate him from all his
Difficulties -- even at the Risque of their Lives? Did not the G -- r
acknowledge himself under great Obligations to them on this Account? But -- O
shameful! -- Was there not within two Days after a Union formed with those very
Murderers, and their Abettors, against the very Persons who had shown
themselves His H -- r's Friends in the Time of Danger? And, lastly, was not
this very extraordinary Conduct, and the afterward insisting on the best of
the Pr -- ry's Land being taxed no higher than the worst of the People's, the
principal Causes of a Majority of the Freeholders, and their Representatives,
determining on a Change of Government? Let them deny any one of this String of
Queries, if they dare. Should they be so hardy, another Narrative shall appear,
that shall probe their Consciences to the very Quick, even though they may be
seared with a hot Iron.

THERE remains then on the List, only, "His Historical Review" as it is called;
but as I am well assured from good Authority, that he did not compile that
Work, and as it is little more than a mete Relation of the public Conduct of
the several Branches of our Legislature, there is nothing farther necessary to
be said on that Head. -- And as to the "many more" of his political Pieces,
which our Author has not named, he is defied to produce one wherein Mr. F -- n
begun an Attack on any Man's Reputation. If in any he has taken great Freedom
with the Characters of others, it is only where he has been drove to it in his
own Defense, and after he had passed by so many villainous Aspersions of his
Character, as to induce his Calumniators to think they might continue to abuse
him with Impunity.

MR. F -- n's Friends are next asked, Why they will insist upon a Practice so
different from his own, and even make it a Condition on which alone they will
make a Reply? They do not, as appears from what is already said, insist upon
any Practice different from his own; all they ask, and in which every honest
Man will think them right, is* that his Adversaries will act in the same open
Manner he has done, and subscribe their Names to their Performance. -- Even his
anonymous Pieces were so far from being disowned by him, that he always, upon
being asked, acknowledged he was the Author. But of all the Shoal of anonymous
Prop -- ry Papers which have appeared during our Contests, there cannot be
found a Man that will own one of them; on the contrary, the greatest Care and
Pains is taken to conceal the Names of their several Writers.

FROM whence they have gathered, that Mr. F -- n's Friends make it a Condition
on which alone they will make a Reply, I am at a Loss to guess. No Words in Mr.
H -- s's Advertisement imply any thing of the kind. It is there said, that if
they will avow their Performance, in such Case, there shall be a Reply
published with the Writer's Name affixed. But surely this is not to be
construed to mean that, if they don't avow it, there will then be no Reply
made, either anonymous or otherwise. If you really, Gentlemen, do imagine that
this was the Intention of either Mr. H -- s, or any other of Mr. F -- n's
Friends, you flatter yourselves egregiously. They were determined, from the
first, to detect and expose what was false in the Answer to the Remarks, but
then they wanted also to detect and expose the Author of those Falsities, and
thereby prevent his imposing on the Public in future; which could not be done
without he could be made to appear. For this Purpose, and to show his Regard
for an absent Friend, Mr. H -- s published his Challenge; but, to do you
Justice, you have had the Address to discover the Plot, and have therefore
prudently declined entering the Lists.

SINCE Matters are thus circumstanced, and you are determined, like your
Brother Savages of the Ohio, to keep to your Bush-Fighting, we must engage you
in the same Manner. A prudent Officer will always adapt his Operations to the
Nature of his Enemy, and attack them in their own Way. -- By this Conduct
Boquet conquered; by the contrary Braddock was defeated.

AS to myself, I am but young and inexperienced in waging Wordy-War, this being
the first Campaign I ever served; yet have I Spirit enough to attack the great
Giant himself in his Castle, notwithstanding all his Blunderbusses. But should
I not succeed in my Attempt, there is a hardy Band of Veterans, all sure
Marksmen, and long enured to Service, who intend soon to charge their
Rifle-barrel'd Quills, and make one general Assault on the Giant and all his
Adherents. A Body of light Infantry, all Volunteers of undaunted Courage, have
already entered into the Service, and have undertaken to skirmish with the
Enemy's Flankers and advanced Guards, and occasionally attack some of their
Out-Posts.

HOWEVER, setting aside the "blundering Simplicity" of our Author, who styles
Mr. H -- s a " Welsh Squire," though he was born in Pennsylvania, I shall proceed
to the next Sentence, which is indeed a curious One. It is there said, that Mr.
H -- s by calling for a Gentleman of Character to enter the Lists with him, is
made to pay himself the Compliment of being a Gentleman of Character, and to
allow Mr. A -- n to be the same, though the Author of the Remarks had asserted
the direct contrary. On this I would just observe, that if Mr. H -- s did
really call Mr. A -- n a Gentleman of Character, he then certainly might call
himself so, without incurring the Imputation of paying himself a Compliment.
But as he really did not make use of that Appellation to Mr. A -- n, he stands
totally clear of the Charge. His Words are, if Mr. A -- n, OR any Gentleman of
Character. Here is a very plain Distinction made by him, and it is evident he
could not intend to compliment Mr. A -- n with that Title; for, if he had, he
would have said, or any other Gentleman of Character, etc. -- The Author of the
Remarks likewise stands as clear of the Charge of having asserted that Mr. A --
n was not a Gentleman of Character, for he has asserted no such Thing. It must,
however, be allowed, that he pointed out some Parts of Mr. A -- n's Conduct
which prove he has not always acted up to the Character of a Gentleman.

WE are next told, that the greatest Part of the Charges in the Answer are
taken from the Protest, which has been signed not only by Mr. A -- n, but nine
other Gentlemen of undisputed Character, and therefore any further Signing
would have been unnecessary. This also is a gross Misrepresentation; for scarce
a Tenth Part of the Charges are taken from the Protest. A considerable Number
of them were not even then invented. Those contained in the Protest were fully
refuted by the Remarks, not only to the Satisfaction of every Man of Candor,
but even of some of the Protesters themselves. However, I shall leave that
Matter to be properly represented in the Reply; and only just remark here, that
I cannot see with what Propriety, Men, who have publicly asserted, what some
of them knew at the Time to be absolutely false, and others of them knew
nothing at all about, merely to blast the Reputation of a Fellow Citizen who
never did one of them the least Injury, can be said to be Gentlemen of
undisputed Character.

Those Rogues, who understand Things least,
Are still the fiercest in Contest;
Unsight, unseen, espouse a Side
At Random, like a Prince's Bride,
To damn their Souls, and swear and lie for,
And at a Venture live and die for.
Butler. I have, however, so much Charity as to believe that several of the
Protesters are now so ashamed of the scandalous Part they have acted, that they
would refuse to do the like again, even though directed by Mr. A -- n, and
threatened with the Loss of their Commissions. It is but Justice too that I
should mention my having heard that one of them has declared, "He almost wished
his Hand had been cut off before he signed the Protest, but that he was
prevailed upon to do it against his Judgment."

AND when Mr. A -- n himself was interrogated concerning the Reason of his
Conduct on the Occasion. He answered, that he was hurried into it, having
scarce Time to read the Paper over; for that he received it while he was at
Dinner at New Castle, with a Letter from Philadelphia, purporting, "That if he
did not sign it first none of the rest would, and that there would likewise be
Danger of some of their Country Members not joining them at a future Sessions,
unless they could carry down with them some specious Reasons to justify their
Conduct to their Constituents, which Purpose would be best answered by
publishing the said Protest with their Names subscribed." But, unluckily for
the Gentleman's Veracity, it has since come out, that he did read it over
several Times, showed it to Mr. C -- w, and desired his Opinion of it. Mr. C --
w read it accordingly, and advised Mr. A -- n in Words to this Effect: "By no
Means put your Name to it -- it is a vey foolish Affair -- can be of no Service
to our Cause -- and if you sign it you may depend that Mr. F -- n will expose
you in such a Manner as to make you repent it as long as you live." Sign it,
however, he did, and gloried in it till the Remarks appeared. When they came
out, he was in a terrible Trepidation indeed. "Wha-wha-wha-What* (says he to
one of his Acquaintance) can make Mr. F -- n use me in this Manner -- He-he-he
seems angry! Bla-bla-bla-Bless me, I never dreamt he would have ta-ta-ta-taken
it so ill, or I should not have signed it -- I don't know that I ever
spo-spo-spoke a disrespectful Word of him in my Life -- I always thought him a
Ma-ma-Man of Integrity and a Ma-ma-Man of Abilities, though I did not like his
Po-po-po-Politicks."

HOW very little disrespectful he has talked of Mr. F -- n let those testify
who have had the Honor of being in his Company at any Time within the last
seven Years. I can call on some of them who can vouch, that he has not only
scandalously traduced that Gentleman's Character in England and America, but
even meanly attempted to blast the Reputation of his Son, because the Father
and himself differed in their Political Sentiments. Though the Son has neither
directly or indirectly interfered in our Disputes since his Return from
England, has treated all those of the Pr -- ry Party, who have fallen in his
Way, with as much Civility as he has done those of the other, yet has this
venomous Slanderer continually aspersed his Character, and even had the
Villainy to accuse him of a Transaction that every Man in the Government where
he resides knows to be totally FALSE. Not contented, however, with thus
villifying him in private, he has had the Baseness to employ those Miscreants S
-- th, Ew-n and D-ve, to give him a Spattering of their Hog Wash in almost all
their execrable Performances! -- But this is not the only Instance which can be
produced of his carrying his Malice and Resentment to the Children of those who
have occasionally disobliged him.

THAT he who is so linked with the Prop -- r, and has had, with his
Brother-in-law, the almost sole Disposition of Offices in this Province for a
considerable Number of Years, should be strenuous in opposing a King's
Government, is not to be wondered at; nor should we blame him greatly, or any
others possessed of Offices under the Pro -- r, for their Struggle on this
Occasion, provided they behaved decently; and did not, for the Sake of
succeeding in their Schemes, attack the good Names of those who are of a
different Opinion with themselves. This is what no Men, who deserve good Names,
can always have such Command over themselves as not to resent; nor can it be
thought to be wrong, by him who has any Feelings, if at some Time or other they
take that Revenge which may be in their Power.

AS to Mr. F -- n's POLITICS, which Mr. A -- n has such an Aversion to, let the
Messages on the Minutes of Assembly, and his other political Writings declare.
They will there be found to be such as must do him Honor with all Lovers of
Liberty and Justice, as long as Liberty and Justice are held in any Repute.

TO proceed, Mr. H -- s ('it is said) knew he trod on safe Ground, by calling on
Mr. A -- n particularly in this Affair, as he well knew that Mr. A -- n would
not choose to enter the Lists with such an Antagonist as had yet appeared. But,
pray, Mr. Author, who was the Antagonist that Mr. H -- s knew had appeared?
However, as I conceive your Meaning, I shall not differ with you about Words. I
should nevertheless, be glad to be informed why Mr. H -- s is not a proper
Antagonist for Mr. A -- n.

IS it on Account of Family? ANNOTATION, by Scriblerus, personating D. J. D-ve.

Some of our wiser and better Sort of People, since they have acquired Offices
and Property, are very apt to talk of Family; though the GRAND-DAM of HONOR to
some of our Honourables sold Pins in a Shed on London Bridge, and their DAM of
HONOR was Daughter to the Apothecary in Romeo and Juliet: And though the
GRAND-DAM of HONOR to another of our Honourables, was a Fish-Woman at
Billingsgate, (from whence the Love of Fish, Oysters, Clams and Bawdry, have
descended to her Posterity) and his DAM of HONOR was a Wapping Landlady, who
afterward rose to be a Huckstering Salt-seller in Quilsylvania, where many now
alive remember to have seen her sitting on a Bushel, in the open Street,
selling Salt. -- But it must, however, be acknowledged, that being ambitious of
mending the Breed, he chose for a DAM to his BRATS, Marget the Daughter of a
Convict Servant.

"This you get Booby Squirt,
"Because you would chatter:
"Since you're for flinging Dirt,
"We'll try who best can spatter-Booby Squirt!"
-- Beg. Opera, altered.
If that be the Case, I must tell them, that Mr. H -- s's Grandfather brought
Money with him into this Country; Part of which he laid out in Land that Mr. H
-- s now possesses. Mr. A -- n will therefore excuse my drawing the Parallel
between them in this Instance.

IS it on Account of Fortune? -- Mr. A -- n is to be sure, by a lucky
Concurrence of Circumstances, by Pr -- ry Favor in Land Purchases, by illicit
Trade, and by -- what may be mentioned another Time, possessed of a large
Estate. -- As to Mr. H -- s, his Father left him a handsome Fortune, to which
he has made a considerable Addition by his honest Industry and good Management.
It is true that his Estate is not so great as Mr. A -- n's, but it is
nevertheless such as puts him upon a Footing with any Man in the Province.

IS it on Account of Rank? -- Mr. A -- n is a Member of Assembly brought in by
Pr -- ry Interest for an inconsiderable distant County. -- Mr. H -- s is
likewise a Member of Assembly; but brought in, for a Number of Years past, by a
considerable Majority of the most wealthy and independent Freeholders of the
most wealthy County in the Province, without the least Solicitation on his
Part, and without Bribery, Corruption, Threats, Promises, or Perjury. -- But is
not Mr. A -- n a C -- f J -- ce? True; but he is a Pr -- ry C -- f J -- ce,
during Pr -- ry Will and Pleasure; and holds his Office on such Terms as make
it much to be doubted, Whether there is more than one Man besides in the
Province who would accept the Commission if it was vacant.

IS it on Account of Abilities? -- Some of Mr. A -- n's Friends may perhaps say
of him, as Sancho said of his Master Don Quixote, in Speeching and
Understanding he knows a Point more than the Devil himself. It must be
confessed, that when he shuts his Eyes, strains hard, and makes the Tobacco
foam at his Mouth, he does sputter out some very extraordinary Sentiments
indeed! But powerful as he is, even those very Friends acknowledge that he was
no ways a Match for Mr. H -- s, in the Debates at the last Sessions; on the
contrary, that the latter answered and refuted every Thing that was advanced by
the other, so that he could not succeed in any one Point he undertook to carry
for the Pr -- r, nor even make a single Convert to his Party. -- Our Author,
therefore, if he had understood his Business, would, instead of depreciating,
have magnified Mr. H -- s's Abilities, that the Defeat his Patron and Employer
suffered might appear the less disgraceful.

IS it on Account of Loyalty? -- Mr. H -- s has ever since he has been in the
Assembly, constantly promoted the King's Service, even when Pr -- ry Power for
Pr -- ry Interest has opposed it: He has been generally one of the
Commissioners appointed by G -- r and Assembly for disposing of the Money
granted to the Crown: He has, in order to free us from Pr -- ry Bondage openly
appeared in Behalf of a Royal Government: His Majesty's Picture has a Place in
his Parlour, and as the old Song has it, He drinks the King's Health as often as
he dines. But for Mr. A -- n, he has openly opposed a King's Government, has in
Time of War supplied the King's Enemies with Military Stores, told us
repeatedly, That we should find the King's little Finger heavier than the Pr --
r's whole Loins, and told us -- something still worse of His Majesty, if
possible, for which I must beg the Reader's Patience till the Reply appears:
Instead of the King's Health, Success to the Minority (who oppose the King's
Measures in England) is his standing Toast; and, instead of the King's Picture,
he has hung up the Portrait of JOHN WILKES! -- the most vile Calumniator of
Majesty that has ever yet appeared! -- a Man so very abandoned and profligate,
that the greatest Part of the very Minority whose Tool he was held him in
Abhorrence!

If then Mr. A -- n has no greater Advantages over Mr. H -- s, in Point of
Family, Fortune, Rank, Abilities, and Loyalty, than what are mentioned, I
should be glad to be informed, on what Account it is that Mr. A -- n will not
enter the Lists with such an Antagonist. When the true Reason appears, I make
no doubt but that it will be found neither more or less than this, That he was
afraid of being as shamefully defeated in Writing as he had been before in
Speaking.

Our Author next tells us, that Mr. A -- n neither was, nor could be supposed,
the Author of a Performance in which so much is said to his own Advantage, and
that his Modesty and Sense would at least have prevented this. But as his
possessing those two Qualities was not a Matter of public Notoriety, the
Supposition, if there was any such, is at least excuseable: And what makes it
the more so is, that, among the numerous People to whom he harangued by the
Hour, there are but few who will not acknowledge that his own Praise was the
Subject of a considerable Part of his Discourse. In Truth, however, he was not,
nor could not, for "very substantial Reasons" be supposed the Author of the
Answer to the Remarks: But as he was known to have furnished most of the
Materials for the " Calumny Part," and to have sent the Piece when published,
to all his Acquaintance abroad, recommending it as a very fine Performance,
containing a just Account of Mr. F -- n's Conduct; it was but reasonable to
imagine, that he would be either weak or wicked enough to own himself the
Author, or at least undertake to justify the Contents. This too was the rather
to be expected, as he had given us a recent Instance of his assuming to himself
even what he had no hand in; namely, the Putting off the Stamp-Duty; as plainly
appears by a Letter from Mr. Husk, Member of Parliament, which was signed with
his Name, and published in all the Newspapers on the Continent except those of
Quilsylvania; and why it was not published there needs not to be explained. So
far it seems was he from contributing thereto, that it was the "blundering
Simplicity" of our Quilsylvanian "Squire," which made the Ministry more
determined in that Matter than they otherwise would have been. Such a Man as
this had needs be, as our Author says, not so destitute of Friends as to be
under a Necessity of advocating his own Cause: For where a Cause requires such
a deal of advocating, it would be a cruel Necessity indeed if one so little
capable was obliged to perform the Whole. The Herculean Labor of cleansing the
Augean Stable was not an Undertaking of half such Difficulty.

WHEN these same Friends, or rather Creatures, will accomplish their Work it is
hard to say; for though they have been a long while industriously employed in
whitewashing their Cause; yet they think it still so very dirty, that they are
ashamed to be known to have had any hand in the Business. -- It is, hovever, a
little surprising that notwithstanding they labor so hard for their Employer,
he should keep them so scanty both of Victuals and Money as to oblige them to
give him such shrewd Hints of their wanting to have a little "Eating in the
Case" even though it were but a few "Pies and Cakes." But lest he might suspect
they only wanted Money to lay out on Betty Nic-be-ravished, a celebrated
Pummel-holder on the Germantown Road, they assure him in some very bad Rhyme,
that Indeed they "had much rather eat
"Than spend their Money on a BET."


-- And they might have added, poor Souls! if the learned Doctors of the
College had no material Objection to furnishing a good Rhyme, and the pitiful
Master D -- n would promise not to take Offense; We "Authors had much rather
eat"
Than run the Risque of being beat.


IT is diverting to hear one of these " poor Authors" (as they justly style
themselves when they speak of their Authorship) talk of the Danger of being
"frightened out "of his WITS," and yet discover to his Readers that he has not
even the Wit to know the Difference between leaving a Matter to Arbitration,
and laying a Wager. Alas, poor Devil! even your Employer has Wit enough to
know, and could have informed you, that every Man in his Wits, who has any
Dispute with the Prop -- rs about Property, chooses, though he may have the Law
ever so clear of his Side, rather to leave the Matter to Arbitration, where he
has " Half a Chance of a favorable Decree," than run the Risque of a Decision
from a Pr -- ry C -- f-J -- ce.

BUT the true Reason for this Jack-Pudding's terming Mr. H -- s's Proposal a
Wager, was, I imagine, that he might take that Opportunity of sneering at and
ridiculing his Master, as he had done before in what he said about his "Modesty
and Sense." This seems plain from his very Words, viz. I have heard a noisy
Fellow in a Coffee House, after every other Argument failed, offer (Reason or
not Reason) to lay Two to One he was right. Now I appeal to every Frequenter of
the Coffee-House, and even to those who sit in another House, whether our
illustrious Chief has not been more distinguished for that Practice than any
other Person they know, and whether the Description above quoted is not
strictly applicable in all its Parts to his Worship's Honor.

Mr. H -- s's Motives for proposing a Reference, were noble, generous,
disinterested, and such as must ever do him Honor, with every Man whose good
Opinion is valuable. They were to put a Stop to any further Altercation with
Regard to the Character of his absent Friend, and to prevent the Public from
being any longer imposed on by false Representations. He offered for that
Purpose to leave the Points in Dispute to the Decision of Gentlemen from any of
the neighboring Provinces, as they might be supposed the most unbiassed and
impartial. And, that the Public might receive some Benefit in whatever manner
the Affair might issue, he further offered to pay Ten Pounds to the Provincial
Hospital, for every Fact mentioned in the Answer to the Remarks injurious to
Mr. F -- n's Character, which should be proved to the Satisfaction of those
Gentlemen; provided the opposite Party would pay Five Pounds for every
Falsehood, or gross Misrepresentation their said Answer should be proved to
contain. This was acting openly, like a Man of Honor engaged in a Cause which
his Conscience approved: He had no Inclinations to have his Friend's true
Character concealed from the World: He desired, for the Sake of the Public,
that it might undergo a strict Scrutiny, and that if Mr. F -- n was the wicked
Man he had been represented, he might be recorded as such. This Proposal,
however, was not accepted: But every Person must be convinced, that if the
Party could have supported one Half of the Charges brought against Mr. F -- n,
they would not have omitted such an Opportunity of destroying his Reputation:
For every one, the least conversant with our Affairs, knows that the Ruin of
that Gentleman's Character is the grand Point they have in View, as they hope
thereby to destroy the Confidence so long placed in him by the Public -- a
Confidence that has so greatly contributed to baffle the repeated Attempts to
render us Slaves to Pr -- ry Will and Pleasure. -- If what they have alleged
against Mr. F -- n be Truths, they are Truths of Importance to this Country,
especially at this Crisis; and no Man, if he had really the Good of his Country
at Heart, would be ashamed or afraid to support them publicly. But how
scandalous is the Part the Pr -- ry Faction have acted on the Occasion! They
even make the very Equity of the Proposal a Reason for not agreeing to it; for
(say they) that would be securing Mr. H -- s HALF A CHANCE of a favorable
Decree! -- Now can these Men expect to be deemed Gentlemen, or as having the
least Tincture of Honor, who will engage in a Cause they think so very bad,
that they cannot trust it to impartial Persons, because there will then be half
a Chance that it is not decided in their Favor? Nothing less, it seems, will
satisfy them than does their Master, the Pr -- r, who will not submit any Cause
of his to Judges here, unless he can command the Determination of a Majority.
-- Mr. H -- s had not any Objection to refer the Matter to Persons chosen in
Quilsylvania, but he imagined that it would be deemed fairest to leave it to
those who might be supposed to be entirely disinterested, and unbiassed by
Party. If, however, the Protesters are willing to leave it to Gentlemen of
their own Province, mutually chosen, I dare say, he has not the least
Objection, notwithstanding they say, Five Sixths of the People of this Province
who have seen the Answer to the Remarks seem already to have decided in its
Favor.

THAT Word seem is indeed cautiously chosen, but it cannot with Truth be
applied to any but P -- ry Minions; "five Sixths" of whom, it must be confessed
do seem, and only seem, to "decide in its Favor" -- because they dare not do
otherwise: But even among them there is not a single Man to be found who thinks
so favorably of it, as to show himself openly in its Behalf. As to other
Readers of the Answer in this Province, there is not even one in Five hundred
but what are so far from seeming to approve, that they publicly express their
Abhorrence of it and its Authors, and think they ought, if possible, to be
dragged into Light, and exposed to public Scorn.

THOSE Words "Five Sixths" may likewise serve well enough to amuse the Pr -- r
who lives at a Distance, and make him believe that though they did not succeed in
making a Change in the Assembly, (which the Party promised him they would, in
order to enable him to carry all his Points, and save him from the
Mortification of doing Justice to the People) yet that by their Writings and
Influence they had brought over a great Majority of the Inhabitants to their
Side. In this Manner they amused the G -- r when he was at N-w-C -- le, during
the last Sitting of Assembly. Letters were daily sent him by Mr. A -- n, to let
him know that Matters went on swimmingly in the House, that the Pr -- ry Party
there was increasing apace, and that he had not the least doubt but he should
have every Thing managed agreeable to his Wishes. [For who could withstand the
Force of so much Eloquence!] But alas, when Matters came to be put to the Vote,
he found that he was not even able to carry a single Point, or to make a single
Convert; but on the contrary, some of the very Members whom the Pr -- ry Party
had got chosen, were ashamed to appear in such a Cause, and therefore joined
the other Side. The Figure he made when he appeared before the G -- r at N-w-C
-- le with the dismal News of his ill Success, was even more woeful than that
of the Knight of the woeful Figure himself. -- In the same ridiculous Light
must he appear to the Pr -- rs; for they are not quite so devoid of
Understanding (whatever he may have reason to think of them) as to believe it
possible that so great a Majority of the House would have ventured to have
chosen Mr. F -- n to represent the Province in England, after so much had been
said and done to prevent it, if they were not assured of its being agreeable to
a great Majority of their Constituents.

MR. H -- s (proceeds our Author) tells us, or is made to tell us, that he
could not observe a Ruffian attempting to stab his Friend in the Dark, without
endeavoring to avert the Blow. On this I would beg Leave to remark, that though
it may, perhaps be proper enough for the learned Owls of the College to talk of
observing in the Dark, as they have been of late so much employed in Works of
Darkness, yet as Mr. H -- s does not pretend to be one of those favorite Birds
of Wisdom, so neither does he incline to deprive them of the Honor of their
own dark Observations. In truth he has not made use of such an Expression: All
that he is ambitious of, in conveying his Sentiments, is to (...) and speak
plain English, unornamented even by Hibernian Tropes and Figures;
notwithstanding what Butler alleges, That he, who is but able to express
No Sense at all in several Languages,
Will pass for learneder, than he, that is known
To speak the strongest Reason in his own.
The Sentence to which the above Quotation from our Author alludes, is this:
But as I am fully persuaded of the Truth of what he [Mr. F -- n] asserted in
the Remarks, That his Reputation is dearer to him than Life, I think it would
be as inconsistent with the Esteem and Friendship I have long professed for
him, were I to see his Character so insidiously and infamously attacked,
without my appearing in his Behalf, as it would be for me to observe a Ruffian
attempting to stab him in the Back, without my offering to avert the Blow. --
"Now it may be curious to observe, how" our Author, by altering, transposing,
and adding to the Words of the latter Part of this Sentence, without paying any
Regard to their Connection with the former Part, has, as he thinks, furnished
himself with an Opportunity of displaying an infinite deal of Wit and Humor.
This indeed is no uncommon Practice with Men of heavy Intellects, who having no
genuine Wit of their own, are obliged to study how to be witty. Thus have I
observed some of your second Rate Punsters, who not being able to start a Pun
off hand on Things as they occur in the Course of Conversation (without which
the best is scarcely tolerable) do therefore labor hard to force the Discourse
to such Subjects as may properly introduce the Puns they had previously
prepared in their Closets. And thus has our Author managed: Having furnished
himself with a Quantity of Stuff which he took to be good sound Wit, and being
determined to squirt it all at Mr. H -- s's Advertisement, he examines that
carefully over in order to find some Spot proper for its Reception, but not
being able to discover any, he falls immediately to work to make one; just as
some Curs strive hard to scratch a Hole in which they may discharge their
Excrement.

SO much, by Way of Simile, in Complaisance to our Author, who seems very fond
of the Business of Simile-making; and it is no Wonder that he should; for he has
a most surprising Skill in adapting them to his Subject. For Instance: After
supposing Mr. H -- s "to call out aloud to a masked Ruffian (whom he had
observed to come behind his Friend and give him a sound Drubbing) that if the
Villain would but show his Face, or tell his Name, he would grind him to
Powder," he tells us, that just so the renowned Don Quixote, meeting a few
Merchants, cried out, Let the whole World stand still, and if the whole World
will not confess, affirm, and swear, that the Empress Dulcinea (who by the Bye
was only a common Trollop) is the most beautiful Damsel in the World, I
challenge you all to Battle. Now as it may possibly happen, that some of my
Readers may be as stupid as I was upon the first Reading of this Passage, and
not comprehend the least Resemblance between Don Quixote's meeting a few
Merchants Face to Face, and Mr. H -- s's observing a masked Ruffian to come
behind his Friend, etc. I shall endeavor to give them such Lights into this
Matter as I have, by Dint of hard Study, or otherwise, been able to procure. I
suppose then the "few Merchants" are intended to allude to those of that
Profession among the Protesters, who, it must be acknowledged, did at first
show their Faces, and tell their Names; but, as they afterward put on their
Visors, and acted a base, assassinating Part, they then became masked Ruffians,
resembling the one Mr. H -- s observed to come behind his Friend. But what
Affinity there is between the DON's challenging the Merchants to Battle if they
did not confess that Dulcinea was the most beautiful Damsel in the World, and
Mr. H -- s's threatening the masked Ruffian that if he did confess his own Name,
or show his Face, he would grind him to Powder, is what I have not yet been
able to discover; and I am apprehensive, that if the "whole World was to stand
still" till Doom's-day in the Afternoon, the whole World would not even then
comprehend a Whit more of the Matter than myself. -- I was also for a long Time
puzzled to find the correspondent Part of the Simile belonging to "common
Trollop," when luckily for me, a worthy Friend suggested that it must certainly
be "sound Drubbing;" for that our Author having some Time ago taken it into his
Head to treat a virtuous young Woman at Frankford, as if she had been really a
common Trollop, she snatched up a Broomstick and gave him such a terrible
"sound Drubbing," that he has not since been able to separate the Ideas. How
this may be, I cannot say, but I think the Solution ingenious, and that it has
an Air of Probability.

BUT should our Author not have properly fitted the several Parts of his
Simile, great Allowance ought to be made for a Man who has been so long
observing in the Dark, that his very Understanding has become darkened. On this
Account I can readily excuse his saying, That as his Quarrel with Mr. H -- s's
Friend was of a public Nature, he would treat him accordingly; which, to be
sure, he has accordingly done by keeping himself private. The same
Consideration too prompts me to readily pass over several of his Grammatical
Errors without Censure, particularly where he tells us, that if any Person of
Character who is known to be capable of writing an Advertisement, will, to save
Trouble, mention what Part of the Answer stands in need of further Proof, THEY
will find the Satisfaction THEY desire. Besides I do not see any Reason why
learned Doctors and Professors in a College should be compelled to the
Observance of Grammar Rules: It is sufficient that they endeavor to teach them
to others. Persons who are really "capable of writing an Advertisement" would
merit our Censure, perhaps, were they not to write grammatically; but as our
learned Doctors and Professors cannot, with any Propriety, be included among
those, they are therefore very excuseable.

AS I profess myself to be a mere Imitator, I ought, according to the Example
of our Author, in the Paragraph before me, give you a long String of
Suppositions founded upon false Representations. But as I have not exhausted a
Hundredth Part of the Stock of Truths I am possessed of against him and his
Employers, I think I may be excused having Recourse to Falsities till the said
Stock is nearly expended. The following Suppositions therefore, must be
considered as having Truth for their Basis, and consequently so far deviating
from those of our Author. Suppose then, that some "dreadful Giant or Knight"
should, partly from the Malice and Envy of his Heart, and partly to oblige his
Superior the great HABERDASHER of Grace Church Street, determine to destroy the
Champion who guarded the Golden Fruit, called Rights and Privileges, belonging
to the People of Quilsylvania, which the said Haberdasher wanted to get into
his Possession. Suppose that the said Giant should for this Purpose take to his
Assistance eight or nine of the most wicked and obedient of his Vassals and
Attendants, and attack the Champion openly in the Highway, hoping that by their
united Strength they should totally overpower him. Suppose, however, that the
Champion should prove too hard for them all, and not only heartily belabour the
Knight's Ribs, but also give his Vassals and Attendants a "sound Drubbing."
Suppose then, that as they were afraid to venture to attack the Champion again,
and yet were determined on his Destruction, that the Haberdasher might be
gratified in his Desires, they should hire a Number of Bravos to assassinate
him. Suppose that those Bravos should likewise be afraid to engage the Champion
face to face, and should therefore take an Opportunity of coming behind his
Back, when he was so busily employed as not to have it in his Power to turn
upon them again, and then fire upon him from some Bushes where they lay
concealed. Suppose that a Friend of the Champion's, upon hearing the Report of
their Guns, should come up to his Assistance; but not being able to discover
where the Assassins were hid, should call upon them to come forth, and that he
would engage them in Behalf of his Friend. Suppose that instead of accepting
this Challenge, they should continue in their Lurking-Places, and from thence
also discharge a Volley at the Person who had acted so bravely and honorably.
Must we not then necessarily suppose them to be a Set of mean-spirited,
dastardly Wretches, who ought not only to be expelled the Community, but driven
from the Face of the Earth? -- "And now (as Bays says in the Rehearsal) pray,
Mr. Author, what becomes of YOUR Supposes?"

HAVING now done with our Author, and as I am not the least desirous of staying
longer in his Company than is necessary for his Chastisement, I shall dismiss
him with this Advice of Sancho's, viz. Let every Man take Care how he speaks or
writes of honest People, and not set down at a Venture the first Thing that
comes into his Jolterhead. -- But perhaps he may look upon me as an Enemy, and
not regard the Council, nor wholesome Correction, I have bestowed upon him. Let
me therefore recommend to his worthy Patron, if he has any Regard for his own
Credit, to take his "blundering Squire" aside, and lecture him as the renowned
Don Quixote did his Squire on a similar Occasion. Tell me, said the Knight,
thou modern Buffoon, and ancient Blockhead! Was it thy Province to dishonor
and affront a Person so worthy of Reverence and Respect. For the Love of God,
Sancho, set a Guard upon thy Tongue, and behave so as that the People may not
discover by the Thread, the coarse Country Web of which thou art woven:
Consider, Sinner as thou art, that the Master is respected in Proportion to the
Discretion and Good-Breeding of his Servants; and this is one of the great
Advantages which Noblemen have over People of inferior Rank: Do thou not
consider, thou Plague to thyself and Vexation to me! that if they perceive Thee
to be a base bred Clown or blundering Fool, they will take me for some cheating
Impostor or Knight of the Post: No, no, Sancho, shun and avoid those
Inconveniences; for, he who sets up for a Merry-Andrew, falls at the first
Stumble into a disgraced Buffoon: Bridle thy Tongue, therefore, consider and
ruminate well before the Words issue from thy Mouth.

AND now, tremendous Sir! having thus exhorted your Squire, be pleased to
accept of a little cordial Admonition for yourself: Part of which shall be
another Extract from the History of Don Quixote, a Work I am vastly pleased to
see quoted by your Squire, as it gives me an Opportunity (as I profess
Imitation) of quoting it likewise. It is indeed a favorite Book with me, and I
don't care how often in the Course of our Disputes I may be referred to a Work
of such infinite Wit and Humor. It contains besides a vast Fund of serious
Instruction, and I heartily advise you to endeavor to deserve the Character
which Sancho has given of that renowned Knight; My Master (says he) has Nothing
at all mischevious about him; on the contrary is as dull as a Beetle, and knows
not what it is to harm Man, Woman, or Child, or to harbor the least Malice,
but seeks to do good unto all Mankind: One of the Articles stipulated between
us was that I might talk as much as I pleased, provided it was not Scandal
against my Neighbor. -- Perhaps, Sir, you may think there will be no great
Obstacle to your acquiring the Beetle Part of the Character, as Nature has
already been so very assistant, and therefore conclude, that it is not worth
your while to attempt it, as no Merit would result to you should you succeed in
a Point of so little Difficulty: But then you should likewise consider, that in
attempting to deserve the other Parts of the Character, you will then have
Nature to combat with; and, consequently, should Success attend your
Endeavors, you will merit and obtain the Reward of a good Conscience! -- and
the sincere Applause of your Fellow-Citizens! Rewards (however light they may
appear in your present Estimation) that would afford you more true
heart-feeling Satisfaction, could you but once acquire them, than any you ever
yet experienced! -- or ever had any Idea of!

IT is, however, but equitable I should mention, that Sancho has grossly
misrepresented his Master with regard to his Understanding; and indeed Squires
are very apt to talk disrespectfully of their Knights behind their Backs, as is
well known to be the Practice of the One you at present employ. The Don was
really a Man of fine Sense and strict Honor, and, could you but imitate him in
these Respects, you would find that whatever Follies and Extravagancies you
might at Times commit, would only excite Laughter, or Pity, instead of that
Ridicule and Contempt you now suffer.

BUT, to be "serious," for the "Subject will admit" of it. -- Experience has, I
hope, by this Time, taught you the Truth of Plautus's Observation, Est
miserorum, ut malevolentes sint atque invideant bonis;
It is a miserable State to be malevolent and to envy good Men;
Therefore endeavor for the future to expel from your Heart the Seeds of Envy
and Malice, which produce you such frequent Crops of Bitterness: -- Learn, if
you can, that Golden Rule, Do unto others as you would they should do unto you:
-- Delight not in vilifying the good Name of your Neighbor: -- Consider that
no Enemy is so despicable but he may if provoked do you an Injury: -- Compel
your calumniating Scriblers to desist from further Attempts to blast the
Reputation* of worthy Men merely because they oppose your Measures, or because
they show they have Spirit enough to stand up in Behalf of their own
Characters, and those of their absent Friends, when attacked; for, you may
depend that you will otherwise raise the Indignation of every honest Man in the
Country, as no Man can say (if such Practices are not discouraged) but it may
be his Turn next; and you may likewise depend that it cannot answer your
Purpose of silencing your Opponents, but that, on the contrary, where your
Scriblers succeed in writing one Man down, they will at least write Two up: --
Remember Sancho's Proverbs, Like begets Like, and, He that plays at Bowls must
expect to meet with Rubbers: Avoid Politics altogether; for most certainly
neither God nor Nature ever intended you for a Politician! No more let loose
the Bloodhounds of Pr -- ry Power to hunt, run down, worry, and tear to Pieces
those who dare to oppose Oppression with Firmness: -- Oblige that Pack of
whiffling Curs, "Every Whiffler in a laced Coat, who frequents the
Coffee-House, shall talk of the Constitution!"

SWITT.
the Johnnys, Tommys, Billys, Sawneys, etc. with whom you are perpetually
surrounded, to confine their Yelpings within their Kennel the C -- n C -- l: --
Make them Ald -- en -- make them Ma -- rs -- you cannot make them Politicians
-- and, for your own Sake, make them no longer the Echoes of your Absurdities:
-- Attempt not to ridicule Men on account of their Trades and Professions, lest
you be told of your own Original, and of -- something still more disagreeable:
-- Weigh well those excellent Lines which Mr. H -- s has given you from Pope, A
Wit's a Feather, and a Chief's a Rod,
An honest Man's the noblest Work of God;
and do not give Occasion for the learned Commentators of succeeding Times to
suppose that the Chief the Author alluded to, must have been a certain Pr -- ry
C -- f J -- ce in America.

BUT, if Habit has rendered Calumny necessary to your Existence, feed only on
those private Family Peccadillos which it has been the Business of your Life to
procure from the Servants and Slaves throughout the City, and to dress up for
the Entertainment of yourself and Acquaintance. If those are not sufficient to
satisfy your and their Appetites, cement more closely the Union you have formed
with your new Associate D. J. D-ve: He will not only furnish you with that most
agreeable of all Foods to your Taste, but after it has found a Passage through
your Body, (or leaky Vessel, as your Party calls it) he will greedily devour
it, and, as soon as it is well digested, he will void it up for a Repast to the
Pr -- ry Faction: They will as eagerly swallow it as the other had done before,
and, when it has gone through their several Concoctions, they will discharge it
in your Presence, that you may once more regale on it, thus refined. -- "Just
so" (now for another Simile) acted the Man who kept a Number of Hogs: After he
had dined plentifully, and Nature was ready to perform her Functions, he tied
the Head of each of his Hogs to the Tail of another, except the foremost, an
old Boar, which he tied to his own Tail: Matters being thus prepared, he fed
the Boar with excrementitious Aliment, which, in due Time, passed through him,
and so through them all, till at length it became again fitted for their
Owner's Stomach.

BEING now about to conclude, I must therefore give you a "Sketch" of the
Character of the Hero of this Performance in Verse, extracted from some modern
Author, in Imitation of my Masters in the Art of Scurrility, who attempted the
same in the Conclusion of their Answer to Mr. F -- n's Remarks. But "that he
may not call it either "maiming or murdering, I shall give it in the Drawing"
of D -- d J -- s D-ve, to whom he sat for the Purpose, and to whom he gave a
handsome Reward for the great Skill he had shown in giving the Picture so
strong a Resemblance to the Original. Nay, so pleased was he with his own dear
Likeness, that he gave D-ve another Sum of Money to draw him in Thirteen (the
Baker's Dozen) different Attitudes, and to publish a Copper-Plate Print of them
all together, for Presents to his Friends in Town and Country. But, a Truce
with Similes.

Here comes the Bard and Blockhead, Side by Side,
Who rhym'd for Hire, and patronized for Pride.
Dunciad.
Thirteen Descriptions of the GREAT A. drawn from the Life by that celebrated
Master D -- d J -- s D-ve, Poet Laureat to the Pr -- ry Party.
I.
Illit'rate Dolt! whose muddy Pate contains,
Scandal and Lies, but not a Dram of Brains.
II.
Who can this Upstart's Insolence endure,
Whose Soul's as mean, and base, as Birth obscure!
But Nothing is so proud and vain as He
That is grown rich, from Want and Beggary.
III.
A Blustering Fool presents himself to View,
To his own Interest, and the Devil's true.
"They Are Rogues, and Rascals, Scoundrels, German Boors,
"Engregious Villains, perjured Sons of Whores,
"Who will not turn honest Franklin out of Doors.
"Rather than he should gain an Inch of Ground,
"I swear by -- I Will spend Three Thousand Pound."
IV.
Old Havanna upon the Stage appears,
Laden with Sins, with Money, and with Years,
See! the old Sharper! cooking up his Stum
With Sugar, with Water, with Brandy, with Cider, with Rum
For his unlawful Trade to the -- But Mum!
Of every Mixture vile, he makes a Trial,
What will not pass for Madeira will for Fyall.
If Wines adulterate his Coffers fill,
He values not how many they may kill.
Span'ards! beware, and with him deal no further,
Lest his Adultery should prove your Murder. --
Thrice happy Boys, whom Daddy loves so well,
To make ye rich, he is riding Post to H --
And you, sweet Youths! will follow his Example,
And under Foot, all Truth and Virtue trample.
V.
Make room! make room! for blund'ring Willy's GUTS
Mark his unmeaning Phiz, see how he struts!
Nature thy Wisdom's great, who have thought fit
To give him Wealth to cover Want of Wit.
VI.
Here comes old Drip-Pan famed for his Deceit,
Who in his Sugar never gave good Weight.
In him no Truth, no Honesty or Trust is,
His Rogu'ry unfits him for Ch -- f J -- ce.
VII.
A driv'ling Fool is now brought on the Stage,
Who, though in Years advanced is not of Age.
Had Busby oft'ner lashed this Blockhead's Breech
He might have taught him Spelling, and eight Parts of Speech;
But now alas! (so void is he of Sense,)
He knows not Grammar or his Accidence:
And all his little Reading at the School
Renders him only an accomplished Fool.
Go Hog! Go Home! and wallow in your Stye,
And undisturbed eat Tripe and Oyster-Pye.
VIII.
Here comes Will Epicure, that Kitchen Cot,
Whose Pride boils over, like a Porridge Pot,
Armed with Corinthian Brass for his Defense,
And more than treble Stock of Impudence.
His Lies and Falsehood well deserve Rebuke,
Although he really thinks himself a Duke.
And why may not Fortune sordid Earth refine,
And from a Dunghill drawn a Meteor shine?
Have you not often seen on Signpost high,
A chatt'ring Monkey look with scornful Eye,
On those of humane Shape, who passed him by?
'Till of his Hat and Doublet stripped; but then
The Jackanapes appeared a Jackanapes again.
IX.
View now the Man who feigns a PATRIOT's Life,
Yet fructified on a poor Negro's Wife.
The Fact most plain and flagrant now appears
That he had used her more than Twenty Years.
In youthful Days one Doxy would not do,
He kept in Pay both PEG and CHLOE too.
But when grown old (though she did beg and crave)
He sold her at Jamaica for a Slave:
And now alas! this quondam MAID of HONOR
Has none but Quaco got to lie upon her;
But had she staid, then would Mulatto SAM
Have learnt from his black Honorable DAM,
He Would sprung from Loins of Judge, and Soup of Clam.
But what does Will for Want of Chlo and Peg? --
He occupies the Velvet Widow Greg. --
All his Designs concenter in himself
For building Castles and amassing Pelf.
And can you then imagine, stupid Fools!
Whom he has wrought on to be Slaves and Tools,
That he the PUBLIC will not sell for Gain,
Who will his Name for PRIVATE Fortune stain?
If so; burn Incense to your Idol God,
Think yourselves blessed, if he vouchsafe a Nod;
Confide in him your sacred Rights to keep,
And vote a Wolf the Guardian of your Sheep.
X.
Here Bully ROUNDHEAD comes, a Sage Divine
Who Adoration pays at Plutus' Shrine.
A mighty Zealot now for Calvin's Church,
Though once he would have left her in the Lurch.
Not Godliness but Gold's his only View;
No Crime to him though ever so vile is new;
A tricking Judge, and Presbyterian Jew.
XI.
Come Will! advance, hold up thy bloated Face,
Of thy own Sect and Party the Disgrace.
Mind him, good People! if he walks or stands,
How like a FLATMAN rowing with his Hands.
No Bags, by Sales of Land had ever been filled,
Had not his Brother John by Pox been killed.
But now grown rich, proud, saucy, and uncivil,
In Coach and Four he is riding to the D --
XII.
Waddlerump come on; Thy great Head is such,
As never furnished was, with over much.
Glad would he be (could he but find the Way)
To make Mankind to him low Homage pay.
Observe him well, whenever he Silence breaks
How big he swells, and sputt'ring stutt'ring speaks,
"O, Johnny, Jemmy, Andrew, if you're wise
"You will immediately get up and rise,
"Nor stand thus idly lying on your Beds;
"But shake dull Sleep from off your lousy Heads.
"To Court! to Court! if we are outdone in Votes,
"We Presbyterians cannot cut Quakers' Throats;
"And therefore I to look out sharp am bent,
"Lest they our noble Tragedy prevent." --
This, this is he, who scruples not to go
Upon the Bench, durante placito;
For well he knows, he scarce an Hour should sit,
If the Law was quam been gesserit.
XIII.
In Scandal sure the Devil cannot go higher
Than what is invented by this foul-mouthed Squire:
Though none but Fools the Mudbrain will believe,
He still has Hopes the Public to deceive.
Here it should not be forgot, that D-ve, to show his Gratitude (for he is as
grateful as his Colleague Dr. S -- h) to so good a Customer, tossed him a
Miniature Portrait of JOHNNY BOY into the Bargain, viz.

See Tickets bought by John with Spanish Dollar,
Whose Father well deserves a hempen Collar.
And if we may presage from what is done,
No less may be expected from the Son.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 26, line 21, for [Inclinations] read [Inclination] Page 29, line 8, dele
[talk] and insert [write]


