JUVENILE POEMS ON VARIOUS SUBJECTS. WITH THE PRINCE OF PARTHIA, A TRAGEDY. BY
THE LATE Mr. THOMAS GODFREY, Junr. of PHILADELPHIA. To which is prefixed, Some
ACCOUNT of the AUTHOR and his WRITINGS.

Poeta nascitur non fit.
HOR. PHILADELPHIA, Printed by HENRY MILLER, in Second-Street. M DCC LXV.

SOME ACCOUNT OF THE AUTHOR and his WRITINGS.
AS it is probable that this Collection of Poems may fall into the hands of
some who are unacquainted with what were the circumstances of the Author, it
may not be improper to annex a short Account of him; which, perhaps, may not
only gratify the curiosity of such, but assist them in forming a judgment of
his natural talent for poetry.

Mr. THOMAS GODFREY, the Author of the following Poems, was born in
Philadelphia, in the year 1736. His Father, who was of the same name, was a
Glazier by trade, and likewise a Citizen of Philadelphia. A person, whose great
natural capacity for Mathematics, has occasioned his name to be known in the
learned world: being (as has been heretofore shown by undeniable The Authors of
the American Magazine for July and August 1758, have taken much generous pains
to do justice to old Mr. GODFREY'S memory, and have published an original
letter of his to the Royal Society, which does not appear to have been taken
any notice of in their transactions, and also two letters of JAMES LOGAN, Esquire
which fully prove that the first invention of this Quadrant was undoubtedly Mr.
GODFREY'S; and that he had formed his plan of it as early as the year 1730. How
he came to be deprived of the honor of this invention (say the writers in the
Magazine) may be made a question by some. We answer, that Mr. GODFREY sent the
instrument to be tried at sea, by an acquaintance of his, an ingenious
navigator, in a voyage to Jamaica, who showed it to a Captain of a ship (said
to be a relation of Mr. HADLEY'S) just going to England; by which means it came
to the knowledge of Mr. HADLEY, though, perhaps, without his being told the name
of the real inventor. This fact is sufficiently known to sundry seamen and
others, yet alive in Philadelphia

In short, after publishing the abovementioned letters, together with Mr.
GODFREY'S first draught of his Octant, or Quadrant commonly so called, they
conclude thus, For our part, we have no hesitation in pronouncing Mr. GODFREY
the real and original inventor of this famous and useful instrument. At the
same time they speak with great respect of Mr. HADLEY, acknowledging, That though
there was sufficient reason to conclude he was not the first inventor of this
instrument, yet he had great merit in the improvement of it, and that his fame
in the learned world could suffer no diminution from the justice done to Mr.
GODFREY, of whose name, perhaps, he had never been told.


evidences) the original and real inventor of the very useful and famous
Sea-Quadrant which has been called HADLEY'S.

He died when his Son was very young, and left him to the care of his
Relations, by whom he was placed to an English school, and there received All
the quotations, relative to the Author of these Poems, are taken from the
account published in the American Magazine.
a common education in his mother tongue; and without any other advantage than
that, a natural genius, and an attentive perusal of the works of our English
Poets, he soon exhibited to the world the strongest proofs of poetical capacity.

It is not to be wondered, therefore, that in the early period of life, he
should feel such a warm impulse for those elegant arts for which nature had
formed him. For, besides having a fine ear for Music, and an eager propensity
to Poetry, we are told, that, when very young, he discovered a strong
inclination to Painting, and was very desirous of being bred to that
profession. But those who had the charge of him, not having the same honorable
idea either of the profession or its utility which he had, crossed him in that
desire. After some time he was put to a Watch-maker, an ingenious man, in this
city, but still the muses and graces, poetry and painting stole his attention.
He devoted therefore all his private hours to the cultivation of his parts, and
toward the expiration of his time he composed those performances that were
published, with so much favorable notice, in the American Magazine.

At length he quitted the business of watch-making, and got himself recommended
to a Lieutenant's commission in the Pennsylvania forces, raised in the year
1758, for the expedition against Fort Du Quesne; in which station he continued
till the campaign was over, when the Provincial troops were disbanded.

The succeeding spring he had an offer made him of being settled as a factor in
North Carolina, and, being unemployed, he accepted of the proposal, and
presently embarked for that place, where he continued upwards of three years.
At Carolina it was, that he finished the Dramatic Poem, called, The Prince of
Parthia, as appears by a letter of his, to a Gentleman in this city; dated, as
early as, November 17th, 1759; which was received after the manuscript of it.
"By the last vessel from this place," says he, "I sent you the copy of a
Tragedy I finished here, and desired your interest in bringing it on the stage;
I have not yet heard of the vessel's arrival, and believe if she is safe, it
will be too late for the Company now in Philadelphia." -- So that he was but
about twenty-two years of age when this dramatic piece was completed.

Mr. GODFREY, on the death of his employer, left Carolina, and returned to
Philadelphia; but finding nothing offer, that was advantageous, at his return
here, he determined to make another voyage abroad; and, accordingly, procured
some small commissions, and went, as a super-cargo, to the Island of
New-Providence, where he was for some months, but met with no great
encouragment. From New-Providence, (led, as it were, by some sad fatality) he
sailed, once more, to North Carolina. Where in a few weeks after his arrival,
he was unexpectedly summoned to pay the debt of nature, and death put a sudden
stop to his earthly wanderings, by hurrying him, off this shadowy state, into a
boundless eternity. --

He happened, one very hot day, to take a ride into the Country, and, not being
much used to this exercise, and of a corpulent habit of body, it was imagined
the heat overcame him; for the night following he was seized with a violent
vomiting and malignant fever; which continued seven or eight days, and at 10
o'Clock, A. M. on the third of August, 1763; put a period to his life, in the
27th year of his age.

Thus hastily was snatched off, in the prime of manhood, this very promising
genius, beloved, and lamented, by all who knew him. What is here presented to
the public, is a collection of those sweet effusions which flowed with a noble
wildness from his elevated soul. Free and unpremeditated he sung, unskilled in
any precepts, but what were infused into him by nature, his divine tutoress.
The Public must judge, whether, from these youthful emanations he does not
appear to have been animated with the genuine poetic flame. -- But whatever
desert he may be allowed as a Poet, it will be rendered still conspicious by
his character as a man. His sweet amiable disposition, his integrity of heart,
his engaging modesty and diffidence of manners, his fervent and disinterested
love for his friends, endeared him to all those who shared his acquaintance,
and have stamped the image of him, in indelible characters, on the hearts of
his more intimate friends.

Mr. GODFREY was first made known to the public by the learned Authors of the
American Magazine; who seemed pleased in having an opportunity to acquaint the
world with his modest merit, and of doing all the justice in their power, both
to our Author, and his Father also, as was observed above. Nature, say they,
seems not to have designed the Father for a greater Mathematician, than she has
the son for a Poet. The former, was, perhaps, one of the most singular
Phenomenon that ever appeared in the learned world. For without the least
advantages of education, almost intuitively, and in a manner entirely his own,
he had made himself master of the abstrusest parts of Mathematics and
Astronomy. Just so it is with the Son. --

The first of our Author's pieces that was published in the Magazine was, the
Invitation, with the following note: "This little poem was sent to us by an
unknown hand, and seems dated as an original; if it be so, we think it does
honor to our city." A little while after, an Ode on Friendship, an Ode on
Wine, and a Night-Piece of our Author, made their appearance in the same
periodical work. The Ode on Wine, say the Authors, "is wrote with much poetic
warmth." "These pieces" continue they, and some others of his, fell into our
hands by accident, soon after the appearance of the Invitation, which was found
among the rest; and we reckon it one of the highest instances of good fortune
that has befallen us, during the period of our Magazine: that we have had an
opportunity of making known to the world so much merit, we mean in
consideration of his circumstances and means of improvement. These detached
pieces made his name known, and gained him a considerable deal of credit; they
were reprinted sometime after in the English Magazines.

In the year 1762 was published The Court of Fancy. The Authors of the
Magazine, it seems, had seen it before it was finished; for we find this
favorable account of it in their literary compilement. What will place him
high in the lists of Poets (when it shall have received his last hand) is a
Poem of considerable length called The Court of Fancy; in managing which he
shines in all the spirit of true creative Poetry.

The next year after this, made its appearance in the Pennsylvania Gazette,
that nervous and noble song of triumph called Victory, which was the last of
our Author's pieces that was published.

The editor will not presume to anticipate the judgment of the public on those
other pieces in this collection, which now make their first appearance in
print; were it, indeed, proper for him, the strong passion which he bore to the
person of the Author, and still extends to his memory, has, he acknowledges,
precluded him from being a suitable judge of the merit of these Poems.

He would only beg leave, therefore, to remark of the Tragedy of the Prince of
Parthia -- That it is the first essay which our Province, or perhaps this
Continent, has, as yet, publicly exhibited of Dramatic Composition -- and, that
there is possibly some merit even in endeavoring to overcome noble
difficulties, though we should happen to aspire after a flight beyond our
years. In great attempts it is glorious even to fall.
The Author's youth, when this piece was composed, his disadvantages in respect
of education, the desultory life he was compelled to lead -- and, the arduous
nature of the task -- all conspire to cast a veil over every fault, and to
heighten every grace and beauty, which the judicious reader may perceive in
perusing it; and induce him to conclude that, even as it stands, it is no
inconsiderable effort toward one of the sublimest species of Poetry, and no
mean instance of the Author's strong inherent genius, unaided as he was by the
rules of instruction.

After what has been said, should any little inaccuracies appear in this
collection, it cannot be doubted, but the generous critic, will favor them
with an indulgent eye -- Instead of halting at a verbal error, he will be
pleased to see natural genius struggling over all obstacles, and soaring, by
starts, into the brightest tracts of Poesy. What might we not have expected,
from these fair promises of our Author, had he arrived to a season of maturity?
More The reader may, perhaps, observe that some of Mr. GODFREY'S later
performances, are not quite so correct as some of his earlier pieces, published
in this collection. The reason is, that before the publication of the latter,
he always submitted them to some of his judicious friends, who made several
corrections in the diction, grammar and placing the accents; in which last
Article having no rule but his own ear, he is sometimes faulty in his
posthumous and more unfinished pieces. Some of these blemishes the Editor has
endeavored to amend; some he finds have still escaped his notice, for want of
due time, from other necessary engagements, to attend to a more thorough
revisal of the sheets; and some others he thought it would be taking too great
liberty to meddle with. The Reader will, perhaps, not blame him for this when
he finds, by the Postscript, that it was occasioned by the fine and ingenious
remarks of one of the first pens among us.

The several Pieces in the Magazine, passed to the Public through the hands of
the Gentleman who has done the Publisher the honor to favor him with his
comment on these Poems; and who drew up the Account both of the Father and Son
in the Magazine; concluding his Account of the latter with the following
generous and moving expressions -- "We hope," says he, our readers will not
think this Account too particular, when we are endeavoring to do that justice
to the genius of a Son of THOMAS GODFREY, which his own genius never had while
it could be of service to him.

Young Mr. GODFREY always retained the most grateful sense of favors confered
on him, and particularly of the kind notice taken of his Juvenile Pieces by
this Gentleman, as well as the share he took in recommending him to a
commission in the Provincial service.

About this time also, the same Gentleman, from the pleasure that attends the
introducing rising merit into the world, took an opportunity of making known
the name of Mr. WEST; almost literally foretelling, in the following remarkable
paragraph, the universal fame which that celebrated Painter has since acquired
in Italy, and is daily acquiring in England, perhaps, beyond any other person
of his profession of the present age.

Speaking of a small Poem on a Lady's portrait, the Writer says -- We
communicate it with particular pleasure, as the Lady who sat, the Printer who
guided the pencil, and the Poet who so well describes the whole, are all
Natives of this Province. We are glad of an opportunity of making known to the
world the name of so extraordinary a genius as Mr. WEST. He was born in Chester
County in this Province, and without the assistance of any Master, has acquired
such a delicacy and correctness of expression in his paintings, joined to such
a laudable thirst of improvement, that we are persuaded, when he shall have
more experience and proper opportunities of viewing the works of able masters,
he will become truly eminent in his profession. -- Thus we find that this
Gentleman's conclusions were drawn from an exact and intelligent observance of
the vigorous faculties of these natural genius's; and had our Poet lived, to
have received equal advantages in his way, no doubt he would have verified all
that his aforesaid friend predicted of him.


especially had he been nurtured by the fostering hand of art? -- For surely in
these first fruits, which are but as the buddings of his genius, are apparent
the seeds of that vivida vis animi, which has always characterized the Poet;
and, in this light, it is hoped they will be received by a candid reader,
notwithstanding there may be found in them some trivial faults: for as Mr. POPE
judiciously sings, -- A perfect judge will read each work of wit
With the same spirit that its Author writ,
Survey the Whole, nor seek slight faults to find
Where nature moves and rapture warms the mind; --


Mr. GODFREY and his Father, we apprehend, may be ranked among the natural
curiosities of Pennsylvania; for though neither of them had much of human
learning, yet by the peculiar felicity of their natural endowments, each of
them were enabled, though in different ways, to raise themselves to honor in the
learned world. It would, therefore, be matter of great concernment should such
singular genius's "neglected bloom and neglected die," without any friendly
hand to transmit their names to posterity. Nor let any one think that the soul
is enervated by a love for the polite arts -- no; The Muse's track, where ever
she roves,
Glory pursue, and generous shame,
The unconquerable mind, and freedom's holy flame.
GRAY. A late Writer excellently observes, that it is doing some service to
human Society, to amuse innocently; and they know very little of human nature,
who think it can b^ar to be a ways employed either in the exercise of its
duties, or in high and important meditations -- Those arts, therefore, that
instruct as well as en^ert^in innocently, surely, in some measure, deserve our
attention; and they who excel in them, the notice of the Public. Considered
purely in a political sense, the works of genius are, of all others, the
cheapest entertainments. Never was there a state, however barbarous and
ignorant, that did not glory in her men of ingenuity; and such were never
wanting in any state, where proper incitements were offered for study and
labor.

Our Author's death happening so soon after he arrived to man's estate, has
occasioned but sew anecdotes worthy to be remarked, in this short account of
him. A relation of the most material, the Publisher has endeavored, with as
much brevity as possible, to present to the view of the reader; neither did the
Author's sudden exit from the stage of life, admit of any leisure to think of
his Poetry. The manuscript pieces, therefore, were left in their primitive
form, and they fortunately falling into the hands of a Gentleman, a friend of
the Author, at the place where he died, were kindly transmitted to this City.
The present publication was undertaken at the motion, and under the countenance
of some Gentlemen here, of incontestable taste and judgment. The sense the
editor has of his own inabilities and inexperience, would have long enough
prevented him from venturing on such a task, had he expected any other hand
would have offered. But he finds that friendship can excite to difficulties,
though the object of its flame is translated into another state of existence;
and a desire to please the Worthy, prevail, even to the exposing one's self to
the sentence of the public. In classing the several pieces, he has studied to
place them in such a manner as might yield the best entertainment to the
reader, and to suppress those, which, he thought, were not proper for
publication -- And far be it from him, to repent of the trouble he has had in
revising, and transcribing for the Press these posthumous Poems of his friend,
when he finds sundry of the first names among us, for virtue, learning and
politeness, in his list of subscribers. Happy shall he think himself, if what
he has done shall be approved of by those, who have done him the honor to
encourage this Work! and thrice happy, if, in this attempt to commemorate his
friend, he shall please those, under whose more immediate patronage he would
shelter himself, and whose plaudit he prefers as the most valuable reward!

He begs leave to return his thanks to those gentlemen who have been assistant
in promoting the subscriptions, and forwarding this undertaking, which, being
entered on from the most disinterested views, he was the more readily
emboldened to apply to his friends for their aid.

And now it only remains for him to bespeak the candor of the public in behalf
of this collection, which, as it is the first of the kind that this Province
has produced, and the last legacy of one of her youthful sons, the editor
cannot doubt, that it will be received with that goodnature and abatement of
rigor, which the Editor's early years alone can justify him in hoping, will be
extended to himself.

N. EVANS.

POSTSCRIPT.
IN a note to the foregoing Account, it was observed that some of Mr. GODFREY'S
Posthumous Pieces are less finished than his earlier performances; and the
reader will not wonder at this when he considers the sudden manner in which it
pleased the Supreme Wisdom to call him from this earthly stage. It is probable
too, as he left his pieces in various hands, and some of them were frequently
transcribed, that several mistakes might have been made this way. The Publisher
when he first entered on this undertaking, intended to have corrected every
thing of this kind according to his best judgment, and as it might have been
presumed the Author would have done, if he had been spared to a longer life.
But as it has been observed, the Editor's attention being called off to
pursuits of another nature, he was obliged to relax in that design, and in
consulting one of Mr. GODFREY'S friends, on whose judgment he always had the
strongest reliance, it occasioned, in some places, his remitting this
intention. The reasons that prevailed on him are contained in the following
Letter; and if it proves as satisfactory to the reader, as it was to him, there
will be no further apology wanted for the present form in which these Juvenile
Pieces, of our much lamented Author, now appear.

SIR,
IT is greatly to your credit, that the warm friendship, which subsisted
between the late Mr. GODFREY and you, is affectionately extended to his memory,
and has induced you to undertake the labor of collecting his Posthumous Pieces
to be published in one volume, with those more corrected and finished
Performances, which made their appearance in his lifetime, after passing through
the hands of some of his friends, whose judgment he esteemed. You tell me, you
have been informed, that the Authors of the Monthly Review, in England, have
not given a very high character of the "COURT OF FANCY," which we had
considered as one of Mr. GODFREY'S capital performances; and you ask whether it
might not be proper to make such corrections in his posthumous Works,
especially the "Prince of Parthia," as the Author himself, if now alive, would
thankfully accept from his friends; particularly in regard to his Pointing, and
the Accentuation of some of his words and classical names?

As to what is said in the Review, it would not displease you, if you had seen
it. The judgment given of Mr. Godfrey's poetical abilities, by the Authors of
that work, who had seen only a few of his performances, does not differ much
from that of his warmest and most indulgent friends, who have seen the whole.
Mr. Godfrey (say the Authors) possesses a considerable degree of poetical
imagination, but little learning, as appears from his improper accentuation of
classical names They mention the Pieces in the American Magazine, which first
procured him his poetical reputation; and add that -- they remember, to have
since seen a pretty Poem of his (meaning his Piece called "VICTORY") on the
success of the British Arms in America. He certainly has genius; and we are
sorry he had not education to improve it. This is their conclusion, and the
substance of what they say; in which Mr. Godfrey's friends will join with them.
But as want of learning was his misfortune, not his fault, the noble efforts of
his natural genius deserve the greater praise; and this the Reviewers confess
by saying They wish well to learning in the Colonies, and would not discourage
any efforts that way, by the rigor of criticism.

It Is kind not to discourage, but it is still more kind positively to
encourage; and it were to be wished that the Reviewers had found room to give
some examples of our Author's strong imagination and picturesque genius from
the "Court of Fancy." The following might have been chosen among many others.
After describing the Temple of Fancy, he gives this grand description of the
Goddess Fancy herself.

" High in the midst, raised on her rolling throne,
" Sublimely eminent, bright Fancy shone, etc.
" A radiant bough, ensign of her command,
" Of polished gold, waved in her lily hand --
" In silver traces, fixed unto her car
" Four snowy Swans, proud of the imperial Fair,
" Winged lightly on: each, in gay beauty dressed,
" Smoothed the soft plumage that adorned her breast;
" Sacred to her the lucent chariot drew --
" Or whither wildly through the air she flew,
" Or whither to the dreary shades of night,
" Oppressed with gloom, she downwards bends her flight, --
" Or proud aspiring, sought the blessed abodes,
" And boldly shot among the astonished Gods." --
I need not hint to you the propriety of all this Painting "Fancy mounted
sublimely on a rolling throne" "snowy Swans" whirling her car, with winged
speed, whithersoever she pleases; in which our Author was no doubt animated by
those beautiful lines of Shakespeare, in the motto to his performance -- The
Poet's eve, in a fine frenzy rolling,
Does glance from Heaven to Earth, from Earth to Heaven!


I have, for brevity, omitted several lines in our Author's description of
Fancy herself; but the following lines, where he makes the Muses Graces and
Loves, with their true offspring, Poetry, Painting and Music, to be the
attendants on Fancy, in the characters of the three great ancient masters,
Homer, Apelles, and Timotheus -- these lines, I say, are conceived with such
classical propriety, and expressed with such laconic elegance, that they well
deserve notice.

" On her right hand, appeared the joyful Nine,
" And on her left, the Graces all-divine;
" Young infant- Love, soft, on her breast reclined,
" And with his Mother's glowing beauty shined.
" Her favorite Sons were ranged in order round,
" In three bright bands, with deathless laurel crowned;
" Great Homer, here enjoyed superior day,
" Illuminated by bright Fancy's ray;
" Apelles, there, whose magic hand could give
" Form to the mass, and bid the Fiction live;
" Timotheus next, whose animated lyre,
" Cold Grief could charm, and thoughtless Rage inspire." --
POPE himself would not have thought the best of his writings dishonored by
such nervous, well-imagin'd and harmonious lines as these. Nor is the humble
place, which our Author has given himself, among the attendants of Fancy, less
to be admired for the modesty and delicate beauty of the thought -- Close at
her FEET, a Bard, in raptures lost,
Was placed, and wildly round his eye balls tossed --
Great Fancy was his theme! the soothing strain,
In floods of pleasure, thrilled through every vein --


His address to Fancy is very beautiful, and also his following apology for
intruding into her court -- With lowly reverence I hither came,
Not to deride, but to adore thy name;
To thee I ever dedicate my song,
And hail thy glories, 'midst this suppliant throng --


He then represents the Goddess as indulgent to his prayer, in the following
rapturous lines -- -- Here, mortal! take this lyre,
Strike bold the strings, and sing as I inspire.
Humbly I bowed, her mild commands obeyed,
And careless over the lyre my fingers laid;
And soon, with wild poetic rage possessed,
All my frame shook, and laboring heaved my breast.


His choosing "Zephyr" as the messenger of Fancy, and his various descriptions
on this head, could arise only from true poetic genius. His Account of the
Egyptian superstitions, the Heathen worship, etc. shows great reading in the
ancient mythology and history, as well as an attentive perusal of the
translations of Greek and Roman classics; and what more could be expected from
a youth that was only acquainted with the English, and a little of the French
tongue?

" Toward the rosy East, great Mythra shone,
" Bright in the glories of a rising Sun.
" Beneath in solemn pomp, with hands uprear'd
" In flowing robes the Magi all appeared -- etc.
" Northward fierce Gods of the Northern Nations.
Woden stood, with terrors crowned,
" And angry Gods of the Northern Nations.
Thor threw heedless thunder round --
" Old Merlin struck the lyre, the wondering throng
" Attend around to his prophetic song --
" Southward, disordered figures struck my eyes,
" Monkies and Serpents raised to Deities, -- etc.
" Maimed Memnon there seemed on his Alluding to the story of Memnon's statue
in the temple of Serapis, at Thebes, fabulously said to send harmonious sounds
from its mouth, when first touched by the rays of the rising sun.
harp to play,
" And hail Osiris bringing on the day.
" Pale Isis crescent faintly glimmer'd here,
" And barking An Egyptian idol, with a dog's head. -- Latratorem, Semicanem
Deum -- says Virg. AEn. 8.
A^ubis displayed the Year -- etc."
Our Author's succeeding descriptions of Poetry, Painting, Sculpture,
Architecture, Astronomy, Philosophy, etc. are equally pleasing -- a few of the
lines will show this.

" Astronomy, with proud aspiring eye,
" Gazed on the glowing beauties of the sky.
" Her vest with glittering stars was spangled over,
" And in her hand a telescope she bore.
" With this she marked the rolling planets way,
" Or where portentous comets dreadful stray --
" Though last not least, Philosophy was seen,
" Slow was her step, and awful was her mien.
" A volume open, in her hand she held,
" With Nature's law the ample page was filled.
" It Is here is great Nature's wondrous Depths to explore,
" Or to the Gods in heavenly rapture soar --
" Fair Truth she led, in spotless white arrayed,
" And pleasing Beauty, sweet celestial maid.
" Where Truth and Nature aid the great design,
" BEAUTY attends and makes it all divine. --
From the Court of Fancy he makes a sudden transition to the Court of Delusion,
-- where -- -- Within confined
Gay Fictions lurk, and Dreams of every kind --
Dressed by her hand, they shine with mimic bloom,
Or, at her word, their Nothingness resume. --


The word "Nothingness" is peculiarly expressive in this line. Under this head,
the airy schemes of Ambition, thirst of Power, Superstition, Jealousy, Avarice,
false Honor, false Affectation of Learning, etc. are described -- I shall only
quote a few lines, out of several pages.

" Others, more bold, majestic 'portments take,
" And plague, delighted, those who dream awake.
" Such are the dreams of those who thirst for power,
" The superstitious, and a thousand more.
" Others usurp the features of the dead,
" And shake the torch around the murd'rer's bed;
" Affright the vigil, or in wanton mirth,
" Make fools seek hidden treasure in the earth." --
Our Virtuoso and butter-fly men are well ridiculed in what follows -- The next
to her approached a reverend dame,
In trophies great, from Insects torn, she came.
With stately step she trod the plain along,
And threw her treasure 'mid the admiring throng.
Forward with joy, each curious mortal sprang,
This caught a gaudy wing, and that a pointed fang.


The Moral of his conclusion is excellent -- As thus I onward moved with
wandering pace,
And viewed the varied wonders of the place;
Just Heaven, I cried, Oh! give me to restrain,
Imagination with a steady rein!
Though often she leads through Pleasure's flowery ways,
In Error's thorny path she sometimes strays.
Let me my hours with solid Judgment spend,
Nor to Delusion's airy dreams attend;
By REASON guided, we shall only know
Those heavenly joys which FANCY can bestow.


Thus you see I have not altered my judgment of this Poem. There is a proper
poetical spirit supported through the whole; and but few places where I think it
could be amended. Many beautiful passages might be selected from his other
Pieces; such as the Character of General Wolf, Pastoral 3. The
Garden-Description in the Assembly of Birds, etc. --

I come now to the question you ask, -- Whether it might not be proper to make
such corrections in Mr. Godfrey's posthumous Pieces, as he himself, if alive,
would thankfully accept from his friends?

In answer to this I would observe, that such corrections and alterations as
were made in Mr. Godfrey's Pieces in his lifetime, upon hints from his
friends, and with the approbation of his own judgment, were thereby rendered
his own. Sometimes he would insert such corrections, as they were offered to
him; and othertimes substitute something in their stead, better than his own
first thoughts, or the amendments proposed by his friends. It was in this last
method, by improving on the criticisms and remarks of every judicious friend,
that the writings of Pope and some of our greatest Poets, appeared so elegantly
nervous and correct.

No doubt, sundry corrections are wanted in some of Mr. Godfrey's posthumous
Pieces, and especially in the Prince of Parthia; I will mention a few. In
Pastoral 1st, though he has sometimes accented the word "Alexis" right, and seems
to have known the proper pronunciation of it -- yet in the following couplet
which occurs thrice, he has occasionally placed the accent wrong -- Droop,
droop ye groves; ye plains, in silence mourn,
Let naught be gay, 'til Alexis return --


It might be amended various ways -- Droop, droop ye groves, and all ye plains
be dumb,
Let naught be joyful 'til Alexis come. --


Or preserving the first rhyme, and leaving out the name Alexis which is not
material, being in the couplet immediately preceding -- Droop, droop ye
groves, ye fields, in silence mourn,
Let naught be joyful till the Swain's return.


Or preserving the name -- Alexis gone! be dumb, each grove and plain,
Let naught be joyful, 'till I see my Swain.


So in the same Pastoral, the word "lay" is not English, but the couplet may be
amended with the smallest alteration -- Here by my side, my pipe shall useless
lay,
Unheeded now Alexis is away. --


To be corrected thus: Here by my side, my pipe shall useless lie,
Unheeded now Alexis is not nigh.


In this couplet, it is to be observed, that Mr. Godfrey places the accent on
Alexis right.

In Pastoral 2d, are these lines -- Witness, ye groves, and eke, ye powers
divine,
How often she is sworn her faithless heart was mine.
Now, fired by female pride, she scorns the truth,
And gives to wealthy Ageon her youth.
He Is rich in numerous flocks, scarce knows his store,
My love is all, nor can I boast of more.


What is faulty in these lines, proceeds from unnecessary elisions, the
obsolete word "eke" and the spelling the classical name wrong; for I do not at
present remember any such name as Ageon, and if there be such a one, it is here
wrong accented. The smallest alteration amends the whole; Witness ye groves,
and all ye powers divine,
How often she swore her saithless heart was mine.
Now, fired by female pride, she scorns the truth,
And to the rich AEgaeon gives her youth.
Of numerous flocks the swain scarce knows his store,
My love is all, nor can I boast of more.


A few lines afterward he places the accent differently on the same word
"Ageon;" which shows that, in his first hasty draughts, he did not even stay so
far to attend to these lesser matters, as to make one part consistent with
another.

There is the same fault in placing the name "Amphion" a few stanzas below,
which a small transposition amends.

As to the Tragedy, it is evidently very unfinished, especially in the last
act; and nothing but that fondness which every Author has for a performance
when it comes first from his pen, would have made him propose it for the stage.
But as he knew the Company was about to break up, and he might not soon have
another opportunity of trying his success this way, he was willing to offer it;
and as the present elisions and unfinished lines, would not have been perceived
from the mouth of the Actors, he would have had leisure before the publication
to correct every thing which he might have found faulty, in the diction and
measure. As to the sentiments, they are generally noble, and worthy of the
subject; and in respect to the plan, it would not be just to enquire whether
the Unities of the Drama be all rigidly observed by a youth, who, perhaps,
never heard of the rules of Horace, or the Stagyrite; yet our Author's own
peculiar Genius, and ideas of Propriety, have helped him surprizingly out, in
this matter.

The same oversights which I have taken notice of in some of the Pastorals,
likewise occur in this Tragedy. What pleasure, Phraates, must swell his bosom,
To see the prostrate nation all around him,
And know he is made them happy! to hear them
Tease the Gods to shower their blessings on him?


For which, might be read as follows -- What joy, Phraates, must expand his
bosom,
To see the prostrate nation all around him,
Made happy by his virtues! and to hear them
Weary the Gods to shower their blessings on him?


In the two first of the three following lines, there are bad grammar, and bad
accentuation.

" While shame and rout disperses all her sons,
" Barzaphernes pursues the fugitives,
The few whom favoring night redeemed from slaughter."
They might be altered thus -- While shame and rout disperse her hapless sons;
Bold Barzaphernes seeks, with vengeful arm,
The few whom favoring night redeemed from slaughter.


A little lower we have these lines -- Arsaces heard,
And through the swelling waves he rushed to save
His drowning brother, and gave him life;
And for the boon the ingrate pays him hate. --
where the 3d line wants a syllable, and there is a disagreeable jingle in the
others. They might run thus -- -- Arsaces heard,
And rushing, instant, through the opposing tide
To save his sinking brother, gave him life,
Who for the boon ignobly pays him hate.


I could easily send you more examples of corrections that might be made in
this and Mr. Godfrey's other Posthumous Pieces, which you put into my hands;
but I am fully persuaded that it will be safer for you, and perhaps more
acceptable to many readers, to lay these remains of Mr. Godfrey before the
Public, in their genuine original state, than venture on any material
alterations, which might not after all be alike agreeable to every body; and
perhaps in some cases be for the worse. For instance, in the following line --
Still in intricate mazes round I run --
the accent on the word "intricate" is wrong; and a person desirous to place it
right and make the line smooth, would correct it thus -- In mazes intricate
still round I run --
But I could not advise such an alteration as this; for it may probably have
been the Author's intention in this line to make the sound an echo to the
sense; and if so, the intricacy of the line, and difficulty of the
pronunciation, with the two in's joined together, are sufficiently expressive
of the subject.

To offer smaller corrections of this kind, might be the work of any hand; but
to reach the heights to which our Poet has arrived in many parts of his
writings, and of this Tragedy itself, is the lot of but a few.

How strongly is the following curse expressed! O may he never know a father's
fondness,
Or know it to his sorrow! may his hopes
Of joy be cut like mine, and his short life
Be one continued tempest -- if he lives,
Let him be cursed with jealousy and fear --
May torturing Hope present the flowing cup,
Then hasty, snatch it from his eager thirst,
And when he dies, base treachery be the means.


As a contrast to the fierce passions in the preceding lines, may be quoted
the following humane sentiments. O it is a heavenly virtue, when the heart
Can feel the sorrows of another's bosom!
It dignifies the man. The stupid wretch
Who knows not this sensation, is an image,
And wants the feeling to make up a life


I shall add but one quotation more from this Tragedy -- How shall I thank you,
ye bright glorious Beings!
Shall I in humble adoration bow,
Or fill the earth with your resounding praise?
No, this I leave so noisy hypocrites --
A mortal's tongue disgraces such a theme.
But heaven delights where silent gratitude
Mounts each aspiring thought to its bright throne,
Nor leaves to language aught: words may indeed
From man to man their several wants express,
Heaven asks the purer incense of the heart.


Upon the whole, I persuade myself that, the severest critic, looking over
smaller matters, will allow these writings of Mr. Godfrey, to be aptly
uncharacterized, in the following lines from the Court of Fancy -- Bold Fancy's
hand the amazing pile uprears,
In every part stupendous skill appears;
In beautiful disorder, yet complete,
The structure shines irregularly great.


I am, Sir, Yours, etc.


SUBSCRIBERS NAMES.
A
Hon. WILLIAM ALLEN, Esquire, Chief Justice, of this Province. Reverend Francis
Alison, D. D. Vice-Provost of the College and Academy of Philadelphia. John
Allen, Esquire Andrew Allen, Esquire James Allen, Esquire Revd Mr. John George Alsentz.
William Atlee, Esquire Lancaster. Capt. Samuel Atlee, Pequea. Mr. Benjamin Austin.
Dr. Ralph Ashton. Mr. John Andrews. Tutor in the C. A. Philadelphia. Alexander
Alexander. Tutor in the C. A. Philadelphia. Association Library Company of
Philadelphia. Mr. Isaac Allman. Capt. John Ashmead.
B
Hon. Col. Henry Bouquet. Capt. James Blair. Mr. Thomas Barclay. John Bell.
Daniel Benezet, Esquire Dr. Phineas Bond. Mr. Thomas Bond, jun. Alexander Barclay,
Esquire Miss Elizabeth Bond. Revd. Thomas Barton, A. M. Missionary, 4. Lancaster.
James Burd, Esqr. Lancaster. John Bar, Esqr. Lancaster. Doctor Boyd. Mr. John
Baynton, 2. Samuel Burge. Philip Benezet. Roger Bowman. William Bartram, jun.
North Carolina. James Bailey. North Carolina. Abraham Bickley, 2. Clement
Biddle. Gunning Bedford. Joseph Burn. John Barns. Joseph Burt, Student, of
Jersey Cellege. Benjamin Brearly, Student, of Jersey Cellege. Jonathan Baldwin,
A. M. of Jersey Cellege. Mr. Andrew Boyd. Philip Bush. Thomas Bradford. John
Beveridge, A. M. Professor of Languages in the College and Academy of
Philadelphia. Mr. Ignatius Baker. Student in the same. Samuel Benezet. Student
in the same.
C
Benjamin Chew, Esquire Attorney General. Hon. William Coleman, Esquire Mr. William
Campbell. North Carolina. Alexander Chapman. North Carolina. Robert Cohren.
North Carolina. Mrs. Eleanor Campbell, Lancaster. Mr. William Cliffton. Matthew
Clarkson. Samuel Cheesman. Charles Cox. Archibald M'Call. Dr. Gerardus
Clarkson. Mrs. Mary Cotringer. Mr. John Chevalier. Peter Chevalier, jun. Philip
Cole. Thomas Coombe, Student in the College of Philadelphia. Abraham Cannel,
Maryland. John Child. William Carter. Samuel Carson. James Carter. Julius
Clare, 2. James Cruickshank. George Corbin. Joseph Chambers. James Claypool.
Lambert Cadwalader. Curtis Clay.
D
Revd. Jacob Duche, A. M. one of the Assistant Ministers of Christ Church and
St. Peter's, 2, Mr. Benjamin Davies, Merchant, 3. John Dorsius. William Davis,
Esqr. North Carolina. Alexander Duncan, Esqr. North Carolina. Mr. Walter
Dubois: North Carolina. Josephus Darrel, Bermuda. James Dickinson. Benjamin
Duffield. Josias Davis. Philemon Dickinson. John Duffield. Charles Dilworth.
Josiah Franklin Davenport. Doctor Duffiel. Mr. John De-normadie.
E
Mr. Samuel Eldridge, 6. Hudson Emlen, 2. George Emlen.
F
Benjamin Franklin. Esquire L. L. D. F. R. S. 12. His Excellency William Franklin,
Esquire Governor of New Jersey. Col. Turb^t Francis. Mr. Caleb Foulke. Amos Foulke.
Moore Furman, 2. Samuel Foulke. David Franks. Henry Collins Flagg,
Rhode Island. William Forster, A. B. Jersey College.
G
Dr. George Glentworth, 2. Col. Caleb Grainger, North Carolina. Mr. William
Greenway. John Green. John Gibson. Miss Elizabeth Garregues. Mr. William
Gallagher. Joseph Galloway, Esquire Mr. Thomas Guy. Germantown Library Company.
H
Richard Hockley, Esquire Benjamin Heron. Esquire Provincial Secretary. North Carolina.
Cornelius Harnett, Esquire North Carolina. Mr. Obadiah Holt. North Carolina. Daniel
Hughes. Francis Hopkinson. Esquire Mr. William Hopkins. William Hamilton. Isaac
Hunt. 2. Samuel Hassel, 2. Levi Hollingsworth, 6. John Heart. Nathaniel Hazard,
A. B. Jersey College. Mr. Richard Hutson. Student. Jersey College. Joseph
Hasbrouck. Student. Jersey College. Jacob Hasbrouck. Student. Jersey College.
David Howell. Student. Jersey College. Alexander Hanson, Student in the College
of Philadelphia. Mr. Robert Harding. James Humphreys. John William Hoffman.
Adam Hubley, 2. Samuel Hudson.
I
Mr. Abel James, 2. Revd. Mr. Charles Inglis, Missionary at Dover. Mr. Jonathan
Jones. Robert Johnson, North Carolina. John Jones, jun. Mrs. Rebecca Jennings,
Bermuda. Mr. Reuben Jarman. Mr. Jesse Jacobs. Joseph Jacobs. Robert Strettel
Jones. Juliana Library Company of Lancaster.
K
Revd. Ebenezer Kinnersley, A. M. Professor of English and Oratory, in the
College of Philadelphia. Dr. John Kearsley, jun. 2. Mr. Philip Kearney. John
Kelly. Joseph Kirk. Henry Keppele. jun. Joseph Kendall.
L
John Lawrence, Esqr. Thomas Lawrence, Esqr. Mr. William Lackly. Alexander
Lunnan. John Long, Lancaster. Capt. Hugh Lidlie, Connecticut, 2. Mr. John
Langdale, jun. 2. Mr. John Lucken, Surveyor-General. John Lucken. Joseph
Lancaster. Nathaniel Lewis.
M
Samuel Mifflin, Esquire William Moore, Esquire John Moore Esquire Mr. John Malcolm.
William Masters. John Maxfield. Mrs. Anne Morgan. Miss Elizabeth Morgan. Mr
Robert Morris. Col. James Moore. North Carolina. Archibald Mc. Clane Esquire
North Carolina. Mr. Archibald M^ Duffel. North Carolina. Alexander Martin.
North Carolina. Robert Moore. Dr Charles Moore. Revd. Mr. Murray Missionary at
Reading. Mr. Samuel Miles. Miss Nancy Mordgarige. Mr. Archibald Mi^^oy. John
Morris, jun Esquire Mr. Henry Mitchell. Matthew Mease. John Mears. Jonathan Morris.
John Murgat^ide. George Morgan. Cadwallader Morris. William Morris. Henry
Miller, 12.
N
Charles Norris. Esquire Mr. John Nixon, 2. Mrs. Anne Nissfield, North Carolina.
O
Mr. John Ord.
P
Honorable JOHN PENN, Esquire GOVERNOR of this Province etc Revd. Richard Peter's,
Rector of the united Churches of Christ Church and St. Peter's. William Peter's,
Esquire, Richard Peter's, jun. A. B. William Plumsted. Esquire 2. William Purviance, Esquire
North Carolina. Mr. Edward Pennington. Samuel Pleasents James Peter's. Druggist,
Lancaster. Joseph Paschall. Joseph Pennel. Jonathan Potts. Thoma Pratt. Joseph
Pemberton, 2. Caleb Parry. Samuel Purviance. John Porters, A. B. Mr Charles
Pettit. Ebenezer Pemberton, Student. Jersey College. Joseph Periam, A. B.
Jersey College.
R
Septimus Robeson Esquire Mr. Barnet Richards. William Richards. Robert Ritchie.
William Ritchie. John Robeson, North Carolina. Edward Robeson. James Ralfe,
Esqr. Lancaster. George Ross. Esqr. Lancaster. Joseph Rose. Esqr. Lancaster. Mr
Alexander Robinson, 2. James Read, Esqr. Reading. Thomas Rutter Esqr. Reading.
Mr. William Rawlings, 2. Theodorick Romans, Student. Jersey College. David
Ramsay. Student. Jersey College. Topping Reeve, A. B. Jersey College. Benjamin
Rush, A. M. Mr. John Reily, Conveyancer. Caesar Roach, Esquire Antigua.
S
Reverend William Smith, D. D. Provost of the College and Academy of
Philadelphia. 4. Hon. Alexander Stedman, Esquire Mr. Charles Stedman. Joseph
Shippen, jun. Esquire Provincial Secretary, William Shippen jun. M. D. Mr. Samuel
Harriet Solavan. William Smith. Capt. Alexander Sage. Mr. Robert Shaw North
Carolina. Patrick Stewart. North Carolina. James Stewart. North Carolina. Miss
Elizabeth Stedman. Edward Shippen Esquire Prothonotary. Lancaster. Mr. Francis
Sanderson. Lancaster. John Stone Lancaster. Thomas Smith, Esquire Bermuda. Miss
Elizabeth Sing. Mr. Robert Shewell. Samuel Sansom, jun. 2. James Searle. Simon
Sparkland. Isaac Stillman. Student. Jersey College. Benjamin Steel. Student.
Jersey College. David Smith, A. M. Jersey College. Jonathan Smith. A. M. 2.
Jersey College. Mr. William Smith. Joseph Saunders. Dr. Benjamin Stakes. Mr.
Walter She. David Sample, Student, in the College of Philadelphia. Amos
Strettle, Esquire Mr. Alexander Stuart. Samuel Shaw. Lodowick Sprogell. John
Sprogell, jun.
T
Revd. Mr. William Thompson, Missionary, for Cumberland County. Joseph Turner,
Esquire Dr. Malachi Treat. Thomas Tredwell A. B. Jersey College. James Thompson, A.
B. Tutor, Jersey College. Mr. David Thomas. Samuel Tailor. 6. Joseph Thomas.
Samuel Treat
U
Union Library Company of Philadelphia.
W
Mr. Samuel Wharton. 2. Joseph Wharton, 2. Daniel Wister 2. Capt Isaac
Lascelles Winn, 2. Capt. George Christopher Winn. Mr. Stephen Watts John White.
Alexander Wilcocks. William White, Student in the College of Philadelphia.
Charles Wharton. Samuel Wheeler. William Watkins, North Carolina. Hugh Wilson,
Lancaster. Nicholas Way. William Warner. William Wood. George Wescott. John
Wood.
Y
Mr. James Young 2.
THE CONTENTS.
ELEGY to the Memory of the Author, 1 Another to the Memory of the same, 5 The
Invitation, 11 Verses occasioned by a young Lady's asking the Author, What was
a Cure for Love? 13 Ode on Friendship, 15 Epistle to a Friend; from Fort Henry,
20 Pastorals. I. To the same, 22 II. To Dr. J -- N K -- SL -- Y, Junr. 26 III.
To the Memory of General WOLF, 29 A Dithyrambic on Wine, 34 The Wish, 37 A
Night-Piece, 39 The Court of Fancy, a Poem. 45 Victory, a Poem. 65 A Paraphrase
on the first Psalm, 72 A Cantata on Peace, 73 Songs. I. The Day was closed,
etc. 75 II. When in Celia's, etc. 76 III. To Sylvia, 77 IV. Young Thy^sis, etc.
78 V. O come, etc. 79 VI. For Chloris, etc. 80 VII. Amyntor, 81 The Assembly of
Birds, from Chaucer. 83 The Prince of Parthia, a Tragedy, 95
ERRATA.
IN the Preface, Page 7, Line 1. for conspicious, read conspicuous. In the
Poems. p 19. l. 2. for lightn'd r lightened. p. 2^ l. 17 for wonted r wanted p.
26, l. 5, for sadn'd, r. sadned. p. 36, l 4. for Zephyr's, r. Zephyrs. p. 50,
l. 10 for Phaeton r. Phaeton. p 54, l. 11, for reverence, r. reverence p. 9, l
10 for saf'ty, r safety. p. 101, l 1^ for. Tisaphernes, r. Tissaphernes. p.
119, l. 21. for, infamcy, r. infamy. p. 131, l. 9, for, set, r sit. p. 192, l.
3, for 'll, r. I Will.

ELEGY, To the Memory of Mr THOMAS GODFREY.
Quis desiderio sit pudor aut modus
Tam chari capitis?
HOR.
WHERE nodding yews the solemn grove imbrown,
Where ivy creeps, and gloomy cypress frown,
While lowering clouds the face of Phaebe shade,
And fleeting ghosts glide silent over the glade,
There let me lie -- by lighter ills unmoved,
And weep the memory of the Youth I loved.
Melpomene, whose plaintive harp never knew,
Aught but heart-piercing sounds of sadest woe,
With mournful voice, and ever-melting tongue,
Join in my grief, and aid the elegiac song.
Death's icy hand has closed my Damon's eyes,
His corse entombed, in sleep eternal lies.
Cold is that breast which every virtue fired,
(Where music dwelt), and all the Nine inspired.
Silent, no more the tuneful tongue shall charm,
No more with glow benign the cheek shall warm;
The death-fixt eye no more with luster beam,
No more the placid brow shall smile serene.
And, ah! that heart the seat of truth before,
With friendship's sacred fires shall beat no more:
Black-rob'd oblivion's baleful wing outspread,
Shrouds his loved form, and every charm is fled.
His sable reign the tyrant whelms o'er-all,
Thus the proud perish, thus the virtuous fall!
As silver streams in easy mazes glide,
And to the main in tribute roll their tide,
Or bursting flames in curling volumes rise
Seeking their place congenial in the skies;
Thus Man is born, thus haste his fleeting days,
Transient his glory as the Meteor's blaze.
Nature's great law stern death impartial sounds,
Hurls the barb'd dart and undistinguished wounds:
The regal scepter in the dust he throws,
Rends the plumed helmet from the Hero's brows,
And tears from beauty's cheek the blooming rose;
Strikes manly vigor withering, in life's prime,
Bids palsied age its trembling breath resign,
Tears from the bleeding breast the infant heir,
In vain the parent-sigh, in vain the melting prayer:
The friend beloved -- Oh! burst my beating heart,
Here the dread tyrant quenches every dart!
On thee, dear Youth, the blow was soft impressed,
Ages of bliss succeed and golden rest;
It Is mine alone to drain the envenomed bowl,
The shaft sustain that rankles in the soul;
Sighing to recollect each joyous day,
That friendship's Cherub smile made ever gay;
In life's first dawn, with infant passion fired,
One path enticed us, and one wish inspired;
By friendship warmed (though strangers to the name,
'Til love of sister-arts increased the flame);
On the soft music of thy lyre I hung,
Charmed with the early lay so sweetly sung,
I hailed! with rapture thy ascending fame!
And saw from ripened years, a deathless name!
In vain I sigh! -- the sun-clad vision 's over,
Those strains by heaven inspired shall charm no more!
Dear shade, farewell! -- it smiling quits its clay
Waves the glad hand, and mounts the dazzling way.
See! glittering bands in angel transport join!
Waft him to endless bliss with songs divine!
Hark! how the sounds seraphic strike the ear!
O virtue! now thy raptures are sincere!
Ye gentle Swains of Carolina's shore,
Who knew my Damon, (now, alas! no more),
By moonlight round his hallowed grave repair,
Strew sweetest flowers, and drop a sorrowing tear;
With never-fading laurel shade his tomb,
And bid the rising bay for ever bloom,
Teach springing flowers their purpl'd heads to rise,
And sweetly twining, write, Here Virtue lies.
Sing in sad strains each venerable name,
In Fortune's spite, that struggled up to fame;
By Virtue led life's rugged road along,
Their lives instructive as their sweetest song.
Say, while their praises tremble on the tongue,
Thus lived this youthful Bard, thus gentle Damon sung.
What though, ah! much-loved Youth among strangers thrown
Thy relics sleep, beneath a nameless stone,
No sculptured glories over thy ashes placed,
That weeping seem to speak what once thou wast;
What, though no tuneful Bard thy praises sings,
And only friendship sounds the jarring strings;
Yet, with the good and just, thy name shall live,
It Is Virtue's sacred right -- this pageant pomp cannot give.
J. GREEN.
ELEGY, To the Memory of the same.
O Death! thou victor of the human frame!
The soul's poor fabric trembles at thy name!
How long shall man be urged to dread thy sway
For those whom thou untimely take away?
Life's blooming spring just opens to our eyes,
And strikes the senses with a sweet surprise,
When thy fierce arm uplifts the fatal blow
That hurls us breathless to the earth below.
Sudden as darts the lightning through the sky
Around the globe thy various weapons fly:
Here war's red engines heap the field with slain,
And pallid sickness there extends thy reign;
Here the soft Virgin weeps her Lover dead,
There Maiden beauty sinks the graceful head,
Here Infants grieve their Parents are no more,
There rev'rent Sires their Childrens deaths deplore.
Here the sad friend -- O! save the sacred name,
Yields half his soul to thy relentless claim;
O pardon, pardon the descending tear!
Friendship commands, and not the Muses here.
O say, thou much loved dear departed shade,
To what celestial region have thou strayed?
Where is that vein of thought, that noble fire
Which fed thy soul, and bade the world admire?
That manly strife with fortune to be just,
That love of praise? an honorable thirst!
The Soul, alas! has fled to endless day,
And left its house a mouldering mass of clay.
There, where no fears invade, nor ills molest,
Thy soul shall dwell immortal with the blessed;
In that bright realm, where dearest friends no more
Shall from each other's throbbing breasts be tore,
Where all those glorious spirits sit enshrined,
The just, the good, the virtuous of mankind.
There shall fair angels in a radiant ring,
And the great SON of Heavens eternal KING,
Proclaim thee welcome to the blissful skies,
And wipe the tears for ever from thy eyes.
How did we hope -- alas! the hope how vain!
To hear thy future more enripen'd strain;
When fancy's fire with judgment had combined
To guide each effort of the enraptured mind.
Yet are those youthful glowing lays of thine
The emanations of a soul divine;
Who heard thee sing but felt sweet music's dart
In thrilling transports pierce his captived heart?
Whether soft melting airs attun'd thy song,
Or pleased to pour the thundering verse along,
Still nobly great, true offspring of the Nine,
Alas! how blasted in thy glorious prime!
So, when first opes the eyelids of the morn,
A radiant purple does the heavens adorn,
Fresh smiling glory streaks the skies around,
And gaily silvers each enameled mound,
'Til some black storm o'erclouds the ether fair,
And all its beauties vanish into air.
Sranger, who ever thou art, by fortune's hand
Tossed on the baleful Carolinian strand,
Oh! if thou see perchance the POET'S grave
The sacred spot with tears of sorrow lave;
Oh! shade it, shade it with never fading bays.
Hallowed 's the place where gentle GODFREY lays.
(So may no sudden dart from death's dread bow
Far from the friends thou love ever lay thee low),
There may the weeping morn its tribute bring,
And angels shield it with their golden wing,
'Til the last trump shall burst the womb of night,
And the purged atoms to their Soul unite!
N. EVANS.
October 1, 1763.
JUVENILE POEMS, ON VARIOUS SUBJECTS.

JUVENILE POEMS, etc.
THE INVITATION. 1758.
DAMON. HASTE! SYLVIA! haste, my charming Maid!
Let Us leave these fashionable toys;
Let Us seek the shelter of some shade,
And revel in never fading joys.
See spring in liv'ry gay appears,
And winter's chilly blasts are fled;
Each grove its leafy honors rears,
And meads their lovely verdure spread!

SYLVIA. Yes Damon, glad I Will quit the town,
Its gaities now languid seem;
Then sweets to luxury unknown
We'll taste, and sip the untainted stream.
In Summer's sultry noontide heat,
I Will lead thee to the shady grove;
There hush thy cares, or pleased repeat
Those vows that won my soul to love.

DAMON. When over the mountain peeps the dawn,
And round her ruddy beauties play,
I Will wake my Love to view the lawn,
Or hear the warblers hail the day.
But, without thee, the rising morn
In vain awakes the cooling breeze;
In vain does nature's face adorn;
Without my SYLVIA naught can please.

SYLVIA. At night, when universal gloom
Hides the bright prospect from our view,
When the gay groves give up their bloom,
And verdant meads their lovely hue;
Though fleeting specter round me move,
When in thy circling arms I Am pressed,
I Will hush my rising fears with love,
And sink in slumber on thy breast.

DAMON. The new-blown rose, whilst on its leaves
Yet the bright scented dew-drops found,
Pleased on thy bosom, whilst it heaves,
Shall shake its heavenly fragrance round.
Then mingled sweets the sense shall raise,
Then mingled beauties catch the eye;
What pleasure on such charms to gaze!
What rapture mid such sweets to lie!

SYLVIA. How sweet thy words! -- but, DAMON cease,
Nor strive to fix me ever here;
Too well you know these accents please,
That often have filled my ravished ear.
Come, lead me to these promised joys,
That dwelt so lately on thy tongue;
Direct me by thy well known voice,
And calm my transports with thy song!

VERSES Occasioned by a Young Lady's asking the Author, What was a Cure for
LOVE? 1758.
FROM me, my Dear, O seek not to receive
What even deep-read Experience cannot give.
We may, indeed, from the Physician's skill
Some Medicine find to cure the body's ill.
But who ever found the physic for the soul,
Or made the affections bend to his control?
When through the blaze of passion objects show
How dark's the shade! how bright the colors glow!
All the roused soul with transport's overcome,
And the mind's surly Monitor is dumb.
In vain the sages turn their volumes over,
And on the musty page incessant pore,
Still mighty LOVE triumphant rules the heart,
Baffles their labor, and eludes their art.
Say what is science, what is reason's force
To stop the passions wild ungoverned course?
Reason, it is true, may point the rocky shore,
And show the danger, but can serve no more,
From wave to wave the wretched wreck is tossed,
And reason 's in the impetuous torrent lost.
In vain we strive, when urged by cold neglect,
By various means our freedom to effect,
Though like the be from sweet to sweet we rove,
And search for ease in the vast round of Love,
Though in each Nymph we meet a kind return,
Still in the firstfond hopeless flame we burn,
That dear idea still our thoughts employs,
And blessed variety itself even cloys.
So exiles banished from their native home
Are met with pity wheresoe'er they come,
Yet still their native soil employs their care,
And death were ease to lay their ashes there.
ODE ON FRIENDSHIP. 1758.
I.
FRIENDSHIP, all hail! thou dearest tie,
We Mortals here below can claim,
To blend our else unhappy lives with joy;
My breast inspire
With thy true genuine fire,
While to thy sacred name,
I strike the golden lyre.
Clothed in pure empyrean light,
For vulgar eyes thou shin'st too bright;
For while they gaze,
Thy dazzling rays
Dim their too feeble sight;
But souls uncloy'd with sensual toys,
Souls who seek true mental joys,
May Phoenix-like sublimely soar,
May all thy heavenly charms explore,
And wanton in the glorious blaze.
II.
O G -- *! if now no charming maid
Waits thy pencil's powerful aid,
That when her charms shall fade away,
And her pleasing form decay;
That when her eyes no more shall roll,
Or heaving sighs betray her soul;
Still by thy art.
The stubborn heart
To melt, and into love betray --
Attend! I sing that power divine,
Whose heavenly influence sways such souls as thine --
Souls, by virtue made the same,
FRIENDSHIP'S powerful ties may claim:
And happy they,
Without allay,
Blessed in the generous flame,
III.
Thus in his tent immured
THETIS angry son,
Forgot the laurels he had won;
And whilst love's flames his bosom burned,
His beauteous captive lost he mourned;
And Ilium in his grief stood well secured:
All Graecia's chiefs dismayed,
Around him wait,
And vainly supplicate his aid.
Old Nestor's eloquence was vain,
Ulysses cunning could not gain
The chief to draw his sword.
In angry state,
He sullen sat,
Nor deigned to give a word.
IV.
But when PATROCLUS' much-loved shade,
Pale, with blood and dust arrayed,
Appeared unto his view;
FRIENDSHIP fired his godlike breast,
Conquered love the power confessed,
And in a sigh withdrew.
Thus, the Ghost --
"Attend, attend my call!
"Let not the vaunting Trojans boast;
"But oh! revenge my fall.
With rage the Hero's bosom glows,
His blood in swifter current flows;
See, how his eye balls roll!
And speak the anguish of his soul:
Revenge, revenge PATROCLUS cried:
Quick at the word,
He seized his sword,
And clasped his sevenfold shield;
Revenge, revenge, Pelides loud replied,
And rushed into the field.
V.
Wild as the wind he went
Through the astonished foe;
While death his sad concomitant,
Attends each fatal blow.
With heaps of slain
He strews the plain;
As when rough Boreas loudly blows,
Huge oaks and lofty pines around he throws.
Cowards revive when he appears,
And banish from their breasts their fears,
Nor death can more affright;
His presence every bosom warms,
They clank with horrid din their arms;
And with new courage fraught renew the fight,
Now shouts around,
And dying cries,
A horrid sound!
Assail the skies,
And now the fainting Trojans yield
The long disputed honors of the field.
VI.
Round the field Achilles flies,
For Hector he cries,
At length the Trojan chief espies,
Horribly glorious midst the war;
Upon his bloody shield the God of day,
Darts pendant rays;
The crimson mirror far
Reflects the blaze;
And all around him glories play.
PATROCLUS' mantle loosely slung,
The pledge of brave Achilles' love,
And by the fair AEgina wove;
Upon his manly shoulder hung.
VII.
The fatal spoil Achilles spies,
And indignation lightn'd in his eyes,
For friendship this, for friendship this, he said,
And in his bosom drove the shining blade.
Down the mighty Dardan fell,
And in a groan exspires;
Ill-fated Ilium gave a yell,
And dreads her future fires.
In vain all-beauteous Venus strove
To ward the threatening blow;
In vain she moved,
In vain she loved
Those raging fires,
And wild desires,
To Friendship's purer flame must bow.
Though Love the sensual appetite,
Tumultuous raise a while,
Friendship yields a calm delight,
And will for ever smile.
Wrote, when the Author was a Lieutenant in the Pennsylvania Forces, and,
garrisoned at Fort HENRY. This little piece is the more valuable, as it
contains a striking picture, and perhaps the only one, of this kind, that will
be preserved, of the deep distress that overwhelmed our Fronder Settlements,
when every field was stained with the blood of its Owners, by the merciless
hands* of unfeeling Savages.
EPISTLE To a Friend; from Fort HENRY. Dated August 10, 1758.
FROM where his lofty head TALHEO rears,
And over the wild in majesty appears,
What shall I write that * -- * will not disdain,
Or worth, from Thee one moment's space to gain?
The Muse, in vain, I court the lovely maid,
Views with contempt the rude unpolished shade,
Nor only this, she flies fierce war's alarms,
And seeks where peace invites with softer charms;
Where the gay landscapes strike the travelers eyes,
And woods and lawns in beauteous order rise;
Where the glad Swain sings on the enameled green,
And views unawed by fears the pleasing scene.
Here no enchanting prospects yield delight,
But darksome forests intercept the sight;
Here filled with dread the trembling peasants go,
And start with terror at each nodding bough,
Nor as they trace the gloomy way along
Dare ask the influence of a chearing song.
If in this wild a pleasing spot we meet,
In happier times some humble swain's retreat;
Where once with joy he saw the grateful soil
Yield a luxuriant harvest to his toil,
(Blessed with content, enjoyed his solitude,
And knew his pleasures, though of manners rude);
The lonely prospect strikes a secret dread,
While round the ravaged Cott we silent tread,
Whose Owner fell beneath the savage hand,
Or roves a captive on some hostile land,
While the rich fields, with Ceres' blessings stored,
Grieve for their slaughtered, or their absent lord.
Yet, would I now attempt, some sprightly strain,
And strive to wake your breast to mirth again,
Yet, would I call you from your Delia's urn,
But Britain's Genius bids her sons to mourn;
She shows the fatal field, all drenched in gore,
And in sad accents cries, my Howe's no more!
Then let again the briny torrents flow,
Oh! teach your breast a nobler kind of woe!
To mourn her faded beauties now forbear,
And give the gallant Chief a British tear.
PASTORALS.
I. To the same.
BEFORE the rosy morn had broke the east,
Before the early lark had left her nest,
While yet the dewy damps of night hung round,
And all mankind were wrapped in sleep profound,
Two swains whom sacred Friendship and soft Love
Kept wakeful, 'rose, and sought the silent grove;
His distant Friend, caused youthful Hylas' care,
And amorous Damon mourned his absent Fair.
* -- * attend! ever friendly to the Muse,
Accept this trifle, and the faults excuse;
By genius fired, thy generous breast may claim
The sweets of Love, or Friendship's envied name.
Thus, as fair Hylas sung, the dales around,
Sad Echo played, and gave him back the sound,
Ye spotless streams, that plaintive glide along,
Be hushed a while, and listen to my song;
Ye winged choirs that chanting on each tree,
Enliven every grove with melody.
Alexis' gone! -- cease, cease to swell your throats,
Harsh are you warblings as the raven's notes.
Droop, droop ye groves, ye plains in silence mourn,
Let naught be gay 'til Alexis return.
Here by my side my pipe shall useless lay,
Unheeded now, Alexis is away.
In mourning here I will my time employ,
Naught shall be seen that wears the face of joy.
Alexis' absence here I will complain,
While the rude north wind whistles to my strain.
'Til he returns no more let spring appear,
But hoary winter shiver through the year.
Let music cease, let flowers no longer blow,
And murmuring streams congealed, forget to flow.
Droop, droop ye groves, ye plains in silence mourn,
Let naught be gay 'til Alexis return.
How often together Schuylkil's verdant side
We Have traced, or wantoned in its cooling tide,
Or soft reclined, where spreading shades were wove,
With joyful accents filled the sounding grove.
Then all was gay, then sprightly mirth was found,
And nature bloomed in vernal beauties round.
Blow, blow ye winds, in softest breezes fend
My kindest wishes to my absent Friend.
But ah! perhaps he heeds not, some sweet maid
By artful wiles his youthful heart's betrayed,
Friendship perhaps is exiled from his breast,
By wanton love alone it is possessed.
But, O ye maids, beware, none true can love,
Who ever in holy Friendship faithless prove.
Droop, droop ye groves, ye plains in silence mourn,
Let naught be gay 'til Alexis return.
But see, he comes, Alexis comes, sound, sound
The joyful news, let all the groves rebound.
Let sorrow cease, let joy for ever reign,
Be naught but gladness seen throughout the plain;
He comes, Alexis comes, let all be gay,
And join with me to hail this happy day.
Cease now ye groves to droop, ye plains to mourn,
Let all be gay, Alexis does return.
Then lovesick Damon thus, while all the grove
Resounds with Delia's name, and Damon's love.
How bright the view! how fragrant was the flower!
When beauty smiled, and Delia blessed the hour!
Her presence then made every season gay,
And cold December bloomed like vernal May.
Then rapture filled my fond exulting breast,
And each intruding care was hushed to rest.
But now, alas! methinks the shifted scene
But only serves to show how blessed I Have been.
By her deserted, birds forget to sing,
And winter's dreary views deform the spring.
All nature weeps, the lilly hangs its head,
The roses fade, and mourning droops the mead.
Hie here, ye Nymphs, hie here, ye lovesick Swains,
Join in my woe, and aid my plaintive strains.
When on the plain I Have tuned my oaken reed,
While all around my bleating flock would feed.
In dumb attention sealed, the listening throng.
Hung on the sound, and caught the pleasing song;
Then loud applause my envied name would raise,
And distant mountains Echo with my praise;
Then to the numbers Delia's voice was joined,
And round my head the laurel wreath she twined.
But now in vain I strive for skill, I Have none,
My soul's untuned, and flowing notes are gone.
Hie here, ye Nymphs, hie here, ye lovesick Swains,
Join in my woe, and aid my plaintive strains.
Fly swift, ye hours, till she return again,
How slow they creep! ah! Damon it is in vain!
Time heeds thee not, nor will he faster move,
Nor winged by fear, nor yet by swifter love.
Slowly he brings us to the wonted joy,
But then how swift the envied minutes fly!
All gracious heaven, in pity lend the power
To rule our passions, or to guide the hour.
Hie here, ye Nymphs, hie here, ye lovesick Swains,
Join in my woe, and aid my plaintive strains.
II. To Dr. J -- K -- SL -- Y, jun.
THE young Alexis drove his bleating Flock
To the sea's side, where seated on a rock,
That overlooked the wave, in pensive mood
He threw his eyes along the azure flood;
His sadn'd brow well anxious care expressed,
And often the sigh would heave his youthful breast,
His flock neglected ranged around him wide,
And useless now his pipe hung by his side.
Calm was the sea, the sky appeared serene,
No angry storms deformed the pleasing scene;
Hushed in their caves the ruder winds were laid,
And only gentle western breezes played,
Gay beauty round seemed blooming every where,
And the bright scene half robbed him of his care.
When a gay bark with spreading sails displayed,
Appeared to view, in garlands rich arrayed.
Swift over the waves with eagle's speed she glides,
And sportive dolphins wantoned by her sides,
Aloft in air the silken streamers flew,
While the shrill music cheered the jovial crew.
Oh! thou, from whose blessed skill our bodies find
Sweet ease, behold the sickness of the mind;
See, with what force, love sways the youthful heart,
Love, which still triumphs over thy heavenly art.
Alexis thus -- the seaman's life how blessed!
No anxious thoughts disturb his peaceful breast.
Free as the wind from shore to shore he roves,
Tastes every sweet, and every bliss improves.
He wears no haughty beauty's servile chain,
Nor heeds a Delia's frown or cold disdain;
Why was I formed with such an abject mind,
Slave to a Fair the proudest of her kind?
Then sudden all the heavens appeared overspread,
And the loud thunder shook the Ocean's bed,
While streaming lightning dreadful fired the sky,
And the rough billows tossed their heads on high:
Now to the heavens the giddy bark is reared,
And as famed Argo's rival there appeared;
And then as sudden from the amazing height
Sunk midst the watery vales, and shunned the sight;
While from her shattered masts the rude winds bear
Sails, cords and streamers, wildly through the air.
The Shepherd thus, ah! faithless cruel sea,
Thus Delia smiled, and thus she did betray.
Caught by the pleasing views, I left the shore,
And gave my peace to seas untried before;
But soon, too soon the pleasing prospects fled,
And swelling waves and tempests did succeed.
Witness, ye groves, and eke, ye powers divine,
How often she is sworn her faithless heart was mire.
Now, fired by female pride, she scorns the truth,
And gives to wealthy Ageon her youth.
He Is rich in numerous flocks, scarce knows his store,
My love is all, nor can I boast of more.
How often I Have led her through the shady grove,
While both our souls seemed joined in mutual love!
Ah! then the Sirens softness graced her tongue,
While quivering on the pleasing sounds I hung,
Such were the sounds which 'woke the slumbering shade,
Such were the sounds which raised her from the dead!
Such were the sounds of Amphion's charming lyre,
And such the music of the heavenly quire!
How often when seated by the crystal flood,
Pleased would we captivate the finny brood!
There in the floating mirror would I trace
Each striking beauty of her angel face,
Her cheek embellished with the rosy die,
Her ruby lip, and heavenly sparkling eye,
'Til some rude wind would over the surface pass,
And envious snatch the beauteous mimic face.
How great the change! -- and then he starting spied
Her body floating on the boisterous tide.
And by the charmer's side the wild waves bore,
Still linked in death, Ageon to the shore.
But, oh! how filled with terror at the sight!
His eyes were veiled in endless shades of night.
Cold was her breast, quick fleeting life had fled,
And on her faded cheeks the rose lay dead.
Fixed like a figured stone awhile he stood,
And gave the tear with anguish to the flood;
Then frantic clasped her midst the briny lave,
And dashed with anger each intruding wave:
He eager pressed her lips, now pale and wet,
But for his warmth a deadly coldness met;
Though once with ruby luster bright they shone,
Their glow was lost, and all their sweetness gone.
Now welcome death, the lovesick Shepherd cried,
And fainting on her clay-cold bosom died.
III. To the Memory of GENERAL WOLF, who was slain at the taking of QUEBEC.
SET was the Sun, and from her silver throne
With fainter luster pallid Cynthia shone,
Over the wide world, and round the etherial plain
Old dusky Night had spread her gloomy reign;
When Lysidas was by Damaetas found
In a dark grove, stretched on the dewy ground,
In silence first his wonder he expressed,
And thus, at length, the mournful Swain addressed.
DAMAETAS. Why rests, my Lysidas, beneath this shade?
See all around night's sable curtain's spread:
Haste, haste away pale ghosts are seen around,
And troops of elves in every glade abound;
For prey the hungry woodland tyrant roves,
And horror shadows all the deepning groves.
As through the glade I halloo'd to thine ear,
Fierce wolves replied, and filled my soul with fear.

LYSIDAS. Ah! leave me, leave me to this deep recess,
Fit is this gloom for sorrows and distress.

DAMAETAS. Thy flocks are safe, I saw them to the fold,
'Ere parting day had tinged the west with gold,
Thy Chloris too I met, as over the plain
She sought the cottage of her much-loved Swain.
What sorrows say can now usurp that breast
Where love and gayety were wont to rest?
Oh! speak, and let thy loved Damaetas know,
Who often thy joy partakes should share thy woe.

LYSIDAS. How kindly urged! then gentle Shepherd hear,
Nor stop the sigh, nor hold the gushing tear;
And yet, as I attempt the sadning tale,
My stronger sorrows over my powers prevail;
Such too will be thy sorrows when I Have said,
The first of Shepherds, brave Amintor's dead.

DAMAETAS. Amintor dead! -- then seated on the ground
Here by thy side, let specter gleam around;
Let wayward elves here dance their magic ring.
And night around us double horrors bring.
Here will I sit until her sable noon,
And aid the wolves to bay the wandering moon;
Though sickning dews and damps around my head
With falling stars, their baleful influence shed.

LYSIDAS. Oh! Shepherd often I Have heard thy pleasing strain,
Like Philomel in gentle woe complain.
Our flocks attentive to thy wondrous reed,
Left the clear stream, and quite forgot to feed.
Come then, once more with music fill the glade,
And waken airy Echo in her shade.
Such as when, at Menalcas death your song,
Fixed in attention all the listening throng.

DAMAETAS. 'Twas thy superior skill from Codrus' bore
The prize, two lambkins from his fleecy store,
Nor is Alexis' strain so sweet as thine,
Although the boasted favorite of the Nine.
It Is true my pipe has oft-times on the plain
Pleased the gay Nymph and cheered the active Swain.
But since Menalcas' death here by my side,
My reed, his gift, has still remained untried.

LYSIDAS. Then let us here, 'til early morn's return,
Join both our skills, and teach the night to mourn;
I Will stretch my utmost art to aid thy lays,
And happy me could I obtain thy praise.

DAMAETAS. Ah! now I know, why threatening flamed on high,
Bright blazing comets dreadful in the sky.
Our Sages shook their heads, and feared to tell
The future evil, which they knew full well.
Two moons are wasted since beneath this shade
As to our Shepherds on my reed I played,
With weary steps old Arcos hither strayed.
Thus spoke the Sire, here sorrow soon shall reign,
No longer joy shall dwell upon the plain,
Corroding care shall banish peaceful rest,
And pain and anguish seize on every breast.
I laughed in gayety to hear the Sire
Speak what I thought his dotage did inspire.
But now I know what caused his mighty dread,
The first of Shepherds, brave Amintor's dead.

LYSIDAS. When ruffian Robbers, ever in rapine bold,
Veiled in the shade of night would break our fold,
Amintor first was ever to pursue,
And never in vain his threatening arrows flew.
Often in their gore the midnight plunderers lay,
Oppressed with spoil, and sighed their souls away;
But now far hence is smiling safety fled,
Since brave Amintor, first of Swains, is dead.

DAMAETAS. Ever fond of danger, eager in the chase,
With fearless mind he sought the savage race;
Foremost to dare, he still with gallant pride
First clomb the cliff, or rushed into the tide;
'Til smeared in glorious horror with the gore,
Of the fierce Tiger or the foaming Boar,
At eve returning from the dangerous toil
He over his shoulders spread the shagged spoil.
Our Shepherds met him with a loud acclaim,
And every Coward's cheek was marked with shame.
But now unawed the Savage Tyrants tread
The silent grove, for brave Amintor's dead.

LYSIDAS. The sorrowing Mother met the mournful bier,
Loose on her neck flowed her disheveled hair;
Around her all her weeping Daughters stood,
And washed his wounds with tears, a briny flood.
Often times she sighed, and beat her aged breast,
And loud complaints her inward woe expressed.
Thus spoke the Dame, ye tuneful Shepherds come,
And hang your deathless ditties round his tomb;
Here all around your flowery garlands throw,
And on his grave let short-lived roses blow.
Haste here, ye Swains, here let your tears be shed,
Weep Shepherds, weep, the brave Amintor's dead.
So sung the Swains, 'til Phoebus' radiant light,
Chased to her azure bed the Queen of Night.

The DITHYRAMBIC demands a greater boldness than any other poetical
composition, and is indeed the only one in which a lyric irregularity may be
happily indulged.

Francis's HORACE.

As our Poet appears so warm on his subject, it may not be amiss to remark
here, that he never drank any Wine, and that his bumpers are all ideal, which
may serve, perhaps, as a refutation of that noted adage, that a water drinker
can never be a good Dithyrambic Poet.


A DITHYRAMBIC ON WINE.
I.
COME! let Mirth our hours employ,
The jolly God inspires;
The rosy juice our bosom fires,
And tunes our souls to joy.
See, great Bacchus now descending,
Gay, with blushing honors crowned;
Sprightly Mirth and Love attending,
Around him wait,
In smiling state --
Let Echo resound,
Let Echo resound
The joyful news all around.
II.
Fond Mortals come, if love perplex,
In Wine relief you will find;
Who'd whine for women's giddy sex
More fickle than the wind?
If beauty's bloom thy fancy warms,
Here, see her shine,
Clothed in superior charms;
More lovely than the blushing morn,
When first the opening day
Bedecks the thorn,
And makes the meadows gay.
Here see her in her crystal shrine;
See and adore; confess her all divine,
The Queen of Love and Joy.
Heed not thy Chloe's scorn --
This sparkling glass,
With winning grace,
Shall ever meet thy fond embrace,
And never, never, never cloy,
No never, never cloy.
III.
Here, POET! see, Castalia's spring --
Come, give me a bumper, I Will mount to the skies,
Another, another -- It Is done! I arise;
On fancy's wing,
I mount, I sing,
And now, sublime,
Parnassus' lofty top I climb --
But hark! what sounds are these I hear,
Soft as the dream of her in love,
Or Zephyr's whispering through the Grove?
And now, more solemn far than funeral woe,
The heavy numbers flow!
And now again,
The varied strain,
Grown louder and bolder, strikes quick on the ear,
And thrills through every vein.
IV.
It Is Pindar's song!
His softer notes the fanning gales
Waft across the spicy vales,
While, through the air,
Loud whirlwinds bear
The harsher notes along.
Inspired by Wine,
He leaves the lazy crowd below,
Who never dared to peep abroad,
And, mounting to his native sky,
For ever there shall shine.
No more I Will plod
The beaten road;
Like him inspired, like him I Will mount on high;
Like his my strain shall flow.
V.
Haste, ye Mortals! leave your sorrow;
Let pleasure crown to day -- to morrow
Yield to fate.
Join the universal chorus,
Bacchus reigns,
Ever great;
Bacchus reigns
Ever glorious --
Hark! the joyful groves rebound,
Sporting breezes catch the sound,
And tell to hill and dale around --
"Bacchus reigns" --
While far away,
The busy Echoes die away. --
THE WISH.
I ONLY ask a moderate fate,
And though not in obscurity,
I would not yet be placed too high;
Between the two extremes I Would be,
Not meanly low, nor yet too great,
From both contempt and envy free.
If no glittering wealth I have,
Content of bounteous heaven I crave,
For that is more,
Than all the India's shining store,
To be unto the dust a slave.
With heart, my little I will use,
Nor let pain my life devour,
Or for a griping heir refuse
Myself one pleasant hour.
No stately Edifice to rear,
My Wish would bound a small retreat,
In temperate air, and furnished neat;
No ornaments would I prepare,
No costly labors of the loom,
Should ever adorn my humble room;
To gild my roof, I naught require
But the stern Winter's friendly fire.
Free from tumultuous cares and noise,
If gracious heaven my Wish would give,
While sweet content augments my joys,
Thus, my remaining hours I Would live.
By arts ignoble never rise,
The Miser's ill-got wealth despise;
But blessed my leisure hours I Would spend,
The Muse enjoying, and my Friend.
A NIGHT-PIECE.
HOW awful is the Night! beneath whose shade,
Calm mournful silence ever serenely reigns;
And musing Meditation, heavenly Maid!
Unbends the mind, and sooths the heartfelt pains!
II.
What pleasing terrors strike upon the soul
While hills and vales around dusk swims away;
While murmuring streams in plaintive numbers roll,
And with their soft complainings close the day!
III.
While silver Cynthia, with her pallid beams,
Does clouded nature faintly re-illume,
Tips tops of trees, and dancing on the streams,
Adds livelier horror to the rising gloom!
IV.
What hand can picture forth the solemn scene,
The deepning shade and the faint glimmering light!
How much above the expressive art of Mr. JOHN GREEN, an ingenious Portrait
Painter, a particular friend of Mr. GODFREY'S, and Author of the Elegy, that
precedes these POEMS, on Mr. G's death.
G -- n
Are the dim beauties of the dewy night!
V.
How much this hour does noisy day excel
To those who heavenly contemplation love! --
Now naught is heard but pensive Philomel
The watery fall, or Zephyr in the grove.
VI.
Now searching thought unlimited may rove,
And into nature's deep recesses pry;
Spread her fleet wings to mount the realms above,
And gain the glowing glories of the sky.
VII.
Rich in expression, how sublimely bright,
Those lucent arguments above us shine!
Now, Atheist! now lift up thy wondering sight,
And own the great creating power divine.
VIII.
Heavens! what a throng, what a dread endless train,
Of complicated wonders yield surprise!
Systems on systems, systems yet again,
And suns on suns, continually arise!
IX.
Too daring thought! give over thy vain emprize,
Nor rashly pry -- at humble distance gaze!
Should heaven unveil those beauties to our eyes
The dazzled sense would sink beneath the blaze.
X.
But leave the glories of heaven's spangl'd dome,
And thy slow-steps to dreary churchyards lead;
There lean attentive on yon marble tomb,
And learn instruction from the silent dead.
XI.
How dismal is this place! whilst round I gaze,
What chilling fears my thoughtful soul invade!
Exaggerating Fancy shrubs does raise,
To dreadful specter gliding cross the shade.
XII.
Pale sleep! thou emblem of eternal rest,
When locked in thy coercive strong embrace,
Those of all-bounteous Nature's gifts possessed,
Are but as those whose gloomy haunts I trace.
XIII.
No objects now wide-straining eyes admit;
Deaf is the ear, mute the persuasive tongue,
Discerning judgment, and keen piercing wit
Are lost in thee, and warriors nerves unstrung!
XIV.
Still led by thee imagination roves,
On towering pinion seeks some distant world;
Or wanders pleased through soft enameled groves,
Or down the dreadful precipice is hurled.
XV.
While sad reclining on this silent tomb,
Surrounded with promiscuous dead I rest;
Thee, I invoke! sweet friendly sleep, O come!
Lock up my sense, and lull my troubled breast!
THE COURT OF FANCY; A POEM.
The Poet's eye, in a fine frenzy rolling,
Does glance from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven;
And, as imagination bodies forth
The forms of things unknown, the Poet's pen
Turns them to shape, and gives to aerie nothing
A local habitation and a name.
SHAKESPEARE.
***The learned reader need not be acquainted that the Author took the hint of
the Transition from the Court of Fancy to that of Delusion, from Chaucer's Poem
called the House of Fame, where the change is from the House of Fame to that of
Rumor; and that he likewise had Mr. Pope's beautiful Poem on that subject in
his eye, at the Time when he composed this Piece.

THE COURT OF FANCY.
'TWAS sultry noon, impatient of the heat
I sought the covert of a close retreat:
Soft by a bubbling fountain was I laid,
And over my head the spreading branches played;
When gentle slumber stole upon my eyes,
And busy Fiction bid this vision rise.
Methought I pensive unattended stood,
Wrapped in the horrors of a desert wood;
Old Night and Silence spread their sway around,
And not a breeze disturbed the dread profound.
To break the wild, and gain the neighboring plain
Often I essayed, and often essayed in vain;
Still in intricate mazes round I run,
And ever ended where I first begun.
While thus I laboring strove to explore my way,
Bright on my sense broke unexpected Day:
Retiring Night in haste withdrew her shade,
And sudden morn shone through the opening glade.
No more the scene a desert wild appeared,
A smiling grove its vernal honors reared;
While sweetness on the balmy breezes hung,
And all around a joyful Mattin rung.
Soft was the strain as Zephyr in the grove,
Or purling streams that through the meadows rove.
Now wild in air the varying strain is tossed,
In distant echoes then the sound is lost;
Again revived, and lo! the willing trees
Rise to the powerful numbers by degrees.
Trees now no more, robbed of their verdant bloom,
They shine supporters of a spacious dome,
The wood to bright transparent crystal changed,
High fluted columns rise in order ranged.
So to the magic of Amphion's lyre
Stones motion found, and Thebes was seen to aspire;
The nodding forests 'rose with the soft sound,
And gilded turrets glittered all around:
Each wondering God bent from his heavenly seat
To view what powerful music could complete.
High on a mountain was the pile disclosed,
And spreading limes the ascending walks composed;
While far below the waving woods declined,
Their verdant tops bowed with the gentle wind.
Bright varying Novelty produced delight,
And Majesty and Beauty charmed the sight.
Such are the scenes which Poets sweetly sing,
By Fancy taught to strike the trembling string.
Here Fancy's fane, near to the blessed abode
Of all her kindred Gods, superior stood.
Dome upon dome it sparkl'd from on high;
Its lofty top lost in the azure sky.
By Fiction's hand the amazing pile was reared,
In every part stupendous skill appeared;
In beautiful disorder yet complete,
The structure shone irregular and great:
The noble frontispiece of antique mold
Glittered with gems, and blazed with burnished gold.
Now through the sounding vaults, self opening rung
The massy gates on golden hinges hung;
All the bright structure was disclosed to view,
Magnificent with beauty ever new!
Trembling I stood absorbed in dread surprise,
And sudden glory dimmed my aching eyes.
Unnumber'd Pillars all around were placed,
Their capitals with artful sculpture graced.
Wide round the roof a fictious sky was raised,
A glorious Sun in the meridian blazed,
On the rich columns played his dazzling ray,
And all around diffused immortal day;
A shining Phoenix on the effusive rays
Fixed his aspiring eye with steady gaze.
Beneath appeared a checkered pavement, bright
With sparkling Jaspanyx and Chrysolite.
'Round, by creating Fiction's hand renewed,
Gay visionary scenes in order stood;
The obedient figures at her touch disclosed,
And various tales the glowing walls composed.
Here mighty Jove amidst assembled Gods,
Raised on his starry Throne majestic nods;
On his right hand the dreadful fates are seen,
And on his left is placed his haughty Queen.
There the pale Tyrant of the dreary coasts
Sways with his powerful scepter fleeting ghosts.
Blue Neptune scours along his watery reign,
Now lifts the waves aloft now stills the raging main.
Perched on a lofty rock AEolus stands,
And holds the winds in strong coercive bands.
Here the bright Queen of beauty stands confessed,
There angry Mars in martial honors dressed.
Alcides here appears with warrior pride,
The Lion's spoil descending over his side,
The watchful Dragon at his feet is lain,
The Lernean Hydra and dire Centaurs slain*
Here glows Diana eager in the chase,
And there Minerva shows with sober grace.
There with the madning rout close at his heels,
Young Bacchus, jolly God, triumphant reels.
Gay Maia's son high mounted on the wind,
Cuts through the air and leaves the clouds behind.
Toward the rosy East, great Mithra shone,
Bright in the glories of a rising sun.
Beneath in solemn pomp with hands uprear'd,
In flowing robes the Magi all appeared.
Here the sage Zoroaster.
Bactrian poised his magic wand,
Obedient Genii waited his command.
There Thammuz laid, while from the gaping wound.
Poured the rich stream, and sanguin'd all the ground.
Amidst his impious vot'ries Chemos' stood,
And horrid Moloch smeared with infant blood.
Northward fierce Woden stood with terrors crowned,
And angry Thor threw heedless thunder round.
Fair Friga with her lovely train was seen,
The beauteous rival of the paphian Queen.
Old Merlin struck the lyre, the wondering throng
Attended 'round to his prophetic song.
Southward disordered figures struck my eyes,.
Monkies and Serpents raised to deities;
Mad superstitious Egypt these revered
And to the hideous tribe their prayers preferred.
Maimed Memnon there seemed on his harp to play,
And hail Osiris bringing on the day.
Pale Isis crescent faintly glimmer'd here,
And barking Anubis displayed the year.
Gay sportive fawns adorned the distant scene,
In antic measures skipping over the green.
There sea Nymphs wantoned on the watery gleam,
Rode on the waves, or cleav'd the yielding stream.
Here the pale Sybils ranged their mystic leaves,
And AEtna with the laboring Cyclops heaves.
There craggy rocks the sons of Titan tore,
And mountains shaggy roots tremendous bore,
And threat'n'd Jove with the promiscuous war.
Bold Phaeton here urged his mad request,
Ambitious joy swelled his presumtuous breast;
Elate he mounted in the flaming car,
The Sire attended with a fixed despair;
Nor could the Parent's tears the Youth restrain,
He laughed at fear, and daring took the rein.
The fiery steeds his feeble hand despise,
And stretched with glowing ardor through the skies;
Now thunders rolled, pale lightning played around,
And the rash boy soon felt the burning wound.
Pygmalion there the statue seemed to move,
Assisted by the powerful Queen of Love;
With rapture fired, to his exulting breast
The animated stone he fondly pressed;
Transported on each shining feature gazed,
Now softened into life, and saw amazed,
Awakened into sense, her eye balls roll,
And heaving breasts bespoke the entering soul;
Saw on her cheeks the rosy tincture burn,
And felt her lips the ravished kiss return.
Famed Doedalus here winged the midway air,
And sighing, saw his Son disdain his care.
Young Icarus on spreading pinions rose,
And scorned the path his wary Sire had chose;
For heaven the aspiring Boy his flight begun,
But felt the ardor of too near a Sun;
The tempered wax before the scorching Ray
Melted, and lo! the loosened wings gave way;
And while his father's Name his accents gave,
Fell from the height, and sunk beneath the wave.
Diana's rage there hapless Acteon feels,
And saw his hounds pursuing at his heels;
Changed to a Stag, he swept along the plain,
In vain his speed, he flew from death in vain.
Elysium next disclosed its blissful bowers,
With heavenly fruitage decked, and radiant flowers;
Celestial Amaranth eternal bloomed,
And the bright Plains with odorous scents perfumed;
Through the gay Meads an amber current rolled.
Over sands resplendent as Arabia's gold,
On whose green banks the happy Shades reclined,
Quafft its sweet stream, and left their cares behind.
What ever Dreamer dreamt, or Poet sung,
Or lying Fable with her double tongue
Told the believing World, now did appear
Delusions all, for when approaching near
They shunned the view, and shrunk to empty Air.
High in the midst, raised on her rolling throne,
Sublimely eminent bright FANCY shone.
A glittering This Conceit is occasioned, by the Tiara's being a Badge of
Royalty used in the East, and the oriental Writers abounding much in Pieces of
Imagination.
Tiara her temples bound,
Rich set with sparkling Rubies all around;
Her azure eyes rolled with majestic grace,
And youth eternal bloomed upon her face,
A radiant bough, Ensign of her command,
Of polished gold waved in her lilly hand;
The same the Sybil to Aeneas gave,
When the bold Trojan crossed the Stygian wave,
In silver traces fixed unto her Car,
Four snowy Swans, proud of the imperial Fair,
Winged lightly on, each in gay beauty dressed,
Smoothed the soft plumage that adorned her breast.
Sacred to her the lucent Chariot drew,
Or whether wildly through the air she flew,
Or whether to the dreary shades of Night
Oppressed with gloom she downwards bent her flight,
Or proud aspiring sought the blessed abodes,
And boldly shot among the assembled Gods.
On her right hand appeared the joyful Nine,
And on her left the Graces all divine;
Young Infant Love soft on her breast reclined,
And with his Mother's glowing beauty shined.
Her favorite Sons were ranged in Order round,
In three bright bands with deathless laurels crowned;
Great Homer here enjoyed superior day,
Illuminated by bright Fancy's ray;
Apelles there, whose magic hand could give
Form to the mass, and bid the fiction live;
Timotheus next, whose animated Lyre
Cold Grief could charm, and thoughtless rage inspire.
Close at her feet a Bard in raptures lost
Was placed, and wildly round his eye balls tossed;
Great Fancy was the theme! the soothing strain
In floods of pleasure thrilled through every vein.
Thus, while the trembling notes ascend on high,
He sung; Indulgent Queen of every joy,
What rapture fills the breast thou do inspire,
The Lover's transport, and the Poet's fire!
At thy command obedient Pleasure bends,
And rosy Beauty to thy call attends;
The (...) gales shall swelling spread thy fame,
And echoing Groves well-pleased resound thy Name!
While thus around my eyes I wildly threw,
From charm to charm, and did each wonder view,
Pleased on the heavenly ravishment to gaze,
'Rose with the strain, or wantoned in the blaze!
Her awful Silence the bright Goddess broke,
And frowning, thus in angry mood she spoke.
Come thou, vain Mortal, here with searching Eye
Into the secrets of our Court to pry?
What rash presumption swells thy youthful breast,
That in our presence thus you have rudely pressed?
Trembling I kneeled, with fear my tongue was tied
A space, when speech regained, I thus replied.
With lowly Reverence I hither came,
Not to deride, but to adore thy Name;
To thee I ever dedicate my Song,
To hail thy glories 'midst this suppliant throng.
Then from her shining seat, the heavenly Maid
In beautiful arrision, answ'ring said;
Then have thy wish, here Mortal take this Lyre,
Strike bold the strings, and sing as I inspire.
Humbly I bowed, her mild commands obeyed,
And careless over the Lyre my fingers laid,
And soon with wild poetic rage possessed,
All my frame shook, and laboring heaved my breast.
By Fancy fired, enraptured thus I sung,
Whilst all around redoubling Echoes rung.
Zephyr attend, or whether through the grove
Soft whispering you the leafy branches move,
Or shaking dulcet dew-drops from each flower
Wide through the plain you spread the fragrant shower,
Or whether Sylvia panting in some shade
In tender accents woos thee to her aid!
No more in amorous sporting spend the day,
No longer wanton on her bosom play:
Fancy commands! obey the regal Fair,
Fancy commands! quick all your wings prepare!
From the Sun's early dawn till where again
He sets his glories in the azure main;
Through every Clime her royal mandate bear,
And bid mankind to her bright Court repair.
Hear Earth's Inhabitants! ye Mortals hear!
And let attentive wonder fix each ear.
Fancy invites! nor let her ask in vain,
Come, taste her heavenly sweets, and hail her reign!
Zephyr obedient on his wings conveyed
The joyful Summons warbling through the glade;
Swiftly he swept along the spicy vale,
Caught all its sweets, and in a balmy gale
Gently he stole on the fond Lover's ear,
And in loud accents bid the Warrior hear!
From different Climes the thronging Nations came,
And rushed promiscuously before the Dame;
Prostrate before her throne their hands they rear,
And to the Goddess loud prefer their prayer.
Confused they all demand her promised joys,
While the long vaults resound their clamorous noise.
As when loud billows break upon the shore,
Or over the opposing Rocks the torrents roar.
Her glittering branch impatient round she swung,
And instant silence seized each babbling tongue.
Abashed they trembling stood, and seemed to be
Transfixed in mute insensibility.
Quick was dispersed each wild tumultuous sound,
And the soft breezes all were hushed around.
Now swiftly forward false Delusion came,
Wrapped in a fulvid Cloud appeared the Dame.
Thin was her form, in airy garments dressed,
And grotesque figures flamed upon her vest;
In her right hand she held a magic glass,
From whence around reflected glories pass.
Blind by the subtle rays, the giddy Crowd
Rushed wildly from the Dome and shouted loud.
The few remained whom Fancy did inspire
Yet undeceived by vain Delusion's fire.
A Troop of shining forms the next came on,
Foremost bright Nature's awful Goddess shone.
Fair Truth she led, in spotless white arrayed,
And pleasing Beauty, sweet celestial Maid;
Where Truth and Nature aid the great design,
Beauty attends, and makes it all divine:
Sweet Poesy was seen their steps behind,
With golden tresses sporting in the wind;
In careless plaits did her bright garments flow,
And nodding laurels waved around her brow;
Sweetly she struck the string, and sweetly sung,
The attentive tribe on the soft accents hung.
It Is here is to sing who great in arms excel,
Who bravely conquered or who glorious fell;
Heroes in verse still gain a deathless name,
And ceaseless ages their renown proclaim.
Often to Philosophy she lends her aid,
And treads the Sage's solitary shade;
Her great first task is nobly to inspire
The immortal Soul with Virtue's sacred fire.
Then Painting forward moved in garlands dressed,
The Rainbows varied tints adorned her vest.
Great Nature's Rival! -- quick to her command
Beauty attends, and aids her powerful hand.
At her creative touch gay fictions glow,
Bright Tulips bloom, and opening Roses blow.
The canvass see, what pleasing prospects rise!
What varying Beauty strikes our wondering eyes!
Chilled Winter's wastes, or Spring's delightful green,
Hot Summer's pride, or Autumn's yellow scene;
Here lawns are spread, there towering forests wave,
The heights we fear, or wish the cooling lave!
Her blooming Sister in her hand she led,
Joy in her eye, fair Sculpture heaven taught Maid.
It Is here is to stone a mimic life to give,
Heroes and Sages at her call revive;
See flowery Orators with out-stretch'd hand
Addressed to speak, in glowing marble stand!
Sudden I heard soft sounds, a pleasing strain!
Music advanced with all her heavenly train.
Sweetly enraptured then my pulse beat high,
And my breast glowed fraught with unusual joy.
It Is harmony can every passion move,
Give sorrow ease, or melt the soul to love;
Exulting Pleasure to her call attends,
Even stormy Rage to powerful music bends.
With Turrets crowned bright Architecture shone,
The lovely Maid with easy steps came on;
Graceful her mien, her looks celestial shined,
Where majesty and softning beauty joined.
At her command see lofty Piles ascend,
Columns aspire, triumphal Arches bend.
Astronomy with proud aspiring Eye,
Gazed on the glowing beauties of the sky.
Her vest with glittering Stars was spangl'd over,
And in her hand a Telescope she bore.
With this she marked the rolling Planets way,
Or where portentous Comets dreadful stray.
Though last, not least Philosophy was seen,
Slow was her step, and awful was her mien;
A Volume open in her hand she held,
With Nature's law the ample page was filled.
It Is here is great Nature's wondrous depths to explore,
Or to the Gods in heavenly rapture soar.
With these bright Fancy's Sons their hours employ,
Pursue their lore, and taste each rising joy.
Now suddenly the scene was changed again,
And brought to view Delusion's spreading reign:
There intermingl'd hills and rocks were seen,
Here shady Groves and flowery Lawns between.
Full in the front a lofty Pile was reared,
The Architecture old and rude appeared.
Delusion's residence, within confined
Gay Fictions lurk, and Dreams of every kind.
Constant as waters roll, or flames ascend,
Hither their course the rising vapors bend;
Dressed by her hand they shine with mimic bloom,
Or at her word their nothingness resume.
But still from Fancy all her power she draws,
Bows to her Name, and owns her sacred Laws.
Some in light Dreams the sleeping senses move,
And led by them the thoughts unsettl'd rove,
Others more bold majestic portments take,
And plague delighted those who dream awake.
Such are the dreams of those who thirst for power,
The superstitious, and a thousand more.
Others usurp the features of the Dead,
And shake the torch around the Murth'rer's bed;
Affright the Vigil, or in wanton mirth
Make fools seek hidden treasures in the earth,
Or lead the weary traveller awry,
Or rising flame amazement in the sky.
Now with the crowd Delusion forward came,
A Troop of Phantoms fluttered round the Dame;
In bands the throng she instantly divides,
A Phantom over every band presides.
Foremost a bright majestic Form appeared,
And in her hand the honored Fasces reared;
Forward she strode with more than virgin pace,
And leer'd upon the Crowd with haughty grace.
Power was her name, assuming selfish Pride
And glittering Pomp attended by her side.
Her favorite Son high on a seat she placed,
With mimic gems and glassy bawbles graced;
Close by his side was seated wrinkl'd Care,
While Envy viewed him with malicious stare:
Sternly he eyed around the servile throng,
While loud acclaim proceeded from each tongue;
But from the giddy height devolving soon,
Reproach, Contempt and Shame is on him thrown.
Eager another mounts the chair of power,
And shines the empty pageant of an hour.
Dame Superstition was the next came on,
Bright on her head the gilded mitre shone,
Varying her aspect, now she raised her eye,
And seemed bewildered with extatic joy;
Then sudden gloom her countenance depressed,
Tears rolled apace, and sorrow heaved her breast;
Now calm again she silent viewed around
The prostrate Crowd bent humbly to the ground:
Then caught with sudden rage she hurled about
Her thundering Anathema among the Rout.
An aged wrinkl'd Hag the next appeared,
Four mouldering turrets over her temples reared;
In rows like beads the faithful medals tied,
In ornamental Rust adorned her side.
A broken Column of an ancient date
She dragged, and sinking seemed beneath the weight.
The Column all admired, the medals more,
The Inscription value, but the Rust adore.
The next to her approached a rev'rent Dame,
In trophies great from Insects torn she came;
With stately step she trod the plain along,
And threw her treasure 'midst the admiring throng.
Forward with joy each curious Mortal sprang,
This caught a gaudy wing, and that a pointed fang.
Before the giddy throng, which now advanced,
With mincing step gay Affectation danced,
Then sudden stopped, and staring on the Crowd
She frowned, then smiled, and giggl'd out aloud.
The numerous Throng attending round the Fair,
Mimick'd her gestures, and assumed her air.
A crowd of Mortals here with wondering eyes,
All pale and trembling gazed upon the skies;
Where on blue plains opposing hosts engage,
While shouts are heard and all the battle's rage.
Amidst the throng stood cold and heartless Fear,
The (...) of Nations whispering in each ear.
Here pallid Specter gleam'd, and there were seen
The Fairy Train in gambols on the green.
Through miry ways the rustic journeys round,
Nor dares presuming tread the hallowed ground;
Dire ills await the Wretch, so fable sings,
Or pinched all over, or pierced with thousand stings.
The Structure entering, as around I threw
My wondering eyes, gay forms arose to view.
False Pleasure here the borrowed form of Joy
Assumed, and rolled around her sparkling eye.
But who, allured by her enchanting song,
From Virtue shrinks, and mingles with her throng,
Soon sees her beauties fade, and to his eyes
Deformity and sad Disease arise.
In a dark corner hell-born Jealousy
A wan and haggard Spright, I did espy;
Watchful she rolled her ghastly eyes around,
And cautious trod to catch the whispering sound.
Her heart forever deathless vultures tear,
And by her side stalk anguish and despair.
Cursed is the wretch with her dire rage possessed,
When fancied ills destroy his wonted rest.
Pale Avarice was seen with looks of care,
And clasped her bags with never-ceasing fear.
Close foll'wing her a wretched spectre came,
With tattered garments, Poverty her name,
In vain her search to elude still Avarice strives,
Amidst her store in endless want she lives.
False Honor here I saw all gayly dressed,
Glass were her beads, and tinsel'd was her vest;
Formed in barbaric ages, rude her mien,
And in her hand the sanguin'd Sword was seen.
Not stained like Patriots in their Country's cause,
To save Religion, or support the Laws;
In private Strife the crimson torrents flow,
Their Country wounded by each fatal blow.
With checkered hood Dissembling stood behind,
And Falsehood coining lies to cheat Mankind;
While with smooth art deceitful Flattery
Addressed the ear of listening Vanity.
The gloom was now disclosed where Spleen remained,
A thousand various ills the Goddess pained.
As powerful Fancy works here Mortals are
Transformed to glass, or China's brittle ware;
Oppressed by Spleen no longer joy they know,
For ever tortured with imagined woe.
As thus I onward moved with wandering pace,
And viewed the varied wonders of the place;
Just heaven, I cried, Oh! give me to restrain
Imagination with a steady rein!
Though often she leads through Pleasure's flowery ways,
In Error's thorny path she sometimes strays.
Let me my hours with solid Judgment spend,
Nor to Delusion's airy dreams attend;
By Reason guided we shall only know
Those heavenly joys which Fancy can bestow!
VICTORY. A POEM.
I.
ON a soft bank, wrapped in the gloomy groves,
(Through which Ohio's ever rolling wave,
Unawed by moons, meandring wildly roves,
And sweetly murmuring seems to mourn the brave;)
II.
Britannia sad reclined, and over their Grave
Surcharged with grief her azure eyes did move,
Her plaint was aided by the mournful wave,
And Zephyr to return her sigh still strove.
III.
Her spear and laurel-wreath aside were thrown,
The big round pearly drops each other trace
From her bright eyes in gushing torrents down,
And washed the roses from her beauteous face.
IV.
"Ah! why, (then cried the bright angelic Maid)
"Why is my breast a prey to foul despair?
"It is but folly thus to mourn the dead,
"No longer then I Will idly loiter here.
V.
"I Will seek where VICTORY her seat does rear,
"And all around her powerful influence spread,
"She yet perhaps may listen to my prayer,
"And grant revenge for every gallant Shade.
VI.
Then spread her snowy wings, and sought the skies,
A lucent path proclaimed the Goddess' flight;
So through the air the streaming lightning flies,
And leaves behind a dreadful blaze of light.
VII.
Above where Morning decks the lovely East
With the deep beauties of the Virgin's glow,
On her bright way Britannia swiftly pressed,
And left the busy worlds to roll below.
VIII.
And soon she gained the vast amazing height,
And soon the shining Palace she espies,
The massy Gates wide opening, gave the bright
Celestial Beauty to her wondering eyes.
IX.
Rude was the Structures front, and round was heard
The groans of anguish echoing through the gloom,
Within bright majesty and grace appeared,
And sounds of triumph shook the spacious Dome.
X.
Horror was Porter, with a ghastly stare
His eyebrows raised, his mouth was opened wide,
A hideous Concave! but no tongue was there,
For speech to him the angry Powers denied.
XI.
The next grim Death was placed, and by his side
Pale shivering Fear, and ever writhing Pain,
His Sister that, and this his gloomy Bride,
Hung on his hand a dreadful hellish Train.
XII.
Clad in deep sables Sorrow did appear,
All wan and ghastly with dejected eye,
Eager she treasured every Widow's tear,
And numbered every helpless Orphan's sigh.
XIII.
High on her shining seat was Victory placed,
Sweet were her smiles, but dreadful was her frown,
Her left hand with the spreading palm was graced,
And in her right she held the Victor's crown.
XIV
One perfect Ruby was her glittering throne,
Gold were the ascending steps, but smeared with blood,
Close by her side bright laureled Glory shone,
And Fame with her loud sounding Trumpet stood.
XV.
Slavery, fast bound to her triumphant car,
In anguish gnash'd her teeth, and shook her chain,
While Liberty aloft, poised in the air,
With pitying eye beheld the Miscreant's pain.
XVI.
Behind brisk Jollity, in frolic mood,
With the full Bowl, and crowned with grapes, was shown,
The Muse, ever grateful to the brave and good,
Struck the soft Lyre with sweetness all her own.
XVII.
And now, the last of all this varied throng,
Sweet Peace was by her branching Olive known,
Smiling, with easy steps she swept along,
Nor ever deformed her beauties with a frown.
XVIII.
Around the wall, in curious niches placed,
The imag'd Heroes sternly frowned in gold,
Each warlike arm a polished Falchin graced,
Their brows were honored with the Laurel's fold.
XIX.
Or those who graced the happier days of old,
Who to the heavens their envied names had raised,
Or those whom later ages had enrolled,
On the bright list in shining armor blazed.
XX.
Prussia, great Monarch! whom no fate can move,
Superior 'bove the glorious Train appeared,
In all the terrors of another Jove,
While the dread bolt his sable Eagle reared.
XXI.
Next Ferdinand; who calm the War surveys,
Serenity ever gilds his princely breast,
So Neptune skims along the troubled waves,
And smiling bids old Ocean be at rest.
XXII.
Over the bright pavement now, with eager haste,
(To where great Victory triumphant shone,
Raised on her glittering seat) Britannia pressed,
And humbly bowed before her awful throne.
XXIII.
Then thus she spoke, (but 'ere she speech could gain,
She dropped fresh tears, and heaved some poignant sighs)
"Oh! brightest thou of the celestial train,
"Adored by Man, and favorite of the Skies!
XXIV.
"Once was I blessed, when over my infant days
"Well pleased you smiled, and reared me up to fame,
"Then did I wanton in thy glorious blaze,
"And distant Nations trembled at my name!
XXV.
"Then to my sway was Gallia forced to yield,
"In vain she called her numerous armies forth;
" Cressy and Poitiers, and the glorious field
"Of Agincourt, proclaimed my Britons worth.
XXVI.
"But now in vain, forsook by heaven and Thee,
"In vain they strive, their courage all is vain;
"Though the dear prize is Fame and Liberty,
"They see triumphant Slaves, and dread the chain.
XXVII.
"For pity (thou, who with a Mother's care,
"Hung over my youth) propitious lend thy aid;
"Their baleful heads, see the pale Lilies rear,
"While my loved Roses mourning droop and fade!
XXVIII.
She ceased, nor could she more, distressing woe
Her utt'rance stopped, and cut the moving Tale,
Down her pale cheeks the briny torrents flow,
Nor Hope could over her strengthening Fears prevail.
XXIX.
Then Victory thus, "Oh! thou, my Joy and Pride!
"Near to my heart, and favorite of my train,
"Thou would not thus have mourned had heaven complied,
"Nor had thy gallant Britons toiled in vain.
XXX.
"But now new laurels wait to grace thy brow,
"And heaven appeased, a chearing (...)ay shall give,
"Thy glory then another dawn shall know,
"Thy power again, and all thy joys revive.
XXXI.
"Thy Fleets, the lordly Sovereigns of the Sea,
"Shall bear from thee the terrors of the war,
"While Gallia pale, and trembling with dismay,
"Shall shrink to view thy Navy from afar.
XXXII.
"Soon Canada shall own thy powerful sway,
"Yet bleeding Conquest here will ask the tear,
"Like noble Decius, thy brave General WOLF.
Chief must pay
"His life a victim for his Country here.
XXXIII.
She said, and while Britannia humbly bowed,
Bid willing Fame her silver trumpet sound,
Britannia's name rung through the vaults aloud,
And Echo gave it to the heavens around!
A PARAPHRASE on the first PSALM.
1.
BLESSED is the man who never lent
To bold designing men his ear,
Who, on his Country's good intent,
From bribing Offices is clear:
2.
But ever constant will remain
Supporter of her lawful right,
Will firm her liberty maintain,
Against Oppressors day and night.
3.
Like a fair Tree he shall appear;
Which planted by some River's side,
Its fruit does in due season bear,
And blooms in vernal Nature's pride.
4.
Thus shall it flourish, thus shall rise,
Its verdant Leaf shall never fade,
Its beauties still shall glad our eyes,
And Pleasure dwell beneath its shade.
5.
But men of dark base treachery,
Like chaff before the active wind,
By giddy factions tossed shall be,
Till left the scorn of all Mankind.
6.
Where Justice reigns they shun the place,
Or where the open way does shine,
Or where bright Truth our Senates grace,
But veiled by night they then design.
7.
To all the virtuous Patriot known,
Shall ever live in endless fame,
Whilst they (their deep laid schemes overthrown),
Shall die, and with them die their name.
A CANTATA, ON PEACE. 1763. To Mr. N. E.
RECITATIVE.
WHERE Schuylkil's banks the shades adorn,
And roses opening to the morn,
Give odours to the breeze;
Thus Corydon, a tuneful Swain,
Tuned his soft reed a soothing strain,
By Nature formed to please.
While Wood-Nymphs listening round him stood,
The Naiads left the oozy flood,
Caught by the heavenly song.
Attention, to the Muse's aid,
Called Silence from her secret shade,
And Rapture joined the throng.
AIR.
Let Pleasure smile upon the plain,
See Peace, with balmy wing,
Now hither bends her flight again,
To crown the joyful spring.
Close by the fair One's side are seen,
The Arts, with garlands dressed,
Gay Commerce, with engaging mien,
And Wealth, with gaudy vest.
Now may the Muse enjoy the shade,
Now tune her pleasing song,
While wanton Echo through the glade
Shall waft the strain along.
Then let all join the cheerful sound,
It Is Peace, sweet Peace we sing!
And let the joyful groves around
With the loud Chorus ring.
CHORUS.
Then let all join the cheerful sound,
It Is Peace, sweet Peace we sing!
And let the joyful groves around
With the loud Chorus ring.
SONGS
I.
1.
THE day was closed beneath the shade,
As pensive Celia sat,
For Damon mourned the lovely Maid,
And railed at envious fate.
Thus to the night she gave her woe,
While hushed was all the wood,
Still were the winds, the streams ran slow,
And Silence listening stood.
2.
Ah! but in vain are tears and sighs,
In vain must Celia mourn,
From me the faithless Damon flies,
And leaves me but his scorn.
Why do the flattering Shepherds say,
Who sees my beauty dies?
Why rob the Sovereign of the Day,
To deck those dreaded eyes?
3.
Nor are those arts to man confined,
The limpid streams deceive,
In the soft mirror charms I find.
And what I wish believe.
But what are all these boasted charms;
They cannot Damon move?
For glory now he leaves my arms,
And slights my proffered love.
II.
1.
WHEN in Celia's heavenly Eye
Soft inviting Love I spy,
Though you say it is all a cheat,
I must clasp the dear deceit.
2.
Why should I more knowledge gain,
When it only gives me pain?
If deceived I Am still at rest,
In the sweet Delusion blessed.
III. TO SYLVIA.
1.
WHY seek you to know what your fond Damon feels,
Yet meet with derision what Passion reveals?
Thy bosom proud Sylvia distress never could move,
Nor ever could feel the soft raptures of Love.
2.
When Damon would urge you with sighs, and with tears,
To pity his sufferings, you laugh at his fears;
Thus cold, and thus cruel, those joys you will never find
Which virtue yields virtue in sympathy joined.
3.
So some curious Image whose figure at most,
And beautiful outside is all it can boast,
By the Artist's kind hand all its beauties are dressed,
And though mimicking Life is a Stone at the best.
4.
Then hear me, proud Sylvia, nor boast your bright charms,
Which every fond bosom so pow'rfully warms,
While thus like an image of life, but a show,
You're swayed by no Passion, no Pleasure you will know.
5.
Accept the advice which I friendly would give,
Drive hence Affectation ever wrinkles arrive;
Or like some maimed statue, disdainful thrown by,
With rubbish and lumber unheeded you will lie.
IV.
1.
YOUNG Thyrsis with sighs often tells me his Tale,
And artfully strives over my heart to prevail,
He sings me love-songs as we trace through the Grove,
And on each fair Poplar hangs sonnets love.
Though I often smile on him to soften his pain,
(For wit I would have to embellish my train)
I still put him off, for I have him so fast,
I know he with joy will accept me at last.
2.
Among the gay Tirbe that still flatter my pride,
There Is Cloddy is handsome, and wealthy beside;
With such a gay partner more joys I can prove
Than to live in a Cottage with Thyrsis on love.
Though the Shepherd is gentle, yet blame me who can,
Since wealth, and not manners, it is now makes the man*
But should I fail here, and my hopes be all past,
Fond Thyrsis I know will accept me at last.
3.
Thus Delia enlivened the grove with her strain.
When Thyrsis, the Shepherd, came over the plain;
Bright Chloris he led, whom he would just made his bride,
Joy shone in their eyes, as they walked side by side;
She scorned each low cunning, nor wished to deceive*
But all her delight was sweet pleasure to give.
In wedlock she chose to tie the Swain fast,
For Shepherds will change if put off to the last.
V.
1.
O Come to A pleasant Retreat, nigh Cape Fear, in North Carolina.
Masonborough's grove,
Ye Nymphs and Swains away,
Where blooming Innocence and Love,
And Pleasure crown the day.
2.
Here dwells the Muse, here her bright Seat
Erects the lovely Maid,
From Noise and Show, a blessed retreat,
She seeks the sylvan shade.
3.
Hence Myra, with that scornful air,
Nor frown within this grove,
Fell hate shall find no resting here,
It Is sacred all to Love.
4.
And Chloe, on whose wanton breast
Lascivious breezes play,
It Is Innocence that makes us blessed,
And as the Season gay.
5.
Ye noisy Revellers retire,
Bear your loud laughter hence,
It Is Virtue shall our songs inspire,
And Mirth without offense.
6.
The Queen of Beauty, all divine,
Here spreads her gentle reign,
See, all around, the graces shine,
Like Cynthia's silver train.
VI.
1.
FOR Chloris long I sighed in vain,
Nor could her bosom move,
She met my vows with cold disdain,
And scorn returned for Love.
At length, grown weary of her pride,
I left the haughty Maid,
Corinna's fetters now I tried,
Who love for love repaid.
2.
With her the pleasing hours I waste,
With her such joys I prove,
As kindred Souls alone can taste,
When joined in mutual Love.
Ye Shepherds here, nor slight my strain,
Fly, fly the scornful Fair,
Kind Nymphs you will find to ease your pain,
And soften every care.
VII. AMYNTOR.
RECITATIVE.
LONG had Amyntor free from Love remained,
The God enraged to see his power disdained,
Bent his best bow, and aiming at his breast
The fatal shaft, he thus the Swain addressed.
AIR.
Hear me, hear me senseless Rover,
Soon thou now shallt be a Lover,
Cupid will his power maintain;
Haughty Delia shall enslave thee,
Thou who thus insulting brav'st me,
Shall unpitied drag the chain.
RECITATIVE.
He ceased, and quick he shot the pointed dart,
Far short it fell, nor reached Amyntor's heart;
The angry God was filled with vast surprise,
Abashed he stood, while thus the Swain replies.
AIR.
Think not, Cupid, vain Deceiver,
I will own thy power ever,
Guarded from thy arts by Wine;
Haughty Beauty never shall grieve me,
Bacchus still shall ever relieve me,
All his rosy joys are mine;
All his rosy joys are mine.
THE ASSEMBLY OF BIRDS; from CHAUCER.
Begins at the thirteenth Stanza of Chaucer's Poem, called, "The Assembly of
Fowls." The Argument of which is, all Fowls are gathered before Nature on St.
Valentine's Day, to choose their Mates. A Female Eagle being beloved of three
Falcons, requires a Year's respite to make her Choice: Upon this Trial, Qui
bien aim tard oublie: He that loves well, is slow to forget.

Qui bien aim tard oublie. TO western climes retired declining day,
And night excluded every lucent ray;
In dens the wearied Beasts were couched to rest,
And each gay Warbler sunk into her nest.
Sad Philomel alone, with plaintive strain,
Chased silence from Old Night's deep gloomy reign:
When locked in gentle slumber was I laid,
And, all around me, airy Phantoms played.
O Cytherea! love's all-pow'rful Queen,
'Twas thou who raised the beauteous mimic scene.
Give me to know the sacred fire again,
'Twas Love inspired, and Love shall guide the pen.
The Sportsman sleeping on the dewy ground,
Pursues the Game, and chears the eager hound:
The Miser tells in dreams his hidden store,
And warlike Knights fight all their battles over;
While those who burn amid the fever's rage,
In fancied Cups their parching thirst assuage.
Nor wonder then if I in dreams should stray,
Where Love inviting makes the fiction gay.
In a wide plain methought that I was placed,
With Spring's gay liv'ry all the scene was graced.
A lofty beauteous wall before me shone,
Like em'rald green was every polished stone;
High in the front a massy gate was reared,
Inscriptions on each glittering fold appeared.
Of gold and azure were the letters wrought,
But different seemed to be the Writer's thought.
To that delightful place through 'me men go,
Where wounded hearts no longer feel their woe;
To that delightful place where ever gay,
And jocund, sports the green and lusty May.
No more let pining grief your breasts annoy,
Haste, enter in, and taste of deathless joy.
To that cursed place, then spoke the other side,
Men go through me where joy shall never abide;
To that cursed place where trees no leaves shall bear,
But chilly Winter shivers through the year.
Here wasting Sorrow spreads her gloomy reign,
Danger attends, and sad distressful Pain.
The varying scene astonished to behold,
A while I stood, sometimes with fear made cold,
With warmer wishes then again grown bold.
In vain the Riddle to explain I try,
Still loath to enter, and as loath to fly.
So when the ever-faithful Needle set,
Between two Magnets, each of equal weight,
While power to pow'er opposs'd, the war maintains,
Fixed and immovable it still remains.
As thus I stood, in thoughtful mood profound,
Soft melody seemed floating all around.
The gates flew open-wide, new beauties rise,
Gay pleasing prospects struck my wondering eyes,
Fair spreading trees adorned the pleasing scene,
By bounteous Nature dressed all gay and green.
The builder Oak, the lofty pillar Elm,
The hardy Ash, and the Victorious Palm;
The Cypress, friend to Sorrow, mournful Tree,
The Fir, bold sailor over the restless sea.
The Holme for whipper's lash, the Box tree too,
The Asp for shafts, for bows the bending Yew;
The peaceful Olive, and the drunken Vine,
And Laurel sacred to the tuneful Nine.
While round were seen the Heart, the Buck, the Hind,
The bounding Roe, and Beasts of every kind.
A garden saw I, full of pleasant bowers,
Close by a river's brink, enriched with flowers.
The curling streams in gentle murmurs glide,
And finny Squadrons sported down the tide.
While beauteous Swans in milk-white plumage dressed,
Against the waves their downy bosoms pressed.
On every bough the Birds were heard to sing,
As when they joyous hail the gladsome Spring.
And gentle Zephyr softly whispering round,
Seemed joined accordant to the pleasing sound.
Mild was the air, the sky serene and clear,
And spring eternal crowned the rolling year.
Here wan Disease was never known to tread,
Nor palsy age to shake his hoary head:
Health painted rosy blushes on each face,
And blooming youth gave every other grace.
Here day for ever shone, no night was here,
But light and joy still banished every fear.
Enticing Pleasure there I did espy,
Sweet were her looks, and full of courtesy.
Beneath a spreading oak there as I guess,
Saw I Delight, and with him Gentleness.
There saw I Beauty, in a nice attire,
And Youth, with Jollity and warm Desire.
False Flattery, Favor, Diligence, and Three
Whose names shall not be here disclosed by me.
On lofty jasper Pillars raised on high,
A Temple 'rose, and seemed to kiss the sky.
Here Nymphs for ever danced an endless round,
A varied Train, some with sad myrtle crowned,
Their garments torn, with loose disheveled hair,
And on their brows was sorrow marked, and care.
Others more gay, in flowery garlands dressed.
And Joy and Gladness seemed to swell each breast.
With looks serene, close by the Structure's gate;
Peace with her lovely blooming Olives sat.
Sweet was her envied smile, and by her side,
Pale Patience, on a sandy bank, I spied.
Here Art was seated, with her shining train,
And Majesty spread round her high domain.
On the bright Roof with gold and azure graced,
Full many thousand pair of Doves were placed.
Gay Wealth stood Porter at the Temple door,
And in his hand a golden wand he bore.
At whose all powerful touch the Gates remove,
And open all the shining Courts of Love.
Haughty his mien, Pride sat upon his brow!
And loosely down his glittering vestments flow.
Entering within I heard unnumber'd sighs,
Such as from fond despairing Lovers rise;
Warm was the Gale, and kindled by Desire,
And every Breast seemed scorched with inward fire.
On a rich bed bright sea-born Venus laid,
Her loose thin vestments every charm betrayed;
In golden fillets were her tresses bound,
The blooming Graces all were waiting round.
Fair bounteous Ceres by the Goddess stood,
And youthful Bacchus, in a frolic mood.
His brows were with bright purple honors dressed,
While in the Bowl the juicy grape he pressed.
It Is sprightly Wine can the dull passions move,
And Ceres' blessings give us power to Love.
High on a shining seat with rubies graced,
Cupid, the God of amorous thoughts, was placed.
Bent was his bow, and in his hand a dart
He held, on which was fixed a bleeding heart;
Around his throne unnumber'd crowds attend,
And to the God in awful reverence bend.
Their prayers with mingled sighs they loud preferred,
Like rolling thunder from a distance heard.
Around, as trophies, bows were cast unstrung,
And useless now, the empty quivers hung.
Once by bright Nymphs these shining arms were borne,
Who strict to keep Diana's law had sworn.
In vain the Goddess called, the desert Grove
They left, and sped to taste the sweets of Love.
The shining wall with tales was painted over,
Of those who bowed to Love's almighty power.
In a fair Grove, which near the Temple stood,
Through which there gently rolled a murmuring flood;
Raised on a bank, with fragrant flowers made gay,
Great NATURE sat, whose laws we all obey.
(As Summer's sun the Stars in light excel,
So she surpasses all that tongue can tell.)
Around the Dame the Birds assembled all,
For 'twas St. Valentine's great festival.
Each to select his mate did now appear,
So ancient custom fixed from year to year.
The highest seats the Birds of prey did grace,
Who fed on worms enjoyed the second place;
While those who humbler fed on seeds were seen,
Unnumber'd spread along the enameled green.
And here might men the royal Eagle find,
With other Eagles of a lower kind;
The gentle Falcon, and the Popinjay,
And Peacock in his angel-feathers gay;
The jealous Swan, the scornful Jay and Stare,
The boding Owl, and Crow with voice of care;
The Chough to thiev'ry prone, the chatt'ring Pie,
And the false Lapwing full of treachery.
The Sparrow, Venus' son, the Nightingale,
And Swallow, Murderer of the bees so small;
The Pheasant, Scorner of the Cock by night,
With the tame Ruddock, and the coward Kite.
The Cuckoo still unkind, the Crane, the Geaunt,
The wakeful Goose, and glutton Cormorant;
The wedded Turtle, and the Goosehawke rare,
The Throstle old, and the frosty Fieldefare.
With numbers more, whose names I shall not tell,
Who in shrill notes, or gaudy dress excel.
Left unfinished

THE PRINCE OF PARTHIA, A TRAGEDY.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Artabanus, King of Parthia. his Sons.
Arsaces, Vardanes, Gotarzes,
Barzaphernes, Lieutenant General, under Arsaces. Officers at Court.
Lysias, Phraates,
Bethas, a Noble Captive.
WOMEN.
Thermusa, the Queen. Evanthe, beloved by Arsaces. Cleone, her Confident.
Edessa, Attendant on the Queen.
Guards and Attendants.

Scene, CTESIPHON.

Advertisement.
OUR Author has made Use of the licentia poetica in the Management of this
Dramatic Piece; and deviates, in a particular or two, from what is agreed on by
Historians: The Queen Thermusa being not the Wife of King Artabanus, but
(according to Tacitus, Strabo and Josephus) of Phraates; Artabanus being the
fourth King of Parthia after him. Such Lapses are not unprecedented among the
Poets; and will the more readily admit of an Excuse, when the Voice of History
is followed in the Description of Characters.

THE PRINCE OF PARTHIA, A TRAGEDY.
ACT I.
SCENE I. The Temple of the SUN.
GOTARZES and PHRAATES. GOTARZES. HE comes, Arsaces comes, my gallant Brother
(Like shining Mars in all the pomp of conquest)
Triumphant enters now our joyful gates;
Bright Victory waits on his glittering car,
And shows her favorite to the wondering crowd;
While Fame exulting sounds the happy name
To realms remote, and bids the world admire.
Oh! it is a glorious day: -- let none presume
TO indulge the tear, or wear the gloom of sorrow;
This day shall shine in Ages yet to come,
And grace the PARTHIAN story.

PHRAATES. Glad Ctes'phon
Pours forth her numbers, like a rolling deluge,
To meet the blooming Hero; all the ways,
On either side, as far as sight can stretch,
Are lined with crowds, and on the lofty walls
Innumerable multitudes are ranged.
On every countenance impatience sat
With roving eye, before the train appeared.
But when they saw the Darling of the Fates,
They rent the air with loud repeated shouts;
The Mother showed him to her infant Son,
And taught his lisping tongue to name Arsaces:
Even aged Sires, whose sounds are scarcely heard,
By feeble strength supported, tossed their caps,
And gave their murmur to the general voice.

GOTARZES. The spacious streets, which lead up to the Temple,
Are strewn with flowers; each, with frantic joy,
His garland forms, and throws it in the way.
What pleasure, Phraates, must swell his bosom,
So see the prostrate nation all around him,
And know he is made them happy! to hear them
Tease the Gods, to shower their blessings on him!
Happy Arsaces! fain I Would imitate
Thy matchless worth, and be a shining joy!

PHRAATES Hark! what a shout was that which pierced the skies!
It seemed as though all Nature's beings joined,
To hail thy glorious Brother.

GOTARZES. Happy Parthia!
Now proud Arabia dreads her destined chains,
While shame and rout disperses all her sons.
Barzaphernes pursues the fugitives,
The few whom favoring Night redeemed from slaughter;
Swiftly they fled, for fear had winged their speed,
And made them bless the shade which saf'ty gave.

PHRAATES. What a bright hope is ours, when those dread powers
Who rule yon heaven, and guide the mov'ments here,
Shall call your royal Father to their joys:
In blessed Arsaces every virtue meets;
He Is generous, brave, and wise, and good,
Has skill to act, and noble fortitude
To face bold danger, in the battle firm,
And dauntless as a Lion fronts his foe.
Yet is he swayed by every tender passion,
Forgiving mercy, gentleness and love;
Which speak the Hero friend of humankind.

GOTARZES. And let me speak, for it is to him I owe
That here I stand, and breath the common air,
And it is my pride to tell it to the world.
One luckless day as in the eager chase
My Courser wildly bore me from the rest,
A monst'rous Leopard from a bosky fen
Rushed forth, and foaming lashed the ground,
And fiercely eyed me as his destined quarry.
My javelin swift I threw, but over his head
It erring passed, and harmless in the air
Spent all its force; my falchin then I seized,
Advancing to attack my ireful foe,
When furiously the savage sprung upon me,
And tore me to the ground; my treacherous blade
Above my hand snap'd short, and left me quite
Defenseless to his rage; Arsaces then,
Hearing the din, flew like some pitying power,
And quickly freed me from the Monster's paws,
Drenching his bright lance in his spotted breast.

PHRAATES. How different he from arrogant Vardanes?
That haughty Prince eyes with a stern contempt
All other Mortals, and with lofty mien
He treads the earth as though he were a God.
Nay, I believe that his ambitious soul,
Had it but power to its licentious wishes,
Would dare dispute with Jove the rule of heaven*
Like a Titanian son with giant insolence,
Match with the Gods, and wage immortal war,
'Til their red wrath should hurl him headlong down,
Even to destruction's lowest pit of horror.

GOTARZES. Methinks he wears not that becoming joy
Which on this bright occasion gilds the court;
His brow's contracted with a gloomy frown,
Pensive he stalks along, and seems a prey
To pining discontent.

PHRAATES. Arsaces he dislikes,
For standing 'twixt him, and the hope of Empire;
While Envy, like a ravenous Vulture tears
His cankered heart, to see your Brother's triumph.

GOTARZES. And yet Vardanes owes that hated Brother
As much as I; 'twas summer last, as we
Were bathing in Euphrates' flood, Vardanes
Proud of strength would seek the further shore;
But 'ere he the mid-stream gained, a poignant pain
Shot through his well-strung nerves, contracting all,
And the stiff joints refused their wonted aid.
Loudly he cried for help, Arsaces heard,
And through the swelling waves he rushed to save
His drowning Brother, and gave him life,
And for the boon the Ingrate pays him hate.

PHRAATES. There Is something in the wind, for I Have observed
Of late he much frequents the Queen's apartment,
And fain would court her favor, wild is she
To gain revenge for fell Vonones' death,
And firm resolves the ruin of Arsaces.
Because that filled with filial piety,
To save his Royal Sire, he struck the bold
Presumptuous Traitor dead; nor heeds she
The hand which gave her Liberty, nay raised her
Again to Royalty.

GOTARZES. Ingratitude,
Thou hell-born fiend, how horrid is thy form!
The Gods sure let thee loose to scourge mankind,
And save them from an endless waste of thunder.

PHRAATES. Yet I Have beheld this now so haughty Queen,
Bent with distress, and even by pride forsook,
When following thy Sire's triumphant car,
Her tears and ravings moved the senseless herd,
And pity blessed their more than savage breasts,
With the short pleasure of a moments softness.
Thy Father, conquered by her charms, (for what
Can charm like mourning beauty) soon struck off
Her chains, and raised her to his bed and throne.
Adorned the brows of her aspiring Son,
The fierce Vonones, with the regal crown
Of rich Armenia, once the happy rule
Of Tisaphernes, her deceased Lord.

GOTARZES. And he in wasteful war returned his thanks,
Refused the homage he had sworn to pay,
And spread Destruction every where around,
'Til from Arsaces hand he met the fate
His crimes deserved.

PHRAATES. As yet your princely Brother
Has escaped Thermusa's, rage, for still residing
In peaceful times, within his Province, never
Has fortune blessed her with a sight of him,
On whom she would wreck her vengeance.

GOTARZES. She has won
By spells, I think, so much on my fond father,
That he is guided by her will alone.
She rules the realm, her pleasure is a law,
All offices and favors are bestowed,
As she directs.

PHRAATES. But see, the Prince, Vardanes,
Proud Lysias with him, he whose soul is harsh
With jarring discord. Naught but madding rage,
And ruffian-like revenge his breast can know,
Indeed to gain a point he will condescend
To mask the native rancour of his heart,
And smooth his venomed tongue with flattery.
Assiduous now he courts Vardanes' friendship,
See, how he seems to answer all his gloom,
And give him frown for frown.

GOTARZES. Let us retire,
And shun them now; I know not what it means,
But chilling horror shivers over my limbs,
When Lysias I behold. --

SCENE II.
VARDANES and LYSIAS. LYSIAS. [Shout. That shout proclaims
Arsaces near approach.

VARDANES. Peace, prithee peace,
Will thou still shock me with that hated sound,
And grate harsh discord in my offended ear?
If thou art fond of echoing the name,
Join with the servile crowd, and hail his triumph.

LYSIAS. I hail him? By our glorious shining God,
I Would sooner lose my speech, and all my days
In silence rest, conversing with my thoughts,
Than hail Arsaces.

VARDANES. Yet, again his name,
Sure there is magic in it, PARTHIA'S drunk
And giddy with the joy; the houses tops
With gaping spectators are thronged, nay wild
They climb such precipices that the eye
Is dazzl'd with their daring; every wretch
Who long has been immured, nor dared enjoy
The common benefits of sun and air,
Creeps from his lurking place; even feeble age,
Long to the sickly couch confined, stalks forth,
And with infectious breath assails the Gods.
O! curse the name, the idol of their joy.

LYSIAS. And what is that name, that thus they should disturb
The ambient air, and weary gracious heaven
With ceaseless bellowings? Vardanes sounds
With equal harmony, and suits as well
The loud repeated shouts of noisy joy.
Can he bid Chaos Nature's rule dissolve,
Can he deprive mankind of light and day,
And turn the Seasons from their destined course?
Say, can he do all this, and be a God?
If not, what is his matchless merit? What dares he,
Vardanes dares not? blush not noble prince,
For praise is merit's due, and I will give it;
Even mid the crowd which waits thy Brother's smile,
I Would loud proclaim the merit of Vardanes.

VARDANES. Forbear this warmth, your friendship urges far.
Yet know your love shall ever retain a place
In my remembrance. pointing to his breast. There is something here --
Another time and I will give thee all;
But now, no more. --

LYSIAS. You may command my service,
I Am happy to obey. Of late your Brother
Delights in hind'ring my advancement,
And every boaster's raised above my merit,
Barzaphernes alone commands his ear,
His oracle in all.

VARDANES. I hate Arsaces,
Though he is my Mother's son, and churchmen say
There Is something sacred in the name of Brother.
My soul endures him not, and he is the bane
Of all my hopes of greatness. Like the sun
He rules the day, and like the night's pale Queen,
My fainter beams are lost when he appears.
And this because he came into the world,
A moon or two before me: What Is the difference,
That he alone should shine in Empire's seat?
I am not apt to trumpet forth my praise,
Or highly name myself, but this I Will speak,
To him in ought, I Am not the least inferior.
Ambition, glorious fever! mark of Kings,
Gave me immortal thirst and rule of Empire.
Why lag'd my tardy soul, why drooped the wing,
Nor forward springing, shot before his speed
To seize the prize? -- 'Twas Empire -- Oh! 'twas Empire --

LYSIAS. Yet, I must think that of superior mould
Your soul was formed, fit for a heavenly state,
And left reluctant its sublime abode,
And painfully obeyed the dread command,
When Jove's controuling fate forced it below.
His soul was earthly, and it downward moved,
Swift as to the center of attraction.

VARDANES. It might be so -- But I Have another cause
To hate this Brother, every way my rival;
In love as well as glory he is above me;
I dote on fair Evanthe, but the charmer
Disdains my ardent suit, like a miser
He treasures up her beauties to himself:
Thus is he formed to give me torture ever. --
But hark, they 've reached the Temple,
Did thou observe the crowd, their eagerness,
Each put the next aside to catch a look,
Himself was elbow'd out? -- Curse, curse their zeal --

LYSIAS. Stupid folly!

VARDANES. I Will tell thee Lysias,
This many-headed monster multitude,
Unsteady is as giddy fortune's wheel,
As woman fickle, varying as the wind;
To day they this way course, the next they veer,
And shift another point, the next another.

LYSIAS. Curiosity's another name for man,
The blazing meteor streaming through the air
Commands our wonder, and admiring eyes,
With eager gaze we trace the lucent path,
'Til spent at length it shrinks to native nothing.
While the bright stars which ever steady glow,
Unheeded shine, and bless the world below.

SEEN III.
QUEEN and EDESSA. QUEEN. Oh! give me way, the haughty victor comes,
Surrounded by adoring multitudes;
On swelling tides of praise to heaven they raise him;
To deck their idol, they rob the glorious beings
Of their splendour.

EDESSA. My royal Lady,
Chase hence these passions.

QUEEN. Peace, forever peace,
Have I not cause to hate this homicide?
'Twas by his cursed hand Vonones fell,
Yet fell not as became his gallant spirit,
Not by the warlike arm of chief renowned,
But by a youth, ye Gods, a beardless stripling,
Stabbed by his dastard falchin from behind;
For well I know he feared to meet Vonones,
As princely warriors meet with open daring,
But shrunk amidst his guards, and gave him death,
When faint with wounds, and weary with the fight.

EDESSA. With anguish I have heard his hapless fate,
And mourned in silence for the gallant Prince.

QUEEN. Soft is thy nature, but alas! Edessa,
Thy heart's a stranger to a mother's sorrows,
To see the pride of all her wishes blasted;
Thy fancy cannot paint the storm of grief,
Despair and anguish, which my breast has known.
Oh! shower, ye Gods, your torments on Arsaces,
Cursed be the morn which dawned upon his birth.

EDESSA. Yet, I entreat --

QUEEN. Away! for I will curse --
O may he never know a father's fondness,
Or know it to his sorrow, may his hopes
Of joy be cut like mine, and his short life
Be one continued tempest; if he lives,
Let him be cursed with jealousy and fear,
And vexed with anguish of neglecting scorn;
May torturing hope present the flowing cup,
Then hasty snatch it from his eager thirst,
And when he dies base treach'ry be the means.

EDESSA. Oh! calm your spirits.

QUEEN. Yes, I Will now be calm,
Calm as the sea when the rude waves are laid,
And nothing but a gentle swell remains;
My curse is heard, and I shall have revenge:
There Is something here which tells me 'twill be so,
And peace resumes her empire over my breast.
Vardanes is the Minister of Vengeance;
Fired by ambition, he aspiring seeks
TO adorn his brows with Parthia's diadem;
I Have fanned the fire, and wrought him up to fury,
Envy shall urge him forward still to dare,
And discord be the prelude to destruction,
Then this detested race shall feel my hate.

EDESSA. And does thy hatred then extend so far,
That innocent and guilty all alike
Must feel thy dreadful vengeance?

QUEEN. Ah! Edessa,
Thou do not know even half my mighty wrongs,
But in thy bosom I will pour my sorrows.

EDESSA. With secrecy I ever have repaid
Your confidence.

QUEEN. I know thou have, then hear,
The changeling King who often has kneeled before me,
And owned no other power, now treats me
With ill dissembled love mixed with disdain.
A newer beauty rules his faithless heart,
Which only in variety is blessed;
Often have I heard him, when wrapped up in sleep,
And wanton fancy raised the mimic scene,
Call with unusual fondness on Evanthe,
While I have lain neglected by his side,
Except sometimes in a mistaken rapture
He Would clasp me to his bosom.

EDESSA. Oh! Madam,
Let not corroding jealousy usurp
Your Royal breast, unnumber'd ills attend
The wretch who entertains that, fatal guest.

QUEEN. Think not that I Will pursue its wandering fires,
No more I Will know perplexing doubts and fears,
And erring trace suspicion's endless maze,
For, ah! I doubt no more.

EDESSA. Their shouts approach.

QUEEN. Lead me, Edessa, to some peaceful gloom,
Some silent shade far from the walks of men,
There shall the hoped revenge my thoughts employ,
And sooth my sorrows with the coming joy.

SCENE IV.
EVANTHE and CLEONE. EVANTHE. No I Will not meet him now, for love delights
In the soft pleasures of the secret shade,
And shuns the noise and tumult of the crowd.
How tedious are the hours which bring him
To my fond panting heart! for oh! to those
Who live in expectation of the bliss,
Time slowly creeps, and every tardy minute
Seems mocking of their wishes. Say, Cleone,
For you beheld the triumph, midst his pomp,
Did he not seem to curse the empty show,
The pageant greatness, enemy to love,
Which held him from Evanthe? haste, to tell me,
And feed my gready ear with the fond tale --
Yet, hold -- for I shall weary you with questions,
And never satisfied -- Beware, Cleone,
And guard your heart from Love's delusive sweets.

CLEONE. Is Love an ill, that thus you caution me
To shun his power?

EVANTHE. The Tyrant, my Cleone,
Despotic rules, and fetters all our thoughts.
Oh! would thou love, then bid adieu to peace,
Then fears will come, and jealousies intrude,
Ravage your bosom, and disturb your quiet,
Even pleasure to excess will be a pain.
Once I was free, then my exulting heart
Was like a bird that hops from spray to spray,
And all was innocence and mirth; but, lo!
The Fowler came, and by his arts decoyed,
And soon the Wanton cag'd. Twice fifteen times
Has Cynthia dipped her horns in beams of light,
Twice fifteen times has wasted all her brightness,
Since first I knew to love; 'twas on that day
When cursed Vonones fell upon the plain,
The lovely Victor doubly conquered me.

CLEONE. Forgive my boldness, Madam, if I ask
What chance first gave you to Vonones' power*
Curiosity thou know is of our sex.

EVANTHE. That is a task will wake me to new sorrows,
Yet thou attend, and I will tell thee all.
Arabia gave me birth, my father held
Great Offices at Court, and was reputed
Brave, wise and loyal, by his Prince beloved.
Often has he led his conquering troops, and forced
From frowning victory her awful honors.
In infancy I was his only treasure,
On me he wasted all his store of fondness.
Oh! I could tell thee of his wondrous goodness,
His more than father's love and tenderness.
But thou would jeer, and say the tale was trifling;
So did he dote upon me, for in childhood
My infant charms, and artless innocence
Blessed his fond age, and won on every heart.
But, oh! from this sprung every future ill,
This fatal beauty was the source of all.

CLEONE. It Is often so, for beauty is a flower
That tempts the hand to pluck it.

EVANTHE. Full three times
Has scorching summer fled from cold winter's
Ruthless blasts, as often again has spring
In sprightly youth dressed nature in her beauties,
Since bathing in The Tigris,
Niphates' silver stream,
Attended only by one favorite maid;
As we were sporting on the wanton waves,
Swift from the wood a troop of horsemen rushed,
Rudely they seized, and bore me trembling off,
In vain Edessa with her shrieks assailed
The heavens, for heaven was deaf to both our prayers.
The wretch whose insolent embrace confined me,
(Like thunder bursting on the guilty soul)
With cursed Vonones voice poured in my ears
A hateful tale of love; for he it seems
Had seen me at Arabia's royal court,
And took those means to force me to his arms.

CLEONE. Perhaps you may gain something from the Captives
Of your lost Parents.

EVANTHE. This I mean to try,
Soon as the night hides Nature in her darkness,
Veiled in the gloom we'll steal into their prison.
But, oh! perhaps even now my aged Sire
May amongst the slain lie weltring on the field,
Pierced like a riddle through with numerous wounds,
While parting life is quivering on his lips.
He may perhaps be calling on his Evanthe.
Yes, ye great Powers who boast the name of mercy,
Ye have denied me to his latest moments,
To all the offices of filial duty,
To bind his wounds, and wash them with my tears,
Is this, is this your mercy?

CLEONE. Blame not heaven,
For heaven is just and kind; dear Lady drive
These black ideas from your gentle breast;
Fancy delights to torture the distressed,
And fill the gloomy scene with shadowy ills,
Summon your reason, and you will soon have comfort.

EVANTHE. Do thou name comfort to me, my Cleone,
Thou who know all my sorrows? plead no more,
It Is reason tells me I am doubly wretched.

CLEONE. But hark, the music strikes, the rites begin,
And, see, the doors are opening.

EVANTHE. Let Us retire;
My heart is now too full to meet him here,
Fly swift ye hours, till in his arms I Am pressed,
And each intruding care is hushed to rest.

SCENE V.
The Scene draws and discovers, in the inner Part of the Temple, a large Image
of the Sun, with an Altar before it. Around Priests and Attendants. KING,
ARSACES, VARDANES, GOTARZES, PHRAATES, LYSIAS, with BETHAS in chains. HYMN.
Parent of Light, to thee belong
Our grateful tributary songs;
Each thankful voice to thee shall rise,
And cheerful pierce the azure skies;
While in thy praise all earth combines,
And Echo in the Chorus joins.
All the gay pride of blooming May,
The Lily fair and blushing Rose,
To thee their early honors pay,
And all their heavenly sweets disclose.
The feathered Choir on every tree
To hail thy glorious dawn repair,
While the sweet sons of harmony
With Hallelujah's fill the air.
It Is thou have braced the Hero's arm,
And given the Love of praise to warm
His bosom, as he onward flies,
And for his Country bravely dies.
Thine's victory, and from thee springs
Ambition's fire, which glows in Kings.
KING (coming forward.) Thus, to the Gods our tributary songs,
And now, oh! let me welcome once again
My blooming victor to his Father's arms;
And let me thank thee for our safety: PARTHIA
Shall thank thee too, and give her grateful praise
To her Deliverer.

OMNES. All hail! Arsaces!

KING. Thanks to my loyal friends.

VARDANES. [Aside. Curse, curse the sound,
Even Echo gives it back with interest,
The joyful gales swell with the pleasing theme,
And waft it far away to distant hills.
O that my breath was poison, then indeed
I Would hail him like the rest, but blast him too.

ARSACES. My Royal Sire, these honors are unmerited,
Beneath your prosperous auspices I fought,
Bright victory to your banners joyful flew,
And favored for the Sire the happy son.
But lenity should grace the victor's laurels,
Then, here, my gracious Father --

KING. Ha! it is Bethas!
Know thou, vain wretch, what fate attends on those
Who dare oppose the power of mighty Kings,
Whom heaven delights to favor? sure some God
Who sought to punish you for impious deeds,
'Twas urged you forward to insult our arms,
And brave us at our Royal City's gates.

BETHAS. At honor's call, and at my King's command,
Though it were even with my single arm, again
I Would brave the multitude, which, like a deluge,
Overwhelmed my gallant handful; yea would meet
Undaunted, all the fury of the torrent.
It Is honor is the guide of all my actions,
The ruling star by which I steer through life,
And shun the shelves of infamcy and vice.

KING. It was the thirst of gain which drew you on;
It Is thus that Avarice always cloaks its views,
The ambition of your Prince you gladly snatched
As opportunity to fill your coffers.
It was the plunder of our palaces,
And of our wealthy cities, filled your dreams,
And urged you on your way; but you have met
The due reward of your audacity.
Now shake your chains, shake and delight your ears
With the soft music of your golden fetters.

BETHAS. True, I am fallen, but glorious was my fall,
The day was brav'ly fought, we did our best,
But victory's of heaven. Look over yon field,
See if thou find one Arabian back
Disfigured with dishonorable wounds.
No, here, deep on their bosoms, are engraved
The marks of honor! 'twas through here their souls
Flew to their blissful seats. Oh! why did I
Survive the fatal day? To be this slave,
To be the gaze and sport of vulgar crowds,
Thus, like a shackl'd tiger, stalk my round,
And grimly lower upon the shouting herd.
Ye Gods! --

KING. Away with him to instant death

ARSACES. Hear me, my Lord, O, not on this bright day,
Let not this day of joy blush with his blood.
Nor count his steady loyalty a crime,
But give him life, Arsaces humbly asks it,
And may you ever be served with honest hearts.

KING. Well, be it so; hence, bear him to his dungeon;
Lysias, we here commit him to thy charge.

BETHAS. Welcome my dungeon, but more welcome death.
Trust not too much, vain Monarch, to your power,
Know fortune places all her choicest gifts
On ticklish heights, they shake with every breeze,
And often some rude wind hurls them to the ground.
Jove's thunder strikes the lofty palaces,
While the low cottage, in humility,
Securely stands, and sees the mighty ruin.
What King can boast, to morrow as to day,
Thus, happy will I reign? The rising sun
May view him seated on a splendid throne,
And, setting, see him shake the* servile chain.
[Exit guarded.
SCENE VI.
KING ARSACES, VARDANES, GOTARZES, PHRAATES. GOTARZES. Thus let me hail thee
from the crowd distinct,
For in the exulting voice of general joy
My fainter sounds were lost, believe me, Brother,
My soul dilates with joy to see thee thus.

ARSACES. Thus let me thank thee in this fond embrace.

VARDANES. The next will be my turn, Gods, I had rather
Be circl'd in a venomed serpent's fold.

GOTARZES. O, my loved Brother, it is my humble boon,
That, when the war next calls you to the field,
I may attend you in the rage of battle.
By imitating thy heroic deeds,
Perhaps, I may rise to some little worth,
Beneath thy care I Will try my feeble wings,
Till taught by thee to soar to nobler heights.

KING Why that is my boy, thy spirit speaks thy birth,
No more I Will turn thee from the road to glory,
To rust in slothfulness, with lazy Gownsmen.

GOTARZES. Thanks, to my Sire, I Am now completely blessed.

ARSACES. But, I Have another Brother, where is Vardanes?

KING. Ha! what, methinks, he lurks behind the crowd,
And wears a gloom which suits not with the time.

VARDANES. Doubt not my Love, though I lack eloquence,
To dress my sentiments and catch the ear,
Though plain my manners, and my language rude,
My honest heart disdains to wear disguise.
Then think not I am slothful in the race,
Or, that my Brother springs before my Love.

ARSACES. Far be suspicion from me.

VARDANES. So, it is done,
Thanks to dissembling, all is well again.

KING. Now let us, forward, to the Temple go,
And let, with cheerful wine, the goblets flow;
Let blink-ey'd Jollity his aid afford,
To crown our triumph, round the festive board:
But, let the wretch, whose soul can know a care,
Far from our joys, to some lone shade repair,
In secrecy, there let him ever remain,
Brood over his gloom, and still increase his pain.

END of the FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I. A PRISON.
LYSIAS, alone. THE Sun set frowning, and refreshing Eve
Lost all its sweets, obscured in double gloom.
This night shall sleep be stranger to these eyes,
Peace dwells not here, and slumber flies the shock;
My spirits, like the elements, are waring,
And mock the tempest with a kindred rage --
I, who can joy in nothing, but revenge,
Know not those boasted ties of Love and Friendship;
Vardanes I regard, but as he gives me
Some hopes of vengeance on the Prince Arsaces --
But, ha! he comes, waked by the angry storm,
It Is to my wish, thus would I form designs,
Horror should breed beneath the veil of horror,
And darkness aid conspiracies -- He Is here --

SCENE II.
VARDANES and LYSIAS. LYSIAS. Welcome, my noble Prince.

VARDANES. Thanks, gentle friend;
Heavens! what a night is this!

LYSIAS. It Is filled with terror;
Some dread event beneath this horror lurks,
Ordained by fate's irrevocable doom;
Perhaps Arsaces' fall -- and angry heaven
Speaks it, in thunder, to the trembling world.

VARDANES. Terror indeed! it seems as sickening Nature
Had given her order up to general ruin;
The Heavens appear as one continued flame,
Earth with her terror shakes, dim night retires,
And the red lightning gives a dreadful day,
While in the thunder's voice each found is lost;
Fear sinks the panting heart in every bosom,
Even the pale dead, affrighted at the horror,
As though unsafe, start from their marble goals,
And howling through the streets are seeking shelter.

LYSIAS. I saw a flash stream through the angry clouds,
And bend its course to where a stately pine
Behind the garden stood, quickly it seized,
And wrapped it in a fiery fold, the trunk
Was shivered into atoms, and the branches
Off were lopt, and wildly scattered round.

VARDANES. Why rage the elements, they are not cursed
Like me? Evanthe frowns not angry on them,
The wind may play upon her beauteous bosom
Nor fear her chiding, light can bless her sense,
And in the floating mirror she beholds
Those beauties which can fetter all mankind.
Earth gives her joy, she plucks the fragrant rose,
Pleased takes its sweets, and gazes on its bloom.

LYSIAS My Lord, forget her, tear her from your breast.
Who, like the Phoenix, gazes on the sun,
And strives to soar up to the glorious blaze,
Should never leave Ambition's brightest object,
To turn, and view the beauties of a flower.

VARDANES. O, Lysias, chide no more, for, I have done.
Yes, I Will forget this proud disdainful beauty;
Hence, with, vain love -- Ambition, now, alone,
Shall guide my actions, since mankind delights
To give me pain, I Will study mischief too,
And shake the earth, even like this raging tempest.

LYSIAS. A night like this, so dreadful to behold,
Since my remembrance's birth, I never saw.

VARDANES. Even such a night, dreadful as this, they say,
My teeming Mother gave me to the world.
Whence by those sages who, in knowledge rich,
Can pry into futurity, and tell
What distant ages will produce of wonder,
My days were deemed to be a hurricane;
My early life proved their prediction false;
Beneath a sky serene my voyage began,
But, to this long uninterrupted calm,
Storms shall succeed.

LYSIAS. Then haste, to raise the tempest;
My soul disdains this one eternal round,
Where each succeeding day is like the former.
Trust me, my noble Prince, here is a heart
Steady and firm to all your purposes,
And here is a hand that knows to execute
Whatever designs thy daring breast can form,
Nor ever shake with fear.

VARDANES. And I will use it,
Come to my bosom, let me place thee here,
How happy am I clasping so much virtue!
Now, by the light, it is my firm belief,
One mighty soul in common swells our bosoms,
Such sameness cannot be matched in different beings.

LYSIAS. Your confidence, my Lord, much honors me,
And when I act unworthy of your love
May I be hooted from Society,
As though disgraceful to the human kind,
And driven to herd among the savage-race.

VARDANES. Believe me, Lysias, I do not know
A single thought which tends toward suspicion,
For well I know thy worth, when I affront it,
By the least doubt, may I be ever cursed
With faithless friends, and by his dagger fall
Whom my deluded wishes most would favor.

LYSIAS. Then let us no longer trifle time away,
I Am all impatience tell I see thy brows
Bright in the glories of a diadem;
My soul is filled with anguish when I think
That by weak Princes worn, it is thus disgraced.
Haste, mount the throne, and, like the morning Sun,
Chase with your piercing beams those mists away,
Which dim the glory of the Parthian state:
Each honest heart desires it, numbers there are
Ready to join you, and support your cause,
Against the opposing faction.

VARDANES. Sure some God,
Bid you thus call me to my dawning honors,
And joyful I obey the pleasing summons.
Now by the powers of heaven, of earth and hell,
Most solemnly I swear, I will not know
That quietude which I was* wont to know,
'Til I have climbed the height of all my wishes,
Or fell, from glory, to the silent grave.

LYSIAS. Nobly resolved, and spoken like Vardanes,
There shone my Prince in his superior luster.

VARDANES. But, then, Arsaces, he is a fatal bar --
O! could I brush this busy insect from me,
Which envious strives to rob me of my bloom,
Then might I, like some fragrant opening flower,
Spread all my beauties in the face of day.
Ye Gods! why did ye give me such a soul,
(A soul, which every way is formed for Empire)
And damn me with a younger Brother's right?
The diadem would set as well on mine,
As on the brows of any lordly He;
Nor is this hand weak to enforce command.
And shall I steal into my grave, and give
My name up to oblivion, to be thrown
Among the common rubbish of the times?
No: Perish first, this happy hated Brother.

LYSIAS. I always wear a dagger, for your service,
I need not speak the rest --
When humbly I entreated of your Brother
To Attend him as Lieutenant in this war,
Frowning contempt, he haughtily replied,
He entertained not Traitors in his service.
True, I betrayed Orodes, but with cause,
He struck me, like a sorry abject slave,
And still withheld from giving what he would promised.
Fear not Arsaces, believe me, he shall
Soon his Quietus have -- But, see, he comes, --
What can this mean? Why at this lonely hour,
And unattended? -- Ha! it is opportune --
I Will in, and stab him now. I heed not what
The danger is, so I but have revenge,
Then heap perdition on me.

VARDANES. Hold, awhile --
'Twould be better could we undermine him,
And make him fall by Artabanus' doom.

LYSIAS. Well, be it so --

VARDANES. But let us now retire,
We must not be observed together here.

SCENE III.
ARSACES, alone. It Is here that hapless Bethas is confined;
He who, but yesterday, like angry Jove,
When punishing the crimes of guilty men,
Spread death and desolation all around,
While PARTHIA trembled at his name; is now
Unfriended and forlorn, and counts the hours,
Wrapped in the gloomy horrors of a goal. --
How dark, and hidden, are the turns of fate!
His rigid fortune moves me to compassion.
O! it is a heavenly virtue when the heart
Can feel the sorrows of another's bosom,
It dignifies the man: The stupid wretch
Who knows not this sensation, is an image,
And wants the feeling to make up a life --
I Will in, and give my aid to sooth his sorrows.

SCENE IV.
VARDANES and LYSIAS. LYSIAS. Let us observe with care, something we, yet,
May gather, to give to us the vantage;
No matter what is the intent.

VARDANES. How eafy it is
To cheat this busy, tattling, censuring world!
For fame still names our actions, good or bad,
As introduced by chance, which ofttimes throws
Wrong lights on objects; vice she dresses up
In the bright form, and goodliness, of virtue,
While virtue languishes, and pines neglected,
Robbed of her luster -- But, let us forward Lysias --
Thou know each turn in this thy dreary rule,
Then lead me to some secret stand, from whence,
Unnotic'd, all their actions we may view.

LYSIAS. Here, take your stand behind -- See, Bethas comes.
[They retire.]
SCENE V.
BETHAS, alone. To think on Death, in gloomy solitude,
In dungeons and in chains, when expectation
Joined with serious thought describe him to us,
His height'n'd terrors strike upon the soul
With awful dread; imagination raised
To frenzy, plunges in a sea of horror,
And tastes the pains, the agonies of dying --
Ha! who is this, perhaps he bears my fate?
It must be so, but, why this privacy?

SCENE VI.
ARSACES and BETHAS. ARSACES. Health to the noble Bethas, health and joy!

BETHAS. A steady hardened villain, one experienced
In his employment; ha! where is thy dagger?
It cannot give me fear; I Am ready, see,
My opening bosom tempts the friendly steel.
Fain would I cast this tiresome being off,
Like an old garment worn to wretchedness.
Here, strike for I Am prepared.

ARSACES. Oh! view me better,
Say, do I wear the gloomy ruffian's frown?

BETHAS. Ha! it is the gallant Prince, the brave Arsaces,
And Bethas' Conqueror.

ARSACES. And Bethas' friend,
A name I Am proud to wear.

BETHAS. Away -- away --
Mock with your jester to divert the court,
Fit Scene for sportive joys and frolic mirth;
Think thou I lack that manly constancy
Which braves misfortune, and remains unshaken?
Are these, are these the emblems of thy friendship,
These rankling chains, say, does it gall like these?
No, let me taste the bitterness of sorrow,
For I am reconciled to wretchedness.
The Gods have emptied all their mighty store,
Of hoarded Ills, upon my whitened age;
Now death -- but, oh! I court coy death in vain,
Like a cold maid, he scorns my fond complaining.
It Is thou, insulting Prince, it is thou have dragged
My soul, just rising, down again to earth,
And clogged her wings with dull mortality,
A hateful bondage! Why --

ARSACES. A moment hear me --

BETHAS. Why do thou, like an angry vengeful ghost,
Glide hither to disturb this peaceful gloom?
What, do thou envy me my miseries,
My chains and flinty pavement, where I often
In sleep behold the image of the death I wish,
Forget my sorrows and heartbreaking anguish?
These horrors I would undisturbed enjoy,
Attended only by my silent thoughts;
Is it to see the wretch that you have made,
To view the ruins of unhappy Bethas,
And triumph in my grief? Is it for this
You penetrate my dark joyless prison?

ARSACES. Oh! do not injure me by such suspicions.
Unknown to me are cruel scoffs and jests;
My breast can feel compassion's tenderness,
The warrior's warmth, the soothing joys of friendship.
When adverse bold battalions shook the earth,
And horror triumphed on the hostile field,
I sought you with a glorious enmity,
And armed my brow with the stern frown of war.
But now the angry trumpet wakes no more
The youthful champion to the lust for blood.
Retiring rage gives place to softer passions,
And generous warriors know no longer hate,
The name of foe is lost, and thus I ask
Your friendship.

BETHAS. Ah! why do thou mock me thus?

ARSACES. Let the base coward, he who ever shrinks,
And trembles, at the slight name of danger,
Taunt, and revile, with bitter gibes, the wretched;
The brave are ever to distress a friend.
Though my dear country, (spoiled by wasteful war,
Her harvests blazing, desolate her towns,
And baleful ruin showed her hagard face)
Called out on me to save her from her foes,
And I obeyed, yet to your gallant prowess,
And unmatched deeds, I admiration gave.
But now my country knows the sweets of safety,
Freed from her fears; sure now I may indulge
My just esteem for your superior virtue.

BETHAS. Yes, I must think you what you would be thought,
For honest minds are easy of belief,
And always judge of others by themselves,
But often are deceived; yet Parthia breeds not
Virtue much like thine, the barbarous clime teems
With naught else but villains versed in ill.

ARSACES Dissimulation never marked my looks,
Nor flattering deceit ever taught my tongue,
The tale of falsehood, to disguise my thoughts:
To Virtue, and, her fair companion, Truth,
I Have ever bowed, their holy precepts kept,
And scanned by them the actions of my life.
Suspicion surely never disturbs the brave,
They never know the fears of doubting thoughts;
But free, as are the altars of the Gods,
From every hand receive the sacrafice.

SCENE VII.
ARSACES, BETHAS EVANTHE and CLEONE. EVANTHE. Heavens! what a gloom hangs round
this dreadful place,
Fit habitation for the guilty mind!
Oh! if such terrors wait the innocent,
Which tread these vaults, what must the impious feel,
Who Have all their crimes to stare them in the face?

BETHAS. Immortal Gods! is this reality?
Or mere illusion? am I blessed at last,
Or is it to torment me that you have raised
This semblance of Evanthe to my eyes?
It is! it is! it is she! --

ARSACES. Ha! -- what means this? --
She faints! she faints! life has forsook its seat,
Pale Death usurps its place -- Evanthe, Oh!
Awake to life! -- Love and Arsaces call! --

BETHAS. Off -- give her to my arms, my warm embrace
Shall melt Death's icy chains.

CLEONE. She lives! she lives! --
See, on her cheeks the rosy glow returns.

ARSACES. O joy! O joy! her opening eyes, again,
Break, like the morning sun, a better day.

BETHAS. Evanthe! --

EVANTHE. Oh! my Father! --

ARSACES. Ha! -- her Father!

BETHAS. Heaven thou art kind at last, and this indeed
Is recompense for all the ills I Have past;
For all the sorrows which my heart has known,
Each wakeful night, and every day of anguish.
This, this has sweet'n'd all my bitter cup,
And gave me once again to taste of joy,
Joy which has long been stranger to this bosom.
Hence -- hence disgrace -- off, ignominy off --
But one embrace -- I ask but one embrace,
And it is denied.

EVANTHE. O, yes, around thy neck
I Will fold my longing arms, thy softer fetters,
Thus press thee to my happy breast, and kiss
Away those tears that stain thy aged cheeks.

BETHAS. Oh! it is too much! it is too much! ye Gods!
Life's at her utmost stretch, and bursting near
With heart-swoln ecstasy; now let me die.

ARSACES. What marble heart
Could see this scene unmoved, nor give a tear?
My eyes grow dim, and sympathetic passion
Falls like a gushing torrent on my bosom.

EVANTHE. O! happy me, this place, which lately seemed
So filled with horror, now is pleasure's circle.
Here will I fix my seat; my pleasing task
Shall be to cherish thy remaining life.
All night I Will keep a vigil over thy slumbers,
And on my breast repose thee, mark thy dreams,
And when thou wak'st invent some pleasing tale,
Or with my songs the tedious hours beguile.

BETHAS. Still let me gaze, still let me gaze upon thee,
Let me strain every nerve with ravishment,
And all my life be centered in my vision.
To see thee thus, to hear thy angel voice,
It is, indeed, a luxury of pleasure! --
Speak, speak again, for oh! it is heaven to hear thee!
Celestial sweetness dwells on every accent; --
Lull me to rest, and sooth my raging joy.
Joy which distracts me with unruly transports.
Now, by thy dear departed Mother's shade,
Thou brightest pattern of all excellence,
Thou who in prattling infancy have blessed me,
I would not give this one transporting moment,
This fullness of delight, for all -- but, ah!
It Is vile, Ambition, Glory, all is vile,
To the soft sweets of love and tenderness.

EVANTHE. Now let me speak, my throbbing heart is full,
I Will tell thee all -- alas! I have forgot --
'T'as slipped me in the tumult of my joy.
And yet I thought that I had much to say.

BETHAS. Oh! I have cursed my birth, indeed, I have
Blasphemed the Gods, with unbecoming passion,
Arraigned their Justice, and defied their power,
In bitterness, because they had denied
Thee to support the weakness of my age.
But now no more I Will rail and rave at fate,
All its decrees are just, complaints are impious.
Whatever short-sighted mortals feel, springs from
Their blindness in the ways of Providence;
Sufficient wisdom it is for man to know
That the great Ruler is ever wise and good.

ARSACES. Ye figured stones!
Ye senseless, lifeless images of men,
Who never gave a tear to others woe,
Whose bosoms never glowed for others good,
O weary heaven with your repeated prayers,
And strive to melt the angry powers to pity,
That ye may truly live.

EVANTHE. Oh! how my heart
Beats in my breast, and shakes my trembling frame!
I sink beneath this sudden flood of joy,
Too mighty for my spirits.

ARSACES. My Evanthe,
Thus in my arms I catch thy falling beauties,
Cheer thee; and kiss thee back to life again:
Thus to my bosom I could ever hold thee,
And find new pleasure.

EVANTHE. O! my loved, Arsaces,
Forgive me that I saw thee not before,
Indeed my soul was busily employed,
Nor left a single thought at liberty.
But thou, I know, art gentleness and love.
Now I am doubly paid for all my sorrows,
For all my fears for thee.

ARSACES. Then, fear no more:
Give to guilty wretches painful terrors:
Whose keen remembrance raises horrid forms,
Shapes that in spite of nature shock their souls
With dreadful anguish: but thy gentle bosom,
Where innocence beams light and gayety,
Can never know a fear, now shining joy
Shall gild the pleasing scene.

EVANTHE. Alas! this joy
I fear is like a sudden flame shot from
The expiring taper, darkness will ensue,
And double night I dread enclose us round.
Anxiety does yet disturb my breast,
And frightful apprehension shakes my soul.

BETHAS. How shall I thank you, ye bright glorious beings!
Shall I in humble adoration bow,
Or fill the earth with your resounding praise?
No, this I leave to noisy hypocrites,
A Mortal's tongue disgraces such a theme;
But heaven delights where silent gratitude
Mounts each aspiring thought to its bright throne,
Nor leaves to language aught; words may indeed
From man to man their several wants express,
Heaven asks the purer incense of the heart.

ARSACES. I Will to the King, 'ere he retires to rest,
Nor will I leave him 'til I Have gained your freedom;
His love will surely not deny me this.

SCENE VIII.
VARDANES and LYSIAS LYSIAS. (come forward.) LYSIAS. 'Twas a moving Scene, even
my rough nature
Was nighly melted.

VARDANES. Hence coward pity --
What is joy to them, to me is torture.
Now am I racked with pains that far exceed
Those agonies, which fabling Priests relate,
The damned endure: The shock of hopeless Love,
Unblest with any views to sooth ambition,
Rob me of all my reasoning faculties.
Arsaces gains Evanthe, fills the throne,
While I am doomed to foul obscurity,
To pine and grieve neglected.

LYSIAS. My noble Prince,
Would it not be a masterpiece, indeed,
To make this very bliss their greatest ill,
And damn them in the very folds of joy?

VARDANES. This I will try, and stretch my utmost art,
Unknown is yet the means -- We'll think on that --
Success may follow if you will lend your aid.

LYSIAS. The storm still rages -- I must to the King,
And know what further orders 'ere he sleeps:
Soon I Will return, and speak my mind more fully.

VARDANES. Haste, Lysias, haste, to aid me with thy council;
For without thee, all my designs will prove
Like night and chaos, darkness and confusion;
But to thy word shall light and order spring. --
Let coward Schoolmen talk of Virtue's rules,
And preach the vain Philosophy of fools;
Court eager their obscurity, afraid
To taste a joy, and in some gloomy shade
Dream over their lives, while in a mournful strain
They sing of happiness, they never gain.
But formed for nobler purposes I come,
To gain a crown, or else a glorious tomb.

END of the SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I. The PALACE.
QUEEN and EDESSA. QUEEN. TALK not of sleep to me, the God of Rest
Disdains to visit where disorder reigns;
Not beds of down, nor music's softest strains,
Can charm him when it is anarchy within.
He flies with eager haste the mind disturbed,
And sheds his blessings where the soul's in peace.

EDESSA. Yet, hear me, Madam!

QUEEN. Hence, away, Edessa,
For thou know not the pangs of jealousy.
Say, has he not forsook my bed, and left me
Like a lone widow mourning to the night?
This, with the injury his son has done me,
If I forgive, may heaven in anger shower
Its torments on me -- Ha! is n't that the King?

EDESSA. It is your Royal Lord, great Artabanus.

QUEEN. Leave me, for I would meet him here alone,
Something is laboring in my breast --

SCENE II.
KING and QUEEN. KING. This leads
To fair Evanthe's chamber -- Ha! the Queen.

QUEEN. Why do thou start? so starts the guilty wretch,
When, by some watchful eye, prevented from
His dark designs.

KING. Prevented! how, what mean thou?

QUEEN. Art thou then so dull? cannot thy heart,
Thy changeling heart, explain my meaning to thee,
Or must upbraiding 'wake thy apprehension?
Ah! faithless, tell me, have I lost those charms
Which thou so often have sworn could warm old age,
And tempt the frozen hermit from his cell,
To visit once again our gayer world?
This, thou have sworn, perfidious as thou art,
A thousand times; as often have thou sworn
Eternal constancy, and endless love,
Yet every time was perjured.

KING. Sure, it is frenzy.

QUEEN. Indeed, it is frenzy, it is the height of madness,
For I have wandered long in sweet delusion.
At length the pleasing Phantom changed its form,
And left me in a wilderness of woe.

KING. Prithee, no more, dismiss those jealous heats;
Love must decay, and soon disgust arise,
Where endless jarrings and upbraidings damp
The gentle flame, which warms the lover's breast.

QUEEN. Oh! grant me patience heaven! and do thou think
By these reproaches to disguise thy guilt?
No, it is in vain, thy art's too thin to hide it.

KING. Curse on the marriage chain! -- the clog, a wife,
Who still will force and pall us with the joy,
Though power is wanting, and the will is cloyed,
Still urge the debt when Nothing's left to pay.

QUEEN. Ha! do thou own thy crime, nor feel the glow
Of conscious shame?

KING. Why should I blush, If heaven
Has made me as I am, and gave me passions?
Blessed only in variety, then blame
The Gods, who formed my nature thus, not me.

QUEEN. Oh! Traitor! Villain!

KING. Hence -- away --
No more I Will wage a woman's war with words.
[Exit.]
QUEEN. Down, down ye rising passions, give me (...).
Or break my heart, for I must yet be calm --
But, yet, revenge, our Sex's joy, is mine;
By all the Gods! he lives not till the morn.
Who slights my love, shall sink beneath my hate.

SCENE III.
QUEEN and VARDANES. VARDANES. What, raging to the tempest?

QUEEN. Away! -- away! --
Yes, I will rage -- a tempest's here within,
Above the trifling of the noisy elements.
Blow ye loud winds, burst with your violence,
For ye but barely imitate the storm
That wildly rages in my tortured breast --
The King -- the King --

VARDANES. Ha! what? -- the King?

QUEEN. Evanthe! --

VARDANES. You talk like riddles, still obscure and short,
Give me some cue to guide me through this maze.

QUEEN. Ye pitying powers! -- oh! for a poison, some
Cursed deadly draught, that I might blast her beauties,
And rob her eyes of all their fatal luster.

VARDANES. What, blast her charms? -- dare not to think of it --
Shocking impiety; -- the numerous systems
Which gay creation spreads, bright blazing suns,
With all the attendant planets circling round,
Are not worth half the radiance of her eyes.
She Is heaven's peculiar care, good spir'ts hover
Round, a shining band, to guard her beauties.

QUEEN. Be they watchful then; for should remissness
Taint the guard, I Will snatch the opportunity,
And hurl her to destruction.

VARDANES. Dread Thermusa,
Say, what has roused this tumult in thy soul?
Why do thou rage with unabating fury,
Wild as the winds, loud as the troubled sea?

QUEEN. Yes, I will tell thee -- Evanthe -- curse her --
With charms -- Would that my curses had the power
To kill, destroy, and blast where ever I hate,
Then would I curse, still curse, till death should seize
The dying accents on my falt'ring tongue,
So should this world, and the false changeling man
Be buried in one universal ruin.

VARDANES. Still err'st thou from the purpose.

QUEEN. Ha! it is so --
Yes I will tell thee -- for I know fond fool,
Deluded wretch, thou dotest on Evanthe --
Be that thy greatest curse, be cursed like me,
With jealousy and rage, for know, the King,
Thy father, is thy rival.

SCENE IV.
VARDANES, alone. Ha! my rival!
How knew she that? -- yet stay -- she is gone -- my rival,
What then? he is Arsaces' rival too.
Ha! -- this may aid and ripen my designs --
Could I but fire the King with jealousy,
And then accuse my Brother of Intrigues
Against the state -- ha! -- joined with Bethas, and
Confed'rate with the Arabians -- it is most likely
That jealousy would urge him to belief.
I Will sink my claim until some fitter time,
'Til opportunity smiles on my purpose.
Lysias already has received the mandate
For Bethas' freedom: Let them still proceed,
This harmony shall change to discord soon.
Fortune methinks of late grows wondrous kind,
She scarcely leaves me to employ myself.

SCENE V.
KING, ARSACES, VARDANES. KING. But where is Evanthe? Where Is the lovely Maid?

ARSACES. On the cold pavement, by her aged Sire,
The dear companion of his solitude,
She sits, nor can persuasion make her rise;
But in the wild extravagance of joy
She weeps, then smiles, like April's sun, through showers.
While with strained eyes he gazes on her face,
And cries, in ecstacy, "Ye gracious powers!
"It is too much, it is too much to bear!"
Then clasps her to his breast, while down his cheeks
Large drops each other trace, and mix with hers.

KING. Thy tale is moving, for my eyes overflow --
How slow does Lysias with Evanthe creep!
So moves old time when bringing us to bliss.
Now war shall cease, no more of war I Will have,
Death knows satiety, and pale destruction
Turns loathing from his food, thus forced on him.
The triffling dust, the cause of all this ruin,
The trade of death shall urge no more. --

SCENE VI.
KING, ARSACES, VARDANES, EVANTHE, LYSIAS. KING. Evanthe! --
See pleasure's goddess deigns to dignify
The happy scene, and make our bliss complete.
So Venus, from her heavenly seat, descends
To bless the gay Cythera with her presence;
A thousand smiling graces wait the goddess,
A thousand little loves are fluttering round,
And joy is mingled with the beauteous train*

EVANTHE. O! Royal Sir, thus lowly to the ground
I bend, in humble gratitude, accept
My thanks, for this thy goodness, words are vile
TO express the image of my lively thought,
And speak the grateful fullness of my heart.
All I can say, is that I now am happy,
And that thy giving hand has made me blessed.

KING. O! rise, Evanthe this lowly posture
Suits not with charms like thine, they should command,
And every heart exult in thy behests; --
But, where is thy aged Sire?

EVANTHE. This sudden turn
Of fortune has so wrought upon his frame,
His limbs could not support him to thy presence.

ARSACES. This, this is truly great, this is the Hero,
Like heaven, to scatter blessings among mankind,
And ever delight in making others happy.
Cold is the praise which waits the victor's triumph,
(Who through a sea of blood has rushed to glory),
To the o'erflowings of a grateful heart,
By obligations conquered: Yet, extend
Thy bounty unto me.
[Kneels]
KING. Ha! rise Arsaces.

ARSACES. Not till you grant my boon.

KING. Speak, and it is thine --
Wide through our kingdom let thy eager wishes
Search for some jewel worthy of thy seeing;
Something that is fit to show the donor's bounty,
And by the glorious sun, our worshipped God,
Thou shall not have denial; even my crown
Shall gild thy brows with shining beams of Empire.
With pleasure I Will resign to thee my honors,
I long for calm retirement's softer joys.

ARSACES. Long may you wear it, grant it bounteous heaven,
And happiness attend it; it is my prayer
That daily rises with the early sweets
Of nature's incense, and the lark's loud strain.
It Is not the unruly transport of ambition
That urges my desires to ask your crown;
Let the vain wretch, who prides in gay dominion,
Who thinks not of the great ones weighty cares,
Enjoy his lofty wish, wide spreading rule.
The treasure which I ask, put in the scale,
Would over-balance all that Kings can boast,
Empire and diadems.

KING. Away, that thought --
Name it, haste -- speak.

ARSACES. For all the dangerous toil,
Thirst, hunger, marches long that I Have endured,
For all the blood I Have in thy service spent,
Reward me with Evanthe.

KING. Ha! what said thou? --

VARDANES. [Aside.] The King is moved, and angry bites his lip --
Through my benighted soul all-chearing hope
Beams, like an orient sun, reviving joy.

ARSACES. The stern Vonones never could boast a merit
But loving her.

KING. Ah! curse the hated name --
Yes, I remember when the fell ruffian
Directed all his fury at my life;
Then sent, by pitying heaven, to assert the right
Of injured Majesty, thou, Arsaces,
Taught him the duty he never knew before,
And laid the Traitor dead.

ARSACES. My Royal Sire!

LYSIAS. My Liege, the Prince still kneels.

KING. Ha! -- rebel, off --
[Strikes him] What, Lysias, did I strike thee? forgive my rage --
The name of cursed Vonones fires my blood,
And gives me up to wrath. --

LYSIAS. I am your slave,
Swayed by your pleasure -- when I forget it,
May this keen dagger, which I mean to hide
[Aside] Deep in his bosom, pierce my vitals through.

KING. Did thou not name Evanthe?

ARSACES. I did, my Lord!
And, say, whom should I name but her, in whom
My soul has centered all her happiness?
Nor can thou blame me, view her wondrous charms,
She Is all perfection; bounteous heaven has formed her
To be the joy, and wonder of mankind;
But language is too vile to speak her beauties.
Here every power of glowing fancy's lost:
Rose blush secure, ye lilies still enjoy
Your silver whiteness, I Will not rob your charms
To deck the bright comparison; for here
It sure must fail.

KING. [Aside] He Is wanton in her praise --
I tell thee, Prince, had thou as many tongues,
As days have wasted since creation's birth,
They were too few to tell the mighty theme.

EVANTHE. [Aside] I Am lost! I Am lost!

ARSACES. Then I Will be dumb for ever,

KING. O rash and fatal oath! is there no way,
No winding path to shun this precipice,
But must I fall and dash my hopes to atoms?
In vain I strive, thought but perplexes me,
Yet shows no hold to bear me up -- now, hold
My heart a while -- she is thine -- it is done.

ARSACES. In deep
Prostration, I thank my Royal Father.

KING. A sudden pain shoots through my trembling breast --
Lend me thy arm Vardanes -- cruel powers!

SCENE VII.
ARSACES, and EVANTHE. EVANTHE, (after a pause) Ever since the dawn of my
unhappy life
Joy never shone serenely on my soul;
Still something intervened to cloud my day.
Tell me, ye powers, unfold the hidden crime
For which I Am doomed to this eternal woe,
Thus still to number over my hours with tears?
The Gods are just I know, nor are decrees
In hurry shuffl'd out, but where the bolt
Takes its direction justice points the mark.
Yet still in vain I search within my breast,
I find no sins are there to shudder at --
Naught but the common frailties of our natures.
Arsaces, -- Oh! --

ARSACES. Ha! why that look of anguish?
Why did thou name me with that sound of sorrow?
Ah! say, why stream those gushing tears so fast
From their bright fountain? sparkling joy should now
Be lightened in thine eye, and pleasure glow
Upon thy rosy cheek; -- ye sorrows hence --
It Is love shall triumph now.

EVANTHE. [Sighs] Oh!

ARSACES. What (...) that sigh?
Tell me why heaves thy breast with such emotion?
Some dreadful thought is laboring for a vent,
Haste, give it loose, 'ere strengthened by confinement
It wrecks thy frame, and tears its snowy prison.
Is sorrow then so pleasing that you hoard it
With as much love, as misers do their gold?
Give me my share of sorrows.

EVANTHE. Ah! too soon
You Will know what I would hide.

ARSACES. Be it from thee --
The dreadful tale, when told by thee, shall please;
Haste, to produce it with its native terrors,
My steady soul shall still remain unshaken;
For who when blessed with beauties like to thine
Would ever permit a sorrow to intrude?
Far hence in darksome shades does sorrow dwell,
Where hapless wretches through the awful gloom,
Echo their woes, and sighing to the winds,
Augment with tears the gently murmuring stream;
But never disturbs such happiness as mine.

EVANTHE. Oh! it is not all thy boasted happiness,
Can save thee from disquietude and care;
Then build not too securely on these joys,
For envious sorrow soon will undermine,
And let the goodly structure fall to ruin

ARSACES. I charge thee, by our mutual vows, Evanthe,
Tell me, nor longer keep me in suspense:
Give me to know the utmost rage of fate.

EVANTHE. Then know -- impossible! --

ARSACES. Ha! do thou fear
To shock me? --

EVANTHE. Know, thy Father -- loves Evanthe. --

ARSACES. Loves thee?

EVANTHE. Yea, even to distraction loves me.
Often at my feet he is told the moving tale,
And wooed me with the ardency of youth.
I pitied him indeed, but that was all,
Thou would have pitied too.

ARSACES. I fear it is true;
A thousand crouding circumstances speak it.
Ye cruel Gods! I Have wrecked a Father's peace,
Oh! bitter thought!

EVANTHE. Did thou observe, Arsaces,
How reluctant he gave me to thy arms?

ARSACES. Yes, I observed that when he gave thee up,
It seemed as though he gave his precious life.
And who'd forego the heaven of thy love?
To rest on thy soft swelling breast, and in
Sweet slumbers sooth each sharp intruding care?
Oh! it were bliss, such as immortals taste,
To press thy ruby lips distilling sweets,
Or circl'd in thy snowy arms to snatch
A joy, that Gods --

EVANTHE. Come, then, my much-loved Prince,
Let Us seek the shelter of some kind retreat.
Happy Arabia opens wide her arms,
There may we find some friendly solitude,
Far from the noise and hurry of the Court.
Ambitious views shall never blast our joys,
Or tyrant Fathers triumph over our wills:
There may we live like the first happy pair
Clothed in primeval innocence secure.
Our food untainted by luxurious arts,
Plain, simple, as our lives, shall not destroy
The health it should sustain; while the clear brook
Affords the cooling draught our thirsts to quench.
There, hand in hand, we'll trace the citron grove,
While with the songsters' round I join my voice,
To hush thy cares and calm thy ruffl'd soul:
Or, on some flowery bank reclined, my strains
Shall captivate the natives of the stream,
While on its crystal lap ourselves we view.

ARSACES. I see before us a wide sea of sorrows,
The angry waves roll forward to overwhelm us,
Black clouds arise, and the wind whistles loud.
But yet, oh! could I save thee from the wreck,
Thou beauteous casket, where my joys are stored,
Let the storm rage with double violence,
Smiling I Would view its wide extended horrors.

EVANTHE. It Is not enough that we do know the ill,
Say, shall we calmly see the tempest rise,
And seek no shelter from the inclement sky,
But bid it rage? --

ARSACES. Ha! will he force thee from me?
What, tear thee from my fond and bleeding heart?
And must I lose thee ever? dreadful word!
Never to gaze upon thy beauties more?
Never to taste the sweetness of thy lips?
Never to know the joys of mutual love?
Never! -- Oh! let me lose the power of thinking,
For thought is near allied to desperation.
Why, cruel Sire -- why did you give me life,
And load it with a weight of wretchedness?
Take back my being, or relieve my sorrows --
Ha! art thou not Evanthe? -- Art thou not
The lovely Maid, who blessed the fond Arsaces? --
[Raving.]
EVANTHE. O, my loved Lord, recall your scattered spir'ts,
Alas! I fear your senses are unsettl'd.

ARSACES. Yes, I would leave this dull and heavy sense.
Let me grow mad; perhaps, I then may gain
Some joy, by kind imagination formed,
Beyond reality. -- O! my Evanthe!
Why was I cursed with empire? born to rule? --
Would I had been some humble Peasant's son,
And thou some Shepherd's daughter on the plain;
My throne some hillock, and my flock my subjects,
My crook my scepter, and my faithful dog
My only guard; nor cursed with dreams of greatness.
At early dawn I Would hail the coming day,
And join the lark the rival of his lay;
At sultry noon to some kind shade repair,
Thus joyful pass the hours, my only care,
To guard my flock, and please the yielding Fair.

SCENE VIII.
KING. -- VARDANES, behind the Scene. KING. I will not think, to think is
torment -- Ha!
See, how they twine! ye furies cut their hold.
Now their hot blood beats loud to love's alarms;
Sigh presses sigh, while from their sparkling eyes
Flashes desire -- Oh! ye bright heavenly beings,
Who pitying bend to suppliant Lovers prayers,
And aid them in extremity, assist me!

VARDANES. Thus, for the Trojan, mourned the Queen of Carthage;
So, on the shore she raving stood, and saw
His navy leave her hospitable shore.
In vain she cursed the wind which filled their sails,
And bore the emblem of its change away.
[Comes forward.]
KING. Vardanes -- ha! -- come here, I know thou love me.

VARDANES. I do my Lord; but, say, what busy villain
Durst ever approach your ear, with coz'ning tales,
And urge you to a doubt?

KING. None, none believe me.
I Will never oppress thy love with fearful doubt --
A little nigher -- let me lean upon thee --
And thou be my support -- for now I mean
TO unbosom to thee free without restraint:
Search all the deep recesses of my soul,
And open every darling thought before thee,
Which long I Have secreted with jealous care.
Pray, mark me well.

VARDANES. I will, my Royal Sire.

KING. On Anna thus reclined the lovesick Dido;
Thus to her cheek laid hers with gentle pressure,
And wet her sister with a pearly shower,
Which fell from her sad eyes, then told her tale,
While gentle Anna gave a pitying tear,
And owned 'twas moving -- thou can pity too,
I know thy nature tender and engaging.

VARDANES. Tell me, my gracious Lord, what moves you thus?
Why is your breast distracted with these tumults?
Teach me some method how to sooth your sorrows,
And give your heart its former peace and joy;
Instruct, thy loved, Vardanes. --

KING. Yes, I Will tell thee;
But listen with attention while I speak;
And yet I know 'twill shock thy gentle soul,
And horror over thee 'll spread his palsy hand.
O, my loved Son! thou fondness of my age!
Thou art the prop of my declining years,
In thee alone I find a Father's joy,
Of all my offspring: But Arsaces --

VARDANES. Ha!
My Brother! --

KING. Ay -- why do start? -- thy Brother
Pursues me with his hate: and, while warm life
Rolls the red current through my veins, delights
To see me tortured; with an easy smile
He meets my sufferings, and derides my pain.

VARDANES. Oh!

KING. What means that hollow groan? -- Vardanes, speak,
Death's image sits upon thy pallid cheek,
While thy low voice sounds as when murmurs run
Through lengthened vaults --

VARDANES. [Aside] O! my foreboding thoughts,
'Twas this disturbed my rest; when sleep at night
Locked me in slumbers; in my dreams I saw
My Brother's crime -- yet, death! -- it cannot be --

KING. Ha! -- what was that? --

VARDANES. O! my dread Lord, some Villain
Bred up in lies, and trained to treach'ry,
Has injured you by vile reports, to stain
My Princely Brother's honor.

KING. Thou know more,
Thy looks confess what thou in vain would hide --
And have thou then conspired against me too,
And sworn concealment to your practices? --
Thy guilt --

VARDANES. Ha! guilt! -- what guilt? --

KING. Nay, start not so --
I Will know your purposes, spite of thy art.

VARDANES. O! ye great Gods! and is it come to this? --
My Royal Father call your reason home,
Drive these loud passions hence, that thus deform you.
My Brother -- Ah! what shall I say? -- My Brother
Sure loves you as he ought.

KING. Ha! as he ought? --
Hell blister thy evasive tongue -- I Will know it --
I will; I Will search thy breast, thus will I open
A passage to your secrets -- yet resolved --
Yet steady in your horrid villainy --
It Is fit that I from whom such monsters sprung
No more should burden earth -- Ye Parricides! --
Here plant your daggers in this hated bosom --
Here rive my heart, and end at once my sorrows,
I gave ye being, that is the mighty crime.

VARDANES. I can no more -- here let me bow in anguish --
Think not that I ever joined in his designs,
Because I have concealed my knowledge of them;
I meant, by powerful reason's friendly aid,
To turn him from destruction's dreadful path,
And bring him to a sense of what he owed
To you as King and Father.

KING. Say on -- I Will hear.

VARDANES. He views thy sacred life with envious hate,
As it is a bar to his ambitious hopes.
On the bright throne of Empire his plumed wishes
Seat him, while on his proud aspiring brows
He feels the pleasing weight of Royalty.
But when he wakes from these his airy dreams,
(Delusions formed by the deceiver hope,
To raise him to the glorious height of greatness)
Then hurl him from proud Empire to subjection.
Wild wrath will quickly swell his haughty breast,
Soon as he finds it is but a shadowy blessing. --
'Twas favoring accident discovered to me
All that I know; this Evening as I stood
Alone, retired, in the still gallery,
That leads up to the appartment of my Brother,
TO indulge my melancholy thoughts, --

KING. Proceed --

VARDANES. A wretch approached with wary step, his eye
Spoke half his tale, denoting villainy.
In hollow murmurs thus he questioned me.
(...) Prince? -- I answered to content him --
Then in his hand he held this paper forth.
"Take this, says he, this Bethas greets thee with,
"Keep but your word our plot will meet success."
I snatched it with more rashness than discretion,
Which taught him his mistake. In haste he drew,
And aimed his dagger at my breast, but paid
His life, a forfeit, for his bold presuming.

KING. O Villain! Villain!

VARDANES. Here, read this, my Lord --
I read it, and cold horror froze my blood,
And shook me like an ague.

KING. Ha! -- what is this? --
"Doubt not Arabia's aid, set me but free,
"I Will easy pass on the old cred'lous King,
"For fair Evanthe's Father." -- Thus to atoms --
[Tears the paper into pieces.] Oh! could I tear these cursed traitors thus.

VARDANES. Curses avail you nothing, he has power,
And may abuse it to your prejudice*

KING. I am resolved --

VARDANES. Though Pris'ner' in his camp,
Yet, Bethas was attended like a Prince,
As though he still commanded the Arabians.
It Is true, when they approached the royal city,
He threw him into chains to blind our eyes,
A shallow artifice --

KING. That is a Truth.

VARDANES. And, yet, he is your Son.

KING. Ah! that indeed --

VARDANES. Why that still heightens his impiety,
To rush to empire through his Father's blood,
And, in return of life, to give him death.

KING. Oh! I am all on fire, yes I must tear
These folds of venom from me.

VARDANES. Sure 'twas Lysias
That crossed the passage now.

KING. It Is to my wish.
I Will in, and give him orders to arrest
My traitor Son and Bethas -- Now Vardanes
Indulge thy Father in this one request --
Seize, with some horse, Evanthe, and bear her
To your command -- Oh! I Will own my weakness --
I love with fondness mortal never knew --
Not Jove himself, when he forsook his heaven,
And in a brutal shape disgraced the God,
Ever loved like me.

VARDANES. I will obey you, Sir.

SCENE IX.
VARDANES, alone. I Will seize her, but I Will keep her for myself,
It were a sin to give her to his age --
To twine the blooming garland of the spring
Around the sapless trunks of withered oaks --
The night, methinks, grows ruder than it was,
Thus should it be, thus nature should be shocked,
And Prodigies, affrighting all mankind,
Foretell the dreadful business I intend.
The earth should gape, and swallow cities up,
Shake from their haughty heights aspiring towers,
And level mountains with the vales below;
The Sun amazed should frown in dark eclipse,
And light retire to its unclouded heaven;
While darkness, bursting from her deep recess,
Should wrap all nature in eternal night. --
Ambition, glorious fever of the mind,
It Is that which raises us above mankind;
The shining mark which bounteous heaven has gave,
From vulgar souls distinguishing the brave.

END of the THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE I. A PRISON.
GOTARZES and PHRAATES. PHRAATES. Oh! fly my Prince, for safety dwells not here,
Hence let me urge thy flight with eager haste.
Last night thy Father sighed his soul to bliss,
Base murdered --

GOTARZES. Murdered? ye Gods! --

PHRAATES. Alas! it is true.
Stabbed in his slumber by a traitor's hand;
I scarce can speak it -- horror choaks my words --
Lysias it was who did the damned deed,
Urged by the bloody Queen, and his cursed rage,
Because the King, thy Sire, in angry mood,
Once struck him on his foul dishonest cheek.
Suspicion gave me fears of this, when first
I heard, the Prince, Arsaces, was imprisoned,
By fell Vardanes' viles.

GOTARZES. Oh! horror! horror!
Hither I came to share my Brother's sorrows,
To mingle tears, and give him sigh for sigh;
But this is double, double weight of woe.

PHRAATES. It Is held as yet a secret from the world.
Frighted by hideous dreams I shook off sleep,
And as I mused the garden walks along,
Through the deep gloom, close in a neighboring walk,
Vardanes with proud Lysias I beheld,
Still eager in discourse they saw not me,
For yet the early dawn had not appeared;
I sought a secret stand, where hid from view,
I heard stern Lysias, hail the Prince Vardanes
As Parthia's dreaded Lord -- "'It Is done, he cried,
"'It Is done, and Artabanus is no more.
"The blow he gave me is repaid in blood;
"Now shall the morn behold two rising suns:
" Vardanes thou, our better light, shall bring
"Bright day and joy to every heart."

GOTARZES. Why slept
Your vengeance, oh! ye righteous Gods?

PHRAATES. Then told
A tale, so filled with bloody circumstance,
Of this damned deed, that stiffen'd me with horror.
Vardanes seemed to blame the hasty act,
As rash, and unadvised, by passion urged,
Which never yields to cool reflection's place.
But, being done, resolved it secret, least
The multitude should take it in their wise
Authority to pry into his death.
Arsaces was, by assassination,
Doomed to fall. Your name was mentioned also --
But hurried by my fears away, I left
The rest unheard --

GOTARZES. What can be done? -- Reflection, why will thou
Forsake us, when distress is at our heels?
Phraates help me, aid me with thy council.

PHRAATES. Then stay not here, fly to Barzaphernes,
His conquering troops are at a trivial distance;
Soon will you reach the camp; he loved your Brother,
And your Father with affection served; haste
Your flight, whilst yet I have the city-guard,
For Lysias I expect takes my command.
I to the camp dispatched a trusty slave,
Before the morn had spread her blushing veil.
Away, you will meet the General on the road,
On such a cause as this he will not delay.

GOTARZES. I thank your love --

SCENE II.
PHRAATES, alone. I Will wait behind, my stay
May aid the cause; dissembling I must learn,
Necessity shall teach me how to vary
My features to the looks of him I serve.
I Will thrust myself disguised among the crowd,
And fill their ears with murmurs of the deed:
Whisper all is not well, blow up the sparks
Of discord, and it soon will flame to rage.

SCENE III.
QUEEN and LYSIAS. QUEEN. Haste, and show me to the Prince Arsaces,
Delay not, see the signet of Vardanes.

LYSIAS. Royal Thermusa, why this eagerness?
This tumult of the soul? -- what means this dagger?
Ha! -- I suspect --

QUEEN. Hold -- for I Will tell thee, Lysias.
It Is -- oh! I scarce can speak the mighty joy --
I shall be greatly blessed in dear revenge,
It Is vengeance on Arsaces -- yes, this hand
Shall urge the shining poniard to his heart,
And give him death -- yea, give the ruffian death;
So shall I smile on his keen agonies.

LYSIAS. Ha! am I robbed of all my hopes of vengeance,
Shall I then calmly stand with all my wrongs,
And see another bear away revenge?

QUEEN. For what can Lysias ask revenge, to bar
His Queen of hers?

LYSIAS. Was I not scorned, and spurned.
With haughty insolence? like a base coward
Refused what ever I asked, and called a boaster?
My honor sullied, with opprobrious words,
Which can no more its former brightness know,
'Til, with his blood, I Have washed the stains away.
Say, shall I then not seek for glorious vengeance?

QUEEN. And what is this, to the sad Mother's griefs,
Her hope cut off, raised up with pain and care?
Had thou ever supported the loved Prattler?
Had thou like me hung over his infancy,
Wasting in wakeful mood the tedious night,
And watched his sickly couch, far moved from rest,
Waiting his health's return? -- Ah! had thou known
The parent's fondness, rapture, toil and sorrow,
The joy his actions gave, and the fond wish
Of something yet to come, to bless my age,
And lead me down with pleasure to the grave,
Thou would not thus talk lightly of my wrongs.
But I delay --

LYSIAS. To thee I then submit.
Be sure to wreck a double vengeance on him;
If that thou know a part in all his body,
Where pain can most be felt, strike, strike him there --
And let him know the utmost height of anguish.
It is a joy to think that he shall fall,
Though it is another hand which gives the blow.

SCENE IV.
ARSACES and BETHAS. ARSACES. Why should I linger out my joyless days,
When length of hope is length of misery?
Hope is a coz'ner, and beguiles our cares,
Cheats us with empty shows of happiness,
Swift fleeting joys which mock the faint embrace;
We wade through ills pursuing of the meteor,
Yet are distanc'd still.

BETHAS. Ah! talk not of hope --
Hope fled when bright Astroea spurned this earth,
And sought her seat among the shining Gods;
Despair, proud tyrant, ravages my breast,
And makes all desolation.

ARSACES. How can I
Behold those rev'rent sorrows, see those cheeks
Moist with the dew which falls from thy sad eyes,
Nor imitate distraction's frantic tricks,
And chase cold lifeless reason from her throne?
I am the fatal cause of all this sorrow,
The spring of ills, -- to know me is unhappiness; --
And misery, like a hateful plague, pursues
My wearied steps, and blasts the springing verdure.

BETHAS. No; -- It is I that am the source of all,
It is my fortune sinks you to this trouble;
Before you shower'd your gentle pity on me,
You shone the pride of this admiring world. --
Evanthe springs from me, whose fatal charms
Produces all this ruin -- Hear me heaven!
If to another love she ever yields,
And stains her soul with spotted falsehood's crime,
If even in expectation tastes a bliss,
Nor joins Arsaces with it, I will wreck
My vengeance on her, so that she shall be
A dread example to all future times.

ARSACES. Oh! curse her not, nor threaten her with anger,
She is all gentleness, yet firm to truth,
And blessed with every pleasing virtue, free
From levity, her sexes character.
She scorns to chase the turning of the wind,
Varying from point to point.

BETHAS. I love her, ye Gods!
I need not speak the greatness of my love,
Each look which straining draws my soul to hers
Denotes unmeasured fondness; but misery,
Like a fretful peevish child, can scarce tell
What it would wish, or aim at.

ARSACES. Immortals, hear!
Thus do I bow my soul in humble prayer --
Thou, King of beings, in whose breath is fate,
Shower on Evanthe all thy choicest blessings,
And bless her with excess of happiness;
If yet, there is one bliss reserved in store,
And written to my name, oh! give it her,
And give me all her sorrows in return.

BETHAS. 'Rise, 'rise my Prince, this goodness o'erwhelms me,
She Is too unworthy of so great a passion.

ARSACES. I know not what it means, I Am not as usual,
Ill-boding cares, and restless fears oppress me,
And horrid dreams disturb, and fright, my slumbers;
But yesternight, it is dreadful to relate,
Even now I tremble at my waking thoughts,
Methought, I stood alone upon the shore,
And, at my feet, there rolled a sea of blood,
High wrought, and 'midst the waves, appeared my Father,
Struggling for life; above him was Vardanes,
Poised in the air, he seemed to rule the storm,
And, now and then, would push my Father down,
And for a space he would sink beneath the waves,
And then, all gory, rise to open view,
His voice in broken accents reached my ear,
And bade me save him from the bloody stream;
Through the red billows eagerly I rushed,
But sudden woke, benumbed with chilling fear.

BETHAS. Most horrible indeed! -- but let it pass,
It Is but the offspring of a mind disturbed,
For sorrow leaves impressions on the fancy,
Which show most fearful to us locked in sleep.

ARSACES. Thermusa! ha! -- what can be her design?
She bears this way, and carries in her looks
An eagerness importing violence.
Retire -- for I would meet her rage alone.

SCENE V.
ARSACES and QUEEN. ARSACES. What means the proud Thermusa by this visit,
Stoops heaven-born pity to a breast like thine?
Pity adorns the virtuous, but never dwells
Where hate, revenge, and rage distract the soul.
Sure, it is hate that hither urged thy steps,
To view misfortune with an eye of triumph.
I know thou love me not, for I have dared
To cross thy purposes, and, bold in censure,
Spoke of thy actions as they merited.
Besides, this hand 'twas slew the cursed Vonones.

QUEEN. And dare thou insolent to name Vonones?
To heap perdition on thy guilty soul?
There needs not this to urge me to revenge --
But let me view this wonder of mankind,
Whose breath can set the bustling world in arms.
I see no dreadful terrors in his eye,
Nor gathers chilly fears around my heart,
Nor strains my gazing eye with admiration,
And, though a woman, I can strike the blow.

ARSACES. Why gaze you on me thus? why hesitate?
Am I to die?

QUEEN. Thou art -- this dagger shall
Dissolve thy life, thy fleeting ghost I Will send
To wait Vonones in the shades below.

ARSACES. And even there I Will triumph over him.

QUEEN. O, thou vile homicide! thy fatal hand
Has robbed me of all joy; Vonones, to
Thy Manes this proud sacrifice I give.
That hand which severed the friendship of thy
Soul and body, shall never draw again
Imbitt'ring tears from sorr'wing mother's eyes.
This, with the many tears I Have shed, receive --
[Offers to stab him] Ha! -- I Would strike; what holds my hand? -- it is n't pity.

ARSACES. Nay, do not mock me, with the show of death,
And yet deny the blessing; I have met
Your taunts with equal taunts, in hopes to urge
The blow with swift revenge; but since that fails,
I Will woo thee to compliance, teach my tongue
Persuasion's winning arts, to gain thy soul;
I Will praise thy clemency, in dying accents
Bless thee for, this, thy charitable deed.
Oh! do not stand; see, how my bosom heaves
To meet the stroke; in pity let me die,
It Is all the happiness I now can know.

QUEEN. How sweet the eloquence of dying men!
Hence Poets feigned the music of the Swan,
When death upon her lays his icy hand,
She melts away in melancholy strains.

ARSACES. Play not thus cruel with my poor request,
But take my loving Father's thanks, and mine.

QUEEN. Thy Father cannot thank me now.

ARSACES. He will,
Believe me, even whilst dissolved in ecstacy
On fond Evanthe's bosom, he will pause,
One moment from his joys, to bless the deed.

QUEEN. What means this tumult in my breast? from whence
Proceeds this sudden change? my heart beats high,
And soft compassion makes me less than woman:
'll search no more for what I fear to know.

ARSACES. Why drops the dagger from thy trembling hand?
Oh! yet be kind --

QUEEN. No: now I Would have thee live,
Since it is happiness to die: It Is pain
That I would give thee, thus I bid thee live;
Yes, I would have thee a whole age a dying,
And smile to see thy lingering agonies.
All day I Would watch thee, mark each heightened pang,
While springing joy should swell my panting bosom;
This I would have -- But should this dagger give
Thy soul the liberty ***it fondly wishes,
'Twould soar aloft, and mock my faint revenge.

ARSACES. This mildness shows most foul, thy anger lovely.
Think that 'twas I who blasted thy fond hope,
Vonones now lies numbered with the dead,
And all your joys are buried in his grave;
My hand untimely plucked the precious flower,
Before its shining beauties were displayed.

QUEEN. O Woman! Woman! where is thy resolution?
Where Is thy revenge? Where Is all thy hopes of vengeance?
Given to the winds -- Ha! is it pity? -- No --
I fear it wears another softer name.
I Will think no more, but rush to my revenge,
In spite of foolish fear, or woman's softness;
Be steady now my soul to thy resolves.
Yes, thou shall die, thus, on thy breast, I write
Thy instant doom -- ha! -- ye Gods!
Queen starts, as, in great fright, at hearing something]
ARSACES. Why this pause?
Why do thou idly stand like imag'd vengeance,
With harmless terrors threatening on thy brow,
With lifted arm, yet can not strike the blow?

QUEEN. It surely was the Echo to my fears,
The whistling wind, perhaps, which mimick'd voice;
But thrice methought it loudly cried, "forbear."
Imagination hence -- I Will heed thee not --
[Ghost of Artabanus rises] Save me -- oh! -- save me -- ye eternal powers! --
See! -- see it comes, surrounded with dread terrors --
Hence -- hence! nor blast me with that horrid sight --
Throw off that shape, and search the infernal rounds
For horrid forms, there is none can shock like thine.

GHOST. No; I will ever wear this form, thus ever
Appear before thee; glare upon thee thus.
'Til desperation, joined to thy damned crime,
Shall wind thee to the utmost height of frenzy.
In vain you grasp the dagger in your hand,
In vain you dress your brows in angry frowns,
In vain you raise your threatening arm in air,
Secure, Arsaces triumphs over, your rage.
Guarded by fate, from thy accursed revenge,
Thou can not touch his life; the Gods have given
A softness to thy more than savage soul
Before unknown, to aid their grand designs.
Fate yet is laboring with some great event,
But what must follow I Am forbid to broach --
Think, think of me, I sink to rise again,
To play in blood before thy aching sight,
And shock thy guilty soul with hell-born horrors --
Think, think of Artabanus! and despair --
[Sinks.]
QUEEN. Think of thee, and despair? -- yes, I Will despair --
Yet stay, -- oh! stay, thou messenger of fate!
Tell me -- Ha! it is gone -- and left me wretched --

ARSACES. Your eyes seem fixed upon some dreadful object,
Horror and anguish cloth your whitened face,
And your frame shakes with terror; I hear you speak
As seeming earnest in discourse, yet hear
No second voice.

QUEEN. What! saw thou nothing?

ARSACES. Nothing.

QUEEN. Nor heard? --

ARSACES. Nor heard.

QUEEN. Amazing spectacle! --
Cold moist'ning dews distill from every pore,
I tremble like to palsied age -- Ye Gods!
Would I could leave this loathed detested being! --
Oh! all my brain's on fire -- I rave! I rave! --
[Ghost rises again] Ha! it comes again -- see, it glides along --
See, see, what streams of blood flow from its wounds!
A crimson torrent -- Shield me, oh! shield me, heaven. --

ARSACES. Great, and righteous Gods! --

QUEEN. Ah! frown not on me --
Why do thou shake thy horrid locks at me?
Can I give immortality? -- it is gone --
[Ghost sinks] It flies me, see, ah! -- stop it, stop it, haste --

ARSACES. Oh, piteous sight! --

QUEEN. Hist! prithee hist! -- oh death!
I Am all on fire -- now freezing bolts of ice
Dart through my breast -- Oh! burst ye cords of life --
Ha! who are ye? -- Why do ye stare upon me? --
Oh! -- defend me, from these bick'ring Furies!

ARSACES. Alas! her sense is lost, distressful Queen!

QUEEN. Help me, thou King of Gods! oh! help me! help! --
See! they envir'n me round -- Vonones too,
The foremost leading on the dreadful troop --
But there, Vardanes beck'ns me to shun
Their hellish rage -- I come, I come!
Ah! they pursue me, with a scourge of fire. --
[Runs out distracted.]
SCENE VI.
ARSACES, alone. Oh! -- horror! -- on the ground she breathless lies,
Silent, in death's cold sleep; the wall besmeared
With brains and gore the marks of her despair.
O guilt! how dreadful do thou ever show!
How lovely are the charms of innocence!
How beauteous though in sorrows and distress! --
Ha! -- what noise? --
[Clashing of swords]
SCENE VII.
ARSACES, BARZAPHERNES and GOTARZES. BARZAPHERNES. At length we have forced our
entrance --
O my loved Prince! to see thee thus, indeed,
Melts even me to a woman's softness; see
My eyes overflow -- Are these the ornaments
For Royal hands? rude manacles! oh shameful!
Is this thy room of state, this gloomy goal?
Without attendance, and thy bed the pavement?
But, ah! how different was our parting last!
When flushed with victory, reeking from the slaughter,
You saw Arabia's Sons scour over the plain
In shameful flight, before your conquering sword;
Then shone you like the God of battle.

ARSACES. Welcome! --
Welcome, my loyal friends! Barzaphernes!
My good old soldier, to my bosom thus!
Gotarzes, my loved Brother! now I Am happy. --
But, say, my soldier, why these threatening arms?
Why am I thus released by force? my Father,
I should have said the King, had he relented,
He Would not have used this method to enlarge me.
Alas! I fear, too forward in your love,
You Will brand me with the rebel's hated name.

BARZAPHERNES. I am by nature blunt -- the soldier's manner.
Unused to the soft arts practiced at courts.
Nor can I move the passions, or disguise
The sorr'wing tale to mitigate the smart.
Then seek it not: I would sound the alarm,
Loud as the trumpet's clangour, in your ears;
Nor will I hail you, as our Parthia's King,
'Til you have full revenged your Father's murder.

ARSACES. Murder? -- good heaven!

BARZAPHERNES. The tale requires some time;
And opportunity must not be lost
Your traitor Brother, who usurps your rights,
Must, 'ere his faction gathers to a head,
Have from his brows his newborn honors torn.

ARSACES. What, do thou say, murdered by Vardanes?
Impious parricide! -- detested villain! --
Give me a sword, and onward to the charge,
Stop gushing tears, for I will weep in blood,
And sorrow with the groans of dying men. --
Revenge! revenge! -- oh! -- all my soul's on fire!

GOTARZES. 'Twas not Vardanes struck the fatal blow,
Though, great in power usurped, he dares support
The actor, vengeful Lysias; to his breast
He clasps, with grateful joy, the bloody villain;
Who soon meant, with ruffian wiles, to cut
You from the earth, and also me.

ARSACES. Just heavens! --
But, gentle Brother, how did thou elude
The vigilant, suspicious, tyrant's craft.

GOTARZES. Phraates, by an accident, obtained
The knowledge of the deed, and warned by him
I bent my flight toward the camp, to seek
Protection and revenge; but scarce I Would left
The city when I o'ertook the General.

BARZAPHERNES. 'Ere the sun 'rose I gained the intelligence:
The soldiers when they heard the dreadful tale,
First stood aghast, and motionless with horror.
Then suddenly, inspired with noble rage,
Tore up their ensigns, calling on their leaders
To march them to the city instantly.
I, with some trusty few, with speed came forward,
To raise our friends within, and gain your freedom.
Nor hazard longer, by delays, your safety.
Already faithful Phraates has gained
A numerous party of the citizens;
With these we mean to attack the Royal Palace,
Crush the bold tyrant with surprise, while sunk
In false security; and vengeance wreck,
'Ere that he thinks the impious crime be known.

ARSACES. O! parent being, Ruler of yon heaven!
Who bade creation spring to order, hear me.
What ever sins are laid upon my soul,
Now let them not prove heavy on this day,
To sink my arm, or violate my cause.
The sacred rights of Kings, my Country's wrongs,
The punishment of fierce impiety,
And a loved Father's death, call forth my sword. --
Now on; I feel all calm within my breast,
And every busy doubt is hushed to rest;
Smile heaven propitious on my virtuous cause,
Nor aid the wretch who dares disdain your laws.

END of the FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE I. The PALACE.
The Curtain rises, slowly, to soft music, and discovers Evanthe sleeping on a
Sofa; after the music ceases, Vardanes enters. VARDANES. NOW shining Empire
standing at the goal,
Beck'ns me forward to increase my speed;
But, yet, Arsaces lives, bane to my hopes,
Lysias I Will urge to ease me of his life,
Then give the villain up to punishment.
The show of justice gains the changeling crowd.
Besides, I never will harbor in my bosom
Such serpents, ever ready with their stings --
But now one hour for love and fair Evanthe --
Hence with ambition's cares -- see, where reclined,
In slumbers all her sorrows are dismissed,
Sleep seems to heighten every beauteous feature,
And adds peculiar softness to each grace.
She weeps -- in dreams some lively sorrow pains her --
I Will take one kiss -- oh! what a balmy sweetness!
Give me another -- and another still --
For ever thus I Would dwell upon her lips.
Be still my heart, and calm unruly transports. --
Wake her, with music, from this mimic death.
[Music sounds] SONG.
Tell me, Phillis, tell me why,
You appear so wondrous coy,
When that glow, and sparkling eye,
Speak you want to taste the joy?
Prithee give this fooling over,
Nor torment your lover more.
While youth is warm within our veins,
And nature tempts us to be gay,
Give to pleasure loose the reins,
Love and youth fly swift away.
Youth in pleasure should be spent,
Age will come, we'll then repent.

EVANTHE (waking) I come ye lovely shades -- Ha! am I here?
Still in the tyrant's palace? Ye bright powers!
Are all my blessings then but vis'onary?
Methought I was arrived on that blessed shore
Where happy souls for ever dwell, crowned with
Immortal bliss; Arsaces led me through
The flowery groves, while all around me gleam'd
Thousand and thousand shades, who welcomed me
With pleasing songs of joy -- Vardanes, ha! --

VARDANES. Why beams the angry lightning of thine eye
Against thy sighing slave? Is love a crime?
Oh! if to dote, with such excess of passion
As rises even to mad extravagance
Is criminal, I then am so, indeed.

EVANTHE. Away! vile man! --

VARDANES. If to pursue thee ever
With all the humblest offices of love,
If never to know one single thought that does
Not bear thy bright idea, merits scorn --

EVANTHE. Hence from my sight -- nor let me, thus, pollute
Mine eyes, with looking on a wretch like thee,
Thou cause of all my ills; I sicken at
Thy loathsome presence --

VARDANES. It Is not always thus,
Nor do thou ever meet the sounds of love
With rage and fierce disdain: Arsaces, soon,
Could smooth thy brow, and melt thy icy breast.

EVANTHE. Ha! does it gall thee? Yes, he could, he could*
Oh! when he speaks, such sweetness dwells upon
His accents, all my soul dissolves to love,
And warm desire; such truth and beauty joined!
His looks are soft and kind, such gentleness
Such virtue swells his bosom! in his eye
Sits majesty, commanding every heart.
Strait as the pine, the pride of all the grove,
More blooming than the spring, and sweeter far,
Than asphodels or roses infant sweets.
Oh! I could dwell forever on his praise,
Yet think eternity was scarce enough
To tell the mighty theme; here in my breast
His image dwells, but one dear thought of him,
When fancy paints his Person to my eye,
As he was wont in tenderness dissolved,
Sighing his vows, or kneeling at my feet,
Wipes off all memory of my wretchedness.

VARDANES. I know this brav'ry is affected, yet
It gives me joy, to think my rival only
Can in imagination taste thy beauties.
Let him, -- 'twill ease him in his solitude,
And gild the horrors of his prisonhouse,
Till death shall --

EVANTHE. Ha! what was that? till death -- ye Gods!
Ah, now I feel distress's torturing pang --
Thou can not villain -- dare not think his death --
O misery! --

VARDANES. Naught but your kindness saves him,
Yet bless me, with your love, and he is safe;
But the same frown which kills my growing hopes,
Gives him to death.

EVANTHE. O horror, I could die
Ten thousand times to save the loved Arsaces.
Teach me the means, ye powers, how to save him*
Then lead me to what ever is my fate.

VARDANES. Not only shall he die, but to thy view
I Will bring the scene, those eyes that take delight
In cruelty, shall have enough of death.
Even here, before thy sight, he shall expire,
Not sudden, but by lingering torments; all
That mischief can invent shall be practiced
To give him pain; to lengthen out his woe
I Will search around the realm for skillful men*
To find new tortures.

EVANTHE. Oh! Wrack not thus my soul!

VARDANES. The sex overflows with various humors, he
Who catches not their smiles the very moment,
Will lose the blessing -- I Will improve this softness. --
[Aside] [to her] -- Heaven never made thy beauties to destroy,
They were to bless, and not to blast mankind;
Pity should dwell within thy lovely breast,
That sacred temple never was formed for hate
A habitation; but a residence
For love and gaiety.

EVANTHE. Oh! heavens!

VARDANES. That sigh,
Proclaims your kind consent to save Arsaces.
[Laying hold of her]
EVANTHE. Ha! villain, off -- unhand me -- hence --

VARDANES. In vain
Is opportunity to those, who spend
An idle courtship on the fair, they well
Deserve their fate, if they 're disdained; -- her charms
To rush upon, and conquer opposition,
Gains the Fair one's praise; an active lover
Suits, who lies aside the coxcomb's empty whine,
And forces her to bliss.

EVANTHE. Ah! hear me, hear me,
Thus kneeling, with my tears, I do implore thee:
Think on my innocence, nor force a joy
Which will ever fill thy soul with anguish.
Seek not to load my ills with infamy,
Let me not be a mark for bitter scorn,
To bear proud virtue's taunts and mocking jeers,
And like a flower, of all its sweetness robbed
Be trod to earth, neglected and disdained,
And spurned by every vulgar saucy foot.

VARDANES. Speak, speak forever -- music's in thy voice,
Still attentive will I listen to thee,
Be hushed as night, charmed with the magic sound.

EVANTHE. Oh! teach me, heaven, soft moving eloquence,
To bend his stubborn soul to gentleness. --
Where is thy virtue? Where thy princely luster?
Ah! will thou meanly stoop to do a wrong,
And stain thy honor with so soul a blot?
Thou who should be a guard to innocence.
Leave force to brutes -- for pleasure is not found
Where still the soul's averse; horror and guilt,
Distraction, desperation chase her hence.
Some happier gentle Fair one you may find,
Whose yielding heart may bend to meet your flame,
In mutual love soft joys alone are found;
When souls are drawn by secret sympathy,
And virtue does on virtue smile.

VARDANES. No more --
Her heavenly tongue will charm me from the intent --
Hence coward softness, force shall make me blessed.

EVANTHE. Assist me, ye bless't powers! -- oh! strike, ye Gods!
Strike me, with thunder dead, this moment, ever
I suffer violation --

VARDANES. It Is in vain,
The idle prayers by fancied grief put up,
Are blown by active winds regardless by,
Nor ever reach the heavens.

SCENE II.
VARDANES, EVANTHE, and LYSIAS. LYSIAS. Arm, arm, my Lord! --

VARDANES. Damnation! why this interruption now? --

LYSIAS. Oh! arm! my noble Prince, the foe's upon us.
Arsaces, by Barzaphernes released,
Joined with the citizens, assaults the Palace,
And swears revenge for Artabanus' death.

VARDANES. Ha! what? revenge for Artabanus' death? --
It Is the curse of Princes that their counsels,
Which should be kept like holy mysteries,
Can never rest in silent secrecy.
Fond of employ, some cursed tattling tongue
Will still divulge them.

LYSIAS. Sure some fiend from hell,
In mischief eminent, to cross our views,
Has given the intelligence, for man could not.

EVANTHE. Oh! ever blessed event! -- All-gracious heaven!
This beam of joy revives me.

SCENE III.
VARDANES, EVANTHE, LYSIAS, to them, an OFFICER. OFFICER. Haste! my Lord!
Or all will soon be lost; though thrice repulsed
By your e'erfaithful guards, they still return
With double fury.

VARDANES. Hence, then, idle love --
Come forth, my trusty sword -- cursed misfortune! --
Had I but one short hour, without reluctance,
I Would meet them, though they bribed the powers of hell,
To place their furies in the van: Yea, rush
To meet this dreadful Brother 'midst the war --
Haste to the combat -- Now a crown or death --
The wretch who dares to give an inch of ground
Till I retire, shall meet the death he shunned.
Away -- away! delays are dangerous now --

SCENE IV.
EVANTHE, alone. Now heaven be partial to Arsaces cause,
Nor leave to giddy chance when virtue strives;
Let victory sit on his warlike helm,
For justice draws his sword: be thou his aid,
And let the opposer's arm sink with the weight
Of his most impious crimes -- be still my heart,
For all that thou can aid him with is prayer.
Oh! that I had the strength of thousands in me!
Or that my voice could wake the sons of men
To join, and crush the tyrant! --

SCENE V.
EVANTHE and CLEONE. EVANTHE. My Cleone --
Welcome thou partner of my joys and sorrows.

CLEONE. Oh! yonder terror triumphs uncontrolled,
And glutton death seems never satisfied.
Each soft sensation lost in thoughtless rage,
And breast to breast, opposed in furious war,
The fiery Chiefs receive the vengeful steel.
Over lifeless heaps of men the soldiers climb
Still eager for the combat, while the ground
Made slippery by the gushing streams of gore
Is treacherous to their feet. -- Oh! horrid sight! --
Too much for me to stand, my life we chilled,
As from the turret I beheld the fight,
It forced me to retire.

EVANTHE. What of Arsaces?

CLEONE. I saw him active in the battle, now,
Like lightning, piercing through the thickest foe,
Then scorning to disgrace his sword in low
Plebeian blood -- loud for Vardanes called --
To meet him singly, and decide the war.

EVANTHE. Save him, ye Gods! -- oh! all my soul is fear --
Fly, fly Cleone, to the tower again,
See how fate turns the balance; and pursue
Arsaces with thine eye; mark every blow,
Observe if some bold villain dares to urge
His sword presumptuous at my Hero's breast.
Haste, my Cleone, haste, to ease my fears.

SCENE VI.
EVANTHE, alone. Ah! -- what a cruel torment is suspense!
My anxious soul is torn 'twixt love and fear,
Scarce can I please me with one fancied bliss
Which kind imagination forms, but reason,
Proud, surly reason, snatches the vain joy,
And gives me up again to sad distress.
Yet I can die, and should Arsaces fall
This fatal draught shall ease me of my sorrrows.

SCENE VII.
CLEONE, alone. Oh! horror! horror! horror! -- cruel Gods! --
I saw him fall -- I did -- pierced through with wounds --
Cursed! cursed Vardanes! -- heard the general cry,
Which burst, as though all nature had dissolved.
Hark! how they shout! The noise seems coming this way.

SCENE VIII.
ARSACES, GOTARZES, BARZAPHERNES and OFFICERS, with VARDANES and LYSIAS,
prisoners. ARSACES. Thanks to the ruling powers who blessed our arms,
Prepare the sacrifices to the Gods,
And grateful songs of tributary praise. --
Gotarzes, fly, my Brother, find Evanthe,
And bring the lovely mourner to my arms.

GOTARZES. Yes, I Will obey you, with a willing speed.
[Exit Gotarzes]
ARSACES. Thou, Lysias, from yon tow'r's aspiring height
Be hurled to death, thy impious hands are stained
With royal blood -- Let the traitor's body
Be given to hungry dogs.

LYSIAS. Welcome grim death! --
I Have fed thy maw with Kings, and lack no more
Revenge -- Now, do thy duty Officer.

OFFICER. Yea, and would lead all traitors gladly thus, --
The boon of their deserts.

SCENE IX.
ARSACES, VARDANES, BARZAPHERNES. ARSACES. But for Vardanes,
The Brother's name forgot --

VARDANES. You need no more,
I know the rest -- Ah! death is near, my wounds
Permit me not to live -- my breath grows short,
Cursed be Phraates arm which stopped my sword,
Ere it had reached thy proud exulting heart.
But the wretch paid dear for his presuming;
A just reward. --

ARSACES. He sinks, yet bear him up --

VARDANES. Cursed be the multitude which o'erpow'r'd me,
And beat me to the ground, covered with wounds --
But, oh! it is done! my ebbing life is done --
I feel death's hand upon me -- Yet, I die
Just as I wish, and daring for a crown,
Life without rule is my disdain; I scorn
To swell a haughty Brother's sneaking train,
To wait upon his ear with flattering tales,
And court his smiles; come, death, in thy cold arms,
Let me forget Ambition's mighty toil,
And shun the triumphs of a hated Brother --
O! bear me off -- Let not his eyes enjoy
My agonies -- My sight grows dim with death.
[They bear him off.]
SCENE the Last.
ARSACES, GOTARZES, BARZAPHERNES, and EVANTHE supported. EVANTHE. Lead me, oh!
lead me, to my loved Arsaces,
Where is he? --

ARSACES. Ha! what is this? -- Just heavens! -- my fears --

EVANTHE. Arsaces, oh! thus circl'd in thy arms,
I die without a pang.

ARSACES. Ha! die? -- why stare ye,
Ye lifeless ghosts? Have none of ye a tongue
To tell me I Am undone?

GOTARZES. Soon, my Brother,
Too soon, you will know it by the sad effects;
And if my grief will yet permit my tongue
To do its office, thou shall hear the tale.
Cleone, from the turret, viewed the battle,
And on Phraates fixed her erring sight,
Thy brave unhappy friend she took for thee,
By his garb deceived, which like to thine he wore.
Still with her eye she followed him, wherever
He pierced the foe, and to Vardanes sword
She saw him fall a hapless victim, then,
In agonies of grief, flew to Evanthe,
And told the dreadful tale -- the fatal bowl
I saw --

ARSACES. Be dumb, nor ever give again
Fear to the heart, with thy ill-boding voice.

EVANTHE. Here, I Will rest, till death, on thy loved bosom,
Here, let me sigh my -- Oh! the poison works --

ARSACES. Oh! horror! --

EVLNTHE. Cease -- this sorrow pains me more
Than all the wringing agonies of death,
The dreadful parting of the soul from, this,
Its wedded clay -- Ah! there -- that pang shot through
My throbbing heart --

ARSACES. Save her, ye Gods! -- oh! save her!
And I will bribe ye with clouds of incense;
Such numerous sacrifices, that your altars
Shall even sink beneath the mighty load.

EVANTHE. When I am dead, dissolved to native dust,
Yet let me live in thy dear memory --
One tear will not be much to give Evanthe.

ARSACES. My eyes shall ever two running fountains be,
And wet thy urn with everflowing tears,
Joy never again within my breast shall find
A residence -- Oh! speak, once more --

EVANTHE. Life's just out --
My Father -- Oh! protect his honored age,
And give him shelter from the storms of fate,
He Is long been fortune's sport -- Support me -- Ah! --
I can no more -- my glass is spent -- farewell --
Forever -- Arsaces! -- Oh!
[Dies]
ARSACES. Stay, Oh! stay,
Or take me with thee -- dead! she is cold and dead!
Her eyes are closed, and all my joys are flown --
Now burst ye elements, from your restraint,
Let order cease, and chaos be again.
Break! break tough heart! -- oh! torture -- life dissolve --
Why stand ye idle? Have I not one friend
To kindly free me from this pain? One blow,
One friendly blow would give me ease.

BARZAPHERNES. The Gods
Forefend! -- Pardon me, Royal Sir, if I
Dare, seemingly disloyal, seize your sword,
Despair may urge you far --

ARSACES. Ha! traitors! rebels! --
Hoary reverend Villain! what, disarm me?
Give me my sword -- what, stand ye by, and see
Your Prince insulted? Are ye rebels all? --

BRAZAPHERNES. Be calm, my gracious Lord!

GOTARZES. Oh! my loved Brother!

ARSACES. Gotarzes too! all! all! conspired against me?
Still, are ye all resolved that I must live,
And feel the momentary pangs of death? --
Ha! -- this, shall make a passage for my soul --
[Snatches Barzaphernes' sword.] Out, out vile cares, from your distressed
abode --
[Stabs himself.]
BARZAPHERNES. Oh! ye eternal Gods!

GOTARZES. Distraction! heavens!
I shall run mad --

ARSACES. Ah! it is in vain to grieve --
The steel has done its part, and I Am at rest. --
Gotarzes wear my crown, and be thou blessed,
Cherish, Barzaphernes, my trusty chief --
I faint, oh! lay me by Evanthe's side --
Still wedded in our death's -- Bethas --

BARZAPHNERNES. Despair,
My Lord, has broke his heart, I saw him stretched*
Along the flinty pavement, in his gaol --
Cold, lifeless --

ARSACES. He Is happy then -- had he heard
This tale, he would -- Ah! Evanthe chides my soul,
For lingering here so long -- another pang
And all the world, adieu -- oh! adieu! --
[Dies]
GOTARZES. Oh! --
Fix me, heaven, immovable, a statue,
And free me from o'erwhelming tides of grief.

BARZAPHERNES. Oh! my loved Prince, I soon shall follow thee;
Thy laureled glories whither are they fled? --
Would I had died before this fatal day! --
Triumphant garlands pride my soul no more,
No more the lofty voice of war can charm --
And why then am I here? Thus then --
[Offers to stab himself.]
GOTARZES. Ah! hold,
Nor rashly urge the blow -- think of me, and
Live -- My heart is wrung with streaming anguish,
Tore with the smarting pangs of woe, yet, will I
Dare to live, and stem misfortune's billows.
Live then, and be the guardian of my youth,
And lead me on through virtue's rugged path.

BARZAPHERNES. O, glorious youth, thy words have roused the
Drooping genius of my soul; thus, let me
Clasp thee, in my aged arms; yes, I will live --
Live, to support thee in thy kingly rights,
And when you are firmly fixed, my task's performed,
My honorable task -- Then I Will retire,
Petition gracious heaven to bless my work,
And in the silent grave forget my cares.

GOTARZES. Now, to the Temple, let us onward move,
And strive to appease the angry powers above.
Fate yet may have some ills reserved in store,
Continued curses, to torment us more.
Though, in their district, Monarchs rule alone,
Jove sways the mighty Monarch on his throne:
Nor can the shining honors which they wear,
Purchase one joy, or save them from one care.

FINIS.

