

TOM THUMB'S PLAY-BOOK; To teach Children their LETTERS as soon as they can
speak.

BEING A New and pleasant Method to allure LITTLE ONES in the first Principles
of LEARNING.

BOSTON: Printed for and sold by A. BARCLAY in Cornhill

TOM THUMB'S PLAY BOOK.
The Alphabet.
a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z and.

Double Letters.
sl fl si fi ss ff ssi ffi ffl ct.

The A B C.
A a Apple pie B b Bit it C c Cut it D d Divided it E e Eat it F f Fought for
it G g Got it H h Had it J j Joined for it K k Kept it M m Mourned for it N n
Nodded for it O o Opened it P p Peeped in it Q q Quartered it R r Run for it S
s Snatched it T t Turned it V v Viewed it W w Wished for a piece in hand X x Y
y Z z


A was an Archer,
and shot at a Frog.
B was a Butcher,
and had a great Dog.


C was a Captain,
all covered with Lace.
D was a Drunkard,
and had a red Face,


E was an Esquire,
with Pride on his Brow.
F was a Farmer,
and followed the Plow.


G was a Gamester,
and he had ill Luck.
H was a Hunter,
and hunted a Buck.


J was a Joiner,
and built up a House.
K was a King,
and he governed a Mouse.


L was a Lady,
and had a white Hand.
M was a Merchant,
to a foreign Land.


N was a Nobleman,
gallant and bold,
O was an Oysterwench,
and a sad Scold.


P was a Parson,
and wore a black Gown.
Q was a Queen,
and wore a fine Crown.


R was a Robber,
and wanted a Whip.
S was a Sailor,
and lived in a ship.


T was a Tinker,
and mended a Pot.
V was a Vinter,
a very great Sot.


W was Watchman, and guarded
the Door.
X was expensive
and so became poor.


Y was a Youth,
did not love School.
Z was Zany,
and looked like a Fool.
Ab eb ib ob ub ac ec ic oc ab ed id ob ud af of if of ag eg ig og ug al el il
ol am em im om an en in on ap ep ip op op ar er ir or as es is os os at et it
ot ax ex ix ox ux az ez iz oz Ba be by bo bu ca ce ci co da di do do du fa fe
fi fo ga ge gi go gu ha he hi ho ja je ji jo ju la le li lo ma me mi mo na ne
ni no pa pe pi po pu ra re ri to sa se si so su ta te ti to tu.

Bla ble bli blo blu cla cle cli clo clu fra fre fri fro fru pra pre pri pro
pru tra tree tri tro trou.

A Scripture CATECHISM, or Questions and Answers to instruct Youth in the Holy
Scriptures.
Quest. MY good child, tell me who made thee?

Ans. God.

Q. Who redeemed you?

A. Jesus Christ.

Q. Who sanctifies and preserves you?

A. The Holy Ghost.

Q. For what did God make you?

A. To serve him.

Q. How must you serve him?

A. In spirit and in truth.

Q Who was the first man?

A. Adam.

Q. Who was the first woman?

A. Eve.

Q. Why was she called so?

A. Because she was the mother of all the living.

Q. Who was the first that kil^ed his brother?

A. Cain?

Q. Who walked with God, and was translated?

A. Enoch.

Q. Who were saved in the Ark?

A. Noah and all his family.

Q. Who was the oldest Man?

A. Methusalem, who lived nine hundred and sixty nine years.

Q. Who was the father of the faithful.

A. Abraham.

Q. Who was the strongest man?

A. Sampson.

Q. Who was the wisest man? A. Solomon.

GRAGE before Meat.
O Eternal God in whom we live and have our being, we beseech the bless unto us
these good creatures, that, in the strength thereof we may set forth thy praise
and Glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

GRACE after Meat.
THE God of all glory and power, who has created, redeemed, and at this time
plentifully fed us, thy holy name be praised both now and evermore.

God save his Church, our King and realm, and send us peace in Christ our Lord.
Amen.

A PRAYER at your uprising.
O LORD God, my heavenly Father, I most humbly thank thee that thou of thy
fatherly goodness have vouchsaved to defend me this ni^^^ from all evil, I most
entirely beseech thee, to preserve me also this day both from suffering and
doing any evil, and to give me grace, so to walk in the light of thy holy word
that I may bring forth the fruits of the same unto the glory of thy blessed
name, and the profit of my neighbor, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A PRAYER before you sleep.
I THANK thee, O father by thy dearly beloved son Jesus Christ, that of thy
free mercy thou have preserved me this day from all hurts and dangers;
vouchsafe also to keeep me this night, and to save me from all thine enemies*
give to my body quietness and sleep, but let my mind continually watch unto
thee and to thy holy law; that where the cheerful light of the day shall spring
and appear, I being whole both in body and mind, may joyfully rise again, and
diligently wa^k in my vocation, (...) the glory of thy blessed name, through
Jesus Christ. Amen.

The young Child's Morning Prayer.
ALmighty God, the maker of every thing in heaven and earth, the darkness goes
away, and the daylight comes at thy command, thou art good and thou do good
continually, I thank thee that thou have taken such care of me this night, and
that I am alive and well this morning. Save me, O God, from evil all this day
long, and let me love and serve thee forever for the sake of Jesus Christ thy
son. Amen.

The young Child's Evening Prayer.
O Lord God, who know all things, thou see me by night as well as by day I
pray thee, for Christ's sake forgive me whatsoever I have done amiss this day,
and keep me also all this night while I am asleep. I desire to lie down under
thy care, and to abide forever under thy blessing, for thou art a God of all*
ower and everlasting mercy. Amen.

The LORD'S Prayer.
OUR Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And
forgive them that trespass against us, and lead us not into temptation; but
deliver us from evil; for thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory,
for ever. Amen.

A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z.




