O! JUSTITIA. A COMPLETE TRIAL.

GOD gives, and takes away, WELL, JUSTICE SHALL TAKE PLACE.

THE COMPLETE TRIAL, OF Saucy Alias Swaggering JOHN, for REBELLION against the
KING and GOVERNMENT. Before chief Justice HILL. Chief Judge of his MAJESTY's
Court of Equity. In that most Memorable and Loyal City of LONDONDERRY.

Taken by a GENTLEMAN, who was Present at the said Trial. On the 1st Day of
Nov. 1764.

The fate of poor JACK it is bad,
But yet my Heart seems full glad,
You Will see him Stand plainly Upright,
With bare face, but in Dead of Night.
Printed in Transylvania. 1765.

TO THE READER.
THE great Lenity that has been shown to this Saucy, alias Swaggering John,
will no doubt surprise every loyal Subject, but there is a wild Irish Doctor
here, that pretends to have knowledge in every case, let it be ever so
desperate, we are all going to him for his eye water, and if it proves
effectual, we shall send you a more perfect account of this affair, but for
your further satisfaction you shall have one of his advertisements by way of a
Preface to this trial. Thus it begins, arro would you be easy.

ADVERTISEMENT,
Here is to be sold, the true Water of Light,
To open your Eyes, and to quicken your sight,
Here is the great Fountain, from whence it does flow,
It discovers to whom, our Allegience we owe,
If you are not besotted, you plainly may see,
We can raise men, from lowest to highest degree,
But as for false Brethren, and false Sisters too,
To the Devil and his Angels, we send the whole Crew
In Secula, Seculorum.

THE Complete Trial, etc.
MR. Doright the town Clerk, ordered Mr. Love Money, the Jailer, to set saucy
alias Swaggering John to the Bar, and there holding up his right hand, he was
arraigned, and on his arraignment pleaded not guilty, the jury being severaly
called, after many Challenges, the under named persons were impannelled.

Mr. True Heart, Mr. Belief, Mr. Upright, Mr. Hate Bad, Mr. Love Good, Mr. See
truth, Mr. Goodword, Mr. Humble, Mr. Moderate, Mr. Thankful, Mr. Loyal, Mr
Union.
The Names of the Witnesses were Mr. Yea, and Nay, Mr. Faithful, Mr. Trusty,


Stephen Bennet, and Jonathan Nicolls Esqrs, City and County Sheriffs.

Clerk. Saucy alias Swaggering John, hold up your Right Hand: thou art here
indicted by the Name of Saucy alias Swaggering John, of this City Liar, for
that you not having the Fear of God before your Eyes, but being lead by the
instigation of the Devil, did on the 1st Day of October last past, in the
Presence of Numbers, of His Majesty's most faithful and loyal subjects
assembled at the Courthouse, then and there in great Rage with Malice at
Heart, Curse the Most sacred Person of His Majesty King George the THIRD, and
His Majestys Government, contrary to the Peace of his said Majestys Crown and
Dignity, and in open Violation of the Laws of his Government, and now you are
about to have a fair Trial for your Life, so be attentive, and in proper Time
you shall make your Defense

Clerk. Gentleman of the Jury, stand together, and hear the Evidences.

Crier, Call Mr. Yea and Nay, Mr. Faithful and Trusty into the Court, on being
called, they all appeared.

Clerk, You the Witnesses for the King, look, upon the Prisoner at the Bar. Do
you know him? They all said yes my Lord, we know him his Name is Saucy alias
Swaggering John, he has been a very Pestilent fellow, for many Years in this
City.

Clerk, To Yea and Nay, You are sure you know him. Yea and Nay, Know him! Yea
my Lord, I have heretofore too often been in his Company, to be at this Time
Ignorant of him, I knew his Father, and Brother, and all his Family very well.

Judge, Clerk, Are the Evidences Quallified,

Clerk, They are my Lord.

Clerk, To the Evidences. Well Sirs, this Saucy alias Swaggering John, the
Prisoner at the Bar, stands here indicted, for that he not having the Fear of
God before his Eyes, but being lead by the instigation of the Devil, did on the
1st Day of October last, past, in the presence of Numbers of his Majesty's most
Faithful and loyal Subjects, Assembled at the Court House, then to them there
in great rage, with malice at Heart, did Curse the most sacred Person of his
Majesty King George the Third, and his Majesty's Government, contrary to the
Peace of his said Majesty's Crown and Dignity, and in open violation, of the
Laws of Government.

On this Indictment he has been Arraigned, and on his Arraignment he has
Pleaded not Guilty. What you Witnesses have to say against him, must be told to
the Court and Jury, so Gentlemen of the Jury be attentive to the Evidences.
Yea, and Nay. My Lord and Gentlemen of the Jury, I and the Prisoner at the Bar,
were once discoursing together at the Courthouse, and there were Numbers of
Persons present. For it was the very Day of the last Election; and there were
two vacances for Parliament. But I think one of them was given up without
bringing it to a Pole, and the other was contended for, by Hamilton and
Vougban, now my Lord and Gentlemen of the Jury, you must know, that there was a
tincture of Popery on one side, and consequently Knavish Policy. And this
Saucy, alias Swaggering John, happening to be on that side of the question. I
was on the opposite side, and we began to Dispute the worth of the Candidates,
I told him that the side I was on, were to a Man true and loyal Subjects and
loved the King and Government in our Hearts, and hoped we should always be
Governed by faithful Subjects to his Majesty, as we were and always should be
loyal to him, and all authority it may please him to set over and govern us
Upon this, the Prisoner at the Bar, swelled with rage, and in a violent Passion
Cursed the King's Government, and said no King's Government for him, he did not
like to be under a yoke, he would rather choose to be in a Penn.

Clerk, You are sure, you heard him say thus? Yea and Nay, Yea, I did and many
others beside me; Prisoner at the Bar, have you any Questions to ask this
Evidence, Pris. my Lord, I only said D -- n the Q -- rs and this Evidence being
one, has made this falsehood against me, on purpose to get me Hanged through
spite, and your Lordship knows he was not sworn, he only affirmed; and they
think no more of an affirmation, than a Roman Catholic does of Kissing the
Bible.

CLERK, My Lord, we have but very few Quakers in this City, but may it please
your Lordship, when any of them are brought before me to give Evidence, they
always bring affadavit Men enough with them to confirm their Evidence.

COURT, CLERK,

Go on, in Examining the witnesses.

CLERK, Mr. Faithful, What have you to say to the Court and Jury, concerning
the Trial between our Sovereign Lord King George the Third, and Saucy alias
Swaggering John, the Prisoner at the Bar? Faithful, My Lord, formerly I was a
great companion of his, and I have often heard him say, and that with great
stomachsulness, that he would sooner be tossed from Post to Pillory, and from
Den to Penn, then submit to be under the King's Government, but I never thought
he was so Mad as to express himself in the manner he did, on the 1st. Day of
October last, before so many of his Majesty's most faithful and loyal Subjects,
at the CourtHouse, as Yea and Nay, has already informed you.

Clerk, But what did you hear him say? Faithful, my Lord I heard him curse the
King and Government, or something to that Purpose, Clerk, you must mind you are
on your Oath, so recollect yourself and tell the Court, the very Words he said,
I believe it was Damn your Kings Government none of your yoakes for me, we
fatten better in Penns. Clerk, you are sure you heard him say thus? Faithful,
upon my Oath, I heard him say them very Words, or Words to the same purpose.

Clerk, Have you any Questions to ask this Evidence.

Prisoner, My Lord, it is all spite, because I was not on their side.

Clerk, Mr. Trusty, have you any knowledge of the Prisoner at the Bar, look on
him, do you know him?

Prisoner, Hold up your Head, Trusty, Yes my Lord, I know him, and have been
formerly acquainted with him, but since these Parliament times have grown so
troublesome, He has always been on the opposite side to me, and I never
conversed much with him, but on the First of October last past, being a throng
day, we had hot handling, and having a former acquaintance with the Prisoner, I
walked close up to him, and seeing him in a great Passion, I did not speak to
him, but I plainly heard him Curse the King and Government.

Clerk, You are sure you heard him Curse the King and Government.

Trusty, By the virtue of the Oath I have taken I did.

Clerk, Prisoner, Have you any Questions to ask this Evidence?

Prisoner, No my Lord, But Gentlemen of the Jury, I have always been a Man of
Valor and Courage, and have not been used when under the greatest Clouds, to
sneak or hang down my Head like a Bull rush, nor was I pleased at that Time, to
see so many Antagonists, and if I did say what is Evidenced against me, I am
hopeful you Gentlemen of the Jury, will Consider the Cause, and the Number of
my Adversaries.

The Court.

Saucy alias Swaggering John, You are not here Indicted, for that you have
wanted Courage, or not been valient in Times of greatest Distress.

But for that you have disloyally and rebelliously Cursed the King and
Government, this is the Crime, and the thing wherewith thou art charged by the
Indictment, and you have heard what these Witnesses have Evidenced against you.

Here the Prisoner hung down his Head, and would not answer one single Question.

Ben Sly, Esquire Attorney for the King. Addressed the Jury in the following manner.

Gentlemen of the JURY.

You have heard all the Evidence for the King and no doubt all you have heard
is Truth, but thus far I must say in favor of the Prisoner at the Bar, that I
have been acquainted with him these many Years, and never knew or heard of the
least Disloyalty laid to his charge before this time, I have often dined with
him in public Company, where sometimes his Majesty's Health has been Drank,
and I never knew him to refuse it, and I am hopeful you Gentlemen of the Jury
will be of opinion with me, as the Evidence all agree, that he was in the hight
of Passion, and that it was more through Passion then Malice, that he was lead to
this fatal mistake, you see Gentlemen how he hangs his Head with confusion, and
no doubt he will faint with shame, he is likewise an alien amongst you, as well
as my self, and they are not so accustomed to Loyalty in his Country as you
here. in this ever memorable City of Londonderry.

The COURT, to the JURY.

Gentlemen of the Jury, you no doubt can see as plainly as I can, that Mr. Sly,
the Kings Attorney Inclines to favor the Prisoner at the Bar, and pleads his
being an Alien if so, I am sure he cannot take it amiss if we treat him in the
same manner that we have done our own Countrymen, there is one Instance that
occurs to my Remembrance, that I shall mention, you no doubt Gentlemen all knew
the late worthy Counselor A -- s the Crime that he was accused of, was only
Drinking, what we call a disloyal Health, you know his Punishment. He was
ordered to stand one Hour in the Pillory, and before the Time was half spent,
he expired. And now Gentlemen of the Jury. you heard this Saucy alias
Swaggering John, the Pris. at the Bar's Indictment, you have heard his plea,
and what the Evidences have testified against him You are now to withdraw to
your Room, where without confusion you may consider on such a Verdict, as in
way of Truth, you ought to bring in against the Prisoner.

A Verdict God save the KING.

CLERK, Gentlemen of the Jury, answer to your Names.

Crier, Count these, Crier, They all Answer.

CLERK, Gentlemen of the Jury, who shall speak for you? Jury our Foreman.

CLERK, You Gentlemen of the Jury, being Impanell'd, for our Lord the King,
have heard the Trial of Saucy alias Swaggering John, the Pris. at the Bar;
Jailer, make the Prisoner hold up his right Hand, Jury look on the Prisoner,
Prisoner look at the Jury, what say you Gentlemen of the Jury, is the Pris. at
the Bar, Saucy alias Swaggering John, guilty of the Crime for which he stands
Indicted, or not guilty? Foreman, he is guilty my Lord, of Rebellion to our
most gracious Sovereign, Lord King George the Third, and to his Government,
Clerk, and so you say all, Jury, all say guilty my Lord.

The Court to the Jury.

Gentlemen of the Jury, you have discharged the trust reposed in you on this,
as likewise on all other occasions, with faithfulness to his Majesty and
Government.

Court to the Prisoner. Saucy alias Swaggering John, You have had a fair Trial
for your Life, and are now found guilty of Rebellion, by the Laws of this
Realm, what have you now to say for your self, why Sentence of Death should not
be passed against you. O Good my Lord, I am a Stranger to them Laws, we have no
such Laws in our Country. And I hope your Lordship will pity my Ignorance,
what Countryman are you, Oh! good my Lord, I am a Transylvanian, I have not
been long in this Country. Court, and what made you turn a party Man at our
Election? Prisoner, O! dear Good my Lord, pardon me but this once, and I never
shall meddle with party affairs any more.

Court Well you shall be placed in public view, until his Majesty's pleasure
be made known unto us.

The Court to the Prisoner.

Saucy alias Swaggering John, you are to be taken from the Bar where you now
stand, to the common Goal, and there to be laid in long Bolts in the Dungeon,
until there can be a Pillory erected close to the Gallows on the Strand, and
there you are to be fixed up, and three times a Day the white of an Egg, is to
be given you for Sustenance, the yolks thereof are to be rubed over your Face,
to keep you from Sunburning, and every Evening at Sun set, your Cap is to be
drawn over your Face, by the Hands of the common Hangman, and by him uncovered
every Morning, at the Sun rising, that the People may have a fair view of you
the whole Day. This light diet you are favored with to keep you as clean as
possible, as you are to carry your Excrements in your Breeches, unless you
prove to be too Nauseous in the Nose of the common Hangman, thus when fixed up,
you are to remain until his Majesty's will and Pleasure be made more fully
known unto us.

Clerk, to the Sheriffs, Gentlemen, The Court orders that you get a Pillory
erected, three times three Feet from the Ground, and that you see Saucy alias
Swaggering John fixed therein,

Sheriffs, My Lord it will be very hard on us, for both to attend the Sentence
Pronounced against this Rebel, besides the Risque we shall run of being both
Poisoned at once, with the stench that must undoubtedly ensue, Court. Well
Gentlemen, you must manage matters as well as possible, and take this Duty in
your turns, until his Majesty's Pleasure be known.

Sheriffs, My Lord, your Lordship could soon ease us of all this trouble by
passing the deserved Sentence, we would sooner dispatch FIVE HUNDRED such
Rebels as this Saucy alias Swaggering John, the Prisoner at the Bar, than wait
one Day on him, when in the Pillory, Court, Gentlemen, I make no doubt of your
Loyalty. But the Prisoner Saucy alias Swaggering John, has received this
Lenity, from the Court. on account of his being an alian amongst us, therefore
you must see the present Sentence Executed.

Jailer, My Lord, what allowance is he to have whilst under my care. Court, a
pint of Oatmeal and Water every Day, Jailer, My Lord, there will be no such
Thing as keeping him clean in long Bolts, on such Diet. Court, Then you must
raise him so high from the Ground, as to put a Pen under him, so that his
Excrements may pass therein, and if he proves very purgative, you must the
oftener shift your Penns.

GOD SAVE THE KING
LONDONDERRY,
February 1st. 1765.

A Reverend Divine, just arrived here from Transylvania College, on seeing,
Saucy alias Swaggering John in the Pillory. Addresses him thus.

My once loved Justass, I am grieved to see,
You torn to Pieces by great Majesty.
But then methinks I hear Hibernian groan,
In Transylvania, where he is left alone,
After Rejection he could not find one,
Of all his Friends, to take him by the Hand,
Your favored more I think by far then he,
You made him Hang himself on tripple tree,
If thy was known in Derry, I don't doubt,
But they would give you a severe'r flogging bout,
Now I Am your friend, I Will lay the truth before we,
And shortly as I can, I Will tell the story,
Hail! mighty, mighty, Interest, doubly Hail!
With Calves the Golden calf, must needs prevail,
It Is like, likes like, only in this the Gold,
Is more Illustrious, as'tis better mold;
Blood thirsty Men, will still delight in blood,
And Rebels always, make Rebellion good,
Affirmatives for Negatives must pass,
To favor Benby, brother Brute Justass,
On this known truth, I will no longer dwell,
You Will loose your Life, so now beware of H -- ll.
To MR. LOYAL, PRINTER, In TRANSYLVANIA
SIR,
YOU will no doubt be surprised on Reading this Trial, to think it was possible
for a Rebel to conceal himself so long in this City, but as I am informed you
have Numbers of them with you, I have sent you the enclosed Trial, for the
Satisfaction of all his Majesty's true, faithful, loving and loyal Subjects,
and I do sincerely wish it may have the desire effect, in turning the Rebels.

Yours,

REJECTION.
The Duty of all Parent's with the ROD's,
To train their Chidren in the fear of GOD,
And like the Be, to use it as their sting,
To learn them how to pray for George their King
FINIS.

