OPPRESSION. A POEM. BY AN AMERICAN. WITH NOTES, BY A NORTH BRITON.

Blessed harmony of verse! you it is command,
The ear of princes, cramp the tyrant's hand,
You strip Oppression, of her gay disguise,
And bid the hag in native horror rise:
Strike towering pride, and lawless rapine dead,
And plant the wreath on virtue's awful head,
ANON. To see such crimes, and in so good a reign,
Who hoops of iron can my spleen contain?
ANON. LONDON: Printed. BOSTON: Reprinted and Sold opposite the Probate Office
in Queen Street, 1765.

Price Half a Pistereen.

OPPRESSION.
"WHEN private faith and public trusts are sold,
"And traitors barter liberty for gold:
"When giant-vice and irreligion rise,
"On mountain'd falsehoods to invade the skies:
"When (...) corruption, dark and deep, like fate,
"Saps the foundation of our happy state BROWN's Essay on Satire.
:"
When (...) murmurs spread throughout the realm,
And favorite pilots bungle at the helm:
When tyrants skulk behind a gracious T --,
And practice what, -- their courage dare not own;
When M -- RS like screening G -- L rule,
A Pedant talker, and a B -- EAN tool:
When law is chained, when M -- holds the rod,
And Justice trembles at his partial nod:
When naught but fauning, flattery and lies,
Are the just emblems of our brave and wise:
When sons of famine Sons of famine] This the North-British reader must not
take as a reflection on the inhabitants of his country, (it being only a
quotation) as our author, through the whole of his poem, has carefully avoided,
as much as possible, any thing of that nature.
swarm throughout our coast,
Unknown to fame, yet rise to every post:
When countries groan beneath Oppression's hand,
And pension'd blockheads riot through the land:
When COLONIES a savage Ex -- se pay,
To feed the creatures of a motly day:
When it is too late for men to seek reward,
And few but MC can have at C -- T Regard:
When dunce on dunce successive rules our S --,
Who cannot love P -- TT, and who a G -- I hate?
When all these ills, and thousands yet untold,
Destroy our liberty, and rob our gold,
Should not then SATIRE bite with all its rage,
And just resentment glow through every page?
Who can indignant bear to hear such crimes,
And not commence an Author of the Times?
Some mercenary souls for profit write,
For nation some, and some through party spite;
But be their motives whatsoever they may,
Enough of treason glares in open day,
Enough of tyranny's oppressive hand,
Destroys our freedom and inslaves our land,
To make all hireling poets change their side,
Foreswear their folly, and give up their bribe.
And shall I mingle with the C -- ly throng,
When truth and reason, tells me they are wrong;
Or, if poetic madness seize my brain,
Shall I not rhyme, when conscience guides my strain?
Shall I subscribe to every dunce's nod,
Call P -- TT a villain, or L -- D B -- T a god?
Or yet ascribe all virtues to the THANE,
And to his wretched conduct, say, Amen;
Shall I extol the late severe EX -- SE,
Call it mere naught, and d -- myself by lies?
Shall I proclaim the H -- N-H's leader brave,
Nor think his agent, nor my L -- D a kn-ve;
Or yet commend the mildness of their reign,
Where woes on woes appeared, an endless train;
Shall I my COUNTRY, at thy distant call,
Nor mark vile H -- K, that first proposed thy fall?
Or shall I turn a traitor to my clime,
And be like HIM, accursed to latest time?
No! first I Would be the meanest meanest wretch,
A player, pimp, a scavenger, a ketch;
Or dead to honor, honesty, and truth,
Commence statesman minion from my youth;
Rather than change my mind, and turn a foe,
TO KING to BRITAIN, COLONIES, to STOW.
I want no places at a servile*****,
To be the dupe of M -- st -- l sport;
Where honesty sincere, but seldom dwells;
Where every tongue with adultation swells;
Where great fools smile, though greater fools may laugh;
Where fawns our H -- K, at best a mere state calf:
Where miscreants in every scence of strife,
Get bread for bastards and themselves, for life;
Where favorite falsehood only seems to charm,
And statesmen promise never to perform;
Where round are placed, a pension'd servile herd,
For meanness honored, and for guilt preferred;
Where public virtue, meets with abject hate,
Gives way to pleasure and intrigues of state;
Where men, devoid of decency as grace,
Get titles, pensions, perquisites and place;
Where every ill that now annoys our st -- te,
Have their fell source, from thence their baneful date.
From such I cannot expect the least, least good,
An uncouth genius from a western wood;
Who Have neither wealth, election votes to bribe,
Nor will, to hackney falsehood for a tribe.
When valiant CON -- Y, veteran in wars,
Now starves at home, rewarded for his scars!
Because he scorned to be a mere ST-T- mute,
To harm his country for a F-X or B -- T-.
Let ought like TWICHER have a brazen skull,
Or been like EG -- M -- T, profoundly dull In this line our author is guilty
of a breach of unity, in regard to times; by uniting present and past things,
under one head: which I hope the candid reader will overlook.
,
Or be he sprung from Caledon'an blood,
Though dead his genius, as the Fleet-ditch mud,
He shall be raised to posts of highest fame,
Though injured millions daily hiss his name.
Does not this ISLE enough of troubles know?
That every STATE CL -- K, must fresh discord sow,
That every HE! -- whom M -- J -- TY promotes,
Dare trample freedom, and enslave our votes.
Too much of this we have seen three passing years,
Too often has liberty bewailed in tears,
Nor causeless has she wept, though wept in vain,
Yet flow her sorrows, endless yet her pain.
A P -- was patched 'twas voted to be good,
So numbers may pronounce, a sea a wood;
Votes may decree that day is truly night,
That right is wrong, that only wrong is right:
But he that joins with such C -- cringing tools,
Must be a Troy in the B -- AN schools;
Must cease to hear, to think, or act the man,
But like a fawning spani'l, court yon clan;
Must like a Proteous, change in every shape,
Be here a monkey, and be there an ape.
Despising this the freeborn W -- arose,
And nobly dared, each traitor to oppose,
Their crimes to public view he bold explained,
Their actions, persons, characters he named,
Condemned the P --, with a true British zeal,
And nobly wrote for Britain and her weal;
But he alas; unmeaning said too much,
At least his foes, could construe it as such;
They took the hint and voted him a knave,
As some would fain have voted S -- K -- brave.
Before PRESIDING JUSTICE often he stood,
As often his righteous cause, appeared as good;
But not content an IRON J -- DG -- was found,
With solid front, impenetrably sound,
Who conscience often had tried, as often in vain,
To form the blush or cause repenting pain:
With him joined W -- B, the diadem of truth!
"Who never knew falsehood from his very youth;"
(Of heart as senseless as the hardest stone,
And dead to every feeling but his own.
When abject want his aged SIRE, oppressed,
Unmoved he heard, he knew, but never blessed,
Never reached a helping arm, to save from fate,
The best of parents in a wretched state;
No ray of pity ever warmed his breast,
Nor even a father's cause disturbed his rest;
For had he mingled with the wretched poor,
And begged an alm, he would thrust him from his door.
This parricide! this honest upright man!
Inrob'd in truth, adopts no perjured plan)
He made an oath, and M -- D read the laws,
M -- D gave sentence, and W -- 's lost his cause.
Oppression here triumphant gained the day,
And W -- 's and Liberty were doomed it is prey.
EX -- SE, another plague, came hissing forth,
Hurled by a son of the rock-blooming north,
And as it went ten thousand demons sung,
And all Acheron in his plaudits rung;
They hailed him " brother," for the good he would done,
And sent him imps to help his EX -- SE on:
Nor wonder Britons, if he gained his end,
When Hell assists, what mortals can contend;
In vain did T -- PLE, G -- F -- N, P-TT oppose,
When the proud Thane, with Hell bred imps arose;
When he with numbers, all a pension'd tribe,
Of purchased votaries, by place or bribe,
A servile crew, prepared by nod to go,
Or wright or wrong, with him say yes or no:
When these collected, HE on EX -- SE called,
"CIDER and PERRY!" all his creatures bawled;
With one assent, on liberty they trod,
And sold their freedom, for their HIGHLAND god.
Strange! that in Britain, there should live confessed,
Such spani'l L -- DS, and C-M -- RS at rest;
And not be hunted in each country town,
Until they have pulled the cringing mongrils down;
Strange! that a people framed for freedom's cause,
Can suffer ST -- TS to oppress their laws,
Can suffer stale ECONOMY to rule,
Nor send the HIGHLAND CHIEFTAIN back to school;
Far in the north, where thrives the frugal itch,
To coin new words, to patch a R -- speech;
To learn that truth, not words true Britons move,
That judgment is the road that leads to love.
Go B --, thou minion! -- to thy country go,
For England loud proclaims you, freedom's foe;
Why will you stay, where mankind scorns your name,
Where every year adds blackness to your fame,
Where if you die, few friends your deeds will bawl,
In Irish cries, or ditties of Fingall?
Haste, haste my P --, to coasts betake your way,
Where snows eternal chill the face of day:
Where torped rocks and mountains threat' the skies,
And hills over hills in barren pomp arise;
Where poverty supreme for ever reigns,
Nor envied wealth, disturb the peasants brains.
Even croaking ravens, will rejoice your flight,
And join chorus with the birds of night:
The ravenous tiger, with the hind will play,
And glad with joy, the unfeeling ass will bray.
If thus all nature for your absence long,
What wonder then, if I should join the throng:
When yet of evils, I more feel can name,
Enough to blast you to the latest fame:
Of ills! that half the western world annoys,
That mars their trade, their liberty destroys,
That makes them slaves, or mere mechanic tools,
To work for naught, as fools do work for fools.
Since first a CABOT trod their distant shores,
No time so dreadful! not their Indian wars!
No time! when fell oppression reared its head,
And even dared, their sacred groves to tread;
Groves! that their fathers found a safe retreat,
From ST -- TS tyranny, and party heat*
Could those brave heroes, who now sleep in rest,
But know how much their children are oppressed,
And that by ST -- TS race, that made them roam, This circumstance which our
author mentions, mostly happened in the reign of the greatly pious CHARLES the
First, and it is a fact, that all, or by far the greatest part, of the
ancestors of the Nothern Colonies, fled their native country, Britain; to the
then inhospitable wilds of AMERICA: to avoid the (allowed of,) tyrannical
persecutions and oppressions of Archbishop LAUD, this pious and bigoted KING's
favorite. These oppressions, (which were of the religious kind,) they avoided
by this banishment; thus giving to their children after them, a freedom to
enjoy, what they in a great measure were deprived of: which freedom it is hoped
they long may enjoy; nor is it much feared, but what it will be lasting: unless
amidst the new oppressions that now threaten, (from a branch of the same
detested ST -- TS family,) their civil liberty; their sacred should fall a
victim: or suffer a tax, from the officious kindness, of some adventrous
money-making soul-saving B -- SH -- P. But be he who he will, let him remember,
and dread the fate of the B -- SH -- P of GLASGOW.

As exiles, from their country, friends, and home.
Methinks they would rise and murmur from their graves,
"Were we not wretched! must our sons be slaves!
"Are there no stores of vengeance for that race?
"That long have dared The Almighty to his face,
"Who to half earth, have proved so fell a pest,
"That living, dying, and the dead cannot rest;"
And as they vanished, pray; "Hear, oh my God!
"Preserve this country from a ST -- TS rod.
Ye M -- S -- RS that do surround the T --,
Has not that land enough of troubles known?
Have not her sons, seen wild destruction rage,
And war with war, a dreadful battle wage?
Have they not felt too often, the savage steel,
And fought and died, for Britain and her weal?
Have not her daughters moan'd in captive chains,
And been the subjects of the worst of pains?
Are not such ills sufficient for that land;
But must oppression add its iron hand?
Dare that sell HE, that sows sedition here,
Wast his foul minions, for to sow it there?
Is he not cursed by Britons loyal souls,
And wished to HELL, to S -- TL -- D, or the POLES?
Yes! he that is dared to abuse the R -- ear,
To give to sighs for liberty the sneer,
That Is da^'d, by meanest arts to gain a wealth,
And ruin M-T-G- by vilest stealth;
Has dared, to make a tribute on their waves,
And load their ocean with a tribe of k --
To mar their trade.
Thou first, thou tyrant man!
Whence sprung that scheme? too vile for mortal plan!
Was it thy genius, and thy plodding brain,
That gave the Hell-born infant first a name?
No! justice bids me give to H -- K his due,
The meanest upstart of thy menial crew;
From him the infant sprung, he gave it birth,
And first proclaimed the monster here on earth;
Envious the fiend you saw, it gave you pain,
You bid it die, but made it live again:
Because you could not bear the galling thought,
(...) H -- K should form a thing, you never sought;
That he, shall plan a method, way and rate,
To gain five hundred thousand to the state.
If you at first despised the Hell-bred scheme,
Why have you made it since your darling theme?
Does not our shores, now swarm by your command,
With licensed OFF -- RS by sea and land?
A crew! more dreadful than our savage foes,
A locust tribe! that feed on others woes.
By arms, the savage from our lands we drive,
But law-made plunderers, will live and thrive.
Go on ye pilferers, with all the rage
That half-starv'd spani'ls for a bone engage,
Be like your brothers HERE, a tyrant crew,
Do all that fell rapacious souls can do;
Make right and wrong an equal balance hold,
And prove or disapprove, as weighs the gold.
Like these, in all the majesty of desk,
Look big, command, and flout, and jeer the best.
Like these, take six days for to do a deed,
Which scarce a day an honest man would need.
In haughtiness like these, and proud disdain,
Build all the honor of your new-got name:
Never once reflect, from nothing you arose,
What once ye were, from whence your honor flows.
I Would have you honest, faithful to your King,
And all just tribute, to his treasure bring:
T-XES must be, they should be justly laid,
But to no scoundrel, should a T-X be paid:
To no proud he! that takes it from my hand,
With all the scorn of half your C-STOM band;
To no such menial, upstart, haughty race,
Many, once lacquies to my LORD or GRACE;
Mere kitchen gentry! great in kitchen wit,
Shall I ye gods! pay duty to a spit?
Shall honest tradesmen that support our state,
Cringe, bow and knuckle, at so mean a rate?
Shall ought possessed of loyalty and gold,
With coachman, grooms and valets, converse hold?
Or wait obsequious to their haughty nod,
And hear their dictates as they would hear a God?
Shall such low vagrants, whom some L -- D has raised,
For such harsh conduct be esteemed or praised?
Are they more faithful to the ST -- TE or C -- N,
Than those whose honesty, with friendship join?
No! I proclaim that man at once a knave,
Who scorns those virtues which adorn the brave:
Honor cannot bind him, that no friendship knows,
He Is sure a villain, that delights in woes,
And proves or disapproves as profit flows.
Must it not fill all men of sense with scorn,
To see a muckworm of the earth, low born,
A creature, but at best a CUSTOM CL-RK,
The chance production of some amorous spark,
In ignorance supreme, profoundly dark?
To see him seat his mighty self in state,
With arms a-kimbo, deal to each its fate;
To see the horned scribler force along,
And elbow here and there, the busy throng;
What awful consequence transforms his face,
To show the importance of his mighty place;
As if on him, all excise solely hung,
And fates of kingdoms, " balanced on his tongue."
Peace to such triflers! such a writing crew!
Such pen ink heroes! from my soul, adieu!
Too much already have I loosed the reign,
Too much have wandered from my former strain,
But I Will return, again I Will sing the wrongs,
That my poor country feels, and on her throngs;
But hold! first mark the inventor of their woe,
And brand the caitiff, as their greatest foe.
From H -- K, the veriest monster on the earth,
Thy fell production of some baneful birth,
Their ills proceed; from him they took their date,
The source supreme, and center of all hate.
"If I forget him, then forget me Heaven!"
Or like a W --, may I from right be driven.
From meanness first, this PORTSMOUTH Yankey "PORTSMOUTH Yankey." It seems, our
hero being a New-Englander by birth, has a right to the epithet of Yankey; a
name of derision, I have been informed, given by the Southern people on the
Continent, to those of New England: what meaning there is in the word, I never
could learn.
rose,
And still to meanness, all his conduct flows;
This alien upstart, by obtaining friends,
From T-WN -- DS clerk, a M -- LD -- N member ends.
Would Heaven that day! was dated in record,
Which shined propitious, on one so abhorred;
That day, which saw how threats and gold could bribe,
And heard the HUZZAS of a compelled tribe:
That horrid day, when first the scheme he laid,
T'oppress AMERICA, and cramp her trade;
Would it were marked! that thousands yet unborn,
Might read the story, and the vagrant scorn;
That hate coequal, to their wrongs might last,
And never cease, till the H -- k -- name is lost.
Fly cringing minion! from all converse fly,
Den with the wolves, and learn the wolv'rins cry,
Go join in concert with the croking frogs,
Or howl in chorus with a pack of dogs;
With monkeys go, and chatter on a stage,
Or turn a mastiff, and each curr engage.
Better thus act, thus beast like live and die,
Than think of schemes, to make the free born sigh:
Better do worse! turn pandors pimp or slave,
Turn highway-man, turn murderer, or knave;
All do, that thy sell foul can think as evil,
And be a B -- R -- N, CARTOUCH or a DEVIL.
What are such crimes? when balanced with the woes,
That from the vagrant! to thy country flows;
Mere naught and trifling, light as empty air,
They harm but few, but these whole countries share;
On one on all, the oppressive evil lights,
And like a tyrant robs them of their rights.
Their trade, alas! how much restrained and crossed,
Their money wasted, and their credit lost;
To these alone, great Britain owns her sway
They make her monarch of the watery way,
They give her all that ever wealth imparts,
Freedom, plenty, elegance and arts:
Deprived of these, how wretched must they fare!
Unless camelion-like, they will feed on air.
Can jealousy extend its horrid sway,
To harm the tender offspring of a day,
To hurt a country, but in opening bud,
A people linked by strongest ties of blood?
It can, it does, all kindred ties begone!
Naught here but riches please the ravenous throng;
A golden fury, rages in each breast,
Let sink who will, or swim, they will be blessed.
Like fools they have plan'd, it is to keep you down,
To make you love them, and to fear their frown.
Ye paltry scheemers! did ye ever hear,
That vile oppression caused love and fear?
Fear it may cause, in coward slavish souls,
But love is free, disdaining servile rules. --
Go search antiquity, from days of yore,
With strictest care, each tyrants reign explore:
Ever ye'll find, when nations have rebelled,
Through fell Oppression they have been compelled.
When civil discord, shakes the props of state,
And wild distraction howls with deadly hate;
When from the Royal head the crown is torn,
And on the front of some usurper born;
When frightful horror glares in every street,
And friends with friends in dreadful battle meet;
When dead to every kindred social good,
Brothers remorseless, shed a brothers blood;
Know then the cause! Oppression lawless reigned,
And every right with liberty was chained;
Revenge at last, a horrid war prepared,
And high and low her deadly fury shared,
Till righteous rage had pulled the monster down,
And made the subject, happy as the crown.
OPPRESSION no more suits, the freeborn there,
Than the destroying damps of midnight air;
They Are not a restive race of meneal drones,
That sit unmoved, to hear affliction's groans,
But sprung from fathers that despised the sway,
Of those fell tyrants that usurped their day,
A British ardour, glows in every breast,
They, Britons like, love liberty and rest:
More loyal subjects, to our gracious king,
England has not, nor Ma-J -- TY can bring:
And yet, prophetic spirit bids me tell,
A horrid tale! on any tongue to dwell;
A woe, by Heaven! I would not wish to see,
Were every evil, doubly heaped on me.
'Ere five score years, have run their tedious rounds,
If yet OPPRESSION breaks over human bounds,
As it has done, the last sad passing year,
Made the new-world, in anger shed the tear;
Unmindful, of their native once loved isle,
They Will bid All-g -- nce cease her peaceful smile,
While from their arms, they tear Oppression's chain,
And make lost LIBERTY once more to reign.
FOOLS may suppose, they never can engage,
Or stand the mark of B -- T-NS mighty rage;
That time don't add to numbers, but that all,
At once would meet a universal fall,
If with R-b-ll -- s arm, they held the spear,
And dared to make their MOTHER C -- TRY fear,
Be such their doom, I Would echo to their fate,
If without cause they urged BRITANNIA's hate.
Though Heaven knows! I greatly love my king,
And often his real worth with rapture sing;
Yet if my country'd groaned OPPRESSION's hand,
And rose in arms, to save their sinking land;
I could not wish them harm, but wish them gain,
And to their righteous cause, must say, Amen.
But let them live, as they would choose to be*
Loyal to KING, and as true BRITONS free;
They Will never, by fell r-v-lt, oppose that C --,
Which first has raised them, though now pulls them down:
If but the rights of subjects they receive,
It Is all they ask, or all a CR -- N can give.
See ALB -- M -- L! what havoc he has made,
And how he lawless dared, t'oppress their trade,
With rapine force, their merchants traffic seized,
And taxed their goods, with duty as he pleased;
Nay! made them sell, for what he chose to give,
As if no MERCHANT, but my L -- D should live.
The pedlar K-N-N, he upheld the strife,
And AGENT for my L -- D, even threatened life, " Threatened life" Amidst the
other oppressive and unheard of methods, contrived to make money at the H -- H,
this scarecrow was tried; and by our JAMAICA hero, MR. K -- N -- N, first put
in execution; for when CAPT. F -- L, of NEW YORK, represented to him the
hardships imposed on their trade, and begged that they might be alleviated; our
courageous agent, (as he informed me,) made this laconick reply, SIR, NOT A
WORD, -- NOT A WORD, -- IF YOU SAY MUCH, -- MY L -- D WILL HANG YOU UP
IMMEDIATELY. -- Language indeed, -- for a Turkish Sultan! -- but not for a man,
(that is now said,) intends as soon as convenient, to purchase a seat in P-R --
M-NT.

These combined bankrupts, to retrieve a loss,
Resolved all interests but their own to cross.
All arts that Hell, with the just agent scheem'd,
Or that our hero, in his hammock dreamed,
Were tried t'inrich, two tyrant kn-vish souls,
Dead to all honor, reason, shame, and rules.
To tell the tricks, the H -- H's GENERAL used,
How much for wealth, the SPANIARD he abused, This alludes, to the immense sum
of money, some have called a gift, which my L -- obtained from the Sp-n -- ds
at the H -- h, as a compliment, in consideration of the extraordinary lenity of
his administration; an unheard of lenity! -- extended only to the conquered
subjects of another PRINCE; while those of his own, were treated at the same
time, with the greatest oppressive severity.

How K -- N -- N whispered, what the gift should be,
That he might finger, with my L -- D the fee;
Would be to tell, what is foreign to my song,
They Are crimes its true, but only Spaniards' wrong.
The wrongs I Would mark, are those imposed on friends,
Merely to gain the intripid l -- der's ends.
Hear sordid man! earth echoes loud your name,
But fiction, louder shall ascribe your fame;
Shall blaze the deeds, your arm victorious wrought,
How brave you conquered, and how brave you fought.
Like matchless FREDERICK! you faced the war,
And scorned to hear the battle from afar;
In foremost lines you bid destruction rage,
And seemed yourself, the MARLB'ROUGH of the age;
All coward ease, you bid to cowards go,
And like another HECTOR, met your foe:
None e're like you, the ponderous sword did weild,
Or like you, spread pale terror over the field.
The brave VALASCO, saw you, loud he cried,
Ye gods, a hero! down he sunk and died,
Unable to behold your warlike stride.
At you apostate angels were amazed,
Forgot their task, and at your valor gazed.
MARS trembled, when you reared the fatal spear,
And JOVE himself, even shook with unknown fear.
The MOR -- 's wall, before your thunder fell,
And all H -- H, deemed your frown a Hell.
Rocks, hills and dales, with beasts, your courage sung*
And not an ass but brayed you on his tongue.
But why thus trifling sing, why longer praise?
A P -- R unworthy of even fictions lays:
No more my L -- D shall fiction lead the van,
Show but yourself, an honest, upright man,
Pay back a wealth, injustice has detained,
Nor let your title, by defraud be stained,
By soldier, sailor, merchant, your arraigned.
No more my L -- D, in lazy riot live,
But share a wealth, which justice bids you give,
The trader you oppressed, by unheard ways,
Will that give luster to your future days?
By lawless rapine you may swell your store,
But will mankind a Cataline adore?
How many widows, did your campaign make?
Will you each orphan, to your bosom take?
Were all those thousands, slaughtered for your gain,
And shall you reap the profit of the slain,
Nor injured friends, their injuries complain?
Shall then the small surviving valiant few,
Be robbed by distribution of their due?
Ye gods! shall armies die, t'inrich a k --?
Nor K -- nor P -- L -- M -- T reward the brave.
Were I a ****! I Would think it noble sport.
To kick such mongril tyrants from my *****.
No knavish soul, that is aggrandiz'd by wealth,
Obtained by force, or got by meanest stealth;
Should tread the threshold of the R -- l dome,
But like a robber, be exiled from home;
Or share, what best becomes a thievish wretch,
A Tyburn salutation from a Ketch.
Enough of such! -- let other themes take place,
Muse speak the conduct of a distant race,
What happened in the gloomy North, proclaim,
And sing how Scotland greatly loves the THANE.
Tell how in flames you have seen a leathern WILKS, It is evident from our
author, if the English have been fond of burning and beheading a BOOT, the
Scotch have not been behind them, in using the effigy of the person of their
greatest hate, with equal marks of contempt and resentment.

Before HE left us, for the land of silks;
How often for him EDENA's streets have rung,
And WOLKS and curses, burst from every tongue:
How often you have viewed the boys, with stones engage,
And pelt his picture with their utmost rage;
While gathered round, their friends beheld the strife,
And for their children wished the paper life,
That like a PORTEUS, "PORTEUS," An unfortunate captain of the Edinburgh
town-guard; who, in the year 1736, to restrain a mob, fired and killed some of
them, for which he was condemned to be hanged; and through fear a reprieve
should be obtained for him, the prison in which he was confined, by a mob was
broke open, and he immediately carried to the place of execution, and hung; and
left hanging, as I have been informed, for above twelve hours after his death.
he might hang in state,
Nor longer live, the mark of Scotland's hate,
To name great WILLIAM, Briton's noblest boast,
And how he drubb'd guide CHARLEY with his host,
Not half so galls our Caledonian friends,
As he who blames a B -- T --, or W -- K-S commends.
B -- T-'s all perfection, SCOTLAND's only brave,
ENGLISH are gluttons, and their W -- K-S a knave:
Are the false themes, each Scottish dunce repeats,
Who drinks to CHARLEY, often as he eats.
Hear how two Loons! their Chieftains worth extolled,
And loud his praise in sickening raptures ball'd,
Sowens and Whiskey, all their mirth awoke,
And for their favored B -- TE, thus SAWNEY spoke;
"Deil take me DONALD, bat he is unco guide,
"And foal'd As our author has given a specimen of the Scotch dialect, a
translation of a few of the most material words, might not be amiss, e. g.
Foal'd -- Born.
my friend frae best of HIGHLAND bluid Bluid -- Blood.

"Frae NORTH to SOUTH, there is nane in a' the land,
"Before this doughty L -- D, for bluid can stand,
"He was na' foal'd, as a' the ENGLISH crew,
"Kings sprang frae him, as bearns Bearns -- Children.
frae me an' you.
"Saul man! I Would spang, with muckle glee I Would sing,
"If but bra' CHARLEY was the BRITISH king.
"Haud Chiel! (says DONALD) troth! ye are nae blate Blate -- Clever or genteel.

"Wat Wat -- Know.
ye no' well? wha's M -- ST-R of ST-TE*
"Is it no' B -- T? though G -- V -- has the name,
"G -- V --, a creature of nae muckle fame;
"B-T- gives us places, pensions at the C -- T,
"And scorns the English, for his ane dear sport;
"A hantle siller Hantle siller -- Much, or a great deal of money.
has our Laddies made,
"Oh! this C -- T traffic, is a blessed trade!
"Was the GUIDE PRINCE, to govern BRITONS T --,
"He could nae mair Mair -- More.
do, than L -- B-T- has done;
"Ye ken fu' weel, a ST -- T canno reign,
"Ah dreadfu' thought! it gees me unco pain;
"Bat ST -- TS can be M-N ST-RS of state,
"Though England loath them, wi' the muck'lest hate;
"Thus our guide L -- D, God bless his noble soul,
"Makes goud in goupings Goud in goupins -- Gold in handfulls.
to us Scotchmen roal;
"Lat you an' I friend SAWNEY, gang to town,
"An' speer Speer -- Ask.
of the bra' L -- D, some feckless Feekless -- Trifling, or small.
boon,
"Enough of places he has geen our lads,
"Perhaps for me an' you, some post he hades."
"Wi' a' my saul, (cries SAWNEY,) lat us gang,
"Lat's buss our bearns, an' down to LONDON spang."
These NORTHERN BRITONS, greatly I commend,
To wealth as others, all their actions tend:
They would be basely mean, they would act the brute,
Not to ascribe all virtues to their B-TE;
When from his partial hand, they share all good,
Because allied by Caledonian blood.
Sure none can blame them! to accept a place,
When solely proffered to their kindred race.
They Are poor, they are proud, but ENGLAND knows they are BRAVE,
Witness each war, and how they have fed the grave.
In friendship they are sincere, in honor just,
They love a station, and they love a trust:
But to one center, like the Jews they move,
Their greatest crime, is a too partial love:
It is an inbred passion, SCOTLAND feeds,
From a too narrow mind the fault proceeds.
Thus they love B-T-, and B-T- he loves a SCOT,
Hence every profit is their nation's lot.
B -- is the man we only should detest, Differing from the most of my
countrymen, in point of politics, I cannot help joining with the author, that
we should trace party differences to their source, nor attribute the political
compositions of a W -- s as the only cause. W -- s could never have found
fault, (as he has done) had there not been too just reason for it, both from
mal-adm -- st -- n, and partial bestowment of favors: by which only, has that
friendly UNION, subsisting between two N-TIONS been greatly marred.

As UNIONS foe, as ENGLAND's greatest pest;
Before his horrid, dark, and gloomy reign,
The souls of SCOTCH and ENGLISH were the same,
One general love presided through the land,
All like good brothers, gave to all their hand;
No party words, nor scornful taunts were used,
None for his COUNTRY, or his TONGUE abused;
But now! oh strange! how altered, how unjust!
A nation, for the crime of one is cursed.
Blame B -- ye Britons, don't despise that land,
Because they take what is offered to their hand:
On him alone, if curses you must pour,
Let loose your vengeance, and exhaust its store;
Bid injured peace, its outmost fury shed,
And fall as ponderous ruin on his head;
Bid haggar'd conscience, treat him as her foe,
And like the rolling stone This is in allusion, (according to the Grecian
mythology) to the punishment of Sisiphus in Hell. -- Who is said by some, to
have been a Trojan secretary, and thus punished for certain crimes of state.
, give constant woe;
Bid justice mark him, as it marks a knave,
And deep repentance, bow him to the grave;
Till then, and only then, will England rest,
So deep the rancour in each English breast.
For me, I could not wish him a worse fate,
Than galling conscience, and his master's hate.
The R -- L ear, he greatly has abused,
For selfish ends the R -- L name has used;
Thus has estranged, his subjects from their ****,
That few alas! too few, his praises sing.
Where are the shouts, that wont to rend the sky,
And where the joy, that gleam'd from every eye,
At sight of him, what acclamations rung,
Long live our ****, was echoed from each tongue;
But now, unheeded may he pass along,
And scarce a wish, is whispered by the throng.
Whence comes this coolness in each English breast,
The English are despised, the Scotch caressed;
Their country feels, a tax-destroying waste,
While Schotchmen have, each profit and each post,
At HOME, ABROAD, C --, ARMY, and the FLEET,
You MC and MC in endless numbers meet;
While England's sons, as true and brave as they,
Are scarce in office, pension, post, or pay.
Hence all this coolness, hence the darling hiss,
And all the affronts, a **** must take amiss.
The unhappy man! I pity from my heart,
That cannot distinguish, foes from friends apart,
That Is close encompassed, by a flattering crew,
Of base dissembler's, of the blackest hue,
Who prate of virtues, which none ever had,
And call that pleasing, which the world calls sad*
Fellows! that round in cringing order wait,
Mere servile dupes, to pageantry and state,
"Whose greatest merit lies in doing ill,
"In constant changing, and in erring still."
Such round our K --, like Stygeon demons stand,
A flattering, crafty, fawning, traitorous band;
Who bar all access, to the R -- ear,
Nor whisper what a gracious K -- should hear;
Creatures! that follow fairy-fancy'd dreams,
And turn the wheels of state, with idle schemes;
Mere abject blockheads, in the scale of worth,
Yet bent on novelty, incompass earth,
And ruin countries, for a mouse's birth. This line seems to have a reference
to the impolitical and tyrannous proceedings of the M -- T-Y; and the trifle
the N-T-N must receive from the C-L-N -- S, amidst all the arbitrary, ruinous,
and oppressive methods they are taking; in regard to the ST-MP DUTEIS T-XES,
etc. etc.

Such mighty nothings, from my soul I hate,
And so despise them, as the banes of state:
Nor would I change my happy sphere of life,
For all the folly of a c -- r^ly strife:
My country's cause, has solely urged my song,
And made me mingle with the scribbling throng:
Else I Would never ventured, "on a sea of rhyme,"
The critics lash, and "perils of the time."
I envy none the favor of the C****,
While B -- makes G -- L truckle for his sport:
Pull but the laurel, from that tyrant's brow,
Send him to SCOTLAND, G -- L to his plow:
Make S -- D -- H, M -- LD, each resign their post,
And roaring N -- T -- N, scamper with the rest;
Then will I cease; then high Heaven adore
That falsehood, pride, oppression, are no more.
FINIS.

