Glorious News.
BOSTON, Friday 11 o'Clock, 16th May 1766.
THIS Instant arrived here the Brig Harrison, belonging to John Hancock, Esquire
Captain Shubael Coffin, in 6 Weeks and 2 Days from LONDON, with important News,
as follows.

From the LONDON GAZETTE.
Westminster, March 18th, 1766.
THIS day his Majesty came to the House of Peers, and being in his royal robes
seated on the throne with the usual solemnity, Sir Francis Molineux, Gentleman
Usher of the Black Rod, was sent with a Message from his Majesty to the House
of Commons, commanding their attendance in the House of Peers. The Commons
being come thither accordingly, his Majesty was pleased to give his royal
assent to

An ACT to REPEAL an Act made in the last Session of Parliament, entitled, an
Act for granting and applying certain Stamp-Duties and other Duties in the
British Colonies and Plantations in America, toward further defraying the
expenses of defending, protecting and securing the same, and for amending such
parts of the several Acts of Parliament relating to the trade and revenues of
the said Colonies and Plantations, as direct the manner of determining and
recovering the penalties and forfeitures therein mentioned.

Also ten public bills, and seventeen private ones.

Yesterday there was a meeting of the principal Merchants concerned in the
American trade, at the King's Arms tavern in Cornhill, to consider of an
Address to his Majesty on the beneficial Repeal of the late Stamp Act.

Yesterday morning about eleven o'clock a great number of North American
Merchants went in their coaches from the King's Arms tavern in Cornhill to the
House of Peers, to pay their duty to his Majesty, and to express their
satisfaction at his signing the Bill for Repealing the American Stamp Act,
there was upwards of fifty coaches in the procession.

Last night the said gentleman dispatched an express for Falmouth, with fifteen
copies of the Act for repealing the Stamp Act, to be forwarded immediately for
New York.

Orders are given for several merchantmen in the river to proceed to sea
immediately on their respective voyages to North America, some of whom have
been cleared out since the first of November last.

Yesterday messengers were dispatched to Birmingham, Sheffield, Manchester, and
all the great manufacturing towns in England, with an account of the final
decision of an august assembly relating to the Stamp Act.

When the KING went to the House of Peers to give the Royal Assent, there was
such a vast Concourse of People, huzzaing, clapping Hands, etc. that it was
several Hours before His Majesty reached the House.

Immediately on His Majesty's Signing the Royal Assent to the Repeal of the
Stamp Act the Merchants trading to America, dispatched a Vessel which had been
in waiting, to put into the first Port on the Continent with the Account.

There were the greatest Rejoicings possible in the City of London, by all
Ranks of People, on the TOTAL Repeal of the Stamp Act, -- the Ships in the
River displayed all their Colors, Illuminations and Bonfires in many Parts. --
In short, the Rejoicings were as great as was ever known on any Occasion.

It is said the Acts of Trade relating to America would be taken under
Consideration, and all Grievances removed. The Friends to America are very
powerful, and disposed to assist us to the utmost of their Ability.

Capt. Blake sailed the same Day with Capt. Coffin, and Capt. Shand a Fortnight
before him, both bound to this Port.

It is impossible to express the Joy the Town is now in, on receiving the
above, great, glorious and important NEWS -- The Bells in all the Churches were
immediately set a Ringing, and we hear the Day for a general Rejoicing will be
the beginning of next Week.

PRINTED for the Benefit of the PUBLIC, by

Drapers, Edes and Gill, Green and Russell, and Fleet.

The Customers to the Boston Papers may have the above gratis at the respective
offices


