The Necessity of a constant Readiness for Death.

A DISCOURSE, Preached at HARTFORD North-Meeting-House, MAY 25th, 1766.
OCCASIONED BY THAT ALARMING PROVIDENCE, THE SUDDEN Demolition of the
SCHOOL-HOUSE, by GUNPOWDER; Whereby about Thirty Persons were wounded, Six of
whom are since dead.

BY THE REVEREND JOHN DEVOTION, A. M. Of SAY-BROOK; providentially present.

For Man also knows not his Time; as the Fishes are taken in an Evil Net, and
as the Birds are caught in the Snare; so are the Sons of Men snared in an Evil
Time, when it falls suddenly upon him.

ECCLES. ix. 12. -- -- Quaeque ipse miserrimina vid^.

VIRGIL. HARTFORD: Printed and Sold by THOMAS GREEN, at the Heart and Crown,
opposite the State-House.

THE AUTHOR makes his kind Acknowledgements to the Congregation -- accepts
their kind and genteel Request of a Copy, as a Token of their Respect,
Gratitude, and Approbation of his short Labors among the Living, and Dying, in
Word, Doctrine and Prayer, in that Time of sudden and alarming Distress; and
earnestly wishes, the Perusal may serve to excite, and promote, that serious
Tho'tfulness, which was so visible upon that Occasion.

PREFACE.
AS the follwing Discourse may probably fall into the Hands of Some, not
acquainted with the special Occasion, on which it was preached; it is
apprehended the following brief Account may not be improper. The joyful News of
the Repeal of the Stamp Act, arriving while the General Assembly were sitting
in this Town, they thought fit to direct that the two Military Companies in the
Town, should be raised, and the Cannon fired, etc. at the public Expense. In
Pursuance of this Order, on the 23d of May, a large Quantity of Powder was
removed from the Colony's Store, into the New-Brick School-House, to be
delivered out to the Soldiers and used for other Purposes, on this Joyful
Occasion. A Number of Young Gentlemen meet in the Chamber of the House over the
Room where the Powder was deposited, to prepare Sky-Rockets, etc. to be played
off in the Evening. In delivering out the Powder to the Soldiery, a
considerable Quantity was scattered on the Ground round about the House: This
being observed by some Children at play, they carelessly put Fire to the
scattered Powder, which communicated itself to that within the House, instantly
blew it up, and buried about Thirty Persons in its Ruins. Thus did GOD in a
Moment turn our Rejoicing into Mourning, and our Merriment into Lamentation and
Sorrow -- -- When this Explosion first happened, every One expected that all
Those within the House, at least, were gone to the Place of Silence; but GOD
was better to us than our Fears; they were all taken out alile, and save Six,
who are since dead, Viz. Doct. Nathaniel Ledyard, Mess'rs William Gardener,
Levi Jones, John Knowles, Richard Lord, Richard Burham.
in a great Measure recovered. In the Midst of this sore Calamity, the Goodness
of God was very remarkably seen in sundry Instances -- One of the Military
Companies had but just left the House, before the Explosion happened; a
considerable Number of Children were sent away, almost that very Instant, by
some Gentlemen who had the Conduct of the Affair. As I am told, had this
Explosion happened almost at any other Time of the Day, between Nine in the
Morning, and Five in the Afternoon, much greater Numbers would have been
exposed. Both the Ministers in the Town being by Sickness confined from public
Service, the worthy Author, then on a Journey, was prevailed with to tarry over
the Sabbath, to assist in our Distresses, and to supply the Pulpit. The
following Discourse, then delivered, is now made public, at the Desire of the
Hearers. And I take this Opportunity to return him my sincerest Thanks, for his
great Humanity and Kindness to this People in that Time of sore Visitation,
when I was providentially hindered from being helpful to them myself: Also to
express my most earnest Wishes, that his Labor of Love might be rewarded. And
that the following Discourse may be sanctified, for the best Good of this
People, for whose Benefit it was more immediately intended.

E. DORR.

The Necessity of constant Readiness for Death.
LUKE, xii. 35, 36. Let your Loins be girded about, and your Lights burning;
and ye yourselves like unto Men that wait for their Lord, when he will return
from the Wedding, that when he comes and knocks, they may open unto him
immediately.


THAT awful and alarming Provividence, which many of us beheld, that sudden
Explosion, than which nothing but the Lightning seems more instantaneous, which
buried many in the Ruins of that House, erected for the Instruction of Youth,
and sent several of your Number away, to appear before the Bar of GOD* calls us
to a mournful Meeting, invites our Minds to Improvement, our Hearts to sensible
Sorrow for the Distresses of our Neighbors, and would render a Teacher
inexcuseable, should he not endeavor to choose suitable Words upon such an
Occasion.

PROVIDENTIALLY with you, at a short Warning, in all the Confusion and
Consternation of such a Disaster, I mean to ask your Candor for much
Inchoherence; and entreat the Auditory to accept the sincere Desires of a
Stranger, endeavoring to assist your Minds upon this sad Occasion.

LET me attempt a brief Explanation of the Words before us, to shorten the
Work, and render the ensuing Discourse more easy to the Mind.

CUSTOM determined the eastern Nations to the Use of long Garments, very
unhandy for Exercise, and to the Use of the Girdle, wherewith they girded up
their Garments enwrapped about their Loins, that they might not be entangled
with them; but as much as possible, consistent with such Dress, be
unincumbered, and ready for Service. -- Thus our SAVIOR uses the Phrase more
than once, Luke 17, 8.
Make ready, wherewith I may sup, and gird thyself, and serve me. -- John 21,
18.
And another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou would not.

'TWAS also a Custom among the Jews to celebrate their Nuptials by Night; and
it is common for our SAVIOR to represent Death, the final Period of our
probation State, by the coming of the Bridegroom. These Words are an Allusion
to those eastern Customs, pregnant with Instruction to them that live in the
Belief of a future State of Rewards and Punishments.

Here then I would,

I. Endeavor to show what we may understand by this Command: Let your Loins be
girded about.

II. Point out the Christian Duty, enjoined in these Words: And your Lights
burning.

III. That this, and this only, will prepare us for the immediate Summons of
Death.

I. WHAT we are to understand by this Command: Let your Loins be girded about.
As it was the Garment, something necessary for us in this fallen State; so,

1. IT is a plain Command, not indeed to throw off all Concerns and worldly
Encumbrance; no, not even that which Custom and Ornament may dictate; but it is
a Direction to put our near, outward, worldly Concerns in such a Position, as
shall least hinder and embarrass us in our LORD's Service. We must have Food
and Raiment, and consequently Care in providing, and some little Time, at
least, in using them. What our LORD would, is, that we should not suffer these,
which are designed for the Comfort of the outward Man, designed to help us
forward in the Way; not suffer them to perplex, confound, hinder, or embarrass
us in our christian Warfare, our faithful Service -- let them not hang upon us
like dead Weights, nor drag after us, to hinder our Advance, or entangle our
Feet. Many the Snares, many the Entanglements, from outward Things, unless they
are kept in proper Decorum, and wise Arrangement, by human Prudence, and
Direction of the living, all-wise GOD. Whatever Service, whatever Employment,
whatever Circumstances we are in, or may be called to in Life; it is the
Christian's Duty, to make outward Things, Accidents and Attendants (like the
Garment girded about the Loins, for Use, Warmth and Comfort) subservient to his
general Good and Welfare. -- Let your Loins be girded about.

2. Besides all Embarrasment from outward Things, it is a Direction to us, to
have and hold our Minds, free for Service, so unincumbred with the Cares of
worldly Things, Plans, Pursuits, Engagements, or Enjoyments, that we can any
Moment, calmly advert to Death, look forward to the Grave, and view the final
Judgment, as already set, the Books opened, the Judge present, and the Award
just ready to be given, according to the Deeds done in the Body. -- Gird up the
Loins of your Minds, 1 Pet. 1, 13.
etc. The Mind, by Watchfulness, Prudence and Grace, may be raised to christian
Fortitude, and such an elevated Holiness, as to view all the Scenes of
Eternity, with the utmost Calmness, though to be uncloathed even St. Paul could
not desire. 2 Cor. 5.4.
It Is unnatural, and hence never enjoined upon us, as a Duty, by the GOD of
Nature. -- It Is possible to have our Treasure in Heaven, and our Conversation
savoring heavenly Things, not indeed through our own Power, and Strength, but
through Help from GOD, which he affords them that humbly wait upon him, and make
true Religion the leading Principle. All the several Powers of the Mind may be
exerted in Religion: Knowledge, Memory, Judgment, Perception, and
Understanding. Grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. 2 Pet. 3.18.
Remember now thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth, while the evil Days come
not, nor the Years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no Pleasure in them.
Eccl. 1.2.1.
For the Love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if One
died for All, then were All dead. 2 Cor. 5.14.
And by careful Attention to Providence, one of the great Books of spiritual
Knowledge; -- by careful Attention to the Scriptures, GOD is pleased to open
the Understanding, to perceive and understand, what is the Hope of his Calling,
and what the Riches of the Glory of his Inheritance in the Saints. Ephesians. 1.18.19,
And what is the exceeding Greatness of his Power to us ward who believe,
according to the working of his mighty Power. The Mind may be girded up to
Sobriety, Temperance, Patience, Gentleness, Forgiveness, and Benevolence, which
will be good Qualifications for Attendance on the Bridegroom, when ever he
comes. And the Minds enlarges and increases in such Virtues, by Exercise and
Improvement; very different is it, from these crazy frail Bodies, our earthly
House of this Tabernacle, which continually wax old, and tend to Dissolution,
by Labor and Exercise -- exercise thyself rather unto Godliness. For bodily
Exercise profits little; but Godliness is profitable unto all Things, having
Promise of the Life that now is, and of that which is to come. 1 Timothy 4.7.8
Thus much, and (...) more is comprised in this Command; Let your Loins be
girded about. Come we now to the next --

II. To point out the Christian Duty* enjoined in these Words, and your Lights
burning. Our Savior himself has explained the Christians Light in a few Words;
Let your Light so shine before Men, that they may see your goods Works, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven. Matt. 5.16.
They are Works that may be seen, Works of holy Obedience to GOD's revealed
Will. Now the End of the Commandment is Charity, out of a pure Heart, and of a
good Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned. 1 Timothy 1.5.
A Temper of universal Kindness and Benevolence, toward all our fellow
Creatures, which leads us to wash the Saints Feet, and give Relief to them that
are in real Distress; 1 Timothy 5.10.
-- to visit the Fatherless in their Affliction; Jam. 1.27.
-- to bear one another Burdens; Gal. 6.2.
-- the Exercise of Charity, which shall cover a multitude of Sins; 1 Pet. 4.8
-- to use Hospitality one to another, without grudging; 1 Pet. 4, 9
overlook the Failings, Frailties and real Transgressions of our fellow
Mortals; yea, heartily forgive them all their Offenses, as heartily as we
desire GOD, through CHRIST, to forgive us our Offenses. Mat. 6.14.15.
-- The Exercise of Patience under Trials, which in the Language of Scripture,
is said to make us perfect and entire, wanting nothing. Ja. 1.4.
A peaceable, peacemaking Temper of Mind, with Meekness and Quietness, which
is an Ornament of great Price in the Sight of GOD; 1 Pet. 3.3
-- A Work of Self-Denial, and Mortification, of fleshly Lusts and Affections,
which also may be perceived; wherein says St. Peter, They think it strange,
that you run not with them to the same Excess of Riot, speaking Evil of you; 1
Pet 4.4.
-- refraining from Malice, Envy, evil Speaking, evil Surmisings,
Unthankfullness, Disobedience to Magistrates, Parents, Masters; -- Disobedience
to the Institutions of CHRIST, viz. Sabbath-Worship, and Ordinances, with a
Spirit of Maliciousness against them, or with a Temper of careless Neglect, and
Contempt of them. These, with a Multitude of others, plainly pointed out in the
Gospel, proceeding from Faith in our Lord JESUS CHRIST; -- a firm, (and if I
might coin a Word, I would say) a feeling Belief of the Truth of the Gospel, a
firm Belief of the many, great and precious Promises therein given by CHRIST; 2
Pet. 1, 4.
an assured Expectation of Death, Judgment, and Eternity, just at Hand; with
this feeling Belief, and Confidence, that such as are obedient to the heavenly
Vision, the holy Commandment, shall as surely stand in the Judgment, with an
holy Boldness, which Love, perfect Love which casts out Fear, 1 John 4.17, 18.
will afford them that have been obedient, and lived not in Word and Tongue
only, but in Deed and in Truth; John 3.18.
and I may add, an earnest Expectation, (which nothing can overcome) of
inheriting the Kingdom, prepared for the Saints, through the rich Mercy of GOD,
and Blood of CHRIST; which alone is a sufficient Sacrifice to sanctify forever,
all them that come unto GOD by Him.

2. The Words direct us not only to have these several Graces in Habit, but
also to have them in actual Exercise; and your Lights burning -- not sparkling,
blazing, and flashing, but burning; which imports, a continual steady Motion,
or Exertion of a most pure Element; burning so that it may be seen, and serve
to keep the Heart warm, enlivened and fervent. Not slothful in Business,
fervent in Spirit; serving the Lord. Romans 12.13.
Those that had no Oil in their Lamps, doubtless had some Kind of Light, which
they mistook for a true burning Light, till the Bridegroom was near at Hand.
The Oil of Grace is necessary to keep the Light steadily burning. This steady
Burning has these several Advantages.

1. It prepares the Heart to meet the most doleful Shocks, the material World
can produce; prepares with Fortitude, and Composure of Mind, while we have (to
express it with a bold Metaphor) one Foot in Heaven, and the other on Earth,
with that Christian Confidence, that whenever our earthly House of this
Tabernacle shall be dissolved, we have a Building with God, an House not made
with Hands, eternal in the Heavens; 2 Cor. 5.1.
where this Corruptible shall put on Incorruption, and this Mortal put on
Immortality; -- when Death shall be swallowed up in Victory. 1 Cor. 15.54.


2. It affords great Comfort, great Consolation to Christian Friends, who
behold their Relations called away, with their Lights burning, hasting away
into the World of Spirits, to shine with immortal Luster, in the Kingdom of our
Father. It removes from surviving Relatives, that keep, heart-rending Concern,
left they should be punished with everlasting Destruction from the Presence of
the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power. 1 Thessalonians. 1.9.


3. It Is a great Advantage to the Religion of our Lord, and serves to engage
others to seek after, and pray for that glorious Light, and Christian Support,
under the Encounter, of that last Enemy Death. It is a Means in the Hand of
GOD, to lead others, to glorify the Name of our Heavenly Father, to adorn the
Doctrine of God our Savior, who has brought Life and Immortality to Light;
which Hope beyond the Grave, is the only sovereign Antidote, against the deadly
Fear of Death, and an Entrance into that Land of Darkness. For as much then as
the Children are Partakers of Flesh and Blood, he also himself likewise took
Part of the same; that through Death he might destroy him that had the Power of
Death, that is the Devil; and deliver them who through Fear of Death were all
their Lifetime subject to Bondage. Heb. 2.14.15.
So that his Children may now say, with an humble Cheerfulness, I know whom I
have believed, and I am persuaded, that he is able to keep that which I have
committed unto him against that Day. 2 Timothy 1.12.
-- Yea, though I walk through the Valley of the Shadow of Death, I will fear no
Evil: for thou art with me, thy Rod and thy Staff, they comfort me. Psa. 23.4.
-- We pass to say,

III. That this, and this only, through Faith in the Redeemer, the ground Work of
all holy Obedience, will prepare us for the immediate Summons of Death; or
render us like unto Men who wait for their Lord. The Gospel-State is well
compared to a Marriage-Supper, or a Wedding, in which the Bridegroom, is gone
from his House, with his bodily Presence, to espouse the Bride, the Church, to
himself, and return again, when the Marriage is completed. His knocking at the
Door, doubtless points out to us, his coming by Death, to Summons our Spirits
to Attendance upon that new Scence, a complete Espousal; or the final Period of
our Stewardship, when we must resign up our Master's Goods, and be accepted or
rejected, according to the Deeds done in the Body. This Light of Faith, and
holy Obedience, is, what enables the Soul to arise up, open the Door, and
heartily receive the Bridegroom; these the Qualifications, that will entitle
the Reward of Grace; from which awful Tribunal, the Award will nevertheless be
given out, according to the Deeds done in each one's own Body, whether they be
good or bad. 2 Cor. 5.10.
If we have not our Loins girded about, and our Lights burning, we are
unprepared, and must be reckoned, among the foolish Virgins, who took no Oil in
their Lamps: While on the other Hand, such as have their Minds so exercised
unto Godliness, are ready, always ready, while the Lights are burning. Their
Stay in this dark World, is only a Waiting, for the glorious Appearing of the
great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. Tit. 2.13.
And in many there is a Desire, of the Appearing of the Bridegroom, 2 Timothy 4.8.
that their Joy may be complete, and their Labor be recompensed, with the
Reward of Grace. -- The earnest Expectation of the Creature, waits for the
Manifestation of the Sons of God: -- and not only they, but ourselves also,
which have the first Fruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves, groan within
ourselves, waiting for the Adoption, to wit, the Redemption of our Body. Romans
8.10.22.
-- GOD has never made known any other Way, in which to be ready, or like them
that wait with Joy for the Coming of the Lord. This we find will prepare Men;
we have illustrious Instances upon sacred Record, in the Apostles, and holy
Men. For me to live is Christ, and to die is Gain. Phil. 1.21.
Stephen the Martyr, we find, with his Lights burning: Being full of the Holy
Ghost, looked up steadfastly into Heaven, and saw the Glory of God, and Jesus
standing on the Right Hand of God; with Calmness recommending his Spirit unto
GOD, and his last Words fully expressive, of that christian Spirit, of Love,
Good Will, and hearty Forgiveness of his Persecutors. Lord, lay not this Sin to
their Charge. Acts 7.55, etc.
And blessed be GOD, we have yet Reason to believe, there is, in one Place and
another, a few holy Souls, that have not bowed the Knee to Baal, living
Evidences of this Truth; that we may say in this Respect also, He has not left
himself without Witness. --

Standing thus with the Loins girded about, and the Lights burning; prepares
for the immediate Summons of Death -- -- they are ready, at whatever Hour the
Bridegroom comes, to open to him immediately -- the Oil is ready in the Lamp,
the Light is burning. Is the Summons as instantaneous as the electric Flash of
the forked Lightning, is it as sudden as the Explosion of Powder? they are
ready. Show us where the Persons are to be found, that have invented, and
completed any new Way, to be ready, calm and assuredly prepared for final
Judgment, without this Gospel Preparation; and then we will honestly confess,
that Infidelity, and not Faith, is their Victory, that overcomes the World.

IMPROVEMENT.
1. The Subject before us presents to our View, this natural Improvement, viz.
However great and numerous, worldly Enjoyments may be, whatever Encumbrances
from outward Things, may surround us; the Command is plain, to dispose them in
the best Manner, that they may not be an Hindrance to us, in the Service of our
LORD. Regulate worldly Cares, Enjoyments, and lawful Recreations so, that,
these notwithstanding, we may be every Moment, in actual Readiness for the
coming of our LORD: Which Duty is largely, and forceably enjoined, by the
Apostle, in these Words -- But this I say, Brethren, the Time is short. It
remains, that both they that have Wives, be as though they had none; and they
that weep as though wept not; and they that rejoice as though they rejoiced not;
and they that buy, as though they possessed not; and they that use this World as
not abusing it; for the Fashion of this World passes away. 1. Cor. vii.
29.30.31.
Let us consider, estimate, and enjoy, the World, and the Things of it, in no
other View, than as Helps in our Way heavenward, Helps in performing the Duties
we owe to GOD, ourselves, and Fellow Creatures.

Wherefore,

2. Let the Loins of our Minds be girded about; keep the Mind, at all Times, in
all Places, and under all Circumstances, improving, reflecting, and enlarging,
and disposed, in such wise, as we should choose to be found, under the same
Circumstances, was our LORD to require our immediate Appearance before his
Tribunal. And blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord, when he comes, shall
find so doing. Matt. xxiv. 46.


3. Let us all seriously examine, whether we had, and now have, our Lights
burning in such Manner and Measure, as we can now wish (considering our
imperfect State) had it been our Lot to be numbered among them that fell, who
were surprised in a Moment, in that House of Instruction, where many were
buried. The Brick School-House.
-- Do our Hearts condemn us, do our Consciences testify, that our Hearts are
not, and were not right with GOD, nor sound in his Statutes Psalm. cxix. 80.
? -- For our Soul's Sake, let us not defer a Moment! GOD has spared, and given
us a Space for Repentance. Nothing can be more stupid than careless Negligence
in our Preparation for the Grave, when Death is all around us, and the
melancholy Ruins, just at the Door, and one and another carried to the Grave,
and a Third waiting our Service. Mr. Richard Lord, died on Saturday, and was
buried on the Sabbath after the Exercise.
What can afford a more powerful, pungeant Exposition of our LORD's Words,
Therefore be ye also ready: For in such an Hour as you think not, the Son of
Man comes? Matt. xxiv. 44.
-- Yes, there is one Consideration may add greatly to the Pungency of the
Exposition: It Is this, that fifty might have been buried in the Ruins, as
fatally as These.

Behold, ye Inhabitants, ye Spectators, the Mercy and Severity of the LORD!
However well disposed we may hope, and charitably believe them to have been,
who were called out of the world, would not they, would not their Friends, have
given all in their Power to have redeemed them from that Explosion, this
Dissolution of Nature? But there is no Man that has Power over the Spirits, to
retain the Spirit; neither has he Power in the Day of Death: And there is no
Discharge in that War. Eccl. viii. 8.
-- None of them can, by any Means, redeem his Brother, nor give to God a
Ransom for him: that he should still live forever, and not see Corruption.
Psalm xlix. 7.9.
-- If their Lights were burning, happy they, who have in a short Time,
finished their Combat, and entered in with the Bridegroom. But if destitute of
Lights burning, none on Earth could minister much unto them. He that was
unjust, must remain unjust still. O that the Living would lay it to Heart! -- O
that we were wise, that we understood this, that we would consider our latter
End! Deuteronomy. xxxii. 29.
-- O that GOD would manifest his Grace, in opening our Eyes, our Hearts, and
Understanding, so teach us to number our Days, that we may apply our Hearts
unto Wisdom. Psalm xc. 12.


Again, see the Necessity of standing every Moment ready, with our Lights
burning -- For Man also knows not his Time; as the Fishes that are taken in
an evil Net, and as the Birds that are caught in the Snare; so are the Sons of
Men snared in an evil Time when it falls suddenly upon them: Those Hours
publicly devoted to Mirth and rejoicing (which I attended, as many others no
Doubt did, hoping to receive a Spring to Nature, too much depressed, by the
long Melancholy that hung over the Land, and some particular gloomy Scenes The
Author was present the same Week, at Suffield, when three Men were killed by
Lightning, in one House, and came direct from that melancholy Funeral, to
Hartford.
) had one fatal Moment reserved, to give a Shock still more immediately
distressing. How is our Rejoicing turned into Mourning, and what was judged an
innocent Recreation, into Heaviness! Learn, O Inhabitants of this Place, O
young Men and Maidens, Children and Servants, learn to rejoice with trembling.
Remember that Death many Times lies entrenched, as fatally in the highest Mirth
and Rejoicing, as by the Sides of them, who never eat with Pleasure. They shall
lie down alike in the Dust, and the Worms shall cover them. Eccl. ix. 12.
Job xxi. 25, 26.


4. I would address myself to the Parents, Relatives and Friends of the
deceased.

Christian Friends,

The Hand of GOD is upon you. It Is sudden, surprising and awful. I make no
Doubt but many of us remember, that you have the same Claim upon us which Job
had upon his Friends; Have Pity upon me, have Pity upon me, O ye my Friends,
for the Hand of GOD has touched me. Job xix. 21.
-- And we also know, that to him that is afflicted, Pity should be showed from
his Friend. Job. vi. 14.
-- Yet let me mind you, that the Bridegroom has an undoubted Right to come and
knock, whenever it seems good to him, and in the Display of his Sovereignty,
he gives no Account of his Matters. Job xxxiii. 13.
-- This one Thing he has taught us, viz. That those Eighteen, on whom the
Tower of Siloam fell, were not Sinners above all Men that dwelt in Jerusalem.
Luke xiii. 4.
-- Yea, it is plainly revealed, that Death comes upon Adam's Posterity, for
the Offense of One, even of Adam; Romans v. 12.
and not for our own personal Transgressions: Which, duly considered, is enough
to guard us all against the Devices, which the Heart would otherwise wrongfully
imagine, concerning the afflicted. Job xxi. 27.
-- Here is a Duty contained in our Subject, profitable for you, in this Day of
your sore Visitation. Let your Loins be girded about, and your Lights burning.
'Twill not only guard you, in a good Measure, against immoderate Grief, but put
you, through Faith in the Redeemer, into a suitable Condition for the Coming of
your LORD. Ascribe Righteousness to your Maker Job xxxvi. 3.
-- In Patience possess your Souls; -- remember and acknowledge his Mercy, in
sparing you, and so many of the Children he has graciously given you; -- sing
of Mercy as well as of Judgment Psalm ci. 1.
-- consider well, that all the Paths of the LORD are Mercy and Truth, unto
such as keep his Covenant and his Testimonies. Ps. xxv. 10.
-- Look not at the Things which are seen, but at the Things which are not
seen, so may your Affliction, work out for you a far more exceeding and eternal
Weight of Glory: 2 Cor. iv. 17.18.
-- Forget not the Exhortation which speaks unto you as unto Children, My
Son, despise not thou the Chastening of the LORD, nor faint when thou art
rebuked of him. Heb. xii. 5.
-- We know, that no Chastening* for the present seems to be joyous but
grievous, nevertheless, afterward it yields the peaceable Fruit of
Righteousness, unto them which are exercised thereby. Heb. xii. 11.
-- Wherefore, lift up the Hands which hang down, and the feeble Knees. And
make straight Paths for your Feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of the
Way, but rather let it be healed. Heb. xii. 12, 13.
-- We are all of us lame in Duty, to use the Words of the Poet, Dr. Young.
Our Virtues too, half Converts to the right. May your Lameness be healed, by
such a corrective Dispensation. Did we believe the Truth, how might it
alleviate our Sorrows, and put our Minds upon immediate Improvement; even this
Truth, that every Dispensation of Providence, that peculiarly respects us, is
planned in the wisest and best Manner to promote our best Good, did we
faithfully attend to it. Open your Ears then to Discipline, and let Instruction
be sealed. Job xxxiii. 10.
-- We wish you a Blessing from the Sanctuary, Grace to support your Minds,
Wisdom to direct you, to reap the peaceable Fruits of Righteousness, from this
Exercise; and Patience that you may possess your Souls in this Trial, and hold
out unto the End. And may GOD so direct, and teach, and you so improve and
learn, that in the End you may say, it is good for us that we have been
afflicted.

5. To the young Men and Children of this Congregation.

Were your departed Friends, Acquaintance, and Companions, to address you from
the World of Spirits, could it be more nervous, and pertinent, than what
naturally arises, from this sad Providence, and these Words of our Text?
Behold, you that are spared, behold the Ruins of that House, where we have
associated, where we have had Mirth and Gladness, as well as Instruction,
blasted in a Moment; made a Kind of a Grave to us in an Instant, before we had
Time for Reflection; ask them who survive, whether they had known the Cause of
Death, had they been cut off with that Blast. Let your Loins be girded about,
and your Lights burning, and ye yourselves like unto Men that wait for the
Lord. Was it a Day appointed for Rejoicing, and who though it what a Day, what a
Moment would bring forth. Boast not in your Mirth, boast not of Tomorrow,
boast not of a Moment. Young Men, we exhort you to be sober-minded; let your
Moderation be known to all Men: The LORD is at Hand. Improve your Time, in
trimming your Lamps, that your Lights may burn. See how instantly, how
immediately the Bridegroom came to us, and left us little if any Time to gird
our Loins, procure Oil, or even trim the Lamps, if Oil were already in them. --
Is this the Effect of Rejoicing! We then exhort you to rejoice, not in Vapor
and Chimeras; Rejoice rather in God your Savior, Luke i. 47.
rejoice in the Hope of the Glory of God* Romans v. 2.
To you, young Friends, the Voice of Providence is loud, be ye also ready. Let
not this Visitation pass over, without engaging a few at least, to put on the
Wedding Garment, if this Providence will not arouse your Minds, if this
Opportunity be neglected by you, when the Eye affects the Heart, when Death is
all around you, when dying Groans are in many Houses, what do you expect, in
Nature or Providence, will ever awaken you! Cry then to GOD, cry mightily to
him, to assist in lighting up your Lamps, to draw you with his loving Kindness,
instruct you with his Word, Spirit, and Providence, that Iniquity may not prove
your Ruin. And may GOD grant in Mercy, that this Dispensation, which proves
natural Death to some, may be a Means of spiritual Life to others, yea, as Life
from the Dead to your Souls.

Finally, To the Auditory in general.

Let us account it Mercy and Long-suffering, that we were not smitten down with
our Fellows. How many among us, know not of Danger there more than at any other
given Place. -- O Lord, I know that the Way of Man is not in himself: It is not
in Man that walks to direct his Steps! Jerem. x. 23.
What but a kind Providence directed many of us, at that Instant, out of Harm's
Way! How many but a little before, were within the Reach of that sad
Catastrophe! May the Goodness of GOD to us ward, lead us to Repentance: We have
our Space lengthened out, and if we do not improve it, to gird up our Loins,
seek Light, and endeavor to keep it burning: we may well fear, that GOD will
quickly say of us, Cut them down, why cumber they the Ground. Luke xiii. 7.
-- Let this Providence engage us also, to stand ready in all Acts of holy
Obedience to GOD, Love, Kindness, Gentleness, Patience and Forgiveness toward
our fellow Men, growing in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior
JESUS CHRIST. Let us pass the Time of our sojourning here in Fear, giving all
Diligence to make our Calling and Election sure: May we live the Life of the
Righteous, may our latter End be peace, and our Rest Glorious, by the Grace of
GOD, through the endless Ages of Eternity. AMEN.

FINIS.

