THE CHARTER LAWS, CATALOGUE of BOOKS, LIST OF PHILOSOPHICAL INSTRUMENTS, etc
OF THE Juliana Library-Company, IN LANCASTER.

To which are prefixed, Some Reflections on the Advantages of KNOWLEDGE; the
Origin of BOOKS and LIBRARIES, showing how they have been encouraged and
patronized by the Wise and Virtuous of every Age. WITH A Short Account of its
INSTITUTION, FRIENDS and BENEFACTORS.

Sine Libris Justitia quiescit, torpet Medicina, Philosophia manca est, Literae
mutae, omnia Tenebris involuta Cimmeriis --

Barth, de Libris Legend. Diss. Books are the Legacies which a great Genius
leaves to Mankind, which are delivered down from Generation to Generation, as
Presents to Posterity. -- What an inestimable Price would a Virgil, or a Homer,
a Cicero, or an Aristotle bear, were their Works, like a Statue, a Building, or
a Picture, to be confined only in one Place, and made the Property of a single
Person?

SPECTATOR. Published by ORDER of the DIRECTORS.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by D. HALL, and W. SELLERS. MDCCLXVI.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Lady JULIANA PENN
THE following LAWS, CATALOGUE OF BOOKS, List of PHILOSOPHICAL INSTRUMENTS,
etc. of the JULIANA LIBRARY-COMPANY, in Lancaster, as a Mark of the great
Veneration and Esteem which the Directors thereof bear for her Ladyship's Merit
and Character; and as a Testimony of their Gratitude for the kind Notice, and
generous Benefaction, with which her Ladyship has been pleased to honor this
infant Institution, are humbly presented, by

Her LADYSHIP's most obedient, Much obliged, And very respectful humble
Servants, The DIRECTORS.

PREFACE.
THE Human Mind, in a State of Nature, may be justly compared to the Soil: --
By the Improvement of the one, and the Cultivation of the other, both are
rendered highly advantageous to Mankind, for Want whereof Error and Barbarity
spring up in the first, and Briars and Thorns choke the latter. -- We come into
the World inveloped in a Cloud of Ignorance: Nature places almost all upon a
Level, and makes no very material Difference in dispensing her Gifts. -- Of all
Endowments of the Mind, then, Knowledge is undoubtedly, on every civil, as well
as moral, Consideration, the greatest. To form a just Notion of the Advantages
derived from it, we need only view the vast Height to which it raises one Part
of the human Species above another; and the Distinction it makes, not only
between Individuals, but between Nations and Countries. -- We have too many
living Instances around us of the wretched State of Mankind, uncivilized and
untutored. -- But if these are not sufficient, let us look back to
Great Britain, now renowned and revered throughout the World, for her Wisdom,
Policy, Learning, and Arts. What was she before the Light of Knowledge beamed
over her its blessed Rays? -- A Land of Barbarity and Error; where the
miserable Inhabitants were distinguished by nothing but a rude and savage
Fierceness. -- They knew not the GOD that made them; and were led by Ignorance
to pay the Homage due to the CREATOR to some of the meanest of his Creatures.
-- They knew not even the Use of Clothes; but, like the savage Natives that
roam these Woods, went naked -- painted their Bodies; and, by Way of Ornament,
made Incisions in their Flesh, representing Trees, Flowers, Animals, etc.
which, with the Juice of a certain Plant, they dyed of a bluish Color, that
never wore out.

IF we taken a View of that immense Territory called Russia, which, for its
Extent, and the late Barbarity of its Inhabitants, may be compared with the
most uncultivated Wilds of America, what was it a few Years ago? -- We are told
that till the Time of Czar Peter I. the Natives were a most barbarous, rude and
ignorant People. -- But that great and wise Prince having traveled into
England, and other Countries, in order to learn their Policy and Manners, and
to improve himself in their most useful Arts and Sciences This powerful and
mighty Emperor disdained not to work at several Trades, and to employ himself
in the King's Yards, in order to learn the Art of Ship-building; such was his
Thirst of Knowledge, and Desire of making his People happy.
, returned to his Empire, enriched with the Knowledge and Discoveries of those
Nations; and immediately applied himself to introduce Learning, by importing
Books, erecting Schools, setting up Printing-Presses and Libraries.

THE first University that ever was in Russia is not above 25 Years old; and
now Petersburgh boasts of an Academy of Sciences, which begins to vie with the
most eminent in Europe; so that in a little more than half a Century, these
late Barbarians have almost brought themselves upon a Level with the most
polite and learned Nations.

BY this we may observe, that in Proportion as Knowledge is encouraged, and
makes a Progress in any Country, it raises the Inhabitants from Ignorance,
Obscurity, Barbarism and Error, and changes them into different Creatures. --
And perhaps the Day is not far distant, when we may have the Pleasure of having
this Observation verified before our Eyes; -- when the rude Barbarians of our
own Country may be led, by the Light of Knowledge, to lay aside their savage
Nature; to become polished Members of Society; and even to serve the Public in
some of its most honorable Offices.

LET us also observe, that as soon as Learning droops, or feels the Tyrant's
Hand, its Votaries sink back again into their original Ignorance and Roughness.
-- If we cast our Eyes toward ancient Greece, to what a Pitch of Glory and
Reputation did she raise herself, by carrying the Sciences to Perfection? But
as soon as they were neglected or discouraged, how did she dwindle again almost
to nothing? And Rome, once Mistress of the World, was no less renowned for her
Victories, than her extensive Learning and Knowledge Vide (...) de Mag, Romans
(...)
: But no sooner was she deprived of these, than she shrunk back again into a
poor petty State; so that Science and Empire sell together; which is
beautifully described by the Poet.

" Learning and Rome alike in Empire grow,
" And Arts still followed where her Eagles flew,
" From the same Foes, at last both felt their Doom,
" And the same Age saw Learning fall, and Rome Tota eris in Cineres, quasi
nunquam Roma suisses.
.
POPE'S Essay on Crit. Afric too, for Knowledge, was once renowned throughout
the Nations. -- She gave us our Origin, Cyprian, and Tertullian. -- She brought
forth many great and learned Men; but, through the Neglect of Literature, she
has sunk into a State of Wretchedness and Barbarity, unequalled in the World.
-- Alas! She is now no more than the shattered Skeleton of her former Self. --
There are not so much as the Traces of Science to be found: But the once
delightful Seats of Learning, and learned Men, are now trod by cruel brutish
Barbarians, who have little more than the Shape of Man remaining Some
Travelers tell us, that there are Places in Africa, where there are public
Shambles for Human Flesh, and that the Father eats the Son, and the Son the
Father, without Horror.
. Throughout the whole East ( China excepted) there is scarce the Glimmering of
Science; for as Ignorance and Slavery are Companions, the Tyrant takes Care to
hold them together. -- So that in all the great Empires of Morocco, Abyssinia,
Persia and India, Ignorance, Misery and Barbarity, go Hand in Hand. -- In
Turkey, Printing is forbid under dreadful Penalties, lest by that Means the
People should be brought to know what Slaves and Wretches they are; lest they
should be brought to know that they have a Right to their Lives and Liberties;
lest they should be brought to know that Mahomet was a vile Impostor, and his
Alcoran a ridiculous Fable. -- How happy then are they who enjoy the Means of
Knowledge, and how miserable and wretched are they, who have the Misfortune to
be deprived of them?

BUT besides the Advantages which we receive from Learning, by its enlarging
our Ideas, and exalting our Natures, it inspires us with a Love of Freedom, and
an Abhorrence of Slavery. -- It shows us the true Value of Liberty, and how
great a Price the Preservation thereof has cost our Forefathers; it points out
every Invasion made upon it, and what we have an undoubted Right to do for the
Security of it. -- We are thereby brought to know ourselves; -- we are shown
how to regulate our Conduct and our Passions; how to make a proper Use of our
Reason; to place a proper Estimate on Persons and Things: -- In short, it leads
us, as it were, by the Hand, and points out the Duties which we owe to GOD and
our Fellow Creatures.

LET us now enquire how Knowledge is to be attained. -- In early Time, before
Letters and Printing were invented, the Access to Learning was extremely
difficult. -- Laws, Rules, Doctrines, Relations, etc. were delivered, and
handed down from Father to Son by Oral Tradition: But the Fallacy and
Uncertainty of this Method of conveying Knowledge became so evident, that
Recourse was next had to Hieroglyphics The Word Hieroglyphic signifies, in the
Original, Holy Sculpture, and was used by the ancient Egyptians, as an Emblem
or Sign of some sacred or holy Thing. -- Those People communicated their
religious Rites, and the Mysteries of their Morality and History, to none but
Kings and Priests, and such as they held divine. -- And this they did by a Kind
of Kabbala, which, at the same time that it instructed them, veiled their
Morality, etc. from others, and left them in Ignorance. -- Hence the Use of
Hieroglyphics; which were afterward reduced to real Characters, and applied to
profane as well as sacred Things. -- They are said to have been first invented
by Hermes (...).
, which were a Kind of Symbols, or mystic Characters, engraved on Monuments,
Pyramids and Obelisks, used in the Heathen Theology, and from thence introduced
into the Jewish and Christian; and afterward reduced to certain Marks or
Images, rather painted than written; and are used at this Day by our own
Indians. -- By these Images People endeavored to express and communicate their
Ideas to one another; but this Method was likewise found to be troublesome and
defective, and, like the other, became the Source of miserable Confusion, and
endless Conjecture. -- When they would write an Elephant, they were under the
Necessity of painting its Figure, and to signify a Forest, they were obliged to
draw a Number of Trees, and so on. -- Had this been the only Inconvenience
(great as it was) it might have been submitted to; but they were never able to
express all their Thoughts; they were liable to be continually deceived and
perplexed by the Similarity of Images; and these Images took up so much Room,
that large Volumes were obliged to be written, to express a few Things. --
Besides all these Inconveniences, they found that the Senses, Passions, and a
Thousand other Objects, could never be represented by hieroglyphical Figures.

AT last they began to make simple Strokes, which became distinguished by the
Name of Characters or Letters; and by being differently transposed and joined,
formed Words, and became at length safe and unerring Conveyors of our Thoughts.
-- The Merit of this noble Invention is claimed both by the Egyptians and
Chinese; and indeed the Merit is so great, that rather than run the Risque of
depriving the true Owner of it, it will be best to allow it to both.

WHEN Men came, by the Help of these Letters, to make a Collection of what they
had experienced or invented, such Collection was called a Book. -- The first
Books were written or engraved on Stones, as was the Decalogue, or Ten
Commandments, delivered to Moses on Mount Sinai, which is the oldest Book that
Antiquity gives us any certain Account of. -- They were afterward written on
the Bark and Leaves of Trees, and on the Egyptian Plant, called Papyrus; then
on Tables of Wax, Leather, Skins of wild Beasts; after that on Lead, Linen,
Silk, Horn, and at last on Paper. -- But the Latin Word Liber, as well as the
English Word Book (derived from the Saxon Word Boc) both signify the Bark of a
Tree, on which it is probable they were chiefly wrote.

WE are told that the first Books were of the Shape of square Blocks or Tables.
-- And this Opinion is favored by sacred Writ, in its Account of the Book of
the Covenant, Book of the Law, etc. -- When Leaves, Skins, Parchment, Linen,
Silk, etc. came to be made use of, it was more convenient to make Books in Form
of Rolls, from whence we have the Word Volume, which signifies to roll up. --
This Method is still used by the Jews, who stitch several Skins of Parchment
together, on which they write the Pentateuch, or five Books of Moses, and roll
them round a Cylinder of Wood, Ivory, Silver, etc.

BUT notwithstanding all the Aids that Knowledge derived from the Discovery of
Letters, it made but slow Advances in the World. -- There was something still
wanting to forward its Progress: For as these Books were obliged to be written
or engraved by the Hand, they were held at such a Price, that none but Princes,
and Persons of the greatest Opulence, were able to procure them; so that the
rest of the World were still left to grope through their original Ignorance and
Darkness. -- This left Room for new Invention, and at last the Art of Printing
was found out, about 316 Years ago. -- Mentz and Strasburg, two Cities of
Germany, and Haerlem, a considerable Town in Holland, claim severally the Merit
of this happy Discovery, which is one of the greatest Blessings that Mortals
could receive! -- John Faust, John Guttemberg, and Peter Scheoffer, of Mentz,
John Mental, of Strasburg, and Lawrence Coster, of Haerlem, have all stood
Candidates for this Honor; and the World has not yet agreed to which of them
it ought to be ascribed: -- Guttemberg, however, seems to have the most Votes
in his Favor; and certain it is that Scheoffer first invented the Method of
founding moveable Types, which was a most valuable Improvement; as Printing was
at first performed by Letters engraved, or cut on Blocks and Boards of Wood. --
May the Memorial of the Man be had in everlasting Remembrance!

THE first Books that were printed, are said to be the Catholicon, a Latin
Bible, and Tully's Offices. -- But by this last glorious Discovery, Books soon
became plentiful and cheap; and the Avenues to Knowledge were made smooth and
easy to all. -- The Labors, Thoughts, Inventions and Skill of the Wise and
Virtuous, of different Nations, have been laid at our Doors; and even the
Husbandman and Mechanic, without neglecting their necessary Callings, may now
taste the Fruits of literary Leisure.

COLLECTIONS of Books have been made by every civilized Nation in the World:
And Libraries have been, and are now promoted and encouraged by all, who ever
knew the Value of being ranked in the Number of intelligent Beings.

THE Hebrews are said to be the first who established Libraries and that other
Nations took the Hint from them.

THE Prophet Ezra gives us an Account of a Library belonging to the Kings of
Persia, which the Sacred Scripture emphatically calls a Treasure-House Ezra v.
17.
We have also an Account of a Library built by the Prophet Nehemiah, in which
the Books of David, and the Prophecies, were reposited.

PTOLEMY PHILADELPHUS, by whose Order the Greek Translation of the Bible is
said to have been undertaken by the LXX Interpreters, founded a Library at
Alexandria, that contained 700,000 Volumes, which was burnt by Coesar's Army By
Omar's Lieutenants, says Voltaire.
.

AT Pergamus, we are informed, there was a Library which contained 200,000
Books.

CONSTANTINE the Great, who was the first Christian Emperor in the World, had a
Library of 300,000 Volumes, among which were Homer's inimitable Poems, called
the Iliad and Odyssey, written on the Guts of a Serpent, in Letters of Gold,
which were all burnt by the cruel Tyrant Leo This Leo was originally a Pedlar
of Isauria; but being raised to Purple and Empire, ordered twelve venerable
Ecclesiastics, and all their Books, to be burnt together.
.

THE Palatine and Ulpian Libraries, and that of Paulus AEmilius, are reckoned
to have been the most famous of ancient Rome.

IT was customary in former Times, for every large Church to have a Library
belonging to it. -- The Vatican was a very considerable One, which was
destroyed in the Sacking of Rome; but afterward was renewed with the Books
which Count Tilly plundered and carried away from Heidelburg.

AT Florence a most valuable Library was founded by Cosmo de Medicis, which
consisted of many Thousand Volumes.

BUT the most considerable Libraries now in Europe are those of the Emperor of
Germany, at Vienna, which is said to contain above 80,000 Volumes, etc. -- That
of the French King, at Paris. -- And the Bodleian and Harleian Libraries,
belonging to the University of Oxford, which are the largest and most complete
of any belonging to any Seminary of Learning in Christendom.

THERE are also many other considerable Libraries in England; such as the
Cotton-Library, and those belonging to the Middle Temple, Sion College,
Merchant Taylor's School, College of Physicians, Royal Society, Paul's School,
Christ's Hospital, etc. etc.

INDEED, the World in general is now happily stored with Collections of choice
and valuable Books, in every Language, for the Advancement of Arts and
Sciences; and the more of this Treasure any Community enjoys, the richer in
useful Knowledge must she be. -- She will be revered by the Nations around her;
and her Members, when called forth to exert their natural as well as improved
Abilities in the Service of the Public, or for the Advantage of Mankind, will
shine as Lights in the World.

WHEN we see the Ambassador, the Counselor, the Legislator, the Magistrate,
the General, the Physician, the Ecclesiastic, in a Word, all the Employments,
which oblige Men to speak in public or in private, to write, or give an Account
of their Administration, to manage others, gain them over, or persuade them --
When we see such Persons acquit themselves with Honor, and acquire the
Applause of the Public, we cannot then but perceive the Advantages of Learning,
and feel our Hearts beat high with Pleasure. -- How often do we hear of Men,
who, by their Seize in Knowledge, raise themselves to the first Offices
of State, and to Degrees of Superiority far above their Birth; when such Marks
of Honor would ill become the Ignorant and Illiterate, however nobly born?

REPOSITARIES of the united Labors of the Wise and Learned, are certainly the
first and most proper Means of making Men knowing and useful: And they so
manifestly tend to enrich, exalt and ennoble the human Mind, that the Love or
Contempt of them, may be a proper Criterion between Goodness of Heart, and its
Contrary: For certain it is, that the Promotion of useful Knowledge is an
Undertaking truly virtuous and Praiseworthy, and such as flows from the
generous Breast alone; -- and that the Patrons and Encouragers thereof ever
have been, and, we hope, ever will be, deemed the great Friends of Mankind.

AND here we cannot but congratulate the Inhabitants of this New World, upon
their generous, though humble Imitation of the Old, with regard to their
Encouragement of Learning and Libraries. -- Several of the Colonies have
already founded public Seminaries of Knowledge There are six Colleges in the
British Colonies on the Continent, viz. HARVARD COLLEGE, in Cambridge, in the
Government of Massachusetts Bay; which has been long supported by a Number of
generous Benefactions. -- But having lately lost its Library by Fire, the
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, have made it a
Present of Books, to the Amount of One Hundred Pounds Sterling

YALE COLLEGE, in the Province of Connecticut. -- KING'S COLLEGE, in the City
of New York; an elegant Building, furnished with a valuable Library, etc. and
under the Direction of the Rev. Mr. Cooper, a Gentleman educated in the
University of Oxford.

NASSAU HALL, in New Jersey, a large fine Building of hewn Stone, with a good
Library -- Under the Direction of the Rev. Dr. Finley.

PHILADELPHIA COLLEGE, a spacious and commodious, Edifice, with an elegant
Hall, furnished with an Organ, and an Oratory or Stage, from which the Speakers
declaim publicly, and deliver Orations, etc. -- This College consists of three
Philosophy Schools; -- a Greek School; -- a Latin School; -- a French and
Spanish School; -- an English Academy, where the practical Branches of the
Mathematics, Drawing, and Oratory are taught; and the Mother Tongue in a
grammatical Manner. -- Besides these, it takes in two Charity Schools, where
above One Hundred Boys and Girls are instructed gratis, and fitted for the
Mechanic Arts, or other useful Employments. -- His Majesty, and several of the
first Personages in Great Britain, have been generous Benefactors to this
Institution. -- It has a valuable Library, and a choice Philosophical
Apparatus; and is under the Direction of the Rev. Dr. Smith, and governed by 24
Trustees. -- And, WILLIAM and MARY-COLLEGE, in the Dominion of Virginia. --
This College has a handsome Endowment, and a good Library, etc.


, and each seems fired with an Emulation to excel.

" This noble Strife, ye noble Sisters feed!
" Be yours the Contest in each worthy Deed,
" Shine God-like Rivals for the Muses' Palm;
And strive who first shall sway the Laureat Realm."
SMITH' s Poem on Visit. Acad. of Philadelphia. In this glorious Contest the
Province of Pennsylvania claims no small Degree of Merit. -- Her College at
Philadelphia has already sent forth several excellent young Men, who are become
useful Members of the Community, and now serve the Public, in some of its most
honorable Stations, with Credit and Applause. -- She has also distinguished
herself in her Attention to public Libraries, there not being less than four in
the Metropolis, and in almost every Town of Note, one.

The Juliana Library in Lancaster, is yet in its Infancy, and has nothing to
boast of, except the Notice and Encouragement it has received from Persons,
whose Names would do Honor to any Institution; -- and that the Means of
Knowledge are thereby brought the nearest Westwardly, of any that we know of,
to the Borders of Error and Barbarity; which may excite others still nearer, to
catch the Example, and carry Knowledge by Degrees to the very Doors of the poor
untutored and unenlightened Heathen.

THIS Consideration alone, it is humbly presumed, will entitle it to some
Regard. -- But besides this, the County of Lancaster is remarkable for the
Richness of its Soil, and the Number and Industry of its Inhabitants. -- The
People seem to have a particular Genius for Agriculture, and the Mechanic Arts
THIS County is very extensive; and in Point of Opulence, has the Preference
over every other County in Pennsylvania, excluding that of Philadelphia. -- Its
Number of Inhabitants is computed to be 40,000 Souls. -- The Fertility of the
Soil, which is every where plentifully supplied with Meadow and Water, renders
the Lands here extremely valuable, which are capable of the highest Improvement.

The Culture of Hemp, and Hops, seems to be much attended to by the Farmers of
this County, who annually send large Quantities of both these Articles to the
Metropolis. -- -- The Number of Wagons continually employed in carrying the
Produce of this Place to Market is incredible. -- -- The Inhabitants are
chiefly Germans, to whose Economy, unwearied Labor, and Industry, the County
is principally indebted for the Wealth and Reputation is so deservedly
possesses.

The County Town (which in the Year 1742 was incorporated into a Borough, with
a Power of holding Fairs and Markets, etc.) contains at least 600 Houses, many
of which are extremely neat, and make a good Appearance, being built of Brick,
and cut Stone. -- -- It contains, at a moderate Medium of five to a Family,
about 3000 Souls. -- -- The Lowness and Unevenness of its Situation, is amply
compensated by its Convenience for Trade.

Amongst the public Buildings, there are seven Places of Worship. -- -- Of
these the New German Lutheran-Church is justly esteemed one of the most elegant
and finished Pieces of Architecture in the Province. -- -- There are three
regular Fire Companies established here, who have two good Fire Engines, etc.
and meet once a Month to examine into the State of the Houses, and to devise
Methods for the more effectual Preservation of them from the dreadful Accidents
of Fire.

This Town has, for many Years, supported a good Grammar School, which is now
likely to be reduced for want of proper Encouragement; though no Place seems
better calculated for an Institution of this Kind, as it enjoys a pure Air, a
remarkably healthy Situation, and a Plentiful Market, besides many other
Advantages.

In the Mechanic Arts this Place also produces many ingenious Workmen, some of
which are deemed not interior to any in the Province, who have exhibited
sufficient Proofs ot their Skill in their respective Occupations. -- On the
whole, it may be observed, without incurring the Centure of Partiality, that
Lancaster stands foremost of all the other Inland Towns on the Continent of
America.


; which may be greatly improved and encouraged by Books.

IT is by no Means intended or meant, that such Persons as those described
above, should sit down in a Library, and become studious. -- All Men are not
born nor fitted, and if they were, all Men could not be spared, for such an
Employment; but yet every Man has Leisure to read some, without breaking in
upon his necessary Calling, more easy and advantageous to him. -- He may view
the Schemes of Millions that have gone before him in the same Art, compare them
with his own, and put in Practice that which he thinks best. -- An Application
of this Kind will be so far from being useless or improper to the industrious
Husbandman, or ingenious Artist, that it will sweeten his Toil, and repay him
with Pleasure and Profit: But besides this, if such a Person should at any time
be called to the Seat of Justice, or the House of Legislation, will he not find
it necessary to have some Acquaintance with Books? It was common in ancient
Rome, to have Dictators and Consuls brought from the Plow, whose Hands, grown
hard by laboring in the Field, often supported the tottering State, and saved
the Commonwealth.

-- -- -- " The sacred Plow
" Employed the Kings and Fathers of Mankind,
" In ancient Times" -- --
THOMSON' s Spring. It would be absurd to suppose, that those Men paid no
Regard to Books, or took no Pains to acquire Knowledge, which must necessarily
fit them for such Stations.

Now if such Advantages accrue to the busy Husbandman and Mechanic, by reading
a little, how great must be the Advantage to those who have Time and Leisure to
read much! They have an Opportunity of traveling, as it were, into distant
Regions; of conversing with their Inhabitants; of comparing their Laws, Customs
and Religion, with their own; of hearing their Disputations and Arguments; of
being Witnesses of all their glorious Actions and Atchievments. -- They have an
Opportunity of entering into Society with the most renowned, of keeping Company
with the best and most virtuous, and of holding high Converse with the most
learned Sages of Antiquity; by whose Examples they may be fired to imitate
every Thing that is great and good, and from whom they may derive that noble
Magnanimity of Soul, that Disinterestedness, that Hatred of Injustice, and that
Love for the Public Good, which shine forth, and make so glorious a Figure, in
every Part of their Lives.

THESE, and many more, are the Advantages derived from Books. They tend to
divert from Idleness, Debauchery and Vice, and to fill up usefully those vacant
Hours, which, without their Assistance, are in a Manner the Grave of a Man who
lives unemployed. -- They fill the Mind with Content, Satisfaction and
Pleasure, which Wealth, Riches, and even Grandeur often deny. -- And they
bestow a Comfort and Tranquillity, when the Duties of civil Life are finished.

A SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE JULIANA LIBRARY.
IN the Year 1759, three or four Persons of the Borough of Lancaster,
considering the great Advantages of public Libraries, conferred together, and
engaged to solicit Subscriptions, to establish one in that Town.

THEIR Proposal was so well received, that a few generous Gentlemen immediately
subscribed, and paid Ten Pounds each, toward promoting this useful Design.

ENCOURAGED by so good a Beginning, it was resolved, that no Subscription under
Forty Shillings should entitle a Person to a Share. The Number of Subscribers
soon amounted to 58; and the Sum of Two Hundred Pounds Sterling was raised.

THE Subscribers formed themselves into a Company, and agreed to be governed by
a Set of Articles or Constitutions, entered into, and signed by the whole.

THE first Parcel of Books and Instruments imported from England, amounted to
Two Hundred and Fifty Pounds Sterling, besides several purchased in
Philadelphia, etc. and those received as Benefactions.

THE Honorable THOMAS PENN, Esquire one of the Proprietaries of this Province, to
whom the Company are much obliged for the kind Notice he has been pleased to
take of them, upon being made acquainted with the Design of erecting a public
Library here, wrote the following polite Letter to the Directors thereof.

GENTLEMEN,
I RECEIVED a very sensible Pleasure in being informed by Mr. Barton, that a
Number of the principal People of Lancaster, and the Country about that Town,
had entered into an Agreement, and had remitted so large a Sum of Money to
purchase Books, in order to form a Library to be established there. -- This
Undertaking, so useful to the Country, could not but meet with my Approbation,
and be entitled to my Assistance, which I shall be ready to give it, whenever
it can promote its Utility; and am,

GENTLEMEN, Your affectionate Friend, THOMAS PENN.
London, Feb. 11, 1762,

To the Directors of the Library Company at Lancaster.

THIS Honorable Gentleman and his Lady, have favored the Company with several
generous Donations, as appears by the List.

THE Honorable James Hamilton, Esquire late Governor of the Province, gave them
also the Sum of Twenty Pounds Sterling, to be laid out in Books.

UNDER these Encouragements the Company, finding their Library increasing, and
growing into Credit and Reputation, applied for, and obtained a Charter, in the
Year 1763, -- which was framed and drawn up gratis, by Edward Shippen, Esquire of
Philadelphia, whose kind Offices on that Occasion, the Directors take this
Opportunity of acknowledging.

IN Honor of Lady JULIANA PENN, and as a Testimony of the high Obligations
they are under to her, the Company desired to be, and were incorporated by the
Name of the JULIANA LIBRARY-COMPANY IN LANCASTER. -- And as the Charter
empowered them to use one common Seal in their Affairs, they chose the
following Device, viz. Minerva leading an illiterate Person with one Hand, and
pointing with the other to a Shelf of Books, and Pair of Globes -- with the
Motto, Ecce Comites Itineris; and round the Margin this Inscription, Seal of
the JULIANA LIBRARY, Lancaster.

THE Number of Members now amount to Seventy-seven, and are never to exceed One
Hundred.

EVERY Member has an absolute Property in his Share of the Books and Effects of
the Company, and may devise it by Will, or dispose of it to any Person the
Directors approve of, provided the Member so selling be about to remove from
the County of Lancaster.

THE Effects of the Company are now valued at about Six Hundred Pounds
Currency. -- So that a Share which at first was obtained for Forty Shillings,
is at present worth near Eight Pounds, -- and increases yearly in Value Seven
Shillings and Sixpence. -- So much being yearly added by each Subscriber to
the Capital Stock.

THE Library is at present kept in a large Chamber rented for that Purpose,
where Attendance is given by the Librarian every Saturday, from Four o'Clock
till Seven.

THIS Institution has been managed hitherto with Harmony and Success; and it is
hoped that no ill-natured Accidents will intervene to interrupt a Scheme
founded on virtuous Principles, and a public-spirited Design.

THE Company retain a proper Sense of, and acknowledge with Gratitude, the
Favors they have received from the several Benefactors of this Library; and
will ever be ready to enter upon their Records, and to preserve the Names of
such Persons as have already, or that may hereafter honor them with any
Donations in Books, Instruments, natural Curiosities, etc. that Posterity may
see who have been Patrons and Encouragers of this useful Undertaking.

THE CHARTER OF THE Juliana Library-Company.
THOMAS PENN, Preamble.
and RICHARD PENN, Esquires, true and absolute Proprietaries of the province of
Pennsylvania, and counties of New Castle, Kent and Suffex, on Delaware: To all
to whom these presents shall come, GREETING. WHEREAS Edward Shippen, Names of
the members.
Esquire the Reverend Thomas Barton, Emanuel Carpenter, Esquire Adam Simon Kuhn, Esquire
Isaac Richardson, Esquire Robert Thompson, Esquire Isaac Saunders, Esquire James Wright,
Esquire James Webb, Isaac Whitelock, John Hopson, William Henry, George Ross, the
Reverend Samuel Magaw, Joseph Rose, William Atlee, James Anderson, Samuel
Boude, James Bickham, William Bousman, Samuel Bethell, Colonel James Burd,
Michael Gross, James Gibbons, John Smith, Caleb Sheward, Samuel Scott, Josiah
Scott, James Starrett, William Smith, Thomas Smith, Stephen Atkison, John
Ashbridge, Robert Clench, Jacob Carpenter, John Craig, Thomas Davis, Abraham
Dehuff, James Ewings, John Edwards, Joshua Evans, Sebastian Graff, James
Galbreath, John Gibson, John Grosch, Abraham Gibbons, Thomas Hollyday, Barnard
Hubley, Adam Hoops, Henry Helm, Michael Habberstick, David Henderson, Adam
Kuhn, jun. Thomas Minshall, Philip Lenheer, George Mayer, Isaac Myers, John
Postlethwait, Samuel Postlethwait, Benjamin Price, Joseph Pugh, John Powell,
Stewart Rowen, James Ralf, John Bar, William Henry Steigle, Matthias Slough,
Frederick Stone, Joseph Simons, Francis Sanderson, Rudy Stoner, James Webb,
jun. Paul Weitzell, Jacob Whistler, Frederick Yaiser, Robert Fulton, and George
Burkert, HAVE, at a great expense, purchased a large and valuable collection of
useful books, in order to erect a library for the advancement of knowledge and
literature in the borough of Lancaster:

NOW KNOW YE, Grant of the charter.
That we being truly sensible of the advantage that may accrue to the people of
the said borough, and the country adjacent thereto, by so useful an
undertaking, and being willing to encourage the same, have given and granted,
and by these presents do, for us, our heirs and successors, give and grant,
that the said Edward Shippen, Thomas Barton, Emanuel Carpenter, Adam Simon
Kuhn, Isaac Richardson, Robert Thompson, Isaac Saunders, James Wright, James
Webb, Isaac Whitelock, John Hopson, William Henry, George Ross, Samuel Magaw,
Joseph Rose, William Atlee, James Anderson, Samuel Boude, James Bickham,
William Bousman, Samuel Bethell, Colonel James Burd, Michael Gross, James
Gibbons, John Smith, Caleb Sheward, Samuel Scott, Josiah Scott, James Starrett,
William Smith, Thomas Smith, Stephen Atkison, John Ashbridge, Robert Clench,
Jacob Carpenter, John Craig, Thomas Davis, Abraham Dehuff, James Ewings, John
Edwards, Joshua Evans, Sebastian Graff, James Galbreath, John Gibson, John
Grosch, Abraham Gibbons, Thomas Hollyday, Barnard Hubley, Adam Hoops, Henry
Helm, Michael Habberstick, David Henderson, Adam Kuhn, jun. Thomas Minshall,
Philip Lenheer, George Mayer, Isaac Myers, John Postlethwait, Samuel
Postlethwait, Benjamin Price, Joseph Pugh, John Powell, Stewart Rowen, James
Ralf, John Bar, William Henry Steigle, Matthias Slough, Frederick Stone,
Joseph Simons, Francis Sanderson, Rudy Stoner, James Webb, jun. Paul Weitzell,
Jacob Whistler, Frederick Yaiser, Robert Fulton, and George Burkert, and such
other persons as shall hereafter be admitted, or become members of the said
library company, according to the laws and constitutions of the said company
hereafter to be made, be, and for ever hereafter shall be, by virtue of these
presents, one body corporate and politic, Clause of incorporation.
in deed, by the name of the JULIANA LIBRARY-COMPANY, in Lancaster; and them by
the name of the Juliana Library-Company, in Lancaster, one body politic and
corporate, in deed and in name, we do for us, our heirs and successors, fully
create, constitute and confirm by these presents; and that by the name of the
Juliana Library-Company, in Lancaster, Name of the company, and power to hold
lands and goods.
they shall have perpetual succession; and that they, by the name of the
Juliana Library-Company, in Lancaster, be, and at all times hereafter shall be,
persons able and capable in law to have, hold, receive and enjoy lands,
tenements, rents, liberties, franchises and hereditaments, in fee-simple, or
for term of life, lives, years, or otherwise; and also goods, chattels, and
other things, Power to assign lands and goods.
of what nature, kind or quality soever; and also to give, grant, let, sell or
assign the same lands, tenements, hereditaments, goods and chattels; and to do
and execute all other things about the same, by the name aforesaid. And also
that they and their successors, by the name of the Juliana Library-Company, in
Lancaster, be, and shall be, for ever hereafter, Company may sue and defend,
persons able and capable in law to sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded,
answer and be answered unto, defend and be defended, in all or any of the
courts, or other places, and before any judges, justices, and other persons
whatsoever, in all manner of actions, suits, complaints, pleas, causes and
matters whatsoever, and of what nature or kind soever. And that it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said library-company, and their successors, and
have a common seal.
for ever hereafter, to have one common seal for their use in their affairs,
and the same at their will and pleasure to change and alter. And for the well
governing and ordering the affairs of the said company, we do, for us, our
heirs and successors, further grant, that it shall and may be lawful for the
said company, and their successors, to assemble and meet together on the
fifteenth day of September in every year, Day of yearly meeting,
except it shall happen to fall on a Sunday, and then on the day following, at
some convenient place in the borough of Lancaster, and notice to be given
thereof.
due and public notice being given, at least twelve days before the times of
such meetings, of the day, hour and place of such meeting: And that they, the
said company, or one fourth part of them at least, being so met in person,
shall elect and choose by ballot, out of their number, Directors, treasurer and
librarian to be elected.
eleven persons to be directors, and one to be treasurer, for the year ensuing;
and shall also elect a librarian, who shall have such a compensation or salary
as the directors shall think reasonable: Which said directors, being so duly
elected, shall have full power and authority, Power to the to (...)
from time to time, to make, constitute and establish such laws, statutes,
orders and constitutions, as shall appear to them, or any nine of them, to be
good and useful, honest and necessary, according to the best of their judgment
and discretion, for the government, regulation and direction of the said
library-company, and every member thereof, and for admitting new members; and
do all things concerning the government, estate, goods, lands, revenues, as
also all the business and affairs of the said company. with proviso.
All which laws, statutes, orders and constitutions, so to be made as
aforesaid, shall be binding on every member, and be from time to time
inviolably observed, according to the tenor and effect of them; provided that
they be not repugnant or contrary to the laws of England or this government.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, Yearly payment to be made by each member.
That for the increase and preservation of the said company, every member of
the said company shall and do pay into the hands of the said company's
treasurer, for the time being, the yearly sum of Seven Shillings and Sixpence,
on the day of annual election of directors as aforesaid, for ever; and they who
neglect so to do, shall pay such greater sum or sums, in lieu thereof, at such
times, within two years then next following, as by the laws of the said company
shall be appointed; Penalty on non-payment.
and that in default of these payments, every delinquent shall forfeit his
share in the books and estate of the said company, and be no longer a member.

IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF, We have caused the great seal of our said province to be
hereunto affixed; witness JAMES HAMILTON, Esquire lieutenant governor, and
commander in chief of the said province and counties, by virtue of certain
powers and authorities to him for this purpose, amongst other things, granted
by the said proprietaries, Date of the charter.
the twenty-second day of October, in the third year of the reign of our
sovereign Lord GEORGE the third, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
defender of the faith, etc. and in the year of our Lord one thousand seven
hundred and sixty-three.

JAMES HAMILTON.

ENTERED in the office for recording of deeds for the county of Lancaster, in
book H, page 185, the twenty-eighth day of November, one thousand seven hundred
and sixty-three. Witness my hand, and seal of my office aforesaid.

EDWARD SHIPPEN, Recorder.

L. S.



THE LAWS OF THE JULIANA LIBRARY-COMPANY.
WHEREAS the honorable THOMAS PENN and RICHARD PENN, Preamble, with recital of
the directors power to enact Laws.
Esquires, true and absolute proprietaries and governors of the province of
Pennsylvania, by their charter under the great seal of the said province,
bearing date the twenty-second day of October, one thousand seven hundred and
sixty three, did, among other things therein contained, give and grant to the
directors of the said library-company, duly elected and chosen, full power and
authority, from time to time, to make, constitute and establish such laws,
statutes, orders and constitutions, as should appear to them, or any nine of
them, to be good and useful, honest and necessary, according to the best of
their judgment and discretion, for the government, regulation and direction of
the library-company, and every member thereof, and for the admitting of new
members, and the doing all things concerning the government, estate, goods,
lands and revenues, as also all the business and affairs of the said company.

In pursuance of which said charter, and the authority therein given, we,
Edward Shippen, Thomas Barton, Isaac Whitelock, James Burd, William Henry,
Joseph Rose, Adam Simon Kuhn, John Hopson, Thomas Poultney, William Atlee, and
George Ross, directors of the said library-company, duly elected and chosen, do
hereby enact, declare, ordain and appoint,

I. That hereafter no person or persons shall be admitted a member or members
of this company but by and with the consent of a majority of the directors, No
person to be admitted a member without the directors consent.
for the time being, and under such rules, regulations and orders, as are
herein after declared and appointed, or may hereafter be made, declared,
enacted and appointed.

II. And be it further enacted, Number of Members settled.
that the members of the said company, shall not at any time exceed one hundred
persons.

III. And be it further enacted, Terms of each member's admission.
that when any person hereafter shall be admitted a member of this company, he
shall pay into the hands of the company's treasurer so much money as, in the
judgment of the said directors, or a majority of them, a share shall be worth
at the time of his admission.

IV. And be it further enacted, Admissionmoney, and annual payments, how to be
disposed of.
that all money arising from the admission of new members, and all money
arising from the annual payments of the members, and all fines and other moneys
arising, growing due and payable to the said company, shall, from time to time,
and at all times hereafter, be paid into the hands of the company's treasurer
for the time being, and subject to the orders of the directors for the time
being, or any nine of them, to be laid out in the purchase of books, and such
other articles and things as shall be thought by them most advantageous and
beneficial to and for the said company.

V. And be it further enacted, Treasurer to give each new member a certificate,
on payment of admission-money, and secretary to record the same.
that every member, hereafter to be admitted as aforesaid, shall, on payment as
aforesaid, receive a certificate from the treasurer of such payment, specifying
the sum paid, and the time of payment, and thereupon shall have the same
entered and recorded by the secretary, in the books of the said company, with
his name, and from thenceforth shall be deemed a member of the said company.

VI. And, No member to hold more than one share.
for the preserving a just equality among the members of the said
library-company, it is hereby further enacted that no person, being a member,
shall hold more than one equal share in the books and effects of the said
company at one time. But if any member shall by any means become entitled to
two (...) more shares in the books and effects of the said company, (...)
directors, Overplus shares how to be disposed of.
or any nine of them, shall have power to sell and ^^^pose of all such overplus
share or shares of such member, two third parts thereof arising from such sale,
shall be paid to (...) person who was entitled to such share sold, and the
other (...) part shall be paid into the hands of the treasurer of the company.

VII. And be it further enacted, Each member to have one vote.
that if any member, as executor, administrator or guardian of any other member
his or their representative, come to have in his hands a (...) of shares, he
shall not thereby be entitled to more than one vote at elections, or on any
other occasion, nor have a right to take out more books at one time than any
other member.

VIII. And be it further enacted, Heir at law, or legatee or member, how
treated, when not approved of by the director.
that the heir at law, or legatee of any member (the said heir at law or
legatee not being a member) shall be entitled to be a member of the said
company, if approved of by the directors for the time being, or any nine of
them; but if the said heir at law, or legatee of such member, shall not be
approved of by the directors, or any nine of them, then, and in such case, the
directors, or any nine of them, shall pay to such heir at law, or legatee, so
much money for such share as the same shall be justly and honestly worth, out
of the stock of the company, and such share shall then become the property of
the said company.

And any heir at law, Minor to give security, by his guardian or other person,
on using the books, etc.
or legatee, being a minor, of the age of fourteen years, or upwards, shall
have the use of the books and effects of the said company, on his guardian, or
any other sufficient person for him, giving security for the proper use and
return of the books or effects which such minor shall make use of, during his
minority, and paying the annual payments and contributions for such minor, as
the other members pay, and are liable unto.

And if any heir at law, Penalty on a minor's nonpayment.
or legatee, being a minor, shall not, when he shall arrive to the age of
twenty-one years, or within six months after (on demand made by the treasurer)
pay all such sums as shall be owing, due and payable, for such share; then, and
in such case, the directors, or any nine of them, for the time being, shall be,
and are hereby empowered to make sale of, and dispose of such, share for the
value thereof, and after deducting such arrears, as shall be due to the
company, pay the overplus to such heir at law, or legatee.

IX. And, Day of the yearly meeting of the members.
for the better preservation of order and government among the members of the
said company, it is enacted, that the members of the said company shall, in
person, annually attend at some convenient place in the borough of Lancaster
(due and public notice being given, at least twelve days before the times of
such meeting, of the day, hour and place of such meeting) on the fifteenth day
of September in every year, except it shall happen to fall on a Sunday, and
then the day following.

And that they, Directors, treasurer and librarian to be chosen, with salaries
for the two latter.
the said company, or one fourth part of them at least, being so met, shall
proceed to the choice and election, by ballot, out of their number, of eleven
persons to be directors, and one to be treasurer, for the year ensuing, and
shall also elect a librarian, who shall have such compensation or salary as the
directors, or any nine of them, shall think reasonable; and so from year to
year; and those who shall thereupon appear to have a majority of votes, shall
be the directors, treasurer and librarian, for the year ensuing.

That the directors shall, Secretary to be chosen yearly; his duty.
and are hereby required and empowered to nominate some fit person of the
company to be their secretary for the year ensuing, who shall, on the day of
election, preside and collect the votes at the election aforesaid, and shall
faithfully enter, in a book to be kept for that purpose, the names of the said
electors, and the number of the names of the candidates, according to the
tickets.

X. And it is further enacted, In case of the death, absence or sickness of any
director, how the rest may proceed.
that if any person elected director, shall refuse to act, or shall happen to
die, or depart this province, so as to be absent for the space of three months,
in any of the first nine months in the year for which he shall be elected
director, or if, within the same year, or term of his office, he should be
confined by sickness, or otherwise rendered incapable of executing the office
of director, according to the true meaning hereof, the rest of the directors,
as often as occasion shall require, in any of the cases aforesaid, shall
proceed in their duty and office without him, or, if they think fit, shall
nominate some other suitable person to supply his place in the office of
director, until the next ensuing election.

XI. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, Treasurer absent, or
neglecting his office, how the directors may proceed.
that if any person so elected treasurer, shall absent himself from his said
office for the space of three months, or shall otherwise be rendered incapable
of acting, or neglect his office or duty of treasurer, in judgment of the
directors for the time being, or any nine of them, it shall and may be lawful
for the directors to displace him from any further continuance in his said
office, and shall cause their secretary to make a minute for that purpose,
containing their reasons for displacing him, and he shall thereupon from
thenceforth cease to be treasurer aforesaid, and shall, upon notice thereof,
adjust and settle with the directors, and pay and deliver the company's money
and effects in his hands to such person as the directors for the time being, or
any nine of them, shall think proper and appoint: And likewise, if the
treasurer should depart this life, Treasurer dying, or displaced, who shall be
substituted in his room.
the person who at the last election had the greatest number of votes next the
highest (if alive, willing and capable) shall be substituted treasurer, to
supply the place of such deceased or displaced treasurer, for which purpose the
secretary presiding at elections shall preserve the votes; but if the said
person cannot, or will not serve, the directors for the time being, or any nine
of them, shall nominate another person of the company, but not of their number,
to be treasurer until the next annual election.

XII. And be it further enacted, Treasurer to give bond.
that every person so chosen to be the company's treasurer, immediately on
entering into his office, shall receive of and from the preceding treasurer,
his heirs, executors or administrators, the company's cash, and books of
accounts, giving his receipt for the same, and shall enter into an obligation,
with one sufficient security, in double the value that does, or probably may
come into his hands, during his continuance in his said office of treasurer, as
near as can be estimated, to the directors, in trust for the library-company,
conditioned, that he will once in three months, or oftener if required, well
and truly adjust, account and settle with them, for and concerning all moneys
that are or shall come into his hands, belonging to the said company, and that
he will well and truly deliver up and pay the balance of the moneys remaining
in his hands, together with the books of accounts concerning the same, with the
company's papers in his keeping, when thereunto required, unto his successor in
the said office, or such other person as the directors for the time being, or
any nine of them, shall order and appoint, and not otherwise; and that he will
observe, do and execute all other things as the company's treasurer aforesaid,
according to the sense and true meaning of this law.

XIII. And be it further enacted, In case of the absence, neglect or death of
the librarian, how the directors may proceed.
that if any person, so elected librarian, shall absent himself from his said
office for the space of thirty days, or shall otherwise be rendered incapable
of acting, or neglect his office or duty, in the judgment of the directors for
the time being, or any nine of them, it shall and may be lawful for the said
directors to displace him from any further continuance in his said office of
librarian, and shall cause their secretary to make a minute for that purpose,
containing their reasons for displacing him, and he shall thereupon from
thenceforth cease to be librarian aforesaid, and upon notice given him, shall
deliver up all the company's books, instruments and effects in his hands, to
such person as the directors for the time being, or any nine of them, shall
think proper to nominate and appoint; and likewise, if the librarian should
depart this life, the person who at the last election had the greatest number
of votes next the highest (if alive, willing and capable) shall be substituted
librarian, to supply the place of such deceased or displaced librarian, for
which purpose the secretary presiding at elections shall preserve the votes;
but if the said person cannot, or will not serve, the directors for the time
being, or any nine of them, shall nominate another fit person of the company,
but not of their number, to be librarian until the next election.

XIV. And be it further enacted, Librarian to give bond.
that every person so chosen librarian, immediately on entering into his
office, shall receive of the preceding librarian, his heirs, executors or
administrators, the company's books, instruments and effects, of what kind and
quality soever, that may now be, or hereafter may be placed in the
library-room, giving his receipt to his predecessor for the same; and shall
enter into an obligation, with one sufficient surety, in double the value of
the said books, instruments and effects, that then are, or probably may come
into his hands, during his continuance in his said office of librarian, unto
the said directors, in trust for the said library-company, conditioned, that at
the end and expiration of the said term of one year, for which he was chosen
librarian, he will well and truly deliver up, unto his successor in the said
office of librarian, all the company's books, instruments and effects, which
are in his possession, and produce proper vouchers for such books as shall have
been let out by him.

XV. And be it further enacted, Secretary, and all non-elective officers, to be
chosen by the directors.
that the secretary, and all other officers not elective, belonging to the
company, shall be in the choice, and under the order and direction of the
directors, or any nine of them, who may displace them, and appoint others, as
often as they shall think fit; which said directors shall have power of calling
general meetings, when they judge it necessary for the interest of the company,
and shall cause due and public notice to be given of the occasion, design or
purpose of such meetings; and shall nominate some discreet member to preside
therein, Power of the directors.
and regulate the debates thereof: They shall also have the disposal of the
moneys paid to the treasurer to and for the use of the company; they shall have
the choosing of books for the library, the renting a place or house for the
service of the library, the furnishing the same with presses, shelves, and
other things fit and necessary; the keeping and affixing the seal for the
company; which seal shall be and remain the same that is now used and affixed
to this law, until another shall be appointed; the lending of books; the
appointing securities for the return of the books to the library, and the
prices of the loans; the printing and disposing of catalogues; the admission of
new members, under the limitations and conditions now or hereafter to be
established by the laws of the company; the settling of the accounts with the
company's treasurer; the payment of house rent, servants and officers wages,
and all other incident charges belonging to the company. Moreover, the
directors, or any nine of them, are hereby invested with a discretional power
to make suitable returns (in behalf of the company) unto such benefactors as
shall honor them with donations, or otherwise.

XVI. And, for the more orderly execution of the duty and trust belonging to
the said directors, be it further enacted, that they meet quarterly, Directors
to meet quartely,
i. e. once in every three months, or oftener, if they think necessary; the
first of which said meetings in every year shall be on the twentieth day of
September; the second the twentieth day of December; the third the twentieth
day of March, and the fourth the twentieth day of June, except any of the
aforesaid days happen to fall on a Sunday, and then their meetings shall be
held on the days following, at the place where the library shall be kept, to
confer and conclude concerning the matters hereby committed to them; and nine
to (...) a quorum;
in every of which meetings nine shall be a quorum, capable to consult, confer
and conclude of and upon all matters appertaining to the directors, according
to the laws and constitutions of the company; and whatsoever nine of the number
so met shall to conclude, shall be deemed and taken for, and as the resolution
of the directors for the time being, with director penalty on non-attendance,
and accordingly entered in their minutes; every director not meeting on the
days and times as by the laws are appointed and directed, shall, for every
omission or non-attendance, forfeit and pay, into the hands of the company's
treasurer for the time being, the sum of five shillings, unless he render a
satisfactory reason to the directors, at their next meeting. Provided, and it
is hereby further enacted and declared, that the secretary for the time being,
and secretary's, on not giving notice.
shall give each director three days notice of the time of meeting, and in
default thereof shall forfeit the sum of five shillings, to be paid into the
hands of the company's treasurer for the time being.

XVII. And be it further enacted, Charter to be lodged in the library.
that the charter granted to the Juliana Library-Company shall be deposited in
the library, for the inspection and perusal of all persons concerned; who shall
also have recourse to the journals of the directors, the minutes and entries of
their secretary, Journals, etc. may be copied, with leave of the directors.
and treasurer's accounts, and all other books and papers belonging to the
company; and may, if the directors, or any nine of them, think proper, take
copies thereof.

XVIII. And be it further enacted, Each member to pay a yearly sum,
that each member of the said company shall pay into the hands of the said
company's treasurer the sum of seven shillings and sixpence, yearly, on the
day of annual election of directors as aforesaid, for the support and service
of the library, during the continuance thereof: Provided nevertheless, and
penalty on non-payment.
that the member omitting to pay his yearly sum, the said directors, or any
nine of them, shall, within two years next after the yearly day of payment,
admit such member to pay in manner following, viz. one shilling and ten-pence
half penny for each quarter of the first year, and three shillings and
ninepence for each quarter of the second year, amounting to two pounds five
shillings, instead of one pound two shillings and sixpence; and so in
proportion for any part of the three payments, after such omission. And if any
member shall make default in any of those payments, every delinquent shall
forfeit his share in the books and estate of the said company, and be no longer
a member; the case of minors, heirs and legatees, only excepted.

XIX. And be it further enacted, Terms of using and letting at the instruments,
fossils, etc.
that no philosophical or mathematical instrument or instruments, or apparatus
whatsoever, belonging to the said library, or any fossils, or other natural
curiosities, be removed from the library chamber, without the consent of a
majority of the directors for the time being; except the telescopes, quadrants,
forestaff, camera obscura, and magic lanthorn, which may be let out by the
librarian to the respective members, the said librarian for the time being
taking security, by note, in double their value, to return them safe, and in
good order, in two weeks time.

XX. And be it further enacted, How long (...).
that all books, to be taken from and out of the said library by any of the
members, shall be retained and kept by the member for no longer time than is
herein after limited, directed and appointed; that is to say, a folio eight
weeks, a quarto six weeks, an octavo four weeks, and a duodecimo two weeks; ^
and if any member shall detain and keep any such book or books for a longer
space of time than is herein before limited and appointed, he shall pay for the
same at the rates herein after mentioned per week, for the time that he shall
detain the same beyond the time that is herein and hereby limited and
appointed; that is to say, for a folio, one shilling per week; for a quarto,
nine-pence per week; for an octavo and duodecimo, sixpence per week. Provided,
that in setts of quartos and octavos any member may take out two, and in
duodecimos four, subject to the same limitations and fines as folios. And it is
further provided, or (...).
that if any such book or books shall be damaged and defaced by any member,
while in his possession, the damage shall be rated and assessed by the
librarian for the time being, and the member shall pay for such damage; but in
case any member shall think himself aggrieved by the judgment of such
librarian, Liberty (...).
he may appeal to the directors for the time being, or a quorum of them, whose
judgment shall be conclusive and decisive; and if any member shall then refuse
to pay the damage, according to the judgment of the said directors, he shall
then forfeit his share in the said company books and estate, and be no longer a
member thereof.

XXI. And be it further enacted, ^
that if one fourth part of the members of the said company do not meet, on the
fifteenth day of September, for the choosing directors, treasurer and librarian
for the said library, agreeable to the charter granted to the said company,
that then and in such case the directors, treasurer and librarian, who were
chosen the preceding year, shall continue, for the succeeding year, directors,
treasurer and librarian, and have and execute all the power and authority
whatsoever, to their several offices and duty belonging and appertaining, in as
full and ample a manner as if one fourth part of the said company had met and
elected them, as by the said charter is appointed and directed.

XXII. And be it further enacted, that every member neglecting to meet for the
purpose aforesaid, on the said fifteenth day of September, Penalty on each
member's not meeting annually.
yearly, shall pay for such absence or neglect the sum of two shillings and
sixpence, unless he shall give such sufficient reason for such absence, as
shall be satisfactory to a majority of the directors for the time being; and
any member refusing to pay such fine, shall forfeit his share in the books and
estate of the said company, and be no longer a member thereof.

XXIII. And be it further enacted, Member removing, may sell his share.
that if any member be about to remove from the county of Lancaster, and shall
be desirous to dispose of his part or share in the books, estate and effects of
the said company, it shall and may be lawful for the majority of the directors
for the time being to permit and suffer him in such case so to do, to such
person as they shall approve of; and the person who shall so purchase, with the
approbation of the majority of the said directors, shall be received a member,
in the room and stead of him so selling his share in the said library.

XXIV. And, How the laws are to be preserved, and where.
to the intent that the laws of the Juliana Library-Company may be securely
preserved, and that every member of the said company may have an opportunity of
being acquainted therewith, it is hereby enacted, that all laws passed,
pursuant to their charter, together with their charter, shall be recorded in a
large bound book of good paper, which shall be safely kept in the library, for
the perusal of the company; and that every law, so recorded, shall be certified
and subscribed by the secretary for the time being.

XXV. And it is hereby further enacted, New member's name to be recorded.
that every person who now is, or that hereafter shall be, admitted and become
a member of the said company (other than those whose names are inserted in the
charter) shall have his name, and the time of his being admitted a member as
aforesaid, recorded in the said book of records, and certified by the secretary
as aforesaid; and that all other matters and things, which by the laws of the
company are or shall be directed to be put upon record, shall also be recorded
in the aforesaid book.

XXVI. And whereas many inconveniences and disadvantages may arise, Penalty on
a director, treasurer or librarian refusing to act.
greatly to the prejudice of the said library-company, by directors, treasurer
or librarian, refusing to act, agreeable to the company's choice at elections,
therefore be it enacted, that if any member elected director, treasurer or
librarian, agreeable to the charter, and the authority therein given, shall
refuse to serve, then and in such case he shall forfeit and pay into the hands
of the company's treasurer, for the time being, the sum of five shillings, and
in default thereof, shall forfeit his share in the books and estate of the said
company, and be no longer a member.

XXVII. And whereas the company has received considerable damage, Penalty
(...) lenders (...) book.
by some of the members taking out books, and lending them to other persons,
not of this company, be it therefore enacted, that where any member shall lend
a book, belonging to this company, to any other person, not a member hereof,
such member shall, for every such offense, forfeit and pay, into the hands of
the company's treasurer for the time being, the sum of five shillings, and in
default thereof, shall forfeit his share in the books and estate of the said
company, and be no longer a member.

XXVIII. And be it further enacted, Members be tenant common.
that the members of the Juliana Library-Company in Lancaster, shall hold their
estate and interest in the said company as tenants in common, and not as joint
tenants.

THE foregoing laws were all enacted and published the 20th day of April, Time
of publication.
in the year of our Lord 1765.

By order of the DIRECTORS.

CATALOGUE OF BOOKS, BELONGING TO THE JULIANA LIBRARY.
FOLIOS.
1 and 2. SMITH's complete History of the Old and New Testament; with large
annotations, and practical observations, from the beginning of the world to the
establishment of christianity; adorned with curious cuts and maps. 2 vols.
London, 1757.

3 and 4. Rapin's History of England; illustrated with maps, genealogical
tables, and the heads and monuments of the kings, engraven on seventyseven
copper plates; translated into English, with additional notes, by N. Tindal, M.
A. 2 vols. 3d edition. London, 1743.

5 and 6. The Continuation of Rapin's History of England, from the revolution
to the accession of King George the second. By N. Tindal, M. A. Illustrated
with the heads of kings, queens, and several eminent persons; also with twenty
maps and sea charts. 2 vols. 3d edition. London, 1758.

7. The Lives and Characters of illustrious Persons of Great Britain. By Thomas
Birch, A. M. F. R. S. London, 1747.

8. Puffendorf's Law of Nature and Nations; or, A general System of the most
important Principles of Morality, Jurisprudence, and Politics; in eight books;
to which is prefixed, Mr. Barbeyrac's prefatory discourse, containing an
historical and critical account of the science of Morality, and the progress it
has made in the world, from the earliest times; together with Mr. Barbeyrac's
large notes. 5th edition. London, 1749.

9 and 10. Britannia; or, A chorographical Description of Great Britain and
Ireland, with the adjacent Islands. By William Cambden, Clarencieux, King at
Arms. With large additions, by Edmund Gibson, D. D. late Lord Bishop of London.
Illustrated with maps of all the counties, and prints of the British, Roman and
Saxon coins. 2 vols. 3d edition. London, 1753.

11 and 12. The History of London, from its Foundation to the present Time;
containing an account of its several wards, churches, parishes, liberties,
districts, streets, squares, lanes, etc. with curious calculations of the
number of its inhabitants, and parallels between London and many of the most
celebrated ancient and modern cities; an historical account of the city
governments, ecclesiastical, civil and military, with the several charters;
accounts of the several incorporations of merchants and trades, with their
ancient rights, privileges, and coats of arms; accounts of the present state of
learning, colleges, etc. accounts of all the hospitals, almshouses, and other
charitable foundations; the ancient and present state of the tower, and the
curiosities therein; illustrated with a complete and curious set of cuts, maps
and plans. By William Maitland, F. R. S. 2 vols. London, 1756.

13 and 14. Chamber's Universal Dictionary of Arts and Sciences; containing an
explication of the terms; the rise, progress and state of things
ecclesiastical, civil, military and commercial; the several systems, sects,
opinions, etc. among philosophers, divines, mathematicians, physicians,
antiquaries, critics, etc. the whole intended as a course of ancient and modern
learning. The 7th edition, corrected and amended. 2 vols. London, 1751.

15 and 16. Johnson's Dictionary of the English Language; in which the words
are deduced from their originals, and illustrated in their different
significations, by examples from the best writers; to which are prefixed, a
history of the language, and an English grammar. 2 vols. London, 1755.

17. Raleigh's History of the World, in five books; to which is prefixed, the
life of the author, and his trial; with some additions. London, 1736.

18. Miller's Gardiner's Dictionary; containing the best and newest methods of
cultivating and improving the kitchen, fruit, flower-garden and nursery; also
for performing the practical parts of agriculture, including the management of
vineyards, together with directions for propagating and improving all sorts of
timber trees; revised and altered according to the latest system of botany, and
embellished with several copper plates. 7th edition. London, 1759.

19 to 24 inclusive. The Statutes at Large, from Magna Charta to the thirtieth
year of King George the second inclusive. By John Cay, Esquire 6 vols. London, 1758.

25. The Book of Common Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, and other
Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, according to the Use of the Church of
England; together with the form or manner of making, ordaining and consecrating
of bishops, priests and deacons; containing also the articles, constitutions
and canons of the church. London, 1751.

26 and 27, Postlethwayt's Universal Dictionary of Trade and Commerce;
translated from the French of the celebrated Monsieur Savary; with large
additions and improvements incorporated throughout the whole work, which more
particularly accommodate the same to the trade and navigation of Great Britain
and her dominions; and the laws, customs and usages to which all traders are
subject. 2 vols. London, 1751.

28. The Construction and principal Uses of mathematical Instruments;
translated from the French of M. Bion, By Edmund Stone. Illustrated with 30
folio copper plates, containing the figures, etc. of the several instruments.
2d edition. London, 1758.

29 to 36 inclusive. A complete Collection of State Trials and Proceedings, for
high treason, and other crimes and misdemeanors, from the reign of King Richard
the second, to the reign of King George the second. 8 vols. 3d edition. London,
1742.

37 to 39 inclusive. Boyle's Lecture Sermons, being a defense of natural and
revealed religion. 3 vols. London, 1739.

40. Nicholson's English, Scotch and Irish Historical Libraries, giving a short
view and character of most of our historians, with an account of our records,
law books, coins, and other matters. 3d edition. London, 1736.

41. Stackhouse's complete Body of speculative and practical Divinity,
extracted from the best ancient and modern writers; with a table of the texts
of scripture explained, 3d edition. London, 1743.

42. Prideaux's Connection of the Old and New Testaments, in the history of the
Jews and neighboring nations, from the declension of the kingdoms of Israel
and Judah, to the time of Christ. 4th edition. London, 1719.

43 and 44. A Collection of the Works of William Penn; to which is prefixed a
journal of his life, with many original letters and papers. 2 vols. London,
1726.

45. Story's Journal and Life; containing an account of his remarkable
convincement of and embracing the principles of truth, as held by the people
called Quakers; with his travels and labors in the service of the gospel.
New Castle upon Tyne, 1747.

46. Biblia Graeca Aldi. Venetiis in AEdib. Aldi and Andreae Soceri, 1518.

47. Parkinson's Paradisus Terrestris; or, Flower Garden, Kitchen Garden, and
Orchard; with directions for ordering, planting and preserving them. London,
1629.

48. Stillingfleet's Origines Sacrae; or, A rational Account of the Grounds of
natural and revealed Religion. 7th edition. Cambridge, 1702.

49. Sidney's Discourses concerning Government; to which are added, memoirs of
his life, and an apology for himself. 3d edition, London, 1751.

50. Hooker's Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity; to which are added, several other
treatises by the same author, with the life of the author, written by Isaac
Walton, London, 1723.

51. Brent's History of the Council of Trent; in eight books; in which, besides
the ordinary acts of the council, are declared many notable occurrences, and
particularly the practice of the court of Rome to hinder the reformation of
their errors, and to maintain their greatness; to which is added, the life of
the author, and a history of the inquisition; translated from the original
Italian of Pietro Soave Polano. London, 1676.

52. Helvicus's Historical and Chronological Theater; distributed into equal
intervals of tens, fifties and hundreds; with an assignation of empires,
kingdoms, governments, kings, electors, princes, Roman popes, Turkish emperors,
and other famous and illustrious men, prophets, divines, lawyers, physicians,
philosophers, orators, poets, historians, heretics, rablins, councils, synods,
academies, etc. and also of the usual epochas. London, 1687.

53. The genuine Works of Flavius Josephus, the Jewish Historian; containing
twenty books of the Jewish antiquities; with the life of Josephus, written by
himself; seven books of the Jewish war, and two books against Appion;
illustrated with new plans and descriptions of the tabernacle of Moses, and of
the temples of Solomon, Zorobabel, Herod and Ezekiel, and with correct maps of
Judea and Jerusalem; translated from the original Greek, by William Whiston, M.
A. London, 1737.

54. Bickham's Universal Penman; or, The Art of Writing made useful; with
necessary observations on the excellency of the pen, in all the hands now
practiced; embellished with beautiful decorations, for the amusement of the
curious. London, 1743.

55. Sewell's History of the Rise, Increase and Progress of the Christian
People called Quakers. 2d edition. London, 1725.

56. The same history in the German language. [Given to the library by the
people called Quakers.]

57. Burkitt's Expository Notes, with practical Observations on the New
Testament; the 12th edition, carefully corrected. London, 1749. [Given by Mr.
Christopher Marshall, of Philadelphia.]

58. A Duplicate of Miller's Gardiner's Dictionary. [Given by Dr. Laughlin
Macleane. London, 1731.

59. Comment. in Concordiam Evangelicam. [Given by Dr. John Sayre.]

60. Commentarii in Quatuor Evangelistas; a Benedicto Aretio Bernensi Theologo,
facili and perspicuo methodo conscripti. Excudebat Joannes le Preux, 1587.
[Given by Doctor John Sayre.]

61. In Divi Pauli Epistolas ad Philippenses, Colossenses, Thessalonicenses,
ambas and primam ad Timotheum, Commentarii nunc primum in lucem editi.
Uvolfgango Musculo Dusano autore. Basileae ex officina Heruagianana. Anno 1565.
[Given by Dr. John Sayre.]

62. Apparatus ad Origines Ecclesiasticas. Collectore R. Montacutio. Oxoniae,
anno Domini 1635. [Given by Dr. John Sayre.]

63. Bowen's complete Atlas; or, A distinct View of the known World; exhibited
in 68 maps; in which the latitude and longitude of the principal places in
different countries are laid down, according to the latest discoveries. London,
1752.

64. Shelley's second Part of Natural Writing; containing the breaks of
letters, and their dependence on each other; likewise various forms of
business, written in the most proper hands; and also variety of ornament, in
several delightful fancies and designs; the whole making a complete body of
penmanship. London.

65. Systemae Agriculturae or, The Mystery of Husbandry discovered; treating of
the several new and most advantageous ways of tilling, planting sowing,
manuring, ordering and improving of all sorts of gardens, orchards, meadows,
pastures, corn-lands, woods and coppices; as also of fruits, corn, grain,
pulse, new hays, cattle, fowl, beasts, bees, silkworms, fish, etc. with an
account of the several instruments and engines used in this profession. To
which is added, Calendarium Rusticum; or, The Husbandman's monthly Directions;
also the prognostics of dearth, scarcity, plenty, sickness, heat, cold, frost,
snow, winds, rain, hail, thunder, etc. etc. 4th edition. London, School. [Given
by the Honorable Thomas Penn, Esq]

QUARTOS.
1 to 5 inclusive. BOWER's History of the Popes, from the Foundation of the Sea
of Rome, to the present time. 5 vols. 2d edition. London, 1749.

6 and 7. Smollett's History and Adventures of Don Quixotte; translated from
the Spanish of Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra; with an account of the author's
life; illustrated with twenty-eight new copper plates, engraved by the best
artists. 2 vols. London, 1755.

8. Smart's Poems, on several Occasions. London, 1752.

9. Edmundi Halleii Astronomi dum viveret Regii Tabulae Astronomicae accedunt
de Usu Tabularum Praecepta. Londini, 1749.

10. Hill's Review of the Works of the Royal Society of London; containing
animadversions on such of the papers as deserve particular observation; in
eight parts. London, 1751.

11. Price's British Carpenter; or, A Treatise on Carpentry; containing the
most concise and authentic rules of that art; illustrated with sixty-two
copper plates. 4th edition. London, 1759.

12 to 22 inclusive. Lowthorpe's Philosophical Transactions and Collections,
abridged and disposed under general heads. 5th edition, corrected; in which the
Latin papers are translated into English. 11 vols. London, 1749.

23. Strahlenberg's Historico-Geographical Description of the North and Eastern
Parts of Europe and Asia, particularly of Russia, Siberia, and Great Tartary,
both in their ancient and modern state; with a new polyglot table of the
dialects of thirty-two Tartarian nations, and a vocabulary of the
Kalmuck-Mungalian tongue; and a map of those countries, with variety of cuts,
London. 1738.

24. Godolphin's Orphans Legacy; or, A Testamentary Abridgment, treating of
last wills and testaments, executors and administrators, and of legacies and
devises, with the material points of law relating to that subject. 3d edition.
London, 1685.

OCTAVOS.
1 to 23 inclusive. THE Monthly Review; giving an account, with proper
abstracts of, and extracts from, the new books, pamphlets, etc. as they come
out. 23 vols. 2d edition. London.

24 to 37 inclusive. The History, Proceedings, and Debates of the House of
Commons, from the Restoration to the present Time, collected from the best
authorities; containing the most remarkable motions, speeches, reports,
resolves, and conferences, etc. 14 vols. London, 1742.

38 to 45 inclusive. The History, Debates and Proceedings of the House of
Lords, from the Restoration to the present Time, containing the most remarkable
motions, speeches, debates, orders and resolutions; with all the protests
during that period, and the numbers pro and con, upon each division; together
with the debates in the Parliament of Scotland relating to the union. 8 vols.
London, 1742.

46 and 47. Brown's Estimate of the Manners and Principles of the Times. 2d
edition. London, 1757.

48 to 54 inclusive. Spectacle de la Nature; or, Nature Displayed; being
discourses on such particulars of natural history, as were thought most proper
to excite curiosity, and form the minds of youth; illustrated with a great
variety of curious copper plates; translated from the original French, by Mr.
Humphreys. 4th edition. 7 vols. London, 1740.

55 to 84 inclusive. The Gentleman's Magazine; containing proceedings and
debates in Parliament, essays, controversies, humorous and satirical, religious
and political; a succinct account of the most remarkable transactions foreign
and domestic, births, marriages, deaths, promotions, bankrupts, etc. with a
register of books, and select pieces of poetry. 30 vols. London.

85 and 86. Locke's Essay concerning Human Understanding; in four books. 15th
edition. 2 vols. 1753.

87 and 88. The Builder's Dictionary; of, Architect's Companion; explaining the
terms of art in all parts of architecture, with the theory and practice of the
various branches requisite to be known in that useful art; illustrated with
above two hundred figures and curious copper plates. 2 vols London, 1734.

89. Bradley's General Treatise of Agriculture, both philosophical and
practical; displaying the art of husbandry and gardening; illustrated with
twenty copper plates. London, 1757.

90 and 91. The Preceptor; containing the general course of education, wherein
the first principles of polite learning are laid down; illustrated with maps
and useful cuts. 2 vols. 2d edition. London, 1754.

92. Gibson's Farrier's New Guide; containing the anatomy of a horse, with an
account of all the diseases incident to horses, with their signs, causes, and
methods of cure; interspersed with useful observations concerning feeding,
exercise, etc. 10th edition. London, 1754.

93 to 95 inclusive. King's British Merchant; or, Commerce Preserved, 3 vols.
London, 1721.

96 to 98 inclusive, Burn's Justice of Peace, and Parish Officer. 3 vols. Best
edition. London.

99. Memoirs of several Ladies of Great Britain; with literary reflections, and
accounts of antiquities and curious things; in several letters. London, 1755.

100. Sheridan's British Education; being an essay toward proving that the
immorality, ignorance and false taste, which so generally prevail, are the
natural and necessary consequences of the present defective system of
education: With an attempt to show, that a revival of the art of speaking, and
the study of our own language, might contribute in a great measure to the cure
of those evils. London, 1756.

101. An Essay on the Writings and Genius of Pope. London, 1756.

102. Whiston's Theory of the Earth, from its Original to the Consummation of
all Things; wherein the creation of the world in six days, the universal
deluge, and the general conflagration, as laid down in the holy scriptures, are
shown to be agreeable to reason and philosophy, etc. 5th edition. London, 1737.

103 and 104. The Spirit of Laws; translated from the French of M. De Secondat,
Baron De Montesquieu. By Mr. Nugent. 2 vols. 3d edition. London, 1758.

105 to 110 inclusive. Plutarch's Lives; translated from the Greek; with notes
explanatory and critical, from Dacier and others; with the life of Plutarch,
written by Dryden. 6 vols. London, 1758.

111. Gordon's Geographical Grammar; being a short and exact analysis of the
whole body of geography, comprehending a general view of the terraqueous globe,
etc. with a curious set of maps, 20th edition, London, 1754.

112 and 113. Fordyce's Dialogues concerning Education. 2 vols. 2d edition.
London, 1745.

114. Kennet's Antiquities of Rome; containing a short history of the rise,
progress and decay of the commonwealth; a description of the city; an account
of the religion, civil government, and art of war; with the remarkable customs
and ceremonies, public and private: To which are prefixed, two essays
concerning the Roman learning and education; adorned with cuts of the principal
buildings, etc. 6th edition. London, 1717.

115. An Account of Denmark. 3d edition. London, 1694.

116. Love's Geodaefia; or, Art of surveying and measuring of Land made easy;
showing, by plain and practicable rules, how to survey, protract, cast up,
reduce or divide any piece of land whatsoever; with new tables, for the ease of
the surveyor in reducing the measures of land; as also how to lay out new lands
in America, etc. 5th edition. London, 1744.

117. Allingham's new Method of Fortification, as practiced by Monsieur De
Vauban; together with a new treatise of Geometry: To which is added, a treatise
of Military Order, and the art of Gunnery, etc. illustrated with 32
copper plates. 4th edition. London, 1722.

118. Ellis's practical Farmer; or, Hertfordshire Husbandman; containing many
new improvements in husbandry, with curious observations on the nature of
wheat, barley, peace, beans, trefoile, clover, lucern, and other foreign
grasses, and the soil proper for each; on the management of cows, sheep,
pigeons and tame rabbits; on the various manures and dungs proper for every
soil, and on the usefulness and culture of hops, etc. 5th edition. London, 1759.

119 and 120. Lambert's curious Observations upon the manners, customs, usages,
different languages, government, mythology, chronology, ancient and modern
geography, ceremonies, religion, mechanics, astronomy, medicine, physics,
natural history, commerce, arts and sciences, of the several nations of Asia,
Africa and America. 2 vols. London.

121. Motte's Treatise of the Mechanical Powers; wherein the laws of motion,
and the properties of those powers, are explained and demonstrated. London,
1727.

122 to 124 inclusive, Warburton's Divine Legation of Moses, demonstrated on
the principles of a religious deist, from the omission of the doctrine of a
future state of reward and punishment, in the Jewish dispensation. 3 vols. 2d
edition. London, 1738.

125. Watts's first Principles of Astronomy and Geography, explained by the use
of globes and maps. 6th edition. London, 1760.

126. Gay's Fables. 2 vols. Adorned with a number of fine cuts. London, 1757.

127 and 128. Townsend's History of the Conquest of Mexico, by the Spaniards;
translated from the original Spanish of Don Antonio De Solis. 2 vols. London,
1738.

129. Grotius's Truth of the Christian Religion; in six books; illustrated with
notes, by Mr. Le Clerk: To which is added, a seventh book, concerning this
question, "What christian church we ought to join ourselves to?" Translated
into English, by Doctor Clarke. 6th edition. London, 1761.

130. Young's Centaur, not fabulous; in six letters to a friend, on the life in
vogue. 2d edition. London, 1755.

131. Longinus on the Sublime; translated by W. Smith, A. M. with some account
of the life, writings and character of the author. 2d edition. London, 1742.

132. Barclay's Apology for the true Christian Divinity, as held and preached
by the People called Quakers; being an explanation of their principles and
doctrines, by many arguments deduced from scripture and right reason, and the
testimonies of famous authors, both ancient and modern; with an answer to the
objections usually made against them. 7th edition. Dublin, 1737. [Given by Mr.
Christopher Marshall, of Philadelphia.]

133. Ward's young Mathematician's Guide; being a plain and easy introduction
to the mathematics. 10th edition. London, 1758.

134. Buchanan's complete English Scholar; containing a new, short and familiar
method of instructing children, and perfecting grown persons in the English
tongue, and of learning grammar without the help of Latin; in which the various
lessons are adapted to convey the ruling principles of life, and mend the
heart, at the same time that they enlighten the understanding. London, 1754.

135. The Wisdom of God manifested in the Works of Creation, viz. the heavenly
bodies, elements, meteors, fossils, vegetables, animals, beasts, birds, fishes,
and insects, more particularly in the body of the earth; its figure, motion and
consistency, and in the admirable structure of the bodies of man, and other
animals, as also in their generation, etc. with answers to some objections. By
John Ray, F. R. S 5th edition. London, 1709.

136 and 137. The present State of Germany; giving an account of the Emperor
and electors, the secular princes, bishops, abbots; memoirs of the families and
estates of the Prince of Orange, the houses of Saxe-Gotha, and
Holstein-Gottorp; and of the succession of Juliers and Berg, of the nobility of
the empire, etc. the natural history of Germany, with its constitution, extent,
climate, soil, commodities, medicinal springs, mines, coins, precious stones,
forests, game, rivers, lakes, etc. together with the moral, civil and political
state of the empire, and the character, etc. of the Germans. 2 vols. London,
1738.

138. Burrish's Batavia Illustrata; or, A View of the Policy and Commerce of
the United Provinces, particularly of Holland; with an enquiry into the
alliances of the States General with the Emperor, France, Spain, and
Great Britain. 2d edition. London, 1731.

139. The Life and posthumous Works of Richard Claridge; being memoirs and
manuscripts relating to his experiences and progress in religion, his changes
in opinion, and reasons for them; with essays in defeace of several principles
and practices of the people called Quakers. Collected by Joseph Besie. London,
1726.

140. Turnbull's Observations upon liberal Education, in all its Branches;
designed for the assistance of young gentlemen, who, having made some progress
in useful sciences, are desirous of making further improvements, by a proper
prosecution of their studies. London, 1742.

141. Newton's Optics; or, A Treatise of the Reflections, Refractions,
Inflections and Colors of Light. 3d edition. London, 1721.

142. Pullein's Essay on the Culture, Practice and Improvement of Silk; for the
use of the American colonies. London, 1758.

143. Barrow's mathematical Lectures, read to the university of Cambridge.
London, 1734.

144 and 145. Leland's View of the Principal Deistical Writers that have
appeared in England, in the last and present Century; with observations upon
them, and some accounts of the answers that have been published against them,
in several letters to a friend. 2 vols. London, 1754.

146. The Sportsman's Dictionary; or, The Country Gentleman's Companion, in all
rural Recreations; with full and particular instructions for hawking, hunting,
fowling, setting, fishing, racing, riding, cocking; with the method of
breeding, curing, dieting and ordering of horses, dogs, pigeons, cocks, etc.
illustrated with near 30 copper plates, representing the different kinds of
nets, engines and traps, that are made use of in taking all sorts of game. 2d
edition. London, 1744.

147. Glanvill's Sadducismus Triumphatus; or, A full and plain Evidence
concerning Witches and Apparitions. 4th edition, London, 1726.

148. Patoun's complete Treatise of practical Navigation, demonstrated from its
first Principles; together with all the necessary tables; to which are added,
the useful theorems of mensuration, surveying and gauging, with their
application to practice. London, 1734.

149. Cheselden's Anatomy of the human Body; illustrated with forty
copper plates. 7th edition. London, 1756.

150. ^^ue Englische Grammatite, von Sohann Jacob Bachmair, A. M. or,
Bachmair's German Grammar. London, 1753.

151. Watt's Logic; or, The right Use of Reason in the Enquiry after Truth;
with some rules to guard against error, in the affairs of religion and human
life, as well as in the sciences. 6th edition. London, 1736.

152. Humphrey's historical Account of the incorporated Society for the
Propagation of the Gospel in foreign Parts. London, 1730.

153. Euclid's Elements of Geometry, from the Latin; translated by Commandine;
to which is added, a treatise of the nature and arithmetic of logarithms;
likewise another of the elements of plane and spherical trigononometry. By Dr.
John Keill, F. R. S. 7th edition. London, 1754.

154. Helsham's Course of Lectures in Natural Philosophy. London, 1739.

155. The Antiquities of Palmyra; containing the history of the city and its
emperors, from its foundation to the present time; with an appendix of critical
observations on the names, religion and government of the country, and a
commentary on the inscriptions lately found there. London, 1696.

156. Mair's Book-Keeping methodized; or, A methodical Treatise of Merchant
Accounts, according to the Italian Form; wherein the theory of the art is fully
explained, and reduced to practice, by variety of suitable examples in all the
branches of trade. 5th edition. London, 1757.

157 to 159 inclusive. Middleton's History of the Life of Marcus Tullius
Cicero. 3 vols. 5th edition. London, 1755.

160. Derham's Astro-Theology; or, A Demonstration of the Being and Attributes
of God, from a survey of the heavens; illustrated with copperplates. 7th
edition. London, 1738.

161. Derham's Physico-Theology; or, A Demonstration of the Being and
Attributes of God, from his Works of Creation; being the substance of sixteen
sermons, preached at Boyle's lectures; with large notes, and curious
observations. 8th edition. London, 1732.

162 and 163. Delaney's historical Account of the Life and Reign of David, King
of Israel; interspersed with various conjectures, digressions and
disquisitions, in which, among other things, Mr. Bayle's criticisms, upon the
conduct and character of that Prince, are fully considered. 2 vols. 3d edition.
London, 1745.

164. Bollingbroke's Letters on the Spirit of Patriotism; on the idea of a
patriot King; and on the state of parties, at the accession of King George I.
London, 1749.

165. An Account of the Conduct of the Dowager Duchess of Marlborough, from
her first coming to Court to the Year 1710. London, 1742.

166 to 168 inclusive. The Works of Mr. Thomson; with additions and
corrections. 3 vols. London, 1749.

169. West's Observations on the History and Evidence of the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ. 5th edition. London, 1754.

170. The Archbishop of Cambray's Dissertation on pure Love; with an account of
the life and writings of the lady for whose sake the archbishop was banished
from court, and the grievous persecution she suffered in France for her
religion, etc. 3d edition. London, 1750.

171. Harris's Description and Use of the Globes and Orrery; to which is
prefixed, a brief account of the solar system. 5th edition. London, 1740.

172. Miller's Gardiner's Kallender, directing what works are necessary to be
done every month in the kitchen, fruit and pleasure gardens; to which is added,
a list of the medicinal plants which may be gathered in each month for use. 9th
edition. London, 1751. [Given by Mr. Christopher Marshall, of Philadelphia.]

173. Bengelius's Introduction to his Exposition of the Apocalypse, etc.
translated from the High Dutch, by Dr. Robertson. London, 1757.

174 and 175. Wall's History of Infant Baptism; being an impartial collection
of all such passages in the writers of the four first centuries, as do make for
or against it. 2 vols. London, 1705.

176. Temple's Observations upon the United Provinces of the Netherlands. 7th
edition. London, 1705.

177. The Judgment of whole Kingdoms and Nations concerning the Rights, Power
and Prerogative of Kings, and the Rights, Privileges and Properties of the
People, etc. 4th edition. London, 1710.

178. Stevens's History of Spain; with a summary account of the dominions of
that crown, its revenues, etc. and a chronological table of the succession of
their kings to this time; collected from the best Spanish authors. London, 1701.

179. Bromley's Way to the Sabbath of Rest; or, The Soul's Progress in the Work
of the New Birth. [Given by Mr. Peter Worrall, of Burlington.]

180. Hutchinson's Essay on the Nature and Conduct of the Passions and
Affections; with illustrations on the moral sense. London, 1730.

181. The Life and Actions of Frederick the Third, King of Prussia, etc.
containing the origin of the house of Brandenburgh, with an epitome of the
lives of all the electors of that family, with a map of Germany, and the seat
of the war in the empire; plans of the siege of Prague, and the battles of
Rosbach and Crevelt. London, 1759. [Given by Mr. Joseph Jacobs, of
Philadelphia.]

182. Egede's Description and Natural History of Greenland; showing the
situation, face and boundaries of the country, the nature of the soil, the rise
and progress of the Norwegian colonies, the ancient and modern inhabitants,
their genius and way of life, their plants, beasts, fishes, etc. with their
manner of hunting and fishing, their habitations, dress, sports, etc. adorned
with a map of Greenland, and many curious plates; translated from the Danish
language. London, 1745.

183 and 184. Burnet's Theory of the Earth; containing an account of the
original of the earth, and of all the general changes which it has already
undergone, or is to undergo, till the consummation of all things; the two last
books concerning the burning of the world, and concerning the new heavens and
new earth. 2 vols. London.

185. Barclay's Apology for the Quakers, in the German language. 1740. [Given
by Mr. Isaac Whitelock.]

186. Squire's Answer to some Papers entitled, The Independent Whig, so far as
they relate to the Church of England, as by law established; in which her
doctrines, creeds, liturgy, establishment and clergy, are modestly defended,
etc. London, 1723.

187 to 190 inclusive. Campbell's Lives of the Admirals, and other eminent
British Seamen; containing their personal histories, and a detail of all their
public services; including a new and accurate naval history, from the earliest
account of time; and clearly proving, by a continued series of facts, our
uninterrupted claim to, and enjoyment of, the dominion of our seas;
interspersed with many curious passages relating to our discoveries,
plantations and commerce; supported throughout by proper authorities. 4 vols.
3d edition. London, 1761.

191. The Gentleman's Magazine, for the year 1761.

192. The Case Stated between the Church of Rome and the Church of England;
wherein is showed, that the doubt and danger is in the former, and the
certainty and safety in the latter communion. 5th edition. London, 1714. [Given
by Dr. Samuel Boude.]

193. Nouveau Dictionaire du Voyageur Francois -- Alleman -- Latin et Alleman
-- Francois -- Latin. Enrichi de tous les mots, and de toutes les belles
expressions, Francoises and Allemandes, nouvellement introduites. Sixieme et
derniere edition. A Geneve, 1719. [Given by Mr. William Henry.]

194. Prosodia Henrii Smelii Rub. F. Aleda. Alostani Flandri, Medicinae
Doctoris, promptissima, etc. Londini, 1681. [Given by Mr. Christopher Marshall,
of Philadelphia.]

195. Hartlib's Legacy of Husbandry; wherein are bequeathed to the commonwealth
of England many outlandish and domestic experiments and secrets, in reference
to universal husbandry, etc. 3d edition. London, 1655. [Given by the Honorable
Thomas Penn, Esq]

196. Blith's English Improver Improved; or, The Survey of Husbandry Surveyed;
discovering the improvableness of all lands, by floating, watering, draining,
enclosing, tillage, etc. with directions for the management of the different
soils and composts, for the different kinds of grass, for planting different
kinds of dye-stuffs, and planting hops, rape, hemp, flax, etc. and how to
cultivate orchards and garden fruits. 3d edition. London, 1763. [Given by the
Honorable Thomas Penn, Esq]

197. The whole Art of Husbandry; treating of arable ground, pasture, meadow,
gardens, orchards and woods; of the manner of breeding, feeding and curing of
all kinds of cattle, poultry, fowl, fish and bees, etc. Written by Conrad
Heresbatch, a learned nobleman; and translated by Barnaby Googe, Esquire London,
1731. [Given by the Honorable Thomas Penn, Esq]

198. A brief Account of the Solar System, and of the fixed Stars; with the
description and use of the globes and orrery; illustrated with curious plates
and cuts. [Given by the Right Honorable Lady Juliana Penn.]

199. Martin's Essay on Visual Glasses, etc. 5th edition. London, 1760.

DUODECIMOS.
1 to 8 inclusive. SHAKESPEARE's Works, collated with the oldest copies, and
corrected; with notes explanatory and critical, by Mr. Theobald. 8 vols.
London, 1757.

9. The London Spy complete, in eighteen parts. 4th edition. London, 1753.

10 to 13 inclusive. The Connoisseur; by Mr. ^^wn. 4 vols. 2d edition. London,
1755.

14. Demosthenes's Orations, exciting the Athenians to oppose the exorbitant
power of Philip, King of Macedon; to which is prefixed, a short view of the
history of Greece, and the life of Demosthenes; translated by different hands.
London, 1744.

15 to 18 inclusive. The World; by Adam Fitz-Adam. 4 vols. 3d edition. London,
1761

19 to 22 inclusive. Addison's Works, in verse and prose. 4 vols. London, 1753.

23 to 26 inclusive. The Tatler; or, The Lucubrations of Isaac Bickerstaff, Esquire
4 vols. London, 1754.

27 to 30 inclusive. The Universal Spectator; by Henry Stonecastle, Esquire 4 vols.
London, 1747.

31 to 38 inclusive. Addison's Spectator. 8 vols. London, 1753.

39 to 44 inclusive. Homer's Iliad; translated by Alexander Pope, Esquire 6 vols.
London, 1756.

45 to 49 inclusive. Homer's Odyssey; translated by Alexander Pope, Esquire 5 vols.
London, 1758.

50 to 57 inclusive. The Turkish Spy; giving an impartial account to the Divan
at Constantinople of the most remarkable transactions of Europe, and
discovering several intrigues and secrets of the Christian Court, etc. 8 vols.
London, 1748.

58 to 63 inclusive. Dodsley's Collection of Poems; by several hands. 6 vols.
London, 1758.

64 and 65. The Inspector. 2 vols. London, 1753.

66. Cambray's Treatise upon the Usefulness of Eloquence in general, more
particularly those branches of it peculiar to the Bar and Pulpit. ^don, 1722.

67. Hall's History of the barbarous Cruelties and Massacres commit by the
Dutch in the East-(...), etc. London, 1712.

68. Locke's Thoughts concerning Education. 12th edition. Land 1752.

69. The Law and Lawyers laid open, in twelve visions, etc. Land 1737.

70. The Gentleman's Library; containing rules for conduct in all (...) of
life. 5th edition. London, 1760.

71 to 78 inclusive. Swift's Works; containing his miscellanies in pr(...) his
poetical writings; the travels of Capt. Gulliver; his papers relating Ireland,
and the Drapiers letters; the conduct of the allies and the ex^^^ners; the
public spirit of the whigs, etc. with polite conversation; let^^^^ to and from
the author; directions to servants; sermons; poems, etc. ^ vols. 6th edition.
Dublin, 1747.

79. Law's Address to the Clergy. London. [Given by Mr. Chri^^^pher Marshall,
of Philadelphia.]

80 and 81. Hervey's Meditations and Contemplations; containing ^^ditations
among the tombs, reflections on a flower-garden, a descant^ creation,
contemplations on the night, contemplations on the starry heave and a winter
piece. 2 vols. 14th edition. London, 1758.

82 to 84 inclusive. Hervey's Thereon and Aspasio; or, A Series of D^^logues and
Letters, upon the most important and interesting Subjects. vols. London, 1755.

85. Locke's two Treatises of Government. 4th edition. London, 171^ [Given by
Mr. Christopher Marshall, of Philadelphia.]

86. Lemery's Treatise of all Sorts of Foods, both animal and vegetable also of
drinkables, with an account how to choose the best sort of all kinds of the
good and bad effects they produce, the principles they abou^^ with, the time,
age and constitution they are adapted to; the whole explained according to the
sentiments of the most eminent physicians and naturalists, both ancient and
modern; translated from the original French, by Doctor Hay. London, 1745.
[Given by Doctor Samuel Boude.]

87 and 88. Colden's History of the Five Indian Nations of Canada; with
particular accounts of their religion, manners, customs, laws, and forms of
government; their several battles and treaties with the European Nations their
wars with the other Indians; and a true account of the present state of our
trade with them; together with the advantage of their trade and alli ance to
the British nation, and the intrigues and attempts of the French to engage them
from us, etc. 2 vols. 3d edition. London, 1755.

89. The Censor. 2d edition. London, 1717.

90. AEsop's Fables; with applications to each fable; illustrated with cuts.
Done into English by Dr. Croxall. 2d edition. London, 1728.

91. The Freeholder; or, Political Essays. 5th edition. London, 1732.

92. Everard's Stereometry; or, The Art of Gauging made easy, by the help of a
sliding-rule, which shows the areas of circles in gallons, and the square and
cube-root of any number under 100,000, by inspection; and is also very useful
in arithmetic and geometry, particularly in the measuring of superficies and
solids; with an appendix of conic sections, showing the nature, properties and
contents of several solids, frequently mentioned in books of gauging; to which
are added, new excise tables; also the new method of gauging stills, backs,
etc. with short and plain rules for gauging of malt; and the line upon the rule
called M. D. or the malt-depth, explained. London.

93 to 95 inclusive. The Lady's Library; written by a lady, and published by
Sir Richard Steel. 3 vols. 3d edition. London, 1722.

96. The complete Juryman; or, A Compendium of the Laws relating to Jurors,
viz. of grand juries; of petit juries; who are qualified to serve on juries;
who are exempted from serving on juries; of returning juries, and the
constable's duty in preparing lists of persons qualified to serve; various
methods of trial; trials at bar, by Nisi Prius et per Medietatem Linguae;
evidence; witnesses; verdicts; how a juror ought to demean himself; what
recompense a juryman may take for his trouble; misdemeanors punishable in
jurors. London.

97. Young's Complaint; or, Night Thoughts on Life, Death, and Immortality; to
which is added, a paraphrase on part of the book of Job. Best edition. London,
1755.

98. Voltaire's Candid; or, All for the Best. 2d edition. London, 1759.

99 to 114 inclusive. Rollin's Roman History, from the foundation of Rome to
the battle of Actium, or the end of the Commonwealth; translated from the
French. 16 vols. Dublin, 1740.

115 to 121 inclusive. The History of Sir Charles Grandison; in a series of
letters, published from the originals; by the editor of Pamela and Clarissa. 7
vols. 3d edition. London, 1754.

122. Art of Speaking; by Messieurs Du Port Royal; done into English. 2d
edition. London, 1708.

123. Boyse's New Pantheon; or, Fabulous History of the Heathen Gods,
Goddesses, Heroes, etc. adorned with a variety of cuts; with an explanation of
the mythology of the ancients, from the writing of Moses, the Egyptian,
Grecian, Roman and eastern historians, philosophers, poets, etc. 2d edition.
Salisbury.

124 to 128 inclusive. The Jewish Spy; or, A philosophical, historical and
critical Correspondence, which passed between certain Jews in Turkey, Italy,
France, etc. translated into English. 5 vols. 2d edition. London, 1744.

129 to 131 inclusive. England's Gazetteer; or, An accurate Description of all
the Cities, Market Towns, Corporations, and most noted Villages of the Kingdom,
with their manufactures and trade, fairs, customs and privileges, principal
buildings, and charitable foundations, with all the chief harbors, bays,
forests, hills, mines, medicinal springs, moors, and other curiosities, both of
nature and art; as also the old military ways, camps, castles, and other
remarkable ruins of Roman, Danish, and Saxon antiquity, etc. 3 vols. London,
1751.

132 to 135 inclusive. Amelia (a virtuous novel) by Henry Fielding, Esquire 4 vols.
London, 1752.

136 and 137. The Adventures of Telemachus, in 24 books; written by the
Archbishop of Cambray; adorned with twenty-four plates, and a map of
Telemachus's travels; done into English by Mr. Littlebury, and Mr. Boyer. 2
vols. 16th edition. London, 1759.

138 to 140 inclusive. The History of the Life and Reign of Lewis XIV;
containing an exact relation of all the battles, sieges, insurrections,
negociations, intrigues, secret designs, literary and other foundations,
inventions and improvements, contests and proceedings, ecclesiastical and
civil, and whatever else is memorable in that long and active reign. 3 vols.
London, 1742.

141 and 142. Pearsall's Contemplations on the ocean, harvest, sickness, last
judgment, on butterflies, the full moon, and in a walk through a wood; in a
series of letters to several friends. 2 vols. London, 1758.

143. Paradise Lost; a poem, in twelve books. By John Milton. London, 1753.

144. Milton's Paradise Regained; to which is added, Sampson Agonistes, and
poems upon several occasions; with a tractate of education. London, 1760.

145 and 146. The Guardian. 2 vols. London, 1756.

147. Nelson's Essay on the Government of Children, under three general heads,
viz. health, manners, and education. 2d edition. London, 1756.

148 to 151 inclusive. Select Trials at the Sessions House, in the Old Bai^^^
for murder, robberies, rapes, sodomy, coining, frauds, bigamy, and other
offenses; to which are added, genuine accounts of the lives, behaviou^^
confessions and dying speeches of the most eminent convicts. 4 vols. London,
1742.

152 to 155 inclusive. The Rambler. 4 vols. 4th edition. London, 1756.

156 to 159 inclusive. The History of Tom Jones, a foundling. 4 vols. By Henry
Fielding, Esquire London, 1755.

160. Memoirs of the House of Brandenburgh, from the earliest account to the
death of Frederick the first, King of Prussia; to which are added four
dissertations on superstition and religion; on manners, customs, industry, and
the progress of the human understanding in the arts and sciences on the ancient
and modern government of Brandenburgh; on the reasons for enacting and
repealing of laws. Written by the present King of Prussia London, 1758.

161. Hubner's Introduction to the Study of Geography; containing an
explication of the sphere, and a general description of the most remarkable
countries throughout the world; with a complete set of maps, and a compendious
dictionary of the most common names of ancient geography, etc. Translated from
the German, by J. Cowley. 4th edition. London, 1753.

162. The Journal of a Voyage to Lisbon; by Henry Fielding, Esquire London, 1755.

163. Echard's Gazetteer; or, Newsman's Interpreter; being a geographical index
of all the considerable provinces, patriarchs, bishoprics, universities,
dukedoms, earldoms, imperial and hanse towns, ports, forts, castles, etc. in
Europe. 17th edition. London, 1751.

164. Fontenelle's Week's Conversation on the Plurality of Worlds; translated
by William Gardener, Esquire to which is added, Mr. Addison's defense of the
Newtonian philosophy. 4th edition. London, 1757.

165. Nickolls's Remarks on the Advantages and Disadvantages of France and
Great Britain, with respect of commerce, etc. translated from the original
French. London, 1754.

166 to 169 inclusive. The Adventurer. 4 vols. 3d edition. London, 1756.

170 to 174 inclusive. The Works of Francis Rabelais, M. D. translated by Sir
Thomas Urquhart, etc. with an entire new set of cuts. 5 vols. London, 1750.

175. Campanalogia Improved; or, The Art of Ringing made easy, by plain and
methodical Rules; by which the practitioner may attain to the knowledge of
ringing all manner of double, triple and quadruple changes, etc. 4th edition.
London, 1753.

176 to 185 inclusive. The Works of Alexander Pope, Esquire 10 vols. London, 1757.

186. Voltaire's Letters concerning the English Nation. A new edition. London,
1760.

187. Sherlock's Discourse concerning the Divine Providence, etc. 10th edition.
Edinburgh, 1754. [Given by Doctor James Peter's.]

188. The Dispensary, a poem, in six cantos; by Dr. Garth. 10th edition.
London, 1741.

A LIST OF PHILOSOPHICAL INSTRUMENTS, etc, BELONGING TO THE JULIANA
LIBRARY-COMPANY.
A SMALL Orrery, or Planetarium, being a curious astronomical machine, made to
represent the motions of the planets, and their revolutions about the sun, as
their center; according to the Copernican system. [Given by the Right
Honorable Lady Juliana Penn.]

A pair of complete Globes, of a new construction, with many useful and
valuable improvements, never before published. [Given by the Honorable Thomas
Penn, Esq]

A pair of Globes, terrestrial and celestial, sixteen inches diameter each,
fixed in a neat frame or horrizon, and supplied with a brass Meridian, and
Quadrant of Altitude.

A Reflecting, or Catoptric Telescope, in brass, eighteen inches long, fixed on
a neat brass swivel and stand.

A Reflecting Telescope, in shagreen, two feet long, fixed on a neat brass
swivel, and mahogony stand. [Given by the Honorable Thomas Penn, Esq]

A Double Solar Microscope, in brass, with a curious variety of objects in
frames, and an Apparatus for examining Liquids, etc. all preserved in a
shagreen case.

A Camera Obscura, done in mahogony, with a Plane Speculum, and a Draw-Tube,
with two Lens's; fitted also with an Apparatus for viewing Prints; to which
belongs a number of fine Prospects.

A Magic Lanthorn, of the best kind, with a number of Images painted on glass,
and fixed in sliders.

A large and curious set of Mathematical Instruments, in a shagreen case.

Godfrey's (commonly called Hadley's) new invented Sea-Quadrant, nearly mounted
in ebony and ivory.

Fahrenheit's Mercurial Thermometer, in a neat mahogony case.

A Torricellian Barometer, of the best kind, in a mahogony case, neatly carved
and ornamented.

Everard's best Sliding or Gauging Rule.

A Forestaff, of mahogony.

A Nocturnal, of the best contrivance.

Hull's Instrument for trying the Purity or Alloys in Gold, with a set of
directions.

An Ostrich's Egg, preserved in a neat turned case.

An Artificial Magnet, of great power. [Made and given by Mr. William Henry,
one of the Directors of the Library.]

Some curious Mines, Minerals and Fossils. [Given by the Reverend Mr. Barton,
one of the Directors of the Library.]

[An Electrical Apparatus, on the model of the ingenious Messieurs Franklin and
Kinnersley, will be added as soon as possible.]

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Directors request the favor of the Members to be punctual in making their
annual payments, that the affairs of the Library may be carried on with the
more success and credit.

THEY are likewise requested, when they take out books, to be careful in
returning them within the time limited by the laws, and to keep them covered
with paper, while they have the use of them, that they may be preserved from
being fullied or defaced, in which case they cannot be received, which subjects
the person who abuses them to pay for the whole set.

FINIS.

