PROCEEDINGS OF THE CONGRESS AT NEW YORK.
BOSTON, June 1765. SIR,
THE House of Representatives of this Province, in the present Session of the
General Court, have unanimously agreed to propose a Meeting, as soon as may be,
of COMMITTEES, from the Houses of Representatives or Burgesses of the several
British Colonies on this Continent* to consult together on the present
Circumstances of the Colonies, and the Difficulties to which they are, and must
be reduced, by the Operation of the Acts of Parliament for levying Duties and
Taxes on the Colonies; and to consider of a general, and united, dutiful, loyal
and humble Representation of their Condition, to his Majesty and the
Parliament, and to implore Relief. The House of Representatives of this
Province, have also Voted to propose, That such Meeting be at the City of
New York, in the Province of New York, on the first Tuesday in October next;
and have appointed a Committee of Three of their Members, to attend that
Service, with such as the other Houses of Representatives, or Burgesses, in the
several Colonies, may think fit to appoint to meet them. And the Committee of
the House of Representatives of this Province, are directed to repair to said
New York, on said first Tuesday in October next, accordingly.

If therefore, your Honorable House should agree to this Proposal, it would be
acceptable, that as early Notice of it as possible, might be transmitted to the
Speaker of the House of Representatives of this Province.

SAMUEL WHITE, Speaker.

In Consequence of the foregoing circular Letter, the following Gentlemen met
at New York, in the Province of New York, on Monday the Seventh Day of October
1765, viz.

From the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, JAMES OTIS, Esquire. OLIVER
PATRIDGE, Esquire. TIMOTHY RUGGLES, Esquire.
Who produced their Appointment as follows, viz.

To James Otis, Oliver Patridge, and Timothy Ruggles, Esquires.

GENTLEMEN,

THE House of Representatives of this Province, have appointed you a Committee,
to meet at New York, on the first Tuesday of October next* such Committees as
the other Houses of Representatives, or Burgesses, in the several Colonies on
this Continent may think fit to appoint, to consult together, on the present
Circumstances of the Colonies, and the Difficulties to which they are, and must
be reduced, by the Operation of the late Acts of Parliament. By this Choice,
the House has reposed in you a Trust of singular Importance, and has just
Reason to expect you will give your utmost Attention to it. In case you should
receive Advice that the Houses of Representatives or Burgesses of the other
Colonies, or any of them, agree to send Committees to join you in this
Interesting Affair, you are directed to repair to New York, at the Time
appointed* and endeavor to unite with them in Sentiment, and agree upon such
Representations as may tend to preserve our Rights and Privileges; and it is
the Opinion of this House, that no Address or Representation, shall be esteemed
the Act of this House, unless it is agreed to, and signed by the major Part of
their Committee.

If it should be said that we are in any Manner represented in Parliament* you
must by no Means concede to it, as it is an Opinion, which this House cannot
see the least Reason to adopt; further, the House think that such a
Representation of the Colonies, as British Subjects are entitled to, and enjoy,
would be attended with the greatest Difficulty, if it is not absolutely
impracticable, and therefore you are not to urge or consent to any Proposal for
a Representation, if such be made in the Congress.

It is the Expectation of the House, that a most loyal and dutiful Address to
his Majesty and his Parliament will be prepared by the Congress, praying as
well for the Removal of the Grievances the Colonies labor under at present, as
for the preventing Others for the future, which Petitions, if drawn up, as far
as you shall be able to Judge agreeable to the Mind of this House, you are
empowered to sign and forward, and you are to lay a Copy of the same before
this House, and make Report of your Proceedings upon your Return.

It is the hearty Prayer of this House, that the Congress may be endued with
that Wisdom, which is from above; and that their Councils and Determinations
may be attended with the Divine Blessing.

SAMUEL WHITE, Speaker.

From the Colony of Rhode Island, and Providence Plantations. METCALF BOWLER,
Esquire. HENRY WARD, Esquire.
Who produced the following Appointment, viz.

By the Honorable SAMUEL WARD, Esquire Governor, Captain General, and Commander in
Chief, of, and over the English Colony of Rhode Island and Providence
Plantations, in New England, in America.

To Metcalf Bowler, and Henry Ward, Esquires. Greeting.

WHEREAS the General Assembly of this Colony, have nominated and appointed you,
the said Metcalf Bowler, and Henry Ward, to be Commissioners in behalf of this
Colony, to meet such Commissioners as are or shall be appointed, by the other
British Governments in North America, to meet at New York, on the first Tuesday
of October next:

I DO THEREFORE hereby Authorize, Empower, and Commissionate you, the said
Metcalf Bowler and Henry Ward, forthwith to repair to New York, and there, in
behalf of this Colony, to meet and join with the other Commissioners, in
consulting together on the present Circumstances of the Colonies, and the
Difficulties to which they are, and must be reduced, by the Operation of the
Act of Parliament, for levying Duties and Taxes upon the Colonies, and to
consider of a general, and united, dutiful, loyal, and humble Representation to
his Majesty and the Parliament, and to implore Relief. And you are also hereby
empowered to conclude and agree with the other Commissioners, upon such
Measures as you shall think necessary and proper, for obtaining Redress of the
Grievances of the Colonies, agreeable to the Instructions given you by the
General Assembly of this Colony. Given under my Hand, and the Seal of the said
Colony, this Sixteenth Day of September, 1765, and in the Fifth Year of his
Majesty's Reign.

SAMUEL WARD.
By his Honor's Command. HENRY WARD, Secry.

From the Colony of Connecticut, ELIPHALET DYER, Esquire. DAVID ROWLAND,
Esquire. WILLIAM SAMUEL JOHNSON, Esquire.
Who produced the following Appointment, viz.

At a General Assembly of the Governor and Company of the Colony of
Connecticut, holden at Hartford, (by Special Order of his Honor the Governor,
of said Colony) on the 19th Day of September, Anno Domini 1765.

WHEREAS it has been proposed, that a Congress be attended by Commissioners
from the several Governments on this Continent, to confer upon a general, and
united, humble, loyal, and dutiful Representation to his Majesty and the
Parliament, of the present Circumstances of the Colonies, and the Difficulties
to which they are, and must be reduced, by the Operation of the Acts of
Parliament, for laying Duties and Taxes on the Colonies, and to implore Relief,
etc.

RESOLVED by this Assembly, that Eliphalet Dyer, William Samuel Johnson, and
David Rowland, Esquires, or any Two of them, be, and hereby are appointed
Commissioners on behalf of this Colony, to repair to New York, to attend the
proposed Congress in the Matters above referred to, and his Honor is hereby
desired to Commissionate them accordingly.

A true Copy, Examined by GEORGE WYLLYS, Secry.

At a General Assembly of the Governor and Company of the Colony of
Connecticut, holden at Hartford, (by Special Order of his Honor the Governor,
of said Colony) on the 19th Day of September, Anno Domini 1765.
INSTRUCTIONS to the Commissioners of this Colony, appointed to meet
Commissioners from the other Colonies, at New York, on the first Tuesday of
October next.

GENTLEMEN,

YOU are to repair to the said City of New York, at said Time, or at the Time
which according to the Intelligence you may receive of the Convening of the
other Commissioners, it may appear to you seasonable and best, to consult
together with them on the present Circumstances of the Colonies, and the
Difficulties to which they are, and must be reduced, by the Operation of the
Acts of Parliament for laying Duties and Taxes on the Colonies, and to consider
of, and propose, a general, and united, dutiful, loyal, and humble
Representation of their Condition, to his Majesty and the Parliament, and to
implore Relief.

In your Proceedings you are to take Care, that you form no such Junction with
the other Commissioners, as will subject you to the major Vote of the
Commissioners present.

You are to inform the Governor and General Assembly, at the Session in October
next, of all such Proceedings as shall appear to you needful and convenient, to
be communicated for Consideration, and to observe all such further Instructions
as you may receive.

And you are to Report your Doings, with the Doings of the Commissioners, at
such Meeting, to the General Assembly of this Colony, for Acceptance and
Approbation.

A true Copy, Examined by GEORGE WYLLYS, Secry.

THOMAS FITCH, Esquire Governor, Commander in Chief of his Majesty's Colony of
Connecticut, in New England, in America.
To Eliphalet Dyer, David Rowland, and William Samuel Johnson, Esquires.
Greeting.
WHEREAS the General Assembly of the said Colony of Connecticut, at their
Sessions holden at Hartford, on the Nineteenth Day of this Instant September,
nominated and appointed you, or any Two of you, to be Commissioners on behalf
of this Colony, to repair to New York, to attend a Congress, proposed to be
held there by Commissioners from the several Governments on this Continent, to
confer upon a general, and united, humble, loyal, and dutiful Representation to
his Majesty and the Parliament, of the present Circumstances of the Colonies,
and the Difficulties to which they are, and must be reduced, by the Operation
of the Acts of Parliament for levying Duties and Taxes on the Colonies, and to
implore Relief, etc. and have desired me to Commission you accordingly.

I do therefore, reposing especial Trust and Confidence in your Loyalty,
Ability, and good Conduct, hereby Constitute, Authorize, and Commission you,
the said Eliphalet Dyer, David Rowland, and William Samuel Johnson, Esquires,
or any Two of you, for and on Behalf of this Colony, to repair to the said City
of New York, on the first Day of October next, or at the Time, which according
to the Intelligence you may receive of the Convening of the other
Commissioners, may appear to you seasonable and best, to confer and consult
with them, or such of them as shall be present, upon and concerning the Matters
and Things before mentioned, for the Purposes aforesaid, wherein you are to
observe such Instructions as you have received, or shall further receive from
the General Assembly of the said Colony of Connecticut, agreeable to the
important Trust reposed in you.

Given under my Hand, and the Public Seal of the said Colony of Connecticut,
within the same, the Twenty-first Day of September, in the Fifth Year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord GEORGE the Third, of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. Annoque Domini One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Sixty-five.

THOMAS FITCH.
By his Honor's Command. GEORGE WYLLYS, Secry.

From the Colony of New York, ROBERT R. LIVINGSTON, Esquire, JOHN CROGER,
Esquire, PHILIP LIVINGSTON, Esquire, WILLIAM BYARD, Esquire, LEONARD LISPENARD,
Esquire,
appeared, and informed the Congress, That since the Receipt of the above
Letter from the Speaker of the House of Representatives of Massachusetts Bay,
the General Assembly of New York have not had an Opportunity of Meeting, but
that they confidently expect from the general Sense of the People, and such of
the Representatives as they have had an Opportunity of speaking to, that when
the Assembly does meet (which will probably be very soon) the Congress will be
Approved, and a regular Committee for the Purpose appointed: In the mean Time
they think themselves in some Measure authorized to meet the Congress, by the
following Votes, viz.

Extract from the VOTES AND PROCEEDINGS of the General Assembly, for the Colony
of New York.

Die Sabbati, 9h. A. M. the 4 th April 1761.
Mr. Speaker represented to this House, that his Situation in the Country
rendered it vastly inconvenient to him alone, to correspond with the Agent of
this Colony at the Court of Great Britain, and more especially to during the
Recess of the House.

ORDERED, That the Members of the City of New York, or the major Part of them,
be a Committee of Correspondence, to correspond with the Agent of this Colony,
at the Court of Great Britain, during the Recess of the House, concerning the
Public Affairs of this Colony, and that they lay before the House, Copies of
all such Letters as they may write to him, and also all such Letters and
Advices as they may receive from him, respecting the same.

Die Jovis, 9h. A. M. the 9 th December 1762.
Alderman Livingston from the Committee appointed to correspond with the Agent
of this Colony, at the Court of Great Britain, acquainted the House, that the
Committee conceived it expedient, that one or more Members should be added to
the said Committee, to correspond with the said Agent, about the Affairs of
this Colony.

ORDERED, That Robert R. Livingston, Esquire be added to, and made one of the said
Committee of Correspondence.

Die Jovis, 9h. A. M. the 18 th October 1764.
ORDERED, That the said Committee appointed to correspond with the said Agent,
be also a Committee during the Recess of the House, to write to, and correspond
with, the several Assemblies, or Committees of Assemblies on this Continent* on
the subject Matter of the Act, commonly called the Sugar Act, of the Act
restraining Paper Bills of Credit in the Colonies from being a legal Tender,
and of the several other Acts of Parliament lately passed, with Relation to the
Trade of the Northern Colonies; and also on the Subject of the impending
Dangers, which threaten the Colonies of being taxed by Laws to be passed in
Great Britain.

Extracted from, Compared and Examined with, the Records of the Proceedings of
the General Assembly for the Colony of New York, by ABRAHAM LOT, Clerk.

From the Colony of New Jersey, ROBERT OGDEN, Esquire. HENDRICK FISHER,
Esquire. JOSEPH BORDEN, Esquire.
Who produced the following Appointment, viz.

At a Meeting of a large Number of the Representatives of the Colony of
New Jersey, at the House of Robert Sprowl, October the 3d. 1765,

At the Desire of the Speaker of the House of Representatives as aforesaid, and
at the earnest Request of many of our Constituents, to consider of some Method
for humbly, loyally, and dutifully joining in a Petition to his Majesty, that
he would be graciously pleased to recommend it to the Parliament of
Great Britain, to redress our Grievances, by repealing several of the late Acts
of Parliament affecting the Northern Colonies, particularly that called the
STAMP ACT;

Robert Ogden, Esquire Hendrick Fisher* Esquire and Joseph Borden, Esquire were desired to
attend at the Congress, now met at New York, and join in the Measures there to
be concluded on for the Purposes aforesaid, and to make Report of their
Proceedings therein, at the next Meeting of General Assembly.

Signed by Order, JOHN LAWRANCE

From the Province of Pennsylvania. JOHN DICKENSON, Esquire. JOHN MORTON,
Esquire. GEORGE BRYAN, Esquire.
Who produced the following Appointment in Assembly, September 11st. 1765. A. M.

The House resumed the Consideration of their Resolution of Yesterday to
appoint a Committee of Three or more of their Members, to attend the General
Congress of Committees, from the several Assemblies on this Continent, to be
held at New York, on the first of October next: And after some Time spent
therein.

RESOLVED, That Mr. Speaker, Mr. Dickenson, Mr. Bryan, and Mr. Morton, be, and
they are hereby nominated and appointed to that Service. A true Extract from
the Journals, CHARLES MOORE, Clerk of Assembly.

Extracts from the Journals of the House of Representatives for the Province of
Pennsylvania.
WEDNESDAY, September 11th 1765, A. M.
The Committee appointed to prepare Instructions for the Deputies nominated by
this House to attend the proposed Congress, at New York, on the first of next
Month, reported an Essay for that Purpose, which they presented to the Chair,
and the same being read and agreed to by the House, follows in these Words, viz.

INSTRUCTIONS to the Committee appointed to meet the Committees of the other
British Continental Colonies at New York.

It is Directed by the House, That you shall, with the Committees that have
been, or shall be appointed by the several British Colonies on this Continent,
to meet at New York, consult together on the present Circumstances of the
Colonies, and the Difficulties they are, and must be reduced to, by the late
Acts of Parliament for levying Duties and Taxes upon them, and join with the
said Committees, in loyal and dutiful Addresses to the King and the Two Houses
of Parliament, humbly representing the Condition of these Colonies, and
imploring Relief, by a Repeal of the said Acts; and you are strictly required
to take Care, that such Addresses in which you join, are drawn up in the most
decent and respectful Terms, so as to avoid every Expression that can give the
least occasion of Offense to his Majesty or to either House of Parliament.

You are also directed to make a Report of your Proceedings herein, to the
succeeding Assembly.

A true Extract from the Journals, September 26 th 1765. CHARLES MOORE, Clerk
of Assembly.

From the Government of the Counties of New Castle, Kent, and Sussex, on
Delaware, CAESAR RODNEY, Esquire. THOMAS M'KEAN, Esquire.
Whose Appointments are as follows, viz.

Caesar Rodney, and Thomas M'Kean, Esquires, appeared from the Government of
the Counties of New Castle, Kent, and Sussex, upon Delaware, and informed this
Congress, That the Representatives of the said Government, could not meet in
General Assembly after the above Letter was wrote, and before the first Day of
this Instant, that the said Assembly consists of (...) Eighteen Members,
Fifteen of whom have appointed the other Three to attend here, etc. by Three
several Instruments of Writing which are in these Words, viz.

To all to whom these Presents shall (...).

KNOW YE, That we the Subscribers, Five of the Representatives of the Freemen
of the Government of the Counties of New Castle, Kent, and Sussex, upon
Delaware, sensible of the weighty and oppressive Taxes imposed upon the good
People of this Government, by diverse late Acts of Parliament, and of the great
Infringement of the Liberties and just and established Rights of all his
Majesty's Colonies on this Continent, occasioned by the late Measures in
England, and being of Opinion, that the Method proposed by the Honorable House
of Assembly of the Province of Massachusetts Bay, is the most likely to obtain
a Redress of these Grievances; and taking into Consideration the Misfortune we
at present labor under, in not having it in our Power to convene as a House,
and in a regular Manner to appoint a Committee; yet zealous for the Happiness
of our Constituents, think it our Duty in this Way to serve them, as much as in
us lies, (assured of the hearty Approbation of any future House of Assembly of
this Government) and therefore do hereby Nominate and Appoint Jacob Kollock,
Thomas McKean, and Caesar Rodney, Esquires, Three of the Representatives of the
same Government, a Committee, to repair to the City of New York, on the First
Day of October next, and there to join with the Committees sent by the other
Provinces, in One united and loyal Petition to his Majesty, and Remonstrance to
the Honorable House of Commons of Great Britain, against the aforesaid Acts of
Parliament, therein dutifully, yet most firmly, asserting the Colonies Right of
Exclusion from Parliamentary Taxation, and praying that they may not in any
Instance, be stripped of the ancient and most valuable Privilege of a Trial by
their Peers, and most humbly imploring Relief.

In Testimony whereof, we have hereunto set our Hands, at New Castle, the
Twenty-first Day of September, Annoque Domini 1765. EVAN RICE, THOMAS COOCH,
WILLIAM ARMSTRONG, GEORGE MONRO, JOHN EVANS.


Kent County, to wit. WE whose Names are hereunder written, Members of the
General Assembly of the Government of the Counties of New Castle, Kent, and
Sussex, upon Delaware, for the said County of Kent, though sensible of the
Impropriety of assuming the Functions of Assembly-Men, during the Recess of our
House, yet zealous to concur in any Measure which may be productive of
Advantage to this Government, and the other British Colonies on the Continent
of America, in general, have Appointed, and as much as in us lies do Appoint,
Jacob Kollock, Esquire Caesar Rodney, Esquire and Thomas McKean, Esquire Members of said
Assembly, to be a Committee, to meet with the other Committees already
appointed, or to be appointed, by the several and respective Assemblies of the
said other Colonies, at the City of New York, on the First Tuesday in October
next, in Conjunction with the said other Committees, to consider of the present
distressful Circumstances of the said Colonies, occasioned in some Measure, as
we apprehend, by several late Acts of Parliament, and to join with them in an
humble Address to his most Gracious Majesty and the Parliament of
Great Britain, for Redress of our Grievances, or in any other expedient that
shall be agreed on by the said Committees, which may tend to promote the
Utility and Welfare of the British Dominions in America.

September 13th 1765. JOHN VINING, JOHN CATON, JOHN BARNES, WILLIAM KILLEN,
VINCENT LOCKERMAN.


Sussex County, to wit. WE whose Names are hereunder written, Members of the
General Assembly of the Government of the Counties of New Castle, Kent, and
Sussex, upon Delaware, for the said County of Sussex, though sensible of the
Impropriety of assuming the Functions of Assembly-Men, during the Recess of our
House, yet zealous to concur in any Measure which may be productive of
Advantage to this Government, and the other British Colonies on the Continent
of America, in general, have Appointed, and as much as in us lies do Appoint,
Jacob Kollock, Esquire Caesar Rodney, Esquire and Thomas McKean, Esquire Members of the
said Assembly, to be a Committee, to meet with the other Committees already
appointed, or to be appointed, by the several and respective Assemblies of the
said other Colonies, at the City of New York, on the First Tuesday in October
next, in Conjunction with the said other Committees, to consider of the present
distressful Circumstances of the said Colonies, occasioned in some Measure, as
we apprehend, by several late Acts of Parliament, and to join with them, in an
humble Address to his most Gracious Majesty and the Parliament of
Great Britain, for Redress of our Grievances, or in any other Expedient that
shall be agreed on by the said Committees, which may tend to promote the
Utility and Welfare of the British Dominions in America.

September 17th 1765. DAVID HALL, BENJAMIN BURTON, LEVIN CRAPPER, THOMAS
ROBINSON, JACOB KOLLOCK, junr.


From the Province of Maryland, WILLIAM MURDOCK, Esquire. EDWARD TILGHMAN,
Esquire. THOMAS RINGGOLD, Esquire.


INSTRUCTIONS from the Honorable the Lower House of Assembly, of the Province
of Maryland, to William Murdock, Edward Tilghman, and Thomas Ringgold,
Esquires, a Committee appointed to join the several Committees, from the
several Colonies in America, at New York.

GENTLEMEN,

You are to repair immediately to the City of New York, in the Province of
New York, and there join with the Committees from the Houses of Representatives
of the other Colonies, in a general and united, dutiful, loyal, and humble
Representation to his Majesty, and the British Parliament, of the Circumstances
and Condition of the British Colonies and Plantations, and to pray Relief from
the Burdens and Restraints lately laid on their Trade and Commerce, and
especially from the Taxes imposed by an Act of the last Sessions of Parliament,
granting and applying certain Stamp Duties, and other Duties, in the British
Colonies and Plantations in America, whereby they are deprived, in some
Instances, of that invaluable Privilege of Englishmen, and British Subjects,
Trials by Juries. That you take Care that such Representation shall, humbly and
decently, but expressly, contain an Assertion of the Rights of the Colonists,
to be exempt from all and every Taxations and Impositions upon their Persons
and Properties, to which they do not consent in a Legislative Way, either by
themselves or their Representatives, by them freely chosen and appointed.

Signed by Order of the House, ROBERT LLOYD, Speaker.

From the Province of South Carolina, THOMAS LYNCH, Esquire. CHRISTOPHER
GADSDEN, Esquire. JOHN RUTLEDGE, Esquire.
Who produced the following Appointment.

THURSDAY, July 25, 1765.
The House (according to Order) took into Consideration, the Letter from the
Speaker of the House of Representatives of the Massachusetts Bay, laid before
them on Friday last, and a Debate arising thereon, and some Time spent therein,
ORDERED, That the said Letter be referred to a Committee of the following
Gentlemen, viz. Capt. Gadsden, Mr. Wright, Mr. Galliard, Mr. Wragg, Mr.
Parsons, Mr. Pinckney, Col. Laurence, Mr. Rutledge, Mr. Manigault, Mr. Drayton.

FRIDAY, July 26, 1765.
Capt. Gadsden Reported from the Committee appointed to consider of the Letter
sent from the Speaker of the House of Representatives, of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay, to the Speaker of this House, and to report their Opinion
thereupon, of the Expediency and Utility of the Measures therein proposed, and
the best Means to effect the Relief therein mentioned:

That they are of Opinion, the Measure therein proposed, is prudent and
necessary, and therefore recommend to the House, to send a Committee, to meet
the Committees from the Houses of Representatives, or Burgesses, of the several
British Colonies on this Continent, at New York, the First Tuesday in October
next.

That the said Committee be ordered to consult there, with those other
Committees, on the present Circumstances of the Colonies, and the Difficulties
which they are, and must be reduced to, by the Operation of the Acts of
Parliament, for levying Duties and Taxes on the Colonies, and to consider of a
general, united, dutiful, loyal, and humble Representation of their Condition,
to his Majesty and the Parliament, and to implore Relief.

That the Result of their Consultation, shall, at their Return, be immediately
laid before the House, to be confirmed or not, as the House may think proper.

And the said Report being delivered in at the Clerk's Table, and Read a second
Time, the Question was severally put, That the House do agree to the First,
Second, and Third Paragraphs of the said Report. It was Resolved in the
Affirmative.

FRIDAY, August 2, 1765.
Motion being made, RESOLVED, That this House will provide a Sum sufficient to
defray the Charges and Expenses of a Committee of Three Gentlemen, on Account
of their going to, continuing at, and returning from, the Meeting of the
several Committees proposed to assemble at New York, on the First Tuesday in
October next, to consult there with those other Committees, on the present
Circumstances of the Colonies, and the Difficulties which they are, and must be
reduced to, by the Operation of the Acts of Parliament, for levying Duties and
Taxes on the Colonies, and to consider of a general, united, loyal, dutiful,
and humble Representation of their Condition to his Majesty and the Parliament,
and to implore Relief.

ORDERED, That the Public Treasurer do advance out of any Moneys in his Hands,
to the said Committee, a Sum not exceeding Six Hundred Pounds Sterling, for the
Purposes aforesaid.

RESOLVED, That this House will reimburse the Treasurer the said Sum.

ORDERED, That the following Gentlemen be appointed a Committee, for the
Purposes aforesaid, viz.

Mr. Thomas Lynch, Mr. Christopher Gadsden, Mr. John Rutledge.

THURSDAY, August 8, 1765.
ORDERED, That the Speaker do inform Thomas Lynch, Christopher Gadsden, and
John Rutledge, Esquires, that they are appointed a Committee, to meet the
Committees of the several other Colonies on this Continent, on the first
Tuesday in October next, at New York, and that he do acquaint them, it is the
desire of the House, that they repair to New York, on the said First Tuesday in
October next, for the Purposes mentioned in the Report of the Committee, as
agreed to by this House, on Friday the 26th Day of July last.

ORDERED, That Three Copies of the Proceedings of this House, relative to the
said Matter, be made out, and Signed by the Speaker, and that he deliver One of
the said Copies to each of the said Gentlemen.

RAW. L^^^^DES, Speaker.

Then the said Committees proceeded to choose a Chairman by Ballot, and Timothy
Ruggles, Esquire on sorting and counting the Votes, appeared to have a Majority,
and thereupon was placed in the Chair.

RESOLVED, Nomine Contradicente, That Mr. John Cotton be (...) to this
Congress, during the Continuance thereof.

Then the Congress took into Consideration the several Appointments of the
Committees from New York, New Jersey, and the Government of the Lower Counties
on Delaware, and

RESOLVED, Nomine Contradicente, That the same are sufficient to qualify the
Gentlemen therein named, to sit in this Congress

RESOLVED ALSO, That the Committee of each Colony, shall have One Voice only,
in determining any Questions that shall arise in this Congress.

Then the Congress Adjourned till Tomorrow Morning at IX o'Clock.

TUESDDAY, October 8, 1765, A. M.
The Congress met according to Adjournment.

Upon Motion, Voted, That the Provinces be called every Morning at the Time
that it is Adjourned to.

Voted, That Mr. Justice Livingston, Mr. McKean, and Mr. Rutledge, be a
Committee to inspect the Proceedings and Minutes, and Correct the same.

Then the Congress took into Consideration the Rights and Privileges of the
British American Colonists, with the several Inconveniences and Hardships to
which they are, and must be subjected, by the Operation of several late Acts of
Parliament, particularly the Act called the STAMP ACT; and after some Time
spent therein, the same was postponed for further Consideration.

Then the Congress Adjourned to Tomorrow XI o'Clock.

WEDNESDAY, October 9, 1765, A. M.
Then the Congress met according to Adjournment.

The Congress resumed the Consideration of the Rights and Privileges of the
British American Colonists, etc. the same was referred after sundry Debates,
for further Consideration.

Then the Congress Adjourned until Tomorrow Morning XI o'Clock.

THURSDAY, October 10, 1765, A. M.
The Congress met according to Adjournment, and Resumed, etc. as Yesterday,

And then Adjourned to X o'Clock Tomorrow Morning.

FRIDAY, October 11, 1765, A. M.
The Congress met according to Adjournment, and Resumed, etc. as Yesterday,

And then Adjourned to X o'Clock Tomorrow Morning.

SATURDAY, October 12, 1765, A. M.
The Congress met according to Adjournment, and Resumed, etc. as Yesterday,

And then Adjourned to Monday Mornining next X o'Clock.

MONDAY, October 14, 1765, A. M.
The Congress met according to Adjournment, and Resumed, etc. as on Saturday
last,

And then Adjourned to Tomorrow Morning IX o'Clock.

TUESDAY, October 15, 1765, A. M.
The Congress met according to Adjournment, and Resumed, etc. as Yesterday,

And then Adjourned to Tomorrow Morning IX o'Clock.

WEDNESDAY, October 16, 1765, A. M.
The Congress met according to Adjournment, and Resumed, etc. as Yesterday,

And then Adjourned to Tomorrow Morning IX o'Clock.

THURSDAY, October 17, 1765, A. M.
The Congress met according to Adjournment, and Resumed, etc. as Yesterday,

And then Adjourned to Tomorrow Morning IX o'Clock.

FRIDAY, October 18, 1765, A. M.
The Congress met according to Adjournment; and Resumed, etc. as Yesterday,

Adjourned to Tomorrow Morning IX o'Clock.

SATURDAY, October 19, 1765, A. M.
The Congress met according to Adjournment, and Resumed, etc. as Yesterday. And
upon mature Deliberation, agreed to the following Declarations of the Rights
and Grievances of the Colonists, in America, which were Ordered to be inserted.

The Members of this Congress, sincerely devoted, with the warmest Sentiments
of Affection and Duty to his Majesty's Person and Government, inviolably
attached to the present happy Establishment of the Protestant Succession, and
with Minds deeply impressed by a Sense of the present and impending Misfortunes
of the British Colonies on this Continent; having considered as maturely as
Time will permit, the Circumstances of the said Colonies, esteem it our
indispensable Duty, to make the following Declarations of our humble Opinion,
respecting the most Essential Rights and Liberties of the Colonists, and of the
Grievances under which they labor, by Reason of several late Acts of
Parliament.

I. That his Majesty's Subjects in these Colonies, owe the same Allegiance to
the Crown of Great Britain, that is owing from his Subjects born within the
Realm, and all due Subordination to that August Body the Parliament of
Great Britain.

II. That his Majesty's Liege Subjects in these Colonies, are entitled to all
the inherent Rights and Liberties of his Natural born Subjects, within the
Kingdom of Great Britain.

III. That it is inseparably essential to the Freedom of a People, and the
undoubted Right of Englishmen, that no Taxes be imposed on them, but with their
own Consent, given personally, or by their Representatives.

IV. That the People of these Colonies are not, and from their local
Circumstances cannot be, Represented in the House of Commons in Great Britain.

V. That the only Representatives of the People of these Colonies, are Persons
chosen therein by themselves, and that no Taxes ever have been, or can be
Constitutionally imposed on them, but by their respective Legislature.

VI. That all Supplies to the Crown, being free Gifts of the People, it is
unreasonable and inconsistent with the Principles and Spirit of the British
Constitution, for the People of Great Britain, to grant to his Majesty the
Property of the Colonists.

VII. That Trial by Jury, is the inherent and invaluable Right of every British
Subject in these Colonies.

VIII. That the late Act of Parliament, entitled, An Act for granting and
applying certain Stamp Duties, and other Duties, in the British Colonies and
Plantations in America, etc. by imposing Taxes on the Inhabitants of these
Colonies, and the said Act, and several other Acts, by extending the
Jurisdiction of the Courts of Admiralty beyond its ancient Limits, have a
manifest Tendency to subvert the Rights and Liberties of the Colonists.

IX. That the Duties imposed by several late Acts of Parliament, from the
peculiar Circumstances of these Colonies, will be extremely Burdensome and
Grievous; and from the scarcity of Specie, the Payment of them absolutely
impracticable.

X. That as the Profits of the Trade of these Colonies ultimately center in
Great Britain, to pay for the Manufactures which they are obliged to take from
thence, they eventually contribute very largely to all Supplies granted there
to the Crown.

XI. That the Restrictions imposed by several late Acts of Parliament, on the
Trade of these Colonies, will render them unable to purchase the Manufactures
of Great Britain.

XII. That the Increase, Prosperity, and Happiness of these Colonies, depend on
the full and free Enjoyment of their Rights and Liberties, and an Intercourse
with Great Britain mutually Affectionate and Advantageous.

XIII. That it is the Right of the British Subjects in these Colonies, to
Petition the King, or either House of Parliament.

Lastly, That it is the indispensable Duty of these Colonies, to the best of
Sovereigns, to the Mother Country, and to themselves, to endeavor by a loyal
and dutiful Address to his Majesty, and humble Applications to both Houses of
Parliament, to procure the Repeal of the Act for granting and applying certain
Stamp Duties, of all Clauses of any other Acts of Parliament, whereby the
Jurisdiction of the Admiralty is extended as aforesaid, and of the other late
Acts for the Restriction of American Commerce.

Upon Motion, Voted, That Robert R. Livingston, William Samuel Johnson, and
William Murdock, Esquires, be a Committee to prepare an Address to his Majesty,
and lay the same before the Congress on Monday next.

Voted also, That John Rutledge, Edward Tilghman, and Philip Livingston,
Esquires, be a Committee to prepare a Memorial and Petition to the Lords in
Parliament, and lay the same before the Congress on Monday next.

Voted also, That Thomas Lynch, James Otis, and Thomas McKean, Esquires, be a
Committee to prepare a Petition to the House of Commons of Great Britain, and
lay the same before the Congress on Monday next.

Then the Congress Adjourned to Monday next at XII o'Clock.

MONDAY, October ^1, 1765, A. M.
The Congress met according to Adjournment.

The Committee appointed to prepare and bring in an Address to his Majesty, did
Report, That they had essayed a Draught for that Purpose, which they laid on
the Table, and humbly submitted to the Correction of the Congress.

The said Address was Read, and after sundry Amendments, the same was approved
of by the Congress, and ordered to be Engrossed.

The Committee appointed to prepare and bring in a Memorial and Petition to the
Lords in Parliament, did Report, That they had essayed a Draught for that
Purpose, which they laid on the Table, and humbly submitted to the Correction
of the Congress.

The said Address was Read, and after sundry Amendments, the same was approved
of by the Congress, and ordered to be Engrossed.

The Committee appointed to prepare and bring in a Petition to the House of
Commons of Great Britain, did Report, That they had essayed a Draught for that
Purpose, which they laid on the Table, and humbly submitted to the Correction
of the Congress.

The said Address was Read, and after sundry Amendments, the same was approved
of by the Congress, and ordered to be Engrossed.

The Congress Adjourn to Tomorrow Morning IX o'Clock.

TUESDAY, October 22, 1765, A. M.
The Congress met according to Adjournment.

The Address to his Majesty being Engrossed, was Read and Compared, and is as
follows, viz.

To the King's most Excellent Majesty.
The PETITION of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the
Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island, and Providence Plantations, (...), (...),
New Jersey, Pennsylvania, the Government of the Counties of New Castle, Kent,
and Sussex, upon Delaware, Province of Maryland,
Most humbly Shows,
THAT the Inhabitants of these Colonies, Unanimously devoted with the warmest
Sentiments of Duty and Affection to your Majesty's Sacred Person and
Government, Inviolably attached to the present Happy Establishment of the
Protestant Succession in your Illustrious House, and deeply sensible of your
Royal Attention to their Prosperity and Happiness, humbly beg Leave to approach
the Throne, by representing to your Majesty, That these Colonies were
Originally Planted by Subjects of the British Crown, who, animated with the
Spirit of Liberty, encouraged by your Majesty's Royal Predecessors, and
confiding in the Public Faith for the Enjoyment of all the Rights and Liberties
essential to Freedom, emigrated from their Native Country to this Continent,
and by their successful Perseverance in the midst of innumerable Dangers and
Difficulties, together with a Profusion of their Blood and Treasure, have
happily added these vast and valuable Dominions to the Empire of Great Britain.
That for the Enjoyment of these Rights and Liberties, several Governments were
early formed in the said Colonies, with full Power of Legislation, agreeable to
the Principles of the English Constitution.

That under those Governments, these Liberties, thus vested in their Ancestors,
and transmitted to their Posterity, have been exercised and enjoyed, and by the
inestimable Blessings thereof (under the Favor of Almighty GOD), the
inhospitable Deserts of America have been converted into Flourishing Countries;
Science, Humanity, and the Knowledge of Divine Truths, diffused through Remote
Regions of Ignorance, Infidelity, and Barbarism; the Number of British Subjects
wonderfully Increased, and the Wealth and Power of Great Britain proportionably
Augmented.

That by Means of these Settlements, and the unparallelled Success of your
Majesty's Arms, a Foundation is now laid for rendering the British Empire the
most Extensive and Powerful of any Recorded in History. Our Connection with
this Empire, we esteem our greatest Happiness and Security, and humbly conceive
it may now be so established by your Royal Wisdom, as to endure to the latest
Period of Time; This, with most humble Submission to your Majesty, we apprehend
will be most effectually Accomplished, by fixing the Pillars thereof on Liberty
and Justice, and securing the inherent Rights and Liberties of your Subjects
here, upon the Principles of the English Constitution. To this Constitution
these Two Principles are essential, the Right of your faithful Subjects, freely
to grant to your Majesty, such Aids as are required for the Support of your
Government over them, and other Public Exigencies, and Trials by their Peers:
By the One they are secured from unreasonable Impositions; and by the Other
from Arbitrary Decisions of the executive Power.

The Continuation of these Liberties to the Inhabitants of America we ardently
Implore, as absolutely necessary to Unite the several Parts of your wide
extended Dominions, in that Harmony so Essential to the Preservation and
Happiness of the Whole. Protected in these Liberties, the Emoluments
Great Britain receives from us, however great at present, are inconsiderable,
compared with those she has the fairest Prospect of acquiring. By this
Protection she will for ever secure to herself the Advantage of conveying to
all Europe, the Merchandises which America furnishes, and of Supplying through
the same Channel, whatever is wanted from thence. Here opens a boundless Source
of Wealth and Naval Strength; yet these immense Advantages, by the Abridgment
of those invaluable Rights and Liberties, by which our Growth has been
Nourished, are in Danger of being for ever Lost; and our subordinate
Legislatures, in Effect, rendered useless, by the late Acts of Parliament
imposing Duties and Taxes on these Colonies, and extending the Jurisdiction of
the Courts of Admiralty here, beyond its ancient Limits: Statutes by which your
Majesty's Commons in Britain undertake, absolutely to dispose of the Property
of their Fellow Subjects in America, without their Consent, and for the
enforcing whereof, they are subjected to the Determination of a single Judge in
a Court unrestrained by the wise Rules of the Common Law, the Birthright of
Englishmen, and the Safeguard of their Persons and Properties.

The invaluable Rights of Taxing ourselves, and Trial by our Peers, of which we
implore your Majesty's Protection, are not, we most humbly conceive
Unconstitutional; but confirmed by the Great CHARTER of English Liberty. On the
First of these Rights the Honorable the House of Commons Found their Practice
of Originating Money Bills, a Right enjoyed by the Kingdom of Ireland, by the
Clergy of England, until relinquished by themselves, a Right, in fine, which
all other your Majesty's English Subjects, both within, and without the Realm,
have hitherto enjoyed.

With Hearts therefore impressed with the most indelible Characters of
Gratitude to your Majesty, and to the Memory of the Kings of your Illustrious
House, whose Reigns have been Signally distinguished by their Auspicious
Influence on the Prosperity of the British Dominions, and convinced by the most
affecting Proofs of your Majesty's Paternal Love to all your People, however
distant, and your unceasing and benevolent Desires to promote their Happiness,
We most humbly beseech your Majesty, that you will be graciously pleased to
take into your Royal Consideration, the Distresses of your faithful Subjects on
this Continent, and to lay the same before your Majesty's Parliament, and to
afford them such Relief, as in your Royal Wisdom their unhappy Circumstances
shall be judged to require.

And your Petitioners as in Duty bound will pray.

The Memorial to the Lords in Parliament, was Read and Compared, and is as
follows, viz.
To the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal of Great Britain, in
Parliament assembled.
The MEMORIAL of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the
Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island, and Providence Plantations, (...), (...),
New Jersey, Pennsylvania, the Government of the Counties of New Castle, Kent,
and Sussex, upon Delaware, Province of Maryland,
Most humbly Shows,
THAT his Majesty's Liege Subjects in his American Colonies, though they
acknowledge a due Subordination to that August Body the British Parliament, are
entitled, in the Opinion of your Memorialists, to all the inherent Rights and
Liberties of the Natives of Great Britain, and have ever since the Settlement
of the said Colonies, exercised those Rights and Liberties, as far as their
local Circumstances would permit.

That your Memorialists humbly conceive one of the most essential Rights of
these Colonies, which they have ever, till lately, uninterruptedly enjoyed, to
be Trial by Jury.

That your Memorialists also humbly conceive another of these essential Rights
to be the Exemption from all Taxes, but such as are imposed on the People by
the several Legislatures in these Colonies, which Right also they have, till of
late, freely enjoyed.

But your Memorialists humbly beg Leave to represent to your Lordships, That
the Act for granting certain Stamp Duties in the British Colonies in America,
etc. fills his Majesty's American Subjects with the deepest Concern, as it
tends to deprive them of the Two fundamental and invaluable Rights and
Liberties above mentioned, and that several other late Acts of Parliament,
which extend the Jurisdiction and Powers of Courts of Admiralty in the
Plantations, beyond their Limits in Great Britain, thereby make an unnecessary
and unhappy Distinction as to the Modes of Trial, between us and our Fellow
Subjects there, by whom we never have been excelled in Duty and Loyalty to our
Sovereign.

That from the natural Connection between Great Britain and America, the
perpetual Continuance of which your Memorialists most ardently desire, they
conceive that nothing can Conduce more to the Interest of both, than the
Colonists free Enjoyment of their Rights and Liberties, and an affectionate
Intercourse between Great Britain and them. But your Memorialists (not waving
their Claim to these Rights, of which with the most becoming Veneration and
Deference to the Wisdom and Justice of your Lordships, they apprehend they
cannot Reasonably be deprived) humbly Represent, That from the peculiar
Circumstances of these Colonies, the Duties imposed by the aforesaid Act, and
several other late Acts of Parliament, are extremely Grievous and Burdensome,
and the Payment of the said Duties will very soon, for want of Specie, become
absolutely impracticable; and that the Restrictions on Trade by the said Acts,
will not only greatly distress the Colonies, but must be extremely detrimental
to the Trade and true Interest of Great Britain.

Your Memorialists therefore, impressed with a just Sense of the unfortunate
Circumstances of the Colonies, and the impending destructive Consequences which
must necessarily ensue from the Execution of those Acts, animated with the
warmest Sentiments of filial Affection for their Mother Country, most earnestly
and humbly entreat, That your Lordships will be pleased to Hear their Counsel
in Support of this Memorial, and take the Premises into your most serious
Consideration, and that your Lordships will also be thereupon pleased to pursue
such Measures for Restoring the just Rights and Liberties of the Colonies, and
preserving them for ever inviolate* for redressing their present, and
preventing future Grievances, thereby promoting the (...) Interest of
Great Britain and America, as to your Lordships in your great Wisdom shall seem
most Conducive and Effectual to that important End.

And your Memorialists as in Duty bound will ever pray.

WEDNESDAY, October 23, 1765, A. M.
The Congress met according to Adjournment.

The Petition to the House of Commons being Engrossed, was Read and Compared,
and is as follows, viz.

To the Honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of Great Britain, in
Parliament assembled.

The PETITION of his Majesty's dutiful and loyal Subjects, the Freeholders and
other Inhabitants of the Colonies of the Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island, and
Providence Plantations, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, the Government of the
Counties of New Castle, Kent, and Sussex, upon Delaware, Maryland,

Most humbly Shows,

THAT the several late Acts of Parliament imposing diverse Duties and Taxes on
the Colonies, and laying the Trade and Commerce thereof under very Burdensome
Restrictions, but above all the Act for granting and applying certain Stamp
Duties, etc. in America, have filled them with the deepest Concern and
Surprize'; and they humbly conceive the Execution of them will be attended with
Consequences very Injurious to the Commercial Interest of Great Britain and her
Colonies, and must terminate in the eventual Ruin of the latter.

Your Petitioners therefore most ardently implore the Attention of the
Honorable House, to the united and dutiful Representation of their
Circumstances, and to their earnest Supplications for Relief, from those
Regulations which have already involved this Continent in Anxiety, Confusion,
and Distress.

We most sincerely recognize our Allegiance to the Crown, and acknowledge all
due Subordination to the Parliament of Great Britain, and shall always retain
the most grateful Sense of their Assistance and Protection. It is from and
under the English Constitution, we derive all our Civil and Religious Rights
and Liberties: We Glory in being Subjects of the best of Kings, and having been
Born under the most perfect Form of Government; but it is with most ineffable
and humiliating Sorrow, that we find ourselves, of late, deprived of the Right
of Granting our own Property for his Majesty's Service, to which our Lives and
Fortunes are entirely devoted, and to which, on his Royal Requisitions, we
leave ever been ready to contribute to the utmost of our Abilities.

We have also the Misfortune to find, that all the Penalties and Forfeitures
mentioned in the Stamp Act, and in diverse late Acts of Trade extending to the
Plantations, are, at the Election of the Informer, Recoverable in any Court of
Admiralty in America. This, as the newly erected Court of Admiralty has a
general Jurisdiction over all British America, renders his Majesty's Subjects
in these Colonies, liable to be carried, at an immense Expense, from one End of
the Continent, to the other.

It gives us also great Pain, to see a manifest Distinction made therein,
between the Subjects of our Mother Country, and those in the Colonies, in that
the like Penalties and Forfeitures recoverable there only in his Majesty's
Courts of Record, are made cognizable here by a Court of Admiralty: By these
Means we seem to be, in Effect, unhappily deprived of Two Privileges essential
to Freedom, and which all Englishmen have ever considered as their best
Birthrights, that of being free from all Taxes but such as they have consented
to in Person, or by their Representatives, and of Trial by their Peers.

Your Petitioners further show, That the remote Situation, and other
Circumstances of the Colonies, render it impracticable that they should be
Represented, but in their respective subordinate Legislature; and they humbly
conceive, that the Parliament, adhering strictly to the Principles of the
Constitution, have never hitherto Taxed any, but those who were actually
therein Represented; for this Reason, we humbly apprehend, they never have
Taxed Ireland, or any other of the Subjects without the Realm.

But were it ever so clear, that the Colonies might in Law, be reasonably
deemed to be Represented in the Honorable House of Commons, yet we conceive,
that very good Reasons, from Inconvenience, from the Principles of true Policy,
and from the Spirit of the British Constitution, may be adduced to show, that
it would be for the real Interest of Great Britain, as well as her Colonies,
that the late Regulations should be rescinded, and the several Acts of
Parliament imposing Duties and Taxes on the Colonies, and extending the
Jurisdiction of the Courts of Admiralty here, beyond their ancient Limits,
should be Repealed.

We shall not Attempt a minute Detail of all the Reasons which the Wisdom of
the Honorable House may suggest, on this Occasion, but would humbly submit the
following Particulars to their Consideration.

That Money is already become very scarce in these Colonies, and is still
decreasing by the necessary Exportation of Specie from the Continent, for the
Discharge of our Debts to British Merchants.

That immensely heavy Debt is yet due from the Colonies for British
Manufactures, and that they are still heavily burdened with (...) discharge
the Arrearages due for Aid granted by them in the late War.

That the Balance of Trade will ever be much against the Colonies, and in (...)
of Great Britain, whilst we consume her Manufactures, the Demand for which must
ever Increase in Proportion to the Number of Inhabitants settled here, with the
Means of Purchasing them. We therefore humbly conceive it to be the Interest of
Great Britain, to increase, rather that diminish, those Means, as the Profits
of all the Trade of the Colonies ultimately center there to pay for her
Manufactures, as we are not allowed to purchase elsewhere; and by the
Consumption of which, at the advanced Prices the British Taxes oblige the
Makers and Venders to set on them, we eventually contribute very largely to the
Revenue of the Crown.

That from the Nature of American Business, the Multiplicity of Suits and
Papers used in Matters of small Value, in a Country where Freeholds are so
minutely divided, and Property so frequently transferred, a Stamp Duty must
ever be very Burdensome and Unequal.

That it is extremely improbable that the Honorable House of Commons, should
at all Times, be thoroughly acquainted with our Condition, and all Facts
requisite to a just and equal Taxation of the Colonies.

It is also humbly submitted, Whether there be not a material Distinction in
Reason and sound Policy, at least, between the necessary Exercise of
Parliamentary Jurisdiction in general Acts, for the Amendment of the Common
Law, and the Regulation of Trade and Commerce through the whole Empire, and the
Exercise of that Jurisdiction, by imposing Taxes on the Colonies.

That the several subordinate Provincial Legislatures have been molded into
Forms, as nearly resembling that of their Mother Country, as by his Majesty's
Royal Predecessors was thought convenient; and their Legislatures seem to have
been wisely and graciously established, that the Subjects in the Colonies
might, under the due Administration thereof, enjoy the happy Fruits of the
British Government, which in their present Circumstances, they cannot be so
fully and clearly availed of, any other Way under these Forms of Government we
and our Ancestors have been Born or Settled, and have had our Lives, Liberties,
and Properties, protected. The People here, as every where else, retain a great
Fondness for their old Customs and Usages, and we trust that his Majesty's
Service, and the Interest of the Nation, so far from being obstructed, have
been vastly promoted by the Provincial Legislatures.

That we esteem our Connections with, and Dependence on Great Britain, as one
of our greatest Blessings, and apprehend the latter will appear to be
sufficiently secure, when it is considered, that the Inhabitants in the
Colonies have the most unbounded Affection for his Majesty's Person, Family,
and Government, as well as for the Mother Country, and that their Subordination
to the Parliament, is universally acknowledged.

We therefore most humbly entreat, That the Honorable House would be pleased
to hear our Counsel in Support of this Petition, and take our distressed and
deplorable Case into their serious Consideration, and that the Acts and Clauses
of Acts, so grievously restraining our Trade and Commerce, imposing Duties and
Taxes on our Property, and extending the Jurisdiction of the Court of Admiralty
beyond its ancient Limits, may be repealed; or that the Honorable House would
otherwise relieve your Petitioners, as in your great Wisdom and Goodness shall
seem meet.

And your Petitioners as in Duty bound shall ever pray.

Then the Congress Adjourned till Tomorrow Morning X o'Clock.

THURSDAY, October 24, 1765.
The Congress met according to Adjournment.

The Congress took into Consideration, the Manner in which their several
Petitions should be preferred and solicited in Great Britain, and came to the
following Determination, viz.

It is recommended by the Congress, to the several Colonies, to appoint special
Agents for soliciting Relief from their great Grievances, and unite their
utmost Interest and Endeavors for that Purpose.

Voted Unanimously, That the Clerk of this Congress Sign the Minutes of their
Proceedings, and deliver a Copy for the Use of each Colony and Province.

By Order of the Congress, JOHN COTTON, Clerk.

Savannah, in GEORGIA, September 6, 1765. SIR,
(COPY.) YOUR Letter dated in June last, acquainting me, that the House of
Representatives of your Province, had Unanimously agreed to propose a Meeting
at the City of New York, of Committees, from the Houses of Representatives of
the several British Colonies on this Continent, on the First Tuesday in October
next, to consult together on the present Circumstances of the Colonies, and the
Difficulties to which they are, and must be reduced, by the Operation of the
Acts of Parliament for laying Duties and Taxes on the Colonies, and to consider
of an humble Representation of their Condition to his Majesty and the
Parliament, and to implore Relief, came to Hand at an unlucky Season, it being
in the Recess of the General Assembly of this Province; nevertheless,
immediately upon the Receipt of your Letter, I dispatched Expresses to the
several Representatives of this Province, acquainting them with the Purport
thereof, and requesting them to meet at this Place without delay, and
accordingly they met here on Monday last, to the Number of Sixteen, being a
large Majority of the Representatives of this Province, the Whole consisting of
Twenty-five Persons; but his Excellency our Governor being applied to, did not
think it expedient to call them together on the Occasion, which is the Reason
of their not sending a Committee, as proposed by your House, for you may be
assured, Sir, that no Representatives on this Continent, can more sincerely
concur in the Measures proposed, than do the Representatives of this Province
now met together, neither can any People, as Individuals, more warmly Espouse
the Common Cause of the Colonies, than do the People of this Province.

The Gentlemen now present, request it as a Favor, you will be pleased to send
me a Copy of such Representation as may be agreed upon by the several
Committees at New York, and acquaint me how, and in what Manner, the same is to
be lain before the King and Parliament, whether by any Person particularly
authorized for that Purpose, or by the Colony Agents. The General Assembly of
this Province stands Prorogued to the 22d Day of October next, which is the
Time it generally meets for the Dispatch of the Ordinary Business of the
Province; and I doubt not, the Representatives of this Province, will then, in
their Legislative Capacity, take under Consideration, the Grievances so justly
complained of, and transmit their Sense of the same to Great Britain, in such
Way, as may seem best calculated to obtain Redress, and so as to convince the
Sister Colonies of their inviolable Attachment to the Common Cause. I am, SIR,

Your most obedient, And most humble Servant ALEXANDER WILLY.
New Hampshire. To SAMUEL WHITE, Esquire Speaker of the House of Representatives of
Massachusetts, etc.



Mr. Speaker laid before the House, a Letter from the Honorable Speaker of the
Honorable House of Representatives of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay,
to the Speaker of this Assembly, proposing a Meeting, of Committees, from the
several Assemblies of the British Colonies on the Continent, at New York, to
consider of a general, united, dutiful, loyal, and humble Representation of our
Circumstances, and for imploring his Majesty and the Parliament for Relief:
Which being Read,

RESOLVED, That notwithstanding we are Sensible such Representation ought to be
made, and approve of the proposed Method for obtaining thereof, yet the present
Situation of our Governmental Affairs will not permit us to appoint a
Committee, to attend such Meeting, but shall be ready to join in any Address to
his Majesty and the Parliament we may be honored with the Knowledge of,
probable to answer the (...).

(...), Clerk.

The Two foregoing Letters, are true Copies from the Original. Attest. JOHN
COTTON, Clerk.

Adjourned to Tomorrow Morning IX o'Clock.

FRIDAY, October 25, 1765.
The Congress met according to Adjournment.

Time not permitting the Clerk to make Copies at large, of the Proceedings of
the Congress, for all the Colonies they think it proper should be furnished
therewith;

RESOLVED, That the Gentlemen from the Massachusetts Bay, be requested to send
a Copy thereof to the Colony of New Hampshire, the Gentlemen of Maryland to
Virginia: and the Gentlemen of South Carolina to Georgia, and North Carolina.

Signed per Order, J. COTTON, Clerk.

An Account of the Disposition of the L 500 Granted by Ordinance, and received
of the Treasurer, by William Murdock, Edward Tilghman, and Thomas Ringgold.
To Cash paid the whole Expenses of the Committee to New York, there and back
again. L 13^ 14 1 To Cash paid Express to New York, to give Notice of our
coming. 15 To paid for Express, to send a Copy of our Proceedings to the
Speaker of Virginia. 1 (...) To paid for a Bill of Exchange, to remit to
Charles Garth, Esquire with the Address and Petition 150^. Sterling, at 65 per Cent
Exchange, ^4^ 10 Cash remaining in Hand 127 (...), and (...), 172 7 ^ L 575 1 9
By Cash received of the Treasurer, in Gold, (...): L 500 ^09 (...) 27^. L 532 3
^ Half (...), at 9^^6. 14 7 ^^ 4 (...), at 26^6. 3 6 1 (...), 2 3 6 ^ ditto. 1
1 9 L 575 19

October 26, 1765. SIR,
WE had the Honor to be appointed by the House of Representatives of the
Province of Maryland, a Committee, to meet Committees of the Members of
Assembly of the other Colonies, on this Continent, at New York, the First of
this Instant, to join in a general, and united, dutiful, loyal, and humble
Representation of the Condition of those Colonies, to his Majesty and the
Parliament, and to implore Relief from the grievous Burdens lately laid upon
our Trade, and the Taxes and Duties lately imposed on us, especially by the
STAMP ACT.

Accordingly Members from Nine Colonies met, to wit, from the
Massachusetts Bay, Connecticut, Rhode Island and Providence Plantations*
New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, the Government of the Counties of
New Castle, Kent, and Sussex, upon Delaware, Maryland, and South Carolina, but
as you will find the Address, etc. Signed only by Members from Six of those
Colonies, it may be proper to acquaint you with the Reasons why they did not
all Sign, though they all concurred with the Proceedings.

The Lieutenant Governor of New York Prorogued their Assembly from Time to
Time, so that their House had not an Opportunity of appointing Members with
full Powers to join, and Sign the Address, etc. Yet the Assembly of New York,
having at their last Meeting, appointed Five of their Members as a Committee,
not only to Correspond with their Agent at Home, but also during the Recess of
the House, to write to, and correspond with, the several Assemblies, or
Committees of Assemblies on this Continent, on the subject Matter of the
several late Acts of Parliament, so Grievous and Dangerous to their Colonies,
it was thought proper to admit this Committee to join in the Conferences, and
they agreed to what was done, and promised to use their Endeavors with their
Assembly to concur also whenever they should be permitted to meet.

The South Carolina Assembly, not rightly viewing the Proposal (which
Originally came from the Assembly of the Government of the Massachusetts Bay,)
as it was intended that the several Committees, when met, should Frame and Sign
an Address to his Majesty, and Memorial and Petition to the Parliament, to be
immediately Dispatched by the Congress, Instructed their Members (Messrs.
Lynch, Rutledge, and Gadsden,) to return their Proceedings to them, for
Approbation. The Connecticut Assembly made the same Restrictions in their
Instructions. The Assembly also of New Hampshire wrote, that they had Resolved,
That notwithstanding they were Sensible such a Representation ought to be made,
and approved of the proposed Method for obtaining thereof, yet the present
Situation of their Governmental Affairs, would not permit them to appoint a
Committee to attend such Meeting, but should be ready to join in any Address to
his Majesty and the Parliament they might be honored with the Knowledge of,
probable to answer the proposed End: And the Speaker of the Assembly of Georgia
wrote, that a Majority of their Members had applied to the Governor to call
their Assembly, and he did not think it Expedient, which was the Reason they
did not send a Committee as proposed, but requested us to transmit a Copy of
our Proceedings to them (which will be done) and that their Assembly would meet
about this Time, and he did not doubt but they should Act so as to convince the
Sister Colonies of their inviolable Attachment to the Common Cause: We also
understood the North Carolina, and we know the Virginia Assembly, was
Prorogued, whereby they could not have the Opportunity of joining us; so that
we doubt not but the Colonies who have not Signed, will very speedily transmit
similar Addresses, etc. if their Assemblies should not be hindered from
Meeting: And to this Purpose, we hope you will soon hear from the Assembly of
South Carolina. By the Gentlemen of that Colony we were favored with a Sight
of your late Letters, and informed of your careful and spirited Conduct with
Regard to the Interests of that Colony, and that, together with your
Declaration, which we find in those Letters, that you enjoy an independent Seat
in the British Parliament, induced us (as we have no established Agent at
present. for this Province, nor have yet been able to obtain a Law to Tax
ourselves for that Purpose) to trouble you with our Request, that you will
Present the enclosed Address to his Majesty, and Memorial and Petition to the
Houses of Parliament, and exert your utmost Interest and Abilities in behalf of
this poor distressed Country, and of this Province in particular.

We hope as there is a Change in the Ministry, and as the Gentlemen in the
House of Commons, may at their next Meeting, take a more enlarged View of the
true Interest of Great Britain, and her Colonies, they will find it to be in
supporting the Rights and encouraging the Trade of the latter, and that the
Happiness of the Mother Country and her Colonies must be inseparable, and that
we shall obtain Relief.

The several Committees agreed to recommend it to their respective Colonies to
appoint Special Agents on this Occasion, and to instruct them to unite their
utmost Interest and Endeavors for that Purpose. One Address, etc. was
transmitted by the Gentlemen of the Massachusetts Government, immediately to
their Agent (Mr. Jackson we understood) and we expect the other Colonies will
have Duplicates sent to their Agents, and we hope will all unite in Expense and
Instructions, to have able Counsel before both the Lords and Commons, as our
Petitions pray.

We were entrusted with the Disposition of some Money upon this Occasion, and
enclose you a Bill of Exchange, on Messrs. Capel and Osgood Hanbury, for One
Hundred and Fifty Pounds Sterling, as a Compensation for your Trouble and
Expense in this Affair. We doubt not our Assembly will approve of what we do in
this Matter; and as they are to meet the last of this Month, we shall lay our
Proceedings before them, and it is probable they will write you more fully, and
furnish you with such further Instructions and Arguments, as may appear to them
to be proper to be given and urged on this Occasion, in Behalf of the Colonies.

We are, Your most obedient Servants.

ANNAPOLIS: Printed by Jonas Green, Printer to the Province. MDCCLXVI.


