Morning and Evening's MEDITATION, OR, A DESCANT ON THE TIMES, A POEM.

BY T. L.

-- Silvis ubi passim,
Palantis error certo de tramite pellit,
Ille sinistrorsum, hic dext^orsum abis, unus utrique
Error, sed uariis illudit partibus HOR.
While mazy error draws mankind astray,
From truth's sure path each takes his devious way;
One to the right, one to the left recedes,
Alike deluded as each fancy leads. ELPHINSTON's Tr.
LONDON, Printed. PHILADELPHIA, Reprinted and Sold by B. FRANKLIN and D. HALL.
1766.

THE PREFACE.
THE following essay is the fruit of some solitary hours, penned and published
with a sincere desire for the reformation of the several classes of mankind,
who are immersed in vice and sensuality, -- of the designing and knavish, --
and the stability of every virtuous, and ingenious person.

The manner in which I have thrown my thoughts together, seemed to occur the
most easy, and for some reasons appeared to me the most eligible.

I am not so vain as to imagine my performance is free from inaccuracies; but
such errors as have either escaped my notice, or are beyond my weak abilities
to amend, I hope my Candid Reader will correct and excuse.

The person who ventures out on the public Stage as an author, becomes of
course subject to the various criticisms of his observers; the keen invectives
of satire, and the poisoned arrows of envy, are illiberally dealt against his
character and productions. -- These I am prepared to receive, with a contempt
due to the efforts of malevolence; and, at the same time, shall not forget to
pay a proper respect and deference to the criticisms of candor and ingenuity.

The poem before you, contains neither the Life nor Opinions of Tristram
Shandy, the Memoirs of a Gentleman of Pleasure, or the Amors of a Lady of
Quality. -- A piece, I must confess, not so well adapted to the genius of the
present age; an age, in which subjects serious, important and interesting, can
scarce obtain a hearing, are treated with indifference, and forgot, whilst
their authors are ridiculed as fools, or pitied as enthusiasts.

To treat of the Deity, his attributes, the relation we stand in to him, and
the indispensable obligation of social and religious duties, -- to excite
considerations on the uncertainty of time, the certainty of death, and the
awful approaching decision of infinite wisdom and purity, with a certain class
of mankind, are deemed enthusiastic speculations, and idle reveries; -- the
certain specimens of either ignorance, a heated zeal, or of incurable madness.
A class, who* to avoid the extreme of superstition and fanaticism, have
incautiously run into another still more alarming and dangerous, from the
borders of Implicit Faith to the confines of Infidelity, from a false heated
zeal to the coldest indifference, and from the austerities of a penance to the
most relaxed licentious indulgence. Be ours to walk in the happy medium of
truth, and of right reason; the medium between the zeal-less and zealot, or
indifference and presumption; and let the deluded of both extremes become the
objects of our pity, and be remembered in our prayers.

You of every rank, degree, and circumstance in life, into whose hand this may
fall, as rational and accountable beings, improve the few, fleeting moments of
your continuance in this mode of existence, in matters of infinite consequence;
consider seriously the important business of life, acquaint yourselves with the
various branches of a Christian's duty, and discharge them with integrity.

Remember time is short; life altogether uncertain; and that death is
inevitable. The time is approaching, when the sable mantle of affliction will
be cast over all the pomp of a court, the glitter of a ball, and the ludicrous
scenes of a comedy. The period, the awful period is hastening, when from life
will be exhausted all its balm, and from terrestrial objects their power of
pleasing -- when every enjoyment will become insipid, except the complacent
notice of uncreated excellence, the testimony of a good conscience, and the
assurance of a happy futurity. Devote then your days, should they be few or
many, to the service of Him, who has called us to glory and virtue. Let not
the enchanting scene of illusive pleasures, the influence of bad example, or
the incitement of the libertine, prevail on you to run with the heedless
multitude to do evil; walk pensive with the few on the side of virtue, acquit
yourselves as men, and as Christians, and the lot of your inheritance will be
with the just; -- for, Verily there is a reward for the righteous, verily there
is a God who judges the earth.

A well-wisher to all Mankind, T. L.

A DESCANT on the TIMES.
THE clock strikes five -- the fiery orb appears;
He seems to emerge as from the briny deep,
Just gilds the hoary brow of yon high mount,
Darts lucid gleams throughout the atmosphere,
And bids depart the shadows of the night.
At his command they flee the firmament;
Then, for a moment, haunt the deep recess
Of arched valleys, groves, and leafy woods;
Now, higher risen, 'nihilates the gloom --
Drowns ancient night in farthest western seas.
The flowery mead, the shrub, the quick-set hedge,
Spread over with Heaven's dew, in luster vies
With orient gems; so christalline the drops:
No cloud is seen, throughout the wide expanse
Of Heaven's arched vault; the vapor dense
Ascending from the valleys, marshy swamps,
Sol's rays, obliquely glancing, dissipate.
Now, let me labor up the acclivity
Of yonder eminence, and there recline
Upon the verdant ridge, bask in the blaze
The genial heat inspire, and feel the glow
Of Sol's refulgent rays glide through my veins --
Correct the languor of my quivering pulse,
Exhilerate my spirits, sinking, sunk
By cruel hectic, colliquative sweats.
The steep now gained, the pleasing landscape opes --
A variegated scene's disclosed to view,
Of hills, of dales, of woods, of smiling meads,
And interspersed with riv'lets, meand'rous streams.
See, what large herds of cattle, spread around,
With bags distended by salubrious juice,
Lowing, impatient wait the loitering swain
To ease them of a full, spring, milky tide!
The feathered species hop from spray to spray;
Or, perched on the highest branch of lofty elms,
Or on the pliant hazel twig, adjust
Their variegated plumes in neat arrange,
And hail the morn with songs of gratitude.
The aspiring lark, her matin anthem thrills
High in the aerial space, beyond my ken,
Lost in the blaze of Sol's refulgent beams;
Not out of hearing, her melodious song,
Soft tuned, more grateful than the violins,
Descending lights upon m' attentive ear;
The inspiration of her tuneful lay
My mind, so much depressed beneath the load
Of complicate disease, exhilerates.
O! how my soul's enraptured! what a scene,
Diversified around, now strikes my eye;
My ear, what melody -- even nature seems
To raise my soul to thoughts refined, sublime,
Of the grand cause. But O! how weak the powers
Of human reason! the most enlarged ideas
Frail mortals form, or seraphs can attain,
Are infinitely short of God's perfections --
His attributes! O what a vast profound!
Hark! Moses hints his power! proclaims his praise!
The world in chaos -- without form, and void --
When darkness envelop'd the formless mass --
Ere man, or beast, or fish, or reptile lived,
The Almighty fiat spoke; then, order sprang
From drear confusion; beauty, out of void.
Let there be light -- in the east the windows opened --
The grand, primoeval day began to dawn;
And there was light -- he placed the firmament --
The atmosphere -- imposed on matter laws.
The sun, the moon, the starry myriads formed,
Assigned their spheres in wisdom consummate,
Described their ample circuit, bade them whirl
With motion uniform, the round immense.
Behold! on fair creation's wrote, A God!
Throughout the scale of beings animate!
Throughout all nature's scene inanimate!
Lo! every species, genus, bears his name,
In characters divine it is strong impressed;
Even legible to Reason's cloudy eye;
So plain, that we may even Run and Read
His power, his godhead; we are without excuse.
O thou supreme, all-wise, sufficient God --
Cause, unoriginate! to contemplate
The effects of wisdom, power, in spheres above
The azure, wide, immensurable space
Of ether; or, the grand display, beneath,
Of power, and wisdom -- feeble reason bows
In humble admiration -- What is man!
Will thou regard him! will thou deign to stoop
To his infirmities -- to notice man --
A humbling thought -- thou have, thou do, thou will.
For MAN, Immanuel bled on Calvary!
For MAN, a bloody sweat bedewed his brow!
For MAN, he cried, Lama Sabacthani!
For MAN, he lived, he died! -- what love is this!
Does man despise him! daring folly this!
And has he bled in vain! the question, this,
Our duty, interest, urge to ask ourselves --
Our all is at stake; be serious; let us enquire --
But oh! lamentable! so vain is man,
Hot in pursuit of riches, fame, or power,
Forgets the business which demands dispatch;
The most momentous business of his life;
On which unfading glory does depend,
Drops, in his thoughts, enduing substance, and
Hunts, fondly, Phantom's train; illusive joys:
Till, or affliction's school, the deathbed shows
His fatal error, by the approach of woe.
What numbers are there -- now, within the walls
Of yon great city, sunk below the brute,
(Nor can the learned Johnson coin a word
Too mean, expressive of nor man nor beast)
Inebriated with nectareous juice
Kind providence to man, to cheer him, gave,
Misused, has proved his bane, now snoring lays
On the soft pillow; on the downy plumes;
Of God forgetful -- lost to all that is good,
To reason dead, and dead to common sense,
And dead to shame, or live to glory in it,
Even rebels to their nature, and their God.
Awake, ye sons of sloth! ye epicures!
See! all the tribes, to man subordinate,
Proclaim your folly, loudly deal to you
Reproof, keen pointed; hear! the ox, the ass
Upbraids you -- all creation censures man.
Come, O ye epicures! ye worldlings, come
And leave the bed of lewdness; leave the bowl,
Cotemporaries all in age, and vice,
Ascend this hill, let the adult'rer's eye,
Half open, give but a glance on yonder scene,
Attend to the honest (...) in the birds*
Reflect on nature, then on providence; --
Reflect on the order in the universe --
The sun, the moon, the stars, stupendous orbs! --
The various genus of the plants spread over
The surface of the earth; the various tribes
Of animals, of reptiles, insect tribes,
Unnumber'd as the sands, or deep immured
Beneath the turf, or, furnished with the wing
Attenuated, mount the air, traverse
In millions, in the fluid atmosphere;
Then on the dignity designed for man.
Shall man, high placed, at head of creatures here,
First on the list of beings visible
Beneath the skies, but little lower than
An angel made, designed to reign as king
Over all inferior beings in the world,
Or species in creation, what! shall he
His station quit, descend beneath the brutes!
Shall man! oh shocking! formed for happiness,
For glory, honor, immortality,
Created free, endowed with reason too,
Powers intellectual, to read, to trace,
In nature's mighty volume, his own heart --
In every thing he sees a cause supreme --
(A self-sufficient, wise, Almighty God:)
Who knows his station, does, or may, the end
Designed by his creation; free to think,
Compare, reflect, invest with power to act
The part becoming his superior rank,
Forget his dignity, forget his place,
Turn traitor against his interest and his God,
Degrade his nature, and degrade his name;
Invert his laws; stand forth in arms against
A God, his providence, and against himself?
O what a pity! is it then his case?
Exists that man, so stupid and so blind,
An high born heir of glory! has he sold
His birthright for a fulsome mess of sense?
There is -- a mournful truth! traverse the streets
On yon metropolis -- of young and old,
Degree and sex, or high or low in life,
Deluded victims, bound with chains of sense --
Bondslaves to lustful passions, pleasures styled,
Feast there the eye, the ear; there every crave
Of groveling appetite employs their thoughts;
Their heads, their hands, their time, more precious far
Than all the treasure of the universe!
Than all the tinsels of an Eastern court!
The empty pleasures of an empty world,
Though canonized by custom and levees.
Are these the pleasures? Does the dazzling glare
Of terrene objects, momentary joys,
Amusements vain, of toys theatrical,
The intellectual eye of reason blind,
Invert man's ideas, and retund his thoughts,
Obscure the laws of reason, laws of God,
Show vice as virtue, and as virtue vice;
Phantoms for men, for substance shadows show:
Height of delusion; delusion this the worst;
Power abused, the light of conscience shunned,
The fatal cause of such insanity?
Nor physical; it is a moral cause.
Who will confront me, or who dare pretend
They follow nature, when they break her laws,
Their conscience violate, and Heaven charge
For want of power! -- O! let me here address
The men of pleasure; men, in vice grown gray,
In age but youths -- in vice decrepid, old,
Over whom their baneful influence poppies shed*
Till in lethargic stupor sunk -- a death
To all that is worthy man's rememberance.
Awake ye sluggards! 'wake at Heaven's call,
Ere death, with sure though silent stop, intrude --
Break up your dream with his terrific shock,
And hurl you, trembling, down the dreadful steep,
From Folly's giddy heights to shades beneath,
To meet your recompense for powers abused.
Trace back the path you have trod in life, recall
The yesterday, the years expired, the time,
In idea, when the blush of innocence
And modesty with crimson graced the cheek,
Even at the mention of those vices which
An after-boldness, with a smile, indulged.
Were youthful passions 'waken'd by a lure?
What voice forbad it then? What fear possessed
The very soul in the interval, the pause
Ere biased will was seconded by act?
Reason forbad it, Conscience gave a twitch.
Was not truth's language -- O! my son, refrain --
All unregarded, headlong rushed the youth,
As horses to the siege, or battle plunge,
Unheeding death, from various engines dealt;
Timid, at first they consecrated shades
T'indulge the foul, flagitious, wanton lust --
In privacy the newborn vice was raised;
Familiariz'd, stalked boldly by their sides
In open daylight, unabash'd appeared;
Star'd virtue out of countenance; she hid
Her modest face; she blushed red for them
Who, dead to shame, forgot to blush themselves.
But, whither do I rove? My pensive soul,
Her powers employed by such momentous themes,
Has left my feet to wander 'thout a guide;
A riv'let's limpid stream recals my thoughts;
What shade is that reflected? It Is my own!
But rude, imperfect this, external form.
Reflection, in the lucid mental stream
Of peerless truth, unruffled by the wind
Of passions turbulent -- presents a form
Expressive, perfect, and instructive too --
The moral shade of man exhibits plain;
It Is reason's mirror, and a virtue here,
To view the image rising in the glass;
Discriminate its features, mark its faults.
This, if neglected, self's an odious sight
Deformed by pride, and blackened deep with vice.
The garb we dress in for the public view,
Of honor, honesty -- a pompous form,
Cannot conceal, in clear reflection's glass,
The darling vice -- the scheme iniquitous,
Or latent evil purpose of the soul,
The inmost form arises full in view;
Delineated by the ablest hand --
The steady hand of truth, the pencil glides,
And draws a perfect portrait of the man:
Reflection! it is a very hell to fools,
They beg redemption of the nearest toy.
Amusement seems to alleviate the pain
Of keen, vibrating truth's convictive stroke;
Or, for a moment, poignant thoughts prevent;
Gives Fancy wings, she mounts the aereal space,
Builds castles there, ideally connect;
Above a God -- above his providence.
O! what a sight! see, how the fopling struts!
A consequential air, his tete, his hands
And back assumes, his feet Italic gait,
Beneath the cane's head grasps his hand, to show
The naked, embossed imagery there.
Bid him reflect -- his hand's upon his sword;
A man of honor, nor can brook affronts:
Reason has left him; he is worse than mad.
O! thou vain mortal, emmet of a day;
What, art thou proud? Do look down with disdain
On all beneath thee? Beneath, did I say?
There Is not a soul beneath thee in the world;
Perched on the point of mode, have thou forgot,
Or ever learnt, the business of a man?
Or that of sins, pride's one, and bears the palm?
A sin against God, as well as common sense.
Reflect, and meet thy naked heart alone!
What various baubles, empty, glittering toys,
Delude the human soul, and captivate
Her noble faculties; the heart of man,
That ought be dedicated to the Lord;
A temple sacred to the Holy Ghost!
What various idols fill from all his thoughts!
A God, a providence, is banished; what
Amazing stupor lulls the sons of men,
Intoxicated with a glut of trash!
Lusts are their gods, and lusts they serve, adore:
Like filthy swine, some wallow in the mire,
Of foulest vices, and prefer it too;
Like filthy swine they rake the jakes of lust,
Their eyes are fixed -- are centered in the earth --
Voracious, pall unnatural appetites.
Beneath the fruitful tree of providence,
Pleased with effects, called adventitious fruit;
It Is fortuitous ideas fill their brains.
Come! every man, who rev'rences a God --
Reveres his laws -- makes them his rule of life,
Manhood lay 'side, let us, as children weep,
They for their toys, let us for substance weep;
Licentiousness exulting in the land,
Spreads blackest horror, "darkness to be felt;"
Darkness more dense than filled a guilty land,
When gross idolatry in triumph reigned;
And sheds a living terror on the soul.
See, Vice so daring, walks the open street,
And, strumpet-like, stares virtue in the face;
Defying law -- in face even of the sun;
Vices to think of, make me even blush,
To write of more, they make me tremble too.
The English genius, not enough acute,
To coin fresh ***** equal to the taste --
The cravings of our modern appetite,
Our ports are opened -- earth is ransacked over;
Exotics are imported duty free;
Here they improve, though not their native soil;
High they aspire, with wide extended branch,
Reach from the C**** to cots of simple swains,
Shade budding virtues, and prevent their bloom.
Brutes are outvied, the Hottentots would blush,
Could they imagine, much more see the scenes
Of vicious pleasures in this British isle,
Inverting nature's laws -- men living here
Without a God, without a sense of shame;
Merely for sake of empty life they live;
Even shorten the short span which Heaven gives,
By luxury -- and Epicurean feasts.
The gaming table, brothel, **********,
Plays, operas, the bottle, flowing bowls,
Their souls distract -- (distraction is their joy)
Fill up their waking moments, haunt their dreams,
The iron sinew melt, unnerve the man.
Huge edifices, groan our hospitals
Beneath the weight of riot, debauchees;
See, pile on pile, high towering to the roof,
Of every age betraying ghastly forms,
Extended lay on foul disease's rack,
Emaciated, putrid, yet alive;
There -- grim death reigns, in all his terrors clothed;
More dreadful still -- a wounded conscience reigns,
Truth's bow, tight strung, than iron stronger, drawn,
Sinks deep the poisoned arrows in the soul,
And banishes delusive gleams of peace.
How many are there now, on beds of down,
Whose day nor night afford no glympse of light,
The light of hope, to allay their mental rage,
Bear up the soul to mock diseases rack,
And open prospects to celestial spheres;
The would be Atheist's pomp and glory fades,
His manly courage -- casual jumbling schemes,
Now vanish as a vapor -- he believes
The sceptic's cloud of doubts are clear dispelled --
Life's evening curtain's drawn on every scene
Illusive, and their Heaven now dissolves;
Old fears revive, with double horror fraught,
Fears, grounded in convulsive aching, throbs
Of wounded conscience, rivetted remorse,
Whose torture constitutes a hell on earth.
A Hell! whose flames an ocean cannot quench,
A Hell! which the inebriating juice
Will still increase -- a Hell! that is beneath
The reach of strong emetic's power to cleanse;
A pain the nearest friend cannot abate,
Nor all invention's soothing opiates.
In this degenerate age, what candid man,
Of virtuous principles, of virtuous life,
Can now forbear to shed unfeigned tears,
The torrent of licentious trash to view,
Through the abused medium of the Press,
Impetuous flowing over this British isle,
The few remaining seeds of virtue left
Contaminating -- novels, foul, obscene --
To see; O what a thought! -- men prostitute
Distinguished genius in the cause of vice! --
By Heaven favored to promote the cause
Of sacred virtue, clothed with the gown
And holy characters of P******, D******.
O thou irrev'rend *****, for shame put up,
Restrain thy foul, obscene, licentious pen,
Nor more offend the ear of virtue with
That T -- st -- m S -- die libidinous stuff:
Strip off the gown, renounce thy sacred claim;
Quit, quit the altar; hide thee in a cave,
And gird thy loins with sackcloth;
On thy head strew ashes, then bewail the hurt
Thou'st done to Christ's cause -- repent, repent;
In deep contrition wash away thy guilt.
At such a time, in this licentious age,
O! what a pity! few -- too few indeed,
Of those who write professedly to serve
The cause of virtue -- to reform the world
(How shall I, now, repress the rising sigh --
Forbear to shed a solemn tear of grief)
By good example virtue's laws enforce --
Just sentiments, by practices as just.
As brethren ought, in harmony should live
Fair virtue's twins -- (the Christian's ornament)
United, hand in hand, ought travel on
Throughout the vale of time, fast by our sides,
Imparting mutual aid to virtue's cause,
The learned lecture -- the elegant essay,
Impotent (single) to effect the end
Of reformation; precept waits the aid
Of bright examples powerful allure,
TO attract the attention of the giddy throng,
And regulate the chaos multitude.
But reason points to Lambeth -- says, behold
A second Tillotson resideth there;
His meekness, charity, exhibits plain
A bright example to the sable cloth --
Amongst the writers of the moral class,
She singles out a Johnson from the few;
A giant genius -- humble, yet erect --
A Saul amongst his brethren appears,
As wise, as learned, as truly good as great.
Oh! modest Johnson, thy unrivaled pen,
And moments few, the glass of time contains,
To virtue dedicate -- O may thy sun
Unclouded sink beneath the horizon;
In good old age, may thy gray hairs descend
The silent grave -- thy soul ascend above --
To peaceful mansions in celestial spheres.
Kind Charity, who always thinks the best,
Now whispers in my ear -- inspires a hope
Ingenious L -- gh -- e stands amongst the few.
Ye men of conscience, honest, virtuous men,
Of every name, society and class,
Who wail religion's ebb, low ebb indeed;
Who, trembling, view the swelling torrent poured,
That, pouring still with unremitted speed
Of open unabash'd licentiousness,
Like a proud rapid current falling down
From giddy heights (see the drear cataracts)
Falling it foams, the loud discordant roar
Strikes craggy mountains towering to the clouds,
Reverberates a tremor all around,
Shocks human nature, placid reason too,
Lay manhood 'side, let us as children weep;
They for their toys, let us for substance weep.
END OF THE FIRST PART.
PART II.
WHILST I sit musing by this limpid stream,
The leafy hazels shade from piercing rays,
Here gentle zephyrs temperate the heat;
The purling rill, the distant water-fall,
Stills every passion rude, and spreads a calm
Solemnly pleasing; the delightful scene,
Diversified around, outvies the pomp,
The empty gew-gaws of the vain Beau-Monde.
O for a L -- or -- r, some other friend,
As true as they unrotten at the core,
To stray with me aside the mazy stream,
Along the sylvan groves or hazel copse,
To share the pleasures of the gilded morn,
And taste the simple joy of rural scenes.
What, am I then alone! millions around,
Of various beings, swarm the grove, and spread
The grassy hillock, skim the mantling stream,
Partake the boon the God of nature sheds
On fair creation, and they all rejoice
In his beneficence, express his praise.
All nature's big with life, earth, air and sea
With beings teem; gradations infinite
Of size and species, in each element.
Perhaps there is fish to whom a sprat's a whale;
Insects as small to mites, as mites to men,
To whom a Millet-seed may be a globe,
Proportionate, as large as this to man.
Now drowsy citizens begin to rise,
Open wide the shop, expose their tinsel wares;
The ribbon curious wrought, the embroidered silk,
To attract the passing crowd; now various schemes,
Planned in the zenith of old night's domain,
To accumulate the pelf of golden ore,
Or right or wrong, or honest or unjust,
With unrelenting ardour are pursued.
The knavish dealer, BROKER, BULL or BEAR.
Law is his gospel; lawyers are his priests --
Proteus like, transformed to every shape,
The likeness of a saint as near assumes
As Satan does the angels form and light.
Morose or placid, arrogant or meek --
The place of sense effrontery supplies;
Of reason, of religion, honesty;
Conscience is banished when she cannot approve,
The petty-fogger then supplies her place;
The cause his business, if, or right or wrong,
To plead, maintain, his client pays the score;
Base interest is his guide, yea it is his god,
He worships her; Indians adore the sun;
The Indian's ignorant, but he is a knave;
Foments contention, blows it to a flame,
Then keeps it living by the quirks of law.
Descanting on the vices of the times,
A trade most infamous must not escape
My justest censure -- Negroe traffic, vile!
The wide extended coast of Africa's
Patrol'd by monsters, Christian cannibals,
The natives quarrels to perpetuate,
On either side their toys to truck for men.
When Afric's flames of war but languid blaze,
Nor hopes of sudden freight their minds elate,
European, Christian policy, supplies
Fresh fuel, throws it on the dying fire.
O what a sight! -- see! human beings ranged,
Exposed to sale, as horses at a fair;
Creolan salesmen exercise the whip,
Or make them run, or walk, or show their teeth;
The bargain struck, they are doomed to slavery,
To proud, despotic planters, men devoid
Of every right to rule, but power usurped --
Of social virtues, all humanity,
To virtue dead, alive to every vice,
Reduced by luxury to walking ghosts --
Of men but shadows, or the imps of ***;
The cruel tyrants take the man for beast;
As such he is used, if different, it is worse.
One Lord, in power, in wisdom infinite,
Of one blood all the different nations made --
All claim relation equal to the source --
The common father of the human race --
The common parent's gracious unto all;
Nor hue, nor clime, nor wealth, degree nor power,
Dominion gives a brother to inthral.
Brethren we are, from pole to pole, overspread
The ant-hill surface of this little globe,
And here we ought in amity to creep,
Till wisdom infinite shall summons hence --
Strip off our clay, and mount us 'bove the world.
Slave! human nature scorns the abject name;
Apply it rightly, stamp it on the beast;
The beast's to bear it, and that is Heaven's decree;
His course invert! thou vain, presumptuous worm;
His laws and natures violate! high treason!
God will avenge the cause of the oppressed.
O Europe! Christendom! what is a NAME!
Compare this traffic with the Christian law,
A law, worthy indeed of God to give,
Man to obey -- hear! even as thou would
Be done unto, so unto others do.
Recall the C****c t***e, nor vainly dream
Of making converts in a distant clime
Where this is known; the Christians deal in slaves!
What thinks the Indian, what the Mussulman,
Or what the Heathen? What the scattered Jews?
The climes idolatrous, of civilized?
First proselyte the infidels at home --
First cruel sons instruct in that grand law,
Charity, offspring divine, from Heaven gave,
In goodness gave, the rugged nature of
The man to smooth, to perfect human kind
This is neglected; why? Base interest reigns.
See! many rise in pomp, add house to house,
Estate unto estate on rent rolls add
By mere deceit, o'er-reaching, private frauds --
Oppressions gain their swelling coffers fill.
See! proud Glorio rolls along in state,
Close at his heels a pompous equipage;
Giant in power -- in virtue but a dwarf:
Amongst the gaping throng, wherever he goes
He scatters terror with indignant glance;
Like Leviathans, in the northern seas,
Preys on his fellow creatures; he devours
The widow and the orphan -- lo! his pride,
Leagued with his power, stalks lordly through the land.
See! the industrious tradesman haunts his porch,
Beseeching payment of an ancient debt --
With suppliant knee he begs -- but for his due,
Unhear'd, unnotic'd begs -- but begs in vain.
Pufft up with pride -- with the empty dignity
Of sounding titles -- down the putrid stream
Of luxury he swims, along the vale
To vast eternity; yet unperceives
The quick succession of protuding hours,
Frail nature urging, onward to the brink
Of that tremendous precipice of death.
All his old follies gather strength from age,
And each new wrinkle brings a new desire.
Beloved ****, and a vile romance,
In deep oblivion bury thoughts of death.
O! what a sight! behold the youthful lust,
Fresh, blooming still upon the hoary head,
Whose dim eyes sunk, must soon for ever close
To all terrestrial glory -- all its bliss --
The pomp of courts -- the glitter of a ball --
Delusive pleasures and the feasts of sense!
O! foolish Glorio! when will thou be wise --
Correct thy errors, and prepare to DIE.
Of those who live in state, in chariots loll,
Half drowned in luxury, and drunk with pride,
How many now (conscience recalled) must blush
To trace their labored steps back to the vale
Of penury; or to review the means
By which they climbed the slippery mount of wealth:
The ideal ghosts of orphans, widows, poor
Laborious mechanics they'ave oppressed,
Would then appear in view, in every place,
Whilst living, haunt them, in the hour of death,
The soul itself would shudder with despair,
And trembling, drop into the deep abyss,
Where Is weeping, wailing, gnashing of the teeth.
Where is the honest, where is the ingenuous man,
Who squares his actions by the golden rule,
Whose heart is free from every paltry bribe;
Every oppressive means of gain despise,
And make his fellow creatures case his own?
"The world's all title page, there is no contents;
"The world's all face, the man who shows his heart
"Is whooted for his nudities and scorned."
Why, here and there we see one amongst the crowd,
Like glowworms scattered over the parched turf,
Or in the thicket blazing as a star;
Nor wonder then, the honest and the brave,
The man that is just beyond a point of law,
The world writes on his forehead fool or mad;
He Is an exception against TOO GENERAL RULES.
Methinks, on wings of contemplation raised,
I have now a prospect of the busy world,
See multitudes with multitudes commix'd;
Toward the enchanted golden mount they press,
With furious ardor -- how they force their way,
Run over the widows, push the orphans down;
See! tender Virtue's almost pressed to death;
She cries aloud, but who regards her cry?
What mingled plaints approach the car divine --
From the oppressed! real plaints ascend
From the oppressor's hypocritic forms,
To blind his neighbor, and effect his end.
See! father against his son, and, in his turn,
The son against his father; and the brother,
By interest blinded, strives to cheat his brother.
Nor only social bonds, the stronger tie
Of relative affection, is dissolved;
The torrent of mere mercenary thoughts
Have drowned love; have sympathy repressed.
Lo! one for one his private interest seeks;
Religion, truth, all that is sacred too
Is called upon to cloak the foulest schemes,
And vouch the purity of hypocrites;
The tinsel shrine of INTEREST is adored:
Some of the r******* t***e, C*n***c class,
Lay prostrate at her feet, they beg her aid
To guide them to a benefice; to crown
Their learned heads with m*****, and to clothe
Their nakedness and poverty in lawn.
O how my soul's convulsed, to view from hence
The various means of craft, chicanery,
Which various men, their various ends to gain,
Adopt, yea consecrate, beneath the cloak
Of truth, religion, honor, public good.
See! what a hideous monster yonder struts,
Goliah's size -- MONOPOLY by name --
Stalks ghastly amongst the throng, his rolling eyes
Flash baneful avarice at every glance,
At every step wide devastation spreads!
Pale, meagre FAMINE, follow'ng at his heels;
No seed of virtue's living in his soul,
Meek sympathy, benevolence and truth --
The common feelings of humanity
Are banished -- Int'rest's base, mere selfish laws,
Guides every step, and every act inspires.
See! in his hand a cruel scythe he holds,
Now sweeps it amongst the pigmy multitude,
Destruction's dealt around at every sweep,
And thousands fall fast-by his ponderous side;
See! thunderstruck the gaping throng aghast,
Stand trembling -- boldly he defies the world,
And glories in his conquests -- where is the youth
By virtue strengthened, and by wisdom taught,
Dare now step forth, and give the monster fight.
Yon legislature has him in his eye --
The monster huge Monopoly pursues;
His coward heart already quakes for fear,
See paleness gathers on the giant's brow,
Whilst every Israelite exulting, shouts.
Hear, all ye worldings! hear, ye men of PREY!
Of every name, of every place and trade,
Who eat, and then in vain attempt to hide,
The omniscient God explores your very souls
Through all the trappings of a pompous show,
Or painted garbs of vile hypocrisy;
Nor is unseen the deepest, dark recess,
Or schemes in embryo concealed there.
Come, all ye knaves, come, summons all your art,
Take to your nitre; wash yourselves with soap;
Try all expedients sophistry affords,
Or syllogisms logic can produce,
Your sins are seen, iniquities are marked;
Omniscience, nor only what you seem,
But what you really are, his eye beholds!
To flee his presence whither will ye go?
Ascend to Heaven, lo! a God is there;
Or to the depths descend, a God is there;
Or to the ocean's bounds -- he is every where;
The darkness and the light's the same to him.
Hear, all ye worldlings -- hear, ye men of prey --
Nor think you there is a God, hereafter too?
Nor think you ever of judgment after death?
You know, you feel those poignant, solemn truths;
Awake they haunt you -- haunt nocturnal dreams,
Tread on your heels, and whisper on your ears;
Even at the banquet house sometimes they are heard --
A hand is seen to write, as on the wall,
When mirth and jolitry reigns noisy round,
You would efface it, would expel the thoughts,
Flee their Conviction, fain elude their force,
Or, like a Felix, beg them to depart;
Yet still they haunt you -- would you lay the ghosts,
Repent, amend, they will vanish and be gone.
Be wise; consider; live as man ought live;
Correct your errors -- peace will then attend.
Come ye, the gleanings of a guilty land,
Whoever you are, or wheresoe'er you dwell,
(The friends to real truth, the friends of man)
Untainted yet with vices popular,
Who walk in innocence, the paths of peace --
Are strangers to the pleasure and the pain
The vicious multitude enjoy, and rue;
May I be your companion through the vale
Of present life, and yours in future too,
When this frail body, bore down with disease,
Shall to its center drop, a ghastly corpse,
And some kind friend turn up the turf, and hide
My putrid carcass in the silent grave,
To lay and rot amongst the ancient dead;
O! what a chill the thought sends through my blood!
The libertine, be his to sneer at God,
Deride his providence, deny his laws --
Curse Virtue when he meets her in the street;
Invention torture, rack his very brains
TO invent diversions for his guilty soul,
And 'bate the force of constitutions fears,
He Will find they are wove into his very soul.
Be yours, as beings rational and free,
To contemplate the man, explore yourselves;
To contemplate the deity; to read
His wisdom, power, in the objects all around;
Adore him, fear him, and observe his law --
His laws -- the grand palladium of our bliss,
The ruling principle in nature's scenes,
Ought be the ruling principles of man.
But where to read his law? They Are wrote within;
Nor need we ransack the huge towering pile
Of mighty volumes to find out his law --
Respecting man, a being rational;
In our own breasts, in the fair open page
Of conscience they are wrote, there we should read.
What matter then though infidels may laugh,
Or the licentious puff an empty blast
Of foulest ridicule, sarcastic fleers,
And passing hiss you, it is beneath the man,
By virtue crowned with her triumphant wreath,
To fear the idle censures of the world.
Immanuel sustained the CRUCIFY;
Upon his head they placed a crown of thorns:
Be yours to learn of him; forgive the wrong;
Pray even for your enemies -- overcome
The malice, pride and envy of the world,
By meekness, patience, faith and charity.
The Christians weapons these, his armor too,
His breast plate and his shield impregnable;
A meek forbearance's better than revenge.
The means to help ourselves, reform the man,
By passion overcome -- our enemy.
If just the censure; then remove the cause,
Correct thy errors; if unjust, increase
Thy watchfulness; be more upon thy guard
In every step; assert thy innocence,
And let thy conduct give report the lie;
Defeat the intent of every enemy,
The craft of knaves, and ignorance of fools.
By injuries we even may improve!
The day of trial is the test of faith!
These are occasions to call forth to view
The latent Christian virtues in the soul,
And give a striking proof of virtue's power;
As men acquit yourselves -- you're in the field,
Time is the day of battle, urge the fight;
Within, without your enemies in arms;
Man's greatest enemies are in his house,
And in his house appears his greatest friend;
If any man is tempted, it is by lusts;
If any man is saved, it is by grace,
And this salvation has appeared to all.
Remember life's a scene probationate,
Afflictions various await us here;
The alternates of health, disease and pain,
Vicissitudes of day, of night, of heat,
Of cold, of summer, winter, alternates
Fill up our time, uncertain too, what in
The approaching moment -- life or sudden death!
The cup of pleasure's mingled with the gall
Of disappointment; pain and pale disease
Of every rank and age, degree in life,
None here exempt, the Wormwood's dealt to all.
The life of man is like a natural day;
The sun of happiness is often hid
Behind a cloud of vapors from the earth.
O! for those purer realms, mansions divine!
Nor sun, nor moon, nor stars are wanted there;
Refulgent lights, to which the unclouded sun
In full meridian glory is opaque,
Where God, the Lamb, at once are light and joy,
And constitute an everlasting day --
Now adverse gales, now prosperous attend,
We Are now elated, then again depressed,
Like ships at sea; we, in the storm of life,
Now are uplift high on the mountain waves,
Descending swiftly, then the yawning gulf,
The hull's immerg'd, the laboring vessel heaves,
The affrighted pilot lashes to the helm;
Addresses him who walks on wings of wind,
Whose chariots are the clouds, to still the waves;
(Invoked in the storm, in calms forgot)
Rough, strong, keen, loud though Boreas may blow,
A dreary, stormy blast, lowering and black,
The clouds may gather, from the East may dart,
Bright coruscations, or the thunder roll
From pole to pole terrifick, torrents pour
From clouds capacious, waves with fury foam,
It Is God Almighty rules in the storm;
Nor murmur then, submit, yea kiss the rod,
A moment bear discordant elements --
Bear nature's clash, the din will soon be over,
And then ensues an everlasting calm --
But O! how hard to human nature, in the hour
When she aghast seems trembling on the verge
Of vast eternity, to cast the eye
Toward the Lord of Heaven, earth and sea,
Of all creation -- say thy will be done --
O! for a tabernacle on the mount --
But human nature shudders at these thoughts,
The Garden -- Calvary, and Golgotha.
The honest, virtuous man, has naught to fear,
Or in life's vale, or in the vale of death;
Before a tyrant, even on the rack,
His nature shrinks, his conscience wears a smile,
The paltry arts of torture with disdain
Looks down upon -- Endures the moment strife
Of human frailty, with disease's rage;
His cause refers to God, and in the hour
Of fell excruciating pangs of death,
Supports a dignity becoming man.
He meets the King of Terrors with a smile --
He welcomes him, as a redeeming angel,
By heaven sent to call to perfect day,
To perfect liberty and happiness.
To break the heavy fetters of this clay,
Incrusting thick the inhabitant within,
To loose her from captivity, to range
In spheres celestial, permanent above,
TO ascend that holy, fair, celestial mount,
The habitation of celestial souls,
With them to feast, enraptured, who surround
The awful throne -- who prostrate in the blaze
Of his refulgent glory -- ever live,
To sing the Hallelujah's -- themes divine!
The honest, virtuous man, has naught to fear;
He bears about a heaven in his soul,
Who dares to meet his naked heart alone,
With her communes, without a sickly pale,
Nor feels his blood run trembling to its source,
And knows her testimony's on his side --
Confides in God -- has hope, nor fears man.
Would thou be happy here, hereafter too;
Would thou be wise, be rich, be full, be safe?
Unmoved hear the praise and scorn of man;
Unmoved see him smile, or see him frown;
Nor praise nor obloquy take for thy rule
Through life to steer; within thou have a guide;
A faithful monitor -- a trusty friend:
Make Conscience then thy test; ask her report
Of all that is past; she will faithfully report;
She will not flatter, nor she cannot lie;
What friend's beside so perfect sound at core,
What friend so wise, so honest, so sincere,
To speak the truth, the whole, nor more nor less?
How loath are friends to probe the wounds of friends!
The wounds of friends how apt we are to heal
Deceitfully -- to extenuate their guilt.
Where is the man impartial to his friend
In every case, or to his enemy?
Affection's biass on the judgment hung,
Inclines the scale in favor of the man
At once we wish to serve and pleasure too.
That task how difficult to execute!
Trust not in man -- Vain is the help of man,
Though honored with a robe, a wand or staff,
A title, coronet or blazing star,
Surrounded with a numerous cringing train
Of fawning sycophants, at core decayed;
They Will bless and c --, as interest may urge.
The title dignified; they are but men;
They Are incident to pain, disease and death --
Death presses through the herd of hangers on,
Above, even ceremonies of a court,
Pass by the page, the lord in waiting, and
Invalidates the plea of privilege,
Arrests the peer, deep sinks the fatal dart;
In vain sagacious SMITH, that favored son
Of Hipp'crates prescribes; alas! he dies.
Above there is no distinction made between
The peasant and the prince; there titles drop --
Nor in the grave beneath -- the inhabitants
Of dreary, gloomy mansions of the dead
Know no distinction; merciless to all,
They prey upon the MONARCH and the Slave.
Trust not to man, he is like a broken reed,
Nor lean thereon, 'twill pierce thee to the heart;
Often make a pause amidst tumultuous life,
And feel the pulse of Conscience, how it beats;
And often withdraw from all the noisy world
To Solitude's instructive, pleasing vale;
Walk silent, pensive there -- there ruminate
On past occurrences -- there trace the spring
Of every action, and explore thyself.
In night's zenith, when thou art reclined
On downy plumes, forget the alluring toys --
All glittering objects, transitory, vain,
When on thy bed -- with thy own heart commune!
Be thine to act the open honest man,
(Nor take the advantage mere contingence gives,
In midst of plenty to proclaim a dearth,
T'ingross, monopolize, send through the land
The ghost of Famine, or distress the poor,
Increase their wants, and prey upon their fears.)
The honest humble man's desires are few,
And therefore few his wants, kind providence
Has put within his reach those few for him:
The wants of nature are but few, it is PRIDE
Increases them almost to INFINITE --
Pride sends us over the globe from pole to pole,
To rake the mines of Peru -- to import
The tinsels of the Indies -- It Is our pride
That swells enormously the heart's desires
For mere terrestrial superfluities;
Mere superfluities, not worth a wish;
They are but trifles, vain, sublunary.
To act as children's seemly in a child,
Toys are adapted to infantile years;
To act as children, and to play with toys,
Disgraces manhood -- Superfluities
Divert th'attention from important truths,
Subjects sublime, adapt to Reason's eye,
Distract our thoughts, plague even whilst they please.
Nor let me now, descanting on the Times --
Whilst pointing out the vices of the age;
In blackest shades painting the sensualist,
Lashing the hypocrite, that formal shrew,
A Churchill like, too rapid in my song
To make exceptions as I go along;
Forget to applaud, where 'plause is justly due,
I reverence merit wheresoe'er she dwells,
Or in a mansion, or the rural cot,
The good I honor, but I hate the knave;
Not hate the man, his vices it is I hate:
Though low indeed -- exceeding low the cause
Of true religion -- yet of every class
Of clergy, laity -- rulers and the ruled,
There are a few who, bound to virtue's cause,
Are friends of truth, of reason, and of man;
There are, and may their number still increase,
Men who deserve to rule, to be obeyed,
As constellations deck the azure sky,
(Their brilliant virtues) grace the church and state:
Come then, ye virt'us, let us forget a name --
Let Us close unite in virtue's sacred cause,
And make a stand against licentiousness.
On that fair, firm, that everlasting ground,
Charity! tongues, prophecies, will cease;
Charity never fails, it is the soul
Of all religion, worship -- it is the soul,
The inspiring soul of Heaven's holy song,
Accentuates the hallelujah there.
O! thou Almighty Being, pierce my soul,
Lay bare my heart, present it to my view,
Nor let me, blind to self, indulge one vice
My pen is drawn to censure in the world.
Lord! let a reverential awe possess
The inmost, deep recesses of my soul;
O! light up there a pure, a holy flame,
Purge off the dregs of every secret thought,
And every sin in embryo consume:
Nor let me only see the secret fault,
Deep rooted in the mental ground within,
But ere it peeps in act, O! lay thine hand
Upon it, though in judgment; extirpate
The root of evil from my very soul.
Methinks, this moment, lashing bold the age,
My imperfections stare me in the face;
The latent weakness hid from mortal eye,
In full view rise -- ah what a humbling sight!
O truth, thy kindness calls for loudest praise!
Nor let thy mercy unimprov'd escape,
Or, like a shadow, in a moment flee;
What man ought be, that let me strive to be;
And honor human nature; honor thee;
Write then my errors on my very heart,
As with a pen of iron 'grave them there,
Until reformed; let mercy then expunge
The dread handwriting, and forget my sins.
Nor let a vain, deluded, empty world's
Harsh censure, nor its frothy sounding praise,
Awake my fears, light up hope's lamp, or warp
The virtuous purpose of my cool resolve,
To follow Truth wherever she may lead;
May thou, but O! I shudder at the thought,
The spirit's willing, human nature's weak,
When my last awful day shall dawn, or in
The bloom of life, meridian, or old age,
Ancient of Days be with me, stay my mind
In humble trust, and confidence in thee,
The darksome dreary valley to illume!
When pale disease, exulting on my brow,
Shall mock the feeble power of medicine,
And death's cold sweat shall trickle down my face,
Bear up my soul with thy Almighty power
Over death, the grave and hell to triumph then,
In hope of blessed immortality --
In full assurance of ETERNAL BLISS.
AN EVENING'S MEDITATION.
THE clock strikes nine; the light of day departs;
No longer tinged with gold yon mountain's top;
See Heaven's bright lamps light up, the planets rise;
The blackbird, thrush, and tuneful lark are dumb;
A silence universal seems to reign,
Save the soft murmurs of a purling rill,
Which grateful break upon my listening ear.
Methinks I view the inhospitable climes
Where Mogul, Cham, or Asiatic prince,
Or proud Bashaw, despotic tyrants, reign,
Or deserts wide-extended, burning sands,
Waste howling wildernesses! dreary scenes!
The sun girt, giant-like, to run his race,
His highest altitude attained, darts down
The piercing ray, with swiftness not conceived;
The sultry scorching heat the Indian drives
To seek a shade beneath the creeping shrub.
When western oceans quench the fiery ball,
And sable evening spreads her twilight robe
Over parched deserts, and Arabian sands,
Voracious monsters quit the hidden den,
Propell'd by hunger, and by nature fierce,
And haunt the clay-built cot for human blood.
The woods resound the hoarse, loud, hideous roar,
Whilst they with terror stalk along the gloom
Of ancient Night's domain -- The dreadful howl,
The complicated roar of savage beasts,
Not to be equaled, search all nature round,
Except by man! (most savage animal!)
The yell of Indians, or, more horrid still,
The cruel, modulated whoop of war!
That dreadful presage of a painful death,
Just as caprice or vengeance may dictate.
O how my soul's convulsed at the thought!
My spirits ebb; the arterial blood is chilled,
And scaree propell'd the trembling ventricle.
Whilst seated here beneath an ancient oak,
That lived before my grandsire's pulse began
To beat, or tenant to a womb his embryo,
Secure from ruffians, and beyond the reach
Of Indian scalping-knives and tomahawks,
To meditate the glories of the skies,
To warm my breast at yonder glowing spheres,
And raise life's mercury to fair, serene,
Perhaps some honest, harmless peasant, who
Beyond the Alleghennies fixed his tent,
Himself aloof, in ambush lies concealed
Deep in the thicket of a leafy shrub,
And, bathed in tears, hears the departing groans
Of all that is near; the partner of his toils,
And of his joys; the lisping child; the babe
Wrench'd from its mother's arms, and hurled to death,
Nor spared the life of man, nor that of brute.
Blind, indiscriminating cruelty!
Even now, perhaps, some destined family,
The wants of nature temperately supplied,
Not with high dishes, but with simple fare,
Swarm round the blaze, ere they resign to rest
Their weary limbs, to take a parting glow,
Affrighted hear the dread distinguished voice,
Nor strive to elude the shock they cannot shun.
Hail! Britain's favored Isle! thrice happy clime!
Nor lion's den, nor alligator's lake,
Nor devastation by tornado spread,
Nor savage Indian (though as cruel men,
Checked by the laws, if not humanity;
The dread of punishment, if not of shame)
Within the limits of our Eden found:
No piercing rays descend in lines direct;
Cheered and enlivened by an oblique glance,
The summer solstice darts the genial beam,
Nor scorches here, but maturates our fruit;
With golden varnish paints the swelling grain,
And glorious plenty spreads throughout the land.
Pensive I sit, retired from strife of tongues,
Int'rest's loud clamor, folly's louder still,
Prophanity's hoarse bawl, and chorus lewd,
Which drown reflection, conscience lull to sleep.
Come solitude, thou physic of the soul,
Purge off the dregs of riot thoughts, and take
The vicious bias off from reason's scale
Frailty hung on, and custom has confirmed.
The lonely cell, the deep recess of groves,
Are schools of wisdom, where momentous truths
Themselves unfold to contemplation's eye:
Refined employment for immortal souls.
It Is solitude's the proper focus, whence
We contemplate the rising wonders of
Almighty Power, and Wisdom's grand display;
By Uncreated Excellence portrayed
On every object which invites the eye
To gaze with rapture on the rolling spheres,
The amazing host of twinkling brilliant stars,
Which intersperse the blue ethereal vault,
And decorate the immensity of space:
It Is here to trace the Almighty in his works;
Stupendous orbs reduced to lucid points
By distance infinite, and trace the line
In which they roll incessant ample rounds,
And, rolling, preach aloud their Author's praise.
It Is here to know ourselves, to know our God;
With our own hearts commune; commune with God*
And will He dwell on earth? Amazing kind!
And will He deign from empyreal spheres,
From the highest heavens (condescension great!)
To cast an eye on frail mortality,
And in creation's veil himself enwrap?
TO impart a feeble glimpse to feeble worms?
TO enkindle ardour in our abject breasts?
To raise our thoughts, inspire the mental prayer?
And guide our secret wish beyond the skies?
Am I, a feeble emmet of a day,
Notic'd by Him? I am! I feel the truth;
The glowing ardour heaves my panting breast;
And may it vivify, reanimate
My cold, my dead affections, once entombed
In worldly lusts, and smothered in the dust
Raised by the active heels of sense, to blind
From duty, peace, and everlasting gain.
In pleasing contemplation Wisdom shines,
And Wisdom infinite! This plainly wrote,
On every part, on every object wrote,
Throughout creation's wide-extended field.
The striking glare, endless diversity
Of colors glowing in the flowery tribes,
Beyond the skill of paltry mimic art,
The fragrant bloom of purple hyacinth,
The jonquille, tulip, and auricula,
The sturdy oak, the lofty towering pine,
The creeping shrub, high on the mountain's brow,
From Lebanon, the cedar branching there,
By just gradation to the smallest plant,
Nor stop at the hyssop which o'er-runs the wall,
Take in the humble lilly of the vale;
Amazing wisdom shines throughout the whole!
The foliage expands, to show his praise;
Ambrosial sweets commix'd perfume the air,
The ascending incense from earth's altar raised.
Stupendous orbs, the work of Power Supreme,
Perform their ample circuit, wheeling round
The line described by Him, nor devious stray
In the wide regions of ethereal space;
With swiftness nice adjusted, uniform,
Their revolutions to a point observe.
Earth, air and winds, the tides, their ebbs and flows,
The sun, the planets, and the starry host,
The whole connect, and every part proclaims
The attribute of Wisdom. Nor less man!
A world in miniature! a microcosm!
The just position of his various parts
For use and ornament, the purposes
Of life to answer, and provide his food.
Nor yet omit the grand machinery
Contrived within, to separate, digest,
Extract the essence of the aliment,
To form the chyle, convert it into blood,
Its mazy passage through the lacteals,
Its progress thence to the subclavian vein,
Nay, all the animal economy,
The curious texture of the human frame,
The just arrangement of the various tubes,
Infinitesimal, composing man,
In accents loud proclaim Almighty Power.
Enclosed here within these walls of flesh,
Faint gleams of light break in upon the soul,
Through inlets which material organs form.
This lower world, this vale of ignorance,
Though day to owls, is gloomy night to man.
Our views but short; these views imperfect too!
There Is earth between us and the greater light!
Dust modified! called flesh! Reason, that moon
Of spirits immaterial clothed in clay,
Not always equal, always clear its light;
At best but gloomy; sometimes it is eclipsed
By passion, interest, prejudice or pain:
These send a cloud of vapors, which obscure
The but dim light, and make it total dark.
Causes approximate; of these how few
Short-sighted mortals just discern and trace!
Then for a moment wonder, and are lost!
Nor adequately can define, conceive,
Or how we live, or what the lamp of life,
How lighted, how supplied, or how it burns,
Now free, now clear, now dim, now almost dark,
Now leaps in quivering flame, now quenched by death.
The lamp of life, that pure ethereal flame,
Common to brutes, even to the creeping worm,
The mite, and smallest animalcula,
That lie immured beneath the clods of earth,
Or, floating, buoyed up in the atmosphere,
The soul of animals, -- its nature what?
Material still, though an ethereal flame;
And naught but matter strained through the fine sieve
Of nature's process -- How is this conjoined,
Connected with an immaterial soul?
What ligaments can reason here suppose?
Or how cohesive principles can act?
Or matter's laws restrict a human soul?
Surpassing wonder! -- Need we boldly soar,
Or try to soar, through nature's mystic bounds,
Beyond the ethereal concave wing our way
Up to the Highest, to the Source of worlds,
TO assert the weakness of a finite mind,
When, dropping into self, we are there but fools?
Parent of worlds, of universe! how weak
Are all conceptions finite beings form
Of infinite perfection! O! what eye
Can pierce the amazing height, the amazing depth!
Even Newton, on the mount of science raised,
His studious mind, his philosophic eye,
Saw but a part, of that a part he knew:
Trembling he winged his way, his soul on fire
With eager expectation, to explore
The rising wonders in the amazing scene
Of Providence; yet at the utmost verge
Of his excursion 'bove the galaxy,
The opening views of farther, fresh, new scenes,
Wider extended yet, amazing orbs,
Unwieldy to the power of science, check,
Repress the ardour of the aspiring mind;
For at the utmost bounds of human ken
Is wrote, A novice still at infinite.
A Being self-existent! the sole source
Of wisdom, power; his attributes divine!
Not only man's, even angels tongues fail here:
Before his eye confused the Cherub hides,
Nor purest Seraph without solly found,
And all the nations of the world a drop!
Finite with Infinite there is no compare.
Lost in the attempt to scan the Deity,
Our reason roves and searches, but in vain;
The more she roves, the more bewildered still.
Like silkworms buried in the silk they spin,
Reason, wrapped round and round, lies hid in dark,
Entangled in the arguments she raised,
The growth luxuriant of fancy's ground,
Drawn from the stock of theologic lore.
The chain that holds creation stands defined
Concatenation of effect and cause;
The Deity beyond the highest link:
Far distant Infinite from nature's bounds;
Yet every atom formed, pervades, sustains,
That lives, or moves, or is! Skill exquisite,
In series infinite appears throughout
The animal and vegetable world.
It Is but a part we see of that vast chain
On which suspended all creation hangs,
Offspring of Deity, by him upheld;
The efficient and conserving cause of all.
Nor let it sooth the infidel, though man,
Of finite understanding, fails to solve
Nature's phenomenon throughout; nor sees
The depths of Providence, in every step
To trace him; yet enough we see and hear,
Enough we feel within ourselves, to know
Before the grand primoeval day first dawned,
Or ever the sun was made, and hung aloft
In the wide regions of the liquid air,
That God, the unoriginated cause,
Existed. Where Is the Epicure so dull,
Or the Lucretian fool, when he perceives
The apparent signatures of a divine,
Intelligent, self-moving principle,
Displayed around, dares still disclaim the truth?
A glorious truth! the life, the soul of all!
The animating spirit of the world.
Without it life is scarcely worth a wish,
And all its pleasures but insipid froth:
The sun without it beams no chearing ray,
Each blessing bears within a hidden sting;
Of future recompense beyond the grave
No prospect fair appears. Without a God
Life's without joy, and death's without a hope.
O! glorious Truth! it is thy energy
That sooths my soul: In all afflictive scenes
Thou art my joy; thou art my sure defense;
When tempests rise, the elements grow black,
When sun and moon are dark'ned, you are my light,
From heat a covert, shelter from the storm;
In life my pilot, and my anchor too:
When sickness pale sits brooding on my brow,
Or hectic fever creeps along my veins,
Thou art my stay, my staff, my only hope,
My all in all, the only source of good
To man beneath, and cherubim above.
If famine, nakedness, or peril, sword,
Disease or pain should be my lot to bear,
May thy complacent smile support my soul!
Forsake me not, or in life's vale, or death.
Take not thy Spirit from me, I am rich
In poverty; in want am full, am safe:
Nor more than this an angel can desire;
Nor less than this thou will'st us to accept;
And this my prayer, this my warmest wish.
Let atheists laugh, their laughter I despise;
I 'wail their folly, let them sneer at mine.
A God without beginning, without end!
Omniscient, omnipresent! O my soul!
Be thine the lot, the happy lot, whilst here
To know he is, to read him in his works,
To feel him present, to adore his name;
Nor vain, impertinent, presume to scan
The wisdom, essence of the Deity,
Or square a God by mathematic rules;
Content to leave the speculative how,
Concealed from man, and foreign to the end
Of his existence in the present mode,
Incrusted with these elements below.
Yet in a future scene (of which frail man
An adequate conception cannot form)
When life's grand engine, muscular and strong,
Shall cease to play, diffuse the purple stream,
The quivering pulse a final period make,
And send us trembling through the gulf of death,
What mortal knows (may I conjecture here?)
What vehicle the soul shall then inform?
Perhaps a pure, a light ethereal one;
A vehicle refined, all eye, all ear!
Thou great I AM! Thou all-supporting Power!
Uncircumscrib'd, eternal, 'bove all praise,
The length, the breadth, the height, the depth to show
Of thy redeeming love, expression fails!
The blessed effect untutored Indians seel;
All, all have heard, though all have not obeyed:
From universal kindness none exempt;
Thou rul'st in heaven above, in earth beneath,
The Lord, the King, the Father, Friend of man!
But whither would I soar? My active mind,
The more she flutters, more she feels the chains;
Nor can arise above the narrow sphere
Of earth's attraction! What then? Wish for death?
It Is ours to wait the time, the appointed time;
Beg resignation's aid, in life or death.
All Is for the best that Providence permits,
Or Wisdom Infinite allots beneath;
Of Perfect Goodness this the gracious scheme;
Nor does he ever afflict, but with this view,
To raise his creatures to consummate joy.
Things secret appertain to God, not man:
But things revealed, to us, our children too.
The truths essential to our peace below,
The truths essential to our final bliss,
Are here revealed, wrote on our very souls,
As with a sunbeam -- Sunbeam did I say?
Brighter than sunbeams, with a ray divine.
How frail, how blind, how ignorant is man!
And yet how strong, how wise, how proud appears!
His life a span; so small the distance from
His first to last; his cradle to his grave.
Diseases numerous await his pass;
Nor can he shun, in this strait path to life,
The numerous ills thick-spread throughout the whole.
And would he rest on earth? Kind heaven forbids;
At peril too; -- the thorn his pillow here.
Health, riches, fame and power, precarious goods,
Misused are evils; prove our greatest curse.
Prosperity; -- this blessing proves our bane,
If in its sunshine wantonly we bask;
As the bright rays emitted from the sun,
The wine, a sweet, to vinegar convert.
Then where is our shelter? It Is humility;
Humility, the proper dewlling place
Of helpless, blind, dependent, feeble man*
His best estate what is it? Vanity.
A father's title foul corruption claims;
The abject worm, immured beneath the clod
We scarcely deign to tread, so delicate,
Claims a relation; mother, sister too:
Gaping they wait impatient our return.
Whilst living on the surface of the earth,
Worms riot in us, on our vitals prey;
Like cannibals torment us, kill, devour.
O mortifying thought to Mira's pride!
This face, this piercing eye, this snowy neck,
This hand, as lillies white, this blooming cheek,
This form, by flatterers angelic termed,
Now stripped of all the equipage of dress!
My casket leave! nor longer grace a ball!
A lifeless putrid lump the grave descend!
Mix with the earth, beneath me even to tread!
O shocking! if a truth, let pleasure veil it.
Come, John, a chair; transport me to the play.
O mortifying thought! the miser's hell;
No bags of gold, nor rent-rolls in the grave.
In quivering flame see nature's lamp declines;
Portentous universal languor reigns:
The aged hand, of ore already full,
Trembling at once with age and vanity,
Still discontented, ransacks earth for more;
Nor heart to spend, nor power to hold it long;
On pelf his dim eyes gazing, dying close.
The ponderous bag Avaro's dead hand drops,
The gaping heir receives the golden prize.
O mortifying thought! and must I die?
It shocks, recoils! And why then hate the thought?
Hear what says Reason, Revelation too:
"Time here is uncertain, transitory, short;
"This lower world is but a jail at best, --
"Contracted, dark; a dreary vale of tears.
"The man who lives to answer life's great end,
"Loves God, his neighbor, and fulfils the law,
"Exults over death, and triumphs in the hour
"Of nature's dissolution. -- Where Is thy sting,
"O death? And, grave, thy boasted victory?
"To him how different then must death appear?
"Disease and pain he meekly bears, as means
"To open the door, knock off the chains of flesh,
"And guide the inhabitant of mouldering clay
"To perfect freedom, boundless liberty,
"To light unmixed, and everlasting day,
"With which compared, even the meridian sun
"Appears opaque, and all its glory fades."
What then the cause man flies the thought of death?
A guilty conscience, when she whispers sin;
(Sin unrepented of, uncancell'd there)
And writes our imperfections on our face,
The dread inscription on the whited wall,
The exterior part of hypocritic man.
This who can read without a sickly pale,
Or when, high uplift, opes the long-wrote roll,
Containing mourning, lamentation, woe,
Not feel his blood run trembling to his heart?
Hear, O ye epicures, who, deep immersed
In floods of luxury, miscalled high life,
Catch at a twig, if any one presents;
Reflect now on your origin, the end
For man designed; it is glory, happiness.
To rise in glory! O transporting thought!
Higher and higher to eternity!
See God's perfections infinite display;
Enjoy those pleasures, pure, refined, above
Which man's contracted heart no place affords
Even to conceive! pleasures for ever new!
When God the object, this the future scene,
How beats the human soul, confined in clay!
Within these elements, this nether world,
Compressed with gross materiality,
She flutters, would extend her wings, and soar,
With unremitted speed, above the stars,
The bliss of Seraphs to anticipate.
Let reason take her scales, and let us weigh
Kingdoms, imperial crowns, and golden mines,
The empty gew-gaws of rich tinsell'd pride,
With all the finery of courts, levees,
Wreaths fame has wrought to grace a victor's brow,
His name immortalize for shedding blood,
All pleasures man enjoys, or earth affords,
Against but a glimpse of beatific joy,
Or a good conscience, heaven here on earth!
See which preponderates and turns the scale,
Celestial or terrestrial glory: Then,
Come then, ye epicures, ye worldlings come,
Call out for mercy; Mercy's ear is open;
He hears, nor only hears, he hearkens too:
What condescension to the penitent!
A glorious attribute! Accept; be saved;
Nor stumble at the means; repent, amend:
Regain the man, and live as man ought live.
Is conscience banished? She Will again return,
Resume the seat she lost, assert her right,
And cause a resurrection of your sins.
The ghosts of man's forgotten vices raised,
Will on the deathbed with new dread appear,
And haunt him in the agonizing hour
Of dissolution; nor will leave him when
The breath of life shall quivering take its flight;
Nor only here, hereafter will torment,
Complete the hell they had begun on earth.
With a distinguished blaze this attribute
Enlightens, warms, enlivens drooping man:
Of hope and confidence the only ground,
TO avert the sentence justice would dispense.
Suppose the Omnipotent, the Sovereign Lord
Of all creation, now were to appear
In fiery clouds of justice rigorous,
To execute eternal vengeance on
The million heaps of proud rebellious worms,
What flesh could stand before the incensed God?
The heavens gather blackness at the thought,
A paleness man, and trembling seeks to hide.
Before him went the pestilence of old;
He lightly touched the mountains, and they smok'd;
He blew on Lebanon, it was consumed;
Forth from his feet went burning coals of fire;
He measured earth, asunder nations drove;
The hoary heads of aged mountains bowed;
Hoarse, loud and dreadful roared the bellowing deep;
The sun and moon affrighted, stood aghast,
Struck with the luster of his glittering spear!
But is there mercy still? --
There is: Stupendous thought! Immanuel,
That pool transparent, lucid, opened in
The vale of time: And this, O glorious truth!
At once a pool, a Shiloh's pearly stream,
Ancient and new, silent and softly glides,
For ever clear, and undiminish'd too;
As yesterday, today; for evermore
Remains the same. A river? It Is a sea,
Immense extended, and immensely deep,
Unfathomable to the longest line
Of human reason, or pure intellect,
Of winged Cherubim or Seraphim.
What love is this! It Is felt, but not expressed.
A Being self-sufficient and entire,
Perfect and glorious throughout his name,
Amazing thought! to notice poor proud man,
A helpless, boasting, groveling, abject worm.
In his immensity of mercy lost,
Our reason, passions rude, to silence hushed,
The soul enraptured breathes unfeigned praise.
And praise a song too high to modulate
In vocal quivering accents, mental praise,
A melody of an angelic kind.
But is there mercy still? There is. The Lord,
The Almighty Parent of the universe,
Calls loud to poor deluded sons of earth,
Pursuing phantoms as substantial joys,
To quit the strife of tongues, and to withdraw
From din of petty interests, powerful banes!
The noise and clamor of misguided crowds,
The feast of libertines, empty parade!
A pompous, ostentatious pride of fame,
Derived from beings foolish, weak and vain,
Short-sighted creatures! nor can pierce the heart,
The deep recess where pride and interest lurk;
But falsely estimate, at transient view,
The real worth of men by painted garbs.
The epicure, the meanest slave to sense,
Who, like the swine he nearly imitates,
But wakes to lust, drinks deep at the foul trough,
Grunts, staggers, drops, and sleeps to shame again.
Nor these forgot; by heaven's most gracious call
Awaked they are (for all have heard the sound)
But wake, and stare, and beg to sleep again!
Come, sleep, thy poppies shed around my bed;
Invite my senses to the enchanted scene;
This voice that rouses brings me no good news;
It interrupts my train of golden dreams;
It pours reflection's horror on my thoughts;
The keen vibrations of important truths,
Too soon they visit on the stage of joy.
Come, sleep a little more, and longer yet;
The veil of darkness suffer to eclipse
The naked truth, too strong for sensual eyes:
At least a slumber's lesser aid I beg,
To sooth the pain of conscience, so acute.
Come, rising generation, deep immersed
In bellowing waves of passion; mounted high
On folly's giddy heights, ideal joys,
Look down the precipice, the gulf of death,
And look beyond, look to the gulf beneath.
Come, rising generation, leave the stage,
The club of lewdness; to the house descend
Of dying infidels: Behold the King
Of every terror sitting on their brow!
The friend may weep, but cannot help; in vain
He would allay the agony of soul;
Yet cannot repress the inward heartfelt pang,
The complicated weight of death and sin.
Come, rising generation, now ascend,
And see the King of terrors wear a smile:
See how the good man meets the shock of death,
Welcomes the messenger, and bids adieu
To all his family around his bed,
Dries up their tears with, All is well with me.
Take his example, smooth the rugged vale;
Death will be then a glorious path to life.
But when to smooth it? In the day of health:
It Is our great business, it is our happiness;
The important work at peril left undone.
Consider then the end, the glorious end
Of your creation, and pursue the means;
Fill up the duty Heaven has assigned,
Nor quit your post; an enemy is near:
It Is youthful lusts that war against the soul,
Cloud reason's eye, and wound even while they please.
Let Us then assert the dignity of man,
Nor meanly truckle to our appetites,
The impetus of groveling brute desire;
Assert our dignity, and reign as kings,
Intelligent, free spirits, clothed with
An angel's nature, immortality,
Though for a moment clothed with a worm's;
Offspring of Deity, the sons of God;
A higher title can man wish to wear?
A lower then shall man stoop to acquire?
Forfeit his glory, and relinquish man?
Come, rising generation, take the field,
Nor make delay; duty demands dispatch,
And interest urges too; they are both connect,
Man's duty and man's real happiness.
Make no delay, eternity's the prize;
Eternity of pure celestial joy.
Be always ready, and be always safe.
Trust to the morrow? This a dreadful risque!
Morrow may be eternity to thee!
The day, the hour, the awful moment, when
Our frame shall fall, no prudence can foresee.
What folly then in man to trust to health,
To strength of nerves a moment may unstring!
A moment parts the attenuated thread,
Dissolves the vital bond of present life.
Omnipotence! he spoke; Let Us make man:
The particles of dust assembled; then
Coher'd together, and a system framed,
A vehicle for intellectual life,
A dreary prison to the immortal soul;
And at his nod the homogeneous mass
Will quick appear a putrid ghastly lump,
Dissolve and crumble into dust again;
For dust thou art, and shall to dust return.
This vehicle, with complicated threads
Though wove and interwove so accurate,
Obnoxious still to thousand different ills,
Disease and death can enter every pore;
And these in millions which our clay overspread
At once the avenues of life and death;
Nor riches, power, nor wisdom can exempt
Even Alexanders from the debt of death.
See, silent monitors, the ghastly corpse
Of nearest relative, or bosom friend,
Crushed by some heavy apoplectic stroke,
Or by a febrile heat intense consumed,
Or other engines death successful plays
Within the limits of these elements,
To bring down princes from exalted thrones,
With simple peasants humble to the dust.
Did I say silent? No, they preach aloud;
In reason's ear inspire important truths:
Be always ready; this the dead man's text,
Voice of religion, and of common sense.
Why weep for me? You weep for me in vain:
Weep for yourselves, weep for your children too.
We hear the solemn language of the dead,
We strew their grave with transient bursts of tears,
Say, Ah! he is gone! I knew him in life's bloom!
The thought of death, like electrific touch,
Our nerves a moment shudder, and it is over;
Impute the shock to a mechanic fear:
So foolish, vain and inconsiderate man!
What! do we start at death? And are we shocked?
Another truth, and yet more solemn still,
Dreadful, important, interesting too;
To whom? The sensualist; to him a hell;
The day of judgment! Have thou never heard?
Then why fly back? Or, hearing, have thou thought?
Or, thinking, have prepared against the day,
The scene succeeding death, alarming most,
Or should alarm before it does arrive?
The Judge enthroned! angelic myriads round!
The long-despis'd, neglected volume opened,
The book of conscience! Registered are there
Our actions, words, our thoughts; the springs of all
From mortal eye secreted, here are wrote:
These read aloud, even infidels must hear,
And hearing, tremble at the dread report.
Not guilty, vain to plead; we are naked, bare;
Discriminating Justice sees our hearts;
One glance explores them; and the prisoner's face,
Paleness already gathered, self-condemned,
Flashes confusion, horror and despair.
Be wise in time; eternity's too late.
From life's gay stage descend, and enter deep
Into thyself; commune with thine own heart,
Not taking sense, but reason for thy guide,
And reason with a ray divine illum'd;
Nor conscience lull with Creeds and Peter Pence;
Nor let self-love just judgment warp: Self-love
The cause we err; remove this cause, and then
The effect will cease. But that is ENTHUSIASM.
This monitor is hissed from off the stage;
To wit and gaiety his subject's dull;
Nay truth is banished from their very thoughts:
Liars are entertained, believed, adored;
And lies the liars only refuge here.
The reason ask, if reason can be given;
Error, delusive, dark, the multitude
To light of truth prefer. This folly's height.
O thou Supreme, First Cause, Omniscient God!
Whose faintest glance takes in the immense of space,
Hold up truth's mirror to my feeble eye,
Nor let a single blemish lie concealed
In self-love's shade; lay bare to open view
The depth of all deception in my soul;
Nor let me barely trust to names, to creeds,
Births instantaneous, delusive boasts
Of mere enthusiast, fanatic zeal,
Whom yet I pity, though I cannot approve:
The lurking thought of interest base expel;
Let honesty the single motive reign
To guide my thoughts, my words, my actions all.
The task be mine, I ask nor more nor less,
An humble, thoughtful penitent, to tread
The lonely path of virtue; nor regard
The sneer of libertines, the scoff of fools:
And whilst this vale of life I steal along,
A better country may my views direct;
For murmur here; what Providence permits
With patience bear, and then resign my breath,
My soul to Thee, its Author, in full hope
Nor vain, presumptuous in thy mercy trust)
To mingle with the angelic host on high,
With harmony the hallelujah sing.
What if affliction be the scene beneath,
Diseases numerous depress my soul;
What matter, russet-clad, or dignified
With titles and a star, puffed with fame's blast,
Or lolling in a coach with coronets,
And equipage's train; a glaring show!
Time's moments few and fleeting; soon they pass,
And in the grave distinction is forgot:
One common lot the king and peasant share.
FINIS.

