THE BIRTH, PARENTAGE, and EDUCATION, OF PRAISE-GOD BAREBONE.

To which is added, An ELECTION BALLAD, OR The LAMENTATION of Miss * * * * * *
*. A true but doleful Ditty.

Printed for JACK NORTHWESTER, at the Sign of the White-Oak in Heart of Oak
Street, MDCCLXVI.

PREFACE, OR AN APOLOGY for writing the Life of PRAISE-GOD BAREBONE. This
curious Personage must be well known to those conversant in the English
History. Rapin, speaking of the extraordinary Parliament called by Cromwell in
1653, says, Amongst these Members was one Praise-God Barebone, a
Leather-Seller, who in his Neighborhood passed for a notable Speaker, because
he used to entertain them with long Harrangues upon the Times: From this Man
the People in Derision called them the Barebone Parliament.

REVENGE, by nature, animates each breast,
As fierce in man, as in the savage beast:
Even the vile reptile feels this passion strong;
The abject Worm resents injurious wrong.
Does not the Wasp, provoked, dart forth his sting?
The patient Swan will sometimes arm his wing.
Nature's the same in All -- What wretch so low
Not to rataliate, or resent a blow?
Why then must I alone to insult yield,
And use no arms but the defensive shield?
Shall coward Scandal dare to wound my name,
Publish dis-praise and privately defame?
And blast, by falsehood, what is my greatest good,
A reputation dearer than my blood?
Shall sons of Belial saucily presume,
While I must sit, like patience on a tomb?
No: -- to rataliate is a natural law;
Reason, in self-defence, the sword will draw.
Arms less offensive to the Bard belong;
The Pen alone must vindicate his wrong:
Thus, like the fretful Porcupine's, his quill,
Venomed with gall, his vengeance must fulfill.
Revenge, like Honor, has some noble laws;
Arm me then, Satire, and maintain my cause.
The Birth, Parentage, and Education of PRAISE-GOD BAREBONE.
TO paint a Puritan, a queer one,
An holy knave, a Prysbyterian,
Teach me, Erynnis, for you dwell
Amongst many Roundheads sent to hell.
I ask not now your aid to sing
The worse than murder of our king;
Nor yet the Regicides, old Lambert,
Cromwell, or Bradshaw, now all damned for
No solemn covenant of the kirk,
To make rebellion holy work;
Nor the committee's pious board,
Who robbed the church to serve the Lord;
With eyes turned up, devoured the land,
Then praised their God's all-bounteous hand:
Nor yet the downfall of the Rump,
Worn by long sessions to the stump:
Awhile we'll wave these lofty themes,
These cursed principles and schemes.
Suffice it now we draw a saint*
Of gesture prim, and visage quaint;
With short blue cloak, and prudish band,
And warning hourglass in his hand:
A little Smec, for Smectymus, a cant-word in HUDIBRAS, containing ^n^
compounded of the initial letters of the names of five Presbyterian Chiefs, as
the word Cable was afterward used to signify a Junto of Five, in the reign of
Charles the IId.
Smec. the epitome
Of Puritan hypocrisy.
Or, as some say, the true descendant
Of him HUDIBRAS.
, who fought for Bear defendant.
Yet for his race, it matters not
Of whom, or where he was begot;
Though Fame proclaims, by lower trump,
That he was issue of the rump.
Spawned in Fleet-ditch the Brat was found,
Wrapped in a smock, yet almost drowned:
Thence Mother Kirk, like PHARAOH's daughter,
Saved him, by By Proverb, viz. He that is born to be hanged will never be
drowned.
Proverb, from the water*
But as it is the Tyburn fashion
Always to sing the education,
Tricks, principles, and pedigree,
Of such as grace the triple tree,
As well as dress of every Smart,
Who makes his exit from the cart;
So shall our Muse, in doggrel verse,
Her hero's history rehearse.
PRAISE-GOD, the Brat was called; a name,
Among fanatics, of great fame:
So called, in memory of the event,
When at his birth a B -- was sent,
Which by a fost'ring Mother's help,
Might save and suckle the young whelp:
Thus when Rome's Founders sprawling lay,
Exposed in woods, it chanced, that way
A prowling Wolf came passing by,
Which on the Bantlings cast an eye:
She paw'd, and lickt, and seemed to hug
The Cubs, who hung about her dug:
Thus was the infant PRAISE-GOD nursed,
To head, in time, the League accursed.
Near to the place renowned of old,
(The nurs'ry of many a scold)
Tradition says there was a den,
Like that which CACUS skulk'd in, when
ALCIDES came to search the place,
Where he his cattle stolen could trace,
Which, VIRGIL says, so stunk and smoked,
That HERCULES was almost choked.
This was the den designed by fate
For Bare-bone lodge, called Billingsgate.
Hither the Dam brought home her young,
And laid him on a bed of dung;
Having observed that Beggars suck,
Like roots, much nourishment from muck:
But she forgot that the infection
Of dunghill-steams would spoil complexion;
Wherefore, alas! her little Bumkin
Grew up in color like a pumpkin.
Yet well he throve in strength and stature;
No sucking pig could well be fatter:
For, as old CHIRON fed ACHILLES
With lion's, and with bear-bone jellies,
So to young PRAISE-GOD often was thrown
A bullock's pluck, or marrow-bone.
Hence he was big at six, or seven,
As other younkers at eleven;
And always prone to kick, and cuff,
Proved he was made of rumpish stuff.
Ere he was Ten, he waxed so stout
That he would join in every rout,
Whenever, to serve the holy cause,
The Saints defied their country's laws.
Such too his early zeal against vice,
Whoring, and drunkenness, and dice,
First Mob he was, whenever a nest
Of Whores, or Gamesters was oppressed.
Yet once he was so over good,
He Would like to have suffered in the bud;
For in the plunder of the stews,
He hardly could escape the noose.
Once he was taken in the lurch,
For breaking windows of the church,
And sent to Durance; yet at the age
Of scarce twelve years he broke the cage.
At length so headstrong he was grown,
So much the Terror of the Town,
That even his Dam began to dread,
And tremble for his yellow head:
The Saints too feared his forward zeal
Might hurt the Cause of Commonweal*
Therefore, to save their darling hope
From danger of the impending rope,
Summons were issued through the Sect
For solemn Synod of the Elect.
Bring to your mind the infernal crew,
Which MILTON sets before your view,
When he describes the Apostate-Board
All-hailing Satan as their Lord.
Such was this gloomy Meeting; sat
TO advise, propound, to weigh, debate.
How to secure from Hangman's claws,
The hoped Messiah of their cause.
It would be tedious to report
The whole proceedings of the court;
In which each canting whining Knave,
Formal and slow, his sentence gave:
Long the debates though nothing worth;
At last the Mountain did bring forth:
This was, in short, the sage event,
'That PRAISE-GOD should with speed be sent
'Under the care of Titus Oats.'
With this decree, by way of notice;
'The Tutor must take care to teach
'His Pupil all the -- abuse of speech;
'To hum, and haw, to whine, and cant,
'To sigh, or groan, to howl, or rant:'
But this was special in the charge,
'T' instruct him how to Lie at large,
'And Swear, as Oats himself best knew,
'Whene'er a Plot was in their view.
'Further to teach him the grimace,
'And odd distortions of the face;
'To roll his eye balls to the lid,
'Till all the rest but white was hid;
'To force a tear at neighbor's woes,
'And how to trumpet through the nose:
'In short, that system of deceit,
'Which forms the Puritan complete.'
Lastly 'twas hinted by the bye,
'That if young PRAISE-GOD shou'n't comply,
'Then, as a last resource, his Elder
'Should take the assistance of a gelder.'
For, said a Synodal, 'Forsooth!
(And against his custom he spoke truth)
'Brethren, the passions of the Brute
'Are cured by striking at the root.
'Do not the Jockeys take this course
'To brake the mettle of an horse?
'Yet why need I attempt to show,
'What all our holy Elders know?
'Was not a proof but lately seen
'In the surprise of Brother Surprise of Brother Green. -- An old story of one
Green at Col^he^^^^, who was tried for Bestiality. Vi^e Rump-Songs.
Green?
'Why did he, Lord, prefer a Mare?
'Our Sisters are not cruel fair:
'Whence could the impetuous zeal proceed?
'The Colt's tooth was not in his head:
'Th' event too plainly has revealed,
'Where all his passion was concealed,
'For since the lucky operation,
'He lately suffered of Castration,
'How calm he is, how cool you see;
'A very Saint for Apathy.
'Hence, by our own experience wise,
'This Operation I advise,
'As a last method of correction,
'To break the Rampant to subjection.
'For PRAISE-GOD'S sake I Have laid before ye
'A fact, on which the Churchmen glory:
'I mean not to upbraid a Brother,
'We Saints must one forgive another:
'I own it was a common slip;
'This was the crime, -- he gave a Leap
'Unto our foe, a Cavalier;
'But had he leaped a Brother's mare,
'With us so kind, though frail an act
'Would have excused the indecent fact.'
The Brethren all confessed the truth;
Therefore in fondness for the Youth,
Held it quite proper in their votes,
To give this bye advice to Oats.
This was to To Anthens sending Owls. -- An ancient proverb, to which the
modern ones, 'of sending coals to Newcastle, or Monks* Rome,' nearly correspond.
Athens sending Owls;
TITUS but smiled at all their rules;
By yellow symptoms on the head,
He knew young BARE-BONE was true bred.
'A Rump-bred Brat, he said t'himself,
'Will make a Saint in hope of pelf:
'To play the cheat will be no pain,
'Where Godliness is sure of gain:
'Yet should that grand temptation fail,
'This glorious bait will sure prevail,
'That, by obedience to my rules,
'He may become the head of Fools.'
Well did he argue, nor in vain,
There was no need of spur, or rein;
The crafty BARE-BONE found out soon,
That he was under charge of one,
Who only sought to teach him, what
With his own genius curried pat:
Therefore in all things he obeyed,
And soon was Master of his Trade.
For when he saw he still might be
As much a knave as formerly,
If he would only ware a cloak,
He thought resistance was a joak:
And since the Art was, to disguise,
Not to forego the Lust of Vice;
He made no boggle at the Feint,
To be a Devilish, and seem a Saint.
Therefore, whenever he meant to sin,
With formal prayer he would begin:
If Whoring was the vice in hand,
Thus, for a pause, he would make a stand;
And ask an Erige in prayer,
Like the petition of Ld. Like the petition of Ld. May'r. -- On the state-bed
at the Mansion House in London, is this inscription; " Dirige nos, Domine."
Direct us, O Lord!
May'r:
Or 'stead of -- Peace be to this bed,
Would beg of heaven a M * * *.
This was his zealous exclamation,
'Lord, we adore thy fair creation!
'Woman to Man, O God, thou'st given,
'Yet marriage is not know in heaven;
'Then Whoring is thy will, it is plain,
'For Woman was not made in vain.
'And if the vulgar may refresh,
'With the enjoyments of the Flesh,
'Much more should Saints have recreation
'In the dear Act of Propagation.
'St. Paul too's christian rule is this,
"Salute the Sisters with a Kiss:"
'Now, my good Lord, I cannot believe,
'St. Paul intended to deceive
'The Saints and Sisters with a bob;
'To bid, and yet forbid the job:
'This will not be using Brethren well,
'But rather like the Tantalus.
Man in hell;
'Just at whose lips was set a treat,
'O^ which the wretch was not to eat.
'Thou, bounteous Lord, art not so cruel,
'You give that men should eat, the gruel.'
Whenever he robbed a neighbor friend,
He did it for some pious For some pious end. -- This, and the twenty following
Lines, are founded on CLARENDON'S history, and allude to the Fanatic Evasion of
the Presbyterians, that they were fighting for the King, while they were in
arms against his Person.
end,
And held i^ righteous to purloin
A Churchman's cattle, or his coin,
Lest, in the hands of such a Turk,
They might be used against the Kirk:
Yea of times would employ the pelf,
Still for his good, against himself.
Sometimes he would steal a silver bowl,
Only to save the owner's soul:
And when he justly robbed the poor,
'Twas but to make 'em work the more*
Whenever he stabbed a wicked foe,
That it was Charity, he would show;
Lest, in the way which he was in,
He should proceed in paths of Sin;
Therefore he killed him for his good,
To save his soul he took his blood.
Thus for each sin he would quote a text,
The cause of G -- d was his pretext:
Thus would he name, and praise his Lord,
For every vice upon record.
In Dress too he appeared devout;
He knew Fools judge by things without.
A broad-brim hat his brows overspread,
Like an Umbrella o'vr his head:
From which a conic tower uprose,
At least a foot above his nose:
A close-stool-pan, turned upside down,
Was the best likeness of his crown:
What made the Simile more pat,
Was, that beneath the brims of the hat
Some In memory of our Hero, a great Body of the Presbyterians wear Yellow-Wigs
to this Day. Vide the Counties of York and Cumberland, etc. etc.
yellow knots of hair were seen,
As if the stool-pan was not clean.
Under his chin, at Holy-tide,
A little, prim, starched band was tied:
But when the Elders kept a feast,
A larger Bib secured his breast.
Whenever he minister'd the Word,
Or did the service of the Lord,
He would not put the beastly Beastly Rag -- the Surplice, -- An abomination to
Presbyterians; who affect to call it a Rag of the Whore of Babylon.
Rag on;
(Apocryphal as Bell and Dragon.)
No. -- a short cloak of rusty sable
Better became their Common Common Table. -- Presbyterians abhor the name of
Altar.
Table.
A short blue Cloak the Lord approves,
Blue is the color, which he loves;
But the white Surplice, which Rome wears,
Shall damn her in her very prayers.
The Cloak then, as a badge of the Sect,
Is sacred held among the Elect.
But PRAISE-GOD had another coat
For common wear, not worth a groat:
It once was Mourning, when in dumps
He wept the Burning of the Rumps. -- A rejoicing Ceremony of the Loyalists to
express their detestation of the Rump-Parliament, which had subverted Monarchy
and the Constitution.
Burning of the Rumps;
But now pile lost, threadbare, seams gray,
It looked a Scarecrow in decay.
Yet all this shabbiness of Dress
Was but a trick of his finesse,
To make the roundhead rabble think,
A Man so meek woun't use their chink
For any expenses of his own,
Who seemed to live on bread alone.
By such like arts each Lambskin Knaves -- Wolves in Sheep's clothing:
Academical Readers may find out another meaning.
lambskin knave
Cajoles the sheep he would enslave.
Thus PRAISE-GOD knew, his coat without,
Made Prudes believe he was devout:
And, as it spoke him meek and poor,
He found his Flock would give the more.
How much his Weeds his heart belied!
The rags were but a cloak to pride.
His waistcoat too would hardly reach
Quite to the covering of his breech.
Readers must own this sable suit,
Was but a very thin Surtout,
They will not wonder then to find
Another Jerkin still behind,
A little Body-coat within,
Which he always wore next his skin.
This was a kind of a Dragoon,
A coat, or shirt, or both in one:
'Twas made of flannel to give heat,
And at the same time dry up sweat;
Yet at the parts, which most were shone,
A bit of Irish-cloth was sown,
For bosom, tail, and sleeves, and neck,
Though there was no shirt to his back.
The trowzers, which enwrapt his thighs,
Were of a monstrous o'ergrown size:
For these did serve as magazine,
To keep his meat and plunder in.
The pantaloons were larger much
Than fashion of the Holland Dutch;
And reason good, though known to few,
To hide his hocks from public view;
For they so shambled were, and crookt,
That worse than King Richard the Third.
Richard's legs they looked.
Whether the Fates hereby designed,
To show an emblem of his Mind;
Or whether, as some Augurs hold,
By this his Greatness they foretold;
Who say, that as at first the ways
To Fame are crooked like a maze;
Or as the great celestial bow
To Noah signs of hope did show;
Or as in Buildings it is seen,
The best on arches do begin;
So did the arches of his hocks,
(As bases to his capital locks)
Presage a future strength of head;
Which of a Key-stone stood in stead.
Two gouty shoes of softest leather,
By little clasps scarce pinned together,
Nicely were made to hide from view
That part which That part, which Satan cannot do. -- A vulgar Opinion that the
Devil cannot hide his cloven foot.
Satan cannot do.
Thus was he dressed from head to hoof;
Above 'twas shown, he was full proof
In every vice, in every art,
To play the hypocritic part;
Of seeming Patriot to embroil
A factious state in civil coil:
Or, by pretext of his devotions,
To propagate dissenting notions;
To raise alarms, dissemble fears,
Only to set men by the ears.
Thus all-accomplish'd in each cheat,
Which makes a Presbyterian great,
TITUS, in hopes of a reward
For the tuition of his* Ward,
Restored him with this commendation,
Spoke to the Synod as Oration.
'Most holy, and most honored Seers,
'In every plot our grand Compeers,
'Lo! I present to you a Youth,
'As ye would wish, a foe to truth.
'Vers'd as I am, and taught by years
'To undermine the Cavaliers;
'Experienc'd well in every wile,
'Which may a friend, or foe, beguile;
'Yet, on my CONSCIENCE, it is true,
'Th' infernal palm is PRAISE-GOD'S due*
'By every Regicide I swear,
'Your second Beelzebub stands here:
'And to do justice to his merit,
'None is so worthy to inherit
'Th' exalted station of....
Here the M. S. being imperfect, a Critic, by a bold conjecture, thus attempts
to supply the hiatus,..... the gallows,
The due reward of all such Fellows.
An ELECTION BALLAD, OR THE LAMENTATION of Miss * * * * * * *, on being
disappointed by JOHNNY VAIN, alias, JOHNNY PITYFUL, who had told her that, as
he was sure of carrying his Election, he was determined upon giving a Ball to
their Wisdoms and Betternesses, and that SHE should be his Partner.
To the Tune of kitty Fell.
1.
WHILE gentle Swains, in Willow Groves,
Of cruel Maids and ^lighted Loves,
In Songs and Sighs complain;
My pensive Verse shall mourn the Youth,
For Speeches famed, and Want of Truth,
Ah luckless Iohnny Vain;
Luckless Johnny, Lovely Johnny,
Ah! Luckless Johnny, Johnny Vain.
2.
I hoped indeed he would be chose
Our Member, Spite of all his Foes;
Ah! me I hoped in vain:
In vain with This (as Blue has long been the favorite Color of the
Presbyterians) was in Compliment to my Iohnny who has lately turned
Presbyterian Parson and on the Saturday before the Election, preached an
Evening's Lecture in Praise -- not of the Lord -- but of himself, to a large
Congregation of Yellow-Wigs at Templum Presbyterianum, otherwise called
Beggar's Opera.
Blue I decked my Hair,
In hopes to be the Favorite Fair
And dance with Iohnny Vain.
Luckless Johnny, lovely Johnny*
Ah! luckless Johnny, Johnny Vain.
3.
His Cash, that he might gain their Aid
To Presbyter'ans Fund Some Time before the Election, he gave a Sum of Money to
the Fund appropriated to the Support of Presbyterian Parsons.
was paid,
Ah, hang the venal Train!
For this what else could he expect,
But that firm Patr'ots should reject
Poor turncoat Iohnny Vain.
Turncoat Johnny, Luckless Johnny,
Ah! Turncoat Johnny Johnny Vain.
4.
You sweet Miss F -- ks, who (when you please)
Can sing with so much Grace and Ease,
Oh! trill you softest Strain;
Dear Go -- er -- or your Fiddle take
Bid all the Powers of Music wake,
To sooth poor Iohnny Vain,
Angry Johnny, Luckless Johnny,
Ah! Angry Johnny, Johnny Vain.
5.
Another Trial might I guess,
May meet, perhaps with more Success,
Ah try it once again:
Perhaps bold Perhaps bold Gall'way etc. -- But I may as well explain this
Passage in some Doggerel suitable to the Subject. At a Time when this naughty
bold Man was quite ill,
My dear Johnny declared that his Blood he would spill;
But wisely took Care, neither Time, Weapon, or Place,
Should the Form of his delicate Challenge disgrace;
-- So Galloway was humm'd with a wild-Goose's Chase.
But alas! when grown well, he with Stick or with Cane,
Broke the Head of poor pityful, luckless JOHN VAIN.

Gall'way may not dare,
Perhaps Squire Ross may then not care,
To Oppose my Iohnny Vain.
Luckless Johnny Lovely Johnny,
Ah! Luckless Johnny, Johnny Vain.
ERRATA.
Page 3 Note, for Cable read Cabal. Page 9 Line 20 for know read known.


