CONSIDERATIONS ON Slavery. IN A LETTER To a FRIEND.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by EDES and GILL, in Queen Street. 1767.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE PRINTERS.
IT is some years since I received the first of these letters from a friend:
since which I have been frequently soliciting him to consent to their being
made public, and have very lately by his second letter prevailed with him.

The Subject is so interesting to mankind in General, that the candid reader I
trust will excuse any Apology for my offering them to his impartial
consideration. It is very surprising says a late ingenious French Author, "that
the Greeks and Romans, with so much knowledge and humanity had slaves like the
Barbarians, instead of Domestics; it is still more surprising, perhaps, that
christian nations with the Gospel before their Eyes, should condemn their
brethren in the colonies to all the horrors of slavery, because they are black.
The first man, who said to another, you shall be my slave, for I am stronger
than you; must have had the heart of a Tiger. But the first man, who said to
another, I see you are poor, if you will receive your subsistence from me, you
shall be my domestic, made a contract useful for both."

CONSIDERATIONS, etc.
SIR.
I Understand you have thoughts of being concerned in the African slave trade.
My regard to the welfare of all mankind, and particular affection for you,
leads me at this time to write you my sentiments upon Slavery, and the
slave trade. -- And I doubt not but you will excuse my thus meddling in your
business, when you consider I have no private ends to answer. If what I shall
offer upon the subject, should be thought of no weight, it will only interrupt
you a few minutes; but if I should be so happy as to convince you, that however
profitable the trade may be to some adventurers, yet that it is contrary to
humanity, christianity, the interest of the province, and of private families,
I shall not only be sure of your desisting from so vile a trade, but have great
hopes, that your example and influence in this place, will, in time, produce an
act of government to prevent the further importation of slaves among us; and I
can flatter myself, that the example of this province may influence others; but
if not, we can be gloriously single.

Great Britain, the envy of the world, does not permit a slave on her happy
island; but gives to every one freedom, which stamps him image of his God.

Before I enter upon the arguments for and against the trade, permit me to
contrast a Briton and a negro slave in America, neither chargeable with any
crime cognizable by the public -- A Briton has the free disposal of his time,
to employ it in that way he likes best; all he gains by his industry, he has
sole right to; none of it can be taken from him, but by his consent; he may
marry, no man can separate him from the object of his affections; his house is
his castle; none (unless he has made himself obnoxious to the public) may
intrude upon him. Happy Briton! The slave has neither command of his time, nor
choice of his employ; must labor incessantly during his master's pleasure; can
make no claim to the produce of his own industry; a bare subsistence is all he
receives; and though he has labored 20 years, and earned his master an estate,
yet even then he is liable to be sold, and often is, for want of employ, or for
fear that in his old age he should be a burden upon the wealthy heirs. He
cannot marry, because marriage is founded on promise, and slaves can promise
nothing. They are indeed, sometimes, to please them, indulged a sham-marriage,
which is dissolved again at the master's will, without consulting the slaves'
inclination. He is sold out of the country, and so shifted from hand to hand
(if he lives to be old) 'till he is a burden, and wished out of life to save
expense. Shocking contrast! Whatever ends a wise God may have in permitting
such various fortunes to the children of men, yet surely no man can be
justified in being instrumental of such hard fate to any of his fellow
creatures.

Humanity makes us feel for the evils we know any of our species labor under;
and unless hardened by education or custom, we naturally resent the pain or
hardships of others; especially, when we see them imposed on innocence by the
hand of oppression, which is certainly the case of all those poor children, who
are dragged from their mother's arms, and never taste the sweets of liberty.

I should have thought none but the hardened wretch could have entertained a
thought of planning a voyage to Africa with design to bring off its
inhabitants, and curse them with perpetual slavery; even supposing they were in
some sort our enemies; but how is it aggravated when we know that the Africans
are an harmless people, having never gone beyond their own bounds, to trouble
mankind; and but for the interruption from white people might enjoy all the
sweets of a rural life; being blessed with a fine fruitful soil, which yields
with small labor all the necessaries of life. This is the people who by some
strange fatality are pitched upon by the Europeans for slaves; and how are they
made such? not by giving an open challenge to fight them that the captivated on
either side may expect to be enslaved; this would have the appearance of
heroism. No! but the basest means are used to accomplish the basest end. It is
well known we have been above a century past crouding our luxuries upon the
Africans; and when the gold dust of their land could not satisfy us, they were
tempted to sell their brethren, to purchase our intoxicating liquors and
childish toys; thus we imposed upon their weakness, and encouraged their
barbarity by appearing ready purchasers of their people for perpetual slaves:
This trade for the lives of men being once established, has set all Africa by
the ears; all honest industry among them is laid aside for the more profitable
business of trapaning one another; all common confidence is destroyed; and
indeed their natural affections are very much weakened by their immoderate
fondness for our luxuries Chambers's Dictionary observes, that it is frequent
for a son to sell his father and mother; and parents their children, for a few
bottles of Brandy, and a bar (...).
-- Pray Sir, is not this inhumane in us? -- But further, I find by the
accounts of that trade, that when a powerful black Prince has collected by
force or artifice a number of his color, they are offered to the whites for
sale; then an inspector, perhaps a physician, is employed by the purchasers to
view the slaves, who are stripped of every rag which modesty had procured, ana
male and female handled in a manner not to be related, to select the sound in
wind and limb: in their choice they pay no regard to former connections,
husband and wife are parted, parents and children are separated, the weakly
wife will not be taken to accompany the healthy husband. Oh! methinks I hear
their screeches, rending the very Heavens, when these horrid scenes take place!
the unhappy healthy are immediately hand-tied, and then two and two are yoked
by their necks like horses for shipping, and drove in herds by their masters to
the seacoast, and stowed in the hold of a vessel: Owners are so greedy of a
large freight that they crowd the negroes in such numbers and under such close
confinement least they should rise, as renders their passage almost
intolerable. Upon a moderate computation it is reckoned that 10, or 12,000 die
yearly on their passage, and, in seasoning, either in the sickly islands or in
the cold climates, those that survive are fixed for life to their destined
slavery -- It is well known that the greatest number by far of these miserable
creatures, are fixed on the West India islands, where their fate in general is
so extremely hard as to shock a humane tongue to relate or a humane ear to
hear. -- Though they spend 6 days in 7, in unremitted labor for their masters,
constantly over-looked, by cruel drivers, yet the master does not think himself
obliged to provide food for his slaves; indeed he allows them Sundays to till a
small piece of land for themselves, and carry the produce to market, by which
they subsist -- If one day's labor in a week is sufficient to support a man
and his children, how excessive hard is it to be obliged to work the other six,
for those whom they must hate? I need not relate any particulars of the
unbounded whippings which they are exposed to, and commonly experience upon
every slight offense. The least opposition discovered in them, or attempt to
free themselves from their miserable state is sure and certain death, and that
with all the aggravation that cruelty can invent, such as starving to death in
the midst of plenty, in which state I have heard Gentlemen say, they live in a
cage from 7 to 9 days. Oh! horrid! Pray Sir consider, is it for any moral evil
that this part of our fellow men, are thus extremely tormented? Can the stale
and flimsy pretense that Africans used to kill their captives before we
appeared to buy 'em, justify the hellish practice of the present day? even though
it should be granted that that was the fate of some; for without all doubt a
much greater number are now yearly destroyed in the extra-wars occasioned by
the demand for slaves.

The shocking noisome passages, as mentioned above, besides the self-murthers
they are drove to by despair, such as starving, or strangling themselves,
beating their brains against the ship, or jumping overboard; the sickly
climates to which they are carried; the excessive labor to which the greatest
part are drove, which we may well think vastly shorten their days: for a slave
of 40 years is scarce worth owning When you take all these circumstances into
consideration, I doubt not, Sir, but you will be convinced that there are more
lives lost now among the Africans yearly, than before the present practice of
slavery commenced; and that the Balance of misery is vastly increased against
them; and all this by us christians.

Nor do I think that the scandalous vindication which some have had the
effrontery to offer, will satisfy a lover of truth and justice, viz. that but
for the slave trade, the West India islands could not be cultivated to such
amazing profit, let them sink then -- Others have said, that if the slave trade
was prohibited, many gentlemen of immmense fortunes must be ruined, let them,
and beg. It Is more honorable to seek a support by begging than by theft, as
every man does who lives by the forced labor and privation of the liberty of
any of his fellow creatures; and though many a palliative have been compounded by
some, even of the right reverend clergy for the consciences of those who have
been troubled, in a serious hour; yet I believe they have been too modest to
think them sufficient cures for such malignant wounds. This leads me Sir, to
address you as a christian, for such you appear to be: and pray how can this
practice be reconciled with the great law of charity, so much applauded by all,
viz. Do to others, as ye would that they should do to you. I never found a man
but was staggered at that short sentence, when applied to the present subject.
I know indeed the great advantages it is pretended slaves receive, by being
brought from a land of heathenish darkness and idolatry, to a land highly
favored with the light of the glorious gospel; and so blessed with the means
of salvation. But let those that appease their consciences with this specious
argument, consider first, that we are not to do evil that good may come of it:
and further, what a very small I suppose 9 out of 10 are carried to, and spend
their days in the West Indies and Southern colonies, where they live in
companies, and not in private families.
proportion of these poor transported slaves have the least chance of being
benefited by christianity. For I take it, and doubt not you join me, that it is
no breach of charity to say, that all those Africans, which are carried to our
West India islands, are carried from a land of ignorance and innocence to a
land of glaring wickedness, where they have constant examples of every vice,
and where they are likely to become sevenfold more the children of satan, than
when in their native country.

And as to those few who are called happy in being brought into these Northern
Colonies, very little can be said of the advantages which they receive, or the
improvement they make of it, for from the best observations that I have been
able to make (and I have long thought on the subject) I don't believe there is
one in Ten of those that have had the best opportunity that know any more of
the christian religion, except the name, than their brethren now in Guinea; and
of those that do know something more than the heathen, how few have we reason
to think are influenced by the motives and principles of our holy religion.

I shall next point you to a few passages of that BOOK, the injunctions of
which we confess to be universally binding upon all that know them.

The jews were strictly forbid man-stealing, as in Exodus 21.16. He that
steals a man and sells him, or if he be found in his hands, he shall be
surely be put to death -- I know that the Jews in their traditions confined
this prohibition to their own nation; because in Deuteronomy 24, and 7. it is
said, If any man be found stealing any of his brethren, etc. then that thief
shall die -- but even according to their explanation, they held that the thief
was obliged to restore the person stolen, though a stranger, to his liberty again.

But whatever distinctions the Jews made between themselves and other nations,
we know that the wall of partition has long since been taken down, and we are
taught in the Gospel to esteem all men, our brethren especially, those who have
not injured us in any respect, either as a nation or private person: of this we
can not have the least doubt, when we hear our Lord saying on the Mount, Love
your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, etc.
that ye may be the children of your Father which is in Heaven -- If this be
scripture, or the word of God to mankind, and the enslaving a poor innocent
People, in the method now practiced, be consistent therewith, I acknowledge all
my ideas of the words are confounded, and the scriptures are wrote in an
unknown language to me.

But if there still remains any doubt in your mind whether the writers of the
new testament had any respect to the practice I am now condemning, please to
read St. Paul's first epistle to Timothy 1 Chap. 9th, and 10th Verses, in which
men stealing is placed in the midst of a very black catalogue of vices, viz.
Profane, murderers of parents, whoremongers, men stealers, liars and perjured
persons, etc. all which are contrary to sound doctrine according to the
glorious Gospel of the blessed God. -- How trifling must be the excuse, which
some, who hold slaves, have made, viz. That they are not men stealers, having
bought them with their money: that they would not be concerned in the trade
upon any account, but seeing they are brought here, and will be sold to
somebody, they may as well buy as others, they will treat 'em as well or
better. Oh! ye fools or knaves, for in one of these classes I think you must be
ranked, Is reason to be blinded with such a thin veil? Is the most valuable
blessing in life, liberty, to be thus trifled with? -- It is most certain that
were there no purchasers, there would be no sellers -- the prospect of a market
here and elsewhere, to those who employ slaves, is the sole cause, and constant
support, of that ungenerous and wicked trade. I don't conceive a whit odds
between the man who goes personally and steals a negro lad from his parents
hut, in Guinea, and brings him here, and enslaves him for life, and the man who
purchases one, that others have brought here: except in the first case, some
degree of courage is requisite, which is valuable in its self, -- in the latter
case there is baseness, infinite meanness without the shadow of a virtue --
Were we exposed to the same curse, should not we think that the abettors of our
misery, were the children of the devil, suffered by the wrath of God to dwell
on the Earth, to increase the heavy load of human woes? Can any who are
concerned in this black hellish business, pretend to the character of
christians? I cannot conclude this part, without making the following
application to any one that ever purchased a slave. Can you lay your hand on
your breast, and declare in the presence of almighty God, that you verily
think, after the most mature consideration, that in purchasing one of the human
race as innocent as yourself, and making him subsurvient to your sovereign
will, all his days, without a chance of freedom, that you in no respect deviate
from that rule laid down by Christ, whatsoever ye would that men should do to
you, do ye even so to them -- if you can say thus, and think you shall be able
to say so, when closing the scene of this life, and have no compunctions of
conscience in your last moments, for having so far promoted and encouraged the
slave trade, as to be a purchaser; if this is your sober thoughts, go on, buy
more, dip largely in the trade, for it is profitable, and blacken these fair
northern climates, as the West Indies are black.

What I next propose, Sir, is, to show that the slave trade is inconsistent
with the interest of the Province; and I doubt not but that alone would be a
sufficient reason with you to desist.

By the importation of black slaves, we prevent the importation of white
servants; and it is well known that there are thousands in Europe, who would
gladly come among us, and might be brought here for a quarter the cost of a
black man: these white people would do all the labor for us, that we have any
right to receive from others; those that cannot pay a passage, must doubtless
sell part of their time for it; after that is expired, they can let themselves
as servants at as low a rate as a negro can be maintained, reckoning his cost,
the risque of his life, etc. (perhaps I may in my next give you an account of
the particulars of the annual cost of a slave) These white people when they
have served some years in the lowest capacities, turn out upon our waste-lands,
marry and in a few years we see a Town well settled; and in less than fifty
years, there will be four fold increase: by this means our country will fill
up, we become respectable, and secure from an enemy, and furnished with every
convenience of life: Though it has been plead, that prohibiting the importation
of slaves, would cut off a large branch of trade, yet it must be remembered
that upon the whole, it is an unprofitable one for the community, because real
riches (if rum may be called so) are sent from this place for an article which
we either might have from among ourselves, or we might import with little or no
exportation; and though individuals may make a good advance upon their stock, yet
the riches are wholly got from ourselves, a trade which you well know Sir, is
always esteemed disadvantageous to a community. I take it to be the policy of a
state to consult measures to have the greatest number of laborers, and those so
interested in the welfare of the community, as to be always desirous and ready
to support and defend it: But how contrary to all this is the policy of
suffering the importation of a set of people, which at best puts a gain into
the pockets of but a few men, and indulges the vanity and haughty tempers of a
few more; instead of being a defense and support of the common wealth, are
often its terror, and sometimes its destruction: For it must be constantly
expected that a slave will improve every opportunity to throw off his burden,
and imposition: New York, and most of the Southern colonies, and West Indies,
have experienced something of that, which is enough to make all those that set
a just value upon domestic security, to tremble: it has been objected that
their numbers are at present so inconsiderable, that nothing of that can be
feared. I grant it for the present, but what security have we that this will be
the case long. I will remind you of another great evil to the community,
consequent upon our having black slaves which doubtless you have observed, and
that is, the great inconvenience our poorer sort of People are put to by this
means, who would gladly serve us for a support, but then they must be upon a
level with negro slaves; they being born free, cannot think of such a disgrace
as they esteem it, and so often spend their youth in idleness, and for want of
proper employ and government then, become ever after poor vagrants; and as to
the female part of our poor youth, its too well known what courses they often
take, and rather than work in the low employments, choose to trust their faces
for a living, -- This is big with evils, that I shall not pretend to enlarge
upon --

I shall now consider, as I promised in the beginning, how this trade affects
private families; and evils that begin there seldom end 'till the public feel
them. When a slave is introduced into a family, at once commences an amazing
distinction: they are indeed among us allowed to be of the human species; yet
so very inferior, as scarcely to be entitled to any of its privileges: Nay,
when I think of it, I don't know of one privilege they have above the brutes;
for as to eating, drinking and sleeping, they are allowed them for the same
reason that the beasts are, to support life and vigor, to do our labor; but
as to choice or property, it is certain they can have none: Notwithstanding, I
say, they are allowed by us to be of our species, yet so very low, that the
first idea which children have of slaves, is, that they are not entitled to the
same tenderness, nor even justice, that whites are. This produces an haughty
and imperious conduct toward them, and often cruelty; this spirit indulged
toward the servants of the family, naturally influences their behavior to all
they esteem their inferiors in any sort, and ten to one this temper grows up
with them, and they ever after be despised by the wise and humane, and hated by
all. -- All writers upon the education of youth, have held it a sacred point to
keep the minds of children as susceptible as possible, of kindness and
compassion, for their fellow creatures. I think the great Mr. Lock, would not
have them familiar to hurting any of the domestic animals, least that heavenly
spark, compassion, should be extinguished, or prevented growing into that
flame, which is the light and glory of the human species. -- But I fear your
patience is exhausted, and so conclude,

Sir, your Friend, and humble Servant, A. B.
P. S. I here enclose a few Lines, which I think must please you. They are
taken from a POEM wrote by James Grainger, M. D. at St. Christopher's, one of
the English West India Islands.

"YET, Planter, let humanity prevail. --
Perhaps thy Negro, in his native land,
Possessed large fertile plains, and slaves, and herds;
Perhaps when'er he deigned to walk abroad,
The richest silks, from where the Indus rolls,
His limbs invested in their gorgeous pleats:
Perhaps bewails his Wife, his children, left
To struggle with adversity: perhaps
Fortune, in battle for his country fought,
Gave him a captive to his deadliest foe:
Perhaps incautious, in his native Fields,
(On pleasurable scenes his mind intent)
All as he wandered; from the neighboring grove
Fell ambush dragged him to the hated main. --
Were they even sold for crimes; ye polished say!
Ye, to whom learning opes her amplest page!
Ye, whom the knowledge of a living God
Should lead to virtue! Are ye free from crimes?
Ah pity, then, these uninstructed swains;
And still let mercy soften the decrees
Of rigid justice, with her lenient hand.
Oh, did the tender muse possess the power
Which Monarchs have, and Monarchs often abuse:
'Twould be the fond ambition of her soul
To quell tyrannic sway; knock off the chains
Of heart-debasing slavery; give to Man
Of every color, and of every clime,
Freedom, which stamps him image of his God.
Then laws, Oppression's scourge, fair virtue's prop,
Offspring of wisdom! should impartial reign,
To knit the whole in well-accorded strife:
Servants, not slaves; of choice, and not compelled;
The Blacks should cultivate the Cane-land Isles."


A Second LETTER To a FRIEND.
SIR,
THIS brings you my consent to publish the Letter I wrote you some years ago,
upon the African slave trade: My objection arose from a hope that some abler
hand would undertake a subject, in my apprehension, worthy the best head and
best heart: But as yet nothing has appeared, though the very enlarged sentiments
of Liberty which have lately prevailed, among all ranks of people, one would
think, naturally tended to raise up many writers against that cruel practice of
enslaving the Blacks.

It has always appeared very strange to me, how people can be so sensibly
affected with what has but a remote tendency to deprive them of their smallest
right or privilege, and yet remain so insensible of the deplorable state of so
many of our species that live among us; and further, can actually plan and
execute the most sordid views of gain, at the expense of the property, and
every privilege (held dear by all mankind) of those poor Africans, whom the
white pleople have strangely fixed upon as the objects of their rapine.

With what consistency can an American-Captain, trading upon the Guinea Coast
for slaves, open his mouth and plead for liberty, and his natural rights?
Perhaps the ignorance and poverty of some of that set of men may be offered,
as an extenuation of their guilt; especially as they will immediately ask, why do
the learned and rich, and even professed christians engage in the same traffic,
and yet talk loudly of liberty, civil and religious, and tell us that without
liberty, and the free disposal of a man's time and property, life itself is not
worth having? When an Englishman would paint the greatest curse that can befall
him, it is to be no better off than an African slave; and yet he will
deliberately plan a scheme to increase the number of these wretches, with no
greater temptation perhaps than to add a few more pounds to his crowded bags.
Oh miserable slaves to wealth! did you never once consider your baseness as
men, thus to plot and design the ruin of so many of your harmless fellow
creatures? Can you consider yourselves, as enjoying the blessings of the
British constitution, whose first principle is the security of your liberty and
property; and feel no pity or compassion for those unhappy people, whose lot
has fallen under the severe rod of tyranny and oppression? Can you devise to
rob them of those few remains of liberty, which they enjoy, and not only break
up their tenderest connections, but drag them into every part of the American
world, and put them into the power of even the greatest villian, if he has
money to purchase? Is this the effect of your progress in all the noble arts
and sciences? is this the effect of your christian knowledge? Shameful fruit!
Oh! ye sons of liberty, pause a moment, give me your ear, Is your conduct
consistent? can you review our late struggles for liberty, and think of the
slave trade at the same time, and not blush? Methinks were you an African, I
could see you blush. How should we have been confounded and struck dumb, had
Great Britain thrown this inconsistency in our faces? how justly might they,
and all mankind have laughed at our pretensions to any just sentiments of
Liberty, or even humanity? We claim our descent from the ancient Britons, who
have resolved from time to time, that no inhabitant of their island shall be a
slave; and shall we, whose Fathers fled to America for greater Liberty than
they enjoyed in Britain; shall we, I say, suffer Slavery to be so much as once
named among us? -- The years 1765 and 1766, will be ever memorable for the
glorious stand which America has made for her Liberties; how much glory will it
add to us, if at the time we are establishing Liberty for ourselves and
children, we show the same regard to all mankind that come among us? that while
we are preventing the chains being put upon us, we are knocking them off from
those who already have them on? -- This will show all the world, that we are
true sons of Liberty, and will be expressive of such noble, disinterested and
generous sentiments, as will give us the highest esteem among mankind, and will
for ever prevent any bad ministry harboring a thought of making the least
infringement upon our privileges; for the people that will forego so lucrative
a trade, on such principles, must be a noble, must be an unconquerable people.

I cannot but hope this subject will appear of importance to most people: If so,
no doubt the honorable house of Representatives, and the other branches of
Government, will take it into their most serious consideration, and rejoice to
have the opportunity, and be the means of fixing such lasting honor upon the
people they represent and govern. Oh! what heartfelt joy must possess the
breast of every one, while he is tasting the sweets of Liberty, while he is
setting under his own fig tree, and under his own vine, while he is delighting
himself with his sweet companion, and his smilling offspring around him, and
none to make him afraid; if at the same time he is conscious that he has done
his utmost that all his fellow-men might enjoy the same happiness? -- It is not
for me to point out to my superiors what particular laws are necessary to be
made, to effect so noble and christian a design. Without all doubt, it will be
thought necessary immediately to prohibit any future importation of slaves,
which, as Dr. Franklin says, has already blackened half America. -- As we are
one of the greatest colonies, and have in more instances than one, given the
lead in affairs of high importance; let us not wait for the example of any
other of our sister colonies: It is praiseworthy to follow good examples: but
much more so to set them.

I am, Sir, a well-wisher to all Mankind, and especially your Friend, and
humble Servant, A. B.
Massachusetts Bay, December 1766.

