At a Meeting of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Town of Boston,
legally assembled at Faneuil-Hall, on Wednesday the 28th of October, 1767.
THE Town then took into Consideration the Petition of a Number of Inhabitants,
That some effectual Measures might be agreed upon to promote Industry,
Economy, and Manufactures; thereby to prevent the unnecessary Importation of
European Commodities, which threaten the Country with Poverty and Ruin:
Whereupon in a very large and full Meeting, the following Votes and Resolutions
were passed Unanimously.

Whereas the excessive Use of foreign Superfluities is the chief Cause of the
present distressed State of this Town, as it is thereby drained of its Money;
which Misfortune is likely to be increased by Means of the late additional
Burdens and Impositions on the Trade of the Province, which threaten the
Country with Poverty and Ruin:

Therefore, VOTED, That this Town will take all prudent and legal Measures to
encourage the Produce and Manufactures of this Province, and to lessen the Use
of Superfluities, and particularly the following enumerated Articles imported
from Abroad, viz. Loaf Sugar, Cordage, Anchors, Coaches, Chaises and Carriages
of all Sorts, Horse Furniture, Men and Women's Hatts, Men's and Women's Apparel
ready made, Household Furniture, Gloves, Men's and Women's Shoes, Sole-Leather,
Sheathing and Deck Nails, Gold and Silver and Thread Lace of all Sorts, Gold
and Silver Buttons, Wrought Plate of all Sorts, Diamond, Stone and Paste Ware,
Snuff, Mustard, Clocks and Watches, Silversmiths and Jewellers Ware, Broad
Cloths that cost above 10 s. per Yard, Muffs Furrs and Tippets, and all Sorts
of Millenary Ware, Starch, Women's and Childrens Stays, Fire Engines, China
Ware, Silk and Cotton Velvets, Gauze, Pewterers hollow Ware, Linseed Oil, Glue,
Lawns, Cambricks, Silks of all Kinds for Garments, Malt Liquors and Cheese. --
And that a Subscription for this End be and hereby is recommended to the
several Inhabitants and Householders of the Town; and that John Row, Esquire Mr.
William Greenlease, Melatiah Bourne, Esquire Mr. Samuel Austin, Mr. Edward Pain,
Mr. Edmund Quincy, Tertius, John Ruddock, Esquire Jonathan Williams, Esquire Joshua
Henshaw, Esquire Mr. Henderson Inches, Mr. Solomon Davis, Joshua Winslow Esquire and
Thomas Cushing, Esquire be a Committee to prepare a Form for Subscription, to
report the same as soon as possible; and also to procure Subscriptions to the
same.

And whereas it is the Opinion of this Town, that diverse new Manufactures may
be set up in America, to its great Advantage, and some others carried to a
greater Extent, particularly those of Glass and Paper

Therefore, Voted, That this Town will by all prudent Ways and Means, encourage
the Use and Consumption of Glass and Paper, made in any of the British American
Colonies; and more especially in this Province.

[Then the Meeting adjourned till 3 o'Clock Afternoon.]

III o'Clock, P. M.
THE Committee appointed in the Forenoon, to prepare a Form for Subscription,
reported as follows.

WHEREAS this Province labors under a heavy Debt, incurred in the Course of
the late War; and the Inhabitants by this Means must be for some Time subject
to very burdensome Taxes: -- And as our Trade has for some Years been on the
decline, and is now particularly under great Embarrassments, and burdened with
heavy Impositions, our Medium very scarce, and the Balance of Trade greatly
against this Country:

WE therefore the Subscribers, being sensible that it is absolutely necessary,
in Order to extricate us out of these embarrassed and distressed Circumstances,
to promote Industry, Economy and Manufactures among ourselves, and by this
Means prevent the unnecessary Importation of European Commodities, the
excessive Use of which threatens the Country with Poverty and Ruin -- DO
promise and engage, to and with each other, that we will encourage the Use and
Consumption of all Articles manufactured in any of the British American
Colonies, and more especially in this Province; and that we will not, from and
after the 31st of December next ensuing, purchase any of the following
Articles, imported from Abroad, viz. Loaf Sugar, and all the other Articles
enumerated above. --

And we further agree strictly to adhere to the late Regulation respecting
Funerals, and will not use any Gloves but what are Manufactured here, nor
procure any new Garments upon such an Occasion, but what shall be absolutely
necessary.

The above Report having been considered, the Question was put, Whether the
same shall be accepted? Voted unanimously in the Affirmative. -- And that said
Committee be desired to use their best Endeavors to get the Subscription
Papers filled up as soon as may be. Also, Voted unanimously, That the foregoing
Vote and Form of a Subscription relative to the enumerated Articles, be
immediately Published; and that the Selectmen be directed to distribute a
proper Number of them among the Freeholders of this Town; and to forward a Copy
of the same to the Select-Men of every Town in the Province; as also to the
principal City or Town Officers of the chief Towns in the several Colonies on
the Continent, as they may think proper.

Attest, William Cooper, Town Clerk.
Then the Meeting was Adjourned to the 20th Day of November next.




