THE DISAPPOINTMENT: OR, THE FORCE OF CREDULITY. A NEW American COMIC-OPERA, Of
Two ACTS.

By ANDREW BARTON, Esquire

Enchanting gold! thou does conspire to blind
Man's erring judgment, and misguide the mind;
In search of thee, the wretched wordling goes;
Nor danger fears, though FIENDS of night oppose.
NEW YORK: Printed in the Year, M, DCC, LXVII.

THE AUTHOR's PREFACE TO THE PUBLIC.
THE following local piece, entitled, ( The Disappointment, or the Force of
Credulity) was originally wrote for my own, and the amusement of a few
particular friends, who (unknown to me) were pleased to signify their
approbation of it, in such a manner, that it soon engrossed the chief part of
the conversation of all ranks of people; who expressed their desire to hear it,
and have it published. -- Under these circumstances, I was greatly at a loss
how to proceed, I did not choose (as I saw no merit in it) to expose it to the
criticisms of critics, to put it in the power of gentlemen skilled in
scholastic knowledge, to ridicule my ignorance, or condescend to the
entreaties of those, who I thought had no more sense than myself, and who might
(perhaps) have made it better than it really is. Conscious therefore of my own
inability, I determined to excuse myself to all; and in this determination I
persisted for some time, but at last, for my own safety, was obliged to
capitulate and surrender on the following stipulations; First, the infrequency
of dramatic compositions in America: Secondly, the torrent of solicitations
from all quarters: Thirdly, the necessity of contributing to the entertainment
of the city: Fourthly and lastly, to put a stop (if possible) to the foolish
and pernicious practice of searching after supposed hidden treasure. Many
people to this day, are possessed with an idle notion, of the pyrate's burying
money up or down the river side; and are so infatuated with the hopes of
obtaining it, that they neglect their business by day with the thoughts of it;
by which their families suffer, and at night, like so many mischievous
muskrats, spoil the pastures and banks along shore* to the very great annoyance
of their industrious neighbors. -- Quere, Is not this insufferable? -- And
ought not these injured people to petition for an act, entitled, An act, to
prevent this unconstitutional digging act, from being any longer in force as an
act, with a heavy fine on those two legged muskrats: and should they refuse, or
be incapable of paying it, that they should be deprived of what is most
valuable in a muskrat, to be sold for the benefit of the sufferers?
These terms, hard as they are, I have with reluctance been forced to submit
to, I am therefore obliged in vindication of my conduct, to assure the public
that the story is sounded on matter of fact, transacted ne^^ this city, not
long since, and recent in the memory of thousands; for the truth of which
assertion I appeal to numbers of my fellow citizens. But in order to give
strangers, and those unacquainted with the story some Idea of it, the following
short history is thought necessary -- The scheme was planned by four humorous
gentlemen, Hum, Parchment, Quadrant, and Rattletrap, to divert themselves and
friends* and try what lengths credulity and the love of money would carry men.
In order to put their scheme into execution, they framed a plausible, well
connected story of hidden treasure; and to gloss the matter, adapted sundry
papers to their purpose, and pitched upon two suitable old fellows, Washball
and Raccoon (as principle dupes) with others, to try the success of their
scheme; which had the desired effect. -- The moral shows the folly of an over
credulity and desire of money, and how apt men are (especially old men) to be
unwarily drawn into schemes where there is but the least shadow of gain; and
concludes with these observations, that mankind ought to be contented with
their respective stations; to follow their vocations with honesty and industry
-- the only sure way to gain riches.

I do not figure to myself the least advantage accruing from it, but the inward
satisfaction of contributing my mite to stop the current of such folly. Such as
it is, I submit to the public for their sanction or condemnation, and if any
merit should appear in the performance, I shall not vainly attribute it to
myself, but give the credit of it to mere chance.

I am the Public's most obedient, most devoted and most faithful humble
Servant, ANDREW BARTON.

PROLOGUE.
THOUGH distant far, from famed Britania's isle,
Where comic-scenes, call cynics forth to smile;
Our artless muse, has made her first essay
TO instrust and please you with a modern play.
Theatric-bus'ness was, and still should be,
To point out vice in its deformity;
Make virtue fair! shine eminently bright,
Rapture the breast and captivate the fight.
No matter which, the pulpit or the stage,
Condemn the vice and folly of the age;
These are our boast, and on sure ground we stand,
Plead virtues cause throughout this infant land;
We mount the stage, and lend an helping hand.
Wits, fools, a knave and conjurer to night,
The objects make both of your ears and sight.
A band of dupes are humm'd with idle schemes,
Quit solid sense for airy golden dreams.
Our flattering muse thinks she is some merit gained,
Pursuing truth, and things (like truth) well feigned.
The subject's suited to our present times,
No person's touched, although she lash their crimes;
Nor gall or copp'ras tincture her design,
But gay good humor breathe in every line.
If you condemn her -- she for censure stands;
But if applaud -- then thundering clap your hands.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Humorists.
Hum. Parchment. Quadrant. Rattletrap, a supposed Conjurer.
Dupes.
Raccoon, an old Debauchee. Washball, an avaritious old Barber. Trushoop, a
Cooper. M' Snip, a Tailor.
Meanwell, a Gentleman, in love with Washball's Niece. Topinlift, a Sailor.
Spitfire, an Assistant to Rattletrap.
WOMEN.
Moll Placket, a Woman of the Town, in Keeping by Raccoon. Mrs. Trushoop, Wife
to Trushoop. Miss Lucy, Washball's Neice, in love with Meanwell. Collector,
Blackboard's Ghost, Tailors, Servants, etc.
THE DISAPPOINTMENT: OR THE FORCE OF CREDULITY.
ACT I.
SCENE I. A Tavern.
Scene opens and discovers Hum, Parchment and Quadrant* seated round a Table
with Wine, etc. [Parchment, pouring out a Glass of Wine sings, Sing tantara
rara, rogues all, rogues all, sing tantara rara, rogues all. COME, success to
us [drinks. all drink.] Well gentlemen! How goes our scheme? Have you made any
new proselytes since our last meeting?

Hum. Why, really, while credulity and the love of money prevail, I think it no
merit to make proselytes of one half the town: but that you know is not our
purpose; we only want to draw in four or five. I baited the hook for the old
shaver; he gaped* snapp'd and swallowed it as voraciously as a cringing cour^^^
would a pension. As for Raccoon, I just threw out a few hints; he soon
discovered the foundation, and raised the fabric himself.


Quadrant, Oh! if he smells money, as great a coward as they say he is, he will
venture to the gates of hell for it. He, he, he.


Hum. I Have hitherto kept him in suspense; he haunts me like a ghost; he thinks
something, but knows nothing: He Will be here presently, and I have contrived
matters so, that he shall make the discovery himself.


Quad. So far we have sailed before the wind, and I Have not been idle, for I Have
drawn in Trushoop and M' Snip: they have been with me these three nights,
consulting proper measures for obtaining the treasure; and are so elevated,
that I Am afraid they will run crazy. He, he, he. Trushoop talks of building a
chapel at his own expense, and employing a score of priests, to keep up a
continual rotation of prayers for the repose of the souls of those poor fellows
who buried it. As for M' Snip, he intends to knock off business, home to
England and purchase a title. He, he, he. They Will both be here in half an hour.


Parch. The devil they do! then I suppose they will not be in a humor for work
till this affair is over -- I Would some thoughts of a new suit of clothes; but I
must drop them, till these chimeras are out of M' Snips brain.


Hum. That Is one reason, why I want the business dispatched; for, though I like
the diversion, I would not hurt their families. Mr. Parchment, have you prepared
the papers?


Parch. Yes, yes, I have 'em here in my pocket.


Quad. Do let us see 'em? He, he, he* for they are the foundation of all our
undertaking.


Parch. [Pulling out the papers] Here they are, all placed in regular order,
and enclosed in a letter to Mr. Hum.


Hum. Aye, aye, let us see. [reads] the letter will do to a tittle -- but what
the devil's this?

Taking hold of the parchment.
Parch. That Is the will.


Hum. Why, it looks as if it had been preserved in the temple of Apollo, or the
tower of Babel.


Quad. Egad, you might have said Noah's ark, He, he, he, for it looks old
enough. -- And pray what is this old weather-beaten piece?


Parch. Why, that is the draught of the place where the treasure lies: together
with the memorandum, signed by all present at the time it was deposited.


Quad. He, he, he, droll enough. Sing^.


AIR I. I am a brisk young lively lass.
In all the town there is none like you,
When you're on mischi^f bent si^s;
With pen and ink, one well can write,
What you do both invent sirs.
It Is you, my boys, it is you can do it,
Parchment you are my darling;
Raccoon may curse, and Washball burst,
We value not their snarling. Tol, lol, etc.
Hum. Well, I must take these into my care, as they are directed to me:
[Gathers up the papers.] but I wonder what detains Jack Rattletrap.


Quad. Oh! I Will be bound for his appearance -- I was at his house just now, and
found him poreing over the canto of Hudibras and Sydrophel, in order to furnish
himself with a set of hard words, which added to his knowledge in the
mathematics, will sufficiently qualify him for a modern conjurer -- but here
he comes! He, he, he -- talk of the devil and his imps appear.

Enter Rattletrap, singing. AIR. II. The Bloom of May.
Behold you my magic phiz,
How solemn and grave I look;
Here, here, my good friends, here i^
My brass bound magical book.
This book wonders contain,
'Twou'd deceive the de'el himself,
And puzzle a conjurer's brain,
That knows no more than myself. That knows, and^.
Your servant gentlemen.

(All say.) Your servant Mr. Rattletrap.


Quad. Take your chair -- Come, Sir, my service to you. All drink.


Parch. We began to look for you with impatience* Well, are you almost prepared
for your office?


Rattle. Yes, dress and books are already provided; but for tools, I must apply
to Mr. Quadrant.


Quad. Yes, yes, I^ll cut you a hazel-rod off our cherry tree; a magnet,
nocturnal and forestaff shall be all ready -- and I can furnish you, as
Hudibras says, with a Moon dial, and Napier's bones,
With store of constellation stones.
He, he, he. -- But say, Have you seen the papers?


Rattle. Yes, I saw them this morning at Mr. Parchment's office -- But,
hark'ee, we want a fifth person, to act as demi-devil, or familiar spirit.


Hum. Leave that to me; I Am acquainted with an old artillery-man, he is a snug
dry dog -- I Will introduce him to you; with his assistance, and a proper habit,
you will cut as droll a figure as old Merlin.


Rattle. Well, well, but we must have a place provided for his reception, under
ground -- Mr. Quadrant and I will see that done -- drop the conversation, here
comes old Raccoon.


Enter Raccoon. Raccoon. Your servant gentlemen -- Brother Hum, I Am bery glad to
see you -- Mr. Quadrant, Mr. Parchment, Mr. Rattletrap. He salutes them all.


Parch* Leave ceremonies, and take hold of the bo^tle. All drink.


Hum. Brother Raccoon and gentlemen all, I must beg your patience for a few
minutes -- I Will be with you instantly. Exit.

As he goes out, he drops the papers; Raccoon picks them up, steps aside and
looks over them*
Rac. [Aside.] Ah! brother Hum, have I found you secret -- I tought dear was
someting in de wind -- dis is a lucky bout -- now my dreams out -- Dad, I Will
keep dese papers, dey shall not hab them, unless I get de share.

He crams them in his bosom.
Parch. Come, Mr. Raccoon, sit down.

Raccoon sits down.
Re-enter Hum. Hum. Did you see any thing of a bundle of papers, gentlemen?


Parch No, I saw none.


Quad. Nor I -- you didn't leave them here.


Hum. Speak gentlemen -- if you have got them, pray don't keep me in suspense?


Rattle. Upon my honor, I saw nothing of 'em.


Hum. Pray put me out of my pain gentlemen? [They all rise, shake their clothes
and look about for them.] If they are not here, the damned drawer must have
picked my pocket when he brought up the wine -- Damn the villain! He knocks.


Drawer (below.) Coming Sir!


Enter Drawer. Drawer. Sir, here is some gentlemen.


Enter Washball, Trushoop and M' Snip. Hum. [Locks the door and speaks to the
drawer.] You scoundre^, where is the papers you took?


Draw. Sir I didn't take any.


Hum. You lie, you rascal!


Washball* What Is the matter? what is the matter, neighbor Hum?


Hum. We Are ruined, Mr. Washball -- the villain! has stole the papers.


Wash. Deliver the papers -- Deliver the papers, you dog!


Draw. Upon my honor gentlemen! I didn't see any.


Trus. Damn your honor, you tief; I hope it is no defense gent^emen


M' Snip. Onor! What, a drawer in a tayvirn have 'Onor?


Wash. You lie, you lie you dog!

He lifts up his cane to strike him.
Quad His countenance condemns him.


Draw Indeed, indeed, gentlemen, I saw no papers at all.


Hum. You rascal! you have got 'em: I Will send for a constable immediately.


Draw. For God's sake gentlemen!


Trus. O! you teif of the world -- when I fish for the devil. I Will bate my hook
wid you.


M' Snip. Gin I come to him, I Will cut his throt.


Draw. Oh L -- d! Oh L -- d!


M' Sn. Produce the pappers this enstant, or by St. Andra I Will sacreseese ye!
He seizes and shakes him.


Draw. Oh L -- d! gentlemen have mercy? don't kill me?


Wash. Kill the dog, kill him.

He strikes at him with his cane.
Draw. (On his knees.) As I hope for mercy I Am innocent gentlemen!


M' Sn. You Have but ane moment to live, deliver or I Will --

Rac. Come gentlemen! be merciful don't kill de poor fellow -- Search him.

They search him and find none.
Hum. They Are not about him -- What shall we do? -- Come, come my lad --
look'ee -- be ingenuous with us -- the'yre of no service to you, and if you will
produce 'em in half an hour, we'll give you something handsome -- Perhaps I Have
dropped 'em -- do my lad! step down and look about.


Draw. I will Sir, I will make what search I can.

Exit drawer.
Rac. Come, come -- make yourselves easy gentlemen -- I did pick up de papers
at de door -- brother Hum dropped them as he went out -- I see de contents of them,
here dey are, and I hope gentlemen, dat you will let me come in for de share.
He gives the papers. (All say.) Agreed, agreed, agreed.


Hum. We always intended you should have a share brother Raccoon -- Well, now
the papers are safe, we are all right again -- come sit down gentlemen, Very
lucky! very lucky indeed! All sit down.


Parch. (To Washball.) What can these papers mean.


Wash. Oh dear! Oh dear! how my heart beats for joy.


Trus So do mine -- I tought it would tump my liver out.


M' Sn. An I had na been stopped, I should a cut his throt -- I Am glad you
prevarted me -- let^s call him up and ge him samthing.


Hum. Aye, aye, by all means. He knocks.


Re-enter Drawer. Draw. Did you call, gentlemen?


M' Sn. Weel lad, we have foond the pappers; and hare's samthing to make ye
ameends for the freeght ye got, [He gives him money.] and meend ye tall na ane,
but keep it to yoursel.


Draw. Thank'ee kindly sir! God bless you sir -- thank you kind sir. Bowing.


Wash. Aye, aye, a close tongue, makes a wise head* remember that young man.
Exit drawer.


Parch. (To Trushoop.) I say, Mr. Trushoop, what are the contents of these
papers?


Trus. The devil a hair do I know about it, at all, at all.


Hum. Well gentlemen -- I look upon you all to be men of honor: I suppose
you're not strangers to the business in hand -- you have all been informed of it,
except brother Raccoon and Mr. Parchment, who are both present, and shall soon
be informed.


Parch. (Starting up suddenly.) Gentlemen! I expected when I was sent for here,
that I was to meet as usual, to take a cheerful glass with my old friends: I
knew of no secret to be divulged not I -- And I earnestly request, that if it
is any scheme, plot, combination, rout, riot or unlawful assembly -- In fine,
if it is any thing against his most sacred majesty, George the second, of
Great Britain, France and Ireland, king, defender of the faith, etc. whom God
preserve! or the lords of his majesty's most honorable privy council, or any
one of them -- Or the lords spiritual or temporal, or either of them -- Or the
honorable the house of commons of Great Britain; that standing bulwark of
British freedom, or either of them -- The lord lieutenant or parliament of
Ireland, or either of them -- The church of England, as by law established; or
the government under which we live -- I say gentlemen, if it is any scheme,
plot, combination, rout, riot or unlawful assembly as aforesaid -- keep it to
yourselves -- don't let me know a tittle of it -- I wash my hands of it: for,
if I know it, I Will be a swift witness against you -- for as I hope to be saved,
I Will immediately to the attorney general; lodge an information against you; and
hang you every mothers son.


Wash Dear, dear sir! Mr. Parchment, don't think of such a thing.


Parch. Don't tell me sir!


Wash Sir, sir, you have known me these many, many years; I Have lived peaceably,
and never was concerned in any of these disturbances you mentioned.


Parch. Mr. Washball, I have nothing to charge you with, but sir, my suspicions
are --


Wash. Lord! Lord! sir, sir!


Rattle. Sir, I believe there is not one in this company, but has as much
loyalty as yourself.


M' Sn. By my saul mon! I ha as great a regord to to the illuustreus hoose of
Hanaver, as ye ha.


Parch. It may be so sir*


Quad. I Am surprised at you, Mr. Parchment.


Trus. The devil burn me but so am I too.


Rac. Come, come, Mr. Parchment -- consider --

Hum. I hope, Mr. Parchment! you don't suppose any of us capable of conspiring
against his majesty or his government -- No sir, I answer for myself, his
majesty has not a more loyal subject. The whole business, that you were
desired to attend upon here, I Will instantly communicate, if you will hear, but if
not, why sir --


Wash. Aye, do hear, do hear, Mr. Parchment.


Trus. A^ra my dear, and have a little pashence, and we'll tell you all, and
more too.


Parch. If it is none of those things, gentlemen, I have mentioned, I am ready
to hear.


Hum. Well then, you must know that I have very unexpectedly, and to my very
great joy, received a letter from my loving sister-in-law in England (who is
heir to the famous capt. Blackbeard) enclosing sundry papers, such as plans,
draughts and memorandums, of a great quantity of treasure, that was buried by
the pirates -- Here are the papers [Pulling them out of his pocket] gentlemen;
please to look over them. They took over them*


Parch. I beg your pardon gentlemen, since it is an affair of this nature; I
join you with all my heart.


Trus. The devil doubt you my dear honey.


Rac. (Pointing to one of the papers in Parchment's hand.) What Is dat' do Mr.
Parchment read it, I cannot see widout my spectetles.


Parch. Why, I find (but I Will omit the preamble) it is a particular account of
the treasure, which I Will read -- Imprimis, 17 golden candlesticks, chalices and
crucifixes; 30,000 Portugal pieces; 20,000 Spanish pistoles; 470,000
pistereens; 7^ bars of gold; a small box of diamonds; 60,000 pieces of eight;
and 150 pounds weight of gold-dust. -- This instrument is signed by Edward
Teach, alias Blackbeard, captain; Moses Brimstone, first lieutenant; Bryan
Fireball, second lieutenant; Judas Guzzlefire, gunner, and Jeffery Eatdevil,
cook.


Wash. Oh! what a treasure -- What do you think of our plot now Mr. Parchment?
He, he, he.


Parch. I like it extremely well sir -- I wish I had been concerned in such a
plot twenty years ago.


Trus. The devil a word a lie in all that again, O hone acree.


Hum. Aye! well here is enough for us all.


Trus. By my shoul! it is a very fine shight, if a body could but feel it.


M' Sn. By my saul! I Will awa we all me dranken joorneymen; and keck the
shap-boord oot a the wandow.


Wash. I Will shave no more -- no not I -- I Will keep my hands out of the suds.


Rac. Dis will make me cut de figure in life, and appear in de world wid de
proper impotance: and den I Will do someting for my poor friend.


Rattle. Our business must be carried on with secrecy and dispatch; besides, it
will be attended with some expense -- I believe gentlemen, it will be necessary
to appoint Mr. Parchment our secretary and treasurer, if it is agreeable to him.

(All say.) With all our hearts.


Parch. Gentlemen, you have already laid me under many obligations, and this
appointment, I look upon as a further proof of your esteem: I accept it with
gratitude; and heartily thank you for your kind information, and the great
confidence, you have reposed in me, and you may depend on the utmost secrecy,
faithfulness, accuracy, dispatch and punctuality.


Trus Fait my dear that is a very fine spache, by my showl! father Duffy never
made a better.


Quad Mr. Rattletrap, what do you imagine will be the expense to each
individual?


Rattle. Oh! trifling, trifling -- I suppose about two pistoles a man.


Wash Well, I Have money about me; I may as well pay it now -- Here, Mr.
Parchment, is a doubleloon, for my neighbor Trushoop and myself.


Trus. Mashah, my dear! and I Am very much obliged to you.


Rattle. Before I make use of my art to discover this treasure, I must insist
that each individual of you, go to Mr. Parchment's office and be sworn to
secrecy and honesty to each other, and you who have not paid, leave your
respective quotas.

(All say) Agreed, agreed.


Hum. Well gentlemen, it grows late, we'll break up -- I expect to see you all
tomorrow at six: mean while let it remain a profound secret -- remember we are
now going to be sworn; so don't let your wives or nearest friends know it.

They all rise.
Parchment sings. AIR III How blessed has my time been.
I.
Now let us join hands and unite in this cause;
It Is glorious gold, that shall gain us applause:
How blessed now are we, with such treasure in store,
We'll clothe all the naked, and feed all the poor.
We'll clothe, etc.
II.
How happy for me to this country I came,
You all, my dear friends, now can witness the same;
In wealth to abound -- Oh! the thought is most sweet,
No more will I write for one farthing a sheet.
No more, etc.
M' Sn. New, my brae lads, let us aw stand true.


Trus. Arra fait we will, that is true for you.

Exeunt.
SCENE II. A Street.
Enter Trushoop. Trus. Now, and what the devil wiill I say to my wife? or what
excuze will I make? By my showl! she looked weary black at me t'oder night, when
I come home in the morning -- By the holy stone! I Am very fraid to to knock at
the dure -- but I can^t stand this way, lying out in the cowld all night -- By
my showl* this shitting up all night, will be the det of me -- Fait, I Will tell
her all the sacret -- but that will not do nather, for I Am book-sworn -- I Will not
fall my showl to the devil for a few scouldings -- Well, if I had the wasdom of
the holy Saint Dominick, St Patrick, St. Kullumkill, and all the pious saints
of Ireland, I would not be able to tell ^at to do -- But fait I must come in
some how or t'oder.


Knocks at the Door. Mrs Trushoop (at the window) Who Is there?


Trus Who else, my dare, but your own Trushoop? open the dure, if you plaze my
dare.


Mrs Trus. Not I, by my conscience! -- go to the hoores, where you come from --
I Will not be disturbed this way by you every night


Trus. Open the dure, my dare, if you plaze, the nabours will make a great
tawk, my dare, if you don't -- for nabour Glibtongue's paple are all up.


Mrs. Trus. Fat do I care for the nabours -- they know I Am an honest vartuous
woman -- and that is all they can say of me -- it is no matters how soon they
know of your goings on -- if you stay out every night till day.


Trus. Well, if you will not open it, my dear, yoursalf, why then call Tarance, if
you plase.


Mrs. Trus Indeed and I Will call up Tarance -- if you want Tarance, why call him
yoursalf; I Will not be staying up in the cowld, killing my life this way, so I
will not.

She retires from the window.
Trus. (Knocks at the door.) Tarance, Tarance, Tarance.


Terence (within answers) Coming sir!


Trus. Well then, cum away, and fait I and you will go to work togeder, so we
will -- for by my showl, the shap will be the stillesht plaashe in the howshe
for me, for I Would rader hare the kooper's march, than the sound of my wife's tung
the day. (Knocks again) Tarance.


Ter. (within.) Coming.


Trus. Augh! dis oat -- dis day will be a bad night to me -- Well, the devil a
hair do I care -- fen I get the money, she will soon make it up wid me, for I Will
make her as great as the earl of Portleydown's own wife -- Lady Barrymoore
hersalf, shall not be finer den she. (He knocks again and calls) Tarance -- why
you teif of the world! if you don't cum down in a minute, I Will give shelaley --
Why, Tarance.


Ter. (within the door.) I Am just here.


Trus. By my showl! this fellow is enough to warey the pashence of saint
Ignatius, or the holy pope himsalf -- Tarance!


Ter (opens the door and enters the street.) Shure, I Am just here.


Trus. You teif of the world! why didn't you let me in when I tumpt?


Ter. Shure I cum, fen I heard you.


Trus. You lie you teif.


Ter. (scratching his head and grumbling.) Shure if you com'd home in time,
we'd not have all this noise, so we would not


Trus. Give us none of your gum, you spalpeene of perdition! by my showl, I Will
give you shelaley, so I would He beats him, Terence bawls aloud.


Ter. Oh! murder! murder! -- master dare! don't kill one.


Mrs. True (returns to the window.) Arn't you ashamed to be making a great noise
all night in the strate, this morning, and killing the poor boy for noting.


Ter. Arra, mistress dare, spoke to him -- Master dare laave off, for shure I
was aslape when I heard you coll.


Trus. (pushes Terence from him and says) To the devil I pitch all liars -- Go
to your work, you teif of the world, and if you don't make me five tight caggs
the day (that will hold no vater) I Will bate you as long as I am able, and
longer too. They cross the stage and exeunt.


SCENE III. A Room in Moll Placket's House.
Enter Raccoon, with a Spit, Pick-axe and Spade. Rac. What shall I do wid dese
things? dad, I Will put them under the bed. ( he steps into the next room, puts
them under the bed and returns) But where is Mrs. Placket? She Will be oberjoy^d
when I tell her -- Dad I Will dress her off as fine as de queen of Shebe, when
she come to see brother Solomon -- She shall go to de play ebery night; a coach
and two footmen to attend her -- Do' I Am an old man, dad I Have strengt in de
back, and marrow in de bone, and as bigorous as some young fellows of
twenty-five; dat Mrs. Placket can testify. ( He calls) Placket, pet, pet.


Pla. (within) Pet's a coming, pet's a coming, dear Cooney -- ( Enter Placket.)
here is pet.


Rac. Buss me, my dear, and I Will tell you someting, dat will make you happy.


Plac. What, is your wife dead? say -- tell me -- for I know that will make us
happy.


Rac. No, but it is bery near so good -- but you will tell.


Plac. No, indeed, indeed, indeed I will not, my dear Cooney.


Rac. Well den, I Will not keep my dear pet in suspense any longer, but you must
buss me, when I say any ting dat pleses you.


Plac. Well, so I will then.


Rac. Well den -- Mr. Hum has rec^^^ a letter from his sister in England, wid
an account (...) two or tree hundred tousand pound, dat was buried by old
Blackbeard de pirate; wid de draught where it is hid -- and we know de bery
spot ( She kisses him) and I Will gib you L. 500 a year for pin-money; ( Kisses)
and we'll ride in de coach togeder; ( Kisses) and we'll go to de play togeder (
Kisses) and den we'll come home and go to bed togeder ( Kisses) and den we'll
-- a you little rogue you. ( Kisses again.)


Plac. And do you really think you will find it? -- Why, if you knew where all
the treasure in the world was buried, you would never obtain it without a conjurer.


Rac. Yes, my dear, but we hab a conjurer -- we'b got Mr. Rattletrap; he
understands 'strology and de magic-art, better den any man in de guberment --
and dis night we intend to make de trial -- and I must go dis instant, and
settle de place of meeting.


Plac. Can you leave me so soon, my dear Cooney?

Raccoon sings.
AIR IV. Yankee Doodle.
O! how joyful shall I be,
When I get de money,
I will bring it all to dee;
O! my diddling honey.
Exit, singing they chorus, yankee doodle, etc. Plac. By'e, b'ye Cooney --
There he goes, and good luck attend him -- poor old fool; he thinks I have a
prodigious fondness for him -- and so I have for his better part, that is his
money -- He has been deficient in payment for sometime past; but he thinks he
makes that up with soft language; for he calls me his pet, his dove, his poor
ting, and a thousand such soft names; and I keep pace with him, as well as I
can; for I call him Cooney, cock-a-pidgeon, sugar-plumb, cock-a-dandy, and all
the sweet things I can think of -- Was any one to overhear us, they would think we
were two little children, playing baby -- and really we do but little more --
but thank fortune, I Am not at a loss for a friend, to make up his deficiency --
though he thinks me as innocent as a dove: and indeed I Am like a dove in one
respect, for when I lose one mate, I mourn till I get another -- but I hope the
worst is past. She sings.


AIR V. Shambuy.
Though I hate the old wretch, full as bad as Jack-Ketch,
My necessities tell me to please him;
I will ogle and whine, till I make the gold mine:
For that is the best method to ease him.
I Will simper and leer, and I Will call him my dear,
And be loving as ever I can be,
Then hasten dear Cooney, and fetch me the money,
For that will exact to my plan be.
Exit, singing the chorus, laral, etc. SCENE IV. A Street.
Enter Rattletrap and Quadrant, meeting Hum. Hum. Hey! Mr. Rattletrap, which
way.


Rattle. I Am just returned from the place of action -- we go on gloriously --
Quadrant and I must set out half an hour before the rest, to have all things in
readiness -- I Have left Spitfire there, and given him his proper cue.


Hum. What do ye think? -- Ha, ha -- I just now saw brother Raccoon, with a
long catalogue of all his military achievements, both in Jamaica and on the
continent -- together with a treatise he wrote on military discipline, last
war, for the instruction (not only of our militia officers) but the regular
officers likewise -- the same that he sent to the coffee house -- you remember
it -- I could scarcely forbear laughing, while he was explaining de hollow
square, and de ebolutious, as he calls it -- He Is gone in great haste to lay
'em before the governor, to procure his recommendation to the secretary of
state, for a colonel's commission. -- I find nothing less than a regiment will
satisfy him -- which he thinks his merit alone, entitles him to -- But whether
or not he swears he will make his gold subservient to his ambition, when he
obtains it.


Quad. Bravo! He, he, he.


Hum. I Am at a loss to know how he will bear up under his disappointment -- Sure
nothing can equal hi folly, but his vanity -- But, I Am in great hopes this
experiment will cure him.


Rattle. No matter how much he is disappointed -- I Am doubtful fellows of his
turn are incapable of proper reflection.


Hum. True; but it is a very great pity for all -- Well, remember we are all to
meet at the Ton, precisely at six, ( Looks at his watch) we have but half an hour
to spare; adieu, adieu. Exeunt.


SCENE V. A Taylor's Shop.
Taylor's at work, some singing and some whistling. Enter M' Snip, with his
broad-sword. Mr Sn. Awa, awa, we ye aw -- awa -- begone ye scoondrels -- oot of
my hoof thas menute, or by St. Andra I Will chop the heeds off every vullain of
ye -- oot ye vele scum -- na a word oot of your heeds, or Ise ma^^ a sacrefeeze
of ye aw. ( He makes a cut at the brass knob on the door, with his broad-swor^,
and cuts it off: the tailors all run off the shop board in confusion, tumbling
one over another, with their stockings about their heels.) nae mai^ my hoose
sil be a resaptacle for thieves, ye prack-loose sins of hoores -- These therty
years post I'se been a sleeve to ye aw; Awa, awa, Ste-tepe, bookrum, mooheer,
guze, shares and aw, ( He kicks and throws them about the stage) na mair
accasion ha I for ye -- New I'se cleared the shap-boord, the naxt thing es to
clear holl of its rubage. ( Kicks the skirts of cloth and rags about the
stage) I'se fot up this rume for the resaption of jontlemen of the foorst ronk
-- than gang to Breetain -- be a teetle and occept a pleece at coort -- It
shall be nathing less than loord chaumberlin, or meester of the waardrobe --
than I'se be a gu^e friend to Amereca, and new I Have ez'd my meend of the
parplaxity of buzness -- New for the trazure -- I'se gang and mate my coompany.


AIR VI The bon^y Broom.
(Sung with a Scotch accent.) I'se cut out political claith,
To patch and mend the state;
My bodkin and my thamble both,
Combine to make me great.
I'se meesur'd oot a pleece at cort,
That best woth grondeur su^ts;
I'se scorn ane of the meaner sort,
Like ^il^^ paultry brutes.
Oh! the gold* the bonny, bonny gold!
That Is buried near the mill;
Oh! could I get ane grup of thee,
Then I should have my will. Exit.
SCENE VI. A Room in Washball's House.
Enter Meanwell and Lucy. Meanwell. My dear Lucy! I cannot conceive the meaning
of your uncle's displea^ure, hi churlish behavior, for some days past, gives
me great concern.


Lucy. He never uttered a syllable to your disadvantage, till within these
three days past, during which time, he has been frequently dinning in my ears,
that, if I marry agreeable to him, he will give m L 0,000 to my portion -- and
further declared, that if ever I spoke to you, or kept your company again he would
disown me.


Meanw. Strange! but pray, where is he to get the money.


Lucy. Oh! he is certainly beside himself, or he could not entertain such notions
-- He told me last night, he intended to sail for France, the first
opportunity; and there get himself dubbed a Knight of the Golden Fleece.


Meanw. Unaccountable why, he must be out of his senses, or he never could act
so inconsistent -- appoint tomorrow for the celebration of our nuptials -- make
the necessary preparations -- then of a sudden change his mind -- I cannot
account for it.


Lucy. I hope this humor will shortly change -- then we shall bring matters to
a conclusion: for I had rather our marriage should be solemnized with, than
without, his consent.


Meanw. Certainly, it would be most agreeable to us both -- but consent, or not
consent, it must be done.


Lucy. Our affair is carried too far, for us to retract, without subjecting
ourselves to the laughter of the town -- you know my dear Meanwell! a girl's
character under these circumstances, seldom escapes censure.


Meanw. True -- my dear Lucy! the world's very censorious, and slander like a
snow-ball, always gathers by rolling -- whatever malice can invent or envy
suggest, shall never lessen you in my esteem -- my affection for you, is too
firm, to be shaken by the blast of scandalous tongues.


Lucy. Be assured, your generous love shall be repaid ^ith virtue, tenderness
and respect -- and if I had the L 10,000 my uncle shadowed out for me; I should
esteem it as so much dro^s -- 'Twou'd only serve to make me miserable without
you.

AIR VII. My fond Shepherds, etc.
Meanwell sings. My dear Lucy! you ravish my heart,
I am blessed with such language as this;
To my arms then, Oh! come, we'll never part,
And let us mutually seal with a kiss.
Lucy sings. Ten thousand sweet kisses I Would give,
O! be you but contented with me,
Then for you my dear Meanwell I^ll live,
And as happy as constant I Will be.
Lord! here is my uncle.


Enter Washball, Meanwell bows to him. Washball. Hey dey! here is fine doings --
how dare you enter my house, after I forbid you? Ha, sirrah!


Meanw. Sir your neice and --


Wash. And what sirrah, have you to do with my neice out of my house directly
-- you're a pretty fellow indeed -- marry a girl with L. 10,000 portion.


Meanw. Sir, I beg --


Wash Beg what? I keep no beggars ^n my house, you rascal! get out of my house
I say -- what, do you want to rob me -- out of my house, or I Will break your
head sirrah!


Lucy. Dear uncle! be patient --


Wash Patient, ha! what, you want him to stay, do you? get to your room you
baggage! to your room this instant (he attempts to strike her, Meanwell
interposes, and receives the blow.) get out of my house, you villain; -- away
to your room baggage! out of my house you rascal. Exit Meanwell one way and
Lucy another. If I ever find you here again, I Will send you to the workhouse
sirrah! L. 10,000 ha -- to an upstart young fellow, who hasn't so much as a
coat of arms -- Meanwell -- I Am sure there is no such name to be found in all
the books of heraldy -- no, no -- I Will match my neice to a nobleman, who can
trace his genealogy up, as far as William the Conqueror: and can settle a good
jointure on her -- I Will away to France, get myself created a Knight of the
Golden-Fleece -- then I shall have a greater coat of arms than any peer of
Great Britain -- I shall be called Sir John Washball, Knight of the most noble
order of the Golden Fleece -- Oh! how I exult in the prospect -- but I must
away and meet my friends: the lucky hour approaches, when gold, diamonds and
rubies, shall make their appearance;

Which now lie dormant, in our mother earth,
But I must labor hard to give them birth. Exit.

SCENE VII.
Scene opens and discovers Rattletrap, Hum, Parchment, Quadrant, Raccoon, M'
Snip, Trushoop and Washball, seated round a table, drinking wine, etc. Parch.
My old friend, Mr. Trushoop, how are you?


Trus. O hone! my dear, at your sharwis, but I don't care how I am, so you are
well. Shake hands.


Hum. Are we all here, gentlemen?


Quad. We Are all here, Mr. Hum.


Hum Well gentlemen things seem to go on prosperously, and bear a favorable
aspect; I think myself happy, in not having discovered this secret, to any of
the vain or profligate part of mankind -- but to you, gentlemen, who by a long
series of acquaintance, I Have found to be men of strict honor and integrity,
and my very good friends: which leaves me no room to doubt, but the treasure
we are about to discover and divide amongst us, will be so disposed of, a^ to
render each of us useful members of so^^iety, and shining ornaments to the
government under which we live -- It would grieve my heart, to see any of us
act contrary to the character of a man of piety, and a gentleman.


Trus. Arra, my dare, that is true for you -- Don't you all hear that weary fine
spache he made just now* a little while ago -- By my shoul! he is a ghantelman
of grate learnedness, fait is he.


Rac. We tank brother Hum, for his kind admonition -- What he says is trute, and
seems to spring from de bery fountain of sense; and as m^ talent lies in de
military, I intend to go to Lond^^, and buy de^^e^^ment -- den I Will show them
what de Americans can do. ( Rises and imitates the salute of the pike with his
cane.) Sa^e bind, safe find ha brother ^um -- I hab engaged wid Mr. Trappick,
and I hab it under his own hand, for a bill of exchange of tree tousand pound,
at 65, at de rate of twenty-seven thilling de pistole, and gold dust at six
pound de ounce.


Hum. It Is very commendable, brother Raccoon; you have to be ^are, an excellent
notion of honor and ^^a^e.


M' Sn. In troth, I'se gang awa and be a teetle


Wash I am far advanced in years, and have lost that sprightliness and
activity, I possessed in my youthful days -- But I hope to do some good with my
money -- I propose to go over to France, get myself knighted, then to London,
and marry my neice to a nobleman -- I Have no am^ition, ^ot I, but to be called
Sir John Washball, and have a coat of arms.


Trus. The devil a ^air do I care, for a coat of arms, or a coat of legs,
myself will build a shapple, and help the poor preasts, who havn't a tootful to
put in their mouts; and the devil a beggar shall lave my dure wid a hungry
^ally, and when I Am dead, shure they will make a shaint o me.


Parch. I applaud your pious resolutions, Mr. Trushoop; your intentional
charity is certainly disinterested, and worthy of none but yourself.


Trus The devil a word a lie in all that.


Rattle. Well gentlemen, it is time to enter on business; have you seriously
considered what you are going about? Our warfare i^ not with men of this world;
we have to engage with principalities and powers of darkness, with invisibles
and demons, far more powerful than the united legions, of the most invincible
monarchs on earth: therefore, the greatest exertion of your courage will be
necessary.


Trus Fait my dear, and you're right, and I think so too.


Parch. The thoughts of these things shock me so, I can scarcely help trembling.


Rac I tink I hab courage enough.


Hum. Aye, brother Raccoon, you're a happy man -- your courage is
constitutional.


Wash. Aye, so it is, so it is; but as for me -- O dear! -- O dear!

M' Snip sings. AIR VIII. Over the h^lls and far away.
It Is money makes the coward brave,
And freedom gi^^ to ea'ry slave;
My gud^ bro^ s^^^^d I^^l soon a^^^ay,
And drive those warlocks far away,
And drive those warlocks, etc.
And drive those warlocks, etc.
My good brod-sword I^ll soon display,
And drive those warlocks far away.

Trus. By my showl! but I don't like the toughts of these dolloughons.


Rac. Come, don't be faint hearted den -- put yourselbes under Mr. Rattletrap's
care and mine.


Hum. We will so, brother Raccoon, it is happy for us, we have you with us --
your example no doubt, will inspire us with some degree of resolution.


Rattle. Well, are you all furnished with tools?


Rac. I Have provided de pick-axe, and de spade and de spit -- I forget to bring
them wid me; I left them wid a friend, but I can hab them for calling for*


Rattle. Now gentlemen, let us fix on a watch word, whereby we may know one
another in the dark.

(All say) By all means.


Parch. The papers inform us, that the treasure was carried up the creek, on
board a canoe.


Wash. A very good watchword! Mr. Parchment -- then let it be canoe; as it has
a reference to the concealment of the treasure.


Hum. For my part, I like the word well.


M' Sn. Troth, I'se na objection, sae we can uunderstond ane another.


Trus. The devil a hair myself cares how it is, or what it is, canew or bote,
so we get the money. Sings.


AIR IX. Chiling O Guirey.
I.
By shaint Patrick, dear honeys, no longer let us stay,
But take laave all togathar, and bundle away,
To the plashe under ground, where the trasure's exposed,
And bring that to light, which shall never be disclosed;
And when we have got it, my jewel's, O hone!
For keeping it snug, arra let us alone,
We'll sing p^whillalew, at the shight of the palf,
And as for the sharing, laave that to mysalf.
Sing laral lal, etc.
II.
Arra, feel how I Will work, wid my peck axe and spade,
For shure I was nursed to the turf cutting trade,
In bright Tipparara, and smiling Tyrone,
And if you will all help me, we'll all dig alone:
Come, come than away, to the plashe we'll retr^^e,
If the devil should mate us, he will surely get bate;
I Will fasten my leg wid a pair of good brogues,
And I^ll follow before, all the way my sweet rogues.
Sing laral lal, etc.
III.
And now we have got it, we'll roar and we'll bawl,
And sing, fait, like locusts, in winter or fall;
With shamrough in hat, de'el a down will we lay,
But dance all night long on St. Patrick's day;
The bagpipes shall fiddle Gramudgey Gramaugh,
While we swill down skolrankey, or good usquebaugh;
When I wauk in the strate, I Will be led by a troop
Coming after, long life to dear maaster Trushoop.
Sing laral lal, etc.
Rattle. Well gentlemen, at eleven o'clock we are to meet at the stone bridge:
it will not be prudent to go all together, lest we be discovered -- Whoever
arrives there first, let him wait for the rest; and as they come up, hail them
with the word canoe -- they must answer with the same word: by observing this,
we shall prevent all discovery.


Hum. Aye, aye, the utmost care and circumspection are necessary -- we cannot be
too cautious.


Trus. Fait and I Will hollow canew and canew, all night long, till daylight, if
you plase.


Rattle. Except you are determined to follow my directions, when we come to
action, 'twill be in vain to proceed.


Wash. The spirits will not hurt us, I hope.


Rattle. Take no rash steps, don't be afraid, follow my directions, and not a
hair of your heads shall be injured.


Wash. I Will do nothing but what you order, Mr. Rattletrap.


Trus. You're right, my dear, and by my showl! and so will I, and more too.


Rattle. It Is needless to say any more -- Remember, eleven o'clock at the stone
bridge. Each of you repair home, and bring all your tools with you -- Be
punctual at the hour -- we'll break up for the presen -- I Will away home and put
on my magic habit; otherwise I shall have no power over the invisibles.


Rac. I Will go and get de tools; and I Will bring a little refreshment wid me.


Trus. Fait and I Will bring my gaaging rod, and all the tools in the shop, if
you want them; becaze why -- I Will have no occasion to use them after this.


M' Sn. I'se feetch me andra wie me; and then I'se feece the de'el h^m^el, gin
he appears.


Quad. I Will bring the instrument, they are all in good order, and well prepared.


Rattle. Now gentlemen, let us go with good hearts; there is nothing like putting
a good face on the^e matters -- If you will bear a chorus, I Will sing you a song
before we set off -- come fill your glasses.

(All say) With all our hearts. They fill their glasses.


Rattletrap sings. AIR X. The Jo^ly ^oper.
I.
The merchant roams from clime to climes,
Regardless of his pleasure;
To hardships and fatigue resigns,
When in pursuit of treasure. And a digging, etc. They drink and fill.
II.
See! now the lucky hour it comes,
With pick-axe and with spade;
A little digging, Oh my sons!
And then our fortune's made. And a digging, etc. Drink and fill.
III.
Let Us boldly venture on the ground,
And seize the glorious chest;
No joy on earth like gold is found,
To ease the human breast. And a digging, etc. All drink, huzza and exeunt.
End of the first ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I. A Room in Moll Placket's House.
Enter Topinlift and Moll Placket. Top. What cheer Moll? let'^ taste your head?
[Kisses her.] How stands the wind? Is the coast clear? No danger of the enemy?


Plac. No, no, we are safe enough, for three or four hours; he has no certain
time of coming, except after church on sundays, and then he never fails -- If
the old fellow succeeds in this night's enterprise, Ill make your fortune for
you, my boy.


Top. Why, what the devil's Raccoon spied now? Is there a galleon in chase, or
is he going to turn pirate?


Plac. No, no, but he may thank the pirates for it.


Top. How, how Moll? tell me you little dear dog you?


Plac. Tell you indeed -- Well can you keep a secret?


Top. If ever I blow you, blast me! you know me better -- If one word goes
through my head-rails, the devil blow me to jill-kicker! aye Moll, the next
hurricane blow me off the main-yard, three leagues a stern* that is enough --
and now I Will kiss the book on it.


Kisses her. Plac. Well then, I Will tell you -- You must know, that Mr. Hum has
received a letter from his sister, in England; giving an account where there is
a deal of money that was buried by the pirates.


Top. Money buried by the pirates? the devil! -- I Have often heard that
Blackbeard hid his money, near the river side somewhere -- But how the devil
came she by the papers?


Plac. Why, she is Capt. Blackbeard's granddaughter -- the papers were
preserved in the family, till they were sent to Mr Hum -- and you must know
Raccoon is a free-mason, so he is to assist him, and they are to go shares.


Top How the devil do you know that Hum's a free-mason.


Plac. Why I suppose so, for they always call one another brother -- and they
keep this business as secret as their masonry -- but I wheedled him out of it,
in spite of all their cunning


Top. I shou'dn't l^ke him on board the Europa -- he would make a damned fist in
the Killecranky trade -- he would throw out a signal, and the custom-house officers
would soon bear down on us -- away goes ship and cargoe by the mast -- He Would
soon make my owners scratch a beggar's a -- e -- But tell us Moll! how the
devil did you pump it out of him?


Plac. That Is none of your business, sauce-box: women like me, have always a
lure to catch the men's secrets.


Top. True Moll -- but this sort of chit-chat keeps us at long-shot -- I
thought to have grappled with you by this time -- let us step into the
state-room, and turn in: you know the old saying, time and tide wait for no one.


Plac. Softly -- don't be too hasty -- let us make the door fast first: [She
locks the door.] though I love your little finger, better than Raccoon's whole
body; yet I must keep in with him.


Top Aye, that is true Moll -- I should be loath to quarrel with an owner,
because he didn't understand navigation.


Plac You know he maintains me, finds me a house to live in fathers all my
children -- and a husband can do no more.


Top. Right Moll; now we are all snug; the hatches are all secured.

Sings. AIR XI. Nancy Dawson.
No girl with Placket can compare,
She is so charming sweet and fair,
Her rosy cheeks and nut brown hair;
There^s none like Molly Placket.
When ever from sea I do return,
For my dear Placket how I burn;
Good luck Raccoon, it is now my turn:
Come, come, my lovely Placket (Chorus, etc.)
Come Moll, now I Will try what the clues of your hammock are made of.


As they walk toward the upper part of the stage, a scene opens, and discovers
a bed, table, and two bottles on it, with a broken glass over one of them and a
candle stuck in the other. A knocking at the door. Top. So -- the devil has
owed me a spite this good while, and now he is brought the enemy upon me, when
I Am landlock'd.


Plac. Who Is there? Who Is there?


Raccoon (without.) It Is me my dear little pet, open de door.


Plac. Oh! curse his head! -- Pet's a coming, dear Cooney; pet's a coming


Top. Where the devil shall I stow myself? -- show me where to hide.


Plac. Creep under the bed, and you're as safe as a thief in a mill.


Topinlist goes under the bed she opens the door. Enter Raccoon. Plac. What
brings my dear Cooney back so soon? no misfortune I hope.


Rac No, no, no misfotune my dear pet -- only I left some tings under de bed.


Plac. Curse your contrivance! now I Am blown Aside. What things my dear Cooney,
did you leave there? -- O invention! thou darling genius of my sex! assist me,
or I Am ruined. Aside.


Rac. Noting* my dear pet, but de spade, de pick axe and de spit -- But what
make you look so suppris'd child?


Plac. Why, I was afraid you would catch me; and indeed you would like to have done it.
He, he, he. Affects a laugh.


Rac. Cech what* cech how? what de devil do you mean by cech* egad, I begin to
tink, it is not all lies dat I hear of you Mrs Placket -- tell me instantly, who
you ^ad wid you; or I Will shake you to atoms ( He shakes her and she bawls.)
what de devil, do you tink to impose upon me wid your he, he, he, -- I Will know
d^ trute before I done ^ussey.


Plac. Oh, my dear Cooney! do let me go and I Will tell you the truth.


Top. (Peeping from under the bed.) Oh! the brimstone where! I wish I was on
board the Europa.


Rac. Well come, let us hear: confine yourself to de trute hussy.


Top. (Peeping) By the Lord! the storm gathers -- we shall have soul weather
soon -- I must bowse taught my rolling tackles.


Plac La sir, I Am afraid to tell you, you're so angry: I Will tell you in the
morning, when your passion's over.


Rac. I Will know it instantly, you vile strumpet! or I Will -- Shakes her again
and she bawls.


Top (Peeping.) It comes thicker and faster. -- Here Is a damned stink of
bilge-water a long side.


Plac I Will tell, I Will tell you all, if you will not hurt me.


Rac Well, tell den.


Plac Look at this book Gives him a Dutch almanac.


Rac. Dis book -- what of dat? It Is High Dutch.


Plac. Cannot you read it?


Rac Not I, indeed.


Plac. I Am glad of it. ( Aside) Why then you must know, when I was about
fifteen years of age, I lived with my uncle, at Germantown, a High-German
doctor; who could tell fortunes, detect lost maidenheads, lay spirits, raise
the devil, find stolen goods, and discover hidden treasure; and all his whole
art is contained in this little book.


Rac. Well, what is all dat to de puppose?


Plac. Nothing, but I Would just taken the book in my hand, and was about to raise
a familiar spirit, to inform me if you would succeed in your undertaking; and he
was just rising through the floor, when you knocked at the door.


Rac. ( Starts, changes his tone and trembles.) I declare you supprise me --
let me get de tings and I Will go.


Plac. No no, it is as much as your life's worth to touch any thing, before I Have
drove him off.


Top. ( Peeping.) By my soul! she acts her part well -- she would out face truth,
and out brazen the devil; a girl after my own heart, faith.


Rac. Can you lay him den, my dear pet?


Plac. Why, I^ve raised and laid 500 in my time -- don't be afraid.


Top. ( Peeping.) That Is true for you my girl -- I Will swear for fifty -- But
I Will secure the spit, for fear of the worst. Aside.


Plac. Would you like to see him?


Rac. No, no, a, a, dere's no 'casion.


Plac. Well but there is no avoiding it now. ( She places his back toward the
bed) Well, stand you here; don't stir an inch; bend your head a little that
way, and keep your eyes shut -- He Is visible -- but don't be afraid.


Rac. [trembling] O, O, I wish he was gone.


Plac. [Beckons to Topinlist; he comes from under the bed, she meets him and
puts an old petticoat over his head and shoulders: she reads] Dunder schlemer
hoont, shizetreek, un caleyreva, rizum, tenealis amisce.

Topinlist runs oversets old Raccoon drops the spit, and runs off.
Rac. [Looking frightened.] Mercy on me; bear am I?


Plac. Get up my dear! did you see it? you an't hurt I hope, my dear: let me
help you up; [she takes hold of him] don't be frightened; he is gone far enough
now; he will not trouble you any more.

She applies a smelling bottle to his nose, he starts and smells.
Rac. Oh my dear! I neber was so frightened in all my life -- Is he gone?


Plac. Didn't you see him?


Rac. I had de glimp of him, as he goed by -- I tought he had a, a, carried de
corner of de house away wid him.


Plac. ( Runs to the bottle and brings a dram to him.) Will you have a dram, my
dear Cooney? here drink it my dear, and you will recover your spirits.


Rac. ( Trembling drinks.) Oh, I was'n't a, afraid my dear! a, a, only --


Plac. Courage man; come rise: ( She helps him up.) you will see ten times more
before morning.


Rac. Oh! I Am not afraid, a, I seed him -- I tink he look like de sailor.


Plac. Why, he is the apparition of one of Capt Blackbeard's crew; and as a
confirmation that you will obtain the treasure, he threw that spit on the floor
as he flew off.


Rac. [Takes up the spit.] Why, dis is de bery spit, dat I put under de bed.


Plac. If so, you must lose no time, but begone.


Rac. Well, I Will get de pick axe, and de spade, and den I Will go. [He goes to
the bed and takes them] Now one buss, my dear pet, and den -- Sings.

AIR XII. The lass of Patie's mill.
Oh! when I get de welt, dat's buried by de mill;
Insur'd long-life and helt, and pleasure at my will.
What store of gold I Will bring my lovely pet to dee,
Den none but my poor ting, shall sh^re de same wid me
Exit.
Plac. Well it is an old saying "when poverty comes "in at the door, love flies
out of the window' -- Realy I Have experienced the truth of it lately -- Had'n't
it been for Topinlift, and a few transient friends, I believe I should have
b^^n in a poor situation by this time; for I Am sure he is ^ng about him that can
please me, but his money -- He promises what he will do -- this thing, and
the other thing; but I Will no longer trust to ba^e promises -- he has deceived me
long enough -- I should have been better off, if I had never seen his face --
yet had he dealt honorably by me, I should have done the same by him: but when
a woman finds herself deceived, basely treated, abused and deprived of real
necessaries, she has it always in her power, and she must be a fool, if she
don't take her revenge, in a way the most pleasing to herself.

Sings. AIR XIII. Black-joke and band so white.
Sure gold is the ^^wel, that kindles the fire*
And serves for to fan up a woman's desire,
To a fumbli^g fool, that is decrip^d and old:
For in all scenes of life, from the great to the little,
The bench, bar and pulpit, it suits to a tittle;
You're surely condemned if you havn't the gold:
But if you have money, never mind what your cause is,
But tickle their palms, and you will gain their applauses;
No statesman so great, so cunning and bold,
But will truckle to you, for the sake of your gold;
But if you lack that* you are certainly sold.
But hang this disappointment, then --

Let women of business take care of their men,
If one will not suffice them, why let them have ten.

Exit. SCENE II. The Place of Action, near the Stone Bridge.
Scene opens and discovers Rattletrap, dressed in his magic Habit, with a dark
Lanthorn and candle; Spitfire, with a dark Lanthorn and Candle; Quadrant, with
a Magnet, Red and Wand; a Chest, and a figure representing the Head and
Shoulders of Blackbeard. Rattle Well that is right -- the holes I see are made.


Spit. Yes, I Have not been idle since you left me.


Quad. We must lose no time it is near eleven O'clock. (They poke in the chest
two or three rusty pieces of silver.) Come, come bury it at once.


They all assist and bury the chest. Rattle (to Spitfire.) Now we have nothing
more to do, than to see you safe in your hole -- step down, step down, and mind
when I give you the signal, throw fireballs -- and when they come to a sight
of the chest, push up the figure -- now besure you act the devil, as if you
were going to deceive the devil himself; and we'll reward you devilishly well.


Spit. And the devil take me if I don't.

Spitfire goes down the hole, and takes the figure, and the lanthorn and candle
with him.
Quad. Now I think we are right -- we are ready to receive them -- and if our
devil plays his part well, I think we shall make a devilish merry night of it
He, he, he. Egad here is some of them. (he halloos) Canoe.


They answer without Canoe Canoe. Enter Hum and Parchment, hallooing Canoe.
Rattle. Where are the rest of you?


Parch. They Are all coming; I heard them as we came down the Hill


Different voices without hallooing canoe, one after another, they on the stage
answering them with the same word Enter Washball, Trushoop, M' Snip and
Raccoon, with Pick axe, Spades and Spit shouldered. Wash. I tore my shins
unaccountably, coming through the briars.


Trus. Fait and I tumbled up the hill, 'till I got my fut in the boggs and if I
had not held fast by the vater, I Would be drowned.


Rac. Don't mind gentlemen -- what is de broken shin, or de cold foot compared
wid de prospect of dese riches.


M' Sn. By my saul* I charged my sell with two bottles, to leeghten me nawse;
and that is a bonny gee^^ in a dark neete -- and for fare of meeting woth any
Icoondrils, I'se brought my andra under my cot -- as good stuff as ever was
made in aw Sco^^^d.


Rattle. Well gentlemen, are we all here?

He calls them over by their names. (All say) We Are all here Mr Rattletrap.


Rattle Keep silence gentlemen -- by the calculation I made this morning, by
the Satellites it must be some where near this place. He sets his magnet.


Rac. Dis seems a likely place brother Hum, now let us hab a good heart.


Hum. Let me beg of you brother Raccoon, not to be too fierce, I am fearful
your courage will get the better of your prudence.


Rattle Not a word, not a word gentlemen -- the magnet works this way -- pray
be silent -- where is my rod? (Quadrant gives him the rod and he works it.) It
draws excessive strong this way. I feel myself interrupted by invisibles -- I
can scarcely keep the rod in my hands -- there -- now I have it -- it draws
this way.


Rac. Dis is de critical moment gentlemen, now gentlemen.


Hum. You Have too much courage brother Raccoon, pray be advised.


Rattle. Silence -- I Am near the place -- the rod points to this spot -- I Am
near the center -- I know the rod to be good* I Have tried it^s virtue -- 'Twas
cut on All-Hallow's Eve, a^ twelve o'clock at night, with my back to the moon*
and the Mercury injected while the sap was running.


Trus. By the holy stone I believe he was born in the moon.


Rattle. Not a word gentlemen [He draws a circle with his wand, and speaks
these words] Diapaculum interravo, testiculum stravaganza.


Trus. By my showl! my dear, and he spakes halgebra to it.


Wash. Oh dear! oh dear* -- you will spoil all.

[Rattletrap goes round the circle and sticks twelve pieces of iron wire in the
periphery; each wire having a piece of paper cut out in form of a star on its
head As he sticks them down he names the twelve signs of the Zodiac.] Aries,
Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagitarius, Capricornus,
Aquarus, Pisces -- make no noise else you will disturb Jupiter, who is the most
wakeful planet: he is now in his first sleep. (He puts on a large pair of
spectacles) Let me see, it is now twelve o'clock -- the moon is near her
southing -- Jupiter is in a sound sleep, a good omen.


Rac. (to Hum.) What does he say? Upiter -- is Upiter a lucky om^um, brother Hum?


Hum Don't speak* don't speak, good brother Raccoon, pray don't -- let me
entreat you.


Rattle. (Calls Washball, Trushoop, M' Snip and Raccoon.) Take off your clothes
gentlemen? They pull of their coats and jackets) and stand within this circle.
( He places Hum* Quadrant, and Parchment without the circle at different posts
and says) keep a good look out -- canoe's the word, don't forget it -- now run
down the spit, and try this place Mr. Washball.


Wash. ( thrusts down the spit and cries out) I feel it -- I feel it -- it
strikes against something.


Rattle. Then fall too and dig -- and when the signal's given -- fall flat on
your faces ( They dig) now the Dragons head* and Scorpions tail are in
conjunction -- a lucky -- concurrence, but Sagitarius seems eclipsed, ha! I
don't like that, -- It looks portentous of ill -- but Syrius's right foot --


Parch. Canoe.

( They answer canoe and fall down within the circle.)
Rattle. Inferno atum, gastro phagnum -- rise up and go on, it was only a blind
fiddler and some company returning from the Batchelor's Hall. (They rise and
dig.)


Trus. By my showl! but I Have made a swate pickle of mysalf, all over full of
mud.


M' Sn. De'el tauk me mon, but I din'na leeke this.


Rattle. Not a word, proceed -- but Syrius's right foot, over Orion's left
shoulder looks well -- and the Swan's tail near the Hydra's heart looks well
too. One fireball with a roaring below the diggers frightened and attempt to
run out of the circle. don't stir an inch -- if you do break the mounds, I Have
no power -- dig -- dig -- conjabetima morentium habavo -- and this leap year is
not unfavourable.


Another fireball with a roaring below, at which the diggers secem terrified.
Trus Oh! how my heart bates.


Wash. Come nearer to me Mr. Rattletrap; or I shall faint* oh dear! oh dear!


Rac. O, O, I wish I was at home, I neber would come again.


Rattle. Never fear -- I Will protect you -- Hobonos cum verigos, omne croxibus
influvientum.


Hum. Canoe All answer canoe and fall down.


Rattle. Metantaborabulum exultisimo, locabulum mongrabo, rise, 'twas nothing
but a cow. They all rise and dig.


Trus. Arra, how my wife will scowld at me, when I fatch her the money, for
spoiling my new cote.


Rattle. Sagitarius is clear -- Sextile in conjunction with Quartile, right. (
He waves his wand) Saturn is a metalic planet, and though in common the most
dull, he looks clearer than the rest -- this is the best sign of all.

Another fireball with a roaring below.
Wash. Oh dear! oh dear! speak to it Mr. Rattletrap.


Rattle. These invisibles will disturb you a while; you're just upon it
Conjunction oppositorium, placabulum fomoso. -- dig away, Arcturus now appears
-- Venus is now our morning star, and is eclipsed four digits. ( Two or three
fireballs and a roaring) now their rage increases -- we are nigh the treasure --
don't be afraid, keep up your spirits, I am with you -- their fiery darts will
soon be over.


Hum. (aside.) He performs to admiration!


Quad. (Aside.) Incomparably well, by Jupiter! He, he, he. Three or four
fireballs and an increase of roaring.


Rattle. Cum meritantibus confiderationibus, terrabandum ophagnum.


Parch (Aside) See how that goose gobbles down the Latin as a duck would a
chitterlin.


Wash. Mercy on us! mercy on us! I shall faint.


Rattle Don't be frightened, now Cassiopea and the Bears Tail, are on the
meridian excessive lucky?


Quad. (Aside.) Come let us drink while the fools are digging, He, he, he. They
drink and keep pointing and laughing at the diggers.


M' Sn. It Is confoonded hord woork, it maks m^ sweet.


Rac. I feel de chest -- I feel de chest.

The ghost appears spits fire, the diggers with up-lifted hands looking at it.
Trus. By my showl! but I Have a great mind to wauk off wid mysalf, for the devil
burn me but I believe he will burn us all up; for fait he looks like no slouch of
a fellow.


M' Sn. Troth mon, he cuuts a shacking fegure.


Wash (With up-lifted hands kneeling sings) Mea culpa, mea culpa, mea maxima
culpa.


Rac Pray in English, dese pirate spirits don't understand de Latin. (He kneels
lifts up his hands and says) I don't know what to say I wish I had lib'd a
better life, dear Mr. Washball say you prayers.


Wash. I cannot pray in English -- do you say something good to it.


Rattle Cruciblarium, advansum perilorum.

The ghost disappears, they rise and tremble with fear, the ghost appears again
spits fire, all fall on their knees.
Rac. Right worshipful master, O, O, I believe, O, O, what is your name
Raccoon, who gib you dat name, my grandmoders and godfaders, O, O, O, for eber
and eber. Amen. -- Dare he comes, dare he comes again.


Trus. (to Raccoon.) Lave off you black mout! you havn't it; lets have no more
of that, (He sings) Sinnerrorum helpum deliverum, miserabulum tuscarorum.


M' Sn. By my saul mon, it is the de'el himsel.


Wash. Save me! save me!


Rattle. ( to the ghost) Superiorum lakeavi, hurorum. ( The ghost disappears.)
Now Is the lucky minute -- the Serpent's neck is round the poleaste^ -- raise
the chest.


They rise and raise the chest the ghost appears, and spits fire, a great
roaring below. The diggers all shriek and tremble. Hum. Quadrant and Parchment
laughing at them aside. Rattle. Now gentlemen, keep your hold -- banish fear --
keep fast ( He calls to Hum, Quadrant and Parchment.) your as^istance
gentlemen, or we shall lose all.


[They run to them, and assist in raising the chest.] Rac. ( Looking toward
the ghost says) Dat's old blackbeard -- by de birtue and de power of de free
and de accepted mason, to me giben; I command you to depaat -- O, O, O, what
distubs die poor soul from rest


M' Sn. Hold fast -- do na let gang your grup. ( He looks toward the ghost)
new I ken him, I Will gang after him.


Rac. Pray don't Mr. M' Snip, it de pirate apparition; didn^t you see how bery
angry it looked at me, when I did speak to it.


M^ Sn. I do na care, what it is, be it sperit, appareetion, or the de'el
himsel, I'se tree my brod sword on him -- gin he can stond a cute of my andra,
he mun be the de'el in troth. ( He takes up his broad sword, runs after it,
mades a cut at it and falls down: the ghost disappears for a short time;
returns again, spitting fire, the roaring continuing below, M' Snip lies on the
ground and says) De'el tak aw warlocks, I say -- I had leken to have brok me
neck down the brae.


Rattle. That was a very wrong step; if I had not been here you would have
suffered by your impetuosity ( He steps up to the ghost and says) Horridum,
callifridum, buscantivo, interdenabulum -- Avaunt! avaunt* avaunt! and be thou
laid in lake Huron, while water flows ( The ghost disappears.) Now we are all
safe -- up with the chest -- these fiends of darkness, will trouble us no more.


They hoist up the chest, and turn it over, some rusty looking pieces of si^ver
tumble out. M' Sn. (Rises up, shakes himself and says( The de'el a seight mare
you will have of him, new he is gotten a smell of my andra.

(All) Huzza! huzza! huzza! etc.


Wash. [Greedily taking up one of the pieces of silver, kisses it and says] Oh
my dear! my dear! [He rubs it, takes it to the lanthorn and says] Let me see,
1634. Aye, this the very money that Blackbeard got at Panama, when he robbed
the churches -- Oh, the poor priests! the poor priests! it seems providen^ially
to have fallen into my hands -- Come, come, let us take it away.


Hum. May we presume to take it away Mr. Rattletrap?


Rattle My business is finished, therefore all is our own.


Hum. There Is one thing gentlemen, proper to mention -- my sister from whom
we have received this information, is entitled to a share -- besides I think she
merits a handsome present from us.


Rac. Yes, brother Hum, I tink she is entitled to one share -- but what present
do you talk of?


Hum Why, I shall leave that to you gentlemen -- What think you of a couple
o'thousand pistoles, or some such trifle?


Rac. Consider gentlemen, we hab run de risk of our libes, wid dese spirits;
beside, dat's a great deal too much.


Hum. Suppose it should be a service of plate of that value -- Put it to vote.


Rac I tink it is a bery great shame. (The others say) Plate, plate, plate.


Hum. Well gentlemen, I Am satisfied.


Rat. The day approaches; remove it immediately.


Parch. Where shall we carry it?


Wash. There Is room in my house -- I Will take care of it -- it shall be safe --
I Will sleep on it all night.

(All say) Agreed, agreed, agreed.


Hum. Gentlemen, let us all meet precisely at eight o'clock and divide the money
-- I think it is necessary some of us should assist Mr. Washball; as this chest
contains an immense treasure, we cannot be too careful -- he is aged, and some
accident my happen.


Rac. I tink, I Would better go too, as I understand de military; if we should be
attacked, my service may be necessary.


Parch. You're right sir; and if Mr. M' Snip and Mr. Trushoop will attend you,
it will be the safer.


Trus. The devil burn Trushoop, if he forsakes 'em.


M' Sn. De'el tauk the mon that lags beheend.


Rat. Well gentlemen, I think this great success deserves a song -- Come bear a
chorus.

(All say) With all our hearts.

AIR XIV. Granby.
I.
Though my art some despise, I appeal to your eyes,
For a proof of my magical knowledge;
Though the wisdom of schools, damn our art and our tools,
We can laugh at the fools of the college. (Chorus.)
II.
Now my friends we are possessed, of the glorious chest,
Join hands and rejoice beyond measure;
Let it be our first care, that great blessing to share,
Whose contents are an infinite treasure. (Chorus.)

The dupes take up the chest, and bear it off, guarded by the humorists: going
off they say, Wash. It feels brave and ponderous


Trus It is so, my dare, but fait I don't care if I broke my back wid it --
Arra dare trad off my hales.


M' Sn. I beg your pordon mon.


Trus. Fait my dare, and you're weary welcome, for the devil burn me if I Am
thinking about my hales, at all at all. Exeunt.


SCENE III. A Room in Washball's House.
Enter Meanwell. Lucy. Bless me! how could you venture, after the severe
reproof my uncle gave you, to approach this house, at this dead time of night?


Mean. Love! angelick love! which knows no fear, but your displeasure, has
brought me here on eagle's wings, to waft you hence, and seal that vow already
ratified in heaven.


Lucy. But consider, my dear Meanwell! what may be the consequence of such a
rash step, when perhaps a few days perseverance may bring matters to a
conclusion, with his consent.


Mean. I cannot think of trusting to any thing so precarious, as he has already
consented, by being my bonds-man for the license, and publicly declaring his
assent, we shall be looked upon by the honest and judicious, as sufficiently
justified in taking this step.


Lucy. I am confounded! my love to you, spurs me to a flight, but my duty to my
uncle, commands me to wait his reconciliation -- I know not what to do, or what
to say.


Mean. Haste! haste! my dear Lucy, we have no time to lose; each moment seems an
hour till we are one; the clergyman waits with chosen friends, to tie the
nuptial knot, and crown our bliss.


AIR XV. Kitty, the Nonpareile.
Lucy sings. My throbbing heart must now give way,
To love, to honor and obey,
Lo! Hymen's torch is lighted. Lo! Hymen's, etc.
My heart, my all, I do resign,
Oh! Meanwell, Meanwell, I Will be thine,
In wedlocks bands united. In wedlocks, etc.
Meanwell sings. Of Venus' charms, let poets write,
Diana chaste, or Juno bright,
Of Kitty, Doll, or Susey: Of Kitty, etc.
The charms of all are centered here,
In Lucy, charming Lucy dear!
Haste! haste! my lovely Lucy. Haste, etc.
Exeunt. SCENE IV. A Street.
Enter Washball. Wash. I cannot bear the thoughts of dividing, not I --
Division, why, I never could learn it at school -- one hundred thousand pounds,
divided into nine parts -- let me see -- nine times nine is, a, a, eighty-nine;
that is wrong; nine times eleven is an hundred and six and four over; that is too
much; but I Am no scholar; well never mind, no matter; charity begins at home,
and he must be must be the greatest fool on earth that cheats himself: I think
I Am old enough to have more wit -- He that cheats another can wipe off the sin
by restoring fourfold; but he that cheats himself, the sin will lie at his own
door, and it will be out of his power to make himself restitution -- I Will go
and inform the collector; then I shall have one half to myself, the other will
go to the king -- They Will call me traitor, but I don't care, let them laugh
that wins -- It Is an old saying, and a true one -- that is -- let me see --
aye, I have it, One bird in hand is better far, Than two that is in the push --
no, no, Than two that in the bushes are. Aye, that is it; I remember it is so on
my neighbor Symonds's sign; but here is fifty thousand birds in the cage, and
all pre^ty yellow-birds every one of them -- Oh! they will make delightful
music, and make me sing too -- I Will even go to the collector; I must'n't lose
any time, no, no; ( He looks up) I think this is the house; aye He knocks at
the door, the collecter appears.


Col. What is your business sir?


Wash. Why, why, sir, I have an information to make you, concerning a chest of
treasure, that was dug out of the ground last night -- Mr. Hum, sir, and
several others are concerned; and it grieves my conscience to cheat the king of
his lawful right; so, pray sir, seize it instantly, for me and his majesty. I
expect all concerned will be at my house immediately to open and share it --
Put the broad R on it and then we shall be safe -- you must act for me and the
king, and we'll reward you handsomely.


Col. Poh, poh, it is not possible; it is only some scheme to make you ridiculous.


Wash. Indeed sir, it is a real truth; for this piece of money ( Showing the
piece) dropped out of the chest, when we took it out of the ground -- Look here
sir, see it -- Pray be expeditious, do sir be expeditious.


Col. Well sir, if you insist upon it, I must seize it


Wash. My loyalty to the king, obliges me to insist upon it.


Col. I Will wait on you.

Exeunt.
SCENE V. A Room in Washball's House.
Scene opens and discovers M' Snip, Trushoop and Raccoon, sitting on the Chest,
and old Gabriel, Washball 's Servant, standing by. Enter Hum, Parchment,
Quadrant and Rattletrap. Parch. Gabriel, where is your master?


Gab. He Is just step^d out sir.


Hum. Will he be in soon?


Gab Aye. I believe he will.


Quad Oh! here he comes! but who the devil's that with him?


Parch. The collector! Egad, this is what I did not expect -- It will not do to
dupe him; we must let him into the secret. Aside to Hum.


Hum. (To Parchment.) Leave that to me, [Enter Collector and Washball. Hum
takes the Collector aside and says] Sir I Am sorry we have been the means of
giving you this trouble; it is a scheme of diversion only; please not to notice
it.


Col ( Aside) Just as I thought -- Mr. Hum your servant; gentlemen yours.


Wash. Sir, sir, I beg you would stay -- Pray do your duty.


Col. Mr. Washball, It Is an affair too intricate for me. I must first advise
with the kings attorney. Exit.


Trus. Augh you cursed old traitor! ar'nt you ashamed of yoursalf to be
chateing us after this way?


Quad. I never heard o such a villain!


Gab Here^s queer doings here. Aside.


M' Sn. Ye eenfamous auld scoondril; ye turned eenformer, to get the ane half
to yoursel -- but you are oot mon. I'se a mind to leeghten your heed by ane of
your luggs.


Gab Worse and worse. Aside.


Rac What did you tink we were all fools, to be cheated by you.


Hum Nothing can equal this! open the chest gentlemen, who knows but the king's
attorney will be upon our backs directly.


Parch. A traitor, gentlemen, of all mankind is the most despicable wretch. You
see, gentlemen that old curmudgeon thinks nothing of betraying his soul, for
the sake of his body not the least regard to his solemn oath


Gab. How he abuses my master. Aside.


Quad. Mr. Trushoop, where is your adz? open the chest.


Trus Augh fait! and here we are bote, at your sharviss my dare.


Wash. (Strives to prevent them, Hum, Rattletrap, Parchment and Quaarant hold
him, he struggles to get from them and bawls) Where Is the Collector? Mr.
Collector -- tou^h it at your peril, you villains! I Will swear robbery against
you.


Gab I believe they are going to rob my master Aside.


Parch. Go on with your business gentlemen, open the chest. Trushoop, Raccoon
and M' Snip opening the chest.


Wash Touch it at your peril I say -- it belongs to me and the king.


Trus Belong to de devil you teif -- we'll soon see who will feel the sharing of
it.


Gab I never see the like before. Lifting up his hands.


Wash. Murder! murder! fire thieves! ravishment! hell and fury! -- Betty,
Betty, bring down the bags you made -- Run Gabriel, and call the Collector.


Gab. Yes, I will, and I Will go for the constable; sorrow on me but I believe
they will murder my master. Exit.


Rac. Dear the chest opens.


M' Sn It Is aupen

They let Washball go, he runs toward the chest; the aupes all scramble to get
their shares, and in the scuffle push down Washball and overset the chest, out
tumble the contents
Wash. ( Rising.) Give me my share! give me my share! give me my share!

M' Snip, Trushoop Raccoon and Washball look at one another confused.
M' Sn. Hoot mon^ what the de'els aw this? nathing but stains -- I k^n weel
enough wha it is -- de'el dom me sirs, but I Will have jontlemen's saytisfakeshon.


Trus Fait, and we are all humbugg'd.


Rac De devil dis is a scheme of brother Hum's -- I Will second your resolution
Mr. M' Snip -- do you gib de cha^lenge.


Trus. By my showl! and I Have been made a fool of for the future; but I Will take
care for the time past.


Rac. I didn't tink brother Hum would serve me so; but egad! I Will inform de
lodge of dis -- Dere's Rattletrap too wid his stars and tings, plague on them
all; and has Mrs. Placket made de fool of me too wid her conjuring -- It cannot
be, for I tink she lobes me, or she would not call me her Cooney, and her
cock-a-dandy -- Dad I Will get a bottle of her water, and carry it to doctor
Witt's, den I Will know if she is a conjurer or not.


Trus. Augh I taught I should be cannonicled for a shaint; but it is all over --
Arra curse these generations of snakes -- I mane wipers.


Wash. Oh! I Am abused -- I shall die, O dear! I shall die (Lifting up his
hands.) Poor Washball, disappointed Washball (Hum, Quadrant, Parchment and
Rattletrap alternately calling canoe; Washball chasing them about the stage,
and endeavoring to strike them with his cane.) Get out of my house, you
villains! (They halloo canoe.) you cursed villains! (Canoe again.) you dogs!
(Canoe.) you hell hounds! (Canoe.) you devils* (Canoe) curse you all! ( Canoe)
They laugh and run off the stage.


Trus. Arra this is the devil's own works, and they are all the devil's own
children; by my showl! and they will do grate pannance for this. Sings.


AIR XVI. The Milking Pail. (To be sung slow, and with an Irish accent)
I.
Arra what a fool was I; by my showl! I think I Will cry,
When I spoke of all thish, it encraases my blish;
'Twill kill me before I die.
Fait I Will now show m^ faash, t'escape all disgraash,
For me they^ll make a true jast.
No more will my foes,
Drive me by my nose,
In bogs over my toes,
Spoiling brogues and shoes,
And carry the ampty chaste.
II.
Augh! feel my back is quite soar, fait becaze it made me roar.
How it broke all my bones, by pulling bricks and stones,
To the mill from Washball's door.
To hear the pain and smart, I fale just in my haart,
My fut is both sick and lame.
With canew and bote,
I^ve muddy'd my cote;
My wife'll cut my trote,
The de'el take the tote;
Augh me! they will make a great game.
M' Sn. De'el dom 'em aw.


Rac Dis, dis is my own faut for being too credulous: I put too much confidence
in dose I tought my friends, and dey deceib'd me. Had I been satisfied wid my
station, and followed a birtuous course of life, den I might have been happy to
dis day, and had noting to trouble my peace of mind. -- But now I hab seen my
folly and former bickedness, I bill take de resolution to lead a new life, and
follow my business wid honesty and industry, and hab noting more to say to de
banities, bexations and alewments of dis world; and from hencefoat my study
shall be birtue, which paat I will pursue to the end of my day.


M' Sn. Confusion to the vullains; I must even gang and fut up my shap-boord
again.


Wash. O dear, I Am robb^d of my money, my health and my ease -- nothing's left
for me now but to grieve and lament -- How shall I procure my peace again* --
Let me see -- attend my business -- what then -- if a customer should laugh
under the operation of my razor, egad, I should think he aimed at me, for being
this silly old fool, and ten to one but I might cut his throat for madness --
Dress a wig -- ha -- I shall think my blocks grin at me -- I Will instantly go
and burn them all -- If I hear the noise of children in the street, I shall
think they bawl canoe, canoe -- Confound this word -- I Would give five hundred
pound it was was made high treason to utter it; then I would hang every one of
those cursed rogues -- O dear! what can I do? -- If I rail against them
publicly, I shall only have the cold comfort of, "'It Is a piece of diversion,
nothing else" -- Hellish diversion -- Suppose I should try to laugh it off --
Alas! alas! I cannot do it -- I shall not be in a laughing humor these seven years
I Am afraid.


Enter Meanwell and Lucy. (They kneel down.) Mean. Sir we crave your blessing.


Wash. Go to the devil you dog


Trus. Augh Lucy! sure you're not married.


Lucy. It is so Mr. Trushoop -- Pray endeavor to pacify my uncle -- pray
gentlemen interpose.

Speaking to them all.
Wash. Oh the gipsey! I shall run stark staring mad.


Rac. Come, come, Mr. Washball, how can you be so angry wid her (...) she is a
pretty young cretur.


Mean. Pray sir pardon us.


Lucy. Pray uncle give us your blessing.


Trus. Let me int^ate you sir, to blass 'em.


Wash. I charge you both, tell me the truth, are you really married?


Mean. It Is really so sir.


Lucy. Dear uncle it is true.


Wash O dear! O lack-a-day! Well, if the knot is tied, there is no untying it
now.


M' Sn Come, come mon gie 'em your blessing; troth she^s a smirky bonny lass.


Wash. Well, since it is so, God bless you both -- rise -- but remember
children, that bare walls makes giddy housewives.


Mean. Sir, we thank you for your kind condescension, and I must now inform you
that I have this day received a letter from Jamaica, giving an account of my
uncle's death, enclosing a copy of his will; by which I understand he has left
me five thousand pounds in cash, with all his real and personal estate; a part
of which cash is remitted me, in the Brig Welcome, Capt. Trusty.


Wash. I am glad to hear it -- it revives my drooping spirits.


Mean. Notwithstanding this flush of fortune, I bear the same respect to your
neice as heretofore; and you may depend sir, I shall always make it my study to
merit your esteem.


Wash. You have my blessing, and may you live comfortably together, and see
many happy days, and be blessed with a train of dutiful children, to comfort you
in your old age -- and, O! that I, who have one foot in the grave, and the
other scarcely out, had been contented, then I should have been happy in my old
age, and not have involved myself in this labyrinth of trouble and confusion --
But let it be a warning to others, not to listen to idle schemes, and give way
to vain imaginations; which had nearly proved fatal to me -- for he whose
desires are unbounded, and is weak enough to listen to artful designing men,
stands upon a dangerous precipice whose foundation must sink and he innevitably
perish. Sings.

AIR XVII. Ah! who is me, poor Walley cried.
(To be sung slow.) Ah! who is me, poor wretched I,
With broken heart and down cast eyes;
To ease my mind where shall I fly?
A prey to knaves, poor Washball dies.
Let future generations take,
Example by my dismal fall,
Nor gods of gold, or idols make,
So shun the fate of poor Washball.
And now my friends, Mr. Trushoop, Mr. M' Snip and Mr. Raccoon, I expect you
will honor us with your company at dinner -- We'll strive to make ourselves as
merry as we can, and forget our folly. -- Gabriel, call in the neighbors,
bring your fiddle and play for us, and we'll have a dance,.


Gab. (without.) I will sir, sorrow on me but I will, for we havn't had a dance
since last christmas.


Wash. In the mean while, my children, give us a song.


AIR XVIII. Jolly Bacchanalian.
Meanwell sings. Banish sorrow welcome joy,
Let Us strike up the sprightly dance;
Mirth abound without alloy;
Tune your lutes, your pipes advance;
Sound your notes in lofty strains,
Join ye nymphs and jovial swains,
Banish care and be at rest,
Of a bad bargain make the best. Banish care, etc. Lucy sings.
Room for joy, how blessed am I,
In a husband and a friend,
Virtuous love shall never die,
Though our lives will surely end.
Virgins all example take;
Virtue love, for virtue's sake,
Constant be as turtle dove,
Let your theme be virtuous love. Constant be, etc.
Enter Gabriel with his fiddle, and Neighbors: they strike up a Country Dance,
called EXCUSE ME. After the Dance Washball says, In search of treasure, we are
led astray,
Believing fully, what deceivers say.
They tread unsure, who against there senses run,
False steps pursue and rush to be undone,
Cursed by themselves, laughed at by every one. Exeunt.
EPILOGUE.
Enter Hum singing. Hum. Down derry derry down* down down derry.


Enter Rattletrap. Rattle. Master Hum* methinks your won'drous merry.


Hum Gad, so I am.


Rattle. That I can plainly see,

Hum. Sing tantararara, rara, raree.


Enter Quadrant. Quad. Of all the plays I ever saw or heard --

Rattle. This beats them all, I swear now by my beard.

Stroaking his beard.
Enter Placket. Plack. It Is false you con^'ring rogue, it is sorry stuff.


Hum. Your servant ma'am for you make noise enough
Hum, Quadrant and Rattletrap leave her, bowing.
Enter Topinlift. Top. Zounds! what is this? the devil and all to pay;
Broadside and broadside, damned warm work to day,
I Will drop a stern and let them end the fray.
He goes out backwards.
Plac. It Is nonsense all, methinks I hear some say,
But hang 'em how they laughed and cla^t away:
There Is one hoarse voice he croak'd, it is very witty,
A female next squeak'd out, it is vastly pretty;
Lord! says a third, how it alarms the city.
Plague on them all, Oh! how I shall be teased.

Enter Meanwell and Lucy, locked arm in arm and cross the Stage. Lucy.
Encircled in thy arms* Oh! how I Am pleased.


Enter Washball. Wash. Confound the play, it is made a wondrous racket

Plac. Oh split 'em all, through breeches, coat and jacket
She cries.
Enter Raccoon. Rac. Come, don't cry pet, don't cry my pretty Placket.


Wash. Oh monstrous! laugh, and not one word of sense.


Enter M' Snip. M' Sn But you see mon, it pleased the audience.


Plac Aye to be sure -- but 'twas at our expense Cries.

Wash. What fools theyv'e made of us -- Oh dear! Oh dear!


Enter Trushoop. Trus. That Is true for you! but by my showl 'twas queer.


Wash. Oh shame! Oh shame! my rage is to excess

Quad. [without.] The boxes laughed aloud -- you heard I guess.


Wash. 'Twill drive me crazy -- It Is a mortal blow.


Rattle. [without*] Never fear old cock -- A digging we'll all go. Sings.


Wash. Ridiculous scenes they were transacting.


Hum. [without.] Aye, but how I laughed while it was acting.


Wash. A play indeed! -- a play should have some wit.


Parch. (without.) Pray who made you a judge? what said the pit?


Rattle. They laughed aloud and took a deal of notice.


Hum. One girl I thought* Ha* ha, she would split her bodice.


Parch. The boxes clapped -- the ladies cried bless me

Quad. So pleased they were, they laughed out, He, he, he.


Wash. That dog Hum's a very wicked body.


Hum. Tol de roll, lol de roll, tol de roll loddy. Sings.


Wash. Come, come away, for this will never do.
Good Night to ye all.

Hum. Canoe.


Parch. Canoe.


Rattle. Canoe.


FINIS.
ERRATA.
In the Title page, for wordling, read worldling.

In the Prologue, for instrust, read instruct.


