TWO DISCOURSES AND A PRAYER, PUBLICLY DELIVERED On SUNDAY the 17th and
TUESDAY the 19th Days of MAY, 1767. At the QUAKERS Yearly Meeting, At the
FRIARS, in BRISTOL. The whole taken down in CHARACTERS, By a Member of the
Church of England. To which is added, a PREFACE.

BRISTOL Printed; And PHILADELPHIA Reprinted, and sold by ANDREW STEUART, at
the Bible-in-Heart, in Second-street.

PREFACE.
THE following pathetic, and moving exhortations, were, as carefully as
possible, taken down in characters, as they flowed from the lips of the
preacher to large and crowded audiences; at which were present numbers of
different persuasions: many of whom have requested copies of the transcript;
and others have desired, in the strongest terms, that they might be made still
more public, by means of the press.

THE writer is desirous of obliging many, without offense to any individual. --
The manuscript has been read and approved of, by numbers of superior judgment,
who were present; and who have joined in this opinion, that from their being
published, good may proceed to the well disposed; nor can any kind of harm be
foreseen to accrue from hence.

AND it is probable that the prejudices which some have conceived against the
faith and principles of the Quakers, (as a people separated from the
established church,) may be removed, from a dispassionate perusal of these
discourses, which is a reason, of itself sufficient, for their being made
public.

THE writer is not conscious of having mistaken the author's sense: And if to
the memory of any who were then present, there should occur any variations from
his immediate expressions, the editor is assured there can be but few, and
those not of moment; he having to the readiest expedition, joined the most
perfect attention, though in a crowded congregation (where he could have no other
rest, or support, than the hand or the knee.)

INDEED! the lively force and heartfelt energy with which the subsequent
exhortations were delivered, must remain from that time wanting: nor is it
material to offer, that it is not in the power of the most faithful
transcriber, to convey that enforcing part to his readers. The texts, i. e.
chapter and verse, have been since added, in order to illustrate the work, and
render it (if possible!) more pleasing.

THE editor has likewise taken down (by desire) two other Sermons, from the
same preacher; the subject: of the first taken from the prayer of Augur, Prove.
xxx. 7, 8, and 9. the other from Cant. iv. and 12, and at the close of each, a
Prayer; but those will continue in manuscript, unless a public edition of them
be encouraged.

AS the minister has been repeatedly solicited, but in vain, to consent to the
present publication; the reader must not wonder that his name is not published.

The following Sermon was delivered, on Sunday morning the 17th day of May,
1767, at the opening of the yearly meeting, at the Friars, in Bristol.
2 Samuel xx. 9.
Art thou in health; my brother?
IT has been in my mind to adopt the language or salutation of Joab to Amasa;
but with sentiments different, far different, from those which actuated the
treachery of Joab; even those of true and tender affection, and with a mind
replenished with that charity, which wishes well to all.

Art thou in health; my brother? I COULD wish, with all possible solicitude, to
lead every mind present, into the most careful enquiry, in respect to their
spiritual state of health; and to their immediate relation, and affinity, to
that supreme almighty Being, who is the just and awful judge of quick and dead.
I fear it has proceeded from too anxious a solicitude for the health of your
bodies, and prosperity of your temporal concerns, that too many of you have too
frequently, and in a manner totally, neglected the great concern of your
immortal souls; which is indeed the one thing needful.

THOSE temporal concerns, I say, which are of a trifling perishing nature,
have, I fear! interrupted and taken off from this principle concern: your
anxiety and application toward the attainment of the treasures and the
enjoyment of the pleasures of the world, have occasioned too great a neglect of
your religious duty.

THE coveniencies of life are, by no means, a contemptible concern, where they
are bounded with temperance, and confined within their proper channel: but as
there is a part in us of infinitely greater, of no less than eternal moment; it
also requires an attention proportionable to its proper worth; for what are
temporal concerns, when compared with the important one of eternity!

THE (...) of the body is subject to diverse maladies; and when we have done our
utmost to preserve it, we shall find in the end (and how soon that may be none
knows) that it is of necessity subject to the stroke of death, and to the
enclosure of the grave.

I HAVE therefore thought it by no means an improper enquiry for each
individual to make, and deeply ponder, What is thy state, or how is it with
thee, O my soul! who art capable of partaking of immortal joys, and destined to
triumph over death and the grave? When this earthly, tabernacle shall be
dissolved, thy appointment and destination, if in proper soundness for it,
shall be made perfect with the whole family of GOD, and be no longer subject to
the diseases, pains, trials and afflictions of this life, but share the things
which are of GOD, Heb. xii. 23. --
With the general assembly and church of the firstborn, whose names are
written in Heaven.

AS this is of the most infinite importance to the sons of men, I have thought
it my particular duty, upon the present occasion, to put you in mind of the
necessary enquiry into the state of your spiritual health; the conditon of your
immortal souls: being very apprehensive that all of you, my brethren, are not
in perfect health, who have outwardly the appearance of health; but that, on
the contrary, many are in a dangerous state of disease and stupefaction; have
only preserved a lethargic frame, and are tottering upon the brink of
destruction.

THIS enquiry into the present state of experience and of advancement in the
work of salvation, has branched itself out in my view, and divided into
several classes, those who are now within the audience of my voice. And, in the
first place, I entreat the attention of you, the elders, amongst whom our LORD,
as amongst so many shepherds, has divided his flock; over whom you are
appointed to watch, and and to teach them to persevere in the path which
leads to eternal life!

YOU have experienced the power of religion; you have Romans xiii. 12.
put on the armor of light; and ought to stand as guardian angels, and to call
as the angel called, saying, Rev. xxi. 9. --
Come up hither, and I will show thee the bride, the lamb's (...).

Are you in health, my brethren? -- Are you in health, my sisters? -- Are you
in health, my fellow laborers in the LORD! -- Are you in a lively active state
in the cause religion? in the cause of virtue and temperance? in the power of
the gospel, as it is in CHRIST?

IF those that have been called with an high and holy calling, as delegated
shepherds under the one great shepherd, walk uprightly in his fear and to his
glory; then the sheep will with them be more likely to be gained upon to follow
the great shepherd; they will then have a frequent desire, a longing appetite
after the divine Manna, which comes down from GOD out of Heaven: for every
life has its food and its proper nutriment; and a soul panting after Heaven
can be satisfied with nothing short of the food from Heaven.

IN the next place, I address you, my brethren in the work of the ministry,
reminding you of its divine institution, all that have entered rightly into it
Heb. ^. 4 --
being called of God, as was Aaron.

IT is written, Psalm civ. 4.
he makes his angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire; and tho the
term angels be generally understood of the glorified spirits in Heaven; yet, as
it signifies messengers, it here seems to be applicable to those whom the Most
High prepares and sends forth, to excite and enliven his militant church on
earth. -- Are you in health, my brethren? -- It is the divine will that you be
fed with celestial food; not with the unlawful things of the world, nor with
the unlawful love of its lawful things; but that you become as angels, and like
his ministering spirits, as a flame of fire. He will make you, if with due
constancy ye adhere to, and attend on him, a sacred and fixed flame of love,
and of light never to be extiguished: your care, and pains, and labor here
will be but a moment, your reward will be a crown of life everlasting. The
bread that you eat, and the water that you drink, and of which ye minister
their due share unto others, will be daily springing up in you unto everlasting
life! The divine Manna and the daily sacrifice will be continued. Rest in hope,
-- look for the coming of the LORD. -- Labor in the discharge of your duty.

INDEED it has sometimes happened that some of the ministers (...), 1 Cor. iv.
1, 2.
stewards of the mystery of God, have not been (...) to what he required. Be
ever mindful of the nece^^^^^ of putting on and wearing the spiritual robes,
prefigured by those of Aaron: the holy girdle about the loins; the
breast plate, with the Urim and Thummin; the Bell and the Pomegranate. Some
indeed have had the Bell sending forth an empty unavailing sound, but have
wanted the Pomegranate, the soul-enlivening fruit of the good spirit of CHRIST,
our everlasting high priest.

But I hope better things of you, beloved in CHRIST, and things that accompany
salvation. I am sure we have need, with the utmost diligence, appplication, and
care, to keep the loins of our minds girded about: we had need to stand upon
the watch: we have great need to maintain the utmost steadiness: for if we who
stand in the fore front, should fall, we fall not alone: if we slide from the
path of truth, who amongst us will be able to stand!

WE ought to be endued with the spirit of wisdom, of judgment, and with sound
minds, which he has promised to them that ask this blessing from him, and has
made good his promise.

Are you in health, my brethren? are you strongly attached to the promotion and
exhaltation of that glorious cause which you have embarked in? have each of you
a share in and a proper care of the LORD's work? do you watch over the flock
attending on your ministry, under the great shepherd, and with the tenderness
of gospel love, seeking to save that which was lost?

I FREELY confess my own sears, that I am not in a state of perfect health and
sound mind; laboring as I ought in the work of the LORD. As it is a task of
the utmost importance, I ought to remain ever diffident of my own care, and to
watch daily in the discharge of a trust so great and important as that of the
recovery and preservation of the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

THE prostration of the soul before the GOD and Father of mercies, in a cause
of such infinite concern, is a continual duty, which can scarce ever be
sufficiently discharged. The secret cry of my soul has, after this manner,
frequently arisen, "LORD! spare thy people and bless thine heritage." I am
fully persuaded, my friends, were all the ministers and elders more blessed
with sound health, the minds of the flock would be more filled with brotherly
kindness, and more and more approach to that state which I have mentioned, they
would know what is meant by the angels being spirits, and how to understand his
ministers being a flame of fire.

I COME now to another class, whom I mean to address under the title of those
within the audience of my voice, who continue in a single state.

Are you in health; my brethren and sisters? are you possessed of inward virtue,
and of ability to live to GOD, as becomes his saints; and which alone will
lead you to eternal life; do you aspire after these, with an unabated zeal?

YOU must not expect always to rest satisfied with the good things of this
life. The day may come when you will loath the abundance of your temporal
possessions: you will then be concerned that you have so indulgently Haggai i.
4^ etc.
dwelt in ceiled houses, and have let the house of God lie waste. Then you
would be glad to have exchanged the fading pleasures of life for the
substantial joys of eternity.

RECOLLECT yourselves in the spring time of life; consider early the importance
of this exchange, while you have it in your power to make it Look up to an
object more glorious than the present world can afford you, even the joys of
that eternal inheritance, which the children of the firstborn, the innumerable
company of happy spirits, the general assembly of just men already made
perfect, are replenished with. -- Pleasures unspeakable! that exist for
evermore!

Art thou in health; my brother? -- my dear brethren, are ye fervently engaged
in laboring, necessary laboring, for the promotion of the cause of GOD upon
earth?

O YE parents and heads of families, who are placed as delegated shepherds over
them; timely beware, lest the blood of your children, or of any part of your
charge, fall on your heads: (if through your misconduct they become corrupted,
and their souls perish.) Know that inquisition for blood will hasten from the
supreme judge, who has divided the classes of mankind; and, as it were,
separated from the rest those who are parents, and have children: -- his call
is to these, "Go work in my vineyard."

THESE precious gifts which he has given, as pledges of his love, are to be
led and instructed by them with a proper authority.

IF the parents experimentally felt the advantages of spiritual health in
themselves, then would they be concerned that the tender minds of their
children should be properly cultivated with the knowledge of the LORD, and a
fearful apprehension of transgressing his supreme commands. They would teach
them to look further than mere temporal acquisitions; even to GOD their
Creator. They would bring them up in the nurture and fear of the LORD; in order
that their minds might be filled from the storehouse and magazine of boundless
good, and early enriched with the joys of GOD's salvation: and this would
naturally diffuse the greatest satisfaction to the parents themselves, to see
their children become the delight and ornaments of human nature, and fitted for
a glorious change! the company of Angels, and the spirits of just men made
perfect. The ties of nature, and the stronger ties of gratitude to him who gave
the blessing, call aloud for teaching the tender minds of your children, to
walk in the safe and delightful paths of virtue. With what satisfaction and
composure of mind will such parents be enabled to answer the great GOD, upon
his awful examination to this purpose; What have you done with those tender
sheep which I committed to your care in the wilderness? have you trained them
up in safety? -- How will such parents be supported by a consciousness of
having done their duty, in that solemn hour! -- They then may truly say, I have
done my utmost within my contracted sphere, within the narrow precincts of
allotment in life, to fill up my stated duty, Then the supreme judge will set
at his right hand such parents, and they shall be united to him in glory.

AND I beseech you parents, elders, ministers, (and I include myself) let us
all say Amen, to this solemn care in our respective famili^^ let us all
discharge our several duties as men, hoping for the coming of our LORD; who
then will say unto us, "well done good and faithful servants," even in the hour
when he shall come with terrors to make inqusition for blood through the various
ranks, whether ministers, elders, heads of families, even throughout the
various classes of mankind.

I WISH all parents and heads of families would continually walk, hand in hand
with their children and families, in the path which leads to life eternal;
daily watching over, and improving their rising judgments, with the wisdom
which comes from above; instructing and encouraging them in the contemplation
of divine things! persuading them to believe, as the truth is, that the things
of this world are all uncertain, and fading away; that they have everlasting
mansions erected for them in the city of their GOD; where (if they fall not
short, or turn not aside (they will enjoy the company of saints and angels for
ever more.

Are you in health; my brethren and sisters? EXERCISE yourselves in this your
present state, differently from those, whose faculties are bounded within the
narrow limits of this world; cultivate, continually cultivate, the minds of
your offspring: endeavoring to raise in them a proper comprehension of the
dignity of their natures, and to fix in them early a steady belief of their
immortality; which is of the utmost importance to all!

THE hearts of those are unsound, who live in a perpetual attachment to the
pride of life, who are contaminated with the love of the world, wherein their
chief happiness appears to be placed: how can such point out the way to the
city of GOD? how can they say to their children, Let us retreat from the world,
from this scene of corruption: let us withdraw from the cares, the solicitudes
of life: let us ascend to our appointed home: let us contemplate the joys of
eternity: let nothing separate us from that blessed hope

HOW can parents thus address their children, when they have, perhaps, for a
long course of years, ceased to consider the awful importance of the subject;
and their own minds continue fixed, and tied down to the fading enjoyments of
life Alas! that the folly and vanity of the superfluous pleasures of the world
should so entirely engage and engross the attention of any one immortal
individual, as to take up almost every moment of their precious time!

HENCE, sometimes, parents, instead of instructing the minds of their children,
have so totally corrupted their own that they have laid obstructions in the way
to the immortal happiness of their offspring, and, when their children have for
a time trod in the ways of religion and virtue, they have been so extremely
corrupt themselves, as to oppose them in their passage; to obstruct them, with
violence, in their way to glory; and thereby aggravated their own guilt beyond
expression; alas! what will their punishment prove, when convicted of so great
a neglect and violation of their duty? when he that is the judge of quick and
dead shall appear in judgment, to render to every man according to his works!
May all parents, who are negligent in the discharge of their duties, lay it
seriously to heart.

IN the mean time, may you, my brethren and sisters in a spiritual relation,
continue in a state of lively active health -- laboring in the sure ground of
hope; that, when the great shepherd himself shall appear, you may also appear
with him in glory. If you so persist, I cannot but yet hope, that your steadfast
continuance will prove the means of spreading spiritual health, in an eminent
degree. For as, on the one hand, minds infected and vitiated with the lust of
the flesh, the lust of the eye, or the pride of life, are very apt to spread
the contagion to all that are round about them: so, on the other hand, such as
are restored by CHRIST, to a state of spiritual health, and by him steadily
preserved in it, often become instrumental in his hand, to diffuse that
blessing; from whence, healthy parents have been frequently observed to have
healthy children.

I AM convinced that the LORD is at work amongst the rising generation; many of
whom stand convicted in their own minds, of the want of spiritual health; and
are imploring the mercy of the GOD of their salvation.

IN order to your attaining it, let me call upon you again, the present rising
generation; whose stations in life may be likely to have some little
continuance; be ever steadfast in the performance of your religious duties, that
you may become heirs of the kingdom; and have your portion, with the children
of GOD.

IT seems to me of the greatest importance, in relation to the various affairs
of life, to form aright the minds of youth; and therefore, I once more entreat
every parent present, that you watch over, and carefully nourish every seed of
virtue springing up in the minds of your children, for the sake of their, and
your own, temporal welfare; as well as for the hope and assurance of both
their, and your own, eternal happiness.

AND here, let me class every single individual; as every single individual is
posting on his way to an eternal state of existence -- and that they may be
guided by an infinite wisdom, is my earnest desire; and be at last received
into glory! welcomed thither by their dear redeemer!

IN this city he has laid his hand upon one, and upon another. He has
preserved many from the pollutions that too frequently reign in the world; and
has mercifully induced some to look early into the law of liberty, into the
counsel of his will, who thereby learn the things which belong to their peace.

Art thou in health; my brother? Art thou not only called from a state of
darkness, into his marvelous light; but, obedient to the call, entered upon the
road to eternal glory? Art thou in health; my fellow pilgrim?

A SENSE of the want of that food which CHRIST gives, is at least a symptom of
life.

I BELIEVE it may be said concerning some among you, as was said formerly to
CHRIST; Lord, he whom thou love is sick. The decay of health in many, has
been owing to foul feeding; to their daily feeding upon the spirit, maxims and
manners of the world, upon exterior appearances, upon comparative
righteousness, upon a comparison of their present, with their former state;
whose minds are relaxed with the love and spirit of vanity. Some have relaxed
into evil, and are now become too much unacquainted with GOD and his law;
which, to holiness, and to that only, annexes happiness. Many of the^e might
have gone on from one degree of strength to another; had they not too much
(...) the things of time, and fed too greedily upon the temptations and
pleasures of this life; not enough considering, that the diseases and disorders
of the mind thus fed, must certainly at last bring death, even the death, though
not dissolution, of the s^ul. They might have been clothed, if not with a
perfect heart, yet with a certain degree of strength; and been more and more
advanced on their way to the regions of bliss.

I BESEECH you, continue in your love to the gospel of CHRIST: that, day after
day, you may feed on the holy sacrifice, and on that eternal fruit with which
he nourishes the soul that hungers and thirsts after righteousness. And, I
cannot help, while I am speaking, pressing you in a more immediate manner, if
possible, that, not relying on your own wisdom, and your own strength, but in a
full dependence and leaning upon the breast of the beloved JESUS, you all,
patiently, with a holy soundness, proceed in the highway to the city of God;
that you may be crowned at last with glory, honor, and immortality!

I FIND in me (at least) one qualification of a gospel minister; even that of a
strong and ardent love, which wishes well to all mankind: and in particular
that you who are present, may enjoy such a state of perfect health, as I have
been at this time enforcing to your serious consideration: may it spread
through every class; may you all increase in the stability of righteousness,
through this life; and may it carry you into the boundless joys of eternity,
into that glorious city, not one of whose inhabitants, can say, "I am sick."

N. B. The writer could not be present in the morning, nor at the immediate
beginning of this discourse; but was assured, by many present, that the
preacher had proceeded but a little way.
The subject taken from the parable of the unjust steward, viz. this question,
Luke xvi 5. --
How much owe thou unto my Lord?
MAY 19, in the afternoon.
HAVING in the morning enlarged on our debts or obligations to GOD, for the
abundant variety of temporal blessings received from him, in trust, for the
good of others, etc. he proceeded thus:

2 Cor. v. 13. --
If we are besides ourselves, it is unto God: If we are sober, it is for your
sakes. If, with the strength of love, and a zealous fervency of mind, we labor
in and for the church, and for the good of those to whom we are sent; if rising
early and lying down late; if being willing to spend and to be spent,
disinterestedly, without any lucrative motive, or receiving any thing, but mere
food, from those amongst whom we labor; if ministering to our own wants, and to
the wants of others, carry any kind of evidence to the considerate and prudent
mind, of a disinterested gospel ministry; we have, so far, a valid claim to it.

2 Cor. iv. 5.
We preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord; and ourselves your
servants for his sake.

If we are besides ourselves, it is unto God. If we are sober it is for your
sakes. Having known the terrors of the Lord for sin; having experienced a
gradual progression from the pit of pollution, from the mire and clay; having,
in some measure, tasted of the good word of life, and of the ^^wers of the
world to come, we apprehend we have authority, more than any human laws or
ordination of men can give us, to tell to others, what GOD has done for our
souls. I may proceed yet further with truth and sincerity, having the sanction
of him, who is the searcher of hearts; 2 Cor. v. 14. --
for the love of Christ constrains us. The foundation of the gospel ministry
is this constraining love of CHRIST.

WE enter not into the ministerial office with any application of this sort.
viz. 1 Samuel ii. 36. --
Put me (I pray thee) into one of the priest's offices, that I may eat a piece
of bread. We think higher of the gospel ministry; so that no temporary
emolument can possibly be an adequate inducement to us, to enter upon it; for,
the love of Christ constrains us. We speak with reverence and a feeling
heart; and we believe the Christian religion will never flourish, in its full
perfection and excellency, still their being thus constrained, becomes the case
of all that take the name of GOD in their mouths in a public manner. 2 Cor. v.
14. --
The love of Christ constrains us; because we thus judge that if one died for
all, then were all dead. And that he died for all, that they which live, should
not henceforth live to themselves, but to him that died for them and rose again.

THIS expression seems to me, if properly considerd, to cast no inconsiderable
light upon the propriety of that query applied to us, viz. How much owe thou
unto my Lord? which I cannot yet relinquish; though some may think I dwell upon
it too long. The love of Christ constrains us, because if one died for all,
then were all dead. I look upon this as a fundamental part of the Christian
faith; and that life and immortality have been brought to light by the gospel.
We were all dead: we have all partaken of guilt: we have all been in a state of
estrangement from the covenant of GOD: we have all become, more or less, Ephesians.
ii. 12.
aliens to the commonwealth of Israel.

IN this state of death the voice of GOD has been signally extended unto
mankind. I have sometimes considered with great attention, his declaration,
Hos. xiii. 14 --
O! death, I will be thy plagues; and it has made a deep impression upon my
mind. This declaration of the most high GOD, has been amply verified in the
experience of all, who have been quickened into a life of piety. Christ has
been the resurrection and the life to all such* Though death has come upon all,
we are not all included under death; so as to be left without the quickening
vivifying power, that is offered to raise the dead to life.

The dead have heard the voice of the Son of God John v. 25. --
and have been raised again to life. I cannot think but it has been the
experience of diverse, within the audience of my voice, who know the certainty
of this important truth, though others may reflect upon me, as being beside
myself; yet if so, I may say with the apostle, it is unto God. But I would
gladly speak intelligibly to the soul that is on its way to the regions of
immortality; for if we are sober, it is for your sakes. I would ask whether a
secret something has not often visited your souls, an unspeakable something,
often secretly and immediately attended, that has engaged you to send up
heavenly and earnest wishes, and raised in your minds strong aspirations, or
breathings, after GOD' when we are told that Romans viii. 21, 22 --
the whole creation groaneth together in bondage until now, we have no doubt of
its being relative and applicable to the present times, or such times of
longing after GOD to be delivered by him. 1 Cor. xv. 45 and 47
The Lord from heaven is the quickening spirit. An expression of want, from a
real sense of it* is an evidence of life; or being raised by him, from a state
of death. We have not been left in a dead state, this prediction has been
verified, O! death, I will be thy plagues. He has brought the first evidence
of life, which is a sense of want. The spiritually dead, have received it; and
it has been of his pure mercy, that he has followed us from time to time;
has met us, as it were, in a narrow place, with instructions and reproofs, and
secretly raised up in us the hidden life of his own divine wisdom; he has
caused the animating and warming beams of the sun of righteousness to break
forth. And, yet more, the word which called Lazarus out of the grave, has
already, in a good degree, raised some of us to life even life eternal! hence 1
Cor. xv. 54. --
death is swallowed up in victory!

AND therefore the love of Christ constrains us, because he has proved "the
plagues of our death. He not only died, but the immediate manifestation of his
quickening spirit has led captivity captive, that we, by him, may triumph over
the united powers of darkness.

WE follow not formally; but we believe in, and are convinced, fully convinced,
of the doctrines of the christian religion, the incarnation, glory, life,
death, mighty miracles, and various circumstances, relative to the holy life of
JESUS, Isai. liii. 7. --
as in the volume of the book is written; and can in an awful and reverent
sense, commemorate those vast and most interesting events.

WE admire, with humble hearts and minds, the awful transactions of that time,
when sweat, like drops of blood, ran from the face of the holy JESUS! when,
being in an agony, he prayed more earnestly! when he was betrayed, his sacred
head crowned with thorns! his face spit upon! he was most ignominiously
treated, and Psalm. xi. ^^
as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, he complained not!

WE behold him in his agonies on Calvary Mount, offering himself as a sacrifice
for the sins of the whole world; that he might purify us, by the shedding of
his precious blood! more precious than the blood of goats and lambs; or any
other that was shed under the law. We believe in his amazing mercy* in offering
himself there; when, laden with the immense weight of the sins of mankind, and
the immediate sense of the father's presence withdrawn, he was left to suffer
alone; under this extreme pressure crying out, Eloi, Eloi, lama Sabacthani! was
crucified! dead! and buried.

HERE pause a little, I beseech you! -- contemplate the adorable theme!
acknowledge, O man! that unbounded gratitude, which is ever due from thee: O!
my soul, how much thou owe unto thy Lord!

I KNOW we have been stigmatized, as disbelieving the truths of the Christian
religion. However, I call the divine record, the SAVIOR of the world, that was
offered a sacrifice without the gate of Jerusalem, to witness for my belief,
that he was sent from God, to do the father's will: and I do, without
controversy, believe that he was 1 Timothy iii. 16. --
God manifest in the flesh, justified in the spirit, believed on in the world,
and received up into glory. We do not at all doubt that 2 Cor. v. 19. --
God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself. 1 Timothy ii. 6. --
That Christ gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time; Isai.
iii. 5 --
that with his stripes we are healed.

BY virtue of that holy sacrifice the remission of sins is gained; the
awakening power of that sentence which is due to sin is felt in a state of
alienation from GOD; and as we believe, that if one died for all, then were all
dead; so, we believe that he who was crucified, dead, and buried, likewise
triumphed over the grave, and now sits at the right hand of God, in a
glorified body, to make intercession for man, in order that he might
effectually purchase, and redeem to himself, a people to the praise of his
name; and diffuse, throughout his universal empire, a similarity of opinion and
nature, arising from the experience of his universal redeeming love.

I AM no Arian, far from it: -- I believe in the clear emphatic testimonies
laid down in holy writ, that CHRIST was more than a prophet. I repeat my
belief, that he suffered, died, ascended, and is now come Heb ix. 28.
the second time, without sin, to salvation: in order to reconcile the world to
himself. I know many are willing to admit that he died for all, as all were in
a state of death; and that, by the imputation of his righteousness, all are
justified in the sight of GOD. Whereas I think it more just to proceed in the
language of the holy inspired apostle; that they which live, should not
henceforth live to themselves; but to him who died for them, and rose again;
that there may be an effectual redemption, a thorough change; not the
imputation of righteousness, without works; but a real substantial
righteousness in the heart and life; which may operate upon, and regulate the
mind and will, and lead us to a conformity to his divine nature; not a
righteousness imputed to as from what CHRIST did and suffered without (...);
but a righteousness raised by him within us; through our surrendering ourselves
to his government, and yielding entire submission to (...) cleansing, re^ining
power.

HOWEVER this doctrine may relish with some, I am convinced he died for all,
that all should be saved; that, through him, we might be justified in the ^^ght
of GOD; that we might put on the Lord Jesus Christ, with all his divine
affections.

Romans viii. 2. --
The whole creation of God groaneth together, 2 Cor v. 22. --
to be clothed upon with a house from heaven; not an imaginary house and an
imaginary righteousness; but, to be clothed upon with the grace of complete
salvation; to put on the LORD JESUS CHRIST; having first put off the old man,
with all his works, and with all his corrupt wisdom, or knowledge; which
puffs up, instead of that charity which edifieth.

Christ is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption.

IN remembering therefore that he died for us, let us consider what follows;
that henceforth, we should not live to ourselves. Gal. ii. 20. --
I am crucified with Christ, says one of the apostles, as a private person: and
it should, or ought to be the language in truth of each individual, through all
succeeding ages. Nevertheless, I live; yet not I, but Christ, lives in me. He
is become my righteousness; not by imputation only -- but he actually lives in
me: and the life which I now live, is by the faith of the Son of GOD. I think I
may now say, Phil. iii. 14.
let us press forward toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God.
Let us be crucified with CHRIST, crucified to the world, and the world to us.

O! MY friends, for such I term you in the course of that universal love, which
reaches forth to the whole human race, which flows from him who has thus
wrought for me, and brought life and immortality to light in my soul. Is any
one of you desirous of being informed, how much owe thou unto my Lord? -- lay
hold on his offers of redemption; live in his fear, in fellowship with him, in
communion with the church of the first born, whose names are written in heaven:
so will you far better know than any one on earth can ever inform you.

EXAMINE the rising suggestions of your own minds; you are not formed to live
merely to yourselves, merely within the contracted bounds of human privileges,
in the narrow limits of mortality. Consider the dignity of your nature; you are
formed for the most glorious purposes.

I EARNESTLY wish the rising youth would lay these things seriously to heart,
and often meditate upon them, as one formerly did; who thus expresses himself,
Psalm xxxix. 3, 4.
while I was musing the fire burned. My heart was hot within me; then spoke I
with my tongue, Lord! make me to know my end, and the measure of my days* what
it is, than I may know how frail I am. -- That they would contemplate the great
design of providence, with regard to their immortality, which would lessen
their esteem of the unsubstantial joys of time, and engage them to pursue those
which are unspeakable and full of glory for ever. While I was musing the fire
burned.

CONTINUE this musing, this state of meditation; prize the invitations of the
Spirit of CHRIST, mercifully extended to your immortal spirits; and let your
minds mount upwards; remember your pious predecessors, now perhaps in glory;
and their connections in the world of spirits: likewise put this question to
yourselves, upon every serious occasion, How much o^^st thou unto my Lord?

I AM fully convinced were the Christian world in general to leave out exterior
ceremonies, and enter more into this inward meditation, their minds would be
more largely replenished with divine fruits; and those who are entering as it
were upon the wilderness of this world, would then partake of the advantage. O!
that we might all live in the beauty of holiness!

My heart was hot within me; then spoke I with my tongue. -- A necessary
preparation for a preacher! Abel's offering on account of such a preparation,
was more acceptable to God (...) his brother's.

Then spoke I with my tongue. -- O! rising generation, what you speak with your
tongues, let it be from the same good source of hearts divinely prepared; since
on the other hand for every ^^le word that men speak, they must give an account
in the day of judgment. As you often speak with your tongue, fervently desire
that the sacred faculties of the mind may be fitted for divine meditations, and
the tongue to publish for the honor of GOD and benefit of others, what you
have been taught by him* so will you never admit or utter any thing contrary to
the divinity of CHRIST JESUS your LORD.

Lord, let me know mine end! O that this sound may dwell upon your minds, who
are the hope of the next generation! upon whom the weighty trust and care of
the cause of GOD must, in a little time, necessarily devolve; that you may come
to the knowledge of the measure of your days. I think, without violence to the
text, you may learn from it that you are destined for immortality: but the love
of worldly things is too apt to engage the attention of that immortal part, the
soul; which occasions, to many, the ^^ant of their knowing the great and
glorious end for which they were formd, a little lower than the angels, and
intended to be crowned with glory and honor.

Lord! let me know my end and the measure of my days! I TREMBLE methinks upon
the brink of eternity! and so, with a little proper reflection, you might say
all; the aged, the middle aged, and the youth. -- The end of all things is at
hand: flatter not yourselves therefore with length of days, and a long
prosperity of worldly possessions; suffer me to beseech you for the sake of
your immortal souls.

What do I owe to my God? -- What do I not owe him? -- He has snatched me as a
brand out of the fire; and I would not, though to gain the world, tread back
again in the path of folly.

I KNOW it by experience, and therefore I would persuade you, not to turn aside
from the GOD of your salvation; but to acknowledge the infinite debt you owe
him, and to pay him daily with obedience, adoration and praise.

OUR sins have been great, and our transgressions never could have been
obliterated, had not CHRIST done it for us; let us therefore no longer dwell
upon the rock of presumption with Satan, who has been a liar from the
beginning; but let us rather descend into the valley of humility and peace, and
settle accounts with the GOD of our lives, from whom I had aray'd to that
degree that my life became a burden to me, and I have wished that I had never
been born; but CHRIST, who was a friend to publicans and sinners, is now become
the rock of my salvation! he has caused me to trust in him, and to seek the
LORD my GOD The debt I owe is infinite, I desire ever to acknowledge it with
all possible gratitude; and to do my utmost toward the discharge of it, while
I have my being.

IF there is a soul within the audience of my voice which (upon this awful
query) How much owe thou unto my Lord? is ready to apprehend, that it owes
too much ever to hope for a discharge, or freedom from the heavy load of debt
it has contracted; I have a little to say to such, even from my own experience:
thy transgressions do not exceed the bounds of his mercy; he still cares for
thee, with an inexpressible fatherly care and tenderness. Even when his
afflictions are upon thee, they are intended for thy good. The bruised reed he
will not break, the smoking flax he will not quench. The more any of you see
your real state, the more you remember the favors you have received, and feel
the burden of your injustice and ingratitude; the more readily will he meet
the penitent disposition of your minds.

I HAVE no manner of doubt but he, whose work is salvation, who came into the
world purely and purposely to save sinners, will carry on his own work, and, as
you wholly resign yourselves to his forming hand, will purify your hearts,
reconcile you to the Father, and make you everlasting instances and monuments
of his infinite mercy. Lift up therefore thy head in hope, whoever art in this
humbled penitent state; for thy salvation draws nigh. Thou owe abundance to
thy LORD; and there is an abundance which thou can never pay: but there is
the good Samaritan, ever ready to do for thee, as for him, who going from
Jerusalem to Jericho, fell among robbers; by whom he was wounded; and to say,
take care of him, and I will pay. There is a glorious sound from the great and
good friend of publicans and sinners; he is ready to say to thee who art in
this penitent state before him, Take thy ^ill and write down fifty. He will
(...)
blot out thy sins as a cloud, and thy transgressions as a thick cloud.

I CANNOT but remember with renewed feeling, and warm emotion of heart, the day
that anxiety (in the view of my condition) seized me; and how his mercy
relieved me from it. He made my soul feel his compassion, and in the depth of
gratitude thankfully to adore him. And hence I often feel a tenderness of mind
toward those who are weary of vanity, and heavy laden with a sense of their
manifold transgressions. I beseech such, by the mercy of GOD, that they would
fly to him in their anguish of mind; for it is he, and he alone that can speak
peace to the sinner; though your unrighteousness may be great, it is not in any
degree of proportion, to his infinite mercy! Again, such among you to whom I
have spoke, who delight to dwell in the path of temptation, wherein you have
too ^^ng continued; I warn you to consider, that you are in the road to
destruction.

I WOULD not give up, like Esau, Heb. xii. 16, 17. --
my birthright to seek a place of repentance with tears, and not find it. O my
soul! for ever acknowledge how much thou owe unto thy LORD! Let none say he
has blessed me variously, and in some future time I will awake my soul to
gratitude. I have now something else to do; like him who, when an apostle Acts
xxiv. 25.
reasoned of righteousness, temperance and judgment to come, replied go thy way
for this time; when I have a convenient season I will call for thee.

THE like disposition continues to prevail in too many; and this seems, to be
the language of their hearts, Go thy way this time; call upon me when I have
lived to myself, and answered my own purposes a little longer: visit me at some
distant time hence. Oh! rather to day, while it is called to day. -- Harden not
thy heart: do not defer thy repentance a moment; thou know not what a moment
may produce. Consider thy repeated transgressions; thy multiplied offenses
against GOD: heap not up wrath against the day of wrath: swell not the dreadful
account. Thou have hitherto trampled upon the goodness and the mercies of the
GOD that made thee; venture not on presumption and delay. Time is uncertain:
Immortality is at hand.

I BESEECH you therefore my friends at the present time, that you will lay to
heart the necessity of your making up this great account: delay it not to the
decline of life. Many are on the brink of the grave! reflect upon your extreme
danger! think not of crowding the account of your repentance into your last
hour of life! You will find it extremely difficult to labor under the
infirmities of the body, upon a deathbed, without a reasonable ground of hope:
all the offers of mercy having been long continued, and often repeated; yet by
you as long slighted, and as often rejected; what then will discharge you from
that dreadful account! I wish it may never be the case of any within the
audience of my voice. Let us all immediately ponder, rightly consider, and
seriously improve this consideration, How much owe thou unto my Lord?

A PRAYER upon May the 19th, which concluded the afternoon service of that day,
at the Fryer's Meeting.
WITH unspeakable reverence we presume to approach thy presence, O Father! who
art in heaven: and, with the voice of thanksgiving and holy praise, to offer
the tribute, that is due to Thee alone!

IN a commemoration of thy mercy, thy infinite mercy! we are awfully bowed
before thee, as at thy sacred footstool; in the deepest reverence and
thankfulness, for the stretching forth Psalm. xxiii. 4 --
of the rod and the staff, which thou have been pleased to bless, as the means
of our furtherance in the way of life and salvation.

THOUGH humbled in dust, in the sense of our unworthiness, we are,
nevertheless, encouraged to breathe unto Thee; to make mention of thy name,
with joy of heart; we adore that goodness, which has put it into our hearts to
seek, serve and fear thee; and to turn to the place where Acts xvi. 1^.
prayer is wont to be made.

THOU have loved us before we loved Thee: thy love, O LORD! has not been after
the manner of men: Thou have called us, when we were enemies; and have
reconciled transgressors to thyself. Thou have followed us in the day of our
revolting; and, when we were straying in the wilderness, as a most gracious and
tender shepherd Thou did lay thy hand on us, not only with judgment, but with
mercy; and have brought us home again unto thy flock, and thy fold, and
forgiven us our multiplied transgressions.

OUR deviations from thy holy path have not been punished with inexorable
justice; but thy conduct toward us has been clothed with unspeakable
compassion. O! Thou everlasting shepherd, and bishop of our souls: who have
looked upon us, when weltering as in our blood* and by thy divine power have
healed us. Thou, that art the physician of our souls, have cared for us, when
the priest and the levite past us by. -- When cast out and surrounded with the
woes of unutterable distress; when thick clouds covered us, -- Thou, in thy
abundant love Psalm. xviii. 9
bowed the heavens and came down to our help, and all the darkness was put
under thy Feet! Thou have made the clouds thy chariot, and walked upon the
wings of wind, for our deliverance; when our iniquities, like floods, rose
high, and appeared unto us like to swallow us up in everlasting confusion! O!
adorable condescension* We have no language to express thy mercy, and the
boundless obligations we lie under to thy Majesty* who have thus, in the times
of unspeakable anxiety, vouchsafed to appear for us* and even when we have
wandered from the counsel of thy will and trod in the path of the wicked, Psalm.
xliii. 3.
Thou sentest forth thy light and thy truth, and did lead us back to thy holy
hill!

WE acknowledge all these blessings to thy praise, O! shepherd of Israel! who
sleep not by day, nor slumberest by night.

TO Thee we owe all our faculties, and all that is within us; and let them all,
we pray Thee, be consecrated to thy honor: we beseech that all our steps may
be directed to Thee; and more and more to thy service. For, Father of infinite
kindness it has pleased Thee to rank us among thy children; and to make our
dwelling with thy light; our habitation with the lifting up of the smiles of
thy countenance; and to remove every obstacle to a perfect communion with Thee:
the po^er is in thy hands; sanctify us thoroughly to this end; write the
inscription of holy and heavenly characters upon our hearts; and, Oh! grant
that we may still be preserved, through every trial and probation, to a
peaceable admission into thy kingdom.

BLOT out all our transgressions* forgive us freely, for thy dear Son's sake!
remember us in the midst of thy mercy! deliver us, we pray Thee, as Thou have
graciously hitherto done, like a tender Father.

GRANT we may never forget thy counsel; sooner cut the thread of our lives, and
number us to the silent grave!

MAY we follow Thee, with our whole hearts, submit to the patient resignation
of our all, for thy dear service; and keep us to a happy conclusion in thy
favor! it is all we ask, and beg at thy hand: with regard to outward
circumstances, thy will be done! we have no other supplication to offer.

PRESERVE us* as in the hollow of thy hand; that from a militant state here, we
may pass to a triumphant one, in thy everlasting kingdom!

O LORD! have mercy on thy people, and thy children, when they spread their
hands toward thy holy habitation. Cloth them with the spirit of grace and
supplication. Excite them to sly to Thee, their only rock and refuge; and to
thy name, that is an impregnable defense; where the righteous, in all ages,
have ever found safety!

REGARD those who are far off, and remain unacquainted with thy name. We pray
Thee, let the same mercy spread to them which thou have showed unto us. Let the
diffusion of thy spiritual blessings, in and through thy dear Son, flow among
them, that they may seek Thee; that a holy anxiety of mind may take place, in
order to rest in the day of trouble, and that when the various trials and
troubles of time are over, they having, through thy abundant goodness and sure
support, fought the good fight, and kept the faith, may be received by Thee,
and be crowned with glory and immortality, in thy everlasting kingdom!

Oh Thou that art fairer than the sons of men! grace flows from thy lips; Thou
beholdest us when tempted, and speaks to our states with all the language of
tenderness. Father of mercy! grant that innumerable multitudes may resort to
thy temple, that sacred house, which thou have erected to thy honor and
service. May the poor, the sick, and the maimed, the blind, and the naked,
inspired by Thee with holy confidence, look toward Sion, and be clothed by
Thee, with the wedding garment; with the righteousness of their dear SAVIOR!

THUS, gracious GOD! we are divinely encouraged to supplicate thy name, on the
behalf of the church militant, wherever scattered; that it may flourish in
peace and stability; that, not only in part, but in the whole luster of
meridian brightness and splendour, they may commemorate thy glory!

IN an humble sense of thy mercy and goodness to the workmanship of thy hands,
we thank* Thee, that Thou have been pleased so abundantly to manifest thy
loving kindness and favor in and amongst us.

WE prostrate ourselves before the throne of thy Majesty and grace! we would
offer to Thee an humble, grateful sacrifice of thanksgiving and praise,
dominion, and every excellent attribute! for we know that we have nothing but
from thy bounty, who art the rock of our salvation!

TO Thee, Father of infinite mercy! for the multitude of thy mercies, in JESUS
CHRIST our LORD! -- To Thee, the author of every blessing! with the Son of thy
bosom; our LORD and SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST, the Lamb immaculate through the eternal
spirit, be all praise ascribed, now, henceforth, and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

