LETTER TO His EXCELLENCY Governor WRIGHT, Giving an Account Of the Steps
taken relative to The CONVERTING THE GEORGIA ORPHAN-HOUSE INTO A COLLEGE.

Together with The LITERARY CORRESPONDENCE that Passed upon that Subject,
Between his GRACE the ARCHBISHOP of CANTERBURY and the Reverend Mr. WHITEFIELD.

By G. WHITEFIELD, A. M. Late of Pembroke College, Oxford, and Chaplain to the
Countess of Huntingdon.

Provide Things honest in the Sight of all Men. Romans xii. 14. LONDON, Printed:
CHARLESTOWN, Reprinted and Sold by ROBERT WELLS, at the Old Printing House,
Great Stationary and Book Shop.

MDCCLXVIII.

A LETTER TO His Excellency Governor WRIGHT, etc.
Honored Sir,
AS your Excellency, together with the members of his Majesty's honorable
council, and house of representatives, were pleased at my late visit to the
Orphan-house, not only highly to approve of, but also deeply to interest
yourselves in, the design of converting the present Georgia Orphan-house into a
college; so I am persuaded, you make no doubt, but that ever since my arrival
in England, in July 1765, I have exerted my utmost efforts in endeavoring to
bring this important affair to a desirable issue. To mention all the various
circumstances which have occurred during that interval, to impede and retard
its more speedy prosecution, would be tedious and unnecessary: I would
therefore only inform your Excellency, that about fifteen months ago, a
memorial was delivered into the hands of the late clerk of his Majesty's most
honorable privy council. That this memorial was by him transmitted to the Lord
President, and by his Lordship referred to the consideration of his Grace the
Archbishop of Canterbury; that by his Grace's permission a literary
correspondence ensued; but as that correspondence, and with that, the
negotiation itself seems at an end, I think it my duty, not only to lay an
account of the whole before your Excellency in particular; but, through your
Excellency's hands; before his Majesty's council and house of representatives
of the colony of Georgia, together with all the other American Colonists, and
the public in general, on both sides the water, who have so liberally
contributed to the promoting this design.

TO The KING's most Excellent MAJESTY, THE MEMORIAL of George Whitefield, Clerk,
Shows,
THAT about twenty-six years ago, your memorialist, assisted by the voluntary
contributions of charitable and well disposed persons, at a very great expense,
and under many disadvantages, did erect a very commodious house with necessary
out-buildings, suitable for the reception of orphans and other poor and
deserted children; and that with the repair of the buildings, purchase of
negroes, and supporting a large orphan family so many years, he has expended
upwards of twelve thousand pounds sterling, as appears by the accounts, which
from time to time have been audited by the magistrates of Savannah, and which
are humbly presented with this memorial.

That your Memorialist, since the commencement of this institution, has had
the satisfaction of finding, that by the money expended thereon, not only many
poor families were assisted and thereby kept from leaving the colony in its
infant state; but also that a considerable number of poor helpless children
have been trained up, who have been, and are now useful settlers in that and
the other neighboring provinces; that in order to render the institution
aforesaid more extensively useful, your Memorialist, as he perceived the colony
gradually rising, has for some years past designed, within himself, to improve
the original plan, by making further provision for the education of persons of
superior rank, who thereby may be qualified to serve their king, their
country, and their God, either in church or state.

That in his late visit to Georgia, he did with inexpressible pleasure see the
province in a very flourishing state; but with concern perceived that several
gentlemen had been obliged to send their sons to the Northern Provinces, who
would much rather have had them educated nearer home; and thereby prevent their
affections being alienated from their native country, and also considerable
sums of money from being carried out of Georgia into other provinces.

Your Memorialist begs leave further to observe, that there is no Seminary for
Academical Studies as yet founded southward of Virginia; and consequently if a
college could be established (especially as the addition of the two Floridas
renders Georgia more centrical for the southern district) it would not only be
highly serviceable to the rising generation of the colony of Georgia, but would
probably occasion many youths to be sent from the neighboring southern
provinces for education. The many advantages accruing to Georgia thereby must
necessarily be very considerable.

That in consideration of the foregoing premises, your Memorialist in December
1764, presented a memorial to his excellency the Governor and the honorable
the council of the province of Georgia, praying that two thousand acres of land
might be granted in trust toward carrying on the de^^rable end of founding a
college; which motion was not only immediately complied with, but the general
assembly being then sitting, an address, a copy of which is herewith also sent,
was presented from them to his Excellency, expressing their unanimous and
highest approbation, with a desire that his Excellency would use his endeavors
to have this affair forwarded at home with all possible expedition. That upon
the arrival of your Memorialist, he was informed that this address was remitted
to, and laid before the Lords Commissioners for trade and plantations; having
received repeated advices that numbers both in Georgia and South Carolina are
waiting with impatience to have their sons initiated in academical exercises,
Your Memorialist therefore prays that a charter upon the plan of New Jersey
College may be granted, upon which your Memorialist is ready to give up his
present trust and make a free gift of all lands, negroes, goods and chattels,
which he now stands possessed of in the province of Georgia, for the present
founding, and toward the future support, of a college, to be called by the
name of Bethesda College in the province of Georgia.

Mr. Whitefield to the Archbishop.
June 17, 1767. May it please your Grace,
I THINK myself highly honored in the Lord President's Earl of Northington.
referring a late memorial to your Grace's consideration; and as highly obliged
to your Grace, for the deep attention your Grace has given to the copy of an
intended charter presented to your Grace by the Earl of Dartmouth. -- The
enclosed will show what an almost implicit regard has been paid to your
Grace's wise remarks and judicious corrections. -- I wish it could have been
altogether implicit -- But circumstances are such (as has been hinted to your
Grace by Lord Dartmouth) that I cannot in honor and conscience oblige the
master of the Georgia College to be a member or minister of the church of
England. Such an obligation, I am persuaded, has greatly retarded the progress
of the college of New York; as on the contrary, the letter signed by your
Grace, Proprietor Penn, and the late Dr. Chandler, engaging, that that
institution shall be continued on a BROAD BOTTOM, has as much promoted the
growth of the college of Philadelphia. -- The trustees of that seminary (as
your Grace is pleased to observe) have agreed, "That their provost shall always
be a minister of the established church." -- But then I would beg leave to
reply, that they are not thereto enjoined by their charter. That is entirely
silent concerning this matter -- Their agreement is purely voluntary. -- The
wardens of the college of Georgia will not be prohibited by charter from
following the example of the trustees of the college of Philadelphia -- It is
more than probable they will never need it. The first master will assuredly be
a clergyman of the church of England. -- By far the majority of the intended
wardens are, and always will be, members of that communion; and consequently
the choice of a master will always continue to run in that channel -- My
heart's desire is, that some worthy duly qualified minister of the church of
England may be always and readily found for that grand purpose. But lest this
should not always be the case, I dare not, as persons of all denominations have
been contributors, confine or fetter the future electors. The moneys gained by
the New York lotteries, for the erecting a college in New York; were thrown in
by persons of all religious persuasions, in confidence, that the college would
hereafter be founded on an enlarged basis. And therefore, very great numbers,
may it please your Grace, think, and forever will think, themselves injured by
its being confined within its present contracted boundary. Hence it is, that
many fine promising youths are almost daily sent from the college in their
native city to that of New Jersey -- I dread giving the same occasion of
resentment and offense -- And therefore am determined to avoid it in the
wording of the Georgia College charter -- For the same reasons I dare not
enjoin the daily use of our church liturgy. I love to use it, I have fallen a
martyr, in respect to bodily health, to the frequent reading it in
Tottenham-Court chapel; and it has been constantly read twice every sunday in
the Orphan-house, from its first institution to this very day -- The wardens,
when the power is devolved on them, may determine this point as they please --
But I cannot enjoin it by charter -- And have therefore, in this present
draught, not only omitted the paragraph concerning public prayer, but also
that concerning doctrinal articles. Perhaps your Grace may judge, that all
things considered, saying nothing about either, may be a proper medium -- Your
Grace further wisely observes, That his Majesty should be very well advised
whom he names for the first master. -- I trust he will. I believe the Right
Honorable the Earl of Dartmouth will vouchsafe to interest himself in the
choice, and likewise be so good as to present the first master to your Grace's
approbation -- The terms of the charter being not as yet settled, the choice of
a master cannot as yet be fixed upon. When the former are ascertained, the
latter may more easily be applied for -- In the mean while your Grace may be
assured that the lot will not fall upon me. Alas! my shoulders are too weak for
the support of such an academical burden: my capacity, may it please your
Grace, is by no means extensive enough for such a scholastic trust -- To be a
presbyter at large, is the station which, I think, divine providence has
called me to for near these thirty years last past -- During that space, I
trust my eye has been in some degree single, and my views disinterested: and
my highest, my only ambition, during the feeble remains of my future
pilgrimage, I trust will be this, viz. That the last glimmerings of an expiring
taper may be blessed, and owned by the great Shepherd and Bishop of souls, to
guide some wandering sinners to the practical knowledge of himself. I desire to
bless his name, that I have been spared long enough to see the colony of the
once despised Georgia, and the yet more despised Orphan-house, advanced to such
a promising height. My honored friend, and father, good Bishop Benson, from
his dying bed, sent me a benefaction for it of ten guineas, and poured forth
his most fervent dying breathings for its future prosperity. -- That your Grace
may yet live many years, to be happily instrumental in promoting its welfare,
both spiritual and temporal, when turned into a college, is the earnest prayer
of

May it please your Grace, your Grace's most dutiful, obliged Son and Servant,
G. WHITEFIELD.
Tottenham-Court Road June 17, 1767.
The Archbishop to Mr. Whitefield.
To the Reverend Mr. Whitefield.
THE Archbishop of Canterbury has put Mr. White field's draught of a charter
for a college in Georgi^ into the hands of the Lord President, who has
promise^ to consider it; but desires to know from Mr. Whitefield, what present
endowment, and to what value, h^ proposes for his college.

July 1, 1767.
Mr. Whitefield to the Archbishop.
London, July 4, 1767. May it Please you Grace,
MY obligations are much increased by your Grace's putting the last draught of
the Georgia College so speedily into the hands of the Lord President. -- As by
this, (I presume) it has been honored by your Grace's, so I make no manner of
doubt, but it will also meet with his Lordship's approbation. In obedience to
your Grace's desire, I herewith send your Grace an account of what present
endowment, "and to what value, I propose for the intended College." -- Upon a
moderate computation, may it please your Grace, I believe its present annual
income is between four and five hundred pounds sterling. The house is
surrounded with eighteen hundred acres of land; a plan of which, and likewise
of the house itself, I herein enclose, and humbly present for your Grace's
perusal. The number of negroes, young and old, employed on various parts of
these lands, in sawing timber, raising rice for exportation, and corn, with all
other kinds of provision for the family, is about thirty. -- Besides these, the
College will be immediately possessed of two thousand acres of land near
Alatamaha, which were granted me by the Governor and Council when I was last
at Georgia, and a thousand acres more, left, as I am informed, by the late
Reverend and worthy Mr. Zouber^uhler. -- So that, by laying out only a thousand
pounds in purchasing an additional number of negroes, and allowing another
thousand fot repairing the house, and building the two intended wings, the
present annual income may very easily and speedily be augmented to a thousand
pounds per annum. Out of this standing fund may be paid the salaries of the
master, professors, tutors, etc. and also s^a^l exhibitions be allowed for some
orphan or other poor students, who may have their tutorage and room-rent
gratis, and act as servitors to those who enter commoners. What these salaries
and exhibitions ought to be, may at a proper season be submitted to your
Grace's future consideration. -- At present I would only further propose, that
the negro children belonging to the College shall be instructed, in their
intervals of labor, by one of the poorer students, as is done now by one of
the scholars in the present Orphan-house. And I do not see why an additional
provision may not likewise be made for educating and maintaining a number of
Indian children, which, I imagine, may easily be procured from the Creeks,
Choctaws, Cherokees, and the other neighboring nations. Hence the whole will
be a free gift to the colony of Georgia -- a complex extensive charity be
established; and, at the same time, not a single person obliged, by any public
act of assembly, to pay an involuntary forced tax toward the support of a
seminary from which many of the more distant and poorer Colonists children
cannot possibly receive any immediate advantage, and yet the whole colony, by
the christian and liberal education of a great number of its individuals, be
universally benefited. Thus have I most readily, and I humbly hope, gratefully
complied with your Grace's desire, which to me is as a command. I am
constrained to trespass on your Grace's patience, whilst I congratulate your
Grace on the goodness of God, who, amongst many other signal marks of his
peculiar providence, has honored your Grace, in making you an happy
instrument of establishing two Northern American Colleges, the one at New York,
and the other at Philadelphia: And if (as I pray may be the case) your Grace
should yet be made further instrumental in establishing a third College in the
yet more Southern distant, but now flourishing, Colony of Georgia, I trust it
will be an additional gem in the crown, which I earnestly pray that God, the
righteous Judge, may give your Grace in that day. -- In his great name, I beg
leave to subscribe myself,

may it please your Grace, your Grace's most dutiful, obliged Son and Servant,
G. W.

Mr. Whitefield to the Archbishop.
Tottenham Court, September 1, 1767. May it please your Grace,
AS I am going out of town for a few weeks, I beg leave humbly to enquire,
whether my Lord President has considered the draught of the charter sent him
by your Grace some weeks ago. The Governor, Council, Assembly, and other
inhabitants of Georgia, wait with impatience to have this affair brought to a
desired issue; and therefore I humbly hope your Grace will excuse the freedom
of the request now made by,

may it please your Grace, your Grace's most dutiful obliged Son and Servant,
G. W.

The Archbishop to Mr. Whitefield.
Lambeth, September 18, 1767. To the Reverend Mr. Whitefield,
THE Archbishop of Canterbury sends Mr. Whitefield the enclosed letter from the
Lord President, which he received this day, and which he desires may be
returned to him.

Mr. Whitefield to the Archbishop.
Tottenham Court, October 13, 1767. May it please your Grace,
BY a series of unaccountable incidents and mistakes, your Grace's Letter, with
that of the Lord President, did not reach me till this afternoon. -- I have
made bold to copy the letter; and in obedience to your Grace's command,
herewith return the original. -- Its contents shall be immediately and duly
considered, and an answer very speedily remitted to your Grace. -- In the mean
time, with most humble thanks for the zeal and punctuality shown by your Grace
in the prosecution of this important affair, and earnestly begging an interest
in your Grace's prayers, that I may be kept from erring on the right hand, or
the left, in this final discharge of my public trust, I beg leave to subscribe
myself,

may it please your Grace, your Grace's most obedient and dutiful Son and
Servant, G. W.

Mr. Whitefield to the Archbishop.
Tottenham-Court, October 16, 1767. May it please your Grace,
AFTER earnest application to the Father of mercies for directions, I have
endeavored, as in his presence, duly to consider and weigh the contents of the
Lord President's letter, which your Grace was so condescending as to transmit
for my perusal. His lordship therein is pleased to inform your Grace, That he
observes, that the second draught of Mr. Whitefield's charter differs from that
of New York, in not requiring the head of the College to be a member of the
church of England, which his Lordship thinks so material a qualification, that
for one, he should not be for dispensing with it. And his Lordship is also of
opinion, that the public prayers should not be extempore ones, but the liturgy
of the church, or some part thereof, or some other settled and established
form. Thus far his Lordship. And as I profess myself to be a presby^er of the
same communion with his Lordship, I cannot but applaud his Lordship's zeal for,
and watchfulness over, the honor of the established church -- But if his
Lordship would be so good as to take a particular view of the point of light in
which I stand, I cannot help flattering myself that his Lordship will be so far
from thinking, that being a member of the church of England is a qualification
not to be dispensed with in the head of the intended College, that, on the
contrary, it ought not so much as to be mentioned, or insisted upon, in the
charter at all -- For, not to trouble your Grace with a repetition of the
reasons urged against such a restraining clause, in my letter of June 17th, I
would beg leave further to observe to your Grace, that by far the greatest part
of the Orphan-house collections and contributions came from dissenters, not
only in New England, New York, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, and Scot^and, but
in all probability here in England also. -- Most of these places I have visited
since the several audits of the Orphan hou^e accounts, together with the design
of turning it into a College, and likewise the address of the council and
assembly of the province of Georgia, with his Excellency Governor Wright's
answer, highly approving and recommending the design, have been published. --
Being frequently asked "Upon what bottom the intended College was to be
founded," I not only most readily and repeatedly answered, Undoubtedly upon a
broad bottom, but likewise, in most of the abovementioned places, have
solemnly declared from the pulpit, that it should be upon a Broad Bottom, and
no other. -- This, I judged, I was sufficiently warranted to do, from the known
long established mild and uncoercive genius of the English government -- From
your Grace's moderation toward protestant dissenters -- From the unconquerable
attachment of the Americans to toleration principles, as well as from the
avowed habitual feelings and sentiments of my own heart. This being the case,
may it please your Grace, I would humbly appeal to his Lordship, whether I can
answer it to my God, my conscience, my King, my country, my constituents, and
Orphan-house benefactors and contributors, both at home and abroad, to betray
my trust, forfeit my word, act contrary to my own convictions, and greatly
retard and prejudice the growth and progress of the intended institution, by
narrowing its foundation, and thereby letting it fall upon such a bottom, as I
am persuaded will give a general disgust, and most justly open the mouths of
persons of all denominations against me. -- This, as I acquainted your Grace,
in the same letter referred to above, is what I dare not do -- And therefore,
as your Grace by your silence seems to be like minded with the Lord President,
and as your Grace's and his Lordship's influence will undoubtedly extend itself
to others of his Majesty's most honorable privy council, I would beg leave,
after returning all due acknowledgments, to inform your Grace, that I intend
troubling your Grace or his Lordship no more about this so long depending
concern -- As it has pleased the great head of the church in some degree to
renew my bodily strength, I purpose now to renew my feeble efforts, and turn
the charity into a more generous, and consequently into a more extensively
useful channel. -- If I know any thing of my own heart, I have no ambition to
be looked upon at present, or remembered for the future, as a founder of a
College -- But I would fain, may it please your Grace, act the part of an
honest man, a disinterested minister of Jesus Christ, and a truly catholic
moderate presbyter of the church of England -- In this way, and in this only,
can I hope for a continued heartfelt enjoyment of that peace of God, which
passes all understanding, whilst here on earth, and be thereby prepared to
stand with humble boldness before the awful, impartial tribunal of the great
Shepherd and Bishop of souls in heaven. -- That your Grace may shine as a star
of the first magnitude in that day, is the sincere prayer of,

may it please your Grace, your Grace's most dutiful obliged Son and Servant,
G. W.

Mr. Whitefield to the Archbishop.
Tottenham-Court, November 11, 1767. May it please your Grace,
THE bearer is my humble friend; one who has been with me several years, and
been my companion in travel through the continent of America. If your Grace
would be so good as to send by him the plans and papers relating to the
Orphan-house, it would much oblige,

may it please your Grace, your Grace's most dutiful, humble Servant, G. W.
P. S. I know not whether your Grace or the Lord President has the copy of the
New Jersey college charter. I gave it to Mr. Secretary Sharp, in order that
your Grace and his Lordship might see it. Mr. Sharp being dead, obliges me to
trouble your Grace with this particular: I should not otherwise have taken the
freedom.



Mr. Whitefield to the Archbishop.
Tottenham-Court, February 11, 1767. May it please your Grace,
AS not only the Governor, Council and Assembly of Georgia, have been for a
long season, and are now waiting for an account of what has been done in
respect to the affair of the intended Bethesda college, I find myself under a
necessity of giving them and the contributors, on this, as well as the other
side, of the water, a plain narration of the steps I have been taking; and at
the same time I intend to lay before the public a draught of the future plan,
which, God willing, I am now determined to prosecute. And as the letters which
I have had the honor of writing to your Grace, contain most of what I have to
say on this subject, I suppose your Grace can have no objection against my
publishing those letters, together with the answers returned, and the issue of
the correspondence. -- To prevent your Grace's having further trouble, as I
hear your Grace is at present much indisposed, I shall look upon silence as an
approbation, at least as a tacit allowance of what is designed by,

may it please your Grace, Your Grace's most dutiful, Son and Servant, in the
King of Kings and Lord of Lords, G. W.

THUS, may it please your Excellency, concluded my correspondence with his
Grace, and I humbly hope, the province of Georgia, in the end, will be no loser
by this negotiation. -- For, God willing, I now purpose to superadd a public
academy to the Orphan house, as the College This College was originally built,
above twenty-eight years ago, for a charity-school and preaching place for me,
and ministers of various denominations, on the bottom of the doctrinal articles
of the church of England. -- The trustees, as a public and (...)
acknowledgements of this, have inserted a clause in their grant, for leave for
a part of the building still to be allowed for that purpose. -- Accordingly I
preached a serm^n, for the benefit of their charity children, in it when I was
last at Philadelphia, before a very large auditory, and Dr. Smith, the present
Pr^v^st, read ^^^je^^.
of Philadelphia was constituted a public academy, as well as charitable
school, for some time before its present College charter was granted by the
honorable proprietors of Pennsylvania in the year 1755.

In pursuing a like plan, the present Georgia Orphan-house estate, which for
near these three years has been in a state of suspense, may be vigorously and
properly improved, and thereby an ample and lasting provision made for the
future maintenance and education of many poor indigent orphans, as well as more
opulent students. -- Proper masters likewise may now be sent over to instruct
and prepare for academical honors the many youths who are at this time, both
in Georgia and the adjacent provinces, waiting for admission. In the interim, a
proper trust may be formed to act after my decease, or even before, with this
proviso, that no opportunity shall be omitted of making fresh application for a
College charter, upon a broad bottom, whenever those in power shall think it
for the glory of God and the interest of their King and country to grant the
same. -- And thus, may it please your Excellency, my beloved Bethesda will not
only be continued as a house of mercy for poor Orphans, but be confirmed as a
seat of nursery of sound learning and religious education, I trust, to the
latest posterity. -- That this may be the happy case, as I am persuaded is the
desire of your Excellency, his Majesty's Honorable Council, and House of
Representatives, in the province of Georgia, so it shall still be, to my latest
breath, as it has been for many years, the earnest endeavor and incessant
prayer of,

may it please your Excellency, Your Excellency's, etc. G. W.

APPENDIX.
To his Excellency JAMES WRIGHT, Esquire; Captain General and Governor in Chief of
his Majesty's Province of Georgia, and to the Members of his Majesty's Council
in the said Province.
The MEMORIAL of George Whitefield, Clerk,
SHOWS,
THAT about twenty-five years ago, your Memorialist, assisted by the voluntary
contributions of charitable and well-disposed persons, at a very great expense,
and under many disadvantages, did erect a commodious house, with necessary
out-buildings, suitable for the reception of orphans, and other poor and
deserted children; and that with the repair of the buildings, purchase of
negroes, and supporting a large ophan family for so many years, he has
expended upwards of twelve thousand pounds sterling, as appears by the
accounts, which from time to time have been audited by the magistrates of
Savannah.

That your Memorialist, since the commencement of this institution, has had
the satisfaction of finding that by the money expended thereon, not only many
poor families were assisted, and thereby kept from leaving the colony in its
infant state, but also that a considerable number of poor helpless children
have been trained up; who have been, and now are useful settlers in this and
the other neighboring provinces.

That in order to render the institution aforesaid more extensively useful,
your Memorialist, as he perceived the colony gradually increasing, has for
some years past designed within himself, to improve the original plan, by
making further provision for the education of persons of superior rank; who
thereby might be qualified to serve their king, their country, or their God,
either in church or state. -- That he does with inexpressible pleasure see the
present very flourishing state of the province; but with concern perceives that
several gentlemen have been obliged to send their sons to the northern
provinces; who would much rather have had them educated nearer home, and
thereby prevent their affections being alienated from their native country, and
also considerable sums of money from being carried out of this into other
provinces.

Your Memorialist further observes, that there is no Seminary for Academical
Studies as yet founded southward of Virginia; and consequently if a college
could be established here (especially as the late addition of the two Floridas
renders Georgia more centrical for the southern district) it would not only be
highly serviceable to the rising generation of this colony, but would probably
occasion many youths to be sent from the British West India Islands and other
parts -- The many advantages accruing thereby to this province must be very
considerable.

From these considerations, your Memorialist is induced to believe, that the
time is now approaching, when his long projected design for further serving
this his beloved colony shall be carried into execution.

That a considerable sum of money is intended speedily to be laid out in
purchasing a large number of negroes for the further cultivation of the present
Orphan house and other additional lands, and for the future support of a worthy
able president, professors, and tutors, and other good purposes intended.

Your Memorialist therefore prays your Excellency and Honors to great to him
in trust, for the purposes aforesaid, two thousand acres of land, on the north
fork of Turtle River, called the Lesser Swamp, if vacant, or where lands may be
found vacant, south of the river Alatamaha.

GEORGE WHITEFIELD.
Savannah, in Georgia, the 18th of December, 1764.
Immediately granted.

The Address of both Houses of Assembly. GEORGIA.
To his Excellency JAMES WRIGHT, Esquire; Captain General and Governor in Chief of
his Majesty's province of Georgia.
May it please your Excellency,
WE his Majesty's most dutiful and loyal subjects, the council and commons
house of assembly of Georgia, in general assembly met, beg leave to acquaint
your Excellency, that with the highest satisfaction we learn that the Rev. Mr.
George Whitefield has applied for lands, in order to the endowment of a college
in this province -- The many and singular obliga^^o^s Georgia has continually
laid under to that Reverend Gentleman, from its very infant state, would in
gratitude induce us, by every means in our power, to promote any measure he
might recommend; but in the present instance, where the interest of the
province, the advancement of religion, and the pleasing prospect of obtaining
proper education for our youth, so clearly coincide with his views, we cannot
in justice but request your Excellency to use your utmost endeavors to promote
so desirable an event, (...) to transmit home our sincere and very ^erv^nt
wi^h^s* ^^r the accomplishment of so useful, so beneficent, and so laudable an
undertaking.

By order of the Upper House. JAMES HABERSHAM, President,
December 20th, 1764. By order of the Commons House, ALEXANDER WYLLY, Speaker.

To which his Excellency was pleased to return the following Answer.
Gentlemen,
I AM so perfectly sensible of the very great advantage which will result to
the province in general, from the establishment of a Seminary for Learning
here; that it gives me the greatest pleasure to find so laudable an undertaking
proposed by the Rev. Mr. Whitefield; the friendly and zealous disposition of
that gentleman, to promote the prosperity of this province, has been often
experienced, and you may rest assured, that I shall transmit your address home,
with my best endeavors for the success of the great point in view.

JAMES WRIGHT.
20th December, 1764.
General Account of moneys expended and received for the use of the
Orphan-house, in Georgia, from January 7th, 1738^9, to February 9th, 1765.
Dr. Cr. l. s. d. l. s. d. 1746, April 16th. To sundries expended as per audit
this day 5511: 17: 9. 1746, April 16th. By sundry receipts per audit 4982: 12:
8. 1752, Feb. 25th. To ditto - 2026: 13: 7. 1752, Feb. 25th. By ditto - 1386:
8: 7. 1755, Feb. 19th. To ditto - 1966: 18: 2. 1755, Feb. 19th. By ditto -
1289: 2: 3. 1765, Feb. 9th. To ditto - 3349: 15: 10. 1765, Feb. 9th. By ditto -
3132: 19: 0. By the Rev. Mr. Whitefield's benefactions, being the some expended
more than received, as appears from the several former audits, now carefully
examined, viz. 10,790: 19: 6. Folio 65 - 1169: 10: 1 Ditto 81 - 400: 5: 4 Ditto
98 - 494: 10: 4 2064: 5: 10. 12,855: 5: 4. 12,855: 5: 4.

GEORGIA ss.
Before me the Honorable Noble Jones, Esquire; senior, one of the assistant
justices for the province aforesaid, personally appeared the Rev. Mr. George
Whitefield and Thomas Dixon of the province aforesaid who being duly sworn,
declare that the accounts relating to the Orphan-house, from Fol. 82 to Fol 98
in this book amounting on the Debit ^ile to Three thousand three hundred and
forty nine pounds fifteen shillings and ten pence sterling, and on the Credit
file to Three thousand one hundred and thirty two pounds sixteen shillings and
one farthing* contain, to the best of their knowledge, a just and true account
of all the moneys collected by, or given to them or any other for the use or
benefit of the said house; and that the disbursements amounting to the sum
aforesaid have been faithfully applied to and for the use of the same.

February 19 th, 1765. Signed, GEORGE WHITEFIELD, THOSE. DIXON.


Sworn this 9th day of February 1765, before me, in justification whereof I
have caused the seal of the general court to be affixed.


Signed, N. JONES, Sealed.

GEORGIA ss.
Before me, the Honorable Noble Jones, Esquire;; senior, personally appeared Jam^s
Edward Powell and Gray Elliott, Esqs. members of his Majesty's honorable
council for the province aforesaid, who being duly sworn, declare that they
have carefully examined the accounts containing the receipts and disbursements,
for the use of the Orphan house in the said province, and that comparing them
with the several vouchers, they find the same not only just and true in every
respect, but kept in such a clear and regular manner, as does honor to the
managers of that house; and that on a careful examination of the several former
audits, It appears that the sum of two thousand and sixty-four pounds, five
shillings and ten pence, has at several times been given by the Rev. Mr. George
Whitefield for the use of the said house; and that in the whole the sum of
twelve thousand eight hundred and fifty five pounds five shillings and four
pence three farthings has been laid out for the same house since 7th January,
1738-9 to this day -- Also that it does not appear that any charge has over
(...) made by the said Rev. Mr. Whitefield, either for traveling-charges or any
other expenses whatever, and that no charge of salary has been made for any
person whatever, employed or concerned in the management of the said house.

February 9 th, 1765. signed JAMES-EDWARD POWELL. GRAY ELLIOT.

Sworn this 9th day of February 1765, before me, in justification whereof I
have caused the (...) of the general court to be affixed.


Signed, N. JONES, (...),

THE END.

