EVERY MAN HIS OWN PHYSICIAN. BEING A complete Collection of efficacious and
APPROVED REMEDIES For every DISEASE incident to the HUMAN BODY. WITH Plain
Instructions for their common Use.

By JOHN THEOBALD, M. D. Author of the MEDULLA MEDICINAE.

Compiled at the Command of his Royal Highness the Duke of CUMBERLAND.

The TENTH EDITION, Improved.

LONDON: Printed for W. GRIFFIN, in Catherine-Street. BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND:
Printed for Cox and BERRY, almost opposite the Post Office. MDCCLXVII. [Price
2s. L. M. or 15s. O. T.]

PREFACE.
ALTHOUGH publishers of receipts have been always very numerous, yet it has so
happened, that the least able have hitherto undertaken this task, as the most
easy and likely to answer any mercenary views; which seems to have been the
reason that more able persons have neglected it as an under part of their
profession. Nevertheless, I have persuaded myself, that I should perform a
work, neither entirely void of use, nor foreign to the duties of my profession,
if I made the public partakers of the principal helps against most diseases,
which I had either learned by long experience, or selected from the writings of
the most eminent physicians. As these receipts are published chiefly for the
use of persons residing in the country, whose convenience or abilities, will
not allow of the attendance of a physician or apothecary, I have studied
plainness in my style, and in my directions, with regard to the treatment of
diseases, that I might render this treatise as useful as possible.

J. THEOBALD.

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION.
THE favorable reception this work has met with, as is sufficiently shown by
the remarkable quick sale of the first large impression, has induced the editor
(to support the credit of what is really beneficial to the public, and add
weight to the receipts) to publish the authorities from whence those receipts
were taken; and to make it still more useful, has added the signs of diseases,
and some plain and concise directions for bleeding: he begs leave to remark,
that although Dr. Theobald has in general given no more than one receipt for
the cure of one disorder, yet he has been careful to select such, only, as upon
long experience were found to be the best; and that although receipts are given
for diseases which are seldom cured, (as an apoplexy, consumption, etc.) yet if
it is in the power of medicine to remove any of these complaints, there is the
greatest reason to imagine, that the remedies directed in this pamphlet will
effect a cure.

PREFACE TO THE TENTH EDITION.
THIS edition of EVERY MAN HIS OWN PHYSICIAN, is improved with the addition of
the best receipts for the cure of the following disorders: viz. the Bite of a
Mad Dog, the Bite of a Viper or Adder; Chilblains, Hooping Cough, Frozen Limbs,
Milk Fever, difficult cutting of Teeth, old Ulcers, Whitloes, and many others;
together with some necessary instructions for the PRESERVATION OF HEALTH, and
RULES for NURSING SICK PERSONS.

INDEX OF DISEASES, For which Remedies are proposed in this Treatise.
A
ACHES, from Colds 1 After-pains ibid Agues or intermitting Fevers 2 Apoplexy 3
Appetite, want of 4 Astma ibid Saint Anthony's Fire 2
B
Baldness 4 Bite of a Mad Dog 56 -- of a Viper or Adder 5 Bleeding at the Nose
5 Blood, spitting of ibid Bloody Flux 6 Boils ibid Bruises, External ibid --
Internal ibid Burns and Scalds 7
C
Cancer 7 Chilblain 8 Cho^ck ibid Colds 9 (...) ibid Con^ul 10 Co^^s 10 (...)
ibid (...) ibid (...) 21
D
(...) 11 (...) ibid (...) ibid (...) health 41 (...) 50 (...) Blood ibid (...)
12 (...) 14 (...) ibid
E
Ear^ (...) 14 (...) ibid Eyes (...) of ibid
F
Fair (...) 15 (...) ibid (...) 15
Fevers, Nervous ibid -- Spotted ibid Fits, see Hysterics Fistula 17
G
Giddiness 18 Gout ibid Gravel and Stone ibid Green Sickness 19 Gripes ibid
H
Headache 19 Heart-burn 20 Hoarseness ibid Hysterics ibid Hard Swellings ibid
Hip-Gout ibid
I
Jaundice 21 Indigestion 22 Inflammations ibid Itch ibid Inflammation of the
Bowels 23 Intermitting Fever, see Ague
K
King's Evil 23
L
Leprosy 24 Lethargy ibid Limbs Frozen 24 Looseness 25
M
Madness 25 Measles ibid Menses, immoderate flow of 26 -- suppression of ibid
Miscarriage 27 Mortifications ibid Milk Fever, to prevent ibid
N
Nervous Disorders 27 Noise in the Ears 28
O
Opiate 28 Obstructions ibid Old Ulcers ibid Ointment for the Eyes 56
P
Pains in the Joints, see Hip Gout 20 Pain in the Stomach, see Heart-burn
Palsy 29 Piles ibid Pleurisy ibid Poison, to expel 30
Q
Quinsey 30
R
Rheumatism 30 Retention of Urine 31 Rickets ibid Ruptures ibid Rules for
nursing Sick Persons 47
S
Scald Head 32 Scurvy ibid Small Pox 33 Sprains 34 Sweating, Excessive 35 Slow
Fever, see Nervous Fever Stranguary 32 Stone, see G ravel Stich in the Side,
see Pleurisy Shingles 33 Swelled Legs 35
T
Teeth, difficult cutting of 34 Toothache 35 Tettars 36 Thirst, excessive ibid
Thrush ibid Throat Sore, see Quinsey -- Putrid 35 Tympany 36
V
Violent Pains after Delivery, see After-Pains Vomiting 37 Ulcers of the Lungs
ibid -- Kidneys ibid -- Bladder 38 -- Womb ibid Ulcers, old 28
W
Warts 38 Whites 39 White Swellings ibid Wind ibid Watery Gripes 38 Wasting
away of Children 39 Whitloe 40 Worms ibid Wounds, green ibid
INDEX TO THE APPENDIX.
A RECEIPT for Making Opedeldoch 52 -- the Clyster Decoction ibid -- Hartshorn
Drink ibid -- Barley Water ibid -- Viper Broth 53 -- an excellent Fomentation
ibid -- Infusion of Senna 54 -- a Purging Draught ibid -- Hiera Picra ibid --
Tincture of ditto ibid -- Mindererus's Spirit ibid -- the Bitter Tincture 55 --
Duke of Portland's Gout Powder ibid -- the Tonquin Remedy 56 -- Stevens's Stone
Medicine 57 -- a Warm Purge 58 -- Daffy's Elixir ibid -- Tincture of Rhubarb
ibid -- Volatile Tincture ibid -- ^riar's Balsam ibid A Receipt for making
Diachylon with the Gum^ 59 -- White Diachylon ibid -- Strengthening Plaster
ibid -- Ointment of Elder ibid -- Spermaceti Ointment ibid -- Ointment of
Marshmallows 60 -- Yellow Basilicon ibid -- a Powder for the Teeth ibid -- a
Lip Salve ibid -- Lime Water ibid -- Camphorated Spirits of Wine 61 -- Hungary
Water ibid -- Lavender Water ibid -- Lavender Drops ibid
Every Man his own Physician.
ACHES AND PAINS.
RUB a little opodeldoch upon the part affected, two or three times a day, and
wear a flannel upon it; if this does not give relief, take twenty drops of
volatile tincture of guaicum, (prepared as directed in the Appendix,) every
night and morning, in a glass of spring water.

HEISTER.
AFTER-PAINS.
TAKE one scruple of sperma-ceti, five grains of volatile salt of hartshorn,
five drops of balsam of Peru, and half a dracham of Venice treacle; mix them
into a bolus, with as much syrup of white poppies as is sufficient to make a
bolus; to be repeated every six hours till the pains abate. Cover the woman up
warm, and let her drink plentifully of caudle.

Lying-inn women should on no account be permitted to quit their bed before the
end of the first fortnight after delivery, since nothing so effectually
prevents a milk fever and other dangerous disorders (at the same time that the
necessary cleansings are thereby encouraged) as warmth and a spare diet, with
drinking plentifully of warm diluting liquors. Getting up too soon is always
productive of bad consequences.

HEISTER and SMELLIE.
AGUE, or INTERMITTING FEVER, Signs of.
A violent headache, a weariness of the limbs, a pain in the loins, a coldness
of the external parts, a shivering and shaking, sometimes so much as to make
the very bed shake under them; a great thirst and burning heat, and frequent
inclination to vomit. Afterward the symptoms begin to abate, the skin becomes
moist, the urine is of a flame color but without a sediment, and a sweat
breaking out terminates the fit.

METHOD OF CURE.
FIRST vomit the sick person, by giving half a dram of the powder of
ipecacoanha, and work it off with chamomile tea; and let the sick person take
the following powder:

Of the best Peruvian bark powdered, one ounce; of Virginia snake root, and
salt of wormwood, each one dram; mix these well together, and divide them
into eight doses, one paper to be taken every two hours in a glass of red wine
or any other liquid. This is a certain and infallible cure; but care must be
taken to administer it only in the intervals of the fits; and it must be
repeated for two or three days, about ten days after the first cure, or else
the disorder will frequently return. In obstinate cases, removing into a drier
air has been found of great service for persons of robust constitutions after
taking the ipecacoanha vomit. Dr. Mead directs a dram of powder of myrrh to
be taken an hour before the ague first comes on in a glass of sack.

HUXHAM.
SAINT ANTHONY's FIRE. Signs of.
This disease affects every part of the body, but most frequently the face, and
it happens at all times of the year. But whatever part is affected, a chillness
and shivering generally attend the disorder, with great thirst, restlessness,
and other signs of a fever; the face swells of a sudden, with great pain and
redness, and abundance of small pimples appear, which often rise up into small
blisters, and spread over the forehead and head, the eyes being quite closed by
the largeness of the swelling. This, in the country, is usually called a Blast.

METHOD OF CURE.
LET the sick person lose eight or ten ounces of blood, and repeat the bleeding
more than once if the symptoms run high; apply to the part a pultice of white
bread and milk, with a little hogs lard in it; let the pultice be changed twice
in a day; but flannels wrung out of a strong decoction of elder flowers applied
warm afford the speediest ease and relief, and every other morning take the
following purge, till the disorder is cured: viz.

Glauber's salt one ounce, Manna half an once, mix and dissolve it in warm
water for one dose.

The diet in this disease must be very low, chiefly water gruel, or at most
weak broth; all strong liquors, even flesh meat, must be avoided as poison.

APPOPLEXY. The immediate preceding Signs are,
Tremblings, staggering, a giddiness in the head, dimness of sight, sleepiness,
loss of memory, noise in the ears, and deep and laborious breathing. The
disease itself is a total deprivation of sense and motion, except that of
respiration, which is performed with difficulty, and snoring. It usually ends
in a paralytic disorder, and is seldom curable, but always leaves behind it a
great defect of memory, judgment and motion.

METHOD OF CURE.
CUPPING in the nape and sides of the (...) always useful, provided the
scarifications are (...) enough to give a free passage to the blood;
stimulating clysters and warm purges are also of service, as is the following
electuary: Take half an ounce of powdered heath valerian, and one ounce and an
half of conserve of orange peel, and mix them together; the dose is the
quantity of a nutmeg every four hours, dissolved in a cup-full of rosemary tea.
Apply a strong blister to the back and the legs. The diet must be very sparing.

MEAD, SYDENHAM, and HEISTER.
APPETITE, Want of.
DRINK chamomile tea every day an hour before dinner, or take ten drops of acid
elixir of vitriol in a glass of water, about two hours before, and about two
hours after, dinner every day. A gentle puke should precede the use of these
remedies, for which purpose nothing is preferable to the powder of ipecacoanha,
a scruple of which is sufficient for a dose, and should be worked off with weak
chamomile tea.

MEAD.
ASTHMA OR PHTHISICK. Signs of.
An obstructed and very laborious breathing, attended with unspeakable anxiety,
and a straitness about the breast.

METHOD OF CURE.
DISSOLVE two drachms of gum ammoniacum in half a pint of pennyroyal water, and
add an ounce of oxymel of squills. Three large spoonfuls of this mixture may be
taken frequently; or from twenty to thirty drops of the paregoric elixir, may
be taken in pennyroyal water, two or three times in a day. Bleeding is
generally proper, as is a large blister applied to the back or the legs, and
gentle vomits; the diet should be slender. Malt liqours must be avoided, being
very pernicious.

MEAD.
BALDNESS.
RUB the part frequently with an onion till it looks red; the use of bears
greese is also recommended as particularly serviceable in this case, being more
subtle and penetrating than any other animal fat hitherto known.

BITE of a MAD DOG.
DR. MEAD's powder, and the Tonquin remedy; for both which receipts see the
Appendix.

BITE of an ADDER or VIPER.
THE fat of this animal rubbed well into the part bitten, prevents the ill
consequences of such a wound. Where this fat cannot be procured the same good
effects will be produced by bathing the part well with warm sallad oil.

PHILOSOPHICAL TRANSACTIONS and MEAD.
Spitting of BLOOD.
TAKE red rose leaves dried, half an ounce, twenty drop of oil of vitriol, one
ounce and an half of refined sugar, and pour two pints and an half of boiling
water on these ingredients in an earthen vessel; let it stand to be cold, and
take half a quarter of a pint frequently. In this disorder, frequent bleeding
in small quantities is proper, not exceeding four, or at the most six ounces at
each time, according to the strength of the sick person.

HOFFMAN, and MEAD.
BLEEDING at the Nose.
APPLY to the back part and the sides of the neck, a linen cloth dipped in cold
water, in which salt prunella has been dissolved. In very obstinate cases
bleeding in the foot is useful. Internally, the quantity of a nutmeg of the
following electuary may be taken three or four times in a day. Take the seeds
of white henbane, and white poppies, each half an ounce, conserve of roses
three ounces, and mix them into an electuary with syrup of diacodion.

SYDENHAM, and BOIL.
BLOODY FLUX. Signs of.
Generally begins with coldness and shivering, succeeded by a quick pulse, and
intense thirst. The stools are greasy, and sometimes frothy mixed with blood,
with filaments intermixed, which have the appearance of melted suet, and are
attended with intolerable gripings, and a painful descent as it were of the
bowels.

METHOD OF CURE.
BLEED first, then give the following vomit; half a dram of powder of
ipecacoanha, work it off with chamomile tea, repeat this vomit every other day,
for three or four times. On the intermediate days, between each vomit, let the
sick person take a large spoonful of the following mucilage, warm, every hour:
dissolve half an ounce of gum arabic, and half an ounce of gum tragacanth, in a
pint of barley water, over a gentle fire. Clisters made of fat mutton broth are
of great service, the sick person must abstain, from malt and spirituous
liquors.

MEAD.
BOILS.
APPLY a plaster of diachylon with the gums, once every day, till they are
cured. To prevent their return a few doses of cooling physic are proper.

WISEMAN
BRUISES, Internal.
TAKE a large spoonful of cold drawn linseed oil, two or three times in a day.
The patient must also be blooded to the quantity of eight or ten ounces. And if
the symptoms are violent the bleeding must be repeated at discretion.

SYDENHAM.
BRUISES, External.
BATHE the part with a little spirits of wine and camphire, which in slight
cases will effect a cure, but if that fails it will be necessary to apply a
pultice of stale beer grounds, and oatmeal, with a little hog's lard, which
must be applied fresh every day till the bruise is entirely cured.

HEISTER.
BURNS AND SCALDS.
TAKE May butter unsalted, and white wax, of each six ounces, oil of olives
half a pint, lapis calaminaris one ounce and an half; melt the wax and butter
with the oil, and stir in the lapis calaminaris finely powdered, till it is too
hard to let it settle. This is an excellent ointment for the above purposes,
and is to be applied once a day spread on a fine linen rag.

TURNER.
CANCER. Signs of.
Begins at first with a small tumor, about the size of a nut, which does not
change the color of the skin, and sometimes remains for several years without
increasing. But as soon as the virulent humor becomes more active, the small
hard swelling becomes all of a sudden a large, round, lived, unequal tumor,
and is attended with an intense shooting pain: at length it breaks, and turns
into a sharp stinking sanies, which eating away the sound parts, the lips of
the wound become offensive to the sight, and the patient being worn out with
intolerable pain, at last ensues death. This disorder may infest any part of
the body, but most frequently the breasts, armpits, behind the ears, the lips,
nose, and private parts.

METHOD OF CURE.
BOIL a quarter of a pound of guaicum shavings in six pints of water, till it
comes to four pints, drink a pint of this decoction twice a day, milk warm.
External applications most proper, are pultices of white bread and milk, and
sometimes of milk and water; and the cancer should be defended from the cold
air, by a piece of fine linen, on which a little of the sperma ceti ointment
(the composition of which you will see in the Appendix) is spread, and should
be renewed two or three times in a day.

Dr. Love of Greenock.

Dr. Storck of Vienna greatly recommends the use of hemlock in cancerous cases
and gives several surprising instances of its success. The part affected is to
be fomented every night and morning with hot flannels wrung out of a decoction
of this plant, prepared by boiling four ounces of dried stinking hemlock in a
gallon and an half of water, till one third part is boiled away, and is to be
afterward covered with the following pultice; boil a pint of the hemlock
fomentation with as much oatmeal as is necessary to give it a proper
consistence for a pultice; during the use of these external applications, the
patient must take the extract or inspissated juice of this plant inwardly,
beginning with two grains only night and morning: the quantity is to be
increased by degrees, 'till it amounts to the quantity of thirty grains in the
twenty-four hours.

CHILBLAINS
Are swellings on the hands or feet from violent cold, accompanied with heat,
redness, pricking pains, and intolerable itching. On their first appearance
bathe them with snow water, or hold them over the steam of boiling vinegar; but
when they break and become sores they must be fomented with a fomentation, the
receipt for making whereof is given in the Appendix, and a dressing applied of
yellow baselicon mixed with a few drops of spirits of turpentine and spread on
fine lint; the limb must be kept warm, and if they are obstinate a sparing diet
must be observed.

HEISTER.
CHOLICK.
TAKE two ounces of Daffy's elixir, and repeat it as occasion may require; or
half a dram of powder of rhubarb toasted a little before the fire.

QUINCEY.
COLDS.
COLDS may be cured by lying much in bed, by drinking plentifully of warm sack
whey, with a few drops of spirits of hartshorn in it, or any other warm small
liquor; living upon puddings, spoon meats, chickens, etc. and drinking every
thing warm. In short, it must at first be treated as a small fever, with gentle
diaphoretics, such as half a dram of the compound powder of contrayerva,
taken night and morning, or half an ounce of Mindererus's spirit, may be given
every night going to rest, drinking a plentiful draught of weak sack whey after
it. If any cough should remain, after using this method a few days, the
medicines directed under the article of Coughs, must be taken.

This is a much more easy, natural and certain method, than the common practice
by balsamics, linctuss's, and the like, which spoil the stomach, destroy the
appetite, and hurt the constitution.

Dr. CHEYNE.
CONSUMPTION. Signs of.
A dry cough, a disposition to vomit after eating, as uneasy straitness of the
breast, spitting of blood, a quickness of the pulse after meals, and flushing
of the cheeks; as the disease advances, and matter brought up by the cough, if
spit into the fire, yields an offensive smell; if into a glass of water, it
sinks to the bottom; profuse night sweats, looseness, and wasting away of the
whole body.

METHOD OF CURE.
A milk diet, riding on horseback, country air, and bleeding frequently in
small quantities, at each time taking away not more than six ounces of blood,
are the most efficacious remedies in this distemper; snails boiled in milk have
sometimes been of service, as is also the Peruvian bark, when it does not
occasion a purging.

SYDENHAM, BOERHAAVE, and PRINGLE.
CONVULSIONS in Children. Signs of.
The mouth is drawn awry, the eyes are distorted, and the face turns blackish,
the child's fist is clenched, and the globes of the eyes seem immovable; when
these symptoms give way, the child is sleepy till another fit comes on.

METHOD OF CURE.
GIVE three or four drops of the tincture of wood soot, or a few hartshorn
drops in a tea-spoonful of water frequently. A blister applied to the nape of
the neck is also serviceable.

SYDENHAM.
CORNS.
After soaking them for a considerable time in warm water, pare away carefully
with a penknife the uppermost and hardest surface, then apply a plaster of
green wax, or diachylon with the gums, spread on thin leather; repeat this
method (which is perfectly safe) a few times, and it will seldom fail to
extirpate them entirely.

HEISTER.
COSTIVENESS.
TAKE the size of a nutmeg of lenitive electuary every morning, or as often as
occasion requires.

SHAW.
COUGH.
TAKE oil of sweet almonds and syrup of balsam, of each two ounces, four ounces
of barley water, and thirty drops of spirit of sal volatile; shake them well
together, and take two large spoonfuls when the cough is troublesome: if this
medicine does not remove the cough: in a few days, it will be absolutely
necessary to be blooded.

PRINGLE.
DECAYS, see CONSUMPTIONS.

DEAFNESS.
SYRINGE the ears well with some warm milk and oil, then take a quarter of an
ounce of liquid opodeldoch, and as much oil of almonds; mix them well, and drop
a few drops into each ear, stopping them with a little cotton or wool; repeat
this every night going to rest.

FOTHERGILL.
DELIVERY, to promote.
DIVIDE one grain of purified opium into two pills, to be taken one six hours
after the other. Or take a scruple of borax with a few grains of toasted nutmeg
made into a bolus with conserve of roses.

MEAD.
DIABETES. Signs of.
Is an excessive discharge of urine, of the taste, smell, and color of honey,
attended with an intense thirst, and a wasting away of the whole body.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE of the shavings of sassafras two ounces, guaicum one ounce, liquorice
root three ounces, coriander seeds, bruised, six drachms; infuse them cold in
one gallon of limewater for two or three days, the dose is half a pint three
or four times in a day. Or four ounces of alum whey, (which is prepared by
boiling four pints of milk over a slow fire, with three drachms of alum, till
it is turned into whey) may be taken three times in a day.

MEAD.
N. B. Lime water is made by pouring twelve pints of boiling water on a pound
of unslacked lime; when it is cold it is fit for use.



DROPSY. Signs of.
Difficulty of breathing, making very small quantities of urine, costiveness,
great thirst, swelling of the feet and ancles, which when pressed with the
fingers will pit; swelling of the belly, and falling away of the other parts.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE powder of jalap, cream of tartar and Florentine iris, of each a quarter
of an ounce, mix them: the dose is from thirty to forty grains every other day.
On the intermediate days take the quantity of a large nutmeg, every night and
morning, of the following electuary: Take two drachms of powdered chamomile
flowers, as much ginger, and half the quantity of prepared steel, make it into
an electuary with two ounces of conserve of orange peels. Diuretics should also
be made use of; the following is excellent: Take broom ashes half a pound, and
steep them in a quart of Rhenish wine cold, strain off the liquor, and take a
quarter of a pint three times in a day.

Dr. DOVER.
ASSISTANCES for DROWNED PERSONS. Directions with respect to drowned persons.
As several circumstances may happen to have continued life in such an
unfortunate situation, beyond the usual term, we should always endeavor to
afford them the most effectual relief, and not give them up as irrecoverable
too soon; since it has been often known that, till after the expiration of
several hours, such bodies have shown some apparent tokens of life. First, the
wet clothes should be stripped off, and the body strongly rubbed with dry
coarse cloths, and put as soon as possible into a well heated bed; and this
rubbing must be continued a considerable time together. Some person should
force his own warm breath into the drowned person's lungs, and also the smoke
of tobacco by means of a pipe or funnel introduced into the mouth, stopping the
sufferer's nostrils close at the same time. If a surgeon can be procured, the
jugular vein, or any large vein in the neck, should be opened, and ten or
twelve ounces of blood taken away. This vein is to be preferred, because it is
seldom that any other vein will afford any quantity of blood under these
circumstances. The smoke of tobacco should also be thrown up into the bowels by
the fundament, by introducing the small end of a tobacco pipe well lighted up,
the bowl of it wrapped up in a paper in which several holes are pricked, and
through these the breath is to be strongly forced. Two pipes, may be thus
lighted and applied, the one to the anus, and the other to the mouth, at the
same time. The strongest volatiles should also be applied to the patient's
nostrils. It is useless, and even dangerous, to pour much liquid of any kind
into the mouth, as long as the patient shows no signs of life; but as soon as
he discovers any motion, he should take five or six spoonfuls of a strong
decoction of carduus benedictus sweetened with honey; and, if nothing else can
be had, some warm water, with the addition of a little common salt. Lastly,
notwithstanding we discover some tokens of life, we should not cease to
continue our assistance, since they sometimes irrecoverably expire after these
first appearances of recovering.

Having pointed out the most effectual means of recovering drowned persons, I
shall just mention those which it is the general custom to use in the first
hurry. Drowned persons are sometimes wrapped up in a sheep's skin immediately
flead off. but this is less efficacious than a bed well warmed and long
continued rubbing with hot flannels. The method of rolling them in an empty
hogshead is dangerous, and loses a deal of important time. The hanging them up
by the feet is also dangerous, and should be discontinued, since the froth,
which is one of the causes of their death, is too thick and viscid to discharge
itself by its own weight, and this posture tends to increase the over-fulness
of the head and lungs. The covering the person with hot ashes, hot sand, or hot
salt, has often succeeded, and may be tried, but should not make the assistants
less attentive to the other methods already directed to be used for the
recovery of the drowned person.

HALLER. TISSOT.
Dry BELLY-ACH, or Nervous Cholic. Signs of.
Extreme costiveness, a most violent pain in the bowels, coldness of the hands
and feet, trembling, extreme anxiety, and a disposition to fainting, which is
frequently succeeded by the palsy.

METHOD OF CURE.
GIVE frequently the following clyster: Take dried mallow leaves an ounce;
chamomile flowers, and sweet fennel seeds, of each half an ounce; water, a
pint; boil it for use. Take half a pint of this decoction, and add two
spoonfuls of sweet oil, and half an ounce of Epsom salt; mix it for a clyster
to be repeated frequently. The warm bath is of the utmost service in this
disorder, as is also balsam of Peru given inwardly from twenty to forty drops
in a spoonful of powdered loaf sugar, three or four times in a day.

RIVERIUS, and SYDENHAM.
EAR-ACH.
The smoke of tobacco blown into the ear is excellent.

HOFFMAN.
EXCORIATIONS in Children.
DISSOLVE a little white vitriol in spring water, and dab the part with it,
which will heal them presently.

HEISTER.
DISORDERS of the EYES.
AN excellent eye-water. Take two grains of sugar of lead, dissolve it in a
quarter of a pint of spring water.

An OINTMENT for the EYES.
DIP a feather in a little ointment of tutty, and gently rub it across the eyes
every night going to sleep.

TURNER.
FAINTING.
APPLY to the nostrils and temples some spirits of sal ammoniac, and give a few
drops in a wine glass of water inwardly.

HOFFMAN.
FALLING SICKNESS. Signs of.
A weariness of the whole body, an heavy pain of the head, unquiet sleep,
dimness of sight, a noise in the ears, a violent palpitation of the heart, a
coldness of the joints, and a sense. as it were, of a cold air ascending from
the extreme parts to the heart and brain; then they fall suddenly on the
ground, the thumbs are shut up close in the palms of the hands, the eyes are
distorted, and all sensation is lost, so that by no noise, nor even by pinching
the body, can they be brought to themselves: they also froth at the mouth.

METHOD OF CURE
TAKE of Peruvian bark powdered one ounce, of wild valerian root half an ounce,
of syrup of orangepeel a sufficient quantity; make an electuary of this, and
let the patient take the quantity of a nutmeg, (after proper evacuations, such
as bleeding and purging) morning and evening, for three months together, and
then repeat it three or four days before the new and full moon.

MEAD
FEVERS Inflammatory. Signs of.
The breath is very hot, and there is a dryness of the whole skin, and sense of
heat; the respiration is thick, difficult and quick, the tongue is dry, yellow,
parched and rough, the thirst is unquenchable, a vast anxiety, restlesness, and
weariness, frequent inclinations to vomit, and sometimes light-headedness and
convulsions.

METHOD OF CURE.
BLEED to the amount of ten or twelve ounces, vomit with half a dram of
ipecacoanha, work it off with chamomile tea; if costive, inject as often as
occasion requires, the clyster directed under the article of the Dry-Belly-Ach,
and give inwardly the following mixture. Take of salt of wormwood half a
dram, lemon-juice three quarters of an ounce, salt of prunella ten grains,
^oring water one ounce; mix them together for one dose, and repeat it every six
hours.

HUXHAM.
NERVOUS FEVERS. Signs of.
Slight chillinesses often in a day, with uncertain flushes of heat, a vast
dejection and anxiety of the spirits, a giddiness and pain of the head, an
inclination to yawn and dose, a dryness of the lips and tongue without any
considerable thirst; the countenance heavy, pale and dejected; frequent sick
fits, the urine is pale and made often and suddenly, the pulse is low, quick
and unequal.

METHOD OF CURE.
A vomit is necessary when the sickness and load of the stomach is urgent; if
the body is costive, clysters of milk, sugar and salt, may be injected every
second or third day. Blisters must be applied to the nape of the neck, head and
legs; the sick person must be kept quiet in body and mind; opiates are commonly
hurtful; a little wine may be allowed, and thin wine whey is proper for common
drink. Give the following draught every six hours: Take salt of hartshorn ten
grains, lemon-juice half an ounce, simple mint-water one ounce and an half,
compound spirits of lavender and syrup of saffron, of each one dram and an
half, mix them together for one dose.

HUXHAM.
PUTRID OR SPOTTED FEVERS. Signs of.
The head aches and is hot, dull, and attended with a dejection of mind from
the very beginning; a constant watchfulness, the countenance is dejected, the
pulse is languid small and low. A pain in the back and loins, a great load at
the pit of the stomach, a perpetual vomiting of black bile: the thirst is
commonly very great, and all drinks seem bitter and maukish: the tongue at the
beginning is white, but grows daily more dark and dry, with a kind of dark
bubble on the top, and livid or brown spots appear over the whole surface of
the skin.

METHOD OF CURE.
GENTLE vomits are necessary in the beginning; and, if the body is too costive,
a clyster of milk, sugar and salt, may be given as often as occasion requires;
wine diluted with water, and acidulated with the juice of Seville oranges, may
be used for common drink, and the following has been found of greater efficacy
in this disorder than any other medicine.

Boil three drachms of Peruvian bark in powder, and three drachms of Virginia
snake-root in powder, in a pint of water, till half a pint is boiled away; then
add a quarter of a pint of good red Port wine; the dose is a tea cup full every
three or four hours.

Dr. PRINGLE.
FISTULA.
TAKE a quarter of a pound of elecampane root, three quarters of a pound of
fennel seeds, and a quarter of a pound of black pepper; pound these separately
and sift them through a fine sieve; take half a pound of honey, and half a
pound of powder sugar, melt the honey and the sugar together over the fire,
scumming them continually till they become bright as amber; when they are cool,
mix and knead them into your powder, in the form of a soft paste. The dose is
the size of a nutmeg, morning, noon, and night, drinking a glass of wine or
water after it.

This is Dr. WARD'S receipt for curing Fistula's; and, if it does not succeed,
immediate recourse must be had to a skilful surgeon.

GIDDINESS.
TAKE twenty drops of tincture of castor in a glass of water two or three times
in a day; or from a scruple to a dram of powder of valerian root, three or
four times in a day: when this disorder proceeds from too great a fullness of
the vessels of the head, bleeding will certainly give relief.

MEAD.
GOUT. Signs of.
A pain resembling that of a dislocated bone, succeeded by a chillness,
shivering and slight fever, usually seizes the great toe, heel, the calf of the
leg or ancle, which becomes so exquisitely painful as not to endure even the
weight of the bed clothes; the part looks red and is very much swelled; the
urine is high colored, and lets fall a kind of red gravelly sediment.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE a tea-spoonful of volatile tincture of guaicum, every night going to
rest, in a glass of water: be covered warm, and drink plentifully of weak sack
whey. In the intervals of the fits, exercise, such as walking, and riding, is
absolutely necessary to prevent a return; and the duke of Portland's gout
powder, the receipt of which we have given in our Appendix, should be taken
according to the directions annexed thereto.

Dr. CHEYNE.
GRAVEL AND STONE. Signs of.
A pain in the loins, bloody urine, numbness of the thigh or leg on the side
affected, a sickness at the stomach, and frequent vomitings.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE one pound of calcined oyster shells, and pour thereon twelve pints of
boiling water, strain it when cold, and take half a pint mixed with a little
new milk three times in a day, gradually (...) the quantity, till it amounts to
four pints a day. If the patient is costive, two ounces of manna dissolved in a
quart of whey, should be taken for one dose, once or twice every week.

Dr. WHYTT, and SYDENHAM
GREEN SICKNESS. Signs of.
A pale complexion, swelling of the ancles, weariness of the whole body,
difficulty of breathing, a palpitation of the heart, drowsiness, a desire of
eating coals, chalk, etc. and a suppression of the monthly courses.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE thirty drops of the tincture of black hellebore, two or three times in a
day, in a glass of water or wine, using moderate exercise, or the pills
directed under the article of obstructions. Chalybeate waters are also of
service, and bleeding in the foot about the time of menstruation.

MEAD.
GRIPES.
TAKE half a dram of powdered rhubarb, and toast it a little before the fire,
then add a little powder of ginger to it, and mix it for one dose, to be
repeated as occasion requires, or take a wine glass of Daffy's elixir.

RADCLIFFE.
HEADACHE.
APPLY leeches behind the ears, and take twenty drops of tincture of castor in
a glass of water frequently: if this fail take a scruple of pil. Rufi every
night going to rest for a week or ten days.

HALLER.
HEART-BURN.
TAKE a little chalk scraped in a glass of water, or a tea-cup full of
chamomile tea.

HOFFMAN.
HOARSENESS.
TAKE the medicines directed under the article of Coughs, or as much as will
lie on a shilling of the following powder, three or four times in a day: take
sperma ceti and sugar candy, of each equal parts, and make them into a fine
powder, or a tea-spoonful of Barbados tar in a glass of old rum, every night
going to rest. Three or four Wellfleet oysters swallowed early in the morning
fasting, afford surprising relief in this complaint.

SHAW.
HYSTERICS. Signs of.
An intercepted breathing, almost to suffocation, fainting, loss of speech,
great drowsiness, exceeding costiveness, and making large quantities of urine,
almost as clear as water.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE simple pepper mint water, twelve ounces, one ounce of powdered valerian,
and half an ounce of lavender drops; mix them together, and take three large
spoonfuls two or three times in a day, and also apply to the navel a large
galbanum plaster.

HOFFMAN and MEAD.
Hard SWELLINGS.
APPLY a plaster of diachylon with the gums, spread thick on leather, or a
mercurial plaster.

PAREY.
HIP-GOUT. Signs of.
A violent pain in the joint of the thigh, and lower part of the loins, which
sometimes reaches to the leg, and even the extremity of the foot, without any
swelling or change of color of the skin.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE a dram of aetherial oil of turpentine, and three times as much honey
mixed with it, every morning, for six or seven days at farthest, drinking
plentifully of warm sack whey after it.

CHEYNE.
HOOPING COUGH.
BOIL a good handful of dried coltsfoot leaves cut small in a pint of spring
water till about one half is boiled away, strain the liquor through a cloth and
squeeze the herbs as dry as you can; dissolve in the liquor an ounce of brown
sugar candy, and give the child (if it be but three or four years old, and so
in proportion) a spoonful of it cold or warm. according to the season of the
year, three or four times a day, or oftener, till the violence of the distemper
is abated; or the child may take from five to twenty drops, according to its
age, of elixir asthmaticum three or four times a day; a gentle vomit should
precede the use of either of these remedies; and, in very bad cases, a blister
applied to the nape of the neck will be necessary; bleeding is highly improper
in this disorder.

HALLER.
JAUNDICE. Signs of.
A yellowishness of the whites of the eyes, and of the whole body, bitterness
of the tongue, heaviness, and lassitude, vomiting of gall, the st^^'s almost
white, and the urine of a saffron color, tinging linen dipped therein yellow.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE Venice soap half an ounce, oil of an^iseeds sixteen drops; mix them well
together, and make it into middle sized pills. The dose is three or four, two
or three times in a day: if costive, half a dram of rhubarb must be taken in
the morning twice in a week.

HUXHAM.
INDIGESTION. Signs of.
Pain, and sense of weight in the stomach, attended with frequent belchings,
heart-burn, etc.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE a large spoonful of tincture of hiera picra every day, an hour before
dinner; or from ten to twenty drops of acid elixir of vitriol, in a glass of
water, two or three times in a day. Pyrmont, and Spaw waters are also very
efficacious in removing this complaint.

CHEYNE and HEISTER.
INFLAMMATIONS.
TAKE away ten or twelve ounces of blood, and repeat it if necessary; give
cooling purges, and apply to the part a pultice of bread and milk, with some
ointment of elder in it.

SHARP.
ITCH. Signs of.
Watery pimples, attended with intolerable itching between the fingers, under
the hams, on the arms, and on the thighs.

METHOD OF CURE.
ANOINT the parts which break out every night with the following ointment: take
hog's lard half a pound; flower of brimstone and sulphur vivum, of each two
ounces; powdered cloves one ounce; mix them together: two or three weeks is as
little time as can be depended upon, and the same linen must be wore the whole
time. This is a never failing remedy. For persons who are too delicate to bear
the smell of the brimstone the following ointment is contrived; take an ounce
and an half of pomatum; precipitated sulphur, a quarter of an ounce; white
precipitate, two scruples; mix them together. During the use of this ointment a
dose of cooling physic should be taken every third day, and the linen should be
frequently changed. High living, rich sauces, etc. must be carefully abstained
from.

INFLAMMATION of the BOWELS. Signs of.
A burning pain in the belly, attended with a fever, vomiting, and frequently
an obstinate costiveness.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE away ten ounces of blood, and repeat the bleeding according to the
urgency of the complaint; give the clyster directed in our Appendix, twice
every day, till the patient has had two or three stools; and to appease the
pain, and stop the excessive vomiting, give ten drops of liquid laudanum, in a
little broth, every six hours. The diet should consist entirely of weak broths.

Juice of lemons taken inwardly in obstinate cases, has sometimes afforded
surprising relief.

ARBUTHNOT.
INTERMITTING FEVER, see AGUE.

KING's EVIL. Signs of.
Hard swellings in the neck, armpits, and groin, and tumors on the joints and
fingers, attended with a swelling, rottenness of the bones, and soreness of the
eyelids. In short there is no part of the human body which may not be affected
with tumors, abscesses, or ulcers, by this disease.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE a scruple of burnt sponge, and four grains of rhubarb; mix them together
for one dose, which is to be taken every night and morning, with a draught of
whey Drinking sea water is very efficacious in curing the disease.

Sir EDWARD HU^^E.
LEPROSY. Signs of.
Red pimples, or postules, commonly first break out in the elbows and knees,
which gradually increase in such a manner, that the whole body is covered with
a leprous scurf.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE sharp pointed dock roots half a pound; monks rhubarb a quarter of a
pound; stick liquorice and coriander seeds, of each half an ounce; boil them in
a gallon of spring water, till it comes to three quarts, and to the strained
liquor add two ounces of diaphoretic antimony. The dose is a pint every morning
and evening. Or take twenty drops of the antimonial wine three times a day.

BANYER.
LETHARGY, see APOPLEXY.

LIMBS FROZEN.
In very sharp winters, it is too common for persons to be pierced with so
violent a degree of cold, that their hands or feet, or sometimes both, are
frozen at once, like a piece of flesh meat exposed to the air. If a person in
this situation attempts to warm the frozen parts before a fire, his case proves
irrecoverable; intolerable pains, and at length a mortification, are the
consequence of his imprudence. The only certain remedy is to convey the person
affected into some place where it does not freeze, but where, however, it is
but very moderately warm, and there continually to apply to the frozen parts
snow, if it can be procured; if not to keep washing them incessantly, but very
gently, with ice water, as the ice thaws in the chamber: by this application
the patient will be very sensible of his feelings returning very gradually to
the part, and of their beginning to recover their motion. In this state the
person may be safely moved into a place a little warmer, and drink some balm
tea, or any other mild diluting liquid. Many persons have been revived, who had
remained in the snow, or been exposed to the freezing air for several days, and
who had discovered no one sign of life for several hours: we should therefore
use our utmost endeavors for the recovery of persons in the like situation, by
using every method.

LOOSENESS.
TAKE half a dram of ipecacoanha for a vomit; and work it off with chamomile
tea. Abstain from malt liquors. If this does not entirely remove the looseness,
take half a dram of powder of rhubarb, made into a bolus, with a little
diascordium, and repeat it every day, 'till the looseness is entirely stopped.

For common drink the sick person may take hartshorn drink, or rice boiled in
water with a little cinnamon.

TOWN.
MADNESS. Signs of.
A redness of the eyes, grinding of the teeth, strange malice to particular
persons, want of sleep, singing in the ears, incredible strength, insensibility
to cold, and an excessive rage when provoked to anger.

METHOD OF CURE.
BLEEDING is useful in this disorder, and take forty drops of tincture of black
helebore in a glass of water, two or three times in a day; or half a dram of
camphor may be taken every night going to rest.

MEAD and KINNEIR.
MEASLES. Signs of.
A chillness and shivering, which is succeeded by a fever, accompanied with
great sickness, thirst, a continual drowsiness, slight cough, and an effusion
of tears, which is the most certain sign of the measles. About the fourth day
little red spots like flea-bites appear over the whole body, which do not rise
above the surface of the skin.

METHOD OF CURE.
FIRST, bleed the sick person, then let him or her drink plentifully of the
following decoction: take pearl barley, raisins and figs, of each two ounces;
stick liquorice bruised half an ounce; boil them in four quarts of water 'till
it comes to two quarts; strain it for use, and add a quarter of an ounce of
salt prunella. You must purge often after this disorder, and the diet and
management must be the same as in the smallpox.

SYDENHAM.
MENSTRUAL DISCHARGE, Excessive. Signs of.
Loss of strength and appetite, bad habit of body, sallow complexion, and
swelling of the feet.

METHOD OF CURE.
BLEED according to the strength of the patient, and give thirty grains of the
following powder in a glass of red wine three times in a day. Take three
quarters of an ounce of roch alum, and a quarter of an ounce of dragon's blood,
and mix them together.

MEAD.
MENSTRUAL DISCHARGE, Suppression of. Signs of.
A swelling in the belly, pain in the loins and groin, difficulty of breathing,
cold sweats, frequent faintings, and sometimes hysteric fits.

METHOD OF CURE.
BLEED in the foot, use exercise, and take the quantity of a nutmeg, three
times a day, of this electuary: Take conserve of dried orange-peel, a quarter
of a pound; candied ginger, half an ounce; powder of steel, two ounces; mix
them into the consistence of an electuary with any syrup: or a tea-spoonful of
tincture of black hellebore may be taken in a glass of warm water twice in a
day.

MEAD.
MISCARRIAGE.
TO prevent miscarriage, bleeding is useful and necessary, about the third
month of pregnancy, more or less, according to the constitution of the woman
with child. The body should also be kept open with manna or rhubarb, in the
first months especially: and all violent exercise must be shunned, and the
passions must be kept under.

HAMILTON.
MORTIFICATION, or GANGRENE. Signs of.
The pain and inflammation abate, the parts which were before swelled and
tight, become soft and flaccid; and upon pressing with the finger, its
impression remains; blisters rise up, like those of burns, filled with a
yellowish, reddish, or black humor. The limb loses its feeling, and power of
motion; the color of the part turns black, and becomes intollerably offensive.

METHOD OF CURE.
FOMENT the part every night and morning with hot flannels wrung out of the
following fomentation: Take limewater a pint, and dissolve in it half an ounce
of crude sal ammoniac; then add three ounces of camphorated spirits of wine.
Afterward apply a pultice of stale beer grounds and oatmeal, moistened with a
little hogs lard: when the part begins to suppurate, apply under the pultice a
dressing of black basilicon. Inwardly, Take a dram of the best Peruvian bark
in fine powder, every four hours, in a gill of mountain wine.

Professor MONROE, and HEISTER.
NERVOUS DISORDERS.
COUNTRY air, exercise, and the cold bath, with the mixture directed under the
article of hysterics, will prove a certain cure for every species of these
disorders.

FULLER.
MILK FEVER.
THIS disorder happens about the third or fourth day after delivery, and is
owing to the congestion of milk in the breasts; it is attended with shivering
fits like an ague, tension and swelling in the breasts, that extends to the
armpits, which parts are often extremely painful. This fever continues a day
or two, and sometime goes off of itself, by the benefit of nature, in plentiful
sweats, proportionable to the preceding cold fits.

METHOD OF CURE.
The patient should drink plentifully of (...) thin diluting liquors, as balm
tea, barley-water, etc. her diet should be very slender, and the child should
be often put to the breast. Internally the following powder should be taken
every six hours, in a cup of balm-tea; take compound powder of contrayerva,
twenty-five grains; purified nitre, five grains; and mix them together for one
dose.

But if the woman does not intend to give suck, she must rigorously adhere to a
very slender diet, and the foregoing medicine; the breasts should also be drawn
by some proper person; and, to prevent the milk from coagulating, the breasts
must be embrocated with warm salladoil, or the leaf of a red cabbage may be
applied thereto. If there is reason to apprehend an inflammation of the
breasts, it will be absolutely necessary to lose eight ounces of blood from the
arm. Folded cloths dipped in brandy or vinegar, placed under the armpits, are
also of service to drive back the milk.

ASTRUC and SMELLIE.
DISORDERS of the BREASTS.
IF there is a tumor and inflammation of the breasts after delivery, from the
stagnation of the milk, it is proper to apply brandy or rum, hot, with linen
cloths; or a white diachylon plaster, with a little camphor mixed with it; and
the milk should be drawn by the nurse.

If the stagnation of the milk does not occasion great heat, the breasts may be
bathed with warm red wine, spirits of wine and camphor, or a pultice of white
bread and red wine, to which add a little spirits of wine and camphor.

If the breast seems likely to break, apply a pultice of white bread and milk,
or a plaster of diachylon with the gums, spread thick on leather. When the
swelling breaks, the wound must be dressed with yellow basilicon, every night
and morning, till the disorder is cured.

THEOBALD.
CHAPT NIPPLES.
ANOINT them with oil and beeswax, equal parts of each; or dab them with a
little Hungary-water.

TURNER.
NOISE in the EARS,
MAY be cured by the vapor of a decoction of rosemary flowers prepared with
wine, being conveyed to the ear by a funnel.

HEISTER.
A safe OPIATE for a Grown Person.
TAKE twenty drops of liquid laudanum in a glass of wine and water going to
rest. The quantity must be porportionably lessened for children, according to
their different ages.

BOERHAAVE.
OBSTRUCTIONS in either Sex.
TAKE species hiera picra half an ounce, salt of steel one dram, make into
pills of a moderate size with a little syrup of saffron: the dose is five pills
twice a day.

SHAW.
OLD ULCERS.
When an ulcer is of long standing, it is dangerous to dry it up, without
substituting in the place of a discharge, which is become almost natural, some
other; such as purging from time to time, or cutting an issue near the diseased
part. To forward the cure, salt meats, spices, and strong liquors must be most
avoided; the usual quantity of flesh meat should be lessened, and the body kept
moderately open by a vegetable or milk diet; and if the ulcers are in the legs,
it is of great importance to keep in a lying posture; for negligence in this
material point changes the slightest wounds into ulcers, and the most trifling
ulcers into obstinate and incurable ones.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE a quarter of a pound of basilicon, and an ounce and an half of oil of
olives, and mix therewith half an (...) verdigrease; dress the sore with this
ointment, back upon a little tow, after fomenting it well with (...) ^^^oction
made of chamomile flowers and mallow (...) or the fomentation directed in the
Appendix. I repeat again: Take frequently a dose of cooling physic, and live
regularly.

SHARP.
PAIN in the STOMACH, see HEARTBURN.

PAINS in the JOINTS, see HIP-GOUT.

PILES. Signs of.
A violent pain at the time of going to stool, the excrements streaked with
blood, and small swellings like warts on the verge of the anus.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE of lenitive electuary one ounce and an half, flour of brimstone half an
ounce, mix them together; the quantity of a nutmeg to be taken every night and
morning: Apply outwardly a little of this ointment; take two ounces of white
diachylon, two ounces of sweet oil, and half an ounce of vinegar, mix them
together. Leeches applied as near the Piles as possible, or on the pile itself,
afford surprising relief.

SYDENHAM.
PALSY.
PERPETUAL blisters are serviceable, and the following drops have frequently
afforded great benefit: Take sal volatile drops half an ounce; lavender drops,
and tincture (...), a quarter of an ounce each; mix them together: the dose is
forty drops frequently in a glass of wine and water; or half a dram of wild
valerian root in powder, may be taken three times in a day.

The diet should be warm and attenuating.

ALLEN.
PLEURISY. Signs of.
A violent pain in the side, accompanied with heat, thirst, and other usual
symptoms of a fever, and a troublesome cough; if the sick person is bled, the
blood, when cold, looks like melted tallow.

METHOD OF CURE.
BLEED frequently till the pain abates; apply a blister to the side, and take
half a pint of the following infu on twice a day: Take fresh horse-dung six
ounces, and pour on it a quart of boiling pennyroyal water; strain it when
cold, and add a quarter of an ounce of Venice treacle; mix for use.

SYDENHAM, and QUINCEY.
POISON, to expel.
MILK mixed with sallad oil, or either of them alone, drank in large
quantities, so as to occasion a plentiful discharge by vomit, yield the most
certain relief, and therefore should be administered to persons who are
suspected to have taken any kind of poison, as soon as possible, and must be
continued to be drank plentifully, 'till the violence of the symptoms are
abated, and the sooner it is given the better.

QUINSEY, or SORE THROAT. Signs of.
A swelling of the parts concerned in deglutition, accompanied with great pain,
inflammation, and a fever, so as to hinder the swallowing any solid meats, and
almost stop breathing.

METHOD OF CURE.
BLEEDING is sometimes necessary, and cooling physic, but often jelly of black
currants swallowed down leisurely in small quantities, effects a cure, without
the assistance of any other medicine.

PHILOSOPHICAL TRANSACTIONS.
RHEUMATISM. Signs of.
It begins with chillness and shivering, heaviness of the joints, and coldness
of the extreme parts. The appetite is lost, the body is costive, and feverish,
and a racking pain is felt sometimes in one part, sometimes in another;
frequently shifting from place to place, and leaving a redness and swelling in
the part visited last.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE half a dram of powder of gum guaicum in a draught of warm ale going to
rest, and be covered with a larger quantity of clothes than usual; persist in
this method a few days, and you will find relief. Bleeding is of service in
phlethoric constitutions.

PRINGLE.
RICKETS in CHILDREN. Signs of.
A swelling of the belly, and constant desire of sitting still; the bones are
crooked, and the joints seem very large, as if knotted; the head is over large,
and the child's understanding exceeds its years.

METHOD OF CURE.
Give the child two grains of ens veneris, dissolved in a spoonful of wine and
water, every night; to this must be joined cold bathing, frictions of the back,
exercise, and a strengthening diet.

BOERHAAVE.
RETENTION of URINE.
TAKE a quarter of an ounce of nitre, a dram of volatile salt of amber, a
quarter of an ounce of powder of egg-shells, and half an ounce of fine sugar;
mix them together: the dose is as much as will lie on a shilling, two or three
times a day, drinking a draught of marshmallow tea after each dose.

TURNER.
RUPTURES,
ARE cured in children and young persons by applying a strengthening plaster
spread on leather, ( the composition of which is set down in our Appendix,) and
a truss, which may be had at any truss-makers in London.

SCALD-HEAD.
FIRST shave, then cover the head with a pitch plaster spread on leather, and
give inwardly one grain of calomel, made into a pill, with a little conserve of
roses, every night going to rest, and a dose of cooling physic twice in a week.

WISEMAN.
STRANGURY.
TAKE half a dram of camphor, a scruple of powdered gum arabic, liquid
laudanum five drops, with a sufficient quantity of turpentine to make it into a
bolus, to be taken night and morning, drinking a draught of marshmallow tea
after each dose.

TURNER.
STITCH in the SIDE, see PLEURISY

SCURVY. Signs of.
A sallow complexion, difficulty of breathing after exercise, spongy gums
subject to bleed with the slightest touch, frequent bleeding at the nose, a
swelling of the legs, accompanied with livid spots, and unusual laziness, and
pains over the whole body, resembling the rheumatism.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE one ounce of acid elixir of vitriol, and one ounce of tincture of
Peruvian bark, mix them together; a tea-spoonful is to be taken twice in a day
in a glass of water. A decoction of the tops of the spruce fir may be taken,
the quantity of half a pint, twice in a day. Bathing in the sea, and drinking
sea water, are of infinite service.

HEISTER, and RUSSEL.
SLOW FEVER, see NERVOUS FEVER.

SMALLPOX. Signs of.
A chillness, shivering, and other usual symptoms of a fever, attended with a
violent pain in the head and back, and an inclination to vomit, and great
propensity to sweat. In children, a dullness, and drowsiness, and sometimes
epileptic fits; about the third or fourth day, red spots about the size of a
pin's head appear on the breast, face, and the whole body, which increase in
size every day, till they are of the size of a large pea, and are filled with
matter.

METHOD OF CURE.
THE sick person must be kept in bed, taking care to defend him or her from the
inclemency of the winter, by proper means, and to moderate the excessive heat
in summer by cool air, for the patient ought not to be stifled with heat and
clothes, nor should the eruption and perspiration be checked by cold. With
regard to diet it ought to be very slender, moistning and cooling; such as
watergruel, pipping-liquor and milk pottage: and in the beginning the best
regimen is that which keeps the body open, and promotes urine; as figs,
damascene prunes, and tamarinds; and by giving subacid liquors for drink, a
small beer sharpened with orange or lemon juice; whey made with apples boiled
in milk, emulsions made with barley water and almonds, or Rhenish wine
plentifully lowered with water. Repeated purging is necessary after this
disorder as well as after the measles.

MEAD and SYDENHAM.
SHINGLES. Signs of.
An eruption of watery pustules, about the size of millet seeds, which encircle
the body like a belt, of an hand's breadth, and occasion an intolerable itching
and soreness.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE two ounces of white diachylon, two ounces of sweet oil, and half an ounce
of vinegar; mix them together for a liniment, which spread on a piece of fine
linen and apply to the part affected, repeating it as occasion requires; this,
with two or three doses of glauber's salt and a cooling and spare diet, will
entirely remove this complaint.

TURNER.
SPRAINS.
AFTER fomenting with warm vinegar, apply a pultice of stale beer grounds, and
oatmeal, with a little hog's lard, every day till the pain and swelling are
abated; then apply the strengthening plaster directed in our Appendix.
Observing the following rules, will much shorten the cure: let the person stand
three or four minutes at a time on both his feet, and sometimes move the
strained foot; and when sitting with his foot on a low stool, let him move it
this way or that as he can bear it; let the strained part be gently rubbed with
a warm hand several times in a day, which will contribute very much to contract
the overstretched vessels, and recover a due circulation of their fluids
through them.

SHARP.
TEETH, Difficult cutting of,
IF the child is costive, a few grains of rhubarb mixed with an equal quantity
of magnesia alba, according to its age and strength, must be given every night
in a little pap; hartshorn drops in the quantity of three or four drops in a
spoonful of water, are proper three or four times in a day: if this method does
not give relief, the gums must be lanced to give opportunity for the tooth to
make its way.

SYDENHAM and HARRIS.
STONE, see GRAVEL.

SWEATING, Excessive.
TAKE twenty drops of acid elixir of vitriol, in a glass of water, two or three
times a day.

SHAW.
SWELLED LEGS.
TAKE the same medicines which are advised under the article of the Dropsy.

TOOTHACHE.
THE root of yellow water flower de luce rubbed on the tooth which is painful,
or chewed in the mouth, in an instant, as if by a charm, drives away the pains
of the teeth, arising from what cause soever. Or take camphor and opium of each
as much as a large pin's head, and put it in the hollow tooth; a blister may
also be applied behind the ear.

ALLEN.
THROAT SORE, see QUINSEY.

Putrid SORE THROAT. Signs of.
A giddiness, chillness, and shivering, like that of an ague fit, followed by
an intense heat, a violent headache, heat and soreness in the throat, stiffness
of the neck, great sickness, vomiting or purging, or both; the face looks red
and swelled, the eyes inflamed and watery, with restlessness, anxiety and
faintness; frequently a great number of small pimples appear on the neck,
breast, and hands, which are sensibly swelled; the inside of the mouth and
throat are swelled, and appear of a florid red color, sometimes of a pale
white, surrounded with red.

METHOD OF CURE.
ALL evacuations which lessen the strength, particularly bleeding and purging,
and all cooling medicines, are highly prejudicial. The hot steam of a boiling
mixture of vinegar, myrrh and honey, is to be received into the throat, through
an inverted funnel; this cannot be used too frequently. The decoction of the
Peruvian bark, made by boiling an ounce of bark in a pint and an half of water,
till it comes to half a pint, and adding a dram of acid elixir of vitriol, is
the best medicine in this disorder, if given, a tea cup full, every four hours.

HUXHAM and FOTHERGILL.
TETTARS.
TAKE four ounces of sweet oil, one ounce of white wax, one ounce of sperma
ceti, and twenty-five grains of camphor; mix them together for a liniment, with
which gently touch the tettars three or four times in a day.

THIRST, unquenchable.
A quart of water mixed with an ounce or two of white wine vinegar will make an
agreeable drink, and has been known to extinguish the most violent thirst after
other liquors have in vain been tried for that purpose.

JAMES.
THRUSH. Signs of.
Little white ulcers affect the lips, gums, cheeks, tongue, palate, and the
whole inside of the mouth.

METHOD OF CURE.
RUB the child's mouth with a linen rag dipped in the following mixture; take
honey of roses an ounce, oil of vitriol six drops, mix them together; or the
child's mouth may be frequently washed with a decoction of elm bark.

SHAW, and ALLEN.
TYMPANY. Signs of.
A great swelling in the belly, which being occasioned by air pent up in the
cavity of the belly, gives a hollow sound when struck by the hand.

METHOD OF CURE.
THE same medicines which are directed for the dropsy are also of service in
this disorder.

BOERHAAVE.
VIOLENT PAINS after DELIVERY, See AFTER-PAINS.

VOMITING.
TAKE mint water one ounce, lemon-juice half an ounce, a scruple of salt of
wormwood, mix them for one dose, to be repeated as occasion may require.

MEAD.
ULCER of the LUNGS.
REQUIRES the same treatment as is directed under the article of Consumptions.

FULLER, PRINGLE, etc.
ULCER of the KIDNEYS. Signs of.
Fleshy excrescences are voided by urine. The heat and pain in making water
comes by intervals; the matter that comes from the kidneys is more plentiful,
white and thin, than in an ulcer of the bladder, and is not foetid; the urine
looks like milk when first made, but after standing some hours, the matter
separates from it, and falls to the bottom.

METHOD OF CURE.
BUTTER-milk not very four, is extremely beneficial, as is also an emulsion
made of barley-water and sweet almonds. Chalybeate waters have been sometimes
of service.

ARBUTHNOT.
ULCER of the BLADDER. Signs of.
A voiding of stinking matter or blood, and sometimes scales, or a membranous
skin along with the urine, and a continual heat and pains in the urinary
passages.

METHOD OF CURE.
THE selter's mineral water mixed with milk are excellent, as is also the
constant use of spaw-water.

HOFFMAN.
ULCER of the WOMB. Signs of.
A flux of purulent matter, or matter mixed with blood, which is more viscid and
foetid than the whites, and attended with a fixed pain.

METHOD OF CURE.
AN injection, composed of barley-water, a pint, and honey of roses two ounces,
must be used to the part affected, by the help of a syringe, several times in a
day. You may add a small quantity of tincture of myrrh.

ASTRUC.
WARTS,
MAY be moved by rubbing them with the juice of celandine, or milk of spurge;
but when they are situated about the eyelids, to prevent hurting the eyes, it
is proper to surround the wart with a ring of wax, or a piece of plaster with
a hole in the middle, so that the wart may come through, by which means the
warts will be destroyed, without hurting any other part.

HEISTER.
WATERY GRIPES in Children.
TAKE half a dram of magnesia alba, and half a dram of rhubarb, mix them
together, and give the child three or four grains in its pap every morning and
evening. Or take a spoonful of hemp seed, and boil it in half a pint of water,
sweetened with sugar. This will also cure the cholic in grown persons.

CADOGAN.
WHITES. Signs of.
A flux of matter from the womb, attended with a pain and weight in the loins,
loss of appetite, pale complexion, difficulty of breathing, a liableness to
miscarriage, and a swelling of the eyes and feet.

METHOD OF CURE.
APPLY a large strengthening plaster to the small of the back, and take a
quarter of a pint of this decoction, every night and morning: Take cow's milk
half a pint, and boil in it one handful of archangel flowers, and a bit of
cinnamon, strain it for use. In obstinate cases, bathing in the sea, and
drinking sea water, is far preferable to any thing else.

RUSSEL.
WIND.
TAKE the powder of angelica seeds, carraway seeds, and parsley seeds, of each
a quarter of an ounce; make them into an electuary with the syrup of clove
gilliflowers; the dose is the quantity of a nutmeg at discretion.

HOFFMAN.
WHITE SWELLINGS of the Joints.
ANOINT the part with Barbados tar, before a good fire, two or three times in a
day, covering it with a bladder, and drink half a pint of seawater every
morning fasting.

GUY'S HOSPITAL.
WASTING AWAY of Children.
TAKE salt of tartar, nitre and arcanum duplicatum, of each a quarter of an
ounce; sal ammoniac three drachms; mix them together; a very little of this
must be put into the child's drink, according to its age.

HEISTER.
WHITLOES.
THIS disorder begins with a slow heavy pain; but in a little time the pain,
heat and throbbing become intolerable; the part swells and grows red, and
sometimes the whole hand is inflamed and swelled: on its first appearance the
finger affected should be plunged in hot water or held over the steam of
boiling water; and by doing this frequently for the first day, a cure has been
often obtained; but when the disorder is further advanced, a pultice of white
bread and milk must be applied.

WORMS. Signs of.
Paleness of the countenance, itching of the nose, voraciousness, startings,
and grinding the teeth in sleep, loosenesses, stinking breath, hard swelled
belly, and sometimes epileptic fits.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE burnt hartshorn, and the best scammony in powder, of each a quarter of an
ounce: calomel one dram; powder of tin a quarter of an ounce; mix them
together, and let the child take eight or ten grains, according to its age,
every other morning, in a tea-spoonful of roasted apple.

ALSTON.
GREEN WOUNDS.
DRESS them every day, with yellow basilicon spread on fine lint, after
fomenting them well with the fomentation, the receipt for making which is
inserted in the Appendix.

TURNER.
Directions for preserving Health, and attaining long Life.
HEALTH has been ever esteemed the first of blessings, and consequently every
endeavor toward its preservation, deserves encouragement. This consideration
induces me to publish the following remarks, from a thorough conviction of the
truth they contain; which ought, with every honest man, to outweigh every
timidity of its reception, and give him courage to offer, at all risques, what,
by well-grounded experience, appears to him, (from its nature) of general
utility to mankind.

The air, which is a fluid elastic substance that surrounds us on all sides,
penetrates our bodies, and yet is so fine, that it escapes the sight, is
rarefied by heat, and condensed by cold: it is so necessary, that an animal
cannot live a moment without it; it serves for respiration or breathing, and is
susceptible of different qualities; it may be hot, moist, cold, dry, serene,
pure, and temperate. It is subject to variations more or less sudden, and to be
mixed with impure, corrupted, infectious vapors, which are prejudicial to
health. The sudden changes of the air are dangerous; whence proceed a great
number of diseases which reign in the spring and autumn. Toward the approach
of winter, hospitals, prisons, places where armies are encamped, places where
lead is melted, and the earth just thrown up, near dunghills, etc. are
unhealthy, on account of the bad exhalations. Too hot an air occasions
malignant and putrid fevers: a cold and moist constitution of the air produces
coughs, pleurisies, rheumatisms, agues, etc. for instance, agues are common in
the Fens of Cambridgeshire and Lincolnshire, and the Hundreds of Essex, on
account of their marshy situation, and the moist vapors which weaken the
fibers of the body, and obstruct the pores of the skin, and consequently
diminish the discharge of the skin, called insensible perspiration. Hence it
appears, that, to preserve health, dunghills should never be placed too near
the dwelling house, since the corrupted vapors which are continually exhaling
from them, cannot sail being in time prejudicial, and causing malignant fevers;
for though those who are used to them, do not preceive their offensiveness, yet
the cause does not cease its unwholesome activity.

From what has been observed with respect to hospitals and jails, the necessity
of daily opening the windows of a bedchamber must clearly appear, to prevent
the bad consequences which arise from soul and confined air; and why houses
should be built rather raised above the level of the earth, than sunk beneath
its surface; and the exposure of the front should be to the south-east, this
being the most wholesome aspect.

Our constitution, from the loss it daily sustains, requires to be repaired by
aliment and drink; hence a knowledge of their general kinds and qualities is
necessary, in order to make a proper choice thereof.

The principal and most general food is bread, made of wheat, barley, rye, or
oats: wheaten bread is most nourishing; barley is dry; rye and oats laxative.
The crust is most easy of digestion; the crumb more oily and heavy; though
other mealy substances, beans, pease, potatoes, etc. nourish much, but are
windy, heavy, and viscid, and their constant use is apt to cause obstructions,
unless a great deal of exercise is used. Rice is emollient and nourishing; but
nuts, almonds, and chestnuts, etc. though they abound with nutritious particles,
are hard of digestion.

Pulpy, tart fruits, which abound with juice, eaten ripe, are refreshing,
cooling, quench thirst, and are easy of digestion; such as strawberries,
rasberries, currants, mulberries, gooseberries, cherries, apples, pears,
appricots, peaches, nectarines, etc. Remark, contrary to the common prejudice
which generally prevails, that fruits are hurtful in the bloody flux, and even
occasion this disorder, they may be eaten with great safety in the bloody flux,
and are indeed the real preservatives against it, as is confirmed by the
experience of the most eminent physicians: the cause of this disorder being an
excess of flesh meats, too moist a state of the air, a succession of cold
showers to violent heats, and uncleanliness. In fact, this disorder has been
observed less frequent, and less dangerous, when fruits were plenty and cheap;
so that to escape this distemper when it is rise, ripe fruits are to be eaten
in plenty, and the quantity of flesh meats are to be lessened considerably.

Pot herbs and roots are less nourishing than the mealy substances. Lettice,
succor^, endive, sorrel, purslain, etc. (...) moisten, and are laxative.
Artichokes, cellery, cresses, asparagus, parsley, etc. are a little heating.
Truffles, mushrooms, onions, garlic, pepper, mustard, and the other spices,
heat very much, and are therefore less wholesome in particular constitutions.

Animal food differs very much with regard to its kind, (...) manner of living
and substance. Fish nourish the (...) animals. Young animals have the greatest
(...) nourishing juice, but that of the older is (...) and nourishing. Yet
though the juices of (...) animals are most gelatinous, and agreeable to the
taste, their flesh is the hardest, and most difficult of digestion. Wild
animals are more light, and easier of digestion, than the (...); their white
parts contain a very juicy substance of tender fibers, yield a soft food, and
are easy of digestion.

Liquid aliments, are milk, eggs, chocolate, soups, broths, etc. Milk,
requiring but little preparation in the stomach, is a good (...) for persons
whose stomachs are weak, and children; new-laid eggs are very nourishing, and
easy of digestion, therefore agree with exhausted and old persons. Chocolate
nourishes greatly, strengthens the stomach, helps digestion, and softens sharp
humors; whence it is proper for weak stomachs and consumptive persons. Broths
and soups abound with a soft, moistning, nutritious jelly, whence they are
great restoratives. Meat that is roasted, contains an excellent nourishing
juice, the moist parts being dissipated by the fire. Things that are tried, are
only proper for strong stomachs.

Drink restores the fluid parts of the body, and helps digestion; the principal
and most salutary is water, of which the softest is best, which is known by its
lathering easily with soap; but taken in too great quantities, it relaxes and
weakens the stomach, and causes many disorders. Wine in moderation strengthens
the solids, and promotes digestion; but if used in excess, as well as brandy,
rum, and all other spirituous liquors, hardens the fibers, weakens the nerves,
destroys the appetite, and causes gout, stone, and other chronic diseases; that
malt liquor is the wholesomest which is the lightest and clearest; for then it
does not offend the stomach, but passes readily through the emunctories or
strainers of the body, and particularly by urine; whence the best beer does not
make the head ach nor grow sour on the stomach, nor cause wind. The making
wholesome beer depends greatly on the softness of the water, the proper boiling
of the ingredients, and a due working of the wo^t; for all thick, muddy, or
stale beer, not sufficiently boiled, disorders the head, causes wind in the
stomach, obstructions, the strangury, asthmas, cholics, and ulcers in the legs.
Tea, used in moderation, promotes perspiration, or the discharge by the skin,
strengthens the stomach, and helps digestion; but that kind of tea which is
called hyson, is improper for persons who have weak nerves or subject to
hysteric disorders. Coffee, drank after dinner, is thought to quicken
digestion, and allay the fumes of wine; but if used in excess, it agitates the
blood, causes watching, and promotes hemorrhages or bleedings from the nose, or
other parts.

Spices, pepper, etc. are pernicious, when used to create an appetite; whence
made dishes are bad; for the appetite caused by the quality and difference of
the victuals, incites persons to eat more than the stomach can well digest;
which causes indigestion, and frequently dangerous and fatal disorders. With
respect to diet, the surest method of preserving health, is to live on plain,
simple food, lightly seasoned, in that quantity which, by experience, nature
has been found to require. Perfect digestion is the best rule for regulating a
meal, which is known from persons being more lively and brisk after a meal than
before. History furnishes us with many examples of persons, who, by temperance,
has lived to a very advanced age, though of weakly constitutions naturally;
wherefore those that are desirous of life and health, should imitate their
manner of living; since excesses in eating and drinking are both extremely
dangerous.

Strong, robust, young people, who use much exercise, ought to eat more than
others, and may be free with the grosser kinds of food; for their stomachs
being strong, the lighter foods would digest too easily, and be dissipated too
soon. Persons of a weak constitution, or who are just recovered from a disease,
should use soft, light foods, agreeable to the stomach. Children, whose
stomachs are weak, and vessels fine, ought to use a light, thin, soft food,
easy of digestion; wherefore infants should be fed with a fl^^d milk, to avoid
causing obstructions in their fine and delicate vessels; consequently the milk
of a nurse newly brought to bed, is more proper for a new born infant, than the
milk of a nurse who has been delivered five or six months, because her milk
begins to have too great a consistence. Nurses should observe an exact diet,
and shun violent passions of all kinds; for they disturb digestion, and
communicate their bad effects to the child. When children are weaned, they
should not be accustomed to spirituous liquors, or strong food, especially salt
or (...) provisions, because they are hard of digestion, and (...) bad
nourishment. Their diet should consist of light animal food, taken in a small
quantity at a time, but often. At all times of life, but especially in old age,
the constant use of salt and smoaked meats tends to harden and stiffen the
solid parts of the body, instead of affording good nourishment; being hard of
digestion: in old age the fluids are more thick, secretious, more slow, and the
solids harder than in youth; therefore they require a more soft, moistning
diet, easy of digestion, and not too much at a time, especially of a night.

All great changes ought to be brought about insensibly, for custom is a second
nature, and an acquired habit is hard to be left off. Many persons enjoy a good
state of health when their meat and drink are very indifferent, by being
accustomed thereto; and are apt to be sick, when they attempt to change their
manner of life. Custom confines us to certain hours, but hunger points out the
best time of eating. In age, where strength is wanting, and in youth, wherein
there is a great dissipation, when much is not eaten at a time, something taken
between the (...) is not improper. It is necessary to observe, that when the
stomach is bad, persons should not begin to eat again, till the last meal is
digested.

Persons who are much fatigued should rest before eating; and, in cases of
distress and sorrow, the food should be now light, and small in quantity,
because the stomach is weak at those times.

The stomach will admit of grosser food in winter than summer. Those who eat in
a hurry, without much chewing, are subject to indigestion; for digestion
depends in part on well chewing the food, and thereby intimately mixing it with
the spittle; for this reason light foods are most proper for children, and old
persons who have lost their teeth.

Vegetables are more difficult of digestion than animal food, therefore
improper for weak stomachs. On this account, light food, such as veal, lamb,
chicken, fish, are the food which best agree with delicate constitutions. On
the contrary, stronger habits are most subject to be (...) with tender and
young meats, than with beef, and mutton; because the degree of heat which
convert beef and mutton into the true state it ought to have in the stomach,
carry the tender aliment of lamb, pig, chickens, etc. into a stercorous or
excremental state, before it leaves the stomach; whence fluxes, etc. In such
strong stomachs, it is necessary to mix vegetables with the animal food, that
the fermentation of the one may oppose the too precipitate digestion of the
other by its acidity. Hence it is obvious, that weak stomachs should abstain
from vegetables, which require a greater degree of vital heat than even beef or
mutton, to be converted into proper nourishment. This, I hope, will
satisfactorily explain the terms of easy and difficult digestion. The stomach,
which can bear beef and water, cannot bear roasted pig and water, from too
great a power of digestion, not from any deficiency in those faculties;
therefore beef and mutton are more easy of digestion than lamb, or any of the
white meats; and the contrary in weak stomachs. Surfeits, from lobsters, crabs,
etc. are of the kind which rise from a too sudden change of these substances in
the stomach; therefore they should be always eaten with vinegar or lemon juice.
In fact, butter is no bad preservative against surfeits in this instance; the
oil blending with the (...) salts, forms a soap of that which would otherwise
be a more acrimonious, inflammatory, and offensive substance.

Sleep restores the strength, and repairs and replaces the wastes which are
made by the labor and exercise of the day. The proper time for sleep is the
night when darkness and silence invite and brings it on; day sleep is less
refreshing, exercise and custom should regulate its duration; six or seven
hours at a time is generally thought sufficient, for excessive sleeping is
attended with great inconveniences; it (...) the senses, and renders them less
fit for the duties of life.

It is beneficial to vary the scenes of life; to be sometimes in the country,
sometimes in town; to go to sea, to hunt, to be at rest now and then; but more
frequently to use exercise, because a sedentary life brings on many
indispositions, and renders the body weak and inactive; while, on the other
hand, exercise and labor strengthen it. But moderation is to be observed in
all these things, and too much fatigue to be avoided; for too frequent and
violent exercise (...) powers the natural strength, and wastes the body. Of all
kinds of exercise, riding on horseback is the most (...). I have known many
instances of persons recovering thereby from the most (...) state, in
consumptions, dropsies, cholics and nervous disorders.

In old age there is seldom sufficient strength to use bodily exercise, though
so very requisite for health; wherefore frictions with the flesh-brush are
necessary, at this time of life, to promote perspiration, which should be done
by the person himself if possible.

I have already taken notice, that cold stops the pores of the skin, and
diminishes both sweat and perspiration. To avoid this inconvenience, the winter
clothing should be put on pretty early in the season, and be left off late;
besides care must be taken not to pass too suddenly from hot into a cold air,
and to forbear drinking any thing cold, when the body has been violently heated.

The passions and affections of the mind, viz. joy, fear, anger, etc. produce
very sensible effects, and when too much given way to, have a very bad effect
on health, for they affect the stomach, hinder digestion, and chylification;
whence arise many terrible disorders: wherefore it is best to keep them in
bounds as much as possible, and to preserve an inward serenity, calmness, and
tranquillity.

Excessive venery must be avoided, since the action of coition is very
impetuous, and comes near to a convulsion. The animal heat is greatly lessened
thereby, the habit of body weakened wonderfully, and the whole nervous system
largely injured.

RULES for nursing SICK PERSONS.
It is a great mistake, to suppose that all distempers are cured by sweating;
and that, to procure sweat, sick persons must take hot medicines, and keep
themselves very hot; for sweating carries off the thinner part of the blood,
leaving the remainder more dry, thick and inflamed, which must evidently
increase the disorder; for, instead of forcing out the watery part of the
blood, we should rather endeavor to increase it, by drinking freely of
barley-water, balm tea, lemonade, or any other diluting liquor made luke warm.
What has been already said on the head of soul confined air, shows the
absurdity of stifling the sick person with the heat of a close apartment, and a
load of bed-cloaths; for these two causes are sufficient alone to produce a
fever, even in an healthy person. By letting in a little fresh air now and then
into a sick person's room, and lessening the bed-cloaths, you will almost
always perceive the fever and oppression in some measure abate. Instead of
venice treacle, saffron, gascoign powder, and other heating medicines, in all
feverish disorders, the belly should be kept moderately open; whilst those
medicines just mentioned render the body costive, and must necessarily have a
bad effect.

Fevers are aggravated by giving the sick persons food through fear of their
dying of weakness; which food increases the disorder, and renders it fatal.
This fear is groundless; persons in a fever may be supported, even for some
weeks, with liquids only; and are stronger at the expiration of that time than
if they had taken more solid nourishment; for, from the first attack of a
fever, whatever solid food is taken, even soup, eggs, biscuit, etc. corrupts in
the stomach. If a man in perfect health was to eat stinking meat, rotten eggs,
four broths, etc. he would be seized with vomiting, load at the stomach, a
purging, fever, and eruptions of the skin.

The same articles, even in the soundest state, given to a person in a fever,
are quickly putrified, by the heat and diseased matter already in his stomach,
and in a few hours produce the same effects. Is it then possible to expect the
least service from them? No: as long as a sick person has a bad humor in his
stomach, his weakness increases, in proportion to the food he receives; for
this food being corrupted by the infected matter already there, proves
incapable of affording the least nourishment; on the contrary, becomes an
additional cause of the distemper. Besides, to heat and cram the sick person,
is wholly opposite to what nature herself indicates: the burning heat of which
they complain, the dryness of the lips, tongue, and throat, the high color of
their urine, their earnest longing after cooling things, the pleasure and
benefit they receive from the admission of fresh air into their chamber, are so
many proofs that we ought to cool them moderately, by refreshing and diluting
liquors, such as balm tea, lemonade, etc. to promote an easy discharge of the
vitiated humors. Those who have the care of sick persons, should particularly
attend to this observation, that as long as there is any taste of bitterness,
sickness, or desire of reaching; bad breath, heat, and feverishness, with
offensive stools, and high-colored urine made in a small quantity only; so
long all flesh meats, soups, eggs, and all kind of food composed of any of
them, and all heating medicines, wine, etc. are so many absolute poisons.

If the sick person has not two motions for stool in the twenty four hours; if
the urine is high colored, the fever runs high, the pain of the head and loins
considerable, a glyster of warm water with sweet oil, and a little common salt,
should be given once in a day. As long as the patient has strength for it, he
should fit up out of bed an hour daily, and longer if he can bear it; but he
should not be raised whilst in a sweat. His linen should be changed every other
day, taking care that the clean linen is well aired; for nothing conduces more
to continue the fever and lightheadedness, than confining the sick constantly
to their bed, and preventing their changing their foul linen.

Persons recovering from distempers, require great care and attention; in
proportion to the abatement and decline of the fever, their quantity of food
may be gradually increased; and when the fever is entirely gone, the sick
person may venture on a little white meat, such as chicken, rabbit, whitings,
flounders, or other flat fish; but salmon, eels, carp, skait, haddock, and the
like, are not to be ventured on 'till the recovery is absolutely perfected:
Soups, new-laid eggs, and a little wine diluted with water; but these are to be
used with great moderation, because the stomach, being extremely weakened by
the disease, is capable only as yet of a small degree of digestion; and if the
quantity of nourishment exceeds its power ever so little, it will not digest,
but become putrid, and delay the recovery.

To procure a complete and perfect termination of acute diseases, observe the
following rules:

Let persons recovering, as well as those who are sick, take very little food
at a time, and take it often.

Let their meal consist of one kind of food only, and let them chew their food
well.

Lessen their quantity of drink; the best in general is wine and water; three
parts water, to one part wine; for too great a quantity of liquids prevent the
stomach from recovering its tone, and increases the tendency to a swelling of
the legs.

Riding on horseback, as often as they are able, is absolutely necessary: the
properest time for this exercise is in the forenoon.

They should eat nothing, or at most but very little, in the evening, as
persons in this state are seldom quite so well toward night. Their sleep will
be the less disturbed for this caution: seven or eight hours, at most, are as
much as should be allotted for lying in bed.

A stool is not absolutely necessary every day; but if the costiveness exceeds
the second day, a glyster should be administered; or sooner, if the person
feels uneasy, is restless, or has the headache.

If after some time they still continue very weak, and their stomach is
disordered, and they have, from time to time, a little irregular fever, they
should take a tea-cup full of the decoction of the Peruvian bark, three or four
times in a day, which may be prepared by boiling an ounce of the best bark in
powder, in a quart of water, 'till two thirds are wasted away, and then adding
to the remainder a gill of red wine.

Laboring men must by no means return to work too soon after their recovery,
left it prevent their ever getting perfectly well, and entirely recovering
their lost strength.

DIRECTIONS concerning BLEEDING.
THOUGH bleeding has been directed in many disorders in the course of this
work; yet, as the improper use of it is attended frequently with the most fatal
consequences, it has been judged necessary to bring into one point of view all
those cases in which bleeding may be administered with advantage, as well as
those in which it is highly prejudicial. In all inflammatory diseases, it
should by no means be omitted, as in the pleurisy, and peripneumony, during the
first days; but so soon as the symptoms of suppuration appear, expectorating
medicines are the most proper means from which to expect relief, and the use of
the lancet must be totally forbid. In the apoplexy, epilepsy, bloody flux and
inflammation of the bowels, bleeding must be repeated according to the exigence
of the symptoms: it is also useful, sometimes to promote suppuration in large
abcesses, where nature is too much oppressed by the violence of the inflammation.
In inflammations of the eyes, bladder, or womb, ischiatic pains, rheumatisms,
coughs, pleurisy, head-achs, quinseys, asthmas, hemorrhages, and nephritic
complaints, bleeding is of the utmost service; but in every disorder proceeding
from a relaxed state of the solid parts, and impoverished state of the blood,
attended with a cachectic habit of body, such as dropsies, jaundice, gout, etc.
bleeding must be abstained from with the utmost caution, as it will, instead of
relieving, greatly aggravate those distempers.

APPENDIX.
A choice Receipt to make OPODELDOCH.
TAKE of Hungary water a pint; Castile soap sliced, three ounces; camphor, an
ounce; let them stand together in a glass closely stopped, till the soap and
camphor are entirely dissolved in the Hungary water.

The CLYSTER Decoction.
TAKE of dried mallow leaves an ounce; chamomile flowers, and fennel seeds, of
each half an ounce; boil them in a sufficient quantity of water to strain off
about half a pint, then add two ounces of sweet oil, and it is fit for use.

HARTSHORN-DRINK.
TAKE burnt hartshorn two ounces, gum arabic two drachms; boil them in three
pints of water, till one pint is wasted away; then strain it, and it is fit for
use.

BARLEY-WATER.
TAKE two ounces of pearl barley, wash it well in cold water, and then boil it
in half a pint of water for a very little while; this water will look reddish,
and is to be thrown away; then add four pints of water, and boil it away to one
half, the remainder is fit for use.

VIPER BROTH.
TAKE a middle-sized viper, freed from the head, skin, and bowels, and two
pints of water; boil them to a pint and an half, then remove the vessel from
the fire, and when the liquor is cold, let the fat which congeals upon the
surface be taken off. Into this broth put a pullet of a moderate size, after
having skinned it, and taken off all the fat carefully; set the vessel on the
fire again, that the liquor may boil; then remove it from the fire, take out
the chicken, and chop its flesh into little pieces; put these into the liquor
again, set it over the fire, and, as soon as it boils up, pour out the broth,
first carefully taking off the scum.

Broths taken frequently, and in a small quantity at a time, are excellent
restoratives, and of infinite service in decays: on this account viper broth
may be reckoned a restorative, though I esteem the chicken the principal
ingredient to be depended on; for I am convinced, by experience, that vipers
have no one virtue to recommend them that can be depended on: but it is usual
to overlook the efficacy of things we are daily conversant with, and ascribe
their good effects to others that are not so common, though loss to be depended
upon: and I am certain that whoever tries chicken broth, with and without the
viper, will find as much service from the first as the latter.

Dr. JAMES.
An Excellent FOMENTATION.
TAKE southernwood and wormwood dried, and chamomile flowers, of each an ounce;
bay leaves dried half an ounce; boil them gently in six pints of water, and
strain it off for use: all green wounds, and old sores, should be fomented with
this every day before they are dressed.

The Infusion of SENNA.
TAKE three quarters of an ounce of senna, cream of tartar three drachms,
carraway seeds bruised two drachms; boil the cream of tartar in half a pint of
water till it is dissolved, then pour the boiling water upon the rest of the
ingredients, and let it stand until it is cold, then strain it off, and it is
fit for use.

A PURGING DRAUGHT.
TAKE of the infusion of senna, as above directed, two ounces, syrup of
buckthorn one ounce; mix them together for one dose, which may be taken in the
morning fasting, three times a week, and it is a safe and sure purge; it may be
taken in all cases where purging is proper.

A Dose of cooling Physic.
TAKE Glauber's salts an ounce, manna half an ounce, dissolve them in a little
boiling water for one dose, to be taken as often as occasion requires.

HIERA PICRA.
TAKE of succotrine aloes finely powdered, a quarter of a pound; winter's bark
finely powdered, three quarters of an ounce; mix them together.

Tincture of HIERA PICRA.
STEEP an ounce of hiera picra, made as above directed, in a pint of mountain
wine, for a week or ten days, by which time it will be fit for use.

MIND ERERUS's SPIRIT.
TAKE a quarter of an ounce of volatile salt ammoniac, and add to it, by
degrees, distilled vinegar, till the effervesence entirely ceases.

An Excellent Bitter Tincture.
TAKE gentian root, and orange peel dried, each two ounces; cochineal bruised,
half a dram; infuse them in a quart of French brandy for three or four days,
then strain off the liquor for use. This is a very pleasant and wholesome
bitter, and may be used occasionally to provoke an appetite, and assist
digestion.

Duke of PORTLAND's GOUT POWDER.
TAKE of round birthwort root and gentian root, of the tops and leaves of
germander, ground pine, and centaury: Take all of these well dried, powdered
and sifted as fine as possible, an equal quantity; mix them well together, and
take one dram of this mixed powder every morning fasting in a cup of wine and
water, broth, tea, or any other vehicle you like best; keep fasting an hour and
an half after it, continue this for three months without interruption, then
diminish the dose to three quarters of a dracham for three months longer, then
to half a dram for six months more, taking it regularly every morning if
possible. After the first year, it will be sufficient to take half a dram
every other day.

As this medicine operates insensibly, it will take perhaps two years before
you receive any great benefit; so you must not be discouraged, though you do
not perceive at first any great amendment; it works slow but sure: it does not
confine the patient to any particular diet, so one lives soberly, and abstains
from those meats and liquors that have always been accounted pernicious in the
gout; as champaign, drams, high sauces, etc.

N. B. In the rheumatism, that is only accidental and not habitual, a few of
the dram doses may do; but if habitual, or that has been of long duration,
then you may take it as for the gout. The remedy requires patience, as it
operates but slow in both distempers.

Sir HANS SLOANE's Ointment for SORE EYES.
TAKE prepared tutty one ounce; blood stone finely prepared, two scruples;
succotrine aloes in fine powder, twelve grains; prepared pearl, four grains;
mix them together in a marble mortar, with as much viper's fat as is sufficient
to give it the consistence of an ointment.

This ointment is to be applied with a hair pencil, the eyes winking or a
little opened.

It must be observed, (...) ^^ourging medicines are hurtful to the diseases of
the (...) which are cured by this medicine.

Dr. MEAD's Remedy for the Bite of a MADDOG.
LET the patient be bled in the arm, to the amount of nine or ten ounces.

Take ash colored ground liverwort four drachms, black pepper two drachms, mix
them together into a fine powder.

This is to be divided into four doses, where of one is to be taken in warm
milk, in a morning fasting, for four mornings successively; after this the
person must be put into a cold bath, pond, or river, for thirty days together,
early in the morning, and before breakfast; he is to remain in it, with his
head above water, not longer than half a minute. The wound should be
continually fomented, with a pickle made with vinegar and salt, as warm as it
can be borne.

The TONQUIN Remedy for the Bite of a MAD DOG.
TAKE of native cinnabar, and common vermillion (both ground to a very fine
powder) each twenty-four grains; musk, sixteen grains; rub these together till
the musk is also become very fine, and give it all for one dose in a tea-cup
full of arrack, or brandy, as soon as possible after the person is bit; and
another dose thirty days after: but if the person has the symptoms of madness
before he has had the medicine, he must take two doses in an hour and a half.
The medicine is perfectly safe and innocent, as appears from the great number
of persons who have tried it, none of whom have felt any ill consequences, or
been disordered since through its use. Its only visibly effect, is producing a
considerable drowsiness, which, in those who being already mad, have two doses
given them within the time abovementioned, is prolonged for several hours, and
ends in a perfect cure. This dose is intended for a grown person; for children
it must be lessened in proportion to their age.

Mrs. Stephen's famous Cure for the STONE and GRAVEL, as amended by Dr. Hartley.
TAKE two scruples of calcined egg-shells, three times in a day, in a glass of
any convenient liquor, drinking, after each dose, a third part of the following
decoction: Take two ounces of Castile soap, dissolve it in a quart of soft
water, and sweeten it, according to your taste, with honey or loaf sugar. If
this decoction is made in a copper vessel, care must be taken that it is well
tinned. The taking of these medicines must be continued for some time after the
complaint ceases, left any part of the stone should remain, which being rough
and unequal, might occasion exquisite pain. It is common, after a few days use
of these medicines, to have an increase of pain in making water; at which time,
a soft diet, emollient drinks, and rest, are proper. For common drink, milk and
water, or a decoction of marshmallow roots, parsley, and liquorice, may be
used; but if the person has been used to strong liquors, small punch, made
without acid, may be drank sparingly. Artichoaks, asparagus, spinnage,
lettuces, succory, parsley, turnips, carrots, potatoes, radishes, peace, etc.
may be safely used; but onions, leeks and celiery, are to be preferred to all
other vegetables.

The patient ought to drink no more of any liquor than is sufficient to quench
his thirst, and he should hold his water, as long as he can without great
uneasiness, that it may have the longer time to act on the stone. If these
medicines occasion costiveness, it will be necessary now and then, at
discretion, to take a dose of Glauber's salt and manna.

A Warm Purge, proper to be given in the PALSY and APOPLEXY.
TAKE tincture of hiera picra two ounces, syrup of buckthorn three quarters of
an ounce; lavender drops a quarter of an ounce; mix them together for one dose,
which may be given in the morning fasting, twice a week, or as often as
occasion may require.

DAFFY's ELIXIR.
TAKE raisins stoned four ounces, senna three ounces, carraway-seeds bruised
one ounce, steep these ingredients in a quart of brandy, for three weeks or a
month, then strain it off for use, and keep it in a bottle close stopped.

TINCTURE of RHUBARB.
TAKE of rhubarb sliced thin, one ounce; lesser cardamom seeds bruised, a
quarter of an ounce; saffron, a dram; brandy, one pint: sleep these ingredients
together for three weeks or a month, then strain off the liquor for use.

N. B. Mountain wine may be used instead of the brandy.

VOLATILE TINCTURE of Guaicum.
TAKE an ounce of gum guaicum in gross powder, and steep it for a week or ten
days in six ounces of sal volatile drops, in a bottle closely stopped.

FRYER's BALSAM.
TAKE of gum benjamin one ounce and an half, of strained storax one ounce, of
balsam of Tolu half an ounce, of succotrine aloes a quarter of an ounce,
rectified spirit of wine a pint. Digest them together till the gums are
dissolved as much as possible, then strain off the tincture for use.

DIACHYLON with the Gums.
TAKE three quarters of a pound of white diachylon, two ounces of strained
galbanum, turpentine and frankincense of each three quarters of an ounce; melt
them together over a slow fire.

WHITE DIACHYLON Plaster.
TAKE litharge finely powdered a pound and a quarter, sweet oil a quart, boil
them together with a quart of water, till they are thoroughly mixed, and are of
a proper consistence for a plaster, and look quite white; if the water should
be entirely wasted away, you must add some more to prevent its turning black.

An excellent STRENGTHENING Plaster. See page 31 and 34.
TAKE white diachylon half a pound, frankincense two ounces, and dragon's blood
three quarters of an ounce; melt the diachylon over a slow fire, and then add
the other ingredients finely powdered, and mix them well together, by stirring
them continually till the plaster is quite cold.

Ointment of ELDER,
IS made by boiling the young leaves of elder in mutton-suet, till they are
quite crisp, and the suet is of a deep green color.

SPERMA CETI Ointment.
TAKE a quarter of a pint of the best sallad-oil, a quarter of a pound of white
wax, and half an ounce of sperma ceti; melt these ingredients together, over a
gentle fire, and keep them continually stirring, until the ointment is quite
cold. This ointment is remarkably efficacious in preventing pits on the face
after the smallpox.

Ointment of MARSHMALLOWS.
TAKE half a pound of marshmallow-roots; of linseeds and faenugreek-seeds, each
three ounces; bruise them, and boil them half an hour gently in a quart of
water; then add two quarts of sweet oil, and boil them together 'till the water
is quite wasted away; then strain off the oil, and add to it a pound of
beeswax, half a pound of yellow rosin, and two ounces of common turpentine;
melt them together over a slow fire, and keep them continually stirring, till
the ointment is cold.

TURNER's CERATE, see the article of BURNS and SCALDS.

Yellow BASILICON.
TAKE sweet oil a quarter of a pint; beeswax, yellow rozin, and Burgundy
pitch, of each a quarter of a pound; Venice t^rpentine three quarters of an
ounce; mix them together over a slow fire.

An Excellent Powder to clean the TEETH.
TAKE cream of tarter, three quarters of an ounce; choice myrrh, three drachms:
dragon's blood, one dram; mix them for a powder.

An excellent LIP SALVE,
Is made by adding a quarter of an ounce of alkanet root to the sperma ceti
ointment, and simmering them together a few minutes over a gentle fire.

LIMEWATER.
POUR a gallon of boiling water on a pound of unslack'd lime; stir them well
together, and let the water remain on the lime for twenty-four hours; then
strain off the clear liquor for use.

Camphorated SPIRITS of WINE
DISSOLVE an ounce of camphor in a pint of rectified spirits of wine.

HUNGARY WATER.
TAKE of fresh rosemary tops a pound and an half; proof spirit of melasses, a
gallon, and distill off about five pints.

LAVENDER WATER.
TAKE of fresh lavender flowers a pound and an half; of proof melasses spirit,
a gallon; and distill off five pints.

LAVENDER DROPS.
TAKE of lavender water a pint and an half; of Hungary water, half a pint; of
cinnamon and nutmegs, each a quarter of an ounce; of red sanders powdered, a
dram and an half: let them infuse together in a glass bottle well stopped for a
month; then strain off the liquor for use.

FINIS.
COX and Berry, Almost opposite the Post Office, BOSTON, Sell the following
Articles, At the very lowest Advance, by Wholesale and Retail,
PLATE and Jewelry of every sort, Gold and Silver Lace, -- Twist Buttons,
Modern Books of all kind, School Books, Seaman's Ditto, Scale and Compasses,
Bibles and Common Prayers, Tate and Brady's Psalms, Watts's Psalms and Hymns,
Testaments, Spelling-Books, Psalters, Primers, PLAYS, Writing Paper, Little
Books for Children, Account Books, Quills, Sealing-Wax and Wafers, Ink-Powder,
Pocket-Books, Patent Ass-Skin Memorandum Books, Black Lead Pencils, Penknives,
Scissars, Spectacles. etc. -- etc. -- etc.
N. B. New Publications, Magazines and Reviews, regularly imported.


