THE HISTORY OF JOSEPH; A POEM.

In TEN BOOKS.

By a FEMALE HAND.

To which is added, The HERMIT; a POEM: AND An ESSAY on the CREATION.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by DAVID HALL, and WILLIAM SELLERS. 1767

THE History of JOSEPH. A POEM.
BOOK I.
An Invocation of the Divine Spirit. A Description of the Temple of Moloch, in
the Valley of Hinnon, where a Congress of infernal Powers are met, to contrive
some Method to extirpate the Hebrew Race.

CELESTIAL Muse, that on the bli^^ful plain
Art often invoked, to guide the immortal strain;
Inspired by thee, the firstborn sons of light
Hailed the creation in a tuneful flight;
Pleased with thy voice, the spheres began their round,
The morning stars danced to the charming sound:
Yet thou have often left the crystal towers,
To visit mortals in their humble bowers.
Favored by thee, the courtly swain of old,
Beneath mount Horeb sacred wonders told;
Of boundless chaos, and primaeval night,
The springs of motion, and the seeds of light.
The son sto^^ still, to hear his radiant birth,
With the formation of the balanced earth.
The moon on high, checked her nocturnal ear,
And listening staid, with every lingering star,
The hills around, and lofty Sinah heard
By whose command their towering heads were reared.
The flowers their gay original attend;
Their tosted crowns the groves, adoring, bend.
The fountains rose, the streams their course withheld,
To hear the ocean's wondrous source revealed.
The Birds sit silent on the branches near,
The flocks and herds their verdant food forbear.
The swains forgot their Labor, while he sung,
How from the dust their great forefather sprung:
A vital call awoke him from the ground,
The moving clay obeyed the Almighty sound.
Thus sung in lofty strains the noble bard;
The heavens and earth their own formation heard.
But thou, propitious Muse, a gentler fire
Did breathe, and tune to softer notes the lyre,
When royal Lebanon heard the amorous king
The beauties of his loved Egyptian sing:
The sacred lays a mystic sense infold,
And things divine in human types were told.
Disdain not, gentle power, my song grace,
While I the paths of heavenly justice trace;
And twine a blooming garland for the youth,
Renoun'd for honor, and unblemished truth.
Let others tell of ancient conquests won,
And mighty deeds, by favored heroes done;
(Heroes enslaved to pride, and wild desires)
A virgin Muse a virgin theme requires;
Where vice, and wanton beauty quit the field,
And guilty loves to steadfast virtue yield.
Jacob, with heaven's peculiar favor blessed,
Leaving the fertile regions of the East;
(Where Haran, then a noble City, stood,
Between fair Tygris and Euphrates flood;)
From Laban fled, and by divine command
Pursued his journey to his native land.
Loaded with wealth, his numerous cam^^s bo^^
His wives, his children, and his household store
Of purchased slaves he led an endless train,
His flocks, and herds engrossed the wide champain.
The spherd's art was all his father knew,
His sons the same industrious life pursue.
The God his pious ancestors adored,
The almighty God, at Bethel, he implored:
An Altar there, with grateful vows he reared,
Where twice the radiant vision had appeared;
The powers of hell, the dreadful omen feared:
Each Demon trembles in his hollow shrine,
The raving priests amazing things divine.
In Hinnon's vale a fane to Moloch stood,
Around it rose a consecrated wood;
Whose mingled shades excluded noonday light,
And made below uninterrupted night.
Pale tapers, hung around in equal rows,
The mansion of the sullen king disclose;
Seven brazen gates its horrid entrance guard;
Within the cries of infant ghosts were heard:
On seven high altars rise polluted fires,
While human victims feed the ruddy spires.
The place Gehenna called, resembled well
The native gloom and dismal vaults of hell.
'Twas night, and goblins in the darkness danced,
The priest in frantic visions lay entranced;
While here convened the Pagan terrors sat,
In solemn council, and mature debate,
TO avert the storm impending over their state.
The apostate princes with resentment fired,
Anxious, and bent on black designs, conspired
To find out schemes successful to efface
Great Heber's name, and crush the sacred race;
From whence they knew, the long predicted king,
The infernal empire's destined foe should spring;
Who conqu'ror over their vanquished force should tread,
And all their captive chiefs in triumph lead.
The affair, their deepest policy commands,
And brought them hither, from remotest lands;
From Ur, Armenia, and Iberia's shores,
From Nile, and Ophir, rich with golden ores,
And where the Adrian wave, and where the Atlantic roars.
Nesroth appears, his amber chariot drawn
With snowy steeds; him at the rising dawn
The Syrian worships from his airy hills,
Whose vales with wealth the famed Araxis fills.
Belus forsakes his high frequented domes,
And over the famous plains of Shiner comes:
Plegor descend his mount; to him were paid,
With impious rites, libations for the dead.
Imperious Rimmon came, whose mansion stood
On the fair banks of Pharphar's lucid flood.
Osiris left his Nile, and thundering Baal
The rock, whence Arnon's plenteous waters fall.
Mithra, whom all the East adores, was there;
And like his own resplendent planet fair,
With yellow tresses, and enchanting eyes
Dissembling beauty, would the fiend disguise.
Nor failed a deity of female name,
Astarte, with her silver crescent, came:
Melita left her Babylonian bowers;
Where wanton damsels, crowned with blushing flowers,
In all the summers various luster gay,
Detested Orgies to the goddess pay.
These various powers, their various schemes prepose,
But none the assembly pleased, till Mithra rose;
(Of an alluring mein above the rest)
Who thus the apostate potentates addressed.
Mankind by willing steps to ruin move,
Their own wild passions their destruction prove,
But the most fatal is forbidden love.
Old Jacob boasts a daughter young and fair,
Fond Leah's glory, and peculiar care:
Her eyes inflame the gazing Pagans hearts,
Young Shechem has already felt their darts;
Who lately saw her with her virgin train,
Near Shalem, wandering over the dewy plain.
I Will fill his youthful breast with mad desire,
By fraud, or force, his wishes to acquire.
The coming day he does a feast prepare,
By me instructed how to hide the snare:
Fair Dinah is his sister's promised guest,
Impatient love will soon complete the rest.
The damsel's wrongs her brothers will inflame
To right, with hostile arms, the Hebrew's shame;
By which provoked, the Canaanites shall join
With us to abolish this detested line.
Revenge and bloody faction are my care,
Moloch replies, thine be the soft affair;
Without instructions thou can act thy part,
Well-practic'd in the nice alluring art;
Euphrates' banks, and Senac's conscious shades,
Attest thy freedom with the Assyrian maids:
Thy voice, applauded in the heavenly groves,
Was there devoted to terrestrial loves:
Thy sacred lyre to human subjects strung,
No more with tiresome Hallelujahs rung;
This graced thy hand, a quiver hung behind,
Nor failed thy sparkling eyes to charm the beauteous kind.
The bold example of thy loose amors,
Prevailed on numbers of the heavenly powers;
Who vainly had the first probation stood,
Proof to ambition, obstinately good.
Long after I, with my associates, fell,
Thy friends enlarged the monarchy of hell;
On softer motives you abhorred the skies,
Allured by women's captivating eyes:
The Sons of God thus with the race of man
Were mingled; hence the giant stock began.
Our plot requires us now, and if it fail,
I Will in my turn, the hated tribe assail;
Domestic faction, may at last prevail.
Joseph, his doting father's life, and joy,
By well-concerted means we must destroy;
This youth, above the rest, excites my fear,
Divine presages in his face appear;
Officious Gabriel's care to him confined,
Foretells a man for mighty things designed.
His brethren, acted by my powerful fire,
Against his envied life shall all conspire:
Joseph removed, old Jacob's greatest prop,
The race shall mourn, in him, their blasted hope.
Here Moloch ceased; the infernal spirits rose,
Crowning the double plot with vast applause.
BOOK II.
Jacob's Daugh^^^ dishonored by Shechem, Prince of the Hivites. Her ^rothers
revenge the Injury. The Patriarch relates to his Sons Abraham's Conquest over
the King of Elam and his Royal Confederates. He rescues Lot. Melchizedech meets
and blesses Abraham. The intended Sacrifice of Isaac.

YOung Shechem all the Night impatient lay,
And sought with eager eyes the breaking day;
With ardent longings waits the promised hour,
And fancies all his wishes in his power:
Aner, his friend, improves the fatal fire,
And sooths, with flattering scenes, his wild desires
Sidonia, guiltless of her brother's snares,
To grace her lovely Hebrew guest prepares;
Who with her young companions now appears,
Too innocent for nice reserves, or fears.
Her artless looks, nor timorous, nor assured:
With easy charms the Jebusites allured:
A rosy tincture paints her guiltless face:
Her eyes, peculiar to her beauteous race,
Sparkle with life, and dart immortal grace.
Rich orient bracelets, round her snowy arms,
And faultless neck, improve her native charms,
The Hivite princess entertains the maid,
To Hamor's palace fatally betrayed;
Where, at the pomp of one surprising feast,
She meets the luxury of all the East.
Her thoughts the proud magnificence admire,
The peoples customs, and their strange attire;
'Till modest rules, and the declining day,
With Leah's charge forbid her longer stay:
But (...) too late, she finds herself betrayed
To Shechem's power, a lost defenseless maid;
A captive in his treacherous courts retained,
By fraud seduced, and brutal force constrained,
Her name dishonored, and her nation stained.
In vain with tender sighs he strives to move
The injured fair to voluntary love;
The strictest rules of chastity she knew,
With all that to her great descent was due;
But what with gentle arts he fails to gain,
His wild desires by violence obtain.
The hateful tidings reached her father's ears,
And almost sunk his venerable years:
Her brothers rage, and for revenge combine;
But guard with secret guile their black design.
The town in feasts consumed the second day,
And plunged at night in fearless riot lay.
The restless shepherds ever the lingering dawn,
Each held his sword, for horrid action drawn;
Surpised the city like a rising flood,
Raged through the streets, and bathed their swords in blood
The Hebrews pleased with this successful fate,
Sprung furious on, and forced the palace gate:
Fierce Simeon through the bright apartments flew,
And old and young, without distinction, flew.
Shechem, with restless passion still inspired,
Was with the charming Israelite retier'd;
And first by mad insulting Levi found,
Without a pause he ghave the desperate wound.
Take thy dispatch cursed ravisher for hell,
He said; and down the bleeding victim fell:
His fatal mistress turns away her eyes,
With horror seized, and trembling with surprise.
The swains her roving vanity upbraid,
And to their tents the penitent conveyed.
Their father grieved, reproves the bloody fact,
But Judah thus defends the hostile act.
Should they, a race uncircumsised and vile,
With lawless mixtures Abram's flock defile?
Our wives and sisters in our sight constrain;
While we, regardless of the shameful stain,
Stand tamely by, and scarce of wrong (...)?
They first entrenched on hospitable trust,
And human faith; -- our vengeance is but just.
Such justice never mingle with my fame,
Good Israel cries, nor spot my guiltless name!
The realms around, who idol Gods revere,
Will this back deed with indignation hear;
And all their policy and rage unite,
To blot our odious memory from the light.
So hell believed -- but heaven a sacred dread
Of Jacob's sons among the nations spread;
While he at Bethel with a pious flame,
Implores the great unutterable Name.
From thence to Mamre's peaceful plain retires,
Where Kiriath-arba lifts her golden spires:
Illustrious Arba built and named the place,
The boasted father of the giant race;
For them designed the monstrous plan appeared,
To heaven the threatening battlements were reared.
In careless joys and plenty here they live,
And to the neighboring swains protection give.
Beneath the hill, on which their city stood,
Ascended high a venerable wood;
The solemn shades, which gave a sacred dread,
Concealed a vaulted structure for the dead,
Machpelah called; with wondrous labor wrought;
This Abram of the giant nation bought:
The cave, the wood, the springs, and bord'ring field,
Ephron, their prince, by public contract sealed.
Here to their purchased right the shepherds drive
Their fleecy charge, and unmolested live;
While frequent through the consecrated ground,
Inscriptions and old monuments they found.
Wherever celestial visions had appeared,
The pious worshippers an altar reared;
The mystic name, to mortals long unknown,
Was deeply figured on the polished stone;
By marks engraved on arching rocks, 'twas seen,
That heavenly powers had there conversed with men.
Remote from this a lofty pillar stood;
This Jacob to the rural concourse showed;
Here see, he said, the memory retained
Of Abram's conquest near Damascus gained.
To distant lands the Eastern rule was spread,
And Jordan's banks a yearly tribute paid:
The King of Sodom first contemned the yoke,
Admah and Zeboim next the treaty broke.
At this the royal Elamite enraged;
The neighboring kings, his great allies, engaged;
Arioch and mighty Tidal join their force,
Conquest wherever they turn attends their course.
The Horims on mount Seir their valor prove,
Their troops the Emims from their fortress drove.
In Siddim's vale the adverse princes stay,
There Shibna, Bera and Shemeber lay.
Amraphel early meets his doubtful foes,
And for the victory his ranks dispose;
But scarce the encounter could be called a sight,
So soon the troops of Sodom took their flight:
The coward race, unused to charge a foe,
Their jav'lins, swords and shields at once forego.
Some seek the woods, and some a sheltering cave;
Some in the rocks their breath, inglorious, save;
While others plunging down fair Jordan's tide,
From the stern looks of war their faces hide.
The invaders sheathe their swords, and scorn to grace
With martial deaths the despicable race.
Bera alone and Lot sustained the field,
But pressed by numbers, were compelled to yield:
These with the riches of the town a prey,
To Paran's hills the conqu'rors bore away.
This Abram heard, and gathered on the plain
A valiant band, his own domestic train:
His glad assistance Eshcol brings, a youth
Of public honor, and unblemished truth;
With Aner, Mamre, dauntless both and young,
Brothers, all three' from noble Amor sprung.
'Twas night, secure the victor army lies,
Scornful of foes, and fearless of surprise;
By heaven's command a sudden vapor spreads
Over all the host, and clouds their drowzy heads;
To the high throne of sense soft slumber climbs,
Slackens their sinews, and benumbs their L^^bs;
The captives eyes alone its force repelled,
Nor to the pleasing violence would yield.
Now near the camp the brave consed'rates draw,
And by the glimmering fires its posture saw:
The foremost rank, the swift invaders flew,
And soon the waking prisoners heard and knew
Their active friends, that to their succor flew.
Abram his nephew, he the rest untied;
The sleeping foe avenging swords supplied:
From file to file the fearless brothers pass,
And leave them breathless on the purple grass.
The old patriarch feels new life in every vein,
And scatters wide destruction over the plain.
The terror grows, the clash of arms, and cries
Of wounded men afflict the ambient skies.
Prince Arioch, startled at the noise, awakes,
And from his eyes the fatal slumber shakes.
At often repeated calls his legions arm,
And madly haste to meet the loud alarm;
But by a force more prevalent outdone,
On certain fate with eager steps they run;
Disordered and amazed, they quit the field,
And, raving, to their unknown victors yield.
The morning rose, and with her blushing light
Exposed their damage, and inglorious flight;
The joyful shepherds seize the abandoned spoils:
And now returning from their martial toils,
A royal priest at Salem Abram meets,
With presents, and a benediction greets
The Hebrew bands; -- to heaven he lifts his eyes,
And blessed be that propitious power, he cries,
Who walks the crystal circuit of the skies;
Who hears the boasts of mortals with disdain,
Contemus their force, and makes their triumphs vain!
His mein was solemn, and his face divine,
Refulgent gems around his temples shine:
His graceful robe, a bright celestial blue,
Trailing behind, a train majestic drew.
The tenth of all great Abram gives the priest,
The kings and Amorites divide the rest.
All pleased, the generous conqu'ror loudly praised,
And to his fame this lasting column raised.
The swains were listening still, when Jacob cries,
To yonder mountain now direct your eyes;
For there a brighter scene of glory lies.
'Twas there the wondering sun in Abram viewed,
The noblest height of human fortitude;
The pious man in guiltless sleep lay drowned,
When through his ears thundered this fatal sound.
Arise, and Isaac on mine altar lay,
With thy own hand the destined victim slay.
He starts, and cries, who can this thought inspire?
Can heaven this monstrous sacrifice require?
The dreadful call again surpised his ears,
And lo! the well-known heavenly form appears.
He bowed, and at the purple dawn arofe,
And with his to darling to Moriah goes.
Astonished long he by the altar stood,
Then pil'd with trembling hands the sacred wood;
Half dead himself; the wondering youth he binds,
Who now his sire's severe intention finds.
What thought he asked, my father, have possessed
Your soul? What horrid fury fills your breast?
Am I to hell a sacrifice designed?
Some cruel demon must your reason blind.
The unblemished skies abhor this bloody deed,
No human victims on their altars bleed.
It Is heaven, the patriarch said, this fact requires,
It Is heaven -- be witness yon etherial fires!
Yet, countless as the stars, from thee must spring
Victorious nations, and the mystic King:
It Is past relief -- yet by himself he swore,
Who from the dead thy relics can restore;
What obstacle surmounts Almighty power?
This said, the pious youth resigned his life;
Blessed Abram shook off all paternal strife,
And forward thrust the consecrated knife.
As lightning from the skies, an angel broke
And warded with his hand the fatal stroke
When thus a voice streams downward from above,
Breathing divine beneficence and love.
By my great self I swear, to bless thy race
With endless favor, and peculiar grace;
Thy sceptered for the spacious East shall sway,
While vanquished kings obedient tribute pay.
Here Jacob ends, and to his tent retires;
Their fleecy charge the parting swains requires.
BOOK III.
The infernal Powers endeavor to raise Factions in Jacob's Family. Joseph's
Dreams. His Brothers Jealousy and Malice. He comes to Dothan. They confine him
in a Pit, while they consult his Ruin. An Angel in a Vision presages to him his
future Greatness, and warns him of the Snares of Beauty and unlawful Love. His
Brothers spare his Life, and sell him to the Midian Merchants, traveling with
their Spicy Traffic into Egypt. Jacob, obstinate in Grief, refuses all
Consolation.

MEan time the Pagan deities dispeas'd,
To find the public storms so soon appeased,
Studious attempt by new malicious ways,
Among the Hebrews civil jars to raise:
Moloch already had provok's the strife,
And Kindling mischief threatens Joseph's life.
The lovely youth, fair Rachel's boassted son,
Completely formed, his seventeeth year begun;
His mother's sparkling eyes, and blooming grace,
Mixed with severer strokes, adorned his face.
Not he that in Sabea's fragrant grove,
(As poets sung) inflamed the queen of love;
Nor Haylas, nor Narcissus looked so gay,
When the clear streams his rosy blush display.
In all his conduct something noble shone,
Which meant him for a greatness yet unknown.
Visions had often his rising fate foretold:
The last ^^ Jacob thus his lips unfold,
His brethren by: -- When sleep had closed mine eyes,
A corny field before my fancy flies;
(Still to my thoughts the yellow crop appears!)
My brothers with me reaped the bending ears:
Industrious each a single sheaf had around,
When theirs with sudden motion mine surround,
And bowed with prostrate reverence to the ground.
But now my mind of rural business cleared,
Above my head a wondrous scene appeared;
The moon and stars at highest noon shone bright,
Unconquered by the sun's superior light;
Methought I saw the gaudy orbs descend,
And at my feet with humble homage bend.
The shepherds hear his story with surprise:
Must we thy vassals be? proud Ashur cries,
With rage and threatening malice in his eyes.
At Mamre, Jacob and his favorite stay,
The rest to Dothan's flowery meadows stray:
Infernal envy all their bosoms fires,
And black resolves and horrid thoughts' inspires:
At last young Joseph's murder is designed,
Hell with the monstrous treachery combined.
He comes to Dothan, by his father sent,
And heaven alone his ruin can prevent.
Their guiltless prey he stands, without defense,
But inborn worth, and fearless innocence.
His brethrens crimes, his father's hoary hairs,
Were all the subject that alarmed his fears.
The fatal stroke they now prepare to give,
When Reuben's arts the hopeless youth retrieve,
By thus advising, -- let your brother live.
A thousand easy methods yet remain,
To render all his glorious projects vain;
But till we have determined the design,
To yonder pit the aspiring boy confine.
To him they yield, and to their tents retire,
The fiends below their own success admire.
The night prevails, and draws her sable train,
With silent pace, along the etherial plain.
By sits the dancing stars exert their beams;
The silver crescent glimmers on the streams;
The sluggish waters, with a drowny roar,
And lingering motion, roll along the shore;
Their murmur answer to the rustling breeze,
That faintly whisper through the nodding trees;
The peaceful echoes, undisturbed with sound,
Lay slumbring in the in the cavern'd hills around;
Frenzy and faction, love and envy slept;
A still solemnity all nature kept;
Devotion only waked, and to the Skies
Directs the pris'ner's pious vows and eyes:
To God's high Throne a winged petition flew,
And from the skies commissioned Gabriel drew;
One of the seven, who by appointed turns
Before the throne ambrosial incense burns.
A sudden day, returning on the night,
Vanquished the shades, and put the stars to flight;
The enlightened cave receives the shining guest,
In all his heavenly pomp divinely dressed;
He greets the youth, and thus his charge expressed.
To morrow thou must leave rich Jordan's shore,
And trace Moriah's sacred hill no more;
A great and grateful nation yet unknown,
Saved by thy care, shall thee their pa^^on own;
But let thy breast impenetrable prove
To wanton beauty and forbidden love:
This heaven enjoins. -- The wondering shepherd bowed;
The angel mounted on a radiant cloud.
The morning now her lovely face displayed,
And with a rosy smile dispelled the shade.
The faction rose, and close in council sat.
On means that must determine Joseph's fate;
Nor long they sat, for on the neighboring road
A train of camels with their spicy load,
Followed by Midian merchants traveled by:
Heaven marks the way, the envious brothers cry;
Whatever the ambitious dreamer's thoughts portend,
His hopes with these to foreign lands we'll send.
They stop the Midianites, and soon agree,
Resolved no more his hated face to see.
With looks, which perfect inward anguish tell,
And falling tears, he took this sad farewell.
I go to wander on some barbarous clime,
May heavenly justice never avenge this crime!
Be still indulgent to my father's ^ge,
His grief for me with flattering hopes assuage
They hear, they see the anguish of his soul,
And scarce their struggling pity can control;
Touched with so sad a scene, they all begin
To feel remorse for this unnatural sin,
And half repent; but hate and envy prove
Their victor passions, and repress their love.
They form a specious fraud, to hide the deed
From their old sire, and in the plot succeed.
Their brother's varied coat they still retained,
And with a bleeding kid the vestment stained;
With this to Mamre treacherous Simeon goes,
Too well the lost old man the relick knows.
After a dismal pause, his sorrow breaks
Its violent way, and this sad language speaks.
My son! -- alas, some savage monster's prey!
Why have I lived to this detested day?
Why have I lingered thus? I should have died,
When thy more happy mother left my side,
My best loved Wife; -- but all my Rachel's face
I could in thy resembling features trace.
Tormenting thought! -- O hide me from the light!
Its useles rays afflict my feeble sight:
Come lead me to the solitary grave,
Despair and woe that dark retirement crave;
There shall I stretched upon my dusty bed,
Forget the toils of life, and mingle with the dead.
In vain his Friends attempt to bring relief,
In vain persuade inexorable grief;
It Is deep, and intermingled with his soul,
Nor time, nor counsel can its force control.
BOOK IV.
A Description of Egypt, with the Pyramids. Joseph sold by the Midian Merchants
to a Captain of the Royal Guards. He leads him to his Place. Shows his Wife the
handsome Captive. Her growing Passion for him. A young Assyrian Maid
endeavoring to amuse and divert her Mistrese, tells her the Story of Ninus and
Semiramis.

MEan while through savage woods, and deserts vast,
The captive with his Midian masters past.
At last rich Egypt's pleasant coasts are seen;
The level meads dressed with immortal green;
Between them fertile Nile directs his course,
And nobly slows from his immortal source.
Along the boarders of the sacred flood
Aspiring groves, and stately cities stood:
Here ancient Tanais in her height appeared,
Before Amphion's lute the Theban wall had reared.
The Sun's devoted city, radiant On,
With roofs embossed, and golden foliage shone;
Ever skilful Vulcan was at Lemnos named,
Or Cynthia's darts, or shields for Pallas framed.
Distinct from these, on the Pelusian strands,
Ansana, crowned with silver turrets, stands;
Raised to its height, as old tradition tells,
By powerful magic, and secured by spells:
The Egyptian wizards here themselves immure,
Converse with hell, and practice rites impure.
Now mighty Pyramids the sight surprise,
On Masre's plain the spiral towers arise.
Roduosa here magnificently shrouds
Its losty head among surrounding clouds:
By Saurid built, the daring structure stood
The fury of the universal flood.
Phacat and Samir's pointed tops ascend,
And over the fields their lengthening shades extend;
Their compass sacred to the dead remain,
Within eternal night and silence reign;
No lightsome ray salutes them from the sky,
But glaring lamps depending from on high,
With sickly gleams the hollow space supply.
Here ancient kings, embalmed with wondrous cost,
A long exemption from corruption boast:
In artful figures some are sitting placed,
With fruitless pomp, and idle ensigns graced;
While others, stretched in sleeping postures, lie
On folding carpets, of imperial dye:
Their hovering ghosts, pleased with this mimic pride,
Amongh the breathless earcasses reside.
But what prodigious things within were shown,
Were to the Hebrew stranger yet unknown,
Astonished at their outward bulk alone.
And now arrived where Zoan's wall enclosed
Imperial towers, the Midianites exposed
Their fragrant traffic, with the handsome slave:
His mind beyond his years composed and grave,
His aspect something spoke divinely great,
Something that marked him for a nobler fate.
A generous captain, chief of Pharaoh's bands,
Admiring much the graceful captive, stands,
Then gives the Midianites their full demands.
A sudden friendship in his breast he finds,
Experienced only by unvulgar minds:
Some heavenly being had prepared his thought,
And on his heart the kind impression wrought.
Without regret, young stranger, follow me,
Said Potiphar, I now have ransomed thee;
From servitude this moment thou art free.
The youth received the savor with a grace,
That answered all the promise of his face.
Fonting the royal house, a structure crowned
With turrets stood, and palmy groves around;
Discoursing, hither through the walks they went,
Both pleased alike, and equally content.
The seat they reached when for a costly vest
The master called, in this the youth they dressed;
No more disparaged with a slave's attire,
His faultless shape and features all admire.
His hair, like palest amber, from his crown
In floating curls, and shining waves fell down.
Young Paris such surprising charms displayed,
When first in gold and Tyrian silks arrayed,
He laid his crook aside, forgot the swain,
And bid adieu to Ida's flowery plain.
Then for his wife the captain bids them send,
And shows with boasting joy his purchased friend.
The fair Sabrina, lately made hid bride,
Was in her beauty's celebrated pride.
Her large black eyes shone with a sprightly sire,
And love at every fatal glance inspire.
The swarthy luster of her charming face,
The full-blown lilly and the rose disgrace.
Her glossy hair outvy'd the raven's wings,
And curled about her neck in wanton rings.
Affectedly she took a careless view,
And to her own apartment soon withdrew.
Joseph beloved and happy long remained,
And from his lord successive favors gained;
Who now at home grown prosperous, and abroad,
Believe his guest some favorable god:
He gives him over his house the full command,
Entrusting all his treasures to his hand.
Mean time Sabrina feeds within her breast
A secret fire, but shame its rage suppressed.
When first she saw the charming Hebrew's eyes,
She felt, but well dissembled the surprise;
But through her various arts an inward care*
The languors of her pensive looks declare.
Cyrena found the change (a Syrian maid
Well-born, but from her native coasts betrayed)
She saw the change, but led by nicer laws,
Was thoughtless still of its reproachful cause.
Her voice, her easy wit, and eloquence,
Could hold the wildest passion in suspense.
Attending often her mistress to a grove,
Their usual walk, with plaesing tales she strove
To entertain her thoughts, and charm her grief;
Nor failed her arts to give a short relief.
Her native clime the pleasing subject proves,
The Syrian pomp, their customs, and their loves;
Among the rest Sabrina hears her name
Semiramis, a Queen of ancient fame,
And asked her now the story to relate;
Reposed beneath a spreading palm they fate.
BOOK V.
The Story of Semiramis, exposed, when an Infant, in the Fields, where she is
found (covered with a rich embroidered Mantle) by a Peasant, who carries her to
Simma, the chief of the King's Shepherds, by whom she is married to Menon, the
principal commander of the Assyrian Forces. Menon being called to the Siege of
Bactria, she follows him in a martial Disguise. Menon discovers her Sex to the
King, who marries her, after the Death of Menon.

THe maid begins: -- Where famed Coaspes laves
Rich Elam's boarders with his sacred waves,
Along the fields their tents the shepherds spread,
By them the king's unnumber'd flocks were fed.
The silent dawn was misty yet and gray,
And hoary moisture on the mountains lay.
Intent on rural cares, with early haste,
A peasant near a rocky cavern past;
Across his path was raised a mossy bed
Over that a rich embroidered mantle spread;
This, lifted up, revealed a lovely child,
Which fairer than the rosy morning smiled:
The wondering swain forgot his country cares,
And back to Simma's house the infant bears.
Simma his master was, though wealthy, just:
The royal lands and flocks were made his trust;
He riches still amassed without an heir,
And seeing now the child surpassing fair,
He took and bred her with indulgent care:
In nothing he controuls her growing years,
No cost to please her boundless fancy spares.
When, by revolving moons, successive time
Had brought her beauty to its perfect prime,
Her shape was faultless, and in all her mein
Presaging marks of majesty were seen:
No mortal ever could boast so fair a face,
Such radiant eyes, and so divine a grace.
A flowery wreath her beauteous temples crowned,
Her snowy vest a crimson girdle bound:
Thus dressed she walks a goddess over the plains,
Admired and loved by all the gazing swains;
To her the fragrant tribute of the spring,
With amorous zeal on bended knees they bring.
Not distant far from wealthy Simma's seat,
Heroic Menon owned a fair retreat;
His rank, and early worth, the high command
Of all the famed Assyrian force had gained:
In peaceful times the chief, whom all admired,
To prove a softer happiness retired;
'Twas here Semiramis his wishes fired.
With ravished eyes her heavenly face he viewed,
And for the glorious prize to Simma su'd;
Proffered with sacred rites his vows to bind:
This honor pleased the haughty virgin's mind;
On meaner terms she had his suit denied;
With virtue guarded, and a noble pride.
The lover finds success, but all his joys
A sudden summons from the King destroys.
Bactria revolts, Ninus the tidings hears,
Himself in arms to meet the foe prepares.
But three short days ungentle fate allows
Sad Menon, for his sighs and parting vows:
He cursed his martial charge, and public fame,
And loathes the encumbrance of a glorious name,
Which rends him now from all the joys of life,
His loved Semiramis, his charming wife.
She hears the King's command with less surprise,
And, Menon, banish all your care, she cries.
We cannot -- it is impossible to part,
Love with heroic courage sires my heart.
To follow you through raging seas I Would go,
Over burning deserts, or perpetual snow,
By your example led, I shall not fear,
The flying arrow, or the pointed spear;
Pierced with a fatal dart, were Menon by,
'Twould be a soft, and easy thing, to die
The event be what it will, with you I Will run
To certain death, nor any danger shun;
Be witness to my vows thou radiant sun!
Nor can the adventurous deed my conduct stain,
Secure with you the secret shall remain;
I boldly can defy all other eyes,
In threatening armor, and a martial guise.
New pleasure fills the hero's breast, to find
Such beauty, love, and steadfast virtue joined.
A thousand kind transporting things he said,
A thousand vows of lasting passion made:
Then for a rich habiliment of war
He sent, and dressed himself the smiling fair.
A costly helmet glittered on her head,
On which a dove its silver pinions spread;
A plume of whitest feathers danced above,
With every trembling breath of air they move.
The embroidered scarf that over her armor flowed,
With dazzling flames of gold and scarlet glowed.
Her hand a javelin shook with mimic pride,
A painted quiver rattled by her side.
Her height and mein adorn the warlike dress,
More vigorous rays her charming eyes express.
The courser, of his beauteous burden proud,
With golden trappings bounded through the crowd.
Menon, of Syrian arms the grace and pride,
Kept near the lovely masquerader's side.
On Dura's plain the Babylonian force
In ranks attend their mighty leader's course.
While Ninus, graceful as a martial god,
Exalted on his glittering chariot, rode.
The Bactrians their approaching foes disdain,
Resolved their fortress bravely to maintain;
And long the town with matchles courage held,
And often to flight the Armenian troops compelled:
Till bold Semiramis, who danger sought,
And fearless in the foremost ranks had fought,
Observed a rock, which over a castle leaned;
The Bactrians this were careless to defend,
Believing it from all access secure:
She finds a path among the cliffs obscure;
Then, with a chosen band intrepid gains
The top, and soon the unguarded sort obtains.
The town thus made the fierce besieger's prey,
To her gave the conquest of the day.
All praised the youth (for such she was believed)
Her bold address each party had deceived;
But Ninus most her fortitude admires,
He views her blooming youth, her race enquires.
Menon in dotage lost, with foolish pride,
No more the fat al secret yet strives to hide;
Nor once imagined this unlucky boast,
The joy of all his future life must cost,
Ninus with other eyes her beauty views,
In other terms his gratitude renews.
To Babylon returned, he yet concealed
His growing flame, by Menon's worth withheld;
Too well he with a sad reflection knows,
What to his counsel, and his sword he owes;
These generous ties at first his love oppose:
But nothing can the increasing rage restrain;
By gentle means he yet his end would gain.
Menon, he said, my wishes to procure,
I Will give thee cities, and a boundless store
Of gold, and precious gems, and for a bride,
A blooming Princess to the crown allied:
All this, and more, to gain her love I Will give;
Without Semiramis I cannot live.
Resenting Menon, with a handsome pride,
Refused his offers, aad the suit denied.
The softer sex he next attempts to gain;
She too rejects his passion with disdain.
What now avail the glories of the East?
Nor wealth, nor empire can procure his rest.
Tired with unheeded sighs, and fruitless prayer,
He tries more rig'rous means to ease his care;
And threatens thus: With my disires comply,
Or soon prepare to see your hero die.
From Menon this she hides, who less severe
Observes her to the amorous King appear:
His fondness with the jealous passion grows;
No joy, no lightsome interval he knows,
The mingled frenzy gives him no repose.
She false! he cries, my fair, enchanting wife!
And can I yet protract this wretched life;
This anxious heart, with hopeless grief oppressed,
In death's cold shade shall find perpetual rest.
He said; then all the hostile stars defied,
And plunged the fatal weapon in his side.
A long adieu! Semiramis, he cries;
With those loved accents on his lips he dies:
She hears the parting groan, and to his succor flies.
Sunk on the floor she sees her lover bleed,
Himself the author of the barbarous deed;
But true to love, and virtue's strictest laws,
She neither knew, nor could suspect the cause.
Seized with a sudden horror and surprise,
She faints, and near the breathless carcass lies;
Her frighted women to her rescue haste,
And wake the doubtful spark of life, at last.
A hollow groan ensues; with feeble sight
She meets the day, and loathes the flashing light.
A steadfast sorrow in her face appears,
Above the soft relief of female tears;
Silent as death, her words no utt'rance find,
To tell the inward anguish of her mind:
A sixth, sedate, and rational despair
Composed her looks, and settled in her air.
In such a fullen calm the billows sleep,
So smooth an aspect wears the gloomy deep;
While treacherous winds their gathering breath refrain,
Presaging tempests on the troubled main.
The impatient prince with just respect attends
Her ebbing grief, and long his flame suspends;
and long her steadfast thoughts relentless prove
^o proffered empire, and inviting love:
^ill fate itself her stubborn heary inclined
To take a crown by all the stars designed,
And sill a sphere proportioned to her mind.
Ninus was now of every wish possessed,
With sovereign rule and brighter pleasure blessed;
But ah! how short a boast has mortal joy?
What sudden storms the flattering calm destroy?
What human privilege, what lawless power
Can once short day retard the appointed hour?
Thrice through the midnight silence, from the ground,
The startled monarch hearts a warning sound;
Thrice Menon's ghost, a frowning spectre stands,
And seems to beckon with his airy hands.
A sudden faintness seized his trembling heart,
While hasty life retires from every part;
Speechless and pale his eye balls roll in death,
While with reluctant pangs he yields his breath.
The mournful princess to his merit just,
With wondrous pomp interred the royal dust:
High on a mount his sepulcher she placed,
With marble spires, and pointed arches graced.
She bids farewell to love's deceitful flame;
Resolved to leave behind a glorious name,
In costly structures of immortal fame.
A lofty dome to Belus first she built:
The inward roof with dazzling silver gilt;
The God was fashioned in a wondrous mould,
With perfect art; his bulk was massy gold;
His sacred utensils were all the same,
While fragrant oils in golden sockets flame.
Old Babel next with bo^ndless cost she walled;
And Babylon the spacious (...) called;
Its bounds with forts and battlements were crowned,
And compassed in an endless tract of ground,
Valleys and levelled hills the vast extent surround:
Where fronting ranks of palaces were seen,
With streams, and groves, and painted meads between.
Euphrates in its course the town divides,
While through the midst his stately current glides.
Around the place a hundred gates unfold,
Through which a hundred glittering chariots rolled;
Which all for state attend the Queen's commands,
When she her progress makes through distant lands.
Resolved to visit now the neighboring Medes,
Her train she over the lofty Sagris leads.
At pompous Ecbatana now she staid,
And all her own magnificence displayed.
Gay projects here employed her active mind,
Gardens, and seats of pleasure she designed;
Luxurious nature with her art combined.
Not far from thence a plain extended lay,
With stately groves and flowery verdure gay;
The spreading palm, the cedar, and the pine,
Arching above their mingled branches join.
Semiramis now turns an ancient flood,
With matchless labor, through the charming wood;
The plenteous stream in various rills divides,
While marble bounds confine the crystal tides.
In marble basins of an equal row,
Myrtle, and balm, and flowery Cassia grow.
Prodigious rocks entire were hither brought,
Smooth arches through their craggy sides were wrought:
Here artificial hills, their summits rear,
For shade retiring grotts around appear.
In various bloom the valleys stood below,
From far the beauteous Syrian roses glow.
All that perfumes the blessed Sabaean fields
Grows here, with all that sacred Nysa yields.
Here breathed the fragrant Calamus, and Fir,
Cinnamon, Frankincense, and weeping Myrrh.
Shrill birds among the spicy branches sing,
Their warbling notes along the valleys ring:
The winds and waters with a gentle noise
Double the sound, and answer every voice.
The Queen awhile had these diversions proved,
And then her court to Babylon removed:
But ah! what height of happiness are free
From fickle chance, or certain destiny?
The princess finds a swift decay control
The usual force, and vigor of her soul;
Nor struggling nature could its force repel,
While heaven and earth the public change foretell.
She from the oracle enquires the event,
The flattering priest this pleasing answer sent:
That from the Gods she drew her heavenly race,
And shortly must the immortal number grace.
Pleased with the glories of her future state,
She yields without reluctance to her fate.
Cyrena ends her tale; the closing day
Withdrew its splendour, and forbid their stay.
BOOK VI.
Joseph's Mistress at last discovers her criminal Passion to him, but is
repulsed. She complains to her Nurse, who vainly tries the force of Spells. She
is sent by her Mistress to Harpinus. His Cell described. He consults the
Planets, and flatters her with Success, till finding the Hebrew Youth
inflexible to all her Charms, she falsely accuses him to his Master, by whom,
he is confined to a Prison.

STill with impatient love Sabrina pines,
And now to speak the fatal truth designs;
Soothed by her own indulgent hopes, which trace
A secret passion in the Hebrew's face.
He sighs, and when he thinks himself alone,
Often seems some new misfortune to bemoan,
In foreign accents, and a tongue unknown.
Her vanity an explanation found,
And put a sense on every flattering sound.
Forgetful of her nuptial vows and fame,
She fondly thus betrays her guilty flame.
If yet my torments are to thee unknown,
If yet my sighs the mystery have not shown,
Insensible, -- let this confession prove
The strange excess, and grandeur of my love.
Yet had I still my wild desires suppressed,
Had not thine eyes an equal flame confessed.
Let me be punished with the last disdain,
He said, if ever I harbored thoughts so vain!
I never Sabrina's favor so abused,
Nor once your virtue in my heart accused.
Should I persidious (heaven forbid!) offend
My generous master, -- I might say my friend;
Let scandal sink my name, when so unjust
I prove, so false to hospitable trust!
Thus with a modest turn he would reclaim
Henam'rous frenzy, and conceal her shame;
Nor waits her leave, but hastily withdrew;
Careless her limbs upon a couch she threw,
And cursed her folly with a thousand tears;
Till Iphicle her artful nurse appears:
Of so much grief she pressed to know the cause,
At last the secret from her mistres draws.
You wrong, the Beldam cries, your own desert,
For you have charms, the youth a human heart.
Your beauty might a savange breast inspire,
At sight of you the coldest age takes fire.
But where is the wonder, that a bashful boy
Should at the first address, be nice and coy?
He loves, no doubt, and languishes like you,
But fear the ambitious motive to pursue:
Nor shall your utmost wishes want redress,
I have a draught that gives divine success;
Nepenthe, which the immortals quaff above,
These sacred drops rewarded Chemis' love.
When Totis, by his death, the full command
Of Misraim left in fair Charoba's hand,
The rich Gebirus from Chaldea came
With foreign pomp to seek the royal dame.
Chemis adorned his train, whose charming face
Allured a goddess of the watery race;
On Nilus' bank the young Chaldean stood,
When lo! Merina rising from the flood,
Her chariot set with pearl, the wave divides,
Softly along the silver stream she glides.
Her robes with pearl and sparkling rubies shine,
Her brighter eyes express a light divine.
Nor from her humid bed the blooming day
Has ever ascended with a clearer ray.
Her smiles the raging tempests could appease,
Allay the winds, an calm the swelling seas.
She leaves her crystal vaults, and coral groves,
Her liquid kingdoms, and immortal loves,
And over the grassy meads with Chemis roves.
At parting gave him this celestial spell,
Which every good procures, and can each ill repel.
My mother from this youth derives her line,
And this she left me as a gift divine,
By all her ancestors preserved with care;
One heavenly drop shall banish your despair.
Her flattering nurse's charm she vainly tries,
For Joseph still her hateful passion flies:
But obstinate in love, to gain her ends,
To famed Ansana Iphicle she sends.
Harpinus there an uncouth dwelling owned,
Planted with yew and mournful cypress round;
Whose shadows every pleasing thought control,
And fill with deep anxiety the soul.
Hither black fiends at dead of night advance,
The horned Serim through the darkness dance:
From earth, from air, and from the briny deep
They come, and here nocturnal revels keep.
From gloomy Acherusia, and the fen
Of Serbon, and the forest of Birdene;
From Ophiodes, the serpent isle, they come,
And Syrtes, where fantastic specter roam;
From Chabnus, and the wild Psebarian peak,
Whose hoary cliffs the clouds long order break.
In hellish banquets, and obscene delights,
The cursed assembly here consume the nights.
The sickening moon her feeble light withholds,
In fable clouds her argent horns she folds;
The constellations quench their glimmering fire,
And frighted far to distant skies retire.
Amidst these horrors, in his ecchoing cells,
And winding vaults, the Necromancer dwells:
Passing from room to room, the brazen doors
Resound, as when exploded thunder roars.
The day excluded thence, blue sulphur burns,
With frightful splendour, in a thousand urns.
The wizard here employs his mighty spells,
And great events by divination tells;
Inscribing mistic figures on the ground,
And mutt'ring words of an unlawful sound;
Which from their tombs the shivering ghosts compel,
And force them future secrets to reveal.
The stars he knew, when adverse, or benign;
When with malignant influence they shine,
Or, darting prosperous rays, to love incline.
The nurse a pleasing answer here obtained,
And thus Sabrina's drooping thoughts sustained.
The third succeeding day shall crown your love,
And every amorous star propitious prove.
Sabrina feeds the while her guilty flame,
And now the third appointed morning came;
When for the favored youth in haste she sends:
The message with reluctance he attends.
Silent she fits; while waiting her commands,
Fixed at a formal distance, long he stands.
Her eyes still fixed on Joseph's beauteous face,
A close contempt, and inward hatred trace;
Yet desperate to complete her own disgrace.
Ungrateful youth! she cries, too well I find
By these cold looks, thy unrelenting mind.
Thy savage temper, and unconquered pride,
By words of sacred import thou would hide.
Thou talk of holy ties, and rules slevere,
Pretending some avenging God to fear.
What God, alas! does cruelty command?
Or human bliss maliciously withstand?
Such thoughts as these the heavenly powers arraign,
Efface their goodness, and their justice stain.
Would they the generous principle control,
Who gave this amorous byas to the Soul?
What Nature is, they made it; nor can bind
With servile laws the freedom of the mind:
Were this our lot, happy the brutal kind,
That unmolested through the forest rove,
Licentious in their choice, and unconfined in love.
Virtue! -- a mere imaginary thing!
Torment it may, but can no pleasure bring.
Honor! -- it is nothing but precarious fame,
For empty breath, for a fantastic name.
Will thou my soft entreaties still deny,
And see me languish, and unpitied die?
Consent at last to love's enchanting joys,
While pleasure ^alls then with her tempting Voice:
These folding curtains shall our bliss conceal,
That no intruding eye our theft reveal.
Deluded fair! the noble youth replies,
Could we some artful labyrinth devise
To hide our sin, and far from mortal fight
Retire, involved in all the shades of night;
Yet there, -- exposed to heaven's unclouded view,
Its vengeance would our treachery pursue;
Distinguished plagues would soon our guilt expose,
While all your sex's glory you must lose.
To Petiphar alone your vows belong,
In him a tender lover you must wrong.
For me, where should I hide my hated face,
Could I he conscious of a crime so base?
No, let me through the yawning earth de^^^nd,
Rather than with such insolence offend
The laws of God, and kindness of my friend!
My master's favors, endless to recite,
When I with such ingratitude requite;
When with a thought so horrid and profane,
My faith and spotless loyalty I stain;
Let wrathful lightnings flashing round my head,
And bolts of raging thunder strike me dead!
Let execrations, and eternal shame,
Destroy my peace, and blast my hated name!
These words with such an awful air he spoke,
Celestial virtue sparkling in his look,
His haughty mistress all her hopes resigned,
And felt a different frenzy seize her mind:
Assisting fiends the hellish thought suggest,
And blot the tender passion from her breast.
A crimson scarf with ornamental pride
Was over his graceful shoulders loosly tied;
This furiously she snatched, while from the embrace
He frees himself, and quits the hated place.
She called aloud, her Voice Syrena hears,
And entering saw her well-dissembled tears.
A tale of proffered violence she seigns,
And of the Hebrew's arrogance complains.
Alarmed at her repeated calls, she said,
The monster left his cursed design, and fled.
His scarf the truth confirmed; her Lord the while
Returns; her words his easy faith beguile;
Blinded with rage he calls the injured youth,
And thus upbraids his violated truth.
How can thou, wretch! belie a mind so base,
With that undaunted air, and guiltless face?
Hypocrisy so steady and complete,
A villain, cautious as thyself, might cheat;
No wonder then thy practiced saintly shows
Should on my honest artless mind impose.
My soul entire to thee I did resign,
Except my bed, whatever I had was thine.
In fetters let the ^ngrateful slave be tied,
Some gloomy dungeon shall the montster hide.
Dungeons, he said, and chains I can defy,
But would not, cursed with your displeasure, die.
This sad reflection aggravates my fate:
How shall I bear my generous master's hate?
Oh stay! at least my vindication hear,
While by the Unutterable Name I swear,
My thoughts are all from this injustice clear.
He ceased, and still Sabrina's shame conceals,
Nor one accusing word her fraud reveals.
Now to a damp unwholesome vault conveyed,
Joseph in ignominious chains is laid.
BOOK VII.
An Angel visits Joseph in Prison, and in a prophetic Vision shows him his own
Advancement, and the future Fate of his Father's Posterity, their Bondage and
miraculous Deliverance. The Keeper of the Ward, convinced of Joseph's
Innocence, treats him with great Esteem. The Dreams of his fellow Prisoners;
and Joseph's Interpretation.

'TWas night, and now advanced the solemn hour;
The keeper of the prison, from his tower,
Astonished sees a form divinely bright,
Smile through the shades, and dissipate the night;
With streaming splendour tracing all the way,
It enters where the new-come prisoner lay.
Some God, he cries, who innocence defends,
Some God in that propitious light descends.
This stranger sure, whate^er the fact can be,
Alleged against him, from the guilt is free.
The sacred vision to the youth appears,
His spirits with celestial fragrance chears.
His heavenly smiles would even despair control,
And with immortal rapture fill the soul.
His youthful brows a fair Tiara crowned,
A folding zone his gaudy vestments bound,
Embroidered high with Amaranthus round.
Such wings the Arabian Phoenix never wore,
Sprinkled with gold and shading purple over.
Beneficent his aspect and address,
His lips seraphic harmony express;
His voice might stay the invading sleep of death,
While these soft words flow with his balmy breath.
From the unclouded realms of day above,
From endless pleasures, and unbounded love,
From painted fields, decked with immortal flowers,
From blissful valleys, and etherial bowers,
I come, commissioned by peculiar grace,
With great presages to thy future race.
This Gabriel spoke; the pious Hebrew's breast
Prophetic flame and power divine confessed:
An awful silence, and profound suspense,
Closed the tumultous avenues of sense;
The heavenly trance, each wandering thought confined,
Collects the operations of the mind,
While Gabriel all the inward scene designed.
Before him, raised to high dominion, all
His humble brethren in prostration fall;
His joyful eyes again his father see,
He takes the blessing on his bended knee.
Vastly in numbers Jacob's sons increased,
Poor vassals by the Egyptians are distressed,
And by a royal tyrant's yoke oppressed:
To heaven they cry, an aid that never fails,
Heaven hears the cry, the potent prayer prevails.
A mighty prophet, by divine command,
Does bold before the raging monarch stand,
And brings his great credentials in his hand.
Across the ground wondrous rod he throws;
The rod transformed a moving serpent grows,
Unfolds his (...) and over the pavement flows.
A dazzling train of miracles ensue,
Which speak the prophet, and his mission true.
The springs, the standing lakes, and running flood,
His powerful word converts to reeking blood;
The wounded billows stain the verdant shore,
Advancing slowly with a mournful roar.
Infernal night her sable wings extends,
And from the black unbottom'd deep ascends:
The seer denounces plagues on man and beast;
Contagious torments soon the air infest;
Aloud he bids a sudden tempest rise,
On rapid wings the storm obedient flies;
The extended skies are rent from pole to pole,
Blue lightnings flash, and dreadful thunders roll.
Nor yet the obdurate King the God reveres,
Whom every element obsequious fears;
Till vengeful strokes of power confessed divine,
With clear, but terrible conviction shine.
The night was covered with unusual dread,
While every star malignant influence shed.
Pale specter through the streets of Zoan roam,
From sepulchers amazing echoes come;
While, like a flaming meteor, down the skies,
With threatening speed the fatal angel flies.
Reluctant justice, with a grace severe,
Sits in his looks, and triumphs in his air.
A crested helmet shades his awful brows;
Behind his military vesture flows,
And like an ev'ning's ruddy meteor glows.
He grasps his sword, unsheathed for certain fate,
Destruction, death, and terror on him wait:
Mortal the sroke, invisible the wound,
While dying groans with mingled shrieks resound,
From house to house the dreadful rumor runs,
While wretched fathers mourn their firstborn sons.
The alarmed Egyptians, at the breaking day,
Hurry the sacred multitude away:
But Pharaoh soon his daring sin renews,
Blaspheming loud, the rescued slaves pursues;
The fearful tribes stand trembling on the shore,
The foe behind, a raging sea before.
Their glorious chief extends his powerful wand,
And gives the mighty signal from the strand;
The obedient waves the mighty signal take,
And parting crowd the distant surges back;
On either hand like crystal hills they rise,
Between a wide stupendous valley lies:
With joyful shouts the grateful Hebrews pass,
Nor does the hardened foe decline the chase;
Till heaven's command the watery chain dissolves,
And in the whelming deep their pride involves.
While Israel through the desert take their way,
Led by a cloud, which marches on by day;
But resting cheered the encamping host by night,
With lambent flame, and unexampled light.
Where lofty Sinah shades the neighboring plain,
Commanded now the sacred tribes remain;
Prepared with mistic rites, to hear with awe,
Their Savior God pronounce their future law:
Close bounds the mountain guard from all approach,
That rashly none the hallowed place might touch,
Reluctant see the appointed morning rise,
And fiery splendors glow around the skies.
While from the etherial summit God descends,
Beneath his feet the starry unequal bends.
His radiant form majestic darkness hides,
While on a tempest's rapid wings he rides.
The trembling earth his awful presence owns,
The forest flames, the cleaving desert groans,
Each river back his wandering current calls,
And rushing down the subterranean falls,
To the profoundest caves affrighted flies,
Revealed and bare each sandy channel lies.
Their stately heads the ancient mountains sink,
And to a level with the vales would shrink;
Again secure in their primaeval beds,
Beneath the waves would hide their fearful heads.
Old Sinah quakes at the tremendous weight,
That pressed with awful feet his cloudy height;
Obscured with blackness, shades, and curling smoke,
Prodigious lightnings from the darkness broke;
While raging thunders round the welkin fly,
The etherial trumpet sounded loud and high.
Adoring low the pious nation bend,
And now the solemn voice of God attend:
The angel shifts the scene, and leaves the rest
Inimitable all, and not to be expressed.
The curtain'd Tabernacle next he paints,
Nor colors for the gay pavilion wants;
The golden altar, with attending priests,
Their sacred pomp, and instituted vests.
Then brings the favored tribes where Jordan flows,
And all the well-known bord'ring landscape shows.
An airy conquest on Bethoron's plain,
The warlike son of Jacob now obtain;
Before the troops a glorious leader stands,
A painted javelin balanced in his hands;
He boldly thus the rolling orbs commands.
Thou sun! to lengthen this victorious day,
With lingering beams on lofty Gibeah stay:
And thou, fair morn! retard thy hasty flight,
And gild the vales of Ajalon at night.
This said, the flying army they pursue,
And all the Amorean Kings o'erthrew.
The promised land entirely gained, they spread
Their peaceful dwellings round Moriah's head.
But with the night the pleasing vision flies;
Gabriel unsealed the youthful prophet's eyes,
His senses from the heavenly trance released,
And all the sacred agitation ceased.
The thoughtful keeper early to the vault
Descends, and thence the injured prisoner brought;
Treats him with kindness, and a just regard,
And gave him all the freedom of the ward.
Of Pharaoh's servants two were here detained,
The steward, who his table did command,
With him that filled the royal cup with wine;
Suspected both as traitors in design.
Joseph, observing a dejected air
Sat heavy in their eyes, with friendly care
Enquires the cause, which freely both reveal,
Mysterious dreams of the past night they tell.
And thus the first: -- Methought a bulky view
Grew up unprop'd, three waving branches shine
With purple grapes, and to my hand incline:
I pressed the tempting fruit without control,
Thou gave to Pharaoh's hand the flowing bowl.
The next begins: -- Three canisters replete
With royal viands, and luxurious meat,
Oppressed my drooping head, while birds of prey
With direful croakings snatched the fond away.
Unhappy man! thy dream from God was sent,
The Hebrew said, and full of black porte^^
The third returning day shall bring thy doom,
When thou a prey to vultures shall become.
Then to the first, these joyful comments sound:
Before the sun has twice fulfilled his round,
Thou with thy former honors shall be crowned.
But in the triumph of thy prosperous fate,
Kindly remember my unhappy state,
Who by the blackest falsehood here am stayed.
To this the man a courtier's promise made.
BOOK VIII.
Joseph's Mistress languishes in Sorrow and Remorse for her Treachery; which
she confesses in the Agonies of Death. Pharaoh's prophetic Dreams interpreted
by Joseph. His Grandeur and Marriage with the Daughter of an Egyptian Priest.

BUT now Sabrina's guilty fire returns,
Her bosom with a raging passion burns:
She with a female tenderness relents,
And all her former cruelty repents.
By her accused, in chains the captive lies,
For whom she fondly languishes, and dies.
Tormented, and enraged, she often cursed
Her pride, her folly, and revengeful lust.
A deep remorse, from conscience of her sin,
With constant horrors vex her soul within.
Her thoughts ten thousand racking torments feel,
Yet in her treacherous crime obdurate still.
Her life and youthful spirits melt away,
Her beauty withers with a swift decay:
By day she wildly raves, consumes the night
In thoughtless watchings, and imagined fright;
While airy terrors glide before her sight,
Pale ghosts with wide distorted eye balls stare,
And burning specter through the darkness glare.
Till forced by fate, and torments more intense,
To vindicate suspected innocence,
To Potiphar the hidden truth she tells,
And all the faithless mystery reveals,
And now he comes -- insulting death! she cries,
Perpetual darkness swims before my eyes.
If there are Gods that human things regard,
My monstrous crimes will meet a just reward.
Oh sacred virtue! at thine awful name
I start, and all my former thoughts disclaim;
For thou art no fantastic empty thing,
From thee alone unmingled pleasures spring.
The world, the boundless universe I Would give,
My first unblemished honor to retrieve:
It Is vainly wished! -- to some strange realms below,
Some dark uncomfortable coasts I go.
She spoke, and gasping in the pangs of death,
With lingering agonies resigned her breath:
While Joseph by the courtier was forgot;
Till fate the period of his freedom brought.
The Egyptian monarch from a short repose
And troubled visions, with the morning rose.
TO explain the doubtful omens in his breast,
He summons ev'ry-planetary priest:
Their orders which to different stars belong,
Were soon assembled, a surprising throng;
Sullen their looks, and varied was their vest,
A wild devotion through the whole expressed.
One wore a mantle of a leaden hue,
Trailing behind, a sweeping length it drew;
With Poppies, Aconite, and Hellebore,
Mandrake, and Nightshade, strangely figured over;
A treble twist of serpents curling round,
With monstrous ornament the foldings bound.
With some a verdant forest seemed to move,
Their flowing robes with palmy branches wove.
With panthers, bears, and every savage beast,
Expressed in lively colors, some were dressed.
On others eagles spread their wings, on some
Appeared the Ostrich' hieroglyphic plume;
While others wore a painted crocodile,
With all the monstrous progeny of Nile.
Nasar, a youth vowed to the morning star,
With budding roses had adorned his hair.
His raiment, of inestimable cost,
Glittered with pearl, and imitated frost.
Overspread with landskips wrought in miniature,
Surprising scenes the ravished sight allure:
Clear fountains, flowery walks, and myrtle groves,
Peacocks with gaudy trains, and shining doves.
The prince with anxious looks relates his dreams,
The doubtful sages search their heavenly schemes:
But all their stars were mute, the meaning flies
In trackless darkness, and obscure disguise.
The bearer of the cup did now reflect
On his past danger, ana his base neglect;
And thus his royal matter he addressed:
Be Pharoah's bounty, and my guilt confessed.
When with my fellow criminal detained,
We.by thy justice in the ward remained,
A Hebrew youth, unjustly there confined,
From nightly omens which perplexed the mind,
With clear conviction did our lot unfold;
My honor, and the steward's doom foretold.
Amidst the solemn darkness of the night,
His cell has glittered with etherial light;
For highly favored by the immortal Gods,
To visit him they left their bright abodes.
Joseph, unfettered, they from prison bring,
By heaven inspired, he stands before the king;
Who thus repeats his dream: Methought I stood
On the fair borders of our sacred flood:
While, curious, I surveyed the spreading stream,
Seven bulky oxen from the river came,
Fat and well-favour'd; over the verdant mead
They proudly ranged, and on the pasture fed;
When just their number rose, of aspect sour,
Ill-shap'd, and meagre, who the first devour.
The scene was changed, when springing in my walk,
Seven blades of corn adom'd one bending stalk,
Ripened and full; when lo! a second rears
His blasted top, with seven unfruitful ears;
This swallowed greedily the former store,
As the lean oxen did the fat before.
I woke with great anxiety oppres'd,
And for the meaning every God addressed.
The almighty G0D over earth and skies supreams,
The youthful prophet cries, has sent this dream
To Pharaoh, which discovers future things;
What changes on the world his pleasure brings.
With one intent the sacred vision came,
Of both the hidden meaning is the same.
Seven plenteous years begin their joyful round,
The fields with boundless harvests shall be crowned;
Then seven unprosp'rous years shall these devour,
And leave no remnant of the former store.
But that the people and the king may live,
This council heaven commissions me to give,
That wasteful luxury should be restrained,
And wise intendants through the realm ordained:
Let these against the threatening ill provide,
Lay up the corn, and over the stores preside.
This youth by some propitious power was sent,
The prince replies, our ruin to prevent:
Then bids them an imperial vestment bring,
And from his finger draws a costly ring:
And this, he said, a sacred pledge shall be
Of those bright honors I reserve for thee.
My power, my kingdom, I to thee resign,
The sovereign title only shall be mine;
To thee my noblest favorites shall bow,
Our guardian God, our great preserver thou!
His second chariot then the King ordains
Should be prepared: White steeds with scarlet reins
The triumph drew; they champ the golden bit,
And spurn the dusty ground with airy feet.
On high with princely pomp the youth was placed,
With marks of power, and regal ensigns gracd.
Gay heralds, bow the knee, before him cry,
The crowd adore him as he passes by:
Nor here the royal favors were confined,
Great Pharaoh's daughter is his bride designed.
The night had twice in sable triumph reigned,
And twice the circling light its empire gained;
When from his high apartment Joseph sees
A lofty temple, through the waving trees,
To Isis vowed: He from the gilded dome
Ravished beheld a beauteous virgin come.
An artless modesty improves her face,
An elegant reserve, and matchless grace,
A rosy tincture in her cheeks appears,
Lovely as that the blooming morning wears:
Her eyes a sprightly blue; her length of hair
Dishevelled hung, like threads of silver fair.
Long strings of jet and pearl, in mingled twists,
Adorned her well-shap'd neck, and slender wrists.
Her robes were heavenly azure, sprinkled over
With stars; a crescent on her breast she wore.
The wounded Hebrew for the virgin figh'd,
And felt a growing passion yet untried:
Her lovely image, on his mind impressed,
Had fixed her empire in his yielding breast.
But oh! what anguish did his soul invade,
When he was told, the loved enchanting maid
At Isis' holy shrine devoutly bowed,
A virgin priestess to the goddess vowed?
This, this, he cried, must all my hopes confound,
Helpless my grief, incurable my wound!
Mean time the fame uncontradicted goes,
That he the Egyptian princess must espouse.
Pained and distressed, he hears the spreading news,
And dreads the offer, which he must refuse,
Or with dissembled vows the imperial maid abuse.
Asenath's power (that was the priestess' name)
Would in his breast admit no rival flame.
The royal maid no less unhappy proved,
Who long illustrious Orramel had loved,
An Ethiopian prince, whose faultless face,
And shape exceeded all the tawny race.
His features nobly turned, his piercing eyes
Sparkled like stars amidst the gloomy skies;
At once they dazzled, and engaged the sight
With awful luster, and imperious light.
Black as a midnight cloud, his yielding hair
In easy curls waves to the gentle air.
The princess, pained with secret discontent,
Her father's purpose labors to prevent;
In vain! the King obstructs her young desires,
But first the pleasure of the Gods enquires.
Just Potiphera, an unblemished priest,
His piety sincere, but ill addressed,
While fragrant incense round the temple smokes,
Osiris from the monarch he invokes.
The fiends, in hopes to cross the great design,
And awful will of providence devine,
With penalties forbid the King's intent,
The Hebrew's future greatness to prevent:
Then named the fair Asenath for his bride,
And blindly with eternal fate complied:
Effecting heaven's predestined ends,
While Joseph's ruin envious hell intends;
Nor doubts the young idolatress would prove
His snare, and soon seduce him with her love.
The priest, yet trembling, near the altar stands,
And dreads the sacrilege the God commands,
My daughter named! he cries, to Isis vowed
By mystic rites, which no reverse allowed!
It must be so! -- the Gods pronounce it fit,
The priest his will, the King must his submit.
The maid reluctant leaves the holy shrine,
But yields obedience to the powers divine.
The gift as heaven's the joyful youth regards,
Which thus bright virtue crowns, and sacred truth rewards.
BOOK, IX.
The seven plenteous Years; with the ensuring Years of Scarcity. Joseph's
Character as Regent over the Land of Egypt. Jacob distressed with the Famine,
sends his Sons thither for Corn. Joseph discovers his Brethren, but is unknown
of them: Pretends to suspect them as public Spies, and keeps them three Days in
Prison; at last sends them back, with a Charge to bring their younger Brother
with them, and detains Simeon as an Hostage till their Return.

THE jocund years, with smiling plenty crowned,
In shining circles, now advanced their round:
Unbounded crops reward the reaper's toil,
And rustic pleasures cheer the banks of Nile.
The Hebrew, late advanced by royal grace,
With dignity and spendor fills his place,
Still watchful for the public good, with care
Restrains excess, by penalties severe,
While justice, truth, and temperate virtue, reigned
Amidst the height of plenty through the land:
His prudent sway, the grateful people bless
In all the calm serenity of peace.
But soon the smiling years their period run,
A gloomy era now its course begun:
Pale famine comes, with her malignant train,
Dries up the springs, and taints the fertile plain:
The trees decay, each flower, and balmy plant,
Pine at their roots, and vital humor want:
No pearly moisture on the meadow lies,
To fan the air no gentle breezes rise.
The languid moon sheds from her silent sphere
No cooling dews, the thirsty earth to cheer.
A sultry night ensues a scorching day;
While dismal signs the fiery clouds display.
Nor Egypt mourns alone her blasted ground,
Pale famine stalks through all the regions round:
Moriah's plain, and Hermon's flowery hill,
Withered and bare, the hot contagion feel:
That fertile climate, by peculiar grace,
Designed the lot of Abraham's future race,
Where long with peace, and fatal plenty gay,
The pagan princes bore imperial sway,
Their crimes not full: -- While Jacob sojourned here
A stranger, as his great forefathers were:
The common fate he shares, with famine pressed,
And for his numerous family distressed:
He sends his sons, by heavenly conduct led,
To Egypt's plenteous granaries, for bread:
Domestic wants require their utmost haste,
And Zoan's regal towers they reach at last.
With soft Assyria, now in all her pride
Of wealth and grandeur, Pharaoh's palace vy'd:
More honored still the rising favorite grew,
No bounds his royal master's kindness knew:
His graceful person, charming to the sight,
Majestic, yet more mild than morning light:
His virtues every grateful tongue employ,
The people's boast, their wonder, and their joy.
All private views were to his soul unknown,
He made the kingdom's welfare still his own:
The oppressor's wrongs are by his power redressed,
He guards the orphan, succors the distressed,
His fame to distant countries flies abroad,
While Egypt names him as her guardian God.
Assiduous still, his officers attend
Where neighboring states their numerous envoys send;
Who for themselves, and pining race, implore
The food of life from his abundant store.
Among the foremost of the suppliant crowd
The Hebrew swains with low submission bowed;
With stern regard each kindred face he views,
Their sight, the late detested scene renews;
Their parting malice, and inhuman rage,
To just revenge his swelling thoughts engage.
Long silent, in a gloomy pause he stands;
At last their country, business, name, demands.
My lord, thy servants (with a modest grace
Judah replies) are all of Hebrew race:
Twelve brethren late, a joyful father's boast,
Till one, by some unhappy chance, was lost;
The youngest with his aged sire remains,
The darling, which his drooping life sustains:
To purchase corn we come, our falling breath
And infant race to save from lingering death.
Thy tale (he said) unfolds its own disguise,
By Pharaoh's sacred life, you all are spies:
Then to the guards with stern command he turns,
While yet resentment in his bosom burns;
In close confinement be these men retained,
Till we some knowledge of their plot have gained.
With just remorse, and secret horror struck,
The conscious Hebrews, at each other look,
In foreign accents, to the guards unknown,
Their length of unrepented sin they own;
Joseph, not yet withdrawn, their language hears,
And hastes away, to hide the gushing tears.
Oh! we are guilty of our brother's blood,
Though heaven the intended fratricide withstood:
With unrelenting hate, for sordid gold,
The gentle youth to Midianites we sold
A slave, and such perhaps he still may live;
Almighty God, the monstrous crime forgive!
Unmoved we saw the anguish of his breast,
In mournful looks, and flowing tears expressed:
Unmoved, and lost to nature, virtue, sense,
Unmoved we heard his tender eloquence.
Such beauty, innocence, and blooming grace,
Would have subdued in wilds a savage race,
What caves what dungeons, should such monsters hide?
We stand condemned, and heaven is justified.
When Reuben, who the barbarous fact disclaimed,
In these sad terms their former malice blamed:
Would heaven your flowing tears might wash away
The bloody stains of that detested day;
Its horror, with eternal grief, I trace;
The soft impression of my brother's face
Dwells on my heart, the tragic scene I view,
The mournful object is for ever new.
Methinks I see the anguish, the surprise,
The melting sorrow in his lovely eyes,
While kneeling, pleading all the tender claims
Of kindred blood, he singly called your names,
And one by one invoked, -- what power I had
Was all employed, to save the guiltless lad.
His filial love, and goodness, free from art,
Touched every tender motion in my heart,
When for his drooping father's hoary age
He tried your soft compassion to engage:
I hear his cries, while round his suppliant hands,
Without remorse you tied the cruel bands;
My soul is wounded with the farewell groan,
When to the yawning pit you forced him down.
What hellish frenzy did your bosoms sire
Against such youth, and virtue to conspire?
What was his mighty crime? -- A childish dream.
A sleeping fancy's visionary scheme:
His blood's avenged -- while here we lie confined
Our wretched offspring are with famine pined.
Their eldest brother's just reproach they own,
And humbly now address the eternal throne,
With penitence sincere they inly mourn,
While thrice the day and tedious night return.
Mean time the thoughtful regent in his breast
The first vindictive motions had suppressed,
When early for the Hebrew train he sends,
And kindness in a stern disguise intends;
Conducted to his presence, prostrate all
(As once their sheaves before his sheaf) they fall.
The power that sits above the stars I fear,
(He said) nor shall you find injustice here,
To prove that you have no clandestine view,
Nor hostile aim, but are to honor true,
One of your kindred number, left behind,
The attending guards shall as an hostage bind;
Secure from wrong, the captive shall remain,
If at set limits you return again:
But be for ever exiles from the place,
Nor ever hope again to see my face,
Unless you bring your youngest brother here,
No more on Egypt's fatal coasts appear;
Be this a proof your words have no disguise,
Or you, by Pharaoh's sacred life, are spies.
Alas, my lord, in tents thy Servants sleep,
(The swains reply) our herds, and bleating sheep
Engross our humble cares; no martial claims
Disturb our minds, no wild ambitious aims:
Strangers to pompous courts, the flowery field,
And tuneful grove, to us their pleasures yield;
Unenvied there, secure from noise and strife,
In harmsess ease we spend a peaceful life;
Our costliest banquets in some balmy shade,
With nature's simple luxury are made;
No dreams of grandeur, no aspiring thought,
Thy servants to the Memphian limits brought;
Distressed with famine, to this friendly shore
We came, your kind assistance to implore.
This said, they find themselves dismissed at last
With full supplies, and to their country haste.
When scarce arrived before their father's tent,
His busy thoughts presaged some sad event;
The captive son was missed, -- his fears to expel,
The unpleasing truth in soothing words they tell.
With temper every circumstance he hears,
Till the fond prop of his declining years,
His Benjamin was named -- that cruel part,
In spite of all their well-meant flattering art,
With piercing anguish wounds his inmost soul,
No pleas of reason can its force control.
His hoary head with weighty sorrow pressed,
Dejected sunk upon his pensive breast,
The careful trav'llers now their sacks untied,
Surpised, their coin restored again they spied.
What can these myst'ries mean, good Jacob said,
What fatal storm is breaking over my head?
Why is my life prolonged? of bliss berest?
Joseph is not; -- my single comfort left,
To distant climes an exile you would bear;
Against me all these sad events appear:
But Know, the flame of life shall quit my heart,
Ever with the lovely blooming youth I part.
Content we then must sacrifice our lives,
Our guiltless offspring, and our tender wives,
( Judah replies) condemned to perish here,
And never again on Egypt's coasts appear:
The man, the mighty ruler of the land,
With eyes to heaven addressed, and lifted hand,
The man protested with a solemn grace,
Not one of us should ever see his face,
Nor other proof our innocence should clear,
Unless we brought our youngest brother there.
And why would you that needless truth make known,
Or that you had a younger brother own?
(The anxious parent said.) -- Alas, could we
( Reuben replies) the consequence foresee?
Or had the certainty been fully known,
Could we, with specious lies, the fact disown?
Or straightly questioned, by a man so great,
Conceal our public or domestic state.
Indeed he roughly talked, but still there broke
Some secret pity through his fiercest look;
However dark the past events appear,
We Have nothing from such clemency to fear;
Where ever with easy state he passed along,
His virtues echoed through the shouting throng:
Then, why my honored sire, these vain delays?
Paternal cares a thousand scruples raise;
Your Simeon bound, a slave unransom'd lies,
Our time's elapsed, and we condemned for spies:
Commit your darling to my faithful hand,
Of me again the sacred pledge demand.
Two lovely boys, adorned with every grace,
Secure I leave, as sureties in his place;
If any negligence my honor stain,
Without compassion let them both be slain.
Half yielding now he stands -- their household straits
Judah with artless eloquence repeats.
With falt'ring speech, and anguish in his eyes,
Then go in peace, the vanquished patriarch cries:
Celestial providence your steps attend,
And angel guards from every ill defend;
With doubled money for your corn advance,
Perhaps the restoration was a chance:
But take some grateful present in your hand,
The balmy products of your native land:
And be the eternal Majesty implored
(The God my great progenitors adored)
To grant you favor in the ruler's sight,
And bring your injured innocence to light:
But know, if mischief should the lad attend,
My hoary hairs down to the grave you send.
BOOK X.
The Hebrews return with their youngest Brother into Egypt. Joseph treats them
with great Kindness, and a splendid Entertainment; but still be conceals his
Relation to them. At last they are dismissed with plentiful Supplies of Corn; but
the Steward, as commanded by his Lord, secretly conveys a Silver Cup into
Benjamin's Sack. After they are gone out of the City, he pursues and charges
them with the pretended Theft; and at last he finds it in Benjamin's Sack. They
return with great Consternation, when Joseph discovers himself to them.

THEIR father's blessing on their knees they take,
And now to Memphis quick advances make,
Where safe arrived, but fearful of their doom,
To Joseph's steward hastily they come,
Disclose in humble terms their late mistake,
And render doubled all the money back.
Your father's God (he said) your coin restored,
'Twas justly paid; then leads them to his lord.
Their gifts, with prostrate homage, they present,
His gracious smiles their rising doubts prevent:
Forgetful of himself, with eager haste,
He forward stepped, and Benjamin embraced:
His heart expands with sympathetic joy,
While in his arms he folds the wondering boy;
Fond nature struggles with the vain disguise,
A brother sparkles in his radiant eyes:
Scarce all his grandeur from the gentle youth,
With mutual rapture touched, conceals the truth;
And half disclosed the kindred soul appears,
Till Joseph flies to hide the swelling tears,
That melting love and soft surprise excite,
But recollected, soon returns in sight.
Conducts them now into a spacious hall,
Where well-born slaves, obsequious to the call,
To luxury inured with artful care,
A splendid banquet instantly prepare;
Embroidered carpets cover all the ground,
While fragrant ointments spread their odours round,
Large silver layers, with officious care,
The gay attendants round the circle bear.
And now, with costly fare, and sparkling wine,
Of various sorts, the loaded tables shine,
Beneath a glittering canopy of state,
In Tyrian robes, the graceful regent sat;
With all the bounty of a royal feast
He nobly entertains each Hebrew guest:
Their hostage freed the mutual joy compleats,
In order placed, they take their destined seats:
With sprightly wines, and social converse gay,
In guiltless mirth they spend the fleeting day.
In calm repose supinely past the night,
Till rising with the morning's rosy light,
They haste away, with full provision stored,
In every sack (as ordered by his lord)
Their coin the steward secretly conveyed,
A silver cup in Benjomin's was laid.
Secure the suburbs utmost bounds were past,
When, with a feigned concern, and anxious haste,
He overtakes the hindmost of the train,
And thus accosts them in an angry strain.
How could you thus, ungrateful and unjust,
Against the rules of hospitable trust
Combine, the consecrated cup to steal,
By which my Lord does secret things reveal.
With what strange meaning is thy language fraught,
Surpised they cry, we are guiltless, even in thought,
And by the immortal God, we dare protest,
Such black designs are strangers to our breast.
Our coin unasked exactly we restored,
How should we then abuse thy injured lord,
And basely, gold or silver from him steal,
While recent favors yet our thanks compel?
If such enormous guilt our bosoms stain,
Vassals for life thy servants shall remain;
The wretch, convicted of a crime so high,
Unpitied here before thy face shall die.
Content, he said, and searched their burdens round;
At last, the cup in Benjamin's was found:
With wild despair their folding vests they rent,
And backward to the royal office went.
The regent here, but oh! how changed, they find,
No more the mild, beneficent and kind,
But fiercely asking, in an altered tone,
What wrong is this your guilty hands have done?
You well might know, where dress and learning shine,
A man like me, must certainly divine.
Prostrate they fall, while Judah for the rest,
With mingled sighs their mutual grief expressed.
What can I say? -- how shall thy servant speak?
In what pathetic words my silence break?
What energy of language shall I find,
To paint the wild distractions of my mind?
Justice divine, with keen revenge begins
To reckon up our lengthened score of sins;
Our secret crimes, this rigorous stroke demand;
And self condemned, we here thy vassals stand.
No, -- cries the gracious regent, only he
With whom the cup was found my slave shall be:
Return in peace, your needless fears resign,
This youth, a public criminal, is mine.
When Judah thus (still gently drawing near)
Be pleased, my lord, to lend a gracious ear,
While I the tender circumstance repeat,
And for my father's hoary age entreat.
Two lovely boys, the pleasure of his life,
And only offspring of a beauteous wife,
The elder branch, by an untimely death,
Snatched from his arms, long since resigned his breath;
The youngest, who does now his care engage,
The single prop of his declining age,
The constant theme of every pleasing thought,
Your strict command, my lord, has hither brought:
Our sire, thy servant, long refused to grant
The pressing suit, till forced by meagre want,
And just concern, to clear our injured truth,
He to my conduct gave the gentle youth.
But oh! what killing anguish pierced his heart,
When thus compelled with Benjamin to part:
With all the eloquence, that filial love
Could ever inspire to calm his fears I strove;
But all in vain, on dismal thoughts intent,
If mischief should his blooming life prevent,
My hoary hairs, he said, with grief oppressed,
Must to the gloomy grave descend for rest.
And I, unhappy, whither shall I go
To shun that dark distracting scene of woe?
My father's wretchedness I cannot see,
Deprived of every future joy by me;
For I, with all the arguments I had,
Became myself a surety for the lad,
And must again the precious pledge restore,
Or see my aged parent's face no more.
My lord, you seem to have a tender heart,
(Though sometimes forced to act a rig'rous part)
This first unfortunate offense forgive,
Or let thy servant here a vassal live
A bond-slave, in my youngest brother's stead,
Condemned, no more my native soil to tread.
No longer Joseph could his tears control,
Or hide the soft emotions of his soul;
Relenting signs the watchful Hebrews saw;
In haste he bids the attendants all withdraw.
I am your brother Joseph, then he cries,
With tears, and melting goodness in his eyes,
That brother you to Midian merchants sold
On Dothan's plain, -- nor need the rest be told.
The cruel fact, alas, too well they knew,
And, with disordered looks, each other view.
He then demands: -- How fares my honored sire!
Confused and mute they farther off retire;
A guilty shame on every face was spread.
Come near, my brethren, then he mildly said,
Reflect not on yourselves, with thoughts severe,
It was not you, but God, that sent me here;
His goodness ruled the circumstance and place,
To save the stock of Abraham's sacred race;
Five years of cruel famine yet remain,
While destitute of hope the careful swain
Shall neither sow nor reap, -- the burning soil
Untilled shall lie, or mock his fruitless toil;
But heaven has sent me here, to save your lives,
Your infant offspring, and your tender wives.
The Egyptian King, in every virtue great,
Ordains me second ruler in the state;
The strength, the power, the wealth of all the land,
Without restraint, are trusted to my hand.
Return, and in my father's ears relate
The plenty, pomp, and grandeur of my state;
Tell him, I long his hoary age to greet,
And throw myself in raptures at his feet:
Let him come down to Goshen's healthful air,
His whole domestic charge shall be my care.
Dismiss your fears, -- this painful silence break!
You see a friend! you hear a brother speak!
Behold the tender motions of my heart,
No more disguised with grandeur or with art!
Regard me well, the kindred features trace,
You Will find the prints of nature in my face!
Then clasping round his youngest brother's neck,
No longer strives the gushing tears to chock;
The friendly ardour throws off all (...),
While nature fits triumphant in his eyes;
Nor less delight transports the gentle youth
Replete with goodness, innocence, and truth;
In mutual sympathy their souls were tied,
And more by virtue than by birth allied.
Saluting then the rest, with mild address,
He clears their doubts, and softens their distress.
Converting freely, now they quit their fears,
While Pharaoh, pleased, the new adventure hears;
And in his clemency, and royal grace,
Commands the viceroy, some selected place
Should be assigned on Goshen's rich champain,
His father's numerous charge to entertain.
The regent, now impatient of delay,
With costly presents sends the men away,
But with a sparkling Babylonian vest
His youngest friend was graced above the rest.
Make haste, he said, to bring my father down,
Tell him I live, and be my greatness known;
Take wagons for convenience on the way,
Your wives and helpless children to convey;
Nor care to gather up your needless stores,
The wealth Zoan's plenteous land is yours.
At Hebrew soon their speedy journey ends,
The good old man their coming now attends;
Where scarce arrived, at once they all relate
The welcome news of Joseph's prosperous state.
Why would you mock my woe with airy schemes,
(He fainting said) of gay fantastic dreams?
But soon the loaded carriages appear,
Recall his life, his drooping spirits cheer.
My Joseph lives! transporting truth (he cries)
I Will see his face, and close my aged eyes:
Content, resign these poor remains of breath,
And gently rest in the calm shades of death.
THE HERMIT. A POEM.
Now taught by this confess the Almighty just, And where thou cannot unravel,
learn to trust. FAR in a wild, remote from public view,
From youth to age, a reverend Hermit grew;
The moss his bed, the cave his humble cell,
His food the fruits, his drinks the crystal well;
Unknown to man, with God he passed the days,
Prayer all business, all his pleasure praise.
A life so sacred, such serene repose
Seemed Heaven itself, till one suggestion rose,
That vice should triumph, virtue vice obey,
Hence sprung some doubts of providence's sway:
His hopes no more a certain prospect boast,
And all the tenor of his soul is lost:
To clear this doubt, to know the world by sight,
To find if books or swains report it right,
He with the sun a rising journey went,
Sedate to think, and watching each event.
The morn was wasted in the pathless grass,
And long and lonesome was the wild to pass;
But when the southern sun had warmed the day,
A youth came posting over a crossing way.
His raiment decent, his complexion fair,
And soft in graceful ringlets waved his hair,
Then near approaching, father, hail! he cried;
And hail, my son, the reverend sire replied.
Words followed words, from questions answers flowed,
And talk of various kind deceived the road.
Till each with other pleased, and loath to part,
While in their age they differ, join in heart.
Thus stands an aged elm in ivy bound;
Thus youthful ivy clasps an elm around.
Now sunk the sun, the closing hour of day
Came onward, mantled over with sober gray,
Nature in silence bid the world repose,
When near the road a stately palace rose,
It chanced the generous master of the dome
Still made his house the wandering stranger's home,
Yet still the kindness, from a thirst of praise,
Proved the vain flourish of expensive ease.
The pair arrive: The liv'ry'd servants wait,
Their lord receives them at the pompous gate.
The table groans with costly piles of food,
And all is more than hospitable good.
Then led to rest, the day's long toil they drown,
Deep sunk in sleep, and silk and heaps of down.
At length it is morn, and at the dawn of day
Along the wide canals the zephyrs play,
Up rise the guests obedient to the call,
An early banquet decked the splendid hall.
Rich luscious wine a golden vessel graced,
Which the kind master forced the guests to taste;
Then pleased and thankful, from the porch they go,
And, but the landlord, none had cause of woe:
His cup was vanished, for in secret guise
The younger guest purloin'd the glittering prize.
As one who spies a serpent in his way,
Glist'ning and basking in the summer's ray,
Disordered stops, to shun the danger near,
Then walks with faintness on, and looks with fear.
So seemed the sire, when far upon the road
The shining spoil his wily partner showed;
He stopped with silence, walked with trembling heart,
And much he wished, but durst not ask to part;
Murmuring he lifts his eyes, and thinks it hard
That generous actions meet a base reward.
While thus they pass the sun his glory shrouds,
The changing skies hang out their sable clouds,
A sound in air presaged approaching rain,
And beasts to covert scud across the plain:
Warned by the signs the wandering pair retreat,
To seek for shelter at a neighboring seat;
'Twas built with turrets on a rising ground,
And strong and large, and unimprov'd around;
Its owner's temper, timorous and severe,
Unkind and griping, caused a desert there.
As near the miser's heavy doors they drew,
Fierce rising gusts with sudden sury blew,
The nimble lightning mixed with showers began,
And over their heads loud rolling thunder ran.
Here long they knock, but knock or call in vain,
Driven by the wind, and battered by the rain;
At length some pity warmed the master's breast,
'Twas then his threshold, first received a guest,
Slow creeking turns the door with jealous care,
And half he welcomes in the shivering pair;
One frugal faggot lights the naked walls,
And nature's fervor through their limbs recals,
Bread of the coarsest sort, with eager wine,
Each harldy granted, served them both to dine:
And when the tempest first appeared to cease,
A ready warning bid them part in peace.
With still remark the pond'ring Hermit viewed,
In one so rich, a life so poor and rude,
And why should such, within himself he cried,
Lock the lost wealth, a thousand want beside.
But what new marks of wonder soon took place
In every settling feature of his face,
When from his vest the young companion bore
That cup the generous landlord owned before,
And paid profusely with the precious bowl,
The stinted kindness of this churlish soul.
But now the clouds in airy tumult fly,
The sun emerging ope's an azure sky;
A fresher green the smelling leaves display,
And glittering as they tremble cheer the day;
The weather courts them from the poor retreat,
And the glad master bolts the wary gate.
While hence they walk, the Pilgrim's bosom wrought,
With all the travel of uncertain thought;
His partner's acts without their cause appear,
'Twas there a vice, and seemed a madness here;
Detesting that, and pitying this, he goes,
Lost and confounded with the various shows.
Now night's dim shades involve the azure sky,
Again they search and find a lodging nigh.
The soil improved around, the mansion neat,
And neither poorly low, nor idly great;
It seemed to speak its master's turn of mind,
Content, and not for praise, but virtue, kind;
Hither the walkers turn with weary feet,
Then bless the mansion, and the master greet;
Their greeting fair bestowed with modest guise,
The courteous master hears, and thus replies;
Without a vain, without a grudging heart,
To him who gives us all, I yield a part,
From him you come, for him accept it here
A frank and sober more than costly cheer.
He spoke, and bid the welcome table spread,
Then talked of virtue, till the time of bed;
When the grave household round his hall repair,
Warned by a bell, and close the hours with prayer.
At length the world renewed by calm repose,
Was strong for toil; the dappled morn arose.
Before the Pilgrim's part, the younger crept
Near the closed cradle, where an infant slept,
And writhed his neck, the landlord's little pride,
O strange return! grew black, and gasp'd, and died.
Horror of horrors! what, his only Son!
How looked our Hermit, when the fact was done!
Not hell, though hell's black jaws in sunder part,
And breathe blue fire, could more assault his heart.
Confused, and struck with silence at the deed,
He flies, but trembling fails to fly with speed;
His steps the youth pursues, the country lay
Perplexed with roads, a servant showed the way;
A river crossed the path, the passage over
Was nice to find, the servant trod before;
Long arms of oaks an open bridge supplied,
And deep the waves beneath them bending glide.
The youth who seemed to watch a time to sin,
Approached the careless guide, and thrust him in:
Plunging he falls, and rising lifts his head,
Then flashing turns, and finks among the dead.
Wild sparkling rage inflames the father's Eyes,
He bursts the bands of fear, and madly cries,
Detested wretch. -- But scarce his speech began,
When the strange partner seemed no longer man;
His youthful face grew more serenely sweet,
His robe turned white, and flowed upon his feet,
Fair rounds of radiant points invest his hair,
Celestial odours breathed through purple air;
The form etherial bursts upon his sight,
And moves in all the majesty of light:
Though loud at first the Pilgrim's passion grew,
Sudden he gazed, and wist not what to do.
Surprise in secret chains his words suspends,
And in a calm his settling temper ends.
But silence here the beauteous Angel broke,
The voice of music ravished as he spoke,
Thy prayer, thy praise, thy life to vice unknown,
In sweet memorial rise before the throne,
These charms success in our bright region find,
And force an Angel down to calm thy mind;
For this commissioned I forsook the sky,
Nay cease to kneel -- thy fellow servants I;
Then know the truth of government divine,
And let these scruples be no longer thine;
The maker justly claims that world he made,
In this right of Providence is laid;
Its sacred majesty through all depends,
On using second means to work his ends;
It Is thus withdrawn in state from human eye,
The power exerts his attributes on high;
Your actions uses, nor controuls your will,
And bids the doubting sons of men be still:
What strange events can strike with more surprise,
Than those which lately struck thy wandering eyes?
Yet taught by these, confess the Almighly just,
And where thou cannot unriddle, learn to trust.
The great vain man who fared on costly food,
Whose life was too luxurious to be good,
Who made his ivory stands with goblets shine,
And forced his guests to morning draughts of wine,
Has, with the cup, the graceless custom lost,
And still he welcomes, but with less of cost.
The mean suspicious wretch, whose bolted door
Never moved in duty to the wandering poor,
With him I left the cup, to teach his mind,
That Heaven can bless, if mortals will be kind,
Conscious of wanting worth he views the bowl,
And feels compassion touch his grateful soul;
Thus artists the sullen oar of lead,
With heaping coals of fire upon its head;
In the kind warmth the metal learns to glow,
And loose from dross the silver runs below.
Long had our pious friend in virtue trod,
But now this child half weaned his heart from God.
Child of his age, for him he lived in pain,
And measured back his steps to earth again:
To great excesses had his dotage run;
But God, to save the father, took the son.
To all, but thee, in fits he seemed to go,
And 'twas my ministry to deal the blow.
The poor, fond parent humbled in the dust,
Now owns, in tears, the punishment is just.
But how had all his fortune felt a wreck,
Had that false servant sped in safety back?
This night his treasured heaps he meant to steal,
And what a fund of charity would fail?
Thus Heaven instructs thy mind; this trial over,
Depart in peace, resign, and sin no more.
On sounding pinions here the youth withdrew,
The sage stood wondering as the seraph flew;
Thus looked Elisha, when to mount on high
His master took the chariot of the sky,
The fiery pomp ascending left the view,
The Prophet gazed, and wished to follow too.
The Hermit, bending, here a prayer begun,
"Lord, as in Heaven on Earth thy Will be done:"
Then gladly turning, sought his ancient place,
And passed a life of piety and peace.
AN ESSAY ON THE CREATION.
IN the dark backward of six thousand years,
(So Moses writes, and all our Christian seers)
The World, a rude, unfashion'd embryo lay,
Eternal night, without one glimpse of day;
Earth, seas and heaven, in one blind chaos thrown,
And years, and months, and days, were names unknown,
Till God marked out the wide, unbounded space,
And stamped CREATION on the formless mass:
Wide over the void his genial wings he spread,
And entity uprear'd its infant head.
Prone to her center sunk the earth below,
And over her face the rising waters flow.
Let there be light, said God; and sudden light
Sprang from the deep, and burst the womb of night:
Dreadful it gleam'd along the barren waste,
Hell started, and old chaos stood aghast;
From the dark gloom he called the cheerful light;
Preserved its bounds, and winged it for the flight.
God saw, approved, and blessed the spreading ray;
And the first evening closed the first created day.
Again the Almighty said; let us prepare
A wide expanse of undulating air;
And let it be, the waters to remove
Beneath the firmament from thofe above;
He spoke benign; and with his out-stretch'd hand,
Established the immutable command.
Forthwith thin vapors from the gulf arise,
Cloud after cloud, and thicken into skies:
God saw and blessed: While coral angels play,
And crown with joyful hymns the second day.
Still was the earth in ambient oceans drowned,
Nor knew the waters their appointed bound;
When thus again heaven's all-sufficient Lord,
Through the dark void pronounced his powerful word;
Hear, and obey, ye waters, that below
The firmament in wild disorders flow;
Be gathered into one capacious bed,
And let dry land upheave her naked head:
The almighty thus; and sudden at the word,
Obedient down the hills the torrents poured;
Through porous veins impetuous waters sweep,
And headlong crowd into a crystal heap:
Low sunk beneath the hallowed earth, provides
An ample basin for the rushing tides.
Emerging hills, and broken rocks arise,
And lift their craggy summits to the skies.
God saw it, and confirmed the wise decree,
He named the dry land earth, the waters sea;
And said, let grateful verdure clothe the earth,
And let the fields conceive a various birth;
Let tender grass, and painted flowers arise,
And to the season trust their gaudy dies:
Let lofty trees their shady honors spread,
And fragrant herbs perfume the springing mead.
Scarce had he spoke, when lo! the quickening ground,
Spontaneous smiled, with vernal beauty crowned.
Flower, herb, and grass arise; and over the plain,
Mature for harvest, waves the bearded grain:
Unplanted trees drive deep their branching roots,
Spread in the air, and bend with golden fruits,
God saw it, that 'twas good, and blessed it all,
And the third day beheld the shadows fall.
Again, said God, let radiant orbs appear,
Through the wide kingdom of the hemisphere;
Alternate day and darkness to divide,
And over the seasons of the year preside.
And God created two vast orbs of light,
To bear dividual rule, by day and night*
And first the sun, an huge, unweildy sphere,
He fixed aloft, to lead the circling year;
To spread around his luster, and bestow
Prolific influence on the world below.
To the bright car, he joined the flaming horse,
Furnished with light, and pointed out his course;
With generous courage from the barrier freed,
Over the wide azure bounds the eternal steed,
Till from afar he views the lessening east,
And hastens down the ruddy colored west;
There forms in halcyon waves a downy bed,
To rest his weary limbs, and quench his burning head.
Opposed to him the silver moon displays
Her spotted orb, and burns with fainter rays;
With levelled aspect views his golden urn,
Feasts on his beams, and fills her farmish'd horn;
Which the Almighty fashioned, to preside
Over winds and waves, and rule the angry tide:
With spangling stars to join his trembling light,
And share the gloomy empire of the night:
Of spangling stars sprang forth, at his command,
And rolled their destined orbs, a numerous band;
Darkness repulsed, day scarce could night outvy,
And on the world bestow a brighter sky.
God saw, approved, and blessed what he had made,
And the fourth day received the falling shade.
And God said, let the fruitful waters teem,
And moving creatures glide through every stream;
Let feathered fowl through fluid kingdoms fly,
And with their pinions fan the floating sky.
He spoke; and strait the pregnant sea brought forth,
And every billow teemed a scaly birth;
The huge Leviathan, from side to side,
Tumbled along, and flounc'd the thundering tide;
On the smooth calm the arching Dolphins play,
And shape, in sportive chase, their liquid way.
While embryo fowl distend their tepid shells,
Mature for life, and burst their scanty cells;
Or loosly ranged, or firmly wedged, they rise
A feathered cloud, and blacken half the skies.
The strong-pounc'd eagle, with unwearied fright,
Towers the bright sun to his meridian height.
The elegiac nightingale prepares
His evening song, and sinks in solemn airs.
The lark melodious, poised on levelled wings,
Hangs in mid-air, and brisker carols sings;
Borne on the Breeze, her silver warblings float,
And the CREATOR swells in every note.
The crested cock, with a majestic mien,
Pains his shrill voice, and struts along the green.
With leathern oars the silver swan divides
The lakes, and proudly over the mirror rides.
While that fair bird, whose varied plumes unfold
Myriads of starry eyes, and gems of gold,
With conscious pride spreads forth his gorgeous train,
And with brocaded pinions sweeps the plain.
God saw that it was good, and gracious said,
(In mantling thunder, and in winds arrayed)
Be fruitful, O ye creatures, that repair
On painted wings through fields of buoyant air;
Be fruitful, O ye creatures, that divide
The restless waves, and c^ave the briny tide;
Female and male increase with genial seed,
Replenish every stream, and multiply your breed.
While yet he spoke, the youthful sun descends,
And the fifth day in gloomy darkness ends.
Once more the ALMIGHTY said; let fruitful earth
Unfold her womb, and teem with numerous birth:
Let cattle in the field expect their food,
And savage beasts frequent the lonely wood;
Let reptile animals, a minim race,
And various insects swarm in every place.
Straitway the earth, impregnated, conceives,
And the swol'n glebe with numerous offspring heaves:
The shaggy lion, and the bristled boar,
Rise into life, and through the deserts roar;
The ox and tiger, crowd the peaceful plain,
And the fleet courser shakes his flowing mane;
The vast behemoth, of enormous size,
Starts from the glebe, and rolls his glaring eyes;
Behemoth, largest of all nature's race,
With ribs of iron, and with nerves of brass;
His loins are stronger than the tempered mail,
And like a cedar moves his length of tail.
Still there remains, said God, the noblest part,
The boldest effort of creating art;
After our likeness let us draw the plan,
And in our image build immortal man;
MAN, over the riches of the earth to reign,
Of trackless air, and vast unbounded main;
Endowed with reason, and a power to will;
Inclined to good, though not restrained from ill.
And from the dust God sharp'd the human frame,
And in his nostrils breathed the living flame;
Female and male he sharp'd them, to command
Earth, air, and seas, and bless his righteous hand;
The brute machine confessed the informing ray,
And infant motion warmed the struggling clay:
Waked into life, his eyes begin to roll,
His heart to beat, to meditate his soul;
Erect to Heaven he lifts his ardent sight,
Charmed with those glorious orbs, and worlds of rolling light.
Female and male God shaped the human frame,
Incorp'rate, consubstantial, and the same;
In the man's side his consort woman lay,
Nor yet called forth to view the cheerful day;
But Adam slept; for God his eyelids pressed,
And took the beauteous female from his breast;
From a stolen rib the shining creature rose,
Fresh, fair, and spotless as the falling snows;
Sparkling and gay as the primaeval light,
Soft to the touch, and lovely to the sight;
With polished features, but an artless mind,
Unequal fate! to damn, and bless mankind.
Like fragrant flowers, she breathed commanding love.
And her eyes glittered like the stars above;
So charming was the MOTHER of our race,
That Angels gazed in transport on her face.
FINIS.

