THE PRAYER of AGUR, ILLUSTRATED IN A FUNERAL DISCOURSE: AND THE ADVANTAGES
RESULTING FROM AN Early and Steadfast PIETY. PREACHED EXTEMPORE, By the AUTHOR
of TWO DISCOURSES, and a PRAYER. Publicly delivered at the QUAKERS YEARLY
MEETING, in BRISTOL. The whole taken down in CHARACTERS, By a MEMBER of the
Church of England.

BRISTOL, Printed: Philadelphia, Reprinted, and sold by D. HALL, and W.
SELLERS, at the New Printing-Office, opposite the Jersey Market. MDCCLXVIII.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE general encouragement given to the Two Discourses, and a Prayer, publicly
delivered at the Quakers yearly meeting in Bristol; the encomiums passed upon
them in the Critical and Monthly Reviews; which are the most approved, if not
the only public testimonies given of the value of any work, offered to the
consideration of the public from the press; and the many copies bespoke of the
following Sermons, etc. already taken notice of in a preface to those
discourses; are the real motives which have occasioned the publication of
these, literally taken down as they flowed from the lips of the same eminent
preacher: And that they may become equally acceptable to Readers of every
persuasion; and tend to the general promotion of true religion and virtue, is
the sincere wish of,

The EDITOR.
BRISTOL, Feb. 1. 1768.
The following SERMON was delivered at the Friars Meeting in Bristol, on
Friday, the 22d Day of May, 1767.
I HAVE frequently thought, and the sentiment has been confirmed from my own
observation and experience, that a great and excellent point would be gained,
highly conducive to the advantage of mankind, did they generally, though from no
surer guide than tradition, subscribe with heart and mind, to that certain
truth, recorded in holy writ; " Psalm lviii. 11.
Verily, there is a reward for the righteous: Verily he is a God, that judges
in the Earth;"

As such a persuasion, from whatever ground it arises, naturally tends to
influence the conduct, to avoid evil, and to pursue that which is good; and
with regard to many, it has proved a step to their nearer acquaintance with
GOD, who is the only sure guide to true happiness.

INDEED I scarce think there can be many, if there be any, who are hardy enough
to deny the existence of the supreme. Being; but believe, on the contrary, that
many, through the divine favor, enlightened to see their duty, and assisted to
discharge it; do, in consequence of these favors, contemplate, with
satisfaction inexpressible, these attributes of the most high GOD, here
mentioned by the Psalmist: And could I be induced to think, that any part of
mankind had swerved from their duty, for want of a firm conviction of those his
attributes, as relative to his creatures; and of the certainty, that there is
really a GOD who judges the earth: I say, could I believe their minds were
destitute of this animating and enlivening prospect of his power, omniscience,
and goodness, in his superintendant care, and present judging the earth, I
should deem such but a very little removed, if any, from the state of the
Athenians, upon whose altars the holy apostle discovered an inscription, Acts
xvii. 23.
"To the unknown God." Indeed a language that was spoken formerly, has been
too much adopted by succeeding generations; numbers of whom have been like
those men of Jerusalem, who said, Zeh. i. 12.
the Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil. Many (seduced by the grand
deceiver and his agents) have endeavored to estrange and withdraw themselves
from the arbitrator of the whole earth: They have hence grown dark in their
imaginations, and in like manner thus reasoned with themselves, He will do us
no good, why therefore should we seek him? He will do us no harm, why should we
fear him? This we may justly look upon as the most unhappy seduction of mind!
as it misleads to the utmost distance (without timely recovery) from that state
of obedience, in which we are only capable of happiness, through the favorable
notice of our father who is in heaven.

BUT we may justly conclude, that such impiety past not the attention of an
all-seeing GOD, in as much as he replied, I will punish those men of Jerusalem,
who have said, The Lord does us no good, why should we seek him? He will not do
us any harm, why should we fear him?

THE certainty of his superintendency, has continued to be the happiness of
all the wise and good in all ages; and it is these, and only these, that
discern wherein true happiness consists. Hence has it become, and still
remains, an established glorious truth, accompanied with, and confirmed by, the
voice of all generations.

UNDER this head in particular, a Petition or Prayer that was put up to him who
has created the earth, and assigned a reward to the righteous, by Agur, the
son of Jaketh, has appeared to my mind, as necessary at this day to be adopted
by every individual, who is desirous of living to the best, wisest, and
happiest purpose of life; without which they had better never have lived: And I
cannot but recommend it most particularly to You, the rising generation, whose
minds I trust are at times susceptible of proper impressions, who are not
become slaves to the vanity and lusts of the world: And indeed it seems like
the language of one that is entering upon the stage of life: Prove. xxx. 7, 8, 9.
Two things have I required of thee, deny me them not before I die! Remove far
from me vanity and lies; give me neither poverty nor riches; feed me with food
convenient for me; lest I be full and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? Or
lest I be poor, and steal, and take the name of my God in vain!

THE substance of this memorable requisition has appeared to my mind, during
the course of a long series of observations of men, and times, with regard to
its import in point of religion, virtue, the love and peace of GOD; as
including indeed, all that is good and necessary for our safe conduct and
support through this life, to that completion of happiness, proposed as the
final reward of the righteous.

BUT how will some be able to prefer a petition to a power in whom, alas! they
have no trust? Who would gladly be possessed of, and are much better pleased
with, sharing a crown of wicked prosperity in this world, than with the
prospect of a crown of pure and perfect felicity, in a state of endless
futurity.

O THAT parents would timely and vigilantly exert themselves to raise early
impressions in the tender minds of their children, in order to fix deeply the
christian doctrine, with all its glorious consequences; firmly persuading and
convincing them, that they are under the immediate notice of that Being, who is
ever unspeakably good and gracious; and informing them, that he is clothed
with every awful, reverential attribute; as being perfectly wise, powerful and
good, yet strictly just; that he is the maker of us all; and that he delights
to be called upon by us, with the tender and endearing appellation of, "Our
father, who art in heaven."

WHEREFORE, under the deep and reverent sense of the certainty of his continual
presence and providence, let us be ever careful, ever earnestly desirous to
constitute a part of his children and family, in this our probationary state;
that as we, by our rank in the creation, belong to the order of spirits, we may
assuredly hope to join the cherubim and seraphim, in the habitations of glory
and peace, by our now becoming members of his militant church; and may, when
our warfare shall be accomplished, unite with the chorus of his triumphant
hosts, in the language and tribute of grateful adoration and praise.

AND indeed without this blessed hope, we are of all creatures the most
miserable! being daily surrounded with lamentation and woe! combating with
secret or obvious distresses! and encountering, from the cradle to the grave, a
perpetual succession and variety of afflictions! we might therefore truly say,
if our hopes were only fixed upon the transitory and fleeting pleasures of this
life, we should be, of all the animal creation, the most miserable! But we are
assured, that nothing less than GOD himself, is the infinite and endless reward
of all that diligently and constantly solicit him to the following purpose. --
Two things have I required of thee, deny me them not before I die; remove far
from me vanity and lies; give me neither poverty nor riches; feed me with food
convenient for me, lest I be full, and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord? Or
lost I be poor, and steal, and take the name of my God in vain!

WHICH is as if the Prophet had said, Thou art my father, the author of my
being; I made nothing myself, but am wholly and entirely the offspring of thy
power, and workmanship of thy hands: Thou know therefore what is best and
fittest for me; and what can I require else from the hands of thee, O my GOD!
than thy preservation out of the dangers of those opposite extremes in life;
thy guidance in the middle path of safety and innocence, and the enjoyment of
thy approbation and favor in my walking therein.

HIS mind was doubtless deeply impressed with the awfulness and essential
subject of his petition; and the removing far from him vanity and lies, seems
to constitute a very considerable part of it. But too many of us, deviating
from this one most important point, are daily inclined to wander in the broad
path of vanity and folly, and prone to mistake it for the path of peace; till
oftentimes the stroke of adversity, of pain of body, or affliction of mind,
convinces in part, and, if unreformed, that of Death may fully convince us,
when too late! of this most fatal mistake.

THE Prophet saw into the propriety of that frame of mind, which utters the
language dictated by divine wisdom: Prove. iii. 5.
Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not unto thine own
understanding: In as much as his gracious superintendency, and merciful notice
of his creatures, is such as even Isai. xlv. 22.
takes in the ends of the earth; and daily affords us the clearest
manifestation of his goodness here, as it has evidently pointed out to us that
glorious path which leads to safety and eternal peace. But vanity and lies have
too frequently estranged the mind, drawn it off from heavenly objects and
heavenly cares, and fixed its attention upon things wholly unworthy the notice
of an immortal spirit. Under the seducing influence of vanity and lies, men
have been frequently led to pursue many things agreeable to their own wishes
and imagined interests, without the least regard paid to justice and equity.

I MAY possibly observe an explanation and distinction of the two states as I
go on, which Agur seems to refer to, viz. The distress and misery of the poor,
on the one hand; and the vanity and pride of heart, too frequently conspicuous
in the rich, on the other.

WERE the lives of men designed to be wholly alienated from a state of justice
and virtue, and entirely instructed and fixed in the maxims and manners of this
world, singly to be taught to consider it as the chief end of their existence,
there would then be some excuse for using every species of art in joining Isai.
v. 8.
house to house, and laying field to field, till there be no place, that they
may be seated as it were alone in the midst of the earth: But now, as the great
design of him who judges the earth, and rewards the righteous, has been
abundantly manifested and denounced to such as thus counteract it, they who are
entrusted with riches, will appear the more inexcusable for their unbounded
avarice, and can have nothing to plead in favor of their violation of his
plain and clear intentions respecting mankind. It will all at last be found
vanity and lies, without virtue; without a faithful dedication of their hearts
to the revealed will of GOD. It is an observation of the preacher, that Eccles.
ii. 26.
God gives to man that is good in his sight wisdom, and knowledge, and joy --
but to the sinner he gives travel; to gather and to heap up, that he may give
to him that is good before God. And though he who is too unmindful of his
Creator, may have erected edifices that appear to the eye of the spectator as
if they would stand for ages, and may call them by his own name; yet even in
this view, without virtue, he is, in the sense of Agur, a liar to himself: He
thinks he has secured happiness, whose the frame of his mind is the reverse of
it; fixed probably in a state of exclusion, from what may be justly deemed true
and substantial happiness; or any acquisition, which will be acceptable and
well-pleasing in the sight of GOD. In this circumstance therefore he is a liar.
The by-stander indeed, who sees him in the free enjoyment of affluence, and
taking his ease, in appearance, in the fullness of his heart, may be ready to
conclude such a one happy, by being unacquainted with his secret griefs;
whereas many of his moments, if their true state could be penetrated into,
would appear like those distressed ones of the king of Israel; who, when he was
seated in the height of his splendour, magnificence, and royalty, 1 Kings xxi.
27.
rent his clothes, put on sackcloth, fasted, and lay in sackcloth, and went
softly.

LABOR therefore after righteousness, rather than to Matt. vi. 19, 20.
lay up for yourselves treasures upon earth; where moth and rust does corrupt,
and where thieves break through and steal; that by such timely and prudent
application, you may lay up for yourselves treasures in Heaven, where neither
moth nor rust does corrupt, and where thieves do not break through and steal.

YE rising youth, whose minds are open to the dictates of Jam. iii. 17.
that wisdom which is from above, and to the just and tender sentiments which
it inspires; be your enquiries to the following purpose, frequent as they are
important, What am I? Who made me? To what purpose was I created? Dedicate your
moments to the real purposes of life; pay not too great a regard to any
prospects or temptations of this world; fix not your attention upon its maxims
and proposed interests, which, when they become our idols, do but deceive and
deprive us of infinitely greater; beware of being seduced by the outgoings of
your own minds; let not things that are trannent and perishing gain too great a
possession of your hearts and affections; nor ever neglect the following
interesting petition, Remove far from me vanity and lies, and remember that he
is the guide, helper, and director of all them that put their trust in him.

Give me neither poverty nor riches; I readily conclude, that in the first part
of this petition all would willingly join; but riches are most apt to lay hold
of our hearts and affections: Many indeed are the promises to the poor, Psalm.
lxxii. 12.
Whom the Lord will deliver when he cries, even him that has no helpers they
are frequently encouraged to hope; while the rich, if they mis-apply the riches
committed to their trust, we are assured by divine authority, will be
constrained to weep and howl: They enjoy the blessing and bounty of Heaven,
which they ought to apply to the noblest purposes, particularly the relief of
their distressed brethren, Matt. xxv. 40.
In as much as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren,
(says our Savior) ye have done it unto me. For which purpose he has
committed to some a larger share of temporal enjoyments; which ought to be a
striking motive, a necessary incitement to well-doing: But alas! instead of it,
too frequently wealth becomes subservient to the purposes of pride, luxury and
wickedness: And therefore our LORD remarks in another place, Matt. xix. 23, 24.
Mark x. 13.
how hard it is for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of Heaven. And the
apostle James says, James v. 1.
go to now ye rich men, weep and howl, for your miseries that shall come upon
you; your riches are corrupted, and your garments are moth eaten; your gold and
silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you; the
hire of the laborers which have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept
back by fraud, cries; the cries of them which have reaped, have entered into
the ears of the Lord of Sabbath.

IF the extent of thy stewardship, O man! is increased, thy obligations to thy
master are still greater; if thou have received additional blessings from the
GOD of bounty, it is a trust which calls upon thee to distribute with an
unsparing hand. O then, ye who are thus favored! maintain a steady endeavor
to discharge your duty in the sight of your Creator; deceive not yourselves
with a belief, that happiness consists in the multitude of your possessions,
since they bring with them their dangers as well as obligations to duty; but
like fountains of water, which supply the little streams, 1 Timothy vi. 18, 19.
be ready to distribute, willing to communicate: This being the way to lay up
in store for yourselves a good foundation against the time to come; that ye may
lay hold on eternal life.

I HAVE known some men, and even women, who have thought the ground scarce
worthy to receive the pressure of their feet, divested of all the ties and
tenderness of humanity, and wholly puffed up with vanity and lies; but as the
reign of such is short, and not even then without its pains, and their end
miserable, as in many parts of the sacred records we are assured; may there be
none such here present; on the contrary, let it be a part of your constant
care, not only to feel the distresses of others, but to visit, and be
convinced, and in a manner share the necessities of the poor and needy; to
soften the anguish of their afflicted minds, to alleviate their hidden griefs,
and to dry up the eyes of those that weep; and the tears which stream, 1 Pet.
iv. 8, 9, 10.
as faithful stewards of the manifold Grace of God; having fervent charity;
knowing that charity shall cover a multitude of sins. Using hospitality one
toward another without grudging; in proportion as ye have received the gift,
removing far from you vanity and lies; and contenting yourselves with being fed
with food that is convenient for you.

SOME that are present, may think this unreasonable doctrine, and be ready to
reply, I have a family to provide for, and therefore I must embrace every
opportunity of acquiring, and laying up all my acquisitions in store for them;
and should I neglect the present, the like may never happen again in the course
of my life.

SUCH, or the like arguments, are often too readily taken up, and obstinately
urged, in opposition to the most important concern; to the unspeakable
prejudice of themselves, of the dispositions and morals of their children in
particular, and of human society in general: How quick is the transition of
many from a state of health to the grave! Luke xii. 20.
"Thou fool! this night shall thy soul be required of thee!" was formerly
pronounced to one of this kind by the great judge of all men. Consider then, it
may be thy case; and art thou prepared against thy dying hour, to render him
such an account, as will then support thee, and justify thee in thy claim to
the inheritance of his everlasting kingdom, by thy having faithfully sought it,
and attended to the conditions thereof, preferably to all the dearest objects
of this uncertain, and momentary state of existence?

I AM fully of opinion, many who run after the world with open mouth, and that
mouth scarce ever closed, till death closes it; could they be induced to yield
some of their precious moments to timely and serious reflection; would
endeavor to withdraw themselves from transitory things, at least before their
last moments of life; and, in some measure, prepare (after this manner) to meet
their GOD.

THEY would now and then retire, for a short space at least, from the world,
before they entirely left it; frequently sit down, and seriously turn their
view toward another world, another state of being, into which they can never
hope to carry wealth, or honors; toward that approaching dread tribunal of
righteousness, where these will gain no favor.

WHEN we take a survey of the world, and look back through the generations that
are past, we see that the love of vanity, wealth and grandeur, has proved,
from time to time, the ruin even of the fairest empires and monarchies, which
have been ever erected on the face of the earth: One reformation after another,
and one state after another, have been destroyed, from the pride and
dissipation inherent in the minds of governors and teachers.

HOW ought this consideration to humble the hearts, and redouble the vigilance
of such as are placed in exalted stations!

I HOPE and trust our love, as a people in general, has not been confined
peculiarly to ourselves; but extended, as it ought to be, to all our
fellow creatures; to relieve poverty and distress, according to our abilities;
to prevent and reclaim from the infinite danger and harms of impiety, and to
encourage every kind of real virtue.

THOUGH some families may have turned aside into the state of the world, and
become engrossed with the love of its pleasures and enjoyments; yet many
others, I hope, and believe, have denied themselves; have laid hold of the good
word of life; and under its influence, pursued the one thing needful. Though
some have declined, and even refused, the subjection due to their maker, as if
they had asked with insolence, Who is this LORD, that he should reign over our
hearts? and had added, We know no power equal to that of getting wealth, and
honors; -- yet others have not departed from the obligations of fear and love;
but have made proper reflections, paid just respect to the great author of
their being; and manifested it by a steady watchfulness in conduct, which I
most earnestly desire, may become the happy case of every one of my fellow
creatures.

THE present solemn occasion is an important lesson of instruction to us all!
The departure of the disembodied soul from this world to another; which
methinks should entirely prevent our setting too great a value upon all
temporal possessions.

I HAVE sometimes been present in a dying hour; I have been present at a scene
of humbling distress; I have seen in some, the closing period of a regular life
of virtue; yet such a life, as on account of outward poverty, had been despised
and over looked -- a whole life spent, in which its happiest moments would have
past for miserable, in the minds of thousands: Yet when they have finished
their course, they have experienced triumphant joy, in the blessed hope and
assurance of eternal life! through the merits of their dear Redeemer.

I HAVE also beheld, on the other hand, the habitations of splendor exhibit a
mournful scene of distress, far different from the former! Then, when the
solemn approach of death has begun to appear, attended with all its tremblings
and fearful apprehensions of an after state! when the soul, agonizing in its
pains, has viewed things in a far different light to what it had before done,
when even the riches, in which it had long trusted, fell short of giving the
least satisfaction: No hope of future happiness afforded to the possessor! but,
on the contrary, a gloomy prospect of despair; of an eternal state of misery!
of this have I been made a sorrowful witness, that some have gone out of the
world, Ephesians. ii. 12.
without God; without hope; without one comfortable reflection from the sacred
ransom of a dying Savior!

IN vain have they ardently wished, in an expiring hour, that they might have
been permitted to lengthen out their alotment of life a little longer; that
they might have but a short space of added time afforded them, for the
important purpose of repentance, and amendment of life; for feeding the hungry,
clothing the naked, and visiting the sick; virtues, to which they had no
pretense, in any of their (...), and which then it proved too late (...) to
attain, however necessary, for their standing approved at the just judgment, to
which they were approaching.

MAY we all therefore learn instruction, from examples like these; and derive
such advantage from this present solemnity; seeking and embracing the good word
of life; and ever steadfastly adhering to it, so long as we continue in
mutability.

MAY we never withdraw ourselves from watchful attention, to the guidance of
divine providence; never indulge ourselves in arrogance, or trust too much to
the rectitude of our own hearts; but 1 Thessalonians. v. 17.
pray without ceasing, that we may be enabled to Matt. iii. 8.
do works meet for repentance; and thereby attain an eternal inheritance in the
kingdom of GOD!

ONCE more suffer me to entreat you, my friends, in great good will, often
seriously to reflect upon the importance of the petition which I have thus far
endeavored to enforce -- Two things have I required of thee, O Lord! deny me
them not before I die. As I am fully satisfied it is not, and will not be
sufficient for me, though I should stand ever so eminently high, on the account
of riches, or honors, in the esteem or applause of men; Remove therefore far
from me vanity and lies; giving me neither poverty nor riches, but feed me, I
pray thee, with food convenient for me, lest I be full, and deny thee, and say,
Who is the Lord? Or lest I be poor and steal, and take the name of my God in
vain.

EVER beware of the first admission of evil. Guard the avenues of your hearts;
make it your peculiar study so to number your days, as to Psalm. xc. 12.
apply your hearts unto wisdom; and to advance therein, keep the account of
your passing moments with greater exactness than you would wish to do of your
most important temporal concerns.

IT IS an usual saying, That short reckonings make long friends: Continue this
short and frequent reckoning; ever esteeming the numbering of your days aright,
to be the most necessary and blessed exercise, that hereby ye may be in a
continual readiness for your final removal, how sudden soever it may be
permitted.

SOME of you are doubtless truly sensible of the importance of thus acquiring
the divine favor; continue to Prove. iv. 23.
keep your hearts in this frame with all diligence, for out of them proceed the
issues of life: Remember too, that as we are a people who have been frequently
blamed for departing from set forms, how necessary therefore it is for us all
to keep up, in the very innermost recesses of our hearts, the daily sacrifices
of prayer and praise, of fervent mental supplications, reverently to offer them
to the Matt. vi. 6.
Father who sees in secret, and rewards openly: And let us never forget,
that if the mind once gets off its guard, and relaxes in its earnest pursuit of
the divine favor, the enemy is then most watchful to enter and to seduce. May
you all therefore keep within the verge of innocence; and ever let your morning
oblations, and evening sacrifices, accompany your spirits to the throne of
grace.

YE rising tender youth, of whom there is a number in this city, for whose
welfare I am at this time, and believe shall ever remain, anxiously solicitous:

MAY grace, mercy and peace, attend you through the succeeding steps of your
lives! May the Father of infinite mercy still accompany your spirits! May you
live in the perfect love and fear of him; making constant, daily enquiry into
your immortal states; always remembering that you must one day fall beneath the
stroke of (...)! May your evening and morning sacrifices, therefore, of fervent
prayer, and of a sincere and steadfast devotion, be constantly directed up to
your Creator! Assuring yourselves, that in casting your care upon, and trusting
in him, he will remember you in his divine love; that he will Genesis xxii. 17.
remove vanity and lies far from you, and feed you with food convenient for
you; that in blessing he will bless you; and in multiplying he will multiply
his favors toward you; crowning you in the end 1 Pet. i. 8.
with joy unspeakable, and full of glory!

TO conclude, let us all treasure up in our minds, and firmly retain this
comfortable assurance, Verily there is a reward for the righteous; verily there
is a God, that judges in the earth.

The following PRAYER was delivered, before the conclusion of the meeting, by
the same Preacher.
IT is unto Thee, the author of all our mercies, thou most glorious and holy
one! that we presume to have recourse; and with the deepest humility and
resignation of mind, to acknowledge thy present blessings, and the diffusion of
thy wisdom and goodness, with gratitude, reverence and feeling submission! As
Thou best know what is best for us, we beg that we may be continually
favored with thy providential and fatherly dispensations; and with that mercy
which sanctifies them, which renders them most highly instructive and useful to
us: That hence we may enjoy inward peace in the time of outward trouble: We
beseech Thee thus to carry on and complete our sanctification and salvation,
that, in thy appointed time, we may attain Col. i. 12.
an endless inheritance with the saints in light.

WE humbly request that Romans viii. 28.
all things may work together for good to those that are afflicted: May they
profitably listen to the instructive voice of affliction; and those who enjoy
prosperity, alike improve, from the language of every mercy!

ESTABLISH us, we pray Thee, upon the holy immovable foundation of thy
ever-blessed and unchangeable truth; Thou that have been with us, and
remembered us; and have opened our hearts for thy admission, through the virtue
of thy heavenly power and divine love. We pray Thee, in the name and spirit of
thy dear son, to direct us in the several succeeding steps of our lives; to
preserve us in an humble dependence and holy trust in thy power: And may we be
continually favored to make mention of thy name with joy and gladness of heart.

LAY thy hand, we pray Thee, upon such as are captivated with vanity and lies,
before they depart hence, and be seen of men no more; to lead them 1 Pet. ii. 9.
out of darkness into thy mavelous light: Let the voice of the holy spouse
reach the immortal part in such, with that comfortable and refreshing language,
"Arise my love, my fair one come away." Lead them, we pray, yet further and
further in the Prove. viii. 20.
path of righteousness, to 2 Cor. ii 1.
the perfecting of holiness in thy fear; and let thy rod and thy staff,
evermore, Psalm. xxiii. 4.
comfort them therein; that they may not lag behind, as in the wilderness; but
in humble steady obedience, persevere with holy circumspection; being thankful
for all thy providential distributions, and ever patiently pronouncing the
divine language of Thy will be done!

ENABLE thy ministers, with power and authority, to exalt thy name with
additional strength; that through their faithful labors, as instruments in thy
hand, thy sacred light may arise, and abundantly spread upon the habitations of
darkness! O most gracious being! Thou that Phil. ii. 13.
workest in us to will and to do, according to thy good pleasure, we pray Thee,
bring all to thy temple; and enable them acceptably to worship Thee therein.
Humble their hearts in full obedience to thy word, Psalm. (...)
lead them in the way everlasting! Let the first dawn of their morning, the
whole course of their day, and the close of their evening, be continually
directed toward Thee!

O THOU! by whom the voice of supplication is with all readiness admitted, even
from the unworthiest of thy creatures! grant that over sea and land, Ephesians. ii. 1.
the dead in heart, in trespasses and sins, may hear thy word, feel its power
in Romans vi. 4.
raising them to newness of life, and be finally admitted to the fellowship and
communion of saints in thy kingdom!

FOR thy great name's sake, and for thy dear Son's sake, remember all the
inhabitants of this city; and those, in particular, that are now met in this
place; that, through the favor of thy light and help, they may move in their
several classes, agreeable to the injunctions of thy holy word. Do Thou, we
pray Thee, animate and preserve thy ministers, elders, and heads of families;
may they 1 Pet. i. 13.
be sober, and hope to the end; discharging their duties to Thee, themselves,
their households, and the public; having on Ephesians. i. 15, 16, 17.
the helmet of salvation, the breast plate of righteousness, the shield of
faith, and sword of the spirit; and having their feet shod with the preparation
of the gospel of peace.

SPEAK peace, we beseech Thee, O sovereign author of peace! all that Matt. xi.
28.
are laboring and heavy laden; Isai. live. 11.
tossed, and not comforted; still the perturbations of their minds, when
arising and swelling, like the raging waves of the sea; Jer. v. 22.
though the waves toss and roar, let them not prevail and pass over them.

NOW to Thee, whose goodness, mercy, and mavelous power, the tongues and
thoughts of the most grateful and perfect of thy creatures here below, have
ever fallen short of expressing or conceiving; to Thee, with the immaculate
lamb, the son of thy bosom, be deservedly and justly ascribed, as is most due,
all honor and glory, through the succeeding pilgrimage of our lives; and when
we shall no longer remain sojourners here upon earth, may we be admitted to
continue the inexhaustible theme, in the boundless habitations of thy
everlasting glory, world without end. Amen.

The following SERMON was preached at the Quarterly meeting at French-Hay, near
Bristol, May 26, 1767, in the morning.
Cant. iv. 12.
A garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse, a spring shut up, a fountain
sealed.
THE whole book of Canticles is understood and taken in the way of similitude,
or metaphor, setting forth that close connection, that near and dear relation,
which eternally subsists between CHRIST and his church; and in this sense it
certainly conveys instruction, very profitable, as well as very delightful, to
that mind which has dedicated itself to the love and obedience of him, its
only rightful LORD.

iv. 15.
The Church is called a fountain of Gardens; which seems to me very evidently
to imply that enclosed collected strength, beauty, regularity; those
consolatory refreshments; that steady firmness of thought, unity of heart, and
divine affection, which becomes a people that well understand what is meant by
the solemn injunction of 1 Pet. i. 13.
girding up the loins of their minds: Well apprised of the state of their
pilgrimage; of the nature, end and design of their being; of the necessity of 1
Pet. iv. 7.
watchfulness unto prayer; of having their minds brought into, and established
in the lovely order of the gospel; their loins girded; their faculties
circumscribed, and directed to the proper purpose, the great and glorious end
of their being; within the limits of that holy frame of mind, which has a
fountain of gifts, preparatory to every kind of useful service, for the comfort
of individuals, and the united benefit of the whole body; ever abiding in the
Prove. i. 7. and ix. 10.
fear of the Lord, which is the beginning of wisdom: The most perfect wisdom,
by which the mind is kept clean, and preserved in its proper clothing.

FOR the Fear of the Lord, as the Psalmist expresses it, Psalm xix. 9.
is clean, and endures for ever: And if this fear continues to rest upon our
minds, it will assuredly keep them clean; and more and more illuminate them to
discern the propriety and fitness of this language of CHRIST to his church; A
garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse, my church; erected and preserved by my
power, my followers united to me, and all dear to one another, 1 Peter, ii. 9.
a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

MAY we therefore all separately, each for ourselves, attend to this state, and
become acquainted with that degree of resemblance of such an enclosed garden
which we bear, in the sight of him, who at one view, sees the several
conditions of men, and beholds the state of his whole creation!

IF we are enclosed, of what nature is our enclosure? since nothing less will
become our sufficient defense, than the surrounding arm of the Almighty! He is
the strength of every individual that rightly trusts in him: Their situation is
aptly described in holy writ, in many parts of it, by a variety of lively and
beautiful figures; as here, by that of a garden enclosed, or Cant. iv. 15.
fountain of gardens. They likewise joyfully experience, in this sense of the
text, what was meant by the song that was predicted to be sung in the land of
Judah, when the divine covenant should happily cement, and enclose that
favored people in a state of innocence, integrity and love, enjoying together
the lasting and unutterable sweets of divine protection and peace. Isai. xxvi.
1.
In that day shall this song be sung in the land of Judah; we have a strong
city; salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks: And I cannot but
entreat that all present, who are come to years of mature consideration
especially, may obey the call of GOD; come out of a state of sin, and neglect
of duty, and become Ephesians. ii. 19.
fellow-citizens with the saints of this city; a city that has Heb. ix. 14.
sure foundations; being built upon that rock, which Matt. xvi. 18.
the gates of hell have never been able to prevail against.

O YOU that are in the bloom of life, and surrounded with the impetuous waves
of diverse passions; who continue yet uncorrected, unrefined by divine grace;
may you diligently and seriously reflect upon your extreme want of resemblance
to the garden enclosed; and of answering thereby the gracious design of your
maker concerning you! May you be directed 1 Kings xix. 12.
by the still small voice, which the LORD GOD will make use of, and meet you
with Genesis iii. 8.
in the garden; in order to reclaim you, and to draw you to himself! May all
that stand in slippery places, make him their refuge, that they may know him,
to calm every tumult in the mind; to crown them with the joys of obedience; and
to direct their steps aright through life, to his honor, and their own true
and lasting happiness!

MAY all who mourn for want of a place of rest, attain this happy situation,
all who are ready to cry out as one formerly did, Psalm cxx. 5.
"Woe is me that I sojourn in Meshech, and dwell in the tents of Kedar." Woe is
me for this state of wickedness, with which I am now on every side surrounded;
both that of my own, and that of others round about me! who are ready to fear
Jer. viii.
the harvest is past, the summer is ended: And that they are not gathered into
the city walled with salvation; or the garden enclosed with divine beauty, with
united and unfading joy!

I HOPE better things for those whose concern sometimes appears likely to
become more than they are able to bear, even a concern, lest they should be
excluded from an inheritance with the sanctified.

HE that of old made Psalm cxiv. 4.
the mountains skip like rams, and the little hills like lambs, for the
miraculous preservation of his people, even when they had begun to despair of
their deliverance; can still equally effect the like glorious work in restoring
the desponding, the broken in heart; that, having been too much off their
watch, have from thence been the more subject to be Ephesians. iv. 14.
toft about by every wind of doctrine, and cunning craftiness of men; whereby
they lie in wait to deceive. Know that though your own resolutions, your own
strength, and wisdom, have been insufficient (in the days that are past) for
your security; and perhaps the strongest resolutions, that you have hitherto
made, have been written in dust; so that the next gale of temptation has blown
them away; and you have hence been carried further and further, into a state of
groaning captivity, and crying distress! and have been unable to lift up your
heads in the day of trial: Know, that the duly humble and repenting sinner has
ever been graciously received; and the diffident have become clothed with
divine strength, through the name and power of the LORD JESUS; their minds have
been brought into a holy frame, having entered within the celestial enclosure
and defense.

O that the salvation of Israel would come out of Sion, then should Jacob
rejoice, and Israel should be right glad. This has been the sacred language of
individuals that have at times been tossed in uncertainty, distressed in vanity,
wickedness and disappointment; who, notwithstanding, have been at last happily
fixed within the habitation of the holy city, or garden enclosed, through a
steady perseverance and strong resistance, though in the night season; like
Jacob, who as a prince, Genesis xxxii. 28.
prevailed with God and with men. So the sincere, the penitent sinner, in his
resolute and patient conflict, imploring and relying on divine help, will at
length obtain an assured victory, to his great joy, and returning of
thanksgiving to the author of all his mercies.

A Garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse; ah, too unthinking youth! how
widely different from this state is too many of yours! To you appears
particularly applicable that ancient call from GOD, Isai. xli. 1.
Keep silence before me, oh ye islands! I beseech you, in this your time of
danger, when your minds may be compared to floating islands, blown upon and
covered with a succession of waves, surrounded with temptations of various
kinds, that are perpetually withdrawing you from that most precious interest,
which CHRIST has purchased for you in the garden enclosed; I beseech you, that
you maintain a steady dependence upon him; that ye be vigilant in your pursuit
after eternal enjoyments; that ye stand upon your guard against the wiles of
the grand enemy to your salvation; remembering that even Job i. 6.
when the sons of God have met together, Satan has presented himself amongst
them.

DOES thy mind watch with holy diligence to prayer? being fervent in spirit,
that though the enemy may endeavor to come in as a flood of corruption, and
seek incessantly to draw thee from the strong hold of that city, Isaiah lx. 18.
whose walls are salvation, and whose gates are praise; the arm of omnipotence
may defend thee: Know, thou art no farther guilty than as thou joinest with the
temptation; it is no sin to be tempted; the holy everlasting bridegroom of the
true church, was himself tried, proved, tempted before thee, time after time,
by the ruler of the darkness of this world, the prince of the power of the air;
yet he continued unmoved, unwearied; being supported and sustained by the power
of GOD: Heb. iv. 15.
He was like unto us in all things, sin only excepted; he knows, and is willing
to sustain them that are tempted; and to encourage, in the day of battle, every
one that cleaves unto, and calls upon him, with full purpose of heart, in
the whole course and conduct of his life: Though he may be deeply proved, and
may sometimes be ready to cry out, Even though the gates of death may appear to
be in motion against me, and just opening to receive me, yet if I die, Oh let
it be at thy feet.

THIS has been the language of minds, in the day of temptation; and when the
battle has been hot, they have known a secret hiding place, where the enemy
could not prevail. Though he encountered the whole army of martyrs; though they
were tempted, trod upon, buffeted, and even crucified; yet it was never in his
power to subdue them; they were still succored by the hand of the Almighty;
they were enabled to 1 Timothy vi. 12.
fight the good fight of faith; to pass through all their fiery trials with
patience; and, in honor of their victory, are now crowned with glory!

HOW beautiful, how amiable, must be those gardens enclosed, the rising youth,
in the vigor and prime of life! when their minds are circumscribed, and
animated to piety; when they have upon them the indubitable proofs of the handy
work of GOD; standing immovably upright on the side of religion and virtue;
keeping out all the works of darkness, by walls of divine erection!

HOW excellent are these gardens enclosed! their conversation and behavior,
how edifying! how exemplary! how truly honorable! their admission i sure into
2 Cor. v 1.
that glorious house, not made with hands, to a perpetual festival, an eternal
fruition of the unspeakably rich rewards of their good works, which they have
been enabled to perform, to the glorifying of their father who is in heaven.

THAN such a blessed society as this, I know of nothing that can possibly be
deemed more amiable upon the face of the earth; nothing more consistent with
the design of heaven; or more resembling its own happiness, for those that are
young Eccles. xii. 1.
to remember their creator in the days of their youth, with a continual
reverence; and to give up their hearts to him, in the perfection of love; for
the most desirable part of the whole creation to live thus, amidst the bloom
and luster of the spring time of life, is to constitute the beauty of holiness!
the one great ornament of the garden of the LORD here on earth!

YE heads of families; fathers, mothers, and guardians, that preside over, and
sustain the various relations in domestic life; ever carefully prosecute your
own eternal happiness, and the happiness of all those over whom you are placed
in charge! exhorting them in tender affection, and encouraging them by worthy
example, to Col. iii. 2.
set their affections on things above; watchfully guarding, and even confining
them, in order to preserve them from all harms and corruptions of vice, as
gardens enclosed within the limits of that holy fear, Prove. xiii. 14.
which is a fountain of life, that preserves from the snares of death, and
prepares for a crown of glory, in the regions of eternal felicity!

WHEN the ties of nature become joined with the ties of grace, and together
rest upon the minds of parents and guardians; they cannot but be solicitous
that their offspring and charge may be favored in an eminent degree with
divine preservation: They would then earnestly desire to help them forward in
their way, being qualified to say to the rising generation, "Follow me, as I
follow CHRIST." I am persuaded had this been more generally the case, had they
themselves, I say, really lived as gardens enclosed within the bounds of divine
wisdom and government, our christian society would have worn a different aspect
to what it now does. Could parents and heads of families from time to time have
appealed to the searcher of hearts for the uprightness of their intentions, and
the rectitude of their conduct in these most important concerns, then might
they have said with holy confidence, Luke ii. 29, 30.
Lord! now let thou thy servant depart in peace; for mine eyes have seen
thy salvation.

WHAT think ye parents? ye that live as it were in a state of stupefaction;
what think ye of the important moment, when in the sight of GOD, angels, and
men, inquisition for blood shall be made; what think ye of the preparation of
rendering that account with joy, at the dread tribunal of final judgment? in
which an enquiry into the discharge of your several duties, in this respect,
will most assuredly be made! -- It is possible, and indeed I cannot but believe
it consistent with the goodness of the supreme being, that, where the natural
parents have been negligent in their discharge of this important trust, and
have conducted their offspring into by-ways and crooked paths, forgetful of the
way that leads to life eternal; the everlasting father has not been wholly
unmindful of his children, thus abandoned to the wiles of the destroyer; but
has frequently reached forth a kind hand to such, and will continue to make up
to them, who gratefully receive his kindness, and obey his voice, the
deficiency of such past parental care; even by the virtue of his living power
in their hearts: In the mean time, the very criminal neglect of such parents
will, notwithstanding this, draw down on them its own weight of condemnation:
Dan. v. 5, 27.
The hand writing on the wall will still remain against them; and like wicked
Belshazzar, they will be weighed in the balance, and found wanting.

INDEED it must be confessed, and I am thoroughly assured, that all parents are
not thus negligent: I cannot but remember the inestimable father I had in early
life; and, above all things, his almost unexampled care and tenderness over his
infant offspring. I well remember the very powerful and moving eloquence of
descending tears! when he collected his numerous family of little ones about
him, and in the time of our extreme tenderness, and very early years, how often
he has wept over us, when he has been recommending us to the throne of grace!
though I cannot repeat the immediate language he uttered upon these occasions,
which were so extremely interesting to us all!

I WANDERED, as to myself indeed I may say, and strayed from the garden
enclosed, in many of the succeeding steps of my life: And even now stand as a
monument of mercy amongst you! whilst I thus afresh remember and recite this
amazing instance of a tender parent's anxious and unabated care, for our
preservation out of the evils that abound in the world; for our having a safe
place within the enclosures where (...). i. 7.
Christ feeds his flock, and makes them to rest at noon!

O FATHERS and mothers! I beseech you, by the mercies of GOD, and the solemn
account you must one day close with him, that you lay this charge seriously to
heart; still offering up your humble petitions to the Father of light, that he
will enable you, more and more, to instruct the children he has blessed you
with, in the one thing needful; in order that being thus favored, thus
enlightened and enlarged by his power, you may have nothing to do but die, when
that time shall arrive; nothing to charge yourselves with, in relation to the
neglect of this great duty, when the measure of your days shall be
accomplished; but may render up your accounts with joy, and receive the
beatific sentence of Matt. xxv. 21.
Well done good and faithful servant; thou have been faithful in a little; I
will make thee ruler over more; enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

A Garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse. -- May we pay all due honor to the
testimony of CHRIST respecting his church, both as individuals, as heads of
families, and parents of children: And more and more sustain, with diligence
and propriety, in all our several stations, the character of gardens enclosed,
or be as plants therein, of the Lord's own right hand planting; plentifully
adorned and enriched with all the good fruits of his own spirit; that we may
be, as our fathers were in the day when the LORD raised them up, fed, and
miraculously supported them! and may fervently pray, Isaiah lii. 1, 2. lx. 1.
that Sion might arise, and shine, and shake herself from the dust of the
earth; and put on her beautiful garments! and that many amongst us, who yet
need it, might shake themselves from those outward things that adorn them; as
they vainly imagine, that that divine beauty and luster which once
conspicuously shined upon and adorned our Sion, may again be restored, and
continue to dwell amongst us: And in order to this, may we study more and more
the increase of righteousness and true holiness; encouraging one another by
good example, and by tender counsel, in the pursuit thereof; as we cannot,
consistent with our love of GOD, be indifferent in our wishes for the happiness
and welfare of any of our fellow creatures; nor say of our brother, Let him
alone, leave him to himself, it is sufficient for me to mind myself. Since it
is our immediate duty to watch over him; and to be ready, on every occasion,
tenderly to advise and assist, to prevent or support him; and not answer the
LORD, when he shall require an account of his welfare from me; Genesis iv. 9.
Am I my brother's keeper?

AT this door, my friends, unspeakable damage has entered, and widely spread
amongst us as a people; even through this neglect, the grand deceiver has the
more easily broke into this and the other family; the power of seduction has
taken place; and many young people may be said to have laid violent hands on
their own souls, and those of others too, in their gradual stepping out of the
garden enclosed.

Am I my brother's keeper? What have I to do with the welfare of another? This
has greatly obstructed the increase of our felicity, as a collective body; the
progress of our Sion; and introduced the destroyer; who has broke into our
enclosure, and made a sorrowful devastation among the flock and family of GOD.
Where I see thus the danger of the hedge (which the LORD in mercy made about
us!) being broke down; I cannot help expressing my concern, and using my speedy
and vigilant efforts to prevent, as much as possible, the beginning and
increase of so great an evil.

IS there even a servant lad, or a servant girl, that has continued neglected,
and their minds left to wander at will? I cannot but feel for them, with an
earnest desire of informing such, and drawing them, if possible, within the
limits of the garden enclosed; that they might enjoy the benefit and delightful
assurance of immortal happiness, from their entrance into, and continuance in
well doing! Many fly from their own interest, forget the GOD that made them,
and even Heb. x. 29.
account the blood of the covenant as an unholy thing, for want of having their
minds properly centered, and their judgments duly enlightened; and therefore it
is all your duty, who are advanced within the heavenly bounds, and are grown up
into a capacity of service, so faithfully to improve your talents, that ye may
become instrumental, to enlighten their understanding, and to administer to
them a suitable degree of spiritual health: Not to say, Am I my brother's
keeper? But if ye love GOD, to love your brother also; to lead him within the
heritage and limits of the enclosed garden; within the impregnable defense of
that city whose walls are salvation.

I KNOW well, friends, that though my education was within the garden enclosed,
yet I wandered far from it; and in my departing, laid myself open to the enemy
of my soul. I kept the worst of company; I subjected myself to almost every
temptation; broke through the fence of the sacred enclosure! trampled it under
my feet! and when for a time I found the least inclination to do good, evil was
present with me! and I went on from one degree of it to another! my wickedness
so far increased with my diligence, that at length, alas! I beheld the strong
wall broken down! the garden wall destroyed! the mound left defenseless! and no
hopes left of returning peace to my afflicted soul!

O YE, who are the hopes of the next generation! the steps I have trod warrant
me to expostulate with, and to warn you of the most dreadful danger of that
deviation, to which youth is too prone, for want of due and timely reflection,
suitable to its vast importance; and the extreme difficulty of treading back,
or extricating yourselves from it, when the mind is once engaged and entered
into the path of folly: Believe me, now is your acceptable time; now is the day
of the LORD'S tender mercy afforded to you: Flatter not yourselves therefore
with the hope of its being time enough, that in some future part of your lives
you will diligently seek him: Now is your seed time; your hour of profitable
diligence; and not in the decline of life. Life frequently is held by a moment
of time! it passes, and man is no more seen! Isa. xl. 6.
All flesh is grass, and its beauty as the flower of the field; the grass
withers, and the flower fades. The grave, to which we are all hastening,
ought to be an early lesson of serious instruction, sounding the alarm in the
ears of every youth; seeing it is frequently opened to receive its victims in
the very bloom of life; and Eccles. xii. 1.
before the years draw nigh, in which, in the course of nature, they can take
no pleasure -- Prove. xxvii. 1.
boast not therefore thyself of Tomorrow, since thou know not what a day
may bring forth; but rather let the example of others teach thee the absolute
necessity of improving the present moments; and duly to reflect upon the
imminent danger of delay.

IF thy delight be not now within the garden enclosed, thou can not
reasonably expect hereafter to do Acts xxvi. 20.
works meet for repentance: Believe me, the evening hour will have its fill of
work, even after discharging the duty of the most diligent day; though thou
begin this necessary work immediately, thou will not have a moment to spare
when thy sands of life are hastening to a close, and thou art finally appointed
to tread the silent and solemn path of death! which is an hour that will,
doubtless, bring with it a sufficient employment to the most serious mind, and
to the most assiduous improver of the time that has been allotted him in
mutability.

O THEN, ye beloved youth! that your minds may be thus properly exercised to
lay hold on the things that belong to your everlasting peace! may you lay these
reflections seriously to heart! and may their good effects demonstrate, that
they have a powerful and proper, influence upon your conduct, through the whole
series of your lives! that ye may finish your course with joy! and be crowned
in the end with glory and immortality! having faithfully answered the boundless
love of CHRIST to his church, whose peculiar relation to himself he expresses
in this endearing language, A garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse, a spring
shut up, a fountain sealed.

The following PRAYER likewise was delivered extempore, after the preceding
Discourse, by the same eminent speaker.
WE approach thy presence, O Father of infinite kindness, and make mention of
thy name, in a deep and aweful sense of thy mercy, which has followed us from
time to time, and most graciously encouraged us, even to open our hearts before
thee! the LORD of heaven, and the whole earth!

WE were cast upon rocks, and there left in a destitute and perishing state;
when thou manifested thy tender regard, stretched forth thy delivering hand,
and fed and sustained us by thy watchful providence! Thou wast pleased to look
upon us in mercy, in the days of our temporal calamities! to reveal to us the
saving arm of thy power, and to cause those very calamities to turn to our
solid advantage! Thou, who art incircled with light, did enlighten our
darkness; gave us clearly to understand the great things of thy law; such of
them as thou in thy wisdom saw necessary for us. In the day of our utmost need,
thou wast pleased to appear for us, and to speak comfort to our afflicted
states!

WE earnestly beg, that the grateful sense of all these thine unutterably kind
dealings with us, may be imprinted on our hearts in characters never to be
obliterated! What more have we to ask, but that thou may ever continue to guide
and direct us! that such a sense of thy unmerited mercies may be to us, as
often heretofore it has been, an enlivening comfort, and a strong support in
the day of trouble: And we beseech thee, O blessed Father! to remember all in
the like situation: Send forth thy light and thy truth even amongst those who
have never known, or have long forgotten thee. We pray thee, draw them into thy
holy house; plant them in thine enclosed, for ever beautiful and most excellent
garden! their hearts becoming hereby powerfully inclined to attend, with a
fixed and unlimited submission, to the salutary discipline of thine
omnipresent, and unerring wisdom!

IF thou see any cast upon the bed of languishing, do thou be pleased, we
humbly pray thee, to afford them the visitation of thy love: Let thy divine
consolation be their continual attendant, whereby they may be endued with
perfect resignation to thy blessed will!

O THOU! that have poured into our hearts, the fresh and reviving sense of thy
unbounded love; accept, we beseech thee, our prayers for our own preservation,
and the lifting up of our hands for one another, for the gathering together of
many to thyself; who art, and have been the restorer of many that have been
scattered abroad, that have gone astray, being seduced by various temptations,
from thy sacred truth.

FOR thy great name's sake, for thy dear Son's sake, and for the sake of thy
glorious cause of righteousness! we pray thee, remember the offspring of thy
people; incline and strengthen them more and more to turn toward thee; and
Heb. xiii. 1.
to run the race that is set before them; that in the places of the honorable
fathers, removed to thy kingdom, may succeed their sons; steadily walking in
their footsteps, to the glory of thy name; that generation to generation may
tell thy acts, and age to age pronounce thy goodness and mavelous power; who,
through manifold temptations and trials, preservest, unspotted from the world,
them who trust in thee, and adhere to the dictates of thy grace!

BE with the people assembled here at this time; and in a particular manner
with those that are thine in heart, and dedicated to thy service. Endue, we
pray thee, with the spirit of sound judgment, those that sit in judgment; and
strengthen those who are enlisted into thine army, engaged under thy banner,
and that turn the battle to the gate, that they may so act, and 1 Timothy vi. 12.
so fight the good fight of faith, as to lay hold on eternal life! which thou
art now, in this the day of thy mercy, freely offering unto all!

MAY the ministers and stewards of thy word, cheerfully proceed in thy glorious
cause, speaking powerfully in wisdom to all, that many may become, through
their calls, yet more and more ardently inclined to listen to the doctrine of
thy Son, and to be instructed in thy law immediately from his internal voice in
their own hearts.

O HOLY and infinite father of all our mercies! grant, we beseech thee, that
being preserved in our stations as those who are Coloss. iii. 1, 2, 3, 4.
risen with CHRIST, our affections may be set on things which are above, and
our life hid with them in thee our GOD, that when he who is our life shall
appear, we also may appear with him in glory!

MAY all our faculties, and all that is within us, bless thy great and
excellent name; may we perpetually approach thy throne with confidence, to
offer thee the oblation of humble prayer, and grateful praise and thanksgiving,
now, henceforth, and for ever, world without end! Amen.

FINIS.

