AN ADDRESS TO A Provincial BASHAW.

O SHAME! where is thy Blush?

BY A SON OF LIBERTY.

Printed in (the Tyrannic Administration of St. Francisco) 1769.

An ADDRESS, etc.
1.
WHEN elevated Worth commands Esteem,
Each glowing Heart surrenders to the Claim,
And pregnant Genius brooding over the Theme,
Inscribes his Honors on the Roll of Fame:
2.
There TRUTH recorded by the artless Lay,
On Time's swift Pinions posts with equal Pace;
The dazzling Wonder we admire to day,
Shall shine unsullied to the latest Race.
3.
But when some Miscreant eminently vile,
Springs into place, and blindly armed with power;
Presuming on his privilege to spoil,
Betrays a keen impatience to devour*
4.
When smothered Rancour gnawing at the Heart,
Is robbed in Smiles, the Villain's worst disguise;
Or couched beneath the triple Shield of Art,
Arrests the unguarded Victim, by surprise:
5.
When beggared Realms impress a damned Delight,
And guiltless Anguish feasts the recreant Mind,
When the base Plunderer of a Brother's Right,
Enjoys triumphant Mischief, he designed:
6.
Conflicting Passions through the Bosom roll,
Indignant VIRTUE stabs with every groan;
To sovereign Vengeance, we consign the Soul,
But on the cursed Carcass wreak our own.
7.
O B -- what has Candor to commend?
Or purblind Friendship to secure thy Fame?
When rig'rous Justice prosecutes the Fiend,
And strips thee bare to everlasting Shame.
8.
Think not, ah think not, with thy wonted Art,
To foil stern Justice, in her vigorous Chase;
To hide the keen Conviction of the Heart,
Or with dissembled Virtue, bronze thy face:
9.
Attend with Reverence, nor by Heaven! presume,
To forge a Smile, or wink away a Tear;
Nor doze thy haggar'd Conscience, while thy Doom,
By kind Anticipation -- strikes thee here.
10.
O B -- where is thy Wisdom? where is thy Pride?
Consider, can thou wish to be forgiven?
To launch thy brittle Bark on Folly's Tide,
And madly dare the menaced Blast of Heaven?
11.
Was every Avenue to Fortune closed,
But that forbidden Path, which led to Shame?
Or was thy black malignant Heart disposed,
To try the hazard of a damning Game?
12.
Nay I will ask thee, did thou not aspire,
Like Rome's fierce Tyrant nobly to destroy?
To glut thy Vengeance with a World on fire,
And wing wide Havoc with infernal Joy?
13.
Base Ingrate! how insatiate was thy Rage?
What ranc'rous Demon nursed the foul Design?
That erring Bounty could not ought assuage,
The ebullient Malice of a Soul like thine.
14.
Have we not lavished Lordships to thy Shrine,
And cloyed thine Avarice, with too generous Food?
But like the Idol of great Ammon's Line,
Thy savage Favor must be bribed with blood:
15.
Were we not suppliant of thy poor Esteem?
Mere Slaves, attendant on thy Car of State;
But while indulging the illusive Dream,
Were doomed the Martyrs of thy mean Deceit.
16.
Tell me proud Villain! shameless as thou art!
Now thine opprobrious Conduct taints the Air;
Does not Remorse harrass thy callous Heart,
And pour a poisoned Flood of Anguish there?
17.
Does Conscience whisper Daggers to thy Mind,
Or pained Contrition hail thy foul Offense?
Whenever you mingle with abused Mankind,
Or when the Eye of Virtue frowns thee thence.
18.
Or if Reflection haunt thy dear Abode,
Art thou not stung to Madness, with the Guest?
Does thy Soul sicken, when she plants the Goad,
Of griding Scorpions in thy blister'd Breast?
19.
Plunge to thy Heart's foul Core, I charge thee now,
Wring out the envenomed Source of Mischief there,
Then if thou durst erect a cheerful Brow,
And boldly bid Defiance to despair.
20.
Can thou elaborate from the Mass of Crime,
One Gem of Worth, or ought to Worth allied?
Inscribe the Wonder on the Tale of Time,
And throw the ponderous Wreck of Guilt aside.
21.
Nay should Compassion her Ablution rain,
Or dove-eyed Charity incline to spare;
Thy Conscious Bosom brooding over it is bane,
Would spawn inexorable Furies there.
22.
Say Parricide! what Penance can atone,
What new Sensations thrill with awkward Smart?
From dread Eternity to snatch a Groan,
Or purge Pollution from thy leprous Heart?
23.
The infectious Follies of a tainted Sire,
Entail Contagion on his wretched Race,
Nor all the Wealth that Rapine can acquire,
Shall screen his Offspring from deserved Disgrace.
24.
Hie thee, poor Tyrant! to that happy Goal,
Where unsuccessful Malice may repose;
Where VERRES, ANDROSS, from Resentment stole,
Go share eternal Infamy with those.
25.
Perhaps kind Pity, then may sluice her Balm,
While lowly wrapped in Death's umbrageous Wing;
Perhaps thy Phrenzy may possess a Calm,
Defeat our Vengeance, and elude it is Sting.
26.
Over Life's last Ebbs, though nameless horrors roll,
To One like thee, abandoned, unforgiven,
Though sharp the Conflict of that parting Soul,
Which long maintained a desperate War with Heaven.
27.
Yet trust me B -- not-the Heart wrung Tear,
Shall snatch thy Name from obloquy below,
Nor sore Repentance, which absolves thee there,
Shall sooth the Vengeance of a mortal Foe.
FINIS.

