A third extraordinary Budget of Epistles and Memorials between Sir Francis
Bernard of Nettleham, Baronet, some Natives of Boston, New England, and the
present Ministry; against N. America, the true Interest of the British Empire,
and the Rights of Mankind
Copy of a Letter from the Earl of Hillsborough to the Honorable Major General
Gage, dated Whitehall, 8th June 1768.
Whitehall, 8th June 1768. (Copy) SECRET and CONFIDENTIAL. SIR,
I TRANSMIT to you for your private Information, Copies of a Letter from His
Majesty's Commissioners of the Revenue to the Lords of the Treasury; of my
Circular Letter to the several Governors upon the Continent in Consequence of
it, and of Governor Bernard's three last Letters to my Office.

The Contents of these Papers will evince to you, how necessary it is become,
that such Measures should be taken as will strengthen the Hands of Government
in the Province of Massachusetts Bay, enforce a due Obedience to the Laws, and
protect and support the Civil Magistrates and the Officers of the Crown, in the
Execution of their Duty.

For these Purposes I am to signify to you His Majesty's Pleasure, that you do
forthwith order one Regiment, or such Force as you shall think necessary, to
Boston, to be QUARTERED in that Town, and to give every legal Assistance to the
Civil Magistrate in the Preservation of the public Peace; and to the Officers
of the Revenue in the Execution of the Laws of Trade and Revenue: And as this
appears to be a Service of a DELICATE Nature, and possibly LEADING TO
CONSEQUENCES NOT EASILY FORESEEN, I am directed by the King to recommend to you
to make Choice of an Officer for the Command of these Troops, upon whose
Prudence, Resolution, and Integrity you can entirely rely.

The necessary Measures for Quartering and Providing for these Troops, must be
entirely left to YOUR DIRECTION; but I would submit to you, whether, as Troops
will probably continue in that Town, and a place of some Strength may in case
of Emergency be of great Service, it would not be advisable to take Possession
of, and Repair, if Repairs be wanting, the little Castle or Fort of William and
Mary, which belongs to the Crown.

I am, etc. HILLSBOROUGH.
A true Copy, In the Absence of the Clerk of the Papers. JOHNSPEED.

Copy of Examination of Mr. Hallowell, at the Treasury Board. July 21st, 1768.
(Copy.) Treasury Chambers, 21st July 1768. Lord North. Mr. Campbell. Mr.
Jenkinson.
MR. Hallowell attends, and is called in; he acquaints my Lords, that he left
Boston 20th June, that he landed at Weymouth the 17th Instant, and came to Town
the 18th at Night; That when he came away, the Commissioners were removing from
on Board the Romney Man of War into Castle William; that the Town of Boston was
pretty quiet, but that it was not safe for the Commissioners to return there;
that Papers were stuck up in different Parts of the Town, declaring that they
should not return, and Sentinels were posted to prevent the said Papers from
being taken down; neither Mr. Temple, who remained in Boston after the other
Commissioners, nor Mr. Venner, Secretary to the Board, were insulted -- He does
not think, that the Determination to resist the Revenue Laws is general, and is
of Opinion, that the better Sort of People would be for Government, if they
could be protected -- That the Commissioners could not safely return to Boston,
till some Measures were taken for their Protection -- He says, that the Number
of Inhabitants in Boston is computed to be from 16 to 18,000 -- That the Mob,
which assembled at the Time of the Town Meeting, was not above 2 or 3,000, and
there was no People of consequence among them, except their Leaders -- He
thinks the present Spirit does not extend beyond Boston -- The People of Salem
and Marblehead have made no Opposition to the Payment of Duties -- He does not
think, that the People of Boston would be joined by any of the better Sort of
People in the Country, if actual Resistance was to be made to Government. With
Respect to the Seizure of Mr. Hancock's Vessel the Liberty, he informs my
Lords, that on the 9th of May last, the said Vessel arrived from Madeira with
Wines, and two officers were put on Board her -- On the 10th he made an Entry
of 25 Casks of Wine only. It was commonly reported, that he had a much larger
Quantity on Board, and he heard Mr. Hancock himself declare, that before the
Arrival of the Ship he would run her Cargo of Wines on Shore. The Officers on
Board gave no Information; they were examined and said there had been no Wine
run out of the Ship; but on the 10th June, Thomas Kirk, one of the said
Officers, gave an Information upon Oath, that on the Evening of the 9th May
Capt. Marshall came on Board the Liberty, and made Proposals to him to consent
to the hoisting out several Casks of Wine that Night before the Vessel was
entered; that he peremptorily refused; upon which Capt. Marshall took hold of
him, and with the Assistance of 5 or 6 other Persons unknown, forced him into
the Cabin, and nailed the Cover down. That he was confined about three Hours,
during which Time he heard a Noise as of many People upon Deck at Work hoisting
out Goods; and that he distinctly heard the Noise of the Tackles; that when
that Noise ceased, capt. Marshall came down to him in the Cabin, and threatened,
that if he discovered what had happened that Night, his Life would be in
danger, and his Property destroyed; Capt. Marshall then went away, and set the
said Kirk at Liberty, but he was so much intimidated by the aforesaid
Threatenings, that he was deterred from making an immediate Discovery of this
Matter. The other Officer, who was on board the Liberty with Kirk, said, he was
asleep, but Kirk declared that he was drunk, and had gone home to Bed. --
Kirk's Information was laid before the Board of Customs the 10th of June by Mr.
Harrison the Collector of Boston, and the Board directed him to take Mr. Lis^^
their Solicitor's Opinion thereupon, who advised the seizing of the Vessel --
The Chairman of the Board the Customs advised Mr. Harrison for Security, that
the Vessel, when seized, should be delivered in Charge to the Captain of the
Romney Man of War. -- Many Persons, and particularly Dr. Warren, had told Mr.
Hollowell, that, if a Seizure was made, there would be a great Uproar: and Dr.
Warren added, that he could not be answerable for the Consequences -- The
Captain of the Romney was applied to in the Name of the Collector and
Comptroller to send a Boat to assist in making Seizure of the Vessel -- The
Fast of the Vessel was thrown off by the Romney's People; and when they were
hawling it, the Mob laid hold of the Ropes, and pelted the Officers and Seamen
with Stones, so that they were obliged to tow the Vessel under the Stern of the
Romney, and the Collector and Comptroller desired the Officer of the Romney to
take Possession of the Vessel for her Security -- About 200 Yards from the
Wharf the Collector and Comptroller were surrounded by a Mob of 4 or 500
People, who beat and wounded them, and it was with Difficulty they escaped with
Life -- On Saturday the 11th June a Proposal was made to Mr. Harrison the
Collector by Mr. Powell from Mr. Hancock, that if the Vessel was brought back
to the Shore, he would see herforthcoming upon the Trial -- This Proposal was
made by Word of Mouth. The same Proposal was made to Mr. Hallowell by Dr.
Warren, in the Name of Mr. Hancock, and Dr. Warren told Mr. Hallowell, that Mr.
Hancock would give his own Bond as a Security -- Mr. Hallowell told him he had
no Objection, if Mr. Harrison approved of it -- Mr. Harrison, as Mr. Hallowell
was informed and believes, wrote to Mr. Hancock, that if he would even give his
Word, that the Vessel should be forthcoming, she should be brought again to
the Shore -- Mr. Hancock went to Dr. Warren's House on Sunday the 12th June
with the said Note, as Dr. Warren informs Mr. Hallowell; the Doctor was not at
Home -- The Doctor came afterward to Mr. Hallowell, and told him, that all
Matters were settled between Mr. Harrison and Mr. Hancock, and that the Vessel
would be restored on Monday Morning the 13th of June; but at 12 o'Clock on
Sunday Night Dr. Warren came to Mr. Hallowell, and told him that he had been at
Mr. Hancock's, and was extremely sorry that Matters could not be settled as he
told him in the Morning, for that Mr. Hancock had taken the Advice of his
Counsel and Friends, and would have nothing to do with the Business, but would
let it take it is Course, and would give nothing under his Hand. Dr. Warren
said, Mr. Otis and Mr. Adams, and a great many others, were with Mr. Hancock,
and that his House was full. Mr. Hallowell understands, that Mr. Harrison
informed the Commissioners on Sunday of the Steps that had been taken; they
were then on Board the Romney. He does not know what Answer they gave Mr.
Harrison, but one of the Commissioners said afterward to Mr. Hallowell, that
they would have had no Objection to taking Mr. Hancock's security, and making
the Affair easy of him.

The Master of the Romney, who made the Seizure, was a discreet Man, and told
Mr. Hallowell that he had his Deputation with him.

A true Copy, In the Absence of the Clerk of the Papers. JOHN SPEED.

Copy of a Letter from the Lords of the Admiralty to the Earl of Hillsborough,
dated December 14, 1768.
Admiralty-Office, December 14, 1768. MY LORD,
HAVING received a Letter from Capt. Smith of his Majesty's Ship the Mermaid,
senior Officer of his Majesty's Ships and Vessels at Boston, giving and Account
of the Two Regiments of Foo^ and Company of the Train of Artillery, which he
brought from Halifax, being landed without any Opposition, and of his
Proceedings afterward: We send your Lordship herewith a Copy thereof for His
Majesty's Information, and are, etc.

E. Hawke, J. Buller, Palmerston.

A true Copy, In the Absence of the Clerk of the Papers. JOHN SPEED.

Affidavit of William Wootton, Inspector General of the Customs.
(Copy) Province of the MASSACHUSETTS BAY. Boston, March 18, 1768.
WILLIAM WOOTON, Esquire; one of the Inspectors General of the Customs in America,
appointed by the Lords of the Treasury, makes Oath, that on his Return to his
Lodgings the Last Evening, four Men passing him, one with a Stick or Bludgeon
in his Hand accosted him, saying, -- Damn your Blood, we will be at you
ToMorrow Night: I replied, you may come at me now if you please. They passed a
little further on, when one of them I suppose the same, damned me again, and
said, we will overset you all Tomorrow Night.

This happened between Nine and Ten o'Clock in the Evening; but I do not know
the Persons; nor do I know that they knew me.

WM. WOOTTON.
Sworn in Council before me, FRA. BERNARD.
A true Copy examined, A. OLIVER, Sec'ry.
A true Copy, In the Absence of the Clerk of the Papers, JNo. SPEED.

Copy of a Letter from Mr. Bradshaw to Mr. Pownall, Treasury Chambers, November
22, 1768.
(Copy) SIR,
MY Lords Commissioners of his Majesty's Treasury having, at the Desire of Mr.
Hallowell, Collector of the Customs at Boston in America, caused several
Corrections to be made in his Examination, which was taken at this Board on the
21st of July last; I am commanded by their Lordships to transmit the enclosed
Copy of the said Alterations to you for the Information of the Earl of
Hillsborough.

I am, etc. THOSE. BRADSHAW.
Treasury Chambers, 22d Nov. 1768. A true Copy In the Absence of the Clerk of
the Papers. JNo. SPEED. John Pownal,
Esquire;
Corrections in the Examination of Mr. Hallowell, on 21st July, 1768.
COPY of CORRECTIONS made in the Examination of Mr. Hallowell.
"THAT the better Sort of People would be for Government if they could be
supported," instead of the Word. "protected." -- And "that the Commissioners
could not return to Boston till some Measures were taken for their support,"
instead of "Protection."

"That the Mob which assembled prior to the Town Meeting." instead of at the
Time of the Town Meeting."

After the Words. "he thinks the present Spirit" to add, "of seeking their
Redress by Mobbing."

"The Captain of the Romney was applied to in the Name of the Collector only."

"The Fasts of the Vessel were", instead of "the Fast of the Vessel was."

"And when they were hawling them in," instead of "hawling it.

"The Collector only, desired the Officer of the Romney to take Possession of
the Vessel for her Security."

"The Master of the Romney into whose Charge the Seizure was delivered,"
instead of, "The Master of the Romney who made the Seizure."

A true Copy,. In the Absence of the Clerk of the Papers, JNo. SPEED.

Copy of a Letter from Mr. Bradshaw to Mr. Pownall, dated, Treasury Chambers,
22nd July 1768.
(Copy.) Treasury Chambers, 22 July, 1768. SIR,
I AM directed by the Lords Commissioners of his Majesty's Treasury to transmit
to you, for the Information of the Earl of Hillsborough, Copies of a Memorial
from the Commissioners of the Customs in America, and of several Affidavits and
Letters relative to their present Situation; as also the Examination of Mr.
Hallowell, the Comptroller of Boston, whom the Commissioners have sent Home
with their Dispatches; and to desire, that you will move his Lordship, that the
same may be laid before his Majesty, and that his Lordship, may receive his
Majesty's Commands for giving such Support to the Officers of the Revenue, in
the Discharge of their Duty, as shall be thought proper.

I am also to acquaint you, that the said Papers (so far as they relate to the
Seizure of the ship Liberty) have been sent to Mr. Nuthall, the Solicitor of
this Board, with Directions to take to his Assistance the Solicitors of the
Board of Customs, and Mr. Hallowell, and to prepare a full State of the Case,
to be laid before the Attorney and Solicitor General, that they may give their
Opinion, whether there has been any Thing illegal or irregular in the
Proceedings hitherto taken by the Officers of the Customs at Boston; and that
they may suggest to my Lords, what Steps it may be proper to direct the said
Officers to take, in the farther Prosecution of this Affair: And as soon as my
Lords have received the said Opinion, they will transmit a Copy of the same to
Lord Hillsborough.

My Lords have directed Mr. Hallowell to attend Lord Hillsborough, whenever his
Lordship shall require him so to do,

I am, Sir, Your most Obedient humble Servant, THOSE, BRADSHAW.
A true Copy. In the Absence of the Clerk of the Papers, JNo. SPEED. John
Pownall,
Esquire;
Copy of a Letter from Mr. Bradshaw to Mr. Pownall, dated, Whitehall, Treasury
Chambers, 31st Aug. 1768.
(Copy.) Treasury Chambers 31st August, 1768. SIR,
HAVING laid before my Lords Commissioners of his Majesty's Treasury a Memorial
of the Commissioners of the Customs in America, dated Castle William in Boston
Harbor 11th July 1768; enclosing Copies of Letters, which they have received
in Answer to their Applications for the Aid of his Majesty's Forces; I am
commanded by their Lordships to transmit Copies of the said Papers to you for
the Information of the Earl of Hillsborough, and to desire you will move his
Lordship to lay the same before his Majesty, that his Majesty may be informed
of the present Situation of the Officers of the Revenue at Boston, and of the
Apprehensions they entertain, that his Majesty's Castle at the Mouth of Boston
Harbor, where they are at present forced to reside was at the Time their
Letters came away, no otherwise secured from falling into the Hands of the
People, but by the King's Ships, which lie at present in the Harbor; and also
that his Majesty may be informed of the Answers they have received from General
Gage, Commodore Hood, and Colonel Dalrymple, to the Requisitions made to them
for Troops and Ships to be sent to Boston, for the Protection of the said
Commissioners.

I am, Sir, Your most obedient humble Servant, THOSE. BEADSHAW.
A true Copy, In the Absence of the Clerk of the Papers, JNo. SPEED.


