COLLECTION OF TRACTS FROM THE LATE NEWS PAPERS, etc.

CONTAINING PARTICULARLY, The AMERICAN WHIG, A WHIP for the AMERICAN WHIG, The
SENTINEL, A KICK for the WHIPPER, The ANATOMIST,
WITH SOME OTHER PIECES, On the Subject of the Residence of Protestant Bishops
in the American Colonies, and in answer to the Writers who opposed it. etc. etc.

VOL. II,

NEW YORK: Printed by JOHN HOLT, at the Exchange. M,DCC,LXIX.

Detached Pieces.
[From Mr. Gaine's NEW YORK GAZETTE. SEPTEMBER 12, 1768.] An EPISTLE from the
GHOST of a certain Pamphlet, Entitled, A LETTER to the Bishop of LANDAFF, Which
was inhumanly cut to pieces, and ignomiously lost its Life, the second Day of
June, A.D. 1768, The Day on which the Vindication of the Bishop of Landaff 's
Sermon was published.
Aetat, 3 Months, 2 Weeks, and a Day.
To the Tune of CHEVY-CHACE.
Fortes creantur fortibus et bonis:
Est in Juvencis, est in equis, patrum
Virtus: -- HOR. CAR.
Simile Simile generat.
VET. AD. The Cat breeds a Kitten, the Serpent a Snake,
The Son of a Sow is a Pig;
And who would ever think a good Churchman to make
Of a canting American Whig?
ANON.
1.
LO I, who whilom trod the Field,
Equipped in borrowed Glory,
With rude-front steeled, and brazen shield,
On Fame's light Wings to soar high; --
2.
With Truth's stiff slavish chains unbound,
A child of Fancy's shaping. --
A doleful Sound to echo round,
And set the World a gaping; --
3.
Too high, like Icarus, had flown,
No Fears my Mind appalling,
Till giddy grown I tumbled down,
And broke my Neck in falling.
4.
My Father is a mortal Swain,
His youngest Child was I,
Brought forth with Pain, from pregnant Brain,
To live an Hour -- and die --
5.
Practiced from Youth with Romish Heat,
His thirsty Arms to wield,
Though often beat, and made retreat,
He never was known to yield.
6.
His Fairy Pen, like Moses' Rod,
Could presently provide him
A groveling Brook of Vermin rude,
To buzz and croak beside him.
7.
Ah! Why did SUCH a Hero trust
To might like mine his Fame?
-- My doom is just, return I must
To Rags, from whence I came.
8.
And yet some cunning Elves would swear
My Tricks my Sire's resembled;
The Hint severe, the haughty Sneer
Of Malice ill-dissembled.
9.
Much, much, was I sent forth to boast
Of those brave priestly Legions,
Whose godly Host drove Witch and Ghost
From their celestial Regions:
10.
Much too, of doughty Doings done
By happy Saints, to vapor;
-- But now out-blown my Blaze is gone,
-- A mere extinguished Taper.
11.
And if, from all my Parts combined,
I may be a Foreboder,
My Friends will find I leave behind
No very grateful Odor.
12.
Ye Priests, unstained with earthly Ways,
By Christian-pity led,
The World may raise proud Victor's praise,
You crown the CONQUERED:
13.
Yet cease, my loving Friends, dete^'d
By what poor Me befell;
For Carrion stirred, you must have heard,
Will give a ranker Smell.
14.
But that I fall not useless quite,
My winding Sheets up-raise;
The gloomy Sight your Sons may fright
From such ungracious Ways.
15.
So Kites and Crows to Rapine bred,
We know are Birds of Prey,
Yet serve when dead, on Gibbets spread,
To scare their Mates away.
16.
Come hither all ye peevish Things,
Ye Hornets of the Age,
Buzz, clap your Wings, and whet you Stings,
And burn with little Rage!
17.
Still like my Sire's shall be the Fate
Of each invidious Elf,
For Envy, when it cannot fate
On Worth confessed, its brutal Hate,
Will prey upon itself.
From the Gulf of TARTARUS. September 9, 1768.
The following Poem, was published, in the PENNSYLVANIA CHRONICLE.
MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING.
YE lovers of freedom and ease,
A few words with you, friends, if you please.
We have been so much pestered, of late,
With disputes about matters of state,
And so tumbled and tossed by a tide
Of religious contention beside;
That, in truth, I suspect that a stranger.
Would think us in no little danger
Of running all into confusion.
A Stranger might draw this conclusion;
But -- however some Ranters may huff.
I think we are still snug enough.
For -- what do we care, do you see,
Whether Bigots, or no, can agree?
Let them wrangle, dispute, and discuss;
It Is a matter of moon shine to us.
To begin at the rear of the clan;
When John has done all that he can
In defending the Kirk with -- slap-dashes,
And the Sentinel (peace to his ashes!)
Has supplied, with waste-paper, the bakers,
Cooks, grocers, and periwig-makers;
When, by misrepresentation,
Bold scandal, and fierce declamation,
The Whigs shall have wearied their tongues,
And exhausted the force of their lungs; --
When the William Livingston' s letter to the Lord Bishop of Landaff is
subscribed by "The Author."
Letter, subscribed by -- the Author,
Shall have feasted an overgrown moth, or
In tatters slown out of our sight,
On the wings, or the tail, of a kite; --
When this Author -- without Aberration -- Indeed, my Lord, I question whether
there be a pamphlet in the nation, that, in proportion to the length of your
sermon, contains so great a number of aberrations from the truth. See the
letter to the Bishop of Landaff -- page first.
Aberration,
Shall have given his last attestation,
That New England rose under the banners
Of primitive faith and good manners; --
When that Eminent pattern of both,
That Fungus of seven weeks growth -- We are told, by the American Whig, that
the answer to Dr. Chandler 's appeal was written in less than two months; and
Dr. Chandler, with the convention to help him, is challenged, with an air of
civil triumph, to make a reply to the said answer in twelve months.
Fungus of seven week's growth!
(Who, in so short a space, did not stick
To send Chandler's appeal to old Nick,
And who bravely defeated Landaff
In less time than you think for by half;)
When Dr. Ram-Chicken -- His (Dr. Chandler 's) narrative from father Hardouin
-- is as much to the purpose, as if he had told the story of a cock and a bull,
and three Ram-Chickens. See the answer to Dr. Chandler 's appeal, page 25.
Dector Ram-Chicken of Boston
Shall have plucked you the beard of saint Austin,
And eclipsed all the Mayhews and Mathers,
By dancing the hays Round the fathers -- This writer advertised some time ago,
proposals for printing extracts out of the writings of the fathers, in order,
by their authority, to confute the advocates for Episcopacy.
round the Fathers; --
In a word -- when these puritan heroes
Shall have proved all our Kings to be Neroes,
And the Bishops -- those creatures of kings,
To be Dragons, with terrible stings;
When the farce of a Mock Reformation
Once more shall have worried the nation,
And -- to purge it of carnal pollution,
Subverted the whole Constitution;
And when the fanatical mother
Shall, instead of it, bring forth another,
A thing without name, by degrees
To be formed -- as the Brotherhood please,
Till the monster becomes a Republic,
As a bear into shape does her cub lick; --
Then! -- well, -- prithee tell us, what then?
Why then -- all will be quiet again.
Then, I hope, we may venture to sing
Tweedledum, without Bishop -- or King!
While we cheerfully toss of our glasses,
And bid all the world kiss -- and be friends.
DEMOCRITUS.
The PRINTER'S ADVERTISEMENT.
IN the Preceding Volume the several Pieces are inserted in the Order of Time
in which they were published, except two papers, a Whig and the Answer to it,
which were printed in Dutch, a Language few of our Readers understand: These
two papers, if the authors, or any other Persons would have sent us a good
Translation, we proposed to print at the end of the first Volume; but as that
is now finished, and no Translation has yet been sent us, if the Gentlemen
concerned or any other Person should think fit to favor the public with
Translations, and send them in Time, they shall be inserted at the end of the
Volume.

As the Anatomist published at Philadelphia, was written in Answer to the
Nineteen Numbers of the Sentinel, already published in the first Volu^e of this
Collection, it was thought best to print the whole of that performance (the
Anatomist) with the several pieces it gave rise to, which were intended as
Answers to particular Parts of it, altogether, in the beginning of this Volume,
without being mixed with the Writings of the Whig, Kicker, or Whipper, the
Printing of which we shall resume as soon as the System of the Anatomist and
his Satellites is completed, which may be had separately, or bound together
with the Whigs etc. to make it of equal Size with the first Volume. and

If upon finishing the second Volume we find the profits adequate to the
Expense, it is proposed to continue a publication Weekly in like manner, not
only during the Continuance of the Whig Dispute, but when that is finished, --
to consist of a Collection of such pieces as best deserve public notice, and
have from Time to Time appeared scattered through a variety of News Papers, but
were too long to be inserted in any one; and upon proper encouragement it is
hoped we shall be able upon this plan, to produce a useful and entertaining
Collection.

From the PENNSYLVANIA GAZETTE, Sept. 8th. The ANATOMIST [No. I.]
Give me leave, and I will stay this DRAGON, without sword or staff.

APOCRYPHA.
AT length after much noise and calumny, and many a false alarm sounded through
many a Weekly Journal, the doughty SENTINEL of Pennsylvania, the Hero of
Presbyterianism and Though Presbyterianism and Independency have ever but ill
agreed, on former occasions, there is a strange mixture of both in the Sentinel.
independency is heard no more!

Whether he has gone to sleep on his post where he had been long nodding
before, or has retired from it in the conscious triumph of having so
strengthened the hopes and fixed the vigilance of his party in America, that no
friend of the CHURCH shall henceforth dare to attack or even approach their
lines, or whether (as is more confidently said) his silence is only political
and for a time, in expectation that during one short month's forbearance of
slander and abuse, good natured easy Churchmen may be so made to forget and
forgive what is past, as to become willing tools to serve the purposes of their
very calumniators themselves at the ensuing election; I say, which ever of
these may be the cause of the Centinel's sudden and unexpected silence, the
ANATOMIST ventures to approach him with his instruments of dissection; yet
scorns to fall to slashing or cutting up in a manner unbecoming his profession,
without calling him to stand on his guard, whether he sleeps, or peradventure
dreameth awake, of his own past feats and wonderful prowess.

In short, to drop all farther allusion to the title of this paper, and to
proceed with great seriousness: -- The treatment which the Church has met with
for many months past, from certain shameless scribblers in three of the capital
provinces of America, has been matter of astonishment and grief to good men of
very different religious persuasions; who cannot but suspect some dark and
wicked design lurking under so much unmerited abuse.

That a CHURCH whose venerable martyrs, unawed by persecution, undaunted by
fire and faggot stood firm in support of the reformation; -- A CHURCH which is
the principal bulwark of protestanism and true English liberty, as well as the
brightest example of moderation and Christian charity to all who dissent from
her, should be thus basely vilified and traduced by an aspiring overbearing
party, who never knew how to exercise the like virtues when in power
themselves; and at a time too when the cause of general liberty in America
requires the closest union of all persuasions, cannot be easily reconciled to
any motives of public good.

An answer however to the Sentinel was forborne, that no interruption might be
given on the part of the Church to any union of councils that might be thought
necessary in the present crisis. To those worthy members who expressed
uneasiness at this forbearance, it was replied, that the foundations of the
CHURCH were on a rock, which could scarcely be shaken, much less overturned by
such attempts; that an answer would be given when it could be seen what plan,
if any, the Sentinel had; and when the measure of his abuse should be so full
that longer silence would be deemed inexcusable, and a retaliation be justified
in the eyes of all impartial men.

That time is now come. Whatever could be done for the public in our present
situation has been done, uninterrupted by any publications on the part of the
Church in Pennsylvania. If in matters of less consequence In defense of their
Country and their Liberties, whenever they shall be in danger, it will
undoubtedly be the interest as well as the duty of all denominations among us
to unite; but in nothing less than this have pr^sbyterians any right to expect
the attachment of Churchmen, whom they have so cruelly and ungratefully treated.
her members should be found considerably alienated from those who have so
basely traduced them, it cannot be deemed strange -- Indeed if they were
consistent with themselves, and really believed what they have printed, they
ought to be covered with confusion to solicit either union or communion, in any
matter whatsoever with the members of a Church, which their Sentinel and his
adherents have painted in the following odious characters, viz.

A CHURCH that has opposed the conversion of the Heathen in America: -- A
CHURCH that has encroached so long on the rights of conscience, and oppressed
her fellow Christians, that she can no more be trusted with power. -- A CHURCH
in which the pure word of God is corrupted and obscured with human inventions.
-- A CHURCH that maintains the mournful relicts of her ancient persecuting
spirit. -- A CHURCH that for half a century has squandered away large sums,
collected for the relief of the savages, in support of a few missionaries. -- A
CHURCH that is an enemy to the liberties of America, whose clergy love to fish
in troubled waters, and are exerting their utmost influence in conjunction with
Mr. Grenville to enslave it. -- Whose applications for American Bishops have
ever been preludes to attempts on Liberty; that such was their application
during the odious Stamp Act, and the like in the end of Queen Ann's reign, when
an open rebellion, the introduction of the Pretender, the revival of Popery in
England, and the establishment of Bishops in America, were all projected
together, etc. etc.

All these charges are to be found in the Sentinel and a writer to whom the
Sentinel can be no stranger, even goes farther and charges the Church roundly
with taking off King Charles's head.

If one asks the reason of this shameful attack on the Church? It is answered
by another question -- who was the aggressor? Why did Dr. Chandler begin? But
is Dr. Chandler the Church of England, or the ten thousandth part of it? or had
he any general commission from that Church, or even from his own brethren
belonging to it in America? This is not pretended; and it is certain, that no
more than half a dozen of them ever had an opportunity of seeing his pamphlet
till in print, and of that number, it is confidently said, not one to the south
of Delaware.

If Dr. Chandler has said any thing wrong (and what writer claims absolute
perfection?) he should be answered as Dr. Chandler, and set right in the same
mildness, that he himself has given an example of. Is it fair to attack the
whole Church; its doctrine, discipline and constitution, on account of the
writings of any single member? Would the Presbyterians think this fair in any
case of their own? As for example, Si parvis magna componere licet, the
venerable JOHN CARMICHAEL, the great advocate of the venerable Synod of
New York and Philadelphia has declared that he never knew that venerable body,
in any instance, act below their venerable character of ambassadors of the Lord
Jesus Christ; that they are upwards of an hundred gentlemen-clergy, all
reputable and learned gentlemen; that they keep an exact history of their
transactions, which is to be finally revised by an almighty, omniscient,
impartial, and most righteous judge.

Should any one conclude from those expressions (which might be done without
much violence to their sense) that John maintains the INFALLIBILITY of the
venerable Synod, and thinks their minutes fit for God Almighty's own revisal;
and should further contend that the slapdash An expression which John has
sometimes used in his preachments.
doctrines of John were the doctrines of the whole Presbyterian Kirk, which was
therefore to be deemed a ranting enthusiastic Kirk, a rotten Kirk, a popish
Kirk, maintaining more than the infallibility of a single Pope -- even the
infallibility of an hundred learned reputable Popes, in full synod or conclave
met -- would this be called fair reasoning?

And yet in the same way has the Church of England been treated on account of
Dr. Chandler, who nevertheless seems to have given no provocation for it, nor
uttered a single word reflecting on the principles of any protestant
denomination. If then Dr. Chandler had been the aggressor, (the contrary of
which shall be shown) if even he had advanced any thing indefensible on the
principles of law, liberty, equity and the Christian revelation, would this
justify the torrent of abuse and calumny which is poured forth on the Church in
answer to him?

The design of these papers, however, is not the defense of Dr. Chandler; who,
if he needs any, is sufficient for that office himself. They have a nobler
purpose in view -- the defense of our national Church -- of the religion of our
sovereign, and of the far greatest, and, may I be allowed to say, the most
respectable part of his subjects.

In prosecuting this design, (though the Sentinel has observed no certain
method) I think it necessary to fix some plan for my answer; and shall
therefore first show that Dr. Chandler, far from being an aggressor, is only a
defendant in a dispute which was commenced on the part of the antagonists of
the Church in New England as early as 1734; from which time their repeated
attacks shall be traced down to the publication of Dr. Chandler's pamphlet.

It is then proposed to enter the lists with the Sentinel and to show that in
the character of the Bishop, which he and his associates have drawn, they have
been combating a phantom of their own brain; that their true design is
evidently to oppress and bear down the Church for the sake of an empire of
their own, that they have nothing to do with that mode of government and
discipline which Episcopalians choose for themselves, unless they could at
least show some probability of its interfering with the rights of others; that
of whatever origin episcopal government is, whether humane or divine it is that
which many wise men have preferred, and probably ever will prefer to the motely
government of Presbytery, which is not indeed the tyranny of One, but too often
the tyranny and absurdity of many; and lastly that if the civil and religious
liberty of America is ever likely to be in danger from any religious persuasion
here, it is not from the CHUF^H, but from a restless and aspiring party, who
are giving too constant and melancholy proofs of the most intolerant and over
bearing spirit.

If in answering the gross charges brought against the Church, I should be
obliged to retort severely on the accusers, and show who are the clergy that
have indeed "loved to fish in troubled waters;" who are they that have in
reality applied to their own use, and to the use of their wives and children,
large sums collected for the use of the savages and frontier settlers in
America; who are they that have been King killers and nursed in rebellion from
their cradle. Lastly, if in answering the challenge of the Sentinel. No. V.
where he calls on our Church, "to show as much moderation as the New England
Churches." I say if in answering those charges and this challenge, I should be
forced even to to disturb the ashes of the dead, and be led to comparisons and
facts that may prove extremely disagreeable to the Sentinel and his adherents,
they must blame only themselves who by their illiberal and continued abuse,
have so abundantly extorted this reply.

In the course of these papers it will often be necessary to mention
Presbyterians as a religious society, in the same indiscriminate and general
manner, in which the Sentinel has mentioned the Church and Churchmen; but I
would be far from being understood by this, to mean every individual of the
Presbyterian persuasion. I know many among their laity, some even among their
clergy, who are real friends to the liberties of their country and of mankind,
and adorned with a truly Catholic and forbearing spirit. Such I revere, and to
such I trust no offense can be given while I rise in opposition to those of a
contrary spirit among them, namely their factious and aspiring leaders, the
greatest part of their clergy: -- For I see nothing sacred in the name of
Presbyterian to protect a sour turbulent party, that assume that appellation,
who by their unbounded zeal to multiply converts, and to exalt their own party,
and their uncharitable attempts to depress, vilify and misrepresent others,
especially the national Church of England, have justly alarmed the fears of
every other religious persuasion in America, and created a jealousy that the
sole view of this party is to erect an empire and establishment for themselves
in this new world on the, ruin of every other religious denomination. The steps
that they have lately pursued in America, compared with their conduct in former
times, when in the pursuit of empire in the Mother Country, give but too much
ground for this suspicion. But before they can succeed in their designs, they
will meet with a resistance far different from what is to be expected in this
paper. -- A resistance perhaps even unto blood. -- To prevent this, to bring
down their temper to the just standard of Christian charity and toleration; and
to show themselves to themselves and wipe off the reproaches which they have
cast on the Church, is the main design of this paper, -- which it is hoped will
be carried on with a firmness and spirit, worthy of such a design; and yet
without deviating into any recriminations or censures that are personal or not
necessarily connected with the defense in hand.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IF any gentlemen of leisure and abilities, the enemies of faction, and the
friends of religious liberty and toleration, choose to communicate their
thoughts to the public, upon the subject which the ANATOMIST has undertaken, he
will be happy in their correspondence, and will pay the highest regard to any
letters, essays, etc. which they shall be pleased to direct for him to the care
of the Printers hereof.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, Sept. 15th. The ANATOMIST. [No. II.]
-- "Dreadful Zeal!
Fierce and intolerant of all Religion
That differs from their own" --
THOMPSON.
IN the former number of this paper, it was observed that the common apology
made by the Centinel's friends, for the unmanly and illiberal manner in which
he has abused and caluminated the Church, is, that Dr. Chandler, by the
publication of his pamphlet, in favor of an American episcopacy, was the
aggressor. -- The futility of this apology has been fully shown. -- Dr.
Chandler made no attack on the principles of any protestant persuasion, and
therefore nothing done by him could justify an attack on the church in general
-- No way then can Dr. Chandler's publication justify the Sentinel, unless he
can show it to be a crime for a member of the church of England to contend for
those rights and privileges, which he considers as essential to the being of a
church -- But the Sentinel probably judges that all power and privileges in
America are the property of his own party as the ELECT; and that it is a daring
attack upon their prerogative, for any other church to claim even a being, much
less a well-being, in the same land with them. -- However, let this be, or not
be, the sentiments of the Sentinel, certain it is, that the presbyterians and
independents of New England have ever looked upon that country as a kind of
Deodand, or godly heritage, derived to them from Heaven; and to which none but
themselves have right or claim -- "We hold our lands" (says a Boston Almanac,
for the year 1763) "under no other Lord, but he who gave Canaan to Abraham."
See Verses and Remarks on Dr. Mayhew' s Observations, etc. -- By a gentleman of
Rhode Island.


Possessed with this notion (namely that God and nature designed New England as
the sole property and inheritance of the saints) they have always considered
those among them, who said their prayers in a different manner from themselves,
"As spies come to see the good land," or as intruders into their new Canaan,
their land of promise. And under this notion it was, that "they hanged up unto
the Lord" in Boston so many Quakers; And for above half a century have pursued
with grossest calumny and abuse, a venerable and truly charitable society The
Society for propagating of the Gospel in foreign parts.
for having only sent a few missionaries to preach the gospel of Christ,
according to the mode of the church of England, to such members of that church
as should be found within their limits -- All which will appear evident from
what follows.

I proceed therefore to show who have been the aggressors, and who the
defendants, in this cause; and, for the present, need go no farther back than
the year 1734.

In that year we find the presbyterians and independents aforesaid basely
attacking the church, vilifying her clergy in language which all the other
writers of that party, down to our magnanimous Sentinel, seem only to have
copied. -- We find them likewise claiming an establishment and empire for
themselves; loudly complaining that episcopalians should be suffered to
approach the Holy Land, or come among them to lay blocks in the way of their
church power; and therefore they boldly address the Bishop of London to send
the episcopal missionaries back among the savages, or to some other part of
America.

Both the address and answers being curious, and greatly tending to show the
early designs of this party for power and dominion, and their intolerant
uncharitable spirit, I shall give the necessary extracts from them.

Extracts of a Letter to Dr. Gibson, Lord Bishop of London, from the Ministers
of Hampshire, September 10. 1734.
We would approach your Lordship with humble deference and respect,
acknowledging our own distance and meanness, and hoping your goodness will
render you a righteous judge, though in your own cause, and toward your
inferiors, as holy Job professes he did not despise the cause of his
Manservant, or his Maidservant.

Now, what is it these pious men want his lordship's goodness to judge in?
After three long paragraphs, or rather pages, in which they give themselves an
excellent character, as the faithful pastors of Christ, and the true preachers
of the gospel, they desire his lordship to judge of his missionaries, and take
them away; and, to help his lordship's judgment, they proceed as follows:

The missionaries are neither necessary or profitable, but as to many instances
injurious to the interest of the kingdom of Christ, and the good of his
majesty's subjects.

The missionaries that come among us, endeavor to render the government of our
churches insignificant, by receiving into their communion and protection, such
as lie open to, or are under censures in them for immoral behavior; which
things tend to breed disorder and confusion in our churches, by cherishing a
small number of disaffected persons in several places, to the ill example of a
whole town.

We cannot but look upon it great injustice, it having been openly declared to
the world, that our Fathers left their native land, and at vast expense
purchased and settled a wilderness, that they might, in a place of their own,
serve God according to their consciences, in peace, without giving offense to
other governing powers.

Observe, good reader, with what openness and candor these Hampshire ministers
speak -- Here is no disguise or mincing of the matter -- They come slap dash to
the point, and not only call the country 'their own,' but claim also dominion
and sovereignty over it; and already rank themselves among the governing
powers. How ardently do these good men seem to wish for the day, when they may
be able -- "To make PRESBYTERY supreme
And KINGS themselves submit to them."


HUDIBRAS.



But an opportunity of doing this, they thought, might be lost if episcopal
missionaries were sent and settled among then -- For, after telling the bishop,
in the words already quoted, that their Fathers settled a wilderness that they
might, in a place of their own, and without offense to other governing powers,
serve God according to their consciences, they proceed to inform his lordship,
this is, a liberty which we have too great reason to fear may in time be
wrested from us, by means of such missionaries, as have set themselves to set
blocks in the way of our having synods convened, for reforming such evils as
have a threatening aspect upon us. -- We would not take upon us to judge men's
hearts, but we heartily wish that the honorable society might not be misled,
and that missionaries might have the worthy views of carrying the gospel among
the heathen, or to such parts of his majesty's dominious where ignorance and
error prevail, and have no provision made for them. -- Mighty kind indeed, was
their wish for the missionaries! -- But not so kind, I am afraid, was their
intention toward them; as appears from the treatment they have ever since met
with in those parts of his majesty's dominions.

A letter from Dr. Coleman of Boston, of the same strain with the above quoted
letter, accompanied and enclosed it to the bishop, who answered Dr. Coleman,
and left the society for propagation of the gospel, etc. to answer the
Hampshire ministers.

Extracts from the Bishop of London 's Letter to Dr. Coleman, dated May 24th,
1735.
In answer to their claim of an establishment, or exclusive right to the
country, his lordship writes,

I need not descend to particulars, because you will clearly see the sentiments
of the society in their answer to the ministers. -- But my opinion has always
been, that the religious state of New England is founded in an equal liberty to
all protestants, none of whom can claim the name of a national establishment,
nor any kind of superiority over the rest; and that therefore every instance,
in which either ministers or people take upon them to act as if they were a
national establishment, is a violation of the charter, the adhering to which as
a rule to all, is, in my opinion, the only sure foundation of peace and love
among the several denominations or professions, who have an equal right to the
benefit of it. -- I am aware, that acts of assembly have passed in New England,
which seem to favor the notion that one denomination of protestants is the
established church there. -- And some of those acts may have obtained a
confirmation here, for want of a due attention to the charter, and to the
consequences of them, with regard to the other denominations: But a doubt may
be raised, with respect to the validity of them, so far as they shall be found
contrary to the tenor of the charter: And besides, a national church, and the
independent way, are things which the bishops and clergy here know not how to
reconcile.

Thus we see what was the opinion of Bishop Gibson, one of the ablest men, and
greatest civilians of his age, concerning the claims of presbyterians and
independents to church establishments, and an exclusive empire of their own. --
An empire which indeed they (...) never attain, while Great Britain continues
to have any sovereignty over this country, and our legislative acts remain
subjected to the negative of our most gracious sovereign. -- But should the
case ever be altered in these respects, every religious society in America will
have just cause to dread the aspiring spirit of this intolerant party. O my
children! -- Upon the prospect of such a change, how should I tremble and
lament for you! -- How far these people might in the issue agree in the
division of power, too probable it seems that they would join together in their
attempts for dominion over all others. After those two parties, presbyterians
and independents, had united to overturn church and state in the mother
country; and, by such a union, had effected their purposes; each party claimed
dominion or superiority over the other. -- For this they sought and struggled
for about ^0 years, and, at last, rather than either should rule, both joined
in the restoration of King Charles II. to the kingdom of his ancestors, by this
time reduced to anarchy and ruin. -- And, as it was in the days of old, so
would it be in the days that are now.


As to the charges brought against the the missionaries, the bishop referred
the New Hampshire ministers to the society for propagation of the gospel, etc.
who, in their letter of May 16, 1735, observe,

1st. That the fund of the society is not a confined charity, or restrained to
any place otherwise than as specified in the charter, viz. ^is majesty's
plantations, colonies and territories beyond the seas, belonging to the kingdom
of England. -- And 2dly. That it is the plain design to empower the society to
support learned and orthodox ministers, to instruct his majesty's subjects in
the principles of true religion, where there is not a sufficient provision for
to live among them.

And though it may be alleged that the presbyterians and independents were in
many places provided with ministers, according to their persuasion; yet there
were considerable numbers of people in severel places, who could not join with
the dissenters there in their form of worship, but were desirous of joining in
communication with the church of England, and were wholly unprovided of
ministers; and in such places only the society have supported missionaries,
upon the earnest desire of the people, and their promising to contribute to the
utmost of their abilities toward their support

And whereas it is objected that missionaries are sent where there are
dissenting teachers; the society remarked further, in answer thereunto, that it
is notorious that here in Great Britain several dissenting teachers are sent to
many market towns, and other places, where there is a legal incumbent; which
teachers ar^ also partly supported by a fund raised here in London.

And whereas it is represented that the design of the donors is not answered in
supporting missionaries in several places of of New England, the society here
remarked, that they print yearly an account of the place where missionaries are
sent, and their reasons for sending them, and that such accounts are
distributed to all the benefactors, who therefore cannot be unacquainted with
this matter of fact; and consequently, the society have good reason to think
that the said donors are so far from disapproving this method of the society,
that they would not contribute, if the society did not send missionaries to
such places.

With respect to that part of the letter, signed William Williams, moderator,
wherein it is expressed by him, in the name of the associated ministers (so
called) that it has been often openly declared to the world, that their
fathers left their native land, and at vast expense purchased and subdued a
wilderness, that they might, in a place of their own, serve God according to
their consciences, in peace; it appears to the society, that in the charter
granted by the late King William to the province of Massachusetts Bay, in
New England, it is established or ordained, that forever hereafter there shall
be liberty of conscience allowed in the worship of God to all Christians
(except papists) inhabiting, or which shall inhabit or be resident within the
said province or territory: And therefore the society concluded, that the
members of the church of England are at least equally entitled to the
privileges and immunities with his majesty's protestant subjects of any other
denomination -- And upon looking into the laws of Massachusetts Bay, the
society could not but observe there are many laws which tend to establish a
particular sect; and one at least extending so far as to oblige persons of
every persuasion, even those of the church of England, to pay toward the
maintenance of the ministers of that particular sect, in direct contradiction
to their charter, which restrains them from the power of making any laws
repugnant to the laws of Great Britain.

Signed, DAVID HUMPHKEY'S, Secretary.



The next attack made upon the church which I shall take notice of, was in the
Independent Reflectors and Watch Towers of New York; and in a history of that
province by a gentleman who calls himself William Smith, A. M. These with
proper remarks shall be the subject of a succeeding paper.

From the PENNSYLVANIA GAZETTE, Sept. 22. The ANATOMIST [No. III.]
I Should have proceeded to the next attack made on the church in America by
the Independent Reflectors, Watch-Towers, etc. of New York, as proposed in my
second number; but having received the following letter, containing some
observations and historical facts, so immediately connected with the subject in
hand, that I cannot omit giving it a place here, -- The kind reader, I am
persuaded, will indulge this small deviation from the plan, when he considers
how much my correspondent justifies the present defense of the church, by
showing that the violent assaults she has suffered were so far from being in
consequence of Dr. Chandler's appeal, that they were commenced above a century
before the time I had fixed for their date, (namely the year 1734) -- even in
the earliest period of of American presbyterianism and independency.
To the ANATOMIST.
"Son of man, be not afraid of them, neither be afraid of their words, though
briars and thorns be with thee, and thou do dwell among Scorpions; be not
afraid of their words; nor be dismayed at their looks, though they be a
rebellious house." -- Ezekiel. vi. 6.
SIR,
LONG has the impartial public looked for the defense which you have now
begun. -- The church of England has ever been deemed by all protestants (a few
hotheaded sects who assume that appellation excepted) a church not only pure
and orthodox in her doctrines, catholic and charitable in her principles, but a
church likewise which has been a glorious instrument in helping forward the
reformation, and in asserting and supporting the cause of protestantism even in
the triumphant days of papacy, when the sword of persecution was often sheathed
in her bowels. -- This is a character which the reformers themselves have given
her, -- and which the wisest and ablest divines abroad have declared to be due
to her. Monsieur Le Moyne, professor of divinity at Leyden, a man distinguished
in the learned world, and whose assertion will receive credit wherever his name
is known, in a letter to the bishop of London, observes, that the foreign
protestant churches have always viewed the church of England in this light. --
C'est ce qui sont les protestants de France, ceux de Geneva, c^ux de Swisse,
and d^ ^gne, and ceux d'Hollande aussi. Car ils se firent un f^ri grand
^^nneur, d^avoir dans leur concile de Dordrecht des thealogiens d^angleterre,
and monstrerent bien qu'^ls avoient pour Pliglise ^nglicane une profonde
veneration. -- Et d'on vient done. que des ^nglots memes en ont aujour^buy si
mechante opinion? -- Thus, says he, all the protestants of France do, those of
Geneva, those of Switzerland and Germany, and those of Holland too; for they
did themselves a very great honor in having some divines of England in their
Synod of Dort, which plainly discovered that they had a profound vencration for
the church of England -- How comes it then, that some Englishmen themselves
have so (...) an opinion of her? -- This is a question which must naturally
arise to every person, not acquainted with the intolle^ant uncharitable spirit
and selfish designs of those Englishmen whom the good professor alludes to: But
we, who "have seen with our yes and heard with our ears," the things which they
and their children have attempted, are at no loss to discover the motives that
did, and still do, influence their conduct. To obtain as exclusive dominion,
founded on true Oliverian principles, Who can say that this is not even now the
wish and aim of those restless zealots, who reads in the last public prints,
Boston, August 29, Yesterday a gentleman in this town had a child baptized at
one of the north churches by the name of Oliver Cromwell. -- Evident surely it
is that they would use the means, if power were not wanting, to overturn again
our boasted monarchy -- "But," (I use the words of a sensible writer upon a
like occasion) alas for them! the principal part of their apparatus is wanting,
Oliver Cromwell is not at the head of forty thousand cutthroats, to carry
their measures into execution.
and with it, a power of tyrannizing over the consciences and religious
sentiments of all who should presume to differ from them, have, ever since the
days of Knox, been the constant aim of those people. -- The church of England,
ever friendly to our present glorious constitution, and to the religious rights
of every protestant denomination, has constantly opposed them in these
pursuits; and for this reason they hat^ the church of England, and "have so ill
an opinion of her." -- They look upon her as the grand obstacle in their way,
which if they could once remove, their wished for superiority over the rest of
their fellow subjects might, they think, be easily effected. In it not then
equally the duty, and the interest too, of every religious society in the new
world, as well as of the church of England, to make head against this aspiring
party; and to join un^nimously in crushing the cockatrice in the egg, which
otherwise may and assuredly will, one day become a fiery flying serpen^?

It was a reflection of this kind, joined with the consideration of their
rivet^d malice, and long unprovoked abuse against the church, which, no doubt,
induced you to propose a weekly dissection of the Sentinel and his associates.
In the prosecution of so necessary a^nadertaking you (...) have the good wishes
of every real friend of our civil and religions libe^ties. The cause you have
embarked in is a virtu us cause. It is the cause of freedom struggling against
the rude attack of ^^pation. The plan you have proposed is a good one, but will
require to be more enlarged. For, (to use the sentiments of an old vindicator
of the church) "you must expose the hypocrites naked, and stripped of their
artificial beauties. You must take off those false jewels of piety and
innocence, which strike with so much luster, and so fatally impose upon the
minds of credulous and easy people; you must offer them to be surveyed by the
light of nature, reason and religion; you must represent them to the world in
the mirrors of their own manufacturing; and if they dislike the figures and
images they reflect, they cannot lay the blame on you, but upon their own
deformities; you must convince ^ deluded vulgar, that under all those
sanctimonious appearances, those saintly faces, this whining about gospel
liberty, this snivelling about persecution, this puking at liturgies and
ceremonies, and this bellowing against bishops, there lay once concealed the
ruin of a flourishing kingdom, and the subversion of a happy church; you must
show the world that the cause of those faints has always been carried on and
supported by muskets and bibles, psalm books and rusty swords; you must teach
posterity wisdom by displaying the sufferings of their ancestors, and by
distinguishing the eternal blessings of a British monarchy from the confusion
of usurpation, and a fantastical republic."

All these things, Mr. Anatomist, and much more, you must take into your plan,
if you expect to complete your work. I am not insensible how much you will
expose yourself to the fury and resentment of those foul-mouthed republicans by
these means. Every man that meddles with them may expect to have "briars and
thorns with him, and to put his hand into a nest of hornets, or a hole of
scorpions; 'and such a man ought to have innocence and law upon his side to
protect him against their stings. But when guarded by these, it would be
criminal in him to fear when he contends for the truth. I cannot doubt, without
doing great injustice to the opinion I have conceived of you, but that you will
proceed 'with a firmness and spirit" worthy your undertaking. But in order to
show the world the early designs of this faction in America, and how soon,
after they were persecuted into the wilderness, they opened their batteries and
attacked the church, you must "go farther back than 1734:" -- And as I have the
following facts, faithfully deduced from history They are chiefly collected
from modern history, Vol. 6.
just at hand, I convey them to you for these purposes. I begin then with the
introduction of independency into New England in the year 62^; but first, let
me say something of its origin. The independents, known at first by the name of
Brownists, from one Robert Brown, their sounder or leader, "were the very worst
and most troublesome of all the English sectaries. By the rebellious principles
they taught, they rendered themselves so obnoxious to the government, that they
thought fit to transport themselves to Amsterdam, where they soon began to
differ among themselves, and crumble into so many parties, that Mr. Brown grew
weary of his office; and r^ing to England, renounced his principles of
separation, and was preferred to the rectory of a church in Northamptonshire.

This revolt of Brown was attended with almost the total dissolution of his
church; but part of the scattered flock being collected by Mr. John Robinson,
one of their preachers, they removed with him to Leyden about the year 1610.
Here they remained 7 years, but at length, the Dutch either grew weary of them,
or they grew weary of the Dutch, for they complained of having suffered very
great hardships among them, declaring that imprisonment in England was
preferable to the condition of refugees in Holland, whereupon many of them
actually returned to England. Robinson and his elders apprehending a general
desertion, hit upon this expedient to keep them together, and increase their
numbers: They represented that New England was not only a place that abounded
with all things desirable in life, but that there were great expectations of
discovering treasures equal to those of Mexico or Peru, and that there they
might become the founders of some mighty state. Such a promising scheme could
not fail of having the desired effect; the adventurers therefore set themselves
to work to purchase a territory in New England of the Plymouth Company, and to
obtain a patent from the crown. The motives made use of at court to obtain this
patent were, the glorious pretense of propagating the Christian religion among
infidets: the extending his Majesty's dominions; enriching their mother
country; and preventing both the French and Dutch from poss^^ing themselves of
this desirable country. All things being at last agreed on, our Brownists,
alias Independents, embarked at Delft in Holland, in July 1620, and arrived at
Cape Cod in New England on the 19th of November following. As soon as they got
footing on shore, they determined to have no regard to the patents they had
obtained from the crown, but to elect a governor, and strike out such a form of
government as best suited their designs. Having therefore formed an
association, and agreed to submit to such laws as should be approved by a
majority, they dre^ up and signed an instrument to that effect; and then
elected Mr. John Carver for their governor.

Soon after this, Mr. Weston, a merchant, came over with a number of
passengers, in order to form a settlement, and accordingly sat down at a place
called Wesagusquaset, afterward Weymouth; but unfortunately for Mr. Weston and
his people they happened to be members of the church of England, and being
therefore looked upon with an evil eye by the independents, and abandoned to
the fury of the savages, they were obliged to quit their settlement, with the
following character from their pious and godly neighbou^, Weston and his men
were so scandalously wicked, that they were a nuisance to the very savages.

Soon after this, Capt. Gorges came over with several families, and Mr. Murres,
a minister, all of the episcopal persuasion, with a design to restore the
settlement Weston had quitted; but this gentleman also finding how obnoxious he
was to the Saints, returned to England, and says the puritanical historian "his
bishop followed him."

The company in a little time after, sent over Mr. Lyford as chaplain in the
Plymouth colony, who being an episcopalian, would have performed divine service
and administered the sacraments after the manner of the church of England; but
the planters compelled him to conform himself to their way of worship, and at
last drove him fairly off.

Some of the planters however, being conscientious churchmen, and finding that
they could have no ministers of their own, set up an assembly, wherein they
used the liturgy of the church of England; and of these Mr Samuel Brown, a
lawyer, and his brother John Brown, a merchant, men of estates and figure, were
the chief, being of the number of the first patentees. The deputy governor
sending to these gentlemen to demand the reason of their separation, they
represented, that as they were of the church established by law in their native
country, it was highly reasonable they should worship God in the manner that
government required from which they received their charter; at least they ought
to allow the members of the church that liberty of conscience they themselves
thought so reasonable when they were on the other side of the water; and as one
article in their charter provided that all persuasions of Christians should
have liberty of conconscience, they did not know whether their denying it to
them was not a forfeiture of their charter. But these arguments were called
seditious and mutinous, and the holy brethren, determining to suffer none to
reside there, that were not of the same levelling principles in Church and
State as they professed, forced the two Mr. Brown's to return back to
Old-England in the same ship that brought them over.

About the year 1630, one Mr. Blackstone, an Episcopal minister, built a little
house opposite to Charles Town, by virtue whereof he laid claim to the whole
Peninsula, but the inhabitants of this town observing that the parson's
situation was preferable to their own, they immediately dispossessed him, and
justified the outrage by suggesting that Mr. Blackstone was an odd sort of a
man, who would not join himself with any of their New England churches; and
when they had driven away this odd sort of a man, they laid the foundation of
their capital city upon this very spot of ground, to which they gave the name
of Boston."

Having thus silenced or banished the Episcopalians, they then fell foul of one
another, and divided into two factions, the one zealous for the covenant of
works, and the other for the covenant of grace. For as the witty Butler
observes, -- "Zeal's a dreadful termagant,
"That teaches saints to tear and rant,
And Independents to profess
"The doctrine of dependencies;
"Turns meek, and secret, sneaking ones,
"To raw heads fierce, and bloody-bones;
"And not content with endless quarrels
"Against the wicked and their morals,
"The Guibellines, for want of Guelfs
"Divert their rage upon themselves.
"For now the war is not between
"The brethren and the men of sin;
"But saint and saint, to spill the blood
"Of one another's brotherhood" --


In short, the covenant of grace-men were severely handled, and being at length
banished, retired to Rhode Island, where they planted a colony. I am the more
particular in these matters because a late infamous scribbler has asserted, by
"refugees who fled from the persecutions of the imperious Archbishop Laud,
were Boston, Rhode Island, etc. first planted." And for the same reason, I beg
to add the following extract of a letter sent by some of those Refugees to the
bishops, clergy and members of the Church of England, from on board the ship
Arabella, when they were quitting their native land; which will show how
unjustly this cry of persecution has been kept up.

We beseech you, Rev. fathers and brethren, by the mercies of the Lord Jesus,
to consider us as your brethren, standing in very great need of your help, and
earnestly imploring it. And however your charity may have met with some
occasion of discouragement, through the misreport of our intentions, or through
the disaffection or indiscretion of some of us, or rather among us; (for we are
not of those who dream of perfection in this world) yet we desire you would be
pleased to take notice of the principal and body of our company, as those who
esteem it an honor to call the Church of England, from whence we rise, our
dear mother; and we cannot part from our native country, where she especially
resideth, without much sadness of heart, and many tears in our eyes; ever
acknowledging, that such hope and part as we obtained in the common salvation,
we have received in her bosom, and sucked from her breasts. We leave her not
therefore as loathing that milk wherewith we were nourished there; but blessing
God for the parentage and education, as members of the same body, shall always
rejoice in her good, and unfeignedly grieve for any sorrow that may ever betide
her; and while we have breath, sincerely desire and endeavor the continuance
and abundance of her welfare, with the enlargement of her bounds in the kingdom
of Christ Jesus, Hutchinson's Hist. of Massachus. Bay, vol. I.
etc. etc. -- This letter was signed by John Winthrop then governor, and a
great number of reputable adventurers.

In this manner did some of the persecuted refugees write and speak of that
church and her clergy, whom their enlightened sons have since so much abused,
calumniated, and mal-treated!

But here I shall stop, and leave you to trace those people from the period you
have proposed. In the mean time, if any thing should occur to me, which I think
may be necessary to elucidate this subject, you may expect to hear from me
again, being very much,

Mr. ANATOMIST, The friend of Liberty, Truth and the Church, HORATIO.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL. Sept. 29. To Messrs. William and Thomas
Bradford, Printers of the the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL.
GENTLEMEN,
As in various instances you have given undoubted evidence of your
impartiality; particularly by your giving a place not only to the American Whig
and Pennsylvania Sentinel, but also to the Anatomist; I hope therefore; you
will insert the following in your very useful paper, which will oblige more
than your friend

IRENICUS.
THE God of Truth has informed us, that a kingdom divided against itself cannot
stand; and that such as bite and devour one another, will be destroyed one of
another. And the evidences we have in every age of the truth of these
assertions, must oblige all to grant, that the strength of a people depends on
their harmony in sentiment and conduct.

Those therefore who study to promote truth and concord among men, ought to be
considered as their true friends; whereas such as endeavor to divide, and stir
up contentions, may justly be deemed their enemies and destroyers. How
affecting is it then that measures of this destructive nature are pursued by
any among us? As I learn from a late paper, there are, by one who styles
himself the Anatomist. As for the Sentinel whom he attacks, the American Whig,
or yet Dr. Chandler, I know little of them; having read but a few paragraphs in
any one, and not seen the others, and therefore cannot be a judge of what they
have said. Nor is it my design to vindicate ^he Sentinel; should that be
requisite, it belongs to himself. But I am informed that Dr, Chandler raised
the debate, at this time, in these middle provinces, and publicly insisted for
an answer. And if the Sentinel has given one, and therein attacked the Church
of England, this is not to be imputed to the Presbyterian or Independent
Church, as the Anatomist does, had the Sentinel gone ever so far wrong. For (to
use the Anatomist's own way of reasoning, which in this appears just) is the
Sentinel the Independent, or yet the Presbyterian Church? or the ten thousandth
part of either of them? Or had he any general commission from these Churches;
or a commission from any in them? That is not pretended. It does not appear
that so much as one, much less that half a dozen, ever had the sight of the
Centinel's pieces till in print. If the Continel has said any thing wrong, (and
what writer claims absolute persection) he should be answered as the Sentinel,
and set right. Is it fair to attack the whole Church on account of the writings
of any single person? Would the Episcopalians think this fair in any case of
their own? How unfairly then does the Anatomist act (himself being judge) who
(when speaking of the Church of England) says, it has been basely vilified and
traduced, by an aspiring over-bearing party, (referring to the Presbyterians)
and that if they were consistent with themselves, and really believed what they
have printed, they ought to be covered with confusion to solicit either union
or communion, in any matter whatsoever, with the members of a Church which
their Sentinel and his adherents have painted in the following odious
characters. And then, he mentions various charges against the Church of
England, which he says are to be found in the Sentinel. And having found these
in one who calls himself the Pennsylvania Sentinel, (whether a Presbyterian or
not I cannot tell) he goes on to represent the Presbyterian society in a very
shocking light indeed; is no way sparing of the basest characters, which, it
seems, come readier to him than arguments. He even insinuates, that they are at
last begun to plot some horrible things; and that the civil and religious
liberty of America is in danger from them; with abundance of the like. In his
visions he is even carried into the field of battle; and talks of resisting
unto blood! It Is to be hoped that Presbyterians will not surmise that such
scurrility and unmannerly treatment is approved of by any sober Churchmen. It
cannot. History informs us that in Britain, Ireland, Germany and America,
Presbyterians have been full as loyal and pacific as other churches; and we
have found it true. The Anatomist, by overturning the rubbish of confused
times, may find enough in any Church to make him cautious. By raking up the
ashes of the dead, and representing things agreeable to his own temper, he may
indeed foment debates, promote jealousies in the minds of inconsiderate
persons, and favor some political plans not very salutary to the colonies.
But, is it likely, that by good reasoning, he will either be of service or an
honor to the Church of England? On the contrary has he not given too much
reason to suspect, either tha^ his capacity is insufficient to maintain a
consistency in his reasoning, or that his passions will not permit him? Even
the paragraph of Mr. Carmichael, that he has foisted into his piece, though not
expressed in the best manner, may be taken in a consistent and justifiable
sense; but his own performance never can. And is not such a defense worse than
none? Wherefore, if he would be so wise as to take a friendly advice, he would
resign the Sentinel at present to another hand. And if he really believes what
he has printed, that the Sentinel has been long nodding, he need not doubt that
he has dropped asleep, and consequently that it would be no credit to an
Anatomist either to flay him, or begin his kind of operation upon him in that
condition, but had better take a nap also. Would he but yield to this, we might
have some hopes that after his awaking he would be much better composed, and
inclined to entertain us with something salutary and pacific. Therefore,
wishing him a calm repose, I proceed to seek what is of more importance, the
peace of my country.

Although our separate interests in these American provinces have sometimes
occasioned jars; yet the harmony that of late appeared in support of our common
privileges must, I think, afford unspeakable pleasure to every lover of his
country. For my own part, I consider the man as a friend, a brother and a
patron, who undauntedly exerts himself to promote a rational concord either in
Church or State. Some have merited well of the State by their essays to unite
us in political affairs, as the Pennsylvania Farmer. And would to God that the
zealous contenders for Christianity would show their skill, and be more
assiduous in laboring to heal our unchristian divisions in the Church. Upon
this head let me beg the attention of such, to the following queries. Is there
any country in the world more divided in their sentiments about religion than
we are? Are not our divisions very injurious in many respects? Do they not
weaken confidence, promote jealousies, mar our profiting by the gifts and
talents of each other, put a stumbling block in the way of infidels, open a
door to error, and greatly dishonor God? Would not our agreement in spiritual
truths and duties tend more, firmly to unite us in our temporal affairs, and
render us more like an army with banners, yea like the heavenly society? Has
not the Church of Christ been long expecting and praying for a time of greater
purity and peace? And has not God himself given us grounds to expect this by
his promise Col. xiv. 9. that he shall be king over all the earth; that there
shall be one Lord, and his name one; and by many other places to the like
purpose? He will surely accomplish his promises in the use of means; and as he
has not told us the time when, ought we not always to be using such means as
appear proper? Do we expect or can we attempt any thing more noble in this
world? How absurd would it be for enquirers after truth (which we all profess
ourselves to be) to content themselves with being of the same religion with
their ancestors, so glory that they are of the same religion with the King? Has
all been attempted that can, or may not the same attempts be renewed? Although a
reconciliation with some has long ago been attempted in vain, are we sure it
will always be so; or are all differences of a religious nature incurable? A
union between Episcopalians and Presbyterians is desired by thousands on both
sides. Their difference in articles about the doctrines of religion is next to
nothing. There is not that strictness with regard to some canons and ceremonies
that used to be; and an emendation in these is desired by a great many sober
Episcopalians. We have no dignified Clergymen whose interest might perhaps
prevent their yielding to some requisitions that possibly might be thought
reasonable, so that now is the fittest like season. But if an agreement between
these churches cannot be effected, perhaps it might between others that do not
differ so much. And were prudent and Christian measures taken, a better
understanding might be promoted among all Consider that attempts of this nature
have been successful of late years among some who had been at great variance. A
happy omen truly! But as some desire to hear the minds of others, I hope they
will take the opportunity and speak freely. And let them consider, that the
Lord blesses the peacemakers, and calls them his children; whereas he who
sows discord among brethren is one of those seven things that are an
abomination to the Lord. If persons of moderation and judgment on each side
would agree heartily to discuss the matters of difference, adhere to necessary
regulations in their reasoning, submit to the corrections of men chosen to keep
them to rule; might not this answer a good end? Especially if friendly
conferences were agreed upon and kept up. Si quid novisti rectius istis
candidus imparte, si non, his utere mecum.

IRENICUS.

The ANTI-CENTINEL, [No. II.]
AT length after many a promise and many a threat, portending great events, the
ecclesiastical Anatomist stands forth brandishing his knife. Long had our
Church complained that a person of such profound erudition and mighty in words;
long distinguished as the hopes and pillar of episcopacy in this new world,
should like another Achilles, have lain by in his camp, while our enemies were
carrying all before them with fire and faggot; but he foresaw and marked the
critical season, when the Sentinel being a sleep, he might fall upon him, cut
him limb from limb, and give his flesh for food to the fowls of the air, and
the beasts of the field. Long had I desired to contribute toward the desirable
work of demolishing that doughty Sentinel; but while the first rate advocate of
our Church stood by in silent gaze, I thought it would be prudent to forbear.
-- Encouraged now by the Anatomist, who kindly invites all the enemies of
faction and friends of religion, liberty and toleration, to communicate their
thoughts to the public, I have ventured, though not so fortunate, as he is in
leisure and Abilities, to bespeak the attention of the public, while I offer a
few arguments in favor of an American Episcopate, in opposition to the
Sentinel, and all his scribbling factious friends. I have said, I shall offer
some arguments, the reader is not to suppose they are such trifling ones as
Bacon or Lock would have offered; but such as are usually advanced by the
advocates of our Church in this more enlightened age: -- Yet conscious how
unfit I am to produce any new arguments that will bear this test, I shall
generally take the liberty of borrowing from the Anatomist, -- Hanc veniam
petimus: damus que vicissim.
I shall borrow from him in particular.


1. Because I am persuaded that for certain reasons we are both acquainted
with, he cannot in conscience complain of my using the freedom.

2. I am persuaded he will say, all that need be said on the subject, and so
render it needless for me to attempt investigating new arguments.

3. I take this to be the most effectual method of convincing our antagonists;
for one good argument well seconded, that is, as lawyers understand it,
advanced a second time with a little abbreviation or paraphrase, as may seem
best, has always been found to do more execution than twenty arguments simply
advanced without any friend to support them.

By this time the reader understands that I do hardly assume the character of
an author, being content with the more humble rank of an editor or translator,
and yet considering the greatness of my original, this same is no
inconsiderable station -- Even as the secretary of a powerful Monarch is
dignified above the clerk of some little peddling store-keeper. I have taken
the liberty, to call this paper the Anti-Centinel, and would have it considered
as a supplement to a paper that was published some months ago, of which, as the
author seems to have discontinued it, I have ventured to borrow the title,
since my plan too is very similar to his, mutatis ^utandis. -- In prosecuting
this work, though I don't preclude the liberty of saying any clever thing that
may occur on the subject, yet I shall generally confine myself to seconding,
enforcing, abreviating and explaining the arguments of the Anatomist; and that
he may have the credit to which he has a title. When I use his arguments, they
shall be marked with inverted coma's -- when I use his very words, they shall
be marked in Italick. Such, reader, is to be the plan of the following papers,
proceed we now to demolish the Sentinel.

EXORDIUM.
A set of shameless scribblers -- an overbearing party, in three of the capital
provinces in America, who certainly are actuated by some base and wicked
design, have had the insolence and temerity to speak and write against the
Church -- against our Church, against that Church which is the bull-work of
protestantism and true English liberty, A Church, which unawed by Presbyterian
persecution, fire and faggot, stood firm in defense of the Reformation, and is
now the brightest example of moderation to all who differ from her -- and more
moderate still to those who agree with her. -- We should have answered those
shameless scribblers and the Sentinel among the rest much sooner, we refrained,
lest we should interrupt a union in councils among the inhabitants of this
province, at this dangerous crisis, and yet for all this was the reason, we are
determined not to have any union or communion with them, for they certainly ha^
some dark wicked design lurking under such open (which is more dangerous than
secret) abuse, and so we will not unite with them in councils, for we believe
in our hearts that they intend to make tools of us at the ensuing election, to
serve their purpose. -- We imagine they intend to put a certain Republican
Writer into the Assembly at next election -- but we are resolved he shall not
go there, for he is an enemy to the colonies, at least, he is an enemy to the
prerogative of parliament and ministers of state, from whose favor we hope for
an Episcopal estblishament; and whom, for that reason, we are determined to
serve, come what will of the more trifling Liberties of our fellow subjects.

The Sentinel has painted the Church in the most odious characters. He calls
her -- A Church that has long encroached on the rights of conscience, and
oppressed her fellow Christian, -- which is not true, for she has no test act
-- A number of other falsehoods he has advanced about her corrupting the pure
word of God by human inventions -- squandering away large sums of money in
support of missionaries, and such groundless aspertions -- Wherefore is our
Church loaded with all this calumny? For no other reason than that Dr. Chandler
in the spirit of meekness wrote a small book, in hopes of recommending an
American Bishop -- But why should Presbyterians be angry with Dr. Chandler for
such an innocent milky performance, surely he said no harm of them. He only
said, or rather hinted, that they are all rebels in America, and have no
natural right to any place of profit or trust under the government -- that
their teachers are no ministers, and that they are no Christians -- Now surely,
it is not fair to abuse the Dr. for this meek sort of writing, much less is it
fair to abuse the Church on the account of its advocate Dr. Chandler, any more
than it would be fair to traduce the Synod of Philadelphia, on account of their
advocate John Carmichael, for the cases are perfectly similar, with this
trifling difference, that the Dr. wrote by the approbation, order and
assistance of a general convention of our clergy, and John only wrote for and
by himself dis-connected with any soul living. Yet, notwithstanding that the
cases are so perfectly similar, we have the good nature and modesty not to
insist much on it. That the Synod are acountable for John's blunders, as when
he says or swears that he is the learned member of a learned body, while the
very performance proves that he is quite as illeterate as any son of our Church
in that part of the country, which is saying a great deal for him. Ah John!
John! It Is a pity you had ever thought of printing your lucubrations since you
had no time to write for the Press. If you should ever think of appearing again
in print be persuaded to pursue a different plan. -- Take example from your
brother Thomas up the way -- Since you are ignorant don't be ashamed to steal,
it is a common and a thriving traffic; whether you preach or publish, don't
trouble the world with any more of your slap-dash sermons; borrow or steal,
though it were from another Church -- Some good Christians hold all things in
common -- By such shifty means, as these, unanimity and public spirit not long
since elevated a Missionary in our Church, to the highest pitch of eminence and
literary fame. -- But of this on some future occasion. In the mean time I
insist on it, that unless we traduce the Synod on John's account, it will be
very indecent in the Presbyterians to speak hard of any other person living, on
account of Dr. Chandler, who, as I proved just now, has not uttered a single
word reflecting on the principles of any protestant denomination. But the
design of the following papers, is not the defense of Dr. Chandler, which by
the way brings me in compliance with the prevailing custom, to present the
reader with a bill of fare. In the first place, negatively, though we are going
to answer the Anatomist, who has attempted a formal refutation of Dr.
Chandler's argument, yet we shall not so much as attempt to support the Dr. and
of course, we shall not interfere with the Sentinel, except to call him a
factious scribbler, etc. -- I know better things than to defend the Doctor or
his appeal, we have observed what advantage the adversary has gained over him,
and have therefore resolved to surrender him and his appeal to be devoured by
Whigs and Sentinels, knowing, that it has ever been accounted better policy to
desert a weak fortress, than attempt its defense, -- Secondly, by answering the
Sentinel, we humbly presume no man can be so absurd as to think we have any
thing to do with the truth and validity of his arguments upon the danger of
Episcopal establishments in this new world, etc. such arguments are below our
notice. But thirdly, we are determines to carry the war into the enemy's
country, and give them a Rowland for their Oliver. -- We shall prove that the
Presbyterians and Independents are and have been enemies to our Church, and
that for this and several other reasons they are a set of factious, seditious,
restless, ambitious, hypocritical, enthusiastic, fanatical, rebellious,
impudent fellows. These things, with sundry others, being fairly proved or
being frequently asserted, it must follow of natural consequence that a bishop
is a very harmless person. That introducing him here by act of parliament,
vesting him with proper powers, and maintaining him by a small public tax, etc.
is not, and cannot be injurious to the civil or religious liberties of any
denomination of Christians on the continent. Perhaps the reader does not see
how such consequences can follow from the premises; but they must and shall
follow -- for to speak our mind plainly, we have a had opinion of the vulgar
method of handling a debate -- Nothing is so stubborn as plain direct argument;
We are determined to shun it -- But we shall deal pretty freely with the
characters of the dead, and if the Sentinel or his ghost should ever think
proper to answer us, we shall lead him such a wild-goose chase from one piece
of scandal to another, that no person shall be able to guess, in a little time,
what was the original subject of debate. -- As to the question whether a bishop
should be sent over to America, how he should be established, and how the
liberties of other denominations of Christians would be safe within his reach.
These are articles we resolve not to meddle with. They are thorny questions --
We hope to keep them out of sight. Such is our present plan, which, for the
prudence discovered therein, we hope will obtain the reader's approbation.

P. S. If any person has any objections to make against the Anatomist, let him
send th^^ to the Printers hereof, and they, with the proper answer to them,
shall obtain a place in the Anti-Centinel, for we are determined to rescue his
labors from all kind of darkness or ambiguicy.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, Sept. 29. The ANATOMIST, No. IV.
I AM again obliged to solicit the reader's indulgence in behalf of my friend
HORATIA, who having, it seems, found leisure to collect additional remarks,
with regard to the early attacks upon the CHURCH in New England, is desirous of
having them inserted before I begin with those which have been made upon her at
New York: -- And as these remarks tend to show that the opposition to the
Church was not by starts and turns; or in consequence of any unkind or severe
treatment which its antagonists might have received, but, for a long series of
years, carried on without remission and without provocation, I willingly comply
with the gentleman's request.

To the ANATOMIST.
"I have spread out my hands unto a people, which say, stand by thyself, come
not near to me, for I am holier than thou: These are a smoke in my nose."

Isa. lxv. 2, 5.
SIR,
THERE are no people upon earth who decry self-righteousness so much as
Presbyterians and Independents; and yet, if we may judge from their outward
deportment and conduct, they think there are none righteous and holy but
themselves. Of the like stamp with these were the Pharisees of old, who the
Evangelist tells us trusted in themselves that they were righteous, and
despised others. Luke 18.6.
But, notwithstanding all the pretenses that men can make to superior sanctity,
when we behold them come forth with scripture in their mouths, and enmity in
their hearts; infringing the civil and religious rights of their fellow
Christians; hanging, banishing, and basely ^raducing such as they suspect might
thwart their darling schemes for exclusive territory and dominion, we may
conclude, without a breach of charity, that such men are not " holier than"
those whom, they desire to "stand by" themselves, and to "come not near to"
them. The Church of England ha^^ constantly been, and still is, the principal
object of the jealousy and opposition of Presbyterians and Independents. This
is the Church which gives the greatest check to their political designs; and
this, therefore, is the Church whose foundations they have been so long
struggling to raze and demolish. And that there may never be a time when these
attempts shall be given up, they take care to transmit their enmity to the
Church from generation to generation. They are taught from their cradles to
think ill of her, and to look upon her principles and doctrines as "an
abomination unto the Lord;" and these opinions are confirmed by their teachers,
who constantly cry out, "down with her, down with her even to the ground." So
that the furious zeal and uncharitable spirit, which we find diffused through a
considerable part of their laity, are in a great measure to be charged upon
those who have undertaken to be their instructors. The chief part of their
prejudices against the Church they derive from the sermons they hear in their
Meeting Houses. There, they are taught to pray (not as our blessed Lord taught
his disciples Though the Directory, Westminster Confession, and Catechisms
recommend the Lord's Prayer " to be used in the prayers of the Church." And
likewise recommend that "one chapter of each testament be read at every
meeting;" and that the Apostle's Creed be used publicly; yet all those duties
are generally omitted, lest the people should observe the least conformity
between the Church of England, of which they had heard so much ill, and the
Kirk, of which they had heard so much good.
But) for the downfall of popery and prelacy in one breath. There they are
taught to make no distinction between the Church of England and the Church of
Rome. To call the habits of the Clergy, ^ags of the Whore of Babylon It ought
to be observed that this reproachful name has been chiefly laid aside since
gowns and cassocks have crept into Presbyterian pulpits. For now there is
scarce a stripling that has been emancipated from College, and received "the
hands of the Presbytery," who does not strut and flaunt about in those once
antichristian and popish habilements. Sic tempora mutantur et nos mutamur in
illis!
-- Our prayers and liturgy, the Romish breviary and mass book -- Our worship
and ceremonies, superstition, carnal ordinances and idolatry -- And our bishops
and clergy, bastardly governors of the Church; priests of the devil; petty
antichrists, beelzebubs of Canterbury; scarlet whores; Caiphases; cozening
knaves; liars; drunkards, hogs: wolves; dogs; bloody murderers of souls;
robbers of Christ's Church, etc. etc. See Martin Marprelat. Udal's Dialog.
Admonit. to Parl. Sion's Plea. Bancrost's dangerous positions, etc.


Hence it comes to pass that a true-blue Presbyterian "will no more enter a
Church than he would the house of Rimmon. To hear the service of the Church
would be to hear Mass. And if you enquire of him what exceptions he has to the
book of common prayer, he will with closed eyes and up-lifted hands, thank the
Lord he never saw it. If any of his friends are to be buried in a Church yard,
he will scarce stay to see them "committed to the ground," so much is he
frighted at the funeral service. As for the sign of the cross he will scamper
away from it as fast, as the Roman Catholics fancy evil spirits and hobgoblins
do." See London Cases, Fol.


And to such ridiculous heights had their zeal carried them in this last
mentioned affair, that history informs us of one Roger Williams, pastor of a
meeting at Salem, New England, who among the many wild and extravagant notions
into which he had led his followers brought them to conceive so ill of the sign
of the Cross, that in the height of their zeal they cut the cross out of the
King's standard, declaring it to be an Idol. The people thereupon became
divided in their opinions, whether it was lawful to have the cross in their
colors or not. Several furious books were wrote and published on each side of
the question; and most of their militia refused to march with the colors so
long as the cross remained in them, lest they should be thought to do honor to
an Idol; while others were for following the colors with the cross in them,
lest their deserting them should be interpreted a casting off their allegiance
to the crown of England: But at length the magistrates and officers compromised
the matter in the following manner; they ordered that all castles and ships
should have the same colors as formerly, but that the cross might be omitted
in the colors belonging to the regiments of militia. See State of New England
in modern history, vol. 6.


When we read of the Egyptian's worshipping monkies, cats, crocodiles, garlic
and onions; of the people of Madagascar being at everlasting strife with such
of their countrymen as will not pay adoration to an elephant's tooth, which,
they say, fell down from Heaven; of the Turks and Persians who charge each
other with sin and heresy on account of their different head-dresses, the
former wearing white turbants, and the latter red bonnets, does not our
astonishment abate, when we look around us, and find among ourselves a people
who would willingly be distinguished by the name of sensible men, reformed
Christians, and enlightened protestants, whose religious opinions lead them
into such ridiculous extravagancies, as those mentioned above; and excite them
to quarrel with, and charge their neighbors with heresies and errors for
things as harmless and indifferent in themselves, as a white turbant or a red
bonnet?

Such absurd opinions and so base a treatment of us are not only unjust to the
Church, but most scandalous to those teachers who inculcate and encourage them.
They blame (and very justly) the Romish clergy for stopping up, as much as
possible, every avenue of knowledge from their laity, and keeping them in the
dark, lest they should receive informations that might be injurious to the
designs of priestcraft. But what shall we say of those protestant clergy, who
keep their followers, in some respects, as much in the dark; Who persuade them
that the Church of England is so infested with popish errors; antichristian
principles, and idolatrous ceremonies, that it is not safe to hear her; and in
short, that salvation is attainable only within the pale of the Kirk? A
gentleman of unblemished reputation, bred in New England. and several years a
dissenting teacher there, declares that he has often heard from dissenters,
both ministers and people, that they not only believed, but knew for certain,
that all Churchmen go to hell. I well remember, says he, when Mr. Muirson, who
first introduced the worship of the Church at Stratford died; and soon after
one Isaac Nell, a Churchman of an unblameable conversation died also; presently
afterward there was found in the street, a copy of verses, one of which ran
thus, "Isaac Nell is gone to Hell,
" To tell Mr. Muirson that his Church is well."


See Beach 's Friendly Expostulation, page 8.


It is true the moderate, sensible and thinking part of their followers do not
choose to submit to an implicit faith, but to judge for themselves: And
accordingly we find, that such of them as have examined our articles, perused
our liturgy, and heard our religious services performed, have, at least,
thought favorably of the Church, and have wished her prosperity. But the
moment that any favorable or friendly dispositions appear in the people
toward us, they are checked and discouraged by their leaders and pastors. This
appears evident from numberless instances, and particularly from the following
one, faithfully deduced from history; and with which I shall finish my remarks
of the early and violent opposition which the Church met with in New England.

"Soon after the establishment of the society for the propagation of the gospel
in foreign parts, in the year 1701, the Rev. Mr. Muirson was sent Missionary to
Rye, in the government of New York. The people of Stratford in the colony of
Connecticut, distant from Rye about 60 miles, earnestly requested Mr. Muirson
to pay them a visit, to which he agreed. Colonel Heathcote, a worthy gentleman
of a considerable interest in West-Chester, was pleased to accompany Mr.
Muirson in this progress, and afterward wrote to the society the following
account of their reception there. We found that colony much as we expected,
very ignorant of the constitution of our Church, and therefore enemies to it.
The towns are furnished with ministers chiefly Independants, who were very
uneasy at our coming among them, and abundance of pains were taken to terrify
the people from hearing Mr. Muirson; but it availed nothing, for
notwithstanding all their endeavors, we had a very great congregation; and the
people were wonderfully surprised at the order of our Church, expecting to have
heard some strange thing, by the accounts and representations of it that their
teachers had given them.

These people having zealously pressed Mr. Muirson to come again to them, he
was honored with Colonel Heathcote's company in his second visit. They now
found the people much more earnest to have the Church worship settled among
them, and the Independents more incensed. The ministers and magistrates were
remarkably industrious, going from house to house persuading the people from
hearing Mr. Muirson, and threatening those with punishment and imprisonment who
would go to hear him preach. Mr. Muirson describes their opposition in these
words. One of their magistrates, with some other officers, came to my lodgings,
and in the hearing of (...) Heathcote and a great many people, read a (...) ing
of it was, to let me know, that I had (...) thing, in coming among them to
establish a new way of worship, and to forewarn me from preaching any more; and
this he did by virtue of one of their laws, the words of which, as he expressed
them, were these -- Be it enacted, etc. That there shall be no ministry or
church administration entertained or attended by the inhabitants of any town or
plantation in the colony, distinct and separate from that which is publicly
observed and dispensed by the approved minister of the place. -- Now, whatever
interpretation the words of the said law may admit of, yet we are to regard the
sense and force they put upon them; which is plainly this, to exclude the
Church their government, as appears by their proceedings with me. So that
hereby they deny a liberty of conscience to the Church of England people, as
well as to all others that are not of their opinion; which being repugnant to
the laws of England, is contrary to the grant of their charter.

But these methods which the Independents used, were so far from hindering the
people from resorting to the Church service, that still greater numbers came;
and other towns sent and invited Mr. Muirson to visit them; particularly the
people of Fairfield, to whom he went next. The Independents used all means to
obstruct him, and refused him the use of the meeting house, though on a week
day; but the principal gentleman of the town invited him to his house, where he
preached to a numerous congregation, and afterward described to the society
the opposition he still met with in these words: The people were likewise
threatened with imprisonment and a forfeiture of five pounds for coming to hear
me. It would require more time than you would willingly bestow on these Lines,
to express how rigidly and severely they treat our people, by taking their
estates by distress when they do not willingly pay to support their ministers;
and though every Churchman in that colony pays his rate for building and
repairing their meeting houses, yet they are so set against us, that they deny
us the use of them, though on a week day. All that the Churchmen in this colony
request, is, that they may not be oppressed and insulted over; that they may
obtain a liberty of conscience, and call a minister of their own; that they may
be freed from paying to their ministers and thereby be enabled to maintain
their own; this is all these good men desire. See Humphrey's Historical Account
of the incorporated Society, etc.


Such has been the opposition, and such have been the grievances which the
Church met with in New England. I hope the accounts I have furnished you with
will not be thought impertinent to your subject; and that you will give them a
place before you proceed any further. Perhaps you may hear from me again. For
the present, I shall conclude with this observavation, that hard indeed, is the
lot of the people belonging to the Church of England! The Papists would burn us
for being Protestants, and the Presbyterians and Independents would demolish us
another way for being Papists! The present confederacy against the Church (...)
truly a formidable one -- Papist and Arian, Presbyterian and Independent,
Atheist and Deist, American Whig and Gentinel, all attempting to overturn her,
in order to erect upon her ruins their own giddy systems. But this Church, thus
attacked, and thus abused, instructs all her sons to pray for their
adversaries. Let us therefore, in the words of our "most excellent liturgy, say
-- We beseech thee good Lord, to forgive our enemies, persecutors and
slanderers, and to turn their hearts.

I am yours, etc. HORATIO.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, Oct. 6. The REMONSTRANT. No. I.
Qui pergit, quae vult, dicere, quae non vult, audiet.

TER.
DR. Chandler's appeal is a noted performance, in which he represents the
episcopal church in America as oppressed, persecuted and groaning under
unparallelled hardships for want of an episcopate established in these
colonies. He with great confidence proposes a new plan of episcopacy, agreed on
as he asserts, by the episcopal church in England and America, which unlike the
episcopate established in England, shall have no concern with the probate of
wills or affairs matrimonial or relating to scandal, nor hurt the civil or
religious rights of any other denomination; and he challenges every man in the
colonies or else where to make objections to this new plan, if they have any,
or if they be silent, it will be taken for granted that all parties acquiesce
and are satisfied.

He has likewise strongly asserted the divine right of diocesan episcopacy, and
the necessity of an uninterupted succession of bishops for the ordination of
ministers, nay he makes this unbroken line as necessary, as to believe in Jesus
Christ, and thereby excludes all the ministers of the protestant churches from
the number of Christ's ministers, who derive not their pedigree from St. Peter,
disregarding this ridiculous pretension.

He represents the prelates that are to be sent on this new plan, as persons to
be invested with great power and dignity, to protect both the clergy and laity;
for whose support great funds are provided; who may possibly be entrusted with
great power in our civil affairs, and for whose support he tells us, it is
reasonable that we should all be taxed, and that we deserve not the name of
good subjects if we should complain if taxed for this purpose; nay, he tells
us, that the episcopal church is established in America as well as in England,
for it is a part of that church, and all that belong not to that church by law
established, have no natural rights to any degree of civil or military power.

When such a challenge was given to all the American colonies, is it a crime,
to make objections when thus called on by the Doctor? Were his high pretensions
to be passed without notice? or how can this universal appeal be called a
continuation of a dispute between the episcopal and other New England
ministers? Was the appeal made to them only, or was it to every denomination in
the English colonies? or did Dr. Chauncey who wrote a methodical answer to the
appeal ever understand or suspect, that it was a continuation of an old
controversy? The Sentinel does not think that he had any concern with the
New England controversies, the rejectors of diocesan episcopacy in those four
provinces are able to manage their own affairs, and in the judgment of most men
are more than a match for their adversaries in America, even with the
assistance of their friends beyond the Atlantic, though we are told that a high
dignitary of the church of England refreshed their drooping spirits by his
seasonable interposition, nay Dr. Chandler, sets this controversy in a
different light and tells us, that having addressed the public on the
expediency of an American episcopate, he and his brethren judged it a matter of
necessity and duty fairly to explain this plan on which bishops had been
requested to offer to the public the reasons of this request, and to obviate
objections: For this reason he was ordered to publish the appeal, that all
might either be satisfied or that such as were not, might publish their
objections, yet our modest Anatomist declares the Doctor was not the aggressor,
and thus all these objects that he dislikes or cannot answer, are called
unmerited abuse.

It has been often objected to Dr. Chandler, that he has given the world no
assurance that his proposed plan of Episcopacy so savourable to civil and
religious liberty is approved by all the Episcopal Churches in England and
America; that if it gave all the colonies the universal satisfaction that he
expected, yet it was proposed by himself only, or by a few of his friends, and
would be denied or opposed by all the narrow bigots in that church, it would
probably be rejected by the powers that could confirm i^, for some political
reasons, as it would weaken the dependency of the colonies on the mother
country; and it would be rejected by all sober men, because these bishops were
only to inspect the morals of the clergy, whilst the laity were totally to be
neglected. And it was alleged that prelates, if once sent among us, would
erect their ecclesiastical courts, as in former times, and possibly vex every
religious denomination, that they were pleased to call dissenters, as in the
days of Archbishop Land, and some of his successors, whose tyranny drove many
to seek habitations in this wilderness. These fears aroused and alarmed great
numbers who paid little regard to Dr. Chandler's fair words, whilst they saw
the dangerous snare laid for their liberties by his specious proposals. And we
find already by the Anatomist, that our fears were just, that most of the
episcopalians paid no regard to his pretenses, for he now asks, -- Had Dr.
Chandler any general commission from that church or even from his brethren
belonging to it in America? This is not, says he, pretended. It is certain that
not more than half a dozen of them ever had an opportunity of seeing his
pamphlet till in print.

The Centines's debate is only with Dr. Chandler, and he with his friends are
loudly called on to answer the Sentinel and to show his mistakes; if he bears
hard on the church of England as by law established, with respect to her
ecclesiastical courts, or any other part of her conduct, he or they are to
vindicate her as far as it can be done with truth and candor, and her
vindication will be heard with pleasure and fairly acknowledged, where the
defense is just; but this doughty champion declines this task. Yet to say
something like argument, he cries the national church is abused, he will defend
the national church -- the religion of his Sovereign, and of the far greater
and most respectable part of his subjects, and Dr. Chandler is, by him, set on
a level with Mr. Carmichael, whom no man ever employed nor thanked for meddling
with public affairs, both we hope are good men; but our respect for Doctor
Chandler, makes us resent the comparison.

How noble is the purpose of the Anatomist and how secure of a victory? He is
in the same situation with the champion at a coronation, who armed cap a pee
challenges all pretenders to the crown, in the presence of the king and his
guards -- But the Anatomist with the bloody knife in his hand must be put in
mind, that his argument had equal force in the mouth of all the heathen powers
who persecuted the primitive church. It would have equal force in Turkey in
defense of the A^oran, against the religion of Jesus; and in France, against
all the protestants, that have been inhumanly persecuted since the revocation
of the edict of Nantz. They all plead for the national religion, the religion,
of their sovereign, and of the most respectable part of his subjects.

We respect the church of England as by law established, and she is deservedly
respected by all Christian churches.

She has had martyrs that sealed the truths of the gospel with their blood, and
many bishops, ministers, and common Christians eminent for learning, piety and
charity, that have been esteemed bright ornaments of our holy religion: And
with pleasure we acknowledge that her complexion is greatly mended by the act
of toleration.

But she never pretended to infallibility, she daily confesses to Almighty God,
that she has erred and strayed like a lost sheep, and done many things which
she ought not to have done, during the long and severe execution of the acts of
uniformity, the act against conventicles and others, that distressed the
followers of the same Redeemer and the children of the same heavenly Father;
her looks were savage and severe, and bore a near resemblance of her who was
drunk with the blood of the saints: there were always in her a moderate and a
high flying party, and the last were for severe measures to all that did not
come into their measures. And had the corporation and test acts never existed
she had been more lovely and the spouse of him who was meek and lowly in
spirit. We revere her merit, but are not blind to ber imperfection; in her
there is great room for a reformation, this the best of her own sons do allow;
nay they loudly call for it; the Lutheran and Calvinist churches were and are
still more truly the bulwark of the reformation than the church of England.
They bore the burden and heat of the day, when old Harry was pleading the cause
of popery, and acquired from Rome the glorio^ ^itle of defender of the Faith.
The church of Scotland and the Dissenters in England and Ireland, and the
Fresbyterian states of Holland, deserve their share in these praises, or this
boasted bulwark had on some occasions proved but a tettering desence.

The Anatomist tells us the treatment this church has met with for many months
past, from certain shameless scribblers, in three of the capital provinces in
America, is matter of astonishment and grief to good men of very different
religious persuasions, who cannot but suspect some dark and wicked designs
lurking under such unmeritted abuse. Men of dark designs are not so apt to give
abuse, they strike in silence, and had not these three capital provinces been
alarmed with (...) dark designs of a turbulent discontented party which began
to appear in Dr. Chandler's Appeal, and been thereby a^^^^ed from their
security, to examine how far an American episcopate was consistent with our
civil and religious liberties, these shameless scribblers, as he politely calls
them, had not set pen to paper on this subject. And if the danger from
ecclesiastical courts, if they should take place among us, must not be
mentioned, if it be unmerited abuse to set before the world, the tyranny and
severity of these courts as they have been managed in England; all other
religious denominations, from the days of Elizabeth have constantly abused that
church, and the fears of being subjected to this yoke of bondage and nothing
else has given occasion for what is here called unmerited abuse.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, Oct. 6. The ANATOMIST. No. V.
-- You lie so open
That I without a Telescope
Can find your Tricks out, and descry
Where you speak Truth, and where you Lie.
BUTLER.
ALTHOUGH furnished with sundry papers from Horatio, and other correspondents,
which would still further demonstrate the early settled plan of New England
Independents, etc. to oppress and bear down the Church, for the sake of
erecting an exclusive dominion of their own, yet I am unwilling to lengthen out
these papers into more numbers than those of the Sentinel. I likewise forbear
many things on account of the present critical situation of the people of
New England; and would not be provoked, to seek any ungenerous advantage, from
times or circumstances.

The eyes of many are now upon them. If the present lead which they take in the
affairs of America be with the single view of supporting the cause of general
Liberty; if it shall betray no thirst for dangerous pre-eminence, no
unconstitutional opposition to a Church and nation that have so long nursed
them -- we sincerely pray them -- God speed! We are alike interested; our
feelings for liberty are the same; and all their evil treatment of Churchmen in
America, I am persuaded, will not make them stand aloof in the common concern.
But if a contrary spirit should appear; if, in any case, the bounds of law and
the constitution should be leaped over; then thousands who will be brought to
suffer with them, will be ready, without the Anatomist, to heap upon their
heads the political as well as religious transgressions both of themselves and
of their forefathers; and all the fatal consequences that followed from attacks
on the national Church in a former age, will be too justly apprehended from the
like attack in the present.

With these reflections, which may stand in the room of many that might come in
this place, I leave these people for the present, and proceed to a more
southern province, where the opposition to the Church has been more properly
and strictly Presbyterian; but the mode and spirit of it the same.

The antagonists of the Church in America are well aware of the grievous
hardships she labors under, in being obliged to send her candidates across an
ocean of 3000 miles for holy orders, and in being at that distance from the
government of Bishops, -- the only mode of government which she can hold
agreeable to her constitution. They know further that while this con^^^ces to
be the case, she can have no chance of keeping pace in her growth, with
Presbyterians or Independents, who have opportunities of filling up every
corner of the country with their preachers at small expense, and no risk or
delay of ordination. And therefore they think, if they can continue the Church
under this hardship, and prevent the introduction of a Bishop into America, by
painting the whole order in odious characters, and dangerous to liberty, they
shall be able, when they arrive to their Mr. Styl^ (...) writer in the
New England colonies, has endeavored to she^ that their congregational
Churches alone will in a century make (I think it is) ten million of souls.
prophesied Ten Millions, to swallow her entirely up in this new world, and
perhaps enable their brethren to do the like in the old.

There is another measure which they think will facilita^^ this end. They
confider the annual bounties or salari^^ given by the venerable society to
missionaries in America as some support to the Church here, and perhaps an
inducement to some young men to subject themselves to the peril^ of the ocean
in a voyage for holy orders. The constant endeavor therefore of those
antagonists of the Church, is to dry up that fund, by representing it as
misapplied and perverted from its original intention. This charge is always a
leading one in every attack upon the Church in America; though it has been
often abundantly answered, and though it be evident that the greatest part of
the fund comes from the clergy of the Church of England themselves, who well
know for what purpose their charity is bestowed, and applied; not to mention
that the accounts of the society, agreeable to charter, have annually the
solemn sanction of the heads of the three great courts in Westminster Hall.
Strange it is then that the great oracles of the law, the whole clergy of the
Church, and thousands of pious benefactors in England, should all be so
deceived in the original design of this society, or should be so desperately
wicked as to connive at, or encourage a perversion of it; and that a few
zealots at 3000 miles distance should be the only persons acquainted with the
purposes for which the society was instituted.

Upon this plan were a set of papers written and published at New York, in the
years 1752, 1753, called the Independent Reflectors and Watch-Towers, which I
scarce think it worth while to disturb in that silence wherein they now rot,
especially as every thing worth notice in them has been hashed out into new
dishes, by the Sentinel, and will be answered in the proper place.

Soon after the publication of the Independent Reflectors, etc. a history of
New York was published by William Smith, A. M. in which the old hackneyed
charges against the society for the propagation of the gospel were carefully
inserted. No doubt that gentleman imagined that this work (being a history and
quarto volume) might have a greater chance of reaching posterity than loose or
detached papers; and I am persuaded he would take it amiss to have it passed
over in neglect. I shall therefore the more readily bestow some notice on is,
as the A late writer, in an excellent pamphlet written in answer to Mr.
Livingston 's letter to the Bishop of Landaff, has the following just remark on
Mr. Smith's partiality, "The author, though obliged to plead the indefeasible
right of his profession founded upon immemorable prescription, for being too
verbose -- although his verbosity is discovered in ^^awing the characters of
the Presbyterian ministers in New York, and in the profusion of praises he
bestows on them; yet when speaking of the Revd. Mr. Henry Barclay, Rector of
Trinity Church, he is not in the least verbose. He is such a niggard of his
words that he can only give this pitiful information -- "that Mr. Barclay had
formerly been a missionary among the Mohawks." It was more consistent with the
apparent design of his history to tell, that "the tops of the pillars that
support the galleries in Trinity Church are decked with the gilt busts of
angels winged, and the alleys paved with flat stones; than to place good Dr.
Barclay's character in a just light, or mention his labors and success among
the Indians." So far this writer -- and had Mr. Smith only neglected to give
Dr. Barclay due praise, we should have had less to say. But the society and Dr.
Barclay too were to be charged by this impartial historian, with neglecting the
Indians, perverting their fund, etc. which charge the Sentinel repeats, and
therefore the same answer will serve for both.
partial and ungenerous manner in which he has written on certain points, will
be a further proof of that spirit of bitterness and intolerancy transmitted
from father to son, through his whole party, against the Church.

It is lucky for me on this occasion that I have nothing to do, but to
transcribe an answer which was prepared for that part of Mr. Smith's history,
soon after its first appearance by the late worthy Dr. Henry Barclay, Rector of
Trinity Church in New York; who had the best opportunities for detecting the
particular misrepresentations here referred to. It pleased God that Dr. Barclay
did not survive the finishing this answer long enough to publish it, nor was he
in any particular haste about it; but he had intended it for the press, sent a
copy to the venerable society, and another copy to some of his brethren in
Pennsylvania; from which the copy now before me was transcribed. I shall lay
before the reader such extracts from it as seem necessary in the present
dispute: And if what has been inserted in the two former numbers from my friend
Horatio, should to any appear too severe (though not near so severe as the
provocation given) I am sure the amiable Christian spirit of Dr. Barclay will
be pleasing to all, and I think must even induce Mr. Smith himself to venerate
his memory.

The answer of this worthy man begins with a remark (which it is thought will
appear just in the sequel) that the author of the history labors under too
great an attachment to a particular sect to be impartial in his account of the
state of religion in America. The great encomiums he, on every occasion, passes
on the ministers of a certain denomination, his silence with regard to those of
other churches, except the bare mention of their names, look as though he
designed to insinuate a contrast; and his frequent invectives against those of
the Church of England are too glaring evidences of partiality.

Mr. Smith's accounts of the Indian mission which are the objects of the
Doctor's answer run thus -- "Nothing to the purpose has yet been attempted in
England for the propagation of Christianity among the Indians. Queen Anne sent
a missionary among them, and gave him an appointment out of the privy purse; --
the Revd. Mr. Barclay afterward resided among the Mohawks, but no suitable
provision being made for an interpreter, he was obliged to break up the
mission."

Here says the benevolent Dr. Barclay "I find myself obliged to undertake a
very disagreeable task -- the vindication of the society, as well as my own
character requiring me to say things that would come with much better grace
from others. I never thought it becoming me to make a parade of the discharge
of those things which I was under an indispensible obligation to perform. I
have never published a journal of my mission; nor should I have had any
occasion at present to give so particular an account of my labors among the
Mohawks, had this gentleman either done me justice or left my name out of his
history. It is well known in this province that I have neither been altogether
remiss nor unsuccessful; and that I never alleged the want of a suitable
provision for an interpreter as the reason for breaking up the mission; a
reason which I blush to think that any person should be led to think me capable
of assigning, after near twelve years residence among them. From Mr. Smith's
account indeed no person, unacquainted with my labors in that mission, can
conclude that I did any more than make my appearance among the Mohawks, and
that the society being unwilling or unable to pay an Interpreter. I left them
without effecting or attempting any thing."

The Doctor then tells us that while he was at College he had formed a
resolution of visiting the Indians, and to endeavor their conversion; that
among others he communicated his design to Mr. Sergeant, then a public tutor in
college, and adds (with a candor which Mr. Smith does not show to other
persuasions) "that from that time he entered into a very intimate friendship
with Mr. Sergeant, who had formed a design of going among another tribe of
Indians; and justice (says he) requires me to say, that Mr. Sergeant was a most
faithful laborious missionary, and his early death justly lamented."

"Immediately after taking my Batchelor's Degree, having some encouragement
from the assembly of New York then sitting. I went up to the lower Mohawk-town,
where excepting the hunting seasons, I staid upwards of two years, endeavoring
to attain their language; at the end of which the assembly passed an act for
paying me sixty pounds out of the treasury; and the honorable society (in
England) granted me an allowance of twenty pounds, sterling per annum. How I
employed myself during the time will appear from the following certificate, the
original of which is still in my possession."

"We the Commissioners appointed for the management of Indian affairs for the
colony of New York, do hereby certify, that we are credibly informed, by some
of the principal inhabitants of the Mohawk Country, and have reason to believe
the truth thereof, that Mr. Henry Barclay has resided among the Mohawk Indians
about eighteen months; and with great study and constant application attained
to such knowledge of their language, that he performs divine service to them
every Sunday in their own tongue; that he teaches above forty young men and
children to read and write, some of whom make great proficiency; that he
instructs them daily in the Church Catechism; that the Indians express great
love and esteem for him, and that they are very much reformed since his
residing amongst them.

Given under our hands in Albany, the thirteenth day of July, 1736, Ph.
Livingston, Secretary to Indian affairs. Myndert Schuyler. John Schuyler. Phil.
Schuyler. Edward Holland. Reyer Gerritse. Nicholas Bleecker. John De Peyster.
J. V. Renselaer.


Here we see men of the first reputation testifying that as early as the year
1736, Dr. Barclay was able to perform divine service to the Indians in their
own tongue. Could one professing to write the history of his country be
ignorant of this testimony, or the sum granted by the assembly to reward this
worthy man for the pains he had taken to qualify himself as an Indian
missionary, by acquiring their language? Or what but the most determined
resolution to traduce the society and the Church, at all hazards, could make
Mr. Smith say, that after ten years longer residence among the Indians "Mr.
Barclay was obliged to break up the mission, no suitable provision being made
for an interpreter." Impartiality and candor (says a writer already quoted
concerning this history) are qualities ^^^^tially necessary to an historian.
The history in which due regard is paid to these, will be read and esteemed;
while such as breath a contrary spirit, and are just intended to serve a party,
will be neglected and despised."

In my next I shall give the necessary extracts from the remainder of the
Doctor's answer; in which there will appear many more striking proofs of this
Presbyterian Historian's impartiality and candor toward the Church. Nor let
the Sentinel think, all this while, that I am losing sight of him. While I am
resuting his masters and predecessors, from whom he has copied his scandal, I
shall be making some progress in the refutation of him. I have been led by a
correspondent a little tour northwards, but he may see I am now on my return.

My plan has been consistent, from the beginning; and when I have fully shown
who have been the aggressors in this dispute, I shall, as I proposed, enter the
lists with the Sentinel. Why can he not have a little patience? He was fairly
and without interruption heard out his fifteen papers. Before I arrive at that
number I shall certainly take notice of what he calls "the truth and validity
of his arguments upon the danger of episcopal establishments in this new world.
And fifty such papers as those of Irenicus and the Anti-Centinel, shall not
divert me from my plan. These papers shall be noticed in due time if they
appear worthy of any; and in the mean while, I would advise their author or
authors to be very careful of setting any more examples of personal invectives;
which, as they have been hitherto avoided on both sides, I was in hopes might
be avoided to the end of this dispute; by which means it may be of much shorter
duration, and that harmony be sooner restored for which Irenicus so warmly
preaches. It is a pity that he had not bestowed his advice on the Sentinel at
the commencement of his papers; but to tell the Church now, that she is to bear
the whole load of abuse patiently, and without a reply, can have but little
weight; when we find that more than a century's forbearance on her part, has
only aggravated the insolence of her antagonists in America.

From the PENNSYLVANIA GAZETTE, Oct. 13. The ANATOMIST. No. VI.
Was there no felony, no bawd,
Cutpurse, nor burglary abroad?
No stolen pig, nor plundered goose,
To tie thee up from breaking loose?
No ale unlicens'd, broken hedge,
For which thou statute might allege,
To keep the busy from foul evil? --
BUTLER.
IN my last, I had given some account of the attack made on the Church by Mr.
Smith, the impartial Presbyterian Historian of New York; and endeavored to
show, that nothing but the most determined resolution to traduce the Church,
and the Society for the propagation of the gospel, could have induced that
gentleman to assert, that the late Dr. Barclay was obliged to break up his
Mohawk mission, because no suitable provision had been made for an interpreter
by the Society.

Dr. Barclay received holy orders, and was appointed to that mission in 1737;
and supposing Mr. Smith so extremely ignorant of the transactions of the
country whereof he undertakes to write a history, as not to know that Dr.
Barclay had, at a provincial expense, spent two years in endeavoring to
acquire the Mohawk language, before he went for orders, and carried home with
him a certificate from the commissioners for Indian affairs, setting forth,
that he had attained such a knowledge in that language, as to be able to
perform divine service in it; yet surely the historian must have seen the
following message from Governor Clarke in December 1740, from which it would
seem that the Doctor's labors did not meet with any obstruction from want of
skill in the Indian language, nor from any other cause but that mentioned in
the message.

The Mohawk sachems (says the Governor to the Assembly) have represented to me
the irreparable condition of the chapel formerly built for their religious
worship, and desiring to have a new one built: I cannot but earnestly recommend
it to you, as a thing worthy the consideration of a Christian assembly. The
progress already made by the reverend Mr. Barclay, opens to our view a glorious
prospect of spreading the Christian faith and worship throughout all the
Six-Nations, especially if he be enabled by you to proceed in the work he has
so happily and successfully begun.

"The honorable mention here made of my labors (continues the Doctor) by the
Governor, proceeded from the great satisfaction he received in seeing the
regular and decent behavior of the Indians at public worship at Albany, where
he held a treaty with them. For however unhappily my mission ended, I had the
pleasure of seeing some fruit of my labors 'til the two last years. I found
them a most ignorant savage people, so universally addicted to drunkenness,
that scarce a day passed without seeing several of them intoxicated, and
frequently above three-fourths of them, the women as well as men, fighting and
tearing each other like ravenous beasts. They were in a short time so far
reclaimed, that I have sometimes, for two months together, not seen above ten
of them drunk; and the women, excepting a few of the elder, were wholly
reclamed."

"It is well known that I was so universally beloved, that I became the umpire
of all their differences, and had so great an ascendant over them, that they
permitted me to appoint officers to seize all spirituous liquors that were
brought among them for sale. I found them without the use of letters, which
rendering their instruction very tedious, obliged me to open a school, teach
them to read and write, which I attended six hours a day, the two first years,
with such surprising success, that in about four years from my first coming
among them, many were able to bear their parts in the Church service with great
decency and regularity. Many of them were well advanced in the knowledge of
Christianity; and their attendance and behavior at public worship was matter
of reproach to their neighbors, who had enjoyed the light of the gospel from
their infancy, under much greater advantages."

"Thus I went on, encouraged with a most pleasing prospect of seeing the rising
generation a very regular and serious Christian congregation; and, at the same
time, had the opportunity of preaching once every Lord's day to a considerable
English congregation, and sometimes to a much larger of Low Dutch, whose
language I was well versed in. But, to my great grief and mortification, these
pleasing hopes were soon cut off. A strange jealousy was infused into the poor
Indians, a little before the breaking out of the last French war, by a very
wicked and malicious person, of which I gave the Society an account. Upon this
I found their regard and affection for me sensibly diminishing till the latter
end of the year 1744; when, in the dead of night, the Indians were alarmed with
a pretended discovery of a horrid plot to murder them all, of which I was
represented as the chief contriver. This would have cost me my life in the rage
of their first resentments, had not some of the more intelligent among them, as
they afterward confessed, prevented it. The particulars of this affair I also
gave the Society an account of at the time when it happened, and they are also
very well known to the honorable Mr. Clinton, who was at that time Governor of
New York. I continued after this, near fifteen months, la^ouring under the
greatest discouragements, and using all possible methods to regain their
confidence and affection, but with little success, and at last, by the advice
of some of my steadiest friends among the Indians themselves, I retired to
Albany in April 1746."

"These were the reasons of my leaving the Indians, and not the want of a
suitable provision for an interpreter -- From whom Mr. Smith had his
information concerning the reason of my breaking up my mission, I know not; but
he has been acquainted with me upwards of ten years last past, and might have
seen me almost every day during that time. In the note under the forty second
page, he gives an account of the "extreme mortification, inextinguishable zeal,
and great success of Mr. David Brainerd, a late missionary from the Scotch
Society, among some Indians in New Jersey, not one of whom, he tells us, has
been concerned in those barbarous irruptions which have lately deluged the
south-western provinces with the blood of several hundred innocents of every
age and sex." And concludes this note in the following words. "Dr. Douglass,
ever ready to do honor to his native country, after remarking that this
self-denying clergyman rode about 400 miles in the year 1744, with an air of
approbation asks, is there any missionary from any of the Societies for
propagating the gospel in foreign parts, that has reported the like?

"As to Mr. Brainord's mortification and zeal, every good man must approve and
commend these virtues wherever they are found, and I hope he is now reaping the
glorious rewards of them. As to his success, though Paul plant, and Apollos
water, it is God alone that gives the increase. I heartily wish I could say
that I had heard those Indians continue the same regular society of Christians
since his death. His brother and successor in that mission, I am told, has left
them, and taken the charge This was the case at the time of Dr. Barclay 's
writing. But Mr. Brainerd, the brother, since had, and now has, I believe, some
Jersey Indians under his pastoral care, and his labors among them are well
reported of.
of an English congregation at Newark.

"With regard to myself, I confess that I might have been more mortified, more
zealous and industrious than I have been; and I pray God to pardon my defects.
However blessed be his goodness, which has enabled me to say, that I have not
been altogether destitute of these virtues, so indispensably necessary to an
Indian missionary. And though I never reported the number of miles I have rode in
the discharge of my mission, hundreds can attest that it was many more than 400
every year. And much more is done by several missionaries in the Society's
service. As to Mr. Smith's remark on that happy effect of Mr. Brainerd's
mission, viz. "That not one of those Indians have been concerned in those
barbarous irruptions, etc. I am persuaded some prejudice must have prevented
his making the same observations with regard to the Mohawks, as it is most
notorious that they have not only been inoffensive, but are the only tribe of
the Confederates that have openly joined us, and attended our armies in the
present war."

"But how comes every favorable circumstance that may redound either to the
credit of the English Society, or their missionaries, to be thus passed over in
silence by this impartial historian, and whence all those insinuations to their
disadvantage?" The Doctor gives the same reason that has already been advanced;
namely, that the intention of all these misrepresentations of the Society, and
their conduct, is to dry up the charities which they receive from benevolent
minds in Great Britain, and thus to reduce the interest of the Church to as low
an ebb as possible in the colonies.

But not content "with passing over in silence what might redound to the credit
of the English Society, and their missionaries," this historian, in the
abundance of his spleen, does not scruple sometimes to invent, rather than fail
in, charges against them.

The Episcopal missionaries (says he, page 42) for enlarging the sphere of
their secular business, not many years ago, attempted, by a petition to the
late Governor Clinton, to engross the privilege of solemnizing all marriages. A
great clamor ensued, and the attempt was abortive. --

Dr. Barclay shows this whole paragraph to be an absolute falsehood. He appeals
to Governor Clinton, and all concerned in the government, whether any such
attempt was ever made, directly or indirectly, or any such petition ever
presented? as to the great clamor said to ensue, he appeals to the whole
province (Mr. Smith excepted) whether any such clamor was ever heard?

"I can speak (says he) with certainty, as Mr. Smith fixes the time of this
imaginary attempt to Governor Clinton's administration, and not many years ago
-- Now the petition presented to Governor Clinton by the clergy (and the only
one ever presented to him by them) was in May 1748 -- setting forth, that some
inconveniences arose from justices of the peace taking upon them to execute
marriage licenses, by virtue of their direction -- to any Protestant minister;
alleging, that justices of the peace, being ministers of justices, were It is
told of the late Bishop Sherlock, that when he was informed that the justices
celebrated marriages from this plea, of their being Protestant ministers of
justice, replied in his blunt way -- "and so may the hangman, he being also a
Protestant minister of justice."
Protestant ministers, and capable of executing the license. The prayer of the
clergy therefore was, that an addition might be made to the future direction of
licenses thus, viz. "To any Protestant minister of the gospel (Mr. Smith says,
not very accurately -- "To all Protestant ministers of the gospel") -- The
Governor complied with this request, and far from raising any clamor, the
measure was greatly approved by The like alteration was made by Governor
Franklin, some years ago, in the direction of his licenses, on an application
of the Episcopal clergy of New Jersey, and the Presbyterians were well pleased
with it.
the clergy of all other denominations, who reaped, proportionably, far more
benefit from it than the Episcopal clergy."

But it was of little consequence to this historian, whether the Episcopal
clergy did well or ill. For in the temper with which he wrote, obloquy and
misrepresentation were to be their portion. And yet if ever his history should
come to a second edition, charity would make one hope, that more years, with
better consideration and enquiry, may release him from some of his prejudices,
and make him appear with that dignity as a historian, which his composition,
and confessed abilities, might otherwise give him some title to hold.

But the party did not choose to trust their cause long to this history. For
finding, probably, that it soon began to share the fate of many other mortal
compositions, namely, to rest harmless on its shelf, the ball was still to be
kept up against the Church; as if it were by alternate blows from Presbyterian
and Independent.

The great Dr. Mayhew, of Boston, therefore, next enters the lists, as if ready
to burst with all the reiterated tales about Bishops, the Church, and the
Society for propagating the gospel. But I beg pardon for offering to place this
Goliath of the party (to whom the Sentinel is but a dwarf) in the tail of my
paper. He shall therefore have the front of my next, and I purpose that the
tail of it shall reach to the Sentinel, not to part again till we have settled
our account.

P. S. October 10. The Remonstrant, No. I. has just come to my hand. There is
nothing in it that gives me uneasiness, but that the Remonstrant, from his
ignorance of Latin, should make me put Dr. Chandler on a level with Mr.
Carmichael, when my words are -- Si parvis magna componere licet. In English --

If little men may be to great prepared. The curious anecdotes of A. B. are
come to hand, by favor of Messieurs Hall and Sellers; by whom also any other
Papers, directed to the Anatomist, will be carefully delivered to him.

From the PENNSYLVANIA GAZETTE, Oct. 13. The REMONSTRANT. No. II.
THE Quakers, we are told, are for introducing Episcopacy; and a severe stroke
is given to the disadvantage of the Presbyterians, because some of those people
were persecuted in New England. We condemn persecution in New England, and
every other church and nation; we plead for no national establishments, that
bear hard on the civil or religious rights of mankind. But were not the Quakers
persecuted in Jamaica, Antigua, Barbados, Nevis and Maryland, where
Presbyterians had no authority? Were they not persecuted in Ireland? Were they
not vexed, plundered, excommunicated, and dreadfully persecuted in every shire
of England? Read Bisse's history of the sufferings of that religious society.
Here I shall present the reader with abstracts of a petition of this persecuted
people in the re^g^^ of James the Second, from another writer.

To the King and both houses of parliament, the suffering condition of the
people called Quakers, only for tender conscience toward Almighty GOD, humbly
presented, showing, that of late above a Thousand five hundred of the said
people, both men and women, having been detained prisoners in England, and part
of (...) in Wales, some of which being since discharged by the judges and
others freed by death, through their long and tedious imprisonment -- there are
now remaining, by late accounts, One thousand three hundred, eighty and three;
above two hundred women -- many under sentence of praemunire -- many on writs of
excommunication -- and fines for the King -- and on the act for banishment;
besides, above Three hundred have died in prison, and prisoners since the year
1660 (when all power was in the hand of the Church of England) Sewell's history
of the Quaker's, page 563, 564. As the petition is too long, we shall give the
reader one at length from the same historian, presented to James the Second,
which is shorter, and is as follows.

To the KING. The distressed case and request of the suffering people, commonly
called QUAKER'S, humbly presented showing.
"That according to accounts lately given, above Fourteen hundred of the said
People, both men and women, are continued prisoners in England and Wales, only
for tender conscience toward Almighty GOD that made them; many-under sentence
of praemunire, and many near it, not for refusing the duty or substance of
allegiance itself, but only because they date not swear. Besides, some hundreds
have died prisoners, many by means of this long imprisonment, since the year
1680, (as it is judged) thereby making widows and fatherless, and leaving poor
innocent families in distress and sorrow. These two hard winters confinement
tending also to the destruction of many in cold holes and jails, their healths
being greatly impaired thereby; besides, violence and woeful spoil made by
merciless informers on the conventicle act upon many convicted, unsummoned and
unheard in their own defense, both in city and country; as also on qui tam
writs, and other process, on twenty pounds a month, and two thirds of estates
seized for the King, all tending to the ruin of trade, husbandry and
industrious families; to some not a bed left; to others no cattle to till the
ground, or give them milk; nor corn for bread or feed, nor tools to work
withal; and all these and other severities, done under a pretense of serving
the King and Church, and thereby to force us to violate our consciences, and
consequently to destroy our souls, which we are very tender of, as we are of
our peace with GOD, and our own consciences, though accounted as sheep to the
slaughter. And notwithstanding all these long sustained extremities, we the
said people do solemnly profess and declare, in the sight of the
Heart-searcher, that we have nothing but good will, and true affection, to the
King, praying for his safety, and the kingdom's peace. We have never been found
in any seditious or treasonable designs, as being wholly contrary to our
Christian principles, and holy profession.

"And knowing where the word of the King is, there is power, we, in Christian
humility, and for CHRIST's sake, entreat that the King will please to find out
some expedient for our relief in these cases, from prison, spoil, and ruin; and
we shall (as in Christian duty bound) pray GOD for the King's welfare in this
world, and his eternal happiness in that which is to come. Delivered to the
King the 3d of the First Month called March, 1684-5, with the number of
prisoners in every shire, in all 1460."

This petition induced King James to write from his court at Whitehall, April
the 18th, 1685, to all archbishops, and bishops, and to their chancellors, and
commissioners, and to all archdeacons, and other officiates, and to all other
ordinaries, executing ecclesiastical jurisdiction, to cause process aagainst
these persons to be stayed, and if they were in prison on the writ de
excommunicato capiendo, to absolve, discharge and set them all at liberty. See
Sewell's history of the Quakers, page 566.

Would the Quakers, or any other men, wish to be under the power of such
instruments of cruelty? Or is it unmeritted abuse of the Church of England, to
say that her courts acted after this manner? But the old Puritans,
comprehending under that name Presbyterians, Independents, Baptist, etc. felt
these severe persecutions for nonconformity to the established Church of
England, through the long reigns of Elizabeth and of James, before the Quakers
became a religious society in England. And they were all as severely handred as
these Quaker sufferers, from the restoration till the glorious revolution. And
if the Anatomist's abusive pen thus continues to bespatter men called forth to
plead for their liberties, we shall be obliged to revive the memory of those
severe persecutions that are now almost forgotten; and well it is, if all
gratitude due to GOD for our glorious deliverances from such cruelty, be not
also forgotten.

We are not to be intimidated, though threatened with bloodshed by this writer;
we pray GOD there may never be a religious establishment in America to deprive
any man, or any religious denomination, of their just rights; we desire none:
But he adopts the glorious method prescribed lately in our Chronicle by an
Episcopal clergyman, of clearing himself by recrimination. When he cannot
vindicate himself and his friends, he boldly charges his accusers with the same
crime, of e^ecting an establishment for themselves in this new world. The
Episcopal Church, it is well known, already claims an establishment in all the
colonies, and a superiority over all other religious persuasions; they claim it
as a kind of birthright, to have their clergy every where supported by all
other societies, which they reproachfully call Dissenters. They have struggled
hard for an establishment in North Carolina, and are oppressing that poor
colony with new taxes from time to time for purchasing glebes, building
churches, and parsonage houses, for the support of their clergy, though the
number of that church be small, in comparison of other societies. And this
unwearied industry we may expect in all the colonies, to bring North America
every where to pay tribute to hungry ambitious missionaries. The Presbyterians,
in these provinces, desire no establishments, they rather think them hurtful to
religion, yet they that claim them, and pant for them, and are willing to move
heaven and earth for them, charge this as a crime on their innocent neighbors;
but this abusive writer cares not what he affirms, nor on what foundation, and
if persecution to blood striving must be our lot, if we strive to prevent such
oppression, we hope we shall be armed with Christian patience and fortitude, to
do or suffer according to the will of GOD. We desire no union with him, or any
other society, to do mischief, nay we abhor it. We neither desire nor expect
the attachment of Churchmen, nor any of the human race, unless for good
purposes, for the defense of our country in their just rights and privileges,
and the common good of all men. But we would ask this blustering writer, Have
all Churchmen, as he calls them, given him a commission to abuse and threaten
their neighbors? Or is he superior to Dr. Chandler, who is blamed by him for
speaking for them without authority? When Presbyterians are slighted in
general, and we hear great encomiums given to Episcopacy, as a national church,
we must remind this writer, that neither of these names can warrant men to do
mischief; and that either or both derive their honor from obeying the gospel,
and following the example of CHRIST, and not from worldly pomp or grandeur;
CHRIST's kingdom is not of this world. But if establishments, or national
churches, make Christians more venerable; the Presbyterians or Reformed are one
of the three religious persuasions established by law in the German Empire. It
is one of the two religious persuasions established in Switzerland; it is the
national religion of Holland and Geneva; and the national church of Scotland is
Presbyterian; but all the ministers of these churches, with all the Lutheran
ministers of Sweden, Denmark, and the German Empire, are rejected as unworthy
the name of gospel ministers by this bulwark of the reformation, this mirror of
charity, which is itself confined to the narrow bounds of Ireland and England.
And let it be for ever remembered, for the honor of Presbyterians, here called
a sour intolerant party, that universal liberty of conscience was first
proclaimed and established among Protestants in the national church of Holland,
where men and women, persecuted by both Protestants and Papists, found a sure
assylum, and a city of refuge. The Sentinel equally pleaded the common cause of
all other denominations, and the Preshyterians here abused, owe him no more
thanks than are due to him by all that dread a yoke of bondage, that neither we
nor our fathers could bear, and if he be cut up while asleep, and even devoured
by this second Polypheme, we hope there will be men found to vindicate
Presbyterians, and to defend the common cause of civil and religious liberty;
but as champions and strong men are said to be merciful, we have hopes that the
Sentinel may yet escape his bloody knife and perform his duty.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, Oct. 20. The ANATOMIST. No. VII.
Each Leader strives to draw the Rabble
With Zeal and Noises formidable,
And make all Cries about the Town
Join Throats to cry -- the Bishops down.
No Sow-Gelder does blow his Horn
To geld a Cat, but cries Reform.
The Oyster-Women lock their Fish up
And trudge away to cry -- No Bishop.
BUTLER.
PEACE to thy manes, honest BUTLER! Much labor do thou save me in my turning
over the musty Volumes of the learned; for still, in the mother tongue, thou
have a motto ready for my subject -- As thou art now, I hope, in a place of
love, from which my charity would not even exclude Dr. Mayhew, the hero of my
present number, gladly would I know, If Bishop's can possibly come there, what
passes between him and them? Is enmity now at an end? Or does the Doctor, like
a fallen champion ghost, still eye them with disdain, as " the mitred lordly
successors of the fishermen of Galilee"? Does he still "with horror," consider
the Church over which they presided while on earth, as "an enormous heirarchy
ascending by various gradations, from the dirt to the skies"? -- So he spoke,
and so he wrote, while actuated with human passions here below! What says he
now? A message from him to his brethren might do them much good; and save me,
perhaps much trouble. -- But I wish in vain -- the dead will not hear me; or,
if they hear, they will not answer -- I must turn, then, to the living, and
pursue my plan.

I was observing, in the conclusion of my last number, that it seems to have
been a settled agreement between Presbyterians and Independents, that the
Church in America should suffer no rest, but still be pursued by them, as it
were by alternate attacks and fury. No sooner, therefore was it found that the
charges levelled against the society and their missionaries, by the
Presbyterian historian of New York, had passed unnoticed, and that his work was
like to prove but a mortal one; than the independent Boston champion, the great
Dr. Mayhew, like another Goliath, appears in the field, with all the old
artillery that had been so often played off against the Church, charged a new
and double. The reader will observe above, what a dreadful volley he lets fly
at the Bishops and Heirarchy, as it were at the first onset -- But that is
little to what follows. --

"The Church herself is a persecuting Church. (1) P. 129.
Her constitution and worship unscriptural." (2) 128.
Her ministers in New England dare to wear 'jovial countenances' (3) 74.
They come into New England sheepfolds, by indirect pretenses; as thieves and
robbers (4) 123.
-- gaming, swearing, etc. are beyond all comparison more frequent in New
England, since the Church prevailed there, than before. (5) 75.
There is less real religion than if the society's money expended there, had
been sunk in the ocean. (6) P. (65) of his second piece.
He never knew a proselyte from his Church to ours, brought back to a Christian
life. (7) P. 82 of his first piece
If Churchmen were exempted from ministerial taxes in New England, almost all
who loved their money better than any thing else might in a few years have
adorned the communion of the Church." (8) 49.


Mighty kind, all this, to the members of the Church in New England! And now,
what says the benevolent Doctor to the society and the members of the Church in
Old England? Why "the society have, in a great measure, neglected the ends of
their institution. (9) 86.
Their essays for converting the savages have been sparing and feeble. Mr.
Barclay had not half a proper support; the mission was starved, and he could
obtain no salary for an interpreter or schoolmaster." (10) 101.
On account of all which conduct of the society, the Doctor holds out to them
"the guilt of Annanias and Sapphira." (11) 118.


I shall conclude my quotations from the Doctor, with one stroke more at the
Bishops. "He cannot think (he says) of the Church of England gaining ground to
any great degree, and especially of seeing Bishops fixed here, without great
reluctance. (12) 101.
He hopes in God, that point will never be carried. (13) 90.
The state of religion (he tells us) is much better amongst those of his own
communion in America, than in England under the immediate eye and documents of
the venerable Bishops." (14) 39.
-- And now comes the finest stroke of all. He says, he cannot think of the
Church, and flood of episcopacy thus following good independents to America,
"without calling to mind (though he declares without applying) the passage in
the Revelation, of the Woman flying into the wilderness from the face of the
Serpent; and the serpent casting out of his mouth water, as a flood after the
woman, that he might cause her to he carried away of the flood." (15) 129.

The Doctor's abuse is thrown out by fits and starts in such undigested manner,
that I am forced to follow the same method that his answerer pursued, and range
it under three heads, viz. against the Church in general, against the society,
and against Bishops. And this will account for my being obliged to leap from
page to page, in order to lay the whole in one short view. The pages of the
London edition are those referred to,




And now, Mr. Sentinel, what think you of your master Mayhew? Have you such a
grand flight in all your work as this, viz. that your good party is the flying
Woman, and the Church and Bishop the pursuing Serpent? Why could you not, when
retailing Dr. Mayhew, give us some of his best touch? But perhaps he did not
suit you in every thing. For, furious as he is in certain places, he has spoilt
the whole by concessions in other places. Although he belabours the society so
vehemently, and presents them with the guilt of Annanias and Sapphira, yet
(good man) he declares it by no means his intention to charge that venerable
body with any wilful known misconduct, or improper applications of Moneys, even
though any incautious expression should at first view have that appearance. For
no one, he says, "whoever read their charter, can possibly imagine that their
care and charity ought to be confined to the heathen slaves in, or the savages
bordering on, the plantations."

Again, although "Bishops are mitred lordly successors of the fishermen o^
Galilee; though they have ascended from the dirt to the skies; though they are
serpents spewng out whole floods to drown the good woman" -- yet he declares,
all (...) while, that he is one speaking one word of any Bishops that live in
the present age, but those that lived near a century ago -- for he would not
have it thought that "he designs to dishonor the more moderate and Christian
spirit of the English Bishops since the revolution, and particularly of this
day, by comparing it to the persecuting Antichristian spirit of many prelates,
antecedent to that glorious era."

Amazing this! Though there is less religion in New England, than if the
society's money had been sunk in the ocean, yet he does not charge them with
improper application of their money -- Though he has described Bishops as
monsters, yet he has no fault to find with those that have lived si^e the
revolution -- what then, in the name of sense, has the man been writing about
all this while? -- Surely he did not expect that the King was to send over to
America any Bishops that lived before the revolution, for they are all dead
long since.

"Why then such dismal apprehensions? Why such outcries? Where are the
persecutors? Where is the dragon? All the world must see, the doctor himself
might have seen, that his declamation was quite foreign to the purpose; and, on
his first recollection, he should have been ashamed of it, and have struck it
out. But paternal tenderness would not let him destroy so pathetic a rant, on
so darling a subject." --

This last Paragraph I copy from an answer given to the Doctor in his life
time. For although most of the attacks made upon the Church in America, before
the Doctor's publication, were suffered to pass unnoticed; yet, as by these
concessions which he made here and there, when his raging fits were a little
off, he appeared to be under some compunctions of mind, that might at length
open him to conviction; it was judged that an answer in the spirit of
moderation and truth might not be wholly thrown away upon him, this answer was
marked in every line with that benevolence of temper, that force of argument,
that amiable decorum and yet dignity of expression, which characterized an
Illustrious Prelate lately deceased, to whom it has been generally ascribed --
I mean the great and good Archbishop Secker -- at mention of whole name, every
true son of the Church, every lover of primitive integrity, piety and
unaffected simplicity of manners, must drop a tear, as for a father lost!

Rude as the Doctor's attack on the Church was; although (as he confesses in
his second piece) his expressions were "too harsh and irritating," yet the
answerer never forgets himself or his own character. He calmly tells him, that
-- "if mitres offend him, our Bishops wear none -- if they are styled Lords, it
is because, by the ancient constitution of our country, they sit in the upper
house of Parliament; and adds (what he still farther proved by his own example)
"that men may be Lords without being lordly."" As to fishermen of Galilee, the
answerer says that he cannot tell whether the Doctor means "that all ministers
of Christ should follow some trade, nor whether he follows any himself -- but
that reviling his brethren is certainly a very bad one." --

As to the charge of persecution, our answerer observes, "that the lawfulness
of it is no doctrine of the Church -- that dissenters did not suffer their
hardships in England on account of their religious tenets, but because, in
general, their avowed aim, was not an exemption for themselves, but the
destruction of the ecclesiastical establishment -- that on this, they were
treated too severely, and they returned the treatment to the full, as soon as
they were able, in the total overthrow of Church and state." He puts them in
mind of the doctrine held by the New England platform, "that heresy is to be
restrained and punished by the civil magistrate" -- a doctrine which without an
establishment has been more rigorously carried into execution in that country,
than ever it was by the Church at home -- for the confirmation of which, the
testimony of a third party is appealed to, namely the Quakers; who affirm, that
they who had loudly cried out of the tyranny and oppression of the Bishops in
old England, from whom they fled, when settled in a place where they had
liberty to govern, made their little finger of cruelty bigger than ever they
sound the loins of the bishops Grove' s preface to Bishop's New England judged.


But I dismiss this charge of persecution for the present, which (on account of
some old mistakes that are to be lamented on both sides) is still unjustly kept
up against one o^ the mildest Churches on earth; and if our antagonists are not
satisfied with what has been already hinted on this head, I shall take another
opportunity of comparing notes fully with them, upon it.

The answerer to Doctor Mayhew, afterward proceeds to the charge repeated from
Mr. Smith's history (which I have already taken notice of) that Mr. Barclay's
mission was starved for want of support, and broken up for want of an
interprete^. This charge both by Mr. Smith and Dr. Mayhew, appears to have been
perversely taken from a letter to Mr. Sergeant from Mr. Barclay, June 11, 1736,
soon after he went among the Indians, and before he was in orders, or in the
society's service as a missionary, and when he was laboring under his first
difficulties in learning the language. Mr. Barclay himself declares that when
he came to his mission, "he found the society at all times, anxiously
solicitous to encourage him; that they readily consented to the establishment
of two Indian schools; that they ordered him to employ an interpreter." (not
indeed to interpret in his preaching, but to assist in the instruction of the
youth;) "but that the old interpreter being dead, he could never meet with any
other qualified for the office; that his subsistence was comfortable; that he
never broke up his mission on account of any backwardness of the venerable
society to support him; but from an unavoidable necessity, on account of base,
insinuations infused by an ill designing party into the minds of the Indians,
just before the breaking out of the French war" -- All which, both Mr. Smith
and Dr, Mayhew must have well known. And here I hope the reader will not think
I have dwelt too long on these particulars; for they are material to show what
spirit the antagonists of the Church have, and to what shifts they are reduced,
in seeking matter to vilify her.

The answerer to Dr. Mayhew proceeds farther, to inform him of all the pains
and expense of the society, in establishing many Indian missions which he
deigns not to take notice of, and mentions from the Doctor's own words, the
great discouragements that have been and still are in attempting to
Christianize the Indians." -- Discouragements which all sides must labor with,
till God's own time comes for converting them, and till he finds instruments
worthy of this great honor. Till then, neither side should reproach the other
for want of that success which God alone can give. There are now large funds in
the hands of the Presbyterians and Independents themselves, expressly for
Indian missions; and I wish there never may be more cause to reproach them with
negligence in the execution of their trust, or perversion of the fund there has
been to reproach the truly venerable society.

The next endeavor of Dr. Mayhew's answerer, is to quiet his apprehensions
about American Bishops -- But the Sentinel thinks that he himself is the man
that has hit upon the true valid arguments against an American episcopate, and
it seems would be very angry if the answer was addressed to any body but
himself. Now although I can see nothing in the Sentinel but what is better said
by his predecessor, I shall indulge him in what he desires, if not to his
satisfaction, yet I hope to the satisfaction, of all impartial men.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, Oct, 20. THE REMONSTRANT, No. III.
THAT there is a project on foot to establish Bishops in America, is publicly
avowed and contended for by many of the episcopal Church; and they as
confidently contend that they are part of the English established Church, and
that all others are Dissenters. But as an episcopate with its ecclesiastical
courts and other appendages has in former times been found hurtful to other
religious societies, the plan now proposed is represented in such a favorable
view, as, in their judgment, no reasonable man can object to it. For these
Bishops are to have no powers but what are purely spiritual. They are only to
ordain, confirm and inspect the morals of the clergy of their own denomination.
Had twenty such Bishops been sent to America, provided they had no connection
with our civil affairs, nor a prospect of being able to claim or exercise the
powers that made them terrible in England, no man had been uneasy about them.
But for many reasons already offered on this subject, all the colonies have
just grounds to fear that the episcopate really desired, and which will be
established, if ever any be established among us, will not be so harmless and
innocent as they pretend, nor so like those that were in the primitive Church.
Even Doctor Chandler, who so strongly asserts that they desire no power that
can be hurtful to the civil or religious rights and privileges of other
denominations, paints his intended Bishops in such colors as must strike all
considerate persons with terror, and convince them that if Bishops be once
established, they will oblige thousands once more to seek shelter among the
savage Indians,

But for want of arguments to refute Doctor Chauncy, the Sentinel, Whig, and
others who have pointed out our danger; and with a view to turn the public
attention from this avowed design of an establishment so dreadful in its
consequences, the Anatomist cries aloud that the colonies are in danger from a
Presbyterian establishment, which, as he alleges, is projected and carrying
into execution.

"This four turbulent party, says he, have justly alarmed the fear of every
other religious persuasion in America, and created a jealousy that the sole
view of this party is to erect an empire and establishment for themselves in
this new world, on the ruin of every other religious denomination. But before
they can succeed in their designs, they will meet with a resistance far
different from what is to be expected in this paper; a resistance perhaps even
unto blood. That the episcopal Churches have an establishment in Maryland and
Virginia, and the Independents (as he calls them) have a sort of establishment
in some of the New England provinces is well known. But a Presbyterian
establishment in the colonies is neither projected nor desired, nor can it ever
be attempted with any rational prospect of success. No denominations of
Christians in any of the other colonies, the episcopalians only excepted, have
the least ground to expect it. They, and they only have power and interest in
England, to get such a bill passed in their favor by the King and his
Gran^ees, who are all of that persuasion; but no act passed in the colonies to
establish Presbytery, or any religious persuasion, (episcopacy excepted) on the
ruins of other societies, would obtain a sanction in England. It would be
madness to attempt it, Nay the Lutheran and Presbyterian societies in New York
could not procure even a charter in England for securing their churches and
burying grounds. Letters of incorporation, such as are granted to almost every
company of mechanics, were denied them by the interposition of gentlemen of
the episcopal establishment, and in particular by one of their Bishops, as we
are informed. With what face then can the Anatomist alarm the world with the
notion of a Presbyterian establishment, a thing in itself not only improbable,
but even impossible; we utterly deny this charge; It is a groundless calumny,
without the least foundation; and we call on this abusive writer either to make
good his assertion, or to take to himself the shame of publishing notorious
falsehoods, for want of better arguments; but this he did to amuse other
religious societies, and to turn their attention from the common danger.

But suppose, for argument sake, that this establishment was projected, is this
a good reason why the Anatomist should shake his bloody knife, and puff and
abuse the Presbyterians? Is it a sufficient reason to threaten then, with a
resistance far different from what is in his paper, possibly he intends
prosecutions, and fines, and imprisonments, and banishment, and confiscation of
goods as in old times. Is every attempt to have an establishment sufficient
provocation to resist even unto blood. Let us then turn his arguments against
himself, and ask what should other societies do to prevent an episcopal
establishment, that dreadful evil, so ruinous to every other religious
denomination, when it comes to be determined that it shall take place among us.
Are we accused and threatened for writing against it, and pointing out the
direful consequences of a well-known establishment, which has already by its
cou^ts persecuted and oppressed thousands of loyal subjects, and sincere
Christians, and driven many to seek habitations in a howling wilderness. He and
his party threaten to strive even to blood, to prevent a Presbyterian
establishment, which is impossible to accomplish; and yet he will not allow
others even to lament their danger from his projected, and almost executed
establishment, nor to complain that they are in danger. All denominations are
loudly or humbly to petition those that are in power and authority to prevent
this evil. But how must the world detest a persecuting Church, or a Churchman
threatening blood and slaughter to any that would aim at an establishment,
t^ough it be a thing that he, and almost all episcopalians contend for, as for
a blessing to a religious society. This is not the Christian spirit; this is
not to obey his commands, who enjoins us to do to others as we would be done by.

The Sentinel was as much an advocate for every society in the colonies as the
Presbyterians, yet they and the New England Independents only must bear the
lash of this writer. What has the New England Independents to do with this
controversy? If they dealt hardly by the missionaries or the people of their
persuation, we would by no means vindicate them, but will this pretended abuse
warrant Episcopalian, to unite in England and America, once more to harrass the
world with their ecclesiastical courts? If the first settlers in New England
were unfriendly to the Episcopalians and other denominations, they imported the
bitter root of persecution and intolerance, and a love of religigious
establishments from England to Boston, and under these unhappy prejudices
enacted, that other denominations should contribute to the support of the
established or town minister: This crying iniquity was done, and still is done
in England before the face of all Israel, and in the face of the sun. For there
all other denominations must, and do maintain the established clergy. But when
the Episcopalians had their own measures returned, what clamours did they
raise? What cries of injustice and oppression? The bishops and zealous
highfliers interposed for their relief, and the New England Independents were
told, that notwithstanding their acts of assembly, every denomination must
maintain their own clergy. And this just and equitable determination, beyond
the Atlantic, we, and the Independents themselves highly approve; but is this
equity and justice observed in Old England, where near a million of Dissenters
must maintain the established clergy? Is this equity and justice regarded in
the episcopal colonies, as in Maryland or Virginia? Or is this equity and
justice observed in North Carolina, where Governor Dobbs obtained severe and
oppressive laws to maintain the episcopal clergy? In these cases there are no
cries of injustice, no advocates to plead the cause of other societies, that
are burdened and oppressed. And all such acts, when once confirmed in England,
are not likely ever to be repealed. The Independents in New England were led by
the practices and laws of Old England to treat Dissenters from their
establishment such as it was, in the same manner the episcopalians did, and
still do treat Dissenters from their religious establishments. Of all men in
the world they should be the last to condemn others, for what they justify in
themselves. We condemn all persecution severity and injustice in all
establishments, whether Roman Catholic, Episcopal, Independent, or
Presbyterian. But what have we to do with these affairs in New England, or with
their present debate with the missionaries? Is it an attack on the Church of
England, to dispute with a few of her missionaries; or is it unlawful to write
against her bigoted sons, who contend for an unbroken succession, a divine
right of episcopacy, and other chimaeras that are despised by the best and most
moderate part of that Church? Are her missionaries so facred that all
Presbyterians in America must be abused, because Mr. Smith, a Presbyterian
historian, has omitted to give one of them a full compliment of praises? What
have all these trifles to do with the present dispute? They solve none of our
objections; they are only designed to draw our attention from a gathering
storm, ready to burst on us and destroy us.

Ecclesiastical courts like a furious wild beast are at present under
restraints, but are not tamed. They have in some degree maintained their
influence, even under the milder administration, since the glorious revolution;
and if an episcopate be here established, we fear they will rage with seven
sold sury. One great reason of our fear, arises from the nature and
constitution of these colonies. In England, the nobility in general hate
oppression, and have on many occasions checked the exorbitant power of
ecclesiastics, and delivered their friends, tenants and religious societies,
from persecution. The judges in England, are men of great reputation and
influence; they are raised above the frowns of the proudest ecclesiastics, nay
they are set above the pride or malice even of the King's ministers, that they
may without danger, adhere to the laws, and defend the rights of (...) people.
They are empowered to grant, and do frequently grant prohibitions to check the
tyranny, and to stop the rigor of the bishops courts. But should episcopacy
with its courts be here established, (and that they certainly will be
established is what we fear) we have no powerful nobility to check their rage,
no independent judges established for life to interpose and deliver us. A
judge, or even a governor in the colonies, would be treated with insolence and
abuse, that would appear against the oppression of any of our proud unmerciful
prelates, most bitter complaints of his conduct would be made to the
Archbishops and Bishops and the King's ministers. He would be traduced as a
republican, an enemy to the church of England, and to his Majesty's government
in the colonies and to Monarchy itself. The old cry would be raised again, no
Bishops, no King, and possibly the offender, whether Judge or Governor, would
be rumbled down with disgrace from his station, and made an example to all who
would not bow down their necks, to our American Bishops. Let me on this
occasion, use the words of the Anatomists, O my children, on the prospect of
this change, how I tremble and lament for you!

How carefully has the Anatomist raked up every thing to blacken the
Independents in New England; even the Boston Almanac is pressed into his
service. But do these shifts and evasions satisfy any reasonable man, that the
intended episcopate will not be hurtful to other religious societies? or that
it will not introduce confusion, into our civil courts, and overturn many of
our laws? Does a story of Independent Reflectors, and Watch Towers, or of a
Historian, that did not extol one of their Missionaries as much as he deserved
and expected, prove that the Presbyterians are laboring for an establishment?
Our granting that they were, which is a notorious falsehood, would that convince
us that our civil and religious liberties were in no danger from the intended
episcopate and its ecclesiastical courts? If he thinks it any advantage to his
cause, to mention the faults of Presbyterians and Independents, who were ever
as moderate in the exercise of power as the church of England; we are ready to
balance accounts with him, and our accounts of the severities of the Highfliers
in the church of England, and their severe acts of Parliament to distress all
non conformists, shall not be taken from almanacks, pamplets, or unprinted
histories, but from Historians of undoubted Authority and good reputation. We
intend to give the world an abstract of the acts of Parliament, which
distressed the British churches from the memorable act of Elizabeth, which
condemned a^ persons refusing peremptorily to come to church, after conviction,
to banishment, and in case of return, to death without benefit of clergy, down
to the severe act called the Schism Bill, in the ^eign of Queen Ann, and shall
at the same time, mention some of the grievous sufferings of many thousands, by
the cruel execution of those laws.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, Oct. 27. The ANATOMIST. No. VIII.
Let the Mastiffs amuse themselves about a sheep-skin stuffed with hay,
provided it will keep them from worrying the flock.

SWIFT.
IT was hinted in my introductory number, that "in the character of the Bishop,
which the Sentinel and his associates have drawn, they have been combating a
phantom of their own brain;" and, therefore, I should have considered them in
the case of the mastiffs mentioned in my motto, viz. as "amusing themselves
about a sheep-skin stuffed with hay," provided they had not fallen foul of the
flock, and attacked the whole body of the Churh, her doctrine, and discipline,
and the principles of her clergy and members. For what less can be meant by
asserting, that the pure word of God is corrupted and obscured among us with
human inventions; and that our clergy are exerting their utmost influence in
conjunction with Mr. Grenville, to enslave America; that the Bishop we want,
would be dangerous to liberty, -- and such like expressions, fairly quoted from
the Sentinel?

It was observed in the second number, "that the common apology made by the
Centinel's adherents, for this illiberal and unmanly abuse of the Church, is,
that Dr. Chandler was the aggressor." But to this it was answered, and no one
has offered to deny the truth of the assertion, -- "that Doctor Chandler far
from being an aggressor, has not uttered a single word, in his whole
performance, reflecting on the principles of any protestant persuasion of men;
and therefore nothing done by him could be the least plea for an attack on the
Church in general."

That this matter might be more clear to every impartial reader, I have even
gone more than a century back and have shown that the opposition to the Church
of England in America, on the part of the Presbyterians and Independents, has
been carried on through that long period of time, with such uniformity of
bitterness, and inextinguishable malignity, as could flow from nothing less
than a rooted desire of crushing the Church wholly on this continent, for the
sake of erecting an exclusive dominion of their own.

Some instances, out of many, have been given, of their unchristian endeavors
to prevent his Majesty's good subjects settled among them from enjoying the
free exercise of that mode of religious worship which their consciences
directed them to follow. Some instances have also been given, of the shameful
falsehoods and illiberal abuse constantly propagated against the society and
members of the Church at home, for reaching out their charitable hand to the
assistance of dispersed congregations of their brethren in America. And to the
whole have been added some examples of the hideous characters in which the
Church, her Bishops etc. have been painted, as pursuing schemes dangerous to
American liberty, and the like; all which our antagonists help out with
prayers, as well in their publications as pulpits, that Bishops may never get
footing here, nor the Church gain ground to any great degree -- a conduct too
evidently calculated to prejudice and inflame the minds of their followers, not
only against their episcopal brethren in America, but (I wish it could not be
said) to alienate their affections from the constitution of the mother country.
Nay, so far gone are they in their domineering uncharitable spirit, that even
our secret wishes are construed into crimes; and our humble petitions to our
sovereign and superiors in the Church, praying that we may be adadmitted to the
natural rights enjoyed by all other religious societies, are said to be deep
laid plots, ready to break forth into every evil, political and religious,
which their fertile imaginations can invent.

This is no exaggerated account of the treatment which the Church has met with
in America; but is much short of what might have been said under this head. In
the review of the treatment which the Church has met with from different
writers in America, I have for the sake of brevity, omitted the virulent pieces
of Hobart, and many others, in Connecticut, as well as in Massachusetts, and
other northern governments. But the specimens I have given will show the
Sentinel to be but an humble retailer of antiquated scandal.


It is therefore submitted to the impartial world to declare, whether. Doctor
Chandler has been an aggressor in this dispute, and whether the Church in
America is not now, and constantly has been, acting on the defensive? Traduced
vilified, and flandered, whenever she claims her natural rights, as if she was
unfit to have a being, much less a well-^eing, in Christian society; could it
be a crime in Doctor Chandler, or any one else, to endeavor, in the spirit of
meekness, to state our case, and endeavor to convince these our intolerant
antagonists that we ask nothing, and wish nothing which, on the principles of
equity, law, and the constitution, can reasonably be denied us? Doctor Chandler
declared this to be the design of his Appeal, and tells the world, that, "as
some persons were said to be alarmed at the application made by the clergy in
several colonies for one or more Bishops to be sent to America, he thought it
proper to show heartily and explicitly for what reasons this application had
been made, and that no invasion of the civil or religious privileges of any,
whether Churchmen or Dissenters, was thereby intended. And if any thing should
appear to be less fitly spoken, or not clearly evidenced, he requests notice of
it in a charitable and Christian way, declaring farther, "that the person who
should act thus to him, should be as welcome to him as an angel of God, sent to
conduct him from the lanes of error into the open ways of truth?"

But has the Sentinel acted like this angel of God? Or rather has he not
acted, (let the impartial world say) like an angel of a different complexion,
in turning from a charitable and Christian answer to Dr. Chandler, into a most
uncharitable and unchristian attack of the whole body of the Church, whereof he
is a Member? The Doctor had a number of antagonists upon him from the northern
governments, who were boasted to be more than his match. What need then of our
Centinel's interfering, unless it was to show his pe^ness and dexterity of
apeing Mayhew, and others; or perhaps, to have the first merit of introducing
this dispute into Pennsylvania, where all had so long subsisted in harmony and
brotherly love between Churchmen and Presbyterians? Or was it intended, by
bringing the dispute into this southern latitude, to make the world believe
that the northern contagion and intolerant raving against episcopacy, was
become general through all America?

Which ever of these was our Centinel's motive, he must now take the
consequences; for having, I think, fully finished the first head, and shown
that Dr. Chandler was not an aggressor in this dispute, much less any member of
the Church in Pennsylvania. I shall come to close quarters with the Sentinel.
But I own myself at some loss how to deal with such an eccentric adversary --
for, as Monsieur Bail observes upon the like occasion; it is like hunting a
duck, which as soon as you think you have her, dives down, and leaves you
staring about to see where she will pop up again. Our Sentinel skips from
Bishops to Stamp-Acts, and from Stamp-Acts to judges of the admiralty, and from
judges of the admiralty, back again to ecclesiastical courts, and canons, and
Bute, and Grenville, and palaces, and coach wheels, and square caps, and lawn
sleves, and tests, and persecutions, and slavery, and wooden shoes, and the
leeks and onions of Egypt, etc. etc.

But I must do as well as I can, and, as "the truth and validity af his
arguments, upon the danger of episcopal establishments in America," seem to be
his main fort, I shall strive there to storm him in my next number.

POSTSCRIPT.
While I am pursuing this erratic scribbler through all his mazes and turnings,
I pray, Mr. Remonstrant, Mr. Irenicus, Mr. Anti-Centinel, and others his
auxiliaries, not to bear too hard upon me, by standing and cuffing me behind
bushes, and at every corner. It is unmanly Indian-like war; for, whilst I am
engaged with such a mighty champion as the Sentinel, I cannot be supposed able
to spare his auxiliaries more than a back blow now and then.

The Remonstrant, No, II. not content with what the Sentinel has said about
persecution, lays before the Quakers, from their own history by Sewell, which
most of them have in their hands, a petition to the King, setting forth many
hardships and sufferings they labored under; and threatens the Anatomist with
reviving the memory of many more such transactions. The Remonstrant may use his
pleasure in this; for the members of the Church have nothing to fear from his
utmost efforts. The history of the Church of England is part of the history of
the nation, and where she has done amiss, the Quakers can as well distinguish
as the Remonstrant or any of his party; and therefore, he will not be able to
tell them or us any thing that is new. But many of the persecutions by his
party, which (if forced to it) we can set in the balance, have been carried on
in low and barbarous obscurity -- and for the sake of Religion, I would be
unwilling to drag them into light.

Nevertheless, since the Church has been charged with persecution, it was
intended (If I could be permitted to proceed regularly) to distinguish the
period before the act of toleration, from that after it. In the former period
the principles of civil liberty were perhaps as little fixed as those of
religious liberty; and where the Church erred in the execution of the laws, by
which she was secured, it was with far less savageness of manner, and fanat^c
barbarity, than were exercised by our accusers during the same period. Again,
since the toleration-act, scarce an instance can be given wherein both the
spirit and letter of the act have not been inviolably observed on the part of
the Church; and that not as matter of constraint on the Bishops, but from an
examplary spirit of moderation and Christian charity; whereas, on the other
hand, during the same period, our antagonists have too often shown, where they
had power, that their spirit ^ath not mended with the spirit of the laws, but
still continues ^^e same in the present day even to the mad zeal of knocking in
head, where other means might fail.

And here, I could such a tale unfold -- But I content myself with acting on
the defensive; and since the Remonstrant has given one petition of the Quakers
to the King, I will give another, and let him say what he will against the
Church, I have sufficient materials still to balance the account with him.

The petition I mean, is that of the Quakers, to Charles II. 1669, complaining
of the intolerable persecutions they suffered by the sanguinary laws of
New England; when, after enumerating some of their sufferings under Cromwell's
usurpation, they proceed thus.

And now, O King, since the very day the Lord brought thee into thy land again,
and gave thee thy land again, and gave thee thy regal power, have they in thy
name, made strange and cruel havoc of thy true subjects, in putting to death
and banishing: And in thy name, with many torturing whippings of old and young
at posts, and at wheels of great guns, and at carts tails, dragging the naked
bodies of parents and children through diverse long towns, through the filth and
dirt of their channels and cart-ways. And in thy name commanding one friend and
brother to help to imprison the other, yea in thy name they have lately pressed
the son to help to force his tender father and mother to goal, sundry miles, in
the extremity of the winter season, to the hazard of their lives: And such as
refused to obey their unnatural and abominable commands, they have fined at
their courts. -- And thus from court to court do these monsters of men, In thy
name, fine, imprison, and break open the houses of the people called Quakers,
and rob them of their goods, and take away that they should eat in, and that
they should drink in, yea, the very clothes from their backs in the winter, and
the bed they lie on, while they keep the body sundry miles off in prison;
driving husbands and wives to prison in times of great frost and snow keeping
them close prisoners to the endangering of their lives, and to the ruin of
their families, had not the LORD preserved them. All this, and much more, have
they done to the servants of the LORD in New England in thy name, saying that
thou ownest their doings and esteemest their laws as thy laws: And all these
hard things have the servants of the Lord patiently suffered and sustained at
their hands, for no other cause but for their faithful obedience to the spirit
of the Lord in their hearts, which spirit of holiness teaches them, that
forced worship and worshippers are an abomination unto the Lord. These few
lines are written not from any defire of the least revenge from thy hand upon
them, but that thou may know it, and make known thy dislike of their
wickedness, that so the blood of the innocent might not be laid to thy charge
in the terrible day of the Lord. The above petition is taken from Modern
History, vol. 6.


As the Remonstrant tells us he is to oblige the world with "abstracts of the
acts of parliament which distressed the British Churches from Queen Elizabeth
to Queen Anne," pray would it not be best to do this by subscription? For we
shall be forced in self-defense, let him go as far as he will, to balance t^
account with the like laws and penal proceeding of Presbyterians and
Independents, even though we should take them from what he calls "pamphlets and
unprinted histories," if he chooses to call the history of Scotland and
New England, and the proceedings of Synods, Presbyteries, and Kirk-Sessions, by
that name.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, Nov. 9. The ANATOMIST, No. IX.
How easy and plain might we make our defense? How clear and allowable even
unto themselves; if we could but obtain of them to admit the same things
consonante to equity in our mouths, which they require to be so taken from
their own? If that which is truth, being uttered in maintenance of Scotland and
Geneva, do not cease to be truth, when the Church of England once alleges it.
--

HOOKER.
I come now to that part of my undertaking, in which the Centinel's
adherents)by their repeated challenges) seem to think I shall be chiefly
pressed. -- I mean, in answering his arguments "on the danger of introducing
(or, as they phrase it, importing) a Bishop, or Bishops to America." -- And, I
confess, I have no small difficulties to encounter with. For,

1st, What he says on this head lies so scattered through his different papers,
that, after wading through all of them, I find it almost impossible to sort
what I glean up, into any kind of form or connection.

2dly, After this pains, which I have taken without any desire of mangleing or
weakening what he has advanced, I can meet with scarce any thing that wears the
semblance of argument.

It would, indeed, be a pleasure, while we claim what we think a natural right,
to be instrumental in removing the apprehensions which any sincere and candid
man may entertain from our prosecution of that claim. But, when called on to
reason with a man, who will neither trust the faith of nations, the sanctity of
laws and charters, nor any human security whatsoever, but will still cry out --
"danger, slavery, persecution" -- I find myself in the situation of one who
foolishly undertook to reason a man into his senses, whose imagination was
continually haunted with ghosts and hobgoblins. --

"Come, says he, who undertook this work, show me the chamber where they are --
For GOD's sake, replies the other, enter not in. See how it stares! It is ready
to devour you! -- Where, where, says the former; I see no such thing. In yonder
corner! I beseech you, continues the haunted man, go not near it! -- Sir, says
the former, it is no such thing. It is a sheet, a sheet -- It is a ghost, a
ghost! continues the other -- Sir, says the former, it is a sheet. I assure
you, it is a sheet. I feel it, I handle it -- a ghost! still continues the
other." And thus might the dialogue proceed for ever, without conviction on the
part of the poor distempered man.

That I am doing no injustice to what is called the Centinel's "arguments," I
hope to show to every candid reader. I shall, therefore, endeavor, with the
utmost impartiality, to gather them into one view.

There are grounds, he says, to suspect that Dr. Chandler has not given the
plan on which Bishops are to be sent to America, with that openness and candor
that might have been expected. -- It is plain, beyond a contradiction, that the
defire of the Missionaries is to have such suffragan Bishops IMPORTED into
America, as shall have authority to exercise all the powers given THEM If this
confused sentence has any meaning, it must be the following, and answers
itself, viz. "The Missionaries want such suffragan Bishops in America as shall
have authority to exercise the powers given them ( the said suffragan Bishops,
that are to be imported into America) by the laws of England." Now, truly, if
the laws of England have given any powers to American suffragans, I cannot see
that it would be illegal to exercise those powers. But I do not know that such
suffragans are once mentioned in all the English laws.
by the laws of England. -- Now, although here he seems to make the Episcopal
Clergy desire a Bishop in America, who has already "powers by the laws of
England," yet No. 11, and elsewhere, he intimates, that they want to introduce
him by an act of Parliament," and new laws. In short, he takes it for granted
all along (for it would be needless to quote particular papers, because, if he
denies this, we have no contest) that the design of the Episcopal Clergy is a
general establishment, as in England, through all America; that the sending out
a Bishop is an establishment of himself, as well as his Clergy; that whatever
may be pretended, he must have jurisdiction over the laity; that arbitrary
spiritual courts must inseparably accompany him, etc. The laity, says he, are
amused with the false and inconsistent hopes of being entirely exempted from
the jurisdiction of the American Bishop. We call it an inconsistent hope, as it
is contradictory, not only to the known sentiments of the English Episcopal
Church, but also to the sentiments of every other Christian Church in the
World. This plan of American Bishops is a mere novel invention, without any
parallel in history, since the first establishment of a Church upon earth.

Nevertheless, this consistent writer, No. 15, "wonders at those who have no
idea of a Bishop separate from the appendages of the office;" -- but still,
when he finds Dr. Chandler has this idea as well as himself, and speaks of a
Bishop without the appendage of spiritual courts, he cries out -- "What is
this, but to say, that an arbitrary spiritual jurisdiction, unknown in the
British constitution, and abhorre^t of the rights of freemen, is asked, and
about to be established in America?" He kindly adds, "Alas! for the poor
Clergy!" Indeed the Clergy are once obliged to him for his pity; but they did
not need it here. For Dr. Chandler has said in the same sentence, and the
Sentinel has quoted the words, that the Clergy are not to be governed
arbitrarily, but "by laws and canons of the Church," clear and explicit in
themselves, which the Clergy have voluntarily bound themselves to obey, and
which may be executed in respect to them, without any jurisdiction over the
laity, because such jurisdiction, as I shall fully show, is derived from other
laws, that neither have, nor are desired to have, any place here.

These few "arguments" of the Sentinel, will be sufficient, till I try whether
they can be answered. Others shall be quoted in their proper place; only it may
not be amiss to show, before I begin, how, in those already quoted, he is
explained and helped out by his associates, the Remonstrant, etc. -- who tell
us, "that there is a gathering storm ready to burst on them, and fl^stroy
them;" that they fear "Episcopacy, and its courts, will certainly be
established together; and that all judges and governors, who will not bow their
necks to American Bishops, will be tumbled down with disgrace from their
stations." -- And then we hear of "LAUD, and Persecutions, and flying once more
to the wilderness, as their FATHERS did;" for it seems every writer now adays
had fathers, and can count his pedigree back to the first settlement of America!

Having thus cut out my work, the question is, where to begin; for I have not a
single spectre to lay, but am surrounded with them. -- "GORGONS, and HYDRAS,
and CHIMERAS dire!"

I will begin then, at a venture; for it makes little odds where. The
Centinel's main argument seems to be -- that "ecclesiastical courts, and
slavery, and persecutions," are a necessary consequence of the introduction of
Bishops into America; and I am called on to show that his apprehensions on this
head are not well grounded. Hard it is to prove a negative, but in all fair
argument, I shall do what may be equally satisfactory, if I prove this
affirmative, -- viz. -- that it is possible, and even certain, that a Bishop
can be settled in America, without affecting the civil or religious rights of
any person whatsoever; and that every presumption that can be adduced to the
contrary, would milita^e equally against every institution in society, even
down to the appointment of a petty constable. And I will engage to show much
greater security against any arbitrary proceedings on the part of a Bishop,
than I think our antagonist will be able to show on the part of such self-made,
and self-delegated things, as Synods, Presbyteries, and Kirk-Sessions, in
America.

However ungenerously the Sentinel has been pleased to traduce the Episcopal
Clergy of America, as in a conspiracy with B -- te and Gr -- n -- lle, to
enslave their country; however basely he has associated attempts for an
American Bishop with plans of rebellion, and the introduction of Popery, and
the Pretender; however wickedly he has endeavored to prejudice the vulgar, by
jumbling our claim of natural right to the privileges of a Christian Church,
with odious Stamp-Acts, and arbitrary Courts of Admiralty, yet I am bold to
say, that if the Episcopal Clergy did not clearly see, and firmly believe, that
what they ask is perfectly consistent with their own rights, and those of the
laity, they would detest the thoughts of becoming instruments in the ruin of
their country. For what motive could induce them to such a conduct? Surely the
present set of Ministers can expect little personal benefit from any scheme of
this kind. And they are not Anchorites, without children, nor wholly without
property; nor is their priesthood, like the Levitical, to descend from father
to son.

Surely then this abusive writer should have some solid foundations for such a
horrible charge against the Clergy, as that of showing one scheme to the world
" plausible, specious, and calculated to amuse with inconsistent hopes," while
the real one lies concealed under it, pregnant with every possible mischief. --
Let us see what those foundations are. --

He says, the exemption of the laity from the jurisdiction of the Bishop is
contradictory, not only to the known sentiments of the Church of England, but
of every other Christian Church in the world -- and is a mere novel invention,
without any parallel in history, since the first establishment of a Church on
earth.

Now both these assertions I utterly deny; and if the Sentinel was in earnest
in them, or meant any thing more than to impose on the ignorant, he must give
me leave to pronounce him wholly unacquainted with Church History, as well as
the constitution of the Church of England, and the foundation of that temporal
jurisdiction, with which it has been thought proper to vest her Bishops.

What meaning the Sentinel designs to have put on the words -- "since the first
establishment of a Church on earth." -- I know not. For he often writes, as if
he chose to keep a backdoor for an escape, in case of detection. But if CHRIST
can be said to have established a Church on earth, or if there was a Christian
Church during the three first centuries, then there were Bishops during that
period, such as we desire for America, that had no jurisdiction over the laity,
different from what every Presbyter had, as essential to the office of a pastor.

I shall give an authority for this, which will not be denied. It is the
learned and accurate Civilian BURN. -- For the first 300 years after CHRIST (he
says) the distinction of ecclesiastical and spiritual causes, in point of
jurisdiction, did not begin. At that time, no such distinction was heard of, in
the Christian world. For the causes of testimony, matrimony, bastardy,
adultery, and the rest, which are called ecclesiastical or spiritual causes,
were merely civil, and determined by the rules of the civil law, and subject
only to the jurisdiction of the civil magistrate."

What has BEEN, is possible to BE again; and the same author proceeds to show
how Bishops came to have jurisdiction over the laity, even in causes called
spiritual; which were never claimed as inherent in their spiritual character,
or derived from CHRIST; but given by the powers then in being, for what they
esteemed salutary purposes.

Christian Emperors, says he, out of a zeal to grace and honor learned and
godly Bishops, were pleased to single out certain causes, wherein they granted
them jurisdiction, -- viz. in case of tithes, because paid to the men of the
Church; in causes of matrimony, because marriages were, for the most part,
solemnized in the Church; in causes testamentary, because testaments were many
times made in extremis, when Churchmen were present giving spiritual comfort;
-- and in all these causes, the Bishops proceeded according to the imperial
law, and as the civil magistrate did in other causes. Who then will say that
they assumed this jurisdiction, as inseparable from their office, or that it
was arbitrary, or could have been exercised without law?

In the same manner did the English Bishops derive jurisdiction over the laity,
in certain causes ecclesiastical. It is no doctrine of our Church, as the
Sentinel would assert, that they hold it inseparable from their office, and
immediately of CHRIST. This proud boast is indeed made by Independents and
Presbyterians, though they have never yet produced their charter. But the latter,
I mean the Presbyterians, in the new national Church of Scotland, hold this
doctrine with much as bad a grace, as they accuse our Church of Sham-elections,
dictated by the King's Conge d'Elire. For though the General Assembly of the
Church of Scotland pretend that they meet yearly with CHRIST as their head, and
from him alone derive their authority to determine causes, civil and
ecclesiastical, yet the King, by his Commissioner, sits at least as their
visible head, and when in his royal prerogative, he thinks fit to adjourn them
to a certain day, they always find (and good worldly wisdom it is) that CHRIST
approves of what the King has done, and they adjourn themselves to the same day
accordingly.

Having already transgressed the bounds allotted me by my publishers, I shall,
in my next, resume this subject, and show, by full authorities, that the
proposed plan for American Bishops, simply as it stands, is no novel invention,
nor any way contradictory to the known sentiments of the Church of England.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, Nov. 3. THE REMONSTRANT, No. IV.
THE Anatomist, and his friend Horatio, have r^ked together abstracts of
pamphlets, written in the New England provinces, from which they have picked an
expression, here and there, which they dislike; and having dressed it in
Italicks, and double commas, they cry out, that the whole performances are
written with a bitter intolerant spirit. If in their controversies* with any of
the Missionaries, the Independent Ministers have set the vain pretensions of
these gentlemen, to an uninterrupted succession, and the power which their
Church claims to ordain or decree rites and ceremonies, etc. in a true light,
there is a loud outcry raised, that they attack the whole body of the Church,
her doctrine and discipline, and the principles of her clergy and members. Is
it so rotten a fabric, that it cannot bear to be touched? A Church that is so
very tender, should give no provocation. But does any of these quotations prove
that the Independents would have crushed the Church of England, or that they
were the first aggressors in any of these debates? No, it is well known that
the Episcopal Missionaries, or their friends, first proclaimed the war, and
when they were foundly drubbed, they would make the world believe, that the
whole Church of England has been too roughly handled; but what have these
squabbles to do with Chandler's Appeal? Every colony, and religious
denomination, are equally called forth by that champion for an American
Episcopate. They are to make their objections, if they have any, or all parties
are supposed to acquiesce in his plan.

The first Episcopal Church set up among the Independents in New England, was
about the year 1680. They were poor, and few in number, and were allowed the
use of the Townhouse by the Independents, as he calls the Congregational
Churches. Was not this an instance of brotherly love? It was an evidence of no
malignity of spirit, or a desire to crush them. But how did they requite this
kindness See Vindication of New England, Pages 13, 14. Life of Dr. Cotton
Mather, Page 43. Hobart's Second Address. Pages 24, 25, 26, 27, etc.
? Under the administration of Sir Edmund Andross, they declared that they were
the Church of England by law established; they would no longer assemble in the
Townhouse, but demanded the keys of the South Meeting House. And when some
gentlemen, proprietors of that house, refused to deliver them, Governor Andross
told them, he would presently seize on that house, and all the Meeting Houses
in the country, and hinder them from contributing the value of Twopence
toward the maintenance of any Non conformist Minister. And when this
threatening could not prevail, they thrust themselves into the Meeting house,
and there continued, until, by interrupting the people of the South
Congregation, often in the times, and sometimes in the very parts of their
worship* the whole town cried shame upon them. Here was a sample of the same
persecuting spirit, from which the Independents fled to this wilderness. At the
funeral of one Mr. Lilly, their Minister came with his gown and book, to read
the service, and to settle this laudable custom in that barbarous country. One
Mr. Fray^^^, a relation of the deceased, in the name of the rest, only with fit
words, desired him to forbear; but Mr. Frayray was bound over to the Court for
this offense, where they intended to have ruined him, had not the unlucky
Revolution prevented these designs.

And, that the Ministers might have their share, Mr. Cotton Mather was
prosecuted upon the act of Uniformity, and illegally condemned, but the
Revolution prevented the execution of the sentence against him. For on that
very day on which he was to be committed to half a year's imprisonment, those
that would have wronged him, were justly taken into custody. This beloved act
of Uniformity, and the penal laws in support of it, tore the established Church
of England to pieces, and brought unnumbered mischiefs on many of its own
Ministers and people, which it drove from their communion. And this same act of
Uniformity, which the Episcopal Church determined to establish in New England,
began all those controversies, that the Anatomist complains of, and it had been
for his honor, and for the benefit of his cause, rather to have let them sleep
in silence, than to have so spitefully revived them.

It is urged, that since the Act of Toleration an exemplary spirit of
moderation and Christian charity have prevailed among the Episcopalians. For
this we thank GOD, and for this we cheerfully praise, and give them due
commendation, as far as they deserve it. But are things really so? Let us
remind the Episcopalians of their conduct in New York, since the Toleration
Act, under the administration of Lord Cornbury See Mr. Makemie's Trial, Page
17, and Mr. Hobart's Second Address, Pages 28, 29.
. Mr. Makemie, a worthy Presbyterian Minister, preached a sermon in New York,
at the desire of a number of the inhabitants, who were Presbyterians. And
though he produced a certificate of his having qualified himself according to
the Act of Toleration, he was committed to prison, and prosecuted upon an
indictment that says, that he unlawfully used other rites, ceremonies, form and
manner of divine worship, than what are contained in a certain book of Common
Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, etc. against the form of the
Statute. etc. Here the attack was vigorously begun by the Church of England,
against the Presbyterians, in open defiance of the Act of Toleration, and in a
city that was originally settled with Dutch Presbyterians, and where the
Episcopal Church, in its infant state, had been kindly cherished, and had
received many favors. Was n^^ the unmerciful and scandalous Schism Bill,
enacted in the last year of Queen Anne, and enacted in open defiance to the
Toleration Act, by which the friends of this beloved Act of Uniformity deprived
all parents that were not of the established Church, of the great trust
committed to them by GOD, and nature, to train up their own children according
to their own sentiments in religion, and the fear of GOD. No catechism was to
be taught to children, but that of the Church of England, and no man under
severe penalties, was allowed to teach even an English school, who did not, in
all things, conform to that Church. Let our Anatomist call this unmerited
abuse; it is the truth, and it was done when High Church rode triumphant. And
had not GOD in mercy placed the Hanover family on the throne of Great Britain,
all the severities that distressed England for near one hundred years, and
ruined many thousands of families, had been felt once more, with sevenfold
rigor.

In Connecticut the Episcopal party carried their pretensions to an
establishment in the Plantations, by the Act of Uniformity, to a very high
pitch. This was urged by Caner and Wetmore, from a principle established, as
Wetmore said, by skilful Lawyers, that colonies transplanting themselves, carry
the laws of their mother country with them. And from these struggles and
attempts to establish themselves by the Act of Uniformity, the world may judge
who have been the aggressors in these disputes; or whether the Episcopal
Churches, or Independents, who strive to defend their liberties and privileges,
are most to be blamed. But this aspiring, restless, ambitious spirit of the
Missionaries, never was content to have equal privileges, but always strove for
something superior to all other religious societies, and to introduce the Act
of Uniformity, with its penal laws. These struggles have given just ground to
fe^r them as a common enemy, and to believe, that if any Episcopate be
established among us, it will not be so innocent and harmless as some pretend,
but that it will bring with it the usual appendage of its Tyrannical
Ecclesiasticle Courts, and with them vexatious law suits, and expensive
appeals, and distress and confusion.

As the old story of New England persecution is again repeated, to the
disadvantage of Presbyterians, though the Anatomist allows it was done by the
Independents, we will once more give it a due attention. We declare, in the
most solemn manner, that we detest and abhor persecution for conscience sake,
in Presbyterians, Independents, Episcopalians and Roman Catholics, as inhuman
and antichristian. We observed already, that the people of New England were led
into these severities by an act of parliament, made in the 35th year of
Elizabeth, which condemns all Non-conformists, after they are convicted, to
banishment; in case of return, without license, to death, without benefit of
Clergy. This severe law was again renewed anno 1664, in the act against
conventicles, with some additional severities, in the reign of King Charles, by
which (...) Quakers, with all other Protestant Dissenters, suffered most
severely. The persecution in New England was in a time of troubles both in
Church and State; the persecution in Old-England was in a time of peace and
tranquillity, when the Church of England sat at the helm, and carried all before
her. The Quakers could not, with any color or pretense, be prosecuted by the
government for any plots or conspiracies, or any distursbance given to the
peace of the State, yet a law was enacted against them in particular, anno
1662, entitled, An Act for preventing mischiefs, and danger that might arise
from certain people called Quakers, by which they were made liable to severe
fines and imprisonment, and after the third offense to transportation, for
refusing to swear. I shall here transcribe a passage from Sewell's History
(Page 335) Haying now left America, and returned to England, let us go and see
the state of persecution at London, where desperate sury now raged, though it
was not in that chief city alone the Quakers, so called, were most grievously
persecuted; for a little before this time there was published in print, a short
relation of their persecution through all England, signed by twelve persons,
showing that more than four thousand two hundred of those called Quakers, both
men and women, were in prison in England, and denoting the number of them that
were imprisoned in each county, either for frequenting Meetings, or for denying
to swear. etc. Many of these had been grievously beaten, or their clothes torn,
or taken away from them, and some were put into such stinking dungeons, that
some great men said, they would not put their hunting dogs there. Some prisons
were crowded full, both of men and women, so that there was not sufficient room
for all to sit down at once; and in Chessm, sixty eight persons, were in this
manner looked up in a small room; an evident sign, that they were an harmless
people, that would not make any resistance, nor use force. By such ill
treatment many grew sick, and not a few died in such jails; for no age, nor
sex, was regarded. Even ancient people of sixty, seventy, and more years of
age, were not spared; and most of these, being tradesmen, shopkeepers, and
husbandmen, were thus reduced to poverty. For their goods were also seized for
not going to Church (so called) or for not paying tithes. Many times they were
fain to lie in prison, on cold nasty ground, without being suffered to have any
straw, and often they have been kept several days without any victuals. No
wonder therefore many died by such hard imprisonments as these,

At London, and in the suburbs, were about this time no less than five hundred
of those people called Quakers, imprisoned; and some in such narrow holes, that
every person had scarcely convenience to lie down, and the felons were suffered
to rob them of their clothes and money. -- This author proceeds to relate many
instances of cruelty and severity to these people, during the administration of
the two brothers, Charles and James. He informs us (Page 517) that since the
Restoration of King Charles (till the year 1676) above two hundred of the
people called Quakers, had died in prisons in England, where they had been
confined because of their religion. But they were not the only sufferers. It is
well known that De Laune, who wrote the Plea for Nonconformity, was one of
near eight thousand, who had perished in prison in the reign of King Charles
the Second, merely for dissenting from the Church in some points, for which
they were able to give reasons; and that one Jeremiah White had carefully
collected a list of the Dissenting sufferers, and of their sufferings, and had
the names of sixty thousand persons, who had suffered on a religious account,
between the Restoration of King Charles the Second, and the Revolution by King
William; five thousand of whom died in prison (Neal, Vol. 4. Page 450) The
Anatomist threatens us with unsolding a tale to our disadvantage, if we speak
of these severities. We assure him we never intended to have mentioned these
severe acts that bore down Dissenters for near one hundred years, had he not
proclaimed Presbyterians sour and intolerant, and tried to blacken them as a
body, who are so respectable a part of the Protestant Churches. It is well
known, that they were the first people in Europe that gave universal toleration
to all religious denominations; but we fear no tales; if they be but true, let
them be fairly told, to the dishonor of all persecutors. We have neither the
inclination nor the power to obtain an establishment to harrass and disturb
other religious societies in America. But that the Episcopal Missionaries, and
others of their party, were they encouraged, and protected by Bishops, have
both the power and the inclination, is what we greatly fear. We are prepared to
hang out the persecutions of a Parker, a Whitegift, a Laud, and a Bancroft, to
the world, to excite the hatred of mankind against religious tyranny; and to
raise their horror and abhorrence of these severe acts that clothed such
oppressors with power to do mischief. But if the Anatomist, instead of abusing
his neighbors, proceeds with sober arguments to answer the objections raised
by the Sentinel against Dr. Chandler's Appeal, we shall leave him and his
adversary to dispute the point; only we desire that he may do it with the
calmness which does honor both to the Sentinel and the Doctor. We shall lie on
our oars, and if relieved of our fears, shall say no more of penal laws and
persecutions. But if instead of arguments, and sound reasons, we have nothing
but shifts and evasions, we must reason by analogy; and by what has happened
from an English Episcopate, shall argue what we must fear from an episcopate,
if it be established in America.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, Nov. 10. The ANATOMIST, No. X.
The men trace the very footsteps of their forefathers. They call in question
the received discipline of the Church, the Liturgy, the vocation of BISHOPS,
and being great admirers of the Geneva discipline, think there is no better way
of establishing the same in England, than by inveighing and railing against the
English Hierarchy; stiring up the people to a hatred of the Bishops and
Prelacy; setting forth scandalous books against both, and in their libels and
sermons, belching forth the most virulent calumnies. --

CAMBDEN'S Annals of Eliz.
SUCH was the character given to the enemies of Episcopacy, in the days of
Queen Elizabeth, by the illustrious and impartial CAMBDEN; and King James, the
successor of Elizabeth, did not find them mended in his day, but declares, in
his Basilicon Doren, (or royal gift to his son, who found them still as little
mended) "that they were the pests of the commonwealth, whom no deserts can
oblige, no oaths or promises bind; breathing nothing but sedition and
calumnies; aspiring without measure; railing without reason; accounting every
one unworthy to enjoy the benefit of breathing, that denies the least jot of
their grounds; and who would make the scripture to be ruled by their
conscience, and not their conscience by the scripture." Nay, though educated
among them, this Prince was obliged to complain to his Parliament, "that they
were a set of men, ever discontented, and scarcely to be suffered in any
well-governed commonwealth, because nothing can fully satisfy them, but the
alteration of the whole frame of government."

How much of this character belongs to the Sentinel and other writers, who have
been taken notice of in my former numbers, I leave every reader to determine
for himself. The Sentinel in particular, with whom I am more immediately
concerned, has shown but little good disposition to "the frame of English
government," by his indecent abuse of an order so closely interwoven with it.
But what he says on this head, may well be passed over, as it will hardly
prevail on a sensible nation, "to forsake that government, the use whereof,
universal experience has for so many years approved, and betake themselves to
a regimen, never till yesterday heard of among men." Hooker.
His new fangled schemes of government, which he proposes to Churchmen in
America, I hope, will meet with as little regard. He asks -- "why do not the
Episcopal Ministers cho^se one of their number to be their superior, and
voluntarily agree to be governed by him? Our answer is ready. We have some
regard to our allegiance; and think this thing does not comport with it. We
hope also, we have some regard to our principles of Church government, and
would not willingly violate them. Lastly, we regard decorum and peace; and we
think neither would be promoted by unauthorized elections, or a government of
this kind; but above all, we are known to hold it as a principle, that the
Episcopal character cannot be derived in this manner. Those who think
otherwise, and choose to be governed otherwise, we do not desire to molest; and
only claim equal liberty to think for ourselves, and follow that mode which we
esteem best, and most agreeable to holy scripture and primitive practice.

But the Sentinel in his charity, strives to remove our scruples on this head,
by attempting to show, (what has often been attempted before him) that Bishops
and Presbyters are the same in scripture. No doubt, he was in hopes, from this
doctrine, to lead the advocates for an American Episcopacy ^^to a long train of
dispute very foreign to the point in question; which is not, whether it is a
right belief in the Church -- "that Bishops are of a divine institution, an
order superior to Presbyters, and essential to a full ecclesiastical
constitution;" but whether this being the belief of her Clergy and Members in
America, they are not entitled to such a constitution, provided it does not
interfere with the rights of others? Here I fix my arguments, and from this
ground I will not be drawn. It is vain, (and indeed would scarce be proper in a
news-paper) for such puny combitants as we Sentinels, Anatomists, and
Remonstrants, to retail over again all that has been written on this subject by
eminent men on both sides. The Church can boast many champions, but
particularly her venerable Hooker, whose arguments in the seventh book of his
ecclesiasticle polity, stand to this day unrefuted.

This excellent and learned writer (excellent and learned even in the opinion
of our antagonists) goes to the fountain head of scripture and Church
antiquity. He shows what things belonged essentially to the office of Bishops
from the beginning, and what were added to it afterward for reasons of
convenience and human policy. He proves that there ever were in the Church of
Christ an order of men, to whom were given, with permanent continuance, not
only power in common with Presbyters to administer the word and sacraments, but
also a further power to ordain ecclesiastical persons, and a chiefty (or
primacy) in government over the Church. Authentic lists of such Bishops from
the earliest times can be produced, which, whoever will question, may as well
question all facts of history, and whether there was a constant succession of
Roman Emperors from Julius Caesar.

"A thousand five hundred years and upwards (says he) the Church has continued
under Bishops; which to have been ordained of God, I am, for my own part, even
as resolutely persuaded, as that any other kind of government in the world is
of God. In this realm of England, before Normans; yea, before Saxons, there
being Christians the chief pastors of their souls were Bishops. -- Even at the
council of Ariminum, about the year 359, Britain had three Bishops present'"

Thus then if we were not able to go back to the time of the apostles, to prove
that a government by one had a preference to a Presbyterian government by many,
yet we can go far enough back, even in the Mother Country, to spare our
antagonists a thousand years, and still have antiquity on our side, If
therefore, this veneration for antiquity were only a prejudice on ourside, yet
as it is a harmless one, we may be indulged in it.

But it is objected, that granting the ancient power of Bishops in ordination,
yet it is not practiced now as in the Apostles' times, in pursuance of some
previous vote or election of the people, etc. Our venerable Hooker, who could
sometimes be merry, laughs at this objection, and shows that all the power
given to the people by our antagonists themselves in the choice or direction of
persons fit to be set apart for the sacred ministry, is a mere illusion; and
that they deal by the people in this case " much as those nurses do with
infants, whose mouth they besmear with the BACKSIDE of the spoon, as though
they had fed them, when they themselves devour the food."

But what vote of the people, besides the imposition of St. Paul's hands had
Timothy; whom no one, without denying scripture, can deny to have been a
Bishop, or a pastor having power superior to that of Presbyters? "For he was to
rule the Church of Ephesus; to command and teach; to regulate the public
worship, and hinder women from speaking: to see that no doctrines were taught
but what were received from our Lord and his Apostles; to ordain, or commit the
doctrine of the gospel to faithful men, who should be able to teach others, and
to lay hands suddenly on no man; to hear and judge of cases in dispute, but
against an elder not to receive an accusation, but before two or three
witnesses; and finally, them that sin to rebuke before all, that others also
might fear."

Here are pointed out the peculiar authorities exercised by the primitive
Bishops; and in the like matter, and with the like authorities, not by the
people's choice was Titus ordained Bishop of Crete by Paul; and we do believe,
from the whole voice of Church history, that there was ^^^stantly afterward a
succession of men, with the power of ordination and government superior to
Presbyters in the Church.

Indeed Calvin himself, the founder of Presbytery, does allow that in the first
ages of Christianity there were Bishops that had the like power in the assembly
of ministers, as the Roman Consuls in the senate, to advise, exhort, regulate
debates, and see that every thing was performed according to rules agreed on.
This power is all that we have occasion to contend for in the matter of
government; and the Sentinel himself allows, "that few professors of
Christianity deny Bishops to be of divine institution;" nay further, his
associate the Remonstrant is willing to allow us twenty Bishops (even one in
every house) to ordain, confirm, and inspect the morals of the clergy, provided
they have no connection with our civil affairs, etc.

These concessions are something, but alas! I must not flatter myself that they
will be allowed to do me much good. The Sentinel contends that it is impossible
for us to have such primitive Bishops; because contradictory to the known
sentiments of our Church, and of every other since the first establishment of
Christianity. Our idea of Episcopacy he contends likewise to b^ diocesan, and
very different from that which prevailed in the fir^^ ages of the church

It any thing in such an inconsistent writer could be astonishing his stumbling
on such an argument as this would be really so; as it is the very argument I
would wish to use against him. For if it be true that the present diocesan
Episcopacy, with that power over the laity, which he reckons so dangerous, was
not the ^ort of Episcocacy that subsisted in the Church from the beginning he
allows what I contend for, namely, that an Episcopa^^ different from that in
England, having once subsisted, may be (...) fixed; and he contradicts his own
assertion, viz. "that a^ exemption of the laity from the jurisdiction of the
Bishop, (namely, such a jurisdiction as the Continel complains of) is a novel
invention, without any parallel, etc, I say, such a jurisdiction over the laity
as the Sentinel complains of; for it would be absurd to say, he speaks here of
such a power, as his own pastors or Presbyterian Bishops (for so they like to
be called) think it necessary to exercise over the flock committed to them,
whether in one or more congregations. If that were his meaning, it would be
nothing at all to his argument, For surely, he could not in decency strive to
alarm all America against such a necessary power as this, unless he could say
that the same power which is perfectly innocent in the hands of a Presbyterian
Bishop, would be highly dangerous in a Bishop of ours; and that what is right
in Scotland and Geneva, ceases to be so in England and America,

Much has been said about diocesan Episcopacy, and sometimes to little purpose.
The truth is, that though such a Bishop as Timothy was appointed to Ephesus, as
his more particular charge, yet he and other Bishops of his time, were not
properly Diocesan, but Bishops at large, who might ordain and govern in the
Church in general, for the more speedy propagation of Christianity. But it is
reasonable to think, (and ancient accounts prove it) that, as this method could
not be necessary long, so it did not long continue; but, for greater
convenience and regularity, different Bishops became fixed to different
districts; and thus a sort of Diocesan Episcopacy soon began; yet still,
without those additions of temporal power, and legal limitation of dioceses,
which constitute the present Diocesan Episcopacy; and which could not possibly
take place till civil rulers became Christians.

Now, if the Sentinel means any thing by a "jurisdiction over the laity,
dangerous to liberty," he must mean the jurisdiction exercised under this last
sort of Diocesan Episcopacy; for his own principles will not permit him to
object to the powers exercised under the former sort of Episcopacy. Why then,
when he has quoted such eminent writers in our Church, as having a just idea of
this sort of Episcopacy, will he still insist on it that such an Episcopacy is
a novel invention, inconsistent with the sentiments of any Church that ever was
on earth? Why cannot he distinguish between the true Episcopal character, and
an adventitious character and powers afterward annexed to it? And these
adventitious powers have been greater or smaller in different countries, and in
the same country at different times, he cannot surely think the real episcopal
character essentially connected with them, or altered either by giving or
taking them away. I would ask "whether if the Governor of this province should
annex the office of surveyor general to that of first minister of the first
Presbyterian Church in this city, it would divest him of his ministerial
character? Perhaps some good people might think the one office rather
inconsistent with the other, but it would not destroy the idea of the
ministerial character; nor would it follow, that if this first minister should
go to another province, the like adventitious office would be essential to this
ministerial character.

Upon what better principle can our Sentinel argue that our Church would
consider and claim all the powers and jurisdiction annexed to the Episcopal
office in England, as essential to it in America? I shall show by full
authorities, that this neither is, nor can be, the principles of any Churchmen
whatever, nor of any man acquainted with the laws of his country, either
statute, common or civil. I thought to have proceeded with these authorities at
present, but as they cannot be inserted entire, with the proper remarks, they
must be deferred till my next number, in which, if I do not mistake my points
of law, I hope this dispute will be brought into a narrow compass.

The ANATOMIST, No. XI.
Leges sub graviori Lege. HALE.
I CAN scarce begin this number, without an acknowledgment to sundry
correspondents for several valuable communications; and hope they will not
ascribe it to disrespect, but to the proposed brevity of my plan, that so
little notice has been taken of their kind hints. I saw with concern from the
first, that by whose malice and artifice soever the late illiberal attacks on
the Church were begun and cherished, they would certainly be productive of much
evil, scandalize our common Christianity, and be matter of joy to its enemies,
and grief to its real friends. This seems now to be the general sentiment of
serious men of all persuasions: and it is but justice to say that I have me,
with many, even among the Presbyterians, who lament that any provocation was
given on their side; and think that their writers would have shown a greater
moment and weight of Christianity in one grain of Charity and brotherly
Good Will to the CHURCH, than in all that they have written and published, to
traduce and prevent her from enjoying her just rights.

From these considerations, then, as it was with reluctance I found myself
obliged to enter into this defense, so I have determined that on my part, it
shall not be protracted into an unnecessary length. Those who take delight in
vilifying a Church, so long honored among true Protestants, I shall soon leave
to the reflections of their own conscience; and in the mean time, I hope, that
indulgence with which I have been already favored will be continued to my
remaining papers, which will not be many (...) number, nor unimportant in their
nature.

In my last, it was observed that the Sentinel (either out of ignorance or
wi^ful design to mislead his readers) had confounded the adventitious powers
and jurisdiction given to Bishops by human laws, with the powers that belong
essentially to the Episcopal character, and are necessary for keeping up a
succession of ministers, and order in the body ecclesiastical, whether lodged
in One or in Many. With him, the acknowledged distinction between "Powers of
Ecclesiastical Order, and power of Jurisdicston Ecclesiastical, seems to find
no place. He has in his imagination, stretched the powers of our present
English Bishops to all the heights in which they were ever exercised in the
warmest times, and when liberty was least understood; and then when it is said
that Bishop, with those powers are neither desired, nor can, consistent with
law, be fixed in America, he charges the clergy with acting a treacherous part,
and "amusing with false and inconsistent hopes; because a Church, whose members
are exempted from the government of its officers, (...) he says, what no age
can furnish an example of -- a n^ Invention." etc.

Now the Sentinel is here certainly brought into this Dilemma, either to say
that a Church without all those enormous jurisdictions, which he had been
complaining of, is a novel-Invention; or to say that the powers he speaks of,
are those essential ones enjoyed by all complete Churches; and then how is it
an argument of inconsistency in our clergy, to desire a matter of common
essential right? And have no^ all his declamations been employed about phantoms
of his own brain?

I have already shown that such a Bishop as the American Clergy prayed for, is
no novel-invention, but known in the purest ages of the Church; and I might
have shown further, in contradiction to what the Sentinel asserts, that
Churches, even now upon earth, have Bishops nearly on the same foundation. The
Danish Bishops have neither temporal Jurisdiction, nor ecclesiastical courts;
nor have the Moravian Bishops, and yet they have the ordination and government
of their inferior cl^rgy.

But I will now come close to the point, and show that the English Bishops were
originally such also, and that what accession of power and temporal
jurisdiction they obtained, was not by encroachments nor yet claimed as of
CHRIST, in virtue of their episcopal office; but given by human laws, generally
expressing the reason of the Grant, and that neither those Laws nor Reasons can
have place in a country where the constitution is previously fixed, and a full
provision made for all the parts of government, except that alone which governs
the true scriptural order and government of the Episcopal clergy, agreeable to
the belief and constitution of their church.

The first thing that offends our antagonists, with respect to Bishops is their
title of Lords. Now if it is considered how they derive this title, perhaps the
Sentinel may not think himself obliged to associate the idea of Lords to our
American Bishops, nor to shape his mouth, to that offensive word, if he should
ever chance to speak to any of them. They are Lords as they sit in the upper
house of Parliament, and they sit there per Baroniam, as Barons accepted by
long usages, but afterward more expressly made such by their possessions being
turned into Baronies by William the Conqueror, to be held of the King. In
respect to their persons they are not Barons, nor are they such in respect to
their order, which they acquire by consecration, but in respect only to their
temporal incorporation. See Hale's Treatise on the Right of the Crown, and Coke
2d. Inst. Sir William Staun^ord also (153) says they have not the name of Lords
by virtue of their office, nor have they a place in Parliament in respect to
their nobility, but in respect of their possession, viz. the ancient Baronies
annexed to their dignities.

Thus the Sentinel may perhaps see a way to separate one offensive thing, viz.
the Lordly name, from American Bishops, but still we hope he will not, for all
this, call them bad names.

But let us pass from names to things, and see if we can satisfy him equally
about the enormous jurisdiction over the Laity which he has told us, he is
greatly apprehensive must accompany the very persons of Bishops into America.
In fair argument (as observed in a former number) the Onus Probandi should lie
on the accuser, and he ought to show by what law now made, or that probably can
be made, American Bishops should obtain such jurisdiction; rather than call on
me to prove what contingences are never to take place. Yet even this may be
done to the satisfaction of all reasonable men, if they will trust to the same
faith of laws and security in this matter, which they trust for their lives and
estates in all other matters.

We must go back, then, to enquire how English Bishops became invested with
jurisdiction over the Laity (for the Sentinel has nothing to do with any
jurisdiction the clergy may choose to submit to) and then we will apply the
argument to the point in question.

It has been already shown that primitive Bishops in the first three hundred
years of the Church, had no courts or jurisdiction over the laity, separate
from the civil power. So it was also in England, during the Saxon Heptarchy. In
each county under different Kings in those days, there was an EARL who had the
administration of Justice under the KING and was called in latin Comes, as
assisting the King in the execution of the laws. In each kingdom there was a
BISHOP, being seven in all England (exclusive of the Welsh or British Bishops)
before the coming of Augustine the Monk. All matters as well spiritual as
temporal, were determined in the EARL's or county Court, where the Bishop was
called to the Earl's assistance for advice in spiritual matters; or in the
Hundred Court, before some Lord of the District, with an ecclesiastical person
in the place of the Bishop. Duck 307. 1 Warn. 374. 2 Still. 14. God. 96


The great CANUTE the Dane, still preserved this order, as late as about the
year one thousand and seventeen, and gave the reasons for it; ordaining the
Shire Gemot or county assembly "to be held twice a year, and oftener if need
requires, wherein the Bishop and the aldermen of the shi^e shall be present,
the one to teach the Laws of God, the other the Laws of the Land." Spelm. Reliq.


Here is yet no separate jurisdiction claimed by the Bishops over the laity;
and when they obtained such jurisdiction, it was not, as the Sentinel says,
because no Church on Earth ever subsisted without it, in the oppressive way he
speaks of; for unlese he means this, I still insist he has said nothing) but
because it was thought fit by a King, who gave his reasons for the change, and
having entered England sword in hand, would not have submitted to have such
power wrested from him.

It was WILLIAM the Conqueror who erected separate ecclesiastical courts; and
thus runs the charter -- "Regia auctoritate praecipio, ut nullus Episcopus in
Hundret amplius placita teneat etc." By virtue of my Royal Authority I do
command that no Bishop do for the future hold pleas, etc. in the Hundred Court,
nor bring any causes which belong to spiritual government, before the judgment
of secular men; but to such places as the Bishops shall appoint for that
purpose, etc. See the Charter at large in Spelman.

These referrences are taken from Burn, whose accuracy may be depended on; for
I would now be thought more learned than I am, nor preten^ that all these
authors are on my shelf.




Having thus brought Bishops down to the conquest, we find no matter cognizable
before them, whereof jurisdiction has been used to or claimed as inherent in
their office, or obtained otherwise than by lawn, which can no way affect us;
laws too, which according to my motto are, sab graviori lege, controlled by
other laws

In my next, I shall bring this Argument down to the temporal powers exercised
by the English Bishops in the present day, and consider whether by Statute or
Common Law, those powers could be imported with Bishops into America; or
whether by encroachments, obliging judges to stoop to them, or by acts of
parliament to be made, we are in danger of being subjected to such powers --
for I would leave no appearance of argument unnoticed.

After discussing those points I hope to be excused, if I retort some of the
Centinel's arguments on himself, and show that if we are to be deprived of a
Natural Right, on account of his imaginary Fears, how many fears of the like
kind I might be able to muster up, from the known principles and former conduct
of his party, against suffering them to exercise those undefined and self
assumed jurisdictions, which they claim in their ecclesiastical courts and
synods. In the last place I shall endeavor to defend the Church against the
gross charge of having corrupted and obscured the pure word of God with human
inventions; and then take my leave of him with some things which I am not yet
disposed to indulge his curiosity with the knowledge of --

From the PENNSYLVANIA GAZETTE, No. 24. The ANATOMIST, No. XII.
The CIVIL and CANON Law submits to the COMMON Law, and all three to the
STATUTE Law.

BURN.
TWO things cannot but be obvious to every one who peruses the late
publications on the subject of American Bishops, viz. --

1st, That the advocates for an American Episcopacy do steadfastly declare they
have no farther, nor other view in this measure, than that the Episcopal
Churches in the colonies, may have the same opportunities of keeping up a
succession of Ministers and Ecclesiastical order, in their body, and agreeable
to their principles, which all other religious bodies in America do enjoy.

2dly, That the opponents of this measure strive to alarm all America against
it, contending, that although the above may be the specious plea of the
Episcopal Clergy, yet their true design (notwithstanding any assertions to the
contrary) is to introduce that yoke of spiritual bondage and jurisdiction over
the laity, which neither they nor their fathers could bear.

This is clearly the design of the Centinel's productions; whose arguments for
such a bold assertion, I am now examining; and if they should be found
groundless, the public will be at no loss to pronounce him either one of the
most uncharitable writers on earth, or one of the most ambitious, in striving
to exalt his own party, by depriving another (respectable among all
Protestants) of its just and essential rights.

It has been already shown, that during the three first centuries, Bishops had
not, in any part of the world, jurisdiction over the laity, separate from the
civil powers; nor different from what every Presbyter It is not essential to
this argument to inquire, whether, in those early days, excommunications, and
Church censures, were reserved as the peculiar right of the Bishop alone, or
might be put in force by Presbyters, without the Bishop. It is no matter
whether these Church powers were in one or many, if they were still in the
Church. The powers here spoken of are different, viz. such as English Bishops
enjoy, by virtue of particular laws and constitutions, beyond what might be
exercised over the laity by a Presbyterian Classis or Synod, or by a
Congregational Church, or any other body Ecclesiastical, ^^aiming government
within itself, in matters essential to its very being. And powers greater than
those, I say, can never be exercised in America, nor any where else, without
law.
might have, as essential to the pastoral office. I have shown that in England
also, the Bishops had only a sort of concurrent jurisdiction in the civil
courts; and no separate Ecclesiastical Courts for the ten first centuries, and
the William the Conqueror first separated the Ecclesiastical from the Civil
Courts, out of a desire, as he says, to do honor to GOD, and godly Bishops.
Lastly, it has been observed that the Danish Bishops, at this day, have no
Ecclesiastical Courts, or grievous jurisdiction, over the laity.

What then becomes of the Centinel's assertion, that Bishops, without
Ecclesiastical Courts, and that grievous jurisdiction over the laity, which he
charges the Episcopal Clergy with desiring to introduce into America, is a
"novel-invention, contrary to the known sentiments of the Church of England,
and every other Church on earth; and that therefore the Clergy are not to be
believed in this matter, but are amusing with false and inconsistent hopes?"

But another argument (as stated partly by the Sentinel, and partly by others)
is -- "That English Bishops now have this obnoxious jurisdiction over the laity
by long enjoyment; that their powers are known by the law of England, statute
and common (for it is needless here to speak of civil or canon Neither the
civil nor canon law (says lord Hale) have any obligation in this realm -- but
so far as they have been admitted either by consent of Parliament, and so are
part of the statute laws; or by immemorial usage in certain courts and causes,
and so are part of the common law. If it be shown, then, that neither the
statute nor common law extends to America in Ecclesiastical causes, then
neither canon or civil law can extend, which derives its validity from the
former. --
law) and that therefore, as we are an English colony, those laws which
concerned the office of Bishops before we had legislatures of our own (by a
well known construction of such ancient laws) will be considered as extended,
together with the person and office of a Bishop, into America."

Having stated this argument, I think, in its full force, I proceed to answer
it, and must take up Bishops where I left them in my last, viz. from the time
of William the Conqueror.

It was from the charter of this Prince (already quoted) that English Bishops
derived the right of jurisdiction in separate Ecclesiastical Courts; and no one
will pretend, that either that charter, or any usage antecedent to it, would be
a foundation for such courts in America. After the grant of this charter, the
Bishops, in their separate courts, proceeded by the same ancient laws and
customs, which had been observed for many hundred years, in matters of the like
kind, during their concurrent jurisdiction with the Earl or Sheriff in the
County Assembly. We find no new statute to enlarge their powers, but many, such
as the statutes of provisors, etc. to restrict and explain them; to birdle the
usurpations of the Popes, to prev^^^ appeals to foreign jurisdictions, and to
vindicate the supremacy of our own Kings in all causes, Civil and
Ecclesiastical.

It would be needless to dwell long on this gloomy period, or the various
struggles it produced. It is sufficient to say that even then, the whole spirit
of the laws was this -- That Bishops could exercise no powers by virtue of the
canons, rescripts or decrees of Popes, Emperors or foreign councils; unless so
far as those powers were allowed ^y the common law of the land; and if those
bounds were exceeded it would not have been allowed a sufficient answer -- to
tell the King's Courts, that Justinian, or Pope Gregory, had decreed otherwise;
for all courts are controuled by the common law."

But leaving this uninstructive period, let us come to the Bishops under the
Reformation. Now their courts are still held separate from the civil, in virtue
of the ancient appointment made by the Conqueror, allowed and confirmed as part
of the law of England by long usage. But neither the Reformation, nor the
received construction of the common law, nor any positive statute, have
extended the jurisdiction of those courts; but all have conspired to define,
limit, and explain it. Lord Coke, and Lord Hale, have accurately explained both
the foundation of Ecclesiastical Courts, and the sundry matters cognizable in
them by the law of the land.

"As in temporal causes the King, by the mouth of his judges, does judge and
determine the same by the temporal laws of England; so in causes Ecclesiastical
and Spiritual, the cognizance whereof belongs not to the common laws, the
same are to be determined by Ecclesiastical judges, according to the King's
Ecclesiastical laws; which, whosoever shall deny, he denies that the King has
plenary power to deliver justice in all causes to all his subjects in these
kingdoms." -- Yet still all Ecclesiastical laws are declared to be sub graviori
lege. The signa superioritatis are always carried by the common law; and if
Ecclesiastical judges refuse to allow acts of Parliament, or expound them in
any other sense than is truly and properly the exposition of them; or if the
cause be mixed, and some part of it properly triable at common law, they must
proceed according to the rules of that law, or the King's Courts in all these
cases can grant prohibitions, and take the matter before themselves; so that
the Ecclesiastical Courts in England are not now those wild and rampant things
that they have been described to be.

But whatever they are, I am to show, that neither the common nor statute law
of England can introduce them here in any form,

It is a known rule, that in a colony, having legislation of its own, the laws
of the mother country do not extend to any matter that has been provided for
by the laws of the colony itself, duly made and confirmed. Now the matters
whereof the Ecclesiastical Courts in England have jurisdiction, are principally
the following, viz. blasphemy, celebration of divine service, rights of
matrimony, divorces, general bastardy, probate of testaments, administrations
and accounts upon the same, incests, fornications and adulteries.

Now the laws of this and every other colony have already made provision for
the administration of justice, in respect to all those matters; and our courts
of law would never suffer any Bishop to exercise jurisdiction in them. For
example, should our Bishop claim the probate of wills in this province, no one
need be at a loss to guess how little disturbance such a groundless claim would
give to the eminent lawyer, who holds that office by as firm a right as any
other can be held by the laws of this country. Should a Bishop call a trial of
bastardy out of the courts of law before himself, our judges would smile at his
presumption, or perhaps punish him for it, if he persevered to disturb the due
administration of justice. And so of the rest. As to matters of tithes,
dilapidations, reparation of Churches, simony, ordering admissions, and
institution of clerks, there can no such things be so much as known, unless
where there is a full establishment of Clergy, and Diocesan Episcopacy, and
such an establishment was never known to be brought about in any country by
implication, or without positive and express laws for that purpose.

Lord Coke, in the list given of the matters whereof Bishops have cognizance in
England, has mentioned only two or three more than I have taken notice of, and
we are secured against any disturbance on account of them, by the happy
toleration act, and that liberty of conscience secured in every American colony.

Upon the whole, this I aver -- That a diocese, with temporalties, cannot be
created but by law, and that a Bishop, in any temporal capacity, without a
diocese and legal establishment, is what the laws of England know nothing of;
and on this principle, all that has been said about erecting Ecclesiastical
Courts in America, falls to the ground at once.

I have never met with a lawyer in the colonies that denied these positions. I
have indeed been told, that two or three very considerable ^^wyers, to the
northward, have said, that a Bishop in America would, by the common law of
England, be considered as a Diocesan Bishop, bringing the laws of Diocesan
Episcopacy with him; and that the Church would thereby gain an establishment.
If these gentlemen can assert this thing, they not only disgrace their
acknowledged abilities, but contradict themselves, to serve a present turn; for
they asserted the direct contrary when it served another turn, about 15 years
ago.

I have a paper before me (viz. the Independent Reflector, No. 44, dated
September 27, ^^53, known to be clubbed by them) in which they write thus, and
more like men of the law, than in some of their late writings, viz. --

Whether the Church of England is equally established in the colonies, as in
the southern parts of Great Britain, is a question that has often been
controverted. Those who hold the affirmative, adduce two arguments, viz --

First, that as we are an English colony, the constitutional laws of our mother
country, antecedent to a legislature of our own, are binding on us; and
therefore, at the planting of this colony, the English religious establishment
took place. -- They then proceed to answer this argument as follows. --

It must be confessed, -- that every new colony, till it has a legislature of
its own, is, in general, subject to the laws of the country from which it
originally sprung; but that all of them, without distinction, are to be
supposed binding upon such planters, is neither agreeable to law nor reason.
The laws which they carry with them, and to which they are subject, are such as
are absolutely necessary to answer the original intention of our entering into
a state of society. -- But no such necessity can be pretended in favor of the
introduction of any religious establishment whatsoever, -- because civil
society, as it is antecedent to any Ecclesiastical establishments, is, in its
own nature, unconnected with them, independent of them, and all sociable
happiness completely attainable without them.

2dly, To suppose all the laws of England, without distinction, obligatory upon
every new colony at its implantation, is absurd. -- It would introduce a
thousand laws inconsistent with the state of a new country -- To use the words
of the present Attorney General, Sir DUDLFY RIDER, it would be acting the part
of an unskilful physician, who should prescribe the same dose to every patient,
without distinguishing the variety of distempers and constitutions. According
to this doctrine, we are subject to the payment of TITHES, and ought to have a
These gentlemen had not then discovered that the common law would introduce
such courts, but vehemently contended the contrary. Tempora mutantur, etc.
SPIRITUAL COURT, etc.

3dly, If the planters of every colony carry with them the established religion
of the country from whence they emigrate, it follows, that if a colony had been
planted when the English nation were Pagans, the establishment in such a colony
must be Paganism alone.

4thly, That the Church of England is not established by the common law,
"appears from the following considerations."

The common law of England, properly defined, consists of those general laws,
to which the English have been accustomed from time to time, whereof there is
no memory to the contrary; and every law deriving its validity from such
immemorial custom, must be carried back as far as the reign of RICHARD I. whose
death happened April 6th, 1199. But the present establishment of the Church of
England was not till the 5th year of Queen ANNE. And hence it is apparent, that
the establishment of that Church can never be argued from the common law, even
in England; nor could be any part of it, since it depends not for its validity,
upon custom immemorial. -- The common law does not consider any religious
establishment whatever, as any part of the English constitution.

'I am obliged to these gentlemen for the foregoing arguments; and let none of
their party quo^, their authority for the future, in contending that the fixing
Bishops in America will, by the common law, be an establishment of Diocesan
Episcopacy, Ecclesiastical Courts, and of the Church of England in the
colonies. But perhaps some statute, already made, may produce this
establishment. -- The same gentlemen shall answer this for me also in my next
paper. But further, some act of Parliament may be made, or our judges may be
intimidated to wrest both common and statute law in favor of this
establishment. These last parts I must answer for myself, as well as I can.

P. S. I give our antagonists joy of their new ally, the NORTH BRITON, No. 61;
and am glad to see him so carefully circulated by them, as it will give me an
opportunity of adding one paper to my proposed number, on a topic not
disagreeable to me.

I should have thought our cause a very unfortunate ^^e, if the North-Briton
had become an advocate for it; and I am well pleased to see our antagonists so
willing to be put on the Republican side of government, and to leave us on the
side of monarchy, and the ancient constitution.

From the PENNSYLVANIA GAZETTE, Nov. 24. The SENTINEL, No. XX.
INVITED by Dr. Chandler, we have offered to the consideration of the public,
some of the objections which we have to the proposed American Episcopate, with
a moderation and candor, which must leave a testimony in favor of the
Sentinel in the breast of every person, who has taken time to read our papers.
We have waited patiently for more than three months, to see whether any thing
would be said, either by Dr. Chandler, or his friends, that had any tendency to
weaken the force of what we have advanced. The Anatomist has promised something
of this kind, but has hitherto entertained us with an uninteresting story,
which has no relation to the present debate, concerning the expediency of an
American Episcopate. He has gone as far back as the first settlement of
New England, and has industriously waded through Boston almanacks, unwritten
histories, and fabulous anecdotes, to find an apology for Dr. Chandler's Appeal
to the public, printed about a year ago. It is not a little surprising, that he
was contented with so short a period as an hundred years, and that he did not
go back to the time of the Reformation, and give us a complete history of all
the objections that have been made to the tyranny, superstition and
persecutions of the High Flyers of the Church of England, down to the present
day, in every quarter of the world, that he might abundantly vindicate Dr.
Chandler from the charge of beginning the present dispute by his late
publication. For doubtless all the instances of abuse, which that bulwark of
the Reformation has met with from all the shameless scribblers since the
Reformation, who have had the impudence to say, that the Church of England ever
maintained or practiced any thing that was wrong, were so many arguments to
prove that Dr. Chandler had been obliged, in defense of his injured, persecuted
Church, to write his Appeal to the Public. But what scandalous trifling with
the debate must this appear to be to every unprejudiced person? Dr. Chandler,
with more honesty and candor, explicitly acknowledges that his Appeal was
wrote from no such motives. It must be confessed, that Dr. Chandler knew the
motives which induced him to write, and he has honestly given them in his
introduction, without the most distant hint to the things, which the Anatomist
has alleged as the causes of his writing. He has not so much as insinuated,
that the persecutions of the Quakers in New England, almost a century ago, or
the neglect of the New York historian to give due praise to an Episcopal
Missionary, were any of the motives of his writing his Appeal. No such matter.
He designed it as an apology for his own and his brethren's conduct, in sending
home a number of addresses to their superiors, on the subject of an American
Episcopate. These are his words: That application has been lately made to our
superiors, by the Clergy of several of the colonies, requesting one or more
Bishops to be sent over to America, is a matter now generally known, and was
never intended to be kept as a secret. As there is great reason to hope, both
from a review of the arguments that were offered in the support of the
addresses that were transmitted on the occasion, and from the favorable
disposition of many in authority, that this request in due time will be
granted; it has been thought proper, in a public manner, to inform all, who may
imagine themselves to be any way concerned in the event of our application,
heartily and explicitly, for what reasons, and with what views an American
Episcopate is so earnestly desired by the Clergy, and the other friends and
members of the Church. -- Then, after mentioning the alarm that this conduct of
the Clergy had given, he invites all, who had any objections against the
scheme. to propose them in such a manner, that they may be fairly and heartily
debated before the tribunal of the public; and if none shall be offered, it
will be taken for granted that all parties acquiesce, and are satisfied App.
pages 1 and 2.
Dr Chandler is not ashamed to acknowledge, and has too much honesty to deny,
that the alarm was given by this conduct of the Episcopal Missionaries in
several of the colonies, and wrote his Appeal as an apology for them, with the
hopes of removing any uneasiness that might remain, and of preventing any
opposition to the preposed plan. What must we then think of the ingenuity and
veracity of the Anatomist, who does not hesitate to say, "that Dr. Chandler,
far from being the aggressor, is only a defendant, in a dispute which was
commenced on the part of the antagonists of the Church in New England" (that
is, by the Episcopal Ministers, the known antagonists of the Church in
New England) as early as the year 1734 Anat. No 1.
.

This is a sufficient answer to all the Anatomist has said in the first eight
of his numbers, and if he thinks it of importance enough to fill up eight more
of his papers with other arguments to vindicate Dr. Chandler from a charge
which the Doctor himself has honestly confessed, and can prevail on the public
to listen to such egregious triffling with the debate, he is welcome to try his
hand at the business a second time.

The Anatomist, after he has worn out the patience of his readers in his
northern expedition, where, Quixote like, he has been fighting with windmills,
hobgoblins, gorgons, chimeras and hydras, has at length returned to the place
of beginning, without having advanced a step in the debate about importing into
the colonies that precious commodity, an American Episcopate. But to make an
atonement for his long and tiresome introduction, he now proposes, without any
farther ceremony or circumlocution, to fall upon the Sentinel without remorse,
and cut him up, whether living or dead, with all that inhumanity, which his art
requires. But still, as if he was unwilling to undertake the disagreeable
office, he begins to make excuses, that he cannot understand the Centinel's
arguments, or reduce them into any kind of form or connection; and, indeed, he
suspects there is scarce any thing in his papers that wears the semblance of an
argument. Some men are so blind as not to see the force of an argument, from
the prejudice of education, and others from a natural defect in their
intellects; but, without determining which of these may be the case with the
Anatomist, we shall endeavor to give him all the assistance that we can, to
encourage him to proceed in the work he has undertaken, and, from time to time,
will hold out to his view the arguments we have used against the establishment
of Bishops in America, until he has tried his matchless prowess upon them.

But as the Anatomist has seen proper to begin with an observation picked out
of the Centinel's 18th number, we shall attend him there at present, and
examine what he has said to show its weakness. The Sentinel, in that paper,
charges Dr. Chandler with a disingenuous attempt to gild the disagreeable pill,
by amusing the laity of his own communion with the inconsistent hopes of an
exemption from the authority and jurisdiction of the new created Bishop. Dr.
Chandler has said (page 95) that "the American Bishops are to have no
authority, nor indeed to exercise any discipline over their own people, the
Clergy-excepted." The Sentinel endeavored kindly to undeceive the people. and
to let them know that it was a vain inconsistent hope, with which they were
flattered, that a Bishop should have no authority to exercise discipline over
his own people, was inconsistent with the known sentiments of the Church of
England, and of every other Christian Church in the world, and a mere ^ovel
invention, without any parallel in history either sacred or profane, since the
first establishment of a church on earth. Both these assertions the Anatomist
has ventured to deny. My veracit, to his upon the proof. He has condescended to
mention only the Church of England, as denying that the officers of it have any
such power essential to their office. He says, that it is no doctrine of our
Church, as the Sentinel would assert, that they hold it inseparable from their
office, and immediately of CHRIST. This proud boast is indeed made by
Independents and Presbyterians, though they have never yet produced their
charter Anat. No. 9.
. Pray, Sir, does not your Church yearly, in the commination before Lent,
solemnly confess before GOD your want of that godly discipline, which prevailed
in the purest ages of the Church, antecedent to any human establishment? And as
to the charter of the Ministers in the Christian Churches, you may find it
recorded, Acts xx, 28, and in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus. To say that a
Christian Minister has no power to govern the laity of the Church over which he
presides, is a bold and groundless assertion; and I challenge the Anatomist to
produce a single writer on Church Government, either in the Episcopal or
Presbyterian Churches, besides himself, who has denied the authority of
Christian Bishops to govern the people of their charge, independent of all
state appointments and civil establishments whatsoever, but derived to them
immediately from JESUS CHRIST, the only head of the Church. What a scandalous
evasion then is it for him to quote his Civilian Burn, to prove that the
English Bishops derived jurisdiction over the laity in certain cases, by the
laws of the kingdom? Could the Anatomist persuade himself, that the consequence
would follow from such premises, that they had no power to exercise discipline
over the laity in other matters derived to them from CHRIST? Which was the
thing he undertook to prove, in order to invalidate my assertion. For the
Sentinel, in the place in question, talks of no jurisdiction or authority over
the laity, but what existed in the three first centuries, and what every Bishop
or Presbyter had, as essential to his office as a pastor.

This is the authority and discipline which is derived from Christ, that is
ruined by your oppressive Test Act in England; this is the discipline the
Church of England is constantly lamenting the want of, without attempting to
restore it; this is the discipline which Dr. Chandler says is not to be
restored under the new American Episcopate; and this is the discipline from
which the laity of your communion are promised an exemption, to make the
disagreeable dose they are about to swallow more palatable. And this doubtless
is the jurisdiction, for the exercise of which the Anatomist says, "the
established Church of Scotland has never yet produced their charter;" for he
certainly could not mean a different jurisdiction with which they are invested,
as an establishment by the laws of the kingdom. What then has the Anatomist
said to relieve Dr. Chandler, and his brethren, from the charge we have brought
against him, for imposing upon the people with the vain hope of an exemption
from the authority and jurisdiction of his new Bishop? An exemption never
before heard of in any Christian Church, and inconsistent with the known
sentiments of the Church of England, as well as of every other Church in the
world. If the Anatomist will take the trouble of reviewing his argument on this
head, he will find that the Sentinel has been perfectly consistent with
himself; and that the Anatomist has, either through inattention or design,
grossly misrepresented the Sentinel, when he says, that Writer contends, "that
it is impossible for the Episcopal Missionaries in the Colonies, to have such
primitive Bishops (as were in the first ages of the Church) because
contradictory to the known sentiments of the Church of England, and every other
since the first establishment of Christianity Anat. No. 10.
." The Sentinel never said such a thing, never contended for such a thing,
either explicitly or implicitly. It is therefore hoped that the Anatomist w^^^
attempt to do justice to his own character, either by a candid acknowledgment,
that he has misrepresented the Sentinel, or by proving what he has asserted.
Nay, so far is the Sentinel from contending for such a thing, that he contends
that all your Missionaries are such primitive Bishops as were in the first
three centuries, that he has not, in the passage referred to, said a single
word about such a jurisdiction of Bishops, as he in other papers justly
complains of, as dangerous to the civil and religious rights of mankind, but
only that Dr. Chandler was much to be blamed for endeavoring to impose on the
Laity of his own Church, by giving them the inconsistent hopes of an exemption
from such a jurisdiction of Bishops over them, as was essential to their
office, and allowed to be so, by every Christian Church in the world. This was
the jurisdiction and discipline that Dr. Chandler, whom the Sentinel was
answering, spoke of, in the passages quoted from his Appeal. A little attention
and candor, Mr. Anatomist, would have saved you the labor of composing your
9th, 10th and 11th numbers, or at least a very considerable part of them.
However there are two excellent concessions in these papers, which we hope you
will not forget, viz. "That in the three first centuries, the Bishops had no
jurisdiction over the Laity, different from what every Presbyter had, as
essential to his office as a pastor Anat. No. 9.
.,' And that neither Timothy nor Titus were Diocesan Bishops, but Bishops at
large; nay, that there were no Diocesan Bishops originally, till, in process of
time, "for greater convenience and regularity, different Bishops became fixed
to different districts Ibid. No. 10.
;" although you had just before, in the same paper; settled his Grace Lord
Bishop Timothy in the Diocese of Ephesus, and Lord Bishop Titus in that of
Crete. But lest you should be called upon to vindicate these good Bishops, from
the scandalous crime of non residency (of which you know they were as
notoriously guilty as any Bishops in England) you have stripped them of the
Dioceses, which you had, to serve a turn, just before given them, and turned
them out at large, to govern in the Church in general.

The ablest advocates for Episcopacy, such as Bret, Hoadley, etc. freely
acknowledge that Bishops and Presbyters, in the New Testament, are synonimous
terms. And it is well known, that they were invested with power by a scripture
charter, to take heed to themselves, and to their flock, over which the Holy
Ghost made them Bishops. And all that are acquainted with the Fathers, or a
state of the primitive Church, know well that there were no pluralities in
those days, nor had the Bishops in those days, an oversight of more than the
people that received the sacrament together in one place, and attended public
worship in one house, and Presbyterian Pastors or Bishops, as the Anatomist
confesses them to be, were the New Testament primitive Bishops. The primitive
Church exercised a strict discipline, and took a special care of the morals of
their people, by the powers given their pastors by Jesus Christ, but fines and
imprisonments, and penal laws, were left to Diocesan Episcopacy, and to Church
zealots, such as Parker, Whitgift, Laud, and others of their stamp.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, Dec. 1. The ANATOMIST. No. XIII.
Thou art snared with the words of the mouth.

SOLOMON.
IN my last number it has been shown (by arguments which I think all the Whigs
and Kickers and Sentinels and Remonstrants on this continent, will not be able
to invalidate) that a church establishment, and ecclesiastical courts, having
jurisdiction over the laity, cannot by the common law of England, be introduced
into America in the person of a bishop; and it has been my good fortune to be
able to confirm this doctrine by the authority of some gentlemen, who have long
been deemed Oracles of the law, and champions for the good old cause, among the
Presbyterian Party. To what purpose then is all the noise that has been made on
this Head and the pains that have been taken by these gentlemen and their
adherents to persuade the people of these colonies, that the introduction of
Bishops into America, would necessarily introduce arbitrary ecclesiastical
courts, and lead to a general establishment of the Episcopal church here. Could
any thing more be meant by this than to alarm and impose on weak minds? Can it
be supposed possible that such writers should believe themselves, when they
assert tenets so directly contrary, not only to the known construction of all
law, but to their own avowed principles on every other occasion? Or can they
mean any thing more than to oppress and bear down the Church, by preventing her
from obtaining her just and essential rights that they may the more easily
erect a dominion of their own?

But it may be answered, that though these writers have suggested their fears,
that the aforesaid grievances would accompany, or soon follow, the settlement
of a Bishop in America, yet it is no where said by them that the Bishop would
derive his powers from the common law.

True it is that those writers, and particularly the Sentinel, have contented
themselves with spreading fears and alarms in general, as the easiest way of
carrying their ends; and do no where give us the particular grounds of their
fears. Had they done this they would have shown themselves men of candor; the
answer would have been easy, and I should not have been under the necessity of
considering every possible ground of apprehension, in order to quiet them. But
this task hard as it is, I have been obliged to undertake for the sake of truth
and an injured Church; and I propose to complete it, with the utmost sincerity
and fairness.

It has been already said, that there are only the following ways, in which a
bishop can be invested with the apprehended powers. He must derive them from
the Common Law, or from Statute Law; or judges will be intimidated to wrest the
present laws in a Bishop's favor; or some new law will be made by the
Parliament, or by the colonies. These are all the ways that have been ever
suggested, or which I think can possible be conceived. If the Sentinel can name
any other, I should think myself indebted to him for the intelligence.

The Common Law, I believe, from what has been said, is now out of the
question. Let us come to Statute Law, and here the same gentlemen that assisted
me before, shall speak for me again. For sometimes, Argumentum ad Hominem, is
the best that can be used, and no men can be better condemned, than out of
their own mouths.

The Independent Reflector aforesaid says, that the only arguments that can be
offered with the least plausibility in favor of an extension of the English
church establishment to America, (without which Diocesan Episcopacy,
Ecclesiastical courts, etc. are chimeras) must be founded on the Common Law, or
the act which establishes the Episcopal Church in South Britain, previous to
the Union Act. Having dispatched what relates to the common, as in my last,
this writer proceeds as follows; taking along with his own arguments, those
of Mr. Hobart, in his second Address to the Episcopal Separation in
New England, who is complimented with the title, (and perhaps truly) of an
ingenious gentleman.

The act we are now disputing about, was made in the 5th year of QUEEN ANNE;
and is entitled, an Act for SECURING the Church of England, as by law
established. The occasion of the statute was this. The parliament in Scotland,
when treating of an Union with England, were apprehensive of its endangering
their ecclesiastical establishment. Scotland was to have but a small share in
the Legislature of Great Britain, etc. -- The Scots, therefore, to prevent
having their ecclesiastical establishment repealed in a British parliament,
where they might be so easily outvoted by English members, passed an act
previous to the Union, establishing the Presbyterian Church, within the kingdom
of Scotland, in perpetuity, and made this act an essential and fundamental part
of the Union, which might not be repealed, or altered by any subsequent British
parliament. And this put the English parliament upon passing this act for
securing the church of England. Neither of them designed to enlarge the bounds
of their ecclesiastical constitution, or extend their establishment further
than it reached before, but only to secure and perpetuate it in its present
extent. This is evident, not only from the occasion of the act, but from the
charitable temper the English parliament was under the influence of, when they
passed it.

The title of the act is exactly agreeable to what we have said of the design
of it, and of the temper of the parliament that passed it. It Is entitled, an
act not for enlarging, but for securing the church of England, and that not in
the American plantations, but as it is now by law established; which plainly
means no more than to perpetuate it within its ancient boundaries.

The Provision made in the act itself, is well adapted to this design; for it
enacts, that the act of the 13th. of ELIZABETH, and the act of Uniformity,
passed in the 13th year of CHARLES the II. and all and singular other acts of
parliament then in force for the establishment and preservation of the Church
of England, should remain in full force for ever; and that every succeeding
sovereign should at his coronation, take and subscribe an oath to maintain and
preserve inviolably, the said Settlement of the church of England, as by law
established, within the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, thd Dominion of Wales,
and the town of Berwick upon Tweed, and the territories thereunto belonging.
This act does not use such expressions as would have been proper and even
necessary, had the design been to have made a new establishment, but only such
as are proper to ratify and confirm an old one. The settlement which the King
is sworn to preserve, is represented as existing previous to the passing this
act, and not as made by it. The words of the oath are, to maintain and preserve
inviolably the said settlement. If it be asked, what Settlement? The answer
must be, a settlement heretofore made and confirmed by certain statutes, which
for the greater certainty and security are enumerated in this act, and and
declared to be unalterable. This is the settlement the King is sworn to
preserve, and this settlement has no relation on to us in America; for the act
which originally made it, did not reach hither, and this act which perpetuates
them, does not extend them to us.

The writer then proceeds to show, "that it is a mistake to imagine the word
Territories (in the title of the act) was intended to comprehend the colonies,
but only the islands of Jersey and Guernsey, which were properly such"
territories depending on the immediate government of England, as fully
satisfied the words in the said title. "It is, says he, the invariable practice
of the Legislature, in every act of parliament, designed to affect us, to use
the words Colonies or Plantations; nor is it to be supposed, that in so
important a matter (as the extension of the English Church establishment, its
ecclesiastical laws, etc.) words of so direct and broad an intent would have
been omitted."

This reasoning is sufficiently conclusive; and certain it is that no British
act, since we had Legislatures of our own, has been considered to bind the
colonies, unless they were expressly named. Now most of our colony ligislatures
existed long before this act of Queen Anne. More than 60 years have since
elapsed, and in no part of America has ever this act been pleaded as the least
foundation for any church establishment, but where ever such establishment has
taken place, colony laws has been made for that purpose.

If then, neither from this act, nor any other British statute, the least
parochial establishment, Tithe, or temporal advantage, can be claimed in favor
of a Presbyter of the church of England, more than any other Presbyter in the
colonies; how could it be possible from Statute Law to plead an establishment
of Diocesan episcopacy and ecclesiastical courts? No one believes this
possible; nay not even those who at present think proper to alarm their
followers with the notion of it.

Since then, neither common nor statute laws that are, nor any colony law can
vest American Bishops with the powers in question; all other ground of clamor
must rest in the imagination of these writers themselves; and till they will
favor us with the cause and nature of their apprehensions, it will not be easy
to remove them. Here then I might drop my pen, were it not on account of some
well meaning people who are imposed upon by their crafty leaders, and on whose
account a few papers more may not be unnecessary.

POSTSCRIPT. Since the above went to the press, I have seen a paper called the
Sentinel, No. 20. which is the strangest jumble of misrepresentation and
unworthy argument, that ever came from a writer, affecting candor. I shall
subjoin a few remarks on some parts of it, for it is in general below notice.

He says, I have gone back to the first settlement of New England, to find an
apology for Dr. Chandler's appeal. -- Now I said at first, that if Dr. Chandler
stood in need of any apology, he was able to make it for himself, that my
design was of another nature, and that I went so far back, to show what sort of
spirit the antagonists of the church in America had possessed from the
beginning; and that the few writers on behalf of the church in the colonies,
Dr. C. as well as others, had ever been acting on the defensive, far from being
aggressors in this, or any former dispute. And I need not repent the short
review I took, as it has opened the eyes of many.

He says "the neglect of a New York historian to give due praise to one
missionary" is assigned by me as another cause of Dr. Chandler's appeal. I have
indeed, as part of my plan, to show the temper of our antagonists, convicted a
New York historian of palpable falsehoods, not only concerning one missionary,
but the society in England, and many missionaries; but said not a word of this
being the cause of Dr. Chandler's appeal.

He says further, "that I undertook to prove, that Bishops had no power to
exercise discipline over the laity in matters derived to them from Christ." Now
I have no where undertaken any such thing, but appeal to every reader whether I
have not carefully distinguished between the powers both of order and
government that are essential to the episcopal office, as derived immediately
from Christ; and those adventitious powers, derived from human laws. The former
powers are what we have all along been contending for, as what our church is
entitled to in common with all others, whether lodged in one, or in many.

He says I confess Presbyterian pastors to be Bishops. -- "Now I have said they
like to be so called, but have confessed nothing in their favor. On the
contrary I have declared my belief, "that there has constantly been in the
church of Christ, a succession of men with powers of ordination and government
superior to Presbyters."

He charges me with giving Timothy a Diocese, and then stripping him of it. My
words are, that Timothy's charge, which was Ephesus more particularly, "was not
properly Diocesan," as he was not restricted to exercise office there only,
"but might ordain and govern in the church in general for the more speedy
propagation of Christianity." These words were well weighed and can be well
defended. As to the sneer Timothy's Non-Residence, it is too low even to
provoke a smile; for when he went to distant places for the purposes of
government in the church, or for the ordination of Bishops and Presbyters, it
no more dissolved his particular connection with the Ephesians, or made him
chargeable with Non-Residence, than our would-be Presbyterian Bishops are
chargeable with Non-Residence, and their connection with their congregations
dissolved, when they gad about to Synods and Presbyteries in distant places and
distant provinces, during long months, for the purposes of ordination and
government, in their way.

I have but a remark or two more. The Sentinel says, "he never contended that
it is impossible for the episcopal ministers to have primitive Bishops," that
(is as he explains it a few lines further) Bishops without the jurisdiction he
elsewhere complains of; for that in the passage referred to, he says not a
single word about such jurisdiction." --

Surely this writer forgets his own words. -- "Many members (says he) of the
episcopal communion detest Spiritual Domination, and are as tenacious as others
of their civil and religious liberty." -- And then adds, "lest these should
oppose the scheme of introducing these new masters, they are amused with the
false and inconsistent hopes of being entirely exempted from their
jurisdiction. Now I would ask what jurisdiction can be here meant -- but the
spiritual domination just mentioned and connected with the whole sentence; that
Domination which laymen tenacious of civil and religious liberty would oppose?
If this is not the jurisdiction the Sentinel was complaining of, he has been
complaining of nothing.

And now, tedious as the Sentinel thinks I have been, (though yet little more
than half as tedious as himself) I have brought the matter to this short issue;
which if he evades, he will give me leave to use some of his own polite
phrases, and cry out in my turn, "egregious triffling, scandalous, evasion,
etc!"

1st. Either the jurisdiction he has been clamouring against is what he
confesses, "essential to the office of Bishops, and allowed so to be by every
Christian church." And then let him give me a reason why the church of England
in America, may not have that jurisdiction agreeable to her own way? Or --

2dly. The jurisdiction he means is that adventitious authority given to
Diocesan Bishops by human laws. And then let him show from what law that now
is, such jurisdiction can be derived to a Bishop in America.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, Dec. 8. The ANATOMIST, No. XIV.
-- Still they find it good
To keep the insection high in the people's blood;
For active faction must be doing still,
Lest she unlearn her art of doing ill.
Dr. LLUEL'S Miracles.
THE priests in Spain, in order to rivet the prejudices of their party against
the reformed religion, once told the people that protestants were not like
catholics, but had heads like dogs and other furious animals.

Just such a piece of art our Sentinel seems to have used, in order to terrify
the good people of America in regard to Bishops. For he ushers in his very
first paper into the world with the following preposterous picture from Horace,
viz. Humano capiti, cirvicem pictor equinam
Jungere si velet, etc. --
And endeavors, through all his succeeding numbers, to represent prelates as
monsters, more frightful and dangerous than those of the Spanish priests. Every
thing that could be judged exceptionable in the character of Bishops that lived
a century ago, is collected as it were into one character for our American
Bishop; and then it is modestly hinted, that if such a creature should be let
loose in America, he would devour all before him; or as the Sentinel himself
has it, would "destroy our charters, laws, constitutions, and threaten us with
the still further loss of our civil and religious liberties."

Every reader would imagine that the Sentinel had some good foundation for such
a terrible alarm -- "of the loss of civil and religious liberty," by the power
of an American Bishop. It might be thought that such power could be grounded on
some law, but I have shown that there is no such thing possible. Or, again it
might be thought at least that the plan of the American Episcopate itself,
proposed some such power; but quite the reverse is the case, and it is high
time that this plan was now laid before the reader; who will be greatly
surprised to find it the most innocent thing, instead of being the most
dangerous. In short, the whole power proposed for an American Bishop, (and all
he can possibly exercise consistent with our laws) amounts to no more than is
daily exercised by any five or six of our clamorous adversaries, within their
bounds, in Presbytery met.

The plan for an American Bishop, which the Sentinel most disingenuously
strives to persuade the public is a "novel invention" set on foot by a few
American clergy, at this particular time for particular purposes, is
notwithstanding a pretty old invention, set on foot in no times of trouble or
distress, and first drawn up by no American clergyman, but by an English
Prelate, in whose favor, even Dr. Mayhew has made an aberration into candor;
and forgetting his usual Bishop-baiting humor, declares him a prelate who was
a great ornament of the Episcopal order, and of the Church of England."

It is the good Bishop Butler we speak of, who in the (...) 1750, digested and
drew up the scheme for an American Episcopate; a copy of which follows, taken
from one in the Bishop's own hand, formerly in possession of William Vassal,
Esquire of Boston.

"1. No coercive power is desired over the laity in any case; but only a power
to regulate the behavior of the clergy who are in Episcopal orders; and to
correct and punish them according to the law of the Church of England, in case
of misbehaviour or neglect of duty; with such power as commissaries abroad have
formerly exercised; (over the clergy in the colonies.)

"2. Nothing is desired for such Bishops, that may in the least interfere with
the dignity or authority, or interest of the GOVERNORS, or any other officers
of State. The probate for wills, licenses for marriages, etc. are to be left in
the hands where they now are; and no share of temporal government is desired
for Bishops.

3. The colonies are to be at no charge in the maintenance of the Bishop.

4. No Bishops are intended to be settled in places where the government is in
the hands of dissenters, as in New England, etc. -- But authority to be given
only to ordain clergy for such Church of England congregations as are among
them, to confirm the members of the same, and to inspect into the manners and
behavior of their clergy."

This scheme was proposed near 20 years ago, and The scheme, as it stands
above, taken from Bishop Butler's copy, revised and approved by Bishop Sherlock
was published at London 15 years ago, viz. in the year 1753, at the end of a
book of Ethics etc. written by the Revd. Dr. Johnson (...) Stratford.
published soon after; and therefore whatever novelty may be in it, cannot be
ascribed to a few American Clergy of the present day, but must be charged first
to Bishop Butler, and then to Bishop Sherlock, and Archbishop Secker; both of
whom publicly declared this to be the only plan, long before Dr. Chandler's
appeal. And all these great Prelates, who certainly knew the principles of the
Church of England as well as the Sentinel, thought it not in the least
"inconsistent with her principles," to have an American Bishop, merely "for
ordaining Ministers, confirming youth, and visiting our own Clergy," without
any government whatsoever over the Laity, leaving each congregation to be
governed, in its spiritual affairs, by its own Presbyter, assisted by Vestries,
as at present.

I should be glad to know what is inconsistent or impossible (...), to use the
Bishop of Landaff's words -- (...) ^he fear? What is the danger? Can two or
three (...) ^rained to these spiritual functions, be dangerous to any, in any
matter? In what? or to whom? Can they possibly, so limited, on any pretense
whatever, attempt to molest any in their religious concerns? Can they invade
the rights of the Magistrates? Can they infringe the liberties of the people?

(...) certainly none of these things could be done by them. For the plan
aforesaid, which is to be the foundation of their appointment, declares against
every thing of this kind. Our own Colony-laws likewise declare the same, in the
case they have taken to secure the civil and religious rights of every member
of the community; and it has been fully shown that no English laws, statute or
common, can extend here to create any Ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the
Laity whatever.

What then can be the ground of the Centinel's apprehension of the destruction
of our "charters, laws, and very constitutions" by the introduction of a
Bishop? On reading over his several papers, I declare myself absolutely unable
to find any such ground whatever. I do indeed find many things said by him in
one paper, and seemingly unsaid in another: and though one can hardly tell in
which he would desire most to be believed, yet if we will take the pains to
cross-examine him, and put one of his arguments versus another, we shall find
that the man himself had none of those fears and apprehensions which he
labored to spread among his party.

The Sentinel against the Sentinel.

On the danger of an American Episcopate.

Thanks be to our wiser Statesmen, of late spiritual power has been kept within
due bounds, and Dissenters in England, have been suffered to worship God
peaceably, according to their consciences; and many of the Clergy of the
establishment, with a truly Christian temper, have written and preached in
favor of toleration. Sentinel No. 3.


Thus he thought, and thus he spoke in No. 3, and thanks be to the man for
having once given an instance of honesty and candor. We are now almost ready
to shake hands with them, and lay aside animosity -- But alas! when we come to
his 5th No. we are quite knocked up again. For though he has just acknowledged
that the Church suffers Dissenters in England to worship God peaceably,
according to their consciences, yet in this number he declares that they are
oppressed by the Church, regardless of the rights of conscience.

"Do you expect says he to Dr. Chandler) we can lay aside all jealousy of a
Church, which we see oppressing all others both in England and the Colonies, in
such flagrant instances, regardless of the rights of conscience, etc?" Sentinel
No. 5.
Let the kind reader try to reconcile this with the former paragraph.

But these are not the only instances where the Sentinel has blown cold and
hot, and contradicted in one place what he has confidently asserted in
another. For in this same good humoured paper No. 3, where he has made some
"aberrations into truth" -- a thing (...) remarkable in him than if he had made
these contrary aberrations" which Mr. Livingston accuses a Bishop with; I say
in this good humoured No. 3, we find the following acknowledgment, viz.

It is evident that to maintain the toleration, and support the rights of
conscience, the government has been careful to promote in the Church, men of
moderation ONLY.

But before he gets through No. 4, his good humor and charity wholly desert him;
the Church is filled again with men, whose temper is quite the reverse of
moderation -- men whose spirit of persecution is ready to flame out in all its
wonted rage --

They must (says he) give the world some more substantial proofs of their
peaceable forbearing temper, than their advocate Dr. Chandler's word, before we
can believe that the spirit of persecution is not yet alive in the Church, and
would not flame out again, in all its wonted rage, if they were but allowed to
exercise the powers they claim --

Here now the poor man seems in a great fright, but a little afterward, in the
same number, he recovers himself and appears very well content -- that these
"exorbitant powers (which had so distressed his imagination) are limited by
the salutary restraints of some modern statutes -- the wings of these
high-flyers have been cropped," etc.

What can be said to a man that seems thus afraid and not afraid, that retracts
in one place what he asserts in another, and that puts improbable, if not
impossible cases, and in these cases, cries out to have security for negatives,
viz. that such and such things should not happen?

If the Sentinel writes to be believed when he declares, the government has
been careful to promote in the Church, men of moderation only; that "many" (he
might have said the far greatest part) of the Church clergy are advocates for
"Toleration;" that "the wings of high-flyers are cropped;" that they are not
allowed to exercise the powers they claim; but are limited by the salutary
restraints of some modern Statutes -- I say, if he be in earnest in these
assertions, which, indeed, the invincible force of truth, and facts notorious,
seem to have extorted from him; then he has the very security he desires -- a
security more substantial than the word of an hundred Dr. Chandlers -- even a
security equal to what we have for life, limb and property, viz, the faith of
government, and the sanctity of law and charters. For if "the salutary
restraints of modern Statutes" are able to prevent persecutions, and secure
liberty of conscience in a country where Bishops are clothed with legal powers;
what can be apprehended from them in a country where the same laws for liberty
of conscience have their fullest force, and yet no law that can vest a Bishop
with the least temporal power over the Laity does extend?

But although this be demonstrably true; and although the Sentinel, by his own
concessions, has cut himself out of every ground of apprehension; yet, for all
this, he will be apprehensive still -- Supposing (says he) these Bishops sent
over with these limited powers, is there any probability they will remain
content with them? Just such another question as this did our Centinel's great
Prototype, Dr. Mayhew put, upon being told that the "Bishops are now, and have
long been, as quiet an order of men as any in the nation." -- But who knows
whether they will continue so? And the same answer that was given Dr. Mayhew,
will serve his disciple, the Sentinel. -- Who can know with certainty any such
thing concerning any person whatsoever?" Who knows whether the New-Englanders
(whose wings were once cropped by the loss of their ancient charter, etc.) will
remain content with their present restricted powers, and will not again hang
Quakers, Witches, etc? Who knows whether Dissenters, either in Old or
New England, will be content long without oversetting again the constitution
both in church and state: Who knows whether they will not again erect a common
wealth? -- And again lead their king. --

But I forbear pursuing this argument for the present; as it might justly be
replied, that there is no reason to suppose any such things; the times and
tempers of men being much changed -- Why then may not the same reply be
admitted on our side? What signifies it to say that a Bishop in America will
not be long contented with limited powers, any more than to say, that
independents, etc. will not be long contented with them? Are our laws and
constitutions, and charters to be annulled for the contentment of either side?
And certainly this must be done before either can exercise the least
ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the other.

For shame! that people cannot argue, as they would wish to be argued with, Is
it fair, is it brotherly in any set of men, to keep up an eternal clamor, in
order to deprive their fellow protestants of a natural right, merely on account
of old grudges, that ought long since to have been done away; or on account of
groundless fears, concerning what may, or never may happen?

Dr. Mayhew, on further consideration, saw the unfairness of such a conduct,
and in his second piece says -- It is readily owned that our apprehensions of
what may possibly or probably be the consequence of sending Bishops to America,
ought not to put us on infringing the religious liberty of our fellow subjects,
and Christian brethren; neither have we any power to do so, if we were
unreasonable and wicked enough to desire it, our charter granting such liberty
to all Protestants.

If the Sentinel could have the virtue to make the like confession, it might
bring this dispute to a speedy conclusion. But if groundless jealousies and
clamours (about contigencies absolutely improbable and only possible to happen
on a dissolution of all law and equity) are to be still thrown out, in bar of
our just rights; it is high time that our jealousies should have vent also; and
that we should make it appear, as we justly can, that if the religious rights
of Americans are ever like to be in danger from any set of men, it is from
these our antagonists themselves; and that other denominations in America can
have no security against their aspiring temper, but from the Church of England
being constantly in a condition to balance their power, and to keep pace with
their growth.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, Dec. 8. The SENTINEL, No. XXI.
To the SENTINEL.
SIR,
I Congratulate you on your escape from the bloody knife of the Anatomist, who,
after paying his visit to the The town of Boston desired the clergy to set
apart a day of solemn fasting and prayer; which request was cheerfully complied
with by every denomination except Episcopalians.
patriotic Episcopalians of Boston, and dissecting a Watchtower in New York,
intended to have seized you in your sleep, cut you up alive as you were, and
exposed you as a scarecrow to frighten his opposers into a tame submission to
his darling Episcopate. I am an entire stranger to your person, and know not
whether you be a Presbyterian or Quaker, Independent or Episcopalian farther
than as appears from your writings; yet the cause of truth makes me your
friend, in opposition to some ambitious spirits, who have been feasting their
fancies that the day is dawning, when the knowledge of episcopacy shall spread
through the land, and an American Bishop shining in full splendor, shall gild
and gladden nations with his beams.

The memorable Appeal has long since made its appearance in this new world: by
some it was viewed as a portentous stranger, foreboding all the horrors of
ecclesiastical tyranny; by others as a specimen of Church moderation and
lenity; and by all acknowledged to have the cunning of the serpent, as well as
the harmlessness of the dove. Various have been the refutations of that
celebrated performance, to the no small satisfaction of all moderate men, and
the lasting vexation and anguish of our American Tories, who, in the agony of
their spirits, talk of "resistance unto blood," and consequently of dying
martyrs in the wild cause of their good master appellant.

So copious of absurdities and contradictions, so abundant in reflections on
his opposers, is Dr. Chandler's appeal to the public, that no withstanding all
that has been said in reply, there is still remaining so much worthy of
animadversion that volumes might be written, and his Majesty's liege subjects
might still be diverted for ages yet to come.

Most unfavourable are the times for such controversies, and every friend to
liberty must lament that a number of ambitious missionaries could raise so
disagreeable a dispute, when our public affairs call for the closest union in
councils and uniformity in measures. It is to be hoped however, as the
Anatomist "scorns to fall to slashing without calling one to stand on one's
guard," that he will desist from his purpose and endeavor to heal the wounds
he may have made, provided it can be made appear that Doctor Chandler " was the
aggressor" in this dispute about Bishops -- that "Dr. Chandler had a general
commission from his own brethren" the clergy of New York and New Jersey, and,
if his own words are true, and we understand the terms commission and
representation as the convention did -- that Doctor Chandler "had a commission
from the Church," and is therefore, in the same sense, "the Church of England"
itself, and consequently much more than "the ten thousandth part of it." All
which I now undertake to prove, although the Anatomist denies it, and has the
impudence to say "this is not pretended." I will also show that it is false to
say Doctor Chandler has given no provocation" for "the treatment he has met
with," as the Anatomist boldly asserts is the case. I will prove too that the
Doctor has "uttered" much more than "a single word, reflecting on the
principles" not only "of any" but of every "protestant denomination" on the
continent, not even sparing his own, especially the unlucky laity.

In the prosecution of this plan I shall take the following things for granted,
which none, except the Anatomist, will venture to deny: 1. That Doctor Chandler
knew what was his design in writing his Appeal better than the Anatomist can be
supposed to do: And 2. That when Doctor Chandler expressly (...) he does or
says a thing with this or the other part (...) ^iew and the Anatomist fi^tly
contradicts him, the Anatomist must then be supposed to be wrong -- with these
(...) proceed to prove. 1st. That Doctor Chandler, far from being a defendant
in any dispute commenced against his Church, is in fact the aggressor. But
here, Sir, I find myself anticipated in your last week's paper, and shall only
refer your reader's to the Doctor's dedication, advertisement to the reader,
and introduction to the Appeal, for a full confirmation of this point. I shall
here only present to view what the Doctor says in his advertisement to the
public in the Pennsylvania Journal, No. 13^1. The principal design of the
appeal (says he) was to assign the reasons for which the members of the Church
of England in America are desirous of having Bishops to reside in this country,
to state and explain the plan on which alone American Bishops have been
proposed and requested, and to obviate and confute the objections that might be
supposed to arise in the minds of any against such an episcopate. Where is
there in all this or any other part of his writings any hint of entering into
any commenced controversy? How then could the Anatomist utter so false an
assertion? I now defy him and his associates to produce a single sentence in
the body of the appeal that has the least appearance of a set defense against
any New England antagonists. So far from it, that the Doctor's professed design
is to explain what himself seems to acknowledge, and is now universally known,
was "kept as a secret." So far from it, that he appears somewhat surprised that
any "persons are" even "said to be alarmed at this conduct of the clergy. He
goes farther, he says that when the case is duly explained and understood, it
is not apprehended that any opposition can be formed against the execution of a
plan so reasonable, etc. This same plan, to explain which is the express design
of the appeal, the Doctor always mentions as a matter the public did not
understand, which had never been debated, and for a thorough discussion of
which all are invited to propose their objections, that they may be fairly and
heartily debated before the tribunal of the public. If therefore it fully
appears that Doctor Chandler is not a defendant in any dispute commenced
against his Church, pray Mr. Anatomist, who was the aggressor? and how
ridiculously have you spent your time in writing seven long papers to prove a
point in which you are so flatly contradicted by the author of the Appeal, who
without doubt must be supposed to know best his own design in writing it? --
But suppose Doctor Chandler had been only a defendant in this dispute, does he
not invite all to propose their objections, and can the Sentinel be blamed for
accepting the challenge? I cannot but observe here the Doctor's craft.
Notwithstanding this his seemingly fair invitation to a fair and candid debate
before the public tribunal, he takes care previously to brand any that might
oppose him with the name of persecutors. Every opposition to such a plan (says
help. 82) has the nature of persecution, and deserves the name: Nay he goes
farther he calls it "persecuting them for their religious principles," and that
too "when no reasons of state require it;" and at last he boldly pronounces it
"persecution in the strictest and properest sense." Under penalty of so heavy a
charge who would have ventured to attack the Doctor? But greater evils await
our silence. He tells us (p. 2) "if no objections shall be offered it will be
taken for granted that all parties acquiesce and are satisfied." A fine
dilemma, -- to oppose the establishment of a Bishop, is persecution: not to
oppose it, is to acquiesce and be satisfied with it! Surprising! that a man
must be thought satisfied with whatever he does not oppose, and what he has
perhaps never heard of. I am apt to imagine that the Doctor is by this time
pretty well convinced, that if all that were dissatisfied with his scheme were
to oppose him, he would bring the whole continent about his ears.

I am next to show that Dr. Chandler had a general commission from his brethren
the clergy of New York and New Jersey, and, in the convention's sense of the
terms commission and representation, that Dr. Chandler had a commission from
the church, and is therefore in the same sense of the terms beforementioned,
the church of England itself, and consequently much more than the ten
thousandth part of it. First then, that Dr. Chandler had a general commission
from his brethren, appears from his own words in his advertisement to the
reader; where he tells us, as an apology for the Appeal, that he was requested
by many of his brethren to undertake it -- that the task was first imposed upon
him by the very worthy and Revd. Dr. Johnson, of Stratford, in Connecticut; and
adds that "at the time when this treaty," as he pompously calls it, was nearly
concluded, the clergy of New York and New Jersey, assisted by some of their
brethren from the neighboring provinces took into consideration, etc. And
after a thorough discussion of the point, they were unanimously of opinion,
that fairly to explain the plan, etc. was a matter of necessity and duty. It
was accordingly voted (says he) that something to this purpose should be
published and the author was appointed to the service. Here we have an express
appointment from the convention: and it appears they were urgent and almost
laid their commands on him: excuses (says the Doctor) were not admitted, and a
refusal could not be justified. So far was the Doctor from acting in
disconnection with the convention, that he tells us he was careful to follow
the directions he had received, and to consult the most judicious of his
friends in regard to the method and management of the work. Hence it appears
that the Dr. had not only a commission for, but direction in his publication,
and that the appeal is the product of the united efforts of the Right
Reverendly inclined clergy of the provinces of York and Jersey in full
convention met.

It must be allowed, by the members of the convention at least, that they have
acted (whether lawfully or not, I leave themselves to determine) as the
representatives of all the Episcopalians on the continent. This they must
allow, or highly condemn their own conduct, in sending over no less than seven
petitions in the name of near a million of Episcopalians, therein including
eight hundred and forty four thousand negroes, all of whom Dr. Chandler
represents as at least virtual members of the church of England, though he at
the same time acknowledges that many of these it is to be feared are not
Christians at all. Now as the convention are, in their representative capacity
(so often made use of in their petitions) the church of England in America (as
they phrase it) then Dr. Chandler in the same sense, as their representative in
the Appeal, is the convention, and therefore is in like manner the church of
England itself, and consequently much more than the ten thousandth part of it.
Quod erat demonstrandum.

It is hoped the respectable laity, who have been so much abused by the Doctor,
and the unambitious clergymen of that church, will not be offended at the
liberty here taken in speaking of the convention as their representatives, as
they may be assured nothing farther is intended than to treat with the Dr. and
his brethren of the convention, in the style they are found to use and have
assumed in their seven petitions. We as fully disbelieve their present right to
act in the name of the American Episcopalians, as the Episcopalians themselves
can do, and we hope never to be suspected to the contrary.

Mr. Sentinel, if you think this worthy of a place in your papers, I shall
write to you again, and intend in my next to show the Anatomist, that Dr.
Chandler has given great provocation, and reflected highly on every protestant
denomination on the continent, not even sparing his own church, and that you
are therefore entirely justifiable in defending their injured characters.

I am, Sir, Your most obedient humble Servant, PHILANDER.
Lancaster, Nov. 26, 1768.
From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, Dec. 15. The ANATOMIST, No. XV.
I appeal to the church of protestants.

NICHOLLS. Cujus aures clausae funt, ut ab amico, verum audire nequeat, hujus
salus desperanda est.

CICERO.
IN answer to what is called the Centinel's arguments, which consist chiefly of
vain surmises, I have shown in part, and may perhaps show more at large, that
if the faults of former times are to be again brought to view, there is no
people on earth whose intolerant, persecuting, aspiring spirit ought more
justly to be dreaded by all protestants, than his own party; who although they
are of various sects, and their heads look different ways, yet, like Sampson's
foxes, their tails have always been joined, to carry firebrarnds into the
cornfieldsd and vineyards of their neithbours.

The distinction has been sufficiently made between those powers of
government, essential to every Christian Church; and those adventitious powers
derived from human laws. The former the Church of England is entitled to, in
common with all other churches here. And the latter, (it has been demonstrably
shown) an American Bishop cannot enjoy, till our laws, charters, and
constitutions are first totally set aside. To suppose, then, that all this will
be done, and to offer it as an argument for denying us a just and natural
right, is too futile to deserve further notice. Even Doctor Mayhew blushed at
such an argument, and retracted it; nor would our antagonists think it fair to
be deprived of any right of theirs, on the like vain presumptions.

The Remonstrant's Though I mention the Remonstrant, yet (if I mistake not) all
these feigned names of Remonstrant, Irenicus, Anti-Centinel and even the
Centinel's new correspondent Philander, stand only for the Centinel's own dear
self; wriggling, and twisting, and starting up in various shapes, under the yet
gentle touches of what he calls a bloody knife. If this conjecture be just, he
has little to boast of his patience. For though it is well known that he had
near half a year's long run, before he was ever interrupted with a single
reply; yet the Anatomist has scarce ever been suffered to see three weeks
together, without something written at him and at him. But in whatever shape
the Sentinel and his journeymen, if he has any, may choose to write, and
however many papers they may publish, they may still expect to be answered,
were it for seven years longer, till they suffer the Church to enjoy her just
rights in peace.
argument that judges may be intimidated to wrest the laws, etc. is equally
absurd, and admits of the like answer, viz. that no men ought to be deprived of
their rights on account of the bare surmises of others. It was formerly more
than surmised that Presbytery could never be safe in Scotland, if Episcopacy
was suffered in England; and yet time has shown that this was a groundless as
well as uncharitable presumption. If the laws of the land will not bind Judges
as well as Bishops. I can offer no further security for either, unless I was to
advise our antagonists to do with the former, as it is said some of them have
threatened to do with the latter, viz. -- "to throw them into the first river
or ditch, when they violate the laws.

By the plan for an American Episcopate, which has been fairly published, no
other power is desired than that of ordination, confirmation, and such
government of the clergy as is derived from the Church and the laws of
canonical obedience. As to the laity, it has been again and again shown, that
no law in force in these colonies, can give a Bishop any power over them
greater than every Presbyter of every denomination has over his own pastoral
charge. And if the laws in being are not explicit enough on this head, we have
no objection, if every assembly of every colony, should by new laws, tie our
Bishop hand and foot, if they think it necessary, provided they leave him those
powers mentioned above, which are on all sides (confirmation excepted) judged
essential to a Christian church; and which our church thinks proper to place in
a single person, and not in many. As to any natural disposition in
episcopalians more than in others, to violate laws, I think the whole world,
one party excepted, will acquit them; and for one violation of law by
Episcopalians, I am ready, if desired, to produce ten on the side of that party
themselves, where ever they had power.

Having made this brief recapitulation of what has been the substance of sundry
of my former papers, I now follow the Sentinel to some other parts of his
performance. For not content with the hideous character he has given us of the
Bishops and government of our Church, he has, with a spirit and charity,
becoming -- himself, in order still better to carry his point, thought fit to
vilify our Church itself, as scarce fit to be tolerated in a protestant land,
having "corrupted and obscured the pure word of God with human inventions."

I have more than once had occasion to complain of the Sentinel for laying down
his charges and assertions in a way so loose, general and unmanly, that they
will scarce admit of a particular answer. Thus he acted in spreading his
general alarm about American Bishops. He gave us no particular grounds of his
fears, so that I was forced to consider every possible ground. The same way he
acts here. He does not tell what those "human inventions are, wherewith our
Church has corrupted and obscured the pure word of God;" and I am left to
guess whether he means in point of Episcopal government itself, or in rites,
ceremonies, and points of doctrine. But if we examine the field from whence his
generous hand has culled some of its choicest flowers to deck the Church with,
we may presume that the whole together, our discipline, government, rites, etc.
are a smoke in his nostrils, like as they were in the nostrils of the old
calumniators he has copied; and that he is afraid of being funked to death
with the rank smell which they retain of the ancient whore!

To general charges, in this case, it may be sufficient to give general
answers; and to make one appeal to the CHURCH of PROTESTANTS, to see how she
has expressed herself; -- 1st. Concerning episcopal government; -- 2d.
Concerning the rites, ceremonies, and doctrines of the CHURCH of ENGLAND. If
the Sentinel (as my Latin motto has it) will not hear truth, from those
reformed Churches abroad, whom he must consider by his own principles, as
friends, nearly allied to his own party, I must despair of his conviction.

This appeal may be unnecessary of those who have the books from which the
Sentinel has kuckstered out his scandal, or the answers that has been given
by learned divines of the Church of England. But the generality of readers, in
this country may not have either the one or the other. They may not know that
the Centinel's villainous charge against the Church, of having "corrupted and
obscured the pure word of God with human inventions, has been answered over
and over again, and stands refuted by the testimonies of almost every reformed
denomination of Christians upon earth, except a few restless fanatics in our
own country. It is fit, therefore, since this writer has raked up this charge
again from the old lumber of refuted pamphlets, that inquisitive readers,
churchmen, especially, should be satisfied on this head, lest impudent
assertions should pass for truth on the one side, and silence be considered as
inability to answer, on the other.

As to the order and institution of Bishops, and government by them, I am now
to corroborate what I have said in my former papers, by the testimonies of the
reformed abroad; and then proceed to give the like testimonies with respect to
rites, ceremonies, and the purity of the doctrines of our Church; for if the
Sentinel could succeed in damning her whole reputation as yet impure and
unreformed, it would be needless to hold any long contest about Bishops, or any
thing else that concerns such a Church.

And now let us hear the sentiments of the first reformers, and and see whether
they agree with our Sentinel, in considering Bishops as monsters, and Episcopal
government as dreadful, Antichristian, "the yoke of bondage," etc.

LUTHER expresses great veneration for Prelacy, and distinguishes betwixt
popish tyrants and true Bishops, professing that he had no difference with them
as Bishops, but as Popish, and ZANCHI (the compiler of the Gallican confession)
observes a change of name, rather than of office, in the superintendents and
general superintendents of the German Churches, these being only Bishops and
Archbishops under disguised names, and he acknowledges further, that by the
consent of histories, councils, and ancient fathers, those orders have been
generally allowed by all Christian societies, that Episcopacy is agreeable to
the word of God: -- that where it is in exercise it ought to be continued, and
where by violence it has been abolished, it ought to be restored Gall.
Confessi.
.

CALVIN recommends the Hierarchy to the king of Poland; and says that the
ancient government by Archbishops and Bishops, and the Nicence constitution of
Patriarchs was for orders sake and good government. -- The same great man, in
his treatise concerning the necessity of the reformation, says -- Give us such
an hierarchy, in which Bishops preside, who are subject to Christ, and him
alone, as their only head, and then I will own no curse too bad for him that
shall not pay the utmost respect to such an hierarchy as this. And when he was
called to an account by Cardinal Sadolet concerning the Geneva defection, and
for subscribing the Augustan confession, he repeats, that he should think every
man deserving the worst curse who would not be subject to such an hierarchy as
that above.

Now such an hierarchy as this, is what has been proposed to take place in the
Episcopal Churches in the colonies; for the words of Calvin -- "Bishops subject
to Christ alone" -- do not mean Bishops who reject the supremacy of the state,
wherein they live, with respect to affairs ecclesiastical, under Christ; but
such as deny their subjection to the Pope, as the sole spiritual head of the
Church, etc. on earth. For Calvin, is known to have made use of the secular
authority where ever he could obtain it in aid of the establishment of his
discipline; and some of his followers in the reformed French Church, as for
example, Monsieur Daille still further explains his meaning in this place.

CALVIN himself, says he, honored all Bishops, that were not subjects of the
Pope, and taught the pure and sincere doctrines of the Apostles -- such as were
the Prelates of England, Cranmer, Hooper, etc. We ourselves also have ever
maintained, and do still maintain the same Christian communion in faith and
charity with their successors -- We confess that the foundation of their charge
is good and lawful, established by the Apostles, according to the command of
Christ. Replique a Messieurs Adam and Cottiby.


The like testimony of Calvin's regard to our Church, and her government by
Bishops is given by Monsieur Del' Angle minister of the French Church at
Charenton, in a letter to the Bishop of London, 1680.

Since the Church of England is a TRUE CHURCH of our LORD; since her worship
and doctrines are PURE, and have nothing in them CONTRARY to the WORD of GOD;
since the reformation [in England] was received together with Episcopacy. the
establishment of the liturgy and ceremonies -- it is, without doubt, the duty
of all the reformed in your realm, to keep themselves inseparably united to the
Church. And those who do not this, on pretense of more simplicity in their
ceremonies, and less inequality among the ministers, do certainly commit a very
great sin.

This was so much the opinion of our great and excellent CALVIN, that he makes
no difficulty to say, that if there should be any so unreasonable, as to refuse
the communion of a Church that was pure in its worship and doctrine, and not
submit himself with respect to its government, under pretense that it has
retained an Episcopacy qualified, as yours is, there would be no censure nor
rigor of discipline, that ought not to be exercised upon them. See this and
other Testimonies in Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness of Separation --
Bingham's Apology of the French Church, etc. -- For where the charge is old we
have no need of new answers in a church that has had so many able advocates.


Here then is a very different testimony concerning Bishops, Episcopal
government, the purity of our Church doctrines, etc. from what the Sentinel
has given; and that from the founders and princes of his own party. As to what
is said about the sin of Nonconformity to such a Church we urge not this
matter, where there is no establishment; and would be well content if these our
bitter adversaries would enjoy their own principles in quiet, and leave us to
do the same, without desiring to tear our principles in pieces, and to deprive
us of our just and common rights as fellow Christians -- but to proceed --

BEZA, some time the colleague, and afterward the rigid successor of CALVIN,
was of the same mind with respect particularly to the English Bishops. -- The
Church of England, says he, after the reformation was supported and stood by
the Authority of Archbishops and Bishops, of which order she had many, not
only famous Martyrs, but excellent doctors and pastors; and may she ever enjoy
that singular blessing of God upon her Bez. Resp. ad Serav.
." And in a dedication of his new testament to Queen Elizabeth he says --
"England enjoys what perhaps no other kingdom does, the complete possession of
the PURE and sincere doctrine of the GOSPEL.

MONSIEUR LE MOYNE, a learned foreigner, and professor of divinity at Leyden,
delivers himself thus. -- As to Episcopal government, what is there in it that
is dangerous, and may reasonably alarm men's consciences? If this be capable of
depriving us of eternal glory, and shutting the gates of Heaven, who was there
that entered there for the space of fifteen hundred years, since that for all
that time, all the Churches of the world had no other sort of government; Who
was it for so many ages, that made up the councils of the Church, as well
general as particular? Was it not the Bishops? And is it not to their wise
conduct, to which, next under God, his word is beholden for its victories and
triumphs?

With such testimonies as these on our side, we need not regard the Barkings of
a thousand Sentinels; but I shall have more to say on this subject in my next.

P. S. In the 21st paragraph of the last Anatomist, instead of these words --
"but a little afterward, in the same number he recovers himself, and appears
very well content, etc" -- read as follows -- "but, in the preceding sentence
of the same number, he appears very well contented, etc.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, Dec. 22. The ANATOMIST, No. XVI.
Continuation of the Church of England's APPEAL to the Church of Protestants.
The withdrawing totally from the Church of England would more effectually
introduce Popery, than all the works of Bellarmine.

Mr. EGERTON. All the reformed Churches in the world have a venture in this
bottom; which, if compared to a fleet, the Church of England must be
acknowledged to be the Admiral. And if it go ill with this Church, so as that
it miscarry, there are none of the Churches of CHRIST this day under heaven,
but are like to feel it.

Mr. BRINSLEY. Oh! that I could prevail with you to lay sadly to heart the
great sin of divisions, and that the leaders and encouragers thereof -- would
leave off their reviling the government ecclesiastical, and the ministers that
conform, etc.

Dr. BRYAN.
HOW little of the spirit of those non-conformists, quoted in my motto, the
Sentinel is possessed of, need not, by this time, be observed to impartial
readers. Far from allowing the Church of England the rank of ADMIRAL in the
protestant fleet, he will not give her so much as the privilege of a cock-boat;
but is for turning her adrift without any commanding officer she can
acknowledge; and that too in a rotten and leaky condition; her whole works
being "corrupted," etc. -- Cruel and un-sailor like man; that will not even
take her in tow, but seems desirous to behold her sink before his eyes!

That there is not the least shadow of ground, either in law or reason, for the
clamor he has set up to deprive our Church in the colonies of her mode of
governing and ordaining her own clergy, has been amply shown; and I am now
considering the heavy charge of having "corrupted and obscured the pure word of
God with human inventions" -- whereby he endeavors to complete his triumph
over our Church, by representing her as unfit to have even a being, much less a
well-being, among reformed Christians.

As this charge is general, I have thought it sufficient to give it a general
answer, and to show "that it stands refuted by the testimonies of almost every
protestant denomination of men upon earth, except a few restless fanatics, in
our own country" -- whether the Sentinel means "corruption" in point of
government, or in rites, ceremonies and doctrine.

As to the first head, the pure and primitive nature of episcopal government, I
have in the preceding number, given several eminent testimonies from Calvin
himself, and some of the principal reformers abroad. I now add some others,
before I proceed to the second point, and Calvin shall once more lead the van.

As we have shown, says he, Calvin's Institutions, Sect. Chap. 4.
there is a three fold ministry recommended to us, in the scripture; so
whatever ministers the ancient church had, it distinguished them into three
orders, bishops, presbyters, and deacons. --

PETER DU MOULIN, an eminent professor in the French Church, thus expresses
himself -- Touching ecclesiastical polity, we do not refuse to acknowledge
those for pure and true Churches, where equality of ministers is not observed
-- Peter Martyr, Calvin, Beza, Zanchius, etc. (continues he) have often written
letters full of respect to the English Prelates. Our adversaries unjustly
accuse us to be enemies to the episcopal order. For we must be altogether
ignorant in history, if we do not know that antiquity speaks honorably of that
degree. Eusebius witnesses that a year after our LORD'S death, James, our
LORD'S brother, was bishop at Jerusalem, etc. And after mentioning many more of
the ancient bishops -- he concludes thus -- If we sometimes speak against the
authority of bishops, we condemn not episcopal order in itself, but speak only
of the corruptions the church of Rome has introduced into it. --

Monsieur CLAUDE, another learned foreigner, writing to the bishop of London,
heartily declares -- We are so very far from believing that a man cannot live
with a good conscience under your discipline, and episcopal government, that in
our ordinary practice we make no difficulty, neither to bestow our chairs nor
to commit the care of our flocks to ministers received and ordained by my Lords
the bishops, as might be justified by a great number of examples, both old and
new. --

It is enough for us to know that the same divine providence, which by an
indispensible necessity, and by the conjuncture of affairs, did at the
beginning of the reformation, put our churches under the presbytery, has put
yours under episcopacy; and as we are assured that you do not despise our
simplicity, so neither ought we to oppose your pre-eminence. I hope then you
will make all the world see, and convince the most incredulous, that you (the
bishops) have piety, zeal, and the fear of God, and that you are worthy
laborers and servants of JESUS CHRIST. This is the testimony which all good
men do already give you; and none, how SPIGHTFUL soever he be, dares to
contradict it." [ N. B. Spiteful Whigs, and spiteful Sentinels, did not then
exist, else they would have dared to contradict it.]

It is remarkable above, that Monsieur Claude ascribes their form of
Presbyterian government in their Churches, to that indispensible necessity,
under which divine Providence put them, by the conjuncture of affairs at the
Reformation; and not to any choice or preference of that form. And certain it
is, that they would most willingly have embraced Bishops as their governors, if
they had not been hindered by the policy, or rather iniquity, of the civil
powers. This we are expressly told by Doctor Du MOULIN, son of the famous PETER
abovementioned. In the preface to his father's book on the novelty of Popery.
-- There was, says he, a time when some of their prime men, feeling the
inconveniences that follow the want of ecclesiastical subordination, moved
Cardinal Richlieu to place it among them; who flatly denied to give way to it,
saying, if you had that order you would look too like a CHURCH.

Nay Peter Martyr (Epist. 57 ad Bez.) and also the same Doctor Du MOULIN, tells
us that the reformed Church in the bishopric of Troyes, as soon as the prelate
began to forsake the errors of property, did unanimously acknowledge and
receive him as a true Bishop and their diocesan; and his authority and piety
did great service to the Church of Christ. Praised be God, (continues Martyr)
who takes these methods to govern and advance the kingdom of his son.

In short, it was only the state, and not their religious persuasion, that
prevented the French protestants from having Episcopal government. For the
aforesaid Bishop of Troyes, Cardinal Castilion and Sangelasius having turned
protestants, and continued to act as Bishops among the reformed Churches for
some time, were forced by the secular power to withdraw and betake themselves
to a private station. See Bingham's French Church's Apology, who cites
Spondanus, Thuanus, etc. as his authorities.


The above testimonies being from eminent divines of the principal Churches
abroad, whose government is Presbyterian, we need not speak of those reformed
foreign Churches, whose government is Episcopal; their own practice being the
greatest testimony in our favor. And if we consider the importance of the
latter, such as those of Denmark, Sweden, the dominions of the elector of
Saxony and Brandenburg, of the great house of Lunenburg, and the many imperial
cities of Germany, etc. they will for outweigh, in the scale of protestantism,
all the former, viz. the Presbyterian or Calvinist Churches of Switzerland, the
lower Palatinate, and those comparatively few of France and Holland, who are of
the same persuasion* Yet we do not despise those Calvinist Churches, but regard
them as a considerable branch of the Reformation, and esteem them for their
candor (already noticed) toward the Church of England; it being from their
rigid brethren among ourselves, and those chiefly of modern stamp, that we meet
with the principal opposition. For some of the eminent old non-conformists
expressed themselves very differently of Episcopacy; whereof I shall, at
present, mention only three.

Mr. GOODWIN confesses, that there was more of the truth and power of religion
under the late prelatical government, than in all the reformed Churches of the
world besides Sion College visited.


Mr. TOMBS says, I think all that are acquainted with the history of things in
the last age; will acknowledge that more good has been done to the souls of
men, by the preaching of Usher, Abbot, Jewel, and some other bishops, than
ever was done by the most rigid separatists -- promoters of the way of the
Churches congregational. Thodulia.


Even the famous BAXTER says -- When I think what learned, holy, incomparable
men, abundance of the old conformists were, my heart rises against the thought
of seperating from them -- such as Bishop Jewel, Bishop Grindal, Bishop Hall,
etc. -- Yea, and the martyrs too, as Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper, etc. Baxter's
Defense. Seeing then, such is the confession, even of the most rigid
non-conformists, we may conclude that there was not an impossibility for
Bishops to be good even in old times -- That they are not worse now, and
neither less learned, less moderate, but even more so, and better acquainted
with the rights of conscience; under the spirit of modern laws, and revolution
and toleration principles, are things, all the candid part of mankind will most
readily allow.


If any testimony from the reformers of our own Church, to whom even our
opponents give such applause, might be admitted those of Cranmer and Jewel
themselves ought not to be passed over.

The former being asked -- Whether a Bishop can make a Priest?" he replied, "We
read not that any other, not being a Bishop, has, since the beginning of
Christ's Church, ordained a Priest. Strype's Life of Cranmer.


Likewise Jewel, in his confession of the English Church, says -- We believe
that there be diverse degrees of ministers in the Church, whereof some be
Deacons, some Priests, some Bishops.

Nay, if the voice of all the Bishops at the reformation, joined to the voice
of the legislature, might have weight, as the sentiment of the wiser part of
the nation; we have it in these words -- It is evident to all men, diligently
reading the holy scriptures, and ancient authors, that from the Apostle's time,
there have been those three orders of ministers in the Church, Bishops, Priests
and Deacons; and that they have ever been held in reverend estimation.

Were we to go back to the first age of the Church, we could bring a cloud of
witnesses; some of whom, as Clemens Romanus, who lived in the year 65,
expressly intimates that the order of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, in the
Christian Church, had a reference to the orders of High Priest, Priests, and
Levites under the old economy. And had this institution nothing divine in it,
as appearing to carry some resemblance of the celestial hierarchy, or the
orders of archangles, etc. ministrant under Christ in the Church triumphant;
but were merely an innocent human accommodation to the Jewish ecclesiastical
polity, as was done in some other matters of rites, etc. for a time, by the
decisions of the apostles themselves; yet still it is far more reasonable, than
to think that a perfect parity of ministers, on the Presbyterian model, without
any distinction of orders, and so repugnant to the whole economy of God's
ancient Church (which was a type of his Son's Church, and both of the Church
triumphant) should all at once be instituted by CHRIST and his APOSTLES.

Whoever will suppose this, has invincible objections to overcome, if there
were not a word in scripture to decide the matter. For if Presbyterian
government was instituted by Christ, and yet Episcopacy, as is confessed on all
hands, was the sole model of Church government in less than two hundred years
after, "what universal cause can be assigned for this universal apostasy --
this strange pretended alteration? Were all the Presbyters, the whole world
over, so very ignorant as not to know the will of Christ, or so desperately
weak and wicked, as contrary to knowledge and conscience, to conspire against
themselves," -- to resign up to a few ambitious brethren, that authority which
Christ had given in common to his ministers? Nay, to resign it up at once, in
every place, at many thousand miles distance from each other, and that quietly
too, without opposition, without contradiction, and without the least vestige
of history to record so mavelous a revolution? Nay, more than this, could
they all agree, for the deception of posterity, to corrupt the very histories
that existed before, and make them declare, in direct opposition to the former
mode of government, that Episcopacy, (this newly-erected, or newly-usurped,
mode) had existed in the Church from the beginning? Was there not one
Presbyterian, in all those times, to oppose this usurpation, to transmit his
testimony to others, or to save one ancient record from the universal
innovation?

Surely such another change as this was never known among mankind and
Presbyterians, in those ancient times, must have been very different from those
of the present day, if they had thus tamely suffered it. We cannot now even
make known our desire to have episcopal government in episcopal Churches (a
thing no way injurious to others) without whole volumes of opposition, some of
which may chance to reach posterity. Could a Presbyter of ours, now, or a
Presbyter of our antagonists, usurp the whole government and right of
ordination over them and us, through this whole continent, and no opposition be
made; no record remain of the change, or no history be left to tell it to
posterity? Yet all these invincible difficulties, and more, are implied in
supposing Christ and his Apostles to have instituted a parity of ministers, and
the Presbyterian model, at the beginning; and that this model was soon
afterward laid aside in the aforesaid unaccountable manner. The consideration
of which made the great Chillingworth (from whom part of the above argument is
taken) conclude his demonstration of episcopacy in the following strong and
incomparable manner.

When I shall see therefore all the fables in the metamorphosis acted, etc. --
when I shall see all the Democracies and Aristocracies in the world lie down
and sleep, and awake into monarchies; then will I begin to believe that
Presbyterian government, having continued in the Church during the Apostles'
time, should presently after (against the Apostle's doctrines and the will of
Christ) be whirled about like a scene in a masque, and transformed into
Episcopacy, etc.

But the truth is, that Presbyterian government can boast no such antiquity;
for our great grand fathers remembered its birth, and could count its pedigree
from a less honorable stock!

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, Dec. 29. The ANATOMIST, No. XVII.
Ostendas populo ceremonias and ritum colendi.

EXODUS xviii.
IN my first number, it was observed that the opponents of the Church have
nothing to do with that mode of government and discipline which Episcopalians
choose for themselves in America, unless some probability could be shown (which
has never yet been done) of its interfering with the rights of others; and
that, whether of divine or human original, it is enough for us to answer, that
it is such a government as we prefer; pay, such as many wise men ever have, and
probably ever will, prefer to the modern government of Presbytery, which
(agreeaable to the words of Chillingworth in my last) one can no more believe
to have been in use "during the Apostles' times and presently afterward
(contrary to their doctrine and the will of Christ) to have been whirled about
like a scene in a masque, and transformed into Episcopacy; then it can be
thought possible for all the Democracies and Aristocracies in the world to lie
down and sleep, and to awake into monarchies, without opposition or trace of
history to record the mavelous change."

It was therefore not so much from any necessity, in my argument with the
Sentinel (because right or wrong, it was sufficient that Episcopacy was our
mode) as to prevent serious Episcopalians from being imposed upon by his bold
and groundless assertion; that I have taken some pains to show that such an
Episcopate as is proposed for America, far from being a novel invention, is
what almost all the reformed Churches have given their testimony for; declared
it to be a truly ancient and even apostolical institution; and such as they
would willingly have been subject to, if they had not been prevented by the
situation of affairs, under different states, at the reformation.

On this footing, then, I leave this matter of Episcopacy, and proceed to
inquire whether we are justly chargeable with any corruption, in having
preserved such rites and ceremonies in our Church, as were judged by our wise
reformers to be for decency and good order, harmless in their own nature, and
neither contradictory to the general usage of protestants, nor to any positive
law in scripture?

The great principles upon which the Church of England was purged from the
dross of popery, are fully set forth in her articles, the prefaces to her
liturgy, and by many of her able sons; and they do honor to the spirit and
temper of our first reformers.

Those men (says the learned Bishop Sanderson) are much mistaken, who either
measure the protestant religion by an opposition to popery; or account all
popery, that is taught or practiced by the Church of Rome. It is only the
corruptions and superstition of that Church, whereunto the name of popery does
belong. Our godly forefathers had no purpose (nor had they any warrant) to set
up a new religion, but to reform the old, by purging it from innovations,
which, in tract of time (some sooner, some later) had mingled with it and
corrupted it, both in doctrine and worship. According to this purpose, they
proceeded, without constraint or precipitancy, freely and advisedly, as in
peaceable times; and brought their intentions to a happy end. All those
doctrines which are either contrary to the written word of God, or superadded
thereto as necessary points of faith; all those superstitions which are either
unlawful, as contrary to God's word; or being not contrary, and therefore
indifferent, are made essentials, and imposed as necessary parts of worship --
these are things whereunto the name of popery does properly belong; and were
accordingly rejected by our Church at the reformation. As to ceremonies, the
Church meant to make use of her liberty, and the lawful power she had (and all
Churches of Christ have, or ought to have) of ordering her ecclesiastical
affairs, yet to do it with so much prudence and moderation, that the world
might see, by what was laid aside, that she acknowledged no subjection to the sea of Rome; and by what was retained, that she did not recede from the Church
of Rome out of any spirit of contradiction, but as necessitated for the
maintenance of her just liberty. -- In short, as it is well expressed by a
humourous writer, in stripping off the lace, she was careful not to tear the
garment.

Concerning rites and ceremonies, we have the confession of all the reformed
Churches, except perhaps our Centinel's Church, that they are not unlawful in
themselves, where they are decent and significant.

The Helvetian Confession Cap. 27.
is -- that "Churches have always used their liberty in rites, as being things
indifferent; which we do at this day."

The Bohemian is -- "that ceremonies brought in, by a good custom, are with an
uniform consent to be retained in the ecclesiastical assemblies of Christian
people, in the common service of God." Cap. 15.


The Gallican declares, that "every place may have its peculiar constitutions,
as it shall seem convenient for them." Act 32.


The Belgic, that "we receive those laws that are fit, either to cherish and
maintain concord, or to keep us in the obedience of God." Act 32.


That of Augsburg -- "Ecclesiastical rites which are ordained by man's
authority, and tend to quietness and good order in the Church, are to be
observed." Act 15.


That of Saxony -- "For order's sake, there must be some decent and seemly
rites." Act 20.


That of Sweden -- "Such traditions of men as agree with the scriptures, and
were ordained for good manners and the profit of men, are worthy to be
accounted rather of God than of man." Cap. 14.


Such are the concessions, and such the practice of the most considerable
reformed Churches abroad, with respect to ceremonies in general -- which are
probably accounted among those "human inventions" wherewith our Church is
accused by the Sentinel of having "corrupted the pure word of God." If he will
mention any particulars that are exceptionable in our Church, which are not
retained in other protestant Churches, we shall show that we are either able to
defend them, or willing to give them up. And till he does this, our answer can
only be general. Let us now hear the sentiments of some of the ablest foreign
divines on the same subject. Calvin, as usual, I choose to lead the van; who
has a long and excellent discourse Instit. Lib. 4. C. 10.
on Rites and Ceremonies; out of which it will be sufficient to select only a
few passages.

"All churches, says he, have power to make laws and ordinances for
establishing a common polity among themselves -- but no polity can be upheld
but by certain laws, nor any Rites observed, without a stated Form. Therefore,
we are so far from condemning the laws which conduce to this end, that we say,
to take them away, is to cut the sinews of the church, and render it both weak
and deformed. -- The end of decency is, partly that, by appointing such Rites
as will create a reverence for holy things, we may by such helps, be excited to
devotion, and partly that our modesty and gravity, which are commendable in all
our actions, may there more especially appear."

Nor does he consider Church laws, about decent Rites and Ceremonies, as mere
human inventions. -- For "such laws says he, are founded on the authority of
Scripture, and so are both human and divine: which he illustrates by the Geneva
law, for kneeling at public prayer, as follows, -- "If it be asked, continues
he, whether this be an human tradition, which any man may refuse or neglect at
pleasure? I answer, it is so human, as also to be divine. It is of God, as it
is part of that decency commended by the Apostle (1 Cor. xiv. 40.) But it is of
men, as it particularly specifies, what the Scripture only declared in general.
-- By this one example we may make an estimate of all things of this kind. In
outward discipline and ceremonies, Christ did not particularly prescribe what
we should do; because he foresaw that would depend upon the different condition
of times; and he did not judge one form agreeable to all ages. -- "And
elsewhere, De Reform. Eccles. C. 16.
he says, I do not contend about Ceremonies, that serve only for Decency and
Order; nor yet against such as are symbols of, or incitements to, that
reverence we owe to God." -- Now that such is the intention of our church
ceremonies, she expressly declares; and that they are not meant to bind
conscience, but for decency and order.

But to proceed with Calvin, neither he nor his followers had any more
objection to forms of prayer than to decent rites, etc. In his letter to the
Protector of England, he says, As to what concerns a form of prayer and
ecclesiastical rites, I highly approve of it; that there be a certain ^^^m,
from which ministers be not allowed to ^ary." -- So the canon Book of Discip.
C. 5.
of the French Church expressly determined; and Calvin not only declared his
own opinion in these things, but pressed strongly upon others to have all
disputes done away concerning them -- "I hope says he, to the fiery John Knox,
your rigor about ceremonies, which is displeasing to many, will keep itself
within due bounds of moderation." -- Epist. ad Joh. Knox.
To Farel, he also thus writes -- "Use your endeavor that the brethren do not
pertinaciously contend about ceremonies. We are free from all men; yet let us
be the servants of peace and concord."

Happy had it been, if the Sentinel and his party could have followed this
advice; and as they are, or may be free from any thing that they may think
corrupted, or of human invention in our Church, that they would enjoy the
liberty which God has given, and suffer us to do the same!

To these testimonies of Calvin, and of whole Churches, concerning the power
which every Christian society has within itself to decree rites and ceremonies,
which be not repugnant to Scripture, but for decency and order; I could add
many in favor of the particular rites and ceremonies of the English church. --

Bucer, for example, thanks God, with all his soul, to see the English
ceremonies so pure and conformable to the word of God." Scripta Anglicana.


Beza, in like manner, answering his discontented brethren in England who
complained to him of the Church rites and ceremonies; enjoins them not to
forsake the church communion on that account; for that those ceremonies were
not of those kinds of things: that were sinful in themselves; and elsewhere
Beza Cont. Baldwin.
speaking of the sign of the Cross, in the English and Lutheran churches -- "I
know, says he, they retain the use of this sign. Let them therefore use their
own liberty as it is meet." --

I could add the testimonies of Martyr, Claude, L'Angle, Turretine, Le Moyne,
etc. abroad; and even of Baxter, Ball, and many more at home; but some notice
will be taken of them, when I come in my next number to speak of the purity of
our church doctrine. On the present head of ceremonies and rites, I would not
wish to be tedious. For some of those things, which were once so offensive to
some among ourselves, are becoming every day less so; and never gave any
offense to foreign churches; such as the observation of holy days,
Church-music, the gown, the Surplice, the Square-cap, etc.

Geneva and Calvin shall here speak in place of all others. And first, as to
Church music, none are more fond of it than the Geneva churches, and no music
more light and airy than theirs. And as to festivals, the French church
observed several; nay several were many years observed at Geneva, and when they
were abrogated, Calvin solemnly declares -- "It was without his knowledge and
advice; and he would have all men know, that if it had been put to his choice
he never would have given his opinion for such a decree." Epist. to Hallrus.
Peter Martyr also defends the wearing of the Surplice, as having a good and
useful signification, in his Epist. to Hooper.


As to the cap and surplice, Calvin blames Bishop Hooper for contending about
them, and writes to Bullenger thus -- "I wish that he (Hooper) would not
contend so much de piet^ and vest linea. This advice I gave him myself not
long ago.

As to gowns and collegiate habits, Calvin was so strict that he would have
expelled some students if they had not complied with his rules, and he once
maintained a good scolding-match with a zealous female saint concerning his own
long garment; but is is said the female had the last word of him, and still
hold to her point, viz. that those long garments were the scripture marks of
false prophets, etc.

In short, with respect to the clerical habits appointed in our Church, they
cannot be called a novel invention. For they are of a truly ancient cut and
make; and it is our antagonists that have introduced novelties and changed the
fashion. For some of them appear with short or half-gowns, some with long ones,
some of one cut, some of another; some with cassocks, and some without. Nay, I
am told that even the square cap now begins to adorn the brow of every
strippling of a Presbyterian college; a piece of intelligence I am no way
displeased to hear, as it is a good omen of our getting over one matter, that
once so much disturbed our antagonists, and seems to have greatly disturbed our
Sentinel himself, even of late. --

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, Jan. 5. The ANATOMIST, No. XVIII.
Conclusion of the Church of England's APPEAL to the Church of Protestants.
Verus Dei cultus, nunc tandem a sordidissimis illis ANTI-CHRISTIANISMI
sordibus, repurgatus.

BEZA, concerning the Church of England.
AS the Sentinel, in his gross charge against our Church, of having "corrupted
the pure word of God with human inventions," did neither think proper to
mention what those inventions are, nor in what points they are to be found,
viz. -- whether in government, in rites and ceremonies, or in doctrines; I
thought it necessary, in order to be sure of his meaning, to suppose the whole
three; and, in each of them, to make one appeal, as well to the judgment of
reformed Churches abroad, as of such particular divines both at home and
abroad, as might probably have the most weight with the Sentinel and his party.

What relates to the two first points, (viz. episcopal government, rites and
ceremonies) being already discussed, little need be said on the last point,
viz. the doctrines of our Church. These, as contained in our articles, have
long had the testimony of the whole protestant world, in favor of their purity
and orthodoxy; and unless the Sentinel should declare so, in particular and
express terms, I can hardly imagine that he meant to run so contrary to the
sentiments of his own party (even some of the most rigid of them at home) as to
charge any corruption upon the doctrinal parts of our articles, or Church
service. However, as his meaning is so vague and undetermined, it may not be
improper to add a few testimonies on this head, as I have done on the former;
although the subject be somewhat anticipated, in the testimonies already given;
where the writers had not separated one part from the other, but had spoken of
government, ^^tes, ceremonies and doctrines together.

BEZ^ (...) given a noble testimony concerning the purity of our worship and
doctrines, in my Latin motto. He says elsewhere, "We believe your Churches do
in all points of doctrine, agree with ours. As to what concerns your faith or
doctrine, received by public consent, and confirmed by royal authority, I
suppose there is no man that thinks rightly of these matters, but will embrace
it as true and certain" -- and again, he says, "It is not without most bitter
sorrow of heart, that, I understand your Churches are so far disturbed, as that
some begin to hold separate meetings." Ephesians. 8, 69 and 23.


Mr. LE MOYNE says -- "The English confession has been highly approved by all
the protestant world; and it really deserves the praises of all good
Christians. For there cannot be any thing made more wise than that confession;
and the articles of faith were never collected with a more just and reasonable
discretion." Let. to Bp. of London.


The learned CAUSABON says -- "That no Church in the world came nearer to the
form of the most flourishing primitive Church; having observing a middle way
betwixt the two extremes of such others as failed either by excess or defect;
by which moderation she obtained this privilege, that even those who envied her
happiness, were constrained to extol her in comparison of other Churches."
Pres. Exercit. in Baron.


LUDOVICUS CAPELLUS, divinity professor at Sanmur, speaks thus of our liturgy,
among some others compiled by the first reformers. "At the reformation --
purged from all Popish superstition and idolatry -- Set forms of liturgy were
composed and prescribed -- in Germany, France, England, Scotland, Belguim, etc.
varying as little as might be from the ancient forms of the primitive Church;
and have hitherto been happily used till of very late, there arose in England,
a sort of morose and froward, nice and scrupulous, not to say superstitions,
men; who, upon very slight and slender reasons, have thought fit to disparage
and abrogate the liturgy (together with the whole hierarchy of Bishops) and
have substituted the directory, as they call it, in its room, which contains no
set form in express words, but only heads, etc. To which some other furious and
mad men have added, that it is unlawful to use any prescribed form of prayer,
either in public or in private; and that a godly man cannot with a safe
conscience be present at them." These. Salmur.


The celebrated GROTIUS, in a letter to his brother, April 8th, 1645, says --
"That the English liturgy was always accounted the best, by learned men."

The learned SPANHEIM, writing from Geneva to Archbishop USHER in 1638, says
-- "I often call to mind that pleasing face of things in your Church; that
reverence in the public worship of God, etc. -- the like to which you will
hardly find elsewhere."

Mr. GACHES, whom that noted nonconformist Doctor Calamy, (page 568 of
Baxter's life) styles a famous preacher at Charenton, says of our liturgy, "I
have read it a long time ago, and was wonderfully edified by it." Dr. Darell on
the government and worship of the reformed Churches.


Nay, BAXTER himself professes that he can subscribe "all the doctrinal
articles of our Church, as true;" only that he thinks the words of them, in the
obvious sense, many times liable to exception. Eng. Non-Conform. chap. 24.
-- "All the reformed Churches in Christendom (says he elsewhere) do commonly
profess to hold communion, with the English Churches in the liturgy, if they
come among us." Defense. p. 68.


Nay, the same BAXTER is so far from scrupling the use of that truly ancient
rite of CONFIRMATION (which our modern antagonists seems to deride us for
desiring the continuance of) that he declares Eng. Non-Conform. Cap. 19.
"he thinks the want of it the greatest corruption of the Church, of any
outward thing he remembers." Only he says that the dioceses are too large for
one Bishop to confirm the hundredth part of his flock, etc. -- That is, Mr.
Baxter desires to make every Presbyter a Bishop, in this as in all other things.

Mr. TOMBS likewise declares himself thus -- "I cannot but judge, that either
much ignorance or much malice it is, that make any traduce the English Common
Prayer Book, as if it were the Popish Mass Book, or as bad as it; and to deter
men from joining with those prayers and services, and ceremonies, etc. -- when
they can hardly be ignorant that the martyrs in Queen Mary's days were burnt
for it. etc." Theodulia, p. 102.


I cannot better conclude these testimonies, than with another striking passage
from the above quoted LE MOYNE -- Truly, I believe not that it is possible to
keep either peace or order in your Church [of England] without preserving the
episcopal dignity. It was observed in a former paper, that it was necessity and
not choice, that made any of the first reformers set up Presbytery rather than
Episcopacy. I shall add one more famous testimony on this head from Mr. (...)
Bo^^. an eminent protestant divine in France, 1660. -- "I think, says he, none
of my brethren will condemn me, if I say that well ordered Episcopacy, has
most important and considerable utilities, which cannot be found in the
Presbyterian discipline. If we have followed the last, it is not from any
aversion we have to the former -- But it is because necessity obliged to it;
for the Reformation having been begun in this kindom by the people, and by the
inferior Churchmen, the places of Bishops remained filled with men of a
contrary religion; so that we were constrained to content ourselves with
ministers and elders, as well as we could. If Bishops had embraced the
reformation at first, I make no doubt but their order had been maintained in
the ecclesiastical polity." -- From Dr. Du Moulin's translation, in Durrell's
government of foreign Churches, p. 122.

Even K^^^ himself, in Scotland, 1560, assisted in founding the reformation
there, on the Episcopal model: having first superintendents in the respective
provinces, with Episcopal powers; who in 1571, were changed into Archbishops
and Bishops, in pursuance of an application from the synod of Sterling to the
Lord Regent and estates. Nor was it till the return of M^^vil, etc from Geneva,
1575, that the model of that country came to (...); and it is well known from
what ambition of state leaders, the chief leaders of the inferior clergy were
set on, in their attempts against (...) Episcopacy. See G^thrie's memoirs.

Before this, the Scots highly approved the English Episcopal model, and (...)
the bishops and pastors at their brethren and true guides of Christ's flock.
Witness the letter from the general assembly of Scotland to the English
Bishops, December 27, 1556; subscribed and addressed thus, viz. The
superintendants, ministers and commissioners, within the realm of Scotland, to
their brethren the bishops and pastors of England who have renounced the Roman
antichrist, and do profess with them the Lord Jesus in sincerity, with the
increase of the holy spirit.


I confess I conceive not by what spirit they are led, that oppose that
government, and cry it down so violently. All good men ought to look upon the
Church of England as a very orthodox Church. Thus all the protestants of France
do; those at Geneva, those of Switzerland, and those of Holland too; for they
did themselves a great honor in having some divines of England in their synod
of Dort -- whence does it then come that some Englishmen themselves, have so
ill an opinion of her at present, and divide rashly from her as they do? Is not
this to divide from all the ancient Churches, from all the Churches of the
east, from all the protestant Churches, which have always had a great respect
for the purity of the Church of England?" Durell, page 127; and Stillingfleet's
unreasonableness of Sep. 407.


Shall a Church, then, whose praise has thus been in the who^e Protestant
world, since the very first establishment of the Reformation, be still traduced
and vilified by a set of aspiring men, who sprung up in licentious times,
within her own bosom, and at this moment enjoy every protection their hearts
can wish, from a prince and nation where she has full and legal power? Is there
decency, is there justice (not to mention gratitude) in such a conduct as this;
especially, when there is no other cause for it, but our desiring equal and
natural rights? Are the strength and interest of the protestant cause, either
in the old world or the new, likely to be promoted by such an Unchristian and
unbrotherly spirit? For, whatever the Sentinel or Remonstrant may say of the
Church of England being but a tottering defense" -- She ever has been, and
still is, considered by Protestants in general, as their great bulwark and
principal fortress.

It is against her chiefly, that all the engines of Popery have been ever
pointed. Her structure is raised on such a strong foundation, that if this
could be shaken or destroyed, the adherents of popery think they have little to
fear from such a many-headed thing as Presbytery; which is still dividing and
subdividing into different factions and parties. Nay the enemies of the
reformation, far from wishing ill to the latter, rather express joy in
beholding their attacks successful against that Church, which is the center of
union among protestants; and to which all denominations among them have, in
their turns, looked up, and probably will again be obliged to look up, for
protection and defense.

But further, as the Church of England has been the principal support of the
reformation, down to the present time; so it is she, that has born the chief
burden and brunt of the day, from the beginning. Her divines they were, who
were encountering Banishments, Imprisonments, and Flames, when Calvin had
gained a firm establishment; and (alas, for Christianity, and that blot in his
character!) was commencing persecutor in his turn. Her divines they chiefly
are, who have shook the Papacy to its lowest foundations, and have exhibited to
the world in their writings, such masculine specimens of found reasoning, in
favor of primitive Christianity, as, we believe, will only perish, or cease to
be admired, when the world itself shall perish with them!

To name one for all, and that in the earliest times of protestantism; where
shall we find among all the Calvin's, and reformers of his party (though truly
celebrated in their day) any that can dispute the palm with our illustrious
Bishop JEWEL? where, a more enlightened zeal, a more undaunted spirit, more
noble argument, or more various learning? I cannot resist the temptation of
throwing a few extracts from his apology into a note, Extracts from Jewell's
Apology of the Church of England.

"But I have a mind, says he, to apply myself to the Pope himself, and to ask
him these questions face to face. Tell us, I pray, good holy father, you who
boast so much of all antiquity -- which of all the fathers, ever gave you the
true of chief priest, universal Bishop, or head of the Church? Which of them
told you that both swords are committed to you? Which, that the whole world is
but your diocese; that all Bishops receive of your fullness; that all power is
given to you in heaven and earth; that you are not subject to the judgment of
Kings, nor of the whole clergy, nor of the whole world? which of them so nicely
and mathematically ascribed just seventy-seven degrees of power and authority
to you, more than to the greatest Prince upon earth? Which of the fathers ever
defined you not to be mere men, but a certain substance made up of God and man?
Which of them says, you have the command over purgatory and the angels of God,
etc.?" -- Which of them taught you to say private mass, while the people looked
on, or to hold the sacrament over your head, wherein the whole of your religion
at present consists; or to mangle Christ's sacraments, and contrary to his
institution and express words, to defraud the people of one part of them?" --

"If we are scismaticks for dissenting from this, what name shall we give them,
who have fallen from the primitive Church, from Christ himself and his
apostles? -- We set forth the holy scriptures in all languages; they will not
suffer them to be published in any one. We invite the people to hear and read
the word of God; they do all they can to keep them from it. We endeavor to
make our case known to the whole world; they will come to no trial. We depend
on learning; they on ignorance. We trust to light; they to darkness. We pay due
respect to the writings of the apostles and prophets; they commit them to the
flames, we desire to have the cause of God tried by God only: they will appeal
to none but themselves. Therefore, when we saw all things thus trodden
underfoot, and proposed to restore the temple of God to its primitive beauty,
we desired no other foundation than that which we knew the apostles had laid of
old; that is, our Savior JESUS CHRIST. -- As to their brags of the Pope's
being Peter's successor -- and unable to err, etc. it is all a jest. God has
promised his grace to a pious mind; not to sees and successions. -- Wherein was
Peter ever like the Pope, or the Pope like Peter? unless perhaps they will say,
that Peter took away his keys of the kingdom of Heaven; and hid his Lord's
talent; or that he only sat in state, in his palace of St. John Lateran, and
pointed out all the places of Purgatory, and the several kinds of punishment,
committing some poor souls to be tormented, and releasing others, as he is paid
for it; exempting himself from civil power; making war himself, and the
occasion of war among other Princes; carried about on the shoulders of noblemen
in a golden chair, etc. etc. -- Or will they rather say, the Pope now does what
we knew Peter did? viz. that he is instant in season and out of season; fulfils
the ministry of Christ; is the watchman of the house of Israel; receives the
oracles of God, and delivers them to the people as he received them; is the
salt of the earth and Light of the world; feeds not himself but his flock; is
not Lord over God's heritage; is subject unto Princes, etc. etc.?" --

"But these tricks have (as the bird of the night, at the rising of the sun)
vanished at the appearance of the gospel. -- It was the will and pleasure of
almighty God, that, in spite of all its enemies, the Gospel of Jesus should at
this time be spread over the face of the whole earth; and men, obeying the
commands of God, have, of their own accord, betaken themselves to the doctrine
of Jesus Christ. We, in good truth, expected neither riches, pleasure, nor ease
from this separation; for all those our enemies abound with; and we enjoyed a
much greater share of them when we agreed with them. Neither do we shun peace
and concord; but we will not fight against God, to be at peace with men." --


by which a judgment may be made of the principles of our Church, and what a
bulwark of the reformation she is to be esteemed.

And is there then, no regard, no charity due among fellow protestants to a
Church that has borne such a part in vindicating our glorious common cause, and
setting at naught the assaults of our common enemy? Is she still to be called
Corrupt, Superstitious, nay possibly affected, after so many well fought
battles against the CORRUPTIONS and SUPERSTITIONS of Christendom? Or will not
reformation please, till we have (contrary to our judgment and reason) reformed
into a skeleton, and promiscuously thrown away the good with the bad, even
things of apostolical institution; because they were once mixed with the
corruptions of Rome? This may please such reformers as our Sentinel and his
party; but thanks be to God, we have not so learned Christ!

Having thus, I hope, with due temper, answered the Sentinel on the principal
heads proposed; I shall conclude these papers in Three more numbers, unless
fresh provocation be given. And if in them, I should assume a style somewhat
different from what I have yet used, and try how he may like some arguments in
his own way, I think I would not incur the blame of impartial men; yet still,
for the honor of that Church, in whose behalf I write, I will strive to the
last, to preserve that spirit which she inculcates on all her sons.

From the PENNSYLVANIA JOURNAL, Jan. 12. The ANATOMIST, No. XIX. The ANATOMIST
to the SENTINEL. A CARD.
Infandum renovare jubes dolorem.
SIR,
SO abhorent to my nature is every species of recrimination, however justly
provoked, that it is with some reluctance I enter upon the remainder of the
task I proposed for myself. The very cur that snarls at me, I am loath to treat
with opprobrious names, and would rather quiet him by throwing a crust, than
attempting to break his bones.

Though you and your friends have called my knife a bloody one, and have
sometimes in imagination magnified it into a cleaver; yet let the public judge
between you and me, whether I have not gone about my work with a decent and
merciful hand, neither mangling the flesh, nor disjointing the bones; but
carefully separating the one from the other, I have fully shown that the fears
and jealousies you have endeavored to spread among his Majesty's good subjects
in America, concerning ecclesiastical courts, the loss of spiritual liberty,
and enormous episcopal jurisdictions to be erected over the laity, are absolute
chimeras of your own brain, without the least shadow of ground, in any law (
statute or common) that has force in these colonies. I have shown further that
your un-christian and un-brotherly charge against our Church, of having
corrupted the pure word of God with human inventions, stands refuted by the
testimonies of almost every reformed Church upon earth; even by the founders
and princes of your own party.

Upon the whole, I have left the reader to judge, whether in your behavior
toward your episcopal brethren, you could have been actuated by any better
motive than an unhallowed zeal to exalt your own party on the depression of
others; and whether it be fair or candid to keep up an eternal clamor, in
order to deprive your fellow-protestants of a just and natural right, merely on
account of groundless jealousies, about contingencies absolutely improbable,
and only possible upon a supposition that all our laws and charters are to be
dissolved. I have appealed to your own conscience, whether union among
ourselves in America, or the common cause of protestantism, are likely to be
promoted by vilifying and traducing a Church which, I will still say, is the
main bulwark of the reformation; whose venerable martyrs sealed it with their
blood; and whose illustrious divines, still foremost in the battle, have shook
the papacy to its lowest foundation, and have exhibitted to the world such
noble writings in favor of primitive Christianity, as we believe, will only
perish, or cease to be admired, when the world itself shall perish with them!

So far, I think Sir, I ought not even to incur your blame in having proceeded;
and although I was not forward to enter into this dispute, yet rejoiced I am in
the event, that it has furnished an answer, and given satisfaction, to some
thousands, whom your party, in every corner of the country, were endeavoring
to prejudice in their sentiments concerning our Church. But, although I have
thus far touched you but lightly, yet in what remains I must approach toward
your very vitals; and therefore I am unwilling to proceed without giving you a
short respite, to see if you have any thing further to offer for yourself, and
whether I may not be saved from some part of the disagreeable task that lies
before me. In the mean while, I will fairly tell you my three remaining
subjects, which will be more or less enlarged upon, according as you offer
fresh matter; for I am earnestly desirous, on account of the public, that this
controversy, if it must be further prosecuted, should be brought to as speedy
an issue as possible.

1. You and your friends, allying yourselves with the North-Briton, have
assiduously circulated his number LXI. with this favorite doctrine to exalt
your party -- "No DISSENTER, NO LIBERTY." -- I propose therefore to give some
specimens of the zeal shown by your party for liberty from the beginning.

2. The Remonstrant, one of your auxiliaries, if peradventure not yourself,
has told us how many have suffered under the penal laws of our Church, and
threatens us with hanging these laws out to view. Just as if one were to throw
a parcel of dead men's bodies before our eyes, and accuse a certain person as
the murderer, threatening, if he would not confess the fact, to produce the
weapon wherewith it was perpetrated. We would be glad this weapon was produced,
as we think it an alleviating circumstance that it would be found a defensive,
not an offensive one. Upon this head therefore, I propose to show what have
been the doctrines of your party concerning that toloration whereof you boast
yourselves to be examples; and shall make good what Bishop BRAMHAL long since
said to your forerunner Baxter. -- "Sum up all of your party that since the
beginning of the Reformation have been cast aside, or driven away in the whole
kingdom; and we will set in the balance only those who, in the short space of
seven years, in three places, London and the two Universities, were haled to
prisons, chased into Banishments, sequestered, or left to the merciless world
to beg their bread, and they shall double your number; -- and for learning,
etc. those of your party will scarce deserve to be named with them in the same
day; and if we compare the sufferings of your supposed confessors, they will
appear but fleabitings, in comparison of theirs. But the greatest disparity
remains yet untouched. -- the one suffered for FAITH and LOYALTY, etc. -- the
others for FACTION.

3. As to my concluding paper, this I propose for the subject. You have most
unjustly accused a society, consisting of many of the most respectable names in
Great Britain "of having squandered away money collected for the relief of the
savages." I will therefore enquire what use your party has made of large sums
collected for the same purpose. Further, you are again in your 21st. number
laboring to prove Doctor Chandler the aggressor in this dispute; although if
he had begun it, there is a manifest difference between a pamphlet, read
probably by a hundred people, and introducing the matter, as you did, into a
news-paper, to be read perhaps by thirty thousand. But to cut this matter
short, I am able to lay before the world some letters written by the leaders of
your party, in November 1766 (long before Dr. Chandler wrote his piece) wherein
this attack upon the Church in America, (pursuant to letters from England) was
projected; and a confession made that your party were determined in a few
months to be at as great variance with Churchmen on account of their desire of
Bishops, as ever you were with the Quakers; and that, for this purpose,
salutary steps were then taking to get the WHOLE PRESBYTERIAN INTEREST on the
Continent, more firmly united. I can even oblige you with your plan of union,
correspondence, committees, etc. and even the names of some committees, If I
had not too good an opinion of several whose names you have made free with, to
believe they were ever consulted or consenting in such a scheme. To this, if I
had not a desire to close rather than widen differences, could be added, a
sample of some exhortations, circulated not a year ago to scour rifles, thrash
grain, make double diligence in their stills, and to fly in the face of
government; which it would make one shudder to read. From all which I must
conclude with an argument in your way, and show that if we are to regard
present appearances, or form any judgment of the future, from what is past, it
is at the ambitious spirit and growing power of your party, and not at the
government of our Church by a Bishop, that all America ought justly to be
alarmed.

But, in truth, from the gloomy prospect that seems gathering against us on the
other side of the Atlantic; it might be better for you, and for me, to
cultivate domestic harmony for the present, and suspend the settlement of our
remaining differences to a more convenient season; all which will depend
entirely on yourself and your party.

A LETTER TO A FRIEND.
SIR,
THOUGH I verily believe the Church of England to be both in Form and Doctrine,
the most pure and acceptable to God, of any religious Society now existing upon
the Face of the Earth, and consequently it must be my earnest Wish and Desire
that this Church which I so highly esteem and reverence, may spread and prevail
universally; yet the long continued reiterated Clamours of the American Whig,
the Sentinel and other Writers against the Admission of Bishops to reside in
the British Colonies, as if thereby both our religious and civil Liberties
would be not only endangered but absolutely lost, could not fail to awaken in
me some uneasy Apprehensions of the Consequences that might attend the
establishment of those reverend Prelates among us. The Writers against them had
made use of every Art and Argument, to represent these Consequences in the most
dreadful Light, and I could not help being a little alarmed; for though their
Arguments were very far from convincing, yet they puzzled me: I supposed them
to be wrong, but was not without some Anxiety at the Thought that they might
possibly be right. I would have set myself down to examine their Arguments
critically for myself, but my Situation would not admit of it, and my Opinion
remained vibrating in Suspense, till I fortunately met with the foregoing Pages
of the Anatomist, which have placed all the material Points in a clear Light,
and removed all the Difficulties that perplexed me: And as you seem to be in
much the same Predicament that I was, I send you the same Medicine that
relieved me, for which I doubt not, you will be, as I was, sincerely thankful
to the judicious Author.

I observe one of the points which both the Whig and the Sentinel, very much
labor to prove, is, that no particular Church, or religious Society, more than
others, ought to obtain a civil establishment in any Government -- By the Way,
I believe there is no religious Sect in the British Dominions, but what have
availed themselves of a Civil Establishment, when ever they have had
Opportunity, as much as the Church -- for Instance -- The religious Forms and
Principles in the New England Governments, are so interwoven with the
Administration of Civil Government, that a Man stands very little Chance of
being preferred to Offices of Honor and Importance -- unless his religious
Profession and Conduct corresponds with the general Establishment of those
Colonies -- there are indeed some Exceptions to this general Observation, but
Instances are rare: And I believe it is an indisputable Fact, that this Aid and
Support of the civil Power, with the Hopes and Expectations, it gives rise to,
are the principal Means of continuing the Modes and Doctrines that have long
prevailed in those Governments. -- But to return.

Notwithstanding the specious Arguments of the Whig and Sentinel, it seemed to
me an Absurdity, that a Church confessedly formed and instituted by Christ
himself (for that the Argument supposes) should be prohibitted from receiving
the Aid and Countenance of the Civil Power, or at least any Preference to other
religious Societies. -- This Argument I take to be indefensible, unless upon
the Supposition that there can be no stronger Evidence in favor of Truth than
of Falsehood. Add to this, that the Whig and Sentinel in their Manner of
arguing, manifested a Disposition very unsuitable to the Spirit of that
Religion they pretended to be so zealous to promote, and laid them under strong
Suspicions, of acting upon false Principles, with unworthy Designs. Instead of
stating Facts in a clear Light, and arguing upon them in a candid reasonable
Manner, their Aim appears to have been to misrepresent, and place every matter
of Dispute in the most obscure and unfavourable Point of View, -- To perplex an
Argument, and evade the Point in Dispute; to put the worst and most perverse
Construction upon every Expression, and to use a Style and Language full of
Haughtiness, Insolence and Provocation, calculated not to convince and
reconcile, but to irritate and inflame, to widen and perpetuate Differences
from one Generation to another. These Observations upon the Writings of the
Whig, Sentinel, etc. being such as could not fail to strike a Reader of the
least Attention, gave me a shrewd Suspicion that every Thing they had advanced
against Bishops and the Church, was founded on Deceit and Malice, intended to
do Mischief, to root out and destroy, or hinder the Growth of the Church in
America, by preventing its Enjoyment of an undoubted Right essential to its
Support and Continuance. But these were rather Matters of Supposition than
absolute Certainty to me, till I had the Pleasure to find the Subject fully
investigated by the Anatomist, who has removed my Doubts, and given me entire
Satisfaction.

The American Professors of the Religion of the Church established in England,
the most pure and respectable Church upon Earth, have an undoubted Right, at
least, in common with other religious Societies, to occupy and possess within
themselves all the Powers and Offices necessary to the Completion and
Continuance of their own Body as a Church. But those Rights, the Whig and
Sentinel, and their Party have thought proper to withhold from them, under
Pretense, that they might possibly use them to the Oppression of other
religious Denominations; and so these good Gentlemen would actually do a
certain Injury to the Church, on an Imagination that the Church might possibly
hereafter do the same Injury to them! I wonder how they would like to have this
Doctrine practiced upon themselves?

I am at a Loss to determine whether the Clamours and Disputes of these
Gentlemen upon this Head are most remarkable, as being ridiculous or malevolent.

This however I am sure of, that if their writings should attract any
considerable Notice in England, and should be supposed to be agreeable to the
general Sentiments of the Colonies (as the Writers themselves, all along, with
great Injustice, endeavor to make the World believe) or even of a considerable
Number in them, such a Belief in England, would raise the most fatal Prejudice
against the Colonies, and be the Occasion of inconceivable Mischiefs: We should
be all considered as a factious, turbulent, unreasonable People, implacable
Enemies to the Church; and consequently all the Friends to the Church, who are
the most powerful Body of the Nation, would be against us; but I hope, through
the Interposition of divine Providence, the Evil may be averted, or fall only
on those who devised it.

I am, etc. A. B.
New York, May 1, 1769.
From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Sep. 12, 1768. AMERICAN WHIG, [NO. XXVII.]
Remainder of a brief View of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as it is at this Day
practiced in England: Begun in No. XXVI. Vol. I. page 422.
I Have now by me a most moving and lamentable account (contained in above
sixty letters) sent me by Mr. John Tempest of Old Durham, (formerly a member of
your house) complaining of the most barbarous and tyrannic proceedings of the
spiritual and temporal courts there, against his person, estate, and property,
that ever was known to have been practiced in any court of law or justice
whatever. And this (as he says) chiefly promoted and carried on by a
confederacy between the bishop's chancellor and sheriff, who, by their
underofficers and agents, have illegally seized upon whatever of his property
they can lay their hands on, on pretense of an outlawry or excommunication, of
which he had no notice till the seizure actually made. -- And that, upon
application to his sovereign, the bishop, for redress, he has been denied all
manner of relief; and therefore entreats me to represent his case to you, the
parliament's committee, which I am now preparing to that end.

But before I trouble you with that particular case, I beg leave to add a few
other general observations, touching the artifices and practices of bishops,
etc. in driving on their ecclesiastical trade of getting money. Which artifices
and practices, I shall endeavor to range under these ten general heads,
(exclusive of some excentricities) viz.

1. By their fees for ordaining priests and deacons, which general ordinations
being at four times in the year, may well be computed at about 100 l. each
time. And thus the whole 26 bishops and archbishops, may make in the whole
about 10,400 l. per annum.

2. By institutions and inductions to vacant benefices, for every one of which
they have at least three pounds. And there being computed in England 9285
parishes, this, at the ordinary rate of one in a parish, comes to 27,855 l.

Note, Some parishes consist of diverse benefices, and others, have diverse
chapelries, which are of the same nature, and require institution and induction
as well as other benefices. -- The single parish of Halifax in Yorkshire, has
ten or twelve such chapelries. Nor are the institutions to archdeaconries,
deanries, prebendaries, sinecures, etc. here included; so that this head of
institutions and inductions, is of much greater benefit to bishops than is
generally estimated.

3. For making rural deans, and for taking their oaths, etc. The bishops
usually received of every rural dean so sworn, the yearly sum of 8 s. 6 d. as I
am informed. And this may hint to us the reason why the late Queen Anne, no
doubt on the advice or importunity of some bishops, sent her letter, dated 29
Jan. 1710, to the then convocation, for augmenting the number of rural deans,
etc. See Nelson's rights of the clergy, 252.

4. By granting visitation licenses to beneficed ministers to preach in their
own cures; for although they are ordained, instituted, and inducted before, and
by the canons are strictly enjoined to preach the gospel; yet this must not be
done, till such a visitation license, or the bishop's approbation, be obtained:
Which license, on every episcopal visitation, costs every such beneficed
minister 10 s. And this for the said 9285 parishes, or rather above 10,000
benefices in England, comes to 5000 l. per annum.

Note, when the bishop does not visit, the archdeacon does, and that twice
yearly; so that there never fails a visitation, in order to pick up the pence.
Vide Post. Archdeacon's jurisdiction.

5. By granting several other special kinds of licenses, whereof nine or ten
are sufficiently remarkable, viz.

1. Licenses to unbeneficed curates and deacons to preach, etc. 2. Licenses to
schoolmasters and schoolmistresses to teach, etc. 3. Licenses to parish-clerks
to sing, etc. 4. Licenses to parishioners to repair, enlarge, or amend their
church. 5. Licenses to churchwardens and overseers in diverse cases. 6.
Licenses to physicians to practice physic. 7. Licenses to midwives to practice
their profession, and to baptize. 8. Licenses to notaries public to practice
knavery. 9. Licenses to marry, and commit adultery, to have two wives, etc.
And I believe, on enquiry, some other kinds of bishop's licenses may be
discovered, as perhaps licenses to communicate with the church of Rome; for I
have heard some discourses of that kind.

But to proceed,

6. The bishops also receive very considerable profits or perquisites by
consecrating of churches and churchyards; for though nothing be due of right, yet
it is well known what is voluntarily given into the hands of a bishop's servant
for his master's use, can be no simony or corruption in the bishop. This may be
learned from the example of a present right reverend and ever memorable prelate.

7. By granting absolutions and commutations for penances, wherein there is
generally a regard had to the ability of the sinner. -- For if he be rich, a
good round sum is expected to free him from that chain of the Devil, called
excommunication; but if the wretch be poor, he is delivered to the Devil of
course; and though he performs his penance both in body and soul, yet neither
can be delivered either from Hell or the ecclesiastical court, 'till he has
paid his fees.

8. They also receive vast sums of money by granting probates of wills, and
letters of administration. -- And by an usurped right (for so, in fact, this
jurisdiction is) they are become in a great measure the disposers and
dispensers of dead men's will's; and though now therein providentially
restrained in some things, by the act of distributions, yet still possessed of
too much power to be for the subject's benefit.

9. By framing new oaths and articles against their visitations, and compelling
churchwardens to swear to present according to such new invented articles;
whereby diverse prosecutions of innocent persons have been carried on in the
ecclesiastical courts.

It Is true, this practice is now almost ex usu, but instead thereof we have
almost yearly new sets of pastoral charges, which, how little benefit soever
they bring either to the flock or to the bookseller, yet have proved gainful to
some of their Lordships.

10. By procurations, synodals, and other visitatorial payments and pensions:
For in the bishop's visitation two things are observable:

1. The churchwardens and chapel-wardens of every parish and chapelry within
the diocese, are called over, and there receive a book of articles to present
by, for which they generally pay 2 s. or 2 s. 6 d. and if any of them are
absent, they are there cited or summoned by proclamation, to appear in the
bishop's next consistorial cou^ with costs.

Note, These church-wa^^ens and chapel-wardens do pay at every bishop's
visitation for such a book of articles, though the very same they had before.
They also pay the bishop's clerk for writing their presentiments, (though many
of them do it themselves) 2 s. 6 d. which, in 9285 parishes, comes to 1058 l.
to which add for the book of articles, and it doubles the sum.

2. All the ministers within the diocese are obliged to attend the bishop's
visitation, where they are to pay about 1. 8 d. or more, merely for producing
to the bishop's register their licenses to preach, though such licenses have
been so produced and allowed never so often before -- After which, they pay to
the bishop, or to his use, the usual sum for procuration and synodals; as also
8 d. claimed by the gentleman apparitor, to whom most pays 1 s. This payment
seems to be in favor of the bishop's man, in order to obtain that of the
master. There is also a suit and service expected at this court from all, even
the poorest unbeneficed curate or clerk within the diocese. -- But I suppose
these are spared in point of money, out of charity, or --.

One thing more is observable with respect to the province of York, viz. That
when any archbishop is first installed or enthroned at York, all the persons
and vicars within his jurisdiction, though never so poor, and their
family-charge never so great, are obliged to give him the tenth of their
ecclesiastical livings, as a benevolence, in order to assist the poor
archbishop to settle himself in that see; which they say usually amounts to
seven or eight thousand pounds (a sweet morsel of ecclesiastical food!) And
it is said, that if any, even the meanest vicar, whose children want bread, does
through poverty omit this customary payment, he must certainly expect to be
severely whipped for the offense, in their merciless spiritual court, 'till
they have flayed him to the very bones.

Besides which, in some dioceses, as London, etc. there is a duty paid, called
the bishop's pension, i. e. 10 l. for every archdeaconry, and proportionably
for other dignities and peculiar jurisdictions, as may be seen in Newcourt's
Repertorium Canonicum, vol. I. and II.

Next to episcopal jurisdiction is to be considered that of the archdeacons,
whose number I have before limited to sixty, but find on a farther scrutiny
they may be enlarged to seventy, or more; for the diocese of London alone has
five, and other dioceses proportionable.

These archdeacons have their visitations twice yearly, viz. at Michaelmas and
Easter, both which afford them plentiful harvests, in their collections of
procurations, synodals, and other profitable perquisities. For,

1. At their Easter visitations, the ministers within their respective
districts pay them synodals, which they denominate their paschal rents, taking
of each person six or seven shillings, some more, some less; for these payments
are not all alike, but, I suppose, raised or lessened according to the value of
the benefice; but none must come empty-handed.

2. At their Michaelmas visitations the same ministers pay their procurations,
some seven or eight, some ten or twelve shillings, some more, some less. But it
is judged, that on a moderate computation, the archdeacons of England do yearly
collect for procurations only, six or seven thousand pounds.

The next jurisdiction to be considered, is that of deans and their chapters.
-- But having already mentioned the several kinds of deans, and the manner of
exercising their jurisdictions, I shall not at present plunge any farther into
this bottomless barathron of ecclesiastical officers, and their rapines; but
beg leave to conclude with the words of a late eminent prelate of the church of
England, viz. Dr. G. Burnet, bishop of Sarum, who, in a familiar discourse with
me on this very subject, freely declared, That the canon law and ecclesiastical
jurisdiction were originally derived from Hell; and that thither it ought to be
sent again: And observing me to be somewhat startled at his words, he continued
thus; A greater than I, even an archbishop (naming Grindal) was also of this
opinion: To which I only add,

Heu! heu! haec e sulphureo font Ecclesiasticorum exurgunt! Vide Mat. Paris,
p. 542. Col. 2.

These observations, I humbly submit to your just and equitable enquiry; and am
(with all due respect)

Your most obedient Servant. W. BOHUN.

From Mr. GAIN'S GAZETTE, Sep. 12, 1768. A KICK for the WHIPPER, No. XVI. By
Sir ISAAC FOOT.
State-quacks (alias Church-quacks) may harangue and swear till they are black
in the face, before they will persuade any to believe that he is in perfect
health, who feels himself sick at heart.

CATO'S LETTERS.
A Catechism, etc.

Quest. WHY does Squire T. pass over No. IX. of the Whig?


A. Because he thinks it (as a Dwarf does a Giant) "utterly unworthy of notice."


Q. What think you of the sense to which the Whig has "perverted the very
harmless passage in the appeal?"


A. I know Dr. Chandler's heart (I dare say) as well as Squire T. or if not,
that he at least ONCE thought of that sense, I dare appeal to his marginal
note, p. 41.


Q. What is it Squire T. calls "a burlesque on scripture.?"


A. A burlesque on Arminianism. --


Q. Why has not he (good man) "patience to read it.?"


A. Because piddling with gnats is dull business for one used to swallow camels.


Q. What seems to have been Squire T's chief aim in his 14th Whig No. 2.?


A. To persuade his readers that there is no considerable uneasiness about an
American episcopate.


Q. What is evident notwithstanding?


A. That the uneasiness is very general, and that Dr. C. is a false prophet.


Q. What does Squire T's attempt in this case resemble?


A. That of a quack who would fain persuade a sick man that he is very well.


Q. Why does he make it?


A. To keep himself and party in countenance.


Q. How do Squire T. and his Diotrephesian brethren probably feel?


A. As angry as furies, at hot headed writers and pragmatical enthusiasts.


Q. Why?


A. Because by "blowing the trumpet of sedition" they have disconcerted their
schemes.


Q. How do Americans at present appear to you?


A. As birds half escaped from the snare of the fowler.


Q. How do you consider Sq. T?


A. As a fisherman angling with a bare hook.


Q. What does Squire T. mean by "open and fair objectors?"


A. Such as make no objections, but those Dr. C. has already most heroically
and victoriously encountered.


Q. What does Dr. C. and he call all others?


A. "Cavillers and sophists."


Q. Do you know any Dissenters really willing to see a right reverend Father in
America?


A. Not a man,


Q. Do you know any church man averse (...) episcopate?


A. A good number (to their credi^ (...) spoken) and I Have reason to believe
there are many.


Q. From his etc. ignorance of "any uneas^ness on the account of the appeal for
some months after its publication" what does Squire T. inser?


A. That it is well known that there was no appearance of any uneasiness at all.


Q. What do you think of the Dissenters Sq. T. speaks of?


A. If there were any who were "easy and satisfied as to the pretended plan
itself, because unaware of the consequences of its execution. I believe they
are by this time uneasy, because fully satisfied that the structure would
probably be very unlike to the model.


Q. What do you think of Squire T's prediction par. 10th?


A. That he will prove a false prophet as well as Doctor Chandler.


Q. What does Sq. T. EUCLIDICALLY infer from the "unusual diffidence" with
which the Whig expresses what he says of churchmen in Virginia?


A. That "he has no evidence to support it."


Q. What therefore is ( according to Squire T.) equivalent to mathematic
demonstration on the contrary?


A. That when the Whig is confident "the consequence is as clear as any in
Euclid," that he has sufficient "evidence to support" his conclusions.


Q. What does Sq. T. mean by lay-churchmen's "understanding the subject?"


A. Entering into the views of the clergy and finding themselves interested in
the episcopal scheme.


Q. Are there many who thus understand the subject?


A. Very few, I believe.


Q. Why so?


A. Because I cannot believe, many of that part of God's heritage are so we
(...) to wish to have a LORD over them.


Q. Have (...) ^iscopal clergymen reasons to fear an epis^^^ (...).


A. No, -- his Lordship, in order to recommend himself to the inferior clergy
of his diocese, would probably be so kind, so clever, and so indulgent as to
give but little reas^^ for complaint. A newly promoted field officer is not ap^
(...) for trifles with subalterns.


Q. Why does Squire T. pretend, that "the clergy of the church of England
choose to have the approbation of the government in all their proceedings?"


A. In order to curry favor with the civil power (to which as AMBASSADORS FROM
HEAVEN they are subject) to represent those of his own party as wondrous loyal,
and others as disaffected republicans.


Q What say you of Sq. T's last paragraph save one?


A. I Have tried it all over, as the Irish girl did her master's fiddle, but like
her, for my shoul, I cannot find where the tune, i. e. where the sense, lies.
The Whig evidently (for argument's sake) supposes the plan executed as
pretended, merely because a more extensive one was found impracticable by
reason of American opposition, and partly on this supposition grounds the
reflections of South Britons, though they would be essentially the same, on the
same supposition, whatever might have been the success of the appeal: So that I
believe it will puzzle others as well as me to find where the tune lies in all
Squire T's fiddle saddle.


Q. Why does he pass over the Whig 's last paragraph?


A. For the same reason that induced him to pass over the whole of No. IX.


Q. What will Squire T. undoubtedly say of you?


A. That I Am a caviller, a sophist, an hotheaded Catechumen, a pragmatical
enthusiast, etc.


Q. What then?


A. Why I shall sleep as sound as ever I did.


From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE, Sep. 19. A WHIP for the AMERICAN WHIG. By TIMOTHY
TICKLE, ESQR. [No. XXIV.]
Because ye have said -- We have made Lies our Refuge, and under Falsehood have
we hid ourselves.

ISAIAH.
To TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQUIRE.
SIR,
THAT the CHURCH labors under a real Hardship, with Respect to Ordination, is,
I believe, sufficiently evident. -- That the Whig and his Confederates, would
fain perpetuate that Hardship, I have demonstrated in a former Letter; and make
no Doubt that it is clear by this Time to every candid and unprejudiced
Enquirer.

The Independants of America, those worthy Imitators of the Pharisees of old,
like them, bind heavy Burdens, and grievous to be borne, and lay them on Men's
Shoulders; but they themselves will not move them with one of their Fingers. --
Had they suffered a Hardship of the same Nature, though infinitely less grievous
than the one abovementioned, how would the Press have groaned with their
Complaints; since even in this Land of Liberty and Toleration, they raise such
violent Clamours, merely because the National Church petitions for those
Peivileges that they already enjoy?

I am far, however, from blaming a just Sensibility of the Grievances we may
suffer; but that very Sensibility ought to give us a Fellow-Feeling for others,
and make us unfeignedly desirous to relieve them.

If we examine the Conduct of the Champions in the present literary Conflict,
who have entered the Lists as Opponents to the Introduction of a Bishop, we
shall find them not aware of this Consequence, or at least, not influenced by
it.

The Hardship which the Church labored under as to Ordination, was evident and
striking -- To invalidate the Argument arising from it, the Whig, with a Degree
of Modesty and Candor unparalled in the Annals of Grubstreet, calls a Voyage
of several Thousand Miles amidst the Wonders and Perils of the Great Deep, by
the diminutive Epithet of, a Trip for Ordination.

"As to the Trip for Ordination (says he) it is far from an Inconvenience;"
that is to say, a long and dangerous Voyage, at a great Expense, if it be
called by the Name of "a Trip for Ordination," changes its Nature, and becomes
"far from an Inconvenience."

Let any one address a Person on the Rack who feels the most excruciating Pain,
and tell him, that the reducing his Limbs to a genteel Position, is "far from
an Inconvenience," and see whether his Anguish will be thereby alleviated, or
he convinced that his Sufferings serve only to reduce his Limbs to a genteel
Position.

And yet, such is the Logic made Use of by the American Whig, in his candid
and judicious Lucubrations, whom I shall leave to enjoy the Wit, (if
peradventure there be any) of the elegant Passage now observed upon --
unmolested and alone.

The Members of the CHURCH indeed, in one Sense, are ready to allow "that this
is far from an Inconvenience;" for they esteem it an intolerable Hardship which
strikes at the very Being of the Church in America.

The Reason assigned why "the Trip for Ordination," is far from an
Inconvenience, is, because, in the Whig's Opinion, "it doubtless conduces much
to the reputable Figure of the Missionaries." -- And why then should not the
Presbyterian, Congregational or Independent Teachers, (call them what you will)
take a similar Trip, since meek-eyed Charity itself, may discern, that many of
them might make a much more reputable Figure than they do at present.

Before I quit the American Whig, give me Leave to mention a Calumny he
introduces, for no other Purpose, but to vilify the Church Clergy -- I mean his
Insinuation, that they preach borrowed Sermons, which false and virulent as it
is, yet, in many Circumstances, easy to be imagined, might be justified to the
World, as well as their own Consciences.

We are told, Sir, in Mr. LIVINGSTON'S manly spirited Letter to the Bishop of
Landaff, that "Recrimination is reputed to be just:" And were I inclined to
recriminate, I doubtless could do it with the greatest Justice. -- I might
represent in striking Colors, the nonsensical Jargon and Cant, too often
thundered out from the Pulpits of extempore Haranguers, to the great Disgust of
all sensible Men, and the prodigious Delight of those who think every Thing
they cannot comprehend, a Miracle of Wisdom and Erudition -- But I spare the
Whig's Favorites, and leave unnoticed their "vain Repetitions," and all the
Rest and Residue of the bright Catalogue of newfangled Ornaments, which
compose their complete System of reformed Pulpit Eloquence. However, as the
Whig does not think "a Trip" across the Atlantic, indispensably requisite for
the Purchase of Second-hand Sermons to qualify a Church Clergyman for the
Exercise of his Function; so I believe nothing else wanting to constitute a
right True Blue Independent Apostle, but a comfortable Stock of modest
Assurance." Of which, "a more than brazen Monument is to be erected," by
liberally dealing out twice or thrice each Sabbath Day, to a gaping Audience,
their own crude and indigested Notions, as the Oracles of Truth, and the
Dictates of Divine Wisdom.

Such are the Whig's Endeavors to surmount the Argument for a Bishop, deduced
from the Source contained in my former Letter -- Let us now see whether any
more effectual have been used by that learned Veteran, Dr. CHAUNCEY.

In his ever memorable Answer to Dr. CHANDLER's Appeal, he upon this Head,
t^^es Notice of four Particulars -- The Danger of crossing the Atlanric -- The
Expense of the Voyage -- The Difficulty of supplying the Church with Clergymen
under these Discouragements: And the Impossibility, that a Bishop residing in
England, should be acquainted with the Characters of those who go Home for
Orders.

As to the first, he observes, that the going to England for Ordination, is
rather an Advantage than a Disadvantage to the Church. That as to himself, he
should esteem it a happy Circumstance in the Case, where he inclined to take
Orders. That many he had mentioned it to, had declared themselves of the same
Mind. And, were it proper, that he could name some Candidates for the Ministry,
who had been tempted by the Professors of the Church, to receive Episcopal
Ordination, with this Motive in special, that they should have a fine
Opportunity to see England.

Without Doubt, we have as much Reason at least to con^^^^ in Doctor Chauncey's
Veracity, as to admire the Whig's i^^pre^^sible Modesty; and therefore, I shall
not dispute, that the Doctor would esteem it "a happy Circumstance" to cross
the Atlantic, were he inclined to take Orders; or that many he had mentioned it
to were seriously of the same Mind; or that some Candidates for the Ministry
had been tampered with to receive Episcopal Ordination, with this special
Motive, "that they would have a fine Opportunity to see England." -- But though
the Doctor and his Friends, as well as the Candidates above mentioned, are
Persons of so much Resolution, that they "esteem it a happy Circumstance," to
face the Dangers of the Ocean, merely to gratify an idle Curiosity; yet he
should consider, that there may be many worthy and learned Men of Episcopal
Principles, and inclined to the Ministry, but not blessed with so much
I^^repidity, who look with Horror upon the "Raging of the Sea," and would
infinitely rather enjoy Tranquillity in some other Profession, than seek for
Orders at the Hazard of their Lives.

It may indeed be imagined, as the Doctor never laid hold of so happy a
Circumstance, when he was inclined to be ordained, which he might very well
have done, since such Ordination as his Sect esteem regular, may doubtless be
procured in Great Britain, that therefore his present Assertion is devoid of
Truth, and only made to serve a particular Purpose. But as the Doctor's
Veracity is not to be questioned, I rather think, that he himself has been
deceived in the present Case; for we often, inadvertently, apply the small End
of the Glass to view Dangers at a Distance, in which we conceive ourselves not
to be interested.

But before I dismiss this Point, permit me to reprimand the Doctor in the
strongest Manner, for calling the Professors of the Church of England, as it
were, propter Excellentiam, Professors of the Church -- A Fault for which he
must have known, Dr. Chandler was severely censured, and which was at least, as
criminal, in the Whig's Opinion, as Sin against the Holy Ghost.

The second Point (viz. the Expense) the good Doctor gets over, by supposing it
to be borne by the Society for propagating the Gospel -- In answer to which, I
shall at this Time, only produce the Words of a late Writer in the present
Controversy -- That the Society (says he) does not bear the Expense of those
who go hence to England for Orders, is a Fact as true, and as well known, as
that England lies on one Side of the Atlantic and America on the other. --
Queen ANNE indeed provided, that the Sum of Twenty Pounds, should be paid out
of the Public Treasury, to such Clergymen as went from England to settle in the
Plantations; and out of this Bounty, Missionaries, I am informed, generally
received somewhat more than Nineteen Pounds. But what is this to the Expense of
a Voyage to England, and another back again?

As to the third Point, the Doctor thinks it sufficient, if he can invent other
probable Causes to account for it, -- To show the Futility of them, would be
too tedious at present. -- But even if we allow them to exist, the Hardships
resulting from the Case of Ordination, must, by all Men of Candor, be allowed
to cooperate with them, and even of themselves, to be sufficient to produce
that Effect.

The fourth and last Point is, the impossibility that a Bishop in England
should be acquainted with the Characters of those who go home for Orders --
Upon this, the Doctor remarks, that the Case would not be altered for the
better, were there a Bishop in America," because, (as he says) "the greater
Part by far of those who would go to him for Orders, would be as unknown to
him, by Reason of their great Distance from his Seat, as to a Bishop in England
-- And besides, he supposes, that a Commissary might as well prevent this
Mischief as Bishops, as far at it can be prevented. -- "But can we imagine,
that a Bishop would be constantly immured at his Seat, (as the Doctor calls it)
so as to receive all his Knowledge of Persons and Characters in the same
defective Way, which he must do in England? May we not rather imagine, that he
would visit, at stated Times, the several Parts of the Continent; and thereby
become acquainted with the Sentiments of the Public, and receive Intelligence,
Viva Voce, from such Persons as were best able to give it? -- By this Method,
almost all Possibility of Forgery and Deception would be prevented: Nay, he
might be able to observe the Conduct of Candidates for the Ministry "from their
Youth upwards," beginning with them at the several Seminaries of Learning where
they are educated.

The Appointment of a Commissary, would be but a bad Succedanium; because the
same dangerous and expensive Voyage would remain, and Credentials, as from him,
might be forged without the Possibility of a speedy Detection; and though the
Fraud might chance not to escape the Bishop of London's Penetration, yet it
could scarce sail of Success, where the Order of Bishops is so numerous as it
is in England.

In short, there is nothing like having the Person who is to ordain, upon the
Spot; where he may "see with his own Eyes, and hear with his own Ears; whereas
when at a Distance he is liable to be imposed upon by a Thousand Artifices.

The Members of the CHURCH do not want, by introducing a Bishop, to procure a
religious Establishment, as Doctor Chauncey declares, and the Whig and Sentinel
impudently assert^ -- If the CHURCH is not already established, that Measure in
itself can never do it -- The Members of the CHURCH are Enemies by Principle to
Persecution; but they will not tamely give up the Rights of Conscience. -- They
cannot sit down quietly, and see the Church insulted and reviled; on the
contrary, they are determined to do themselves Justice by all the Methods of
Reason and Moderation; and above all Things, to "hold fast steadfastly the
Profession of their Faith,"

These are the Sentiments of all true CHURCHMEN, and these will ever be the
Sentiments of,

Sir, Your most obedient humble Servant, ROGER DE CHAMP.

AN ANECDOTE, Humbly addressed to Sir ISAAC FOOT.
AN impudent dirty Fellow, once struck Socrates with his Hoof. -- The Friends
of that great Man, wondered to see him put up with such an Insult without
showing any Resentment. -- What! (says he calmly) if an Ass kicks me, shall I
be Fool enough to kick him again?

The learned Reader, if I mistake not, will find this Story in Diogenes
Laertius, and Sir Isaac may see it in HAYS'S Essay on Deformity.

A.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Sep. 19. The AMERICAN WHIG, [No. XXVIII.]
THE nature of Christianity, and the errand and duties of a minister of the
gospel considered, what an be more manifest than that the thirst of the clergy
after civil authority must be both mischievous and criminal. They are sent out
to beseech Men to be reconciled unto God; and the success of their negotiations
depends upon the harmony of their lives with principles of the most exalted
refinements. -- Principles utterly inconsistent with the pursuit of worldly
pleasures and the intangling cares of the magistracy.

Suppose for instance that Dr. Chandler's little flock at Elizabeth-Town,
should consist of but five hundred souls; I venture to affirm, that the
conscientious discharge of his duty scarce leaves him time for common
recreation. Besides what he owes to himself as a Christian (and the best may
cry out, who is sufficient for the spiritual warfare?) how immense the load
induced by his office of a shepherd, who watches for their souls! -- I shall
say nothing of the painful pursuits of his studies, his public exercises in
season and out of season, his catechitical lectures and periodical attendances
at his chamber as a Ductor Dubitantium, to solve cases of conscience: -- His
parochial visits alone open to view a field of labor that must make any
minister tremble who would not have the blood of his people found in his
skirts. The pastoral care is to extend to all; some are to be instructed and
others reproved. -- The incautious are to be admonished, the sluggish to be
quickened -- Encouragement must be applied to the faint-hearted; and the
backslider, if possible recovered. In a word, as the variety of their cases is
endless, so are his fatigues, each demands skill and address, and some will
pierce a tender heart with the most pungent distress. What a task to stand
ready for sick and death bed calls! How is the presumptious to be convinced?
who can sap the delusive hopes of hypocrites, and support those of the dying
tymid believer? But I forbear, the anxieties of the pious minister must be
inconceivable: And charged with duties so various, what can be more absurd and
cruel than to increase the burden by civil concerns foreign to his function?
What more mischievous than to abate his industry in so glorious a work, by the
intoxications of worldly wealth and honor? Such a good shepherd the Doctor is
or ought to be. -- And seems it not strange then to find him contending for the
investiture of the clergy with powers repugnant to their offices? Conceiving,
as it was natural, that the bishops whom he is desirous of having in this
country, might meet with preferment to civil trusts, and the clergy under their
patronage be constituted judges and justices; and that the colonies might
thence take an alarm; he endeavors to justify such appointments, and two pages
of his appeal are devoted to obviate objections to a measure for which fifty
thousand volumes would be utterly insufficient; since reason, revelation and
the experience of all nations conspire to teach us the lesson, that nothing can
be more dangerous to church and state, than the participation of the clergy in
the power of the magistrates. -- Of all orders they are most prone to
persecute. -- Such is the sect. -- It stands recorded in the history of the
world, in characters of blood. -- The nature of their creeds makes no
difference. -- In this respect the poet asserts, an undeniable truth, that
priests of all religions are the same. -- Nay, the Christian clergy seem to
have surpassed the Pagan priesthood, as much in their cruelties, as in the
refined morality they were sent out to inculcate. Power in the hands of
ecclesiastics, raised antichrist in the very bosom of the Christian church; and
if we may judge from what is past, civil authority can never be entrusted to
the clergy with safety to the people. It is far from the author's design to
depart from the honor due to the heralds of the religion of Jesus, who as such
deserve the highest respect: The clergy can boast, and I confess it with
pleasure, the most distinguished ornaments of humanity. The delegation of civil
power to their class, has nevertheless ever proved unfriendly both to religion
and the common weal, and the reason is as obvious as the fact incontestible.
Secluded from the world, and ignorant of mankind, (I speak of them as a body)
they grow sour and vindictive, over-rate their order, are impatient of
opposition, and enemies to freedom of thought. -- Being intriguing,
speculative, systematical and enterprising, they are always an overmatch for
the vulgar; and by the advantage of their numbers, and the devotion of their
weak and bigoted adherents, naturally acquire a dominion the more to be
feared, as their operations proceeding upon the flattering principles of
advancing the glory of God, and the good of souls, rarely cease until an
implicit submission to their opinions is extorted. -- All devotees contract
more or less of the spirit of persecution. -- But from circumstances of
condition, education and interest, the clergy acquire the greatest proportion
of it -- All sects will persecute. The persecuted if lifted to power will
persecute in their turn. The clergy are sure prompters; and it is worth a
remark, that when the people of New England, who were persecuted out of
Old-England, persecuted the Quakers, they were in a manner ruled by their
ministers. -- And if this most peaceable of all sects had the same
opportunities, and a clergy to stimulate them, overcome by the passions and
infirmities common to fallible mortals, they would doubtless revenge the
oppressions which their ancestors have felt both in Europe and America. The
losses of the Quakers, by tithes and church-rates, in the mother country,
notwithstanding our progress in toleration-principles, amounted the very last
year to J. 3469 sterling. -- See Gaine's Mercury, for the 29th of August, 1768.
It ought therefore to be the maxim of all states, and especially of a
Christian state, and above all of weak province connected as ours are, and
contending for the preservation and establishment of our liberties, to confine
men who have so often abused the powers committed to them, to a dependence upon
the laity, and to such a proportion of wealth as will be a decent provision,
but ever prevent them from mounting the ladder of civil promotion.

To dispel our fears, Doctor Chandler tells us, that if the government should
invest the bishops with SOME DEGREE of civil power WORTHY THEIR ACCEPTANCE, it
is inconceivable that any should thereby be injured. Upon being so invested, he
supposes the inferior clergy will become justices and judges of the quorum, and
alleges it would make no difference to the parties concerned in their
proceedings, whether they were laymen or clergymen; and adds, " So if bishops
should be invested with a PROPORTIONABLE degree of civil authority, neither
could there be ANY GREAT reason for complaints:" -- Appeal, 110, 111.

As the delusive mincings of this see-saw canting pamphlet have been already
exposed, I shall not stop to remark upon the qualifying and evasive words some
degree, proportionable degree, worthy of their acceptance, and any great
reason, all doubtless artfully designed as so many loop-holes to creep out at,
but proceed to examine what effects this prelatical doctrine would probably
have in the plantations. Let us make the experiment first in the province of
New York.

Here are above one hundred thousand as happy subjects as any upon the face of
the earth, and the more so, for being split into many different protestant
denominations. We live here in Christian fellowship, and the liberty and peace
of the gospel. -- In this delightful branch of the empire, the rights of
conscience are shackled by no religious test laws. -- Every loyal protestant is
a candidate for public honors; can offer his service, and receive the rewards
and munificence of the crown. -- whether of one denomination or another, he is
exposed to no penalties on the score of his religion, but being left to the
unbiassed dictates of his own conscience, may worship God as he pleases. -- No
sect has a general odious pre-eminence, and without establishments, tithes or
church-rates (a small tax not universal only expected) we abound with churches
and places of worship, beyond the censure even of the bishop of Landaff; have
raised them by our own free and voluntary contributions, and without the
compulsion of laws, maintain a clergy, proportioned to our numbers, and but for
a few instances, as unexceptionable as any in all Christendom.

Thanks to the wisdom and policy of our Dutch ancestors, for this happy
exemption from penal and persecuting laws, and the glorious liberty we enjoy.
If the first settlers of this colony, who were all of the national reformed
church of the United Netherlands, had been bigots to their own persuasion, it
would often, in ancient days, have been easy for them to take advantages of
necessitous Governors; and procure, if not acts unfriendly to Christian
liberty, at least discriminating immunities, and ill-policied endowments, out
of the vacant lands of the crown. -- But inspired by the principles of generous
toleration, they contented themselves with the says of the English nation, in
the capitulatory articles at the surrender by which they asked nothing but the
liberty of conscience, in worship and discipline, -- and though once worried and
trapanned by a bigoted governor, into a law that exposed themselves and their
posterity (not excepting their own clergy) to a perpetual tax in four counties,
levied for the use of clergymen, of whom, some at least, as missionaries of the
society for propagating the gospel, were at the same time receiving support,
like objects of charity, out of a fund raised by the alms of the people of
England. -- I say, all this notwithstanding, they scorned to resent the
provocation, have seen, without envy, the distinguishing liberality of Fletcher
and Cornbury, to a sect fed out of their own bowels, and even in its infancy,
aspiring at a pre-eminence: And though in a subsequent period, by the
devolution of the command upon President Schuyler, the whole legislative
authority was in the hands of the Dutch; yet so far from making reprisals, they
have not even attemping the repeal of the church-tax; but only avoided a
repetition of that error. And to their wisdom and generosity we owe that influx
of protestants, which adds daily to our prosperity, and is so necessary to the
cultivation, and so advantageous to the landed interest of the colony.

But to whatever cause our liberty and felicity is to be ascribed, certain it
is, that the permanence and security of both greatly depend upon the partition
of power, among our various denominations, and the wisdom and impartiality of
the government. With two of the three branches of the legislature, in favor of
the episcopalians; I mean the governor and council, who are generally of that
persuasion, and with the power of the crown and the nation, to protect them;
that sect has such a bulwark of defense, that every step taken to increase
their security, ought to be considered as a demonstration, that not their own
safety, but mischief to other, is the true end in view. -- The strength of the
Dutch, and other non-episcopalians, consists in their power to maintain a
majority in the assembly. To which, as contributors of near nine tenths of all
taxes, they ought to be ever attentive; and more especially, now measures are
pursuing by the episcopal clergy, to wriggle themselves into power. -- What!
shall the protection of the governor and council, of king, lords and commons,
be an insufficient security to the episcopal churches, and all the other
protestants in the colony be thought unconscionable, in opposing a project that
tends to deprive them of their weight in one single branch of the legislature?
though this, under God, is the main, if not the only security they have for the
glorious religious liberty they at present enjoy. -- If ever a bishop drives
his gilded equipage in our streets, and shares in the public councils of the
colony, and the missionaries are judges and justices in the counties, who, but
the learned Doctor of Elizabeth-Town, cannot foresee the most tragical
consequences, from such a priestly mixture of power? Let us mention a few of
the innumerable complaints to which it will infallibly give rise. -- And,

1. As a bishop at the council board, with the clergy as justices and judges of
the quorum, and all their dependent bigots in his train, and the interest of
the reverend bench in England on his side, will instantly possess a power, at
which every governor, and especially a necessitous one, will tremble; two
branches of our legislature must fall a sacrifice to priestcraft, and every
measure of government thenceforth be dictated by ecclesiastical zeal. -- A
bishop upon such ground, will be more than mortal, if his pride and haughtiness
is not excited; and that governor and council possess an uncommon spirit of
courage, who dare to check the insolence of a priest, whose influence will be
sufficient by a single letter, to reduce them to po^itical non entities. -- And
here, good Doctor, what a source for complaints have you overlooked!

2 With such an ascendency in the prelates (which would be greater here than
that of all the bishops put together in England) and the lower clergy for
judges and justices in our counties; can any man but Dr. Chandler, be so betle
eyed, as not to see, that the people immediately concerned in their
proceedings, may be far otherwise affected, than if they were mere laymen?
Will those motly compounds of Moses and Aaron, possess such angelic perfection,
that no man, not even an anti-episcopalian, will ever have any great cause to
complain? -- The Dr. indeed may be conscious of his own impartiality, and
fitness to determine a controversy between one of his churchwardens and a
lay-elder of the Presbyterian conventicle at Elizabeth-Town; but all who are
strangers to the rectitude and internal operations of his mind, would be apt to
think the cause in the hands of a worthy lay-justice, upon a more eligible
footing; and that as but few of the missionaries can pretend to the
qualifications which have rendered the Dr. so famous, complaints against the
judgment of such ecclesiastico-political judges, would be neither few nor
ill-grounded.

3dly, If the places of honor not military; for it is not proposed at present,
as far as I am informed, that the clergy should have any command as officers in
the militia; I say, if the only places of honor and profit are to be committed
to the clergy, what short work will such powerful election-jobbers have, in
securing the voices for the choice of an Assembly man? Only suppose then, the
new bishop concerned in a plan with the enemies of America, in the mother
country; (which is no improbable supposition) and the colony legislature at his
back, and ideas present themselves that fills the mind with consternation and
horror.

4thly, Though a dabbler in politics may apprehend no mischief of this kind, it
is most of all to be wondered at, that an endoctorated divine should be so
blind as not to foresee any great complaints neither from men of honor and
justice, or of real and undissembled piety, even of his own denomination. --
Will not a resort to the bishop's palace at New York or Albany, for the purpose
of pleasure, preferment and intrigue, occasion their non-residence at their
cures? -- And are not their flocks in danger of being unfed, and exposed by the
prostitution of their time and talents, to affairs of private litigation, the
commitment and punishment of felons, the indemnity of the parish from bastards,
and that infinity of business, which our laws have committed to justices of the
peace, and especially to those of the quorum.

Let these hints suffice for the present, to refute the pernicious doctrine of
the appeal. -- A doctrine that will, if carried into practice, give rise to
complaints from all quarters. -- The Doctor can see no very great reason for
any, but though his pamphlet is recommended by a round allegation, that "nothing
has been asserted in the course of his work, but what he believes upon good
evidence to be true," yet thousands are apprehensive of complaints, from all
parts and denominations, not excepting even the Prelate and the Doctor himself.
-- A project that will fill us with jealousies, and tend to subjugate us to the
most merciless thraldom, will first excite the complaints of the people, and
then end in an enquiry for which the author and the instrument will doubtless
have reason to complain, both of themselves and each other.

If the Doctor had any view of this, it appeared to him afar off, and hence
perhaps the information to his superiors that the present time, of all others
best savoured his scheme. -- But the most urgent motive was omitted, to wit,
that the Americans had as yet no rich independent Barons as in the mother
country, to curb the new prelates and keep them to order, but for this very
reason (a reason not proper to be even hinted in the appeal) every real
Christian, -- every son of liberty, ought to stand upon his guard, and protest
against the investitures of the clergy with powers so repugnant to the pure and
holy religion we profess. Security against this fruitful source of distress we
demand; but it is so far from being offered, that the very advocate for an
episcopate not only confesses this possible, that his bishops may acquire civil
powers and preferments, but very sagaciously, and doubtless keeping the grand
end of his appeal in sight, pleads for the distribution of a share, not only to
their lordships the bishops, but to their inferior clergy. We see then what
kind of primitive episcopacy America is to be blessed with, had some men their
aims.

The KICK for the WHIPPER, No. XVII. being in Dutch is omitted in this Place,
But if a Translation can be procured, will be added at the End of the Volume.

From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE, Sep. 26, 1768. A WHIP for the AMERICAN WHIG. BY
TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR. [No. XXV.]
They Grin like a Dog, and run about through the City.
DAVID.
THE XIVth Number. of the American Whig consists of a very curious Letter, ushered
in by a very furious Introduction. What it was, that added this extraordinary
Degree of Acidity to the native Sourness of the Whig's Temper, is but little to
the Purpose. Chemists tells us, that Acids when mixed with Alkalies, i. e. with
Things of a Nature contrary to their own, produce the most furious and
distructive Fermentations. Possibly our Whig had seen a Tory, a Jacobite, or
what is ten times worse in his Opinion, a good honest CHURCHMAN: -- Possibly
Conscience -- a Thing as opposite to the Nature of a thorough Whig, as Alkalies
to Acids -- had given him a whipping through one of my Papers, for the many
base Designs that he is by every Art carrying on, to the great Disturbance of
his Majesty's liege Subjects. -- But however uncertain we may be with Regard to
the Cause, the Effect is evident: A most furiously flustratious Ferment seized
him, which spent itself in foaming, fuming, and fretting, against every Person
that has so much Regard to Truth and primitive Christianity, as to open his
Mouth, or use his Pen, in Defense of the venerable and Apostolic Order of
BISHOPS, and in Support of the natural, civil and religious Rights of the
CHURCH in America. All such Persons are by him denominated shameless
Scribblers, -- Scribblers, who in open Defiance of all Modesty and Decorum, are
engaged in perverting Truth, propagating Falsehood, out-raging common Sense, and
abusing without Offense given, the most numerous Denomination of Christians in
this Province.

Would not a Person who knew nothing of our Whig, but what might be gathered
from this Sentence, be led to consider him as a very bashful, shamefaced sort
of a Man, who had never scribbled in his Life! -- One, that had monopolized all
Modesty and Decorum; to that there was not a Grain in the whole Province, but
what was in his Possession? One, that never was engaged in perverting Truth,
and propagating Falsehood? -- And would not the Person, who should make these
Conclusions, be most abominably mistaken? -- Of all Men in the World the Whig
should have been the last, to have mentioned scribbling as a Mark of Reproach;
or noticed the Want of Modesty and Decorum in any one; or any Thing about
perverting Truth, or propagating Falsehood: -- For what Scribbler is more a
Scribbler than himself, or more shameless? -- Who ever wrote more "in open
Defiance of all Modesty and Decorum? -- Who was ever more laboriously diligent
in torturing and "perverting Truth." and "propagating Falsehood," than the
American Whig? -- Name the Man, et eris mihi magnus Apollo.

What the Whig means by "out-raging common sense," I confess I know not. Had he
given us a little more common Sense, and a little less Rage, possibly I should
have understood him better: But to his and my Misfortune, the Ebullition of the
Ferment of his Brain, has been so superlatively flustratious, that his Rage
has run away with his common Sense, just as honest Teague's Legs ran away with
their Master.

I come now to the Letter, which this flustratious Introduction presents to us,
as the genuine Production of a Member of the Dutch Church. The Dutch and
English Churches in this Province, have ever been mutually happy, in the good
Understanding that has subsisted between them, and I hope ever will subsist;
notwithstanding the vile Endeavors of the American Whig, and his Tools, to sow
Jealousies and Animosities in the Breasts of these two Sisters.

When I said in a former Paper that the Power of Ordination in the Church of
Holland, was confined to the Classis, and was not given to every ordinary
Pastor, I said it upon the Authority of a Person, whom I know to be every Way
qualified to judge of the Truth of what he affirmed; and utterly incapable of
saying in this Case, what he did not know to be true. -- But -- waving all
other Arguments, and Assertions, let us come to the Matter of Fact. -- If the
ordinary Pastors of the Church of Holland have the Power of Ordination,
distinct from the Classis, how comes it, that the Dutch Ministers in this
Province do not ordain? If it be said, that there have been Instances of their
ordaining. -- I beg to be informed, whether a Schism does not subsist in the
Dutch Church, upon that Account, among others?

With Regard to the Church of England's unchurching all the Protestant Reformed
Churches, I again deny it. On the contrary, she has ever looked upon them with
the most friendly Regard, and has given them all the Assistance that has been
in her Power. She settled her own-Church Government, as she supposes, upon the
sure Word of God, and left others to judge for themselves.

Whatever is darkly, or not fully expressed, in the Writings of the inspired
Penmen of the New Testament, is best explained by the Practice of the Primitive
Christians -- and their Practice can be known only from Ecclesiastical History.
Now, besides the Testimony of the Holy Scriptures in favor of Episcopacy, we
have the joint Practice of the universal Christian Church, from the Apostles'
Days, 'til within a little more than Two Hundred Years. The Argument, from the
Practice of the Primitive Church, is just as strong in Favor of Episcopacy, as
it is in Favor of the First Day Sabbath, or Lord's Day; or as it is in Favor
of Infant Baptism, or admitting Women to the Lord's Supper. When therefore, our
Adversaries will produce a plain, positive Text of Scripture, enjoining the
baptizing of Infants, or the observing the first Day of the Week, as a Day of
public Worship, or for admitting Women to the Lord's Supper; then I will
produce as plain and as strong a one in Favor of Episcopacy. -- And when the
Church of Scotland will prove her Kirk Sessions, her Presbyteries, her
Provincial Synods, her General Assemblies, to be jure divine, -- and if they
are not jure divino, they are mere Creatures of the State, and owe their Being
to Acts of Parliament -- I will then prove, that Spiritual Courts are jure
divino.

But if the Dissenters, either in England or the Colonies, think they stand
upon the same foot of Innocence, in their Separation from the CHURCH, that
Foreign Protestants do, in departing from the Mode of Worship, etc. established
in England, they are much mistaken. The Charge of Schism, in dividing and
rending a National Reformed Church, without any tolerable Reason, will be their
lasting Reproach in this World; and, it is much to be feared, the Condemnation
of some of them in the World to come.

The Church, it is true, holds and teaches the Necessity of an uninterrupted
Succession of Ordinations -- from the Apostles, in order to qualify any Man for
the Christian Priesthood, or Ministration: And if any Persons, who are
conscious that their Ordinations are in this Respect irregular and defective,
will fly to the Consequences, and talk of being unchurched, unchristianed, etc.
I cannot help it. I unchurch nobody: But what Truth will do, concerns them much
to inquire.

This Writer seems to define a Church -- for he is seldom clear in his
Expressions -- to be the "Members of the visible Church of Christ," --
"assembled for the public Worship of God;" -- and accuses me of unchurching the
Baptists, Presbyterians, etc. because I do not call their Meeting Houses
CHURCHES; and of unchurching the Dutch-Church, because I do call the Houses
where they meet CHURCHES. But I repeat it, I have unchurched no one; I have
only honestly spoken the Truth; Have called my own CHURCH by its proper Name;
and the other Denominations of Christians, by those Names, by which they
originally distinguished themselves: And if they choose to alter their Names,
must I be at the Trouble of learning a new Vocabulary?

But howeve^ unwilling this Writer is to be unchurched himself; he has with a
Stroke of his Pen, unchurched the Church of Rome, and made it "a Synagogue of
Satan." -- But if the Church of Rome has "ceased to be a Church of Christ, and
is become "a Synagogue of Satan," with what Propriety are the Protestant
Churches called reformed Churches? -- Can a Synagogue of Satan be reformed into
a Church of CHRIST? -- I trow not. -- If this Writer has expressed himself
properly, the Protestant Churches ought to have been called Newformed, instead
of Reformed; -- A Term that would suit our English Dissenters -- I mean no
Reflection on any others -- much better than any they have ever yet had the
Honor of conferring upon themselves.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Sep. 26. The AMERICAN WHIG, [No. XXIX.]
The necessity of American bishops from the want of confirmation considered. --
AS my controversy is not with the church of England, but with those of the
bigots of that communion, who contend for an American episcopate; I have,
through the whole course of these papers, avoided to oppugn any tenet or
ceremony held by episcopalians, except in those instances in which the great
champion for the convention has rendered it absolutely necessary, by inducing
therefrom an argument in favor of his darling project. For this reason, I
should deem ^t no concern of mine, did every man in America, think proper to
have himself confirmed every day of the year. But is confirmation urged as an
argument for introducing spiritual lords into his Majesty's dominions, and
represented as Dr. Chandler does, in a sense not held by the church to which he
belongs; the refutition of it falls directly within any province, and I shall
accordingly consider it, without the least intention of giving offense to any
man, and caring very little what offense is taken at it, by those who have
lately thought fit to urge it in their sermons, in order to disquiet weak
minds, and increase the party in favor of an American prelate.

As ambition ever wants a ladder to climb to dignity, it is not wonderful to
find a certain set of clergymen in this country, so fond of introducing the
hierarchy among us. Could their aspiring views be gratified without danger to
the religious liberties of millions, we should make no objections; but until
they have convinced us, by demonstrative arguments, that an episcopate upon the
English plan, will not be productive of the like events in America, which it
has produced in England, we shall never cease to oppose, as men, who have at
stake the most invaluable of all priveleges on this side of Heaven; in which
opposition we are sure of forty-five fiftieths of all America to back us.

Doctor Chandler and his brethren are sensible that one of the most successful
artifices to blind the populace, is to persuade them, that without such a
dignitary they must want some privilege essential to their salvation; or at
least to their advancement in religion. To this purpose the want of
confirmation is urged as a grievance, only to be moved by his Lordship's
arrival. And indeed if the people are convinced that they cannot be confirmed
in possession or enjoyment of the gifts and graces of our divine religion,
without the laying on of the hands of a prelate; if the sanctifying, if the
quickening, nay, if the smallest degree of the preventing and comforting
influences of the sacred spirit, is confined to the hands of a bishop, or
conferred by this boasted rite, I applaud the convention in their pursuit of a
mitred apostle. -- No temporal good bears any proportion to this spiritual
blessing; and we might cheerfully consent to the loss of many privileges could
we thereby obtain men of such extensive power and utility.

But I fancy there are few of the sensible episcopalians themselves in this
country, so much the dupes to priestcraft, or so ignorant of their bibles, as
not to know that there is not the least shadow of such a thing in the sacred
volume. And does the Doctor himself really believe, that the gift of the holy
spirit in any kind or degree, is in this our day, conferred by the hards of a
man? Can it be imagined by any rational creature, acquainted with the economy
of our religion, that the preventing and saving operations of the almighty
spirit, ever were, or now are at the disposal of a bishop? -- That they may be
conferred by a worm of the dust when he pleases? Were this the case, adoration
itself would only be a sufficient honor paid to his Lordship whenever he came!

Will the Doctor answer us, that though the holy ghost is not in reality conveyed
by that means, it is nevertheless appointed as a sign of its actual conveyance
to the person confirmed, "to certify him of God's gracious favor and
goodness?" We cannot but ask whether the bishop is to certify this to all,
without distinction, or to those only who make the profession with sincerity?
If only to the latter, he had need to be the searcher of hearts, to be sure
that they are sincere: If to all without distinction (as is usually done) though
many are most insincere and ungodly, then he certifies to them a falsehood. Nor
can we suppose that God ever gave him power to ratify and confirm that, as a
fact, to any one, which in most instances must prove false, and in all is
uncertain.

Will it be said, that the imposition of hands is only a sign to signify the
giving the holy ghost, to enable us to fulfill the condition of the gospel
covenant? Then is this rite erected into a sacrament of equal importance with
baptism itself; and the church of England has at least three sacraments; for
her own definition of a sacrament is an outward and visible sign of an inward
and spiritual grace, given unto us, ordained by Christ himself, as a means
whereby we receive the same, and a pledge to assure us thereof. But I can as
easily believe that there are seven sacraments, as that there are three.

I wish the Doctor had been a little more explicit, and told us distinctly,
what he means by confirmation, and what end it answers. He has, it is true,
given us a sketch of the confirmation office, by which to guess it out; but
that is as confused as his own description. However on reading the 23d page, or
thereabouts, it would appear to us, that the most important part of
confirmation is, the conferring of the holy ghost by the imposition of hands,
not in his miraculous influences, which he thinks are ceased, but in his
sanctifying and preventing influences. Now though the bare mention of such a
thing is shocking; yet with Americans, with a knowing, an enquiring people,
this is urged as an argument for the necessity of prelatical bishops in this
country: How greatly to be deplored the unhappy fate of America, that for near
two ages its numerous inhabitants have been deprived of the mercy of a bishop's
hand!

But the Doctor's notion of confirmation differs from that of the church of
England herself -- his arguments are insufficient -- the thing is inconsistent
-- and as practiced in the church of England, pernicious. If I prove these
things, I hope the good people of this country will not be distressed in their
minds for want of an episcopate on this account.

1. The Doctor's notion of confirmation differs from that of the church of
England herself. She only goes so far as to say, that It has been a solemn
ancient and laudable custom continuing from the apostles times. But the Doctor
is wiser, and adopts bishop Taylor's assertion, that it is an holy rite, a
divine ordinance. Now in spite of the Terminus a quo, or any other ill-quoted
scrap of school divinity, I am obliged to conceive that there is a wide
difference between an ancient custom, however laudable, and a divine ordinance.
For an ordinance I humbly conceive we must find some plain appointment in
scripture; and not receive any thing as such, merely because uncertain
tradition, or the history of the ancients, informs us that it was a custom in
primitive times. If it is an ordinance of God, pray tell us where it is
ordained in the word of God; and think not, good Doctor, that we shall take it
upon St. Jerome's word, and his infamous misapplication of that passage in the
Acts, any more that we shall take it upon your own assertion. That the passage
in Acts is infamously misapplied, we shall presently evince. That the
sacrament, word and prayer, are divine ordinances, no one can properly dispute,
because they are plainly ordained in the scriptures. But where do we find the
institution of confirmation according to the Doctors's notion of it, which must
be more important than ever I conceived any of the sacraments to be?

Had the first reformers of the church of England, who composed the office of
confirmation, intended to have it understood as a divine ordinance, they would
have called it so, in plain terms, and not left the Dr. such hard labor to
prove that they meant so. But as far as I can see, they never had any such
meaning, and he has plainly perverted their intention. It is well known, that
none of the reformed churches did at first admit it as a divine institution;
and none but the church of England, paid so much respect to the church of Rome,
as even to retain under the notion of a laudable custom, what that mistress of
harlots had taught as a divine ordinance. Nay, many of the wisest Romanists
themselves did at the time of the reformation, give up its being an ordinance
of divine right; as may be seen in the history of the Council of Trent. Nor had
it any longer been retained in the Romish church, had not the influence of the
Pope carried it, being thereto incited by a fear of hard imputations upon the
infallibility of the Roman see. But the Doctor and his high-flying fraternity,
are for going back, instead of advancing in reformation. Instead of joining his
church in calling it only a laudable custom, he asserts it to be a divine
ordinance.

It seems that it was in St. Jerome's day a laudable custom for ministers of the
gospel, or bishops to go abroad to catechize all who had been baptized, and to
implore a blessing upon them in a solemn manner when he had done. That this was
a laudable and ancient custom we do not dispute; and indeed the same custom is
practiced in all churches more or less to this day. Nay would our zealous,
humble and painful episcopal clergy, instead of waiting for the bishop, do more
of this kind, it would be no harm. If this is what is meant by confirmation,
and this is all that was anciently meant by it, as far as I have been able to
trace it; I cannot see why the common Presbyter may not do it; or to what
strange cause it is to be ascribed that the whole of this useful custom is
monopolized by the diocesan bishops

I do not object to the ancient and laudable custom, of catechizing young
persons, and asking a profession of their faith or assent to their baptism,
before they come to the sacrament of the Lord's supper. This sort of
confirmation is well enough; but none suppose a mitred bishop essentially
necessary to this. And as to the posture in which a blessing was anciently
implored by the bishops, whether it was by laying on of hands. -- by holding
them erect, or only over the head; what is this to us, while God has left us to
choose in the matter that posture which to us appears most solemn and
convenient? If there is any divine institution of a posture, let it be
produced. But if none, as the ancient ministers of the gospel used their
liberty, so let us. -- But when St. Jerome gives to any peculiarities of a
custom the force of a divine command; and that only because it was unniversally
consented to in the church; we must differ from him, and not take the name of a
saint for an argument, If universal consent of a church to a thing proves it to
be a divine institution; the giving the Lord's supper to infants was by divine
institution, for the Doctor can probably inform us of the time when this gross
absurdity was generally consented to throughout the Christian world.

The truth is, it was customary in the primitive times to catechize, to ask a
profession of their faith, or an assent to their engagements in baptism. In
process of time this assent came to be called confirmation, as therein the
catechumen did confirm and bind himself a new. -- The bishop did afterward
usually pray for a blessing upon them; as is usually practiced in all churches;
and this he did in that posture which to him appeared proper. This was the
ancient and laudable custom; and as long as it continues under that name and so
practiced, we have no objections. But superstition, ever fond of erecting any
good custom into an ordinance to be of as much force as any of the positive
institutions of Christ, first gave this the name of a divine ordinance, then
made it one of the seven sacraments. The act of the catechumen in assenting to
his baptism, was the confirmation: But the fondness of bishops to assume
importance, led them to teach, that the more essential part of confirmation was
the imposition of their important hands; as if this was the ratification of the
covenant, and the holy spirit deseended somehow through their consecrated arms.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Sep. 26, 1768 A KICK for the WHIPPER, No. XVIII.
By Sir ISAAC FOOT.
-- rudis indigestaque moles,
Nec quicquam nisi p^ndus iners --
OVID. ff

PANDECTS.
THE Whig No. XVI. is really such a poor little thing that it is almost a pity
to kick it, -- I must give it (poor thing!) a touch or two with my toe however.

She, who in England sits law-dignifi'd among other less numerous and barely
tolerated denominations, may there perhaps be with some propriety called THE
CHURCH; but in this land, the asylum of our ancestors from her severities, to
see a scribbling Bigot arrogantly claim the emphatical Title for an handful of
disseminated episcopal dissenters, (many of them schismaties too) and
impudently wrangle with the original American Churches, because they modestly
claim the common Appellation of Christian Societies, without monopolizing the
virtue of the Popes paw, -- is though to tickle one into a side splitting fit of
Laughter, and must certainly excite the contempt rather than the resentment of
every judicious reader. "Calling Meeting Houses by the name of Churches," Sq.
T. says, "is a very late refinement, and unknown to our forefathers." -- "His
eldest Son," a Boy of 12 years, it seems, "remembers the first of this custom."
-- Observations vastly pertinent, weighty and edifying! to which I beg leave to
add, that (if he has indeed begot Sons) his eldest may possibly be older, than
he imagines.

In charging the Whig so seriously with Plagiarism, he seems to envy him so
ingenious a correspondent as O. W. -- Original or not, Mr. Wheeler's letter and
particularly the mention of a Bribe, seems to have so much affected his
imagination, as to have occasioned a Dream in his 18th No. no less than a
Fortnight after.

In Par. 7th. and 8th. We have a curious proof of episcopal patriotism,
selected from "every page almost of the history of England." Look sharp,
reader, lest you see not the force of the demonstration. -- King James II, a
friend, it seems, to popery, arbitrarily granted a general "Liberty of
conscience." but the Bishops (more averse to protestant schismatics than to
popish bigots, from whom they themselves had in effect schismatiz'd) opposed
the King's tyrannical Indulgence, insisted on the constitutional right of
Persecution, and choose to go prisoners to the Tower, rather than allow
heretics to say, by words or actions, that Episcopacy was not JURE DIVINO,
ergo; They were "warm friends to our constitution and liberties." Q. E. D.

When Pro Aris so ecstatically cried " Joy, Joy, Joy, to his good friend
Tickle," some wags suspect, he was in so comical a pickle, as to need for
himself his whole store of Water. He seems to be a queer chit-chat sort of a
^ellow. vox it praeterea nihil, in his repetitions and abrupt sentences, much
like unto a pretty fellow in green, who often stands chattering at Gentlemen's
windows, to the great amusement of passengers. No farther remarks must be
expected from me, for the reader would certainly think me a goose, if I should
undertake to reason with -- a Parrot.

Roger de Champo (Whip, No. XVII.) gives us to understand, that he is a
Churchman, -- lives in the country, -- and -- SMOKES TOBACCO. His letter
consists chiefly of hackney'd sentiments, trite observations and queries 20
times already answered. His 7th. Par. indeed seems to contain somewhat new and
curious; -- he prays, it seems, "not for the whole catholic Church alone, but
for Jews, Turks and Infidels;' i. e. "for all the race of Adam" Now as we
Independants must not be called "members of the Church" (Whip No. 16.) Roger
doubtless prays for us, either as Jews, Turks or Infidels: under which of these
Characters he remembers us in his prayers, we hope to learn by his next letter
from the verdant vale. But seriously, what could induce this episcopal country
-- smoker, to interfere in the present dispute? Old as he may be, he owns
himself a Novice in controversy, and indeed most readers will (I believe) think
he had better have " devoted the time wasted in a childish effort in favor of
that earthly thing Prelacy (amidst "curling Eddies of smoke") to the
"contemplation of heavenly things."

Sq. T's Advertisement chiefly concerns the Whig; but his Query I shall answer.
Independents are "afraid of imputations of disloyalty" for the same reason that
a person in a clean dress is afraid to jostle a Chimney-sweep; whereas SOME
Churchmen "patiently bear the Apellation of Tories," as a Cook maid in her
dirty garb patiently bears the additional Smut of the oven, the Grate and the
Kettle.

Crabtree Crambo is a gentleman noted for rhime-shackling prose thoughts. As he
has versifyed a late Vote of Thanks, it is hoped he will, for the good of the
public, proceed, and give us a Version of the Newspapers entire, especially
the Advertisements, completely DONE INTO MEETRE. -- One cannot sufficiently
admire the music of some of his Rhymes, particularly in the last couplet,
which ends with fair stones and Bare-bones; and which can be excelled by
nothing but a late M. S. Triplet to his, the harmonious jingle of which is
composed of -- AW GROAN-LAW-TONE and -- JAW BONE. L.

P. S. Just as I had finished the above I was diverted with a 2d. letter from
Roger de Champo; but as he seems not to be in a prating frame at present, find
we must still want for the desired information.

From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE, Sep. 26, 1768. To TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQUIRE
Quid tam temerarium tomque indignum Sapientis Gravitate atque Constantia, quam
aut falsam sentire, aut quod non satis explorati perceptum sit and cognitum
sine ulla Dubitatione Defendere?

CICERO de Natura Deorum.
WITH Impatience Sir, have I waited for a cheerful Compliance with either the
one or the other, of my reasonable Requests honestly proposed to your Candor,
in the Piece directed to you, as the Whipper of the American Whig. I am totally
at a Loss, in what Sense to construe your Silence. Does it insinuate your
improving the relapsed Time in obtaining Proofs, to support the Information
whereon your alarming assertions were founded? Or, your engaging yourself a
Defender both of the Truth of your Information, and the Thereon grounded
Assertions? -- Howsoever this may be, I hope, Sir, you will act the Part of an
honest and impartial Inquirer after Truth.

Permit me, Sir, to make an Apology, (perhaps one will (...) thought necessary)
for my attempting to prosecute the Subject of your Alarming, Amazing,
Yea-stunning Assertions, concerning the Constitution of the Dutch Church, a
little farther. Two particular Things of great Moment with me, urge me to this
Attempt. The one is, That several Persons of different Characters, have of late
been most eagerly engaged to promulge such odd, and against the true
Constitution of the Church of Holland, diametrically repugnant Notions of the
Constitution of the Dutch Church, as will inevitably terminate in its Ruin, if
imbibed and practically observed by the Body of the Dutch Church. -- Several
Things have given these Gentlemen a favorable Opportunity of imposing, not
only upon a Number of respectable Members of the Dutch Church, but also upon
many others. As -- the Infancy of the Dutch Church in these Colonies, which
prevented the Exercise of the whole Extent and Plenitude of its Constitution;
and necessitated it to adopt such Measures of Regulation and Government, as
were adapted to its State and Condition. To this are (...) People accustomed,
and few look any farther for its real Constitution. -- Our Distance from
Holland, where it is fully exercised. -- The little Opportunity the greatest
Part of our People have of reading the Belgic Divines on their Church
Constitution. Considering all these, as abused by Sophistry, with sinister
Views to prejudice People, it appears very probable to me, Sir, that your
positive Assertions, founded on a bare, I am told, will go farther with these
prepossessed Gentlemen, than my Negative can do. I expect therefore, that
neither yourself, nor the respectable Public, will censure me, for my
attempting to reclaim both Truth, and the Church I belong ^o, from the Jaws of
their Devourers!

The other Reason, in Support of my Apology, is, the present Ecclesiastic State
and Condition of the several Denominations in these Colonies. You cannot help
but be sensible, Sir, of the Ecclesiastical Fires kindled in these American
Churches, while you are heating yourself and others by its Flames. Although
both Parties judge it in one Respect or other, unjustifiable; or at least, at
this Juncture, unseasonable: Thus ascribing the cause and origin vice versa,
the one unto the other; The fire is nevertheless burning. Can any one blame me,
a Citizen, if I exert myself in preserving my Interests, consistent with the
Public's, in a general Conflagration of the City? I suppose it is obvious to
every intelligent Reader, that your Description of the Dutch Church was
intended, either to lug it into the Bosom of the Church you belong to, and thus
into the Plan for American Bishops; or at least, to lull it asleep until your
Ends in View were accomplished. With Respect to the Subject of the present
Ecclesiastical Debates, I frankly acknowledge, that it appears to me very
reasonable, that those in America, who are not conscientiously attached to the
Constitution of the Church of England, as by Law established, should be
permitted the Craving of its full Enjoyment here, Provided that it can be
obtained without the Hazard of the Liberties, Privileges and Properties of
their Fellow Subjects. -- I repeat the Proviso! I can never consent to it as
reasonable, that one Denomination should remove many of its Inconveniences, at
the Risque of the Liberties, Privileges, and Properties of other Orthodox
Denominations, much more numerous than itself. I do also sincerely declare,
that my Scruples in this Respect have never been removed by all what I have
seen, either in the Appeal, or other Tracts upon the Subject. Thus I think
myself not justly liable to the Censure of any one, because I would undertake
to unmask the Sophistry calculated to debauch the Members of the Church I
belong to, and prevail with them to promote, in some Respect or other, a Scheme
they would afterward heartily repent of.

You say, Sir, in your No. 8. That the Church of Holland is not Presbyterian,
in the same Sense that the English Dissenters are Presbyterian: I readily
consent to this. And if your Information advanced in Support of this your
Declaration, had been true, I would also have concurred in the former. That it
is nor Episcopal exactly in the same Manner, that the Church of England is
Episcopal. This taken in Connection with the Information given you, that when a
Member of the Classis is ordained, the Powers of Or^ination and Government are
committed to him, but when an ordinary Pastor is ordained no such Powers are
conferred on him, but only the Powers of preaching the Word, and administering
the Sacraments; I say, your former Declaration taken in Connection with this,
plainly insinuates, that the Constitution of the Church of Holland is
Episcopal, although it may differ from the English Episcopal Church, in some
circumstantial Things. Admirable Novelty! Surprising indeed! A spacious Plan of
Church Policy!

A Plan as ridiculous as inconsistent with itself. Here are all the Powers,
Preheminencies, Superiorities, and Authorities, (...) to only claimed by
Bishops, appropriated to a Number of Presbyters, (permit me the Episcopalian
Term) who have never so much as pretended an Episcopal Ordination, or an
uninterrupted Succession. There are above Fifty Presbyters, who belong as
Members to the Reverend Classis of Amsterdam: Do all these collectively
constitute one Bishop? or is every Individual a Bishop? I am sure, Sir, the
Episcopacy you maintain, has much more the Appearance of a Foundation in
Scripture, Antiquity, and Reason, than this.

A Plan (if we may believe Doctor Chandler,) pregnant with unparalleled
Hardships and intolerable Persecutions. For according (...) it, our
Presbyter-Prelatical Superiors are in Holland, perhaps only in Amsterdam. How
much, Sir, are our Difficulties ^gg^^ndized in comparing them with those of
your Church? Consider the greater Difiance from hence; the Restrictions on
Trade with Holland; Thus must Voyages thither be more difficul^, dangerous, and
expensive. But, above all, the People of your Denomination have sanguine
Expectations of a speedy deliverance from their Calamities, by the Arrival of
Bishops; but we can never expect the Classis will embark for America. Must we
then sink in Despair under these our intolerable Calamities?

A Plan, which is entirely inconsistent with the Civil Constitution and
interest of the Empire we belong to. -- Do not those Things, in your
Information appropriated to the Classis, constitute to all Intents and
Purposes, a Prelatical, Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical Pre-eminence, Superiority,
and Authority? This being the Case, how can any Member of the Dutch Church,
maintain that any Classis in a Foreign State has this Pre-eminence,
Superiority, Authority, etc. etc. over so great a Number of his Majesty's
Subjects in these Colonies, and yet take the Oath of Supremacy, as by law
established, without, ipso facto, making himself guilty of a detestable,
Jesuitical, imental Reservation, or downright Perjury? -- I suppose every wise
and prudent State will never esteem it safe to have the Supreme Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, over a considerable Number of its Subjects, lodged and exercised
in a Foreign State. I say no more on this Head. From these Observations it
appears, that if the Dutch Church Constitution, was such as you, Sir, have been
pleased to represent, it could never be legally exercised in these Colonies.

I flatter myself, if I am permitted to lay before the respectable Public, a
true Portrait of the Dutch Church-Constitution, as by Law established in the
United Netherlands, it will appear to be as foreign to this new modeled Plan,
as it is to the Cathedra of St. Peter. What I have to communicate further, I
intend to give it in a brief Sketch; but what I had here previously to observe,
has run me in to such a Length, as calls upon me to desist for the present. I
have only to observe, that I had a View of your Number. 15. and among all the
perfect Gibberish of your old Dutch Correspondent, have seen his Description of
the Dutch Church. Sir, if ever you want an Executioner for Truth and a good
Cause, never employ any other but such Correspondents. Their Propriety of
Speech, proper Method, and manly Arguments, will soon do the Business. --
Future Occasion will perhaps give me an Opportunity of droping a few Remarks on
some Expressions of Mr. Propatria,

I remain, Sir, Your humble Servant, PHILALETHES.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Oct. 3. The AMERICAN WHIG. [NUMB. XXX.]
The conclusion of the Subject began in our last.
2d. BUT the Doctor's arguments in support of confirmation, according to his
notion of it, are insufficient. Let him not take it amiss, when I say they are
perfectly weak. The Testimony of the Church of England, the supposed antiquity
of the practice, and three quotations of scripture, are all he has to produce
on this head.

The testimony of the Church of England, has already appeared to be rather
against him, as she only avows as an old custom, what he insists upon as a
divine ordinance. And pray is there any need of setting America in an uproar,
merely for the support of an old custom, however laudable the Church of England
may think it? Especially when there is no reason assignable, why a Presbyter
cannot answer all the purposes as well as his Lordship? But if the Church of
England did avow it as an ordinance, we are disposed in this country to ask her
for her vouchers.

As to its antiquity, this writer would have us believe, that it was in the
first ages of the Church undisputed -- But what means the Doctor, by such
assertions? Does he suppose, that no one in America can detect him in such
misrepresentations? Does he imagine the knowledge of ancient facts to be wholly
engrossed by him and his fraternity? Let him show us, if he can, the least
mention of this rite in any author before Tertullian. Near the beginning of the
third century that father mentions this among many most absurd and ridiculous
rites, that had already been introduced into the Church. Let him triumph if he
will, in the testimony of St. Jerome, which is still later, and indeed oversets
itself, by its absurd quotation of Acts, as well as by its strenuous arguing
for a rite, for which himself acknowledges there was no occasion, because the
whole world consented.

The ancient good custom which the Doctor would have a divine ordinance, has
been most apparently corrupted by the church of Rome, and adopted by the Church
of England, agreeable to many other parts of their system, in which the clergy
assume to themselves the prerogatives of God.

3. St. Jerome's quotation of that passage in Acts 8. appears full as absurd as
it does in Doctor Chandler's appeal. Be so kind courteous reader, as to take
the New Testament, and for your own satisfaction in this matter, turn to the
14th, 15th and 16th verses of the chapter -- read the whole passage, and then
judge whether there is any thing like confirmation there.

The state of the case is plainly this, -- The gospel had been preached in
Samaria -- many of those mongrel Jews believed it, and were baptized. -- The
apostles hearing this, sent two of their number, Peter and John, to strengthen
them and confer upon them the miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost; and this was
usually done by the 'laying on of hands and prayer.' The effect of which was
that 'they spoke with tongues etc.' By this, they themselves were not only
strengthened, but each private Christian, had thereby the means in his hands of
giving conviction to others. And it is remarkable, that this gift of the Holy
Ghost was sometimes conferred before baptism, as in the case of Cornelius the
centurion, and those who were with him; from which it appears to a
demonstration, that it was nothing like what the C. of England pretends to, for
their confirmation in its very nature supposes baptism to have gone before. In
the instance of Samaria, Simon the magician was a spectator, and forced to
consent to the demonstration of Christianity, given by the miraculous effusion
of the spirit. He had long got his living by sorcery, and now avarice led him
to covet the power exercised by the apostles. He offers money to purchase it,
but only obtains a curse. Now, good Dr. can you imagine, that it was only the
power of conferring the sanctifying or supporting influences of the spirit that
the magician wanted? Was his pious soul so desirous of conveying spiritual
blessings to mankind, that he could not rest without the power of doing it? Was
it then that he coveted the office of a bishop? Sure an inspired apostle, since
that day, commends that covering the best gifts, and particularly the office in
question. And if this was all, you cannot but be struck with horror at that
sentence, "Thy money perish with thee!" Would an apostle have an^thematized a
good man for coveting to be a bishop, and being willing to part with some of
his money for the office? It appears to you, and every man with full evidence,
that he wanted no such thing as the power of confirmation -- he did not want to
benefit the souls of men, by conferring the invisible influences of the
preventing spirit, but it was covetousness that led him to wish for the power
of working miracles, and an ability to convey that power, expecting by this
means to enrich himself. And does it not follow with irresistible evidence,
that it was the gift of miracles here conferred by Peter and John? And when
Simon saw that through the laying on of the hands of the apostles, the Holy
Ghost was given. I entreat Dr. Chandler, I call upon all the hierarchy of
England, to show us how Simon got glasses sufficiently fine immediately to see,
that the Holy Ghost was conferred upon the Samaritans in his gracious and
preventing influence. -- If these are invisible to mortal eyes, I hope we shall
have leave to conclude, that what the sorcerer saw, was that "the gil^ of
miracles was conferred' by their immediate exertion of it. Is the age of
miracles at an end? How infinitely absurd is it then, master appellant, to
bring this instance, to patronize your confirmation! Are Americans so ignorant,
as to induce you to hope for rising to dignity, by imposing upon their
credulity? Show us the bishop vested with like power, to confer the gifts of
miracles, before you appeal to us for the justice of your cause: But with all
the temptation, do not think that we shall even then turn into Simoniacs, and
be willing to purchase the gift of miracles by the loss of our religious
liberty.

As for Acts 19. which is his second text; I remark in the first place, that
the Dr. acknowledges the transaction to be the same in kind with that in
Samaria. -- This concession after what has been said, is enough to show that it
is nothing to the purpose.

The world must own the justice of another remark, i. e. that he has unfairly
s^ppressed the last clause of the verse, which if he had not, he would have
refuted himself. But since he would not recite it, we will do it for him, and
reply no farther.

After they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. And when Paul had laid
his hands on them, the Holy Ghost came on them, and they spoke with Tongues,
and prophesied.

As for the 3d text, where he finds the doctrine of baptism and laying on of
hands, mentioned by the apostles, I have as good a right to apply the laying on
of hands here, to that in presbyter^al ordination, as he has to confirmation.
And if he can find a solid argument merely in the position of the words laying
on of hands, after the word baptism, let it be adduced.

And is this all the foundation, my country men, to build so strange an
ordinance upon? It is all that any man has yet laid. And do you not see, that
this argument to catch your consciences, is nothing more than m^re artifice?
And shall the want of confirmation lead you to consent to the importation of
spiritual tyranny? Pray open your eyes, and judge for yourselves. Does People
in England, who have been confirmed, speak with tongues, and prophesy? Or will
the Doctor's bishop work miracles for you? --

But confirmation as practiced in the Church of England, is not only without
foundation, but inconsistent and pernicious. Inconsistent -- as, though it is
confessed, that the sacraments, and particularly baptism, is a more grand and
important ordinance; yet the ministers of baptism are not allowed to be of
sufficient dignity to administer confirmation.

Pernicious it is, as it leads men to a false security in their sins. After the
catechumen answers, that he assents to the vows made for him in baptism, the
bishop, without regard to his sincerity or insincerity, declares in a solemn
address to God himself, that, he has vouchsafed to regenerate these his
servants, with water and the Holy Ghost; and to give them the forgiveness of
all their sins. Amazing assertion! and by what authority does he declare, that
a particular man's sins are all forgiven? Then laying his hand upon the head of
each, he certifies him by that sign, of God's gracious favor and goodness to
him. But who has told him, that these persons are regenerated and pardoned? Who
gives him power to certify to every one, who comes for confirmation, that he is
in God's favor? Where does he find this ceremony in the bible? The conduct of
most, is sufficient to convince the world that the bishop's declaration is
false. This is pernicious to Christianity itself, among its enemies; but still
more so, to the ignorant, unthinking and selfdeceiving part of the world. They
are taught to look upon the bishop as an ambassador from Jesus Christ, and
successor of the apostles, who knows the will of God. And when they hear this
venerable person, so solemnly declaring that they are regenerated and pardoned,
what wonder if they really think themselves so; and upon these wretched grounds
indulge a confident security of their future happiness?

Americans want no such pernicious bait to poison their soul^ They perish
sufficiently without it!

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Oct. 3, 1768. A KICK for the WHIPPER, No. XIX.
By Sir ISAAC FOOT.
Quicquid delirant reges, plectunt^r Achivi.

HORACE.
THAT Sq. T. is not possessed of Infallibility, is notwithstanding his modest
disavowal, not more evident than that he is also destitute of that Holiness
which is pretended in the Title assumed by the BISHOP of Rome. In his 18th No.
such Weakness and Wickedness as are united, are at once a disgrace, if
possible, to his party, and a scandal to even the little dirty Trick of
scribbling.

Not content with endeavoring to foothe our just fears as to America, he would
fain persuade us that Spiritual Courts are in themselves mighty innocent things
even in England. It Is a wonder he did not likewise fancy, that, if the late
oppressive Acts of P -- rl -- m -- t "deserve all the severe things that are
said of them, it is owing" not to their nature or the M -- y, but to the
Stamp-Masters and Commissioners, and that the Horrors of the Holy Office are
not owing to its constitution, or the Inquisitors, but to the Lawyers. The poor
Lawyers, it seems, must, bear all the blame of Spiritual Courts, and, to
prejudice the public still more against them, our American civil Courts are
^ugg'd into the dispute, and scandalized. His Loyalty forsooth will not allow
him to "imagine" their Inconveniences are owing to their Constitution, and he
dare not impeach the Judges; he therefore again spits his spite at the Lawyers,
as if they could at pleasure interrupt the course of forensi^ justice, as much
as an inconsiderable junto of bigots have lately found means to disturb the
internal peace of America.

Astonishing are Sq. T's Misrepresentations, Par. 6th. He represents the
American Churchman as reflecting on a Christian government, for "depriving a
National Church of a right essential to the Church of CHRIST; whereas he rather
commends the government, for having deprived her of what was only PERHAPS
essential to her well-being, in order to avoid what would have probably
conduced much to her worse-being. -- The Whig also, he THINKS, has in like
manner reflected on "the kings of the house of Hanover." In his 12th. No.
indeed the Whig says, that "the moderation and humanity of our present
sovereign and his predecessors of the house of Hanover, have of late years
restrained, and at present check, High Church fury; but farther, so far as I
can find, says not the A. Whig. So that on the whole, Sq. T. himself has
certainly learned the "scurvy trick of lying for" what -- is not "the Truth."

Of all the grievances urged by Sq. T. Par. 7th, for redress of which he claims
for the CLERGY an uncontrollable right to petition the King, one only is a
grievance peculiar to the Clergy, and, if others bear the expense of their
Trips to London, part of that one only, viz. the Risk of their own dear Flesh
and Blood. So that unless Sq. T. can prove, that they were authorized, not only
by their respective parishioners, but even by a majority at least of America
Church men, he can with scarce greater propriety argue from the supposed
grievances a right in the Convention to petition the King. etc. for a general
American Episcopate, than their right to petition for redress of the grievances
of the Catholic Laity of Canada.

The Clergyman in a neighboring County, whom Sq. T. so maliciously sneers at,
is indeed a candid, catholic gentleman, and therefore (in things indifferent)
can become all things to all men, but is no such Weathercock as many I could
mention have proved themselves; for, though he can easily turn his head to any
scriptural point of the compass, he has always stood immoveably fixed, in spite
of frequent zealous though gentle puffs, from the mouths of some of our late
blustering Episcopalian Bellowers, and never yet veer'd round to Episcopal
Ordination. If Sq. T. indeed believes "that there are ten people of other
denominations who are willing and desirous of having bishops in America, for
one Churchman that is against it," I beg leave to recommend to his serious
perusal II. Thessalonians, ii. chap. 11. ver.

In the honor of the university of Oxford, Sq. T. seems to be more interested
than I am; -- but if the dissenters favored the Measures of K. James II. it
evidently was, because arbitrary as they might be, they at least tended to
knock off the "Fetters" with which, through Episcopal Influence, they
themselves were still shackled; and therefore no wonder they afterward
"shifted about" in favor of the Prince of ORANGE, who they flattered
themselves would, as he soon after his establishment did, grant them the wished
for toleration. If they for certain reasons called the Papists their good
Brethren; tell me, Sq. T. who are they who nowadays, without any such
necessity, treat them as such. Actions speak louder than words, Mr. Whipper.

The pretended letter from the American Whig, is such a stupid unmeaning thing,
that, as it has doubtless excited blushes, for Sq. T. in many of his
fellow-partizans, and the contempt of all his readers, it certainly deserves
from me not one-single syllable by way of animadversion.

A.

ERRATTA.
In the P. S. of our last, -- for prating, read praying.

From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE, Oct. 3. A WHIP for the AMERICAN WHIG. BY TIMOTHY
TICKLE, ESQR [No. XXVI.]
Woe unto them that call Evil Good, and Good Evil; that put Darkness for Light,
and Light for Darkness; that put Bitter for Sweet, and Sweet for Bitter!

The Prophet ISAIAH.
I HAVE heard of a Sort of Men who made it their Business to prove, by Words
multiplied for the Purpose, that White is Black and Black is White, as they
were paid. The Disposition and Talents of the American Whig, are such, as
eminently fit him for this Employment; and was I concerned in a Cause that
needed such Management, of all Persons upon Earth HE should be my Advocate,
provided I was able, or could afford to out-pay my Antagonist. What surprising
Dexterity have we already seen, in the Course of his Papers! And yet Exploits
more surprising than any he has hitherto performed, are still to be expected,
before he retires from the View of the Public. For he has promised not to quit
the Stage until he has demolished every Argument that has been, or can be,
produced in Behalf of American Bishops -- and has shown that the most harmless
Episcopate in this Country, unless NEGROES (aye gentle Reader, NEGROES) be the
Bishops, would have a more fatal Tendency, even than the late obnoxious
Stamp Act.

I now request the Reader's Attention to his Fifteenth Exhibition made to the
Public on June 20th, as a curious Specimen of his Abilities in this Way. In
this not-able Performance he tumbles, he twists, and plays the Monkey, with
such Agility, shat every Woman and Child, that beholds him, is ready to cry
out, Did you ever see so queer a Creature! His attempt is to undermine and
overthrow a Reason, assigned by Dr. Chandler, in his Appeal (Page 58), for
which the Church of England in America at this Time, has a peculiar Claim to
the Attention and Assistance of our Superiors in the Mother Country. This
Reason is founded on the late remarkable Display of Divine Goodness in Favor
of the British Interests in the American Colonies

In Order to judge properly of this Attempt, it will be necessary to place
before the Public the Doctor's Argument, in the Words of the Appeal, "As
America is the Region (says he) wherein the Divine Goodness has been more
remarkably displayed in Favor of the British Nation; so, America is evidently
the very Ground, on which some suitable Monument of religious Gratitude ought
to be erected. This should be of such a Nature as to be visible to the World,
and that the Honor of the supreme Ruler of Events may be thereby immediately
promoted. Now as the Honor of God is most directly promoted by public Worship
-- as that Worship must be most acceptable to him wherein the Praises and
Adorations of his Creatures are regularly offered him, in the solemn Offices of
the purest and best Religion -- and as the national Religion must be supposed
best to answer these Characters, in the national Opinion; it necessarily
follows, that the State of the national Religion here, has a Right, on this
Occasion, to the peculiar Attention and Consideration of those, who are
entrusted with the Direction of our public Affairs." The Application of this
general Reasoning to the Purpose of an Episcopate the Dr. makes in his next
Paragraph. The Church of England in America, is there said to be in the utmost
Distress for want of Bishops. In this Case. and on this Occasion. She earnestly
requests, and She only requests, that proper Remedies may be provided for her
present Sufferings -- She WISHES FOR NOTHING which shall be thought
inconsistent with the Rights and Safety of others. She asks nothing, but what
has been granted to others, without any ill Consequences; and She relies on the
common Affection and Justice of the Nation, to raise her to this EQUALITY. This
is the Doctor's Argument, and it appears to me to be very fair, strong and
conclusive.

Let us now see in what Manner, and by what Arts, the American Whig endeavors
to subvert it. Has he the Hardiness to deny the Truth of any of these several
Propositions? No: the Truth of them is so evident, that a direct Denial of it,
he knows would destroy the wretched Remains of his Reputation. does he then
heartily acknowledge the Force of the Argument? No: he is too well acquainted
with his Trade, and too true to his Cause, to do this; and yet he seems more
than to half-acknowledge it. For of one Proposition he says, "to be sure a
Denial of it would be a flat Rejection of all Obligations to the Deity' -- and
of another, "it will not meet with any Opposition," and so forth. Well; but
does he not, at least quit an Argument that he is unable to confute, and of the
Strength of which his own Concessions imply a Conviction? No: so fair a Conduct
is inconsistent with his Character, and would ruin his Plan. In what Manner
then does he contrive to carry his Point? The Reader need not be told, that he
has Two Engines by which he performs almost all his Operations, as he knows how
to bring them to bear upon any Object; and with these he falls to work in the
present Case. The Use of one, is to raise a Prejudice against the Argument, by
speaking of it contemptuously -- and of the other, to puzzle and obscure it,
until the Force and Propriety of it, if possible, are made to disappear.

In the first Place, finding the Argument too solid to give Way to the
Impressions of his Teeth, he mumbles and beslavers it, in Order to render it
odious and offensive. The Reasoning and Language of the Appeal, on the Subject
in Question, he calls "priestly Cant and Jargon;" and every one knows that Cant
and Jargon are disagreeable Things, whether proceeding from Priests or Whigs.
The Advocates for American Bishops he vilifies with the Title of God-makers;"
but by the same Figure their Opposers, I mean such as our Whig, may be called
Devil-maker's: a Sort of Manufactures not more reputable than the other. For if
we were to judge of an American Bishop from the Representation which is weekly
given of him, we should conclude him to be at least as bad as the Devil. Nay,
the American Whig, discovers ^^rong Symptoms of wishing to inspire a Belief,
that a Bishop in this Country would be worse than the Devil; and (...) pretends
to abhor him to a Degree, to which, if we may judge from the Immorality of his
Writings, he does not abhor the Devil himself Again; Episcopacy he presents to
the Public under the Image of a "devouring Monster," and the Scheme for the
Settlement of an American Episcopate which is proposed in the Appeal, he tricks
off in the Attire of "an Establishment of spiritual Bondage in the Land of
religious Liberty." This is a small Spicilege of the Flowers of thy Rhetoric, O
American Whig!

From reviling and beslavering, this extraordinary disputatious Phenomenon,
proceeds to the Business of puzzling and obscuring. If "there be (says he) any
Fo^^ or Conclusion in his (Dr. Chandler's) Argument, it plainly consists in
this Position, that Episcopacy and not Christianity is the national Religion."
I know no one that supposes "Episcopacy and not Christianity to be the
nationable Religion" in any other Sense, than Non-Episcopacy or
Anti-Episcopacy, and not Christianity, is the Religion of Whigs and Dissenters;
and all the Argument the Appeal implies is, that Christianity, as taught in
Scripture and preserved by a Church under a Form of Government which is
episcopal, is the national Religion. If the Reader will take the Trouble to
review the Argument, he will see its Force, and be in no Danger of being misled
by such flimsy Sophistry.

Indeed the general Force of it, the American Whig himself cannot avoid
confessing, He will allow it to conclude for "establishing an anniversary
Thanksgiving, to be celebrated in all the episcopalian and non-episcopalian
Churches in the Nation;" but he cannot bear that it should conclude any Thing
in Favor of an Episcopate. As to his anniversary Thanksgiving I have no
Objections to it, as it may be one Way of properly expressing the national
Gratitude; but it would by no Means preclude such other Expressions of it as
are equally proper. If there is any Weight in the Argument, it must operate as
effectually in Favor of all proper Expressions of Gratitude, as of any single
Expression of it. And particularly, as to the Case now in Debate, the Writer's
Scheme of an anniversary Thanksgiving would but increase the Absurdity of
refusing us Bishops. By a national Appointment of an anniversary Thanksgiving,
the Nation appears in a religious Character; but it is peculiarly inconsistent
with this Character to let the Cause of Religion notoriously suffer, when there
is Power to prevent it.

Christians unhappily are divided in Sentiments, and have formed themselves
into different Societies. Amidst this Variety, every Christian joins himself
with that Society which he esteems to be most perfect, or, in other Words, most
agreeable to the Institution of CHRIST. Accordingly every Christian, especially
in a free Country, must be supposest to believe that particular Mode of
Christianity to be most perfect, which he is known to have adopted, the
Presumption being, that upon this Principle he gave it the Preference. In like
Manner, whatever Mode or Form of Religion any free Nation has thought fit to
adopt and establish, must be looked upon as the most perfect in the general
Opinion of that Nation. For this only Reason it has been made the national
Religion; and those who adhere to it, according to its Institutions, are called
the Members of the Church of that Nation. Now in the American Colonies there is
a vast Body of People, including "Whites, Blacks and Browns," who by
Examination or by Education have been led to give the Preference to that
particular Mode and System of Christianity, which also in the Opinion of our
Nation (the Whig will be pleased to understand that I do not mean the Scotch
Nation) is the most perfect. These Americans, having received for their
Religion the Religion of the Nation; nothing can be plainer, than, that their
Religion, and the national Religion -- their Church and the national Church,
are one and the same -- and consequently, that they are Members of THE CHURCH
OF ENGLAND IN AMERICA.

Let us now suppose an anniversary Thanksgiving appointed to be religiously
observed throughout the Nation, on the beforementioned Occasion, and the
Application for an American Episcopate rejected; how natural would it be to
make the following Reflections. The English Nation, in one Instance, has
appeared in the Character of a religious People. The Supreme Ruler of Events
they have honored with their Lips; and such Honor will be accepted, provided
it be paid in Sincerity, and attended with suitable Actions -- without which it
is no better than solemn Mockery, and will be considered as an Abomination. The
peculiar Species of Religion which this Nation professes, has been embraced by
innumerable Americans; but they complain that with them the Cause of this
Religion deplorably suffers, for want of proper Persons to perform some of its
most important Offices. The Relief so greatly wanted, it is in the Power of the
Nation to give, without any Inconvenience to itself without any Injury to
others. Dutiful and earnest Application has been made to the national Governors
in Behalf of this suffering Religion, for their charitable Aid; but they turn a
deaf Ear to this Entreaty. Notwithstanding their outward Professions, their
solemn Thanksgiving, their pretended Zeal for God's Honor; they discover a
Disposition to do nothing in Favor of that Religion, which they esteem to be
best fitted to promote his Honor and Service. How absurd is this Conduct! How
glaringly inconsistent is such a Neglect with such Professions!

After endeavoring to impose upon the Public, by substituting a "legal
Establishment" of the Church in America, in the the Room of an American
Episcopate, as it instead of, or together with, the latter, the former had been
requested, which Insinuation, like many of his Assertions, is "absolutely,
utterly and entirely false" and abberratious; our Whig attempts to discredit
the Argument to which he is opposed, by saying it would doubtless be as
conclusive, in the Mouth of a Musselman, and in an Address to the Grand
Signior. This sagacious Observation he afterward sagaciously repeats and
expands, telling us that in Consequence of this Doctrine, in TURKEY the
Lawgiver should advance Mehometanism; in FRANCE, SPAIN, and PORTUGAL, Popery;
in the BRITISH EMPIRE, Protestant Episcopacy; in China, Idolatry: And then
cries out, this is certainly most excellent Doctrine, from the Pen of a Church
of England Divine, and a Doctor too. In Answer to which I say, that the
contrary to this, namely, that in TURKEY, FRANCE, SPAIN and PORTUGAL, and I may
add, in the BRITISH EMPIRE as well as CHINA, Men should not be allowed to act
according to the Dictates of their Consciences, in religious Matters, is
certainly most excellent Doctrine, from the Pen of an Advocate for Liberty, and
one who thinks to signalize himself in its Cause too! This Writer, with all his
Perverseness, must allow, that it is the Duty of all Men to promote the true
Religion. Now if he can point out any other Way for Men to promote the true
Religion, than by promoting what they esteem to be the true Religion he shall
have the Credit that is due to an original Genius. Or, does he set himself up
to be Director-General of the Consciences of Men throughout all the Kingdoms of
the Earth, as well as in the BRITISH EMPIRE.?

He makes another Effort against the Doctor's Argument, by pretending that it
will not stop, until it has introduced the whole Anglican Hierarchy, with all
its Pomp etc. and "established it over our Heads." But he has offered nothing
in Support of this Pretense, but what will equally prove, that I ought not to
give a poor Man a Shilling to receive his Necessity; because if I give Way to
his Plea so far, I cannot consistently with hold my Hand, until I have raised
him to a Level with Sqire Tickle himself.

Besides the despicable Sophistry and Misrepresentation that runs through this
Paper of the American Whig, we meet with many obnoxious Things, for some of
which even a common Schoolboy would deserve the Castigation of a WHIP. Thus
for Instance, he roundly asserts, that prelatic Dominion in the Church, and
arbitrary Rule in the State, have ever been inseparable Companions. If by
prelatic Dominion he means any Thing else than episcopal Government, it is
nothing to the Purpose. Now (not to ramble into the Histories of other Nations)
there never has been a Time since the English Nation became Christian, as
almost every Child knows, in which there has not been prelatic Dominion, in
this Sense of the Word: -- excepting between the Year 1641 and 1660, when his
beloved Presbyterianism, and its Cousin-German Independency, in their Turns,
usurped the Dominion of Prelacy. But will he dare to say, that, in the English
Nation, arbitrary Rule has always governed the State, unless in that blessed
Period? What! Will he say this of our GEORGES, and of the immortal WILLIAM? On
the other Hand, will he say that the Nation received only Protection in their
Liberties from his favorite OLIVER, without any Allay of despotic and
arbitrary Rule? And yet unless he will say and can maintain all this, he ought
to be ashamed of his Assertion.

It would be endless to call him to account for every Instance of his
Misbehaviour as a Writer; and it every Day becomes less necessary. The public
are learning very fast, not to be influenced by his Prevarication and
Sophistry; and, it is hoped, they will soon resolve to admit no Assertions from
so infected a Quarter, until they have performed a sufficient Quarentine.

As to the Author of the Appeal, he may say of this literary Quixot, supported
by his Squire and sallying forth Weekly in Quest of Adventures, as a very
celebrated Writer said of one of his Antagonists: He comes forth with a more
than ordinary Briskness, and seems to set up for a Sort of Wit. This Book
resembles the Bird of Athens, for it seems to be made up of Face and Feathers.
For setting aside his bold Sayings, his impertinent Triflings, his hunting up
and down for any Occasion of venting his little Stories and Similitudes, there
is very little of Substance left in him, but what he has borrowed from Dr. O.
Query, may not Dr. O. stand for Dr. Ram-Chicken?
Methinks, such a light, vain, scurrilous Way of Writing, does not become such
a Tenderness of Conscience as our Dissenting Brethren pretend to. There is a
Sort of Pleasantness of Wit which serves to entertain the Reader in the rough
and deep way of Controversy; but certainly there is a Difference between the
Raillery and Good Humor of Gentlemen, and the Jests of Porters and Watermen.

MR. Tickle's most respectful Compliments, wait upon the American Whig and Co.
He begs Leave to congratulate Them on the Promotion of a most eminent Prelate
(of whom they are the most eminent Friends,) to an eminent Station at the Board
of Trade -- asks Pardon for not doing This sooner -- and hopes, that upon such
a favorable Occasion as the present, they will not fail of renewing their
Applications. -- O! the Bishop, the Bishop! O! the CHARTER, the CHARTER!

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Oct. 10. The AMERICAN WHIG, No. XXXI.
To the AMERICAN WHIG. Of the uninterrupted succession.
IF the clergy in the days of ignorance and superstition, when learning was at
a very low ebb, the bible seldom read, and sound reasoning a thing unknown,
strenuously asserted, and zealously contended for the absolute necessity of an
uninterrupted succession of diocesan bishops, from the apostles, in order to
render the gospel ministry valid; this is not so much to be wondered at, and
must be imputed to the badness of the times in which they lived, and the
predominant attachment of Christians in those times to religious triffles, and
all the vain notions and unscriptural opinions of the Popish hierarchy.

But that Dr. Chandler, a protestant divine, in the present glorious age of the
church, enlightened by all the happy labors of the reformers, and the greatest
masters of reason that ever existed, eminent on the account of their great
learning, profound knowledge of scripture, accurate and extensive acquaintance
with ecclesiastical history, free and impartial enquiry after truth, and
remarkable candor and charity: That Dr. Chandler (I say) born and educated in
so enlightened an age, should patronize and plead for an old absurd, Popish
tenet, long since refuted and rejected by the ablest advocates for truth in his
own communion; is a consideration that must surprise and grieve all, who are
not under the influence of superstition* wish well to the Doctor's character as
a divine, and a man of and desire to promote the Prosperity of the protestant
religion in general, to which this tenet is very unfavourable. For my own part,
I really esteem and regard the Dr. and only oppose some of his opinions;
because I think they are unworthy of himself, inconsistent with truth,
derogatory to the honor of the reformation, and most of the protestant
churches, and tending to disunite and raise ill blood among fellow protestants;
at a time when the ministers of Christ and the friends of liberty and mankind,
should unite their utmost efforts, to promote natural charity and a good
understanding.

But let us hear the Doctor, that we may be convinced of the uncharitableness
of his tenet. After having premised that the church of England, holds a
distinction of orders among the clergy, and that she confines the right of
ordaining to diocesan bishops; and after observing that none can have authority
in the Christian church, but those who derive it from Christ, either mediately
or immediately, he says, Those who receive it mediately must derive it from
those persons whom Christ has authorized to convey it; i. e. they must receive
it by a regular succession i. e. of diocesan bishop. But may not a person
receive authority in the Christian church mediately, without that authority's
being received by a regular succession of diocesans or presbyters? A worthy and
celebrated bishop of the church of England, supposes, that in case of absolute
necessity, a number of lay Christians, have authority to ordain a man to the
work of the ministry, insinuating that after such ordination, he will be a
lawful and valid minister of the gospel. See Burnet's exposition of the 23d
article.

Dr. Chandler, by his regular succession, means a regular succession of
diocesan bishops. Yet, why, if an uninterrupted succession was absolutely
necessary, to convey authority in the church, such a succession of presbyters
might not confer that authority, as well as bishops, I presume could not easily
be proved.

If any stress was to be laid upon an uninterrupted succession of ministers,
the presbyterians are on the surest side; because the succession of presbyters
is much more probable than that of diocesan bishops.

Presbyters in the church of England, may and do perform the most essential
parts of the ministry; they preach, administer the sacrament, receive into
communion, excommunicate, absolve, etc. Now gentle reader! let me ask, is the
conferring authority to preach, an higher act, of a higher nature and dignity,
than all the abovementioned acts united? And can any solid reason be assigned,
why he who performs those, may not perform that? Is the conveying any dignity
(suppose the regal) more important than the dignity itself and the exercise of
it? Rather is it not less noble? And with these Sentiments in thy mind,
impartial reader! is not the dispute, whether presbyters have a right to ordain
presbyters on the side of the episcopalians, a very triffling and silly
controversy?

One would imagine, from Dr. Chandler's strenuous confinement of the right of
ordination to a diocesan bishop, that a diocesan bishop was able to convey
every ministerial accomplishment by the imposition of his hand, and his
episcopal benediction.

But is this really the case! can a bishop's hand and act, convey learning,
piety, knowledge, grace, holiness and other requisites to the ministry? Far
from it. Those ordained by the presbytery are not in these respects inferior to
those ordained by the bishop.

Do the bishops ordain fitter persons, and more virtuous and holy men to the
ministry, than presbyters ordain, or do they take more care to keep bad men out
of the ministry? Experience does not prove this. Are the bishops better men,
more orthodox in the faith, more holy in their lives, and more indefatigable in
their ministry than the presbyters? I believe not. -- Let it be recorded, to
the dishonor, the eternal dishonor of bishops, that one of the most apostolic
men now in the world, the most powerful, eloquent, zealous, indefatigable,
successful, devout, practical preacher, that perhaps ever lived, the grand
ornament of the church of England, would have had a period put to his useful
and edifying ministry, and possibly to his precious life too, if bishops could
have treated him as they desired. -- This same seraphic, and divine preacher,
though rejected by his own bishops, disowned and denied their pulpits by the
generality of his episcopal brethren, yet is received with open arms, by the
presbyterian ministers and people.

These things may be thought foreign to the argument, but I for my part, must
declare, that where I find the clergy zealous for God's glory and the good of
souls, eager in the encouragement of holy men, indefatigable in the discharge
of their office, exemplary in their lives, successful in gaining subjects to
Christ, and in making their fellow men wiser and better, strict in their
discipline, cautious in admitting into the ministry, and severe in punishing
the unworthy.

I look upon it, that such men must be lawful ministers of Christ, and invested
with authority from him, the above characteristics I esteem, (and St. Ambrose
and Gregory Nazianzen are of my opinion) much more substantial proofs of the
validity of their ministry, than their ordination by a bishop in an
uninterrupted succession, would be, if they could fully prove it. And with
regard to such proofs as these, the presbyterian ministers have as many of
them, and those as strong as the episcopalians.

I think the best seals of a man's ministry, are the souls that he is
instrumental in saving, and in turning from darkness to light, from sin and
vice, to virtue and holiness, and from the power of Satan unto God. Let these
be the proofs of one's ministry, and he need not envy any other, the privilege
of ordination by a bishop; No, nor the dignity and revenues of a bishopric
itself.

I believe that Jesus Christ, gives in the present age his approbation of a
gospel minister, and authenticates, and adds a sanction to his ministry, by the
supernatural influences of the Holy Ghost, which accompanies and renders such a
ministry successful in the salvation of men, and this approbation and sanction,
the non-conformists have as abundantly as the episcopalians.

But lest I should be thought to declaim, and not to argue, I should now
proceed to discuss more particuliarly the opinion of an uninterrupted
succession, of diocesan bishops, from the apostles, and the necessity of
ordination in such a succession.

I observe first, that if the validity of the Christian ministry, was to depend
upon such an unbroken line of bishops, it is probable that Christ or his
apostles, would have directed every church to keep in its hands an authentic
register of its bishops, and their legal consecration. When under the law the
high priest's office was entailed upon the Aaronical family; God provided that
a register, should be kept of the descendants of Aaron, that so the right to
the priesthood might appear. Now to reason by analogy and a for^iori, it is
probable, that if a knowledge of the succession of ministers, had been as
important and necessary in the Christian church, as it was in the Jewish, God
would have made the same provision for the one, which he made for, the other;
yet such provision has not been made, but on the contrary, the apostle Paul in
his epistle to Titus, cautions him, not to give heed to Jewish fables, and to
avoid foolish questions and genealogies; and surely if any thing is a foolish
question, it is this, have I been ordained by a bishop in an uninterrupted
succession? if ever there was any thing like a Jewish fable, and an endless and
vain genealogy, it is this same uninterrupted succession; a man may pore all
his life time on the records of past ages, and yet never come to any
satisfaction about every individual and proper link in the unbroken chain.

This argument will be strengthened if we consider what innumerable and almost
endless catalogues of bishops there must have been, if each church had kept a
catalogue of its bishops from the apostles; and what a tedious, endless, and
next to impossible task it would have been to examine those records: the bare
mentioning of the thing shows its absurdity, and its absurdity proves it could
not be consistent with divine wisdom. -- It was comparatively an easy matter to
preserve the genealogies of a few families in one nation, for a few centuries
under the law: But how difficult would it have been, to have kept a catalogue
of all the Christian bishops in every nation, for many centuries under the
gospel? the former was kept up by a divine revelation and a supernatural
interposition; the latter could not be any otherwise preserved. But who will
pretend the necessity of a divine continual revelation, since the sacred canon
has been closed, or since the days of the apostles. There are therefore, no
authentic catalogues of all the Christian bishops since the apostles, now
extant.

This argument will be farther corroborated, if we consider how much the
apostles inveighed against the ceremonies, peculiarities and minute observances
of the Mosaic economy, as unworthy the scrupulous regard and observation of
the professors of the gospel, whose simplicity and freedom, from beggarly
elements, they so often celebrated and displayed. Circumstantials in religion
are in low esteem with the apostles. Essentials, faith, hope, charity and
holiness, are with them of principal consideration.

2. I observe, 2dly that if the uninterrupted succession is absolutely
necessary, in order to render a gospel ministry valid, then there can be no
valid ministry in most of the protestant churches; then the Waldenses and
Albigenses, those faithful witnesses and illustrious sufferers for the truth,
had no lawful ministers; then the Church of Holland, Geneva and Scotland, the
protestants in France and Germany, and the dissenters in England, Ireland and
America, are destitute of legal pastors. But can a tenet, from which such
consequences flow, and which reflects so much dishonor on the generality of
protestants, and is so favorable to popery, be rational and true. Charity,
virtue and common sense forbid the thought. I dare assert, that upon Dr.
Chandler's principles, the lawfulness and necessity of the reformation cannot
be maintained, and therefore, I do not wonder that some high churchmen declare,
"Better be a papist than a presbyterian." -- Or that they would sooner receive
for their pastor, a Romish priest, who had lived in error and vice, and been
actually guilty of continued fornication, than the most orthodox and virtuous,
the most able and powerful non-episcopal minister in the world.

3. I observe, that this tenet seems inconsistent with the gracious promise of
Christ, to his church, of being ever present with it, and providing for its
perpetual subsistence; for if its subsistence depends on this uninterrupted
succession; then if the uninterrupted succession cannot be proved (as we
positively assert and defy the Dr. to prove the contrary) then neither can the
presence of Christ with the church, and its regular subsistence be proved. But
the church does subsist regularly, and Christ is present with it, in places
where diocesan bishops have no authority; therefore the presence of Chirst, the
subsistence of the church, and the regular administration of ordinances, cannot
depend on an uninterrupted succession. Dr. Chandler asserts, in the appeal,
that if it could be made clear, that the succession had been interrupted, it
would also prove farther, that Christ had neglected to provide for his church,
in a case so essential to the being of it. O incredible weakness and
superstition! This indeed is playing pushpin and crambo with a witness. I thus
reply to it, Christ's church has a being, and he is present with it in places
where ministers are not ordained, in virtue of an uninterrupted succession;
therefore the uninterrupted succession is not essential to the being of it. I
leave it to the candid reader, to determine, whose reasoning is most
conclusive, the Doctor's or mine; he argues from a succession, which he cannot
prove; I argue from the actual existence of the Christian church, and Christ's
gracious presence with it, in places where no uninterrupted succession is
pleaded for, which I can prove, and which I look upon as an unanswerable
argument, that the succession is not essential to the being of Christ's church.
It is not to be supposed, that Jesus Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures
of wisdom, knowledge and benevolence, would have made the actual existence of
his church to depend upon a fact that cannot be proved, and concerning which,
no man alive can obtain proper satisfaction, or that he would have suspended
the validity, of the Christian ministry, on a succession, at best uncertain,
and which I think I can prove to have been broken.

4. I observe, that several of the most eminent bishops, of the church of
England, have disavowed, this uninterrupted succession; which is in my opinion,
a very strong argument against it, as their interest lay the contrary way.
Nothing but the force of truth, and the conviction of their own conscience,
could have led them to give up the cause of an uninterrupted succession of
diocesan bishops. I have already mentioned the opinion of bishop Burnet, and
many other eminent divines of the church of England, who allowed that in the
beginning of Christianity, bishops and priests were the same, I shall add to
these, the testimony of bishop Hoadly, a professed advocate for diocesan
episcopacy. It is highly absurd (says he) to put so important a point as God's
favor and eternal happiness upon what no man living can ever be acquainted
with to his satisfaction. But it is still more absurd, to put it upon a matter,
the contrary to which appears to be true. This is the case here. This regular
uninterrupted succession of persons, qualified and regularly ordained, is a
matter impossible to be proved; nay, the contrary is more than probable upon
all historical evidence, which we receive in other cases. (he says also) It
has not pleased God, in his providence, to keep up any proof of the least
probability or moral possibility of a regular uninterrupted succession: But
there is a great appearance, and humanly speaking, a certainty to the contrary;
"that this succession has been often interrupted. See Preser. p. 78.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Oct. 10. A KICK for the WHIPPER, [No. XX.]
By Sir ISAAC FOOT.
Quid dignum fanto feret hic promiss^r hiaetu?
Parturient montes, nascetur ridiculus mus.
HORACE.
AFTER having "long remained silent" (except singing now and then a ballad)
behold a "worthy," very ingenious" self important and long-winded Whipper,
steps into T's place, and undertakes wonders for the public "welfare," He ought
to have done this before, say you? Better late than never, reader; besides
merit is most conspicuous in doing wh^^ was never done before: Others had ap'd
Dr. C. over and over and over again; but -- hem, hem, hem! Attend, says he, to
what I I can say, Gentlemen; -- I Will tell you another guise story -- Well! and
what is it? Why, having hinted that Priestianity is Christianity, and
hierarchical dominion -- evangelical ministration, he says a number of fine
things about ordination, government, and confirmation, the moderation of the
Appeal, and the violence of its factious opposers, etc. -- Well! and what are
they? Why, could you expect it, reader, after such a pompous introduction? --
nothing, in effect, but old stories still. -- I Am sick of Identity, tired with
only new comments on the Appeal; if its friends would justify it to public
satisfaction, and clear the convention of disagreeable imputations, I say once
more, let them produce the PETITIONS. -- "Can you believe I Will be such a fool
or such a villain?" can never be a proof of the wisdom or integrity of any man
living.

Par. 8th. after others had failed, the Citizen undertakes a vindication of an
obnoxious passage in the Appeal; but it will not answer: -- "blowing trumpets
of sedition in PULPITS," and "suffering seeds of disaffection to be sown in
HOUSES, are expressions too emphatical to be flatly translated" "public and
private transgressions." A general justification indeed had been
unexceptionable; but, in a party notorious for boasts of loyalty, in order to
conciliate the partial favor of the government, an expurgation, specifying
seditious practices they were never particularly charged with, amounts to an
invidious ACCUSATION of others. Should I, in petitioning the King for a favor
granted to others of my countrymen but denied to me, in bar of such
distinction, amidst loyal boasts, plead, that I had never raised a RIOT, or
headed a Mon in AMERICA; would not his Majesty naturally conclude, some others
he had already gratified had done so? Certainly! and therefore Dr. C's marginal
note only proves, that, like Zanga in the REVENGE, he could pretend to throw
water with one hand, while he was kindling the fire of jealousy with the other:
So lame is the C's defense! and yet, not content with endeavoring to screen
Dr. C. from censure, he half challenges our gratitude for the quack-plaster the
Dr. has applied to the wound he made: O the impudence of the body! -- But
before I quit this subject, I must just ask this strippling, why he maimed the
paragraph he pretended to quote at large, by leaving out a material passage and
important article immediately preceding the words in question? Reader he did
not expect you would, therefore compare his quotation with the Appeal, p. 41.
and judge for yourself.

Par: 9th. and 10th: -- Cret^ et carbone notantur. The first contains a pair of
testimonies in favor of the hierarchy of the church of England. I Have a good
mind to produce a cloud of witnesses on the other side of the question from
among her own children; but for want of room I rather choose to hint at some
very "recent instances" of the "charity and benevolence of her clergy, --
generously displayed in encouraging the propagation of Christianity etc." Such
decent things as these the C. surely need not "blush" at. In the 2d. there is a
quantity of holy revenge or Christian tit for tat, and particularly a terrible
club, made of the solemn league and covenant, is shaken over our heads and
threatens to crush us to atoms; but fortunately it concerns us only as a
caution, not to swear but firmly resolve to endeavor (not the extirpation
thank God! but the exclusion of prelacy, lest we partake in its sins and
receive of its plagues. At any rate however, the impartial will judge it as
impertinent, in a party that already has the advantage, thus to recriminate, as
it were in a country-Squire to cast in the teeth of a pursued complaining fox,
that his grandsire had formerly bitten his worship's grand-father's finger. Who
is it now, that, after blustering about the merits of the cause, "wanders from
the direct track of the subject, to point out the blemishes of" DISSENTERS.

Dr. C. has indeed been charged (and that justly) with mincing and ^umbling on
several occasions, and exposed as betraying his own foresight of future
deviations from the pretended plan; but, till I can find (which I cannot) where
he is charged with " mentioning it in a mincing mumbling manner," I must think
the C's reprinting it from the Appeal just as rational, as to have pointed to
the clear sky in the west, in order to prove that it is not cloudy in the east.

The Whig must not be supposed to have been willing to do Dr. C. and convention
so much honor, at the expense of his own character, as to suggest that they
were the original and sole inventors of the American Bishop manufactory; but
thus much must be on all hands allowed, that, while other American sticklers
for prelacy, have done turbulently, they (and particularly Dr. C.) have had the
singular honor, in creating disturbance, of excelling them all.

Reader, I blush to think I have taken so much notice of this forward youth's
puerile effusions; -- as he seems resolved to engross as much as may be the
business of stagellation, it is probable I should frequently stumble upon him
hereafter, but shall not repeat the same fault, I promise you.

From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE, Oct. 10. A WHIP for the AMERICAN WHIG. BY TIMOTHY
TICKLE, ESQR. [No. XXVII.]
THE good Sense, Candor, and honest Freedom, which are so conspicuous in the
following Production, justly entitle it, though written by a Dissenter, to a
Place among these Papers. Were the same generous Sentiments enter^^^^^d by all
Dissenters, instead of thus Attacking the CHURCH, without any Provocation, and
pouring a Load of Slander Weekly upon IT, and it is Members: We would find them
cheerfully concurring in such Measures as would promote our Common
Christianity. The Author has showed the Futility of the American Whig's chief
Argument against an American Episcopate -- an Argument, for which no Dissenter
who sees into its Consequences, will thank him. This worthy Gentleman is
apprehensive that the Whig's Writings will have a Tendency to bring the Clergy
into Contempt. I am totally of another Opinion. I firmly believe there is not a
Man of Sense or Virtue who will not esteem the Clergy the more for his Abuse.
The Whig and his Designs are now too well known to do any Mischief that Way.
Besides, he only echoes the hackneyed Jargon of Tindal, Collins, and others of
the same Tribe. My ingenious Correspondent thinks I am reprehensible for my
'Recriminations against Dissenters." But I beg he will reflect on the
Provocation which I, as a Member of the CHURCH of ENGLAND, have received. How
cruelly, how ungenerously has that CHURCH been treated! I began not this
Controversy; nor shall I continue it longer than the American Whig is pleased
to make it necessary. And he may be assured, that if the Whig should continue
his Attack as long -- nay, thrice the Space that Troy stood out against the
Greeks: So long will the Whip be held over him, and he chastised for his
Misbehaviour. I shall only add, that I have no Controversy with such Dissenters
as my Correspondent, who are willing that others should enjoy the same
Privileges with themselves; and that I shall be much obliged to this Gentleman,
if he will be so kind as to leave his Address with my Printer.

T. T.

To TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQUIRE
SIR,
The following Piece was written with a View to set the Argument respecting an
American Bishop, in what I conceive to be its true Point of Light. The Author
claims at least the Merit of it is having been dictated by Impartiality, and has
therefore chose to reason upon Principles common both to Churchmen and
Dissenters. As the Argument is designed upon these Principles to show the
present Clamor of his BRETHREN, the Dissenters to be groundless, he hopes the
American Whig will excuse him for emphatically expressing such his Design in
the Scriptural Motto prefixed to this Paper. The Author moreover professes
himself to be a Friend to civil and religious Liberty, in it is most extensive
Sense; and if you, Sir, can bear with his Freedom, and think his Sentiments
worthy of Notice, you will by publishing them, oblige him.

Out of thine own Mouth will I judge thee.

LUKE xix. -- 22. THE Dispute concerning the Introduction of an American
Episcopate has unhappily formed two grand Parties. -- Churchmen who maintain
the Cause on one Hand, and the Dissenters who oppose it on the other, have
become so warmed with the Subject, that I am afraid they are both chargeable
with having departed from that Delicacy and Politeness which ought to be
preserved in every Debate. The American Whig has frequently indulged his Pen in
casting Reproach upon the Church of England and its Clergy; and though I have a
better Opinion of his Candor than to suppose he aimed at every Particular
Clergymen of that Church, yet his Expressions are thrown out with an Air and
Appearance so general, that every Reader cannot discern so much Charity as
would even shelter under its benign Protection, any one of those Clergymen,
from the malignant Blasts of his illiberal and indiscriminate Censures.

It is well known, that the serious and religious Part of a Community, will
entertain a Regard and Veneration for their Clergy; and those of them who
faithfully discharge their important Trust, are truly worthy of the Esteem they
generally meet with. Hence it is, that whatever looks like an undistinguished
Abuse of the Clergy of any particular Church, hardly ever ^ails to become
interesting to the Members of it; and this is still more the Case when the
Abuse is conceived to be levelled at the Church itself. Nay, whenever a Dispute
enters into, or affects our religions Concerns, though remotely, in its mere
Appendages, it is apt to engage us with a Degree of Warmth unknown to ^s upon
other Occasions. To what Cause this is to be ascribed can be of little
Importance here to enquire into; it is sufficient that there is in human Nature,
a Principle that leads to this Disposition, and it serves in some Measure to
account for the Heat with which this Controversy has been conducted.

Some indeed think, that if the Clergy were brought into Contempt, it would
have a very unfavourable Influence upon Religion itself, and I confess it is an
Opinion that does not appear to be ill founded. For suppose now that we could
once be persuaded to believe, that the Missionaries sent out by the Society for
propagating the Gospel, or in other Words, the CLERGY of the CHURCH of ENGLAND
in America, were a Set of designing, crafty, lying Fell^^^, who have no other
View in in-introducing a Bishop, than to aggrandize their own Church upon the
Ruin of all others; in short, that they are laboring to become the Instruments
of Oppression to their fellow Christians; must they not appear to (...) cruel
and dishonest; and would not such an Opinion conceived of the Teachers of
Christianity, naturally tend to prejudice Mankind against, or make them
indifferent to, the Doctrines and Precepts they incul^ate? This I am confident
the American Whig would never wi^h to see, because I believe him (...) be a
Friend to Christianity. But yet I cannot help fearing that some of his Papers
have (...) Tendency to these Consequences.

After having thus reproved the American Whig, will you Mr. Tickle, permit me
to treat you with equal Plainness and Freedom? Pray, Sir, has not your Paper
too much abounded in Recriminations against Dissenters? Has not your Zeal
sometimes transported you beyond the Bounds of Moderation? I am afraid it has;
and so far you must also, acknowledge yourself to be reprehensible. Pity it is,
that more Temper and Decency had not been observed on both Sides!

Give me Leave now, Sir, to tell you that I myself am a Dissenter, but upon
such Principles of Catholicism and Benevolence as have hitherto, and I hope
ever will make me over look the narrow Confines of Party-Spirit and Bigotry;
while I view and regard the whole Christian Church (however split into
different Denominations) as one Fold, under one Shepherd. It is observable in
this Dispute, with what Greediness of Approbation each Party commends and
applauds whatever is written in its own Favor; while with equal Disgust and
Detestation they reject the Sentiments offered on the other Side of the
Question. Thus it is that Truth gets entirely out of Sight; and yields the
Prize to blind Prejudice and Party-Zeal.

I have been amazed that upon this Subject, which is thought to affect American
Liberty, and in which the grand Argument against an Episcopate in America is,
that he must necessarily be invested with the temporal Powers which Bishops
have in England, the leading and capital Circumstance of the Church of
England's not being established in the Colonies, should have been so little
attended to.

For my Part, as a Dissenter, I hold the Opinion, that there is no such
Establishment by Law in the Colonies. This I know to be the general Opinion of
Dissenters, and indeed of the most sensible Churchmen too: Nor have I Reason to
doubt, that the American Whig himself, is well satisfied as to this Point. It
was so clearly proved in a Course of Papers published some Years ago by the
Independent Reflector, that I have never since had the least Difficulty about
it. He showed, to a Demonstration, that neither the Common nor Statute Law
could effect such Establishment; and that in this Country, we might glory in
the free and equal Participation of religious Privileges; and in the
undisturbed Exercise of all the sacred Rights of Conscience. Happy are the
People that are in such a Case! -- May we and our Posterity for ever remain
thus secure in these our inestimable Rights and Privileges; nor, while the Sun
and Moon endure, behold the Standard of ecclesiastical Tyranny erected in this
goodly Heritage, this Assylum of Liberty which we possess.

It being once taken for granted, (and surely the American Whig will not deny
it) that there is no Establishment of the Church of England in the Colonies;
does it not furnish a solid Principle for determining the present Controversy?
May not the Waste of Argument and Declamation that have been used upon this
Subject, be drawn, as it were, into one Point, and tested by the Principle here
advanced? -- Here, as in a Sanctuary, I think the Dissenters may take Refuge,
and calm all their Fears. This must effectually secure them against the so much
dreadful Chains of Episcopal Dominion: And thus secured, does it not become
their Duty to hush the Storm they have raised; put an End to the Paper War they
have declared, and leave the Church they have attacked, at Peace? The Method of
Reasoning by which I satisfy myself upon the Point is this. If there be no
episcopal Establishment in the Colonies, then the Church of England here, as
having Relation to the State, can no more be known in Law than any of our
Dissenting Churches: It must be as absolutely free from all legal Modifications
as they are None of the Laws relating to the Church of England as a national
Establishment, can have Reference to that Church where it is not established;
if then the Church of England as it exists in America, is not legally
established, it follows that all the Laws relative to, and founded on that
Establishment in England, when considered with regard to the Colonies, are
without an Object to which they can be directed, and consequently become a mere
dead Letter. Whence then is the Force and Operation of those Laws to be derived
on this Side the Atlantic?

The Church of England being thus destitute at present of all legal
Establishment, neither has or claims any secular or ecclesiastical Powers,
beyond Dissenters. Her Government and Discipline are indeed similar to that of
the established Church in England, and hence she distinguishes herself by that
Name, as the Parent Church out of whose Bosom she emerged.

The Question then might be asked, what it is that can raise the Church of
England here, out of its present State, into all that Splendor and Dignity
which some Dissenters seem to be so much afraid of? In short, what is it that
could give her a legal Existence? Would a Bishop's setting his Foot in this
Country do it, or would it not require Acts of our own Legislature to
accomplish this new Creation? I call it a Creation, because as the Church of
England, in Supposition of Law, may be said now not to be; so that Power by
which it is brought into being, must be a Power creating it; and I trust we
have no Reason to fear, that a Legislative Fiat will ever bring this Event to
pass.

Is it not rather a hasty Conclusion, to infer that a Bishop's Presence would
have such a magic Force and supernatural Efficasy as to raise the Church of
England from Nonentity? To build up an Establishment without Materials, and to
set all the various Wheels of her Ecclesiastical and Political Machinery at
work? It seems to me dangerous to advance such a Doctrine; for I believe, if a
Bishop should come, we shall one and all deny the Principle upon which the
Doctrine is founded. At this Rate, should a Bishop go into Holland or Geneva,
why might not Episcopacy be established there? -- Nay, a few ite^erant Bishops,
by this strange and mysterious Dissemination of their Influence, might carry
the Establishment of the Church of England like a Charm, throughout the World,
as well as into America. A Supposition, the Absurdity of which, must confute
itself.

Let us then with Christian Charity, forbear this Contention. The Church of
England, by the Accession of a Bishop, can only gain the Privilege of
Ordination here; and as the Enjoyment of this Privilege is reasonable in itself
and cannot be injurious to us, have they not Cause to complain of our opposing
it, seeing that to justify this Opposition, we have by chimerical Suppositions,
magnified our Danger, when there really is none.

A DISSENTER.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Oct. 17, 1768. The American Whig, No. XXXII.
Continuation of the letter, on the uninterrupted succession.
THOSE are the truest ministers of Christ, who must resemble their blessed
master in the temper of their minds and their outward behavior. As the apostle
assures us, that the genuine children of Abraham, are not always his natural
descendants; but those who imitate his faith; so I believe that those are the
genuine ministers of Christ, not merely, who are ordained by episcopal hands,
(for if this were so, the ministers of Satan might be the ministers of Christ)
but those who are most like their lord and master.

I mean not, however, to deny the propriety of gospel ministers being ordained
to their office by the clergy, because the clergy are generally best capable of
judging of a candidate's qualification for the ministry; and solemnly setting
him apart to his office, being also thereunto appointed by Christ; and
therefore, I think it irregular, very irregular, to preach without ordination,
or to receive a lay ordination, where an ordination by presbyters is to be
obtained.

Yet I do not think, that Jesus Christ, has confined the authority to ordain to
the ministry, entirely to the clergy; I believe he has authorized the laity in
cases of absolute necessity, to set apart men, or to ordain them to the gospel
ministry; and if Dr. Chandler, attends to this sentiment, for which I can give
good reason; he will find, that it will fully answer all his reasoning, in the
4th page of his Appeal, and whatever else the episcopalians have advanced on
this subject.

But to return to the uninterrupted succession, I think it is very weak in Dr.
Chandler, to declare, that "for any one to say, that such a succession cannot
be proved, (I suppose he means when nobody can confute the assertion, as is the
case here) is not sufficient," But I am sure that a proposition destitute and
incapable of proof, ought not to be made an article of faith, and positively
asserted as an undoubted truth; and I am also sure, that to assert, that the
uninterrupted succession cannot be proved, if such an assertion cannot be
confuted, is altogether sufficient and very much to the purpose.

The Dr. says, it is incumbent on the objectors, to prove, that the succession
by which he and his brethren hold, has been broken. But I ask the Doctor's
pardon, for differing in judgment from him on this point.

As we, the objectors, are satisfied with the validity of our ordinations, and
have no doubts on the head, with reference to the uninterrupted succession; why
should we perplex our brains in endeavoring to prove it unbroken? But as the
Doctor and his Brethren, lay so great a stress and build the validity of their
ministry upon it, I think it highly incumbent upon them, to prove it unbroken.
In all other cases of a similar nature, such evidence is required as
essentially necessary. When a man pretend a right by succession or descent, to
any estate, dignity, freehold or possession, he is obliged to prove, if his
right is contested, every link of the succession or descent by which he
pretends to hold.

For instance, if G. pretends to be the lawful son of F. the lawful son of E.
the lawful son of D the lawful son of C. the lawful son of B. the lawful son of
A; and if G. pretends a right to a certain tract of land, as the lawful
descendant of A. in case G's right is disputed; it is evident, in order to make
it good, he must not only prove his own legal descent from F. but the legal
birth of all his intermediate ancestors and their lawful descent from A. Thus
also Dr. Chandler, upon his own principles, as he founds his right to the
Christian ministry, upon authority received from an uninterrupted succession of
diocesan bishops, ought to satisfy us, that every bishop in the line of whom he
received ordination, was legally consecrated

The Doctor says, it is not sufficient for any one to say, that such a
succession cannot be proved. But the following instance will illustrate that
point: The present King of France, has a right to his crown, because he is the
great grandson of Lewis XIV. and was at his death the only surviving male in
the eldest male line: As this was the case, his right to the crown was clear,
and he was able to prove it by the genealogy of his family, and every proper
evidence; and if any other French Prince, had pretended a right to the crown of
France, by virtue of the same lineal descent, I believe it would have been
reckoned quite sufficient to have told such an one he could not prove such a
descent.

If Dr. Chandler has a right to preach the gospel, only because he was ordained
by a bishop, ordained by a bishop and so on, in an unbroken line up to an
apostle; I am sure he cannot prove such a right upon such principles, unless he
can prove at the same time, the unbroken line; his right to preach in such a
case, supposing he cannot prove the uninterrupted succession, can be at best
founded only on conjecture; a very improbable conjecture too, as the reader
will find by the following considerations.

Eusebius, the most ancient ecclesiastical historian, from whom succeeding
writers have made their catalogues of bishops; declares, that it was no easy
matter to tell who succeeded the apostles in the government of the churches,
excepting such as may be collected from St. Paul's own words. Mr. Lewis, a
clergyman of the church of England, thus expresses himself, in a Letter to Dr.
Kennet, You know, sir, bishop Pearson, has shown that Eusebius's account is
very disturbed and confused; St. Peter is set down as the first bishop of Rome,
and yet it is a thing very disputable, whether St. Peter ever was at Rome. --
Linus is reckoned as his immediate successor; and bishop Pearson, has shown
that St. Peter died after Linus; Cletus, Clement and Anacletus are reckoned
next; and yet bishop Pearson has made it probable at least, that Cletus and
Anecletus are both the same person.

Dupin justly observes, according to the common received opinion, to St. Peter
succeeded St. Linus, to St. Linus, Anacletus or Cletus, and to him St. Clement;
this order is observed by St. Ireneus, Eusebius, St. Jerome, and in the ancient
catalogues of the Popes; but Optatus, Rusinus, St. Augustine and some other
Latin authors, substitute St. Clement immediately to St. Linus, and place
Anacletus in the third rank, some distinguish Cletus from Anacletus. Thus we
see the ancients differed about the succession, nay, the very existence of some
of the first bishops of Rome, the most celebrated church in the world, and
which has taken the most pains to preserve a catalogue of her bishops.

As Dr. Chandler pretends to have received authority in a line of diocesans
from an apostle; and as I imagine he includes in the first part of his line;
the bishop of the church of Rome. I suppose as he lays a very great and undue
stress upon ancient and ecclesiastical history; he looks upon St. Peter as the
first bishop of Rome, or at least the apostle who consecrated that first bishop
from whom he derives his authority: But I will lay before him, Monsieur
Abbadie's reasoning from God's infallible word, which I think fully proves that
St. Peter was never at Rome.

The scripture expressly informs us, that in the division which the apostles
made of the departments of the gospel ministry; St. Peter, with St. James and
St. John, had a commission to preach J. C. to the Jews, and St. Paul, that of
evangelizing to the Gentiles; when they saw (says Paul, Gal. 2.) that the
gospel of the uncircumcision was committed unto me, as the circumcision was
unto Peter, (for he that wrought effectually in Peter, to the apostleship of
the circumcision, the same was mighty in me toward the Gentiles; and when
James, Cephas and John, who seemed to be pillars, perceived the grace that was
given unto me, they gave to me and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship, that
we should go unto the Heathen, and they unto the circumcision. According to
this regulation, St. Paul, immediately preaches the gospel in Greece, in
Illyrium, in Italy and at Rome the capital of nations, but he makes no stay in
Judea, nor in the neighboring country; and when he would pass into Bethinia,
he was prevented in his design, by the spirit of Christ, who sends him into
Macedonia; he indeed travels to Jerusalem, but it was to carry collections for
the poor, and not to establish his see. St. Peter, with St. John and St. James,
turns his steps another way. He preaches to his countrymen in Judea and at
Babylon, or in the provinces contiguous to it, to the Jews of the dispersion;
but neither he, nor his colleagues make their appearance i^ the west: St. Paul
in his different travels, does not meet them, he does not salute them, in his
epistle so full of salutations, addressed to all sorts of persons: Timothy,
Titus, Silas, etc. assist him in his ministry, and he does all in concert with
them, even to the placing their names with his at the beginning of his
epistles. But no interview between St. Peter and St. Paul: no letters received
or written in common, by those two apostle^ no message from the one to the
other, no correspondence by word of mouth, or by writing, which are so common,
and even so necessary between colleagues who are not very distant from each
other; the apostles did not forget their principal calling. St. Paul went to
Jerusalem, but not to fix his see there, for he was the apostle of the
Gentiles; and if Peter should have come to Rome, as some will have it, it could
not be to establish his see there, for he was the apostle of the Jews; but the
voyage which it is said Peter made to the west, has all the air of a fable.

1. The apostles knew nothing of it, or which amounts to the same thing, have
told us nothing of it.

2. St. Clement, bishop of Rome, successor of St. Peter without knowing it, was
no doubt ignorant of this voyage, inasmuch as he makes no mention of it, whilst
he describes the travels and labor of the apostles, and particularly the
courses of St. Paul, in the different parts of the world.

3. St. Luke, who leaves St. Paul at Rome, under the reign of Nero, has forgot
to tell us, that St. Peter had been in that capital of the world, and that he
had been made bishop of it, from the reign of Claudius.

4. St. Paul arriving at Rome, finds that the synagogue there, had scarce heard
any thing said of Jesus Christ, and that they knew nothing with regard to
Christianity, but that the Christians were every where spoken against. And
nevertheless St. Peter had then been a long time amongst them, according to the
Legendary writers, and of the twenty five years of which his pontificate is
made to consist, two thirds of it, at least must have been by this time elapsed.

5. The Books of the New Testament, besides saying truth, contain a thousand
things which have not an essential relation to our salvation; and yet upon the
supposition of the church of Rome, an essential and fundamental fact is here
forgotton, which in placing the corner stone in its place, sustains the divine
edifice of religion. Was it then more necessary, to be informed, that the ship
which carried Paul, had for a sign Castor and Pollux, than to know that Peter
was bishop of Rome.

I think this reasoning overturns the foundation of popery, and proves that Dr.
Chandler and his brethren, have not received their authority from Peter; as
they imagine. It also proves, that one supposed chain of succession has been
mistaken, and that those ecclesiastical writers, on whom so much stress is
laid, have contradicted scripture, and published falsehoods, and therefore
deserve but little credit.

We have seen that the links of the chain of Roman bishops have been mistaken.
Let us reflect a little upon what the ancients say of the succession in the
church of Alexandria, which was also a very famous church.

Eutychius, patriarch of Alexandria, relates, that St. Mark in establishing
Annanias patriarch of that same chuch of Alexandria, established with him
twelve presbyters, to the end, that when the sea should become vacant, they
should fill it with one of their number, and that the remaining eleven, should
lay their hands upon him, bless him, and create him patriarch; and should
straightway choose another man, and establish him presbyter, in the stead of
him who had been made patriarch; and that by this means, the number of twelve
should be always complete. And the author of the questions upon the Old and
New Testament, says, that this custom prevailed throughout all Egypt, whilst it
had no bishop. By this fragment of ancient history, we see that the line of
succession in the Alexandrian church, ran at first, through a number of
presbyters, and not diocesan bishops; which disproves Dr. Chandler's notion of
the uninterrupted succession. The intelligent reader will observe, that the
patriarch was consecrated by his eleven fellow presbyters, and that they
established another presbyter in the patriarch's stead. St Jerome says, that at
Alexandria, since St. Mark the evangelist, until the bishops Hieracles and
Denis, the presbyters took always one of their number, whom they placed in a
more elevated station, and called him bishop, and it is very probable, that
presbyters ordained the first bishops of Gaul.

Dr. Doddridge, in his lectures justly observes, that contested elections, in
almost all considerable cities, make it very dubious which were the true
bishops and decrees of councils rendering all those ordinations null, where any
Simoniacal contract was the foundation of them, makes it impossible to prove,
at least on the principles of the Romish church; (and I may add Dr. Chandler's)
that there is now upon earth, any one person who is a legal successor of the
apostles.

Mr. Jones, (continues the Dr.) has undertaken to prove at large, that the
ordination of our English bishops, cannot be traced up to the church of Rome,
as its original; that in the year 668, the successors of Austin the monk (who
came over in 596) being almost extinct, by far the greatest part of the bishops
were of Scottish ordination, by Aidan and ^inan, who came out of the Culdee
Monastry of Columbanus, and were no more than presbyters. So that denying the
validity of presbyterian ordination, shakes the foundation of the episcopal
church of England.

I shall conclude this paper, with the animated and sensible words of Mr.
Boyse, on this subject. Speaking of the necessity of ordination by diocesan
bishops, and of the uninterrupted succession, he says, We should not indeed
wonder, to hear such senseless notions as these, advanced by the furious
parti^^ns of the church of Rome, though if any thing be capable to break this
pretended line of succession, it has been most notoriously broken in that
church, even with respect to the pretended heads of it, those Roman bishops,
that pretended all ecclesiastical power, to be derived from themselves as the
vicars of Christ: For if a man's ascending the papal chair, by simony, by
magic, by murder of his predecessors, by the interest of whores; if a man being
a notorious heretic, if his being openly abandoned to all manner of abominable
wickedness, or if his wretched ignorance of the Christian faith, or his
monsterous usurpation of the incommunicable rights of our blessed savior; in a
word, if any defects of understanding, in the doctrines of the gospel, or
visible immoralities of life, can ^^qualify a man for being a pastor or teacher
in the church of Christ; this pretended line of succession, has no where more
remarkably failed, than in the church of Rome, which makes the most confident
boast of it.

But that pretended protestants should lick up the poisonous spittle of those
popish writers, and throw it in the face of so many of the most eminent
teachers, that the reformed churches were ever blessed with, argues a strange
degree of judicial infatuation; that they should allow the validity of the
mission of the popish priests, who are given up to so manifold and pernicious
delusions, who are set apart by their ordinations, to celebrate an idolatrous
mass; and that they should at the same time deny the validity of the mission of
all those eminent pastors of the reformed churches who have been set apart to
their office (as Timothy was to ^his) by the laying on of the hands of the
presbyters. Nay, though they have been ordained by such pastors of particular
churches as were in the style of the three first centuries bishops; and this
after a due and precious trial of their ministerial abilities, and unblameable
conversation. This is such a strain of ignorance and uncharitableness, that we
may well cry out, tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of popish
Askalon, lest the daughters of popery rejoice, lest the sons of Antichrist
triumph: And well may they do so, to see pretended protestants, thus betray the
interest and honor of the reformation, by casting so vile a blot on so great a
part of those glorious instruments, whom God has employed to advance that
blessed work; and I cannot but approve the just censure that the learned (and
great) Monsieur Claude, in his defense of the reformation, has passed on the
patrons of these notions, in the following remarkable words; "To speak my
thoughts freely, it seems to me that this fierce opinion of the absolute
necessity of episcopacy, that goes so high as to own no church, no call, no
ministry, no sacraments or salvation in the world, where there are no episcopal
ordinations; though the true doctrine, the true faith and piety be there, and
which will make all religion depend on a formality, and on such a formality as
we have shown, to be of no other than human institution." This opinion can be
looked upon, no other than the worst character, a piece of pharisaism all over,
that strains at a gnat, and swallows a camel; and I can not avoid having at
least a contempt of those thoughts, and compassion for their authors.

DORDRACENSIS.

From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE, Oct. 17. A WHIP for the AMERICAN WHIG. BY TIMOTHY
TICKLE, ESQR [No. XXVIII.]
Accedit in multis eximia quaedam Petulantia, et aliis insultandi Libido;
quibus caeteri, etiam modesto Ingenio praediti, Studio se ac suam Libertatem
conservandi ac tuendi, non possunt non offendi, ac ad resistendum accingi.

PUF^ENDOR^, de Off. Hom. and Cavis.
To TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQUIRE
SIR,
MY last Letter contained a Refutation of the weak Sophistry used by the Whig
and his Confederates, with Regard to the Case of Ordination. -- A Case hard
beyond Measure; especially if we consider the unimpeached Loyalty of the
Persons who suffer, and the known Principles of those to whom that Suffering
may by some be attributed. The Sufferers have upon all Occasions, manifested
their Attachment to the Constitution, with which their own Interests are
intimately connected, by maintaining as far as lay in their Power, that Balance
between the Prerogative of the Crown, and the Liberty of the Subject, which
makes the British Government universally admired and revered. The Authors of
that Suffering, at least in some Measure, have been Persons invested with
Authority, who, though they esteemed the CHURCH of England the most perfect
Transcript, both as to Doctrine and Discipline, of the pure and amiable
Religion of the holy Jesus; yet suffered Numbers of the same Persuasion, to be
destitute of what the Church considers as instituted by the Apostles
themselves, who undoubtedly acted under divine Inspiration.

As to the Time past, I charitably hope this Neglect has proceeded from
Inattention, rather than Design. But what Reason can be now given for it, when
the Members of the Church are warm in their Application, and are only opposed
through blind Prejudice or mischievous Designs? Shall the just Expectations of
a Body of Men, whose Fidelity has been tried like Gold in the Fire, be
frustrated merely to gratify a FACTION, which like the Cameleon perpetually
changes Color, and at one Time, under the Mask of Religion, and Pretense of
Liberty, actually overthrew the Constitution; at another, joined with a Popish
Prince, to subvert our Liberties and introduce Tyranny and Superstition? Shall
this FACTION triumph in the Success of those Schemes, in the Prosecution of
which it has grossly insulted the wisest and best Men in the Nation, the truly
venerable Society for propagating the Gospel, and falsely reviled that Religion
which their Sovereign himself and the major Part of the Nation are firmly
attached to? Shall they succeed in their Endeavors to render suspected as
aiming at Independency, those very Persons, whose Loyalty, they themselves tell
us, has never been questioned? Shall such an unwarrantable Suspicion be deemed
sufficient to justify the with holding from a considerable Part of his
Majesty's Subjects some of the inestimable Rights of Conscience, innoxious to
the Public, and secured to them by Magna Charta? Are not the Members of the
CHURCH allied to the Mother Country in a more particular Manner, by the
Agreement of their religious Tenets; and may they not be driven to some Act of
Desperation by being subjected to particular Hardships, and refused the
Privileges common to all other Sects?

Should we suppose a Debate in the House of Commons upon this important
Question, whether a Bishop should be sent to America or no; and that some
paltry Copier of the American Whig (if such could there be found) had started
the Objection that this Measure would tend to free the Colonies from their
Dependence on Great Britain, I think it might be answered in the following
Manner.

I am truly surprised, Gentlemen, at the Objection just now made to a Measure
highly reasonable in itself, and absolutely requisite for the CHURCH in
America. The Colonies in general, are both by Principle and Interest dependant
on the Mother Country; whose Constitution is the Model of their own, whose
Protection has freed them from the Fear of their Enemies; and whose
Manufactures are necessary to their Subsistence. -- These are Ties of an
indissoluable Nature, at least so long as they are left in the undisturbed
Fruition of those Rights, which they claim as inherent in them by Nature, and
secured by the British Constitution; those Rights for which your Ancestors made
the noblest Struggles, and which they gloried in delivering down inviolate to
Posterity. And though there may be some turbulent Spirits amongst them, who were
rocked in the Cradle of Sedition, and brought up in Principles subversive of
Order and Government* yet I trust the Number is but small, and am sure their
Influence can never be extensive or lasting.

But let us not be induced by any groundless Calumnies to do Injustice to those
whom we have not the least Reason to suspect. The Churchmen in America are so
well persuaded of the Excellency and Moderation of the British Government, and
so fully sensible of the mutual Advantages accruing from the Dependence of the
Colonies on Great Britain, that though they may seek Redress by lawful Measures
for what they esteem Grievances, yet they would be the last to frame, or join
in any Project to shake off that Dependence, and thereby lessen those
Advantages. Besides it may be worth our Consideration whether we ought not to
bind them to us by further Motives of Gratitude and Affection; the strongest
Methods to secure their Fidelity and Attachment. -- I will venture to assert,
Gentlemen, and I assert it with that Holdness which Truth never fails of
inspiring, that Great Britain, has no Reason to be jealous of the CHURCH, but
that the Members thereof will always be an Obstacle to any Project of
disjoining the Colonies from the Mother Country.

And upon what Authority, Gentlemen, are we to harbor this Suspicion so
injurious to the Members of that Communion which the greater Part of us by far
join in? Upon the Authority of an insignificant and malevolent SCRIEBLER, whom
through Contempt I should have left unnoticed, had not his Sentiments been
espoused even in this House. A Scribbler, who in the Opinion of many, would
himself be an Advocate for such a Separation; yet audaciously charges the
CHURCH as inclinable to it.

Consider, Gentlemen, if you refuse the CHURCH this reasonable Request
(supposing it can conscientiously be refused) you dispirit the Friends of the
Constitution, and afford Matter of Joy to those, whose Attachment to it is far
from clear, to Fanatics and Independants. By this Means you may give the
latter such a Sway in the Colonies, and reduce the CHURCH to such a Situation,
as every Friend to Great Britain and America, must shudder at the very Thoughts
of.

True Policy, exclusive of every other Motive, ought to make us carefully
provide for the Welfare of the CHURCH in America. It Is Principles and
Constitution are so interwoven with, and adapted to those of the State, that
together both must flourish, both together fall. If we cast our Eyes back to
that unhappy Period when the great Barriers of the Constitution were broken
down; the House of Lords (if I may use the Expression) politically annihilated;
and a British SOVEREIGN ignominiously led to the Block, was not the CHURCH an
equal Sufferer, and by the same nefarious Hands?

Let us not then be swayed by Insinuations, which originally proceed from the
Father of all Lies, and are industriously propagated by Malice and Bigotry --
But let us give our Fellow Subjects and Members of the same Communion with
ourselves, those Indulgencies which Reason and Equity demand. The Bishop will
be appointed from hence, where his Connections will lie, and his Subsistence
must in a great Measure depend upon those Funds which are here -- By this Means
HE will hardly think of joining with, or encouraging the Colonies in any Scheme
to become independent -- -- And as his influence will probably extend both to
the Clergy and Laity of the CHURCH, the proper Dependence of Episcopalians on
Great Britain will be better secured even that at present.

It may seem extraordinary to some, that I should have thought this Objection
worthy of a serious Answer. But bold and impudent Assertions even when
unsupported by Plausibility, are apt to make too deep Impressions upon the
ignorant and unwary -- And though I trust, they would not produce such Effects
within these Walls, yet the Friends of the CHURCH might have been supposed to
admit the Charge were they not to answer it. -- Their Defense is built upon the
stable Rock of Truth; supported by Experience; and may defy all the Storms and
Tempests, which Presbyterianism and Independancy can raise, to over-turn it. --
The malicious Sneers, and impotent Cavils of the American Whig and his little
Associates, like so many half spent Waves, beat with fruitless Rage against the
Foot of it, and only serve to demonstrate the Solidity of it is Foundation.

In short, from the Principles entertained by the Members of the CHURCH, and
the Concessions of it is bitterest Enemies, we may conclude, that should every
other Denominations of Christians in America, conspire to render themselves
independent of Great Britain (which from the known Loyalty and duteous
Sentiments of many, we may believe will never be the Case) yet even then the
Members of the CHURCH would behave in such a Manner, that they might be
described in the Language of Milton.

-- "Faithful found,
"Among the Faithless, Faithful only they;
"Among innumerable false, unmoved,
"Unshaken, unseduc'd, unterrify'd,
"Their Loyalty they keep, their Love, their Zeal;
"Nor Number, nor Example with them work
"To swerve from Truth, or change their constant Mind."
I am sensible, Sir, that this Paper might have received many Decorations from
superior Art and Genius; but as I have already taken up a good deal of your
Time, I shall wave Apologies and subscribe myself,

Your most obedient humble Servant, ROGER DE CHAMPO.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE Oct. 24. The AMERICAN WHIG, No. XXXIII.
The following is inserted at the request of several of my readers, to show the
sentiments of the friends of liberty in England, respecting an American
episcopate; and the American Whig would be glad to know from Dr. Ch^ndler, Mr.
S -- b -- ry, or Mr. I -- gl -- s, by what faction of Presbyterians or
Independants in New York, the North-Briton is published in London.

The NORTH BRITON. [NUMB. LXI.]
To the NORTH BRITON.
SIR,
AGREEABLE to the promise I made in my last letter, I shall now proceed to
consider the religious grievances of the AMERICANS; which, though not carried, as
yet, to so great a height as those of a civil nature, are, nevertheless, as
real, and, if allowed to continue, and to operate their full effect, may
perhaps become, in time, still more intolerable. What I mean is, the design
that has been formed to introduce into AMERICA, the episcopal persuasion, as
the established religion.

This design, which is now no secret, has justly excited the apprehension and
indignation of almost every AMERICAN. They say, and they say it truly, that it
was in order to free themselves from the tyranny and despotism of the episcopal
hierarchy, that their ancestors abandoned their native country, and took refuge
in the barren wilds of the western continent. And is it to be supposed that
they will patiently bend their necks to a yoke, which neither they nor their
forefathers have been able to bear? Is it to be supposed, that, after having
enjoyed, for so long a time, the blessings of religious, and consequently, of
civil liberty, they will tamely forego them without a single struggle? Those
who think so, know not human nature; for every one that knows it, must be fully
satisfied, that there is nothing of which mankind are so very tenacious as of
their religious principles; and that almost every attempt to change these
principles, in opposition to the humor of the people, has terminated in the
destruction of the person who made it. Witness the injudicious and ill-timed
attempt of King Charles the First, to introduce into Scotland the episcopal
form of government. For it may be safely affirmed, that notwithstanding the
many rude encroachments which that prince had made upon the civil rights of his
English and his Scottish subjects, neither of these people would, at least for
some time, have risen in arms, had it not been for the violent steps which his
majesty took to change the religious principles of the latter. This was the
true source of the civil wars; and, in the like circumstances, will ever be the
source of civil wars. Nor, indeed, is it at all surprising that it should: for
can it be expected, that a people should change their religion, their manners
and their customs, in an instant, and with the same rapidity with which a
prince or his ministry may publish the ordinance that establishes a new
religion.

The truth is, most ministers consider the people as clay in the hands of the
potter, which they think they may mould into any shape they please; but I am
afraid, that our present ministers will find the AMERICANS composed of every
different matter. I am afraid, that, instead of clay, they will find them
composed of steel, that will break before it will bend, and will perhaps cut
the hand that shall attempt to bend it.

But, admitting the possibily of establishing episcopacy in AMERICA, such a
scheme could it actually be executed, ought to be strenuously opposed by every
friend to his country; as, were it once actually executed, it would certainly
be attended with the most pernicious consequences. It was, I think, a saying of
king James the First, No BISHOP, no KING; and, might I take the freedom of
opposing a maxim of mine to that royal chopper of sentences, I would say, and I
believe, with equal truth, No DISSENTER, NO LIBERTY. THE DISSENTRRS are, and
ever have been, the very life and soul of the republican part of our
government. They have often saved it, when upon the brink of destruction; and
it is to be hoped, they will still save it, if ever it should be again brought
to the brink of destruction.

The PURITANS, -- says a celebrated historian Hume.
, who cannot be supposed partial to that republican sect -- the PURITANS
preserved alive the small sparks of the love of liberty that were to be found
in the nation, during the reign of Elizabeth and of the two first princes of
the Stuart line. And whatever ridicule may be thrown upon the Puritans by some
courtsy^ophants; I must confess, for my own part, I would rather be a Puritan,
attached to law and liberty, than a Churchman, attatched to slavery and
despotism: I would rather be a Puritan, who can sit quietly under his own vine
and his own figtree, and none to make him afraid; than a Churchman, who is
either employed in ravishing the vineyards of others, or who, like Naboth, is
in danger of having his own vineyard ravished from him.

Accustomed to think freely in religious matters, the Protestant Dissenters
have ever exercised the same freedom in their political speculations. They
plainly perceived the absurd nature and pernicious tendency of the doctrine of
divine indefeasible hereditary right, and of passive obedience and
non-resistance; and they accordingly rejected it with the utmost indignation.
They boldly maintained, that all government was instituted for the good of the
people; that the Salus Populi was the Suprema Lex; that the sovereign was only
the first servant of the public; that the prince, as well as the subject, was
bound to obey the laws; that the moment the prince violated the laws, the
subject was, at least in that instance, freed from obedience; and that if ever
the prince proceeded to such a length as to violate the laws essential to the
constitution, the subject was entirely freed from his allegiance.

These are the principles, which the Dissenters have ever embraced, and which
they still embrace. These are the principles, upon which the civil war was
begun, and the revolution effected. These are the principles, upon which the
present family was established on the throne, upon which it still possesses it,
and upon which alone it can continue to possess it. And if ever any minister
should be so daringly wicked, as to advise any prince of that family to violate
these principles, he ought to be punished as a traitor to his king and to his
country.

But, perhaps, it will be said, that these principles have been always
embraced, and with as much sincerity, by the Episcopalians, as by the
Dissenters. If any one should say so, the whole English history would give him
the lie. Were they embraced by them in the reign of King James the First, who,
when, in the conference of d^vines at Hampton Court, he exalted his own
prerogative and the prelatical character, was told by the Archbishop of
Cante^bury, that undoubtedly his majesty spoke by the special assistance of
God's spirit? Were they embraced by them in the reign of King Charles the
First, whom they wickedly intoxicated with such high notions of the royal
prerogative, as precipitated him into measures that terminated in his own
destruction and in the destruction of the monarchy? Were they embraced by them
in the reign of King Charles the Second, to whom they suggested the most
arbitrary councils, and whom they strongly advised to get the doctrine of
passive obedience enacted into a Law; and who, when that prince made a bold,
and unhappily, but too successful an effort to reign without parliaments, so
vigorously assisted him in his unconstitutional measures, that the historian
James's hist. 8 vo. edit. vol. viii. p. 152.
above quoted, expressly says; the clergy especially were busy in this great
revolution; and being moved, partly by their own fears, partly by the
insinuations of the court, they represented all their antagonists as sectaries
and republicans, and rejoiced in escaping all those perils, which they believed
to have been hanging over them. Principles, the most opposite to civil liberty,
were every where enforced from the pulpit, and adopted in numerous addresses;
where the king was flattered in his present measures, and congratulated on his
escape from parliaments. Could words have been depended on, the nation appeard
to be running fast into voluntary servitude, and seemed even ambitious of
resigning into the king's hands, all the privileges, transmitted to them,
through so many ages, by their gallant ancestors.

And though they made some opposition to the violent measures of King James the
Second, yet was it chiefly because their own order was attacked; for, had that
prince been contented with destroying only the civil liberties of the nation,
without endeavoring to undermine its religion, it is more than probable that he
might have carried his point, at least for any interruption he was likely to
have met with from the established clergy.

True it is, they concurred in the revolution; but with what sincerity, the
great number of them who refused to take the oaths to the new government, and
the endless plots and conspiracies they hatched against it, sufficiently
declare.

Let it not, however, be imagined, that I mean to impute the above principles
and practices to the whole body of the Episcopal Clergy. God fordid! I know
there are some of the Episcopal Clergy, who are as staunch friends to the
liberty of the subject, as any Dissenter in the kingdom; witness the worthy
author of the Confessional, and several others. I only mean impute them to the
high flying, Jacobite clergy, and to their deluded followers among the laity,
who never were, and, I believe, never will be thoroughly reconciled to our free
government; and if ever they should be reconciled to our government, I shall
begin, I must own, to entertain a suspicion, that our government it no longer
free.

But, though I mean not to impute the above principles and practices to the
whole body of the Episcopal Clergy, I may yet, I am persuaded, take upon me to
assert, that the episcopal form of church government is much better adapted,
than that of the presbyterians or of any other sect, to an absolute monarchy;
and for the truth of this assertion I appeal to the sentiments of the most
sensible writers who have treated of politics. The distance between the proud
prelate and the poor curate is almost as great, as that between the grand
monarch and the meanest of his menial servants. The truth is, the spirit of
subordination that prevails in the episcopal form of church government, is
admirably calculated to preserve order, or rather slavery, in civil society;
for is it to be supposed, that a man, possessed of about ten pounds a year,
will dare to disobey the orders of one, possessed, perhaps, of as many
thousands?

It Is an old and just observation, that superstition is an enemy to civil
liberty, and enthusiasm a friend to it. -- But it is well known, that the
Church of England partakes considerably of the superstitious character; and
that all the Dissenters are, more or less, remarkable for enthusiasm. That this
is the natural tendency of superstition, will be evident to any one who
considers the situation of France, of Spain, or of any other Roman catholic
country, where superstition prevails in its full force, and where the poor
people are held in such a slavish subjection by their spiritual and temporal
rulers, that they are almost looked upon as beings of an inferior species. It
is commonly reported of a French bishop, who was a Man of Quality, as most of
the French bishops are, that, thinking it beneath his dignity to address his
flock in the usual style, Mes cheres freres, or Dearly beloved brethren, he
began his sermon thus; Canaille Chretien, eco^tez la parole de Dieu; Ye
Christian Scoundrels, listen to the word of God! Such were the ideas of a due
subordination, with which superstition inspired this right reverend and
honorable prelate!

But not only is the episcopal form of church government an enemy to liberty
and a friend to slavery, by the strong mixture of superstition which it
contains, and by the infinite distinction it makes among the different members,
of which it is composed: it is likewise so, by the great member of useless
priests with which it is encumbered, by the immense wealth possessed by these
priests, and by the unequal distribution of that wealth among the several
persons belonging to the priesthood.

The clergy of Scotland, if I am rightly informed, do not amount to one
thousand. The clergy of England, I believe, fall not greatly short of twelve
thousand. -- So that, supposing the clergy to bear the same proportion to the
laity in both these kingdoms, England should contain twelve times as many
inhabitants as Scotland. But England, according to the highest computation,
does not contain above three, or, at most, four times as many inhabitants as
Scotland; so that, making allowance for the greater number of people in the
former than in the latter, for every clergyman in Scotland there are at least
three, if not four, in England. And, as the number of clergy in England, is so
much larger than in Scotland, their revenues, it is well known, are
proportionably large. The whole annual revenue of the Scottish clergy does not
exceed 80,000 pounds; a sum hardly equal to what is possessed by the bishops
alone, and perhaps not one tenth of what is possessed by the whole body of the
English clergy. And as the annual revenue of the English clergy is so much
greater than that of the Scotch, it is divided, it is certain, among the
different members in a much more unequal and disproportionate manner. Few
Scottish clergymen have less than fifty, and few more than a hundred pounds a
year. But, as I hinted above, some English clergymen have ten thousand, and
some little more than ten pounds a year. Such an infinite difference is there,
in the number of clergymen, in the amount of their revenue, and in the
distribution of that revenue, between the episcopal and the presbyterian
establishments; and so much more favorable is the former, than the latter, to
an absolute and pure monarchy! But as the English government never was, is not
now, and I hope never will be an absolute and pure monarchy, so I pray I may
never be so unhappy as to live to see the time when the episcopal persuasion
shall be extended over the whole British dominions; for, if ever that time
should unfortunately arrive, I will take upon me to affirm, that our liberties
are, from that moment, irrecoverably ruined.

I will, indeed, admit, that the episcopal religion is the chief support of the
monarchical part of our government; and so far I wish it may always be
preserved in its present condition. But, as I never desire to see the
monarchical part of our government enlarged, so neither do I desire to see the
episcopal religion extended beyond its present bounds. Our government, as I
observed in my last letter, partakes more of a republic than of a monarchy. The
episcopalians are the chief support of the monarchical part of it; the
dissenters, of the republican; and therefore I wish, that there may be always a
greater number of dissenters than episcopalians in the British dominions. The
crown, God knows! does not at present stand in need of any additional
assistance from the hierarchy. It is daily receiving fresh accessions of
strength from a variety of other quarters; which, I am afraid, it is not so
easy to block up; and which yet, if they are not blocked up, will in time
confer upon it such an exorbitant degree of power, as will enable it to
overturn the liberties of the nation.

Let the ministry, therefore, drop their ill judged scheme of establishing
episcopacy in America; and let the bishop of London, who has lately been
appointed one of the L -- of Tr -- e and Pl -- ns, direct his attention rather
to temporal than to spiritual objects. Nor need he be afraid of being put out
of countenance by the superior abilities of his fellow-commissioners; for,
however ignorant he may be of the nature of commerce, I will venture to assure
him, that he cannot well be more ignorant than his colleagues.

I am, Sir, Yours, etc. L.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE Oct. 10. A KICK for the WHIPPER, [No. XXI.] By Sir
ISAAC FOOT.
Rail on, my friends! What more the Kick can crown
Than -- 's smile, and your obliging frown?
YOUNG.
To Sir ISAAC FOOT.
Dear Sir ISAAC,
I beg 10,000 pardons for procuring you the long threatened cuff from the huge
fist of that Herculean bruiser Plead well's Friend. Though you felt not the blow,
I must make you satisfaction for the insult, by a vindictive kick on the brawny
posteriors of this Broughtonian champion. Sq. T's extravagant encomiums on him,
while they do himself no honor, are very ill-judg'd tokens of "respect;" for,
it being almost impossible to cause ^^ting prepossessions in the minds of
competent judges, previous commendation seldom fails of introducing even
something more than a disappointment. Both Sq. T. and P's F. (...) ready to
tear their beards (if any they have) out of vexation; -- poor rogues! I pity
them, but I must kick them too.

P's F. "fears it may be thought too low a stoop" for him "to take any notice"
of you, Sir Isaac. He may make himself very easy on that score; but let him
remember that the towering GOLIATH, in spite of all the contemptuous airs he
gave himself, was forced to stoop lower still, and even submit to be more than
kicked, -- to be trampled upon, by little David.

I had said, that to such an ignorant fellow as I was, nothing seemed, at least
so well, to admit of a reply as an untruth; but that Mr. P. scorning such
ordinary business, appeared ambitious of the honor of replying to real truths,
and desirous of trying his abilities at defending the contrary: -- but P's F.
says you apologize for your ignorance, and wonder that Mr. P. should decline
replying to an untruth, and be ambitious of entering upon the defense of the
contrary. -- I will just suggest, that I wondered not, (nor had I reason) at
Mr. P. -- That an Irony is no apology; and that the contraries of truth and
untruth are very different things: and then from his misrepresentations and
blunders, let your readers judge for themselves of the "goodness of heart and
abilities of Pleadwell's Friend. "Lawyers," he says, "in their pleadings are
not bound down to^ very nice rules of composition." Supposing this to be true,
what then? -- ^y remark concerned not composition but sentiment, and if lawyers
are not "bound down to" nice reasonings and even expressions at least
intelligible, FROM ALL OF THE PROFESSION -- DELIVER ME! say I. If the passage
in question was a mere "Imperfection in style," a direct acknowledgment had
been much more decent than an oblique reflection on forensic practice; but if
you, Sir Isaac, make it a point to "pass over" none such, -- you have an hard
task, an A^g^an stable indeed.

But the observation be very wisely makes, par. 3d. viz. that "lawyers are much
shackled with forms," is more true, but to me seems as impertinent as it is
inconsistent with the other. I know imperfection as to form, and 20 other
Things, expose a plea to a demurrer; but I cannot find that untruth as to facts
is ever alledg^d as the cause of insufficiency. -- But perhaps I Am mistaken,
for (as I said before, I am no lawyer, though eno' of one perhaps to discover,
that P's F. is neither more nor less, than an attorney's clerk, and probably
the identical farmer Pleadwell himself

In my (...) letter I did not, as (I da^e say) you, Sir Isaac, in (...) of your
kicks ever did* "aspire to literary fame." Kicking (...) paltry whippe^ would
naturally be done under cover, as being, however useful to the public, rather
disreputable to a decent private character; but, if P. did indeed aim (as his
friend suggests) at literary fame, I must needs say, he was not in the read,
and dare promise, that, though he, his friend, and even Sq. T* himself, should in
person avow their respective performances in presence of 500 old women, not one
of them all would present either of them with a single sprig of laurel.

P^^. 4th P's F. boggles miserably at the word merely. He may ironize and
syllogize as long as he pleases; but 'twill after all be pretty clear* that by
that "unlucky word" P. has blabb'd out, what he would copy an armful of
juridical formulae to get in again: for he as well as William Pere Williams was
pleading about "aggrandizement -- on RUIN," and not -- beside, near, or in the
midst of WEAKENING and ALMOST ruin, as his friend considers the matter, He will
probably call this also "grammatical artillery," -- Words indeed are of little
value but as expressive of sentiment (and hence the world has been plagued by
some attorneys and many scribblers, with words without meaning and sounds
without sense;) yet, as words are supposed to stand for ideas, reasoning upon
their meaning (when intelligible) I call -- lo^ ^rtillery. Thus much for
canonading.

Par. 5th. His conceptive powers seem weak as to the danger, but very strong as
to the attainableness of PRELACY, in a Church which has not so much as
existence without it (ha! ha! ha!) i. e. according to him, THE CHURCH in
America is no Church at all. His way of "turning the tables" is sophistical; --
we never said, "Churchmen should not have a single clergyman ordained, except
he went to England;" much less that "they should for ever be obliged to go
there: To bring the matter to a fair issue, let him (with all his abilities and
goodness of heart) imagine himself a dissenter, Par. 6th He confesses himself
no match for you (i. e. me) at giving delicate epithets etc; -- he wrongs
himself; but the public will give him the disavowed character due to such
singular modesty.

Hitherto I Have used this piddler as a play thing; but his 7th par, half excites
my indignation, he represents me as in effect saying, that the right of
episcopacy must necessarily be as human in America as in England; when I only
inferred, it could not be more divine. How miserable the cause in which such
resources are thought necessary! Far from "confounding distinct things" I
rather distinguished confounded things; so that his trite chatter about his
lordship and Timothy (par. 8th) is as impertinent as it is gratis dictum, and
his mistake (if such it be) lies in scribbling, against what he did not
understand. He endeavors to persuade us, that without an establishment of the
Church of England, PRELACY could not, and with one, would not necessarily, be
accompanied with secular powers. -- He might have saved himself the trouble. --
That it could not (while right and power differ) few will believe; -- that it
would not NECESSARILY, we knew before; -- but that it MIGHT and probably WOULD,
we are fully, persuaded, -- and that is enough.

P's F. really acted a prudent part in passing over my 8 last paragraphs, which
he is however requested to stumble over, the next time he spits his spite at
Sir Isaac Foot instead of

OBADIAH LISTEN^

From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE, Oct. 24. A WHIP for the AMERICAN WHIG. BY TIMOTHY
TICKLE, ESQR [No. XXIX.]
To TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQUIRE
Yet let me flap this Bug with gilded Wings.

PO^E.
SIR,
THOUGH the Church in America has ever studied assiduously to promote Concord,
and to conciliate Peace with every Denomination; yet, a restless Party,
discontented with the freest Enjoyment of their religious Privileges have been
continually waring against her, and constantly increasing in their Virulence,
and Animosity. From the Heighths to which they have already risen, every Friend
to Liberty and Justice, may judge what the established Church must expect from
an Increase of their Power.

So gigantic at this Day are their Strides, that for a candid Appeal to the
Public in its Behalf, his Majesty's and the national Religion, has been
stigmatized in the most injurious Manner; and a Bishop under the Restrictions
proposed, threatened with a Reception similar to that of the Commissioners of a
late Act. Whether such a Conduct is agreeable to their Professions of a Love to
religious Liberty, and the Interests of their Country, I leave to their most
insatuated Votaries to determine. Every good Man will endeavor to calm as much
as possible the Spirit of Party; but these Men, fond of fishing in troubled
Waters, have ever made it their Study to promote Dissentions. For this Reason,
in this Country where ever the Name were in general unheard of, they would
diffuse the Principles of Opposition among us, by the Party Distinctions of
Whig and Tory; and kindle Discord in the Church by a Division into High and
low. To Answer the last mentioned End, the American Whig has affected the Guise
and Appearance of a Churchman, -- that he may stab us the more sensibly. But I
am confident that his Disguise is so thin, that he stands exposed to the Scorn
of every just Man, and the Contempt of the weakest. However as Poison is
destructive by whatever Hand administered, I shall make such Observations on his
Attempt in the 25th No. of the Whig, as I flatter myself will be a sufficient
Antidote, and point out the Author's native Hideousness.

The two first Paragraphs of this Epistle are taken up with abusive Reflections
on the British Hierarchy, without Advancing one Proof of his foul-mouthed
Assertions. They are thick sown with Reflections on the "Pride, Ambition, and
Tyranny of Priests;" and the evident Intent of them appears to be, to excite an
Odium against Prelacy. Now, though such an Episcopate as he combats with was
never desired -- though the onus probandi lies on him, and these Affirmations
might float down the Tide of Oblivion with the rest of those light,
unsubstantial, unprov'd Asseverations which he has thrown out, and which the
Reader is no more obliged to swallow than the Decisions of the Pope: Yet since
by their being so often repeated in so rancorous a Manner, they may tend to
excite in weak Minds a Disrespect for the present Constitution of Government; I
shall offer a few Particulars worthy the Consideration of every Well-wisher to
his Country.

Since the Legislature, for the Preservation of true Religion, has wisely
established a Church, which differs only from other Denominations, for the most
Part, in mere external Modes, and her external Modes are deemed most consonant
to the Principles of Government, every true patriot will either promote such an
Establishment, or at least not oppose it.

Again, -- If the Legislature, for the Encouragement and Support of this
Church, has decreed to those whom it judges most capacitated for her Service by
their Piety, Learning, or Assiduity, certain Immunities and Honors, every
Friend to Religion and Society must approve of the Procedure.

Since these ecclesiastical Rights and Immunities, are so interwoven with the
civil Polity, and have been so molded and fashioned with the Constitution of
the State, that the Extermination of Prelacy, will either destroy or very much
endanger the Commonwealth; every wise Politician will support the one, if only
to preserve the other.

Further, -- since the present Bishops make no undue use of their Powers, but
mildly exercise them to charitable Purposes, -- to the Increase of
Protestantism and Learning, to the Relieving the Poor, the Propagation of the
Gospel, and the Diminution of Vice and Ignorance; it follows, that whosoever by
oppugning and maligning them, endeavors to diminish their Usefulness, proves
himself an Enemy to the Interests of Religion and his Country, and acts
contrary to the Character of a Protestant and true Briton.

Our pious Forefathers, led by the Example of all former Ages, considering
their Obligations to Gratitude greater than those of any other Nation;
remembering the Promise our LORD and SAVIOR has made unto them, who should
confer the smallest Favor on his Disciples; reflecting how earnest the Apostle
is in arguing, That if the Ministers of the Law were so amply provided for,
less Care ought not to be had of those, who under the Gospel possessed
correspondent Situations in the Church; knowing how expedient and necessary it
was that those Rulers, who are especially commanded to be given to Hospitality,
and to provoke all others by Examples of Charity, should have Means by which
they might effectually perform these Duties. -- Considering these Things, they
liberally set apart Livings, Lands and Possessions, for the Use of the Church;
and though these have been invaded by the avaricious Hand of Persecution, and
mangled by the sacrilegious Jaws of Rapine and Rebellion, yet a Remnant
continues to this Day; -- and will continue so long as Justice, Learning, and
true Religion survive!

The Practice of strengthening the Reins of Government, by a Reverence paid to
the Officers employed in the Service of Religion, seems to be founded on a
Dictate of natural Reason, adopted by all Nations, and authorized by the
Example of God himself, the divine Legislator of the Jews. So weak is human
Nature, that it looks upon Poverty (however unjustly) with Contempt. To avoid
this, since a Reverence for Governors is essentially necessary to the
Preservation of Order, prudent Legislatures have annexed Degrees of Dignity and
Honor to every public Office, according to its Usefulness. As therefore the
Officers appointed for the Promotion of Religion, are the first in Expediency,
it is wise to encourage them with adequate Supports. -- Again, it is agreeable
to sound Policy, to engage as many Persons of Learning and Abilities in the
Service of any Society as possible: For Reason and Experience pronounce, that
without the Aids and Ornaments of Learning, no Society will either flourish or
be much respected. Now it is evident that the wisest Men will generally want
the Incitements of Honor and Fortune, as Rewards for their Labors, and Spurs
to their Diligence. Wise therefore is it in any Nation to stimulate Men of
Learning to those Offices which are essential to its well-being, by proper
Rewards. -- Further, Want begets Servility, which is inconsistent with
Superintendency. Men likewise, in such a Situation, are more subject to the
Becks of Power, and more liable to Bribery and Corruption. The Poverty also of
some of the Clergy, has, in the Opinion of the wisest Politicians, occasioned
most of that Neglect and Despite with which the Order itself is too frequently
treated, to the great Prejudice and Obstruction of Christianity. Much more just
Cause of Declamation, are those Pensions which are squandered on the Idle, the
Vicious, and Profane, than that Provision for the decent Support of Men, who
are the Supporters, (under God) of Protestantism; who are Ornaments of their
Country, and the firmest Defenders of every Species of Liberty.

And lastly, to doubt of the Propriety of their retaining their legal Incomes,
is to call in question the Knowledge of those Men, who reared the Fabric of our
happy Constitution, and so combined its Powers, that to take them away, would
render the Scale of Authority, so well-balanced, unequal. Upon the Whole, I
doubt not but those very confident Assertors, the American Whig, and his
Associates, appear in the Eyes of all reasonable Men, in the very Colors with
which they would paint others; for, like the Papists, Enemies to our good
Government, they have ever endeavored to foment Divisions among his Majesty's
peaceable Subjects by railing against Establishments, and scattering their
poisonous, discordant Principles round the Land. They have also acted repugnant
to the Spirit of Christianity, which breathes a Love for all Mankind: which is
tender, long suffering, pitiful, courteous, which despises the narrow
Principles of Rancour and Sectarism; which hops all Things, believes all
Things. Their Conduct is also inconsistent with sound Policy, which bids us
diffuse among our fellow Subjects a Reverence for Government; which enjoins us
to promote the general Interests of Religion; and which at this nice Juncture
direct us, more especially, to increase Harmony and Union, and to strengthen,
as much as possible, the Reins of Government.

From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE, Oct. 1768. To the American Whig. From the SHADES,
Sept. 8, 1768.
My dear Friend,
EVEN in these Realms of Woe, Experience has at length convinced me, that
Comfort may fixd an Entrance. My Situation, whether considered abstractedly, as
relating only to myself, or as it is rendered more dismal by that of my fellow
Prisoners, has been gloomy indeed, and I can truly say, that 'till the
Publication of your first Number, I was altogether unhappy: But as the
Transactions of you Mortals are not hid from our Eyes, the American Whig in all
his Glory, could not fail of contributing some Relief to those Agonies of Mind
I have so long suffered, in beholding England, and its Dependencies,
flourishing under the Establishment of religious Principles, diametrically
opposite to those which I so strongly inculcated by myself and Emissaries, and
which with unspeakable Joy, I find you and my other Friends so faithfully
adhere to. Go on with unabating Vigor; and let no Considerations of Religion
or Humanity stop you in your Career: Be assured of the Truth of what I so
loudly proclaimed, that while the Church of England as by law established has
the Ascendency in the British Empire, our Cause can never flourish. You know,
my worthy Friend, how contradictory that Church and all its Doctrines are to
our past, present, and future Views. While she subsists in her prefent Form, it
will be utterly impossible even to totter the Constitution of the present
State, much more to tumble it into those Ruins, upon which alone we and our
Friends may arise into that Power which we have so long and so arduously sought
after, Prelacy and Plumb Pudding must be abolished; Bishops and Lawn Sleeves
must be rooted out; and no Pains must be lest untaken, no Steps nor Designs
untried, to accomplish so glorious a Purpose. To this End, let all your
Preachers thunder out Anathemas against all the Promoters, or even silent
approvers, of Episcopalian Worship: Let them bid the People beware of that
Scarlet Whore the Church of England, and keep wisely separated from a For^ of
Worship (such as Here Is) evidently calcula^ed to extirpate all levelling
Principles; -- that the King can do no Wrong, is (...) ^ost dama^^ble Error: --
that he can do Wrong, witness poor Cha^les the First, (that unsuspecting
deluded M^^) those Head I with a Perseverance peculiar to th^^e of o^^
Principles, brought to the Block, and with a glorious Resolution (that will
hand my Name down to the latest Posterity) severed with my own Hands from his
Body. Tru^^ it is, I was disguised; -- but Art! Art! Art! I would not have been
thought the Murderer: My Schemes would have been then immediately seen through
and detested; and I should not have been ^o^sted at this Day by so many honest
Levelle^s, as I with Pleasure find are still living in those Dominions, over
the People which I ruled, as the Object at once of their Fear and Regard.

Go on my dear Whig, -- look not behind you for fear Conscience, that Bugbear,
should then stare you in the Face; but push forwards boldly, and in defiance of
that very Power and Government which nourishes you, and so many of my other
dear Descendants. But when they think themselves most secure than shall the
happy Time be, when thou and those of thy Principle; shall turn -- and sting
them to Death. -- Oh! pray for the glorious Period when the Blood of Oliver
which now warms your Hearts, shall reign immovable upon the throne of Britain.
Then shall you be sed with the Fat of Bishops, (more delicious than that of
Green Turtle) and the Blood of them shall flow like Oil down your never to be
satiated Throats. Then Lambeth, that Sink of Wickedness and Episcopacy, shall
become a Place where a Synod shall be held, and where the Descendants of Noah
Well's, the fasting Scribe, shall flourish like the Palm Tree! Then shall
Meeting Houses be built of hewn Stone, yea, and the Pillars thereof be of
goodly Cedars; and gilded Cherubim^ shall hang between the Arches; and the
Church Estate (that Object of your unbounded Desires) shall become Gardens and
pleasant Places, for the true born Sons and Daughters of those bitter Opposers
of Episcopacy, -- even the honest Presbyterians, those meck and lowly followers
of the Author of the Christian Religion. -- Oh the Bishop! the Bishop! Be a
very Watchtower, -- be an Independent Reflector; -- above all, continue to be
the American Whig, and I will cherish that precious Drop of my Blood that
lives in thine Heart, and which will never be at rest 'till the Episcopalians
are demolished, and Presbyterians triumphant.

Your ever affectionate O CROMWELL.
P. S. Never mind Tim, -- We must allow he speaks Truth, but by Sophistry and
Cunning you can ruin ever so good a Cause. Your Abilities are Great.



From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE Oct. 31. The AMERICAN WHIG, No. XXXIV.
A Superstructure, whose foundation gives way, and must every few years,
receive new props for its support, is evidently not the contrivance of a wise
master builder. That this is the case, with modern episcopacy, will be evident
to every one, who considers, the several foundations, which have been at
different times esteemed its support. If we look back but about thirty years,
we shall find the then advocates for diocesan episcopacy, endeavoring to
defend their cause, by alleging, that the sacred scripture expressly speaks of
Bishops in the church. They depended upon making it appear, that those who in
the New Testament, are styled Bishops, were an order distinct from, and
superior to, such as were styled Presbyters. -- While these scripture-bishops
were trumped up, as a sufficient foundation for modern episcopacy; the
distinction between Apostles, and all other gospel ministers, was readily
acknowledged. It was readily acknowledged, that the apostolate was a gift
received immediately from Christ, that it was a personal gift, not to be
communicated from one to another, -- it was readily acknowledged, that
Apostles, as distinct from, and superior to all other gospel ministers, were
made such, by their being chosen witnesses of Christ, to the world; that he had
appeared in the flesh, that he had suffered, died, arose from the dead, and
ascended into Heaven. By their being inspired, or divinely illuminated with the
knowledge of the whole gospel scheme. -- By their being entrusted with the
important message of publishing to the world the truths and doctrines of the
gospel; and declaring the way of life, and terms of Salvation. -- And by their
being authorized to constitute, form and regulate the gospel church state,
according to the mind of Christ; together with a capacity to give full proof of
their acting with authority from Christ, in those matters, by working miracles,
etc' These things used to be acknowledged to be the things by which the
Apostles as such, were constituted, and distinguished from all other ministers
in the church. It used to be acknowledged that the commission in Matt. xxviii.
28, did relate to them, not as Apostles, but as the order of ministers, which
was to continue in the church, to the end of the world; and consequently in
which they were to have successors. It is but a sew years since, that the
warmest advocates for episcopacy, could readily see and admit these
distinguishing gifts and qualifications, which constituted, and were essential
to the apostolic office; while they depended upon supporting episcopacy, by
the instances of such as were styled Bishops in the New Testament. But having
been obliged, by the superior force of truth, to acknowledge, that in the
scripture, the term Bishop, and Presbyter or Elder, are promiscuously used for
the same office; they now generally give up what but about thirty years ago,
was their whole dependence; and are obliged to fabricate a new foundation to
support their admired episcopacy. The present scheme is to make us believe,
that the bishops of the Church of England, are Apostles. The present zealots
for prelacy are so strangely infatuated, (...) to deny, that any thing
extraordinary, is necessary to make an apostle. They can now see none of those
extraordinary gifts, conferred upon the twelve Apostles by Christ himself, as
being necessary; but suppose that men at this day, may warrantably act as
Apostles, without any of those gifts, by virtue of the commission Christ gave
to the standing officers in the church. And by this new scheme would persuade
us, that the present set of Bishops in the English church, are as much
Apostles, and as much vested with the apostolic office and authority as ever
were Peter or Paul. A notable scheme this! And which, if they can establish,
will effectually support their lordly and domineering purposes. For if their
Bishops, are equal with the Apostles, in point of office and authority, then
they have as much power to mould and fashion the form and regulations of the
church, to their own humor and liking, as the twelve Apostles had. And to
dispute the matter with them, is to dispute the authority of an Apostle; and
equally criminal with rejecting the authority of the sacred books of the
New Testament. To what length will blind zoal, and party spirit carry weak
mortals!

But before we oppose the authority of an Apostle, let us hear their defense,
and see what evidence they adduce that their Bishops are Apostles.

Dr. Chandler tells us, that he will only give us a sketch of the arguments of
episcopacy; and for better satisfaction, refers us to Archbishop Potter, and
Mr. Leaming. And in the last of those authors, do we find in page 10. this
remarkable intelligence, Let it be carefully remarked, that those who were
commissioned to send others, were called Apostles, in the Time when the
New Testament was penned; but in the next, and after ages, out of honor to the
Apostles, the apostolic office, had the name of Bishop appropriated to it. LET
IT BE CAREFULLY REMARKED that out of honor to the first set of Apostles, the
very next set of Apostles, laid aside the name which Christ had given to that
order; and instead of it, took the name of Bishop, which till then, did belong
to that order which was also styled Elders! Let it be carefully remarked, that
this alteration in the use of words, was brought about, all the world over,
through the whole church, immediately upon the death of the last of the
Apostles; that those who till then, were distinguished by the title of Apostle,
should all agree to lay aside that title, so that no ONE, in the church
universal, was ever known to be styled an Apostle, after the death of the first
twelve; and that all such as were really Apostles, should, forever after be
known, and distinguished by the title of Bishop, which till that moment, had
been given only to Presbyters. Let it be carefully remarked; and truly
remarkable it is, that such a piece of history should life so long concealed,
and never be published to the world, till within these few years.

Upon hearing so extraordinary a novelty, the following inquiries will
naturally arise in the minds of the curious: If the second set of Apostles,
were really Apostles as well as the first; what reason could they have, for
such an excessive veneration for the persons of their immediate predecessors,
as to relinquish the title Christ had given to their office; and rob another
set of officers in the church, of a title which did confessedly belong to
them? Or was the second set of Apostles, ashamed to be known by the title,
which had been given to the poor fishermen of Gallilee? Or was it for sear that
if they retained the nam^, they should also be exposed to like sufferings with
their predecessors? Or is it not, because that after the death of the first
twelve, there were none who were really Apostles? This is the true reason, why
there have been none since, who have pretended to the name, till very lately?
It is therefore to be hoped, that these retailers of ancient history, will in
some future publications, inform the world how these things were.

Again, this author, to whom the Dr. refers us, exerts himself to prove that
Timothy was an Apostle in the church of Ephesus. And in proof of it, recites
several particular charges, which the Apostle Paul gave him, in the two
epistles written to him, which he supposes would serve to show Timothy, to
have authority in the church above, and over Presbyters; and that he must
therefore necessarily be an Apostle. But let Timothy have what authority over
the Elders in the church of Ephesus, he can suppose; It is evident that the
Apostle Paul exercised much more authority over Timothy, than the Apostle
Timothy did over the Elders of Ephesus. And consequently, according to this
argument, there must be Apostles over Apostles, as well as Apostles over
Elders. And where shall we stop, till we come to the Apostle general, the
pretended successor of Peter?

It is very evident, that Timothy, as well as several other evangelists, were
under the authority and direction of the Apostle Paul; and were sent by him to
one place after another, as occasion required. And Timothy discovered a
continual readiness to comply with his injunctions in the propagating of the
gospel, and in the service of the churches. But if Timothy was an Apostle as
well as Paul, why do we not some times find him called an Apostle? Why do we
not find him some times, sending Paul from one church to another, as well as
Paul's sending him. The Apostle Paul, wrote many epistles to the churches; and
it was his common method, in his introduction to style himself an Apostle. In
many of these epistles, Timothy also is joined with him: And the introduction
runs in this form, "Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ. and "Timothy our brother."
Why does Paul style himself an Apostle, unless it is to give weight and
authority to his epistles? And if Timothy was also an Apostle, why was not his
apostolic character also mentioned to impart an additional weight? Or was the
Apostle Paul so aspiring and lordly, as not to suffer his brother-apostle
Timothy to have equal honor with himself? These are inquiries of importance in
this case, and call loudly for a full and satisfactory solution, before a
submission to the apostolic character and authority, of these pretended
successors of the apostles can be reasonably expected.

While we view this struggle, for the support of modern episcopacy, and observe
how often they are obliged to replace the foundation that supports it; that as
often as they find themselves confuted upon one plan they so readily form to
themselves another; which with much patching, may serve their cause, for about
fifteen or twenty years; and is then given up by their absent advocates, and a
new one substituted in its room: Who, I say, can suppose such a tottering
building to be the workmanship of the divine architect? The present scheme of
making Apostles of their Bishops is too chimerical to be long in vogue; and too
ridiculous to bear a serious confutation -- But weak as it is, it must be
asserted, till some prolisic genius shall invent another substitute.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE Oct. 31. A KICK for the WHIPPER, [No. XXII.] By Sir
ISAAC FOOT.
-- sone verbum
Quod sonui, crepo quod crepui --
LILLY'S as in praesenti.
THE greatest part of the ingenious citizen's 2d and 3d addresses ( Whip No.
XXI XXII.) consists of declamation, and that, either on subjects foreign to the
purpose, or such as he had sufficiently blubbered about in his first juvenile
production. However, as my undertaking obliges me to take some notice of him, I
shall not disdain to follow his example; and therefore call upon you, my
countrymen, to "attend to the merits of the cause," yet hoping you will excuse
me, though I tell you nothing but what you knew very well before.

A great many years ago (long before the citizen was born) Bishops were
solicited for America; -- 5 or 6 years ago the affair was vehemently urged at
home (disinterestedly no doubt!) by one Dr. S --; and more lately a (still more
impatient) convention of scarce less than -- XX clergymen, sent home to their
superiors no less than 7 urgent petitions for a right reverend father or two,
and, that their downy lordships on their arrival might have as little noise as
possible to disturb their repose, AFTERWARD commissioned the velvet-mouth'd
Dr. C. to assure the people, that their lordships would not hurt 'em. But the
more prudent, alarmed, as much perhaps by the preposterous conduct of the
affair, and the pains taken to ^ull them into security, as by the thing itself,
smelt a rat, and among the rest the Whig, thinking it his duty publicly to warn
the unwary, in order to justify his own apprehensions, found it necessary
(among other things) to discover the genius of the English hierarchy; and this
alarm has been preversely represented as an attack of the church of England.

The fly tendency of a considerable part of the 1st of the C 's pieces under
consideration, is to represent dissenters as enemies to all civil, as well as
episcopal government, (else what means the tale about German fanatics, etc.?)
yet all this Sq. T. calls "candor and sound reasoning." Wicked fellows, thus
to scandalize America, (at this time especially) because opposed in selfish
schemes that tend to ruin her?

Par. 4th. The C. charges the Whig with self-contradiction; he deserves to be
whipped for lying. For truth's sake, reader, compare this par. with the Whig's
1st No. and then tell me what you think of a cause which needs falsehood for its
support, and of a paper in which this little Whig pecker can find no holes but
such as he has made himself.

The letter from John Winthrop and Co. is a strong proof of the piety, charity,
and affection of those our forefathers; but, as it contains not the most
distant invitation of any Bishop to mortify himself so much as to accompany
them, it seems not sufficient to prove (as it should seem designed) that they,
if now living, would be more urgent for the importation of spiritual
carnalities than we their "degenerate sons" are. -- Quere, was not the scrap of
Greek in the 6th. par. designed to give the good old ladies of this city etc.
important ideas of the citizen's erudition?

In his next lucubration the C. very wisely tells us, "RELIGION is advantageous
to society." Well! and what then? -- why, a civil establishment of a particular
form of church government must be so too, according to him; and he even boasts
that the civil establishment of the church of England "has cost a million of
Lives, etc." -- Excellent form indeed! -- but what tickles me most is, that,
unless he very unskilfully expresses himself, he in effect owns it to have been
"indifferent" previous to its establishment; Thus at once giving up the divine
right of episcopacy so much stickled for. -- But whether expressional or
sentimental, I must not take advantage of his blunder; for, I Am told, he is a
child.

He next undertakes (champion like!) a defense of the clergy, which is partly
needless and partly impotent. Does any one condemn the whole order? No; God
forbid! -- for my part, I sincerely believe there are many humble pious, godly
persons even among at least the inferior clergy of the church of England, who,
( primitive Bishops themselves) lament in secret the decay of primitive
Christianity. Such clergymen as these we honor; but shall their merit excuse
those who, under cover of the cassock, disgrace the ministerial character, and,
as though an episcopal ^aw had conferred an uncontrollable privilege of serving
the devil, seek the fleece instead of the flock, and are squabbling who shall
be greatest and richest in the kingdom of heaven? No; their office is indeed
sacred, but their persons as profane as our own, and more damage is done to
religion by the bad examples of individuals, than by all the undistinguishing
satire of the world against the order itself. Would you know, reader, why this
impartial layman, the C. is so solicitous about the credit of the American
clergy? Perhaps I can tell you; I Am told, he is soon to be of the number
himself, and wear a band, perhaps before he wears a beard.

I doubt not but Bp. Burnett and other moderate churchmen of the last century,
even communicated with foreign protestants, and can easily believe that even
Laud and other bigots of his kidney, might, from complaisance, etc. call them
BRETHREN; nay I know that formerly foreigners have actually been allowed to
officiate in English churches without reordination. -- But what of all this?
Are they thus considered and thus treated now? -- Oh! but "it is unreasonable" it
seems, "that any one," (even a protestant, however excusable his ordination)
"should enjoy the immunities" i. e. the benefice or money, "without complying
with the terms required:" that is, in plain English, until a Christian ceremony
has been by repetition legally played the sool with, as an holy ordinance must,
since the Test Act, be profaned to qualify a man to cut the throats of his
fellow creatures. -- Why ay! -- That I did not at first think of; however I
cannot help thinking of the success of Mons. HOUDIN.

E.

From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE, Oct. 31. A WHIP for the AMERICAN WHIG. BY TIMOTHY
TICKLE, ESQR [No. XXX.]
Amphibious Thing! that acting every Part,
The trifling Head, and the corrupted Heart, --
-- Beauty that shocks you, Parts that none will trust,
Wit that can creep, and Pride that licks the Dust.
POPE.
To TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQUIRE
SIR,
I Proceed to make some Remarks on the remaining Parts of the Letter signed an
American Churchman. In spite (says he) of all the Address of the Partisans of
the Scheme to conceal their true Aim, they have given so many Proofs, that
Prelates and Bishops are the Characters they wish to see established among us.
And whether this is sufficiently proved must be left to the Public to determine.

That any Evidence has been brought of this Assertion, I absolutely deny; -- to
prove it the American Whig has labored only by the Perversion of harmless
Sentences in the Appeal, which common Sense must evince could never be
understood in that Meaning. On the other Hand, he has passed by unnoticed, that
Section, wherein the Plan is fairly stated; and where it is declared, that
without Equivocation or Reservation, the Bishops requested are to have no
Authority, but purely of a spiritual and ecclesiastical Nature, such as is
derived altogether from the Church, and not from the State. The contrary to
this I defy his evidencing from any Thing urged by the "Partisans of the
Scheme," either in public or private.

If (he goes on) the Introduction of Prelacy to subjugate the Colonies to the
Tyranny of Priests, is the Object of Dr. Chandler, and the Convention, it
becomes every true Son of the Church, every. etc. to rise up and set his Face
like a Flint against a Scheme of so pernicious a Tendency. Rare Argumentation
for a public Writer! a mere petitio Principii, (as the Schoolmen say:) But such
has been the Foundation of most of that pretty Superstructure with which your
Opponent has amused the Public. -- Indeed, it such is the Design of Dr.
Chandler and the Convention, the most bigoted and strenuous Advocate for an
American Episcopate, (I confess) ought and will oppose it. -- But on this Hinge
turns the Dispute, and this, should these bitter Opponents have proved, --
contrary to the Declarations of Men whose Characters are exposed to the View of
the World, to the published Plan, and the received Opinions and declared
Sentiments of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, and the highest
Dignitaries of the Church of England: They should have evinced these
Declarations to have been untrue by more valid Facts; the Plan to have been
false, by producing and proving another agreed on; and these Sentiments
adopted, to be erroneous, by the Proffer of unyielding Truths; if they would
deserve the Characters of Christians, Lovers of Truth, Gentlemen, and Friends
of their Country and Mankind. On the contrary, always pre-supposing this to be
true, they have worked themselves into a Ferment, puffed up their Disciples
with Rage and Zeal, to a danger of Suffocation; bespattered all around them,
and pursued the Bugg bear, till they have left themselves in such a Situation,
as to attract a rude Stare from Fools, -- Laughter and Contempt from the Wise,
-- the Scorn of good Men, and Approbation only from those who are too
prejudiced, or too blind to see their Nakedness.

That the Majority (continues he) of Episcopalians are not chargeable with this
dangerous Enterprise, shall be the Scope of this Letter.

What dangerous Enterprise? If he means of subjugating the Colonies to the
Tyranny of Priests, he attempts to prove what no one denies, or have ever
denied. But (says he) it is to remove any such Suspicions, which the guilty
Contrivers of the Plot, are falsely, and wickedly endeavoring to propagate.
Indeed Mr. Tickle, I am at a Loss to account by another Way, than the Cause,
for such gross Prevarications, Insinuations, and Accusations. I challenge him
to prove any Authors of such a Plot, or to point out the Paper wherein, or the
Persons (excepting the American Whig, and his Allies) by whom American
Churchmen are accused of enterprising the Subjugation of the Colonies to the
Tyranny of Priests by the Introduction of Prelacy.

But if he intended, by expressing it in this loose indeterminate Manner, to
leave Room for Equivocation, -- that Churchmen might imagine he meant to
vindicate them from any Design against their Country; and his own Disciples
interpret it as a Proof that the Majority of Episcopalians were averse to the
Plan of an Episcopate as proposed by Dr. Chandler. By what I have said before,
the Needlessness, and consequently Impropriety of undertaking it in the first
Sense, is evident; and I doubt not, I shall in my following Remarks, make its
Absurdity, Weakness, and Incongruity for the last Purpose, obvious to his most
insatuated Votaries.

This (says he) may be argued from the Character and Principles of American
Churchmen; the Conduct of the Petitioners for an Episcopate, and the Nature and
Method of their Defense, against the Attacks they have received. First, he
attempts to prove it from describing those Parts only of the Character of
Churchmen which seem to answer his Purpose. -- Now supposing the Portrait to be
drawn to the Life; it proves nothing in his Favor. For granting that American
Churchmen are Enemies to the slavish Doctrines of passive Obedience and
Non-resistance; That they excelled in a late memorable Opposition to the
Stamp Act, conceding even what is the labored Aim of these Paragraphs; That
they are the most frugal Oeconomists in the World; yet it follows not from this
that they will be averse to an Episcopate, when they are not required (to use a
coarse Expression from the Paper before me) "to open their Purse Strings," but
to have him supported by a Fund graciously bestowed for that Purpose by
Benefactors. Neither though Churchmen were watchful (as the Whig describes them)
of the undue Extension of the Prerogative, does it follow that they are
"opposed to a Bishop so limited in his Powers."

But this Picture of American Churchmen, I deny to be a just one; the
Lineaments are rough, the Colors laid coarsely on, and some Features seem
rather to be traced from the Figure of the four, narrow hearted Presbyterian,
than the open-countenanc'd and generous Churchman.

That the Spectator may be better judge of the Truths of this Assertion, I will
just pencil out in Miniature, a Portrait of Churchmen, whereby it will appear
what a Variation he has made from the Original.

In their political Principles American Churchmen in general are fixed between
the Bitterness of Modern Whigs, and the Servility of ancient Tories. To his
Majesty and the Royal Family, they bear the warmest and most unalterable
Affection, and are ever ready to support him in his kingly Power. -- Sensible
of the Excellence of the British Constitution, they will ever be ready to
preserve and defend it, and to lay down their Lives in its Support. Convinced
of the Blessings resulting from the Balance of Authority in the State they
desire it may ever remain equi-poised. Not more solicitous are they to preserve
the Rights of the People, than his Majesty's Prerogative inviolable. They are
steady Friends to Order and Discipline in Government, and ever ready to put an
End to Discord and Confusion.

But (says this Anti-Churchman) in all their Expenses in Government, they are
the most frugal Oeconomists in the World. Frugality, I must own, is
commendable: But when speaking of Expenses of Government, especially at such a
Season as this, the Insinuation is very injurious. -- Can this officious
Mangler of Characters, deny in the Face of his injured Country, that this
Province, as well as its Neighbors, has generously and profusely contributed
to the Expenses of Government? Were not their vital Sources drained almost dry,
by Supplies they granted the last War? -- The sainting Looks of Commerce, --
the tattered Garments of Trade, -- and the Complaints of Poverty in our
Streets, must strike this invidious Accuser dumb!

But perhaps he would be understood to mean, that they are so in public
religious Expenses. As for the Non-Episcopalians, they may defend themselves;
but quite the contrary is evident from the Conduct of Episcopalians. Their
Generosity, in their Contributions for their Clergy, in Support of their
Churches, and for charitable Uses, has ever done them Honor. The
Non-Episcopalians themselves, have often testified this, by petitioning their
Assistance in many Instances; and I doubt not they have ever met with Success.

Animated with the Spirit of their Church, which teaches them to pray for their
"Enemies, Persecutors, and Slanderers," and that God would "bring all into one
Fold, under one Shepherd," they earnestly desire the Conversion of the Heathen
to the Knowledge of Jesus and his Gospel; they behave with Tenderness and
Mildness to other Denominations; endeavor to calm their Animosity into Peace;
and when their Adversaries have made frequent Attacks on them, they have passed
them by for the most Part, unnoticed as the Offspring of Spleen, Ignorance or
Envy. Satisfied with the Excellence, Purity, and Charity of the Society, of
which they are members, they would uphold it with Spirit, but in such a Manner,
as not designedly to prejudice others. -- Convinced of the Advantages resulting
from Confirmation, and an orderly Government of their Churches, -- that
Episcopacy was instituted by Christ, or his Apostles; and that it is most
conducive to the Preservation of Harmony, and most suitable to the constitution
of the State, they are its steady Friends.

From this Picture of the Generality of American Episcopalians, (which, if any
Doubt should arise of its Resemblance, may be compared with the Originals)
instead of being "opposed" to an Episcopate so limited, it is evident they must
be strenuous Advocates for it, as they will enjoy that Order and Regularity
they so much esteem, and those Rites they deem so highly beneficial, have a
Prospect opened of that Conversion of the Indians they so much desire; and see
that Church, they are by Principle attached to, recovered from that Weakness
she labors under, for want of a ready Ordination.

I think it almost needless, to take Notice of the palpable Misrepresentations
in the remaining Part of this and the succeeding Paragraph: And indeed, to
expose every "Aberration" in this Paper, would be to cleanse an Augean Stable
Though the Episcopalians in Virginia "pay not a blind Devotion to their Clergy,"
the least Counties have two, and most of them three Churches; and their
Clergymen are supported in a genteel Manner, superior to what the Non-Episcopal
Clergy are, in most Provinces. As to the Episcopalians resisting hitherto "the
Solicitations of the lower Clergy, and the Influence of the right Reverend
Bench in Behalf of an American Bishop." -- "That our Exemption is occasioned by
the Discountenances an Episcopate has steadily received from the Episcopalians
themselves," -- they must be thrown into the large Heap of those improbable and
unprov'd Affirmations, which are vox and preterca nihil. Large indeed must be
the Throats of his Disciples, if they can swallow as Truths, Assertions which
so many Facts evince to be fa^^^, Upon repewed Instances, (says the Society for
the Propagation of the Gospel) from Governors of Provinces, Ministers,
Vestries, and private Persons in the Plantations, for settling, Ecclesiastic
Superiors there, etc. See Abstract. Soc. -- Proc. -- for 1714, Page 52.


The Conduct of the Clergy in this Affair, has been, agreeable to their Duty,
and well pleasing to the Government: And they may flatter themselves with a
successful Accomplishment of their Plan, from the gracious Reception of their
Petitions, and the Approbation of their Superiors. As "to the Umbrage" this
Connoisseur in Politics supposes "the Government and Bishop of will take at
their Proceedings. -- I could whisper something in his Ear, -- but it might
endanger his bursting with that Spleen, with which he is already so violently
distended!

I cannot help remarking, Sir, in my Way, the malevolent Stroke he aims at the
Conventions of the Episcopal Clergy; not that I doubt of their being approved
of by the Bishop of London, and every Friend of Christianity; (I know they are)
but as it serves undeniably to prove, that the Enemies of the Church will shut
up every Source of Succor from her, and remain unsatisfied till they have
levelled her with the Ground.

The next Proof of his Assertion, he endeavors to draw from the Nature of the
Desence made by the Advocates for a Bishop. -- If the abler Sons of the Church
have hitherto neglected to appear in print, it is because they perceive nothing
as yet offered worthy an Answer; that they are averse to entering in such a
Manner into a Controversy, with an Author, so entirely regardless of his
Reputation: And lastly, they would refrain till their Opponents have shown
their true Aim. An Argument like this, the American Whig should blush to offer!
Have not his Papers from the first to the last, been a Medley of Wrath* It
appears to me, gentle Reader, from a general View of his Papers, that he
designeth them for Engines to disperse the Overflowings of his Bile against the
Church and Clergy -- He toils, labors, and worries himself to find Blemishes
on which he may discharge it. Take a Sample of his Eructations from the Paper
before me, Whig, No. 25. " The Tyranny of Priests, -- Papistical proud
Prelates, who sprung up in the Church under the Dominion of Antichrist; --
Necessitous Zealots of the Gown. -- Flaming Zealots -- Pride of Prelacy --
Popish Investitures -- A few meddling Priests -- Conspirators of this Plot --
Wise Deliberation disgustful to Priestcraft. -- Inquisitorial Oppression of
Spiritual Courts. Clerical Domination -- Modern proud Prelates -- Odious
Prelacy -- Tyranny of Priests -- Guilty Contrivers of a Plot -- Less than
twenty dependant Clergyman. -- Dr. Chandler -- a Dubbed Doctor -- Employed like
a wild Irish Mourner to utter Sighs and Groans." etc.
Contradictions, Falsehood, and Aberrations from the Subject? One while he
approves of Dr. Chandler, and reveres his Character -- another, he asperses his
Name and Abilities: -- In one Paper he proposes no Aversion to a Bishop on the
Plan stated -- in the next, he is against any Episcopate whatever. From the
Letter under my Consideration, it is evident he is capable of making Use of any
low Artifice that may serve the beloved Cause, -- but in spite of his affected
Disguise, the frowning American Whig lours through the Dress of the calm American
Churchman. Optat Ephippia Bos piger. Though he has ever so studiously imitated
the Voice of the harmless Sheep, the most dimsighted Observer must now perceive
-- the Stern-brow, griping Teeth, and fiery Eyes of the howling Wolf.

Yours, etc. A True CHURCHMAN.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Nov. 7. The AMERICAN WHIG. [No. XXXV.]
DOCTOR Chandler, having in his first section, represented the bishops of the
church of England, as being Apostles; proceeds in his next, to point out those
powers which are inseparable from, and peculiar to the office. Under this head,
the public to whom he appeals, might reasonably have expected, (...) scriptural
representation of those peculiar gifts and powers, by which the twelve Apostles
of our Lord were at that time distinguished from all other officers in the
Christian church. And had he collected his account from the New Testament; he
must have represented their distinguishing qualifications, to have consisted
in, "Their being chosen witnesses of Christ to the world, -- their being sent
forth to publish his gospel, and erect his church among all mankind. -- Their
being furnished for this work, by the infallible guidance, and miraculous gift
of the Holy Spirit; together with a power of conveying such gifts of the Spirit
as the Holy Ghost (not the Apostles themselves) though it proper, to the converts
to Christianity, by the laying on of their hands. It is by these things, and
these only, that the Apostles are distinguished from other officers in the
church, in the New Testament. But instead of this scriptural description of the
apostolic office, the Dr. has arbitrarily assigned such peculiar prerogatives,
as are at this day claimed by the present new-modeled set of Apostles in the
church of England, viz. government, ordination, and confirmation. It may be
true what the Dr. says, in p. 15. "In the Christian church, the Apostles were
invested with this power (of government) by Christ; as it was intended for
perpetual use, they conveyed it to their successors." -- But his next assertion
is couched in such ambiguous expressions, as seem designed to deceive the
incautious reader. This power he says, "was exercised by Timothy at Ephesus, by
Titus at Crete, by Dyonisius the Areopagite at Athens, by Epaphroditus at
Philippi, by Archippus at Colosse, etc." Here the Dr. in order to have been
consistent with himself, ought to have shown, that Timothy, Titus, Dyonisius,
etc. were real Apostles, and did exercise the power of government in the
church, by virtue of their succession in the apostolic office, considered as
distinct from, and superior to other officers in the church. Without this all
his pretended argumentation on this head, is mere trifling. He well knows, that
government in the church, is universally allowed to be of divine appointment;
and that it is to be exercised by the appointed officers in the church. But if
he would prove any thing to his purpose, he must prove, that church government
is to be exercised by none but such as are properly styled Apostles, and that
his bishops are such. -- Had he been consistent, he must have said that
Timothy, Titus, Dyonisius, etc. were as really Apostles as Paul himself was.
But had he said this, every common ready would have seen the falsehood of his
assertion, and the weakness of his argument. For every one who reads the Bible,
must know, not only that these men were never once styled Apostles in the
scripture, but that they have not one of those qualifications ascribed to them,
which were peculiar to the Apostles, as such. And the Doctor's own
representation, is a flat contradiction to that on which the whole stress of
his argument depends. For the Apostles as such, had the whole world for their
charge; they had a right to exercise their apostolic power, wherever they
went. It was not the design of their office, to fix themselves down in a
particular bishopric, and act as Apostles there, and no where else. But
Timothy, Titus, Dyonisius, etc. whom the Dr. would have us believe were really
Apostles, are represented, as being fixed down in their respective places, to
exercise their apostolic power only in such places. And although to an attentive
reader, he evidently contradicts the notion of their being Apostles; yet he
hereby crastily metamorphoses the apostolic office to make it harmonize with
the state of the bishops of the church of England, who are fixed down in their
respective bishoprics, whom he ridiculously represents as clad with the
apostolic character and authority.

After this ambiguous and falacious representation, our appellant proceeds to
lay down, this very remarkable assertion, "The bishop may communicate this
power, in some degree, to Presbyters or others, as he shall think proper; but
in such cases it must be exercised in subordination to him." A truly surprising
claim of power this! "The bishop may communicate this power in some degree, --
as he shall think proper." If this is the case, then the bishop may communicate
one degree of this power to one, and another to another: And by this means, may
introduce as many different orders into the church, vested with different
degrees of power, as he shall think proper. It is well known, that the Pope
claims this power of office-making in the church: But I believe, Dr. Chandler
is the first protestant writer who has claimed it as the right of an English
bishop. It is a pity, he has not told us precisely what degree of this power,
the Apostle Paul communicated to Timothy, to Titus, to Dyonisius, etc. whether
he communicated the same degree of power to them all; or one degree of it to
one, and another Degree to another. -- But be that as it will: yet, if these
degrees of power, communicated by the bishop to presbyters and others, are
according as he shall think proper, then the public is to hear no more of the
three orders, of bishops, priests and deacons, as being set in the church by
divine appointment. For the Dr. tells us, that these several powers, are as the
bishop shall think proper. Thus he boldly rejects the darling trinity of his
brethren.

Again, there is something peculiarly remarkable in these words, As he shall
think proper, as they stand in connection with the rest of the sentence.
Protestants have commonly held, that the degree of power, communicated to any
one in the church, was to be determined by the form of words, and the sacred
rites used in his investiture. But the Doctor tells us, the degree of power is
to be determined by the bishop's secret intention, as he shall think proper. It
is well known, what great profits have been made of this principle, by the
popish clergy: -- But it is really surprising, that a protestant divine; yea,
and a Doctor of divinity, should undertake to re^establish such exploded
sentiments.

Let it be further remarked, that the Dr. here tells us, the bishop may
communicate this power, in some degree of it, to presbyters and others. He has
not told us, who or what these others are besides presbyters, to whom the
bishop many communicate of his power. Those indeed, who are acquainted with the
constitution of the episcopal church, need be at no loss in determining who are
those others here intended. It is well known, that besides the clergy, there is
a long list of lay-officers belonging to their spiritual courts: Their
lay-chancellors, commissaries, proctors, etc. to whom the bishop communicates
some degree of his power. But let me remind this advocate for the episcopal
church, that the public to whom he appeals, has just reason to expect that he
should show some scripture warrant for the bishop, in his parcelling out these
several degrees of his power, received from Christ, among his own creatures,
dependants and favorites.

The Dr. has peremptorily declared, that no such thing as spiritual courts, are
to be erected by bishops in America. But what security can be give to the
public, that no such courts shall be erected by the bishop when he comes? For
he here expressly asserts, that the bishop may communicate this power, in some
degree, to presbyters and others, as he shall think proper. If therefore, these
communications of power, are to be as the bishop shall think proper; I demand,
in the name of common sense, how this gentleman can pretend to know, that the
bishop shall not think proper to erect his spiritual courts among us; or by
what logic he will convince mankind that no such thing is intended.

There is one passage more in this remarkable sentence, that still remains to
be considered. The Dr. tells us, The bishop may communicate this power, -- but
in such cases, it must be exercised in subordination to him, etc. Is this then
really the case, in the church of England, that the bishop only, acts in
subordination to Christ; but all others that are vested with ecclesiastical
authority, act in subordination to the bishop? Hence then, we have no longer
reason to think it strange, that an oath of canonical obedience to the bishop
and his successors, should be exacted of every one, at the time of his
receiving holy orders. According to this representation, the Dr. himself is not
a minister of Jesus Christ; but of the bishop, who communicated to him some
degree of his power.

He further adds, that the bishop "can never divest himself of his controuling
and superintending authority. It is so essential to his office, that he cannot
relinquish it in such a manner, as not to be accountable for the exercise of
it." And yet, how notorious is it, that the judges in the bishops court, act in
many cases directly contrary to the mind of the Bishops? It seems however, that
these spiritual-court officers, have nothing to sear from the expectation of an
after-reckoning, because not they, but the bishop it seems, must be accountable
for their conduct.

Upon the whole, there is but little reason to expect, that the public will be
much enamoured with the government of the church, as it is exercised by these
Anglican Apostles, whose transportation to America, is so earnestly desired.
The other two peculiar and distinguishing qualifications of the Doctor's
Apostles, are ordination and confirmation. The last of these, has already been
fully considered; and I flatter myself, in the opinion of every impartial
reader, clearly confuted. The other I shall make the subject of some future
paper; assuring the Dr. that no part of his Appeal in which he has even
attempted to reason, shall be passed over without a serious examination, which
it is hoped, will convince him, that his triumph in his advertisement on the
publication of the first number of the American Whig, which though it treated
with ridicule, such parts of his boasted performance, as were really
ridiculous, and consequently not the subject of argument, promised at the same
time, "fully to consider every part of the pamphlet, that respects the merits
of the cause;" this I say, it is to be hoped will convince him, that his triumph
was really puerile and premature, and ought to teach him to be less impatient
of contradiction, especially after inviting, not to say challenging the whole
world to make their objections.

When I have refuted every part of this dangerous sophistical and jesuitical
pamphlet, I shall proceed to give a full reply, to the scurrilous vindication
of the Bishop of Landaff's sermon, which is generally supposed to be the joint
fabrication of the convention, and to be prefaced by the Rev. Mr. Inglis,
thereunto doubtless lawfully conventionated, as being the most moderate, (after
the candid and moderate Dr. Chandler) of the whole fraternity.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Nov. 7. A KICK for the WHIPPER. No. XXIII.
By Sir ISAAC FOOT.
Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas,
Atque me^us omnes et inexorabile ^atum,
Subjecit pendibus, STREPITUMQUE ACHERONTIS AVARI.
VIRGIL.
SO weak and yet so ill natured is Nov-anglus's letter in the 23d Whip, that
I Have had thought of going to bed in an ill humor and dreaming a few remarks
upon it. By this means I might have known whether the letter to the Bishop of
Landaff be indeed a ghost or not (for Virgil says -- consanguine^s lethi
sopor;) but I rather chose to consider even dreams waking, and as such believe
it will soon appear to be still alive, and that the sing song of the
convention's poet laureate will prove but the "shadow of a shade." But had I
indeed through one of the somni portae visited the gulf of TARTARUS, I should
probably have seen the ^ppeal stretched over more than 9 acres (provinces) like
Tityus with vultures tearing it is liver; -- the vindication tugging at a stone
like Sisyphus, or like the Danaides filling a cullender; -- the Whip, like
Ixion, twirl'd round on a wheel for a rape on an imaginary Juno; and perhaps
the 7 sister- petitions, like Tantalus, longing for forbidden pleasures.

Nov-anglus tells us he is a churchman, but not "violently prepossessed in
favor of his own principles;" as he is probably an apostate, he seems to be
violently post possessed however. His presbyterian, etc. friends, seems, don't
think him a persecutor, -- and perhaps not an idiot; but he treats most of his
countrymen as idiots, in endeavoring to "persuade them" that they are
persecutors, because they cannot consent that he and a few others should be
indulged a piece of pageantry, at their risk if not at their expense. But tell
me, reader, -- from all the flummery of his 2d. par. where he talks of the
EXTREME INDULGENCE of the church, GRATITUDE of dissenters, -- extension of
greater FAVORS, etc. etc. etc. do you not suspect that Nov-anglus, if not an
idiot, is at least very weak in his intellectuals? -- For our privileges indeed
we thank our king (and his predecessors) with all our hearts, and shall always
be ambitious of kissing his MAJESTY'S hand; but are no such thank
ye-for-nothings as to kiss any ECCLESIASTICAL toe whatsoever.

Par. 3d. He "is certain," he says, "that, if some late designs succeed"
America will be an unhappy place for dissenters of all denominations; for --
says he, -- well! Why? -- Because CHURCHMEN "however lukewarm they may at
present appear" -- will kick up a dust and make America (as the saying is) too
hot for us. Well! that were unhappy indeed! -- But what means all this fluster?
Who but Nov-a. and his party ever thought of "dragging churchmen to Cuttey
stools, or hanging Quakers, -- or of drawing swords instead of pens, and
shedding blood instead of ink on this occasion? -- Oh, fie for shame!
Nov-anglus.

But alas! (I beg his pardon) here comes his argument in his 4th par. "It is
well known" says he. "that an establishment of Presbyterianism" is aimed at "in
the middle colonies." Now this I plumply deny; ergo, this and the next
paragraph stand for -- NOTHING.

In his last par. he seems apprehensive that hereafter the importation of
PRIESTS will be opposed. He need not disquiet himself. -- If he and others will
but content themselves with earthen vessels II. Corinth. iv. 7.
they will always be welcome to as much crockery as they can purchase; but if
they must needs have silver ewers as big as hogsheads, and golden bowls that
hold a tun, at the risk or expense of our purses, we beg leave to give
dissenting voices. -- Hah! what say thou? Nov-anglus; do ^higs "turn says
into faction, and religion into rebellion?" Oh! -- thou dirty tory!

On the whole, the bankruptcy of Sq. T. and co. which has long been discovered
by the discerning, is now evident to the whole town and province. For want of
specie, they have undertaken to answer their engagements with paltry paper,
and, instead of sterling sense, have put us off with a weekly old-tenor bundle
of WORDS.

P. S. Some of my readers, it seems, think my paper obscure and unintelligible.
I know it is not so well understood as I could wish for these two reasons. 1. I
am confined to scanty limits, which obliges me to be as laconic as possible,
and 2. some, neglect comparing it with the Whips animadverted upon. Many faults
no doubt, I am chargeable with, but I beg it as a favor, that no reader, would
charge my misfortune and his negligence to my account.

From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE, Nov. 7. A WHIP for the AMERICAN WHIG. By TIMOTHY
TICKLE, ESQR. [No. XXXI.]
The WHIGS raise the Spirits of their Friends, recall their Stragglers, and
unite their Numbers by Sound and Impudence, as Bees assemble and cling together
at the Noise of BRASS.

SWIFT.
THE professed Design on which the American Whig set out, "was, to confute Dr.
Chandler'. Appeal." How far, and how often he has wandered from this Point,
deviating into the Bye paths of Defamation, must be evident to all his
unprejudiced Readers. His di^igent Malice, it is true, has here and there
fixed on a Passage of the Appeal, from which he has endeavored to extract a
Meaning which the Words, without the ^tmost Violence done to them, would not
bear; and which, I may venture to affirm, never once entered into the Doctor's
Mind.

But even this Kind of Confutation, such as it is, takes up the smallest Part
of his Papers. They are strewed thick with Invectives against the Clergy, as
well as the Constitution, the Discipline and Principles of the Church of
England. The Person must possess an uncommon Share of Sa^^city, who can see in
this, the least Connection with the Subject he took in Hand, -- the least
Consistency with the Character he assumes of a Defender of religious Li^erty,
or with the Christian Temper. I own my Sagacity is unequal to to the Task.
Perhaps he may think that by protracting the Controversy thus, he will frighten
or tire the Friends of the Church and of religious Liberty. But in this he will
find himself mistaken. I hope the Public will pardon me, if in following the
Whig I should degress from what is properly the S^bject of Debate. For this I
am not to blame; as my Intention was principally to correct his Errors.

The single Point that is now (...) before the Tribunal of the Public, -- at
least that should be deb^ted -- is this -- "Should the Members of the Church of
England in America have one or more Bishops fixed here on the Plan proposed in
Doctor Chandler's Appeal?" To write against any other Plan or Bishops is
nothing to the Purpo^^. I am convinced that neither the Author of the Appeal,
nor his Brethren, nor any other Members of the Church, desire a Bishop on any
other Term than such as the said Appeal has specified. The Whig has not yet
produced the least Shadow of Proof to the contrary. He has published Letters
which he says were written by Missionaries and other Members of the Church, to
their Friends, where we may naturally suppose they freely declare their
Sentiments. -- he is busy in quest of Intelligence by every Method his fertile
^magination can suggest: Yet nothing has yet appeared to show that Churchmen
have applied for, or desire a Bishop vested with any Powers but those which are
purely spiritual. Such a Bishop they want, -- such only they have applied for.

Dr. Chandler, willing to obviate every Objection to an American Episcopate
that had the least Color of Reason; states the following. -- Another Objection
has been made by some, to the following Purport; That if Bishops are once
settled in America, although in the Manner we now propose, there will probably
be an Augmentation of their Power, as soon as Circumstances will admit of it:
And what is easy and inoffensive in its Beginning, may become burdensome and
oppressive in the End.

And then adds, -- But at this Rate, there can be no End of objecting. For if
every possible ill Effect of a Thing, although confessedly proper in itself and
harmless in its natural Tendency, may be made an Argument against it, there is
nothing that can escape. Appeal p. 109.

The Doctor proceeds to show that Objections of this Sort may as fairly be
alleged against a religious Toleration, -- against reading the Scriptures, or
a learned Education. Each of these is liable to be abused, and is often
^ttended with some bad Effects: Yet Protestants in general agree that these are
upon the Whole useful and necessary, and such as every Christian has an
undoubted Right to. The natural Inference from all which is this, That the ill
Effects which some may be pleased to think will probably attend the sending
Bishops to America, vested only, with spiritual Powers, can be no just
Objection against this Measure; especially when their Apprehensions on this
Head are totally devoid of any Foundation, and it is improbable in the highest
Degree that any such Effects will follow.

The American Whig No. XVI, has taken the Passage above quoted from the
Appeal, into his most critical Consideration. However, he does not offer a
Syllable that will invalidate this Inference. He rings the Changes on the Words
probable and possible, till he becomes most tedious, disgusting and
unintelligible. He insinuates that Dr. Chandler in his answer to the Objection,
substituted the Word possible, in the Place of probable, to evade the Force of
the Argument. But every Person of the least Discernment, must perceive that the
Doctor, when he used the Word probable, put it in the Mouth of the supposed
Objector: When he used the Word possible, he speaks in his own Name. The ill
Effects which in the Objection are supposed to be probable, he denies to be
such, but barely possible only; and justly observes from thence, That if every
possible ill Effect of a Thing, although confessedly proper in itself and
harmless in its natural Tendency, may be made an Argument against it, there is
nothing that can escape." The Doctor asserts that the "proposed Episcopate has
a natural Tendency to produce no ill Consequences, such as are alleged in the
Objection. If he thought so for good Reason, and that those ill Effects which
the Objector supposed probable, were barely possible, had he not a Right to say
so? Evidently, there is in this no "Sophistry," no "Artifice," with which the
Whig very decently charges him. The Reasoning is conclusive, the Inference is
just.

Dr. Chandler is fully able to vindicate himself, and doubtless will do so at a
proper Season. In the mean Time, I will here briefly show the Improbability
that the ill Effects, implied in the Objection, (and which are hashed up and
dealt out weekly to the Public by the American Whig) will accompany the
proposed Episcopate. The ill Effects are, Spiritual Courts, the Investiture of
Bishops with temporal Power, taxing the Colonies for their Support, and paying
Tithes. Now that these Consequences will attend an American Episcopate, or that
these Appendages will be annexed to the Episcopal Office, either when Bishops
are first sent to America, or in any future Time, is improbable to the last
Degree, -- so far as human Foresight can reach, I might say impossible; and
this for the following plain, evident Reasons. --

1. BECAUSE it is diametrically opposite to the Plan on which it has been ever
proposed that Bishops should be sent to America. Several of the Society's
Abstracts as early as the Beginning of the present Century mention this
Proposal for fixing Bishops in the Colonies. The Readers may see Extracts to
this Purpo, taken out of the Society's Abstracts for the Years 1712 and 1714,
in Dr. Chandler's Appeal, P. 49 -- 51, in the Notes.
The Public has seen Bishop Butler's Scheme, drawn up Ann. Dom. 1750, in the
Vindication of the Bishop of Landaff's Sermon, in answer to Mr. Livingston, p.
67. The Plan drawn up by Dr. Chandler in his Appeal, p. 79. which the Reader
will find printed in Italics, is perfectly similar to one that is proposed in a
Pamphlet, entitled, An Answer to Dr. Mayhew's Observations on the Society's
Charter, and now generally known to have been written by the late excellent
Archbishop Secker. In each of these, and many others I could mention, those
Temporal Powers, Spiritual Courts, Taxes and Tithes are utterly disclaimed, and
no Powers are proposed to be given to American Bishops, but such as are purely
spiritual, viz. To ordain and superintend the Clergy, and confirm such as
choose that Ordinance.

2. BECAUSE in all the late Applications to England for an Episcopate, none but
such a primitive Bishop as I have mentioned, is proposed or desired. I have
been lately favored with a Sight of the seven Petitions or Addresses to our
Superiors at Home, so famous in the Annals of American Whiggism; and I here
declare in the Words of Truth and Sincerity, that there is not in any of them
so much as a distant Hint desiring Bishops, vested with those Powers and
Appendages, mentioned by the Enemies of an American Episcopate. On the
contrary, they apply only for Bishops vested with the Power of ordaining and
governing the Clergy, and administering Confirmation. They only desire that the
Inconveniences with regard to these Points, arising from the Want of Bishops
may be removed; that Churchmen may be put on an equal Footing with other
Denominations, and enjoy equal Privileges; which cannot be the Case, unless
Bishops are sent to America.

3 BECAUSE all the Members of the Church, to a Man, are so far from desiring,
that they are extremely averse to our having a Bishop vested with temporal
Powers, and those Appendages beforementioned. They are convinced, that such a
Measure would injure the Church -- would probably produce as many
Inconveniences to it, as the primitive Bishop they desire will assuredly bring
real ^dvantages. This single Consideration is sufficient to determine the
Judgment of all the Members and Friends of the Church, besides their being as
fast Friends to every Species of Liberty, religious or civil, as any Dissenters
that exist.

4. BECAUSE the Provision made for an American Episcopate, clearly evinces,
that no other than the primitive Bishop specified in the Appeal, was or is
intended for America, Archbishop Tennison, left One Thousand Pounds, for the
Support of one or more American Bishops. Archbishop Secker, a few Months ago,
left an equal Sum for the same Purpose, to mention no more such Legacies. But
why these Donations to support Bishops here, if it were intended that they
should be supported by a Tax on the Colonies, by Tithes, or the Fees arising
from Spiritual Courts? The American Whig himself will not, I presume, have the
Face to say, that these two eminent Prelates were not fully acquainted with the
Plan of an American Episcopate. Why then would they throw away their Estates
unnecessarily to support those Bishops, if another Fund was intended here for
their Support! Would it not have been absurd to the last Degree? The Reader may
rest assured, there never was any Design formed of imposing such Taxes and
Tithes, or of erecting such spiritual Courts.

Had the American Whig lived when the Society for propagating the Gospel in
foreign Parts was incorporated, and was providing Missionaries to be sent to
the Colonies, he might have inveighed with equal Plausibility against that
Measure, as against sending Bishops at this Time. How eloquently might he have
expatiated on the many ill Effects which would probably arise from our having
so many Zealots of the Gown fixed here -- That however specious or harmless the
Plan might be represented by priestly Craft, by the guilty Contrivers of the
Plot: Yet the true Design was to subjugate the Colonies to Clerical Dominion --
to impose Taxes and Tithes for the Support of those Missionaries, and erect
spiritual Courts to harrass and plague the good People of America.

All this, and much more in the same dulcet Strain, which flows in such
Abundance from the mellifluous Pen of our Whig, might he have urged against the
Importation of those "spiritual Carnalities" the Missionaries. And what Answer
could the Society return to this Kind of Argumentation but the following? That
their sole Design was to supply those People with Clergymen who were destitute
of the Ordinances of Religion -- that the Collections made by the Society, the
Donations and Legacies of its members, and of other pious Persons, to supply a
Fund for the Support of the Missionaries, fully evinced that they did not
intend the Imposition of Tithes, or any Tax whatsoever on the Colonists, for
the Missionaries. This answer would have been satisfactory then to every
unprejudiced, sensible Person; and the Experience of more than sixty Years
demonstrates it was the Truth.

The Case is perfectly similiar at present. The same Answer will serve to
confute the false Suggestions of the Whig, and his Associates, concerning an
American Episcopate, The sole Design of the Society, and other Members of the
Church, in proposing that Measure, is to remove the Inconveniences we now
labor under, through Want of Bishops, with Regard to Ordination, superintending
the Clergy, and Confirmation. The Donations and Legacies to raise a Fund to
support American Bishops, fully evince no other Fund is proposed, no tax upon
the Colonists intended; and that the Outcry now raised about Taxes, Tithes and
spiritual Courts, is entirely groundless -- utterly void of any just Foundation.

5. And lastly, Because the Spirit of the Times is such as inclines People
rather to abridge, than add to the Power of the Clergy, both in England and
America. It is really pleasant to observe to what an Height the Whig raises
the ecclesiastical Power, if a Bishop should set his Foot on this Continent. He
makes him a mere Colossus, that would bestride this whole western World, and
seize in an Instant all Power, civil and military, as well as spiritual. I am
sometimes tempted to think the poor Whig is haunted with Bishops as with
Specter, -- that he nods, and is carried back in his Dreams to those monkish
Times, when Superstition bore Sway, and People were for giving up every Thing
into the Hands of the Mother Church.

But surely he must dream, or worse than dream, who represents this Humor as
prevailing in our Day; or would insinuate that there is any Prospect of it. Any
Attempt in Ecclesiastics to encroach on the Rights of others, would not fail of
being instantly crushed here or elsewhere in the British Dominions; nor would
any be more ready to assist in doing so, than the Members of the Church. But it
would be injurious and false to suppose the American Clergy had any such
Design. Their Characters are well known; nor are there any warmer Advocates for
the Rights and Liberties of their Fellow Subjects among us.

These Particulars, to which many more might be added, duly considered, will
serve to convince every unprejudiced Person, that no Bishop is desired on any
other Plan than what is mentioned in Dr. Chandler's Appeal. -- That the Alarms
which are sounded in our Ear by the Whig's brazen Trumpet, as if Taxes and
Tithes, and Spiritual Courts awaited us, are altogether groundless, -- and that
Churchmen in desiring Bishops, desire nothing but their Right, and what every
other Denomination among us enjoys. Whether the Whig's Conduct proceeds from
Malice, or from a distempered, heated Imagination, I will not take upon me to
determine. Sure I am, to speak in the most charitable Terms, it must proceed
from a misguided Zeal, -- "Zeal which is not according to Knowledge."

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Nov. 14. The AMERICAN WHIG. [No. XXXVI.]
THE new scheme of converting the Anglican Bishops into Apostles, has been of
great service to Dr. Chandler, in various parts of his Appeal. And that nothing
might be wanting in his dignified prelates, to answer this high and honorable
title; he has stripped the apostolic character of all those divine gifts and
qualifications, by which the twelve Apostles of our Lord were distinguished in
the primitive church; and made it to consist only in having the power of
government, ordination and confirmation.

It is the Doctor's representation of the power of ordination, as being one
distinguishing property of the Apostle's character, that falls under the
present consideration.

The Dr. enters upon this part of his subject, by enquiring, "To whom can the
appointment of inferior and subordinate officers belong, in every society, but
to those who govern it?" Here we have another specimen of his peculiar strength
of reasoning; which is not to prove his point, but to beg the question. It
belongs to him first to prove, that inferior and sub^rdinate officers in the
Christian church, have been appointed by Christ. But by his usual logic, he
takes it for granted, that there are such understrappers in the church of
Christ; and then, with an air of assurance, enquires, to whom the appointment
of them should belong, but to those who have the government of it. The whole
force of his argument depends upon that which he had before asserted, under the
preceding head of government, where he proves, in direct opposition to both
reason and scripture, by the mere authority of his own ipse dixit, that "The
Bishop may communicate this power, in some degree, to Presbyters and others, as
he shall think proper." It is by this almightiness of the Bishop's
communicative power, that he can create as many inferior and subordinate
officers in the church as he pleases, by communicating this power to one and
another, in such different degrees as he shall think proper. And from this
inexhaustible fountain it is, (not from any scriptural precept, precedent or
example,) that these inferior and subordinate officers in the church, start
into being. And as this regiment of subalterns, which come not in by the door,
but climb up some other way, owe their existence and prerogatives to modern
episcopacy; I shall leave the Doctor and his brethren to marshal them, in their
several ranks of seniority and dominion. But if he means thereby to wheedle us
out of our scriptural right of choosing, and appointing our own ministers, I
must tell him, that the public will require some better evidence, that his
Bishops are really Apostles, than any that he, or his party, have hitherto
produced, before they will consent, that his Bishops should appoint them.
However, we may here see a door opened, by the intended importation of Bishops,
for our making use of our idle pence, as all those inferior and subordinate
officers must have their share for a maintenance, as well as my Lord Bishop.

As a further argument, the Dr. adds, "The same argument which proves the
distinction of Bishops from Presbyters, proves also that ordination is an
office peculiar to the former; for it is chiefly by the appropriation of
offices, that we are able to prove the distinction of orders." The same logic
still! It is here again taken for granted, that the scripture appropriates
certain offices, to particular officers in the church; which is the thing to be
proved. But let us consider this, which he says, is his chief argument. He
says, it is proved, that there are different orders in the gospel ministry,
because there are different parts of the ministerial work appointed; as if it
were absurd to suppose, that the same officer might perform the whole work. And
again, some particular parts of the ministerial work, are appropriated to some
particular officers in the church, as appears from there being different orders
in the ministry, some superior, some inferior, which shows, that all are not to
perform the same services. -- Thus the Dr. alternately proves the one by the
other, or as the Logicians call it, argues in a circle. Let us however,
consider what proof he lays before us, of this appropriation of officers to the
different orders in the gospel ministry. And here, the subject he is upon,
requires that he should insist upon the power of ordination, as being
peculiarly appropriated to a particular order, viz. Apostles. Now all accounts
of ordination, to be collected from the scripture, are these: The ordination of
Paul and Barnabas. -- The Elders ordained by these two Apostles, in the
churches which they planted. -- The ordination of Timothy. -- And the
ordinations performed by Timothy and Titus. These are all the ordinations the
New Testament mentions. As to the first of those, viz. the ordination of Paul
and Barnabas, the Dr. will not allow them to be ordinations. And why? Not
because all the parts proper and peculiar to an ordination, were not performed;
but because it was performed, not by Apostles, but by certain prophets and
teachers in the church at Antioch. The appropriation of the power of ordination
to Apostles only, is here evidently made, not by the scripture, but by Dr.
Chandler.

As to the power of Barnabas and Paul, to ordain Elders in the churches which
they planted, none will deny it. But then, I demand where he finds this power
appropriated to them, because they were Apostles? If the churches which they
planted, had Elders ordained in them, that service must be performed by them,
for this plain reason, that there was no body else there to do it. -- But what
evidence does this afford, that the power of ordination was peculiar to them?

Again, Timothy and Titus, had directions given them for ordaining, and they
doubtless did ordain; and there is as much to be said of the power of
ordination being appropriated to them, as to Paul and Barnabas. But here,
Reverend Doctor, flinch not; but speak full to the case. Will you assert that
Timothy and Titus, were as truly Apostles as Paul and Barnabas were? Should you
assert that they were really Apostles, in the proper scriptural sense of the
word, you know that the public, to whom you have appealed, will laugh you to
scorn. But if you insist, that they were not Apostles, you give up your whole
argument, about the appropriation of the power of ordination. How does it
appear that the other Apostles, James, Peter, etc. had the power of ordination,
since there is no mention made in the scripture, that they ever did ordain? Or
how does it appear, that the Elders which Timothy and Titus ordained, had not
the power of ordination committed to them, as well as the other branches of the
ministerial work? The silence of the scripture about it, is no evidence at all
in the case. What hint is there in the whole sacred canon, that the power of
ordination is appropriated to any particular order? Yea, is not the
representation of the scripture, f^ll in opposition to these appropriating
notions? For the ordinations mentioned in the scripture, were performed, some
by Apostles, some by Presbyters and Teachers, some by Evangelists, and some by
the laying on of the hands of the Presbyters. Upon the whole then, all that
does, or can appear from the scripture, is no more than this: "That it is by
the religious rite of ordination, that a man becomes vested with ministerial
authority." But as to the power of ordination, being appropriated to a
particular superior order; it is so far from being countenanced by the
scripture, that it is contrary to the scripture-representations, to suppose,
that there is more than one order in the gospel ministry.

Thus then it appears, that what the Dr. pretends to be the chief argument to
prove the distinction of Bishops from Presbyters, is a mere empty sophistical
flourish of words, fraught with sound, but destitute of sense, extracted from
the very dregs of that unscriptural, absurd, antichristian, papistical dogma,
"That the Bishop may communicate his power, in some degree, to Presbyters and
others, as he shall think proper."

The Dr. proceeds to add, "Because some ecclesiastical offices, are never
performed by the clergy in common, but only by such of them as are particularly
ordained for those purposes, it is evident that those who are thus ordained and
empowered, are admitted to a different and higher order." The same logic
still. A mere barefaced begging of the question. Where does he find these
particular ordinations? He still treads the same circle; alternately proving
the one by the other. I must here enquire, were the Apostles thus particularly
ordained for the purpose of ordination? If so, how came Timothy and Titus who
were not Apostles, to have this power? Or, was Timothy particularly ordained to
this office? If so, how does it appear? The Dr. will perhaps say, that Timothy
did ordain, and therefore had the power of ordination committed to him. But
this is nothing to the purpose. -- The thing to be proved, is, that there was
something peculiar in Timothy's ordination, empowering him to ordain others,
which was not common to the ordination of every Presbyter. Here the Dr. can
have no evasion, but only his former dogma. "That the Bishop may communicate
his power in some degree, to Presbyters and others, as he shall think proper."
But I ask, who says the Bishop may do this? Does the scripture say so? Or has
there ever been any body who said it, besides Dr. Chandler and the Pope?

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE Nov. 14. A KICK for the WHIPPER, [No. XXIV.]
By Sir ISAAC FOOT.
Optat ephippia hospiger, optat ararc caballus.

HORACE.
OUR late modest novice Roger de Champo, on seeing himself in print, grows
self-important, gives himself magisterial airs ( Whip, No. XXIV.) and not only
ventures to encounter the learned veteran CHAUNCEY, but undertakes to
"reprimand him in the strongest manner." He boasts that he has demonstrated,
that, the Whig, etc. would fain perpetuate the supposed hardship under which
the CHURCH labors. Now he has demonstrated (if any thing) not a disputable
point, but a self-evident truth, viz. that we wish to perpetuate the present
state of things, till either Churchmen consider it as no hardship, or
dissenters think an innovation safe; (a clever thing to make such a fuss
about!) but truly little did I dream that he meant to demonstrate ANY THING AT
ALL. However, sure I am, that, before H^ will be able to prove the thing in
question an "intolerable hardship," -- that Independents are more like
Pharisees than High-church men. -- that they are destitute of fellow-feeling,
-- or that a ship is like a rack, and a voyage equivalent to torture, he must
puff and blow, bite his pipe stem, and knock his tobacco box a long while, and
sublime a vast deal of mundungus into "curling eddies of smoke" to perfume his
"little habitation."

From a number of Roger's expressions, such as "great-monstrous-prodigious
expense," -- "a voyage of several 1000 miles," -- "dangers of the ocean," --
"raging of the sea," -- "perils of the great deep," etc. he seems to be a very
parsimonious gentleman, and a true fresh water sailor; but perhaps the dotage
of 70 has occasioned these dismal outcries, which could scarce be expected from
the timidity and experience of a child. Sure I am however, that those, who
"look with so much horror on the raging of the sea" that they "would infinitely
rather enjoy tranquillity in some other profession than seek for orders at the
hazard of their lives." cannot (whatever are the motives of those that do) be
moved by the HOLY GHOST, any more than those who seek for riches, honors and
pleasures at such a risk. What had become of the Christian cause, if St. PAUL,
etc. had been, and what will become of the poor heathen, i^ clergymen in our
day, should be so careful of themselves. That Dr. CHAUNCEY, "when inclined to
be ordained, never laid hold of the happy circumstance" of seeing England, is
not to be wondered at; since (in so doing) he must have made a grand motive, of
a bare circumstance; and a business, of diversion; and have acted as absurd a
part as those, who take holy orders merely for the sake of flaunting in
Canonicals, or those who travel for diversion or secular business, and take out
an holy commission EN PASSANT.

As to the expense he so much bellows about, Roger combats Dr. Chauncey by
proxy. My second is B. W. whom Sq. T.. more than two months ago promised to
"speak with to the purpose," but has not yet answered. But whoever is in the
right, Dr CHAUNCEY or the vindicator, B. W. or Roger, sure I am, it is not
right, that the purses of Americans in general should be endangered in order to
secure those of a few mercenary Bigots.

Dr. CHAUNCEY had assigned some causes of the difficulty of supplying the
Church with clergymen; -- "showing the futility" of them, Roger declines as too
tedious a task. Would you know why, reader? -- consult Dr. CHAUNCEY himself,
and you will not wonder.

With regard to vicious men among the American ^piscopal cl^rgy a bare query of
Dr. CHAUNCEY'S is by Roger misrepresented as a positive proposition; but (to
pass over this) -- he seems displeased that the title of seat instead of palace
is given to an ideal Bishop's house, and would fain persuade us, that his
American lordship would not be so defective in the business of his diocese
(large as it would be) as the Bishops in England* but like a primitive Bishop,
would roll about in his coach and six -- poh! I should have said -- trapes
about with his staff and sandals, through all the forests and swamps of America,
be here, be there, be every where at the same time, or at least by some
unaccountable means discover all future "candidates for the ministry," even "at
the several seminaries where they are educated," and so strictly "observe their
conduct" as to "prevent almost all possibility of deception." Your most
obedient humble servant, my lord Bishop of UTOPIA!

P. S. By way of acknowledgment for his anecdote, Sir Isaac Foot, begs leave to
remind Sq. T. that none but quadrupeds (and particularly that species of
animals he mentions) kick BACKWARDS as he does.



From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE, Nov. 14, 1768. A WHIP for the AMERICAN WHIG. By
TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR. [No. XXXII.]
Were it not for that Sense of Virtue which is principally preserved, as far as
it is preserved, by National Forms, and Habits of Religion, Men would soon lose
it all, run wild, prey upon one another, and do what else the worst of Savages
do.

WOLLASTON'S Religion of Nature delineated.
THERE is an unhappy Perverseness in the Disposition of some Men, which will
never suffer them to be contented themselves, and engages them to disturb the
Peace of others. The most beautiful Systems either appear disagreeable to them
or they endeavor to represent them so to others. In some Measure they seem to
claim the Pity, but in a greater to deserve the Indignation of good Men. The
American Whig appears to be of this Character, from his Productions, and
especially from his 17th Numb, wherein he aims a Blow at that Pillar of the
Const^uction the Fall of which, he must be conscious would be attended with the
most fatal Consequences. The Church of England (says Dr. Chandler,) in its
external Polity, is so happily connected and interwoven with the civil
Constitution, that each mutually supports and is supported by the other.
Against this Position he levels his Paper; I shall therefore offer in this
Day's Lucubration, some Arguments in its Defense, and draw them from that
Representation of the external Polity of the Church of England, given us by the
Whig in the Paper under Consideration. If the State (says he) derives Happiness
and Support from the Church, or if the civil Constitution harmonizes with it,
this Happiness, this Support, this Harmony, must be evinced in one or more of
the following Particulars. First, That the King is, by Law, the supreme Head of
the Anglican Church. Secondly, That he has the Appointment of all the Spiritual
Lords in the Realm. Thirdly, That those Lords make a Part of the Legislature of
Great Britain. Fourthly, That they are authorized to hold spiritual Courts in
England, for punishing Offenders against the Ecclesiastical Law. Fifthly, That
the King has Authority ^o summon the Convocation, and to permit them to make
Canons.

These I shall consider in Succession, as they are placed. First, The King's
Supremacy is a Prerogative right in itself, and advantageous to the State. It Is
a just Privilege resulting from the Alliance between Church and State The civil
Magistrate, for the Benefit of the Common Wealth, desired an Union between it
and the Church. To effect this, the Church deprived herself of her natural
Independency, and relied on the Protection of the State, which was due to her
for the Advantages which it would receive from her Influence in its Favor:
Consequently the civil Magistrate must have a just Superiority, as that which
protects is always more powerful than that which is protected. This Prerogative
is also both just and beneficial, -- for without it the Form of Government, and
the Rules of Worship, might be altered, and those Doctrines corrupted, for the
Sake of which the State entered into this Alliance. As Religion, in the Opinion
of the wisest Legislators, is the main Support of Government; and as the
purest, both in external Polity, and internal Structure, is best adapted to
advance the Interests of the State, it follows undeniably that it is an
essential Privilege in the civil Magistrate, after he has chosen a Church which
he deems purest, and on which he has conferred Powers of being serviceable to
continue its Utility, by suffering no Alterations to be made without his
Consent.

By this Prerogative the King is enabled to answer the End aimed at by the
Association. He sees that those Principles are instilled into the Minds of the
People, which are favorable to Society. He can take care that none shall be
appointed Teachers in the Church taken under his Protection, but those who will
deliver its Doctrines uncorrupted to his Subjects. Disorders in Government
demand speedy Remedies. Those he could not readily obtain from Religion, if the
Church was independent of his Power; but, as its supreme Head, he can demand
its strongest Exertions in the Cause of the State, and can himself extend their
Usefulness. By this conditional Subordinancy of the Clergy, those Evils also
are avoided, which proceed either from an absolute State of Dependence, or from
an Independency. Absolute Dependence would make them mere Engines in the Hands
of the Prince, and would probably raise him to a Tyrant. While from an
Independency would arise such woeful Disorders as are visibly attendant on the
Papacy, in those Kingdoms where the civil Magistrate is a mere Tool to the
Church.

This Prerogative tends likewise to create a Reverence and Veneration for the
Prince, as Head of two Bodies united, and Defender of their religious as well
as civil Privileges: A Reverence extremely well adapted to engage his Subjects
to a ready and cheerful Obedience. To establish a Church without giving the
civil Magistrate a Supremacy, would be the direct Method of constituting an
Imperium in imperio, -- a Charybdis, which every wise Common Wealth will avoid,
if possible.

Secondly, Equally necessary and useful is that Branch of the Supremacy, which
the Whig next mentions, viz. That the King has the Appointment of all the
spiritual Lords in the Realm. For since He has conferred Honors and Powers on
the Church (in Consequence of the Union) to make it more serviceable to the
State, he ought certainly to be possessed of a Power of choosing those Persons
whom he judges best capacitated for the public Good. Not that he has a Power of
making Bishops; for this is inherent in the Church as a religious Society; but
only of directing where, and by whom, this Office shall be exercised. By this
Means the State is secured from the Evils which might flow from the ambitious
Intrigues of Churchmen; If, independent of the Authority of the King, they
could arrogate to themselves those Powers which were given for the public
Service; and instead of this Danger, has a Prospect of seeing these Offices
well filled by the Magistrates whose Aim must be supposed to be the Good of the
whole Community.

Thirdly, That the Bishops make a Part of the Legislature of Great Britain, is
a Privilege beneficial to the Government, and justly claimable by the Church.
For since, to effect an Union, she has given up her Independency, and suffers
the State to decide in Affairs relating to her as a Society it is reasonable
that she should have her Agents or Representatives in the Legislature, lest she
should suffer by her Kindness, and Laws be enacted prejudicial to her Interests.

Their Advice and Assistance in any Thing respecting Church Affairs more
especially, we cannot but suppose to be very useful and necessary; for common
Reason dictates, that those Men must naturally be best acquainted with the
Affairs, which their Functions engaged them to study, and in which they have
continually employed themselves. From this Conjunction of the Lords Spiritual
and Tempor^^ this Advantage also arises, -- that the People will consider the
Laws as more binding, when enacted by the concurrent Judgment of their
religious and civil Superiors. Neither do I imagine it would be impolitical to
give Prelates a Seat in Parliament, if it were only to strengthen the second
Branch of the Legislature, which needs confessedly their Support. Wi^e also,
for this Reason, was it to connect the Prelates and Lords Temporal together,
that, in a wicked Administration, the Prelates might oppose any Measures
detrimental to the Church, and the others obstruct any ambitious Schemes of the
Clergy.

The fourth Particular is, That they are authorized to hold Spiritual Courts in
England, for punishing Offenders against the Ecclesiastical Law. Spiritual
Courts are only formed and employed for the Service of the State. However the
Enemies of our happy Constitution may harrangue on ecclesiastical Power and
Tyranny, as if a Dominion was usurped by the Bishops for their own Purposes, it
is evident that these Courts were established ^s an aid to the Civil, to remedy
those Evils which the Civil either could not take Cognizance of or could not
remove. It is certain a wise Legislature would not have erected them, if it had
not supposed them beneficial, and it is no less certain that Bishops receive
this juridical Authority, not as inherent in their Office, but as a Sword to be
wielded in the Cause of their Country.

If they have abused their Power, let them be called to account like other bad
Officers of the Common Wealth; -- if the Courts themselves are found to be
detrimental to the Public, let them be abolished. But, as it has never yet been
proposed to have any such constituted in America, I shall dismiss the Argument,
as altogether impertinent to the Case of introducing Bishops into this Country.

Fifthly, What has been said of the King's Supremacy in general, makes it
unnecessary to expatiate on this Branch of it: Suffice it to say, that if the
King had not a Power of summoning the Convocation, and permitting them to make
Canons, when Accident, Opposition, or some Circumstances dangerous to the
Church and State, if not obviated, demanded it, his Supremacy would lose one of
its most energetic Parts. Add to this, that by a Power of dissolving when he
sees proper, he can obviate those Disadvantages resulting from long, frequent,
and controversial Convocations, which, in many supposeable Cases, might be
attended with pernicious Consequences.

Thus have I briefly enumerated some of the Advantages obtained, and
Disadvantages avoided, by the present happy Combination of Church and State. --
The State supports and protects the Church, and the Church exerts its salutary
and most effectual Influence in the Service of the State; thus, (agreeable to
Dr. Chandler's Problem) They mutually support and are supported by each other.

It would take up more Space than the Limits of this Paper allow, to animadvert
on all the futile Objections and Misrepresentations in the tedious Number
before me: -- However, I hope I have sufficiently evinced the Truth of the
Dr's. Position, -- To his frequent Assertions, "that "The King is absolute
Monarch of the Church." I think no Reply more suitable than the Words of the
sage Hooker, who was confessedly acquainted intimately with the Laws Civil and
Ecclesiastical, and had the Honor of the highest Commendation from Lock
himself, that illustrious Master of reasoning. Our Laws have with much
Certainty prescribed Bounds into each Kind of Power. All Decisions of Things
doubtful, and Correction of Things amiss, are proceeded in by order of Law,
what Person soever he be unto whom the Administration of Judgment belongs. It
is neither permitted unto Prelates nor Prince to judge and determine at their
own Discretion, but Law has prescribed what both shall do. What Power the King
has, he has it by Law, the Bounds and Limits of it are known; the entire
Community gives general Order by Law, how all Things publicly are to be done,
and the King as the Head, the highest in Authority over all, causes according
to the same Law, every particular to be framed and ordered thereby. The whole
Body Politic makes Laws, which Laws gave Power unto the King; and the King
having bound himself to use according to Law that Power, it so falls out,
that the Execution of the one is accomplished by the other in most religious
and peaceable Sort. Hocker's Ecclesiastical Polity. Lio. 8.


I shall finish this Paper with a few Observations pertinent to the Subject.

Whoever examines, or even superficially surveys and compares the Government of
the Church and State, will find a beautiful Harmony and Concordance, such as no
other Society can produce. The Subordinancy of Powers in each, and the
Resemblance in their three Estates, advance a mutual Regard and Veneration and
Esteem in the People for each. The Dignities likewise conferred on the Bishops,
must be very instrumental in e^citing those Principles of Honor which are so
favorable to a Monarchy. Add to this, that Persons of the highest Rank, --
Brothers of Kings, and Noblemen by Birth, have added Luster to the Office, --
so that the most eminent Personages think it an Honor to them, by entering
into this Station, to promote the Interest of Religion and their Country. The
Presbyterian Principles or Form of Government, cannot, with any Justice, be set
in Competition with it, as they maintain a perfect Equality, and cannot boast
that Antiquity, or illustrious Descent, so agreeble and necessary to Honor.

It may be accounted likewise no small Testimony in favor of the Efficacy of
Prelacy in the English Government, that the Enemies of the State have ever
tried to disparage it; and Oliver Cromwell, (when he aimed at the Destruction
of Monarchy,) proved by his Conduct, that he imagined the Extirpation of
Prelacy the surest way to effect his diabolical Purposes.

It is highly necessary that a Church which is established by the State, should
have settled Articles of Doctrine, Creeds, etc. that the civil Magistrate may
judge of their Propriety, -- that he support not dangerous Principles, and that
the People may have a public and uniform Method of Instruction. Her public
Worship must be precompos'd and stated, that he may inspect it, and judge what
will be most beneficial for the common Weal. To such Methods and Practices the
Principles adopted by the Presbyterians are opposite, and those of the Church
most favorable; and consequently it must be best entitled to an Establishment
by the State.

The Number of Members also which the Church comprehends in it, renders it more
fitting for an Establishment. Though the motly Troops which gather under the
Standard of Presbyterianism may now seem to be numerous, -- yet if it were to
be established, and consequently certain Principles to be agreed on, those
ravenous Devourers, who only joined with her in her Opposition to the Church,
would turn their full-mouthed Bowlings at her; and she would be left, as in the
Times of Oliver, to cease from the Attempt, or be ^orn to Pieces by th^se who
formerly herded with her.

The Advantages which are derived to us from the Labors of the Prelates, like
those which issue from Temporal Superiors, by the remoteness of their Sphere
escape the public Attention, and for that Reason receive not that Gratitude
which is due to them. Very ill therefore does He deserve of his Country, who
not only neglects to pay them that Tribute of Praise which their Services
demand, but endeavors to rob them of that Share of Acknowledgment which the
Public might be disposed to give them. When we consider likewise, that in the
Confirmation of the great Charter, and in the Charter itself, and in the Body
of the English Laws, the Ecclesiastical are so interwoven with the civil
Rights, that a Dis^union cannot be effected without Danger to the Whole; when
we consider this, I say, we cannot but doubt of that Man's Affection to his
Country, who endeavors to lessen a Reverence for the Wisdom of the
Legislature, and a Love for any Part of the Constitution.

Abolish (says an eminent foreign Politician) the Privileges of the Lords, of
the Clergy, and of the Cities, in a Monarchy, and you will soon have a popular
State, or a despotic Government. Montesquieu's Spirit of Laws. Vol. 1. Lib. 2.
Chap. 4.


From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Nov. 21, 1768. The AMERICAN WHIG, No. XXXVII.
SO sacred are the rights of truth, and of conscience, that it argues a
considerable degree of meanness of spirit, to violate them, even for the
preservation of life itself, Nay, to misrepresent things in a jocular romantic
way for the diversion of others, common as it is, among the lower sort of
people, is no small immorality: It discovers a trifling temper of mind, with a
want of a due tenderness of conscience, a proper regard to truth and religion.
-- But to assert a falsehood with great seriousness and solemnity, is doubtless
a notable aggravation of the crime, and renders this sin, in the beautiful
language of scripture, exceeding sinful. This practice of deceit and falsehood,
is in the meanest of men, but is esteemed more criminal in gentlemen of
distinction and learning. Hence to give such a person the lie, is accounted the
greatest indignity and seldom fails to kindle a proportionable resentment.

A clergyman is considered not only as a Man of honor, but of religion and
piety; and by his office appointed to reprove the vices of others, and to be a
preacher of truth and righteousness. It must therefore be still more atrocious
in him to take up the business of misrepresentation and duplicity. So far as
any of them are guilty of this scandalous offense, they practically deny
themselves to be the ministers of Christ, who is the faithful and true witness,
and inlist themselves under the banners of Satan, who was a liar from the
beginning. Hence it is that among the many things which are justly looked upon
as exceptionable in high church, and her missionaries in the colonies, there is
none that gives greater offense, and raises more disgust against the prelatical
faction, than that want of varacity for which they have rendered themselves so
remarkable, and those methods of deceit, misrepresentation and calumny, which
they too constantly pursue. -- They may pretend what they will, about having
all the power, and being the only ministers of Christ, and greatly zealous for
the only church he has in the world: But can any sober man who really believes
the Bible, seriously think that to be the cause and kingdom of Christ, which he
sees so principally founded in, and constantly promoted by imposition and
artifice? Was the religion which the missionaries profess much more
exceptionable than it is, they might notwithstanding be justly entitled to the
charitable opinion of mankind, did they but pursue fair and honest measures to
promote it. But since they are guilty of such gross disingenuity, in
prosecuting their scheme, they must, to every upright and candid person,
acquainted with their measures, appear in the most disagreeable colors. How
inexpressibly odious then, must be their conduct in the sight of that God who
loves truth and uprightness in the inward parts. -- Truly affecting must it be,
to every serious person to think what account such men will be able to give of
their conduct in the great day of judgment, when all their specious disguises
and falacious colorings shall vanish, and the naked truth of things appear.

The honest and intelligent reader, will not I believe, be surprised at these
reflections, on the behavior of the mission^^ies, when he has duly considered
what D. Chandler himself has republished of the addresses, which, he tells us,
were e^rnestly and repeatedly made to the society for the propagating of the
gospel, then newly incorporated* signed not only by the clergy, and by
vestries, but by governors of the provinces, setting forth the necessity of an
American episcopate, and imploring their influence and mediation in favor of
it. P. 49, 50 In their address made to the Throne at the accession of King
GEORGE I. there is this surprising inducement to en^orce their requ^^^ for an
American Bishop, Nor can our expectations but revi^^, so soon as his royal
wisdom shall be apprized, that the inclination of those people in those
regions, (which surely is the voice of God in the case) concur with the
apparent necessity, that such governors in the church be there constituted. In
reading this passage would not any man naturally think, that the people in the
British colonies in general, were desirous of an American Bishop? The terms are
general and indefinite, "those people in those regions." Not only one region,
colony or province, but all in general, Those People in those Regions.

But was there are any foundation in truth and fact, for such a representation
of the inclinations of the Americans? Directly the reverse. Nothing can be
further from the truth, though it was signed by the clergy and vestries, and
also by some governors. For some governors have not disdained to become the
tools of the episcopal clergy, in order to avail themselves in their turn, of
the dirty instrumentality of the gown and cassock. Dr. Chandler and his
missionary brethren, when it becomes necessary for them, to inform their
employers how laborious and successful they are, frequently represent in their
letters, the church of England to be in a growing state, and that she has been
greatly increasing; and this I believe, they have constantly done both before
and since the year 1714, when this address was made to the throne. He tells us,
p. 88. Whatever notions the Dissenters in this country may have formerly
entertained concerning the church, yet of late years they have greatly come off
from their prejudices; and sentiments of candor, charity and moderation, have
visibly taken place. -- And yet not withstanding th^^ the prejudices of
Dissenters, as he absurdly calls them, in the colonies against the church of
England, are so greatly removed, there are but very few in America who desire a
Bishop at this present period. The general assemblies of the Massachusetts Bay
and Connecticut, which are by far the largest of the N England colonies, have
instructed their Agents to remonstrate against an American episcopate. Nor does
it appear that the people of the other colonies are more desirous of such a
spiritual Lord to rule over them. It should seem from all the public
appearances and the best intelligence that can be obtained, that there is
scarcely one in a thousand of the inhabitants of the British colonies, who
really desire an American Bishop. There are on the contrary, thousands and ten
thousands, who detest the project as much as they did the late stamp act, and
look upon an American episcopate to be a more tremendous evil, and more
certainly calculated to deprive us of our liberty, and reduce us to the worst
and most infamous kind of b^ndage. Their indignation and resentment is roused,
and they will resist and reprove this spiritual tyranny and s^avery, by all
lawful ways and means in their power. -- What can we think of the clergy,
vestries and governors, who represented it to be the inclinations of the people
in those regions, that such officers should be sent hither? What is there that
such men will stick at, who dare thus in the face of the Sun, contradict the
plainest facts, and inform our gracious Sovereign, that we desire a Bishop,
when there is scarce any thing we more detest and abhor?

I am greatly mistaken if Dr. Chandler be not guilty of continuing this
misrepresentation of the colonies, as false and disingenuous at it is. He had
represented in the former part of his appeal, the great importance and
necessity of sending Bishops to the colonies, in such a rue^ul and pathetic
manner, that he seems to have been afraid, the warmth of his imagination had
transported him too far, that he had overacted his part, and that his
representations might afford grounds for sundry objections against the
character of his superiors, for not sending Bishops long ago, since the call
for them was so extremely urgent, and indeed if but one half of what he says
upon the great excellency, necessity, importance and usefulness of an American
episcopate to the colonies, the church, the Negroes and Indians, were true, it
would reflect signal reproach on the English Bishops at home, for being so
remiss and negligent in endeavoring to procure us this most momentous
blessing: As this might therefore give them great ^^brage, our appellant, after
having conjured up a real ghost, while he was pursuing his ideal blessing a
Bishop, found it necessary to try to lay him again. Among other things, which
he says in answer to this shrewd objection, he observes, that, the colonies
were generally settled by private adventurers; and some of them by those who
had an aversion to episcopal government. The propriety of not sending a Bishop
to colonies of the la^^er sort, will be disputed by none." P. 47.

This passage would seem at first view, a generous concession, and a full
acknowledgment that there would be no propriety in sending a Bishop to the
colonies, northeast of Maryland, because it will be difficult to prove with
satisfactory evidence, that the first settlers of these colonies had not in
general an aversion to episcopal government; so many of them having been
harrassed and persecuted in a most cruel and barbarous manner, by these
ecclesiastical tyrants, who were a disgrace to the reformation, and the
greatest plagues to the church and nation. And it will be difficult to prove,
that this aversion is eradicated, since a vast majority of the present
inhabitants, the posterity of those persecuted refugees are filled with
abhorrence of all such Bishops, upon the review of the many oppressions and
barbarities which their forefathers for a long course of years suffered from
their merciless hands. In this view the passage quoted from the Doctor, would
breathe a very noble and Christian spirit: For in this case agreeable to the
society's inference from the supposal of our being inclined to have a Bishop,
that this was the voice of God, it may with equal propriety and strength of
reason be inferred that the general and great aversion to Bishops in the
colonies, is the voice of God, that none should be sent here. Why is not their
strong aversion to American prelates, as divine an argument against them, as
their inclination for them would be, especially since the aversion is real and
general, and their inclination, bating only the convention and a few zealots,
false and imaginary.

But this cannot possibly be the Doctor's meaning, in the passage under
consideration, because such a declaration would confute the whole of his
appeal, and the seven famous petitions; since the appeal and the petitions,
make application for Bishops for these very colonies, that have the greatest
aversion to prelacy. We must then search for another meaning to this passage,
and though it is one of those passages in which the author found it necessary,
not to speak out fully, but to leave eliptical, rather implied than expressed,
for very obvious reasons, to mince and smooth it over with much artifice; yet
it is not very difficult to supply the elipsis, and discover the true sense by
comparing it with some other passages, viz. "That though these colonies were
settled by those, who had an aversion to episcopal government, and there would
have been no propriety in sending Bishops to them while this remained; yet this
being now chiefly removed, the present inhabitants in general, having conformed
to the church of England, there is now not only the greatest propriety, but
even a necessity that they should be immediately sent to these colonies to
confirm this wonderful conversion to episcopacy.

That this is the true and only consistent sense of the passage under
consideration, I think may be demonstrably proved, from the following passage.
"Whatever notions the Dissenters in this country may have formerly entertained,
concerning the church; yet of late years, they have have greatly come off from
their prejudices." -- In the former part of this century, the number of
American clergy and professors of the church. -- was small and inconsiderable
in comparison with the amount of their present number. -- And even then, he
tells us with seeming approbation, the clergy vestries, and governors of
provinces, signed petitions or addresses, setting forth, that it was the
inclination of the people in the colonies to have an American Bishop, which
they looked upon to be the voice of God approving the scheme. Now when he had
thus told us from the authorities of the clergy, the vestries and the governors
of provinces, that the inclinations of the people in the American regions, were
to have Bishops among them, fifty years ago; and that the professors of the
church of England, were small and inconsiderable then in comparison with the
amount of their present number, what can any stranger to America conclude, but
that they are all in general conformed to the church? -- Accordingly he has
represented in his appeal, that the professors of the church of England in
America, are about a million who complain for want of bishops. Will not, says
he, then the complaints of near a million of British subjects, who are
suffering under the (...) unprecedented hardships, with regard to their
religion, be regarded and procure the redress of so intolerable a grievance?
Now if there are million in America, who belong to the church of England,
certainly she has increased in a most amazing manner, and other denominations
must have unaccountably decreased, and dwindled away comparatively to almost
nothing. But who that has any tolerable acquaintance with America, and the
numbers of the various denominations, does not know this calculation of the
Doctor, to be a most gla^ing misrepresentation of facts? It is astonishing that
he should have no greater regard for his public reputation, than to stuff his
appeal with such striking falsehoods, entrenched as he may flatter himself to
be, within the authority of the clergy, vestries and governors of provinces.
For how many such authorities will be sufficient to convert a notorious
falsehood, into an important and serious truth? To have requested a Bishop at
all, since he is likely to prove so injurious to the civil and religious
liberties of the colonies, would have been highly unreasonable, but to report
that we are desirous of such an opp^^ssion, is at once to enslave and insult us.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE Nov. 21. A KICK for the WHIPPER, [No. XXV.]
By Sir ISAAC FOOT.
-- Sic olim in retia marsus
Actus aper, fremit horrendus, sinuos^qu^ quassat
Vincula. ludibrium CATULIS, --
HO^DSWORTH'S muscipulo.
I Have somewhere read the following story. A King^s jester called a nobleman
of the Court, a FOOL, which so enraged his lordship, that he threatened to whip
him. -- Why, there it is now, says the buffoon, you're as angry as a fury at me
for calling you fool, because every body else call, you so; but had I called my
Lord S -- 20 fools, he would have only smiled, for all the world knows him to
be a man of sense. The Whig having said something in general about shameless:
scribblers, Sq. T's conscience makes a particular application; and ^uming and
fretting, roaring and bellowing like a ^^^man, he with all the fury of revenge,
hurls back a shower of scurrility in the 3 first par.'s of his 25th. No. While
the Whig in all the dignity of conscious merit, only condescends to laugh at
him.

It signifies nothing to hold an object before a man who will shut his eyes.
That very letter from A. M. O. I. D. C, which our whipping-post hero in his
paper now under consideration most foolishly pretends to lash, contains
incontestable evidence of the constitutional dissimilary of the Churches of
England and Holland; and yet this scribbler still has the effron^ery to
insinuate (on the authority of a person, to whom ^e, perhaps inadvertently,
ascribes an attribute of the Deity, viz. that he cannot lie or be mistaken)
that the Dutch know not the constitution of their own Church, and in the name
of that of England salutes as a sister, the Church of Holland with a kiss, not
much unlike to that of JUDAS. The Church of Holland either is episcopal, or it
is not. -- If it is, a classis of presbyters is a Bishop; if it is not, Sq. T.
has thrown away his kiss of charity, having saluted not a sister, but (as the
sensible Dutch writer has since wittily observed) only "a distant relation."

Par. 9. Sq. T. says the Church holds and teaches the necessity of an
uninterrupted succession of -- Ordinations;" ( episcopal ordinations, no doubt
he means; but his design requires a little mincing) and yet he plumply denies
that she unchurches foreign churches, and himself caresses them as sitters to
the Church of England, though they reject episcopacy, and pretend not to
uninterrupted succession. But these are crumbs of complaisance not to be thrown
away, it seems, on such domestic schismatical dogs as we are, whom our Whipper
sentences to reproach in this world and condemnation in the next. That English
dissenters "stand not on the same foot" with foreign protestants, is in some
sense true; the latter separated from the mo^her, and the former from the
daughter, (both of which seem to have been equally vexed at the separation) but
though foreign protestants stepped much farther at one step from the Church of
Rome than British protestants, I cannot but think English dissenters after their
2d step "stand on the RIGHT foot, as well as they. But if schism, as such, is
so criminal as to be scandalous is this world and condemnatory in the next,
what will become of the members of the Church of England, originally rent from
the Church of Rome for no more "tolerable a reason" than a whimsical freak of
Harry VIII!

Sq. T's Parallel (par. 7.) will be admitted, when it shall appear that the 1st
day of the week is as ambitious, and women and infants as powerful, as aspiring
males or ecclesiastical adults. No valid objection can be raised from Pope Joan
or Bishops in their cradles.

In his 2 last par.'s Sq. T. in order to fix (...) of absurdity on A. M. O. I.
D. C. plays upon words most delightfully; I shall interrupt his diversion only
by observing, that should I in this respect treat the Whipper with half the
severity that he does my friend the Dutchman, I should kick the Whip to atoms.

Though he declines, "the trouble of learning a new vocabulary," I shall give a
specimen of one which his readers had need to learn; and yet I will not promise
that the completest of the kind would render his Whip quite intelligible.

The CHURCH. The Church of England. alias The Clergy. Sister Church One
necessary to a Party. Grievances of the Church. Grievances of the Clergy.
Petitions of the Church. Do. of the Clergy. Faction All opposers of
ecclesiastical bondage. Religion The national form. Dissenter An Enemy to
Monarchy. Persecution etc. Self-defence. Demonstration Asseveration. Conclusive
argument Misrepresentation. Things unworthy of notice. Things incontestable.
Anti-episcopalians Cavillers, sophists etc, (...) appeal Scripture.
From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Nov. 21. A WHIP for the AMERICAN WHIG. By TIMOTHY
TICKLE, ESQR. [No. XXXIII.
A Knave or Fool should perish in a Line.

YOUNG.
To TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR
SIR,
IF I justly remember, both you and your Antagonist, the American Whig, in some
of your preliminary Numbers, promised to relieve your Readers, when tired of
the Dry Crust of Controversy, by now and then throwing into your Papers
something sprightly and entertaining. This Engagement, I confess, has been
pretty well complied with on your own Part: But the Whig seems utterly to have
forgotten his Promise; unless he goes upon the old Maxim, That he who acts by
another, acts by himself. On the Strength of This, perhaps he may fondly hope
to justify his Procedure; as it is more than probable that Sir Isaac Foot,
writes his Kick by Whiggish Direction, -- most palpably under Whiggish
Influence.

However, as the Knight seems to have sunk into total Neglect, (if peradventure
any Regard was ever paid to his Babblements and Buffoonery,) I think it
incumbent on his Master, who I will presume is somewhat more attended to, at
length to give us some Specimens of that Wit and Humor, which heretofore, it
has been said, gained him some small Reputation: Though from what I have seen,
heard, and understood, at least Five Eights of it were given him by the good
Nature of the Public; several spirited Performances in the ludicrous Style,
having been fathered on Him, though they were in Reality the Offspring of some
other Parent; which it seems, the Gentleman's superlative Modesty would not
suffer him to disavow. But, be that as it may, I should be glad that either He,
or some of his Associates, (for I cannot but suppose that he has some superior
to Sir Isaac, -- I cannot but suppose (a Supposition, Mr. Tickle, which he has
not made in your Favor) that some Men of Gen^^s may be sound among the Variety
of Writers that are engaged in his Paper) I say, I should be glad that some of
the Conf^deracy would give us a few Strokes of that Humor (still avoiding all
personal Reflections) with which, "I am told," he has long ago, and openly
threatened to be avenged of his Adversaries. Laugh and be Fat, is an old
Prescription: I hope he will try ^ts Efficacy, both for his own Sake, and for
the Sake of many others, as well his Writers as Readers, who, I will be bold to
say, are every Way poor enough, except in Head and in Spirit.

I know you have declared, that you look upon Sir Isaac as below your Notice,
or even your contempt; and I do assure you, that unless I was convinced in my
own Mind that you really thought him so, I never should have dishonored myself
and my Profession, by writing to you upon the Occasion. But meeting
accidentally with a Complaint of his, in one of his latest Numbers, That the
People either did not read, or else that they did not understand him, or Words
to that Effect, I snatched up my Pen, and wrote the following Ode, as I stood
by the Side of my Counting Desk, as fast, aye, as fast, Mr. Tickle, as most
Folks can read it -- And now as it came from my Pen so glibly, and as it is the
first of my Exhibitions in the poetical Way, if you can prevail upon yourself
to think it no Breach of your Engagement to the Public, to insert it in your
Whip (I mean, if you can forgive this Notice being taken of the illustrious
Commoner) I should esteem it a particular Favor. I cannot say that the
Versification is in all Places very harmonious; but I hope that both yourself,
and the Public, will forgive or get over any little Hobble, of which
Inexperience must be thought the Occasion.

I am, Sir, (At least I shall be, if you comply with my Request) Your most
obedient and obliged Servant, THE AUTHOR.
P. S. Just as I was going to Seal, came in a Latin Scholar, to whom I showed
my Ode; and though he sound great Fault with it for not being agreeable to the
Rules of Proso^ia, (for so he called the Author, who, I suppose, from the Sound
of the Name, must have been a Lady -- and it gave me great Uneasiness to think
that any Thing of mine should be disagreeable to any of that Sex particularly;)
yet he was kind enough to furnish me with a Classical Motto: For, said he, a
Piece of Latin at the Head of an English Performance, gives it a Look of
Erudition, and adds much Credit to the Author, (think how I was pleased Mr.
Tickle, with the Application of that Word to your humb^ Serva^^!) and makes him
appear a Man of Consequence in the Republic of Letters. -- He was going on a^
full Speed, til^ the Mention of Republic made me stop his Career; for, to tell
you the Truth, I began to fear that he would have insensibly slid into Treason;
as I have observed that Republicans and Rebels (under a monarchial Government)
are pretty commonly synonimous Terms. -- But this, you will tell me, is nothing
to the Purpose; and I own, it may be more to the Purpose, at least, to give you
the same Information that the Scholar gave me, which was, That the Motto is
taken from Quintus Horatius Flaccus, who, he added, would have been a very
clever Fellow, if he had not been too much addicted to Women and Wine, and
withal a Polytheist and an Heathen: However, said He, my Master often told me
that He wrote Latin almost as well as himself, and every Body allows Him to be
the best Linguister in all America.



A most irregular ODE, On a most irregular WRITER.
To the most potent, most puissant, most pedantic, most presumptuous, most
pugnacious, most Pedestrian Knight of the Post, this poetical, though pitiful
Performance, is most publicly, and most properly presented, by P P. Clerk of
this Parish.
PEDE IN UNO.
On one FOOT.
HOR.
SIR ISAAC complains
That he loses his Pains,
In Writing,
And Fighting,
And Squabbling,
And Babbling,
As fondly he deems,
Or as wildly he dreams,
To his schismatic Schemes
To draw the rude Rabble in:
Quoth He. on a Time,
Though he spoke not in Rhyme;
(For that was the Season,
It seems, to speak Reason;)
Many are the Folks,
Who love to crack their Jokes,
And suppose me John O'Nokes
Whilst more,
Rich and Poor,
With sarcastical Smiles,
Say, they smell Tom O'Styles.
Some think him a Tindall, some think him a Chubb,
Some think him a Ranter that spouts from his Tub:
Some think him a Newton, some think him a Lock,
Some think him a Stone, and some think him Stock,
-- But a Stock he at least may thank Nature for giving.
And if he is a Stone, I pronounce it is Living.
But think him a Man of the Pulpit or Bar,
A Man of -- whatever you please, -- but of War;
(For, trust me, the Knight
Has no Stomach to fight;
Yet, though he is no Fighter,
He Is sure a prime Writer;)
There are who aver that they know his Condition,
And vow that He Is either a Fool or Physician:
Quoth Dick, by my Troth,
(Though he meant not an Oath,)
I believe he is both;
Because into Sense He so seldom does vary,
And talks so much like an Apothecary.
But, quoth his Friend Will -- i -- am,
Of this Notion still I am,
And always have been,
(As may plainly be seen
By my Watchings of old
And Reflections so bold,
And by Whigging of late
In Defense of the State;
For as to the Crown,
I would have it pulled down;
And the Mitre, that Whore's-Cap, and still greater Evil,
If I had my Will, should be sent to the -- I-)
I say that which Fact is,
And still is my Practice;
When a Man writes with Reason, I make it a Rule
To deem the said Writer of Reason a Fool;
And all Men of Reason will judge, that, from thence,
I think him a Fool who presume to write Sense:
From which one may guess,
What I dare not express
That the Right
Worthy Wight,
Though so knowing an Elf,
Does not know Himself,
Better than he knows his Friend the Knight.
But all,
Great and Small,
High and Low,
Friend and Foe,
Do declare,
Vow and Swear,
(Excepting these Worthies, the Wight and the Knight,
And the Wight's never wrong, and the Knight's ever right)
That whatever be his Trade, or whatever be his Name,
He Is not likely soon to be kicked into Fame;
Because, notwithstanding
He Is so good a Hand in
The Art of purloining, and picking, and gleaning,
No Mortal on Earth can peep into his Meaning:
But trust me, Sr Knight,
You may write Day and Night;
Yes, good Master Isaac,
Till both Arm and Eyes ache;
Scratch Noddle so thick,
Bite Nails to the Quick;
Praise Cromwell the glorious,
And Kirk the Victorious;
Twist Ropes
To hang Popes;
And damn the old Harlot
In purple and scarlet;
Though there is One next of Kin,
Who, when stripped to the Skin,
Exhibits such Purity, Beauty and Charms,
Her Form is so pleasing
You cannot help squeezing,
And tugging and hugging her close in your Arms:
Yet alas, honest Man,
Do the best that you can,
Not one in the Nation,
At least before the general Conflagration,
(And then what you write
May perhaps come to Light,)
Your Works will develope, or even once heed them,
For none, my good Friend, takes the Trouble to read them.
From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Nov. 28, 1768. The AMERICAN WHIG, No. XXXVIII.
The following letter is wrote with so much good sense and plety, that I shall
make no apology for giving it a place in the American Whig. --

New Jersey, November 18, 1768.
To the AMERICAN WHIG.
SIR,
AMONGST all the various devices that have from time to time been formed by
those who aspire to lord it over God's heritage, there probably never was a
more pernicious scheme concerted for the destruction of our religious
liberties, than that of establishing an episcopate in the American plantations.
It must therefore be matter of rejoicing to every serious mind, that the
advocates for this ruinous project, appear daily more and more cre^t-fallen and
dejected; while its opposers increase in number, and are manifestly victorious
in argument. -- Nay, so far superior to the little juncto, that are engaged in
forging chains for a free and loyal people, that I doubt not, but mad wit'
despair, and raving with disappointment, having already long since abandoned
all pretense to reason and argument, they will within the space of two months,
contract their forces to a competent number for forming a circle round a fire
side, and vent their ultima ratio Jacobitorum, as they usually do, that is, in
cursing the Whigs, and drinking to the restoration of a Tory administration.
But however promising, the prospect of their speedy and total defeat; I think
we should not rely on an arm of flesh. If not so much as a sparrow falls to the
ground, without the will of our Heavenly father, how much more ought we to eye
the dispensations of providence, in a matter so momentous to our most
inestimable privileges. I would therefore draw my encouragement of success,
from a devout consideration of the reasons we have for supposing that the great
disposer of events is on our side. And if he be for us, who shall be against us?

It has justly been observed by divines, that what we generally call second
causes, are not causes in strict propriety of speech; and what we call the laws
of nature, are only certain rules and methods, by which the great ruler of the
world generally proceeds in those of his ^ons, which fall under our cognizance:
Nay, that the right notion of the divine omnipresence will greatly assist us,
in forming a just apprehension of the nature of that providence, which respects
not only the great events, but the minutest circumstances of every the smallest
action and event in the world: Even that providence, by which "the very hairs
of our heads are all numbered." That though the providence of God presides
over, and governs all things, it has a peculiar influence upon all the great
events that happen to men, and especially in respect of such, wherein the fate
of a whole people is involved. And that these are effected by the Deity's
inclining the hearts of men, in a way consistent with rational agents, to
accomplish the purposes of his will, and by controuling the designs, or
infatuating the counsels of those who act against his divine predestinations.
Thus we frequently find, that he terrifies bad men, with strange amazements, to
discover their own conspiracies, and to fall into the snares which they
secretly laid for others. -- Agreeable to this, the sacred oracles inform us,
that he frustrate^h the tokens of liars, and makes diviners mad; turns wise
men backward, and makes their knowledge foolish. I remember an excellent
remark of the pious Mr. Matthew Henry, in his comment on the conduct of
Rehoboam, who like the Bishop of Landaff, had been advising with a parcel of
hotheaded striplings. God, says he, often fulfills the counsels of his own
wisdom, by infatuating men, and giving them up to the counsels of their own
folly. No more needs be done to ruin men, and to leave them to themselves, and
their own pride and passion. Let us examine the mad conduct of our diviners,
and trace their conspiracy by this rule, and we shall find great reason to
thank God for the comfortable hopes, that he is by a strange concurrence of
external causes, about making their knowledge foolish. The world had hitherto
been imposed upon by the specious pretenses of a certain society, who had
secretly been preparing the way for an episcopate in America, by introducing
missionaries into this country, to pro^elyte the different denominations of
Christians to episcopacy. This being done under color of converting the Pagans
to Christianity, was so far from giving umbrage at home, that thousands of
Dissenters, yearly contributed to the apparent, without so much as conjecturing
about the true and ^atent design. And this scheme, though suspected by some among
us, yet being only suspected, might have been prosecuted for years to come,
without affording any satisfactory evidence in reality. Such being the case,
who could have imagined, that a man engaged in this very plot, and who must
certainly have known that its success depended on its being kept a secret, till
another century had matured it for execution, should, in the most public
manner, divulge it through the nation; than which nothing in the world could more
contribute to mar and ruin it.

But being smitten with the splendour of an American Bishopric, which
notwithstanding the incredible fustian about a primitive Bishop, is intended to
outshine the inconsiderable lack-cash see of Landaff, his Lordship under the
most astonishing infatuation declares, This point obtained [the mission of
Bishops to the Colonies] the American church will soon go out of its infant
state, be able to stand upon its own legs, and without foreign help, support
and spread itself." "Then the business of this society will have been brought
to the happy issue intended.

Nor is the finger of God, less discernable in his Lordship's (who is by many
supposed to be the prelate they had fixed their eye upon, or rather raised their
eyes unto) discovering such extreme virulence against the non-episcopalians in
this country, as must necessarily rouse them to a greater opposition than
perhaps they would otherwise have given.

I proceed now to show the reasons we have to conclude, that the providence of
God is about confounding the measures of these men by the striking instances of
infatuation in the conduct of Dr. Chandler, all tending to defeat the very
project he was endeavoring to promote.

1st. He appears sensible, that whatever were his private sentiments about the
religious denominations, not of his own communion; it was but common prudence,
not to affront them in an affair in which he seems desirous, if not of their
assistance, at least of them neutrality. Actuated by this principle, he has in
some parts o^ his pamphlet treated them with such marks of respect, as nothing
but the most absolute necessity could have extorted from a person of his
bigoted turn. And yet in other parts, he appears so unaccountably infatuated,
as to represent them, though (...) could serve no imaginable purpose, and is
flatly contrary to truth, as sounding the trumpet of sedition, and being
disaffected to the civil establishment.

2d. Though he confesses it altogether unnecessaay to his purpose, to insist on
the divine right of episcopacy; yet has he openly avowed such an attachment to
the Jure Divino of diocesan Bishops, as (supposing his illogical syllogisms to
be conclusive) to unchurch, and consequently to affront the whole body of
Christians in America, except those of his own communion, and his good friends
in Canada.

3d. He declares, that he only desires a harmless primitive Bishop; and on
gaining credit to this declaration, the successful prosecution of his scheme
principally depends, and yet he has rendered it totally impossible to gain any
man's belief, by giving more than bare intimations, that as soon as his party
have sufficient power and influence, they will procure legislative acts, to
aggrandize the American hierarchy, and exalt this primitive Bishop into as
great a Lord spiritual, as ever wielded the episcopal staff in England; and now
pretends to be affronted for being disbelieved, this self-contradiction
notwithstanding

4th. Confounded by the same infatuation, he published an advertisement in
which he speaks with the highest contempt of Whig principles, though a person of
half his abilities must have known, that nothing could be more fatal to the
success of his scheme, than the discovery of a Tory biass, in the reign of a
Prince whose royal progenitor was advanced to the throne on Whig principles,
immediately after a scheme had been concerted in the reign of the Doctor's
beloved Queen Anne, the great patroness of an American episcopate, for
introducing the Pretender, "For America says he, has Whigs." Who that was not
under a providential infatuation in order to be finally disappointed, would
have ventured to risk the success of his cause, on so ill-timed, as well as
wretched a witticism, when he knows, that bating some of his own party, and the
papists in Maryland, he might search the continent with a lanthorn for a
different character, as Diogenes did Athens for a man, and be baulked in his
search.

I am farther induced to conclude, that God is determined to bring their
counsels to naught, and to make the devices of these people of none effect, on
considering some remarkable and providential occurrences in the conduct of the
convention, as that their malevolent calumnies on as obedient and loyal a
people, as any Prince upon earth could ever boast, should, notwithstanding
their studied secrecy, be so soon divulged. So that though they shot in secret
and encouraged themselves in an evil matter, and communed of laying snares
privily, saying who shall see them, a bird of the air carried the voice, and
that which has wings discovered the matter. That they should appoint a person
to conciliate the good graces of the non episcopalians, who, from his narrow
principles, they must have known, could not possibly write with temper on the
subject of episcopacy. Nor while contemplating this his grand idol, refrain
from using those whom he most nonsensically calls Dissenters, with indignity
and insult, -- That they should notwithstanding his invitations of all
objectors to propose their objections, no sooner find an opponent, than
determine to treat him with the most unparallelled scurrility; and in order
weekly to abuse him, retain in their service, a brace of reverend
blunderbusses, who in the language of Milton, are lower than the lowest; and by
that means exhibit the clearest demonstration of that very spirit, which, though
at present, harmless and despicable for want of power, the continent so greatly
and so justly apprehends, when armed with the temporal powers of a Bishop,
which will enable them to carry it into the most dreadful and unrelenting
execution. -- And finally, that of all the members of the convention (among
whom there must doubtless be some men of ability and temper) they should depute
such a genius as Mr. I-gl-fs, to preface and correct their laborious defense of
a defamatory sermon; and after having decluded a poor credulous creature by
their most malevolent misrepresentations, render him still more ridiculous, by
the slander and falsehoods, interspersed through their vindication.

From these observations on the conduct of providence, respecting this
interesting affair, I think we may conclude that it does not seem at present
agreeable to the divine will, to give success to the measure; and that
notwithstanding the great demerit of our sins, we shall not be chastised for
them, with the particular punishment meditated by the convention; but that he
who has from time to time delivered us from the merciless designs of ambitious
and unreasonable men, and still brings to light the hidden things of darkness,
and has preserved to us our religion and liberty, in despite of all the
malicious and restless attempts of our adversaries, will also in his infinite
mercy, rescue us from that tremendous destruction which was ready to devour us.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Nov. 28, 1768. A KICK for the WHIPPER. No. XXVI.
By Sir ISAAC FOOT.
-- Sudat multum fuustraque laborat.

HOR.
A Propos! Sq. T. (No. XXVI) talks of some who by "multiplying words" endeavor
to prove that black is white. Among this kind of gentry he himself makes a
distinguished figure; he writes as though he had the same veneration for the
appeal, as for the BIBLE; and right or wrong, would fain persuade us, that the
whole is consistent and rational. He may be, for aught I know, as much a
voluntier in this service as the Whig in a better; but, though he may not be paid
for conceiving. I Am not clear that he does not pay largely for the delivery of
his MICE. NIGRICOLA, it is true, proposed a negro episcopate; but I cannot find
that the Whig (as Sq. T. pretends) has said a syllable about the matter:
however, if negroes could be proved white men, the character of the appeal, as
to sincerity, would not suffer in the least by the argument.

I wonder not that the Whig has (nor should I have wondered if the grave Dr.
CHAUNCEY had) ridiculed Dr. C's queer long-winded argument, which begins with
British conquests, and ends (who would have thought it?) with an American
episcopate; for, in spite of all the tinkling of Sq. T's hammer, a number of
the links in this long chain are evidently too defective to support the huge
weight of a Bishop. -- For, that what is called the national, is "the purest
and best" religion, -- that the opinion of the civil magistrate concerning
religious matters, which either are disputable or affect the rights of
conscience, ought to be considered as the national opinion, and that episcopacy
(or if you please, episcopal Christianity) is the "MOST suitable monument of
religious gratitude," are propositions very far from being indisputable. The
first, (which Dr. C. himself has half given up) has often been confuted! the
2d. rests on an absurdity, viz. that religious sentiments are capable of
delegation: and the 3d. regards the outside, as what principally recommends a
sacrifice to Heaven.

Sq. T. may shuffle as much as he pleases, but it is evident, that by the phrase
national religion, Dr. C. and he mean, not Christianity, but merely that "mode,
form or species of religion' called episcopacy. And indeed, in spite of his
tergiversation, Sq. T. implicitly owns as much in some places, where he speaks
of those who were Christians before, as "receiving" -- "adopting" --
"preferring" -- "establishing" etc. what he calls NATIONAL RELIGION. By this
distinguishing term cannot be meant the Christian religion, in which almost all
denominations agree, but that in which episcopalians differ from others; for
this difference, Sq. T. says, is the "only reason" that "it has been made the
national religion." (Quere, was pure Christianity without regard to "mode, form
or species" ever established by law?) -- As Sq. T. seems fond of the terms
"mode, form, and species" of religion, he must give me leave to ask him a
question. -- The essential materials of dress being the same in different
nations, if I adopt or prefer the English dress, is it not the " mode, form or
fashion of the English dress which I adopt or prefer? -- Certainly; -- and
therefore by Dr. C's NATIONAL RELIGION, we must necessarily understand
episcopacy and its appendages.

Sq. T. seems to think the establishment of American prelacy a "monument of
gratitude equally proper" with an anniversary thanksgiving. I consider it as a
monument not only less proper, but entirely improper; because 1. endangering
the civil and religious liberties of a people, is evidently no proper method of
thanking heaven for their deliverance from arbitrary power and savage violence.
And 2. If the members of the civil legislature have a right (which I think they
have not) to determine for their constituents in disputable matters of
religion, which may therefore affect the rights of conscience, the legislature
of Great Britain certainly has not a right so far as to meddle with the
internal policy of the colonies, as to impose a Bishop any more than to TAX
them: and therefore Sq. T. need not distress himself, for fear the nation will
not maintain its "religious character," for want of taking unconstitutional
steps. But a national anniversary thanksgiving, being what no man living, not
even an heathen, can doubt the propriety of, might be "erected as a monument"
by the King's prerogative alone. However after all, I cannot but think what Dr.
C. last mentioned and is most cool about (which however cannot be "erected"
without a Bishop) of all, the most proper "monument of gratitude," viz. THE
CONVERSION OF AMERICAN HEATHEN. This would be a "monument erected" most
remarkably on "the very ground" itself; and this is what the "Worthy" Dr.
Wheelock and others have been since the war indefatigably preparing: I wish I
could say they had not met with powerful obstructions.

I cannot suppose even Sq. T. would be so silly as to refuse a "poor man a
shilling," merely for fear he would rise to a "level with himself;" but I am
sure he would be loath to give him a Whip, if he expected to feel the smart of
it himself.

The moderation of "our GEORGES and the immortal WILLIAM" (Whig Princes!) and
the arbitrary rule of OLIVER (as well as CHARLES I, stimulated by LAUD) we are
ready to acknowledge; but certain it is, notwithstanding, that civil and
ecclesiastical despotism, in such a state as ours, naturally tend to introduce
each other; and, if they do not hereafter do so, we shall, I believe, have as
much reason to thank the monarch as the metropolitan.

If the Whig loses credit so fast as Sq. T. pretends, it is a pity he labors so
hard in Whipping him. -- But alas! I forget, that Sq. T. himself is the AEOLUS,
who by his puffs, airs the "infected" Whig Vessels during their quarentine."

We are much obliged to Sq. T. for informing us, that "a most eminent prelate"
is elevated so low to secular business, and so eminently "promoted" to the
truly evangelical occupation of buying and selling in the temple. The reader
will doubtless judge Sq. T's card a very decent triumph before victory, or
rather a true picture in miniature of the genuine spirit and designs of his
party.

L.

From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE, Nov. 28, 1768. A WHIP for the AMERICAN WHIG. By
TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR [No. XXXIV.]
They studiously avoid entering into the Merits of the Cause; but are loud,
violent, and tedious, in dwelling upon all Circumstances which are not to the
Purpose. For instance, in the Case already mentioned: They never desire to know
what Claim my Adversary has to my Cow; but whether the said Cow were red or
black, her Horns long or short.

GULLIVER.
WHEN we see Men, in any public Debate, carefully avoiding to enter into the
Merits of the Cause, but loud, violent, and tedious in dwelling upon
Circumstances; we naturally infer that they are conscious, either of their own
personal Insufficiency, or of the Badness of their Cause. This Reflection has
been already suggested, not less than 500 Times, by the American Whig and his
"Underling" Scribblers.

I propose at this Time to consider the two Papers in the American Whig, (Numb.
XVIII, XIX) upon the general Subject of Episcopacy, signed Dordracensis. Who
Dordracensis is, I know very well. Faenum habet in Cornu. But why he signs
himself thus, I know not. If he means thereby to intimate his Approbation of
the Proceedings of the Synod of Dort, it is not much to his Credit. For, as a
very masterly and candid Writer observes, the Synod of Dort was convened in
Malice, and protected in Policy, and came not to examine the Truth, but to
punish the Remonstrants; themselves acknowledging that they came not to
dispute, but condemn. Ad judicandum quippe, non ad disputandum, Se convenisse
aiebat Synodus. Acta. etc. Pref. P. 5. I doubt not but many who subscribe to,
and approve of the Doctrines then and there established, hold in Abhorrence the
Conduct of that Synod.

But as I was going to say: I know Dordracensis, what he is -- what he has been
-- and what he lately would have been, if he could. You may say, What is all
this, to the Purpose of answering his Papers on the Subject of Episcopacy? I
reply, that it is, and I will maintain it to be, as much to the Purpose, as his
Papers on Episcopacy are to the Purpose of the grand Point in Debate.

Dr. Chandler thought proper to introduce the Subject of American Bishops with
a brief Sketch of the Arguments in Favor of Episcopacy, and an Explanation of
the Episcopal Office, according to the Doctrine and Belief of the Church of
England; in Order to show, that, upon the Principles of the Church, Ordination,
Confirmation, and a regular Government of the Clergy cannot be exercised in
America, for Want of Bishops. It was thought that a brief Explanation of these
Points was not improper, to enable those, who are Strangers to our Principles,
to judge of the great Disadvantages and Hardships the American Church of
England is under, while without an Episcopate. For the only fair Way for Men to
judge of this Case is, to consider it upon the Principles of the Church, and
not of those who differ from it. Accordingly the Author of the Appeal very
justly observes, that whether we are right or wrong in our Principles of
Ecclesiastical Polity, our Plea for American Bishops is equally valid; for no
Plea of this Kind can be founded on the absolute Truth of Principles, but on
the Belief of the Truth of them. It is evident therefore, that an Attempt to
overthrow the Doctrine of Episcopacy as maintained in the Church of England,
can make no Part of a regular Opposition to the Proposal of American Bishops;
and that it is as foreign from the proper Point in Debate, as a tedious
Examination into the Color of a Cow, or the Length of Her Horns, in a Dispute
concerning her legal Proprietor.

However I propose briefly to consider what Master Dordracensis has offered on
the Subject, and to truss up his two Papers together, like a Brace of "Snipes;"
for verily, gentle Reader, like Snipes they are, being, although long-leged, yet
smallbodied. His first Paper consists altogether of Presumptions, alias
presumptive Arguments against Episcopacy.

1. His first presumptive Argument is, "that the Reformers, when they rejected
the Errors of Popery, rejected with it Episcopacy." I am sorry, if this Writer
believes his own Assertion, that he has been so grossly misinformed. None of
the Reformers ever rejected Episcopacy on the Footing of its being an
Innovation in the Church; but some of them were obliged to depart from it, as
they have often lamented, on Account of the Restraints of the civil Power. As
to Presbyterianism, Bp. Burnet, never blindly prejudiced against its Disciples,
has shown it to have been originally a political Engine of popish Invention.

2. "All the present Churches, except that of England, disclaim Episcopacy."
This is so far from being true, that most of them enjoy it; and the rest of
them wish for it, if there is any Truth and Sincerity in their Declarations. I
could produce innumerable Documents in Proof of this; but I will content myself
with a single one, which is recommended to the peculiar Attention of
Dordracensis. It is taken from the Church of Holland in the Synod of Dort. Bp.
Carleton, a Member of the Synod, informs us, that having made a public
Protestation against Presbyterianism and in Favor of Episcopacy, be told the
Divines of that Synod in a Conferrence, that the Cause of all their Troubles
was because they had no Bishops, etc. To this they answered, That they had a
great Honor for the good Order and Discipline in the Church of England, and
heartily wished they could establish themselves upon this Model; but they had
no Prospect of such a Happiness; and since the civil Government had made their
Desires impracticable, they hoped God would be merciful to them. As to the
ancient Waldenses and Albigenses, here classed under the Head of present
Churches, I affirm, upon the most valid and unexceptionable Authority, against
this Writer, and those who have deceived him, that they were strictly and
properly episcopal.

3. His next presumptive Argument against Diocesan Episcopacy is, "that many of
the brightest Lights in the Nation (meaning by this Metaphor, the Dissenters)
cannot in Conscience consent to it." But a better presumptive Argument for it
is, that a far greater Number of as bright Lights in the Nation, cannot in
Conscience reject it. If indeed there are many poor Presbyterian Ministers, who
would find their Advantage in conforming to the Church, but choose rather to
forego it, though I question whether there be many such; this may be allowed to
be a Proof of their Sincerity, but cannot be admitted as an Evidence of the
Truth of their Notions. The English Papists make a much greater Sacrifice of
wordly Advantages than they; and consequently, upon the Plan of this
presumptive Argument, offer a much stronger Proof in Favor of Popery.

4. Episcopacy seems not so consistent with the Genius of the Gospel, and the
Humility it so strictly inculcates, as the Scheme of an Equality amongst
Ministers.

5. "It is more apt to swell proud Ambition," i.e. not humble Ambition. I put
these two presumptive Arguments together, because in Reality they are no more,
and ought not to count more than One. And if it proves any Thing, it proves too
much; namely, that the Superiority of the Twelve over the Seventy -- of the
Apostles over the Elders, -- and perhaps of Christ himself over his Apostles,
was inconsistent with the Genius of the Gospel. The same Kind of Argument in
the Mouth of a Republican (I hope Dordracensis is not one) would as
conclusively prove, that there ought to be no Superiority of Office in the
State, nor in our Fleets and Armies. Dordracensis here tells us, as we have
been told a thousand Times by others, with equal Pertinence, of Diotrephes who
loved the Pre-eminence. Now what a sad Fellow was this same Diotrephes? I
believe him to have been a most ambitious, irregular Man; and the learned Dr.
Hammond has unanswerably proved him to have been a Presbyterian. Diotrephes,
says he, was not ordained to any Office of Power, in the Asian Church, -- but
of himself, without any Mission, nay expressly against the Apostles' Consent,
was willing to assume and exercise this Power; and is but an Example of Korah's
Sedition and presumptuous Humor; and that is inevitably the Case of the
Presbyterian, etc.

6, and 7. These two Arguments again can count but One; and they tend to prove
(so far as Arguments upon the Weathercock Establishment, turning round and
round, can have any particular Tendency) that no Man, either in Church or
State, ought to be entrusted with, or to undertake, the Government of others.

8. The last presumptive Argument here against Diocesan Episcopacy is, that
several Bishops, etc. of the Church of England, have themselves disavowed the
divine Institution of it. And here we are told of Cranmer, and others, and are
referred to Stillingfleet's Irenicum, in Support of a long String of
Misrepresentations. But does not Dordracensis know, if not I now tell him, that
the Irenicum is no Authority, and is looked upon by the Advocates for
Episcopacy as no Evidence, in the Case before us. None can have a greater
Veneration for the Character of Bp. Stillingfleet than I have. I believe him to
have been one of the greatest Scholars and best Men of his Age; and I never
wish to see any Men higher in their Principles, than that mild and excellent
Prelate. At the same Time I do not scruple to declare, that I look upon his
Irenicum to have been a hasty, indigested and partial Account of Principles and
Facts. And in this the good Bishop would not have blamed me; for when he had
examined Matters more thoroughly, he looked upon it in the same Light himself.
His Design in writing, appears to have been a good one; which was, in general,
to assist in composing the religious Differences that then tore the Nation in
Pieces, and particularly, in Order thereto, to demolish the Jus Divinu^^ of
Presbytery. But his Zeal carried him, as it often carried others, into an
Extreme. It represented Things to him through the Medium of Prejudice; but it was
not long before he was able to correct his Mistakes, and to form a very
different Opinion, both of Principles and Persons. He wrote his Irenicum at the
Age of 24, and did not scruple to condemn it himself afterward, declaring,
That there are many Things in it, which if he were to write again, he would not
say; some which show his Youth, and want of due Consideration; others, which he
yielded too far, in Hopes of gaining the Dissenting Parties to the Church of
England. As to Cranmer, he was once a Papist; afterward a Protestant; and
before he died, as good a Churchman as almost any of his Successors.

I have said more than enough, in answer to the presumptive Arguments in the
Papers before me, and their Invalidity is no bad presumptive Argument of the
Invalidity of the Cause they are made use of to support. I shall now proceed to
the second Paper, wherein Dordracensis undertakes to produce positive Proofs
from the New Testament, against Diocesan Episcopacy. But his positive Proofs
amount in Number to no more than a single one, at which he labors through the
bigger Part of his Paper; and what he produces farther than this, cannot, by
the greatest Stretch of Courtesy, be allowed a higher Title than that of
presumptive Arguments.

The positive Proof is taken from the Ordination of Timothy; on which one
Instance, aided by positive Assertions, Dordracensis is obliged to rest the
whole Weight of his Cause. And what Proof it is will be seen presently. If
there had been, says he, one Instance in the sacred Scripture, of a Minister of
the Gospel, ordained to his Office, by the Imposition of a Bishop; how greatly
would the Episcopalians have triumphed in such a Case? I think therefore, as
there is an Instance of a proper Ordination to the ministerial Office, recorded
in the New Testament, which is said to have been done by the laying on of the
Hands of the Presbytery, the Point ought to be given up. His Instance of
Presbyterian Ordination, as I have observed, is that of Timothy, to whom St.
Paul says in his first Epistle to him, Neglect not the Gift which is in thee,
which was given thee by Prophecy, with the laying on of the Hands of the
Presbytery. I will allow that this Passage relates to the Ordination of
Timothy, and that the Hands of the Presbytery were imposed in his Ordination.
But still, Evidence is wanting to prove that the Word Presbytery was intended
to convey the Ideas, which are affixed to it by our modern Presbyterians. It is
farther observable, that the Office is said to have been performed, not by, but
with the laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery; which is a feeble
Expression, and I believe has never been used, in any other Instance, to
signify the actual Conveyance of Authority. Upon an Inspection therefore of the
Passage, two Difficulties immediately offer themselves: One is, to settle the
Meaning of the Word Presbytery; the other is, to account for the Expression,
"with the laying on of Hands." Now the only proper Way of clearing up these
Points, is to compare the Case with other Instances of the like Nature in
Scripture, if any are to be found. And upon Inquiry it will appear, that there
are various other Instances of Ordination recorded in the New Testament, in
each of which the Office was performed by those who were superior to
Presbyters. An impartial Inquirer will therefore endeavor to explain the
Passage in such a Manner, as to render it consistent with the known Practice of
the Apostles. That there are several Ways of doing this, Dordracensis knows; he
is pleased to call them Evasions, but giving harsh Names is one of the easiest
Ways of getting clear of Difficulties. I do not at present contend for any
particular Interpretation, but approve of any which the Expressions will bear,
if it can be reconciled with that System upon which the Apostles evidently
acted; and I insist upon it, that every Interpretation, which is
irreconcilable therewith, is false, and ought to be rejected

I have said no more than what, I imagine, the first Inspection of the Passage
under Consideration would naturally suggest to a Mind divested of Prejudices;
and this, of itself, is sufficient to guard Men against the novel
Interpretation of the Presbyterians. But for our farther Security, it so
happens, that this very Case of Timothy's Ordination is, in another Place,
mentioned by the fame Apostle, and expressed in such a Manner as to afford an
obvious Solution of all the Difficulties that attend the Passage we have been
considering. Wherefore I put thee in Remembrance, says St. Paul in his second
Epistle to him, that thou stir up the Gift of God, which is in thee, by the
putting on of my Hands 2. Tim. i. 6. This Text. with a strong Light of
Evidence, bursting through the Cloud of Objections that has been raised to
darken it, as manifestly refers to Timothy's Ordination, as the other Text
beforementioned. Not so, says Dordracensis; and he endeavors to assign
Reasons. But they are so poor, jejune and futile, as not to deserve Notice. It
is really a pitiable Case, that our Adversaries should be reduced to the hard
Shift of maintaining, that the latter Text has no Relation to that Fact or
Event, to which they contend that the same leading Word in the other Text has
an exclusive Reference! The whole Force of their Argument is, Sic nole, sic
jubeo, stat pro Ratione No luntas. But others will take the Liberty to
conclude, upon a Comparison of the Two Passages -- that, in the Ordination of
Timothy, the Hands of the Presbytery, in whatever Sense the Word is used, were
not imposed without those of an Apostle, -- and, that the Gift therein
mentioned, was confered by the Hands of St. Paul, as well as with the laying on
of the Hands of the Presbytery.

What has been said is sufficient to show, that the Ordination of Timothy was
not Presbyterian, but Episcopal; or, if Dordracensis likes his own Phraseology
better, "by the Imposition of a Bishop." I had Thoughts of producing several
other Instances from Scripture, of episcopal Ordination, which can easily be
done; but the Limits to which I am confined will not at present admit of it. --
Dordracensis seems to allow that we may triumph, upon producing a single one.
One has been fairly produced; and, to add to the Honor of the Triumph, it is
the very Instance on which alone he placed his Dependence.

Dordracensis has drawn out a Number of presumptive Arguments, for such they
are, if they can be called Arguments in any Sense, to guard the Rear of his
Papers; but I am persuaded the Reader will readily excuse me from concerning
myself farther with presumptive Arguments. When Dordracensis undertakes,
according to his Promise, to demolish Chilling-worth, as I expect to see rare
Work, I propose to do myself the Pleasure of attending him. -- I have also some
what to say to him, in due Time, on the Subject of an uninterrupted Succession.

From Mr. PARKER's GAZETTE, Dec. 5, 1768. The AMERICAN WHIG, No. XXXIX.
INGLISIANA, PART I.
MR. William Livingston having promised in the Advertisement prefixed to his
Letter to the Bishop of Landaff, that he would acknowledge himself under
obligations, should he be mistaken in any the most immaterial circumstance, to
the friendly hand that pointed out his error, provided the person discovering
his mistake did it with decency and temper, and was not ashamed to discover his
own name; might reasonably have expected, that if any of the missionaries
thought themselves obliged to defend a man, whom in all probability themselves
had deluded, they would act upon equal terms; and not meanly shelter themselves
within the intrenchments of anonymous scandal. Such a step, though the nameless
author of the Vindication, thinks it "of no consequence to the public who or
what manner of person he is," was of great importance to the author of the
letter; as the contrary conduct has given his antagonist an opportunity of
using such language, as no gentleman could think consistent with the dignity of
his character, if he appeared openly. It was moreover extremely mean, as a
contrivance to disable Mr. Livingston from replying, without breaking his word.
Thus his not answering was to be construed into a defeat; and if he answered,
they were to triumph in the violation of his promise: Mean while he was to be
bespattered with their weekly billingsgate; and most heroically dared to
answer, though not a single missionary chose to subscribe his name to the
challenge. But what must the impartial world think of a man who indulges
himself in such scurrilous liberties, because he flatters himself that he will
not be discovered. Who will know it, is the argument that prompts little minds
to commit these indecencies. Secure from being detected by others, and unawed
by any self respect, they take up their vilifying pens; and thence arise those
buffooneries which are only fit for the gentry of Wapping. This however,
sneaking as it is, has been the constant practice of this set of men. Thus they
treated Dr. Mayhew, who, though he prefixed his name to his writings, was
perpetually attacked by anonimous pamphleteers, till he laid an Archbishop upon
his back, without knowing his adversary; and after being long since dead, is
now re-assaulted in the same insidious and ungentleman-like manner. Having
therefore by this despicable artifice, prevented the letter-writer from doing
himself-justice, and the Bishop of Landaff's sermon, being evidently calculated
to facilitate his Lordship's acquisition of an American Bishopric, and thus
unquestionably coincident with my design of exposing the project of any such
episcopate; I shall without farther apology, undertake a reply to the so much
celebrated Vindication. But as I am determined never long to lose sight of the
main object, the Appeal, till every part of it is refu^ed; I shall not hold
myself obliged to prosecute the subject of the Vindication, in an uninterrupted
succession. That the reader, may however, be no loser by the interruption, I
shall entitle all the papers on this subject, Inglisiana: and by numbering them
in the order they succeed each other, he may always peruse them in their
connection, notwithstanding the intervention of any other subjects, between
their several numbers. In four or five papers I hope completely to refute the
Vindication, and to reduce the author (whom this notable performance, has by an
incredible miracle exalted at least a cubit above his stature) to his pristine
dimensions.

Though this writer has thought proper, for reasons best known to himself, to
conceal his name, it is no secret, that the author of the prefatory
advertisement, is the Rev. Mr. Ch-rl s I gl-s, who by this step has adopted the
whole work, and thrown on himself the burden of the exculpation. Till this be
done, I shall accordingly treat him as the author of the Vindication. There is
indeed one, and but one supposition against this presumption; and that is, that
some parts of the performance, may appear to persons not intimately acquainted
with him, to be rather a little above his capacity. But whatever agency that
reverend and very constitutional body, the convention, may have had in the
composition, it being rather disproportionate to the industry of any individual
member; Mr. J-gl-s had certainly in the manner abovementioned, made it his
own. His it is de juro, let the de facto be where it will. The affair being
thus far settled betwixt us, I shall treat him in the progress of my reply, as
responsible for the whole; and so with an all malice apart, proceed to the
business. But as I find it impossible immediately to enter the magnificent
structure (so I call the argumentative part) of this master builder, by reason
of the immense rubbish with which he has choked up the passage; I find myself
necessitated to clear away the lumber, before I can introduce the reader into
the mansion; which, considering his hearty invitation to survey and examine the
edifice, ought in all good conscience to be done at his own costs and charges
and whether I shall make him pay a Quantum meruit, must be submitted to the
verdict of the impartial reader. Among this rubbish, I reckon what he fondly
deemed wit; of which he has made some very vigorous and very awkward efforts.
-- But of all the delicate touches of humor, wherewith the Vindication, like a
kind of artificial firmament, is so gorgeously bespangled, commend me to the
first page of the advertisement, where he declares, that he looks for no fee or
reward. And so fond is he, of this pretty conceit, that in page 18 of the
Vindication, he must give it a second deliverance. The following character, of
these people, says he, is given by Mr. Neal, who is their professed advocate,
though I know not that he ever received any fee from them. That "Mr. I-gl s
looked for no fee or reward," in compiling or publishing this voluminous
pamphlet, is a fact known only to himself, and which therefore I shall not be
so uncourtly as to dispute with him; and the rather as he really might, in his
serious and humble moments entertain of the Vindication, the same opinion which
the beggar did of the blessing of a certain Bishop, who having refused to give
him the solicited groat, very munificently bestowed his benediction. Thus there
may perhaps be a little equivocation in the matter, and though the gentleman may
not think himself entitled to a reward ex condign; he may expect a small
recompense ex congruo; and so fancy a comfortable deanery, after his Lordship's
arrival, no great Incongruity. But as the word see, is in the last quotation
printed in Italic, and in the first in capitals, as though it was in the most
intimate alliance with the church (on which Mr. I-gl-s's printer has almost
worn nine of his capital types) he undoubtedly intended to insinuate, that Mr.
Livingston had wrote his letter for a fee. But the whole wit and poignancy of
this sublime stroke cannot appear in full luster, without being made
acquainted, that Mr. Livingston is of a certain profession, which, for having
more than once saved this province from utter destraction, is of late, for
certain political reasons, endeavored to be rendered very unpopular. Now he
being a lawyer, and lawyers being paid for serving their employers (which it
seems is peculiar to them, all the rest of mankind working for nothing) it
therefore follows, that every letter they write, either for their own
amusement, or to serve their country or to expose the falsehoods of the
missionaries, must be in expectation of a see. But doe^ Mr. I-gl-s really
believe, that Mr. Livingston, for the let^er, in question, either had, or
looked for a see? I am confident the reader in convinced that he does not: Why
then endeavor to appear witty at the expense of truth? Why drop an insinuation
so injurious to his neighbor's character, and that had no relation to the
matter in contest? For if it was of no consequence to the public, who or what
manner of person the author of the vindication was; neither was it of the least
consequence, what fee or reward the Letter-writer had, or looked for. The only
thing material, was the truth or falsehood of what was written, and not the
consideration that gave rise to the writing. Surely if every one of Mr. I-gl
s's sermons for which he has received a see, were upon that account to be
deemed heretical, I fear very few of them would be found orthodox. But I am
well persuaded, that Mr. Livingston, neither received or looked for any fee in
the case; and that if he did, Mr. I-gl-s is the last man in the world that
should have reproached him for it. -- For pray what is it that this gentleman
will do without fee or reward? He certainly received a see for abandoning the
parish of Dover, for that of New York; and whether he had stomach'd the
exchange, had not the latter out- feed the former, is best known to himself. I
ask again, what it is that he will do without fee or reward? Why, he will not
suffer a man in his parish to be born or to die without it. He will neither
marry nor bury without it. Yea, for that last office of humanity, the interment
of the dead, this disinterested and money hating gentleman will cheerfully take
a fee; for without fingering the cash, he must be caught in a special good
humor, if he will send to heaven even the soul of a dear brother departed.
Nay, for admitting an infant into the visible church by baptism, he has no
objection against taking a fee. Thus he will not let an individual creature
within his parochial jurisdiction, come into the world, continue in it, or go
out of it, without a fee; and what is beyond all toleration, the gentlemen of
his fraternity, in this city, make no conscience of taking fees from both sides
of the question. For they are paid by those of other communions, as well as
their own. They take money from people whom they do not serve, and who want
none of there services. They receive fees for preaching even from the clergy of
other denominations, who can preach for themselves, and whom they are so far
from preaching for, that they must, upon certain occasions preach against. The
most inglorious fee to be met with, in the whole compass of history! Nay, so
great a lover of fees is this same Mr. I-gl-s, that in conjunction with his
good brother of Elizabeth-Town, (who says, he has changed his religion for a
better, and no doubt from mere principle of conscience, without looking for an
additional fee from the society) he is for procuring legislative acts, to
compel the whole province to pay fees to a primitive Bishop, though not a
twentieth part of it ever intend to become his clients The doctrine of fees,
was therefore certainly not a proper topic for the display of his wit; and
happy would it be for him, if any of his friends could persuade him, that wit
is not his principal talent.

But as no man is answerable for not being a wit, (wit being as certainly
native as religion is not) I have no controversy with him on that account. But
for misrepresentation, and falsely citing the words of his adversary, he is
doubtless answerable; and I think it greatly concerns his reputation to make a
satisfactory answer. -- Mr. Livingston, he says, tells his Lordship, That he
questions whether there be a pamphlet in the nation, that in proportion to the
length of the sermon, contains so great a number of aberrations from the truth.
That is, says Mr. I-gl-s, in plain English, so great a number of lies. But does
this gentleman really believe, that there is no difference between an
aberration from the truth, and a lie? If he does, I believe he is the only
casuist in the world, who makes every mistake, to which human nature is
incident, a lie. I have always understood, that a man might as well ignorantly
as knowingly err from the truth, and that in the latter case only, he was
chargeable with the guilt of lying. And so far is Mr. Livingston from
supposing, or even insinuating, that his Lordship had knowingly deviated from
the truth, without which he could not be guilty of lying, that he expressly
declares the contrary; and ascribes his errors to the misrepresentations of the
missionaries. How then has he charged him with lying? But this is only one of
the numerous artifices of the Vindicator to render his antagonist odious; and
deserves at least the name of a wilful misrepresentation; and whether that be
lying or not, we shall suspend our judgment till we are favored with Mr.
I-gl-s's definition of that crime. But in the art and mystery of false
quotation, he appears as great an adept, as though he had been regularly bred at
the feet of the Gamaliel of Elizabeth-Town, whose adulterated citations, I
shall make the subject of a particular paper. Mr. Livingston being as well
acquainted as Mr. I-gl-s with the letter from the Lord Justices, to
Lieutenant Governor Dummer, respecting certain synodical proceedings, expressed
himself in the following words, And what may appear extraordinary to an English
prelate, they (that is the N. England synods) have been so conducted as never
to give any just umbrage to the civil power. Now as no person can be so
ignorant, as not to know the difference between just umbrage being given and
umbrage being unjustly taken, by misrepresentation and calumny, it is evident
that the word just, was of the last importance in the passage cited, and that
on the praeterition of it in the quotation, is founded the whole supposition of
the Letter-writer's error. -- What appears extraordinary in this, says Mr.
I-gl-s, is that Mr. Livingston should roundly assert, their synods never gave
any umbrage to the civil power. What appears still more extraordinary, say I,
is that he should roundly assert, that Mr. Livingston had so asserted. For pray
Sir, why so slily drop out of the above quotation, the little monosyllable,
just? Is it a word particularly obnoxious to thy reverence; or did it unluckily
stand in thy way, in a passage which thou could not successfully attack
without excluding it from that company in the Vindication, in which it made a
very significant figure in the Letter? Upon what very unequal terms a man must
contend with an antagonist who can allow himself in such liberties, the
intelligent reader cannot be insensible; and while he loves and reveres the
clergymen, on account of his sacred function, will naturally despise the writer
for his disingenuous and contemptible artifice.

Another of this gentleman's gross misrepresentations is this: Mr. Livingston,
speaking of the New England colonies, says, There is not a more virtuous, not a
more religious people upon the face of the earth, -- which is in ^lain English,
that in virtue and religion, no people in the world s^rpass them; and if there
be any that do. I should be glad Mr I gl^s would inform the public who they
are. But when the Reverend Vindicator comes to observe upon this passage, he
represents Mr. Livingston as saying, that they are the most virtuous and
religious people upon the face of the earth, which in plain English, is
affirming that they surpass all others. -- Such misrepresentations do not
happen by accident, and whatever this gentleman may think, the more
conscientious part of mankind, who hold such practices in the highest
detestation, will not consider them as ornamental to the clerical character.

But what has given our author the greatest offense of all, is, that the
Letter-writer should waft (as he calls it) the first settlers of New England to
heaven. Let us see the ebullitions of his wrath upon this occasion. I defy the
most flaming panegyrist among Catholics, who stands forth collected and
transported, to trumpet aloud the praises of some departed saint, under whose
guardianship he places himself, and to whom he intends to pay daily and devout
adoration, -- to be more florid, vehement, lavish, luscious or extravagant in
his encomiums than this gentleman is in his encomiums, on the departed saints
of New England. What a matchless floridity, fervidity, prodigality, mellifluity
and pomposity of expression! In all my life I never knew a man so much
disturbed at a few people's going to heaven. But let us see what has thus
transported this peaceable minister of the gospel Mr. Livingston, speaking of
the first adventurers to New England, says, whom we have the greatest reason to
believe, have long since received the approbation of their and your Lordship's
final judge. This one would have thought so remote from any thing like a popish
canonization, a practice to which the exercises prescribed for the "thirtieth
of January," bear a much greater resemblance) that one is obliged in the
judgment of charity, to suppose that the people whom Mr. I gl-s himself allows
to have been pious, and whom he insists the Bishop of Landaff intended thus to
caracterize, are now in the mansions of the blessed. But it seems, that to
believe the salvation of a Presbyterian soul, however pious, is according to
Mr. I-gl-s's creed, downright popery. To suppose such a spirit admitted into
the realms above, is to canonize "the departed faints of New England;" and
Christian charity is popish idolatry. Methinks those who have so little that
does not look like popery, should be particularly careful in preserving charity
as a tru^ protestant virtue. I am really sorry, that this gentleman by
appearing so greatly discomposed on bearing of those people's being lodged in
heaven, has betrayed a spirit that would have been more gratified to have found
them sent elsewhere. But I must notwithstanding, join Mr. Livingston in
believing them in heaven; and happy is it for them, if they are really there,
that it is not in Mr. I-gl-s's power to fetch them out.

-- Tantaene animis caelestibus irae?
-- "Such malevolence in priestly breasts?"
But the Vindicator had so often thumb'd over the Bishop of Landaff's sermon,
that he had thoroughly imbibed his Lordship's spirit, which, while revolving
the above passage, coming into contact with his own, instantly occasioned what
the chemists call an "Effervescence. Here ^e blazes out with all the combustion
of a Vesuvius. Popery! ^oiatry! Canonization! Ring the bells backward; the
temple is on fire! For people are going to heaven without paying sees to the
church. If Christianity cannot inspire this Reverend divine with sufficient
benevolence to bear the happiness of others, I (...) recommend to him, the
story of "Uncle Toby, and the Fly," which I dare say, will tend as much to his
edification, as the perusal of Hadibrass, the study of which, with some gentry
in black, is in no small danger of supplanting the holy scriptures. But as I
said, upon another occasion, if Mr. Livingston had been a little too forward in
sending people to heaven, Mr. I-gl^s is the last man in the world that should
have made any disturbance about it. For it is well known, that this gentleman
himself, and that for a very "inconsiderable see," and in a solemn address to
Almighty God, will tell the supreme being (not that he has "reason to believe,"
but (that he has sure and certain hopes of the resurrection to eternal life of
the person in whose behalf he is retained; though he knows him to have been one
of the greatest reprobates that ever existed.

ADVERTISEMENT.
AS the author to justify his charge of the false representations of the
Missionaries, will have occasion in the course of his reply, for the abstracts
of their letters annually published, with the anniversary sermons preached
before the Society, which, notwithstanding what Mr. I-gl-s says of hundreds of
them, being regularly sent to America, and given by the Missionaries to "every
person that will please to read them," he finds it extremely difficult to
procure; he will acknowledge himself singularly obliged to any friend of truth,
possessed of any of those abstracts, to favor his printer with the loan of
them; promising that they shall be safely returned with abundance of thanks;
and if he does not point out at least ten falsehoods in every abstract, be will
have reason to think the Missionaries greatly reformed since he had the perusal
of those, their skilsully abbreviated and "aberratious" epistles: and if Mr.
I-gl-s has any of them in his custody, and will be kind enough to gratify the
author as above, he can assure him, that he "will be pleased to read them,"
with the greatest attention.

From Mr. PARKER's GAZETTE, Dec. 5, 1768. A KICK for the WHIPPER. No. XXVII.
By Sir ISAAC FOOT.
Introrsum turpem, speciosum pelle decora.

HOR.
THE 27th Whip seems to be Sq. T's masterpiece. His pretended letters from the
Whig, an independent and even oude duytsman were, the 1st. so improbable not to
say impossible, and the two last so out of character, that his readers have, I
dare say, long ago discovered the forgery; but here he exhibits his chef
d'oeuvre in the letter signed a DISSENTER. 'Twas necessary indeed that his
dissenter should plead for prelacy in some places; but, lest he should be
suspected to be the Whipper himself, Sq. T. takes care to make him speak like a
real dissenter in others, and, (still more to color his deceit) even
controverts some of his sentiments. Thus his D. reproves the Whig, but
cunningly reproves the Whipper too; -- He condemns the Whig's paper, as
containing "malignant blasts, etc." yet compliments him as a "friend to
Christianity:" -- and though an advocate for episcopal dominion "as a dissenter,"
most characteristically denies any establishment of the Church of England, in
America, and even prays for exemption from "ecclesiastical tyranny." Sq. T. has
profited, I find, by his blunders, and this artifice of his is somewhat
plausible; but alas! it will not do. What must we think of the "good sense" of
one, who undertakes as moderator to determine a dispute by the mere shadow of a
single argument? -- What of his impartiality, who with a great show of
moderation, instead of publishing his thoughts by themselves in the Gazette,
chooses to have them inserted in the most scurrilous periodical party-paper in
town? -- and then, what must we think of his sincerity, who publicly asks for
the address of a person, whom he may at any time find, if he will but seek him
in his own study?

I shall now examine the only thing that looks like an argugument in the D's
whole letter. He says the Church of England is at present destitute of all
legal establishment; -- (AT PRESENT! hem -- very well! Mr. D.) that, as having
relation to the state, she can no more be known in law than any of our
dissenting Churches: -- that is true indeed, but why? -- for want of an
EPISCOPAL establishment," says he, This position, no Whipper, who sees into its
consequences, will thank him for, as it ruins all the late loyal boasts
grounded on the union of the CHURCH and state, especially when seconded by some
late loyal threats of applying for a foreign Bishop, if a British one is
denied. Vid, letter from New-Brunswick; HOLT's Journal, No. 1351.
But what are we to infer from these premises? Why, because there is no
EPISCOPAL establishment, there is AT PRESENT no legal establishment of the
CHURCH, and therefore no episcopal domination, in the colonies. -- Well! and
what is all this to the purpose? -- But, not to take advantage of the confusion
of our D's thoughts, and the self-betraying inadvertency of his expressions,
let us try to guess at his drift, and suppose he meant to reason thus. The
Church of England is not legally established in America; Ergo, the privileges
of Americans would be in no danger from an establishment of episcopacy. In a
similar manner might one with more reason have argued five years ago, thus,
Great Britain has no right to tax America while unrepresented; Ergo, she never
will: -- But how just this reasoning would have been, let all America judge!
Aware of an objection suggested by our late experience, viz. That we fear that,
with prelacy' "a legislative fiat will bring to pass a legal existence or
creation" of the CHURCH in America, the D. very sagely obviates it by telling
us he "TRUSTS we have no reason to fear." Now by trusting just the contrary I
confute his confutation, till he is pleased to justify it by TRUSTING again.
Seven years ago indeed we should have been less afraid of Bishops than of
Stamp-masters and commissioners of the customs; but at this time if they all
come authorized by, and under the patronage of, the government, to exercise
their respective functions here, we have as much reason to dread the one as the
others.

S. T. after justifying his pious virulence by pleading provocation, as a
member of the CHURCH of ENGLAND, etc. most heroically resolves to presevere in
Whipping the Whig, thrice as long as the Greeks besieged Troy, viz. 30 years
longer; -- but if so, though he may have many a furious Achilles, haughty
Agamemnon and sturdy Ajax, I dare promise there will never be found an ULYSSES,
in his army.

A.

From Mr. GAINES's GAZETTE, Dec. 5. A WHIP for the AMERICAN WHIG. By TIMOTHY
TICKLE, ESQR. No. XXXV.
If you would have your Son reason well, let him read Chillingworth.

LOCK ON EDUCATION.
As my good Friends, the American Whig and his Associates, have frequently been
imposed upon by spurious Copies of Letters, Addresses, and so forth; and as,
very unfortunately for their own Reputation, they have been obliged often to
have Recourse to second-hand and third-hand Accounts of Books, for Want of the
Books themselves; I hope it will be considered as an Act of Generosity in me,
that I now present them with a true Copy of Chillingworth's Demonstration of
Episcopacy. This Piece I recommend to the peculiar Attention of Dordracensis,
who has promised a full Answer to it; and I advise him, with great Compassion
to him, to examine well into the Soundness of his Teeth, before he hazards them
in the Encounter; lest he should undergo the Fate of Phaedrus's Viper.

-- et fragili quaerens illidere Dentem,
Offendet solido.
The Apostolical Institution of EPISCOPACY DEMONSTRATED.
SECTION I.
IF we abstract from Episcopal Government, all accidentals, and consider only
what is essential and necessary to it; we shall find in it no more but this; An
appointment of one man of eminent sanctity and sufficiency to have the care of
all the Churches, within a certain Precinct or Diocese; and furnishing him with
authority (not absolute or arbitrary, but regulated and bounded by Laws, and
moderated by joining to him a convenient number of assistants) to the Intent
that all the Churches under him may be provided of good and able Pastors; And
that both of Pastors and People, consormity to Laws, and performance of their
duties may be required, under Penalties, not left to discretion, but by Law
appointed.

SECTION II.
To this kind of Government, I am not by any particular interest so devoted, as
to think it ought to be maintained, either in opposition to Apostolic
Institution; or to the much desired reformation of men's lives, and restoration
of Primitive Discipline; or to any Law or Precept of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ: For that were to maintain a means contrary to the and: for Obedience to
our Savior is the end for which Church Government is appointed. But if it may
be demonstrated (or made much more probable than the contrary) as I verily
think it may: I. That it is not repugnant to the Government settled in and for
the Church by the Apostles. II. That it is as compliable with the Reformation
of any evil which we desire to introduce as any other kind of Government: And,
III. That there is no Law, no Record of our Savior against it: Then, I hope,
it will not be thought an unreasonable Motion, if we humbly desire those that
are in Authority, especially the High Court of Parliament, That it may not be
sacrificed to Clamor or over born by Violence, and though (which God forbid)
the greater part of the Multitude should cry, Crucify, Crucify; yet our
Governors would be so full of Justice and Courage, as not to give it up, until
they perfectly understand concerning Episcopacy itself, Quid mali fecit?

SECTION III.
I shall speak at this time only of the first of these three Points: That
Episcopacy is not repugnant to the Government settled in the Church for
perpetuity by the Apostles. Whereof I conceive this which follows is as clear a
Demonstration, as any thing of this nature is capable of.

That this Government was received universally in the Church, either in the
Apostles' time, or presently after, is so evident and unquestionable, that the
most learned Adversaries of this Government do themselves confess it.

SECTION IV.
Petrus Molinaeus in his Book, De munere pastorali, purposely written in
defense of the Presbyterial Government, acknowledges: That presently after the
Apostles times, or even in their time (as Ecclesiastical story witnesses) it
was ordained, That in every City one of the Presbytery should be called a
Bishop, who should have pre-eminence over his Colleagues; to avoid Confusion
which often times arises out of equality. And truly, this form of Government all
Churches every where received.

SECTION V.
Theodorus in his Tract, De triplici Episcopatus genere, confesses in effect
the same thing. For, having distinguished Episcopacy into three kinds, Divine,
Human and Satanical; and attributing to the second (which he calls Human, but
we maintain and conceive to be Apostolical) not only a Priority of Order, but a
superiority of Power and Authority over other Presbyters, bounded yet by Laws
and Canons provided against Tyranny: He clearly professes that of this kind of
Episcopacy, is to be understood whatsoever we read concerning the Authority of
Bishops (or Presidents, as Justin Martyr calls them) in Ignatius, and other
more ancient Writers.

SECTION VI.
Certainly from these two great Defenders of the Presbytery, we should never
have had this free acknowledgment, (so prejudicial to their own pretense, and
so advantageous to their Adversaries' purpose) had not the evidence of clear
and undeniable truth enforced them to it. It will not therefore be necessary,
to spend any time in confuting that uningenuous Assertion of the anonymous
Author of the Catalogue of Testimonies, for the equality of Bishops and
Presbyters, who affirms, That their disparity began long after the Apostles'
times: But we may safely take for granted that which these two learned
Adversaries have consessed; and see, whether upon this foundation laid by them,
we may not by unanswerable reason raise this superstructure.

That seeing Episcopal Government is confessedly so Ancient and so Catholic, it
cannot with reason be denied to be Apostolic. SECTION VII.
For so great a change, as between Presbyterial Government and Episcopal, could
not possibly have prevailed all the world over in a little time. Had Episcopal
Government been an aberration from (or a corruption of) the Government lest in
the Churches by the Apostles, it had been very strange, that it should have
been received in any one Church so suddenly, or that it should have prevailed
in all for many Ages after. Variasse debuerat error Ecclesiarum: Quod autem
apud omnes unum est non est erratum, sed traditum. "Had the Churches erred,
they would have varied: What therefore is one and the same amongst all, came
not sure by Error, but Tradition. Thus Tertullian argues very probably, from
the consent of the Churches of his time, not long after the Apostles, and that
in matter of opinion much more subject to unobserved alteration. But that in
the frame and substance of the necessary Government of the Church, a thing
always in use and practice, there should be so sudden (...) change, as
presently after the Apostles' times; and so universal, as received in all
Churches; this is clearly impossible.

SECTION VIII.
For, what universal cause can be assigned or feigned of this universal
Apostasy? You will not imagine that the Apostles, all or any of them, made any
Decree for this Change when they were living; or left order for it in any Will
or Testament, when they were dying. This were to grant the question; to wit;
That the Apostles, being to leave the Government of the Churches themselves,
and either seeing by experience, or foreseeing by the Spirit of God, the
distractions and disorders, which would arise from a multitude of equals,
substituted Episcopal Government instead of their own. General Councils to make
a Law for a general Change, for many Ages there was none. There was no
Christian Emperor, no coercive Power over the Church to enforce it. Or, if
there had been any, we know no force was equal to the courage of the Christians
of those times. Their lives were then at command (for they had not then learnt
to fight for Christ) but their obedience to any thing against his Law was not
to be commanded (for they had perfectly learnt to die for him.) Therefore there
was no Power then to command this Change; or if there had been any, it had been
in vain.

SECTION IX.
What device then shall we study, or to what fountain shall we reduce this
strange pretended alteration? Can it enter into our hearts to think, that all
the Presbyters and other Christians then, being the Apostles' Scholars, could
be generally ignorant of the Will of Christ, touching the necessity of a
Presbyterial Government? Or, dare we adventure to think them so strangely
wicked all the world over, as against knowledge and conscience to conspire
against it? Imagine the spirit of Diotrephes had entered into some, or a great
many of the Presbyters, and possessed them with an ambitious desire of a
forbidden superiority, was it possible they should attempt and atchieve it at
once without any opposition or contradiction? And besides, that the contagion
of this ambition, should spread itself and prevail (...) ^out stop or control,
nay, without any noise or notice taken of it, through all the Churches in the
world; all the watchmen in the mean time being so fast asleep, and all the dogs
so dumb, that not so much as one should open his mouth against it.

SECTION X.
But let us suppose (though it be a horrible untruth) that the Presbyters and
people then, were not so good Christians as the Presbyterians are now; that
they were generally so negligent to retain the Government of Christ's Church
commanded by Christ, which we now are so zealous to restore: yet certainly we
must not forget nor deny, that they were men as we are. And if we look upon
them but as mere natural men; yet, knowing by experience, how hard a thing it
is, even for Policy armed with Power, by many attempts and contrivances, and in
a long time, to gain upon the liberty of any one people; undoubtedly we shall
never entertain so wild an imagination, as that, among all the Christian
Presbyteries in the world, neither conscience of duty, or love of liberty, nor
averseness from pride and usurpation of others over them, should prevail so
much with any one, as to oppose this pretended universal invasion of the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the liberty of Christians.

SECTION XI.
When I shall see therefore all the Fables in the Metamorphosis acted and prove
true stories: when I shall see all the Democracies and Aristocracies in the
world lie down and sleep, and awake into Monarchies; then will I begin to
believe that Presbyterial Government, having continued in the Church during the
Apostles' times, should presently after (against the Apostles' Doctrine and the
Will of Christ) be whirled about like a Scence in a Masque, and transformed
into Episcopacy. In the mean time, while these things remain incredible, and,
in human reason, impossible, I hope I shall have leave to conclude thus:
Episcopal Government is acknowledged to have been universally received in the
Church, presently after the Apostles' times.

Between the Apostles' times and this presently after, there was not time
enough for, nor possibility of, so great an alteration.

And therefore there was no such alteration as is pretended. And therefore
Episcopacy being confessed to be so Ancient and Catholic, must be granted also
to be Apostolic, Quod crat demonstrandum.



From Mr. PARKER's GAZETTE, Dec. 12, 1768. The AMERICAN WHIG, No. XL.
OUR reverend appellant, by his own confession might have saved himself the
trouble of entering into the controversy about the divine institution of
episcopacy, in a country where the non-episcopalians are content with the
enjoyment of their own sentiments, without disturbing the mental repose of
others, in opinions, however absurd or irrational. Nor could it any way conduce
to the equity or reasonableness of his proposal, whether episcopacy was of
divine or human appointment. It was sufficient for his purpose, that such was
the government of his church. Of this he was so sensible that he expressly
declares, It is not necessary to enter upon a particular defense of the
doctrine, in an undertaking of this nature; since our present plea is equally
valid whether these principles are founded rightly or wrongly. Where then the
necessity of troubling the word with so unnecessary a controversy; or of
repeating what has been advanced a thousand times, and a thousand times
refuted? How can a brief sketch of the argument whereby the necessity of
episcopal government is defended, be either useful or proper, when they are
admitted to be useless and unnecessary? But Brother Leaming had wrote a book on
the subject; and why should not Dr. Chandler write another? Accordingly he
introduces the darling theme, with the humourous conceit of the uninterrupted
succession. But as he was confident no mortal wight could refrain from smiling
at the thoughts of so ludicrous an object, we are the less obliged to the
gentleman for his gracious license to exert the muscles of our faces. Men may
ridicule (says he) the uninterrupted succession as they please. And take my
word for it, good Doctor, they will please to ridicule it as often as any man
is pleased to mention it. But now let us attend to what no one would have
expected from so zealous an advocate for human appendages. As Christ (says our
author) is the great founder of the church, so he is the only fountain of
ecclesiastical authority. This is a truth to which all Christians will readily
subscribe; and a pity it is, that any of them should subscribe it with secret
equivocations, or mental reservations. But how such a position is consistent
with the principles of any man, who believes, that secular potentates as such
are invested with ecclesiastical authority, not only to enjoin rites and
ceremonies, but also matters of says, I confess myself at a loss to conceive.
Did this gentleman really believe this fundamental maxim of the Christian
religion, according to the plain and evident meaning of the words, down went
all obligation of conformity to the law established modes of Christian worship,
like the unstable fabric which the fool of the gospel had built on the sand. If
Christ has laid one foundation, pray whom has he authorized to lay another?
If he is the fountain, what have Christians to do with the millions of rivulets
that can all be traced up to ecclesiastical policy, and never originated from
this divine source? What business have they with that motly junction of
king-craft and priestcraft, which has almost banished primitive Christianity
out of the world? Hay, it is this very persuasion of Christ's being the great
founder of the church, and the only fountain of ecclesiastical authority; and
their inviolable attachment to it, that has made the Dissenters suffer such
grievous persecutions, for not acknowledging the divine right of episcopacy,
nor the usurped power of Bishops, to inflict temporal pains and penalties, or
to illuminate the consciences of their fellow creatures, by afflicting their
bodies and picking their pockets. It is the belief of this, that has restrained
them from recognizing any man on earth as the head of the Christian church;
while the high-church ^lergy have at different times, submitted to the
infalibility of an Henry and a Mary, though as repugnant in principle as popery
and protestantism.

But as our author cannot find the episcopacy he wants among the laws of
Christ, he has at least invented a compass by which we of the Laity are
directed to discover it. Whatever general laws (says he, speaking of our
blessed Savior) he was pleased to enjoin, must be of indispensible obligation
to all his followers So far perfectly right! But in what immediately follows,
no protestant can possibly acquiesce. Indeed, with regard to the government of
the church, his laws are expressed in such general terms, that we must have
recourse to those whom he immediately entrusted with the government of his
church, for a more particular explanation of them. If this be not downright
popery, it is exceeding difficult to determine wherein the formal nature of
popery consists. For this very position of the laws of Christ, being so
expressed, that the Laity are unable to comprehend their meaning, is the very
basis on which the whole enormous babel of the papacy is erected. For that once
admitted, and an infallible head of the Christian church is of absolute
necessity. And of the two, Papa has this (...) ^antage of the Doctor, that it
is certainly more rea(...) up our judgments to a man claiming infallibility,
(...) to one who pretends to no such thing. It is far from being evident, that
the Apostles themselves were the interpreters of scripture They were the
amanuenses of the Holy Ghost, who lest no doctrine or precept to their
interpretation; much less are we^o receive the sense of holy writ from their
pretended successors, who from their insatiate thirst of wealth and domination,
appear to be actuated by a very different spirit. I should have drawn a very
different conclusion from the generality of the laws of Christ respecting his
church. I should never have imagined it consistent with the dignity of the
divine author of our religion, to express his laws in terms mystical and
ambiguous, merely for the sake of rendering it necessary to have an
uninterrupted succession of interpreters, to give them a more particular
explanation. I should have concluded, that it was to teach us not to lay too
great a stress on any particular form of church government; but to be furnished
with a perpetual opportunity of exercising our forbearance and charity toward
those who differed from us in sentiment. -- It was most certainly not that we
should make an implicit surrender of our judgment and consciences in matters of
religion, to any fallible, political ambitious churchman. It was not to warrant
or authorize any of his followers to inflict pains and penalties on his
Fellow Christians, for not bowing down to mitres; or believing the divine right
of human ceremonies. It was not that we should worry one another like wild
beasts, and even shed human blood, to compel and enforce for doctrines the
commandments of men. It was not in fine to convert the peaceful religion of
Jesus into an engine of violence and oppression; or to authorize any man to
challenge as a successor to him, who had not where to lay his head, worldly
wealth and dignity, and tithes, and lordships, with innumerable other
appendages, which I am sure the Doctor even by the help of the most particular
explanation, finds not in the sacred canon. How extremely fortunate is the
Christian church, to be thus prevented from running into fatal errors about the
office of a Presbyter, as explained in the laws of Christ, by the particular
explanation of those unerring interpreters, the governors of the church, by
whom, as by an inerrable pole star we are directed to find the man, concealed
as he is, beneath the robe and the mitre and the lawn sleeves of the Bishop. So
open an attack on the rights of private judgment, and a doctrine so manifestly
inducing the necessity of an infallibility in the clergy, is what I had never
expected from the pen of a protestant divine. If this arrogant claim of a
particular explanation, and in consequence of it, a right of enforcing it by
compulsory means, without which it is vain and ridiculous, is to be part of the
Bishop's errand into this American world, the Doctor cannot pray more fervently
for his speedy arrival, than I do, that he may never, never, never come; to
which, if not all, I believe ninety-nine in a hundred of all the people here
will say, Amen.

From Mr. PARKER's GAZETTE, Dec. 12, 1768. A KICK for the WHIPPER, [No.
XXVIII.]
By Sir ISAAC FOOT.
Non cuivis hemini contingit adire corinthum.

HOR.
HAH! what Roger again! -- Well! Countrymen I find, must have their fit of
scribbling out as well as Citizens, and old as well as young men contend
earnestly for the Church. Desiring, it seems, that episcopacy and the stamp act
should be established by the same authority, yet resolving that at least the
CHURCH in America, shall have a representative in paliament, Roger (Whip No.
XXVIII) gives his ideal advocate instructions how to speak in the house of
commons. Here, indeed, when it suits a particular purpose, we are told that the
CHURCH in America has no "legal existence," nor any "relation to the state" and
only wants the apostolical powers of the primitive times; but Roger's orator
tells the house, that, in her principles and constitution she is so connected
with the state, that "together both must flourish, both together falls,"
affects to "shudder" at the thought of "refusing" her a Bishop, as a ruinous
and destructive measure, as though she (ay, reader, the CHURCH in America) were
the Atlas that sustains the globe, or at least the rock that supports the
pillars of the British empire; and for proof (par. 8th) appeals to history,
which can never justify such extravagant notions of the CHURCH even in England
itself. Because formerly the Church "suffered" with the state in England, he
would fain infer, that if even the little CHURCH in America, should fall, it
must involve the state in its ruin. Ha! ha! ha!

The episcopal commoner, is likewise made to assure the members of parliament,
(par. 15th) that American churchmen are a mighty loyal peaceable people (so
they are, at least many of them) and incorruptible as Milton's good angels; and
yet Roger in his introduction, after grievously complaining of the negligence
of some "in authority," even threatens them with some act of desperation on the
part of American episcopalians, in case the FACTION be allowed to "triumph,"
and those who have the honor (forsooth) of being "attached to" the same form
of religion with the "SOVEREIGN" have not a Bishop indulged them.

Roger as well as his commoner has a good deal to say about FACTION,
SCRIBBLERS, fanatics, Independants, turbulent spirits, "rocked in the cradle
of sedition" etc. but his comsort, it seems, is that the number is but SMALL,
and mine is, that such hard words, how often soever repeated, cannot injure the
Antiepiscopal cause AT ALL; and so Roger may even light his pipe, and I Will lay
down my pen.

POSTCRIPT.
Having a little room to spare (which I have not had lately) I beg leave to
present the compliment of the TOE most respectfully to the modern Socrates, our
late retro-kicking flagellator, assuring him, that I am deeply sensible of the
honor he has done me (in the midst of affected disdain) in making me the
subject of another entire paper. Thus much to Sq. T. and now for a word or two
to his Parish-Clerk. This parochial publican, in the introduction to his ode,
pretty plainly hints, that what "came from his pen so glibly," contains, in his
opinion, something "sprightly, and entertaining." By this time perhaps he
knows, how far his sentiments are confirmed by those of the public. However
certain it is, that the whole is grounded on misrepresentation. -- Far from
"complaining" that people did read the Kick, I only assigned as one reason of
their not understanding it, what plainly implied, that they did not think the
Whip deserved a second reading; and this perhaps Sq. T. knows to be true. It Is
really diverting to observe the P. Clerk's embarrassment in guessing at my
person, profession, and connections; but I must inform him, that whether I am a
lawyer, a divine, a physician or a fool, and whether I write by Whiggish
direction, or "under Whiggish influence," are questions not to be solved by
Parish Clerks. I would therefore advise him to light from his pretty poetical
hobbyhorse, and diligently apply himself to collecting the parson's fees. --
non omnia possumus omnes.

From Mr. GAINES's GAZETTE, Dec. 12. A WHIP for the AMERICAN WHIG. By TIMOTHY
TICKLE, ESQR. No. XXXVI.
To TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR.
Sir,
As you are already engaged in a Controversy with the American Whig, in
generously defending Dr. Chandler, and his Appeal, from his rude Insults, and
Misrepresentations, you would confer a singular Obligation on the Author of the
Vindication of the Bishop of Landaff's Sermon, if you would also undertake the
Defense of his Pamphlet, which is now attacked by the same Writer. It will ease
the Vindicator of a disagreeable Office, be all in your Way, and you have shown
yourself to be equal to the Task; besides, you may serve the Cause of Truth, --
which I am convinced was your Motive when you first engaged, -- by the one as
well as the other. In the mean Time, by giving a Place to the enclosed
Advertisement to the Public, in your next Whip, you will oblige your constant
Reader, and humble Servant, The Author of the Vindication.

Advertisement to the PUBLIC.
THE Design of the Vindication of the Bishop of Ladaff's Sermon, in Answer to
Mr. Livingston's Letter to his Lordship, was to rescue the Character of that
worthy, eminent Prelate, from the Odium which the Letter would throw upon it,
and justify the venerable Society, so far as they were charged with Blame, in
the said Letter. The Author of the Vindication professed he would set about
this, not as an angry Antagonist, who assumed a Liberty of abusing and reviling
at Pleasure, just as Resentment or Caprice might dictate; but as a
dispassionate Inquirer after Truth, who desired that Persons and Things might
appear in their true and proper Light. What he undertook, he executed, by
confining himself to Facts, and representing them fairly.

The Author appeals to every candid, unprejudiced Person, who has perused his
Pamphlet, whether he has not acted agreeable to his Engagement, and to the
Character he assumed, of a Lover of Truth and Decency; notwithstanding the many
Misrepresentations, the unprovoked Abuse and Insolence, with which Mr.
Livingston's Letter was replete.

As the Refutation of the several Charges contained in Mr. Livingston's Letter,
turned chiefly on the Investigation of Facts, for which the Vindicator refered
his Readers to the Authorities on which he related them -- and as others might,
if they chose it, be ascertained of their Truth, by turning to those
Authorities: He conceived it could be a Matter of no Consequence to the Public,
to know who, or what Manner of Person he was, Besides, he judged it improper,
as well as beneath him, to hazard a Rencounter with a Set of scribbling
Janissaries, who, to mention no other Instances, had so grossly abused the
Candor and Moderation of Dr. Chandler, in their Attack upon his Appeal. From
such Men, inflamed with Party Rage, and all the dark Passions which
disappointed Ambition generally rouses, what could he expect but the same
Persecution his Betters had experienced before him? For notwithstanding the
Invitation and Promises, contained in the Advertisement presixed to Mr.
Livingston's Letter were specious; yet little Regard was due to them,
considering that he himself was the principal Writer of the American Whig, to
pass over his former Publications of a similar Nature. And indeed his Treatment
of the Bishop of Landaff, who had prefixed his Name to his Sermon, was a
sufficient Circumstance to deter any one who had not the greatest Confidence in
his own Patience, or who was tender of his Character, from entering into
Controversy with him openly, These Considerations induced the Vindicator to
conceal his Name. Actuated, as he was, by a Desire to serve the Cause of Truth
and Religion, and not to embroil himself with angry, personal Altercations, he
endeavored with all good Faith to discharge what he esteemed to be his Duty.
If he has flung in a few Strokes of Humor now and then, they are decent, and
were judged proper to keep the Reader's Attention more awake; and if he has
interspersed several Anecdotes through his Pamphlet, they were all pertinent to
the Subject, had a manifest Connection with it -- yet still without any
Malevolence.

It must be confessed, that after the Vindicator had detected so many Errors,
and refuted so many Calumnies in Mr. Livingston's Letter, the Letter-Writer's
Character, as to Veracity and Probity, supposing him to have had a competent
Knowledge of his Subject, did not stand in the most favorable Point of Light;
for this however, he had none to blame but himself, as he first commenced
Hostilities. Yet still a Way was left for him to retreat with Honor, and
exculpate himself with Reputation; making some small Abatement for his fond
Credulity, The Vindicator, after seeing Dr. Chauncy's Remarks on the Bishop of
Landaff's Sermon, (which was not till after he had finished his Strictures on
the Letter to his Lordship) charitably supposed that Mr. Livingston had been
misled by the garrulous old Gentleman of Boston. This was the most favorable
Construction that could be put upon his Conduct; and indeed his Friends thought
it the best Apology that could be made for him. The Vindicator was willing to
think so, and doubtless the Public would have admitted the Plea.

But, alas, how often is our Charity mistaken! Some Spirits are of such a Cast,
that you only make them more untractable, more stubborn, by Reason. Their
Obstinancy rises in Proportion to the Clearness and Strength of your Arguments.
You cannot enrage them more, than by showing them they err, Mr. Livingston was
not of a Temper to make any Concessions, nor even admit he was fallible.
Instead of making any Reparation to the Bishop of Landaff, for the injurious,
groundless Calumnies flung upon him, as Truth and Justice demanded -- instead
of acknowledging he had been led into any Error by the Remarks: He breathed out
Threatenings and Vengeance against the Vindicator. His Head indeed was generally
supposed to have received some little Damage by this unlucky Bounce against the
Bishop. Conscious of this, and that his Character, as an Author, had also
suffered, it stung him on to keener Resentment. For although the genius of
literary Fame had not given him Admittance into her Train, nor even, as it is
reported, heard once of his Name, Yet he paid her some distant Adoration; and
to testify his Sincerity, had frequently sacrificed at her Shrine the trifling
Considerations of Humanity, Decency, Friendship, and Truth. All these mournful,
galling Reflections crowding together on the Mind, were enough to transform a
moderate Person, much more our American Whig, into an Inquisitor -- even of
Blood.

Accordingly, he came forth, gentle Reader, as you may perceive by casting your
Eye on the American Whig. No. XXXIX. -- he came forth, I say, with all the
tremendous Pomp of of an Inquisitor -- Effrontery and Suspicion leading the
Van, Insolence and Malice his Assessors on either Side, whilst Condemnation and
fierce Revenge brought up the Rear. Thus terribly accoutred and supported, the
Rev. Mr. I-ng-l-s became the hapless, devoted Victim of his Rage. On a bare
Suspicion that this Gentleman had written the prefatory Advertisement which is
prefixed to the Vindication, he discharges the whole Weight of his Resentment
against him, and treats him with the lowest and most contemptible Scurrility.
Surely this would not be justifiable had there been the clearest Evidence, even
to Demonstration, that he had written the whole Pamphlet.

Mr. Livingston absurdly makes this Gentleman accountable for every Passage in
the Vindication, at the very Time he says -- "Some Parts of the Performance --
are rather a little above his Capacity;" and that the Composition is rather
disproportionate to the Industry of any Individual Member of the Convention,"
Now this I conceive to be a little hard. If the whole Convention was combined
to write the Vindication, why should the Blame, if perchance there is any, be
thrown upon one? Yea, but Mr. I-gl-s, quoth our Whig, by writing the prefatory
Advertisement, "has adopted the whole Work, and thereby thrown on himself the
Burden of Exculpation." And Mr. Livingston, say I, wrote the first Paper of the
American Whig; Is he therefore accountable for all the Blunders, Nonsense,
Falsehoods, Securrility, Dullness, Forgeries, bad Reasoning, etc. contained in
the subsequent Papers? Would he not think it unjust? The Cases are parallel. I
say not this as if Mr. I-ngl -- s, need be ashamed to adopt the Vindication, if
the Opinion of others is to be taken; but to expose the Futility of the Letter
Writer's Reasoning -- Reasoning indeed is not his Talent -- as well as the
Injustice of his Procedure.

This ungenerous Attack on Mr. I-ngl-s is the more extraordinary, as he is
known to have always entertained the most favorable sentiments of Dissenters,
particularly Presbyterians, and to have been so much attached to them as to
incur the Censures of some Members of his own Community on that Account. This
Attack is also extraordinary, as the Vindication, whether he was the Author or
not, is, in the Judgment of every candid, dispassionate Reader of it, that I
have conversed with, written with much Temper, and intended only to wipe off
the Calumnies that had been flung on the Church of England, and its Members.

Particular Answers shall be returned in due Time, to the Papers against the
Vindication. In the mean Time, I will give the Reader a Specimen of the first,
which seems to be rather intended as a Vehicle for private Scandal, and to
fling Dirt at Mr. I-ngl-s, than a Reply to the Vindication. Mr. Livingston
charges the Vindicator with "false quoting," and says he dropped the Word just,
in citing a Passage from the Letter. If the Reader will be pleased to turn to
the Vindication, he will find the Passage at p. 24; and he will also find, to
his Astonishment at the Whig's Effrontery, the Word just at full Length. I
shall transcribe the Passage for the Reader's Satisfaction from the
Vindication. -- "Again, he, i. e. Mr. Livingston tells the Bishop of Landaff,
-- "Ecclesiastical Synods have ever been in use among them," i. e. the New
England Colonists," and what may seem extraordinary to an English Prelate, they
have been so conducted as never to give any just Umbrage to the civil Power."
These are the Words exactly as they stand in the Vindication, p. 24.

In the very next Sentence, the Mode of answering, adopted by the Vindicator,
led him to repeat the Substance of the Quotation, when for Brevity's Sake,
several Words were omitted; and among others the Word just. But was it not laid
before the Reader in the Quotation? Or did this alter the State of the Case?
Not in the least. The violent Proceedings of the New England Synods gave
Umbrage to the civil Power, -- the Lords Justices wrote to Governor Dummer,
about them, and forbid their meeting. These Facts the Whig cannot deny.

Perhaps he will say there was no just Umbrage given to the civil Power. Yea,
but who is to judge? Shall he judge for the civil Power, or shall the civil
Power judge for itself? Most certainly the Lords Justices thought that just
Umbrage was given, or else they would not have written to Mr. Dummer.

From this Specimen the Reader may judge what Sort of Reply the Vindication is
to have. Mr. Livingston affirms the Vindicator dropped the Word just, though in
Truth he quoted it; and I observe he cautiously avoids setting down the Page of
the Vindication, as few Readers may be able to remember where the Passage lies,
and turning to it would detect his Misrepresentation. How wretched must the
Cause be which requires such Artifices to support it? And what Kind of a Heart
must he have, that can use such Artifices!

Indeed this Method of answering Pamphlets by detached weekly papers, is as
unsair as it is unprecedented, and argues want of Ability in the Writer, or
else a bad Cause. It is much easier to sit down and write a short, flimsy
Piece, made up chiefly of Personal Invective and private Scandal, which will
not fail to catch vulgar Ears; than to write a Pamphlet where Argument and
close Reasoning are necessary. The Whig however, like most Animals, knows no
doubt where his Strength lies; and his Exhibitions often remind me of the Feats
of Punch, placed in a Window, to draw the Rabble to see a Puppet Show. To do
the Whig Justice, I believe his Abilities for Reasoning are much on a Level
with his Courage and Heroism; as he generally makes his valiant Attacks on your
passive Ecclesiastics, who are restrained at least by a Regard to their
Character, from making such Reprisals as Laymen would be apt to make, and for
which he seems to have no Stomach. But he certainly ought to have considered,
before he sat down to animadvert on Characters, whether his own be
invulnerable. According to his own Doctrine, "Recrimination is just." The
Vindicator assures him he will make no Return in the Way of Scandal, or raking
into his private Character. As a Gentleman, he despises it, as a Christian he
detests it. He has no Ambition to excel in the Manners, Flowers, or Style of
Billingsgate, -- to the Whig's more masterly Genius and Pen, he leaves such
Things. But be will not be answerable for what others may think proper to do
with Regard to Characters.

After the Whig has made his first foul Discharges, it is probable his Stomach
may be easier, and his Head more cool, -- Evacuations being generally attended
with such Effects. Should this fortune to be the Case, and a Regard to Truth
and Decency, gain the Ascendant a little, his Reply to the Vindication shall be
noticed accordingly; if not by 'Squire Tickle, yet by the Vindicator himself
The Author declares he will defend the Vindication no farther than the
Vindication defends Truth. If in any Instance it is plainly shown, that the
Vindicator was misled, and thereby erred, -- for knowingly or wilfully he erred
not -- he will immediately acknowledge and retract it.

But he humbly requests the Whig, alias, Mr. Livingston, that, if possible, he
would be decent, -- that he would quote fairly, -- that he would not torture
Words, nor endeavor to wrest them from their natural, obvious Sense, -- and
that he would not endeavor by Sophistry, to cast a Mist before the Reader's
Eyes, in order to obscure the Truth. Moreover, he submits it to the Whig's most
sage Consideration, whether for his own Sake, -- verily not for Mr. I-gl-s's,
whose moral religious Character is very well known, and above the Reach of his
Malice, or that of any other Dirt-Flinger, -- whether for his own Sake, I say,
meaning and refering to the Whig, he should not be somewhat tender and delicate
when treating of private Characters. Because, whatever be may lose in the
Estimation of some Folks, with respect to his being a frolicksome, waggish
Companion, -- whatever Abatement there might be of the Savage Pleasure which
others would take in reading calumniating Insults on their Neighbors, -- a
Pleasure which we are to suppose the Whig never tasted --: All this will be
fully made up in clear Gain to his Character, as a Gentleman and a Christian.
Add to this, that as the Subject has some Connection with Religion, it would be
quite as well to reason more, and rail less. The Premises being complied with
by the Whig, shall be sacredly observed by the Vindicator. Should Squire Tickle
think proper to engage, he ought to do the same; but if he deviates from them,
even let him be kicked, or buffetted, or abused, as seems most meet unto the
meek minded Whig.

These Preliminaries being adjusted and adhered to, Mr. Livingston may proceed
with his Reply as fast as he will. But he must not think to impose on the
World, by calling such Papers as his XXXIXth No. which consists chiefly of
shameless Scolding, and misrepresents two or three Words and Passages in the
Vindication; -- he must not think. I say, to impose on the World by calling
such Papers, Answers or Replies to the Vindication. A free, sensible People,
will discern better; they will treat with Indignation, so palpable, so
outrageous an Insult on their Understanding.

The Author of the Vindication.
Mr. Tickle's Compliments to the Writer of the above Advertisement, -- will
very readily undertake the Desence of the Vindication, which he is convinced
will not give him much Trouble -- if the Author himself should decline the
Task; which, however Mr. T. hopes he will not, being convinced of his
Qualifications for the Office; -- If he is only fearful of being led amay, in
the Course of his Observations, to use severe Reflections, etc. the following
Hint may be of Service. -- To speak the Truth, be it ever so poignant, of a Man
who has scribbled away all his own Reputation in defending a Party which never
had any to lose, is one of the most beneficial Acts of an Individual to the
Community; and all good Men (in which Number I do not include S. L. and S.)
will thank him for his Services. N. B. The Brunswick Affair is not forgot.



From Mr. PARKER's GAZETTE, Dec. 19, 1768. The AMERICAN WHIG, No. XLI.
To the Author of the AMERICAN WHIG.
WHEN I first took a superficial view of the celebrated Appeal to the Public,
it appeared to be plausibly written; the author, it is evident, intended to
appear in public, in the character of a man of candor and moderation. But a
wolf in sheep's clothing, will ever find it difficult to (...) long concealed.
-- Although he has been much upon the reserve, it being his professed design to
conciliate us to his scheme of Bishops; yet an attentive reader may easily
discover what spirit he is of, and with what views he is aiming at the
introduction of an American episcopate. The whole tenor of his Appeal
represents every argument in favor of religion, as favorable to his own
scheme; and that religion itself must necessarily sink or swim, according as it
shall fare with his darling prelacy. It is evidently the light in which he has
represented the case, that there can be no church of Christ in this country,
nor any real Christianity among us, in any other way than by introducing the
episcopal constitution. The most conscientious worship of God, and the
strictest profession and practice of the religion of Jesus Christ in the
presbyterian form, is, in his view of the case, the most brutal profligacy of
manners, and equal to the highest degree of infidelity that is to be found,
even among the grossest barbarians: Yea, that it is a scandalous neglect, and
what brings great and deserved reproach upon the civil authority of the nation,
to suffer us in this country so to continue. Indeed it was his design, that the
sentiments should, for the present, be concealed from public view; yet, (as
much upon his guard as he was) his incautions pen has referred us to one who
has spoken his sentiments with more freedom. -- He tells us in page 10, of his
advertisement. "That it gives him great pleasure to find that his sentiments
have been so clearly and forcibly expressed, by the right reverend Lord Bishop
of Landaff, in his excellent anniversary sermon preached before the society in
February last." -- The sermon here reserred to, sufficiently justifies me in
the representation I have given of the Doctor's sentiments of religion.
Especially in page 6, of that sermon, we find these notable expressions. --
"Since the discovery of the new world, the same provision has not been made of
ministers necessary to the support of Christianity, among those who removed
thither; especially in the British colonies. -- A scandalous neglect, (this, of
not making a provision of ministers) which has brought great and deserved
reproach, both on the adventurers, and on the government whence they went, and
under whose protection and power they still remain in their new habitations. To
the adventurers, what reproach could he cast heavier than they deserve? Who
with their soil abandoned their native manners and religion, and ever long were
found in many parts, living without remembrance or knowledge of God, without
any divine worship, in dissolute wickedness, and the most brutal profligacy of
manners, instead of civilizing and converting barbarous infidels, as they
undertook to do, they became themselves infidels and barbarians." -- In these
strong expressions, does the Bishop represent our forsaking the episcopal
constitution, and setting up and pactising the presbyterian form of church
order, to be the abandoning the Christian religion, and living without
remembrance or knowledge of God, in dissolute wickedness, and the most brutal
profligacy of manners; yea, as becoming infidels and barbarians. And it is here
called a scandalous neglect of the authority of the British nation, which
brings great and deserved reproach upon them, to suffer us, in these
plantations to continue such infidels and barbarians, as to remain in the
practice of presbyterianism, which is here styled wickedness.

This sermon, Dr. Chandler calls an excellent one, and rejoiceth to find his
own sentiments so clearly and forcibly expressed in it. I have therefore his
own authority for considering this representation, which the Bishop gives of
this country, as his own; from which, notwithstanding all that moderation and
show of candor with which he makes a parade in the Appeal, it appears that in
his view of the case, presbyterianism has nothing of Christianity in it; yea,
that it is the most dissolute wickedness, by which we make ourselves infidels
and barbarians. And although he would fain persuade us to believe, that he his no
design to give the least disturbance to such as are of any other denomination,
by the introduction of Bishops; yet how ready is he to accuse the King and
parliament of a scandalous neglect, and as exposing them to great and deserved
reproach, for not interposing their authority for our recovery, from this
dissolute wickedness of presbyterianism. What sincerity can there be in his
repeated and positive declarations, that he aims not at any thing beyond the
harmless, enfeebled and disarmed creature of a Bishop, which stands described
in his Appeal? Can we believe him that he desires the authority of the nation,
should continue in such a practice, which he looks upon as a scandalous
neglect! Or is it not evidently his aim to introduce episcopacy, as a leading
step to engage the civil sword, to convert us from the barbarous infidelity of
presbyterianism to the Christian faith, which is to be found only in the
prelatic church? It is evidently in this view of the case, that he pleads for
the necessity of Bishops in this country, representing throughout his Appeal,
that there can be no real church, or Christianity among us upon any other
footing, and that every argument than can be urged in favor of religion, must
be understood as being in favor, and as showing the necessity of his ghostly
prelate.

It is plain the Bishop of Landaff could collect his account of this country
from no public history that has ever been written, it being diametrically
opposite to every other account of us, that has been ever published to the
world. The only medium of intelligence from whence he can be supposed to
collect it, must be private correspondence. And as the Dr. has so freely
declared, that he finds his own sentiments of us plainly expressed by the
Bishop, it is but doing him justice to esteem him the person to whom the Bishop
is indebted for his information. And to speak the truth, it must be confessed,
the account he has given of us to the Bishop of Landaff, is as near the truth,
as usually are the accounts transmitted by him and his brother missionaries, to
the society which employ them. The Dr. makes frequent complaints of
persecution, representing his party and his cause as being heavily loaded with
it. And yet, not a man on the continent can show any thing this gentleman had
to present the idea of persecution to his mind, unless it be the pleasing
forethought of being soon able to make use of the convincing arguments of
confiscation and faggot, for the conversion of presbyterians. A spirit of
bigotry this, not inferior to that which once blazed in that fiery prelate Arch
bishop Laud, whose character will stand marked with indelible infamy, as long
as the British annals shall endure, for his more than brutal savageness toward
his fellow creatures, cloak'd under the specious mask of religion, and
conducted with a pious zeal for the church. All that the Bishop of Landaff, or
Dr. Chandler himself want, in order to shine with the same luster, is only to
arrive at the same meridian. Bigotry and superstition are, in our fallen state,
the natural product of that tendency to religion, implanted in human nature, in
its rectitude, which prompts to this inquiry, "Wherewith shall I come before
the Lord." And although the kind father of the universe, has been pleased, by the
medium of divine revelation, to give us needful direction; yet, mistaking the
true scope of the divine precept, while confident of having divine revelation
for our guide; the tendency of our nature to religion, fills us with zeal, and
we become furiously mad, verily thinking we are doing God service; while we are
really fighting against Heaven. A notable instance of this enthusiasm we have
in the British annals, which gave rise to the first settlement of America, in
the reigns of those two weak princes, James I. and Charles I. who by designing
men, were easily persuaded to become tools to priestly tyranny. While some were
endeavoring to restore popish superstition, others were aiming at exalting the
prelatic church, to as formidable an height as the Pope himself. By these
united schemes, so fierce a fire was kindled in the nation, as rendered that
region too hot for such of its inhabitants as conscientiously governed their
conduct, and worshipped their maker with a gospel spirit, and obliged them to
seek shelter among the savages of America, whom they found more hospitable than
the dignified prelates of their native soil. And although this persecuting spirit
of bigotry has been so often exposed, by writers of all denominations; yet how
surprisingly does this ignis ^atuus again kindle and rekindle between the Dr.
and the Bishop of Landaff, together with the other members of the convention!
And unless just Heaven shall blast their malevolent scheme, it will be
necessity for us to look out for the discovery of another new world, in which
we may take shelter from the approaching storm, as our fore fathers did in this.

LIBERIUS.

From Mr. PARKER's GAZETTE, Dec. 19, 1768. A KICK for the WHIPPER, [No. XXIX.]
By Sir ISAAC FOOT.
For who can write the true absurd like me,
Thy pardon, Codrus, who, I mean, but thee?
YOUNG.
THE grand scope of the American Churchman (Whig No. 25) was to exculpate the
generality of American Churchmen, of all concern in the late prelatical scheme;
but the grand scope of the TRUE Churchman (as he calls himself) Whip No. 29.
seems to be to prove (if possible) that those who dare presume to dissent from
his MAJESTY's and the national religion, are disloyal subjects. That when the
legislature has established a church in England, we cannot be "true patriots,"
-- "wise politicians" or "friends to religion," unless we submit to its
jurisdiction in America, -- and that it is absolutely necessary to the success
of the religion of the indigent JESUS, who knew not where to lay his head, that
his ministers should be rich and powerful. The manner in which he undertakes to
prove this last article particularly, is eno' to make a school boy laugh. From
the cup of cold water mentioned by our Savior, he would infer (par. 8.) the
necessity of a fat warm benefice; from his orders by his Apostles, that those
"who preach the gospel should live by the gospel" and be gives to hospitality"
he would fain argue, that they ought to have palaces to receive, and plumb
pudding to entertain strangers; and by the provision made (under the Jewish
theocracy) for the priests, that they might not be obliged to meddle with
secular business (par. 9.) We are to be convinced, it seems, that the Bishops
of the English church, ought to enjoy the church "livings, lands and
possessions," have seats in parliament, and even become members of the board of
TRADE. We doubt not indeed, but ambitious candidates for holy orders, tremble
at the thoughts of poverty (the burden of the song!) and hanker after
Bishoprics, or other lucrative stations in the church, nor shall we wrangle
with Great Britain, though she burdens herself with ten times her present number
of ecclesiastical Lordship's; but (in spite of all the T. C. has to (...) out
cold water, hospitality and Levites) we beg leave to (...) have no need of
them; nor can we think ourselves less loyal to our King, less friendly to our
country, or less devoted to a CRUCIFIED Savior, because we oppose episcopal
domination, ecclesiastical oppression, and the establishment of a proud
hierarchy of human invention.

That the aim of the convention (vid. Whip No. 30.) is to "subjugate the
colonies to the tyranny of priests," we acknowledge has never as yet been
publicly demonstrated, by "producing and proving" a plan different from that
pretended, or publishing any of the petitions which have taken wing. -- Such
things as these will perhaps best answer as a Corpse de reserve. However that
one chief design of an episcopate, is, to keep us, "insolent, republican"
colonists in order, is pretty plain from the Yankey-Zealot's letter published
(unexpectedly to him no doubt!) in the Whig No. XX. But words and papers out of
the question, actions, actions, actions! Mr. T. C. are sufficient to excite
just suspicions, put rational men on their guard, and make every friend to his
country "set his face like a flint," until he is convinced by demonstration
(for nothing less will do) that there is no danger. And this is a sufficient
answer to thy five first wise parts (Whip No. 30.) -- I catch a fellow in my
parlour, fumbling at my bureau, suspect him of, and charge him with evil
designs, -- and he challenges me to prove it! -- Ha! ha! ha!

The A. C. had said, that in Virginia, "the public provision extended only to
two churches in a county," the T. C declares, that "the least counties have two
and the most of them three churches" How far this declaration is true, or (as
designed to be understood) contradictory, I cannot determine: Certain it is
however, that "there may be more churches than there is public provision for;
and that the difference of two and three is too small, supposing the A. C.
mistaken, to destroy the propriety of his observation, viz. that the
episcopalians of Virginia "pay not a blind devotion to their clergy." But blind
indeed must be their eyes who from the society's words, "upon renewed instances
from Governor's of provinces, ministers, vestries and private persons, etc." --
can infer that a majority of American episcopalians had solicited an
episcopate, and "wide indeed must be their throats," who can "swallow" the T.
C's windy boasts and improbable declarations.

Displeased with the picture of American churchmen, drawn by the A.C. out T. C.
gives us another as much beyond, as that can possibly be supposed short of the
life. We are at once transported into a fairy land, and every churchman, by the
extravagant touches of his pencil, appears scarce less than a little divinity.
If the A C. has been deficient in his commendations, he is accused as an
accuser of the brethren (for generous donation is it seems, inconsistent with
frugal aeconomy, etc.) and if, for want of skill in painting, he has failed of
a likeness he is charged with aiming at, the grotesque style (unconscionable
this!) But our Apelles dashes off a portrait, which, though it may resemble some
individuals among American churchmen, is much too flattering a picture, for
perhaps 9 10ths of Americans, of whatever denomination, and I Am pretty
confident, no more resembles the painter himself than Paris did Thersites.

L.

From Mr. GAINES's GAZETTE, Dec. 19. A WHIP for the AMERICAN WHIG. By TIMOTHY
TICKLE, ESQR. No. XXXVII.
To TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR.
Sir,
As you have frequently gratified occasional Correspondents, by publishing
their Productions in your Paper, I hope you will favor me so far, as to give a
Place therein, to the following Animadversions upon a Letter signed B. W. which
appeared in the New York Gazette, or Weekly Post-Boy, of the 29th of August
last, printed by James Parker, Esquire -- and indeed I have some Right to be
indulged in this Request, as the unmanly Attack that was made upon me in that
Letter, was occasioned by a Paper published in your Whip, of July the 4th. Your
Compliance will oblige your very humble Servant.

West-Chester, Dec. 9, 1768. S. SEABURY.



AS it is more than probable that the Public has by this Time forgot a Letter
signed B. W. which was published by James Parker, Esquire Comptroller of the
Post Office, in New York. Land Waiter in the Custom-House, and Printer of the
New York Gazette or the Weekly Post-Boy, in his News-Paper of the 29th of
August last, in which I am treated in the most injurious and scurrilous Manner;
I shall give the Reader an Opportunity of re-examining the whole Letter as it
stood in Mr. Parker's Paper: That no Imputation may lie against me, of
misquoting or misrepresenting it.

Mr. Parker introduced the Letter with the following Preamble, viz.

The Printer thought proper to inform the public, that he received the
following letter from a gentleman of figure in Boston, who has, several years
past, been a member of the society for propagating the Gospel in foreign parts;
and lest any person should doubt the genuineness of this letter, the Printer
hereby gives notice. That the original is now in his hands, and ready to be
shown to any person, who is desirous of satisfaction on this head.

Boston, August 5, 1768. To Mr. James Parker, Printer of the American Whig.

I OBSERVE that Mr. S-b-r-y, as I suppose, in his Paper, printed in the
New York Gazette of July 4, very decently for a clergyman, gives Dr. Chauncey
the lie, for asserting, as he says, that all candidates for holy orders, in the
church of England, have the expenses of their voyage home paid by the society,
etc." It would not have been impertinent, if this declaimer against falsehood,
had mentioned some passage in the Doctor's answer, referring to the page,
wherein he affirms this for fact -- Till he is pleased to do this, I shall take
the liberty to think that the Dr. has affirmed no such thing. He has indeed
affirmed "that the society has publicly given an invitation to all the
colony-students, who desire Episcopal ordination to come to England assuring
them that their expenses in going to, and returning from thence, shall be
defrayed by the society;" and he has faithfully referred his readers to the
very abstract and page, in which this invitation and promise are contained.
Upon which I might ask this stickler for impartiality in writing, whether it
was fair dealing to keep so important a fact entirely out of sight? Let him, if
he can assign some better reason for his passing it over in silence, than his
not knowing what to do with it. He probably knows, if he does not, I now tell
him, till he is able to prove, that the society never published the above cited
invitation and promise, or that they have since published their revocation of
them, the world will judge, and are authorized to judge, that they are bound in
strict justice to defray the expense any young students, who go to England for
Episcopal ordination, are put to on this account, unless it is paid in some
other way. This is all the Dr. wanted, or had in view, in order to a full proof
of the point in debate, namely, that the want of a Bishop in America was no
great hardship to candidates, on account of the expense that would arise from
their crossing the atlantic. This might be galling to our correspondent with '
Esquire Tickle, and the true reason, at bottom, of his rude and injurious
reflections on the Dr.

I am not ignorant, that the society, for some time, have not defrayed the
expense of voyages to England for holy orders. And why? because there was no
need of it; as this expense has been paid, not by the candidates themselves,
but by the communities, who expect the benefit of their labors, or by private
donations from other persons here, who wish the growth of the church, or by the
joint contributions of both. Very few, if any, candidates, I have reason to
know, have, for many years, gone from this part of the country for ordination,
but the expense of their voyages have been provided for in one or other of
those ways. I have myself been frequently called upon for help in such cases,
and have always been free to afford it. And as the expense of candidates has
been borne by others, and in order to lessen the disbursements of the society,
which would otherwise have been claimable, and must in honor and conscience
have been paid by them, the Doctor's argument remains strong, and cannot be
invalidated.

I shall not think it improper to let this over-zealous writer know, that I am
not only a son of the church of England, a real hearty friend to its growth and
prosperity, but one who has the honor of being a member of the incorporated
society, for the propagation of the gospel in foreign parts. I am also a friend
to decency, good manners, and a becoming treatment, especially of respectable
characters; and what is more, I am a friend to truth and honest impartiality:
and as I am fully convinced, that the representation the society have had from
this side the water are, in many instances, not only unfair, but notoriously
false; I am obliged to say, what I really think, that the greatest occasion we,
at present, have for a Bishop in America, is to correct and keep in order such
troublesome persons as this associate with The American Whig Whipper, appears
to be, who with some others of the like malevolent spirit, have impertinently
disturbed the quiet of this country for sometime past.

B. W.

I was so little conscious of deserving the malevolent Strictures and false
Insinuations contained in this Letter, that had there been another Clergyman in
this, or either of the neighboring Colonies, whose Name thus gutted, would
have answered to S-b-r-y in the Letter, I should have had no Suspicion that it
was intended for me. But as I found myself so particularly pointed out, I took
the first Opportunity of calling on Mr. Parker, to see the original Letter. Mr.
Parker showed me a written Paper, signed only B. W. and dated at Boston. I
immediately took Notice that the Direction at the Head of this written Paper.
"To Mr. James Parker, etc." and I think the Date at Boston were in a different
Hand and Ink, from the other Writing. Upon my expressing my Surprise, that he
should produce this Paper, signed only B. W. as an original Letter "from a
Gentleman, of Figure in Boston," -- and demanding of him who the Author was,
Mr. Parker, after some Shuffling, and Hesitation, named Benning Wentworth, Esquire
late Governor of the Province of New Hampshire, as the Author; and affirmed
that the written Paper he then showed me, was his Hand Writing. Being asked by
me whether he, (Parker) had received the written Paper, signed B. W. from the
late Governor Wentworth; -- he replied, that he himself did not receive it; but
that it was sent by Dr. Chauncey, of Boston, to some Gentlemen of this City, to
be publish a his Paper; and that if I denied or doubted its being the Hand
Writing of the late Governor Wentworth, he was ready to prove it. -- Comparing
in my Mind, Mr. Parker's Answers, and the Circumstance that the Direction at
the Top of the wrriten Paper, was in a different Hand and Ink, from the other
Writing. I could not help suspecting that there was some Fraud or Forgery in
the Case: And finding from Mr. Parker's frequent Shiftings and Shuflings, that
he was not a proper Person to be conversed with alone on such an Occasion; --
after telling him, that he had in no wise complied with his own Preamble to the
Letter he had printed, -- that I doubted its being the late Governor
Wentworth's, and that he should be applied to about it, I left him.

As Mr. Parker had told other Persons that the Letter signed B. W. was written
by the late Governor Wentworth, a Gentleman of Character in this City, had,
before I came to Town, written to a Friend of his at Portsmouth, concerning the
Affair; his Friend's Answer enclosed the following Letter from the late
Governor Wentworth to him, viz.

Portsmouth Sep. 18, 1768.
"IN the short Time I have had to consider of the Letter signed B. W. which Mr.
-- advises one Parker had printed in his Paper of 29th August past, I can only
at present assert, That the Contents, and every Clause therein contained, is a
villainous Piece of Forgery: And if any Measures can be taken to obtain the
original Letter, the Villains may be discovered: And if that cannot be
effected, and a legal Prosecution of Parker, will answer, or be serviceable, I
will be at the Expense.

I am Sir, your most humble Servant, B. Wentworth."


After I had seen this Letter from Mr. Wentworth. I again called on Mr. Parker,
in Company with a Gentleman of undoubted Credit, in order to obtain a second
Sight of the Paper in his Possession, that I might compare the Writing, with
the Letter from Mr. Wentworth. Mr. Parker complained that I had not, when I was
last at his House, treated him like a Gentleman; and then he rummaged over a
Box of Papers, and and said he could not find it; but he repeatedly declared
that the Letter signed B. W. and published in his News-Paper, was written by
Benning Wentworth, Esquire and transmitted to New York by Dr. Chauncey, of Boston,
with a Direction to have it printed in his Paper. Upon my desiring him to
produce his Proofs, which in a former Conversation he had said he could give,
that the Letter published by him was written by Mr. Wentworth, he replied, --
that he was obliged immediately to attend a Corpse into the Country, and
therefore had not Time, but that if I doubted the Authenticity of the said
Letter, if I would go to Mr. Thomas Smith, Attorney at Law, he had such Proofs
in his Hands as would effectually convince me; for that Mr. Smith had received
it from Dr. Chauncey, whom he supposed I would esteem a Man of Veracity.

From Mr. Parker I went, in Company with the same Gentleman who was with me at
Mr. Parker's, to Mr. Thomas Smith. Upon metioning my Business, and telling him
that Mr. Parker had declared that Mr. Wentworth was the Author of the Letter
signed B. W. and that it was Mr. Wentworth's Hand Writing; and that Mr. Parker
had said that he received the Letter from him, and had referred me to him for
the Proofs that the Letter was Mr. Wentworth's; -- he replied, that he had
indeed given the said Letter to Mr. Parker to be printed, that he received it
from Mr. Rogers, who recieved it enclosed in a Letter from Dr. Chauncey, who
received ^t from the Gentleman himself in Boston; -- that it was no Mr.
Wentworth's own Hand Writing, for that Mr. Wenworth was an old Man and could
not write; but that it was written by his Order, and that he signed B. W. to
it, and gave it to Dr. Chauncey who enclosed it to Mr. Rogers, who delivered it
to him (Thomas Smith) who put it into the Hands of James Parker, Esquire who
printed it in his Paper. I observed upon the, that Mr. Wentworth did not live
in Boston. To which Mr. Smith replied, that he was in Bo on at that Time, and
that if it would be any Satisfaction to me, if I would wait till the following
Week, an Affidavit would arrive from Boston, to prove that the Gentleman was
the Author of the said Letter

As I observed that Mr. Smith cautiously avoided mentioning Mr. Wentworth's
Name, but always expressed himself by the Term -- the Gentleman, I suspected
that all was not fair, I therefore pressed him more closely, and then he said
that one Reason why he thought the Letter to be written by Mr. Wentworth, was,
that B W. were the initial Letters of no other Name on the Societies List of
Members, but of Mr. Wentworth's only. -- As I went out of Mr. Smith's Office. I
told him that I had such Proofs in my Pocket, that Mr. Wentworth was not the
Author, as would surprise him and all concerned.

After we came into the Street, I insisted, that as Mr. Smith had been so very
officious, as to go between Mr. Rogers, and Mr. Parker, in the Affair of
printing the Letter signed B. W. in which I thought myself very cruelly and
unjustly treated, he ought in Justice to procure me a Sight of Dr. Chauncey's
Letter to Mr. Rogers. Mr. Smith replied that I might take what Steps I pleased;
that he would give himself no Trouble about it, unless he chanced to see Mr.
Rogers; and that he never had told Mr. Parker, or any other Person, that the
Letter signed B. W. was written by Mr. Wentworth.

I forgot to mention, that in my Conversation with Mr. Parker, when I told him
that he had not complied with his Promise in the Introduction which he had
printed to the Letter signed B. W. he answered, That he did not write that
Introduction; that he objected to its being printed, and that therefore he did
not think himself obliged by it, -- or Words to that Purpose.

From Mr Smith's, I immediately went to Mr. Roger's House, but he was from
Home, on a Journey into New Jersey, though expected to return that Night, or in
the Morning. I called again, two or three Times the next Day, but he had not
returned. The next Week I set out on a Journey, to Philadelphia, and when I
returned, Mr. Rogers was gone into New England, so that I had no Opportunity of
seeing him till some Time in November. Upon my mentioning my Business to him,
he behaved with great Openness and Candor; readily gave me a Sight of Dr.
Chauncey's Letter to him. He without Hesitation also declared that he did not
know, and never had heard who wrote the Letter signed B. W. That when he was
lately in Boston, Dr. Chauncey mentioned the Matter, but did not choose to make
known the Author's Name.

In Dr. Chauncey's Letter to Mr. Rogers, according to the best of any
Recollection, (for Mr. Rogers did not think himself at Liberty to permit any
Extracts to be taken from it) he says, That the Letter signed B. W. was written
by an Inhabitant of the Town of Boston; an Episcopalian by Principle and
Education, and for several Years past a Member of the Society for the
Propagation of the Gospel; -- that it was written voluntarily, and unsolicited
by him, and put into his Hands for him to make what use he pleased of it; that
the Author wrote it with a View of exculpating him (Chauncey) from an
Accusation of Falsehood, in a Paper published in Mr. Gaine's Gazette, and Weekly
Mercury, July the 4th.

[ The Remainder, containing Reflections on the Letter signed B. W. in the next
Number of the Whip,]

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Dec. 26, 1768. The AMERICAN WHIG, No. XLII.
To the Author of the AMERICAN WHIG.
To my dear countrymen; especially my friends and brethren, who are attached
to, and united in the episcopal cause.
THOUGH fixed in a private station of life, I have not been a careless observer
of what passes in public; nor do I look upon myself unconcerned in debates
affecting privileges of a civil, but more especially, of a religious nature. I
could not look on the late tumults and commotions, occasioned through these
colonies, by the unhappy Stamp Act, without the most tender concern, knowing
the consequences (ever to be dreaded) of a rupture between the mother country
and these plantations; which is an event never to be desired by those who are
true friends to either. A real friend of the nation or its colonies, ought
therefore to be sensibly alarmed at every thing which has the remotest tendency
to increase the jealousy, or weaken the connection between them. -- Pardon me
then, my brethren, if it should appear to be without just foundation, that the
vigorous efforts lately made, to obtain an American episcopate, have excited my
fears, and prevailed on me, in this manner, to use my endeavors to awaken the
attention of such as are united in the same religious interest with myself. My
apprehensions on this occasion, I must confess, are various; not being fully
satisfied as to the true cause of those endeavors, nor the end really aimed
at. Although I must profess the sincerest regard for the episcopal church in
America, and heartily desire to see it blessed with all its most ample
gospel-privileges; yet whether the la^e attempts to procure American Bishops,
take their rise from friends to the church, or secret enemies to both church
and state, appears to me an uncertainty. Whoever considers the jealousy of the
nation respecting its colonies, as being desirous to throw off their dependence
upon the mother country; and the mutual jealousies between the nation and its
colonies, so lately excited by the Stamp Act, cannot far of being alarmed, lest
some evil-designing men, taking the advantage of the credulity of some of our
well meaning clergy, have stirred up their well intended, but ill-timed zeal,
earnestly to solicit the obtaining Bishops among ourselves. An event, which,
should it happen, would so evidently lessen the dependence, and weaken the
connection of these colonies with the crown. It is said, there are more than a
million of subjects, dispersed through the plantations, professed members of
our excellent church, who are all connected with the nation, not only by civil
ties, in common with those of other denominations; but in addition thereto are
strongly united by the sacred ties of religion, being in subjection to, and
dependent upon the Bishops in the mother country. Of this the able statesmen of
the nation, cannot but be sensible; and from principles of state policy, they
must oppose the design. -- In what light then, will they view those strenuous
efforts for an American episcopate, but as a secret design, cloak'd with the
specious pretense of religion, to ripen our circumstances for a revolt? Nor
will our warmest protestations of loyalty to the crown, avail to prevent such
apprehensions concerning us, while the thing we are aiming at, whether it be
our intention or not, really has such a tendency.

These, my dear countrymen and brethren, were my apprehensions till the late
"Appeal" to the public, fell into my hands; on the reading of which, I was
greatly surprised, more especially at the character there given of the Bishop
sought after, and intended for us. A Bishop that should have power only to
confirm, -- to ordain, -- and to govern none but the clergy! One that should
have nothing to do with us who are in lay-communion, save only to confirm! --
How different this from the character of a scripture Bishop, as we have always
been taught! -- And how far from being able to answer the great and good ends
of religion among us! -- are there none but our clergy, that stand in need of
the godly discipline of the church; And must we of the laity be as sheep going
a^^ray, without any to (...) to the fold? Is not the discipline of the church,
of divine appointment, to be a guard to our virtue, to quicken and strengthen
us in maintaining Christian watchfulness over ourselves, and for our recovery
to repentance after a relapse? I should be content with a Bishop stripped of
those temporal dignities, which by the law of the nation, have been superadded
to that office: But one divested of such an essential part of the authority
given him by the gospel, appears to me really worse than none at all; because
he must necessarily soon fall into contempt, and the credit of religion,
especially the credit of the episcopal persuasion, sink with him.

That the Bishop intended for us, should be such a maimed, incomplete creature,
was, to me, really suprising and unaccountable, till by a more attentive view
of the whole discourse, I was alarmed with shrewd marks of a covered design in
the scheme. -- The reason which is there held up to public view, is to prevent
our design of having Bishops from being opposed by our neighbors of other
religious denominations. But however plausible and catholic this, at first
sight, may appear, yet I am persuaded any one who attentively considers the
matter will, with me, be fully convinced, that this is only used as a
palliative, whild a latent project is carried on, either against them, or
against us. If the secret aim is levelled against our neighbors of other
persuasions, to lull them asleep, and prevent their opposing our scheme of
getting an American episcopate, established in such an inoffensive and harmless
shape hoping afterward to have him the more easily completely vested with a
full character; if, I say, this is the secret aim, it is manifest the pious
fraud is not so closely concealed as to escape their notice, as is evident from
the "American Whig," who so often appears in this paper, and whom I shall leave
to manage his own cause.

But why, my brethren, should others take the alarm, and we sleep on secure? Is
our cause invulnerable? Or is it impossible there should be any evil
imagination, and secret intrigues carried on against us? It surely cannot but
appear surprising, that the Bishop intended for us should be like the "log in
the fable, who was made king of the frogs." Or, as the prophet says of the
idols, "One that can do no good, nor is it in him to do hurt." If this is not
meant to delude our neighbors of other religious denominations it must be to
delude us, and keep us quiet till such a Bishop be sent, as would be equally
displeasing to us, as to them. What objections could the Dissenters make
against a prelate clothed with full ecclesiastical power to govern the laity in
communion with the church of England, as well as her clergy, supposing his
jurisdiction confined to them, and not extended to others? It is plain, they
could have none. Is it not therefore designed to cajole us into a compliance
with some secret design artfully concealed from public view? It is well known,
that many of those additional powers, conferred on Bishops at home, by the
statutes of the nation, would be as grievous to us, as to our dissenting
neighbors; and to which, (were we apprised of it) we should be as ready to
make opposition, as they. The payment of tithes, the probate of wills, the
license of marriages; but above all, the spiritual courts, that disgrace of our
church, and intolerable grievance of the nation; are things to which we can, by
no means consent; and against the introduction of which, we should be equally
opposed, were we but sensible any such things were intended. If our secret
schemers can but lull us to sleep, and amuse us with the expectation of having
Bishops amongst ourselves, from whom we may hope for signal spiritual
advantages and thereby prevail with us, to use our influence for facilitating
their designs, in procuring to be set over us such, as instead of being
agreeable to our wishes, will prove the very reverse of what we expected; and
instead of being a blessing, will really prove a curse: How grievous will be
our disappointment? And shall we not ever blame ourselves for that supine
negligence, whereby we now suffer ourselves to be wheedled into their
pernicious devices?

Are we to have a Bishop; let him be a Bishop. Let him be set over us with the
full authority which the gospel gives him. Let him exercise that ancient godly
discipline of the primitive church, the want of which, we are taught in our
service, yearly to lament: -- But let him not come to plague and harrass us,
with that shameful substitute of a spiritual court. I am sensible, that
alterations cannot be made i^ the religious constitution of the church at home,
without the hazard of great convulsions in the state; and how far this may
justify our nation in retaining the spiritual courts, which are so loudly and
justly complained of; and not restoring the godly discipline of the ancient
church; I shall not take upon me to determine. But what is there to hinder the
establishment of Bishops in this part of the world, after the truly primitive
pattern; or what is there to keep out the godly discipline of the primitive
church amongst us; -- where no modern corrupt substitutes are introduced to
prevent it? If we have Bishops at all, it is evident there is nothing to
prevent their coming clothed with their true primitive authority in the church.
But to have a nominal Bishop, o^ neither the ancient, nor modern kind, divested
of so great a branch of that authority which belongs to the episcopal office;
and thereby rendered incapable of answering the end of his function, is what
ought to be opposed by every true Christian. And if, to quiet us, we should be
told, that when once we have obtained the establishment of Bishops in this
inoffensive character proposed, it will be an easy matter to obtain any
additions to his office, as occasion shall require: -- I must still demand what
security can be given us, that the additions shall not be the same, wherewith
the Bishops at home are now invested; which would be as grievous to us, as to
any of the non-conformists. -- If they come at all, it is plain, they may come
as inoffensively both to us, and to them, clothed with the power of the
primitive discipline, as without it; which of all things, would be the most
effectual security against spiritual courts, and other grievous and justly
dreaded consequences. The maimed and mutilated creature pleaded for in the
Appeal to the Public, is therefore to me, and must be to every intelligent
friend of our church, sufficient to alarm us, and put us upon our guard, lest
kind words and fair speeches allure us to expect good, when evil is really
intended.

LIBERIUS.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Dec. 26, 1768. A KICK for the WHIPPER, No. XXX.
By (...).
Tantum rellig^ ^otuit suader^ Malorum!
Such flimsy pro^ can Bigotry suggest!
ANON.
SQUIRE T. tells us (No 31) HE is "convinced" that nobody desires Bishops on
any other plan but that "proposed in the Appeal," -- and that "to write against
any other is nothing to the purpose." To the 1st of these articles I can only
reply, that I (as important a person as Sq T. reader) am convinced of the
contrary; -- and the last I beg leave to deny, because I Am convinced that even
such a plan as is pretended, though punctually executed, would not be long
adhered to.

Sq. T. blames the W.'s "ringing changes" (as he calls it) on the words
probable and (...) and very graciously condescends to inform him of what he
^ery well knew, viz. that what the objector thought probable Dr. C. called
barely possible. -- Very cunning this! But how in the name of wonder! can it
clear the Dr. of the W's charge of aiming to juggle conviction down his
reader's threat, by frighting him with imaginary absurdities of his own
invention? But, "if Dr. C. thought so for good reasons," says Sq. T. "had he
not a right to say so? No doubt! but then his readers certainly bad a right to
know what good reason he had to think so or say so. Dr. C. indeed had offered
some lame reasons for the mere possibility of a probable thing, which Sq. T.
conscious of their weakness, ekes out as though they could be coroborated by
repetition. -- These we shall now consider.

1. The "ill effects" apprehended "are diametrically opposite to every plan
proposed" The term diametrically, is rather too mathematical here; -- all that
can be taken for granted is, that Dr. C's plan disowns any "ill" designs; but
it is extraordinary reasoning thence to infer IN OUR DAY, that no such
"effects" would probably follow the establishment of prelacy even on the most
unexceptionable plan imaginable, unless it contained greater security than the
ipse dixit of those Dr. C calls "our superiors at home," or those who would
fain be our superiors in America. 2. None but primitive Bishops have been
petitioned for. How true this is, I am not sure. -- Sq T. indeed says he has
seen the 7 petitions, and declares, they request no other; but, as HE has
heretofore ventur^d even beyond gross misrepresentation, I Am sorry to say, that
his word cannot be taken as evidence on the present occasion. 3. "The members
of the church are to a man averse to a Bishop vested with temporal power^,
etc." How Sq. T. has found out their sentiments to a man I cannot conceive: The
general aversion of Americans to the STAMP ACT I knew indeed, in the time of
it, as well as Sq. T. (though neither of us could answer for every individual)
but did their aversion render our present miseries improbable? Far from it; --
the most judicious, even at the time of the repeal, foresaw, as highly
probable, the present calamitous state of America. 4. Legacies have been left
in England for the support of American Bishops. What then? Is Sq. T. sure those
legacies will be sufficient? or, if so, is he so ignorant of human nature as
not to know, that to dignitaries especially, though they have eno', a little
more, a little more, -- and yet a little more, is vastly agreeable? -- Oh! but
the testators bequeathing were it seems, "fully acquainted with the plan," and
therefore would not have "thrown away their estates ( thrown away sure eno'!)
unnecessarily," though obliged to leave them, for the support of an American
episcopate, unless it were improbable that ever taxes would be levied or other
methods taken for that purpose; i. e. if a person, who knows my circumstances
in life, leaves me a legacy, it is therefore improbable, that I shall ever find
means of making additions to my estate. 5. "The spirit of the times" tends
"rather to abridge than add to the power of the clergy, both in England and
America." It Is really pleasant to see such an argument advanced, when the
"spirit of the times" evidently is, to create new Bishops, with their subaltern
officers, and make Lords of trade of the old ones. But however just Sq. T's
observation may be as to the generality of the laity, who but Mr. W -- m H -- r
S -- th's patients can consider it as an argument, that court favored, law
dignified ecclesiastics would not attempt unreasonable usurpations? Such
attempts could not be "crushed INSTANTLY" even by the vast majority in the
American opposition; but, though they might be crushed in time, the numerous
non-contents have been too long used to arbitrary measures, to risk a
repetition of squabbles, so disagreeable to themselves, and so liable to be
misrepresented, as sowing discord-seed and trumpeting sedition.

"Had the W. lived when the society was incorporated," perhaps he might (though I
suspect no "person of the least discernment," could) have judged ecclesiastical
usurpation in America, a bare POSSIBILITY; but, though it might be merely an
apparent possibility at that time, it has by this (in spite of all scribbling
to the contrary) grown up into an evident PROBABILITY. So that all Sq. T's
raillery (par. 12.13.) is flat, dull and insipid.

On the whole, the conduct of Dr. C. Sq. T. and Co. etc. is extremely odd. If
we are not "convinced" by their pleas for the necessity and apostolicality of
episcopacy, they tell us, it is sufficient that they are; but, when we tell
them why we are afraid of those apostolical gentlemen, called BISHOPS, they
even huff us, and try to cram conviction down our throats, by authoritatively
asserting, that our apprehensions are "totally devoid of any foundation." Or,
if they condesend to produce arguments, they are, as the reader sees as flimsy
as cobwebs. If they would but act reasonably (since neither party can be
convinced) they would heartily leave the affair to be determined by a majority,
as Dr. C. seemed to do; but alas! they unexpectedly find this method would ruin
all their favorite schemes.

Some time ago I happened to be in an inn, where six gentlemen agreed to have a
dish of soup at dinner. One of them, being a Frenchman insisted on having
shallots in it, though they were disagreeable to all the rest of company. When
they objected, he swore, the shallots would season only his side of the dish,
and undertook to prove it, but, they not being "convinced" either by his word
or his arguments, he rudely told them, they were enemies to liberty, and he
would overturn the table, if they did not consent to indulge him. Reader, make
the application.

A.

From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE, Dec. 26, 1768. A WHIP for the AMERICAN WHIG. By
TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR. [No. XXXVIII.]
A Continuation of Mr. SEABURY 's Letter, (Whip No. 37.)
HAVING thus given a just and faithful historical Account of this Affair, I
shall now make some Reflections upon the Letter itself. And,

1st, I shall take Notice of the Spirit and Temper with which it is written. It
appears, both from the Letter itself, and from Dr. Chauncey's Letter to Mr.
Rogers, that the Design of the Letter Writer was to vindicate him (Dr.
Chauncey) from an Accusation of Falsehood; But with what Spirit has the Author
done this, or more properly attempted it? -- With the most malevolent Party
Rage, and with such Rancour and Ill Nature, as none but a Heart inflamed by
Malice could dictate. The whole Letter shows this to have been the Temper and
State of Mind in which it was written, and no Censure passed upon it can
possibly expose it. Instead of vindicating Dr. Chauncey, he rails at Mr.
S-b-ry; accuses him of "giving Dr. Chauncey the Lie," -- of making "rude and
injurious Reflections on the Dr." -- of being a "troublesome Person," -- of a
"malevolent Spirit," -- of having "impertinently disturbed the Quiet of this
Country for some Time past," and strange to tell! of being a "Declaimer against
Falsehood," and a "Stickler for Impartiality in writing." -- If by this Country
the Letter Writer means Boston, and the Territority thereunto belonging, I
seriously declare, That I have been so far from "disturbing the Quiet of that
Country," that I never was in it; that I have no Agents in it; that I do not
recollect ever to have wrote a single Letter to any Person in it: -- In short,
I have, and desire to have nothing to do with it.

If by this Country the Letter-Writer means the American Colonies in general;
-- I do not remember that I have done any Thing by which the Quiet of any one
Person could have been disturbed, except, that I once called the American Whig
to an Account, for his Effrontery in saying, that Dr. Chandler "and the
Convention, do not desire such a Bishop as is mentioned in the Appeal:" And if
the American Whig will allow me a very small Share of that Vanity with which he
himself is so replete, I can confidently affirm, that in the Affair litigated
between us at that Time, I "laid him fairly on his Back without knowing my
Antagonist;" -- whether he has since gotten upon his Legs, or whether, ad hu^
pro^^umbit Humi Bos, is a Matter of more Consequence to him than to me.

2dly. The Letter signed B. W. as far as it relates to me, is "utterly,
absolutely and entirely false and groundless." And though this Writer is so very
angry with Mr. S-b-r-y, for giving, as he says, "Dr. Chauncey the Lie," yet he
himself has written without any Regard to Truth. I speak only of what relates
to myself in B. W's Letter, -- a lying Heart has directed a deceitful Hand. --
I positively declare, that I was so far from being the Author of the Paper to
which he refers, that I never saw it, heard it, thought of it, or dreamed of
it, 'til it made its public Appearance in Mr Gaine's Paper of July 4th -- Who
B. W. is, I know not, and to speak the Truth, care not But B. W. says, he is "a
Son of the Church of England," -- "a real Friend to its Growth and Prosperity,"
-- "a Member of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in foreign
Parts," -- a Friend to Decency, good Manners, and a becoming Treatment,
especially, of respectable Characters," -- "and what is more -- a Friend to
Truth and honest Impartiality." -- If Mr. B. W. is endowed with all these good
Qualifications, it is very strange that not one of them should show itself in
the Letter now under my Consideration. -- Is he a "Son of the Church of
England?" Let him remember that the Church teaches and requires him "to keep
his Tongue from evil Speaking, Lying, and Slandering." Is he "a Friend to the
Growth and Prosperity of the Church?" -- Why then does he take Part with its
avowed Enemy? Why does he represent those who contend only for its real and
just Rights and Privileges, as troublesome Persons, of a malevolent Spirit, who
have impertinently disturbed the Quiet of their Country for some Time past? Is
he a "Member of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel?" That venerable
Body have ever cherished, countenanced, and protected those Missionaries that
did their Duty; they never abused, slandered, or vilified them, in anonymous
Letters and scurrilous Papers. -- Is he "a Friend to Decency and good Manners,
and a becoming Treatment, especially of respectable Characters?" Why then has
he treated me with so much Indecency and Ill-Manners? If a steady and sincere
Desire and Endeavor to do my Duty in that honorable State of Life to which it
has pleased God to call me, will entitle me to any Respect. I may, without
Vanity affirm, that my Character is respectable enough to have entitled me to a
more becoming Treatment. Is he "a Friend to Truth and honest Impartiality?" How
could such a Person, write such a Letter? -- A Letter from which, if you take
all that is false and partial, you will leave a mere Chart Blanch.

Mr. B. W. says I "gave Dr. Chauncey the Lie." It is a Form of Speech in which
I do not allow myself to my menial Servants: And with Regard to any Thing Dr.
Chauncey has said in his Answer to Dr. Chandler's Appeal, I am so far from
giving him the Lie, that I deliberately declare I never read more than a Dozen
Pages in it, and never intend to read a Dozen more. -- When an Author can
calmly and seriously set himself to establish such wild Positions as that "the
Church of England does not teach the Divine Right of Episcopacy, and that her
Reformers did not believe it," I can spend my Time much more profitably than in
giving him the Reading. Perhaps it may be alleged in Excuse for the Dr. that
he wrote his Pamphlet in less than two Months; that he is an old Man, and
thefore it must be expected he will be tedious and positive: Tediousness and
Positiveness being often the Foibles of old Age. This I confess would be a good
Excuse for not writing at all; and it is much to be lamented, that the Dr. does
not avail himself of it, and of the Poet's Advice, Solve Senescentem mature
sanus Equum, ne^
Peccet ad extremum ridendus, and Ilia ducat.
HOR. Loose fron the rapid Car your aged Horse,
Lest in the Race derided, left behind,
He drag his aged Limbs and burst his Wind.
FRANCIS.

That the Dr. is in some Danger of meeting with this Accident, every one must
be sensible, who considers with what Rapidity he answered Dr. Chandler, if any
Credit is due to the American Whig. And now behold he has advertised a Volume
of Thirty Sheets at least, in which the Fathers of the Church are, many
Centuries after their Martyrdom, again to be put to the Rack, and tortured into
Confessions. If however the Dr. should escape this Fate, the following Line of
another Poet, will be very applicable to so voluminous a Writer. -- "See who
never was nor will be half-read." -- This, as I put no Motto to this Paper,
many serve instead of one to those who are found of Motto's; and I hope it will
not be thought the worse for being introduced in the Body of my Performance.

3dly. I shall take Notice of the villainous Baseness of this Writer, in
putting B. W. at the End of his Letter. Possibly he thought he had a Right to
press any two Letters in the Alphabet into his Service. But certainly it is a
most extraordinary Piece of Conduct, first to declare himself a Member of the
Society, and then to affix the initial Letters of another Member's Name to his
scandalous Production; especially when it is considered, that B. W. are the
initial Letters of no other Name on the Society's List of Members, but only of
Benning Wentworth, Esquire and that this B. W's Letter, though now it has all the
Appearance of a base-born Child, brought forth in Secrecy, was ushered into the
World, by James Parker, Esquire who acted the Part of Man-Midwife at its Birth, as
the legitimate Offspring of a reputable Parent, who was ready to own, support,
and defend it. Whether the Writer intended by this artful Conduct, to lead
People into a Belief that the Letter was really written by a Gentleman of so
established a Reputation as Mr. Wentworth is, in order to give a greater Weight
to his Assertions; or whether it was with a Design to terrify Mr. S-b-r-y from
replying to his infamous Performance, is not easy to determine: Possibly both
these Motives may have concurred, to induce him to proceed in this dastardly,
fradulent Manner. The first of these Inventions was fully answered in this
Place, by the signing B. W. to the Letter, and by "Mr. Parker's positive
Assertion, That Mr. Wentworth was the Author of it." That the other Design did
not succeed, the Author is by this Time, I believe, pretty well convinced.

The Author has declared himself a Member of the Society for the Propagation of
the Gospel; and Dr. Chauncey says (if I remember right) in his Letter to Mr.
Rogers, "that he is an Inhabitant of the Town of Boston." I have carefully
examined the List of the Society's Members for the Year 1767, I can find only
four Members who reside in Boston, viz. His Excellency Francis Bernard, James
Apthorp, Hugh Hall, and John Temple, Esqrs. To all these Gentlemen I am
personally unknown. I am utterly at a Loss to conceive, that I have ever given
any Occasion to them to treat me in so injurious and cruel a Manner, as I find
mself treated in that Letter. I cannot therefore suppose, that any one of these
Gentlemen was the Author of it. It remains then with Dr. Chauncey to produce
his Author, or to take the Letter, with all its "Fraud, Forgery, Villainy,
Scandal, Falsehood, and Baseness," upon himself.

To you therefore, most venerable Doctor, I now beg Leave to address myself.
Possibly you may think I treat you with too great Freedom; that your Age,
Station, and Character should exempt you from it. Age is not an Excuse for such
base Conduct as you have been guilty of, and therefore it ought not to screen
you from the Consequences of it. My Station and Character, (save the Article of
Learning) are equal to yours; and if you think that some Regard is due to the
Station and Character, you ought to have considered, before your illiberal
Attack upon me. -- You have been at the Pains of sending an anonymous Letter
250 Miles, directing it to be printed in a public News-Paper, that it might
circulate far and wide, in order to wound the Character of a Man, utterly
unknown to you, who never did, nor intended to do you any injury; -- and who
was even innocent of the heinous Crime of having contradicted you. When you
coolly and calmly consider this Part of your Conduct, I cannot but hope you
will feel some little Compunction of Heart; some, if they be slight, Rebukes of
Conscience; some Tendency at least toward a Blush. What Reparation you will
think proper to make me, I know not; but that some Reparation ought to be made,
you must be sensible. The Bread of myself and Family; nay more, my Usefulness
as a Minister of Christ, depend upon that Character, which you have cruelly
sported with, and most unjustly endeavored to deprive me of. -- These Things,
Sir, I say, not for my own Sake, but for yours; to make you sensible of the
Iniquity of your Conduct; and to bring you, if possible, to Repentance and
Amendment. For my own Part, though it would but ill become me to boast, yet I
trust, that within the narrow Circle of my Acqu^intaince, my Reputation is too
well established to be shaken by such Attempts. If therefore you choose to
persist in the Way of Defamation, and had rather endeavor to vindicate what
you have done, than like an honest Man, and a good Christian, to repent and
retract it, you have my free Consent to act as is most natural and agreeable to
your Inclinations.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Jan. 2, 1769. The AMERICAN WHIG, No. XLIII.
The advantages of a new interpretation of Scripture in favor of an American
episcopate, in ASERMON, Occasioned by a late celebrated comparison of the
church to the woman in the apocalypse, BY The Right reverendly -- inclined
Charles Doubledee. In the 12th Chapter of the visions of the most reverend
Father in God, John, Lord Archbishop of Ephesus, and Primate of all Lydian
Asia, are these words; "And there appeared a great wonder, a woman clothed with
the Sun, and the Moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve Stars.
Dearly beloved brethren,
GREAT are the advantages of a new interpretation of scripture. By this we are
relieved from many burdens and yokes of bondage, to which former interpreters
have unreasonably subjected us. 1st. We shall be delivered from the irksome
duty of believing in the sun of righteousness for justification, which has
always been insisted upon by the old interpreters of of this text; who, by the
sun here, foolishly understood Jesus Christ and his merits, by faith in whom
true Christians were to be justified. This they spoke of as the great glory
dignity and honor of believers: -- And therefore have urged mankind with truly
nonsensical zeal to believe in Christ, and to look to him for becoming to them
in a spiritual sense, what the sun in the firmament was in a natural sense. --
2dly, We shall be delivered from the insupportable burden of regulating our
religious sentiments, according to the doctrine taught in the New Testament by
the twelve Apostles. By the crown of twelve stars in our text, has generally
been understood, by dreaming commentators, conformity in articles of faith to
the doctrine of the Apostles. -- And hence much learned pains have been taken
in comparing scripture with scripture, to fix and determine the leading
principles of Christianity: But now, this drudgery of believing orthodoxly,
which has done much mischief in the world, we are happily freed from, by a
modern paraphrast, who demonstrates, that all the ancient commentators have
been mistaken in understanding by the twelve stars, the apostolic doctrines of
Christianity. -- 3dly, Another great advantage, accruing to Christians, by the
new mode of interpretation is, that they will be happily rescued from the
mortifying business of self-denial. There will be no need of spiritual
mindedness, crossing our carnal inclinations, or striving against terrene
affections. You know, my brethren, that this has been the interpretation,
generally gone into by our old divines, of "the moon under her feet." But now
it appears, they were only a pack of "hotheaded writers, and pragmatical
enthusiasts, who expected to find their account in raising a combustion and
being noisy." Thus you see that renouncing the old interpretation of scripture,
will introduce you into a glorious liberty. The ancient interpreters and
teachers were always for shackling us with the doctrine of justification by
faith in the merits of Christ, with the necessity of a good degree of apostolic
orthodoxy in our sentiments, and what was worst of all, with the indispensible
obligation of an holy walk and conversation; but the new interpretation sets us
free from all this more than Egyptian bondage. -- Now to show further wherein
the ancients were mistaken, and to sot the advantages of the new interpretation
in a true light: This woman, clothed with the sun, having a crown of twelve
star on her head, and the moon under her feet, is The Church dressed and
dignified with the glorious trappings, appendages, perquisites and advantages,
which arise from her blessed "alliance with the state in Christian countries."
These ornaments are in our text mentioned under three heads, "which may be
reduced to civil power, temporal possessions, and legal exemptions." -- Civil
power is the clothing of the sun. You know what a brilliant sigure the church
always makes, when she has regal dignity at her head, is incircled with
gartered peers, and led into green pastures by mitred lords. -- Temporal
possessions is her crown of twelve stars. These are the tenth part of the lands
of the state, which were solemnly offered in holy unburnt sacrifice by "St.
Ethelwulph, for the health of his soul on the altar of Winchester" temple, An.
854; to which is added a tenth part of all the labor and industry of the
King's subjects, who are to manure and cultivate these lands for the church,
together with a multitude of other perquisites arising from matters
testamentary and matrimonial. This is a glorious crown, well set with gems,
which causes the church to shine with orient luster! -- Legal exemption, is
another important part of her dress. The church enjoys the sun of civil power,
and the glorious crown of temporal possessions, without the grievous
encumbrance of duties and taxes for the support of government, the poor, or any
other charges of state. Thus she has the moon under her feet; has not the
mortification of parting with her lands or money either to protect or defend
her.

Again, the new method of interpretation discloses more truth from the text. By
the sun is farther meant the extensive bishoprics and metropolitan sees of the
church. These give light to Christian eyes, and are a lamp to their feet -- By
the crown of twelve stars is intended the hierarchy of the church. 1.
Archbishops, 2. Diocesans, 3. Prebends, 4. Deans, 5. Suffragans, 6.
Chancellors, 7. Vice-Chancellors, 8. Archdeacons, 9. Rectors, 10. Prebends, 11.
Curates, 12. Prelatical Baillies. These are the twelve stars that bespangle her
crown of temporal possessions; and an illustrious constellation they are --
None can object here, "unless they do it from ignorance or malice," that these
church officers are not found in the Bible; for they are clearly found in our
text, and any doctrine or office, proved by one text, is every way sufficiently
established. But we have not only this one text, to support our prelatic
church, but we can easily press more into our survice. And where these fail us,
we can easily administer conviction of our point by the unquestionable
authority of St. Ignatius, and other more modern fathers, and invincibly prove
that these were the church's crown for almost 1500 years.

Moreover in our context, in the same visions, there appeared "another wonder a
great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns." And this dragon is that
horrible monster, the English dissenters, "who have no natural right to any
degree of civil or military power. They persecuted the woman, and she fled into
the wilderness of North America. And here she now is in a naked, perishing,
and, "without speedy remedies," in an infallibly dying condition. She has
neither sun, nor moon, nor stars; neither "civil power, temporal possessions,
nor legal exemption;" has nothing to guard her, but a parcel of turn-coat
Missionaries and lazy luxurious priests ( paucis exceptis) -- And now you see
this "renders her outward circumstances and figure widely different;" yea, the
difference is as great as between "being possessed of a fortune, and without
one, -- or between having a large parish and a small one." But you must know
that these things do not make any essential difference in the church. For though
"these have generally varied in different countries and ages, -- yet they have
not altered its real nature, which is always and essentially the same under all
outward circumstances." -- Whether she is in Rome or Geneva, Georgia or
Holland, England or Scotland, Abyssinia or America, she is "always and
essentially the same." And as to her "act, whether it is performed by the
Bishop of Man, or the Archbishop of Canterbury, or in the language to St. Jerome
(with whom! perfectly agree) whether by the Bishop of "Rome or Rhegium, it
matters not." -- If any should here remark, that then the church "is
essentially and always the same," whether it be popish or episcopalian,
presbyterian or congregational, this can only be "the abuse of some petulant
tongues, or more petulant pens." -- But the woman is now in America, having
fled hither, through the aid of Dedalian wings, from the face of the serpent; yet
the serpent has persued her to this wilderness also, and besides drawing with
his tail many stars of Heaven, he covers more than seven-eighths of this
wilderness with his body; yea, he overspreads all the northern colonies, except
a very few spots, which would in like manner have been covered by the filthy
monster, had it not been for the unexampled liberality, and truly excessive
"charity of the worthy sociecy." To which society "the church owes its
existence at this day in some of the colonies," for it either had been drowned
by the flood, or crushed beneath the serpent's weight, if the society's
"indifatigable application and amazing perseverance" had not prevented; because
the earth here does not help the woman. -- Thus you see the great distress and
perishing condition of the church; wherefore, travailing in birth and paining
to be delivered, her clergy and friends, "looking up to your grace," and call
(with our mouths, for we have no trumpets) over the Atlantic to your Majesty
for help and relief in our deplorable and wretched circumstances. Some of us
have been looking up and calling over, not merely from morning to evening, but
these 40, 50, or 60 years, and are not heard even to this day. Is the head of
the church asleep? Is he deaf or on a journey? or if we leap on our altars, and
cut ourselves with knives and lancets, will there be no voice nor any to
answer? -- What can be further said? Is it not demonstrable, that the American
church must soon perish? She has neither sun to clothe, her, nor moon to tread
upon, nor twinkling stars to shed a ray through her tremendous gloom. She is
perishing! she is perishing! her diseases must prove fatal; and none can wonder
should death be the event; for she wants the common necessaries of life. She
therefore "earnestly requests, and only requests" (at present) one star to
comfort her, even a mutilated suffragan, which is far from being a star of the
first magnitude. Oh! that proper remedies may be provided for her present
sufferings! Oh, that she may be delivered out of her unparrallelled distress!
Oh! oh! oh!

Now, my very dearly beloved brethren, I dismiss you for the present; whether I
have said any thing "presumptuous or unreasonable, let heaven and earth judge."
For all, whether protestants or papists, presbyterians, or epistcopalians, if
they are in reality the friends of truth and justice and liberty -- they must
be heartily disposed to act a friendly part toward us, with regard to an
American episcopate.

Blessed forever be the Bishop of Landaff, and let every one of us say, Amen,
Amen.

The Doctor's miracle accounted for, in a natural and easy manner by father
Paul, a Romish writer.

LET us hear what a more celebrated writer than even Chillingworth himself,
says on this subject. -- A writer as much conversant with the antiquities of
the church as any man living, and whose affinity to the church of Rome, might
have blinded him had it been possible. I mean father Paul of Venice, the
admired historian of the council of Trent. In his discourse upon exemptions
from episcopal authority Lib. 2. he takes occasion to show how that authority
took its rise, and by what degrees it rose to its height. Out of this, compared
with that upon episcopal jurisdiction, Lib. 4. we collect the following in
substance, though not verbatim, viz.

That,

According to St. Paul to the Cor. the whole body of the primitive church, took
cognizance of offenses, as appears from ^is reproving them, that they 'had not
lamented to separate from among them the transgressor:' -- As their custom was
to do it with much mourning and fasting. It was necessary that the judgment of
the multitude should be d^cted by one, and the Bishop [or minister, according
to his office] always presided and directed the action. But when Christians
became numerous, the matter was usually ripened in the consistory, and by them
proposed to the general congregation for their resolution. This form was still
on foot in the year 250, as is plainly seen by the epistles of St. Cyprian,
concerning those who did eat meats offered to idols. -- And St. Jerome
testifies, that in the beginning of Christianity the churches were guided by an
aristocracy or common council of the presbytery. -- The goodness and charity of
the Bishops, made their opinions for the most part to be followed, and by
little and little charity waxing cold, this was the cause why the church not
regarding the charge laid upon them by Christ, did leave the care to the
Bishop; 'and ambition a witty passion, which does insinuate itself in the show
of virtue," did cause it to be readily embraced. -- Divisions at length arising
among themselves, they sell upon the monarchial form of government, giving all
the superintendency to the Bishop, and ridding themselves of the trouble, until
the times of persecution ceasing, the Bishops (or Ministers) of one province
did govern themselves in synods, and to make this government more easy,
attributing much to the Bishop of the principal city, they made him head of
that body; and by a more ample communication of all the provinces in a great
government, the Bishop of the head city where the chief ruler did reside, got a
superiority, as was natural, from custom. Thus arose the Romish Bishop above
all, as Rome was then the capital of the whole world: -- Hence also the vast
influence and power of the patriarchs of Alexandria, over Egypt, Lybia and
Pentapolis, of Antioch over Syria, and the eastern provinces, and so of the
lesser Eparchai or Prefectures. This government brought in by custom, and
supposed convenience only -- and for some time executed with great fidelity,
was found by Constantine of great benefit to him in civil affairs, as by it he
saw many causes determined with all the authority and sanction of religion. He
therefore made a law that there should lie no appeal from the sentences of
Bishops, and that the secular judge should execute them, This ecclesiastical
form of government with all its peculiarities was under him established by the
first council of Nice, and ordained by a canon to be perpetual. After this the
authority of Bishops was from time to time enlarged or diminished as affairs
happened to turn.

Hence the whole train of diocesan Bishops, Archbishops, Metropolitans,
Primates, Patriarchs and Popes. -- The Doctor's miracle is thus unravelled in a
plain and natural manner, and if antiquity has any certain voice, it confirms
it.

ADVERTISEMENT.
AS Mr. S -- b -- ry has again thought fit to be abusive to the American Whig,
from which, considering the scurvy figure he made in a late rencounter, common
prudence ought to have restrained him; I take this opportunity of informing my
readers, that though I really think it beneath me to enter into a formal
altercation with a man of his ungovernable passion and illiberal language, yet
being determined that he shall not pass with impunity for his transgression, I
intend to deliver him (...) Mr. As^ to be buffeted.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Jan. 2, 1769. A KICK for the WHIPPER, No. XXXI.
By SIR ISAAC FOOT.
Sumite materiam vestris qui soribitis aequam
Viribus --
HOR.
TO every sensible reader, after the masterly reasoning of the W' s 17th, No.
Sq. T. in his 32d. must appear like a Whipper chastizing a man with a straw.
The W. had mentioned 5 particulars in which, if in any thing the derivation of
"happiness and support" "to the" state from the Church, and the "harmony" of
both, must be evinced; but he afterward proved, that in those articles the
Church as at present established, does not harmonize with the state, and
therefore, as such, can afford it neither "happiness nor support:" And yet, out
of even this defeat, Sq. T. would fain Whip a victory for D. C. -- Let us see
how he manages.

By his reasoning (to make him a small compliment) I Am almost convinced, that
(as I Have heard some sophistical disputants say) nothing is so absurd, but that
something may be said in it is favor; and yet it is plain, that all he has said
under art. 1.2 and 5, relative to the King's supremacy, instead of proving that
the Church of England "supports," on the whole rather proves, what is really
true, that she is SUBDUED to, the state. Mighty meritorious this! Henry VIII.
the first who claimed ecclesiastical supremacy, usurped it, not from a "desire
of uniting the Church to the state," but out of revenge against the POPE: And
if his parliament, in confirming it to him, aimed at any thing more than
gratifying an ambitious monarch they durst not offend, they doubtless meant to
take care, that "the civil magistrate" should no longer be (as Sq. T. expresses
it) "a mere tool to the church." As to the Church, she did not "deprive herself
of her natural independency," but surrendered it sorely against her will,
because Harry was so boisterous, that she durst not defend it against him. Sq.
T. tells us, "religion is the main support of government." This I am not clear
in, -- the temporal happiness of mankind being the proper object of government,
it seems to be mainly supported by hopes and sears of a temporal kind. I know
indeed that religion is of great advantage to a state; but not as a national
religion, such a one being, properly speaking, no religion at all, but a mere
political engine. If such a religion therefore "supports" a state, all that can
be said is that the state supports itself. It Is the divine or supposed divine
original of a religion, that gives additional support to a state, and, were it
not for this, the religion of the Koran would have no more moral influence on
the civil conduct of a mussel-man than on that of the A. Bp. of C-nt-y. Hence,
uninfluenc'd by any hopes of political advantages, the protestant (i. e. the
Presbyterians or dissenters) of FRANCE, behaved so, that Lewis XIV, though he
afterward revoked the edict of Nanter, gave an ample testimony to their
loyalty, in his declaration 1652, and the Queen Mother acknowledged they had
saved the state; and even now, episcopalian bigets can commend French
protestants, while they spout scandal at English dissenters. "An Imperium in
Imperio," Sq. T. says, "every wise common wealth will avoid, if possible." --
The Jews in our Savior's time (who, though he declared his kingdom was not of
this world, was sole head of the Church) professed (mighty loyally, no doubt!)
to act from the same wise principles of policy; and yet CHRIST was a King, in
spite of Tiberius, and would have been so even, though Caesar had declared
himself head of, the Church.

But Sq. T. pleads, as meritorious, the privileges of the Church, as well as
the prerogatives of the King; -- just like a Whipper, who, whether he flogs or
is kicked) boasts, that all is for the good of the public. For the 1st of the
Churches privileges (Art. 3d, viz. Bishops sitting in parliament, he pleads,
"the usefulness, etc. of their advice, etc." when the legislature is plagued
(as it never should be) with "Church affairs." Whether their advice is likely
to support the state or not, when ecclesiastical and political interests
interfere, is easy to guess; however it is as easy to see that their advice and
assistance might be had without their enacting judgment. 2. That episcopal
voices make laws more binding. For my part, I judge of the obligation of the
laws, not from the character, but, from the right of the legislator, nor should
I think our provincial laws a want "more binding," even though the whole of our
legislature were composed of BISHOPS: What say you, my countrymen (...) 3.
Temporal and spiritual Lords can oppose each other respectively. And what of
this? -- the opposition of the Church certainly does (...) "support the state;"
and surely temporal Lords might oppose "ambitious schemes of the clergy,"
without having any in the house. So that on the whole I cannot see that the
Lords temporal "need" or can obtain, if they would, any "support" from Lords
spiritual. The 2d. privilege of the Church (Art. 4.) is "spiritual courts,"
which were "erected," it seems, to "remedy evils the civil courts either could
not take cognizance of, or could not remove;" and yet, even according to Sq. T.
these courts receive their authority from the state. I Am really surpised to
hear of a power delegated by a body politic of remedying evils it could not
take cognizance of or remove, itself; and fancy that must be a strange sword
which none but Bishops can "wield." However after all, Sq. T. himself seems
half to suspect, that spiritual courts are rather insupportable, than
supportative, to the state.

To Sq. T's quotation from Hooker, by way of reply to the W's assertition, that
the King is absolute monarch of the Churches, "I think no rejoinder more
suitable than" -- that in the whole I cannot find a syllable about the matter.
If by "King as the head" Hooker meant head of the Church, the quotation indeed
amounts to an assertion, that he is so by law: And what of that Mr. Whipper? If
a King is absolute monarch by law, is he not absolute monarch at all?

Sq. T. "finishes his paper (as a man with 100 oysters did his supper) with 6
par's of what he calls "pertinent observations: and yet his remarks relative to
Bishops, on dignities," -- "antiquity," -- "illustrious descent," -- "honor,"
-- "highest rank," -- "brothers of Kings and noblemen -- to every one, who
considers, that our SAVIOR was born in a stable and laid in a manger, must
appear so puerile and ridiculous, that could Sq. T. be deemed a good Christian
and a man of sense, they would infallibly be taken for a burlesque on prelacy.
-- If (as Sq. T. no doubt thinks) O. Cromwell aimed at the crown himself, he
surely could not, by "the extirpation of episcopacy, have aimed at the
destruction of monarchy;" and therefore our knowing Squire must have failed of
penetrating into his system of politics: But we are not unacquainted with that
of Charles I. nor are we ignorant how much it was indebted to prelatic "advice
and assistance." -- Sq. T's 5th finishing par. just amounts to this, -- that he
is probably an enemy to this country, who endeavors to reform her, at the risk
of "lessening a reverence for the wisdom of the legislature, and a love for any
part of the constitution," which ill natured sentence must involve many of the
best members of the Church of England -- The rest of Sq. T's observations are
not more important than they are "pertinent;" I shall therefore conclude by
observing on his quotation from Montesquieu, that neither Hooker's authority,
nor his, (great men as they both were) are sufficient to prove, that black is
WHITE.

P. S. Sir Isaac makes Sq. T. the compliments of the season and hopes he will
mend his pen with the New-Year.

From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE, Jan. 2, 1769. A WHIP for the AMERICAN WHIG. By
TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR. [No. XXXIX.]
To TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR.
SIR,
ALTHOUGH I have a natural Disrelish for Controversy, and am far from being moved
by any personal Disregard to the Author of "the Letter to the Bishop of
Landaff;" yet, as a Friend to the Author of the Vindication, and a "Lover of
that Truth and Decency, which I think are justly preserved throughout his
Pamphlet, I cannot help interesting myself in the Dispute. But, notwithstanding
the Subject has thus become interesting to me, the Part I shall take in it,
will be conducted with Coolness and Impartiality; it being a Maxim with me,
that the Page to which I set my Pen, shall never be stained with the infamous
Blots of Malevolence, or the soul Daubings of the relentless Hand of Party-Zeal.

On reading, and attentively considering, both the Letter and Vindication, free
from Prejudice, I was upon the whole, and as yet am satisfied, that the latter
contains a full and complete Refutation of the former. And what more strongly
enforced this Conclusion upon my Mind, was, that the Arguments of the
Vindicator are principally founded on Facts, and his Inferences are such as
naturally result from them.

How far the Inglisiana may tend to induce a Change of Sentiment in me, I know
not; but should there, through this Medium, any new Light break from that dark
Cloud which now invelopes the Letter, and the favorite Subject espoused by
it is Author, I shall cheerfully yield to the illuminating Ray. Blinded neither
by Prejudice, nor heated with Party-Zeal, I shall always be open to Conviction.

But should the Whig take up Raillery for Reason, and substitute a Play of Wit
in the Room of solid Argument; and should his first Number of the Inglisiana,
in this Respect, be characteristical of the Rest, he must allow me the
Privilege (however inferior I may be to him in Point of Wit) of seasoning my
Answers to such of his Papers, with a little Spice of the same Ingredients.
Perhaps my Efforts may be feeble and somewhat awkward, for I claim not Wit as
my native Inheritance.

What I mean by this is, that should it so happen, that any of my Remarks may
be somewhat keenly edged, the Author of the Letter will excuse me, from this
plain Principle of Justice, namely, that I have a Right to make use of such
Kind of Weapons as he himself has brought into the Field. My principal Design,
is however, to adhere closely to reasoning upon the Subject, avoiding all
personal Abuse and Invective. If I sometimes range in the airy Region of Fancy,
it will be only when my Antagonist calls me aside, and takes Post there; and
while we are diverting ourselves upon this Ground, I shall not act so mean and
ignominious a Part, as to throw dirt in his Face, or bespatter him with
Calumny. The Support of Truth is the single Object I aim at, and I trust I
shall pursue it with the Candor of an ingenuous Mind.

I am sensible, Mr. Tickle, that you have generously undertaken to become an
Advocate for the Vindicator; and am persuaded his Cause could not have been
committed to better Hands. -- It is, I confess, Presumption in me to think of
asking you to permit me to take this Engagement upon myself. But are you not
already engaged in a Work of Importance, that is more general in its Nature,
and may not your undertaking to support the Vindication, too much break in
upon, and interefere with this more extensive Design?

Shall I then with your Leave, 'Squire Tickle, step in as a Voluntier to rescue
the Character and Abilities of a worthy Clergyman, from an Attack, which (to
say no worse of it) is very ungenerous? I have the utmost Confidence that I can
shield his Reputation from every Assault, and bring off the Vindication
triumphant in the End. -- They both stand upon good Ground, and cannot but be
victorious.

In the Prosecution of my Plan, I propose to answer the Numbers of the
Inglisiana regularly, in Mr. Gaine's Gazette. The Title I shall adopt, is that
of, The Candid Examiner; and as I conceive the Arguments in the Vindication are
fair and conclusive, and that it may be defended upon the most solid and
rational Principles, it shall be my Endeavor to show, that the Spirit which
this Paper breathes, corresponds with the Title under which it appears -- If
you approve of my Proposal, you will be pleased to signify it by the
Publication of this Paper. The next I shall send will be an Answer to the first
Number of the Inglisiana; and I would desire that it might be published under
the Title of, The Candid Examiner, No. I. which I shall continue as Occasion
may require.

A. B.

To TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR.
SIR,
THE Controversy between you and Mr. Whig, after a Continuance of so many
Months, seems to be as f^^ from a Conclusion as the warmest Advocate for
Contention could wish; and on the Part of your great Opponent, seems rather
about Words than Measures; more about what may possibly, than what is likely to
happen; and in a great Measure, is an Abuse of the Time and Attention of that
Public to whom Dr. Chandler so seriously and solemnly appeals.

Whatever may be the religious Profession of the Writer of this Letter, can be
of no Manner of Consequence to you, or Mr. L -- the supposed Author of the
Whig: Suffice it to say, that as on the one Hand, Impartiality obliges me to
accuse him of wandering from the Path marked out by the Appeal; so, on the
other, I cannot conceive there is any Necessity for so steadily pursuing him
through that Thicket in which he seems, if not lost, yet very near benighted. For
his obstinate Perseverance in a a Road so foreign to the real Question of the
Debate, no Doubt his own Conscience frequently condemns him; but, be that as it
may, to pursue him through all his sinister Turnings and Windings, would be
rather to lose Sight of the Subject (as he does) than to convince your Readers
of the Legality and Propriety of the Church's Petitions.

Allow me now to point out to Mr. Whig, what is not, and then, in a few Words,
to show what is the Question before a Public, who will not be swayed by
pompous Declarations, and round Assertions, altogether foreign to the Business
in Hand.

It is not indeed, Mr. Whig, it is not the Matter, Whether or no Bishops, like
other Men, are fond of good Living, and with the rich Man upon Record, would
choose to "fare sumptuously every Day;" -- it is not whether the Episcopalians
are to provide their Lordships a Palace, or two, that will cost three or
L.400.000, or whether they are to dwell in Fishermen's Cottages, as once did
their Predecessors; -- it is not whether their Sleeves are generally made of
Homespun, Lawn, or Crocus; -- it is not whether they wear square or round,
Castor or Beaver Hats; -- it is not what Persecutors Bishops may have been,
when Superstition and Bigottry overspread the Christian World; -- it is not
whether they will go to Meeting Houses and Conventicles, and chant Hymns
through their Noses; or whether with "Sternhold and Hopkins (who had great
Qualms)
"They Will sing a Stave of David's Psalms."


It is not, Mr. Whig, Whether they are Men or whether, as you weekly insinuate,
they are Jesuits, Inquisitors and Devils: -- Believe me, none of these
Questions would interfere in the Debate was it properly conducted in Mr.
Parker's Paper. On the other Hand, it is not whether Presbyterians are Bigots,
or the Practisers of an universal Charity; -- whether they are in general a Set
of hard featured Mortals, who cannot even smile on the Prosperity of a
Neighbor and Fellow-Christian; -- it is not whether it was not for Ease of
their tender. Consciences, that they once persecuted the poor Quakers in
New England, or that they burnt the unhappy People accused of Sorcery and
Witchcrast, -- It is not whether (pious Souls!) they will keep holy the 30th of
January; a Day sacred to a Man of Humanity; or whether they then feast upon
Calves Head, and jovially drink to the Memory of the other Man of that Day,
those Names will be branded with Infamy while the Sun endures, even honest
Oliver, who with his Descendants and Adherents, are the distinguished Enemies
of Monarchy and true Religion.

It is not whether the Church has an Estate in this City, that has hitherto
supported her against Independent Artillery, and the Title to which is too
clear, even for the Assaults of a Whig; it is not whether some People lost
their Hopes of placing a Party Somebody, in a certain Honorable House; it is
not whether a memorable Application for a Charter succeeded or miscarried, and
whether a certain Bishop spoke against it with his usual convincing Eloquence,
at the Board of Trade. No, Friend Tickle, it is not, but really, and truly, and
bona fide, without Equivocation or mental Reservation, it is; whether or not,
The Church of England in America has not as good a Right to enjoy all her
Privileges and Immunities as any Church on Earth; provided always (and soon be
it enacted) that the Privileges and Immunities do not interfere with the
religious and civil Rights and Liberties of others -- here the Matter comes to
a Point at once -- Debate it with that Calmness and Moderation, which ought
ever to distinguish Men who write for the Information of the Public; and would
Mr. Whig do this, of how much more Consequence would his weekly Labors be,
than to skip and jump about from Post to Pillar in the Manner he does, as if
really he had no other Intention than to recommend himself to his Readers, as a
Hero every Way qualified to constitute the Character of Mr. Punch in a Show? --
believe me Mr. Whig, they may smile at your Witticisms, and admire your
wonderful Talent for Satire, but they do not stand before you convinced by your
Scurrility and wonderful Assertions, nor are they so much fright^ed as you
imagine with your Pitchforks and Spiritual Courts: your red hot Furnaces, and
other Bugbears, which seem too much to infect and torment you. -- And now, Mr.
Whig, for a little Supposition.

Suppose the British Parliament should pass an Act to prevent Presbyterians in
America, ever holding a Synod in future, and that no one of your Candidates for
the Ministry could be admitted, without going to dear sweet Edinburgh for his
Letters of Ordination, and that the different Legislatures upon the Continent,
should pass Laws to confirm and make it valid and binding upon all their
Constituents -- Pray now for a few Questions -- Do you really, Mr. Whig,
imagine this would be no Hardship? -- Would you not be the first Man to
complain of the Cruelty of the Case? -- At least if you regard any Consistency
in your Character, Would your Church (you love to be churched dearly of late)
do you imagine, flourish under such Restrictions as much as you or any other
Member of it have a Right to wish for? Would you not think it hard to go a
Voyage of 3000 miles on an Errand, the Business of which could as well be
answered (with Leave) at Home? Has many of your young Band, think you, L. 100,
a L. 150 to spare, to provide for the necessary Expenses of such a Voyage? If
Half or a Third of them were drowned in prosecuting the Voyage, would you not
think the Parliament in some Measure accessory thereto, and as a Lawyer, be
very apt also to advise a Prosecution against that august Assembly, for wilful
Murder, as they at least by inference constrained the spruce young Gentlemen of
Yale to the Danger? Such Persons being drowned, would you not think the Family
(perchance thereby made destitute of Support) most cruelly and despitefully
neglected, did not Churchmen contribute to their Maintenance? I address you for
Answer not as a Whig or Tory, not as Presbyterian or Churchman. As a Man, -- as
a Christian, are these Questions applicable or not? -- Oh! lay your Hand upon
your Heart, and declare like an honest Man, before God and the World, and as
you shall one Day answer it, -- do you in your Soul think, the Church has a
Right to a Bishop in America, upon Dr. Chandler's declared Plan, or not? I
could venture my Life, would you be candid and sincere, and for once divest
yourself of Prejudice, that the Moment of your reading this, your Conscience
answers in the Affirmative. If the Church is in Errors, you nor no other
Presbyterian will have them to answer for, -- to the Church and its Members be
it, -- they have Souls as well as Dissenters, and pray, Mr. Whig, let them be
saved or d -- in their own Way. Let me now take leave of Mr. Whig, with
advising him to pay some little Regard to a Rule held in very high Estimation
by every Man who would approve himself a Follower of its divine Author. Do unto
others as ye would they should do unto you.

Pray now, S. T. for that is what you are called by Sir Isaac, (whose Foot by
the Bye smells as rank as the Musk in his Shop) give me Leave to advise you
never to mind the Whig, when he does not mind the Subject, but stick to the
Letter and Spirit of the Text, and go on vindicating the Appeal and its worthy
Author; be not under any Apprehensions for the Church, she runs no Risk from
such Enemies as at present attack her; for assure yourself, your Antagonist
gains no Proselytes while he remains entirely employed in the Dirty Work of
Abuse and Scurrility, instead of treating us now and then with at least a
little Show of Reason and Argument.

A FRIEND TO EPISCOPACY.

[From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Jan. 9, 1769.] The AMERICAN WHIG, [No. XLIV.]
WHETHER Dr. Chandler means to support the proofs he adduces in savor of an
episcopacy in general, or only those for an American episcopate in particular.
I am at a loss to determine. If only the latter -- his challenge is too
general; and a proper explanation had been kind to himself as well as to his
opponents: To himself, as it would have saved him the trouble of entering into
a dispute to which he cannot expect to give a better issue than has heretofore
been given; to them as it would have spared the repetition of old answers to
worn-out arguments -- Was it necessary he should first confirm the
Episcopalians in the belief, that the office of a prelate in his sense, was of
divine original? Do they need his confirmation? Or is it not evident that he
has some other end in view? Under the nation of a mere preamble, which did not
enter into the essence o^ his plan, but served only as an introduction, he
artfully aims a stroke, at all other denominations of Christians in America;
and on pretense of only favoring an American Episcopate, he designs to make
proselytes to the church of England. The scheme i^ sufficiently subtle, and
managed with tolerable art; but is still obnoxious to many objections, which by
his own challenge he is bound to obviate, whenever produced.

Whether he intended it or not, his manner of writing has engaged him in the
dispute between the church of England and other Churches; and his public
defiance not having made this an exception, he had need to arms.

His first section is called "A sketch of the arguments in favor of
Episcopacy." And indeed he has given us in a small compass, all the arguments
of any weight that the church of England has ever produced; or can produce, for
her unhappily defering in discipline from all the other protestant churches
under Heaven. But his title page is too general for his purpose, and so is his
plan of Arguments. Why does he follow the old track, and give us a defense of
Episcopacy, when in no wise requisite? Why did he not rather attempt to support
it, as established in England, and desired by him in America, than proceed to
defend it in general? But it has ever been the art of the writers of the church
of England in this controversy, to avoid the plain definition of Episcopacy in
their sense, as distinguished from what the other reformed churches mean by it.
This gentlemen has imitated them. His whole success depends upon keeping this
distinction out of sight. Let it be but fairly made, and it will be found, that
his sketch of arguments, wherever they are tolerably true, concludes as
strongly in favor of his opposers, as of himself. The usual method is to set
out and d^^ead episcopacy in general, to declare themselves advocates for (...)
being of Bishops in the church, -- to plead for them by arguments from
scripture, -- to cite regiments of fathers in support of things never denied by
the other churches, viz. That in the church there is the office of a Bishop, --
that this office is superior to mere presbyters, The reader will ^ere
distinguish between those presbyters that preach, and those who are employed
for other purposes.
-- and the oversight of the church is committed to them. Having plain proofs
for these things, they exhibit them under the notion of their being deanied;
they exhibit them I say, -- they fight the phantom themselves created, -- they
beat it down, -- they trample it in the dust, -- they triumph in the conquest.
Thus it is with Chillingworth, who has demonstrated a thing which no
intelligent presbyterian ever denied; and thus with the writer on my table.

Are the other reformed churches enemies to episcopacy? No. -- they contend for
it as much as does the Doctor's sketch. Do they deny the superiority of a
Bishop to a mere presbyter or elder? No, -- they give instances of it almost
universally. Do they refuse to acknowledge three degrees of office in the
church? No. -- there is scarce a parish without its Bishop. -- its elders, and
its deacons. Now to argue against those churches by the proof of these things
in general terms! What is it but an unfair method of reasoning, to deceive the
unwary? the controversy must turn in his favor. But it will ^ver be hard for
the Doctor to convince men of sense, that when he has clearly demonstrated the
necessity of Bishops in the church, he has effectually proved, that a Bishop on
the English plan, is of divine ^ment. All the other reformed churches, it is
true, refuse to admit a Bishop over Bishops, but they do not refuse episcopacy.
They find nothing in holy writ to warrant such an enormous hierarchy, which
only wants a Pope to complete it, "from the dirt to the skies." Nor do they
dread all the ipso facto excommunications thundered out by the canons of that
church, against all who cannot shape their judgment and consciences to such an
unscriptural prodigy.

This writer would have done well not to have spent his sketch in proving, that
Bishops are an order in the church superior to Presbyters merely so, -- that
they have the powers of government and ordination. The man who wages war with
nobody, let him fight ever so valiantly, cannot be called an hero. Let him not
take it amiss, if I should prescribe him a task not so easy, but more to his
purpose, i.e. after he has honestly distinguished between a diocesan and a
parochial Bishop, -- to demonstrate, that the former is more agreeable to the
word of God, than the latter; or (if he pleases) more agreeable to his
venerable St. Ignatius, whose sacred authenticity he is willing to defend, by
comparing one of equal degree, and superior literary merit to himself, with the
hypocondriacal Hardouin, and whose arguments against this apostolical Saint,
are beyond the ability of this or any other writer to answer: except by
ridicule, which himself allows is not a test. I say, let him prove by St.
Ignatius, that a diocesan is more consistent with the plan of the gospel, than
a parochial Bishop. His Saint will tell him, that It is a Bishop's duty "to
know the state of his flock" so minutely, as to become acquainted (not merely
with the heads of families) but with the servant maids and others of the house.
I would therefore demand, whether those epistles even allowed to be genuine,
the Doctor can show, that their author had any idea of such a diocese, as that
of the Bishop of London, or as all America would make? Or whether he supposes,
that a Bishop ought to be endowed with omnipresence, an attribute of deity? Let
him show, that the erecting a Bishop, to ^^perintended a thousand other
ministers of Christ, and to govern a thousand parishes. At the council of Nice,
under Constantine, there were many Bishops who were not able to write their own
names, as appears (...) the minutes of that council. Men fit for the ministry
were rare in the first ages of Christianity, so that if our opposers should
prove, that there was but one Bishop in a vast district, this will not prove,
that there ought to be no more, when men properly qualified, are numerous. What
avails it then, if you prove undeniably, as the Doctor supposes has been done,
though I must differ from him; what avails it, (...), that you prove James to
have been the only Bishop of Jerusalem, Timothy of Ephesus etc.? Because there
were no more in that ^ay, when fit men were not to be found, does it follow
that such a proportion is enough in this? The same reason will then (...) sure
with more force, that it is clergymen are sufficient for North Carolina, and
three for the whole African coast.
is more agreeable to the humble plan of the gospel, than the erection of a
Bishop over one parish only, to be equal to his brethren, and capable of
knowing the spiritual state of his flock. Nay, I could wish he had gone
farther, and attempted to prove, what never has yet been proved to
satisfaction, -- that for such "a truly scripture Bishop," we must be dependant
upon our mother country, as we are for other taxable commodities, -- that we
must have a bill disputed in Parliament, creating him one, or at least giving
him jurisdiction over us, without our consent: -- that the King of England, as
"head of the church," has a right to choose for us; as if we were not of age,
nor competent to choose for ourselves. I do not mean to ask him to show me that
these things are originally and essentially belonging to the office; he has put
us in mind that we should be careful to separate the several things that have
been added as appendages, etc. But to show that it is better for us to have one
Bishop with all this enormous load of appendages, this unweildly mass of
lumber, than to have a thousand as good upon the simple plan of the gospel, and
who call no man master; to have one, for whose creation all England, Scotland,
and Wales must vote, before we can have him, and in whose election and
creation, we cannot have the common privilege of Englishmen, of Christians, or
of men; but must submit to those who have nothing to do with us in this matter.
-- Let the Doctor show, that this is more scriptural and eligible, than to have
many who can show as much authority from Christ, as his Lordship, when he
comes, though they are stripped of those antichristian appendages, and chosen by
ourselves. I boast myself a non-episcopalian, for the same reason that I boast
myself an Englishman; nor can I see half so much reason why we should submit to
tyranny in the church, as in the state.

Allow us, I say, the distinction between a diocesan and parochial episcopate,
-- allow us to judge from scripture, what a Bishop means, and we are ready to
subscribe to the most of the Doctor's "sketch of arguments." The most of it, I
say, because there are some exceptions, to which I am amazed that he can
subscribe himself.

That he should, for instance, adopt that quotation from the offices, by which
the function of a presbyter and priest is confounded. If one views the Church
of England as but had purified from the corruptions of popery; if one traces
the history of its reformation, and considers the many impediments which
obstructed its progress, one will not wonder at finding the name and office of
a priest, as well as an altar retained, when the abhorred doctrine of
transubstantiation, or the sacrifice of the real body and soul of Christ, in
the eucharist was discarded. But sure, to one who is acquainted only with his
bible, the inconsistency of retaining the one and dropping the other, must
appear very glaring. The office of a priest under Christ, is unknown to
scripture, as much as the offering of sacrifices. Upon the popish plan, the
office is indispensible; upon that of the church of England, it is absurd.

To suspect any material alteration in the plan of church government, during
the "first, second, or third centuries," is according to this writer, an
argument of a wrangling and captious disposition. And yet himself furnishes us
with an instance of a dispute called the quarto-deciman controversy, which
proves that within that time, such was the character of Christians, as to
suffer them to separate from each other, and tear the church to pieces, upon so
very a trifle, as the time of the observance of E^^ter; a mere superstition or
institution never commanded by the word of God! This methinks shows, in spite
of what the Doctor had said; that their character was not such as to oppose all
innovations; since they not only consented to this institution of men, but were
so attached to it, as to quarrel about the time of it to a furious degree.

We know, that even in the time of the Apostles, many corruptions in doctrine
did arise, and were opposed by them. We know that very soon after them, the
most damnable heresies did spring up and spread. No one will deny this, or I
would assign instances. The Apostle warns them of "evil men and seducers." Now
if the character and persecuted state of the primitive Christians, was no
security against corruption in doctrines, much less in discipline and
government.

Simple unaspiring, unsuspicious men, as were the primitive Christians, were
more exposed to the designs of ambition, in the article of government, than in
matters of faith. Will the appellant dispute this? The event proves it a fact.
To what domination did many Bishops arise within the space of 400 years! The
man of Sin, is to this day a monument of the supreme height to which this
ambition has mounted. Time was when he assumed to himself more power, than was
ever claimed by Jesus Christ himself; and above half the world subscribed to
the abomination; the world "went wondering after the beast." In the Church of
Scotland, or any church so well established, where the powers of church
officers and all manner of discipline have been so thoroughly sifted, and where
the reformation occasioned so many contests, it would not be surprising to find
an innovation of this kind vigorously opposed. But let the Doctor show us that
this case is parrallel to that of the primitive Christians, who though they might
be well informed of doctrines necessary to salvation yet might not in general
have equally understood the nature of government; as this was a less essential
point in their view, and at that time not so thoroughly weighed. Where a plan
is settled after long contest, the least attempt to innovate gives loud alarm:
where there never was a contest on this head, -- men may steal by unsuspected
degrees into dominion, until the multitude find the yoke to fast wreathed to
get it off. So that we need not suspect the zeal of the primitive Christians,
and yet allow that there were innovations.

Our author would have us produce the history of the time, when all the
Christian church did tamely resign their privileges, and how this was
accomplished without the most violent convulsions? I ask him with the same
reason to show me the history, and to account for the prodigy, how one Bishop
upon his plan, began to usurp over another -- And pray let him tell me, how it
happened at last, without the most dreadful convulsions, that one Bishop
assumed the whole power, and became the vicar of the son of God? The same
reasons which will account for one man's arriving at the supremacy of the whole
church, will certainly account for one ambitious man's obtaining the power of
"lording it over ten of his brethren." In plain words, the same reasons will
account for the rise of diocesan episcopacy, which will account for the rise of
an universal bishopric or popedom. For it is full as easy to tell how a man
got upon the lower round of the ladder, as how he ascended to the top. As for
history, it gives us as much light in the one case, as it does in the other.
The truth is, that ambitious ecclesiastics assumed, and the civil authority
finding it for its advantage, confirmed the tyranny.

It is on all hands granted that the mighty dissension between Bishops.
Metropolitans, Archbishops, Primates, Patriarchs and Popes, did not spring up
in the church in a moment. This grand portent was not the birth of a night; but
gradually arose and gained strength for a long time before it came to its
crisis. The Dr. indeed insists that the first three centuries were clear of
corruption. But the form of government in the church, was nevertheless greatly
changed before the end of the fourth, or else the Church of England, cannot
pretend to be in the right so much as the Church of Rome. But what reason could
operate in the fourth, that did not also operate in the third century? If an
innovation would have alarmed in the second, why should it not in the fifth
century? If historians would have given us the particular account in the third
century, why did they not in the fourth? Before the end of the fourth, it is
certain, the aspiring prelates had got almost to their ne plus ultra, and yet
no particular account of it, as a sudden thing. Therefore, though I admire the
language of Chillingworth, in his boasted demonstration, and especially the
passage cited by our author; yet I cannot admire his reasoning. Let us try,
whether it will not establish popery as well as diocesan episcopacy; by only
putting the same argument into the mouth of a Jesuit.

When I shall see therefore all the fables in the metamorphosis acted, and
prove true stories; when I shall see all the aristocracies in the world lie
down and sleep, and awake into monarchies; then will I begin to believe, that
the episcopal government (as it obtains in the Church of England) having
continued during the Apostle's times, and for three hundred years after it, --
should presently after, against the Apostle's doctrine, and the will of Christ,
be whirled about like the scene in a masque, and transformed into papacy. In
the mean time, while these things remain thus incredible, and in human reason
impossible, I hope I shall have leave to conclude thus:

The papal jurisdiction is acknowledged to have been received into the church,
not very long after the third century.

But between the end of this third century, and this not very long after, there
was not time enough, nor possibility of so great an alteration.

And therefore there was no such alteration as is pretended: and therefore the
papacy being confessed to be so ancient and catholick^ must be granted also to
be apostolic.

The reasoning is as good in the one case as the other. But if you grant that
the papal power arose gradually, and in an unalarming manner, the same answer
is sufficient to account for the immoderate rise of episcopal power.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Jan. 9, 1769. A KICK for the WHIPPER, No. XXXII.
By SIR ISAAC FOOT.
-- Two or three brace of snipes on one and the same spit.

TICKLE'S Whip, No. II.
IN a late P. S. I took more notice of the Parish-Clerk than I had ever
intended; but in my course, stumbling upon him ^^ain, ( Whip No. 33) I shall
just kick him little out of my way. "Out of the abundance of the heart the" pen
writes. -- Even this little publican, I find, aspires, and with other sons of
the switch (if he the Citizen, Messrs. Tag Rhyme and Crambo, etc. are all
different scribblers) longs no doubt to be " kicked into FAME." Fame! fame!
fame! is the cry with them; and, though THE CHURCH should sink and drown, they
hope at least to swim themselves, it seems, and immortalize their own name, by
means of bladders of windy nonsense blown up for her support. The queer
contrast between the Parish Clerk's letter and P. S. and even between this last
and itself, is really diverting. In the 1st he appears somewhat like at least
an honorary BACHELOR OF ARTS; but in the last he so unaccountably affects the
Ignoramus, and even while puffing out technical terms, so absurdly blunders out
Linguister, -- gapes at the latin scholar, and dreads affronting the Lady
Prosodia; that, unless he can support a character better, he will never shine
in either epic or dramatic poetry, and I dare promise him, that, though he writes
an episcopiad, 'twill never find a place in a library, and though he scribbles
fifty plays, not one of them all will ever be acted even at the Theater in
John-street.

I am much obliged to Dordracensis for lending me an helping ha -- foot, as he
has thereby saved me the trouble of kicking Sq. T's 34th No. to pieces. -- I
must however beg his pardon, for anticipating him by a few remarks on
Chillingworth's Demonstration of the apostolical institution of episcopacy, as
given us by Sq. T. (No. 35.) This boasted demonstration is founded entirely on
a supposed concession of Molinaeus and Theodorus. Until I see those writers, I
cannot judge for myself of their real sentiments, and therefore must in the mean
time make the best of Sq. T's "THIRD- hand account," from which however, it
seems very natural to suppose, that by Bishops presently after the Apostle's
times, Molinaeus meant no more than Dr. Chauncey does by primi interpares, As
to Theodorus, if he admitted the authenticity of the Ignatian epistles, and did
indeed ascribe "superiority of power as well as priority of order" in
Chillingworth's sense, to the Ignatian Bishops, (whom it is allowed Justin
Martyr of the 2d century calls only Presidents) I Will venture to say he was no
"great defender" of presbytery. However I suspect neither Molinaeus nor
Theodorous meant to allow the identity of primitive and modern episcopacy: --
But even supposing they did, who but those that grant the same can feel any
force in Chillingworth's demonstration? Demonstration indeed! founded on the
concession of two men! -- A demonstration is founded either on axioms,
propositions proved, or universally allowed; but if an argument founded on the
bare confession of two persons, may be marked Q. E. D if that plain and
spherical triangles are in all respects similar, I Will undertake to demonstrate,
that the three angles of an equilateral plain triangle are equal to three right
angles. A demonstration founded on personal concessions, or even on private
instead of general principles, is no demonstration at all.

Chillingworth might have spared much of what he has said in proof of the 2d.
of his premises, amounting to this, that the work of a century cannot be done
in a year; for if Molinaeus and Theodorus were indeed so complaisant as to
grant his 1st, he need not to have feared that any one, who knows that Rome was
not (as to either city, state or CHURCH) built in a day, would dispute his 2d.
-- but on certain occasions, men love to harrangue on evident points rather
than others. If episcopacy is not an apostasy, because of its universality,
permanency and uniformity, what are we to think of the original apostasy of
mankind, which may boast of its having been ancient, uniform, permanent and
universal? These properties, in such a world as ours, can never prove human
conduct conformable to a divine pattern, but under certain circumstances,
rather furnish presumptions to the contrary. If we have no account of any
opposition made at first to episcopal usurpation, in ecclesiastical history, we
have, I fancy, at least some account of its mysterious operation, in the
scripture prophecy, contained in the 2d chap. of St. Paul's 2d epistle to the
Tessalonians, which I recommend to the reader's attentive perusal.

From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE, Jan. 16, 1769. A WHIP for the AMERICAN WHIG. By
TIMOTHY TICKLE, ESQR. [No. XL.]
This Heap is much in Show, but light in Substance.

Bp. JEWEL.
WHEN I entered the Lists with the American Whig, I really expected that I was
to engage with a potent Adversary; that I should have Reason and Argumentation
in every Paragraph: I was also much pleased with the Prospect of having the
"dry Crusts of Controversy" mollified by Strokes of Wit and Humor, at proper
Intervals. But, how great has been the Disappointment, both to myself and the
Public! -- Instead of Reasoning, we have been presented with Sophistry; instead
of Argumentation, with Misrepresentation; instead of Wit and Humor, with
Scurrility and Buffoonery; -- Impudence has been obtruded upon as for "sound
Sense; Pertness," for Sprightliness; a quaint canting Style, for manly
Eloquence; Pedantry, for Erudition, and Falsehood, for Truth. -- I am therefore
not at all surprised, at the Contempt with which his Papers are treated by the
Public. Nay, I find that I myself am, in Danger of being neglected, for
attending so closely upon his Productions: And the general Opinion seems to be,
that Esquire Tickle might employ himself better, than in making Remarks upon Papers
that Nobody reads. For this Reason the American Whig must not take it amiss, if
I sometimes am obliged to take three or four of his Papers into Consideration,
in order to furnish one tolerable Entertainment to the Public.

In his XXI Numb the American Whig again enters on the Subject of the Expense
of American Bishops; but in a Manner so angry, and with a Temper so inflamed by
Passion, that what he says on the Subject, deserves the less Attention.
Speaking of Dr. Chandler, he says, -- Indeed, in no other Instance should I
discredit his Word: -- But before he had got half through his Paper, he is
fired with Passion, which rises so high, that the atrabilious Humor is put
into the most ^^ustratious Ferments, and the Doctor is painted as a
tergiversatious, hypocritical, arrogant Claimant, for Civil Power, and worldly
Riches: -- Is described, as smuggling into Port this contraband Commodity, viz.
American Bishops, in a sneaking, mealy-mouthed, half-choaked, hesitating,
claiming, disclaiming, avowing, bungling Manner.

Again, speaking of the Dr. and the Convention, he says, -- For besides the
extreme Stupidity of confiding in the Promises of this Sort of Gentry, when a
darling Project is to be carried, any longer than they labor under an
Incapacity of breaking them, it having been their constant Practice to violate
those kind of Engagements, whenever their Designs were sufficiently matured to
defy Opposition, (as shall hereafter be abundantly shown from History,) it is
evident, from their present Conduct, that a primitive Bishop is as far from
their Thoughts, as primitive Christianity. -- When a Writer thus gives himself
up to intemperate Anger, and can so utterly divest himself of all Regard to
Truth, Decency, and good Manners, instead of meriting an Answer, he becomes the
just Object of Contempt.

With Regard to the Expense of American Bishops, I have in my 31st Number.
incontestably proved, that no Tax will be needed; a Fund is already provided,
and daily increasing; a Fund established by the pious Donations and Legacies of
some of the worthiest Men that England has produced. This outrageous Clamor
which this "testy, petulant Reviler," has made, and which he has wearied
himself in endeavoring to propagate, is only intended to raise an Odium
against American Bishops; and if I thought the Whig himself believed it, or
that there was one Person in the Province, "above the Capacity of an Idiot,"
who paid any, the least Regard to the visionary Tax-bill, with which the Whig's
second Sight has tormented him, (in which he has omitted the Article of Bibles,
imagining, possibly, that as little Use is made of the Bible in the Church, as
in a Meeting House,) I would enter into a particular Examination of it. But
till I am convinced of this, -- and I must have better Proof than either the
Whig's Word, or that of his footy Fellow-Scribblers, -- I choose to leave it,
and the Remainder of this Paper, to be a Monument (as long as it lasts) of his
implacable Opposition to the established Church of the Nation, and the
venerable Ministers of God's true Religion. I shall just take the Liberty to
ask the Whig, Whether, The Rev. Mr. Williams, who had been Rector of
Yale-College, was not promoted to the Command of a Regiment, in the Expedition
against Cape-Breton, in the Year 1745; if that was the Case, he might have
mentioned it as another Instance, besides Rector Sharp, of an Ecclesiastic
having a military Promotion.

The Whig labors hard, in his XXII Numb. to establish a Point of the greatest
Importance to himself, and the Cause he has undertaken to manage, viz. That Dr.
Chandler, Mr. Seabury, and the Convention, do not desire, and are not
endeavoring to obtain such a Bishop as is proposed in the Appeal, or in other
Words, a primitive Bishop, but a modern, proud, Law-dignified, Court-favoured
Prelate. It is remarkable that the Whig has indulged himself, through the whole
Course of his Writings, in a most flagrant Piece of Sophistry. -- Dr. Chandler
and Mr. Seabury have declared, that they themselves, and the Convention, have
applied for, and desire only a primitive Bishop, i. e. a Bishop whose Powers
shall be of a spiritual Kind, such as are derived from the Church and not from
the State. It is sufficiently known, that according to the Principles of the
Church of England, and the whole Tenor of Scripture, Bishops are an Order
superior to Presbyters; and such an Order superior to Presbyters, it is, that
the Clergy of this Country have applied for; -- an Order, who are to ordain and
govern the Presbyters of a certain district, and to confirm such of the Laity
as desire to be confirmed. The Whig has repeatedly declared, that there are no
Objections against Primitive Bishops being settled in America; but then he
considers every Presbyter as a primitive Bishop; and an Order of Men in the
Church, superior to Presbyters, he considers as an Innovation. Under Cover of
this Sophistry he has repeatedly declared, that it is impossible we should
have a primitive Bishop; because he would refuse to give that Apellation to any
Person, who was of an Order superior to Presbyters: -- From the same Source his
most amazing Kindness and Indulgence to the Episcopalians has proceeded: --
"The Episcopalians," says he in his Number, -- may have I doubt not, a thousand
primitive Bishops, without Molestation. They may make every Missionary a
Bishop, without giving any sort of Uneasiness to the Colonies, provided they
adhere to the primitive Pattern; i. e. provided those Bishops are not superior
to Presbyters. The American Whig has therefore, grossly imposed upon his
credulous Readers, by this Sophism. He has dressed up a Phantom, and has most
unmercifully belabored it. Whereas he ought to have showed the Inconvenience
that would have accrued to the Colonies from the settling one or more Bishops
in them, to ordain, and govern the Clergy of the American Church of England,
and confirm such as desired to be confirmed. Had he done this, or had he
endeavored to have done this, he would have stuck to the Point and the
Controversy would before this Time have been at an End. However,

As he has attempted to point out sundry material Differences, between the
primitive Bishop, and the Bishop mentioned by Dr. Chandler, and I will do him
the Honor to attend him.

"1st, The primitive Bishop" says the American Whig, was "chosen by the People,
over whom he was to preside," and for the Truth of this Assertion, he appeals
to the Writings of the Fathers, and the Canons of the primitive Church. -- And
further on, he asks, "Is it not a Privilege for the People to choose their own
Bishops? Why then did Christ, the great "King and Head of the Church, confer it
upon them"?

If the American Whig will consent, that this Point shall be decided by
Testimonies from the Fathers, I will readily join Issue with him; with this
Proviso, that his Quotations shall be taken immediately from the Writings of
the Fathers, and from the Canons of the primitive Churches, and in the original
Language. I will not be satisfied with Quotations of Quotations, or
Translations of Translations; particularly I shall object to any Translations,
Quotations, or Authorities from St. Peter King's Enquiry; many of which are so
very faulty, that a School Boy would have deserved a Flogging for them.

For the present, I absolutely deny that the primitive Bishops were chosen by
the People; or that Christ ever conferred this Privilege upon the People. St.
Paul, appointed Timothy Bishop of Ephesus, and Titus of Crete, without any
popular Suffrage. When the American Whig produces his Authorities for these
Assertions, it will then be Time enough to be more particular.

2dly, The American Whig asserts, There was one or more primitive Bishop or
Bishops, in every City or Town, where Christianity was professed. -- Ans. There
was one Bishop in the larger Cities, and in some Districts of the Country; and
if, through Age or Infirmity, he was unable to discharge the Duties of his
Function, an Assistant or suffragan Bishop was allowed. -- "The Apostle Paul,"
continues the Whig, appointed that there should be Elders or Bishops ordained
in every City, or Town, of the Island of Crete. -- Ans. St. Paul consecrated
Titus Bishop of Crete, and directed him to ordain Elders, i. e. Presbyters in
every City. But if Elders or Presbyters, and Bishops, are the same, what Need
was there of leaving Titus in Crete, to do that which every Elder or Presbyter
might do as well as he? This is an Instance of the Whig's Sophistry, which I
took Notice of above. He uses the Words. Elder. i. e. Presbyter, and Bishop, as
meaning the same Office; which every Person who is not as purblind as a Whig,
must see is the Point he ought to have proved, and therefore he has no Right to
take it for granted.

3dly, According to primitive Institution, Bishops were to be apt to teach, i.
e. I suppose disposed to teach, -- and to take heed to all the Flock. -- he
should have added -- over which the Holy Ghost had made them Overseers, -- i.
e. to take the best Care they could of the whole District, whether greater or
less, that was committed to their Charge, -- To feed the Church of God. But Dr.
Chandler's Bishop is not to be a constant Preacher, nor, as far as I can learn
from him, to preach the Gospel at all. But is it not universally known and
allowed, that one Part of the Bishop's Office, is to preach the Gospel? Did Dr.
Chandler exclude the Bishop he mentions, from preaching the Gospel? Why then
this malicious Insinuation against Dr. Chandler? Does not the Governor take
Care of the People committed to his Charge, who requires, and sees that the
Judges, Justices, and every inferior Order of Magistrates do their Duty: unless
he in his own Person executes the Office of Judge, Justice, Sheriff, Constable,
and Hangman, in every City, Town, and Village in his Government? And does not
that Bishop "take heed to the whole Flock," who requires and sees that both
Orders of Ministers under him, do their Duty, and administer the Ordinances of
Religion, in the various Congregations to which they are appointed? Titus was
left by St. Paul in Crete, to ordain Elders, Presbyters, or Ministers, in every
City, and to see that they did their Duty: but St. Paul gave no such absurd
Direction, as that he should preach constantly in every City.

4thly, The primitive Bishop was to discipline all Offenders; such as sinned
before all, they were to rebuke before all, that others also might fear; and to
reject Heretics after the first and second Admonition. -- But according to his
(Dr. Chandler's) Account of his American Bishop, he is not to discipline the
Laity at all; etc. To obviate this Objection, I shall here give a short, but
full Answer to the 23d Numb. of the American Whig, which is professedly upon
this very Subject, and contains more Misrepresentations, than any Paper of the
same Length that ever appeared in this Province.

That Excommunication was one Part of the Discipline of the primitive Church, I
believe will not be denied; and the American Whig, after complaining bitterly
of the severe Effects of Excommunication in the Church of England, endeavors
to prove, that the Church of England has no Discipline at all, and quotes Part
of the Exhortation in the Office of Commination, Dr. Whitby, and Bp. Burnet, in
Support of his Position. But if Excommunication be a more severe Discipline in
the Church of England, than it was in the primitive Church, where is the Sense
of asserting, that the Church of England has no Discipline at all? I am ready
to defend Dr. Chandler's Position, viz. That the Power of the Church is
entirely Spiritual, etc. But if any civil State shall determine, that a Person
excommunicated by the Church, shall not be, ^^llowed to commence any Action at
Law; nor to be a Witness, Advocate, or Juror, etc. the Church is no more
accountable for these Consequences, than for the Effects of any other penal
Laws passed by the State. None of these Consequences, however, can happen in
this Country, because there is no Law to give Being to them.

With Regard to the sacramental Test, though I am no Lawyer, I am confident no
Action at Law would lie against a Minister for r^^sing the Communion to any
Officer of a scandalous Life, and Conversation; and my Reason is, that the
Rubrics in the Book of Common Prayer, being established by Act of Parliament,
have the Force of a Law; and it cannot be supposed that a Minister would be
punished by one Law for obeying another.

That the Discipline of the Church of England is very much weakened, I readily
allow; and I think Dr. Chandler has assigned the true Reason, viz. Altars are
set up against Altars, and Churches against Churches; and those who are
rejected by one, may be received by another. The English Independents and
Presbyterians must take all the Glory and Honor of this to themselves. They
rent and divided the Church; they sowed the Seeds of Enthusiasm, and Hypocrisy,
Libertinism, and Infidelity, which have produced a most plentiful Harvest: They
refuse to submit to the Discipline of the Church, and then censure the Church,
because its Discipline is not of Force enough to reclaim those that are
incorrigible; they, by their Clamours and Cabals, by their restless Ambition,
and unwearied Endeavors to change the "monarchial Government" of their
Country, into a Republic; by Reflectors, Watch-Towers, American Whig's, and
Sentinels; by a premeditated Opposition, and pre-concerted Combination from
Boston to Philadelphia; by "Ass-sociations, Consociations, Presbyteries and
Synods" by Pulpit Harrangues, and private Conversations; have given, and do
give, all the Obstruction in their Power to the Appointment of American
Bishops, and then have the Effrontery to make their Non-appointment an Argument
to prove, that the Office of Bishop in the Church of England, is not the same
with that in the primitive Church.

Thus I have fully confuted three Numb. of the American Whig; and if he or his
Associates, have the least Modesty left, they will never mention this Matter of
Discipline more.

The 6th "Particular of his 22d Numb. is this, -- The Bishop of the Appeal, is
to be a grand Personage, etc. Whether the American bishops will be of great or
small bulk, the American Whig knows no more than I do; nor whether their
"support and dignity" will be great or little; but when he insinuates, nay
affirms, that the Appeal proposes that the American bishop should be a 'grand
personage,' and that a 'tax of four-pence' in the L. 100, should be raised for
his support, he knows as well as I, that he insinuates and affirms what is
false, false, false.

His triumph over Dr. Chandler, Mr Seabury, Aristocles, and Hierocles he may
enjoy, "if he can; -- only let not him that girdeth on his armor, boast
himself as he as that puts it off:" And let him remember, that it ill
becomes Whigs, and Independents, to accuse others of 'breach of promise or
forgetfulness of engagements and protestations.'

N. B. I have passed over No. XX of the American Whig as it is chiefly filled
with a pretended letter from "one of the Society's missioners in America, to
one of his Majesty's chaplains." The Whig says, "the public may depend on it to
be genuine." But the public has been so often and so flagrantly abused with
forgeries by him and his party, (of which the letter signed B. W. is an
instance, lately detected) that his word is not to be relied on. In the first
place, I absolutely deny that the said letter to one of his Majesty's
chaplains, was written by one of the Society's missionaries, and in the next
had it been wrote by a missionary, I aver there is nothing in it that is
unjust, or that may not be well defended. The infamous trade of forgery by the
Whig and Co. is at present in a bad state. -- almost ruined, to the great
satisfaction of all honest men.

[From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Jan. 16, 1769] The AMERICAN WHIG, [No. XLV.]
To the Author of the AMERICAN WHIG.
SIR,
AS the episcopalians in this city, are preparing the way for the better
reception of an American Bishop, by filling our house of representatives with
members of that denomination, or such as they know to be under their influence,
I cannot but think such their insidious project within the native design of
your periodical pa^^^s, which among other salutary purposes, are doubtless
intended to preserve this colony from the absolute dominion of high-church. --
For which reason I persuade myself, you (...) cheerfully insert the following
piece in your paper.

The episcopalians in this city, having for more than half a century past,
regularly and invariably pursued a confederacy for establishing episcopacy,
through every part of this province, and steadily prosecuted this design through
many of their political menuvres; a majority of the dissenting denominations
conceived it high time before they were irremediably enslaved by prelatical
tyranny, to make a stand for the preservation of their religious liberty, by
choosing for their representatives in the next general assembly, men upon whom
they could depend as the guardians of their rights and privileges; and who
were not to be influenced by the threats or promises of their adversaries. --
To avoid however, the least imputation of giving rise to a contested election,
if it could be avoided consistent with a due regard to their political safety,
they appointed a committee authorized to propose to the two episcopal
candidates, that the dissenters would acquiesce in their appointment and give
them their votes, and interest on condition, that in consideration thereof,
they should be at liberty to appoint two non-episcopalians, and that such four
should be elected without any contest. This proposal was rejected; and the
episcoplians are pleased to wonder forsooth that the affair should be made a
religious quarrel. What follows, is therefore to remove all wonder about the
matter; and to show that if there be any religious quarrel in the case, it is
of their own making. This will be evident to all impartial men, and to every
considerate person among themselves, who will seriously consider the following

Reasons for the present glorious combination of the dissenters in this city,
against the farther encroachments and stratagems of the episcopalians, from a
brief recollection of what the latter have already done, to exalt their own
party on the ruins of every other religious persuasion amongst us.
I.
NOTWITHSTANDING one of those fundamental articles of the 'conditions for
plantations,' upon which this country was settled, published by the Duke of
York, is in these words, "That every township should be obliged to pay their
own ministers, according to such agreements as they should make with him; the
ministers being elected by the major part of the householders and inhabitants of
the town." And notwithstanding the Dutch were farther expressly secured by the
faith of the nation, solemnly declared in the 8th article of the capitulation
at the surrender of this province, by them, to the crown of England, on the
27th August, 1604, that "the Dutch here should enjoy the liberty of their
consciences, in divine worship and church discipline, -- notwithstanding all
this I say, and in manifest violation thereof, they the episcopalians did in
the year 1693, procure an act of legislature for establishing episcopacy, in
four several counties of this province, under the specious pretense of settling
a ministry and raising a maintenance for them in the city of New York, county
of Richmond, West-Chester, and Queen's county.

II.
But lest the people of other denominations should insist that the choice of
the minister entitled to the salaries to be raised by the said act was in the
people, they procured another act in the year 1704, "granting sundry privileges
and powers to the Rector and Inhabitants of the city of New York, of the
communion of the church of England, as by law established," transferring the
right of calling a minister, from the people of this city, to the vestry and
churchwardens of Trinity church.

The moneys raised by virtue of those acts to which every denomination must
contribute, did already amount on the 6th of June 1755, above 13 years ago,
being calculated (...) ^pound interest, to above half a million, viz. five
hundred and thirty three thousand one hundred and forty pounds, three shillings
and sixpence lawful money of New York.

III.
Between the morning and the afternoon service, they took possession of the
presbyterian church at Jamaica; and on Mr. Hubbard's returning to his church,
he found to his great astonishment, an episcopal clergyman reading the liturgy
in it. Of the possession so obtained, they availed themselves for 19 or 20
years, till in the year 1727, they were ejected by due course of law.

IV.
In the year 1702, Governor Cornbury, a violent episcopalian, retired from this
city, on account of a very mortal distemper which then raged in it, to the town
of Jamaica; and in a friendly manner entreated Mr. Hubbard, for the use of the
parsonage house, during his stay there. That clergyman generously put himself
to inconveniences to oblige his Lordship, who instead of re-delivering the
house to his benefactor on his return to New York, did, with the most
astonishing perfidy, put the episcopalians in possession of it; and they, by
virtue of this possession, kept it till the said year 1727, when it was,
together with the church recovered from them by the ejectment abovementioned,

V.
During the administration, of the same Governor, they persecuted the Rev.
Messieurs Makemie and Hampton two Scotch presbyterian ministers, for preaching
in this city without license from the Governor, and had the former tried on an
information, and though acquitted by the verdict of a Jury, loaded him with
upwards of L. 80 costs.

VI.
In the year 1712, they opposed the application of the presbyterians to
President Schuyler, for a charter for their church; and again during the
administration of Governor Burnet; employing counsel against granting their
petition, though the Governor was willing to do it and the King's counselor in
England advised that it might be done agreeable to law.

VII.
They obtained a patent from the same Lord Cornbury for a very valuable tract
of land near this city, which had before been granted to the widow of a Dutch
minister; and taking the advantage of the abscence of the owners, still hold it
by possession without ever having made any compensation to the legal
representatives of the original patentee, which tract of land is now worth
above L. 50,000 pounds.

VIII.
They prevailed on the assembly to appropriate half of the moneys raised by a
lottery, for a free and catholic college in this province, to the narrow
partial episcopal college now in this city; and aimed at securing the whole,
but were disappointed by the spirited opposition made against them.

IX.
They have since attempted to establish episcopacy in the Manor of
Philipsburgh, by act of legislation, but were happily defeated by a seasonable
opposition.

X.
They have again opposed the English presbyterians in this city, in their
application to the throne for a charter of incorporation for their church.

XI.
Instead of assisting by their wealth, the French protestant refugees in this
city, and thus pouring oil into the expiring lamp of one of the most glorious
churches of the reformation, they fomented an opposition to Mr. Daller (a man
of undoubted piety and unexceptionable abilities) for the sole cause of his
firm adherence to the presbyterian worship and discipline of the church of
Geneva. -- Mr. Daller's friends remembered who signed his certificate; nor will
ever forget the unfeeling hearts of those who refused to certify the most
notorious truth, in favor of that persecuted stranger.

XII.
They have so managed, as to fill the whole council with members of their own
persuasion, one only excepted, and refrain not saying that it is a shame there
should be one single non-episcopalian at that board.

XIII.
They have lately attempted, in order to obtain the water lots contiguous to
the church ground, and other purposes equally iniquitous, to exclude every non
episcopalian from the magistracy of this city, and to fill the office of
alderman and common-council-men, with persons of their own persuasion.

XIV.
To ruin the Dutch church, they have for above 20 years past used every art and
stratagem to prevent the introduction of English preaching into it, knowing
that to be the most effectual measure for preserving that congregation, from
which they were continually making additions to their own, on account of the
Dutch language growing into disuse, and being little understood by the younger
sort of the Dutch themselves.

XV.
When disappointed in this unfair and unchristian plot, they began to foment,
and have hitheto supported an unhappy division in that church, and excited a
law suit between the two parties, in order to rend it piecemeal.

XVI.
That church being now at peace, and in so flourishing a condition, that they
despair of destroying it, and the Dutch being now thoroughly apprised of their
pernicious designs they have lately, after all their flattering and cajoling,
openly thrown off the mask, and by the instrumentality of their weekly
'calumniator general,' publicly reviled the 'Dutch reformed religion,' by
traducing that venerable body the synod of Dordreght, the grand bulwark of
calvinism, and one of the greatest ornaments of the reformation, as a parcel of
designing men, rather convened to wreak their resentment on their enemies, than
to serve the cause of religion.

XVII.
They have by their influence, procured the rejection of a petition of the
Lutheran and French churches in this city, and of four Dutch churches in this
province, for charters of incorporation for their respective churches, whilst
the like charters are constantly granted to the episcopal churches amongst us.

XVIII.
The more effectually to rivet our chains, and at one stroke to crown their
long and uninterrupted design, steadily pursued for upwards of fifty years, of
totally subjugating us to their absolute empire, they are now meditating the
introduction of that curse of curses, an American Bishop, with all his
spiritual courts and tremendous power. And

XIX.
They do now refuse the most reasonable overtures of allowing dissenters to
nominate only two of the four candidates to serve in the next general assembly,
rather choosing to throw this city into the most violent convulsions, than not
to have the sole direction of that important affair.



These my friends and fellow citizens are facts, stubborn and incontestible
facts, And now I appeal to the sober judgment of every impartial man, to
determine whether (if so it must be called) we or they have made it a religious
quarrel. We are disaffected to no man, of any Christian persuasion on account
of his religious sentiments. Nor are we prejudiced against any episcopalian for
his religion. -- But it is the politics of the church, -- its domineering
spirit, -- its perpetual strides toward universal dominion, -- its pride, --
its power and its thirst of domination, a thirst not to be satiated but by our
absolute destruction, that we are combined to oppose. Instead of any
machination against them, I wish we could answer for our criminal passivity for
half a century. Why have all these things been suffered? Many of them could
certainly have been prevented, had we not been wanting to ourselves. Look
around you, my brethren, and the^ tell me what post or what office is not
engrossed by them! Could all this happen by chance in a province where they
constitute so small a minority? not such a series of encroachments to be
ascribed to a concertion of design for aggrandizing themselves, and suppressing
the dissenters? Rouse therefore my friends, and act like men! Exert yourselves
in the glorious cause of preserving your liberties. Transmit them like an
inestimable jewel, to your posterity. Suffer yourselves no longer to be
wheedled by their artifices. Let it suffice, and more than suffice us, that
hitherto we have slumbered on supine and inactive. They want only a majority in
the house of representatives to have all the three branches of the legislature
on the side of episcopacy: And then farewell, an eternal farewell, to our
religious liberty! Then shall we indeed be made, (what one of them within these
six days, had the assurance to say we ought to be made,) 'Tributaries to the
church.' Up therefore, and be doing. If you sleep now, you sleep as on the top
of a mast, and all beneath you is destruction and ruin. To avert the perdition
which threatens you, preserve inviolate your laudable combination. -- Your only
strength consists in your union. Let no stratagem of theirs disconcert it. As
you have one joint interest to secure, act as if inspired by one soul. The
prospect is encouraging. Providence will not frown on your struggles for
liberty, Whatever be the issue, it is ours to use the means, and then to
acquiesce in the dispensations of Heaven: But indolence is certainly culpable.
If we succeed, we shall lay a permanent foundation for our privileges. If we
fall, we gloriously fall, by falling in the vindication of what is dearer than
life itself. -- In a word, should we be disappointed, let our disappointment be
improved, to a still closer, and more intimate junction. Let it be improved to
excite us to exert ourselves upon every future occasion, with greater harmony,
and redoubled vigor.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Jan. 16, 1769. A KICK for the WHIPPER, No. XXXIII.
By SIR ISAAC FOOT.
Sic opis est nostra, fer opem legis, atque open digns.

LILEY'S Quae genus
THE vindicator's advertisement in the Whip, is the first piece I remember to
have seen in that paper which bears the least marks of even tolerable
abilities; so that, in its present situation it looks like a jewel on a
dunghill: And yet partiality and prepossession are so glaringly evident in it,
that I cannot but think, it contains at least something very kickable.

It appears extremely odd to me, that one, who had taken up arms, and made one
campaign as a voluntie^ ^^^u'd cry out to another for defense, especially to
such a popgun hero as my Squire T. T. i. e. that a vindicator should apply to a
Whipper to vindicate his vindication. His reasons likewise for concealing his
name are evidently deficient. A voluntary second to one of two well known
persons engaged under the eye of the public, certainly ought not to appear in a
masque, and it evidently is "a matter of" at least some "consequence to the
public, to know, who he is etc." and that for this among other reasons, that
individuals may not be exposed to uncertain imputations. Besides, if the V. had
one half the "courage and heroism" he would fain separate from the character of
Mr. Livingston, he would have been no more afraid of persecution than that
gentleman, who (though he foresaw it) ran the risk of being by name abused,
slandered and reviled (and since it is a fashionable phrase, PERSECUTED) as he
has been, by Sq. T. and his club of Dunces, and yet, (who would have believed
it? he is alive still. The V. assures us; his "anecdotes are all pertinent to
the subject;" but the reader will be at a loss, I fancy, to discover any other
connection than what he has arbitrarily made by his transitions, the story
about a YOKE OF OXEN and a ploughman, seems to be a cock and a bull story; and
that about the Indian Deacon might be very well contrasted with another (as
much to the purpose) of an Indian who, being by a celebrated divine converted
to Churchanity with a mug of cider, brought another almost dead drunk, and
tumbling him on the floor, cried, Here Dr! another Shurchman!

The V's 4th. and 5th. par's as they chiefly concern Mr. Livingston personally,
I shall leave to be by him treated either with neglect or otherwise as he shall
think proper; only just observing, that both in his pamphlet and advertisement,
the V. (with others of Sq. T's associates) seem to consider LITERARY FAME as no
small acquisition, if gained, and if relinquished as no small sacrifice.

I Am not fond, I own, of calling proper names in question on the present
occasion, without sufficient evidence; (how sufficient the W's evidence is, I
pretend not to know) but I confess, I can see no absurdity in saying that he,
whoever he be, (whether friend or foe to DISSENTERS, it matters not which) who
wrote the prefatory advertisement, is accountable for whatever is contained in
the vindication, though 20 were concerned in writing it. A Pamphlet, the V. tells
us requires greater abilities than a periodical paper. -- Not to dispute this
point, I Will just tell him, that a pamphlet prefac'd with great I often
repeated, is generally supposed to be written by one person, which a peroidical
paper is not: So that his simile taken from the writer of the 1st. Whig, is ^al
a prop^s, and "the cases are" not "parallel," (let him say what he will) but as
different as a private man and the foreman of a jury.

The V. complains heavily of the W's charge of "false quotation," and like an
innocent person appeals to the reader. This dispute may be easily determined;
-- both parties are in the right: I am witness that, as some can speak the
truth and something else in the same breath, the V. whoever he be, has quoted
truly and falsely on one and the same page. In the 1st. quotation, it is true,
the word just, as very long as it is, is inferred "AT FULL LENGTH;" but in the
2d. it is omitted, apparently in order to color a charge against Mr.
Livingston, of having asserted ROUNDLY. But if I rightly understand the V. he
thinks it needless to have copied the word just at all; because Mr. Livingston,
having no right to "judge for the civil power, has, it seems, no right to have
his private sentiments fairly represented. But pray Mr. V. should I differ in
sentiment, (of which the word just is expressive) from all the LORD'S JUSTICES
on the globe, have you a right, in quoting my words, to leave out that
important word, because I have not a right to judge for others? -- Fie, fie!
Mr. V.!

The V. pretends to great candor and moderation, and yet cannot help letting fly
with a Vengeance now and then. He likewise professes, as a gentleman and a
Christian, to be very tender of private characters, and yet for a bishopric
would not have omitted a few gentlemanly and Christian INNUENDO'S with regard
to Mr. Livingston's

But what is of all most diverting, is, that no less than 3 gentlemen have
undertaken to refute the refutation of the vindication, before it has made it is
appearance. The V. it is true, affecting the candid disputant, promises to
tumble down whenever the W. shall knock him down; and the CANDID EXAMINER
declares, that, in such case, he will not help him up; but Sq. T. not being
possessed of such delicacy of sentiment, justifies "severe reflections," and
evidently recommends stamping Mr Livingston in the dirt, in order to raise the
vindicator from the mire.

[From Mr. GAINE'S GAZETTE, Jan. 23, 1769.] A WHIP for the AMERICAN WHIG, By
TIMOTHY TICKLE, Esquire [No. XLI].
-- Quis, talia fando, --
Temperet a lacrymis?
VIRGIL.
INCITED by an insatiable lust of power, and spurred on by an ambition which
increases in its prospects, as it advances to an eminence, a turbulent faction
in this province, have never ceased blowing the coals of party spirit, till
they have burnt forth into a blaze; divide et impera, is a favorite political
maxim with them; accordingly as the church of England has been an obstacle to
their towering designs, they have sought every means to destroy the friendship
and harmony which has subsisted between her and other denominations, that they
might rise to power over her ruins, and rule with absolute dominion. Evidently
with this intent was the 24th number of the American Whig written. Dr. Chandler
after incontestably proving that a bishop under the restrictions proposed,
could be no way detrimental to dissenters, and that it is a privilege essential
to the well-being of the church, urges, that any opposition of dissenters to a
plan of so harmless a tendency, would have in it the nature of persecution --
From so just an assertion, the American Whig takes occasion to accuse Dr.
Chandler of insinuating that the church had been grievously opposed by
dissenters; merely that he might with some degree of propriety and excuse,
inflame their minds by a high colored narration of the savage cruelty of
churchmen* Strange that a splenetic crew, who since their fi^^^ origin, have
been continually maligning, traducing, and disturbing the quiet of all around
them; who, discontented with the fre^st toleration any where granted, are
continually discharging their venom at the bosom that nourished them; who have
never missed one opportunity of persecuting others, and aiming at the
destruction of the church; that such (I say) should not blush to accuse that
religious society, the charity and benevolence of whose members is every where
acknowledged, and enjoyed by themselves whenever they have petitioned for it.
-- The charges contained in this paper, and repeated in the 25th number, I
should with pleasure refute; but the task is needless, since they have been
totally obviated in a late paper, -- are no way coincident with the subject,
and would be improper at this season.

If the church of England in America is considerably distressed through the want
of an episcopate to superintend her clergy, and to confirm her members, -- if
half her churches are destitute of clergymen to officiate in them and
administer the sacraments, -- if the episcopate desired, would remedy these
inconveniences, and be of advantage to religion in general among us, and
assist the propagation of the gospel among the heathen, -- if the bishop is to
be so abridg'd in his powers as that he cannot possibly infringe the privileges
of dissenters, -- if these postulata are true, and that they are so, Dr.
Chandler has irrefragably evinced -- the opposition of presbyterians to so
reasonable a proposal, is evidently cruel, invidious, and malevolent; and
betrays a spirit, scandalous to protestantism, and heinously criminal and
nefarious.

But says the American Whig, I am surprised that any man, who has resided but a
few years in this country, and especially a native, who cannot but be
thoroughly acquainted with the genius and disposition of its inhabitants,
toward an ecclesiastical hierarchy, should seriously set himself to urge a
measure that has so manifest a tendency to interrupt the peace, impede the
population, and re-kindle a flame in his Majesty's dominions.

This objection is so far from having any truth or solidity in it, and has been
considered so often in the course of these papers, that it scarcely deserves
attention. The dissenters in this country (excepting a trifling minority) with
the reformed Dutch church are so fully convinced of the moderation and benefits
resulting from the established church, that they would rejoice in any method
that could promote her interests, without damaging the liberties of others.

An insinuation that 'nine tenths of the colonies' have an unconquerable
aversion to bishops, under the restrictions stated by Dr. Chandler, is a
calumny that deserves the severest reprehension. The dissenters in this country
have imbibed the principles of freedom and moderation: They are not, they
cannot be of such an intolerant spirit, as to refuse a protestant church the
enjoyment of an episcopate that interferes not in their concerns. -- Such
assertions must give the enemies of the reformation cause to rejoice. and a
fair plea to doubt of the boasted mildness and charity of protestants. The
temporal powers of English bishops are not considered as inherent in their
office -- they are mere appendages conferred by the state (in consequence of the
alliance) to be employed in its service. These, if the church is established,
may be circumscribed by an act of parliament, and if it is not -- they cannot
be exercised.

The faith of treaties, the sanctity of laws, and the fence of charters, will
be the guardian of their privileges.

Where then can be the obstacle? Can they fear its increase in strength? -- The
well-being, harmony, religious liberty and peace, of the various denominations
in America, depend on this circumstance. The presbyterians are fast increasing
in number -- unsatisfied (as they ever will be) with their present large
participation of privileges, they are ambitiously grasping for more.

Their aspiring leaders pant to seize the chariot of power -- in which if they
are once mounted, they will drive furiously.

The dissenters experience the lenity and mildness of the government of
churchmen; they find them open hearted and charitable, and in general despising
the little views of party. On the contrary, from every instance in which the
presbyterians have had the ^eins of authority, they have grown giddy, arrogant,
and intoxicated, they have been carried away with the strea^ of ambition; every
principle of justice and humanity have fell a sacrifice to the darling service
of presbytery! -- Just then are the reasons of policy which should urge
dissenters to support the church of England (...) its just privileges, as the
only bulwark against popery on the one side, and the insatiable ambition of
independent presbyterians on the other. -- That their incroaching strides are
to be feared, is evident to any one who reflects on the bitter enmity which
they now, and have ever shown to a pacific church, to whose members however,
when their interests will be promoted by it, they can humbly crouch and
supplicate. -- All the most mean and ignominious intrigues are made use of to
deprive that church of an episcopate, because they flatter themselves, if this
point could be effected, through want of clergymen it would by degrees crumble
into nothing; while haughty presbyterianism would unmolested, fix her standard
in this extensive world, and every denomination be swallowed up into herself.
-- When that melancholy period arriv^s! -- adieu to the tender blandishments of
friendship and sociability -- to the soft breathings of concord and peace!

Persecution shall again unsheathe her sword, and knee-deep in blood stalk
along, brandishing her scourges, pointing to gibbets and halters! -- In those
happy seats of the muses where science rears her laurels; -- Gloomy bigotry,
and degenerate cunning shall clap their wings; -- Oppression and savage cruelty
shall prowl arrogantly abroad with harpy talons, to wrest from industry the
reward of its toil, and spread desolation around!

Ah! where is that liberty that sweetened the cup of sorrow, and smoothed the
brow of care? -- that open benevolent religion, pitiful courteous and merciful
as its author was merciful? -- Succeeded by suspicious unforgiving hypocrisy,
by noisy confusion, and wild uproar. -- Should any one, startled at the
representation, conceive this picture the product of a heated imagination, --
let him recollect the days, when an unhappy monarch was brought to the block!
-- Where then was that liberty of conscience, that purity of religion, -- that
illimited toleration, which were before so exultingly trumpeted! The weapons of
the kingdom of darkness were seized on, to stablish the kingdom of light. --
The well-wrought constitution of Britain, obtained at the price of the blood of
our forefathers, tottered on its base! -- Rapine extended its sacriligious jaws
to devour the offerings dedicated to the service of learning! -- and the sword
of faction was sharpened for those who would not bow down to the idol of
presbytery!

Though in their state of weakness, they professed a free enjoyment of their
religious liberties would satisfy them; -- though they declaimed (as they now do)
of their affection to toleration, and freedom of every kind, yet as they
ascended the steps of power, they changed their cry and behavior, grew
intolerably arrogant and imperious, and at last entered into a covenant, to
extirpate prelacy root and branch, and make the name of the Lord one, and his
religion one, through the three kingdoms, Their sentiments of toleration were
altered, and their very devout and merciful synodmen, bellowed out against
schism, and that 'hell-born doctrine of satanical toleration;' that those whom
the word could not convert, the sword should; that the vine of the Lord should
flourish over the whole earth. That I may not be thought to ground charges on
bare assertions, let the reader peruse the following quotations, taken fairly
from the sermons and essays of their public preachers and defenders, when
Oliver was mounting to the throne.

The famous city of London, is become an Amsterdam; Separation from our
churches is countenanced; Toleration is cried up; Authority lies asleep.
Calamy's Sermon to the Lord Mayor, January 14, 1645, page 3.

O! Let the ministers therefore oppose toleration (as being that by which the
Devil would at once lay a foundation of his kingdom to all generations: Witness
against it in all places; possess the magistrate of the evil of it; yea, and
the people too; showing them, how, if a toleration were granted, they should
never have peace in their families more; or ever after have command of wives,
children, servants, etc. Let Us therefore fill all presses, cause all pulpits to
ring, and so possess parliament, city, and the whole kingdom, against the
sects, and of the evil of schism and toleration; that we may no more hear of a
toleration, nor of separated churches, being hateful names in the church of
God. Amen. Amen. Edward's Gangrena, part 1, page 84.

This prelacy in the article, this many-headed monster of archbishops,
bishops, etc. This is the beast wherewith we fight in the covenant, -- thy
mother papacy, shall be made childless among harlots; your diocesses,
bishopless; and your sees, lordless; and your places shall know you no more.
Case's Sermon before the Commons, page 50, 51.

Subjects may appeal from the king and council to the next general assembly. An
Assembly may abrogate acts of parliament, and discharge subjects of their
obedience to them, if they any way reflect on the business of the church:
King's large declaration, Fol. 407. Our presbytery is no other than Christ's
court. Rutherford's Lex. Rex. Come, my brethren, take this Agag prelacy, and
hew it to pieces before the Lord. Case's Covenant Renewed, page 51.' Down with
Baal's altars, down with Baal's priests. Salwey's Sermons to the Commons, page
19. To you of the honorable house, up, for the matter belongs to you; we, even
all the godly ministers of the country will be with you; let not the pretense
of peace or unity cool your fervor, or make you spare to oppose yourselves
unto those idle idolized ceremonies of the church. Fain Cloth to the Commons,
page 29. You cannot preach nor pray them down, directly and immediately; --
Well! that which the word cannot do, the sword shall. Reyner to the Commons,
page 12.

Episcopacy must not be pulled up, but the Bishops hanged up before the Lord.
King's large Declaration, Fol. 404.

If any person or persons whatsoever, shall, at any time or times hereafter,
use, or cause the aforesaid Book of Common Prayer, to be used in any church or
chapel, or public place of worship, or in any private place or family within
the kingdom of England, etc. Every such person so offending therein, shall, for
the first offense, pay the sum of five pounds, of lawful English money. For the
second offense, ten pounds; and for the third, shall suffer one whole year's
imprisonment, without bail or mainprize Ordnance of Parliament August 23, 1645,
for putting the Directory in execution.

As Josiah put to death those that followed Baal, so may the parliament those
that will not return and leave Antichristianism. -- That Antichristianism that
was sworn in the covenant to be rooted out. Marshal's Sermon 1645, p. 45.

The execution of judgment is the Lord's work; and cursed is he that does it
negligently: And cursed shall they be that keep back their sword from blood in
this cause. Strickland, Nov 5, 1644, p. 26.

Let us not out of any worldly respects of estate, wives, children, honor,
good nature, justice compassion, care of trade, of laws. grow ^lack and lazy in
our undertakings; upon the success of which the eyes of Christendom are fixed:
-- But let us proceed to shed the blood of the ungodly. L --, Dec. 19, 1642.

These are some of the sentiments of these pious assertors of freedom, in the
only instance that they ever weilded the sword of power, -- the horrid
cruelties they were then guilty of, and the woes they entailed on the British
nation, will reach perhaps to latest posterity, -- Reason bids us suspect their
pretenses to charity and moderation, and their inflamed declamation on
toleration and liberty of conscience! -- and experience points to their former
disguises, to their airs of magisterial tyranny, -- to the lips of cruelty, --
and the garments bathed in blood! -- But perhaps it may be urged that the
conduct of a misled monarch drove them to these extremities, -- were not, I
will ask, the sufferings he underwent sufficient to compensate, nay to exceed
the degree of his errors? Must churchmen, as well as other Christians, be
obliged to bow down to the image which they had set up? -- But let us (to find
the true spirit of this aspiring party) pursue them to this country, and
inspect their conduct when not under the stimulations of heat and faction, --
we shall find them claiming lands where they had settled by royal permission,
as a heritage sacred to themselves, where no other protestants had a right even
to pass through! -- We shall perceive them with all the severity of the
inquisition, mangling the bodies of the most innocent and harmless people, for
disagreeing with them in religious sentiments. -- The aged brought with their
gray hairs in bloody sufferings to the grave! -- Women (weep humanity and
tender hearted pity!) denied that food which nature expostulated for in vain!
stripped naked (blush modesty!) and dragged with mangled limbs from town to town,
and at last consigned cruelly to death -- their sex exposed to the scorn of the
multitude, and their mutilated bodies denied the last offices of humanity --
Burial! -- and that by men who ever railed out against the persecution of the
church, and by a denomination who hypocritically professed to excel all other
in purity and moderation! -- My pen trembles and is unable to perform its task!
-- let the unhappy sufferers themselves recite the rest!

An extract from a short summary of some of the sufferings of the people of God
called quakers, as represented to the king and parliament in the year 1699.

In these few lines, O King, thou and thy Parliament may see the continued
sufferings of thy subjects under the cruel and bloody hands of the priests and
rulers in New England, who did for diverse years, most barbarously spoil and
ruin the goods of thy faithful subjects there, hawling them out of their
habitations to prison, far from their families and little-ones, cruelly
torturing their bodies with whips and pitched ropes, and locking up neck and
heels in irons many hours, with famishings near unto death, being without pity
to their aged parents or to their helpless children; chaining to a log of
timber night and day, a long and very cold winter, dragging men along by the
hair of their heads, and the tender women (as they were on their knees in
prayer) dragged out of the house by their hands, with their faces toward the
earth, over stumps and old trees, through very deep frost and snow, to prison.
-- And last of all, in the height of the spirit of the wicked one, the spirit
of madness, blindness, blood and murder, they spared not, but cruelly put to
death some of the servants of the living God, for no other cause but for their
faithful obedience to the spirit of the Lord in their hearts.

From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Jan. 23, 1769. The AMERICAN WHIG, [No. XLVI.]
LIBERTY is the gift of God to mankind; and a jewel of inestimable value. Had
we retained our primitive innocence, we should have enjoyed our primitive
liberty. But the introduction of sin into the world, introduced the necessity
of putting the sword into the hands of the magistrate, to protect the weak from
the violence of the strong. Hence the origin of government. We surrender a part
of our liberty to secure the remainder; and thus it appears, that
licentiousness, or an unruly desire in any man to do as seems good in his own
eyes, is unfriendly to liberty; or in other words, that every true Son of
liberty is a friend of good government, and in this consists the glory of that
character. The government, I say, must be a good one; for to disturb one that
is destructive of the public felicity, or to oppose a tyrannical dominion,
either originally acquired by force, gradually erected on the ruins of a free
state, can never be called licentiousness: For no man or set of men, could ever
acquire a right to render the society they are appointed to govern, as
miserable as it would have been without any government; and much less to make
the members of it more wretched than they would be in a mere state of nature.
The happiness of the people is therefore the law of laws, the supreme law. And
hence it follows on the other hand, that as no government is or can be perfect
in its plan, nor always faultless in the execution of its powers, resistance is
unlawful; unless, all things considered, there is a moral certainty of thereby
promoting the happiness of the community. The true Son of liberty will
therefore abhor both tyranny and licentiousness, and think it his duty to
oppose every bad measure, whether attempted by prince or people, and conduct
his opposition with a steady eye to the general good.

Upon these principles we justify those heroes of our own nation, who with
their blood, purchased that glorious constitution, which after innumerable
struggles, acquired a permanent establishment on the accession of that ever
memorable Dutchman, King William the third. By these principles also, the Sons
of liberty in America, will be able to vindicate their attachment to the
constitutional claims of freeborn Englishmen; and the time is fast approaching
when the present threatening clouds, with respect to the contested right of
taxation, will be dissipated, to the honor of all those who shall appear at
the end of those troubles, to have been cordial friends to the interests of the
empire.

But whatever share any of us may claim in that harvest of glory, let it ever
be remembered, that His will be the greatest, whose actions have been conducted
upon the most generous principles, and with views of promoting the most
extensive felicity; and that the man who shall stickle to shut out one evil,
and contribute to open a door to a greater, will rather deserve censure than
applause.

He who really loves his country, will, to the utmost of his power watch
against, and prevent every annoyance: But a man who is clamourous against one
ill measure, and regardless of others equally mischievous, can have no claim to
true patriotism: Such only wear it as a cloak to cover some sinister design:
The conduct of some of those who in this city acquired honor by their
opposition to the stamp act, gives therefore just ground to suspect, that they
were not inspired by that laudable spirit, which seeks the redress not only of
one partial grievance, but will exert itself against every machination devised
for the ruin and destruction of their country. Let us attend to a few instances
in which the patriotism of those pretenders to the character of sons of
liberty, has been brought to the test; and their claim to it will be found to
be emptiness itself.

Scarce had we concluded our exultation on the repeal of the stamp act, before
we heard of the execrable scheme for enslaving the whole continent under the
dominion of spiritual courts. The Bishop of Landaff assures us, that the
introduction of Prelates into this country, was the main design of erecting the
society for propagating the gospel in the reign of King William. Ever since
that period they, have had their eye upon us; and now when the conquest of
Canada bids fair for such an increase of wealth, as to enable us to support the
hierarchy, every exertion is made on both sides of the water, to accomplish the
project. -- Bishops preach it up. Legacies are given for it. Our own clergy
petition the King, the Universities, and others in its favor. Private letters
are written to solicit the assistance of men in power, Pamphlets and papers are
published to wheedle and deceive the Americans; and the late Archbishop of
Canterbury himself, undertook to defend the scheme, and in his answer to Dr
Mayhew, who gave the first alarm, boldly presumes without the royal leave, to
intimate, that if any colony will signify its request for a Bishop, a Bishop
shall be sent.

As therefore the subjugating such an infant country as this, to dignified
prelates, must be its inevitable ruin; who would imagine that any person
bearing the name of a son of liberty, would have heard of so portentous and
alarming a project, without the most painful emotions! Upon all those who
really deserved that honorable appellation, it had that effect; and the
efforts they are making to vindicate the religious liberties of the people, are
as vigorous as those made in defense of their civil rights and privileges.

Admitting that the wings of the American Bishops may be so clipped, as to
prevent them from doing us any injury; and that such only are desired as are of
the primitive kind; yet surely it became the professed assertors of liberty, to
take proper steps to obstruct the scheme till security was given for this
clipping, in order that all reasonable jealousy might be removed. -- Instead of
joining to allay the fears of others, till the remedy was impracticable, they
ought to have aided them in driving the zealots for this pernicious plot, not
only into a disavowal of it in words, but from urging it in any manner
whatever, before such laws were enacted, as might put us out of danger. The
proper steps were obvious. One denomination only was suspected to befriend the
scheme. The motions of the bigots among them were therefore to be narrowly
watched. I say their bigots were to be watched, because it must be confessed,
to the honor of the majority of the episcopalians on the continent, that they
are as averse to prelacy as any other protestants amongst us. And to frustrate
the designs of those bigots, the sons of liberty of that church, should have
joined all others in refusing their votes to any candidate for an election,
whose profession of principles afforded any ground for suspecting him a friend
to the introduction of prelatic power into America. Nay, they ought upon the
first notice of such a design, to have petitioned the assembly for a most
explicit declaration of our abhorrence of the measure, and the most earnest
supplication to King Lords and Commons, that no such power might be suffered to
disturb the repose, and consume the substance of this peaceable and prosperous
country.

The neglect of all this is truly culpable -- Nay, some who pretend to the
character of sons of liberty, seem to act as if they were struggling to
arrogate to themselves the name, merely to have the fairer opportunity of
destroying the substance. They clamor against the laws destructive of civil
liberty, only to gain a credit and power to rob us of what is infinitely dearer
to us, even the privilege of worshipping God, according to the dictates of our
consciences, and to make us, as it has been expressed, Tributaries to the
church.

That the attachment of those pretenders to the cause of liberty, was at best
but partial, appeared incontestibly evident in the course of the last election
for this city.

The real son of liberty will consider the business of an election, especially
at such a critical juncture, as one of the most important concerns in which he
can be engaged. -- The freedom of elections is the grand bulwark of all our
liberties, rights, and privileges, civil and religious; and it is impregnable
to all attacks except those of corruption and terror. But will any man have the
assurance to deny, that in the last elections, at least one of those batteries
was served, and that too by men who boast in the name of Liberty-Boys? And was
not this manifestly to keep out a certain candidate merely for his attachment
to the cause of religious liberty; and because his abilities gave the enemies
of it, reason to tremble for their darling scheme of erecting a prelatical
domination over all the other churches in the colony?

There is no court to which we ought to resort with more seriousness, than the
sheriff's court of election. To preserve our liberties and promote the common
welfare, we should ourselves behave in it, and assist in obliging others, to
demean themselves, with the greatest decorum.

Every man who offers his service to the public as a candidate, has a right to
good usage, and deserves our thanks. Nay, if his offers are countenanced by the
voices of any of his countrymen, there is a double respect due to him; and if
he is insulted, his electors are abused, and have reason to resent it as an
injury done to themselves and the public. But were there none who pretend to be
sons of liberty, concerned at the late election, in tumultuous shoutings,
displaying of colors, and other artifices, designed to inspire terror into one
of the candidates, or his electors? Was not every part of the town alarmed by
exhibitions purposely contrived to intimidate the inhabitants who befriended
him? Yes, and those insulting acclamations were made in the very court of
election. Not to mention all the menaces and threats offered to the poor
voters, some of whom were thereby terrified out of their birthright, and
treated as the most abject slaves, merely on the score of their poverty.

[From Mr. PARKER'S GAZETTE, Jan. 23, 1769] A KICK for the WHIPPER, No. XXXIV.
By SIR ISAAC FOOT.
Projicit ampullas et sesquipedalia verba.

HOR.
I AM very loath to exercise my office on any gentleman personally; but, if any
one will imprudently stand in the way of my toe, and thereby happens to be
kicked I cannot help it. -- He must blame himself.

Mr. S -- b -- r -- y ( Whip No. 37.) gives us (as he says) 'a just and
faithful account' of his adventure, in quest of the name of the writer of the
letter signed B. W. and after all his rambles, concludes, (as, it seems, he did
at first) that the whole is 'a villainous piece of forgery,' in which B. W. Dr.
Chauncy, Mr. Parker and Mr. Smith, stand charged by him as persons concerned.
Now as I am not acquainted with the necessary facts, I shall leave it to those
gentlemen, if they think it necessary, to vindicate their own characters: In
the mean time, as one story is often good only till another is told, I advise
the reader to suspend his judgment as I do. I beg leave however to make a few
remarks on Mr. S's. 'performance,' as he calls it.

1. He gives Mr. P. a long string of titles, evidently out of pure spite, being
apparently as much displeased with him for printing, as with B. W. for writing
the letter. 2. He says, 'the direction at the head' of it and, He thinks 'the
date at the Bottom were in a different hand and ink from the other writing.'
Had his aim been to prove the authenticity of the letter, perhaps he would have
thinked otherwise, at least as to the latter; and to the former he would no
more have suspected Forgery, than he might have done in many a piece sent to
the press, introduced with a 'different hand and ink' for the sake of the
composers. 3. He accuses Mr. P. of 'not complying with his promise in his own
preamble:" -- Now Mr. P. promised nothing at all, or at most no more than to
'shew the original letter to any person desirous of satisfaction.' The letter
Mr. S. owns Mr. P. showed him; -- and what would the man have had more? By
being troublesome, it is probable he obtained the knowledge of Mr. P's
conjectures as to the author, which right or wrong, he would fain improve to
his disadvantage. 4. Mr. S. contradicts himself. Mr. Smith, he says,
'cautiously avoiding mentioning Wentworth's name, but always expressed himself
by the term -- the gentleman;' and yet he owns Mr. Smith mentioned Mr.
Wentworth's name no less than twice before. On the whole Mr. S. seems to have
written his history in a great passion, to the beginnings of which, I doubt
not, some of the gentlemen accused were witnesses, as well as the 'gentleman of
undoubted credit' his companion, in proof of which as well as other articles,
it is a pity he did not procure and publish his affidavit.

I come now to consider M. S's reflections on B. W's letter, ( Whip No. 38) His
remarks on the spirit and temper of it, so naturally put me in mind of his,
that I shall confine myself to that alone. He is so much vexed with Boston,
that he declares he 'never was in it, -- 'has no agents in it,' -- 'never wrote
a single letter to any person in it,' -- and 'desires to have nothing to do
with it.' Mighty good humored this! -- He likewise 'confidently' boasts, that
he has 'laid the Whig fairly on his back.' What a pity it is such a doughty
combatant has no trumpeter!

Mr. S. seems to think B. W. has not acted in character. Not as a son of the
church; because he has ventured to reprove some of her hotheaded children. --
Not as a friend to Her growth; because he scorns to promote it by the dirty
manure of misrepresentation, and is so candid as to do justice to Dr. Chauncy:
-- Not a member of the society; because he declares he is not imposed upon like
most of his brethren: -- Not as a friend to decency and good manners: because
he has treated with some freedom, so very Respectable a character as Mr. S's --
and, not as a friend to truth and impartiality; because impartiality, on this
occasion, obliged him to take the part of one of the dissenters, and because in
his whole letter there is not One word of truth -- but what is very unwelcome
to Mr. S. Such a 'stickler for impartiality in writing' as Mr. S. had need to
approve himself a very candid inquirer after truth; and yet reader! (could you
have thought it?) this same gentleman, undertakes to decide on the propriety of
Dr. Chauncy's answering the appeal, and ridicules him, as he would an old
horse, in the same breath with which he 'deliberately declares,' that he '
never read more than a dozen pages in' the Dr's. pamphlet, 'and never intends
to read a dozen more.' On this occasion, I shall only remark, that I Have known
many an old horse worth more than a dozen young -- s

Mr. S. affects to be thought too manly to give any one, even a servant, the
lie, when in effect he had just declared, that B. W's letter was nothing but a
pack of lies, and misrepresentations. I hope indeed Mr. S. was not the person,
who gave Dr. Chauncy the lie, July 4th. 1768; but somebody certainly did: And
even Mr. S. endeavors to justify him in it, by in effect declaring that there
is not one word of truth or impartality in B. W's letter.

Whether B. W. are the initials of the letter-writer's Real name, or were by
him signed as W. X. Y. Z. etc. have been by others. I cannot pretend to say; but
it would doubtless greatly surprise Mr. S. (who has nothing to do with Boston)
to find that some one of those gentlemen he mentions by name, had written the
letter, and (whether mistaken or not as to the person who ap'd an independent)
had acted from nobler motives than Mr. S. can, it seems conceive of, viz. --
than rev^^ge for his having personally 'given him an occasion.' How apt some
people are to discover unwarily the principles of their own conduct! But be all
this as it may, I am so fully 'convinc'd' of Old Dr. Chauncy's good sense,
integrity, and veracity, that I must not, I cannot, alter my sentiments, till
Sq. T. Mr. S. or somebody else have advanced something more convincing than
they have ever yet done, to prove him a dotard, rascal, or a liar; And
therefore I cannot believe Mr. S. will either procure 'bread for himself or
family' (whatever he may for bears) by crying, go up thou baldhead! or promote
his usefulness as a minister of Christ, by party, and publicly rebuking an
elder. By 'such attempts,' he has little reason to hope to ' shake Dr.
Chauncy's reputation' or ^establish' his own.

The End of the Second Volume.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THIS being the 106th Half Sheet of this Colection, which as before proposed,
concludes the second Volume; (the Price of which in Sheets, to those who took
the News from the Beginning, and had the first 26 half Sheets gratis, is 12 s.
4 d; and to others who were not Customers for the News, is 16 s. 4 d.) And as
the Expense of the Work has been very considerable, of which a very small Part
has yet been paid, the Subscribers and others who have taken or agreed for the
said Collection, and have not yet paid, are requested immediately to transmit
the Money for the said two Volumes to the Printer, and enable him to proceed
with the third Volume, and complete the Collection, the finishing of which he
finds it necessary to defer, till he is reimbursed Part of the Charge already
incurred.

Those who have lost any of their Numbers, may procure the wanting Numbers of
the Printer; and those who choose to have them bound, may, by sending their
loose Sheets, have them well and reasonably Bound, in such Manner as they shall
direct.


