A DISCOURSE UPON THE DUTIES OF A PHYSICIAN, WITH SOME SENTIMENTS, ON THE
USEFULNESS AND NECESSITY OF A PUBLIC HOSPITAL: DELIVERED BEFORE THE PRESIDENT
AND GOVERNORS OF KING's COLLEGE, AT THE COMMENCEMENT, Held on the 16th of May,
1769.

As Advice to those GENTLEMEN who then received the First MEDICAL DEGREES
conferred by that UNIVERSITY.

By SAMUEL BARD, M. D. Professor of the Practice of Medicine in KING'S COLLEGE.

NEW YORK: Printed by A. and J. ROBERTSON, at the Corner of BEAVER-STREET,
M,DCC,LXIX.

To His EXCELLENCY SIR HENRY MOORE, Bart. Captain General, and Governor in
Chief, in and over the Province of NEW YORK, and the Territories depending
thereon, in AMERICA, Chancellor, and Vice Admiral of the same.
SIR,
THE favorable Sentiments you were pleased to express of the following
Discourse, when it was delivered, and the very generous Warmth with which your
Excellency entered into the Proposal it contains, of founding a Public
Infirmary in this City, have emboldened the Author to submit it to the
Consideration of the Public; and to insure it a favorable Reception, he has
ventured to prefix to it your Excellency's Name; not doubting but that the same
Benevolence which prompted you so generously to undertake the Cause of the Poor
and Unhappy, will now plead his Excuse, for the Liberty he has taken of
proposing your Excellency's humane and benevolent Example, to the Imitation of
his Fellow Citizens and Country Men.

May your Excellency, and every generous Contributor to this Institution, enjoy
the Happiness of seeing the good Effects of your charitable Endeavors; and as
the just Reward of your Humanity, may "the Blessing of him that is ready to
perish come upon you."

In which Hope, I have the Honor to be, With the greatest Respect, Your
Excellency's Most obedient Humble Servant, SAMUEL BARD.

THE PREFACE.
THE Scheme of a Public Hospital for the Reception of the poor Sick of this
Government and City, is a Subject, which for a long Time past, has employed the
Attention of many charitable and benevolent Inhabitants; particularly of those
Gentlemen engaged in the practice of Physic, and Offices of Religion, whose
Professions afford them the most frequent Opportunities of knowing the great
Necessity there is for such an Institution.

In particular, a Plan has often been proposed, and the most proper Method for
putting it in Execution considered, by a Set of Medical Gentlemen, who have
formed themselves into a Society for promoting the Knowledge, and extending the
Usefulness of their Profession: and it has been a Resolution entered upon the
Minutes of that Society, from its first Institution, that they should Address
the Legislature upon that Subject, on the first favorable Opportunity.

It likewise has repeatedly been mentioned by the different Professors of
Medicine, (particularly Doctors Middleton, and Jones,) in their public
Lectures, and earnestly recommended to the Consideration of the Inhabitants;
the unhappy Disputes however, in which we have lately been engaged with our
Mother Country, have hitherto rendered their Endeavors fruitless; but, they
nevertheless (convinced of the great Necessity there was for such an
Institution, and the very great Advantages which all Orders of People must
derive from it) resolved to persist in their Endeavors, until some happy
Occasion should offer of pushing it with some Probability of Success. Such an
Occasion now presents itself, and the Warmth and Zeal, which his Excellency the
Governor, and most of his honorable Council, have expressed for it, and the
Liberality, with which they have subscribed toward it, induce them to think
the present, the fittest Time, for recommending it, to the serious
Consideration of the Public.

And as an Institution of this Nature, must necessarily be calculated for the
Benefit of the distressed of all Sects and Persuasions whatsoever, it is hoped,
that the generous and public spirited of every Denomination, will enter warmly
into the Design, and promote it with that Zeal, which should actuate the Breast
of every Man, who thinks it his Duty to relieve the Necessities of his Fellow
Creatures, or promote the Happiness of Society.

A DISCOURSE UPON THE DUTIES OF A PHYSICIAN.
Homines ad Deos, nulla re proprius accedunt, quam Salutem Hominibus dando.
CICERO. There is nothing by which a Man approaches nearer to the Perfections of
the Deity, than by restoring the Sick, to the Enjoyment of the Blessings of
Health.
THAT this Country has, ever since its Discovery and Settlement, labored under
the greatest Disadvantages, from the imperfect Manner, in which Students have
been instructed in the Principles of Medicine; and from the Consequent
prevailing Ignorance of but too many of its Professors; is a Truth which cannot
be contested; and of which many unhappy Families have severely felt the fatal
Effects.

The present Occasion therefore must give the most real Pleasure to every
considerate Man, or Lover of his Country; and surely there is no Friend of
Learning, but must rejoice to see these Gentlemen, who have given the most
public and ample Testimony of their Abilities, now soliciting the Honors of
this University, in a Profession hitherto (at least in a regular Manner)
uncultivated amongst us.

I am therefore particularly happy in having this Opportunity of congratulating
every public spirited Friend and Patron of this College, and especially those
of the medical Institution, upon the present Instance of its Success, which
affords so pleasing a Prospect of its rising Reputation and future Utility.

But it is to you, Gentlemen, who are Candidates for medical Degrees, that I
mean in a more particular Manner to address my present Discourse; receive then
my Thanks for the Honors you have already reflected upon us, and as both for
your Sakes and our own, I cannot but be anxious for your future Reputation; let
me once more, before we part, request your Attention for a few Moments, whilst
I endeavor to explain to you the weighty duties of your Profession -- A
Profession, in the Practice of which, Integrity and Abilities, will place you
among the most useful; and Ignorance and Dishonesty, among the most pernicious
Members of Society.

And be not alarmed, if I set out with telling you, that your Labors must have
no End. No less than Life, and its greatest Blessing Health, are to be the
Objects of your Attention; and would you acquit yourselves to your own
Consciences, you must spend your Days in assiduous Enquiries, after the Means
of rendering those of others long and happy.

Do not therefore imagine, that from this Time your Studies are to cease; so
far from it, you are to be considered as but just entering upon them; and
unless your whole Lives, are one continued Series of Application and
Improvement, you will fall short of your Duty. For, if in the Eye of the Law,
the Man who does not afford, to all immediately under his Care and Protection,
as far as in him lies, the necessary Means of preserving Life, is considered as
accessory to Murder, how will that Physician excuse himself to his own
Conscience, or what Palliation of his Guilt, will he plead at the awful Bar of
eternal Justice, who instead of embracing and industriously cultivating every
Opportunity of Improvement, shall (conscious of his own Inability) rashly
tamper with the Lives of his Fellow Creatures; and, at the risk of their
Safety, defraud them of their Property? Would not any one consider the Lawyer
an Impostor, not to use a harsher Phrase, who, conscious of his own Ignorance,
should give Advice, which might endanger the Estate of another? And is not the
Physician who imposes Ignorance upon me for Knowledge, and puts my Life to the
hazard of an uncertain die; so much the greater Impostor, in as much as my
Life, is of greater Estimation than my Estate. In a Profession then, like that
you have embraced, where the Object is of so great Importance as the Life of a
Man; you are accountable even for the Errors of Ignorance, unless you have
embraced every Opportunity of obtaining Knowledge.

And to a Man, who has any Conscience at all, it will be but a slight
Alleviation of his Remorse, to say, after some fatal Blunder, I knew no better!
Unless he can likewise add, that it is to be attributed to the Frailty of his
Nature, and not to the Negligence of his Disposition, that he was not better
informed. Nor will a weeping Parent receive much Consolation from this
Reflection, that by the fatal Ignorance of his Physician, and not by the
malignancy of the Disease, he has been robbed of the Staff and Support of his
Life, the Joy and Comfort of his declining Age.

Did I know a Wretch among the Practitioners of Medicine, whose insensible Soul
neither feels for the Distresses he may Occasion, nor partakes in the Joys he
may give rise to; I say, did I know a Man so void of every Sentiment of
Tenderness, and Humanity; I would advise him, from Motives of Interest and
Gain, to endeavor at the Attainment of Skill in his Profession. But to you,
Gentlemen, I will point out the Gratification inseparable from the Acquisition
of Knowledge, that ever to be wished for Praise, which falls from the Lips of
the Wise and the Virtuous, the Applause of an approving Conscience, and the
unspeakable Pleasure of doing good, as the Reward of all your Toil, and as the
strongest Spur to your future Industry.

As to those who have neither Emulation nor Honesty, who neither have
Abilities, nor will give themselves the Trouble of acquiring them; I would
recommend it to such, seriously to consider the Sixth Commandment,

'THOU SHALL DO NO MURDER.'

In the Prosecution of your Studies, let such Authors as have transmitted to us
Observations founded upon Nature, claim your particular Attention. Of these,
HIPPOCRATES shines the foremost; his unwearied Diligence in observing and
collecting the Symptoms of Diseases, his Fidelity and Accuracy in relating
them, his happy Facility in discovering their Causes, his almost prophetic
Knowledge of their Events, and his successful Treatment of them, can never be
sufficiently admired, and will hand down his Name, with Honor and Applause to
the latest Posterity.

A few others among the Ancients, who have followed the Steps of Hippocrates,
are well worth your Perusal; but whilst you acknowledge their Merit* do not
affect the Pedantry of despising the Moderns; and carefully avoid that Rock,
upon which most of the fond Admirers of Antiquity have split, a blind and
slavish Attachment to its Opinions; the Bar where Truth has been so often
Shipwrecked, and which more than the want of Ingenuity or Capacity, stopped the
Progress of Learning for above twelve hundred Years.

Why should we give more to those Times, than they attributed to themselves?
Read the Writings of the wisest among the Ancients, and they are filled with
Modesty and Diffidence, why then should we ascribe to them, Infallibility and
Omniscience? They doubted the Assertions, and controverted the Opinions of the
Times which preceded them; why should not we doubt and controvert theirs; and
leave to Posterity the Liberty of controverting ours? Let us then examine their
Writings with Candor, but with Freedom, and embrace or reject their Opinions;
as they shall be found consistent, or inconsistent with later Experience.

Without therefore depreciating the Merit of the Ancients, let us do Justice to
their Posterity, and do not from an over Zeal for Antiquity, sacrifice Sydenham
and Boerhaave, to the Manes of Hippocrates and Galen. -- I see no Reason why
Time only should lessen our Abilities, and surely Experience must increase our
Knowledge: and although I think some of the Ancients may be read with great
Advantage; yet it is the most celebrated Moderns (who with equal Abilities
enjoy the additional Advantage of near 2000 Years of Experience) whom I would
recommend to your most attentive Perusal; particularly those great Ornaments of
their Profession, SYDENHAM, BOERHAAVE, HUXHAM, PRINGLE, and WHYTT; and some
others of our latest English and Scotch Physicians, "Horum Scripta nocturna
versate manu, versate diurna."

In your Intercourse with your Fellow Practitioners, let Integrity, Candor,
and Delicacy be your Guides. There is a particular Sensibility of Disposition,
which seems essential to delicate Honor, and which I believe is the best
Counterpoise to Self-Interest. This I would by all Means advise you to
cultivate, as you will meet with many Occasions where it only can direct your
Conduct.

Never affect to despise a Man for the want of a regular Education, and treat
even harmless Ignorance, with Delicacy and Compassion, but when you meet with
it joined with foolhardiness and Presumption, you must give it no quarter.

On no Pretense whatever, practice those little Arts of Cunning and
Dissimulation, which to the Scandal of the Profession, have been but too
frequent amongst us. Nor ever attempt to raise your Fame on the Ruins of
another's Reputation; and remember that you ought not only to be cautious of
your Words, a Shrug or a Whisper, the stare of Surprise, or a piteous
Exclamation of Sorrow, more effectually wound another's Reputation, and more
clearly betray the Baseness of a Man's own Heart, than the loudest Expressions.

Do not pretend to Secrets, Panacea's, and Nostrums, they are illiberal,
dishonest, and inconsistent with your Characters, as Gentlemen and Physicians,
and with your Duty as Men -- For if you are possessed of any valuable Remedy,
it is undoubtedly your Duty to divulge it, that as many as possible may reap
the Benefit of it; and if not, (which is generally the Case) you are
propagating a Falsehood, and imposing upon Mankind.

In your Behavior to the Sick, remember always that your Patient is the Object
of the tenderest Affection, to some one, or perhaps to many about him; it is
therefore your Duty, not only to endeavor to preserve his Life, but to avoid
wounding the Sensibility of a tender Parent, a distressed Wife, or an
affectionate Child. Let your Carriage be humane and attentive, be interested in
his Welfare, and show your Apprehension of his Danger, rather by your Assiduity
to relieve, than by any harsh or brutal Expressions of it. On the other hand,
never buoy up a dying Man with groundless Expectations of Recovery, this is at
best a good natured and humane Deception, but too often it arises from the
baser Motives of Lucre and Avarice: besides, it is really cruel, as the stroke
of Death is always most severely felt, when unexpected; and the grim Tyrant may
in general be disarmed of his Terrors, and rendered familiar to the most timid,
and apprehensive; either by frequent Meditation, by the Arguments of
Philosophy, or by the Hopes and Promises of Religion. But even overlooking the
important Concerns of Futurity; the Business of this Life may render such a
Conduct highly dangerous and criminal; as those to whom the thoughts of Death
are painful, are too apt when flattered with the Prospect of Recovery, to
neglect the necessary Provision against a Disappointment, and by that Means
involve their Families in Confusion and Distress.

Above all Things, avoid any ridiculous Expressions of Humor, at the bedside
of a sick Man; you cannot choose a more unseasonable Opportunity for your Mirth;
nor will you find a Person of a generous and benevolent Disposition, who can
smile even at the Repetition of a Witticism, which carries with it the
Appearance of so much Inhumanity.

Let your Prescriptions be simple, and as neat and agreeable as the Nature of
the Remedy will permit -- Nothing can be more absurd than the Farrago of some,
nothing more disgustful than the Slovenliness of others; for it is impossible
to learn the true Virtues of Medicines, from compound Prescriptions; and
Inelegance frequently disappoints us of their Effects. -- And as it is
probable, from the Mode of Practice in this Country, that you will not only be
the Prescribers, but likewise the Dispensers of your Medicines, let your
Integrity be proof against the Temptation of unnecessarily multiplying
Prescriptions, and trust rather to the Liberality of your Patient, than to the
Quantity of your Physic, for your Reward. For although perhaps by this Method you
may sometimes think your Services undervalued, yet you will always enjoy the
superior Satisfaction of conscious Rectitude, which, by an honest Man, will
ever be preferred to a trifling Emolument. --

In the Infancy of this Country, the present Mode of practicing Medicine was
necessarily introduced, from the Scarcity, both of Inhabitants and Physicians.
But in so populous a City as this, it is beyond a Doubt, that the Regulations
it is now under, are both injurious to the Inhabitants, and dishonorable to the
Profession: yet I confess it is not very easy to point out a Remedy to the
Inconveniences attendant on it. There is but one, and that perhaps at present
would not be thought expedient; but until it is, those who are in good
Circumstances must rely wholly upon the Integrity of their Physicians; and for
the Poor who are the greatest sufferers, we must endeavor to find out some
other Source of Relief.

Whenever you shall be so unhappy as to fail, in your Endeavors to relieve;
let it be your constant Aim to convert, particular Misfortunes into general
Blessings, by carefully inspecting the Bodies of the Dead, inquiring into the
Causes of their Diseases, and thence improving your own Knowledge, and making
further and useful Discoveries in the healing Art.

Nor can I help regretting the many Obstacles you will meet with in prosecuting
this so necessary an Enquiry; from the Prejudices of the People in general, and
a false Tenderness and mistaken Delicacy in Relations. Time and Perseverance
however must overcome popular Prejudices, and will I hope before long, remove
these Difficulties, and open this Door to Medical Improvement.

Let those who are at once the unhappy Victims, both of Poverty and Disease,
claim your particular Attention; I cannot represent to myself a more real
Object of Charity, than a poor Man with perhaps a helpless Family, laboring
under the complicated Miseries of Sickness and Penury. Paint to yourselves the
agonizing feelings of a Parent, whilst laboring under some painful Disease, he
beholds a helpless Offspring around his Bed, in want of the necessaries of
Nature; imagine the Despair of an affectionate Wife, and a tender Mother, who
can neither relieve the Pain and Anxiety of her Husband, nor supply the
importunate cravings of her Children; and then deny them your Assistance if you
can -- but the Supposition is injurious to Humanity, and you in particular, I
know want no such Incitements to Duty and Benevolence. I cannot however help
regretting, the very frequent Opportunities you will meet with, particularly in
this Place, of exercising your Humanity upon such Occasions; owing to the want
of a proper Asylum, for such unhappy and real Objects of Charity, it is truly a
reproach, that a City like this, should want a public Hospital, one of the most
useful and necessary charitable Institutions that can possibly be imagined.

The laboring Poor are allowed to be the support of the Community; their
Industry enables the Rich to live in Ease and Affluence, and it is from the
Hands of the Manufacturer we derive, not only the Necessaries, but the
Superfluities of Life; whilst the poor Pittance he earns will barely supply the
Necessities of Nature, and it is literally by the sweat of his Brow, that he
gains his daily Subsistence; how heavy a Calamity must Sickness be to such a
Man, which putting it out of his Power to work, immediately deprives him and
perhaps a helpless Family of Bread!

Nor would the good Effects of an Hospital be wholly confined to the Poor, they
would extend to every Rank, and greatly contribute to the Safety and Welfare of
the whole Community. Every Country has its particular Diseases; the Varieties
of Climate, Exposure, Soil, Situation, Trades, Arts, Manufactures, and even the
Character of a People, all pave the Way to new Complaints, and vary the
Appearance of those, with which we are already acquainted; Hence Egypt is
subject to the Plague; Holland to Intermittents; the West Indies to Putrid; and
the Northern Countries to inflammatory Diseases; and Spain and England to
Hypochondriocal Complaints; which reigning Diseases of a Country, not only have
Peculiarities of their own, but often vary the Characters of such as are common
to that Country with others, and these Peculiarities with their Antidotes can
properly be learned only in public Hospitals, where having a number of Sick at
one Time, not only affords an Opportunity of the better comparing and remarking
their Symptoms, but they being under a certain Discipline and Regulation, the
Faces of their diseases are not changed, either by the indulgence of friends or
the officiousness of Nurses; which is too often the case in private practice.
Another argument, (and that by no means the least,) for an Institution of this
Nature, is, that it affords the best and only means of properly instructing
Pupils in the Practice of Medicine; as far therefore, as the breeding good and
able Physicians, which in all Countries and at all Times has been thought an
object of the highest Importance, deserves the Consideration of the Public,
this Institution must likewise claim its Protection and Encouragement.

Nor is the Scheme of a Public Hospital I believe so impracticable, nor the
Execution of it, I hope at so great a distance, as at first sight it may appear
to be. There are Numbers in this Place I am sure (was a Subscription once set
on foot, upon an extensive and generous Plan) whose Fortunes enable them, and
whose Benevolence would prompt them, liberally to contribute to so useful an
Institution; it wants but a Prime Mover, whose Authority would give Weight to
the Undertaking, and whose Zeal and Industry, would promote it. Such a one I
hope ever long to see rise up amongst us, and may the Blessing of the Poor, and
the Applause of the Good and Humane, be the Reward of his Assiduity and Labor.


