MINUTES OF CONFERENCES, HELD AT FORT-PITT, IN APRIL AND MAY, 1768, UNDER THE
DIRECTION OF GEORGE CROGHAN, Esquire, DEPUTY AGENT for INDIAN AFFAIRS, WITH THE
CHIEFS and WARRIORS OF THE Ohio and other Western INDIANS.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by WILLIAM GODDARD, at the New Printing-Office,
in Market-Street. M,DCC,LXIX.

Minutes of Conferences, etc. At a CONFERENCE held at Port-Pitt, on Tuesday the
Twenty-sixth Day of April, 1768, with the Chiefs and principal Warriors of the
Six Nations, Delawares, Shawanese, Munsies and Mohickons, re^^^ing on the
Waters of the Ohio.
PRESENT,
GEORGE CROGHAN, Esquire, Deputy-Agent for Indian Affairs. JOHN ALLEN,
Esquires, Commissioners from the Province of Pennsylvania. JOSEPH S^IPPEN,
junior, Esquires, Commissioners from the Province of Pennsylvania. ALEXANDER
M'KEE, Esquire Commissary of Indian Affairs. Colonel JOHN REED, Commandant, Captain
CHARLES EDMONSTON, Captain -- POWNALL.
Lieutenants.
THOMAS FORD, ALEXANDER MACLELLAN, JESSE WRIGHT, SAMUEL STEEL, WILLIAM WOOD,
THOMAS BATT.
Ensigns.
THOMAS HUTCHINS, ROBERT HAMILION, JAMES SAVAGI. GODFREY TRACY.
Mr. HENRY MONTOUR, Interpreter.

INDIANS.
Six Nations.
Keyashuts, Chiefs. White Mingo, Chiefs. So^^^o, Chiefs. Allyo^dongo, Chiefs.
Onaughkong, Chiefs. Gettyqueaye, Chiefs. Onondagago, Chiefs. Cadodonago,
Chiefs. Soggoyadentha, Chiefs. Thonissagarawa, Chiefs. Oyanay, Chiefs.
Toeaughquottet. Chiefs.
Delawares.
Nettawatways, or Newcomer, Chiefs. Custettoga, Chiefs. Beaver, Chiefs. Latort,
Chiefs. Spawgassa, Chiefs. Nessicuthethem, Chiefs. Cascatchon, Chiefs.
Kekiwenum, Chiefs. Washawanon, Chiefs. Mahetoaughkong, Chiefs. Loyalaughaland,
Chiefs. Tugasso. Chiefs.
Six Nations.
Toeageda, Chief Warriors. Toedassaho, Chief Warriors. Kennissoen, Chief
Warriors. Thagonneyesus, Chief Warriors. Dawatdehough, Chief Warriors.
Awanneynatha, Chief Warriors.
With 293 Warriors, besides Women and Children.

Delawares.
Capt. Jacobs, Chief Warriors. Winganum, Chief Warriors. Capt. Pipe, Chief
Warriors. Capt. Jonny. Chief Warriors. Quequedagaytho, or Gray Eyes, Chief
Warriors. White Wolf, Chief Warriors. Theckhoton, Chief Warriors. Opemalughim,
Chief Warriors. Killaykhehon, Chief Warriors. Wiesahoxon, Chief Warriors.
With 311 Warriors, besides Women and Children.

Shawanese.
Kaysinnaughtha, or the Hard Man, Chiefs. Etawakissaho, Chiefs. Maughkatethwa,
Chiefs. Maykypuckathey, Chiefs. Maughkateymawaywa, Chiefs. Nymwha, Chiefs.
Bennoxcumma, Chiefs. Naynichtha, Chiefs. Wassaynametha, Chiefs. Wethawathocka.
Chiefs.
Munsies.
Auttemaway, Chiefs. Kendasseong, Chiefs. Wassawayhim, Chiefs. Quekquahim,
Chiefs. Waughellapo, Chiefs.
With 196 Warriors, besides Women and Children.

Thethawgay, Chief Warriors. Waughcomme, Chief Warriors. Othawaydia, Chief
Warriors. Mawaydia, Chief Warriors. Munnena, Chief Warriors. Kawcomme, Chief
Warriors. Shilleywathetha, Chief Warriors. Quighbya. Chief Warriors.
With 141 Warriors, besides Women and Children.

Mohickons.
Wen^ighjalis, Chiefs. Kelleighoon. Chiefs.
With 90 Warriors, besides Women and Children.

Seven Wyandot^s sent to attend the Conference.

In the whole 1103 Indians, besides Women and Children.

1768.
THE Indians having taken their S^^^e, in Order, Mr. Cr^ghan opened the
Co^ferences as follows, viz.

Brethren of the Six Nations, Delawares, Shawanese, Munsies, and Mohickons.

I am glad to see so many of your different Nations assembled at this Council
(...) and with this String of Wampum I clear your Eyes, and wipe away your To^^
that you may see and look on your Brethren the English, with Pleasure.

A String.

Brethren,

With this String I clean the Sweat off your Bodies, and remove all evil
Though^ from your Minds, and clean the Passage to your Hearts, that every Thing
which man be said to you, from your Brethren the English, may rest easy there.

A String.

Brethren,

With this String I clear your Ears, that you may hear and consider well what
going to be said to you at this general Meeting of your several Tribes.

A String.

Brethren,

I take this first Opportunity of our Meeting in Council, 176^
to introduce to you the Commissioners of Pennsylvania, appointed by your
Brother Onas, and the wise Men of that Government, and desire you will give
particular Attention to the several Messages those Gentlemen are charged with,
to deliver to your several Nations.

A Belt.

After the above Speeches were explained to the different Nations, Mr. M'Kee
delivered to them the Message which Go^^rnor Penn sent to his Care in February
last, having had no Opportunity, till now, of meeting with the Chiefs of the
several Tribes together, though he had dispatched Messengers to inform them of
his having such a Message to communicate to them

The Message follows in these Words, viz.

By the Honorable JOHN PENN, Esquire, Lieutenant Governor and Commander in
Chief of the Province of Pennsylvania, and Counties of Newcastle, Kent, and
Sussex, on Delaware, etc. etc.
A MESSAGE to the Chiefs and Warriors of the Six Nations, Delawares and
Shawanese, at Ohio.
Brethren,
I AM sorry to acquaint you that one Frederick Stump, and John Ironcutter, some
Time ago, having sold some Rum to a few Indians of your Nations, they all got
drunk at Stump's House on Middle Creek, and, in their Liquor, threatened to
kill him and his Family, as he says; on which those two wicked Men murdered
several of your People.

Brethren,

You must all be sensible that there are bad and foolish People of all Nations,
whom at Times the evil Spirit gets the better of, and tempts to murder their
most intimate Friends, and even Relations, in order to disturb the Peace and
Tranquillity of their Neighbors -- These Accidents often happen amongst
yourselves, as well as among us, but the imprudent Act of a few foolish People
should not disturb the Peace of the many wise and innocent amongst us.

The great Giver of life has given us a good Heart, and Tongues to speak the
Sentiments of our Hearts to each other -- And when any Misfortune happens of
this Kind to either of us, we should consider well the Consequences, and meet
under the Tree of Peace, and smoke together as our Forefathers formerly did,
and endeavor to adjust and settle any Disputes that might formerly happen,
that so no black Clouds might arise over our Heads, to prevent us from seeing
the Sun rise and set over us in the strictest Friendship.

This is the Method I propose to take on this unlucky Occasion, and recommend
to you my Brethren, and desire you may rest easy and satisfied till you hear
from me again. The strictest Justice shall be done you, and I make no Doubt but
you will be satisfied with my Conduct.

On first hearing of this unfortunate Affair, I issued a Proclamation, and had
those two Men apprehended and put into Prison, and make no Doubt but to bring
them to that Punishment so heinous a Crime deserves, by the Laws of their
Country.

I have wrote to Sir William Johnson, and informed him of this Accident; and as
soon as my Express returns, you may be sure to hear from me and him farther on
this Matter, and more to your Satisfaction, at you will be convinced of the
Justice and upright Intentions of all His Majesty's Subjects, toward your
several Nations.

A Belt.

GIVEN under my Hand, and the lesser Seal of the said Province of Pennsylvania,
at Philadelphia, the Twenty-second Day of February, in the Year of our Lord,
1768. JOHN PENN. Lesser Seal

By His Honor's Command, JOSEPH SHIPPEN, jun. Secretary.


1768.
WENESDAY, 27th APRIL, Mr. Croghan, and the Commissioners of Pennsylvania, had a
Meeting with the Chiefs of the several Tribes, and explained to them the Heads
of the several Speeches to be delivered to them from the Governor of
Pennsylvania. After the above Chiefs had considered what had been told them,
the Delawares and Shawanese on a Belt and String of Wampum expressed their
Satisfaction at seeing Commissioners from Pennsylvania, at their Council Fire;
and returned Mr. Croghan Thanks for introducing them to their several Nations,
assuring him they would pay due Attention to what those Gentlemen should say to
them from their Brother Onas and their Brethren of that Province.

A Belt and String.

At a CONFERENCE held with the Indians at Fort Pit, on Friday the 29th Day of
April, 1768.
PRESENT the same as before.
MR. Croghan addressed himself to all the different Tribes, and spoke as
follows viz.

Brethren,

The other Day I introduced you to the Commissioners from Pennsylvania, and
informed you they had several Messages to you from the Governor and good People
of that Province They are now going to speak to you, and I desire you will pay
du^ Attention to what they shall say.

The Commissioners then in the Name of the Governor of Pennsylvania, delivere^
the following Messages to the Indians.

The Honorable JOHN PENN, Esquire Lieutenant Governor, and Commander ^ Chief of
the Province of Pennsylvania, and Counties of Newcastle, Kent, and Suff^^ on
Delaware, to the several Tribes of Indians, living on and beyond the Ohio, viz
Six Nations, Shawaness, Delawares, etc.
Brethren,

IT is not long since I sent a Message to you, to be delivered by Mr. Alexand^^
M'kee.

You will see that that Message was sent on Purpose to acquaint you that two ^
our bad Inhabitants had murdered some of our Indian Brethren, at Middle Creek,
an^ Susquehanna, and that I was taking all the Pains in my Power to have the
Murdere^ apprehended, and brought to the Punishment they justly deserve.

Ever since I sent that Message to you my Heart has been so deeply afflicted
wit^ Sorrow, for the Loss you have sustained by that barbarous Act, that I
could not res^ or sleep quiet in my Bed, as I well knew it was a very great
Breach of the solem^ Engagements we had entered into of preserving the
strictest Friendship between u^ in not suffering the least Link in the Chain to
be broken or any Ways hurt.

I have longed much to come myself to the Ohio, to take you by the Hand, and
s^^ down and condole with you, on so melancholy an Occasion, in the Losses you
have sustained in the Death of some of our good Brethren the Indians; but I
must let yo^ know that the great Affairs I have to manage in the Government,
necessarily detai^ me at this Time in Philadelphia. -- I have therefore
appointed my good Brother, Jo^^ Allen, Esquire and the provincial Secretary, Joseph
Shippen, Esquire Commissioners, ^ meet you on this Occasion, and to speak and
condole with you in my Stea^. Th^^ will deliver this Message to you in my Name,
and whatever they shall say to you, yo^ may hear and believe in the same Manner
at if I was present among you, and spok^ to you myself; for you may depend on
it, they will say nothing to you but the re^^ Truth, and what are the sincere
Sentiments of my Heart.

A String.

Brethren,

I told you also in that Message, that I had communicated this melancholy News
^ Sir William Johnson, and promised you that as soon as I should receive his
Answer, yo^ should hear from me again; 176^
and I hoped in such a Manner as would be to your Satisfaction.

Brethren,

I am now to inform you, that I have since received Sir William Johnson's
Answer, and am pleased to hear that he has laid this Matter before a large
Number of Indians, as well of the Si^ Nations as of several other Northern
Tribes of Indians, with whom he has lately held friendly Conferences at his
House. And Mr. Croghan will relate to you whatever was done at that Treaty.

A String.

Brethren,

The unhappy Accidents which have happened to some of your People, in my
Government, have given me great Concern, as I have already told you; I, with
this String of Wampum, gather up the Bones of all our dead Friends, and bury
them in the Earth that they may be no more seen.

A String.

Brethren,

As I have buried the Bones of all our deceased Friends, I condole with you for
the Loss you have sustained in them, and cover their Graves with these few
Goods.

Delivered the Condolance Presents.

Brethren,

With this Belt of Wampum, I clean the Blood off the Leaves and Earth whereon
it was sprinkled, that the sweet Herbs, which come through the Earth, may have
their usual Verdure, and that we may all forget the unhappy Accidents that have
happened.

A large white Belt.

Brethren,

Hearken now to what I have to say further to you, in Behalf of myself and all
the good People of this Province.

I am informed that some wicked and ill-disposed People have told you many
Lies, endeavored to make you believe that the good People of my Province are
not well affected toward you, but intend you some Mischief, and are not
desirous of preserving the Chain of Friendship bright and entire between us.
You may depend on it that all such Representations are false, and without the
least Foundation, and are made with no other View than to make a Breach between
us, and the Authors must be looked upon as our greatest Enemies. To assure you
that I am desirous and sincere in my Intentions, to live always in the
strictest Harmony with you, and to remove every Uneasiness that may be lodged
in your Breasts, I have empowered and instructed my Commissioners, to confer
with you on any Matters which immediately relate to my Government; and to hear
what you may have to say to me with Regard to all such Things as may contribute
to preserve the Peace, and strengthen that Band of Friendship in which you are
united with the good People of this Province: And I make no Doubt but you have
the same good Dispositions that I have to promote that End; and that all Things
will be freely communicated to one another in these Conferences. I desire,
therefore, that you will fully inform my Commissioners of every Thing that
gives you the least Uneasiness, that I may know it and endeavor to remove all
Cause of Discontent among you.

A Belt.

Brethren,

I have told you every Thing I had to say to you relative to the unhappy Murder
committed by two of our wicked People, on some of your Brethren; and as I am,
and have been, doing every Thing in my Power to bring those Offenders to
Justice, I cannot help reminding you of the Number of People I have lost in the
Indian Country, by some of your foolish young Men; and as I am determined that
the strictest Justice shall be done you, I must let you know that I expect the
same Justice from you for the Loss of His Majesty's Subjects entrusted to my
Care. This is agreeable to the Treaties of Friendship long subsisting between
your several Nations and us; and if we both unite in attending strictly to
those Treaties, we shall be able to preserve the Chain of Friendship bright,
and without Rust.

It was likewise agreed at those Treaties, that whenever any Accident should
happen, that might give the least Uneasiness, or in any Manner endanger the
Friendship subsisting between us, 1768.
we should immediately inform each other of it. -- Now yo^ see that I have not
forgot those ancient Treaties, for, as soon as I had Knowledge o^ those unlucky
Accidents, which have happened in my Province, I immediately sen^ you Notice of
them by a Speech and Belt, to be delivered to you by Mr. M'Kee; an^ I now send
my two Commissioners to condole with you on that melancholy Occasion^ I must
now inform you of such English Subjects belonging to my Province, as have been
murdered in the Indian Country, and have come to my Knowledge, viz. He^r^
O'Brian, Peter Brown, and eight other Men, in proceeding down the Ohio, last
August, with two large Batteaus, loaded with Goods, were murdered by the
Indians, and Part of the Goods taken away near the Falls of that River. --
Thomas Mitchell, a Trader was likewise murdered in one of the Shawanese
Villages, last Fall. -- John M'Donal^ was also murdered near Fort Pit, in
December last, by a Delaware Indian.

A Belt.

Brethren,

With this Belt I renew, brighten and make strong the Chain of Friendship, that
subsists between us; I have still fast hold of one End of it, and desire you
will also keep fa^^ hold of the other End; and let us both for ever hold it
fast, that we may hereafte^ continue as one Man, and act together in all
Matters relating to our mutual Welfare^ as Brothers who have the same Interests
and Concern for each other's Peace and Happiness.

A Belt representing a Chain, held by a Hand at each End, of 11 Rows.

Dated at Fort Pit, the 29th Day of April, 1768. JOHN PENN. By his
Commissioners, JOHN ALLEN, (L. S.) JOSEPH SHIPPEN. jun. (L. S.)




The Commissioners having delivered the Governor's Messages in Council, M^
Croghan addressed the Indians as follows.

Brethren,

You have now heard what the Governor of Pennsylvania has said to you by his
Commissioners; and you see that he and the wise Men of that Province have not
forgo^ the former Friendship which subsisted between your Forefathers and
theirs. Th^^ have now condoled with you for your lost Friends, agreeable to
your ancient Custom^ and spoke their Minds freely on every Subject that has
caused their meeting you at thi^ Time, and have called upon you to do the same
on your Parts. -- They have brightened the Chain of Friendship, and have done
every Thing in their Power to preserv^ that Friendship which was made between
your Forefathers and the first Settlers o^ that Province, who came over with
your ancient Brother Onas.

Brethren,

I now desire you will assemble all the wise Men of your several Tribes
together and call to Mind your former Treaties with the good People of
Pennsylvania, and consider what has been said to you, and speak your Minds
freely and openly to the Governor's Commissioners, that every Thing which gives
you Uneasiness, or Discontent may be fully known to your Brother Onas, as he
has desired.

A Belt.

After the above Speeches were interpreted to the different Nations, one of the
Chief spoke, and said they would take them into Consideration, and let us know
when they should be ready to answer them.

Then a Deputy sent from the Six Nation Country got up, and delivered the
following Message to the several Nations present.

Brethren,

I am sent from the Six Nation Council with this Speech, to inform you, that
they have considered well the past Conduct of their Warriors in going through
this Country to and from War, who have made a Practice of stealing Horses, and
behaving otherwise very ill to their Brethren the English, and have forbid
their doing any Mischie^ for the future; and do now desire you the Shawanese,
Delawares, and Wyandotts to d^ the same, and to throw all evil Thoughts cut of
your Minds and Hearts; 17^^
and to think of nothing but promoting a lasting Friendship with your Brethren
the English, as we your elder Brothers, the Six Nations, have determined to do.

A Belt.

After the Six Nation Deputy had finished the foregoing Speech, and it was
interpreted to the Indians, Mr. Croghan informed them of the Congress Sir
William Johnson lately held with the Six Nations, Canada Indians, and other
northern Tribes, of the Business transacted with them, and the Peace settled
between those several Nations and the Cherokees, and that the Deputies of the
latter, with a Number of the Six Nations, were to return home by the Way of
Fort Pit, and recommended it to the different Tribes present to behave in a
friendly Manner to them, and see that they passed safe through their Country;
on which Mr. Croghan gave them

A Belt.

At a CONFERENCE held with the Indians, at Fort Pit, on Sunday the First Day
of May, 1768. PRESENT, the same as before.
QUEQUEDAGAYTHO, Speaker for the Delawares, rose up and made the following
Answer to the Message from the Governor of Pennsylvania.

Brother,

We return you Thanks for your Kindness in sending Commissioners to condole
with us, on Account of the unhappy Accidents which have happened between us; as
also for the friendly Messages they have delivered to us in your Name, and you
may be assured we shall pay due Regard to every Thing you have therein said to
us.

He then requested the several Nations present to attend to what he was about
to say further to their Brother, the Governor of Pennsylvania; and proceeded.

Brother,

The Grief and Concern which you have expressed to us, on Account of the late
Mischiefs committed on our People, we believe to be very sincere, and that they
were caused by the Evil Spirit. You have also mentioned, in a particular
Manner, several Losses which you have sustained in the Indian Country; we are
heartily sorry for them, but must acquaint you, that as to the Murder of the
Ten Men in the Batteaus, down this River, we have heard of it as well as you,
but it was committed by other Nations, and not by any of the Tribes here
present, so that we have not had the least Concern in this unhappy Affair. --
It is too true that one of your People was killed by the Shawanese, and we are
also very sorry for that Accident. -- As to the Man who, you say, was killed
near Fort Pit, by a Delaware Indian, we tell you that the Person who committed
that Fact, was half a white Man, and the other half an Indian; so you see,
Brother, that you are equally concerned with us in that Breach of Friendship;
but I hope, Brother, all these Misfortunes are now buried in Oblivion, and that
our Children may never think of them more, and that we may continue in the
strictest Friendship.

A Belt.

Brother,

I shall, in the next Place, speak to you concerning the Friendship that
subsists between us; I hope we shall always be firm in it; and we shall
endeavor, on our Parts to keep the Chain as bright and strong as our
Forefathers did at their first Councils, which were held by wise Men.

A String.

He then repeated the same Ceremonies that we had used in the burying the
Bones, the said, -- --

Brother,

I now gather all the Bones of your deceased Friends, and bury them in the
Ground, in the same Place with ours, so deep that none of our young People may
ever know that any Misfortunes have happened between us; 1768.
and it gives us great Satisfaction that our Brother Onas has not forgot this
ancient Custom of condoling with us for our Losses.

A Belt.

Brother,

By this Belt I also wipe away the Blood, as you have done, from the Earth, and
make your Bodies quite clean, that you may appear to have as good Hearts as
those of our wise Forefathers; and we hope what passes in this Council will
never be forgotten.

A (...).

After repeating what had been said to them, relating to the Chain of
Friendship, he concluded. --

Brethren,

We are much obliged to the Governor for speaking so freely and openly to us
from his Heart, and as he has recommended to us to take fast hold of the Chain
of Friendship, we assure him we shall take his Advice, and will do it; and that
we shall likewise speak to him from our Hearts, for we look upon this as the
only Way to preserve our Friendship; and we shall take Care to guide and direct
our young People to behave as they ought to do, in promoting the Peace, and
cultivating the strictest Harmony between us.

A Belt.

The Beaver, a Chief of the Delawares, then rising up, desired all present
(...) ^y Attention to what he should say to his Brother, the Governor of
Pennsylvania.

Brother,

We, the old Men of the different Nations present, are much rejoiced that the
Chain of Friendship is now brightened by our Brother, the Governor of
Pennselvania, and we return him Thanks for putting it into our Hands, in the
kind Manner he has done, which convinces us of his good Intentions.

We, the Delawares, Shawanese, Munsies, Mohickons, Wyandotts and our Uncles the
Six Nations, will keep fast hold of the Chain of Friendship, in the Manner you
(...) us. We now desire the Governor will also take hold of the ^^nd of this
Belt, wh^^ we stretch along the Road between him and us, in order to clear it
of the Briars and Brush that have grown up in it, that we may all travel it in
Peace and Safety.

Brother,

We make the Road smooth and pleasant for your Commissioners to travel Home,
and make a Report to you, at our ancient Council Fire in Philadelphia, of what
they now hear from us. And when you consider our Speeches, you will find that
our Hearts are good, and that we are determined to preserve the Road of Peace
free from any Interruption on our Parts: We desire you will take the same Care
on your Parts, for if any Logs shall be laid across it, by any of your People,
it will be undoing every Thing that is now agreed on between our several
Nations and you at this Meeting.

A Belt.

Then Quequedagaytho rose and said that they had spoken every Thing they had to
say, at this Time, to their Brother Onas; and, addressing himself to Mr.
Croghan, spoke as follows,

Brother,

We have been long acquainted with you, and are well pleased with your
Behavior toward us; and, at this Time, are the more obliged to you for
introducing to us the Commissioners from the Government of Pennsylvania; as it
has given us a good Opportunity of renewing our Peace with the good People of
that Province, with whom our Forefathers always lived in the most perfect
Friendship. You spoke to us the other Day, and recommended to us to take into
our most serious Consideration the several Matters we have heard from the
Governor of Pennsylvania, by his Commissioners, and to weigh them well in our
Minds before we give our Answers to them.

Brother,

We have taken your Advice, and you may be convinced of this by what we have
just now said in Behalf of the Delawares, Munsies and Mohickons.

A Belt.

The Speaker of the Delawares then observed that they had finished what they
had to say at this Time. 176^.


Then a Chief of the Six Nations rose up, and, addressing himself to the
Commissioners of Pennsylvania, said, --

Brethren,

We have heard with Attention what the Delawares have now said to you, and we
shall speak to you Tomorrow; and so will our younger Brothers, the Shawanese.

At a CONFERENCE held with the Indians, at Fort Pit, on Monday the Second of
May, 1768.
PRESENT, the same as before.
TOHONISSAHGARAWA, a Chief of the Six Nations, got up, and, addressing himself
to the several Nations present, said, --

Brethren,

The Great Giver of Life has brought us all together, at this Council (...) in
order to promote the good Work of Peace; and we have heard what our Brother
Onas has said to us b^ ^he Commissioners; and you will now hearken attentively
to what the Six Nations are about to say to him in Answer to his Messages.

A String.

Then, addressing himself to the Commissioners of Pennsylvania, he said, --

Brethren,

You have already heard what our Nephews, the Delawares, have said to you; they
have spoken freely and openly to you from their Hearts; and we hope it has made
a proper Impression on you; we are now in like Manner going to open our Hearts
to you freely, and we also hope that what we shall deliver will be received by
you in a friendly Manner.

A String.

Brother Onas,

In your several Speeches you have desired us to open our Minds freely, and to
speak before you every Thing that gives us Uneasiness; we are obliged to you
for this Advice, which we shall follow, and are glad of an Opportunity to speak
to you in Council.

Brother,

It is not without Grief that we see our Country settled by you, without our
Knowledge or Consent; and it is a long Time since we first complained to you of
this Grievance; which we find has not as yet been redressed; but Settlements
are still extending farther into our Country. Some of them are made directly on
our War Path, leading to our Enemies Country, and we do not like it.

Brother,

You have Laws amongst you to govern your People by, and it will be the
strongest Proof of the Sincerity of your Friendship to let us see that you
remove the People from our Lands; as we look upon it, it will be Time enough
for you to settle them when you have purchased them, and the Country becomes
yours.

A Belt.

Brother,

We have heard with Pleasure what you have said to us; you have made our Hearts
easy with Respect to the Losses we have suffered by you; and, therefore, we
shall not take Notice of any past Misfortunes. -- We are glad to find our
Nephews, the Delawares, have taken fast hold of the Chain of Friendship with
you, and by this Belt we join our Hands with you and them in holding it fast.
We speak now in behalf of the Six Nations residing in this Country, as there
are some of every Tribe present, and we wish, Brother, that you may be strong,
and as well disposed to preserve that Friendship as we are.

A Belt.

1768.
Brother,

I have now done speaking, and have told you every Thing that remains in our
Hearts, which gives us, and the several Nations in this Country, any U^^a^ness.

At a CONFERENCE held with the Indians, at Fort Pit, on Tuesday the Third of
May, 1768.
PRESENT, the same as before.
NYMWHA, a Speaker for the Shawanese, addressing himself to all the Indians,
desired they would attend to what he was going to say to the Commissioners of
Pennsylvania, and all his Brethren the English, present, and spoke as follows;

Brethren,

When you talked of Peace to us, at the Time we were struggling in War, we did
not hearken to you at first. You mentioned it a second Time to us, we still
refused to attend to you; but after repeating it to us several Times, we
consented to hear you. We then looked at you, and saw you holding Instruments
of War in your Hands, which we took from you, and cast them into the Air out of
our Sight. We afterward desired you to destroy your Forts, as that would be
the Way to make all Nations of Indians believe you were sincere in your
Friendship; and we now repeat the same Request to you again. -- We also desire
you not to go down this River, in the Way of the Warriors, belonging to the
foolish Nations to the Westward; and told you that the Waters of this River, a
great Way below this Place, were colored with Blood; you did not pay any
Regard to this, but asked us to accompany you in going down, which we did, and
we felt the Smart of our Rashness, and with Difficulty returned to our Friends.
We see you now about making Batteaus, and we make no Doubt you intend going
down the River again, which we now tell you is disagreeable to all Nations of
Indians, and now again desire you to sit still at this Place.

They are also uneasy to see that you think yourselves Masters of this Country,
because you have taken it from the French, who you know had no Right to it, as
it is the Property of us Indians. We often hear that you intend to fight with
the French again, if you do, we desire you will remove your Quarrel out of this
Country, and carry it over the great Waters, where you used to fight, and where
we shall neither see or know any Thing of it. All we desire is to enjoy a quiet
Peace with you both* and that we should be strong in talking of Peace.

We have now spoken to you from our Hearts, and hope we shall exert ourselves
in promoting a lasting Friendship. All we have to say to you now is to be
strong, and let us agree to what we desire of each other. When you first talked
of Peace to us, you desired us to sit over the River quietl^ at our Fires; but
our Women and Children were frightened away by the Noise you made in repairing
your Fort; but if you do as we desired you, they will return without Fear.

A Belt.

Brethren,

You have heard what we have desired in our last Speech, and we hope you will
comply with our Request, and not attempt to go down this River again, as the
Nations who live that Way are surprised to see you make a Practice of this, at
the same Time that you were making Professions of Friendship to us. We
therefore desire you will put a Stop to your People going down this River, till
we have spoke to the Nations living in that Country; which we intend to do with
the Assistance of our Brothers the Six Nations, and our Grandfathers the
Delawares.

A String.

Brethren,

The Reason of our mentioning this Matter, at this Time is, because we hope you
will take Pity on us, and do as we have desired you.

Then Kissonaucththa, a Chief of the Shawanese, rose up and said,

Brethren, 176^


We are glad to see you here, and that you are sent by the Governor of
Pennsylvania to confer with us at this Council. It much rejoiced our Hearts to
take you by the Hand on your Arrival, and we assure you that the several
Nations now present are equally rejoiced with us on this Account.

A String.

Brethren,

You have informed us that you are sent by the Governor and wise Men of
Pennsylvania, to hear whatever may pass at this Council. We are glad to hear
you say you had made the Road clear and smooth, as you came along, and that you
have brought to us the Chain of Friendship, in your Hands, from our Brethren
the wise Men of Pennsylvania. This has dispersed the dark Clouds of Night which
hung over our Heads, on Account of many late Misfortunes which have ha^^^ned,
and brought to us the Light of the clear Day. You have, no Doubt, heard I many
bad Reports of Mischief, which may have made an ill Impression on your Minds
against us* we now remove them ^^ite away, and make your Hearts easy, like
those of your wise Forefathers. We also clear the Road on our Parts, that, when
you set off, you may travel it back with Pleasure to your Council House at
Philadelphia, which I likewise sweep clean, that your wise Men, when you
return, may sit down in it with Satisfaction and Comfort, and look back upon
us, their Brethren, remembering that we have not forgot our ancient Friendship.

Brethren,

We have now, on all Sides, cleared and made smooth the Road between you and
us; and we desire you, on your Parts, to be strong, and not suffer any of your
Soldiers to travel it, who carry sharp edged Weapons with them, as that may
injure the Friendship subsisting between us.

A Belt.

Mr. Croghan then acquainted the Indians, that the Commissioners of
Pennsylvania and he would take the above Speeches into Consideration, and
answer them Tomorrow.

N. B. This Afternoon fourteen Canoes arrived here, containing thirty-eight
Munsies and Mohickons, exclusive of Women and Children, who reside on the Heads
of the West Branch of the Susquehanna.

At a CONFERENCE held with the Indians, at Fort Pit, on Wednesday the Fourth
of May, 1768, P. M.
PRESENT, the same as before.
THONISSAHGARAWA, a Chief of the Six Nations, rose up, and, addressing himself
to the Gentlemen, and several Nations present, apologized for some Difference
which happened this Morning among themselves, as it was the Means of preventing
our meeting them in the Forenoon, and desired that their Brethren, the English,
and the Tribes of Indians present, would take no Notice of it.

A String.

The same Chief then spoke as follows:

Brethren,

I am sorry to hear what our Brethren, the Shawanese, said to you Yesterday, as
we did not expect that they would have made any Mention of your keeping
Possession of the Forts you have taken from the French; for it was agreed upon
by the Six Nations, as well as all other Indians, that the French should be
driven out of this Country, and the Possession of all their Forts and Towns put
into the Hands of our Brethren the English; and the Road of Peace was opened,
from the Sunrising to the Sunsetting, for all Nations to travel in.

A String.

Then Kayashuta, a Chief of the Senecas, got up, and laying down a Copy of the
Treaty of Peace, made by Col. Broadstreet with the Indians, in the Year 1764,
spoke as follows:

1768.
Brethren,

What our Chief has just now mentioned to you is very true, and you will see by
this Paper, that, during the late unhappy Differences between us, we held a
Treaty with Colonel Broadstreet, by which we agreed, that you had a Right to
build Forts and trading Houses where you pleased, and to travel the Road of
Peace, from the Sunrising to the Sunsetting. At that Treaty the Shawanese and
Delawares were with me, and know all this well; and I am much surprised that
the Shawanese should speak to you in the Manner they did Yesterday.

The Commissioners then addressed themselves to the Six Nations, and spoke as
follows:

Brethren of the Six Nations,

It gave us great Pleasure to hear what you said the other Day to your Brother
Onas and we thank you in his Name for the Readiness you discovered in
brightening and making strong our ancient Chain of Friendship. This will be
very agreeable to him* as we know he is sincerely determined to continue to do
the same on his Part.

Brethren,

We esteem it a strong Mark of the Sincerity and Goodness of your Hearts, that
you have opened them to us so freely and fully, as your Brother Onas earnestly
desired you, that he might know whatever lay still concealed within your
Breasts, which gave you any Uneasiness.

Brethren,

You have heartily and publicly told us that you are now easy with Respect to
al^ former Losses you have suffered by our Means, and that you will take no
farther Notice of such Things. This entirely corresponds with your strong
Professions of Friendship.

A String.

Brethren,

You have also freely, and without Reserve, informed us that the only Grievance
which you now have Reason to complain of, is the Settlement made on your Lands
We are glad, Brethren, we have now so good an Opportunity of acquainting you,
as well as the several Nations present, with the Mind of your Brother Onas, and
the Endeavors which have been used to do you Justice in this Respect.

Brethren,

We can assure you that nothing has given him more Concern than to find a
Number of foolish People should dare to seat themselves on Lands in this
Province, which your good Friends the Proprietors have not a^ yet purchased
from you. Governor Penn, therefore, as well from his own sincere and earnest
Inclinations to remove this Injury done you, as by the express Commands of our
great King George, issued Proclamations, near two Years ago, ordering all
Persons whatsoever, who had settled on your Lands, to remove without Delay, and
forbidding others from taking the least Possession of any, under the severest
Penalty of the Law.

Brethren,

As the People, who have settled your Lands, came chiefly from Virginia, the
Governor of that Province likewise issued Proclamations and Orders to the same
Purpose. The King's General too (His Excellency General Gage) has twice sent
up Parties of Soldiers to the People living on Redstone Creek and the
Monongabela, to warn them off your Lands, and threatened them with seizing
their Persons and Effects, if they refused to move away. But, Brethren, we are
sorry to tell you, that none of these Measures have had the desired Effect;
and, therefore, Governor Penn, and his Assembly, having still your Interest
greatly at Heart, passed a Law, in February last, inflicting the Penalty of
Death on all Persons who should continue on your Lands after the first Day of
June next; and, in order that the People, who were settled on them, might have
timely and proper Notice of that Law, Governor Penn, near two Months ago, sent
to them four prudent and honest Men to distribute Copies of it among them, with
a Number of Proclamations, commanding them to obey it strictly, under the
Penalty of Death, and also to read and explain them fully to all those People.

Brethren,

Those four Men have lately returned home, and reported to the Governor of
Pennsylvania, that they had executed his Orders; but that they were told by the
People settled at and near Redstone Creek, 17^^
that they had been encouraged by the Indians themselves to continue on those
Lands; that, however, they are determined to obey the Law, and move off without
Delay. But, Brethren, we are sorry to tell you, that as soon as the Men sent by
the Governor had prevailed on the Settlers to consent to a Compliance with the
Law, there came among them eight Indians, who live at the Mingo Town down this
River, and desired the People not to leave their Settlements, but to sit quiet
on them till the present Treaty at this Place should be concluded. The People,
on receiving this Advice and Encouragement, suddenly changed their Minds, and
determined not to quit their Places, till they should hear farther from the
Indians.

The Indians then delivered to the Men sent by the Governor a String of Wampum,
and a Speech, which they desired them to carry to the Governor. The Speech was
this: -- You are sent here by your great Men to tell these People to go away
from the Lands which you say is ours, and our great Men have sent us, and we
are glad to meet here the same Day. We tell you the white People must stop, and
we stop them till the Treaty; and when George Croghan and our great Men shall
speak together, we will tell them what to do.

Now, Brethren, we cannot help expressing to you our great Concern at this
Behavior of those Indians, as it has absolutely frustrated the Steps the
Governor was taking to do you Justice, by the immediate Removal of those People
from your Lands. And we must tell you. Brethren, that the Conduct of those
Indians appears to us very astonishing; and we are much at a Loss to account
for the Reason of it at this Time, when the Six Nations are complaining of
Encroachments being made on their Lands. You yourselves, Brethren, must be very
sensible that, while any of the Indians encourage the People to stay on your
Lands, it will inevitably defeat all our Measures to remove them. But,
Brethren, all that we have now to desire of you is, that you will immediately
send off some of your prudent and wise Men with a Message to the People settled
at Redstone, Youghoghainy, and Monongahela, to contradict the Advice of the
eight Indians from the Mingo Town; and to acquaint them that you very much
disapprove of their continuing any longer on their ^^ttlements; and that you
expect they will quit them without Delay.

If you agree to this, we will ^^nd an honest and discreet white Man to
accompany your Messengers. And, Brethren, if after receiving such Notice from
you, they shall refuse to remove by the Time limited them, you may depend upon
it, the Government will not fail to put the Law into immediate Execution
against them.

A String.

The Commissioners then, addressing themselves to the Shawanese, spoke as
follows:

Brethren,

In the first Part of your Speeches Yesterday, you acquainted us that it was
very disagreeable to you to see a Fort continued at this Place, contrary to
your Expectations, and that you were very sorry to find a Number of Batteaus
building here, in order to go down the River. With Regard to these Things we
can only say, it is not a little surprising to us that you should mention them
at this Time, as we have always understood that this Matter was settled with
the Six Nations, and all other Indians, several Years ago, and their full
Consent obtained for keeping Forts in your Country, as well as for going down
this River to trade. But, Brethren, as we came here to confer with you on
Subjects which only relate to the Province of Pennsylvania, we have no Concern
in this Business. It is an Affair of our great King of England, and as such we
must refer you for a more particular Answer to Mr. Croghan, who, you know, is
appointed by his Majesty to transact his Affairs with the Indians in this
Country.

The Commissioners then spoke to the Delawares, Shawanese, Munsies, Mohickons,
and Wyandotts, as follows:

Brethren,

We now return you Thanks, in the Name of the Governor of Pennsylvania, and in
Behalf of the good People of that Province, for the kind Manner in which you
have received his Messages by us. We assure you it gave us great Satisfaction
to hear you declare, in this public Council, your hearty Concurrence with him
in keeping fast hold of the Chain of Friendship, and your Determination to
preserve it bright, and not to suffer any little Accidents to make a Breach in
it.

1768.
Brethren,

It is a strong Proof of the Sincerity of your Hearts, that you have resolved
to forget entirely all the past Mischiefs and Injuries which have been
committed by the Folly of our wicked and rash young Men, and we now hope these
Things will never interrupt our future Peace and Happiness.

Brethren,

We also thank you for making the Road smooth between you and the People of
Pennsylvania, by removing all the Obstructions that were in it, in such a
Manner that it may be traveled by all People with Ease and Safety.

Brethren,

It will give us much Pleasure, when we return to Philadelphia, to communicate
to the Governor all that has passed between us in these Conferences; and to
assure him of your friendly Dispositions and upright Intentions, which you may
depend on we shall faithfully do.

A Belt.

The Commissioners having finished what they had to say to the Indians, Mr.
Croghan made them the following Speeches:

Brethren the Shawanese,

When you spoke Yesterday to the Governor of Pennsylvania, you desired him to
destroy this Fort, and not to pass down this River, as it was bloody; and said
that our Warriors, passing through your Country, gave you and all other Nations
great Uneasiness in your Minds. -- You are the only Nation that has mentioned
this Circumstance, and I must tell you that this Fort was built by the King's
Orders, and that your Brother, the Governor of Pennsylvania, has no Concern in
this Matter.

Brethren,

I well remember that when the French first bui^^ a Fort here, and passed up
and down this River, you did not desire them to destroy their Forts, and leave
your Country. We were at War with your old Fathers, the French, when we drove
them away, and took Possession of this Fort; after that we conquered them,
which you well know, and when we came here the Six Nations agreed to it, and
came with us* and opened a Road of Peace through all this Country, from the
Sunrising to the Sunsetting, both by Land and Water, that we might talk in
Peace with all Nations of Indians to the Westward; and we thought the Six
Nations had a Right so to do, as we always understood that they were the
original Proprietors of this Country.

Brethren,

When I was first going down this River, by Order of his Excellency General
Gage* and the Honorable Sir William Johnson, all the Nations now present
agreed to it, and sent Deputies with me to promote the good Works of Peace with
all Nations o^ Indians to the Westward; and to receive them into the Chain of
Friendship subsisting between the King's Subjects, the Six Nations, and all
others in Alliance with them* and to take them under his Majesty's most
gracious Protection, which has been sinc^ done. It is very true, when we first
went down, we met with a Misfortune from some of the Nations we were going to
speak to, through the Instigation of the French, wh^ then had an Influence with
those People to persuade them to do Mischief, but eve^ since that Time those
Nations have behaved well to their Brethren, the English, and after that
unhappy Accident, by which we were Sufferers, Captain Murray and Mr M'Kee
condoled with your Nation for your Losses, agreeable to the ancient Custom of
our Forefathers, and buried the Bones of our deceased Friends, whose Loss gave
me great Pain of Mind; and I did not expect to find their Bones raked out of
the Ground, and brought into Council at this Time, especially as you must know
that we were struck by the very Hatchet you yourselves put into their Hands to
strike the English with.

Brethren,

By the late Treaty of Peace between the King of Great Britain and the French
King, the latter gave us Possession of all their Forts and Towns, as we had
conquered them. You likewise took Notice, Yesterday, of our building Boats, and
making Repairs to this Fort. I must tell you, that the King my Master never
made War o^ any Indian Nation in this Country; on the contrary, he has always
promoted Peace among you; 176^
an Instance of which you see in the Peace brought about between the Six
Nations and Cherokees. But you all well know that the French acted on different
Principles, by setting one Nation at War against another. This Conduct of
theirs was not pleasing to the Six Nations; they, therefore, requested the
English to go with them and Sir William Johnson to drive the French from
Niagara, and put it into the Possession of the English, which you all well know
they did; and since that Time our Warriors have passed through this Country
from Fort to Fort, and back again, and no Difference has happened between them
and your People. I am therefore surprised, Brethren, to hear you want to stop
the Road of Peace that has been so long opened for all Nations, from the
Sunrising to the Sunsetting:

A Belt.

Brethren of the Six Nations, Shawanese, Delawares, Wyandotts, Munsies and
Mohickons, give Attention to what I am going to say to you.

It gives me great ^^tisfaction to find that the Measures taken by the Governor
of Pennsylvania, and the wise People of that Province, have proved so effectual
and agreeable to your several Nations as to remove all Uneasiness from your
Minds, on Account of the many Accidents that have happened between your People
and the King's subjects in that Province; and that you have buried them so deep
in the Earth that neither you, nor your Children yet unborn, may ever call them
to Remembrance.

Brethren,

Your Forefathers lived in the strictest Friendship with the worthy Founder of
that Province, and the good People that came with him; and you have now renewed
and brightened that ancient Chain of Friendship with the Governors
Commissioners, in Behalf of the King's Subjects in that Government. I now
recommend it to your several Nations to hold fast by that Chain, and act on the
same Principles your wife Forefathers formerly did.

A String.

Brethren,

You have all heard what the Six Nations said to you by their Deputies, that
they heartily repented of their own past ill Conduct toward their Brethren,
the English, in stealing Horses and committing other Abuses; and they have
desired you, Brethren, to cast out all evil Thoughts from your Minds, and
return any stolen Horses you may have amongst you, and think of nothing, for
the future, but promoting the good Work of Peace between you and your good
Brethren, the English.

Brethren,

The King of Great Britain, your Father and my Master, takes Delight in
promoting Peace among all Nations of Indians, in this Country, and his own
Subjects, which you must be well acquainted with. You all daily experience his
Love toward you, and his Pity for your Necessities, by the Favors you
constantly receive from his Officers here and elsewhere, and I am sorry to say
that your past Conduct shows a Want of Gratitude in you to his Subjects.

Whenever the King makes Peace with any Nation, he never violates his
Engagements, though he always has it in his Power to chastize any People that
dare be so hardy as to disturb the Tranquillity of their Neighbors. -- But I
now trust, Brethren, that your future Conduct will be such as may merit his
Majesty's Esteem and Protection.

By this Belt I now clear the Road of Peace, and make it smooth and easy to
travel, from the Sunrising to the Sunsetting, that your Brethren the English,
and all Nations of Indians, may travel it with Pleasure, as one People, united
in the strongest Chain of Friendship, that our Women, and Children yet unborn,
may mutually enjoy the Blessings of a lasting Peace.

Brethren of the Six Nations, who are settled at the Two Creeks,

I am sorry to hear from some of your Brethren, the English, that whenever any
of them pass by your Village, you take Rum and other Things from them. You must
be sensible this Conduct is very wrong, and a Breach of your Engagements to us.
I hope I shall hear no more of it. You have been desired three Years ago, by
the Six Nation Council, to remove up this River nearer to their Country, and I
now desire you will take that Message into your most serious Consideration,
1768.
and do as they have directed you; which will be very agreeable to all your
Brethren the English.

A String.

Mr. Croghan having finished what he had to say to the Indians, the
Commissioners addressed themselves to all the Nations present, and said,

Brethren,

We are now to acquaint you, that, by order of the Government of Pennsylvania*
we deliver to you a Present of Goods, to be distributed among the several
Tribe^ present, to clothe your Women and Children; and we desire you will
receive them as a Testimony of the Affection and Regard which the Governor and
good People o^ this Province have for you.

The Commissioners then delivered the Presents to the different Tribes,
amounting to One Thousand and Fifty Pounds, Pennsylvania Currency, including
the several private Presents made to the Chiefs and principal Warriors.

This Evening arrived here Twenty-five Six Nation Warriors, on their Return
from the Cherokee Country, and brought with them two Prisoners.

At a private CONFERENCE held at Fort Pit, on Friday the Sixth of May 1768,
with all the Chiefs and principal Warriors of the Delaware^ Munsies and
Mohickons.
PRESENT, Mr. CROGHAN and the Commissioners.
THE Beaver rose up and spoke as follows, in Behalf of the Delawares, Munsies
and Mohickons,

Brethren,

It gives us great Pleasure that the Conferences are now ended, that the
antien^ Chain of Friendship is now renewed, and the Road made smooth between o^
several Tribes and our Brother the Governor of Pennsylvania. -- Every Thing you
have said respecting the Folly of our young People, in stealing your Horses and
committing other Abuses, we have laid to our Hearts, and will take Care to
prevent and such Misconduct in them for the future; and we desire, Brethren,
you will take Care tha^ none of your young People steal any Horses from us,
which they have frequently done

A Belt.

He then addressed himself to the Commissioners, and said,

Brethren,

We now speak to you on Account of Trade -- The Traders, who supply us with
Goods, come from your Province, and we do not take upon us to judge whether the
Goods they sell to us are dear or not, as we are ignorant of what they cost
them; but we are certain, from our own Knowledge, that they do not allow us the
same Pri^^ for our Skins and Furs as they did formerly, and hope you will speak
to them ^ allow us a sufficient Price for our Peltry.

A Belt.

Brethren,

The Country lying between this River and the Alleghenny Mountains, has always
been our Hunting Ground; but the white People, who have scattered themselves
over it, have, by their hunting, deprived us of the Game, which we look upon
ourselves to have the only Right to; and we desire you will acquaint our
Brother, the Governor, of this, and prevent their hunting there for the future.

A String.

Brethren,

We have now done speaking on Business, and every Thing has been settled at the
Conference to our Satisfaction; and we have agreed, that two of our principal
Warriors, named Quequedaguedo and Killbuck, shall accompany you to
Philadelphia; 176^
in order to see the Governor, and bring as such Answers as he shall think
proper to send us respecting our Trade and Hunting Country.

A Belt.

To which the Commissioners replied,

Brethren,

We have already communicated to you, and the other Nations, the several Steps
taken by the Government to do you all Justice, with Respect to the
Encroachments on your Lands; and we shall carefully report to the Governor
every Thing you have now said to us on his Head, that he may take such Measures
as may be judged most expedient to satisfy you; and you may expect to receive
his Answer as soon as a convenient Opportunity offers.

At a MEETING held at Fort Pit, on Saturday the 7th of May, 1768, with the
Chiefs and principal Warriors of the Shawanese.
PRESENT, Mr. CROGHAN and the Commissioners.
KISSINAUGHTHA, a Chief of the Shawanese, addressed himself to the
Commissioners, and said,

Brethren,

When you spoke to us from the Governor, you desired us to speak from our
Hearts, and tell you what gave us any Uneasiness of Mind. We considered your
Speeches, and did so, which we find by your Answer was not agreeable to you.
You tell us, what we spoke to you did not belong to the Governor of
Pennsylvania, but to the King.

Brethren,

We assure you that we are as well disposed to live in Friendship with our
Brethren the English, as any other Nation in this Country, and will hold fast
by the Chain of Friendship, now renewed and brightened by our Brother Onas, as
long as the Grass grows, or Waters run, with all our Brethren the English.

A String.

The same Speaker addressed himself to Mr. Croghan, and spoke as follows:

Brother,

We are all very sorry that we should have said any Thing, the other Day, to
our Brother Onas, that should give you, or his Commissioners, any Off^^ce, or
our Brethren the Six Nations. But as the Governor of Pennsylvania, in his
Speeches, desired us to open our Minds, and to tell every Thing that gives us
any Uneasiness, we were determined to do so.

Brother,

When you spoke to us the next Day, you told us every Thing that passed in the
Time of War, as well as since, which is very true; and we acknowledge we were
wrong, though we did not expect you would do as we requested. And, from what
you have told us, we know that it is not in the Power of any other Person but
the King our Father. And though you say, we are the only Nation that has
mentioned this to you, we know that all other Nations of Indians wish, as well
as we, that there were no Forts in this Country.

As to what we said about the Boats going down the River, we did not mean that
they should not go, but desired you would not send them till we had Time to go
and counsel with the Nations in that Country, as we have heard bad News from
thence. And as to what we said about our People that were killed, when you were
taken Prisoner, we only mentioned it to show you what a foolish People the
Indians there are. It is very true, Brother, we did send a Hatchet to those
Nations in Time of War; but it was sent to us from the Senecas, to carry to
them.

Brother,

1768.
We now desire that you may forget what we first spoke to you about those
Things; and help us to some Council Wampum, as we are very poor; and we will
immediately set out to talk to all the Nations in that Country, and take back
from them all the Belts we sent them, and do every Thing in our Power to make
the Road smooth and easy to travel, and convince you that we are as much
disposed to hold fast the Chain of Friendship, as any Nation in this Country.

A Belt.

At a MEETING held at Fort Pit, on Monday the Ninth of May, 1768, with the
Chiefs and principal Warriors of the Six Nations.
PRESENT, Mr. CROGHAN, and the Commissioners.
IT was agreed upon by them to comply with the Request of the Commissioners in
sending Messengers to the People settled at Redstone, Youghiogany and
Monongehela, to signify to them the great Displeasure of the Six Nations at
their taking Possession of the Lands there; and making Settlements on them; and
also that it is expected they will, with their Families, remove without further
Notice. They accordingly appointed the White Mingo and the three Deputies sent
from the Six Nation Country, to carry a Message to that Effect; and the
Commissioners agreed to send Mr. John Frazer and Mr. William Thompson, to
accompany them with written Instructions, in Behalf of the Government of
Pennsylvania.

Monday, Ninth of May, 1768. P. M.

THE Indian Messengers having agreed to set out for Redstone Creek Tomorrow
the Commissioners, as an Encouragement to them for the Trouble of their
Journey, made them a Present of some black Wampum.

They then desired Mr. Frazer and Capt. Thompson to hold themselves prepared
for accompanying the Indian Messengers in the Morning, and wrote them a Letter
of Instructions, which follows in these Words, viz.

Fort Pit, the Ninth of May, 1768. Gentlemen,
THE Six Nations, at the public Conferences held last Week with them another
Tribes of Indians at this Place, renewed their Complaints of Encroachments
being made on their Lands; and they have agreed, at our Instance, to sen^ four
Messengers to the People settled on the Waters of the Monongahela and
Youghiogany, to express their great Disapprobation of their continuing still
there; and also to let them know that it is expected, by the whole Confederacy
of the Six Nations that they will remove from the Lands they have unjustly
taken Possession of, without further Delay. But as it is necessary, in order to
enforce the Message from the Indians, and to see that it is properly and
effectually communicated to the People, that some prudent Persons should
accompany the Indian Messengers, we request you will do us the Favor to
undertake this Business.

As soon as you arrive in the midst of the Settlements near Redstone Creek, it
will be proper to convene as many of the Settlers as possible, to whom the
Indians m^^ then deliver their Message, which shall be given to you in Writing;
and we desir^ you will leave a few Copies of it with the principal People, that
they may communicate the same to those who live at any considerable Distance
from them. We here with furnish you with a Copy of the Speech delivered to us
at this Treaty by the Six Nations, respecting the Settlement of their Lands,
which you will be pleased to rea^ to the Settlers for their Information.

You may then acquaint them, that they must now be convinced by this Message
and the Speech of the Six Nations, that they have hitherto been grossly
deceived b^ a few straggling Indians of no Consequence, who may have encouraged
them to continue on their Settlements; and that they will now be left without
the least Pretenc^ or Excuse for staying on them any longer. However, we make
no Doubt, but, 176^
before you reach Redstone, many of the Families will have removed, in
Obedience to the late Law passed in this Province, which has been read and
fully explained to them by the Rev. Mr. Steel, and the other Gentlemen whom the
Governor sent up to them in March last.

But should you find any of those inconsiderate People still actuated by a
lawless and obstinate Spirit to bid Defiance to the civil Authority, you may
let them know, that we were under no Necessity of sending, in the Name of the
Governor, any further Notice to them, or of being at the Pains of making them
acquainted with the real Minds of the Indians, to induce them to quit their
Settlements, for that the Powers of Government are sufficient to compel them to
pay due Obedience to the Laws; and they may depend upon it, they will be
effectually exerted, if they persist in their Obstinacy.

You may likewise assure them, that they need not attempt to make an Offer of
Terms with the Government respecting their Removal, as we hear some of them
have vainly proposed to do, by saying, they would go off the Lands immediately,
on Condition that they should be secured to them as soon as the Proprietary
Purchase is made. It is a high Insult on Government for those People even to
hint such Things.

The only Motives, therefore, which excite us to make Use of the present
Expedient of sending you with Messengers from the Indians on this Occasion, is
the compassionate Concern we have for the dangerous Situation and Distresses of
those unhappy People, and the Hopes we have that, by this Means, they may be
convinced it is their true and best Interest to pay a due Submission to the
Laws, by relinquishing their Settlements without Delay. If any of them should
talk of petitioning the Governor for a Preference in taking up the Lands they
have improved, you may assure them from us, that it will be to no Manner of
Purpose, till they have first complied with the Law.

We depend greatly on your Care and Prudence in executing this Business to our
Satisfaction, and recommend it to you to be particularly careful that the
Indian Messengers are treated with the greatest Civility and Kindness. When you
return to Fort Bedford, we beg you will write us an Account of your
Proceedings. We wish you a safe Return to your Families, and are, with great
Regard,

Gentlemen, Your most obedient humble Servants, John Allen, Joseph Shippen, Jun.


To Messrs. John Frazer, and William Thompson.

Messrs. Frazer and Thompson being in Readiness with their Horses and
Provisions, for their Journey to Redstone Creek, the Commissioners sent several
Times for the Indian Messengers, who at last came to them to the Fort, and
acquainted them that they had been seriously considering the Business they were
going to be sent on, and it now appeared to them so disagreeable, that they
could by no means consent to undertake it, and immediately returned the Wampum
which had been given them. Upon being interrogated, as to the Reasons of their
declining to perform what they had consented to, they answered, that three of
them were sent as Deputies by the Six Nation Council to attend the Treaty here;
and having received no Directions from them to proceed any further, they chose
to return Home, in order to make Report of what they had seen and heard at this
Place. They further added, that the driving white People away from their
Settlements was a Matter which no Indians could, with any Satisfaction, be
concerned in, and they thought it most proper for the English themselves to
compel their own People to remove from the Indian Lands.

After this Refusal of the Indians, who had been appointed to carry the Message
from the Six Nations, the Commissioners in vain attempted to persuade or
procure others to execute the Business, though they used great Endeavors for
that Purpose; and they thought it both useless and imprudent to continue to
press a Matter on the Indians, which they found they were generally much averse
to; and therefore concluded to set out on their Return to Philadelphia, without
further Delay. But in a short Time afterward Kayashuta came with Arroas (a
principal Warrior of the Six Nations) to the Commissioners at their Lodgings;
1768.
where the former addressed himself to them in Effect as follows, viz.

Brethren,

I am very sorry to find that you have been disappointed in your Expectations
of the^ Indian Messengers going to Redstone, according to your Desire, and our
Agreement; and I am much afraid that you are now going away from us with a
discontented Mind, on this Account. Believe me, Brethren, this Thought fills my
Heart with the deepest Grief, and I could not suffer you to leave us without
speaking to you on this Subject, and endeavoring to make your Minds easy. We
were all of us much disposed to comply with your Request, and expected it could
have been done without Difficulty, but I now find that not only the Indians
appointed by us, but all our other young Men* are very unwilling to carry a
Message from us to the white People, ordering them to remove from our Lands.
They say they would not choose to incur the ill Will o^ those People, for, if
they should be now removed, they will hereafter return to their Settlements,
when the English have purchased the Country from us. And we shall be very
unhappy, if, by our Conduct toward them at this Time, we shall give them
Reason to dislike us, and treat us in an unkind Manner when they again become
our Neighbors. We therefore hope, Brethren, you will not be displeased with us
for not performing our Agreement with you, for you may be assured that we have
good Hearts toward all our Brethren the English.

The Commissioners returned Kayashuta many Thanks for his friendly Behavior on
this Occasion; and assured him that they greatly approved of the Conduct of all
the Indians, during the Treaty, and were now returning home with very easy and
contented Minds. They further acquainted him that their Reason for urging them
to send a Message to the Redstone Settlers proceeded entirely from the great
Anxiety they had of contributing every Thing in their Power, that might
expedite the Measures taken by the Government to do them Justice, and to
redress every Injury they complained of. Yet, as they found the Compliance of
their Request was disagreeable to the Indians, they should not press the Matter
on them any further, though it appeared to be a Step very necessary to be taken
at this Time.

They then took Leave of the Indians, in the most friendly Manner, and sat out
on their Return to Philadelphia.

THE END.

