Lady M-y W-rt-l-y Mountague The Female Traveller
Let Men who glory on their better (...)
Read, hear, and learn Humility from (...)
No more let them Superior wisdom^ (...)
They can but equal Mountague at (...)


THE POETICAL WORKS Of the Right Honorable LADY MARY WORTLEY MONTAGUE; With
the ADDITIONAL VOLUME of Her LETTERS, Written during her Travels In EUROPE,
ASIA, and AFRICA: Likewise Her Celebrated LETTER

In Defense of MARRIAGE:

To which is added, The TRAVELLER: A PROSPECT of SOCIETY;

CONTAINING A SKETCH of the MANNERS of

ITALY, SWITZERLAND, FRANCE, HOLLAND, AND BRITAIN.
By OLIVER GOLDSMITH, M. B.

LONDON: Printed for CHARLES THOMSON,

MDCCLXIX.

THE CONTENTS.
ADDRESS to the Public, with an Anecdote of Lady Montague and Mr. Pope. 3
Letter from Lady Montague to Miss *** 4
SIX TOWN ECLOGUES.
Monday. Roxana, or the Drawing Room. 5 Tuesday. St. James's Coffee House. 6
Wednesday. The Tete a Tete. 9 Thursday. The Bassette Table. 11 Friday. The
Toilette. 14 Saturday. The Small Pox. 16
Verses addressed to the Imitator of the first Satire of the second Book of
Horace. 19 An Epistle to Lord B --. 22 Epistle from Arthur Gray, the Footman,
after his Condemnation for attempting a Rape. 24 An Elegy on Mrs. Thompson. 27
A Hymn to the Moon. 28 Epilogue to Mary, Queen of Scots. ib. A Ballad to the
Tune of the Irish Howl. 30 The Lover; a Ballad -- to Mr. C --. 31 The Lady's
Resolve. 32 The Gentleman's Answer. 33 A Man in Love. ib. A Receipt to cure the
Vapors. 34 The fifth Ode of Horace imitated. ib. Farewell to Bath. 35 To Clio;
occasioned by her Verses on Friendship. 36
THE ADDITIONAL VOLUME.
Verses addressed to Lady Montague, by Mr. Pope. 2 Letter 53. Character of Mrs.
D --, etc. etc. 3 Letter 54. From Vienna to the Abbot 8 Letter 55. On European
and Asiatic Manners, etc. etc. 12 Letter 56. From Florence. Story of La Trappe,
etc. 18 Letter 57. Remarks on Paris. 26 Letter 58. Observations on the Alcoran,
etc. 30 Letter 59. A Defense of Marriage. 36 The Libertine Repulsed; a new
Song. 50 Verses written in the Chiask at Pera. 51 Verses written in a Garden.
53 A Song. Dear Colin. ib. On the Death of Mrs. Bows. 54 A Caveat to the Fair
Sex. 55 Answer to an improper Love-Letter. 56 Answer to a Lady who advised
Retirement. 57 The Traveller; a Prospect of Society; by Goldsmith. 1 The
Character of a Lovely Woman. 14 True Beauty; a matrimonial Tale. 15 The
Adventures of Tom Dreadnought. 18
TO THE PUBLIC.
FROM the eager welcome with which the former series of this incomparable
lady's literary correspondence was received by the public, there is no room to
doubt whether her poems, with the additional volume of her letters, will meet
with a favorable reception.

Ever lively, witty, easy, sensible, and elevated above the common level of
female capacities and female modes and forms, -- nothing dull, nothing insipid
or unentertaining, could possibly fall from her pen. She was a philosopher in
sentiment, a moralist in pleasure, and a voluptuary in taste: in sex a woman,
in understanding a man. Pope gained nothing by his quarrel with this Amazon in
wit; who, in return for some ill-natured insinuations thrown at her, gave him
the severest poetical chastisement he ever received.

ANECDOTE OF LADY MONTAGUE AND MR. POPE.
-- BY the publication of this lady's elegant letters, written during her
travels in Europe, Asia and Africa, her name, her wit, her abilities and fame,
have been particularly distinguished in the polite circle of sentimental
entertainment -- Elevated above the precision of prudery and the little arts of
hypocrisy, with which the weakest and least virtuous of her sex are often
masked, she had an attack made on her reputation by an infamous story -- [On
eagles wings immortal scandals fly,
While virtuous actions are but born and die.]
as void of probability as any to be met with in the unbounded range of
romance, at first fabricated and industriously propagated, as she believed, by
the celebrated mr. Pope, with whom she had some literary disputes. Under these
impressions our noble poetess, from the consciousness of injured innocence,
pours out her spirited invecttives against him in verses addressed to the
imitator of the first satire of the second book of Horace. [See Page 19.] How
far the acrimony of her pen may be excused or even justified, we submit to the
judgment of the candid reader, for whose information we have taken the liberty
of subjoining an account of the rise and progress of that rancour which
subsisted between these celebrated rivals, in the words of mr. Airs, the
professed panegyrist of mr. Pope, the memoirs of whose life and writings he
published at London, in 1745 -- "A certain lady of quality (says he, vol. 2d,
page 194 and 199) took offense -- Now from one step of dislike and disgust to
another, there was a total misunderstanding between mr. Pope and her; and as
she took all occasions to insinuate things to the world disadvantageous to mr.
Pope; that he did not understand Greek, but was forced to hire persons to
translate Homer, etc. -- so he, on the other hand (as 'twas reported to her)
gave himself great liberties about her; and great mockery was made, and much
loud laughter, at the story of a visit it was pretended the said lady was
permitted to make to the seraglio, when her husband was ambassador at the
Port. It is certain, let the tale arise from whence it will, it was very
scandalous, neither can we think (if true) that it could possibly have ever
come to their knowledge; for it is to be thought that the lady, for the sake of
her own fame, would never have divulged so strange a secret. --

"However, as most stories of the like nature do, it gained credit, and most
prodigiously exasperated the lady, who neglected no opportunity of raising
whoever she could against Mr. Pope and his writings, imagining him the great
disperser of this tale; and perhaps he was not entirely clear." -- From the
foregoing quotation, even in the opinion of mr. Airs, mr. Pope's guilt may
readily be inferred. -- But if any reader yet hesitates to pronounce our
literary heroine entirely innocent, mr. Airs is at no loss to do it for him,
when he adds "we think the lady's anger just." -- Yea the celebrated swan of
Thames himself, according to his above mentioned panegyrist, is said to have
regretted the part he acted toward this lady: his words are "mr. Pope, toward
the latter end of his time, said that, setting apart raillery and the love of
satire, he wished he had never offended this lady." -- Henceforward defamation
will blush at the recital of so ridiculous a story, which never existed, but in
the creative fancy of this fair lady's ungenerous satyrist.

To a laugh never martyr an innocent name,
It Is malice most cruelly cool;
Nor plunge the chaste lady in anguish and shame,
For the loudest applause of a fool.
Letter from Lady Mary W. Montague, to Miss --.
My dear Girl,
I Have so violent a cold, that I never was less qualified in my life for
inspecting the heavenly bodies, and must content myself with the vulgar warmth
of my dressing room fire, to a corner of which I shall be confined all this
evening, and very glad to see you if you can attend me any time after your more
learned employment.

If the moon is inhabited by mortals like us, and the most important
transactions among them are nothing more than kingdoms turned into
commonwealths, and commonwealths into kingdoms, and these mighty events are
produced there, as they are here, by tyranny or lust, I have no desire of being
acquainted with its inhabitants, but can look down upon them as they do upon
us. I have peeped behind the scenes here more than contributes to my ease, and
by examining the wires and mechanism of the show, the entertainment has long
since ceased. Who is any longer entertained with the hocus pocus man, when he
knows how the tricks are performed? In short, my dear Girl, our most pleasing
pursuits become carrion by the time they are hunted down. I would not put you
out of conceit with a world you are but just beginning to enter into; but to
prepare you to bear those disappointments common to all, but most severely felt
by those of your cast and mine, for I would willingly tack myself to any thing
that is half so good as I know you to be, and wish myself.

I remain yours, etc.

POEMS
By the Right Honorable LADY MARY WORTELY MONTAGUE.
TOWN ECLOGUES. Of these six Eclogues, four only were written by Lady Mary
Wortley Montague. Thursday the BASSETTE TABLE, and Friday the TOILETTE, being
the Productions of Mr. Pope and Mr. Gay.

MONDAY. -- ROXANA, or the Drawing Room.
ROXANA from the Court retiring late,
Sighed her soft Sorrows at St. James's gate.
Such heavy thoughts lay brooding in her breast,
Not her own chairmen with more weight oppressed;
They groan the cruel load they are doomed to bear;
She in these gentle sounds expressed her care.
"Was it for this that I these roses wear,
For this new set, the jewels for my hair?
Ah! princess! with what zeal have I pursued!
Almost forgot the duty of a prude.
Thinking I never could attend too soon,
I Have missed my prayers, to get me dressed by noon.
For thee, ah! what for thee did I resign?
My pleasures, passions, all that ever was mine.
I sacrificed both modesty and ease,
Left operas and went to filthy plays;
Double entendres shocked my tender ear,
Yet even this for thee I chose to bear.
In glowing youth, when nature bids be gay,
And every joy of life before me lay,
By honor prompted, and by pride restrained,
The pleasures of the young my soul disdained:
Sermons I sought, and with a mien severe
Censured my neighbors, and said daily prayer.
Alas! how changed! -- with the same sermon-mien.
That once I prayed, the What-d'ye-call't A Farce, by Mr. Gay.
I Have seen.
Ah! cruel princess, for thy sake I Have lost
That reputation which so dear had cost:
I, who avoided every public place,
When bloom and beauty bade me show my face;
Now near thee constant every night abide
With never-failing duty by thy side,
Myself and daughters standing on a row,
To all the foreigners a goodly show!
Often had your drawing room been sadly thin,
And merchants' wives close by the chair been seen;
Had not I amply filled the empty space,
And saved your highness from the dire disgrace."
"Yet Coquetilla's artifice prevails,
When all my merit and my duty fails,
That Coquetilla, whose deluding airs
Corrupts our virgins, and our youth ensnares;
So sunk her character, so lost her fame,
Scarce visited before your highness came,
Yet for the bedchamber it is her you choose,
When Zeal and Fame and Virtue you refuse.
Ah! worthy choice! not one of all your train
Whom censure blasts not, and dishonours stain.
Let the nice hind now suckle dirty pigs,
And the proud pea-hen hatch the cuckoo's eggs!
Let Iris leave her paint and own her age,
And grave Suffolka wed a giddy page!
A greater miracle is daily viewed,
A virtuous princess with a court so lewd."
"I know thee, Court! with all thy treacherous wiles,
Thy false caresses and undoing smiles!
Ah! princess learned in all the courtly arts
To cheat our hopes, and yet to gain our hearts!"
"Large lovely bribes are the great statesman's aim;
And the neglected patriot follows fame.
The prince is ogled; some the king pursue;
But your Roxana only follows You.
Despised Roxana, cease, and try to find
Some other, since the princess proves unkind:
Perhaps it is not hard to find at court,
If not a greater, a more firm support."
TUESDAY. -- St. JAMES'S Coffee-House.
SILLIANDER and PATCH. THOU, who so many favors have received,
Wondrous to tell, and hard to be believed,
Oh! H -- d, to my lays attention lend,
Hear how two lovers boastingly contend:
Like thee successful, such their bloomy youth,
Renowned alike for gallantry and truth.
St. James's bell had tolled some wretches in,
(As tattered riding-hoods alone could sin)
The happier sinners now their charms bring out,
And to their mantuas their complexions suit;
The opera queens had finished half their faces,
And city dames already taken places;
Fops of all kinds, to see the Lion, run;
The beauties stay till the first act's begun,
And beaux step home to put fresh linen on.
No well-dress'd youth in coffee house remained,
But pensive Patch, who on the window leaned;
And Silliander, that alert and gay,
First picked his teeth, and then began to say.
SILLIANDER. Why all these sighs; ah! why so pensive grown?
Some cause there is why thus you fit alone.
Does hapless passion all this sorrrow move?
Or do thou envy where the ladies love?

PATCH. If whom they love my envy must pursue,
It Is true, at least, I never envy you.

SILLIANDER. No, I Am unhappy -- you are in the right --
It Is you they, favor, and it is me they slight.
Yet I could tell, but that I hate to boast,
A club of ladies where it is me they toast.

PATCH. Toasting does seldom any favor prove;
Like us, they never toast the thing they love.
A certain duke one night my health begun;
With cheerful pledges round the room it run,
'Till the young Sylvia, pressed to drink it too,
Started and vowed she knew not what to do:
What, drink a fellow's health! she died with shame:
Yet blushed whenever she pronounced my name.

SILLIANDER. Ill fates pursue me, may I never find
The dice propitious, or the ladies kind,
If fair Miss Flippy's fan I did not tear,
And one from me she condescends to wear.

PATCH. Women are always ready to receive;
It Is then a favor when the sex will give.
A lady (but she is too great to name)
Beauteous in person, spotless in her fame,
With gentle strugglings let me force this ring;
Another day may give another thing.

SILLIANDER. I could say something -- see this billet doux --
And as for presents -- look upon my shoe --
These buckles were not forced, nor half a theft,
But a young countess fondly made the gift.

PATCH. My countess is more nice, more artful too,
Affects to fly, that I may fierce pursue:
This snuff box which I begged, she still denied,
And when I strove to snatch it, seemed to hide;
She laughed and fled, and as I sought to seize,
With affectation crammed it down her stays;
Yet hoped she did not place it there unseen,
I pressed her breasts, and pulled it from between.

SILLIANDER. Last night, as I stood ogling of her grace,
Drinking delicious poison from her face,
The soft enchantress did that face decline,
Nor ever raised her eyes to meet with mine:
With sudden art some secret did pretend,
Leaned cross two chairs to whisper to a friend,
While the stiff whalebone with the motion rose,
And thousand beauties to my ^ight expose.

PATCH. Early this morn -- (but I was asked to come)
I drank bohea in Celia's dressing room:
Warm from her bed, to me alone within,
Her nightgown fastened with a single pin;
Her night-cloaths tumbled with resistless grace,
And her bright hair played careless round her face;
Reaching the kettle made her gown unpin,
She wore no waistcoat, and her shift was thin.

SILLIANDER. See Titiana driving to the Park!
Hark! let us follow, it is not yet too dark:
In her all beauties of the spring are seen,
Her cheeks are rosy, and her mantle green.

PATCH. See Tintoretta to the opera goes!
Haste, or the crowd will not permit our bows*
In her the glory of the heavens we view,
Her eyes are star-like, and her mantle blue.

SILLIANDER. What color does in Celia's stockings shine?
Reveal that secret, and the prize is thine.

PATCH. What are her garters? tell me if you can;
I Will freely own thee far the happier man.
Thus Patch continued his heroic strain,
While Silliander but contends in vain,
After a conquest so important gained,
Unrivaled Patch in every ruelle reigned.

WEDNESDAY. -- The Tete a Tete.
DANCINDA. "No, fair Dancinda, no; you strive in vain
To calm my care, and mitigate my pain;
If all my sighs, my cares, can fail to move,
Ah! sooth me not with fruitless vows of love."
Thus Strephon spoke. Dancinda thus replied:
What must I do to gratify your pride?
Too well you know (ungrateful as thou art)
How much you triumph in this tender heart:
What proof of love remains for me to grant?
Yet still you teize me with some new complaint.
Oh! would to heaven! -- but the fond wish is vain --
Too many favors had not made it plain!
But such a passion breaks through all disguise,
Love reddens on my cheek, and wishes in my eyes.
Is It not enough (in human and unkind!)
I own the secret conflict of my mind;
You cannot know what secret pain I prove,
When I with burning blushes own I love.
You see my artless joy at your approach,
I sigh, I faint, I tremble at your touch;
And in your absence all the world I shun;
I hate mankind, and curse the chearing s^n.
Still as I fly, ten thousand swains pursue;
Ten thousand swains I sacrifice to you.
I show you all my heart without disguise:
But these are tender proofs that you despise --
I see too well what wishes you pursue;
You would not only conquer, but undo:
You, cruel victor, weary of your flame,
Would seek a cure in my eternal shame;
And not content my honor to subdue,
Now strive to triumph over my virtue too.
Oh! Love, a God indeed to womankind,
Whose arrows burn me, and whose fetters bind,
Avenge thy altars, vindicate thy fame,
And blast these traitors that profane thy name;
Who by pretending to thy sacred fire,
Raise cursed trophies to impure desire.
Have you forgot with what ensnaring art
You first seduced this fond uncautious heart?
Then as I fled did you not kneeling cry,
"Turn, cruel beauty; whither would you fly?
Why all these doubts? why this distrustful fear?
No impious wishes shall offend your ear:
Nor ever shall my boldest hopes pretend
Above the title of a tender friend;
Blessed, if my lovely goddess will permit
My humble vows thus sighing at her feet.
The tyrant Love that in my bosom reigns,
The god himself submits to wear your chains.
You shall direct his course, his ardor tame,
And check the fury of his wildest flame."
Unpracticed youth is easily deceived;
Soothed by such sounds, I listened and believed;
Now, quite forgot that soft submissive fear,
You dare to ask what I must blush to hear.
Could I forget the honor of my race,
And meet your wishes, fearless of disgrace;
Could passion over my tender youth prevail,
And all my mother's pious maxims fail;
Yet to preserve your heart (which still must be,
False as it is, for ever dear to me)
This fatal proof of love I would not give,
Which you would contemn the moment you receive.
The wretched she, who yields to guilty joys,
A man may pity, but he must despise.
Your ardour ceased, I then should see you shun
The wretched victim by your arts undone.
Yet if I could that cold indifference bear,
What more would strike me with the last despair,
With this reflection would my soul be torn,
To know I merited your cruel scorn
Has love no pleasures free from guilt or fear?
Pleasures less fierce, more lasting, more sincere?
Thus let us gently kiss and fondly gaze,
Love is a child, and like a child it plays.
O trephon, if you would continue just,
If love be something more than brutal lust,
Forbear to ask what I must still deny.
This bitter pleasure, this destructive joy,
So closely followed by the dismal train
Of cutting shame, and guilt's heart-piercing pain.
She paused; and fixed her eyes upon her fan;
He took a pinch of snuff, and thus began;
Madam, if love -- but he could say no more,
For Mademoiselle came rapping at the door,
The dangerous moments no adieus afford;
-- Begone, she cries, I Am sure I hear my lord.
The lover starts from his unfinished loves,
To snatch his hat, and seek his scattered gloves:
The sighing dame to meet her dear prepares,
While Strephon cursing slips down the back stairs.

THURSDAY. -- The BASSETTE-TABLE. Only this, of all the Town Eclogues, was Mr.
Pope's, and is here printed from a Copy corrected by his own hand. The humor
of it lies in this happy circumstance, that the one is in love with the Game,
and the other with the Sharper.

SMILINDA and CARDELIA. CARDELIA. THE Bassette-table spread, the Tallier come;
Why stays Smilinda in the dressing room?
Ri^e, pensive nymph! the tallier waits for you.

SMILINDA. Ah! madam, since my Sharper is untrue,
I ^oyless make my once adored alpieu.
I saw him stand behind Ombrelia's chair,
And whisper with that soft, deluding air,
And those feigned sighs, which cheat the listening fair.

CARDELIA. Is this the cause of your romantic strains?
A mightier grief my heavier heart sustains.
As you by Love, so I by Fortune crossed;
One, one bad deal three septleva's have lost.

SMILINDA. Is that the grief which you compare with mine?
With ease the smiles of fortune I resign:
Would all my gold in one bad deal were gone;
Were lovely Sharper mine, and mine alone.

CARDELIA. A lover lost is but a common care;
And prudent nymphs against that change prepare.
The knave of clubs thrice lost: oh! who could guess
This fatal stroke, this unforeseen distress?

SMILINDA. See! Betty Loveit very a propos,
She all the care of love and play does know;
Dear Betty shall the important point decide;
Betty, who often the pain of each has tried;
Impartial, she shall say who suffers most,
By cards ill usage, or by lovers lost.

LOVEIT. Tell, tell your griefs; attentive will I stay,
Though time is precious, and I want some tea.

CARDELIA. Behold this equipage, by Mathers wrought,
With fifty guineas (a great pen'orth!) bought.
See, on the tooth-pick, Mars and Cupid strive;
And both the struggling figures seem alive.
Upon the bottom shines the queen's bright face;
A myrtle foliage round the thimble case
Jove, Jove himself does on the scissars shine;
The metal, and the workmanship divine!

SMILINDA. This snuff box, once the pledge of Sharper's love,
When rival beauties for the present strove;
At Corticelli's he the raffle won;
Then first his passion was in public shown:
Hazardia blushed, and turned her head aside,
A rival's envy (all in vain) to hide
This snuff box -- on the hinge see brilliants shine:
This snuff box will I stake; the prize is mine.

CARDELIA. Alas! far lesser losses than I bear,
Have made a soldier sigh, a lover swear.
And oh! what makes the disappointment hard,
'Twas my own lord that drew the fatal card.
In complaisance, I took the (...) he gave;
Though (...) at wi^h was for the knave.
The knave won (...) which I had chose;
And the next pull, my s^ptl^va I lose.

SMILINDA. But! ah what aggravates the killing smart,
The cruel thought that stabs me to the heart;
This cursed O^^brelia this undoing fair,
By whose vile arts this heavy grief I bear;
She, at whose name I shed these spiteful tears,
She owes to me the very charms she wears;
An awkward thing when first she came to town;
Her shape unfashion'd, and her face unknown:
She was my friend, I taught her first to spread
Upon her sallow cheeks enlivening red.
I introduced her to the Park and plays:
And by my interest Cosins made her stays.
Ungrateful wretch! with mimic airs grown pert,
She dares to (...) my favorite lover's heart.

CARDELIA. Wretch that I was! how often have I swore,
When Winnall tallied, I would punt no more?
I knew the bite, yet to my ruin run;
And see the folly, which I cannot shun.

SMILINDA. How many maids have Sharper's vows deceived?
How many cursed the moment they believed?
Yet his known falsehoods could no warning prove:
Ah! what is warning to a maid in love?

CARDELIA. But of what marble must that breast be formed,
To gaze on Bassette, and remain un^arm'd?
When kings, queens, knaves, are set in decent rank;
Exposed in glorious heaps the tempting bank,
Guineas, half-guineas, all the shining train;
The winner's pleasure and the loser's pain:
In bright confusion open (...) lie,
They strike the soul, and glitter in the eye,
Fired by the sight, all reason I disdain;
My passions rise and will not hear the rein.
Look upon Bassette, you who reason boast;
And (...) if reason must not there be lost.

SMILINDA. What more than marble must that heart compose,
Can hearken coldly to my Sharper's vows?
Then when he trembles, when his blushes rise,
When aweful love seems melting in his eyes,
With eager beats his Mechlin cravat moves:
He loves, I whisper to myself, he loves!
Such unfeigned passion in his looks appears,
I lose all memory of my former fears:
My panting heart confesses all his charms,
I yield at once, and sink into his arms:
Think of that moment, you who prudence boast;
For such a moment, prudence well were lost.

CARDELIA. At the groom-porter's, battered bullies play,
Some dukes at Marybone bowl time away.
But who the bowl, or rattling dice compares
To Bassette's heavenly joys, and pleasing cares?

SMILINDA. Soft Simplicetta doats upon a beau;
Prudina likes a man and laughs at show.
Their several graces in my Sharper meet;
Strong as the footman, as the master sweet.

LOVEIT. Cease your contention, which has been too long*
I grow impatient, and the tea's too strong.
Attend, and yield to what I now decide;
The equipage shall grace Smilinda's side:
The snuff box to Cardelia I decree,
Now leave complaining and begin your tea.

FRIDAY. The TOILETTE.
LYDIA. NOW twenty springs had clothed the park with green,
Since Lydia knew the blossoms of fifteen;
No overs now her morning hours molest;
And caught her at her toilette half undrest.
The thundering knocker wakes the street no more,
Nor chairs, nor coaches crowd the silent door;
Nor at the window all her mornings pass,
Or at the dumb devotion of her glass:
Reclined upon her arm she pensive sat,
And cursed the inconstancy of man too late.
"Oh youth! O spring of life for ever lost!
"No more my name shall reign the favorite toast;
"On glass no more the diamond grave my name,
"And lines mis-spelt record my lover's flame:
"Nor shall (...) boxes watch my wandering eyes,
"And, as they catch the glance, in rows arise
"With humble bows; nor white-glov'd beaus encroach
"In crowds behind, to guard me to my coach.
"What shall I do to spend the hateful day?
"At chapel shall I wear the morn away?
"Who there appears at these unmodish hours,
"But ancient matrons with their frizled towers,
"And gray religious maids? my presence there
"Amidst that sober train, would own despair;
"Nor am I yet so old, nor is my glance
"As yet fixed wholly on devotion's trance.
"Strait then I Will dress, and take my wonted range
"Through India shops, to Motteux's, or the Change,
"Where the tall jar erects its stately pride,
"With antic shapes in China's azure died;
"There careless lies a rich brocade unroll'd,
"Here shines a cabinet with burnished gold.
"But then, alas! I must be forced to pay,
"And bring no penn'orths, not a fan away!
"How am I cursed, unhappy and forlorn!
"My lover's triumph, and my sex's scorn!
"False is the pompous grief of youthful heirs;
"False are the loose coquet's inveigling airs;
"False is the crafty courtier's plighted word;
"False are the dice when gamesters stamp the board;
"False is the sprightly widow's public tear;
"Yet these to Damon's oaths are all sincere.
"For what young flirt, base man, am I abused?
"To please your wife am I unkindly used?
"'It Is true, her face may boast the peach's bloom;
"But does her nearer-whisper breathe perfume?
"I own her taper shape is formed to please;
"But don't you see her unconfined by stays?
"She doubly to fifteen may claim pretense;
"Alike we read it in her face and sense,
"Insipid, servile thing! whom I disdain!
"Her phlegm can best support the marriage chain.
"Damon is practiced in the modish life;
"Can hate, and yet be civil to his wife;
" He games, he drinks, he swears, he fights, he roves;
"Yet Cloe can believe he fondly loves.
"Mistress and wife by turns supply his need;
"A miss for pleasure, and a wife for breed.
"Powdered with diamonds, free from spleen or care,
"She can a sullen husband's humor bear;
"Her credulous friendship, and her stupid ease,
"Have often been my jest in happier days:
"Now Cloe boasts and triumphs in my pains;
"To her he is faithful; it is to me he feigns:
"Am I that stupid thing to bear neglect,
"And force a smile, not daring to suspect?
"No, perjured man! a wife may be content,
"But you shall find a mistress can resent."
Thus lovesick Lydia raved; her maid appears,
And in her faithful hand the band-box bears;
(The Cestus that reformed inconstant Jove
Not better filled with what allured to love)
"How well this ribband's gloss becomes your face!"
She cries in rapture; "then, so sweet a lace!
"How charmingly you look! so bright! so fair!
"'It Is to your eyes the head-dress owes its air!"
Strait Lydia smiled; the comb adjusts her locks;
And at the Playhouse, Harry keeps her box.

SATURDAY. The SMALLPOX.
FLAVIA. THE wretched Flavia on her couch reclined,
Thus breathed the anguish of a wounded mind,
A glass reversed in her right hand she bore,
For now she shunned the face she sought before.
"How am I changed! alas! how am I grown
"A frightful spectre, to my self unknown!
"Where Is my complexion? where my radiant bloom,
"That promised happiness for years to come?
"Then with what pleasure I this face surveyed!
"To look once more, my visits often delayed
"Charmed with the view a fresher red would rise,
"And a new life shot sparkling from my eyes!
"Ah faithless glass, my wonted bloom restore;
"Alas! I rave, that bloom is now no more!
" The greatest good the gods on men bestow,
"Even youth itself to me is useless now.
"There was a time (oh! that I could forget!)
"When opera-tickets poured before my feet;
"And at the ring, where brightest beauties shine,
"The earliest cherries of the spring were mine.
"Witness, O Lilly; and thou, Motteux, tell,
"How much japan these eyes have made ye sell.
"With what contempt ye saw me often despise
"The humble offer of the raffled prize;
"For at the raffle still each prize I bore,
"With scorn rejected, or with triumph wore!
"Now beauty's fled and presents are no more!
"For me the Patriot has the house forsook,
"And left debates to catch a passing look:
"For me the soldier has soft verses writ:
"For me the beau has aimed to be a wit.
"For me the Wit to nonsense was betrayed;
"The Gamester has for me his dun* delayed,
"And overseen the card he would have played.
"The bold and haughty by success made vain,
"Awed by my eyes, have trembled to complain:
"The bashful 'Squire touched by a wish unknown,
"Has dared to speak with spirit not his own:
"Fired by one wish, all did alike adore;
"Now beauty's fled and lovers are no more!
"As round the room I turn my weeping eyes,
"New unaffected scenes of sorrow rise.
"Far from my sight that killing picture bear,
"The face disfigure, and the canvass tear:
"That picture, which with pride I used to show,
"The lost resemblance but upbraids me now.
"And thou, my toilette! where I often have sat,
"While hours unheeded passed in deep debate,
"How curls should fall, or where a patch to place;
"If blue or scarlet best became my face;
"Now on some happier nymph your aid bestow;
"On fairer heads, ye useless jewels, glow!
"No borrowed luster can my charms restore;
"Beauty is fled, and dress is now no more!
"Ye meaner beauties, I permit ye shine;
"Go, triumph in the hearts that once were mine.
"But 'midst your triumphs with confusion know,
"'It Is to my ruin all your arms ye owe.
" Would pitying heaven restore my wonted mien,
"Ye still might move unthought of and unseen:
"But oh, how vain, how wretched is the boast
"Of beauty faded, and of empire lost!
"What now is left but weeping, to deplore
"My beauty fled and empire now no more?
"Ye cruel chemists, what withheld your aid!
"Could no pomatums save a trembling maid?
"How false and trifling is that art ye boast!
"No art can give me back my beauty lost.
"In tears, surrounded by my friends I lay,
"Masked over; and trembled at the sight of day;
" Mirmillo came my fortune to deplore,
"(A golden-headed cane well carved he bor^)
"Cordials, he cried, my spirits must restore!
"Beauty is fled, and spirit is no more!
" Galen, the grave; officious Squirt, was there,
"With fruitless grief and unavailing care:
" Machaon too, the great Machaon known
"By his red cloak and his superior frown;
"And why, he cried, this grief and this despair,
"You shall again be well, again be fair;
"Believe my oath; (with that an oath he swore)
"False was his oath; my beauty is no more!
"Cease, hapless maid, no more thy tale pursue.
"Forsake mankind, and bid the world adieu!
"Monarchs and beauties rule with equal sway;
"All strive to serve and glory to obey:
"Alike unpitied when deposed they grow --
"Men mock the idol of their former vow.
"Adieu! ye parks! -- in some obscure recess,
"Where gentle streams will weep at my distress,
"Where no false friend will in my grief take part,
"And mourn my ruin with a joyful heart;
"There let me live in some deserted place,
"There hide in shades this lost inglorious face.
"Plays, operas, circles, I no more must view!
"My toilette, patches, all the world adieu!

VERSES These severe Verses owe their birth to two lines in the first Satire of
the second Book of Horace, imitated by Mr. Pope, which were supposed to point
at Lady Mary Wortley Montague, under the name of Sappho. We find by the Letters
of Mr. Pope, vol. ^, and those of Lady Mary Wortley Montague lately published,
that a friendly correspondence once subsisted between these two Wits, which
probably did not continue much later than her ladyship's return into England in
the year 1718. But the exact time when the quarrel between them commenced, and
the circumstances relating to it, are not easy, at this distance of time, to
discover. It is said in Mr. Pope's Life, (Biographia Britannica, vol. 5, p.
3413) that he was charged with propagating a scandalous report concerning her
ladyship, which, it is added, perhaps he was not quite clear of. The note to
that life in which this charge on the poet is to be found, has the name of Dr.
Warburton annexed to it, and therefore, on his authority, may well be supposed
not without foundation. If a conjecture may be allowed, it is not improbable
that this was the occasion of their difference. With respect to the lines which
produced these verses, Mr. Pope, in his letter to Lord Hervey, vol. 8. p. 196.
absolutely disclaims any intention of applying them to Lady Montague, In regard
(says he) to the right honorable Lady, your Lordships friend, I was far from
designing a person of her condition by a name so derogatory to her as that of
Sappho, a name prostituted to every infamous creature that ever wrote verse or
novels. I protest I never applied that name to her in any verse of mine, public
or private, and (I firmly believe) not in any letter or conversation. What
degree of credit this asseveration deserves, must be left to the reader's
determination, only observing, that Mr. Pope, was not very scrupulous in
disowning a character when the opinion of the Public was not in his favor.
With equal, or more earnestness, he denied that the description of Timon's
Villa was designed to expose that of a certain nobleman. In which particular,
he has been unwarily given up by his Commentator, who, in the following note on
these lines in the edition of 1751, seems to acknowledge the fact.

Another age shall see the golden car
Imbrown the slope, and nod on the parterre;
Deep harvests bury all his pride had planned,
And laughing Ceres reassume the land.
MORAL EPISTLES iv. Verse 172. Had the poet lived but three years longer, he
had seen this prophecy fulfilled. It is to be remembered, that Canons was sold
about the time here fixed upon, and therefore this question will naturally
arise, What prophecy was fulfilled, if Mr Pope had not that place in his mind
while he was writing the beforementioned Epistle? The Editor of his works, as
if conscious that he had done no service to Mr. Pope's moral character, by the
above note, has since altered it in the following manner: Had the poet lived
three years longer, he had seen his general prophecy against all ill-judged
magnificence fulfilled in a very particular instance.


addressed to the IMITATOR OF THE FIRST SATIRE of the Second Book of HORACE.
IN two large columns on thy motely page,
Where Roman wit is striped with English rage;
Where ribaldry to satire makes pretense;
And modern scandal rolls with ancient sense;
Whilst on one side we see how Horace thought;
And on the other how he never wrote:
Who can believe, who view the bad and good,
That the dull copi'st better understood
That Spirit, he pretends to imitate,
Than heretofore that Greek he did translate?
Thine is just such an image of his pen,
As thou thyself art of the sons of men:
Where our own species in burlesque we trace,
A sign post likeness of the human race;
That is at once resemblance and disgrace.
Horace can laugh, is delicate, is clear;
You only coarsely rail, or darkly sneer:
His style is elegant, his diction pure,
Whilst none thy crabbed numbers can endure;
Hard as thy heart, and as thy birth obscure.
If he has thorns, they all on roses grow;
Thine like rude thistles, and mean brambles show,
With this exception, that though rank the soil,
Weeds as they are they seem produced by toil.
Satire should, like a polished razor keen,
Wound with a touch, that is scarcely felt or seen.
Thine is an oyster-knife, that hacks and hews;
The rage, but not the talent to abuse;
And is in hate, what love is in the stews.
It Is the gross lust of hate, that still annoys;
Without distinction, as gross love enjoys:
Neither to folly, nor to vice confined;
The object of thy spleen is human kind:
It preys on all, who yield or who resist;
To thee it is provocation to exist.
But if thou see See TASTE, an Epistle.
a great and generous heart,
Thy bow is doubly bent to force a dart.
Nor dignity nor inocence is spared,
Nor age, nor sex, nor thrones, nor graves revered.
Nor only justice vainly we demand,
But even benefits cannot rein thy hand:
To this or that alike in vain we trust,
Nor find thee less ungrateful than unjust.
Not even youth and beauty can control
The universal rancour of thy soul;
Charms that might soften superstition's rage,
Might humble pride, or thaw the ice of age.
But how should thou by beauty's force be moved,
No more for loving made, than to be loved?
It was the equity of righteous heaven,
That such a soul to such a form was given;
And shows the uniformity of fate,
That one so odious should be born to hate.
When God created thee, one would believe,
He said the same as ^o the snake of Eve;
To human race antipathy declare,
'Twixt them and thee be everlasting war.
But oh! the sequel of the sentence dread,
And whilst you bruise their heel, beware your head.
Nor think thy weakness shall be thy defense;
The female scold's protection in offense.
Sure it is as fair to beat who cannot fight,
As it is to libel those who cannot write.
And if thou draw'st thy pen to aid the law,
Others a cudgel, or a rod, may draw.
If none with vengeance yet thy crimes pursue,
Or give thy manifold affronts their due;
If limbs unbroken, skin without a stain,
Unwhipt, unblanketed, unkick'd, unslain;
That wretched little carcass you retain:
The reason is, not that the world wants eyes;
But you are so mean, they see, and they despise:
When fretful porcupine, with rancorous will,
From mounted back shoots forth a harmless quill,
Cool the spectators stand; and all the while,
Upon the angry little monster smile.
Thus it is with thee: -- while impotently safe,
You strike unwounding, we unhurt can laugh
Who but must laugh, this bully when he sees,
A puny insect shivering at a breeze?
One over-match'd by every blast of wind,
Insulting and provoking all mankind.
Is this the thing to keep mankind in awe,
To make those tremble who escape the law?
Is this the ridicule to live so long,
The deathless satire, and immortal Song?
No: like thy self-blown praise, thy scandal flies;
And, as we are told of wasps, it stings and dies.
If none do yet return the intended blow,
You all your safety to your dullness owe:
But whilst that armor thy poor corpse defends,
'Twill make thy readers few, as are thy friends;
Those, who thy nature loathed, yet loved thy art,
Who liked thy head, and yet abhorred thy heart;
Chose thee, to read, but never to converse,
And scorned in prose, him whom they prized in verse.
Even they shall now their partial error see,
Shall shun thy writings like thy company;
And to thy books shall open their eyes no more,
Than to thy person they would do their door.
Nor thou the justice of the world disown,
That leaves thee thus an outcast, and alone;
For though in law, to murder be to kill,
In equity the murder's in the will:
Then whilst with coward hand you stab a name,
And try at least t'assassinate our fame;
Like the first bold assassins be thy lot,
Never be thy guilt forgiven, or forgot;
But as thou hat'st, be hated by mankind,
And with the emblem of thy crooked mind,
Marked on thy back, like Cain, by God's own hand,
Wander, like him, accursed through the land.
AN EPISTLE TO LORD B --
HOW happy you! who varied joys pursue;
And every hour presents you something new!
Plans, schemes, and models, all Palladio's art,
For six long months have gained upon your heart;
Of colonades, of corridores you talk,
The winding staircase and the covered walk;
You blend the orders with Vitruvian toil,
And raise with wondrous joy the fancied pile:
But the dull workman's slow performing hand
But coldly executes his lord's command.
With dirt and mortar soon you grow displeased,
Planting succeeds, and avenues are raised,
Canals are cut, and mountains level made;
Bowers of retreat, and galleries of shade;
The shaven turf presents a lively green;
The bordering flowers in mystic knots are seen:
With studied art on nature you refine --
The spring beheld you warm in this design,
But scarce the cold attacks your favorite trees,
Your inclination fails, and wishes freeze:
You quit the grove, so -- lately you admired;
With other views your eager hopes are fired,
Post to the city you direct your way;
Not blooming paradise could bribe your stay:
Ambition shows you power's brightest side,
It Is meanly poor in solitude to hide:
Though certain pains attend the cares of state,
A good man owes his country to be great;
Should act abroad the high-distinguish'd part,
Or show at least the purpose of his heart.
With thoughts like these the shining courts you seek;
Full of new projects for almost a week:
You then despise the tinsel glittering snare;
Think vile mankind below a serious care.
Life is too short for any distant aim;
And cold the dull reward of future fame:
Be happy then, while yet you have to live;
And love is all the blessing heaven can give.
Fired by new passion you address the fair;
Survey the opera as a gay parterre:
Young Cloe's bloom had made you certain prize,
But for a side-long glance from Celia's eyes:
Your beating heart acknowledges her power;
Your eager eyes her lovely form devour;
You feel the poison swelling in your breast,
And all your soul by fond desire possessed.
In dying sighs a long three hours are past;
To some assembly with impatient haste,
With trembling hope, and doubtful fear you move,
Resolved to tempt your fate, and own your love:
But there Belinda meets you on the stairs,
Easy her shape, attracting all her airs;
A smile she gives, and with a smile can wound:
Her melting voice has music in the sound;
Her every motion wears resistless grace;
Wit in her mein, and pleasure in her face:
Here while you vow eternity of love,
Cloe and Celia unregarded move.
Thus on the sands of Afric's burning plains,
However deeply made, no long impress remains;
The slightest leaf can leave its figure there;
The strongest form is scattered by the air.
So yielding the warm temper of your mind,
So touched by every eye, so tossed by wind;
Oh! how unlike the heaven my soul designed!
Unseen, unheard, the throng around me move;
Not wishing praise, insensible of love:
No whispers soften, nor no beauties fire;
Careless I see the dance, and coldly hear the lyre.
So numerous herds are driven over the rock;
No print is left of all the passing flock:
So sings the wind around the solid stone:
So vainly beat the waves with fruitless moan:
Tedious the toil, and great the workman's care,
Who dare attempt to fix impressions there:
But should some swain more skilful than the rest,
Engrave his name upon this marble breast,
Not rolling ages could deface that name;
Through all the storms of life it is still the same:
Though length of years with moss may shade the ground,
Deep, though unseen, remains the secret wound.
EPISTLE from Arthur Gray, the Footman, This man was footman to a gentleman
whose daughter, a married lady, he attempted to ravish. It appears by his
trial, that he went into her room about four o'clock in the morning, armed with
a pistol in one hand, and a drawn sword in the other; and advancing to the bed
side, threatened to murder her if she made any noise. Upon asking him what he
meant by coming into her chamber in such a manner, he replied, that he intended
to ravish her, for that he had entertained a violent love for her a long time,
but as there was so great a difference between their fortunes, he despaired of
enjoying his wishes by any means but force. After some resistance, the lady
wrenched the pistol from his hand (he having laid down the sword) and rung the
bell; upon which he ran away. He was indicted and convicted of a burglary, at
the Old Bailey, in December 1721, but the sentence was not executed, for he was
reprieved, and afterward transported.
After his Condemnation for attempting a RAPE.
READ, lovely nymph, and tremble not to read,
I have no more to wish, nor you to dread:
I ask not life, for life to me were vain,
And death a refuge from severer pain.
My only hope in these last lines I try;
I would be pitied, and I then would die.
Long had I lived as sordid as my fate,
Nor cursed the destiny that made me wait
A* servile slave: content with homely food,
The gross instinct of happiness pursued:
Youth gave me sleep at night, and warmth of blood.
Ambition yet had never touched my breast;
My lordly master knew no sounder rest;
With labor healthy, in obedience blessed.
But when I saw -- oh! had I never seen
That wounding softness that engaging mein!
The mist of wretched education flies,
Shame, fear, desire, despair and love arise,
The new creation of those beauteous eyes.
But yet that love pursued no guilty aim,
Deep in my heart I hid the secret flame.
I never hoped my fond desire to tell,
And all my wishes were to serve you well.
Heavens! how I flew, when winged by your command,
And kissed the letters given me by your hand.
How pleased, how proud, how fond was I to wait,
Present the sparkling wine, or change the plate!
How when you sung my soul devoured the sound,
And every sense was in the rapture drowned!
Though bid to go I quite forgot to move;
-- You knew not that stupidity was love!
But oh! the torment not to be expressed,
The grief, the rage, the hell that fired this breast,
When my great rivals, in embroid'ry gay,
Sat by your side, or led you from the play!
I still contrived near as I could to stand,
(The flambeau trembling in my shaking hand)
I saw, or thought I saw, those finger's pressed,
For thus their passion by my own I guessed,
And jealous fury all my soul possessed
Like torrents, love and indignation meet,
And madness would have thrown me at your feet.
Turn, lovely nymph (for so I would have said)
Turn from those triflers who make love a trade;
This is true passion in my eyes you see;
They cannot, no -- they cannot love like me.
Frequent debauch has palled their sickly taste,
Faint their desire, and in a moment past,
They sigh not from the heart, but from the brain;
Vapors of vanity, and strong champagne.
Too dull to feel what forms, like yours, inspire,
After long talking of their painted fire,
To some lewd brothel they at night retire;
There pleased with fancied quality and charms,
Enjoy your beauties in a strumpet's arms.
Such are the joy those toasters have in view,
And such the wit and pleasure they pursue:
-- And is this love that ought to merit you?
Each opera-night a new address begun,
They swear to thousands what they swear to one.
Not thus I sigh -- but all my sighs are vain --
Die, wretched Arthur, and conceal thy pain:
It Is impudence to wish, and madness to complain.
Fixed on this view my only hope of ease,
I waited not the aid of slow disease:
The keenest instruments of death I sought,
And death alone employed my laboring thought.
This all the night -- when I remember well,
The charming tinkle of your morning bell!
Fired by the sound, I hastened with your tea,
With one last look to smooth the darksome way. --
But oh! how dear that fatal look has cost!
In that fond moment my resolves were lost.
Hence all my guilt and all your sorrows rise --
I saw the languid softness of your eyes;
I saw the dear disorder of your bed;
Your cheeks all glowing with a tempting red;
Your night clothes tumbled with resistless grace;
Your flowing hair played careless down your face,
Your night gown fastened with a single pin;
-- Fancy improved the wondrous charms within!
I fixed my eyes upon that heaving breast,
And hardly, hardly I forbore the rest;
Eager to gaze, unsatisfied with sight,
My head grew giddy with the dear delight!
-- Too well you know the fatal following night!
The extremest proof of my desire I give,
And since you will not love, I will not live.
Condemned by you, I wait the righteous doom,
Careless and fearless of the woes to come.
But when you see me waver in the wind,
My guilty flame extinct, my soul resigned,
Sure you may pity what you cannot approve,
The cruel consequence of furious love.
Think the bold wretch that could so greatly dare,
Was tender, faithful, ardent, and sincere:
Think when I held the pistol to your breast,
Had I been of the world's large rule possessed,
That world had then been yours, and I been blessed!
Think that my life was quite below my care,
Nor feared I any hell beyond despair. --
If these reflections though they seize you late,
Give some compassion for your Arthur's fate:
Enough you give nor ought I to complain;
You pay my pangs, nor have I died in vain.
An ELEGY on Mrs. THOMPSON.
UNHAPPY fair! by fatal love betrayed!
Must then thy beauties thus untimely fade?
And all thy blooming soft inspiring charms,
Become a prey to death's destructive arms?
Though short thy day, and transient like the wind,
How far more blessed than those yet left behind!
Safe in the grave, thy griefs with thee remain;
And life's tempestuous billows break in vain.
Ye tender nymphs in lawless pastimes gay,
Who heedless down the paths of pleasure stray;
Though long secure, with blissful joy elate,
Yet pause, and think of Arabella's fate:
For such may be your unexpected doom,
And your next slumbers lull you in the tomb.
But let it be the muse's gentle care
To shield from envy's rage the mouldering fair:
To draw a veil over faults she cannot defend;
And what prudes have devoured, leave time to end:
Be it her part to drop a pitying tear,
And mourning sigh around thy sable bier.
Nor shall thy woes long glad the ill natured crowd,
Silent to praise, and in detraction loud:
When scandal, that through life each worth destroys,
And malice that imbitters all our joys,
Shall in some ill starr'd wretch find later stains;
And let thine rest, forgot as thy remains.
A HYMN to the MOON.
Written in JULY, in an Arbor.
THOU silver Deity of secret night,
Direct my footsteps through the woodland shade;
Thou conscious witness of unknown delight,
The lover's guardian, and the muses aid!
By thy pale beams I solitary rove,
To thee my tender grief confide;
Serenely sweet you gild the silent grove,
My friend, my goddess, and my guide.
Even thee, fair queen, from thy amazing height,
The charms of young Endymion drew;
Veiled with the mantle of concealing night;
With all thy greatness, and thy coldness too.
EPILOGUE to MARY, This Epilogue was intended for a Play on the Story of Mary,
Queen of Scots, which the Duke of Wharton began to write, but never finished.
No Part of the Play now remains but these four Lines: Sure were I free, and
Norfolk were a prisoner,
I Would fly with more impatience to his arms,
Than the poor Israelite gazed on the serpent,
When life was the reward of every look.
Walpole's Catalogue, vol. II. p. 134.


Queen of SCOTS.
Designed to be spoken by Mrs. OLDFIELD.

WHAT could luxurious woman wish for more,
To fix her joys, or to extend her power?
Their every wish was in this Mary seen,
Gay, witty, youthful, beauteous, and a queen.
Vain useless blessings with ill conduct joined!
Light as the air, and fleeting as the wind.
Whatever poets write, and lovers vow,
Beauty, what poor omnipotence have thou!
Queen Bess had wisdom, council, power, and laws;
How few espoused a wretched beauty's cause!
Learn thence, ye fair, more solid charms to prize,
Contemn the idle flatt'rers of your eyes.
The brightest object shines but while it is new:
That influence lessens by familiar view.
Monarchs and beauties rule with equal sway,
All strive to serve, and glory to obey;
Alike unpitied when deposed they grow --
Men mock the idol of their former vow.
Two great examples have been shown today,
To what sure ruin passion does betray;
What long repentance to short joys is due;
When reason rules, what glory does ensue.
If you will love, love like Eliza then;
Love for amusement, like those traitors, men.
Think that the pastime of a leisure hour
She favored often -- but never shared her power.
The traveller by desert wolves pursued,
If by his art the savage foe's subdued,
The world will still the noble act applaud,
Though victory was gained by needful fraud.
Such is, my tender sex, our helpless care;
And such the barbarous heart, hid by the begging face.
By passion fired, and not withheld by shame,
They cruel hunters are; we, trembling game.
Trust me, dear ladies, (for I know 'em well)
They burn to triumph, and they sigh to tell:
Cruel to them that yield, cullies to them that sell.
Believe me, it is by far the wiser course,
Superior art should meet superior force:
Hear, but be faithful to your interest still:
Secure your hearts -- then fool with whom you will.
A BALLAD.
To the Tune of, The Irish Howl.
1.
TO that dear nymph, whose powerful name
Does every throbbing nerve inflame,
(As the soft sound I low repeat
My pulse unequal measures beat)
Whose eyes I never more shall see,
That once so sweetly shined on thee;
Go, gentle wind! and kindly bear
My tender wishes to the fair.
Hoh, ho, ho, etc; 2.
Amidst her pleasures let her know
The secret anguish of my woe,
The midnight pang, the jealous hell,
Does in this tortured bosom dwell:
While laughing she, and full of play,
Is with her young companions gay;
Or hearing in some fragrant bower
Her lover's sigh, and beauty's power.
Hoh, ho, ho, etc; 3.
Lost and forgotten may I be!
Oh may no pitying thought of me
Disturb the joy that she may find,
When love is crowned and fortune kind:
May that blessed swain (whom yet I hate)
Be proud of his distinguished fate:
Each happy night be like the first;
And he be blessed as I am cursed.
Hoh, ho, ho, etc. 4.
While in these pathless woods I stray,
And lose my solitary way;
Talk to the stars, to trees complain,
And tell the senseless woods my pain:
But madness spares the sacred name,
Nor dares the hidden wound proclaim;
Which secret rankling, sure and slow,
Shall close in endless peace my woe.
Hoh, ho, ho, etc. 5.
When this fond heart shall ach no more,
And all the ills of life are over;
(It gods by lovers prayers are moved,
As every god in heaven has loved)
Instead of bright Elysian joys,
That unknown something in the skies,
In recompense of all my pain,
The only heaven I would obtain,
May I, the guardian of her charms,
Preserve that paradise from harms.
Hoh, ho, ho, etc. THE LOVER:
A BALLAD. -- To Mr. C --
I.
AT length, by so much importunity pressed,
Take, C --, at once, the inside of my breast.
This stupid indiff'rence so often you blame,
Is not owing to nature, to fear, or to shame.
I am not as cold as a virgin in lead,
Nor is Sunday's sermon so strong in my head:
I know but too well how time flies along,
That we live but few years, and yet fewer are young.
II.
But I hate to be cheated, and never will buy
Long years of repentance for moments of joy.
Oh! was there a man (but where shall I find
Good sense and good nature so equally joined?)
Would value his pleasure, contribute to mine:
Not meanly would boast, nor lewdly design,
Not over severe, yet not stupidly, vain,
For I would have the power, though not give the pain.
III.
No pedant, yet learned; no rake-helly gay,
Or laughing because he has nothing to say:
To all my whole sex, obliging and free,
Yet never be fond of any but me;
In public preserve the decorum that is just,
And show in his eyes he is true to his trust;
Then rarely approach, and respectfully bow,
But not fulsomely pert, nor foppishly low.
IV.
But when the long hours of public are past,
And we meet with champagne and a chicken at last,
May every fond pleasure that moment endear;
Be banished afar both discretion and fear!
Forgetting or scorning the airs of the crowd,
He may cease to be formal, and I to be proud,
'Till lost in the joy, we confess that we live,
And he may be rude, and yet I may forgive.
V.
And that my delight may be solidly fixed,
Let the friend and the lover be handsomely mixed,
In whose tender bosom my soul may confide,
Whose kindness can sooth me, whose counsel can guide.
From such a dear lover as here I describe,
No danger should fright me, no millions should bribe;
But till this astonishing creature I know,
As I long have lived chaste, I will keep myself so.
VI.
I never will share with the wanton coquet,
Or be caught by a vain affectation of wit.
The toasters and songsters may try all their art,
But never shall enter the pass of my heart.
I loath the lewd rake, the dressed ^opling despise:
Before such pursuers the nice virgin flies:
And as OVID has sweetly in parable told,
We harden like trees, and like rivers grow cold.
THE LADY'S RESOLVE:
Written extempore on a Window.
WHILST thirst of praise, and vain desire of fame,
In every age, is every woman's aim;
With courtship pleased, of silly toasters proud,
Fond of a train, and happy in a crowd;
On each poor fool bestowing some kind glance,
Each conquest owing to some loose advance;
While vain coquets affect to be pursued
And think they are virtuous, if not grossly lewd;
Let this great maxim be my virtue's guide;
In part she is to blame that has been tried --
He comes too near that comes to be denied.
THE GENTLEMAN'S ANSWER.
WHILST pretty fellows think a woman's fame
In every state and every age the same;
With their own folly pleased, the fair they toast,
And where they least are happy, swear they are most;
No difference making 'twixt coquet and prude;
And her that seems, yet is not really lewd;
While thus they think, and thus they vainly live,
And taste no joys but what their fancy give:
Let this great maxim be my action's guide,
May I never hope, though I am never denied;
Nor think a woman won, that is willing to be tried.
A MAN IN LOVE.
L'Homme qui ne se trouve point and ne se trouvera jamais.
THE man who feels the dear disease,
Forgets himself, neglects to please:
The crowd avoids and seeks the groves,
And much he thinks when much he loves;
Pressed with alternate hope and fear,
Sighs in her absence, sighs when she is near.
The gay, the fond, the fair, the young,
Those trifles pass unseen along;
To him a pert, insipid throng.
But most he shuns the vain coquet;
Contemns her false affected wit:
The minstrels sound, the flowing bowl
Oppress and hurt the amorous soul.
It Is solitude alone can please,
And give some intervals of ease.
He feeds the soft distemper there,
And fondly courts the distant fair;
To balls the silent shade prefers,
And hates all other charms but hers.
When thus your absent swain can do,
Molly, you may believe him true.
A Receipt to cure the VAPORS.
Written to Lady J -- N.
I.
WHY will Delia thus retire,
And idly languish life away*
While the sighing crowd admire,
It Is too soon for hartshorn tea:
II.
All those dismal looks and fretting.
Cannot Damon's life restore;
Long ago the worms have eat him,
You can never see him more.
III.
Once again consult your toilette,
In the glass your face review:
So much weeping soon will spoil it,
And no spring your charms renew.
IV.
I, like you, was born a woman,
Well I know what vapors (...)
The disease, alas! is common;
Single, we have all the spleen.
V.
All the morals that they tell us,
Never cured the sorrow yet;
Choose, among the pretty fellows,
One of honor, youth, and wit.
VI.
Prithee hear him every morning,
At the least an hour or two;
Once again at night returning --
I believe the dose will do.
The fifth ODE of HORACE imitated.
FOR whom are now your airs put on,
And what new beauty's doomed to be undone?
That careless elegance of dress,
This essence that perfumes the wind,
Your very motion does confess
Some secret conquest is designed.
Alas! the poor unhappy maid,
To what a train of ills betrayed!
What fears, what pangs shall rend her breast,
How will her eyes dissolve in tears!
That now with glowing joy is blessed,
Charmed with the faithless vows she hears.
So the young sailor o^ the summer sea,
Gayly pursues his destined way:
Fearless and careless on the deck he stands,
Till sudden storms arise and thunders roll;
In vain he casts his eyes to distant lands,
Distracting terror tears his timorous soul.
For me, secure I view the raging main,
Past are my dangers, and forgot my pain:
My votive tablet in the temple shows
The monument of folly past;
I paid the bounteous god my grateful vows,
Who snatched from rain, saved me at the last.
FAREWELL TO BATH.
TO all you ladies now at Bath,
And eke, ye beaus to you,
With aching heart, and watery eyes,
I bid my last adieu.
Farewell ye nymphs who waters sip
Hot reeking from the pumps,
While music lends her friendly aid,
To cheer you from the dumps.
Farewell ye wits, who prating stand,
And criticize the fair;
Yourselves the joke of men of sense,
Who hate a coxcomb's air.
Farewell to Deard's, and all her toys,
Which glitter in her shop,
Deluding traps to girls and boys,
The warehouse of the fop.
Lindsay's and Hayes's both farewell,
Where in the spacious Hall;
With bounding steps and sprightly air,
I Have led up many a ball.
Where Somerville of courteous mein,
Was partner in the dance,
With swimming Haws, and Brownlow blithe,
And Britton pink of France.
Poor Nash, farewell! may fortune smile.
Thy drooping soul revive.
My heart is full, I can no more --
John, bid the Coachman drive.
To CLIO.
Occasioned by her VERSES on FRIENDSHIP.
WHILE, Clio, pondering over thy lines I roll,
Dwell on each thought, and meditate thy soul,
Methinks I view thee, in some calm retreat,
Far from all guilt, distraction, and deceit;
Thence pitying view the thoughtless fair and gay,
Who whirl their lives in giddiness away.
Thence greatly scorning what the world calls great,
Contemn the proud, their tumults, power and state.
And deem it thence inglorious to descend
For aught below, but virtue and a friend.
How come thou framed so different from thy sex,
Whom trifles ravish, and whom trifles vex?
Capricious things, all flutter, whim and show,
And light and varying as the winds that blow.
To candor, sense, to love, to friendship blind,
To flatterers, fools, and coxcombs only kind!
Say whence those hints, those bright ideas came,
That warm thy breast with friendship's holy flame,
That close thy heart against the joys of youth,
And open thy mind to all the rays of truth,
That with such sweetness and such grace unite,
The gay, the prudent, virtuous and polite.
As heaven inspires thy sentiment divine,
May heaven vouchsafe a friendship worthy thine;
A friendship placed where ease and fragrance reign,
Where nature sways us, and no laws restrain.
Where studious leisure, prospects unconfined,
And heavenly musing lifts the aspiring mind.
There, with thy friend, may years on years be spent,
In blooming health, and, ever gay, content;
There blend your cares with soft assuasive arts,
There sooth the passions, there unfold your hearts;
Join in each wish, and warming into love,
Approach the raptures of the blessed above.
END OF THE POETICAL WORKS.
THE ADDITIONAL VOLUME TO THE LETTERS Of the RIGHT HONORABLE LADY MARY WORTLEY
MONTAGUE*

Written during her TRAVELS in EUROPE, ASIA, AND AFRICA, TO Persons of
Distinction, Men of Letters, etc in different PARTS of EUROPE. Which contain,
Among other curious Relations.

ACCOUNTS of the POLICY, and MANNERS of the TURKS; Drawn from sources which
have been inaccessible to other Travelers:

Also Poems on several occasions; And her Celebrated Defense of MARRIAGE.

AMERICA* PRINTED, for every PURCHASER, MDCCLXVIII.

VERSES ADDRESSED TO THE Lady MARY WORTLEY MONTAGUE,
By Mr. POPE.
IN beauty or wit,
No mortal as yet
To question your empire has dared:
But men of discerning,
Have thought that in Learning,
To yield to a Lady was hard.
Impertinent schools.
With musty dull rules
Have reading to females denied;
So Papists refuse
The BIBLE to use.
Lest flocks should be wise as their guide.
'Twas a woman at first
[Indeed she was curst]
In knowledge that tasted delight;
And sages agree,
The laws should decree
To the first possessor the right.
Then bravely fair dame,
Renew the old claim,
Which to your whole sex does belong,
And let men receive,
From a second bright Eve,
The knowledge of right and of wrong.
But if the first Eve
Hard doom did receive,
When only one apple had she,
What a punishment new
Shall be found out for you,
Who tasting have robbed the whole tree
TO THE POLITE READER.
THE ease and elegance, of the style of these LETTERS; fully justifies the very
favorable reception they have met with, a luxuriant fancy displays itself
through the whole in a variety of ENTERTAINING DESCRIPTIONS; And the Wit and
Spirit which gave LADY MARY WORTLEY MONTAGUE* during her Life such rank in the
POLITE WORLD, was in no instance more happily displayed than in her CELEBRATED
DEFENSE OF MARRIAGE against the Duke De La Roche Foucault's maxim, 'That
Marriage is sometimes convenient, but never delightful.' (see Letter LIX. from
page 36. to 49) We think all Readers of taste will be of opinion with us, that
there is no Letter in the collection where the Life and Spirit of the
ingenious, elegant, noble, and truly Right honorable Writer is to be more
admired or the sentiments more approved.

THE CONTENTS.
Let. 53. Character of Mrs. D -- and humourous representation of her intended
marriage with a greasy curate -- anecdotes of another couple-remarks on the
abuse of the word nature; applied to the case of a husband who insisted on his
wife suckling her own child -- observations on the forbidding countenance of a
worthy gentleman. Let. 54. From Vienna. Remarks on some illustrious personages
at the court of Vienna -- character of the poet Rousseau -- alchemy much
studied at Vienna -- Prince Eugene's library. Let. 55. Victory of prince Eugene
over the Turks, and the surrender of Belgrade -- the news how received at
Constantinople -contrast between European and Asiatic manners -- estimate of
the pleasures of the seraglio -- observations on Mr Addison being appointed
secretary of State -- Mr. Addison, Mr. Pope and Mr. Congreve, in what respect
three happy poets -- reflections on the Iliad and Mr. Pope's translation of it.
Let. 56. From Florence, Remarks on the road between Bologna and Florence visit
to the monastery of La Trappe, with reflections on the monastic life --
occasion of the institution of the order of La Trappe -- the burning mountains
near Fierenzuola-general description of Florence -- the grand gallery-* the
statues of Antinous and Venus de Medicis -- the first sketches of Raphaels
cartoons -- envious behavior of modern painters in defacing the productions of
the ancients -- digression to some reports raised by Mr. P. concerning the
writer. Let. 57. Remarks on Paris -- reflections on staring and grinning --
character of the French people -- criticism on statues in the gardens of
Versailles -- the gardens compared with the royal gardens of England. Let. 58.
Obsevations on the Koran, and the conduct of the Greek priests with regard to
it -- women not excluded from mahomets paradise -- who among the women excluded
-- the exhortations of Mahomet to the women, compared with the monastic
institutions of popery -- the sciences cultivated among the Turks by the
effendis -- sentiments of an intelligent one respecting abstinence from wine --
strange mixture of different countries in the suburbs of Constantinople --
different species of men asserted -- mungrels in the human species why the
English women so fond of hoop petticoats. Let. 59. A Defense of Marriage
against Duke De La Roche Foucault's maxim, 'That marriage is sometimes
convenient, but never delightful.' POEMS ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS.
LETTERS OF LADY MONTAGUE.
LETTER LIII.
To Lady --,
January 13. 1716.
I FIND after all, by your letter of yesterday, that Mrs. D -- is resolved to
marry the old greasy Curate. She was always High Church in an excessive degree,
and you know she used to speak of Sacheverel as an Apostolic Saint, who was
worthy to sit in the same place with St. Paul, if not a step above him. It is a
matter however very doubtful to me, whether it is not still more the man than
the apostle that Mrs. D -- looks to in the present alliance. Though at the age of
forty, she is, I assure you, very far from being cold and insensible; her fire
may be covered with ashes, but is not extinguished. -- Don't be deceived my
dear Lady, by that prudish and sanctified air -- Warm devotions are no
equivocal marks of warm passions; besides I know it is a fact, (of which I have
proofs in hand, which I will tell you by word of mouth) that our learned and
holy prude is exceedingly disposed to use the means, supposed in the primitive
command, let what will come of the end* the Curate in^eed is very filthy --
Such a red, spungy, watery nose! Such a squint! in short, he is ugly beyond
expression; and what ought naturally to render him peculiarly dipleasing to one
of Mrs. D -- 's constitution and propensities, he is stricken in years. Nor do
I really know how they will live. He has but forty five pounds a year -- she
but a trifling sum; so that they are likely to feast upon love and
ecclesiastical history, which will be very empty food without a proper mixture
of beef and pudding. I have, however, engaged our friend, who is the curate's
landlord, to give them a good lease; and if Mrs. D --, instead of spending
whole days in reading Collier, Hicks, and vile translations of Plato and
Epictetus, will but form the resolution of taking care of her house and minding
her dairy, things may go tolerably. It is not likely that their tender loves
will give them many sweet babes to provide for.

I met the lover yesterday, going to the alehouse in his dirty nightgown, with
a book under his arm to entertain the club; and as Mrs. D -- was with me at the
time, I pointed out to her the charming creature: she blushed and looked prim;
but quoted a passage out of Herodotus, in which it is said that the Persians
wore long right gowns. There is really no more accounting for the taste in
marriage of ma^^y of our sex than there is for the apetite of your neighbor
Miss S -- y, who makes such waste of chalk and charcoal when they fall in her
way.

As marriage produces children, so children produce care, disputes and
wrangling, as it is said (at least by old batchelors and old maids) is one of
the sweets of the conjugal state: you tell me that our friend Mrs. -- is, at
length, blessed with a son; and that her husband who is a great philosopher,
[if his own testimony is to be depended upon] insists on her suckling it
herself. You ask my advice on this matter; and to give it you frankly, I really
think that Mr -- 's demand is unreason, able, as his wife's constitution is
tender, and her temper fretful. A true philosopher would consider these
circumstances, but a pedant is always throwing his system in your face, and
applies it equally to all things, times and places, just like a tailor, who
would make a coat out of his own head, without any regard to the bulk or figure
of the person that must wear it. All those fine* spun arguments that he has
drawn from nature to stop your mouths, weigh, I must own to you, but very
little with me. This same Nature is indeed a specious word, nay there is a
great deal in it if it is properly understood and applied, but I cannot bear to
hear people using it to justify what common sense must disavow. Is not nature
modified by art in many things? Was it not designed to be so? And is it not
happy for human society, that it is so? Would you like to see your husband let
his beard grow until he would be obliged to put the end of it in his pocket,
because this beard is the gift of Nature? The instincts of nature point out
neither tailors, nor weavers, nor mantua makers, nor semp^resses, nor
milliners: And yet I am very glad that we do not run naked like the Hottentots.
But not to wander from the subject -- I grant that Nature has furnished the
mother with milk to nourish her child; but I maintain at the same time that if
she can find better milk elsewhere, she ought to prefer it without hesitation.
I don't see why she should have more scruple to do this, than her husband has to
^^^ve the clear fountain, which Nature gave him to quench his thirst, for stout
October, Port, or Claret. Indeed if Mrs. -- was a buxom, sturdy woman, who
lived on plain food, took regular exercise, enjoyed proper returns of rest, and
was free from violent passions (which you and I know is not the case) she might
be a good nurse for her child; but as matters stand, I do verily think that the
milk of a good comely cow, who seeds quietly in her meadow, never devours
ragouts, nor drinks ratafia: nor frets at quadrille, nor sits up till three in
the morning elated with gain or dejected with loss, I do think that the milk of
such a cow or of a nurse that came as near it as possible, would be likely to
nourish the young squire much better than hers. If it be true that the child
sucks in the mother's passions with her milk, this is a strong argument in
favor of the cow, unless you may be afraid that the young squire may become a
calf; but how many calves are there both in state and church, who have been
brought up with their mother's milk?

I promise faithfully to communicate to no mortal the letter you wrote me last
-- What you say of the two rebel Lords, I believe to be true; but I can do
nothing in the matter. -- If my projects don't fail in the execution, I shall
see you before a month passes. Give my service to Dr. Blackbeard -- He is a
good man, but I never saw in my life such a persecuting face cover a humane and
tender heart. I imagine (within myself) that the Smithfield priests, who burned
the protestants in the time of Queen Mary, had just such faces as the Doctor's.
If we were papists I should like him very much for my confessor: his seeming
austerity would give you and me a great reputation for sanctity, and his good,
indulgent heart, would be the very thing that would suit us in the affair of
penance and ghostly direction.

Farewell, my dear Lady, etc. etc.
LETTER LIVE.
To the Abbot --.
Vienna, January 2, O. S. 1717.
I AM really almost tired with the life of Vienna. I am not, indeed, an enemy
to dissipation and hurry, much less to amusement and pleasure; but I cannot
endure long, even pleasure, when it is fettered, with formality, and assumes
the air of system. It Is true, I have had here some very agreeable connexions,
and what will perhaps surprise you. I have particular pleasure in my Spanish
acquaintances. Count Oropesa and General Puebla these two noblemen are much in
the good graces of the Emperor, and yet they seem to be brewing mischief. The
court of Madrid cannot reflect without pain upon the territories that were cut
off from the Spanish monarchy by the peace of Utrecht, and it seems to be
looking wishfully out for an opportunity of getting them back again. That is a
matter about which I trouble myself very little; let the court be in the right
or in the wrong, I like mightily the two Counts its ministers. I dined with
them both some days ago at Count Wurmbrand's, an Aulic counselor and a man of
letters, who is universally esteemed here. But the first man in this court, in
point of knowledge and abilities, is certainly the Count Schsick, High
Chancellor of Bohemia, whose immense reading is accompanied with a fine taste
and a solid judgment; he is a declared enemy to Prince Eugene, and a warm
firiend to the honest hot headed Marshal Staremberg. One of the most
accomplished men I have seen at Vienna is the young Count Tarrocco, who
accompanies the amiable Prince of Portugal. I am almost in love with them both
and wonder to see such elegant manners, and such free and generous sentiments
in two young men who have hitherto seen nothing but their own country. The
count is just such a Roman Catholic as you; he succeeds greatly with
the-devout beauties here; his first overtures in gallantry are disguised under
the luscious strains of spiritual love, that were sung formerly by the
sublimely voluptuous Fenelon and the tender madam Guion, who turned the fire of
carnal love to divine objects; thus the Count begins with the spirit, and ends
generally with the flesh, when he makes his addresses to holy virgins.

I made acquaintance yesterday with the famous poet Rousseau, who lives here
under the peculiar protection of Prince Eugene, by whose liberality he
subsists. He passes here for a free thinker, and, what is still worse in my
esteem, for a man whose heart does not feel the encomiums he gives to virtue
and honor in his poems. I like his odes mightily they are much superior to the
lyrick productions of our English poets, few of whom have made any figure in
that kind of poetry. I don't find that learned men abound here; there is indeed
a prodigious number of Alchymists at Vienna; the philosophers stone is the
great object of zeal and science; and those who have more reading and capacity
than the vulgar, have transported their superstition (shall I call it?) or
fanaticism from religion to chemistry; and they believe in a new kind of
transubstantiation, which is designed to make the laity as rich as the other
kind has made the priesthood. This pestilential passion has already ruined
several great houses. There is scarcely a man of opulence or fashion, that has
not an Alchymist in his service, and even the emperor is supposed to be no
enemy to this folly in secret, though he has pretended to discourage it in
public.

Prince Eugene was so polite as to show me his library yesterday; we found him
attended by Rousseau, and his favorite Count Bonneval, who is a man of wit,
and is here thought to be a very bold enter prizing spirit. The library, though
not very ample, is well chosen; but as the prince will admit into it no
editions but what are beautiful and pleasing to the eye, and there are
nevertheless numbers of excellent books that are but indifferently printed,
this finikin and fopish taste makes many disagreeable chasms in this
collection. The books are pompously bound in Turkey leather, and two of the
most famous bookbinders of Paris were expressly sent for to do this work
Bonneval pleasantly told me that there were several quarto's on the art of war,
that were bound with the skins of Spahis and Janissaries; and this jest, which
was indeed elegant, raised a smile of pleasure on the grave countenance of the
famous warrior. The Prince, who is a connoiseur in the fine arts, showed me,
with particular pleasure, the famous collection of portraits that formerly
belonged to Fouquet, and which he purchased at an excessive price. He has
augmented it with a considerable number of new acquisitions, so that he has now
in his possession such a collection in that kind as you will scarcely find in
any ten cabinets in Europe. If I told you the number, you would say that I made
an indiscreet use of the permission to lie, which is more or less given to
travelers by the indulgence of the candid.

Count Tarrocco is just come in -- He is the only person I have excepted this
morning in my general order to receive no company. -- I think I see you smile,
-- but I am not so far gone as to stand in need of absolution; though, as the
human heart is deceitful, and the Count very agreeable, you may think that even
though I should not want an absolution, I would nevertheless be glad to have an
indulgence. -- No such thing. -- However, as I am a heretic, and you no
confessor, I shall make no declarations on this head. -- The design of the
Count's visit is a ball; -- more pleasure -- I shall be surfeited.

Adieu, etc*
LETTER LV,
TO Mr. P --.
Sept. 1, 1717.
WHEN I wrote to you last, Belgrade was in the hands of the Turks; but at this
present moment, it has changed masters, and is in the hands of the
Imperialists. A Janissary who in nine days, and yet without any wings but what
a pannick terror seems to have furnished, arrived at Constantinople from the
army of the Turks before Belgrade, brought Mr. W -- the news of a complete
victory obtained by the imperialists, commanded by prince Eugene, over the
Ottoman troops. It is said the Prince has discovered great conduct and valor
in this action, and I am particularly glad that the voice of glory and duty has
called him from the -- (here several words of the manuscript are effaced.) --
Two days after the battle the town surrendered. The consternation, which this
defeat has occasioned here, is inexpressible; and the Sultan apprehending a
revolution from the resentment and indignation of the people, fomented by
certain leaders, has begun his goodly precautions after the goodly fashion of
his blessed government, by ordering several persons to be strangled who were
the objects of his royal suspicion. He has also ordered his treasurer to
advance some months pay to the Janissaries, which seems the less necessary, as
their conduct has been bad in this campaign, and their licentious ferocity
seems pretty well tamed by the public contempt, such of them as return in
straggling and fugitive parties to the metropolis, have not spirit nor credit
enough to defend themselves from the insults of the mob; the very children
taunt them and the populace spit in their faces as they pass. They refused
during the battle to lend their assistance to save the baggage and the military
chest, which however were defended by the Bashaws and their retinue while the
Janissaries and spahis were nobly employed in plundering their own camp.

You see here that I give you a very handsome return for your obliging letter.
You entertain me with a most agreeable account of your amiable connexions with
men of letters and taste, and of the deliscious moments you pass in their
society under the rural shade; and I exhibit to you in return the barbarous
spectacles of Turks and Germans cutting one another's throats. But what can you
expect from such a country as this from which the muses have fled, from which
letters seem eternally banished, and in which you see, in private scenes,
nothing pursued as happiness but the refinements of an indolent voluptuousness,
and where those who act upon the public theater live in uncertainty,
suspicion, and terror. Pleasure to which I am no enemy, when it is duly
seasoned and o^ a good composition, is surely here of the cloying kind. Veins
of wit, elegant conversation easy commerce, are unknown among the Turks; and
yet they seem capable of all these, if the vile spirit of their government did
not stifle genius, damp curiosity, and suppress an hundred passions, that
embellish and render life agreeable. The luscious passion of the Seraglio is
the only one almost that is gratified here to the full, but it is blended so
with the surly spirit of despotism in one of the parties, and with the
dejection and anxiety which this spirit produces in the other, that to one of
my way of thinking it cannot appear otherwise than as a very mixed kind of
enjoyment. The women here are not indeed, so closely confined as many have
related; they enjoy a high degree of liberty even in the bosom of servitude,
and they have methods of evasion and disguise that are very favorable to
gallanty; but after all, they are still under uneasy apprehensions of being
discovered; and a discovery exposes them to the most merciless rage of
jealousy, which is here a monster that cannot be satiated but with blood. The
magnificence and riches that reign in the apartments of the ladies of fashion
here, seem to be one of their chief pleasures, joined with their retinue of
female slaves, whose music dancing and dress amuse them highly; but there is
such an air of form and stiffness amidst this grandeur, as hinders it from
pleasing me at long run, however I was dazzled with it at first sight. This
stiffness and formality of manners are peculiar to the Turkish ladies; for the
Grecian belles are of quite another character and complexion; with them
pleasure appears in more engaging forms, and their persons, manners,
conversation, and amusements are very far from being destitute of elegance and
ease, --

I received the news of Mr. Addison's being declared Secretary of State with
the less surprise, in that I know that post was almost offered to him before.
At that time he declined it, and I really believe that he would have done well
to have declined it now. Such a post as that, and such a wife as the Countess,
do not seem to be, in prudence eligible, for a man that is asthmatick; and we
may see the day when he will be heartily glad to resign them both. It is well
that he laid aside the thoughts of the voluminous dictionary of which I have
heard you or somebody else frequently make mention. But no more on that
subject; I would not have said so much, were I not assured that this letter
will come safe and unopened to hand. I long much to tread upon English ground,
that I may see you and Mr. Co^greve, who render that ground classick; nor will
you refuse our present Secretary a part of that merit, whatever reasons you may
may have to be dissatisfied with him in other respects. Ye are the three
happiest poets I ever heard of; one a secretary of state the other enjoying
leisure with dignity in two lucrative employments; and you, though your religious
profession is an obstacle to court promotion, and disqualifies you from filling
civil employments, have found the Philosophers stone since by making the Iliad
pass through your poetical crucible into an English form without losing aught
of its original beauty, you have drawn the golden current of Pactolus to
Twickenham. I call this finding the Philosophers stone, since you alone found
out the secret, and nobody else has got into it. Addison and Tickell tried it,
but their experiments failed; and they lost if not their money, at least a
certain portion of their fame in the trial -- while you touched the mantle of
the divine Bard, and imbibed his spirit. I hope we shall have the Odyssey soon
from your happy hand, and I think I shall follow with singular pleasure the
traveller Ulysses, who was an observer of Men and manners, when he travels in
your harmonious numbers, I love him much better than the hot headed son of
Peleus, who bullied his general, cried for his mistress, and so on. It is true,
the excellence o^ the Iliad does not depend, upon his merit or dignity, but I
wish nevertheless that Homer had chosen a hero somewhat less pettish and less
fantastic: a perfect hero is chimerical and unnatural, and consequently
uninstructive; but it is also true that while the epick hero ought to be drawn
with the infirmities that are the lot of humanity, he ought never to be
represented as extremely absurd. But it becomes me ill to play the critic; so
I take my leave of you for this time, and desire you will believe me with the
highest esteem,

Yours, etc.

As this letter is the supplement to a preceding one which is not come to the
hands of the Editor, it was probably on that account, sent without a date. It
seems evidently to have been written after lady M. W. M. had fixed her
residence in Italy.
LETTER LVI.
To the Countess of --.
Saturday -- Florence.
I SET out from Bologna the moment I had finished the letter I wrote you on
Monday last, and shall now continue to inform you of the things that have
struck me most in this excursion. Sad roads -- hilly and rocky -- between
Bologna and Fierenzuola. Between this latter place and Florence I went out of
my road to visit the monastery of La Trappe, which is of French origin and one
of the most austere and self-denying orders I have met with. In this gloomy
retreat it gave me pain to observe the infatuation of men, who have devoutly
reduced themselves to a much worse condition than that of the beasts* Folly,
you see, is the lot of humanity, whether it arises in the flowery paths of
pleasure or the thorny ones of an ill-judged devotion. But of the two sorts of
fools, I shall always think that the merry one has the most eligible fate; and
I cannot well form a notion of that spiritual and extatick joy that is mixed
with sighs, groans, hunger and the other complicated miseries of monastic
discipline. It is a strange way of going to work for happiness to excite an
enmity between soul and body, which nature and providence have designed to live
together in union and friendship, and which we cannot separate like man and
wife when they happen to disagree. The profound silence that is enjoined upon
the monks of La Trappe, is a singular circumstance of their unsociable and
unnatural discipline; and were this injunction never to be dispensed with, it
would be needless to visit them in any other character than as a collection of
statues; but the superior of the convent suspended, in our favor, that
rigorous law, and allowed 'one of the mutes to converse with me, and answer a
few discreet questions. He told me that the monks of this order in France are
still more austere than those of Italy, as they never taste wine, flesh, fish
or eggs; but live entirely upon vegetables. The story that is related of the
institution of this order is remarkable, and is well attested if my information
be good. Its founder was a French nobleman whose name was B^^^thillier de Rance
a man of pleasure and (...) which were (...) gloom of devotion By the following
incident. His affairs obliged him to absent himself, for some time, from a lady
with whom he had lived in the most intimate and tender connexions of successful
love. At his return to Paris he proposed to surprise her agreeably, and at the
same time, to satisfy his own impatient desire of seeing her, by going directly
and without ceremony to her apartment by a back stair, which he was well
acquainted with -- but think of the spectacle that presented itself to him at
his entrance into the chamber that had so often been the scene of loves highest
raptures! his mistress dead -- dead of the small pox -- disfigured beyond
expression -- a loathsome mass of putrified matter -- and the surgeon
separating the head from the body, because the coffin had been made too short!
He stood for a moment motionless in amazement, and filled with horror -- and
then retired from the world, shut himself up in the convent of La Trappe, where
he passed the remainder of his days in the most cruel and disconsolate
devotion. -- Let us quit this sad subject.

I must not forget to tell you that before I came to this monastery I went to
see the burning mountains near Fierenzuola, of which the naturalists speak as a
great curiosity. The flame it sends forth is without smoke, and resembles
brandy set on fire. The ground about it is well cultivated, and the fire
appears only in one spot where there is a cavity, whose circumference is but
small, but in it are several crevices whose depths are unknown. It is
remarkable that when a piece of wood is thrown into this cavity, tho it cannot
pass through the crevices, yet it is consumed in a moment, and that though the
ground about it be perfectly cold, yet if a stick be rubbed with any force
against it, it emits a flame, which however, is neither hot nor durable like
that of the volcano. If you desire a more circumstantial account of this
phenomenon, and have made a sufficient progress in Italian to read father
Carazzi's description of it, you need not be at a loss, for I have sent this
description to Mr. F --, and you have only to ask it of him. After observing
the volcano, I scrambled up all the neighboring hills, partly on horseback,
partly on foot, but could find no vestige of fire in any of them; though common
report would make one believe that they all contain volcano's,

I hope you have not taken it in your head to expect from me a description of
the famous gallery here, where I arrived on Thursday at noon; this would be
requiring a volume instead of a letter; besides I have as yet seen but a part
of this immense treasure, and I propose employing some weeks more to survey the
whole. You cannot imagine any situation more agreeable than Florence. It lies
in a fertile and smiling valley watered by the Arno which runs through the city,
and nothing can surpass the beauty and magnificence of its public buildings,
particularly the cathedral, whose grandeur filled me with astonishment. The
palaces, squares, fountains, statues, bridges, do not only carry an aspect full
of elegance and greatness, but discover a taste quite different, in kind, from
that which reigns in the public edifices in other countries. The more I see of
Italy, the more I am persuaded that the Italians have a style (if I may use
that expression) in every thing, which distinguishes them almost essentially
from all other Europeans. Where they have got it, -- whether from natural
genius or ancient imitation and inheritance, I shall not examine; but the fact
is certain. I have been but one day in the gallery, that amazing repository of
the most precious remains of antiquity, and which alone is sufficient to
immortalize the illustrious house of Medicis, by whom it was built and enriched
as we now see it. I was so impatient to see the famous Venus of Medicis, that I
went hastily through six apartments in order to get a sight of this divine
figure, purposing when I had satisfied this ardent curiosity, to return and
view the rest at my leisure. As I indeed passed through the great room which
contains the ancient statues, I was stopped short at viewing the Antinous,
which they had placed near that of Adrian, to revive the remembrance of their
preposterous loves, which I suppose the Florentines rather look upon as an
object of envy, than of horror and disgust. This statue, like that of the Venus
de Medicis, spurns description: such figures my eyes never beheld -- I can now
understand that Ovid's comparing a fine woman a fine woman to a statue, which I
formerly thought a very disobliging similitude, was the nicest and highest
piece of flattery. The Antinous is entirely naked, alll its parts are bigger
than nature; but the whole, taken together, and the fine attitude of the figure
carry such an expression of ease, elegance and grace, as no words can describe.
When I saw the Venus I was wrapped in wonder, -- and I could not help casting a
thought back upon Antinous. They ought to be placed together. They are worthy
of each other -- If marble could see and feel, the separation might be prudent,
-- if it could only see, it would certainly lose its coldness and learn to
feel, and in such a case the charms of these two figures would produce an
effect quite opposite to that of the Gorgon's head, which turned flesh into
stone. Did I pretend to describe to you the Venus, it would only set your
imagination at work to form ideas of her figure, and your idea's would no more
resemble that figure, than the Portuguese face of Miss N -- who has enchanted
our knight, resembles the sweet and graceful countenance of lady -- his former
flame. The description of a face or figure is a needless thing as it never
conveys a true idea, it only gratifies the imagination with a fantastic one,
until the real one is seen. So, my dear, if you have a mind to form a true
notion of the divine form, and features of the Venus and Antinous, come to
Florence.

I would be glad to oblige you and your friend Virtue by executing your
commission with respect to the sketches of Raphaels cartoons at Hampton Court;
but I cannot do it to my satisfaction. I have, indeed, seen in the Grand Dukes
collection, four pieces, in which that wonderful artist had thrown freely from
his pencil the first thoughts and rude lines of some of these compositions; and
as the first thoughts of a great genius are precious, these pieces attracted my
curiosity in a particular manner; but when I went to examine them closely, I
found them so damaged and effaced, that they did not at all answer my
expectation. Whether this be owing to negligence or envy, I cannot say; I
mention the lattter, because it is notorious that many of the modern painters
have discovered ignoble marks of envy at a view of the inimitable productions
of the ancients. Instead of employing their art to preserve the masterpieces of
antiquity, they have endeavored to destroy and efface many of them. I have
seen with my own eyes an evident proof of this at Bologna, where the greatest
part of the paintings in fresco on the walls of the convent of St. Michael in
Bosco, done by the Carracci, and Guido Rheni, have been ruined by the painters,
who after having copied some of the finest heads, scraped them almost entirely
out with nails. Thus you see nothing is exempt from human malignity

The word Malignity, and a passage in your letter, call to my mind the wicked
wasp of Twickenham: his lies affect me now no more; they will be all as much
despised as the story of the seraglio and the handkerchief, of which I am
persuaded he was the only inventor. That man has a malignant and ungenerous
heart; and he is base enough to assume the mask of a moralist in order to decry
human nature, and to give a decent vent to his hatred of man and woman kind. --
But I must quit this contemptible subject, on which a just indignation would
render my pen so fertile, that alter having fatigued you with a long letter, I
would surfeit you with a supplement twice as long Besides a violent headache
advertises me that it is time to lay down my pen and get me to bed. I shall say
some things to you in my next that I would have you to impart to the strange
man, as from yourself. My mind is at present tolerably quiet; if it were as
dead to sin, as it is to certain connexions, I should be a great saint. Adieu,
my dear Madam.

Yours very affectionately, etc.

LETTER LVII.
TO Mr. P --.
I Have been running about Paris at a strange rate with my sister, and strange
sights have we seen. They are at least strange sights to me, for after having
been accustomed to the gravity of Turks, I can scarcely look with an easy and
familiar aspect at the levity and agility of the airy phantoms that are dancing
about me here, and I often think that I am at a puppet-shew amidst the
representations of real life. I stare prodigiously but no body remarks it, for
every body stares here; staring is alamode -- there is a stare of attention and
interet, a stare of curiosity, a stare of expectation, a stare of surprise, it
would greatly amuse you to see what trifling objects excite all this staring.
This staring would have rather a solemn kind of air, were it not alleviated by
grinning, for at the end of a stare there comes always a grin, and very
commonly the entrance of a gentleman or lady into a room is accompanied with a
grin, which is designed to express complacence and social pleasure, but really
shows nothing more than a certain contortion of muscles that must make a
stranger laugh really, as they laugh artificially. The French grin is equally
remote from the cheerful serenity of a smile, and the cordial mirth of an
honest English horse-laugh. I shall not perhaps stay here long enough to form a
just idea of French manners and characters, though this I believe would require
but little study, as there is no great depth in either. It appears, on a
superficial view to be a frivolous restless and agreeable people. The Abbot is
my guide, and I could not easily light upon a better; he tells me that here the
women form the character of the men, and I am convinced in the persuasion of
this by every company into which I enter. There seems here to be no
intermediate state between infancy and manhood; for as soon as the boy has quit
his leading-strings, he is set agog in the world; the ladies are his tutors,
they make the first impressions, which generally remain, and they render the
men ridiculous by the imitation of their humors and graces, so that dignity in
manners is a rare thing here before the age of sixty. Does not King David say
somewhere, that Man walks in a vain show? I think he does, and I am sure this
is peculiarly true of the French man, -- but he walks merrily and seems to
enjoy the vision, and may he not therefore be esteemed more happy than many of
our solid thinkers whose brows are furrowed by deep reflection, and whose
wisdom is so often clothed with a misty mantle of spleen and vapors?

What delights me most here is a view of the magnificence often accompanied
with taste that reigns in the King's palaces and gardens; for though I don't
admire much the architecture, in which there is great irregularity amd want of
proportion, yet the statues, paintings and other decorations afford me high
entertainment. One of the pieces of antiquity that struck me most in the
gardens of Versailles was the famous Coloss^an statue of Jupiter, the
workmanship of Myron, which Mark Anthony carried away from Samos, and Augustus
ordered to be placed in the Capitol. It is of pariah marble, and though it has
suffered in the ruin of time it still preserves striking lines of majesty. But
surely if marble could feel, the God would frown with a generous indignation to
see himself transported from the Capitol into a French garden; and after having
received the homage of the Roman emperors who laid their laurels at his feet
when they returned from their conquests, to behold now nothing but frizzled
beaus passing by him with indifference.

I propose setting out soon from this place, so that you are to expect no more
letters from this side of the water; besides I am hurried to death, and and my
head swims with that vast variety of objects which I am obliged to view with
such rapidity the shortness of my time not allowing me to examine them at my
leisure. There is here an excessive prodigality of ornaments and decorations,
that is just the opposite extreme to what appears in our royal gardens; this
prodigality is owing to the levity and inconstancy of the French taste, which
always pants after something new, and thus heaps ornament upon ornament without
end or measure. It is time, however, that I should put an end to my letter; so
I wish you good night,

And am, etc.
LETTER LVIII. To Count --.
Translated from the French.
I AM charmed, sir, with your obliging letter; and you may perceive by the
largeness of my paper, that I intend to give punctual answers to all your
questions, at least if my French will permit me; for as it is a language I do
not understand to perfection, so I much fear, that, for want of expressions, I
shall be quickly obliged to finish. Keep in mind, therefore, that I am writing
in a foreign language; and be sure to attribute all the impertinencies and
triflings dropping from my pen, to the want of proper words for declaring my
thoughts, but by no means to dullness or natural levity.

These conditions being thus agreed and settled, I begin with telling you, that
you have a true notion of the Alcoran, concerning which the Greek priests (who
are the greatest scoundrels in the universe) have invented out of their own
heads a thousand ridiculous stories, in order to decry the law of Mahomet; to
run it down, I say, without any examination, or so much as letting the people
read it; being afraid that if once they began to sift the defects of the
Alcoran, they might not stop there, but proceed to make use of their judgment,
about their own legends and fictions. In effect, there is nothing so like as
the fables of the Greeks and of the Mahometans; and the last have multitudes of
saints, at whose tombs miracles are by them said to be daily performed; nor are
the accounts of the lives of those blessed Musselmen much less stuffed with
extravagancies, than the spiritual romances of the Greek Papas.

As to your next enquiry, I assure you it is certainly false, though commonly
believed in our parts of the world, that Mahomet excludes women from any share
in a future happy state. He was too much a gentleman, and loved the fair sex
too well, to use them so barbarously. On the contrary, he promises a very fine
paradise to the Turkish women. He says, indeed, that this paradise will be a
separate place from that of their husbands; but I, fancy the most part of them
will not like it the worse for that; and that the regret of this separation will
not rende their paradise the less agreeable. It remains to tell you, that the
virtues which Mahomet requires of the women, to merit the enjoyment of future
happiness, are not to live in such a manner as to become useless to the world,
but to employ themselves as much as possible, in making little Mussulmans, The
virgins who die virgins, and the widows who marry not again, dying in mortal
sin, are excluded out of paradise: For women, says he not being capable to
manage the affairs of state, nor to support the fatigues of war, God has not
ordered them to govern or reform the world; but he has entrusted them with an
office which is no less honouble, even that of multiplying the human race: and
such as* out of malice or laziness, do not make it their business to bear or
breed children, fulfill not the duty of their vocation, and rebel against the
commands of God. Here are maxims for you, prodigiously contrary to those of
your convents. What will become of your St. Catharines, your St. Theresas, your
St. Claras, and the whole bead roll of your holy virgins and widows? who, if
they are to be judged by this system of virtue, will be found to have been
infamous creatures, that passed their whole lives in the most abominable
libertinism.

I know not what your thoughts may be concernin a doctrine so extraordinary
with respect to us; but I can truly inform you, sir, that the Turks are not so
ignorant as we fancy them to be, in matters of politics, or philosophy, or
even of gallantry. It Is true that military discipline, such as is now practiced
in Christendom, does not mightily suit them. A long peace has plunged them into
an universal sloth. Content with their condition, and accustomed to boundless
luxury, they are become great enemies to all manner of fatigues. But to make
amends, the sciences flourish among them. The effendis (that is to say, the
learned) do very well deserve this name: They have no more faith in the
inspirations of Mahomet, than in the infallibility of the Pope. They make a
frank profession of deism among themselves, or to those they can trust, and
never speak of their law but as of a politic institution, fit now to be
observed by wise men, however at first introduced by politicians and
enthusiasts.

If I remember right, I think I have told you in some former letter, that at
Belgrade we lodged with a great and rich Effendi, a man of wit and learning,
and of a very agreeable humor. We were in his house about a month, and he did
constantly eat with us, drinking wine without any scruple. As I rallied him a
little on this subject, he answered me, smiling, that all creatures in the
world were made for the pleasure of man; and that God would not have let the
vine grow, were it a sin to taste of its juice: but that nevertheless the law,
which forbids the use of it to the vulgar, was very wise, because such sort of
folks have not sense enough to take it with moderation. This Effendi appeared
no stranger to the parties that prevail among us: nay, he seemed to have some
knowledge of our religious disputes, and even of our writers, and I was
surprised to hear him ask among other things how Mr. Toland did?

My paper, large as it is, draws toward an end. That I may not go beyond its
limits, I must leap from religions to tulips, concerning which you ask me news.
Their mixture produces surprising effects But what is to be observed most
surprising, is the experiments of which you speak concerning animals, and which
is tried here every day. The suburbs of Pera, Jophana, and Galata, are
collections of strangers from all countries of the universe. They have so often
intermarried, that this forms several races of people, the oddest imaginable,
there is not one single family of natives, that can value itself on being
unmixed. You frequently see a person, whose father was born a Grecian, the
mother an Italian, the grandfather a Frenchman, the grandmother an Armenian,
and their ancestors English, Muscovites, Asiaticks, etc.

This mixture produces creatures more extraordinary than you can imagine: nor
could I ever doubt, but there were several different species of men; since the
whites, the woolly and the long hair'd blacks, the small-eyed Tartars and
Chinese, the beardless Brasilians (and to name name no more) the oily-skinned
yellow Nova Zemblians, have as specific differences under the same general
kind, as greyhounds, mastiffs, spaniels, bull dogs, or the race of my little
Diana, if nobody is offended at the comparison. Now as the various intermixing
of these later animals causes mungrels, so mankind have their mungrels too,
divided and subdivided into endless sorts. We have daily proofs of it here, as
I told you before. In the same animal is not seldom remarked the Greek
perfidiousness, and the Italian diffidence, the Spanish arrogance and the
French loquacity, and all of a sudden he is seized with a fit of English
thoughtfulness, bordering a little upon dullness, which many of us have
inherited from the stupidity of our Saxon progenitors. But the family which
charms me most, is that which proceeds from the fantastical conjunction of a
Dutch male with a Greek female. As these are natures opposite in extremes, it is
a pleasure to observe how the differing attoms are perpetually jarring together
in the children, even so as to produce effects visible in their external form.
They have the large black eyes of the country, with the fat, white, fishy flesh
of Holland, and a lively air streaked with dullness. At one and the same time,
they show that love of expensiveness, so universal among the Greeks, and an
inclination to the Dutch frugality. To give an example of this: young women
ruin themselves to purchase jewels for adorning their heads, while they have
not the heart to buy new shoes or rather slippers for their feet, which are
commonly in a tattered condition; a thing so contrary to the taste of our
English women that it is for showing how neatly their feet are dressed, and for
showing this only they are so passionately enamoured with their hoop-peticoats.
I have abundance of other singularities to communicate to you, but I am at the
end both of my French and my paper.

LETTER LIX.
ON MARRIAGE.
Containing a Refutation of one Maxim of the Duke De La Roche Foucault's --
"That Marriage is sometimes convenient, but never delightful."
IT may be thought a presumptuous at tempt in me to contravert a maxim advanced
by such a celebrated genius us as Monsieur Rochefoucault, and received with
such implicit faith by a nation which boasts of superior politeness to the rest
of the world, and which for a long time past has prescribed the rules of
gallantry to all Europe.

Nevertheless, prompted by that ardour which truth inspires, I dare to maintain
the contrary, and resolutely insist, that there are some marriages formed by
love, which may be delightful, where the affection are sympathetic. Nature has
presented us with pleasures suitable to our species, and we need only to follow
her impulse, refined by taste, and exalted by a lively and agreeable
imagination, in order to attain the most perfect felicity of which human nature
is susceptible: ambition, avarice, vanity when enjoy^^d in the most exquisite
perfection, can yield but trifling and taste less pleasures, which will be too
inconsiderable to affect a mind of d^^l^^a^e sensibility.

We may consider the gifts of fortune as so many steps necessary to arrive at
felicity, which we can never attain, being obliged to set bounds to our
desires, and being only gratified with some of her frivolous favors; which are
nothing more than the torments of life, when they are considered as the
necessary means to acquire or preserve a more exquisite felicity.

This felicity consists alone in friendship, founded on mutual esteem, fixed by
gratitude, supported by inclination, and animated by the tender solicitudes of
Love, whom the ancients have admirably described under the appearance of a
beautiful infant: it is pleased with infantine amusements, it is delicate and
affectionate, incapable of mischief, delighted with trifles; its pleasures are
gentle and innocent.

They have given a very different representation of another passion too gross
to be mentioned, but of which alone men in general are susceptible. This they
have described under the figure of a Satyr, who has more of the brute than of
the man in his composition. By this fabulous animal they have expressed a
passion, which is the real foundation of all the fine exploits of modish
gallantry, and which only endeavors to glut its appetite with the possession
of the object which is most lovely in its estimation: a passion founded in
injustice, supported by deceit and atttended by crimes, remorse, jealousy and
contempt. Can such an affection be delightful to a virtuous mind? Nevertheless
such is the delightful attendant on all illicit engagements; gallants are
obliged to abandon all those sentiments of honor which are inseparable from a
liberal education, and are doomed to live wretchedly in the constant pursuit of
what reason condemns to have all their pleasures embittered by remorse, and to
be reduced to the deplorable condition of having renounced virtue, without
being able to make vice agreeable.

It is impossible to taste the delights of love in perfection, but in a well
assorted marriage; nothing betrays such a narrowness of mind as to be governed
by words. What though custom, for which good reasons may be assigned, has made
the words husband and wife somewhat ridiculous? A husband in common
acceptance, signifies a jealous brute, a surly tyrant; or at best a weak fool,
who may be made to believe any thing. A wife is a domestic termagant who is
destined to deceive or torment the poor devil of a husband. The conduct of many
married people too much realizes these two odious characters.

But as I said before, Why should words impose upon us? A well regulated
marriage is not like these connections of interest or ambition. A fond couple
attached to each other by mutual affection, are two lovers who live happily
together. Though the priest pronounces certain words, though the lawyer draws
up certain instruments; yet I look on these preparatives in the same light as a
lover considers a ladder of ropes which he fastens to his mistress's window: if
they can but live together what does it signify at what price or by what means
their union is accomplished? Where love is real and well founded, it is
impossible to be happy but in the quiet enjoyment of the beloved object and the
price at which it is obtained does not lessen the vivacity and delights of a
passion such as my imagination conceives. If I was inclined to romance, I would
not picture images of true happiness in Arcadia. I am not prudish enough to
confine the delicacy of affection on to wishes only I would open my romance
with the marriage of a couple united by sentiment, taste and inclination. Can
we conceive a higher felicity than the blending of their interests and lives in
such an union? The lover has the pleasure of giving his mistress the la^^
testimony of esteem and confidence, and she in return commits her peace and
liberty to his protection. Can they exchange more dear and affectionate
pledges? Is it not natural, to give the most incontestable proofs of that
tenderness with which our minds are impressed? I am sensible that some are so
nice as to maintain that the pleasures of love are derived from the dangers and
difficulties with which it is attended; they very pertly observe, that a rose
would not appear a rose without thorns. There are a thousand insipid remarks of
this sort which make so little impression on me, that I am persuaded, was (...)
lover, the dread of injuring my mistress would make me unhappy, if the
enjoyment of her was attended with danger to herself,

Two married lovers lead very different lives; they have the pleasures to pass
their time in a successive intercourse of mutual obligations, and marks of
benevolence, and they have the delight to find that each forms the entire
happiness of the beloved object. Herein consists perfect felicity. The most
trivial concerns of economy become noble and elegant when they are exalted by
sentiments of affection; to furnish an appartment, is not barely to furnish an
apartment; it is a place where I expect my lover: to prepare a supper, is not
merely giving orders to my cook; it is an amusement to regale the object I doa^
on. In this light a woman considers these necessary occupations as more lively
and affecting pleasures* than those gaudy sights which amuse the greater part
of the sex, who are incapable of true enjoyment.

A fixed and affectionate attachment softens every emotion of the soul, and
renders every object agreeable which presents itself to the happy lover (I mean
one who is married to his mistress.) If he exercises any employment, the
fatigues of the camp the troubles of the court, all become agreeable when he
reflects that he endures these inconveniences to serve the object of his
affections. If fortune is favorable to him, for success does not depend on
merit, all the advantages it procures are so many tributes which he thinks due
to the charms of the lovely fair; and in gratifying this ambition, he feels a
more lively pleasure, and more worthy of an honest man, than that of raising
his fortune, and gaining public applause. He enjoys glory, titles and riches no
farther than as they regard her he loves; and when he attracts the approbation
of a senate the applause of an army, or the commendation of his prince, it is
her praises which ultimately flatter him.

In a reverse of fortune, he has the consolation of retiring to one who is
affected by his disgrace; and locked in her embraces he has the satisfaction of
giving utterance to the following tender reflections. My happiness does not
depend on the caprice of fortune; I have a constant assylum against inquietude.
Your esteem renders me insensible of the injustice of a court, or the
ingratitude of a master and my losses afford me a kind of pleasure, since they
furnish me with fresh proofs of your virtue and affection. Of what use is
grandeur to those who are already happy? We have no need of flatterers, we want
no equipages, I reign in your affections, and I enjoy every delight in the
possession of your person.

In short there is no situation in which melancholy may not be assuaged by the
company of the beloved object. Sickness itself is not without its alleviation,
when we have the pleasure of being attended by her we love. I should never
conclude, if I attempted to give a detail of all the delights of an attachment,
wherein we meet with every thing which can flatter the senses with the most
lively and diffusive raptures. But I must not omit taking notice of the
pleasure of beholding the lovely pledges of a tender friendship, daily growing
up, and of amusing ourselves, according to our different sexes, in training
them to perfection We give way to this agreeable instinct of nature, refined by
love. In a daughter we praise the beauty of her mother: in a son we commend the
understanding, and the appearance of innate probity which we esteem in his
father. It is a pleasure which according to Moses, the Almighty himself
enjoyed, when he beheld the work of his hands, and saw that all was good.

Speaking of Moses. I cannot forbear observing that the primitive plan of
felicity infinitely surpasses all others, and I cannot form an idea of
Paradise, more like a Paradise than the state in which our first parents were
placed: that proved of short duration, because they were unacquainted with the
world, and it is for the same reason that so few love matches prove happy. Eve
was like a silly child, and Adam was not much enlightened. When such people
come together, their being amorous is to no purpose, for their affections must
necessarily be short lived. In the transports of their love they form
supper-natural ideas of each other. The man thinks his mistress an angel
because she is handsome, and she is enraptured with the merit of her lover,
because he adores her. The first decay of her complexion deprives her of his
adoration, and the husband being no longer an adorer, becomes hateful to her,
who had no other foundation for her love. By degrees they grow disgustful to
each other, and after the example of our first parents they do not fail to
reproach each other with the crime of their mutual imbecility. After
indifference contempt comes apace, and they are convinced that they must hate
each other, because they are married. Their smallest defects swell in each
other's view, and they grow blind to those charms which, in any other object
would please them. A commerce founded merely on sensation can be attended with
no other consequences.

A man, when he marries the object of his affections, should forget that she
appears to him adorable, and should consider her merely as a mortal, subject to
disorders, caprice and ill temper; he should arm himself with fortitude, to
bear the loss of her beauty, and should provide himself with a fund of
complaisance which is requisite to support a constant intercourse, with a
person even of the highest understanding and the greatest equanimity. The wife,
on the other hand* should, not expect a continued course of adulation and
obedience; she should dispose herself to obey in her turn with a good grace; a
science very difficult to attain, and consequently the more estimable in the
opinion of a man who is sensible of the merit. She should endeavor to revive
the charms of the mistress, by the solidity and good sense of the friend.

When a pair, who entertain such rational sentiments, are united by
indissoluble bonds all nature smiles upon them, and the most common objects
appear delightful. In my oppinion, such a life is infinitely more happy and
more voluptuous, than the most ravishing and best regulated gallantry.

A woman who is capable of reflection can consider a gallant in no other light
than that of a seducer who would take advantage of her weakness, to procure a
momentary pleasure at the expense of her glory, her peace her honor, and
perhaps her life. A highwayman who claps a pistol to your breast, to rob you of
your purse, is less dishonest and less guilty; and I have so good an opinion of
myself as to believe that if I was a man, I should be as capable of assuming
the character of an assassin, as that of seducing an honest woman, esteemed in
the world and happy in her husband, by attempting to inspire her with a passion
to which she must sacrifice her honor, her tranquillity and her virtue.

Should I make her despicable, who appears amiable in my eyes? Should I reward
her tenderness, by making her abhorred by her family, by rendering her children
indifferent to her, and her husband detestable? I believe that these
reflections would have appeared to me in as strong a light, it my sex had not
rendered them excusable in such cases; and I hope that I should have had more
sense than to imagine vice the less vicious, because it is the fashion.

N. B. I am much pleased with the Turkish manners: a people, though ignorant,
yet, in my judgment, extremely polite. A gallant convicted of having debauched
a married woman, is regarded as a pernicious being, and held in the same
abhorrence as a prostitute with us. He is certain of never making his fortune,
and they would deem it scandalous to confer any considerable employment on a
man suspected of having committed such enormous injustice.

What would these moral people think of our anti-knights-errant, who are ever
in pursuit of adventures to reduce innocent virgins to distress, and to rob
virtuous women of their honor; who regard beauty, youth, rank, nay virtue
itself as so many incentives, which inflame their desires, and render their
efforts more eager; and who, priding themselves in the glory of appearing
expert seducers, forget that with all their endeavors, they can only acquire
the second rank in that ignoble order the Devil having long since been in
possession of the first.

Our barbarous manners are so well calculated for the establishment of vice and
wretchedness, which are ever inseparable, that it requires a degree of
understanding and sensibility infinitely above the common, to relish the
felicity of a marriage such as I have described. Nature is so weak and so prone
to change, that it is difficult to maintain the best grounded constancy, in the
midst of those dissipations, which our ridiculous customs have rendered
unavoidable.

It must pain an amorous husband to see his wife take all that fashionable
liberties; it seems harsh not to allow them and to be conformable he is reduced
to the necessity of letting every one take them that will, to hear her impart
the charms of her understanding to all the world, to see her display her bosom
at noon day, to see her bedeck herself for the ball, and for the play, and
attract a thousand and a thousand adorers, and listen to the insipid flattery
of a thousand and a thousand coxcombs. Is it possible to preserve an esteem for
such a creature, or at least must not her value be greatly diminished by such a
commerce?

I must still resort to the maxims of the East, where the most beautiful women
are content to confine the power of their charms to him who has a right to
enjoy them; and they are too sincere not to confess, that they think themselves
capable of exciting desires.

I recollect a conversation that I had with a lady of great quality at
Constantinople, (the most amiable woman I ever knew in my life and with whom I
after wards contracted the closest friendship.) She frankly acknowledged that
she was satisfied with her husband. What libertines said she you Christian
ladies are! You are permitted to receive visits from as many men as you think
proper, and your laws allow you the unlimited use of love and wine. I assured
her that she was wrong informed, and that it was criminal to listen to, or to
love, any other than our husbands. Your husbands are great fools she replied
smiling* to be content with so precarious a fidelity. Your necks, your eyes,
your hands, your conversation are all for the public, and what do you pretend
to reserve for them? Pardon me, my pretty Sultana, she added, embracing me, I
have a strong inclination to believe all that you tell me but you would impose
impossibilities upon me I know the filthiness of the infidels; I perceive that
you are ashamed, and I will say no more.

I found so much good sense and propriety in what she said, that I knew not how
to contradict her, and at length I acknowledged that she had reason to prefer
the Mohammedan manners to our ridiculous customs which form a confused medley of
the rigid maxims of Christianity, with all the libertinism of the Spartans: And
notwithstanding our absurd manners, I am persuaded that a woman who is
determined to place her happiness in her husbands affections, should abandon
the extravagant desire o^ engaging public adoration; and that a husband who
tenderly loves his wife should in his turn, give up the reputation of being a
gallant. You find that I am supposing a very extraordinary pair; it is not very
surprising therefore, that such an union should be uncommon in those countries,
where it is requisite to despise established customs in order to be happy.

END OF LADY MONTAGUE'S LETTERS.
The LIBERTINE REPULSED, a New Song, On the principles of Lady MONTAGUE.
Let fo^d affection no pretenses make,
Your honor, or happiness to forsake;
Nor let your wisdom be bereaved by love,
To suffer what it self must disapprove.
Mrs. Phillips, HENCE Bellmour, perfidious! this instant retire,
No future entreaties employ.
Nor meanly pretend any more to admire,
What basely you wish to destroy.
Say, youth, must I madly rush on upon shame,
If a ^^aitor but artfully sighs!
And eternally p^^^ wi^h my honor and fame,
For a compliment paid to my eyes?
If a love all dishonest be vilely prof^st,
(...) tenderness must be incline.
And seek to indulge the repose of a breast,
That would plant endless tortures in mine!
No Belmour -- a passion I cannot but despise,
Shall never find was to my ears,
Nor the man (...) glance o^ regard from th^se eyes,
That would drench them for ever in tears.
Can the villain who strives, and attempts to debase,
Expect that I ever should be kind?
Or atone with a pa^try address to my face,
For the injury done to my mind?
Hence, Belmour, this instant, and cease every dream,
Which your hope saw so foolishly born;
Nor vainly imagine to gain my esteem,
By insuring my hate and my scorn.
Written in the Chiask at Peru, overlooking Constantinople, December 26, 1718.
GIVE, me, great God! said I, a little farm,
In Summer shady, and in Winter warm;
Where a clear spring gives birth to murmuring brooks
By nature gliding down the mossy rocks.
Not artfully by leaden pipes conveyed,
Or greatly falling in a forced cascade,
Pure and unsullied Winding through the shade.
All bounteous Heaven has added to my prayer,
A softer climate and a purer air.
Our frozen Isle now chilling Winter binds,
Deformed by rains and rough with blasting winds;
The withered woods grow white with hoary frost,
By driving storms, their verdant beauty lost;
The trembling birds their leafless covert shun,
And seek in distant climes a warmer sun:
The water nymphs their silent urns deplore,
Even Thames benumb'd's a river now no more;
The batten meads no longer yield delight,
By glistening snows made painful to the sight.
Here Summer reigns with one eternal smile,
Succeeding harvests bless the happy soil.
Fair fertile fields to whom indulgent Heaven
Has every charm of every season given,
No killing cold deforms the beauteous year,
The springing flowers no coming winter fear.
But as the parent Rose decays and dies,
The infant buds wi^ brighter color rise,
And with fresh sweets the mother, scent supplies.
Near them the Violet grows with odours blessed,
And blooms in more than Tyrian purple dressed;
The rich Jonquils their golden beams display,
And shine in glories emulating day;
The peaceful groves their verdant leaves retain,
The streams still murmur, undefiled with rain,
And towering greens adorn the fruitful plain,
The warbling-kind uninterrupted sing,
Warmed with enjoyments of perpetual Spring.
Here at my window I at once survey
The crowded city and resounding sea;
In distant views the As^^^ mountains rise,
And lose their snowy summits in the skies:
Above those mountains proud Olympus towers,
The parliamental seat of heavenly powers.
New to the sight my, ravished eyes admire
Each gilded crescent and each antique spire,
The marble mosques beneath whose ample domes
Fierce warlike Sultans sleep in peaceful tombs;
Those lofty structures once the Christian's boast,
Their names their beauty, and their honors lost
Those altars bright with gold and sculpture graced,
By barbarous zeal of savage foes defaced;
Sophia alone her ancient name retains,
Though unbelieving vows her shrine profanes;
Where holy saints have died in sacred cells,
Where monarch's prayed the frantic Dervise dwells.
How art thou fallen, imperial city low!
Where are thy hopes of Roman glory now?
Where are thy palaces by prelates raised.
Where Grecian artists all their skill displayed
Before the happy sciences decayed;
So vast that youthful kings might here reside,
So splendid to content a patriarch's pride;
Convents where emperors professed of old,
Their labored pillars that their triumphs told;
Vain monuments of them that once were great,
Sunk undistinguished by one common fate,
One little spot the tenure small contains
Of Greek nobility the poor remains.
Where other Helens with like powerful charms,
Has once engaged the warring world in arms;
Those names which royal ancestors can boast,
In mean mechanic arts obscurely lost;
Those eves a second Homer might inspire,
Fixed at the loom destroy their useless fire;
Grieved at a view which struck upon my mind
The short-lived vanity of human kind.
In gaudy objects I indulge my sight,
And turn where Eastern pomp gives gay delight;
See the vast train in various habits dressed.
By the bright scymitar and sable vest,
The proud Vizie^ distinguished over the rest;
Six slaves in gay attire his bridle hold,
His bridle rich with gems his stirrups gold;
His snowy steed adorned with costly pride,
Whole troops of soldiers mounted by his side,
These top the plummy crest arabian courtiers guide.
With artful duty all decline their eyes,
No bellowing shouts of noisy crowds arise;
Silence in solemn state the march attends,
Till at the dread divan the slow procession ends.
Yet not these prospects all profusely gay,
The gilded navy that adorns the sea,
The rising city in confusion fair,
Magnificently formed irregular:
Where woods and palaces at once surprise,
Gardens on gardens, domes on domes arise,
And endless beauties tire the wandering eyes:
So sooth my wishes, or so charm my mind,
As this retreat secure from human-kind.
No knave's successful craft does spleen excite,
No coxcomb's taudry splendor shocks my sight;
No mob alarm awakes my female fear,
No praise my mind nor envy hurts my ear,
Even fame itself can hardly reach me here:
Impertinence with all her tattling train,
Fair-sounding flattery's delicious bane;
Censorious folly, noisy party-rage
The thousand tongues with which she must engage,
Who dares have virtue in a vicious age.
VERSES Written in a GARDEN.
SEE how that pair of billing doves
With open murmurs own their loves;
And heedless of censorious eyes,
Pursue their unpolluted joys:
No fears of future want molest
The downy quiet of their nest;
No interest joined the happy pair,
Securely blessed in Nature's care,
While her dear dictates they pursue:
For constancy is nature too.
Can all the doctrine of our schools,
Our maxims our religious rules,
Can learning to our lives ensure
Virtue so bright, or bliss so pure?
The great Creator's happy ends,
Virtue and pleasure ever blends:
In vain the church and court have tried
The united essence to divide;
Alike they find their wild mistake,
The pedant priest, and giddy take.
A SONG by LADY M. W. M.
DEAR Colin prevent my warm blushes,
Since how can I speak without pain;
My eyes have often told you their wishes.
Ah! cannot you their meaning explain?
My passion would lose by expression,
And you too might cruelly blame:
Then don't you expect a confession
Of what is too tender to name.
Since yours is the province of speaking,
Why should you expect it of me?
Our wishes should be in our keeping,
'Till you tell us what they should be.
Then quickly why don't you discover?
Did your breast feel tortures like mine,
Eyes need not tell over, and over
What I in my bosom confine.
On the Death of Mrs. Bows who died three months after Marriage Dec. 14. 1724.
Written extempore on a card, in a large Company.
HAIL, happy bride! for thou art truly blessed,
Three months of rapture crowned with endless rest.
Merit like yours was heaven's peculiar care,
You loved, -- yet tasted happiness sincere.
To you the sweets of love were only shown;
The sure succeeding bitter dregs unknown:
You had not yet the fatal change deplored,
The tender lover for the imperious Lord*
Nor felt the pains that jealous fondness brings,
Nor wept the coldness from possession springs:
Above your sex distinguished in your fate:
You trusted -- yet experienced no deceit,
Soft were your hours and winged with pleasures flew,
No vain repentance gave a sigh to you,
And if superior bliss heaven can bestow*
With fellow angels you enjoy it now.
A Caveat to the FAIR SEX.
WIFE and servant are the same,
But only differ in the name:
For when that fatal knot is tied,
Which nothing, nothing can divide:
When she the word obey has said,
And man by law supreme is made,
Then all that is kind is laid aside,
And nothing left but state and pride:
Fierce as an eastern Prince he grows,
And all his innate rigor shows:
Then but to look or laugh or speak.
Will the nuptial contract break.
Like mutes she signs alone must make,
And never any freedom take:
But still be governed by a nod*
And fear her husband as her God:
Him still must serve, him still obey,
And nothing act, and nothing say,
But what her haughty Lord thinks fit,
Who with the power, has all the wit.
Then shun, Oh! shun that wretched state,
And all the fawning flatterers hate:
Value yourselves and men despise,
You must be proud, if you will be wise.
Answer to an improper LOVE-LETTER.
IS it to me, this sad lamenting strain?
Are heavens choicest gifts bestowed in vain?
A plenteous fortune, and a beauteous bride,
Your love rewarded gratified your pride:
Yet leaving her -- it is me that you pursue
Without one single charm, but being new.
How vile is man how I detest their ways
Of artful falsehood and designing praise!
Tasteless an easy happiness you slight,
Ruin your joy, and mischief your delight.
Why should poor pug (the mimick of your kind)
Wear a rough chain and be to box confined
Some cup perhaps he breaks or tears a fan, --
While roves unpunished the destroyer, man.
Not bound by vows, and unrestrained by shame.
In sport you break the heart, and rend the fame.
Not that your art can be successful here,
The already plundered need no robber fear:
No^ sigh's no^ charms, nor flatteries can move,
Too well secured against a second love.
Once, and but once that devil charmed my mind,
To reason deaf, to observation blind;
I idly hoped [what cannot love persuade!]
My fondness equaled and my love repaid,
Slow to distrust, and willing to believe,
Long hushed my doubts and did myself deceive;
But, oh! too soon -- this tale would ever last,
Sleep, sleep, my wrongs and let me think 'em past,
For you who mourn with counterfeited grief,
And ask so boldly like a begging thief,
May soon some other nymph inflict the pain,
You know so well with cruel art to feign.
Though long you sported have with Cupid's
You may see eyes, and you may feel a heart*
So the brisk wits, who stop the evening coach*
Laugh at the fear that follows their approach,
With idle mirth and haughty scorn despise
The passengers pale cheek and staring eyes:
But ^eiz'd by justice, find a fright no jest,
And all the terror doubled in their breast.
Answer to a LADY who advised RETIREMENT.
YOU little know the heart that you advise;
I view this various scene with equal eyes:
In crowded courts I find myself alone.
And pay my worship to a nobler throne.
Long since the value of this world I know,
Pity the madness and despise the show.
Well as I can my tedious part I bear
And wait for my dismission without fear.
Seldom I mark mankind's detested ways.
Not hearing censure nor affecting praise;
And* unconcerned, my future state I trust,
To that sole Being, merciful and Just.
THE END.
THE TRAVELLER: OR, A PROSPECT OF SOCIETY.

A POEM.

CONTAINING A SKETCH of the MANNERS OF

ITALY, SWITZERLAND, FRANCE, HOLLAND, AND BRITAIN.
TO WHICH IS ADDED, TRUE BEAUTY: A Matrimonial Tale.

LIKEWISE, The ADVENTURES of TOM DREADNOUGHT, Who served as a SOLDIER, and also
as a SAILOR, in the late WAR.

BY OLIVER GOLDSMITH, M. B. Author of the Vicar of Wakefield, etc.

AMERICA: PRINTED FOR EVERY PURCHASER, MDCCLXVIII.

THE Traveller is one of those delightful Poems that allure by the beauty of
their scenery, a refined elegance of sentiment, and a corresponding happiness
of Expression. -- We cannot but recommend this Poem as a work of very
considerable Merit. -- Griffith's Literary Journal.

Five Editions of this Poem without the Matrimonial Tale and the adventures of
Tom Dreadnought, have been sold in Great Britain at no less price than two
shillings and six pence of this Currency. --

THE TRAVELLER.
Inscribed to the Reverend HENRY GOLDSMITH.
REMOTE, unfriended, melancholy, slow,
Or by the lazy Scheld, or wandering Po;
Or onward, where the rude Carinthian boor,
Against the houseless stranger shuts the door;
Or where Campania's plain forsaken lies,
A weary waste expanded to the skies.
Wherever I roam, whatever realms I see,
My heart untravell'd fondly turns to thee;
Still to my brother turns, with ceaseless pain,
And drags at each remove a lengthening chain.
Eternal blessings crown my earliest friend,
And round his dwelling guardian saints attend;
Blessed be that spot, where cheerful guests retire
To pause from toil, and trim their evening fire;
Blessed that abode, where want and pain repair,
And every stranger finds a ready chair;
Blessed be those feasts where mirth and peace abound,
Where all the ruddy family around,
Laugh at the jests or pranks that never fail,
Or sigh with pity at some mournful tale,
Or press the bashful stranger to his food,
And learn the luxury of doing good.
But me not destined such delights to share,
My prime of life in wandering spent and care:
Impelled with steps, unceasing to pursue
Some fleeting good, that mocks me with the view;
That, like the circle bounding earth and skies;
Allures from far, yet, as I follow flies;
My fortune leads to traverse realms unknown,
And find no spot of all the world my own.
Even now, where Alpine solitudes ascend,
I sit me down a pensive hour to spend;
And, placed on high above the storms career,
Look downward where an hundred realms appear;
Lakes, forests, cities, plains extended wide,
The pomp of kings, the shepherd's humble pride.
When thus Creation's charms around combine,
Amidst the store, 'twere thankless to repine,
'Twere affectation, all, and school-taught pride,
To spurn the splendid things by heaven supplied.
Let school-taught pride dissemble all it can,
These little things are great to little men;
And wiser he, whose sympathetic mind
Exults in all the good of all mankind.
Ye glittering, towns, with wealth and splendor crowned,
Ye fields, where summer spreads profusion round,
Ye lakes, whose vessels catch the busy gale,
Ye bending swains, that dress the flowery vale,
For me your tributary stores combine;
Creation's heir, the world, the world is mine.
As some lone miser visiting his store,
Bends at his treasure, counts, recounts it over;
Hoards after hoards his rising raptures fill,
Yet still he sighs, for hoards are wanting still:
Thus to my breast alternate passions rise,
Pleased with each good that heaven to man supplies:
Yet often a sigh prevails, and sorrows fall,
To see the sum of human bliss so small;
And often I wish, amidst the scene, to find
Some spot to real happiness consigned,
Where my worn soul, each wandering hope at rest,
May gather bliss to see my fellows blessed.
Yet, where to find that happiest spot below,
Who can direct, when all pretend to know?
The shudd'ring tenant of the frigid zone
Boldly asserts that country for his own,
Extols the treasures of his stormy seas,
And live-long nights of revelry and ease;
The naked Negro, panting at the line,
Boasts of his golden sands and palmy wine,
Basks in the glare, or stems the tepid wave,
And thanks his Gods for all the good they gave,
Nor less the patriot's boast, wherever we roam,
His first best country ever is at home.
And yet, perhaps, if states with states we scan,
Or estimate their bliss on Reason's plan,
Though patriots flatter, and though fools contend,
We still shall find uncertainty suspend;
Find that each good by art or Nature given,
To these or those, but make the balance even:
Find that the bliss of all is much the same,
And patriotic boasting reason's shame.
Nature, a mother kind alike to all,
Still grants her bliss at Labor's earnest call;
And though rough rocks or gloomy summits frown,
These rocks, by custom, turn to beds of down.
From Art more various are the blessings sent:
Wealth, splendor, honor, liberty, content:
Yet these each other's power so strong contest,
That either seems destructive of the rest.
Hence every state, to one loved blessing prone,
Conforms and models life to that alone.
Each to the favorite happiness attends,
And spurns the plan that aims at other ends:
Till carried to excess in each domain,
This favorite good begets peculiar pain.
But let us view these truths with closer eyes,
And trace them through the prospect as it lies:
Here for a while my proper cares resigned,
Here let me sit in sorrow for mankind,
Like yon neglected shrub, at random cast,
That shades the steep, and sighs at ever blast.
Far to the right, where, Appenine ascends,
Bright as the summer, Italy extends;
Her uplands sloping deck the mountain's side,
Woods over woods in gay theatric pride;
While often some temple's mouldering top between,
With venerable grandeur marks the scene.
Could Nature's bounty satisfy the breast,
The sons of Italy were surely blessed,
Whatever fruits in different climes are found,
That proudly rise or humbly court the ground,
Whatever blooms in torrid tracts appear,
Whose bright succession decks the varied year;
Whatever sweets salute the northern sky
With vernal leaves that blossom but to die;
These here disporting own the kindred soil,
Nor ask luxuriance from the planters toil;
While sea-born gales their gelid wings expand
To winnow fragrance round the smiling land.
But small the bliss that sense alone bestows,
And sensual bliss is all this nation knows.
In florid beauty groves and fields appear,
Men seem the only growth that dwindles here.
Contrasted faults through all their manners reign,
Though poor, luxurious, though submissive, vain,
Though grave yet trifling, zealous yet untrue,
And even in penance planning sins anew,
All evils here contaminate the mind
That opulence departed leaves behind;
For wealth was theirs nor far removed the date,
When commerce proudly flourished through the state;
At her command the palace learnt to rise,
Again the long-fall^n column sought the skies,
The canvass glowed beyond even Nature warm,
The pregnant quarry teemed with human form.
But, more unsteady than the southern gale,
Soon commerce turned on other shores her sail;
And late the nation found, with fruitless skill,
Their former strength was but plethoric ill.
Yet, though to fortune lost, here still abide,
Some splendid arts, the wrecks of former pride;
From which the feeble heart and long fallen mind
An easy compensation seems to find.
Here may be seen, in bloodless pomp arrayed,
The paste-board triumph and the cavalcade;
Processions formed for piety and love,
A mistress or a saint in every grove.
By sports like these are all their cares beguiled,
The sports of children satisfy the child;
At sports like these, while foreign arms advance,
In passive ease they leave the world to chance.
When struggling virtue sinks by long control,
She leaves at last or feebly man's the Soul;
While low delights, succeeding fast behind,
In happier meaness occupy the mind:
As in those domes, where Caesar's once bore sway,
Defaced by time and tottering in decay,
Amidst the ruin, heedless of the dead,
The shelter-seeking peasant builds his shed,
And, wondering man could want the larger pile,
Exults, and owns his cottage with a smile.
My soul, turn from them, turn we to survey
Where rougher climes a nobler race display,
Where the bleak Swiss their stormy mansions tread,
And force a churlish soil for scanty bread;
No product here the barren hills afford,
But man and steel, the soldier and his sword.
No vernal blooms their torpid rocks array,
But winter lingering chills the lap of May;
No Zephyr fondly sooths the mountain's breast,
But meteors glare and, stormy glooms invest.
Yet still, even here, content can spread a charm,
Redress the clime, and all its rage disarm.
Though poor the peasant's hut his feasts though
He sees his little lot, the lot of all; [small,
Sees no contiguous palace rear its head
To shame the meanness of his humble shed;
No costly lord the sumptuous banquet deal
To make him loath his vegetable meal;
But calm, and bred in ignorance and toil,
Each wish contracting, fits him to the soil.
Cheerful at morn he wakes from short repose,
Breasts the keen air, and carrols as he goes;
With patient angle trolls the finny deep.
Or drives his venurous plow-share to the steep;
Or seeks the den where snow-tracks mark the way,
And drags the struggling savage into day,
At night returning, every labor sped,
He sits him down the monarch of a shed;
Smiles by his cheerful fire, and round surveys
His children's looks that brighten at the blaze:
While his loved partner boastful of her hoard,
Displays the cleanly platter on the board;
And happily too some pilgrim, thither led,
With many a tale repays the nightly bed.
Thus every good his native wilds impart,
Imprints the patriot passion on his heart,
Dear is that shed to which his soul conforms,
And dear that hill which lifts him to the storms,
And as a babe, when scaring sounds molest,
Clings close and closer to the mother's breast;
So the loud torrent, and the whirlwind's roar,
But bind him to his native mountains more.
These are the charms to barren states assigned,
Their wants are few, their wishes all confined;
Yet let them only share the praises due,
If few their wants, their wishes are but few:
Since every want, that stimulates the breast,
Becomes a source of pleasure when represt,
Hence from such lands each pleasing science flies,
That first excites desires, and then supplies;
Unknown to them, when sensual pleasures cloy,
To fill the languid pause with finer joy;
Unknown those powers that raise the soul to flame,
Catch every nerve, and vibrate through the frame.
Their level life is but a smould'ring fire,
Nor quenched by want, nor fanned by strong desire,
Unfit for raptures, or, if raptures cheer
On some high festival of once a year,
In wild excess the vulgar breast takes fire,
Till, buried in debauch, the bliss expire.
But not their joys alone thus coarsly flow,
Their morals, like their pleasures are but low.
For as refinement stops, from sire to son,
Unaltered, unimprov'd their manners run,
And love's and friendship's finely pointed dart,
Full blunted from each indurated heart,
Some sterner virtues over the mountains breast
May sit, like falcons cow'ring on the nest;
But all the gentler morals, such as play
Through life's more cultured walks, and charm our way,
These far dispersed, on timorous pinions fly,
To sport and flutter in a kinder sky.
To kinder skies, where gentler manners reign,
We turn; and France displays her bright domain.
Gay sprightly land of mirth and social ease,
Pleased with thyself, whom all the world can please,
How often have I led thy sportive choir,
With tuneless pipe, beside the murmuring Loire;
Where shading elms along the margin grew,
And freshen'd from the waves, the Zephyr flew;
And happily, though my harsh touch faltering still,
But mocked all tune, and marred the dancer's skill;
Yet would the village praise my wondrous power,
And dance, forgetful of the moon-tide hour.
Alike all ages. Dames of ancient days
Have led their children through the mirthful maze,
And the gay grandsire skilled in gestic lore,
Has frisk'd beneath the burden of threescore.
So blessed a life these thoughtless realms display,
Thus idly busy rolls their world away:
Theirs are those arts that mind to mind endear,
For honor forms the social temper here.
Honor, that praise which real merit gains,
Or even imaginary worth obtains,
Here passes current; paid from hand to hand,
It shifts in splendid traffic round the land:
From courts to camps, to cottages it strays,
And all are taught an avarice of praise;
They please, are pleased, they give to get esteem;
Till, seeming blessed, they grow to what they seem.
But while this softer art their bliss supplies,
It gives their follies also room to rise;
For praise too dearly loved or warmly sought,
Enfeebles all internal strength of thought,
And the weak soul within itself unblest,
Leans for all pleasure on another's breast.
Hence ostentation here, with tawdry art,
Pants for the vulgar praise which fools impart;
Here vanity assumes her pert grimace,
And trims her robes of frize with copper lace,
Here beggar pride defrauds her daily cheer,
To boast one splendid banquet once a year;
The mind still turns where shifting fashion draws,
Nor weighs the solid worth of self applause.
To men of other minds my fancy flies,
Embosom'd in the deep where Holland lies,
Methinks her patient sons before me stand,
Where the broad ocean leans against the land,
And, sedulous to stop the coming tide
Lifts the tall rampart's artificial pride,
That spreads its arms against the watery roar,
Scoops out an empire, and usurps the shore,
Onward methinks, and diligently slow
The firm connected bulwark seems to go;
While ocean pent, and rising over the pile,
Sees an amphibious world beneath him smile.
The slow canal, the yellow blossomed vale,
The willow tufted bank, the gliding sail,
The crowded mart, the cultivated plain,
A new creation rescued from his reign.
Thus while around, the wave-subjected soil
Impels the native to repeated toil,
Industrious habits in each breast obtain,
And industry begets a love of gain,
Hence all the good from opulence that springs,
With all those ills superfluous treasure brings
Are here displayed. Their much loved wealth imparts
Conveniences plenty elegance and arts;
But view (...) craft and fraud appear,
Even (...) ^a^^er'd here.
At gold's superior charms all freedom flies,
The needy sell it, and the rich man buys:
A land of tyrants, and a den of slaves,
Here wretches seek dishonorable graves,
And calmly bent, to servitude conform,
Dull as their lakes that sleep beneath the storm.
Heavens! how unlike their Belgic sires of old!
Rough, poor, content, ungovernably bold;
War in each breast, and freedom on each brow;
How much unlike the sons of Britain now!
Fired at the sound, my genius spreads her wing,
And flies where Britain broods the western spring,
Where lawns extend that scorn Arcadian pride,
And brighter streams than famed Hydaspes glide;
There all around the gentlest breezes stray,
There gentle music melts on every spray;
Creation's mildest charms are here combined,
Extremes are only in the master's mind;
Stern over each bosom Reason holds her state,
With daring aims, irregularly great,
I see the lords of human kind pass by,
Pride in their port, defiance in their eye,
Intent on high designs, a thoughful band,
By forms unfashion'd, fresh from Nature's hand.
Fierce in a native hardiness of soul,
True to imagined right above control,
While even the peasant boasts these rights to scan;
And learns to venerate himself as man.
Thine, freedom, thine the blessings pictured here,
Thine are those charms that dazzle and endear;
Too blessed indeed were such without alloy,
But fostered even by freedom ills annoy:
That independence Britons prize too high,
Keeps man from man, and breaks the social tie;
See though by circling deeds together held,
Minds combat minds repelling and repelled;
Ferments arise, imprisoned factions roar,
Represt ambition struggles round her shore,
Whilst over-wrought the general system feels
Its motions, stopped or phrenzy fires the wheels.
Nor this the worst. As social bonds decay,
As duty, love, and honor fail to sway,
Fictitious bonds, the bonds of wealth and law,
Still gather strength and force unwilling awe.
Hence all obedience bows to these alone,
And talent sinks and merit weeps unknown;
Till time may come when stripped of all her charms,
That land of scholars, and that nurse of arms;
Where noble ^^^ms transmit the patriot flame,
And monarchs (...), and poets pant for fame;
One sink of level avarice shall lie,
And scholars, soldiers, kings unhonour'd die.
Yet think not thus, when freedom's ills I state,
I mean to flatter kings or court the great:
Perish the wish; for, inly satisfied,
(...) their pomp^ I hold my ragged pride.
But when contending chiefs blockade the throne,
Contracting regal power to stretch their own,
When (...) ^old a factious band agree
(...) call i^ freedom, when themselves are free;
Each want on judge new penal statutes draw,
Law ^rinds the poor, and rich men rule the law;
The wealth of climes where savage nations roam,
(...) from slaves, to purchase slaves at home,
(...), pity justice, indignation start,
Strip off r^^^rve, and bare my swelling heart;
(...) half a patriot, half a coward grown,
I sly from petty tyrants to the throne.
Yes, brother, curse with me that baneful hour,
When first ambition struck at regal power;
And thus polluting honor in its source,
Gave wealth to sway the mind with double force,
Have we not seen, round Britain's peopled shore,
Her useful sons exchanged for useless ore?
Seen all her triumphs but destruction haste,
Like flaring tapers brightening as they waste;
Seen opulence, her grandeur to maintain,
Lead stern depopulation in her train,
And over fields, where scattered hamlets rose,
In barren solitary pomp repose?
Have we not seen at pleasures lordly call,
The smiling long frequented village fall;
Beheld the duteous son, the sire decayed,
The modest matron and the blushing maid,
Forced from their homes, a melancholy train,
To traverse climes beyond the western main;
Where wild Oswego spreads her swamps around,
And Niagara stuns with thundering sound?
Even now perhaps, as there some pilgrim strays
Through tangled forests, and through dangerous ways,
Where beasts with man divided empire claim,
And the brown Indian takes a deadly aim?
There, while above the giddy tempest flies,
And all around distressful yells arise,
The pensive exile, bending with his woe,
To stop too fearful, and too faint to go,
Casts a fond look where England's glories shine,
And bids his bosom sympathize with mine.
Vain, very vain, my weary search to find
That bliss which only centers in the mind:
Why have I strayed, from pleasure and repose,
To seek a good each government bestows?
In every government though terrors reign,
Though tyrant kings or tyrant laws restrain,
How small of all that human hearts endure,
That part which laws or kings can cause or cure.
Still to ourselves in every place consigned,
Our own felicity we make or find:
With secret course, which no loud storms annoy,
Glides the smooth current of domestic joy.
The lifted ax, the agonizing wheel,
Luke's iron crown, and Damien's bed of steel,
To men remote from power but rarely known,
Leave reason, faith and conscience all our own.
END OF THE TRAVELLER.
The CHARACTER of a LOVELY WOMAN.
I DO not know a woman in the world who seems so much formed to render a man of
sense and generosity more happy in the married state than Amasia.

Amasia never said, or attempted to say, a sprightly thing in all her life; but
she has done ten thousand generous ones; and if she is not the most conspicuous
figure at an assembly, she never envied or maligned those who are, her heart is
all tenderness and benevolence: no success ever attended any of her
acquaintance, which did not fill her bosom with the most disinterested
complacency; and no misfortune ever reached her knowledge, that she did not
relieve or participate by her generosity. If ever she should fall into the arms
of a man she loves (and I am persuaded she would esteem it the worst kind of
prostitution to resign herself into any other) her whole life would be one
continued series of kindness and compliance.

The humble opinion she has of her own uncommon merit, would make her so much
the more sensible of her husband's; and those little submissions on his side,
which a woman of more pride and spirit would consider only as a claim of right,
would be esteemed by Amasia as so many additional motives to her love and
gratitude.

TRUE BEAUTY: OR, THE DOUBLE TRANSFORMATION.
A MATRIMONIAL TALE.
BY OLIVER GOLDSMITH, M. B.
I am persuaded that a woman who is determined to place her happiness in her
husband's affections should abandon the extravagant desire of engaging public
adoration; and that a husband who tenderly loves his wife, should, in his turn,
give up the reputation of being a gallant. Lady Montague's Letters. Loving and
loved regard thy future mate,
Cherish esteem unto the latest date;
For constant virtue has immortal charms,
Makes age seem youth in a loved husband's arms.
Prior's Poems. With a smooth and steadfast mind,
Gentle thoughts and calm desires,
Hearts with equal love combined,
Kindle never dying fires.
Where these are not I despise
Lovely cheeks, or lips, or eyes.
Thomas Carew, Esquire
SECLUDED from domestic strife,
Jack Book-worm led a college life;
A fellowship at twenty-five,
Made him the happiest man alive;
He drank his glass and cracked his joke,
And Freshmen wondered as he spoke:
SUCH pleasures unallay'd with care,
Could any accident impair?
Could Cupid's shaft at length transfix,
Our swain arrived at thirty-six?
O had the archer never come down
To ravage in a country town!
Or Flavia been content to stop
At triumphs in a Fleet-street-shop.
O had her eyes forgot to blaze!
Or Jack had wanted eyes to gaze.
O! -- But let exclamation cease,
Her presence banished all his peace.
So with decorum all things carried;
Miss frowned and blushed and then was -- married.
Need we expose to vulgar sight,
The raptures of the bridal night!
Need we intrude on hallowed ground,
Or draw the curtains, closed around?
Let it suffice, that each had charms,
He clasped a goddess in his arms;
And, though she felt his usage rough,
Yet in a man 'twas well enough.
The honey-moon like lightning flew,
The second brought its transports too,
A third, a fourth were not amiss;
The fifth was friendship mixed with bliss:
But when a twelvemonth passed away,
Jack found his goddess made of clay;
Found half the charms that decked her face.
Arose from powder, shreds or lace;
But still the worst remained behind,
That very face had robbed her mind.
Skilled in no other arts was she,
But dressing, patching, repartee;
And, just as humor rose or fell,
By turns a slattern or a belle:
It Is true she dressed with modern grace,
Half naked at a ball or race;
But when at home, at board or bed,
Five greasy night caps wrapped her head.
Could so much beauty condescend
To be a dull domestic friend?
Could any curtain lectures bring
To decency so fine a thing?
In short, by night, 'twas fits or fretting;
By day 'twas gadding or coquetting,
Fond to be seen she kept a bevy
Of powdered coxcombs at her levy;
The 'squire and captain took their stations,
And twenty other near relations;
Jack sucked his pipe, and often broke
A sigh in suffocating smoke;
While all their hours were passed between
Insulting repartee or spleen.
Thus as her faults each day were known,
He thinks her features coarser grown;
He fancies every vice she shows
Or thicks her lips, or points her nose:
Whenever rage or envy rise,
How wide her mouth, how wild her eyes!
He knows not how, but so it is
Her face is grown a common phyz;
And, though her fops are wondrous civil,
He thinks her ugly as the devil.
Now, to perplex the ravell'd nooze,
As each a different way pursues,
While sullen or loquacious strife
Promised to hold them on for life,
That dire disease, whose ruthless power,
Withers the beauty's transient flower:
Lo the smallpox, whose horrid glare:
Levelled its terrors at the fair;
And, rifling every youthful grace,
Left but the remnant of a face.
The glass, grown hateful to her sight,
Reflected now a perfect fright:
Each former art she vainly tries
To bring back luster to her eyes.
In vain she tries her pas^e and creams,
To smooth her skin, or hide its seams;
Her country beaux and city cousins
Lovers no more; flew off by dozens:
The 'squire himself was seen to yield,
And even the captain quits the field.
Poor Madam now condemned to hack
The rest of life with anxious Jack,
Perceiving others fairly flown
Attempted pleasing him alone.
Jack soon was dazzl'd to behold
Her present face surpass the old;
With modesty her cheeks are died,
Humility displaces pride,
For taudry finery, now is seen,
A person ever neatly clean:
No more presuming on her sway
She learns good nature every day,
Serenely gay, and strict in duty,
Jack finds his wife, A PERFECT BEAUTY.
END OF THE MATRIMONIAL TALE.
THE ADVENTURES OF TOM DREADNOUGHT, Who served as a SOLDIER, and also as a
SAILOR, in the late WAR.
NO observation is more common, and at the same time more true, than, That one
half of the world are ignorant how the other half lives. The misfortunes of the
great are held up to engage our attention; are enlarged upon in tones of
declamation; and the world is called upon to gaze at the noble sufferers: the
great, under the pressure of calamity, are conscious of several others
sympathizing with their distress; and have, at once, the comfort of admiration
and pity.

There is nothing magnanimous in bearing misfortunes with fortitude, when the
whole world is looking on: men in such circumstances will act bravely even from
motives of vanity; but he who, in the vale of obscurity, can brave adversity;
who, without friends to encourage, acquaintances to pity, or even without hope
to alleviate his misfortunes, can behave with tranquillity and indifference is
truly great: whether peasant or courtier, he deserves admiration, and should be
held up for our imitation and respect.

While the slightest inconveniences of the great are magnified into
calamities! while tragedy mouths out their sufferings in all the strains of
eloquence, the miseries of the poor are entirely disregarded; and yet some of
the lower ranks of people undergo more real hardships in one day, than those of
a more exalted station suffer in their whole lives. It is inconceivable what
difficulties the meanest of our common sailors and soldiers endure without
murmuring or regret; without passionately declaiming against Providence, or
calling their fellows to be gazers on their intrepidity. Every day is to them a
day of misery, and yet they entertain their hard fate without repining.

With what indignation do I hear an Ovid, a Cicero, or a Rabutin, complain of
their misfortunes and hardships, whose greatest calamity was that of being
unable to visit a certain spot of earth, to which they had foolishly attached
an Idea of happiness. Their distresses were pleasures, compared to what many of
the adventuring poor every day endure without murmuring. They eat, drank, and
slept, they had slaves to attend them, and were sure of subsistence for life:
while many of their fellow creatures are obliged to wander without a friend to
comfort or assist them, and even without shelter from the severity of the
season.

I have been led into these reflections from accidentally meeting, some days
ago, a poor fellow, whom I knew when a boy, dressed in a sailor's jacket, and
begging at one of the outlets of the town, with a wooden leg. I knew him to
have been honest and industrious when in the country, and was curious to learn
what had reduced him to his present situation. Wherefore, after giving him what
I thought proper, I desired to know the history of his life and misfortunes,
and the manner in which he was reduced to his present distress. The disabled
soldier, for such he was, though dressed in a sailor's habit, scratching his
head, and leaning on his crutch, put himself into an attitude to comply with my
request, and gave me his history, as follows.

As for my misfortunes, master, I cannot pretend to have gone through any more
than other folks; for, except the loss of my limb, and my being obliged to beg,
I don't know any reason thank Heaven, that I have to complain; there is Bill
Tibbs, of our regiment, he has lost both his legs, and an eye to boot; but
thank Heaven, it is not so bad with me yet.

I was born in Shropshire, my father was a labourer, and died when I was five
years old, so I was put upon the parish. As he had been a wandering sort of a
man, the parishioners were not able to tell to what parish I belonged, or where
I was born, so they sent me to another parish, and that parish sent me to a
third. I thought in my heart, they kept sending me about so long, that they
would not let me be born in any parish at all; but, at last however, they fixed
me. I had some disposition to be a scholar, and was resolved, at least, to know
my letters; but the master of the workhouse put me to business as soon as I was
able to handle a mallet; and here I lived an easy kind of life for five years.
I only wrought ten hours in the day, and had my meat and drink provided for my
labor. It is true I was not suffered to stir out of the house, for fear, as
they said, I should run away; but what of that, I had the liberty of the whole
house, and the yard before the door, and that was enough for me. I was then
bound out to a farmer, where I was up both early and late; but I eat and drank
well, and liked my business well enough, till he died, when I was obliged to
provide for myself, so I was resolved to go seek my fortune.

In this manner I went from town to town, worked when I could get employment,
and starved when I could get none: when happening one day to go through a field
belonging to a justice of peace, I spyed a hare crossing the path just before
me; and I believe the devil put it in my head to fling my stick at it: -- Well
what will you have on it? I killed the hare, and was bringing it away, when the
justice himself met me, he called me a poacher and villain; and collaring me,
desired I would give an account of myself: I fell upon my knees, begged his
worship's pardon, and began to give a full account of all that I knew of my
breed, seed and generation; but, though I gave a very true account, the justice
said I could give no account at all; so I was indicted at sessions, found
guilty of being poor, and sent up to London to Newgate, in order to be
transported as a vagabond.

People may say this and that of being in jail; but, for my part, I found
Newgate as agreeable a place as ever I was in, in all my life. I had my belly
full to eat and drink, and did no work at all. This kind of life was too good
to last for ever; so I was taken out of prison, after five months, put on board
a ship and sent off with two hundred more to the plantations. We had but an
indifferent passage, for, being all confined in the hold, more than a hundred
of our people died for want of sweet air; and those that remained were sickly
enough God knows. When we came ashore we were sold to the planters, and I was
bound for seven years more. As I was no scholar, for I did not know my letters,
I was obliged to work among the negroes; and I served out my time, as in duty
bound to do.

When my time was expired, I worked my passage home, and glad I was to see Old
England again, because I loved my country. I was afraid, however, that I should
be indicted for a vagabond once more, so I did not much care to go down into
the country, but kept about the town, and did little jobs when I could get them.

I was very happy in this manner for some time, till one evening, coming home
from work, two men knocked me down, and then bid me stand. They belonged to a
press gang: I was carried before the justice, and, as I could give no account
of myself, I had my choice left whether to go on board a man of war, or list
for a soldier. I chose the latter; and in this post of a gentleman, I served
two campaigns in Flanders, was at the battles of Val and Fontenoy, and received
but one wound, through the breast here; but the doctor of our regiment soon
made me well again.

When the peace came on I was discharged; and as I could not work, because my
wound was sometimes troublesome, I listed for a landman in the East India
company's service. I here fought the French in six pitched battles; and I
verily believe, that, if I could read or write, our captain would have made me
a corporal; but it was not my good fortune to have any promotion, for I soon
fell sick and so got leave to return home again, with forty pounds in my
pocket. This was at the beginning of the present war, and I hoped to be set on
shore, and to have the pleasure of spending my money; but the government wanted
men, and so I was pressed for a sailor, before ever I could set my foot on
shore.

The boatswain found me, as he said, an obstinate fellow; he swore he knew that
I understood my business well, but that I shammed Abraham, to be idle; but God
knows, I knew nothing of the sea-business, and he beat me without considering
what he was about. However I had still my forty pounds, and that was some
comfort to me under every beating; and the money I might have had to this day,
but that our ship was taken by the French, and so I lost all.

Our crew was carried into Breast, and many of them died, because they were not
used to live in a jail; but for my part, it was nothing to me, for I was
seasoned. One night as I was sleeping on the bed of boards, with a warm blanket
about me, for I always loved to lie well, I was awakened by the boatswain who
had a dark lanthorn in his hand; Tom, says he to me will you knock out the
French centry's brains? I don't care, says I, striving to keep myself awake, if
I lend a hand. Then follow me, says he, and I hope we shall do business. So up
I got, and tied my blanket, which was all the clothes I had, about my middle,
and went with him to fight the Frenchmen. I hate the French because they are
all slaves, and wear wooden shoes.

Though we had no arms, one Englishman is able to beat five French at any time;
so we went down to the door, where both the centries were posted, and rushing
upon them, seized their arms in a moment, and knocked them down. From thence
nine of us ran together to the quay, and seizing the first boat we met, got out
of the harbor and put to sea. We had not been here three days before we were
taken up by the Dorset privateer who were glad of so many good hands; and we
consented to run our chance. However we had not as much luck as we expected. In
three days we fell in with the Pompadour privateer, of forty guns, while we had
but twenty-three; so to it we went yard-arm and yard-arm. The fight lasted for
three hours, and I verily believe we should have taken the Frenchman, had we
but had some more men left behind: but unfortunately, we lost all our men just
as we were going to get the victory.

I was once more in the power of the French, and I believe it would have gone
hard with me had I been brought back to Breast: but by good fortune, we were
retaken by the Viper. I had almost forgot to tell you, that in that engagement,
I was wounded in two places: I lost four fingers of the left hand, and my leg
was shot off. If I had had the good fortune to have lost my leg and the use of
my hand on board a kings ship and not a-board a privateer, I should have been
entitled to clothing and maintenance during the rest of my life: but that was
not my chance: one man is born with a silver spoon in his mouth, and another
with a wooden ladle. However, blessed be God, I enjoy good health, and will
forever love liberty and Old England. Liberty property and Old England, for
ever, huzza!

Thus saying, TOM limped off, leaving me in admiration at his intrepidity and
content: but I could not avoid acknowledging, that an habitual acquaintance
with misery serves better than philosophy to teach us to despise it.

THE END.

