AN EXTRACT OF Miss MARY GILBERT's JOURNAL. WITH Some ACCOUNT of the LADY
ELIZABETH HASTINGS, etc.

Whosoever is born of GOD overcomes the World. 1 John v. 4. Set your
Affections on Things above, and not on Things on Earth. For ye are dead, and
your Life is hid with CHRIST in GOD. Col. iii. 2, 3. LONDON, Printed:
PHILADELPHIA, Reprinted and Sold by DAVID HALL, and WILLIAM SELLERS. MDCCLXIX.

GEORGE PARKER* A SHORT ACCOUNT OF Miss MARY GILBERT.
THE ensuing Account, it is hoped, may animate those who are in the Morning of
Life, to a due Improvement of their Time, in remembering their CREATOR in the
Days of their Youth; so that they may offer him the first Fruits of those
precious Moments, in which they are Probationers for an awful Eternity: And
which when past, whether they have been employed in the important Task or
(...), are irrecoverably gone.

IF it has this happy Effect, the desired End will be fully answered, which is,
that GOD'S Grace, and saving Power, may be manifested, in additional Instances,
both of living and dying Witnesses.

Miss MARY GILBERT, was the eldest Daughter of Nathaniel Gilbert, of the Island
of Antigua, Esquire by his Wife Elizabeth, both Persons of good Families, and
eminent Piety; whose chief Study it was to train up their Children in the
Knowledge of GOD and his Ways, according to the established Religion of the
Church of England.

SHE was born in the same Island, on the 28 th of February, 1751, under the
happy Circumstance of having Parents, who as they were wanting in no Act of
Care and Tenderness to their Offspring, so took care in particular to make
them, like young Timothy, acquainted from their Infancy with the Holy
Scriptures. In the earliest Dawn of Reason she discovered an extraordinary
Capacity, and uncommon Understanding; a great Willingness to learn, and a
Desire of being instructed, which often occasioned her to ask the most
pertinent Questions. Such a Genius was observed by her Parents with much
Gratitude to Him, who is the Author and Dispenser of every good and perfect
Gift. Her natural Disposition was a Mixture of Good and Evil. She was a strict
Observer of Truth, which appeared to arise from a Nobleness of Mind, which made
her incapable of those Meannesses from whence the Vice of Falsehood springs. But
as every Flower in Nature's Garden, however blooming, needs improving, so did
this Principle in her: For as it was productive of some Virtues, so it no less
occasioned the greatest Blemishes in her Temper; such as Highspiritedness,
Pride and Self-will; which notwithstanding the shining Example of her Parents,
and their Care to restrain, would, while she was very young, often gain an
Ascendency.

IN the Year 1757, her Father and Mother made a Voyage to England (bringing
this Daughter and their other Children with them) entirely upon a religious
Account, and in order to enjoy the Company of some who were esteemed Persons of
remarkable Piety, and extensive Usefulness, and with them to partake of those
sacred Privileges, with which their native Island was not yet favored. During
their Residence in England, she showed the greatest Delight in reading
religious Books, and in receiving the Instruction of serious Christians, who
were frequently entertained at her Father's House. So that what was recorded of
the ROYAL PSALMIST, might be asserted of her; All her Delight was in the Saints
upon Earth. Her Father's Affairs calling him back to Antigua, he, with his
Family, left England in the Beginning of the Year 1759, taking with them a
Person whose Sentiments and Abilities they approved of, to whose Care they
committed the Education of their Children, for whom their Daughter MARY soon
contracted a very tender Affection; far from shunning the Company of one that
was to correct her Faults, and whose Presence must restrain the little Levities
of Childhood. She, for these very Reasons, delighted in being constantly
confined with her, even in those Hours which she might have spent at Play with
her Sisters. These Seasons she employed in improving her Mind; and having the
Liberty of retiring into a Closet within her GOVERNESS'S Chamber, she would
continue in it for a long Time every Day reading, praying, and meditating, and
her Remarks upon what she read, were often just and instructive.

AS soon as she had learned to write, she seldom failed nothing down whatever
appeared useful in any Author she read; and having a very retentive Memory, she
stored it with SCRIPTURE TRUTHS, so that many of her Relatives and others, were
greatly surprised at her Readiness in repeating, and finding out almost any
Text in those sacred Pages. She likewise wrote several Books of well collected
Texts, in Proof of some of the Fundamental Doctrines of the CHURCH OF ENGLAND,
such as, The fallen State of Man, the Necessity of Repentance, and the new
Birth, and of Holiness. Before she was twelve Years of Age, she corresponded
with some Persons in England, and her Letters were much admired; though, as she
grew older, her Style greatly improved, so that she had acquired both an easy
and elegant Manner of addressing different Persons, and upon various Occasions,
though Religion was her constant and favorite Theme; herein, as in other
Instances, endeavoring to redeem as much as possible the golden Moments of her
contracted Span.

THUS she gently and profitably passed five Years of her Pilgrimage, without
Variation, and exempt from Vicissitudes under her Parent's Roof; till in the
Year 1764, they thought it most for her Advantage to send her to England, to
finish her Education. Here she arrived the 28 th of May that Year; from that
Time boarding with an Aunt, and being under the Care of the same Tutoress, who
had before gone with her to Antigua. This Separation from the best of Parents,
could not but prove an afflictive Circumstance to one of her great Sensibility,
and who was a most dutiful and affectionate Child; but this was alleviated by
the pleasing Hopes they gave her, that they themselves would soon come and
reside in England; a Thought which as it enabled her cheerfully to bear their
Absence, so it animated her to a more than ordinary Improvement of Time, in
order to render them the utmost Satisfaction, when she should have the
Happiness of being restored to them; a Period, which she often mentioned with
the greatest Delight; but which the infinitely wise Disposer of Events saw
right never to indulge her with. It was with great Pleasure that we observed,
as her Years increased, her good Understanding, and the Power of Religion,
entirely prevailed over those Tempers, which have before been mentioned, so
that she became every Day more amiable, and was more endeared to all that knew
her. On the first of January, 1765, she began to keep a Diary, chiefly
consisting of the LORD'S Dealings with her Soul. This will give a juster
Conception of her Understanding in the Way of Godliness, of her improvement of
Time, and the Propriety of her Sentiments on many Occasions, than any Thing
that could be said upon the Subject. She was one of those happy Few, who are
not afraid of being singularly Pious, and was deeply convinced that the Service
of GOD is no Impediment to, but the greatest Augmentation of true Happiness, in
every Period and Circumstance of Life. She had learned to disdain the Follies
of the World, always choosing Plainness and Neatness in Dress, rather than
Gaiety and Extravagance, and prefering an Hour's Solitude, spent in communing
with her own Heart, or in searching the Word of GOD, before all those trifling
Amusements, which so much engross the Attention, and waste the Time of the
Generality of Persons of all Ages.

THUS, though young in Years, she contemplated her latter End, and applied her
Heart unto true Wisdom, and is now reaping the vast Advantage in a blessed
Eternity. She was so exercised in the needful Duty of Selfinspection, as to
discern the Imperfection of her best Performances, and utterly to disclaim
every other Hope of obtaining the Divine Favor, than that built on the sure
Foundation, JESUS CHRIST, and Him crucified. An Interest in his atoning Blood,
was what she sincerely sought after; being truly sensible of the Necessity of
being born again, before we can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. She thought
the Time long ere she was admitted into the glorious Liberty of the Children of
GOD; and would greatly deplore her own Instability, Levity, and want of
Earnestness, to which she attributed her LORD'S Delay; but these Things, though
felt by her tender and enlightened Conscience, did not appear to others; and
the LORD was not slack concerning his Promise, as her following Experience
proved, when He came suddenly to the Temple of her Heart, never to leave her
more. Some Weeks before her last Sickness, she told a Friend, that she had been
greatly led out in the Meditation of Death; that she formerly considered it as
very dreadful, but had of late seen it in a different View: So that if it would
please GOD to finish his Work in her Soul, she could be content, young as she
was, to give up all that were dear below, in Hope of receiving them again in
that eternal Day. A few Days before her Disorder seized her, being asked by a
Friend, concerning the State of her Soul, she said, She had a Confidence that
GOD would not long withhold the Blessing, that she soon should know his
pardoning Love, and that she was patiently waiting upon Him. As soon as she was
taken ill (which was on the 10th of January,1768) she was asked how she found
her Mind? She replied, Quite composed, that she believed the LORD had visited
her in Love, and that whether it terminated in Life or Death, it would be
greatly to her Advantage. During the whole Time of her Illness, not a Doubt
seemed to disturb her, nor did she ever lose her steadfast Hope, that if she was
taken, the LORD would perfect his Work in her Soul. She was also endued with a
constant Spirit of Prayer, and to all around behaved with the utmost Patience
and Meekness. She seldom complained, and declared she had not a murmuring
Thought, though she appeared to suffer exquisitely; her Disorder being a putrid
Fever, with a sore Throat, which mortified some Days before her Dissolution: It
was likewise attended with a Deafness, that increased gradually, till at last
there was no conversing with her. She was also deprived very early of Speech,
which, as she retained her Senses, rendered her Situation very trying, as well
as deprived her Friends of that Profit and Satisfaction, which might otherwise
have been expected. But on Thursday, the 14th (before the Disease had made so
great a Progress, though even then her Speech was thick, and her Hearing dull)
she desired the whole Family would come and pray with her, and to some of her
Friends made this good Confession: That she had found CHRIST, that she loved
GOD, knowing that He had first loved her; that she was now neither afraid nor
unwilling to die; and that she experienced unspeakable, and, till now, unknown
Happiness. From this Time she spoke but little, except about two Days
afterward, when she said to one who desired her to speak to her, that she was
perfectly resigned to the Divine Will; this she uttered with Difficulty, and
could add no more; but though her Lips were thus closed to all below, it was
evident her Heart was open to GOD in Prayer, which was discernible from the
frequent lifting up of her Hands and Eyes with great Devotion: In this Posture
she sweetly yielded up her Spirit on the 21st Instant, at the Age of near 17
Years.

AN EXTRACT OF Miss MARY GILBERT's JOURNAL.
TUESDAY, January 1, 1765. When I awoke in the Morning, I found my Heart raised
in Thankfulness to GOD for his Mercies, in bringing me to the Beginning of
another Year; and found my Soul much in the same Frame all the Day. O! may this
Year be spent more to the Glory of my Almighty Maker and Preserver, than the
last has been; and may every Thought, Word and Work, tend to this glorious End.

Wednesday 2. I found a Blessing while dressing, but lost it by giving way to
Levity; yet the merciful LORD restored it to me in the Evening: Blessed be his
Name.

Thursday 3. I found my Soul in a dead, dull Frame, with a great Disinclination
to Duty, which I did not yield to; and though I found no immediate Blessing, yet
I doubt not, but the LORD was pleased with my Endeavors to wait upon him.

Friday 4. I awoke with some Degree of Comfort, and had my Thoughts stayed on
the Things of GOD. I found a Desire, while I heard the Book of Martyrs read, of
being like them; but could not submit to die for the Truth as they did; it
seemed too great a Trial to Flesh and Blood: Yet I trust, was the LORD to call
me to it, He would give me Strength to bear it.

Saturday 5. I spent the Morning in writing Letters to my dear Friends in
ANTIGUA, for whom I find the most tender Affection. O! that we may all at
length meet around the Throne, and stand at the last Day among the Sheep at his
right Hand!

Sunday 6. In the Morning my Thoughts were very wandering, and my Mind much
discomposed. When I came up, I read and writ my Journal, and spent the rest of
the Morning comfortably. In the Afternoon I read the Experience of ELIZABETH
WEST. May I like the Be suck Honey out of every Flower, gather Profit out of
every Book I read, every Sermon I hear, and every Occurrence in Life, let it
seem ever so trifling. The Evening Text was Isaiah Iviii. 1. Cry aloud, and
spare not, etc. The Preacher showed our Transgressions in the most glaring
Colors, and my own Conscience convicted me that I had done all which he had
mentioned, and more too; so that was I to be tried by Works, I could not be
saved.

Monday 7. I found my Heart raised in Thankfulness for the Mercies of the Night
past. O for a Continuance of it! Surely had I always a deep Sense of the
innumerable Obligations I owe to my Almighty Benefactor, it would keep me from
falling into many of those Things, which are so prevalent over me. LORD, give
me a thankful Heart.

Tuesday 8. I awoke in a serious Frame, but it did not continue long; for I
yielded too much to wandering Thoughts, which robbed me of that Blessing. LORD
make me more watchful for the future! In the Evening my Uncle preached a
Funeral Sermon on, It is appointed unto Men once to die, etc. Heb. ix. 27. My
Soul was very much blessed, and stirred up to seek the LORD, but O! how soon do
my good Resolutions die away! They are like the Morning Cloud, and the early
Dew which passes away. LORD, strengthen and confirm them!

Wednesday 9. I found my Soul in a very dead Frame, and continued so all the
Day. I may truly say,

" My drowsy Powers, why sleep ye so?
" Awake my sluggish Soul!
" Nothing has half thy Work to do,
" Yet Nothing's half so dull."
Thou GOD of Love; quicken my drooping Powers! Stir up and waken my insensible
Soul, and give me to seek thy Face with my whole Heart! And O be thou found of
me!

Thursday 10. I was very cold and dead all the Day, and found neither Power,
nor Inclination, to pray or read, which I yielded to; and passed the Day
without performing either of these Duties. O my God! pardon my Sins of
Omission, as well as those of Commission! They are both as innumerable as the
Hairs of my Head, but thy Mercies are still more.

Friday 11. I was very busy this Day with setting my Things in Order, which
were come from London, and being in a Hurry, my Mind was not stayed as I could
have wished. O my GOD! gather in my scattered Thoughts, and let my Mind be
fixed entire on Thee!

Saturday 12. I was enabled, blessed be the LORD, to be serious and watchful.
In the Evening, Mr. R -- a preached. His Text was Mark, xii. 24. Thou art not
far from the Kingdom of GOD. He showed 1 st, What the Kingdom of GOD is. 2 dly,
That by Nature we are all at a great Distance from it. 3 dly, He described the
Person, who is not far from the Kingdom of GOD! And, 4 thly, Made Application
of the whole. I was much blessed under this Sermon, and my Mind was stayed on
what was delivered,

Sunday 13. In the Evening, My Uncle preached on Isa. xxx. 21. This is the Way,
walk ye in it. I found my Thoughts much composed, but being in great Pain, I
could not attend, as much as I found myself inclined to do. O how many
Hindrances have we while below! Sometimes from the World, sometimes from the
Infirmities of the Body; and very often from a corrupt Heart! LORD, do thou arm
me with thy Spirit's Might, and enable me to combat, and overcome, all the
Enemies of my Salvation.

Monday 14. Our Class met at Ten as usual; but my Soul was in a very wandering
dead Frame, and afterward I was as light and rifling; this is the natural
Consequence of the other, if not strove against.

Tuesday 15. I was in a very cold indifferent Frame all the Day. In the Evening
my Uncle catechized us; such a Spirit of Laughter came upon us, that we could
hardly speak. LORD, deliver us from a light, trifling Spirit, as also from an
unloving, disputing Spirit.

" Mutual Love the Token be,
" LORD, that we belong to thee."
In the Evening my Uncle preached on Hos. xiv. 1, 2. My Soul was blessed
especially in singing the last Hymn, in which are these sweet Words,

" He Will never quench the smoking Flax,
" But raise it to a Flame:
" The bruised Reed he never breaks,
" Nor scorns the meanest Name."
Wednesday 16. I arose this Morning with some Degree of Recollection and
Stayedness upon my Spirit. It partly continued all the Day; but in the Evening,
yielding to Levity, I lost it. LORD, give me Power over a trifling Spirit! Give
me a continual Sense of thy Presence! Then I shall not easily yield to this or
any other Temptation. I retired and read the third Chapter of Matthew, went to
Prayer, and found Enlargement in it.

Thursday 17. All this Day I was in a very disagreeable Frame, which I cannot
well describe. I retired, read the Psalms, and the Fourth of Matthew. O! may I
like our blessed LORD when tempted, answer the Tempter with the Word of God!
The Text this Evening was Isa. xiv. 22. Look unto me, and be saved, etc. My
Thoughts were very wandering all the Time. O when will my Mind be constantly
fixed on, and looking to that glorious Object of our Faith and Love.

Friday 18. My Soul was in a cold dead Frame, and so it continued all the Day,
yea all the Week. For though I cannot accuse myself of the Omission of any known
Duty, yet such a total Indifferency I have not felt for some Time. O that GOD
would give me to see the fatal Cause, the accursed Thing, that keeps my Heart
from Him!

Saturday 19. I was much in the same State, and felt not the least Life in any
Duty till Evening: Then the LORD enabled me to pour out my Complaints into his
compassionate Bosom, with great Enlargement. When Mrs. L -- met me. I told her
my State, she advised me not to let my Deadness discourage me, but still to
hold on in the Ways of the LORD, who perhaps might be proving and trying me, to
see if I would do so or not. This gave me some Comfort, and left me Hopes, that
He would at length come, and visit my Soul with his Salvation.

Sunday 20. My Uncle's Text this Evening was Luke xiii. 3. I tell you nay, but
except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. The Word came with Power to my
Heart. O GOD, give me Grace, that I may not prove a forgetful Hearer, but a
Doer of the Word, that so I may be blessed in my Deed!

Monday 21. I found a Desire when I awoke to spend the Day to the Glory of GOD,
and I made it my earnest Prayer to Him, that He would enable me to do it. I
bless GOD that through his Grace I was serious, and found my Mind stayed on Him
in some Measure. O that I may always have a recollected Spirit! Thou, LORD,
have promised to keep him in perfect Peace, whose Mind is stayed on Thee.

Tuesday 22. My Mind was in some Measure serious, but not so much as the Day
before.

Wednesday 23. My Soul seemed like a barren Wilderness, where nothing but Weeds
and Thorns grow; nothing but Evil did I find in my Heart. O my GOD, give me
thyself; then shall this Wilderness become like a watered Garden, which thou
have planted.

Thursday 24. I found my Mind kept in a serious Frame all the Day, blessed be
GOD.

Friday 25. I continued in a serious Frame, which I bless GOD lasted all the
Day. O how much sweeter is it to be in such a State, than to enjoy all that the
World calls Pleasure! But indeed it is only they who term it so. The People of
GOD see there is no Pleasure in these foolish Things; for surely nothing can
satisfy an immortal Soul created for the Enjoyment of GOD, but GOD Himself!

Saturday 26. I have Reason to praise the LORD, that I found my Soul still
serious; this I account a great Blessing, especially to me, who am naturally of
such a trifling Spirit.

Monday 28. When I awoke my Thoughts were still stayed, and I bless GOD I was
in a serious Frame all the Day. O my Soul! if thou had always an awful Sense
of the Divine Presence, thou would be always serious and recollected. For it
is impossible that a Soul, which considers GOD is present, should dare to
behave in a trifling Manner before his awful Majesty.

Thursday 31. The Evening Text was Matt. xi. 28. Come unto me, all ye that are
weary and heavy laden, etc. My Mind was taken up with observing a Gentleman and
Lady, who were laughing and talking together all the Sermon Time. LORD, forgive
my Sin, and lay it not to my Charge!

Friday, Feb. 1. My Mind was much stayed on the Things of GOD when I awoke, and
it continued so all the Day.

Saturday 2. My Soul was much alive this Day, and I was given to see more
clearly than ever, the Mystery of Iniquity which is in my Heart. O thou who
searchest and triest the Reigns of the Children of Men! Give me to see more and
more of the Sinfulness of it, and do thou wash and cleanse it in the Blood of
JESUS!

Monday 4. This Morning we experienced GOD'S providential Care over us, for the
Chimney of the little Parlour took Fire, and might have done great Mischief,
had it not been discovered in Time. Thus the LORD took Care of us when we knew
of no Danger, and could not take Care of ourselves.

Thursday 7. This Day my Uncle, and Miss H -- e, set out hastily for Bristol,
where my Aunt B -- ly was in great Distress; Mr. B -- ly having died suddenly,
and left her among Strangers, with whom she was quite unacquainted till within
three or four Weeks. O how many unforeseen Troubles are we liable to, which are
all so many Calls to us, to lay up our Heart and Treasure above!

Sunday 10. Mr. R -- a preached on Matt. iii. 10. The Discourse, blessed be
GOD, came with Power to my Soul. O LORD! give me the hearing Ear, the seeing
Eye, and the understanding Heart!

Monday 11. This Morning being to be taken Measure of for Mourning, we were
obliged to go out, which dissipated my Thoughts very much. O what a little
serves to draw our Minds from GOD! But alas! they are not so easily drawn off
other things; such Enemies are we to ourselves!

Tuesday 12. My Thoughts were pretty much stayed this Day, and I was enabled to
resist a Temptation not to go to Prayer, because the Weather was cold, and I
was unwilling to leave the Fire.

Wednesday 13. In the Evening I read Miss COOPER'S Life and Letters: Then we
all joined in Prayer. My Soul was blessed and enlarged in that Duty. When I was
in Bed, I took a Review of my past Life, and found Reason to humble myself
before GOD, for my Unfaithfulness in not making a better Use of his many
Mercies to me. But O! may I now begin, and serve and love him all my Days!

Monday 18, Tuesday 19. My Soul was in a serious, and yet dead Frame these
Days. O may I improve every State I am in! and make the very Temptations of the
Enemy, serve as Weapons to fight against him with! Thus shall I, by throwing
his Darts back upon his own Head, force him to fly from me.

Thursday 21. I was in a comfortable Frame of Spirit this Day. In the Evening,
whilst I was conversing with my Sisters and Cousins upon Religion, I found my
Soul greatly blessed; and I was much enlarged afterward in praying with them;
blessed be GOD.

Sunday 24. I finished writing the Life of that excellent Man, Mr. Blackerby; O
may I live his Life, die his Death, and be in the Place where doubtless he now
is! There I shall be free from all Impurity, all Sorrow, all Sin, and be
eternally out of the reach of Death.

Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday. I was in a serious, though dead Frame. LORD!
quicken, strengthen and comfort me by thy Word, and Spirit!

Thursday 28. Was my Birthday. I found a Desire, and Resolution, to be more
devoted to GOD the ensuing Year, than I was the foregoing. O may the LORD
enable me to perform my Resolutions! I also found serious Reflections on the
Shortness of Life, and a Thankfulness for sparing me to see fourteen Years. O
may I let these Reflections have their due Weight, and Influence, on all my
Conduct for the Time to come! And always consider that

" My Life is a Dream,
" My Time as a Stream,
" Glides swiftly away:
" And the fugitive Moments for no one will stay."
LORD! do thou give me, So to number my Days, that I may apply my Heart unto
Wisdom!

Saturday, March 2. My Uncle returned Home, and with him my Aunt B -- ly, whom
I was much rejoiced to see.

Saturday 9. This Evening poor Mrs. L -- was taken extremely ill. It brought
many serious Reflections to my Mind. Well may we say in the Midst of Life we
are in Death. O may I always consider this, and never yield to Levity, or any
Thing which is displeasing to a GOD of the strictest Purity, who may strike me
dead in a Moment; and since I may die this Day, let me spend this and every
other as though it were my last!

Sunday 17. At Night as I sat by the Fire, I found my Soul blessed, and many
serious Reflections brought to my Mind, which continued till I went to Bed.

Monday 18. I awoke in much the same State, and continued so all the Day,
blessed be GOD.

Tuesday 19. The Text this Evening was John v, 8. Will thou be made whole? My
Heart seemed to reply, Yea, LORD, I will, if thou will, and of this I need not
doubt, for thou art always more ready to give, than I am to receive. O! that
thou would ever Make we willing to receive
All thy Goodness waits to give!"


Saturday 23. My Soul was much blessed, and my Heart raised in Thankfulness, for
the many Mercies I have received at the Hands of my merciful GOD: At the same
Time I was humbled under a Sense of the ungrateful Returns I have made Him.

" When all the Mercies of my GOD
" My rising Soul surveys,
" Why, my cold Heart, art thou not lost,
" In Wonder, Love, and Praise?
Sunday 24. Mr. M -- preached from Numbers xxiii. 10. Let me die the Death of
the Righteous, etc. O! may I not only die his Death, but also live his Life,
for indeed it is impossible to do the former, unless we first do the latter.

Saturday 30. Mr. F -- l in the Evening preached on John xx. 19. Peace be unto
you. Though I was much tempted with Drowsiness under the Word, yet some Parts of
it were greatly blessed to me. He afterward met the Society, and told them, that
in several Places, both in this Round, and others, Numbers were convinced, and
brought to CHRIST. O may I be one! Into that happy Number, LORD,
A weary Sinner take,
Jesus fulfill thy gracious Word,
For thy own Mercy's Sake."


Sunday 31. I spent the Morning in reading the eight last Chapters of Romans.
Indeed I think they are a most beautiful Part of the Scripture. O! that they,
and every other Part of that Holy Book, may be written upon my Heart!

Sunday, April 7. Was Easter Day: I was prevented from hearing the Sermon by a
violent Toothache. O! how many Pains are we subject to, while in this mortal
Life! But when this Mortal shall put on Immortality, what a glorious Change
shall we undergo! Lord, let this Change pass upon me; and to that End, let me
now rise from a Death of Sin, unto a Life of Righteousness.

" Thy Resurrection's Power impart,
" And rise triumphant in my Heart."
Sunday 14. I found my Mind much oppressed with perplexing Thoughts concerning
my dear Parents. But why, O my Soul! do thou suffer these anxious Cares to
oppress thy troubled Breast? Is not the GOD who gave me these tender Parents at
Liberty to take them from me? And is he not able to raise me up Friends in
their Room? Besides, this is caring for the Morrow: Is it not time enough to
make myself uneasy when the Trial comes, without anticipating what may never
be? Then, O my Soul, trust thou in GOD; for he will be the Help of my
Countenance, and my GOD!

Saturday 20. I was all this Day in a fretful Frame, which I too much yielded
to. O God! give me Power over this, and every other easily besetting Sin!

Sunday 21. I read a Letter of Miss B -- t's to Mr. W -- y, concerning the
Manner of her bringing up the poor Children that she has taken; in which I
could not help observing the Power of Faith. How has she surmounted every
Difficulty that stood in her Way! O may I, like her, live by Faith, till I
shall go to live, Where Faith is sweetly lost in Sight,
And Hope in full supreme Delight,
And everlasting Love!"


Monday 22. Expecting our Friends home from Liverpool, Miss H -- e and I sat up
to receive them; about Twelve at Night they came, very much fatigued. They
informed us of a narrow Escape they had met with; the Coach they were in was
overturned with six People in it, and some on the Outside; yet not one was
hurt: Surely the Providence of GOD was over them for good. I soon got to Bed
sleepy enough, and when asleep, I dream a very particular Dream: I thought Mrs.
L -- bid my Cousin A -- and me look out at a Window, and we should see an
ANGEL, who would tell us comfortable News. We did, and after some Time we saw a
bright Star, which grew brighter and brighter, till an ANGEL appeared,
exceedingly beautiful and majestic. As he came nearer, I was quite overwhelmed
at his Presence, and could scarce look at him, his Luster so dazzled my Eyes.
When he approached me, I thought I faintly uttered these Words. "Speak, LORD,
thy Servant hears." At this he said, The LORD has sent me to tell you, that
all your Sins are forgiven, and will never be remembered against you any more,
unless you fall again into Sin. He has blotted out your Transgressions, and
cast them behind his Back. I immediately said, how can these Things be? Can I,
who am so great a Sinner, and have never truly repented, be forgiven? He
answered, With GOD nothing is impossible. Continue waiting upon GOD in his
appointed Way, and you will soon find the Truth of these Promises. He spoke
much to me concerning my Unbelief, and then suddenly disappeared, leaving me
quite overwhelmed, but much comforted. O that my Dream may be shortly fulfilled!

Saturday 27. I was in a very cold dead Frame all the Day, and when I retired
to Prayer in the Evening, I found no Life: But still I had the Blessing of
waiting upon GOD, and an earnest Desire and Panting in my Soul for Faith, though
I could not utter a Word. LORD, let me never rest till I get this Pearl of
great Price into my Possession! then shall I be truly happy, and not till then.

Sunday, May 5. My Uncle met the SOCIETY, and informed them of his being to
leave them soon. The Sorrow that sat on every Countenance, would have drawn
Tears from any one's Eyes, who could in the least sympathize with another's
Grief. O LORD, what is Man! How various, how unforeseen and often, are the
Changes of this short Life! LORD, prepare me for whatever thou have in thy
Wisdom prepared for me.

Monday 6. We were in a great Hurry in packing up all the Day, and at Night sat
up till Twelve o'Clock. Having a violent Cold, I was quite disordered all the
next Day, so as not to be able to read, or pray, or do any Thing else, as I
would. O! how does this corruptible Body press down the Soul! But when it shall
escape from this Prison of Clay, and wing its Way to the Mansions of eternal
Joy, how will it exult in the glorious Change, and rejoice in being delivered
from this Dungeon, which has so long clogged it with its manifold Infirmities!

Tuesday 9. In the Afternoon we went with Mr. and Mrs. W -- h to the old
Castle, on the Top of the Hill, where it seems Lady Catherine Parr, last Wise
to King Henry the VIII. was born. Indeed it is a venerable Ruin, and strongly
shows what all worldly Grandeur must come to. O! that I, and all that are near
and dear to me, may never desire such fading transitory Enjoyments! But may we
seek for, and obtain a House not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens:
Jerusalem, the Saint's Abode,
Whose Founder is the living GOD."


Monday 13. I bless GOD, I found my Soul in a very serious Frame this Day,
having a Measure of the Spirit of Prayer. O! may it always continue! In the
Afternoon we took a Walk to the Mount, which was thrown up to batter down the
old Castle on the Top of the Hill. It was delightfully pleasant to see all the
green Fields, and the little lonely Houses that stand there. I could have liked
to stay there all the Afternoon, the Weather was so calm and serene, and all
Nature seemed so lively and sprightly. O! was my Soul but illuminated by the
Sun of Righteousness as this Earth is by the material Sun! how happy, how
unspeakably happy, would it be in the Possession of such a Blessing!

" If this Felicity were mine,
" I every other would resign,
" With just and holy Scorn:
" Cheerful and blithe my Way pursue,
" And with the promised Land in View,
" Singing to GOD return."
Tuesday 14. I found my Soul in a serious Frame all the Day long, blessed be
GOD, who kept me so.

Thursday 16. I found my Soul alive. My Uncle's Text was, GOD is Love. 1 John
xvi. 4.

Friday 17. I still continued in some Measure blessed. LORD! increase the Spark,
and let it grow into a Flame!

Saturday 18. I was much tempted to Levity, which I gave Way to. But while Mr.
C -- k was preaching in the Evening from these Words, O Israel, thou have
destroyed thyself: But in me is thine help, Hos. xiii. 9. my Soul was much
refreshed. Afterward I was enabled to watch against every Thing that might
deprive me of it, so that I lay down, and rose with it again the next Morning.
All Thanks be ascribed to GOD; for had I been left to myself, I should
undoubtedly have lost it immediately.

Sunday 19. I awoke in the same watchful Spirit, and an eager Desire for Faith,
which I was enabled to pray for with great Earnestness.

Monday 20. I yielded so much to Levity, that it was with Difficulty I forced
myself to Duty; and when I did, I was quite cold and dead, and my Thoughts were
wandering on some foolish Thing or other. O GOD! deliver me from a trifling
Spirit!

Tuesday 21. I found myself thoughtful and serious in the Morning, but in the
Afternoon I was overcome by Levity. O how soon am I drawn off what is good! But
how difficult do I find it to prevail with myself to forsake the evil! For
often when the LORD shows me the Error of my Ways, though for the present I feel
Sorrow and Regret, yet the next Temptation that offers, finds me ready to
comply with it; and this doubtless I should always do, did not GOD in that
Moment, step in and hinder me by his restraining Grace; such a Propensity have
I to do that which grieves my GOD, and wounds my own Conscience.

Saturday 25. In the Evening I retired, and entering into a strict
Self-examination, I found I must own with the ROYAL PSALMIST, My inward Parts
are very Wickedness. I saw clearly that I had broken every Commandment,
therefore were I to be tried by the Law of Works, I must eternally perish. I
must come with the Publican, crying, GOD! be merciful to me a Sinner! How truly
might I say, No good Word, or Work, or Thought,
Have I to buy thy Grace,
Mercy I accept unbought,
Thy Proffer I embrace.


Sunday 26. In the Afternoon we went to Mrs. C -- r, to see the Corpse of her
Daughter. I was not at all shocked at the Sight, but it brought many serious
Reflections to my Mind. How is she who, not many Months ago, was in all the
Bloom and Vigor of Youth, cut down like a Flower! So, just so, thought I, must
shortly be: I must die, be stretched in a Coffin, and laid in the silent Grave,
and shortly it will be forgot, that there was such a Person. O! may this awful
Thought never be absent from my Mind! How will it lessen my Esteem for all
these perishing Enjoyments! How will it make me spend every precious Moment, in
Preparation for a never ending Eternity! May the LORD grant that when Death
comes, he may not appear as a King of Terrors; but like a welcome Messenger,
sent to carry me to my Father's House!

Sunday, June 2. In the Evening my Uncle preached his farewell Sermon on Acts
xx. 27. I have not shunned to declare unto you the whole Counsel of GOD. He
repeated briefly the Doctrine which he had taught them, and exhorted them to
take Heed, lest the Word should rise up in Judgment against them in the last
Day. O may it not against me! For alas! as yet I have been a barren Fig Tree.
Well may I say, Long have I sat beneath the Sound
Of thy Salvation, LORD,
But still how weak my Faith is found,
And Knowledge of thy Word."
LORD! let it be no longer so with me, but may I now bear Fruit to thy Glory!

Tuesday 4. We were called up at half an Hour after One, and at a quarter past
Two, set out on our Journey to Chester. When we came near Lancaster, our
Coachman had like twice to have overturned us. At Seven, we breakfasted there,
at One, dined at Preston, and at Nine in the Evening, reached Mr. A -- 's House
in Warrington. We soon got to Bed truly fatigued, and I slept till Six in the
Morning, without ever waking. About Eight, on Wednesday Morning, we set out
again, and had a delightful Journey the rest of the Way to Chester, where we
arrived about Noon. In the Afternoon we took a Walk round the Walls. You have
here an extensive Prospect of a fine open Country, far unlike the barren Kendal
Mountains. We then walked to the Dock, and from thence to the Preaching-House.
Mr. G -- d preached on Matt. ix. 22. Daughter, be of good Comfort, etc. I found
my Soul humbled under a Sense of my own Vileness, and fixed a Resolution to set
out afresh in the narrow Way of Holiness, if the LORD will give me Strength,
for without he does, all my Resolutions will be in vain.

Sunday 9. Mr. G -- d preached, met the Society, and spoke to the Children. I
found my Soul blessed. O may it be a lasting Blessing, and not like a Guest which
tarrieth but a Day!

Monday 10. In the Afternoon we went to see the Infirmary; every Thing is neat
and clean about it. I found a Thankfulness to GOD, that He had kept me from all
those Disorder that others have. O may my Life be singularly good, as he has
been so singularly merciful to me! I experience Mercies that very few others
have; which it would be almost impossible to enumerate. How few have such
Parents, who, from my earliest Days, have instructed me how to fear and love
GOD! How many are tortured with broken Limbs, and deprived of their Sight,
whilst I am preserved from all these, and kept in Health, Strength, and the
full Exercise of my Reason! Many more Mercies I am indebted to my gracious
Benefactor for; how truly may I say, Not more than others I deserve,
Yet GOD has given me more,
For I have Food whilst others starve,
Or beg from Door to Door!"


Thursday 13. In the Afternoon I set out with my Uncle, Aunt, Mrs. L --, and
some other Friends, to go to a little Village called Crislington, about two
Miles out of the Town, where my Uncle was to preach. We had a very pleasant
Walk, and went to see the delightfulest, though oddest contrived Garden, that I
ever saw. The Owner of it is the Rector of that Place; but one would think, by
the Manner of his laying it out, that he had very little else to think of. Some
Part of it represents a Field of Battle, a General's Tent, with Cannons all
round it, a Mount, a Tower, a Drawbridge, and every Thing to resemble a Camp
of Soldiers. The other Parts of the Garden are laid out in the same peculiar
Taste.

Tuesday 18. At private Prayers in the Morning, I had Power to pray
particularly against my besetting Sins, and blessed be GOD, I do in some
Measure overcome them. Indeed He is a GOD, both hearing and answering Prayer.

Friday 21. In the Evening I went to the Chapel, there was no Preaching, but a
private Meeting. Having been much refreshed, especially in the singing that
HYMN Wrestling Jacob, I had no Reason to repent going. My Desires were much
enlarged after GOD, with a Hatred to Sin. O! that I may indeed forsake it, and
hate it as deadly Poison!

Monday 24, and Tuesday 25. I spent most Part of these Days in Retirement, my
Mind was much composed, and my Thoughts stayed on the Things of GOD.

Wednesday 26. This Afternoon we came to our own House. I spent the Evening in
a little Room by myself, found Enlargement in Prayer, and my Soul much blessed.

Thursday 27. When I retired in the Morning to private Prayer, I experienced
great Power and Sweetness in the Duty. My Mind was kept in a serious Frame,
till I went out of my Chamber, when I gave Way to Fretting. O! how many
Temptations are we liable to! And while we endeavor to shun one, we often fall
into another. When I avoid Levity, I too often fall into Fretting. We have Need
to have the Wisdom of the Serpent, with the Harmlessness of the Dove.

Friday 28, and Saturday 29. Were spent comfortably. I had great Sweetness in
Prayer, and much of the Spirit of it.

Sunday 30. I tasted the good Word of GOD, in reading the Eleventh Chapter of
the Hebrews. O! how much did those excellent Ones of the Earth endure for their
blessed Master, while I, who have every Means of Encouragement I can desire
(and far more than I deserve) am careless and supine in working out my own
Salvation! But since Thou have convinced me of my Error, O LORD! do Thou help
me to amend it, and let me now turn to Thee with all my Heart and Soul!

Tuesday, July 2, and Wednesday 3. Both these Days I was ill, and in violent
Pain; all Tuesday Morning I endeavored to look to GOD, and was relieved. O!
how good is He to me, the unworthiest of his Creatures! LORD, give me a
thankful Heart. I was hindered going to Preaching all this Week, by Reason of a
violent Cold; but if that was sanctified, I have Need to be thankful, and to
bless GOD for afflicting me.

Saturday 20. Though I was very busy all the Morning, my Mind was kept in a
serious praying Frame. LORD! make me truly thankful for this Mercy!

Sunday 21. We went to St. John's Church. I found my Soul blessed at the
SACRAMENT, and felt an earnest Desire for Faith. O! may it always continue!
"LORD, give me Faith," be all my Cry; and He that gives me the Desire, will
fulfill it.

Wednesday 24. In the Evening we went down to my Aunt B -- 's, where we parted
with my dear Friend Miss H --; I was much concerned at taking Leave, but I
comforted myself with the Hope of seeing her soon again: If we should not meet
again in this Vale of Tears, may we meet where Crying, and Pain, and Death are
over.

Tuesday 30. I was in a lukewarm Frame all the Day; but in the Evening, as my
Uncle and others were speaking their States to one another. I could scarce help
shedding Tears, to think I had made so little Use of all the Means I enjoy.
When I came up to Bed, I found a great Earnestness for Faith, which I prayed
for with something of a Confidence that I should receive, till Unbelief stepped
in: Then I thought I had not repented enough, had not forsaken my Sins long
enough; and at last I yielded, rose from my Knees, and lost the Blessing which
I might have received, had I held on. May I learn more Wisdom for the future,
and when I get such a precious Moment, improve it, and not so shamefully yield
to the Enemy of my Soul!

Sunday, August 4. I went to Church, and was much blessed, particularly at the
SACRAMENT.

Sunday 18. In the Morning Mr. W -- y preached on Mark ix. 23. My Soul was
exceedingly blessed. He seemed to speak as exactly to my State as if I had
mentioned it to him. He answered every Objection that has oftentimes occurred
to my Mind against believing, and then gave me Encouragement to come to CHRIST,
and believe in him; but when I came Home, my Mind was much hurried, so that I
lost the Blessing I had received. O how unfaithful have I hitherto been to the
manifold Favors GOD has bestowed on me! LORD, pardon the past, and make me
more faithful for the future!

Monday 19. I was much disordered with a violent Cold in my Head, and so I
continued all Tuesday and Wednesday, that I scarce could read, or pray, or do
any Thing else, as I would have done; but, praised be GOD, my Mind was kept in
a sweet composed Frame, and I had much of the Spirit of Prayer. O the Goodness
of GOD to me, the most unworthy of his Creatures! Me, who have so often sinned
against Him! LORD, write the Law of Gratitude on my Heart! On Wednesday our
Class met for the first Time, although it was something of a Cross, I experienced
the Goodness of GOD.

Wednesday 28. In the Evening our Class met again: Thanks be to GOD, I was in a
composed Frame, and had my Mind stayed on Him; as indeed it had been all the
Day, and all the Week.

Thursday 29. In the Afternoon we went with Mr. and Mrs. B -- t to Eaton by
Water, to see Lord Grosvenor's Seat. We had a Parcel of obstinate Men in the
Boat, who knew nothing of the Sea, and yet would have their own Way, which
rendered what might have been otherwise pleasant, very disagreeable. The
Gardens are extremely pleasant, and far surpass any Thing I have ever seen. My
Mind was fixed on GOD, while I was in the Boat, and I had such a Confidence in
Him, that I don't know I felt Fear arise once the whole Time.

Sunday, September 1. At Church I felt great Earnestness for the Blessing.

" Author of Faith, to Thee I lift
" My weary longing Eyes,
" O let me now receive that Gift,
" My Soul without it dies."
Wednesday 4. In the Evening I was very cold and dead. O my GOD! let me never
give Way to a lukewarm Spirit, for this, of all Things, I find hurtful to my
Soul, and it too often brings on Levity, which to me is slow Poison. It does
not appear heinous as some other Sins do, but steals upon me unawares. And when
I am once down, it is not an easy Matter to rise again. Therefore let me be
Always standing on my Guard,
And watching unto Prayer."


Sunday 8. In the Morning we went to Church. I was not much blessed there; but I
was greatly quickened by Mr. M -- 's Conversation at Dinner, for which I have
Reason to praise the LORD.

Wednesday 11. At Night while I was meeting in Class, my Soul was much
refreshed, and I thought I would not give up that Spark, small as it was, for
all the World's Riches. And if the Foretaste be so sweet, O! what must the full
Enjoyment be! LORD, as Thou have given me this Desire, O fulfill it! Let me
never rest till I am made a joyful Partaker of the Inheritance of the Saints in
Light!

Thursday 12. Blessed be GOD, my Soul was much alive this Day also, and I was
much quickened under my Uncle's preaching in the Evening.

Sunday 15. This Morning Mr. M -- r made an exceeding fine Discourse upon Phil.
iii. 7. But what Things were Gain to me, those I counted loss for CHRIST. My
Soul was much comforted and encouraged, while he was inviting Sinners to come
and taste the Sweetness that is in CHRIST, and to forsake all those Things
which before we counted Gain, in order to partake of those hidden Treasures.

Monday 17. I was overcome by a trifling Spirit, and also gave Way to wandering
Thoughts; for which the LORD in Mercy gave me to feel much Remorse. While I was
at Preaching in the Evening, He also gave me a fervent Desire to look to that
JESUS whom his Servant was pointing out to us from John iii. 14, 15. O! that I
may ever look to Him to heal the Wound which Sin has made!

" Stung by the Scorpion Sin;
" My poor expiring Soul."
O that I could add!

" The balmy ^ound drank in,
" And was at once made whole."
I staid the Bands as I could not go Home by myself, my Aunt choosing to stay,
and I experienced that it was good for me to be there, for my Soul was
exceedingly blessed. LORD! make me truly thankful for this, and all thy other
Mercies daily conferred upon me, the chief of Sinners!

Tuesday, October 1. In the Evening I found my Soul quickened under religious
Conversation, and continued so all Wednesday and Thursday, having great
Enlargement in Prayer, and free Access to the Throne; blessed be GOD!

Monday 14. My Mind was in a serious Frame most Part of this Day. In the
Evening we had a comfortable Lo^^ feast, at which my Soul was much comforted,
and found a great Wrestling and Agonizing for the Blessing.

Saturday 19. I was rather cold all Day; but Glory be to GOD! I had great
Enlargement in Prayer, especially in the Evening.

Sunday 20. Mr. M -- r preached on Mat. v. 22, 26. Agree with thine Adversary
quickly, etc. He earnestly exhorted and entreated every one to agree with GOD,
by forsaking their Sins, and turning to Him, lest he should swear in his Wrath,
they should not enter into his Rest. The Word came with Power to my Soul, and I
felt a Resolution never to rest, till I had made my Peace with GOD. O! may the
LORD confirm it, or it will be like the Morning Cloud!

Monday 21. I arose this Morning with an earnest Desire, and a Determination,
by the Grace of GOD, to give myself up to Him. O! may I never, never rest, till
I fully rest in Him!

Tuesday 22. My Soul was in a serious Frame; but in the Evening I gave so much
way to an inordinate Desire after a foolish Thing, that my Mind was quite drawn
off from GOD. When I went to Bed, I was greatly humbled, and ashamed on Account
of it, and I trust I shall never so yield again to the Enemy of my Soul.

Wednesday 30. I was in a very indifferent State all the Day; but in the
Evening, in Class-meeting, I was much quickened, and stirred up by a young
Person's giving an Account, how she found Peace the Day before in private
Prayer. I was, and am still determined, by the Grace of GOD, never to rest till
I also find him whom my Soul desires to love. My Soul continued much blessed all
the Evening, and I dropped asleep with earnest Desires to be brought into that
glorious Liberty of the Sons of GOD. Dearest JESUS! how long will it be before
Thou will manifest Thyself to me, as Thou do not unto the World! O come and
take up thine Abode in my longing Heart, and live and reign in me without a
Rival!

Thursday 31. My Soul was greatly blessed all this Day, and my Heart much drawn
out after GOD. I also found Enlargement in praying for Faith. O thou Son of
GOD, do Thou now impart to me this great and inestimable Blessing, and make me
truly happy in thy Love! Do Thou now arise upon my poor Soul, with Healing in
thy Wings, and keep me continually!

Friday, November 1. I still continued in a comfortable Frame, finding a great
Hunger and Thirst for Faith. I could truly say from Heartfelt Experience.

" Thou have pronounced the Mourner blessed,
" And lo! for Thee I ever mourn:
" I cannot, no, I will not rest,
" Till Thou my only Rest return:
" Till Thou, the Prince of Peace, appear,
" And I receive the Comforter."
Saturday 2. I found my Soul in a very watchful Frame, from a great Concern I
felt upon my Conscience for Sin, and the Fear I had of falling into a careless
lukewarm Spirit again. LORD! do thou always let me retain A Spirit still
prepared,
And armed with jealous Fear,
For ever standing on its Guard,
And watching unto Prayer!"


Monday 4. I was overcome in some Measure by Levity; but the Gracious GOD gave
me to feel much Remorse for it, and also encouraged me to trust that He who had
showed me the Evil of this, and all other Sins, would pardon them.

Saturday 9. My Soul was not so lively Today, as it was some Days ago. When I
retired to Prayer, I felt a great Backwardness to it, which was heightened by a
Consideration of my own Unfaithfulness to GOD. But the Thought was immediately
checked by this; if I am unfaithful, will my keeping from Him make me more
faithful? No surely: It is the LORD alone that can impart the Blessing of a
faithful Heart; then I will wait upon Him for it, and he has promised, Those
that ask shall receive.

Monday 18. I was in a serious praying Frame. In the Evening Mr. M -- preached
on John ix. 25. My Soul was exceedingly blessed, and I seemed just ready to lay
hold on the Blessing. How I lost it, I am not sensible.

Sunday 24. Mr. M -- e preached in the Morning on, Do all to the Glory of GOD.
1 Cor. x. 38. When I came home and retired, I found some Liberty in Prayer. O
how good is God to me, and how undeserving, how unfaithful a Creature am I!
LORD, pardon the past, and give me Strength for the Time to come!

Tuesday, December 3, and Wednesday 4. I was rather in a cold Frame. O that the
LORD would deliver me from a lukewarm Spirit! For I find that an Inlet to all
wrong Tempers, and therefore it must be hurtful to me, and displeasing to GOD.

Saturday 7. I was much cast down on Account of having yielded to many wrong
Tempers the Day before. In the Evening I went to Preaching without the least
Expectation of a Blessing; however, as I was under the Word, bemoaning my
helpless Condition, the LORD in a Measure comforted and encouraged me to trust
in Him. Indeed I am often pained that my Pain is over so soon, and grieved that
I can grieve no more.

Sunday 8. In the Morning Mr. M -- preached on Romans i. 17. For the just shall
live by Faith. My Thoughts were wandering under the Word, and when I came Home
and retired, I found no Life nor Liberty in Prayer. O! when shall I be enabled
to come with Boldness to the Throne of Grace, through JESUS the Mediator of the
new Covenant, and to call Him, my LORD and my GOD.

Thursday 12. My Uncle's Text was Prove. xxiii. 23. During the first Part, my
Mind was pretty much stayed, but toward the latter End it was much drawn off
by a Thing which probably may never happen. O! for a stayed, and composed Mind
in waiting upon GOD! Surely it is a great Sin to have the Mind wandering upon
foolish Things, when so immediately in the Presence of GOD.

Saturday 14. This Day, as well as the Day before, my Body was much disordered.
In the Evening, when I retired; I was neither humbled under a Sense or past
Mercies received, nor of mine own Unfaithfulness to GOD. Sometimes I am all
alive, I am so in earnest, so diligent in the Means, and take such Delight in
them; then one Thing or another steps in, is yielded to, and deprives me of all
my Life and Earnestness. And though I do not neglect the Means, yet how are they
hurried over, and how slightly performed! And indeed I am often glad when they
are finished. LORD, what is Man! what am I! What a poor unstable Creature!
LORD! quicken me! Make me more alive, more in earnest! LORD! make me, and keep
me, what I ought, what I want to be!

Saturday 21. All this Week I have experienced a Stayedness of Mind, and a
Degree of Recollection, for which I desire to be thankful. But alas! I do not
find that Earnestness, that Hungering and Thirsting which I did. LORD, what is
the Cause! O remove it, whatever it be! Remove the accursed Thing, which
separates between Thee and my Soul! On Saturday Night, the LORD was pleased to
show me the Thing which had quenched that Earnestness, and I am not sensible
that I have this Week yielded to it. O! what a good GOD is ours! He showed me
my Sin: He gave me to feel Remorse for it, and then imparted Power to subdue
it. LORD give me a thankful Heart!

Sunday 22. This Morning I was much affected in reading the Fifteenth Verse of
the Fourth Chapter of the Hebrews. For we have not an high Priest who cannot be
touched with the Feeling of our Infirmities: For He was in all Points tempted
like as we are, yet without Sin. O what comfortable Words! especially when the
Enemy is pouring in Floods of Temptation upon us! at such a Time, how sweet is
the Meditation upon such Words! How comfortable the Reflection that our GOD
knows, and not only knows, but sympathies with us in all our Afflictions,
Distresses, and Temptations; and will assuredly deliver us out of them! O may
this Scripture be ever present with my Mind, and may it prove a Comfort to me
in Trials, while it also hinders me from yielding to my spiritual Enemy, by
assuring me that JESUS is ever able and willing to help me.

Wednesday 25. I was impressed with a Sense of Gratitude to GOD, for sending
his Son into the World, to be born of a pure Virgin, and in a mean Manger, and
all to rescue me from endless Woe. O that my Heart may never for one Moment,
lose the Sense of this great and inestimable Blessing!

Thursday 26. I continued in a serious Frame, and found a Degree of Liberty in
Prayer.

Sunday 29. I was not very well, and stayed at Home with my Friend Miss H --,
who was in great Affliction for the Loss of poor, or rather happy little Ned H
--, he died of a Scarlet-fever a Week ago. O that I was as safely landed on the
happy Shore! But alas! I am still in an evil World, and liable to Crosses and
Temptations: Yet liable to fall from Grace when I get it, and perhaps to be
lost for ever. LORD preserve me, and when I die, O let me die unto Thee!

Tuesday 31. The Watch Night was to last till half past Twelve: But we came
Home between Ten and Eleven. I would not go to Bed till near Twelve, spending
the Time in Prayer and Meditation. LORD make me truly thankful for thy Mercy in
bringing me to the Conclusion of another Year, and grant that I may spend the
ensuing Year, to the Glory of thy blessed Name, through JESUS CHRIST.

Wednesday, January 1. I awoke in a lukewarm State; and though I endeavored to
pray, yet it was not with that Life and Fervency I desired. O how many have
been cut off in the last Year, and I am yet upon praying Ground! LORD, spare me
yet another Year; and O let it be spent so, as will show my Gratitude to Thee,
for this undeserved Mercy!

Thursday 2. I was to my great Concern overcome by a trifling Spirit. O how is
it, that I am so soon off my Watch, that the Enemy so frequently gets the
better! O GOD give me, I beseech Thee, for Thy Son's Sake, a recollected,
serious, praying Spirit!

Friday 3. My Soul was in a more recollected Frame than the foregoing Day.
LORD, make me thankful even for this Mercy!

Saturday 4. I continued much in the same State as the Day before. In the
Evening Mr. R -- s preached on Lam. iii. 22, It is of the LORD' s Mercies that
we are not consumed, because His Compassions fail not. Had it not been for
this, LORD, where should I, and all the rebellious Sons of Adam, have been at
this Day!

Monday 6. I found my Mind in a serious Frame, but it is seldom that it
continues. O that GOD would make me more stable, that I may not be like the Sea
continually fluctuating, and driven about with every Wind of Temptation; but,
like the Sun, which constantly rises and sets at the appointed Times, and never
fails to bring a regular Succession of Day and Night, according to the Command
of that GOD who made him, when He sent him forth with a Commission to rule the
Day, and to be for Signs, and for Seasons, for Days, and for Years!

Tuesday 7. This Day I found great Enlargement in Prayer, which made me perform
that Duty with much Pleasure; but when my Soul is (...) it is a most
burdensome Task.

Thursday 9. I went to Chapel. Mr. R -- s preached on Psalm xxxiv. 14, Seek
Peace, and ensue it. The Sermon was tedious, and I so cold, that I was quite
tired under it, and found myself growing impatient. O how soon am I tired of
what is good! The World are not so soon weary at the Playhouse, or in the
Ball-Room, as I am in GOD's House, and under His Word. Truly the Children of
this World are wiser in their Generation, than the Children of Light.

Friday 10. I was oppressed all this Day, with that tormenting Passion, the
Fear of Death, insomuch that I had not Comfort in any Thing. I was overwhelmed
in an Instant with such Horror and Dread, as plainly told me I was unfit to
die; unfit to appear before the awful Judge of Quick and Dead. O my GOD, do
Thou give me the Pardon of my Sins, and remove this Bondage (the Fear of Death)
from my Conscience! LORD, prepare me, make me meet to see thy Face!

Saturday 11. At Night Mr. M -- s made an excellent Discourse upon the barren
Fig Tree, Luke xiii. 6, 9. I fear this Character belongs to me. Alas! O may I
at last bear Fruit!

Tuesday 14. This, as well as the three following Days, my Soul seemed to be
much in earnest, and pressing forward after the Blessing; and although I was much
tempted on Friday to Anger, yet I found Power to resist it, and also great
Enlargement in praying for Faith. O how gracious is GOD! LORD, make me truly
thankful for thy numberless Mercies bestowed on me, the unworthiest Worm thy
Hands have made! My Uncle preached on Isa. 19. If ye be willing and obedient,
ye shall eat the Good of the Land. He said many People were willing enough to
be saved, but few were willing to be saved in GOD's Way, which was to confess
and forsake Sin, and turn to GOD, by using all the Means which He has
appointed; but I think GOD has brought me so far, as to make me truly willing
to be saved in his own Way; and were it possible to be saved in Sin, I had
rather be saved from it, for Heaven would be no Heaven to me while Pride,
Anger, and Self-will, have Possession of my Breast; wherefore, LORD, deliver me
from the Guilt and Power of these Things now, and finally deliver me from the
In-being of them!

Saturday 18. I still found my Desires after GOD very earnest, and was much
enlarged in wrestling for the Blessing, both in private Prayer, and under the
Word. In the Evening while Mr. M -- e was discoursing on these Words, Let him
that names the Name of CHRIST depart from Iniquity, 2 Timothy ii. 19. I found
much Enlargement in private Prayer. In the Afternoon I was admitted to meet in
Band, which I found blessed to me, and trust to find it so constantly; as I
shall, if it is not my own Fault.

Monday 20. I did not find my Soul so much alive this Day, as I did all last
Week. O what a changeable Creature am I! Never, never, at one Stay, LORD,
strengthen, settle, and stablish me!

Tuesday 21. Blessed be GOD! He sought me even when I was straying from Him,
and did not suffer me long to continue in a lukewarm State. This Day He gave me
back that wrestling Spirit, which I had lost the Day before. I can say my Soul
is athirst for GOD, even for the living GOD. I am willing, yea, LORD, I am
desirous to forsake all my Sins, and to return unto Thee. O my GOD, make me in
earnest, and take me for thy Child! Keep me! Keep me, gracious LORD, and never
let me go!

Wednesday 22. I still found earnest Desires, and my Soul to be all on a
Stretch for GOD. LORD continue this Blessing, till thou impart to me that which
my Soul desires, even thy blessed Self; then shall I be possessed of all that
is desirable in Earth or Heaven.

Friday 24. Upon a strict Self-examination, I trust I may say, I have made some
Progress in the Heavenly Journey, within these last three Months; for I find
more Power over Sin; even my besetting Sins have not Dominion over me. And if
through Unwatchfulness I yield to them, my Heart is broken on Account thereof,
and I endeavor to be more watchful for the future. I find more Delight in the
Ordinances of GOD, and a more stayed, composed Mind in waiting upon Him; and
when wandering Thoughts assault me, I find Power to resist them. I have more
Power to plead the Promises in Prayer; my Desires are more earnest, and I have
a more watchful Spirit during the Day: If I deceive myself, the LORD knows it
is not willingly. I sincerely desire to be tried, and to know the worst of my
State. LORD, search well if there be any Way of Wickedness in me, and lead me
in the Way Everlasting!

Thursday 30. I was rather cold and dead this Day. O what is the Cause of this
Instability! LORD, show it to me for JESUS'S Sake, though not for mine, and make
me earnest! I found my Soul something quickened at Night, while my Uncle was
preaching on these Words, Only believe, Mark v. 36.

Friday 31. I was much tempted to Fretfulness this Morning; but through Mercy was
restrained from letting it break out into Words or Actions: Thanks be to GOD
for this, as also that I found a Degree of Liberty in Prayer.

Monday, February 3. When I awoke this Morning, I found an earnest Desire to
spend the Day to the Glory of GOD. I soon found myself stripped of all my
Strength, and a trifling Spirit prevailed over me. LORD, I bring this besetting
Sin to Thee: Thou know it is my Grief, my Burden! LORD, give me Power over
it!

Saturday 8. All this Week I have been hindered going to Chapel, by Reason of a
bad Cold. And as to the State of my Soul, I know not what to say. Sometimes I
have been groaning under my Unbelief, sometimes cold and dead; yet I find a
Hope left, that I, even I, shall yet rejoice in the GOD of my Salvation. Yet I
shall find his Favor, and taste an Earnest of eternal Bliss; Amen, LORD JESUS!
BUT LORD, make me in earnest, make me alive to Thee! I cannot bear this
Instability, this halting between two Opinions. LORD, I am convinced Thou art
GOD! O then let me serve Thee!

Sunday 9. This Morning being hindered attending the public Means, I spent some
Time in private, and found the LORD was willing to hear and answer Prayer; for
He enlarged my Heart in that Duty, and enabled me to pray with Life and
Fervency; blessed by his Name!

Sunday 16. This Day I found much Sweetness and Enlargement in private Duty,
and my Mind was in some Measure stayed on GOD. O for an Heart to praise and
love Him for this, and all his Mercies! The rest of the Week, I found my Soul
blessed at different Times, with a Desire to wait upon GOD in private: It was
profitable to me; which indeed I need never doubt, seeing he has promised, that
they that wait upon him shall renew their Strength.

Friday 28. When I awoke this Morning, I felt a Thankfulness to GOD for safely
bringing me to see the End of my Fifteenth Year, and an earnest Desire to spend
the Remainder of a short Life to His Glory. How Time flies! It was but the
other Day since I was but a little Infant, utterly unable to help myself: In
this tender State, the LORD provided me good Parents, and kind Friends, whose
constant Care it has been, to train me up for Heaven, and to dedicate me to Him
betimes. Now I am come to Years of Reason, should it not be my one Endeavor,
my constant Aim to glorify GOD in my Body, and in my Spirit, which are His by
Creation and Redemption, as also by the early Dedication which my dear Parents
made of me to Him? Should I not from my Heart ratify, and confirm by my own Act
and Deed, that which they promised on my Behalf? LORD, I am willing, I am truly
willing so to do! JESUS LORD, lend me thine Aid, and I will devote myself to
Thee, Body, Soul and Spirit, a living Sacrifice! Lend me thine Aid, and I will
take Thee for my Prophet to teach me; my Priest to atone for my Sins; and my
King to reign over me! Come, dear LORD, and take me for thine own! Thine in
Time, and thine to Eternity?

Monday, March 3. This Week I have been confined by a severe Cold; however I
have not been remiss in private Duties, though I have found little Life in them.
A Sort of Stupidity has overspread my Mind, which has made me unfit for any
Duty. This I can account for no other Way than by my Disorder, which always
throws me into this dull Frame. O how this vile Body weighs down the Soul! How
happy are those who are delivered from it!

Sunday 16. This Week, as well as the former, I have found my Heart as cold,
dead, and hard as it was possible; nor even has it been broke or softened while
waiting upon the LORD either in private Prayer, or under the Word. On Friday
Evening at the Watch-night, I found my Mind very wandering; but toward the
latter End, it was more composed, and I really believe the LORD waited to be
gracious to me, but my unbelieving Heart put the Blessing away, by thinking I
was not worthy: O my GOD, when shall I be worthy!

Thursday 27. As we were going to Chapel this Evening, a Parcel of genteel well
dressed Boys set upon us, throwing Dirt in such a Manner as almost blinded us,
and hollowing and hooting after us. O what Enmity is in the Heart of Man
against every Thing that is good, even when Children! O how gracious has GOD
been to me, that I never have been taught to despise and treat any Person ill,
either on Account of any natural Infirmities, or of the Religion they profess!
but from my earliest Infancy have I been trained up in the Nurture and
Admonition of the LORD: O how will this enhance my Condemnation, if I make not
a right Use of these Privileges!

Friday 28. Being Good Friday, I spent more Time than usual in Reading and
Prayer, in which Duty I found my Soul very much blessed and enlarged.

Saturday, April 5. I set apart this Day, in order to seek the LORD by Prayer
and Meditation; and although I did not find Him, so as to enable me to rejoice in
Him, as a pardoning GOD; yet I found Him enlarging my Heart in Prayer, enabling
me to plead his Promises, and to cry to Him for Mercy, without which I clearly
see I am undone for ever.

" I give up every Plea beside,
" LORD, I am damned -- but CHRIST has died!"
LORD, Thou have said, I came not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to
Repentance. I am then one Thou came to save. O save me for thy Mercy's Sake!

" No Need of Thee the Righteous have,
" Thou come the Lost to seek and save."
Sunday 13. I arose pretty early, and went to the Preaching. I afterward found
great Sweetness in meditating on the Love of GOD to Sinners, and His
Willingness to receive them upon their Sincere Repentance, as also in private
Prayer.

Monday 14. At Night Mr. B -- gave me an Invitation to meet in his Class, which
I accepted, and found it was good to wait upon the LORD, for I was much
comforted and refreshed there.

Wednesday 16. All this Day, I was very melancholy, which was chiefly
occasioned by recollecting the sorrowful Scene I saw that Day two Years, when I
had the last Sight of those whom I love as my own Soul. O how many unforeseen
Events have happened in that Time! Some of them have been very trying to me,
and made me repent leaving my native Land: Yet now I see they were all working
together for my Good, and I trust I have no Cause to repent, seeing my Soul has
much prospered since I have been at this Place; whereas I did not gain, but
rather lost Ground, while I was in London and Kendall. How wisely does GOD
order all Things for the Benefit of His poor undeserving Creatures, and how
ungrateful are we, not to render Him the Tribute of an Heart and Life, devoted
to His Service!

Friday 18. Mr. M -- kept a Watch-night, and preached on these alarming Words,
At Midnight there was Cry made; Behold the Bridegroom comes, go ye out to meet
Him, Matt. xxv. 6. I found my Soul much blessed under one of his Prayers. O may I
have Oil in my Lamp, when the Bridegroom comes, that I may not be shut out with
the foolish Virgins, but enter with the wise into the Joy of my LORD.

Saturday 20. This Morning Mr. R -- preached on those comfortable Words of our
blessed LORD, Him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out, John vi. 37.
I found myself much comforted and encouraged by it to come to the LORD,
especially when he was inviting the Young to come, and close in with JESUS.

Tuesday 22. This Day I found great Backwardness to private Duty, but was
enabled to break through, and found the LORD was as good as His Word. They that
wait upon Him shall renew their Strength.

Wednesday 23. I found much Sweetness and Enlargement in private Duty this Day,
and was in a Measure blessed, while meeting my Class in the Evenning. O how good
is it to draw nigh to GOD, and yet how backward am I so to do!

Friday 25. I found myself much grieved upon Account of having given way to
Levity. O how prone am I to this Evil! LORD, help me against it, or I fear it
will sink me lower than the Grave! I spent my Evening comfortably, and I trust
profitably, in reading the BOOK OF MARTYRS. O what did they go through for the
Sake of their LORD! While I cannot take up the least Cross without murmuring.

Saturday 26. This Day I found great Enlargement in praying for my Friends and
Relations, as also for the whole World, and for my own poor Soul. LORD, help me
ever to continue so to do herein!

" Help me to believe, obey,
" Help me to repent and love;
" Help me to take the Blessing given,
" Help me quite from Hell to Heaven."
Sunday 27. Mr. M -- s preached on Matt. xi. 29, 30. Take my Yoke upon you,
etc. O what would I not give to be enabled so to do: But alas as yet I am like
a Bullock unaccustomed to the Yoke! O LORD, help me this Day to take Thy sweet
Yoke upon me, and learn of Thee, for I am truly convinced, that till then I
shall never find Rest to my poor Soul. I have no Objections to make, take me as
I am, and let me be Thine for ever!

" Take my Body, Spirit, Soul,
" Only Thou posses the whole."
Tuesday 29. I went to Five o'Clock Preaching. As I went my Heart was raised to
GOD, that He would please to bless His Word to my Soul; and indeed Mr. M --
gave a very profitable Discourse on Ephesians. vi. 10. LORD, help me so to put on the
whole Armor of GOD, that I may be able to withstand in the evil Day, and
having done all, to stand!

Wednesday 30. I found my Heart much broken on Account of Sin this Evening in
meeting my Class. LORD, give me a broken and contrite Heart, for such Thou will
not despise!

Thursday, May 1. Going a little earlier than usual to Preaching, I took out my
little Bible, and found a peculiar Sweetness in reading the Fifty-fifth Chapter
of Isaiah.

Friday 2. I found great Sweetness in Reading and Prayer. O for a watchful
Spirit to keep it!

Saturday 3. I had a great Seriousness and Solemnity upon my Mind this Morning,
which continued all Day. Blessed be GOD.

Sunday 4. I was much cast down by hearing that my poor Father was in a bad
State of Health; but was comforted by this Consideration, that if I made GOD my
Father and my Friend, nothing but my own Unfaithfulness could ever separate me
from Him.

Monday 5. I rose this Morning with a Desire to spend the Day to His Glory, and
blessed be His Name, He did enable me to keep a recollected Spirit, and also to
seek Him in His appointed Ways, in doing which I found great Sweetness.

Tuesday 6. I was this Day much overcome by Levity, and unprofitable
Conversation. Lord, give me Power over this easy besetting Sin.

Wednesday 7. I was disappointed going to Preaching, which was a Cross to me at
first; but I was to blessed while meeting my Class, that the Loss was abundantly
made up; my heart was softened and melted for my past Offenses, and at the same
Time a comfortable Hope sprung up, that the LORD would have mercy even upon me.

Friday 9, and Saturday 10. I cannot say, that I found my Soul so much blessed
those two Days, as it had been those two preceding. What is the Cause I know
not; but whatever it is, I trust the LORD will discover it to me, and remove
it. On Saturday Evening I was greatly shocked at the melancholy Account of the
Death of two of my Uncles; and Satan strongly suggested that my dear Father
would soon follow: This hindered me from sleeping great Part of the Night.
Every such alarming Providence should loudly found in our Ears, Be ye also
ready, for at such an Hour as ye think not, the Son of Man comes.

Sunday 11. I broke the Matter to my Cousin by Degrees, thinking it would shock
her to tell it to her at once. But O how her Cries and Lamentations pierced my
Heart! I endeavored to comfort her, but all in vain, all her Cry was, if she
did but know his Soul was happy, then she should be easy. At last she seemed to
take some Comfort in the Consideration, that he had religious Friends about him
in his Illness. Surely it is a grievous Thing to lose a tender Parent. O may I
not by my Sins, provoke GOD to lay the same Affliction upon me. Alas! it would
be a heavy Stroke! I know not how I should bear it; I fear I should murmur
against the Hand that inflicted it, unless preserved therefrom by the
restraining Grace of GOD. My Mind was now far from the comfortable Frame it was
in the last Week; it was so confused, that I could not for one quarter of an
Hour keep it stayed on GOD. But notwithstanding this, I took up my Cross, and
used private Prayer constantly. Indeed I was often tempted to think, I had
better let it alone, for I was only mocking GOD by drawing near to Him with my
Lips, while my Heart was far from Him. If this was the Case, it was not with my
Desire or Approbation, the LORD knows I would have prayed better if I could.
I would fain have my Lips, and Heart, and Life go together in his Service; and
therefore since He has put this Desire into my Heart, He will graciously pardon
what has been amiss, and enable me to do better for the future.

Thursday 22. This Morning I went to my Aunt B -- 's, where I spent the Day
very agreeably. In the Evening I was much blessed, while my Uncle was preaching
on John i. 11, 12, He came unto His own, but His own received Him not: But as
many as received Him, to them gave He power to become the Sons of GOD, etc. O
would He now Himself impart, that I may become a Child of GOD!

Thursday 29. This Day I was much beset by wandering Thoughts, and to my Grief
and Shame, yielded but too much to them. How long shall vain Thoughts, which
are often the Forerunner of vain Words, lodge within me! O for Power to resist
and overcome!

Saturday 31. I found great Power this Day over that Evil, with which I have
been so much beset, blessed be GOD.

Sunday, June 1. This morning my Soul was in a Measure blessed while Mr. R -- s
was showing how we had destroyed ourselves, from Hosea xiii. 9. He had not Time
to show us where our Help lay: But blessed be GOD, he has showed this to me,
may I seek for it where only it can be found. In the Evening I was stirred up
to ask the Blessing, and I trust with some Importunity.

Monday 2. This Morning my Soul was exceedingly blessed while Mrs. L -- was
speaking to me, encouraging me to come, and lay hold of the Blessing, assuring
me, that even now the LORD was willing to impart it. My Desires were also very
strong in the Afternoon; although I was in Company, and the Conversation not very
edifying (so gracious was the LORD to me.)

Tuesday 3. I found my Soul exceedingly blessed this Day, especially in the
Evening: Such Hope and Confidence I had that the LORD would reveal himself,
that had no Doubt of it, and such a sweet Calm was upon my Spirit till I went
to Bed, as I never experienced before. I was also greatly encouraged by
accidentally opening the Bible upon these Words, Then shall we know, if we
follow on to know the LORD. Amen, let it be according to thy Word, LORD JESUS!

Wednesday 4. I experienced a Measure of the same Confidence as the Night
before. LORD, continue it, and also increase it, so that I may never doubt more!

Thursday 5. I was not altogether in such a sweet Frame as the two preceding
Days; nevertheless my Mind was stayed on GOD, and my Desires earnest for the
Blessing, while my Uncle was discoursing upon these Words, Except ye repent, ye
shall all likewise perish, Luke xiii. 5.

Friday 6. My Mind was distracted with wandering Thoughts, but the gracious
LORD soon gathered them in again, and I experienced a sweet Calm upon my
Spirit, and Liberty in Prayer.

Sunday 8. I went to Church, expecting the Sacrament, but there being none, we
had a Sermon on Gal. vi. 9. It was a very pretty Discourse, showing what
Well-doing was; but nothing of a Change of Heart was mentioned. O Thought I,
how many may go thus far, and perish at last! LORD, let me not be one of this
Number!

Monday. 9. This Afternoon we set out for Eaton to see Lord Grosvenor's
Gardens; they are the most elegant and pleasant I ever saw. I do not find the
Sight of such Things to draw my Mind from GOD; but am rather led to meditate on
the Vanity of all worldly Enjoyments, and to desire to have substantial
Pleasures, even those which are at GOD'S Right Hand. The rest of the Week, my
Mind was in much Confusion, by Reason of removing; but still I have found Power
to be constant in private Duty, and to resist all Temptations to the contrary.
By thus doing, I was enabled to keep a greater Watch over my Words, and
Thoughts, and to avoid my besetting Evil, Levity. O LORD, make me truly
thankful!

Monday 16. I was much cast down, by receiving a Letter from my dear Mother,
containing a melancholy Account of the Situation of my dear Father's Health:
But in the Midst of my Anxiety, I found a great Confidence in GOD: So that most
of my Uneasiness was upon his Account. LORD, strengthen, comfort, and bless him
for JESUS Sake! The two following Days my Mind was much hurried by the
Confusion the House has been in; nevertheless I have been constant in private
Duty, and have generally found it good to draw nigh to GOD. O what a GOD have
we to deal with, and yet I cannot find a Heart to love Him! LORD, soften this
obdurate Heart, and give me an Heart to love Thee; for this Thou know is all
my Desire!

Tuesday 24. All this Week I have been in a very disagreeable Frame, being
neither in earnest for my Soul, nor quite forgetful of it. I have been constant
in private Duties, though I am often fearful that I am only drawing nigh to GOD
with my Lips; but on Saturday, my Soul was much blessed under Mr. R -- 's
Preaching: His Text was in Romans vi. 17, 18, And if Children, then Heirs, etc.
My Desires were exceedingly earnest to be made a Partaker of those glorious
Privileges of the Sons of GOD. O LORD, when shall I be one of Thy Children!

Sunday 29. In the Morning Mr. R -- 's Text was in Romans viii. 32, He that
spared not his own Son, etc. O these encouraging, these Heart reviving Words!
Why, O my Soul, art thou so backward to believe the Promises of GOD! Surely he
is not a Man, that can deceive Thee. O then believe the Record true! Then, and
not till then, shall thou experience real Happiness.

Monday, July 7. All this Week my Soul has been cold and dead, and I (to my
Shame and Grief) have been too negligent in private Duties. How truly may it be
said, the Way of Sin is down Hill. I was hindered from Prayer one Day at my
usual Hour, and almost every Day afterward, something happened just at that
Time to keep me from that Duty. I observe, that if I neglect it one Day, I am
sure to do the same for several Days running. LORD, help me to be watchful,
seeing my subtle Adversary is ever watching to betray me into Sin either of
Omission or Commission!

Sunday 13. I found a small Degree of Life in private Prayer, which was the
only Duty I was quickened in this Day. LORD, help me out of this stupid State!
On Thursday Evening my Uncle preached on Matt. xiii. 46, Who when he had found
one Pearl of great Price, etc. O that the LORD would enable me instantly to
part with all, and purchase this Pearl! All this Week my Soul has been in the
same lukewarm State, and yet generally quickened in private Prayer, especially
one Evening I had such a Discovery of the Love of GOD to Sinners, that I was
almost enabled to believe he died for me.

Sunday 20. This Morning Mr. M -- gave us a sweet Discourse on 2 Pet. i. 4,
Whereby are given unto us exceeding great Promises, etc. I found my Soul blessed
under it, and afterward at the Sacrament in St. John's Church, blessed be GOD.
He likewise met me in the Evening while Mr. M -- was discoursing on Romans iv. 5.

Monday 21. I was too neglectful of private Duty this Day, and therefore it is
no Wonder if my Soul was dry and barren in other Duties. While we were at
Preaching in the Evening, my dear Friend Miss D -- arrived from Ireland. I was
much rejoiced to see her, and she seemed to be so at seeing me. May we all at
last meet round our Father's Throne!

Tuesday 22. My Soul was much shut up in Prayer. When shall I find free Access
to the Throne, and be enabled to call JESUS mine, my LORD, and my GOD!

Friday 25. In the Afternoon we walked to Crislington, and went to see the
Rector's Garden, who is for ever altering it; after being at great Expense to
have it done to his Mind, still it does not please him. O how restless is the
Mind of Man! Ever seeking after Rest, he cannot find it nigh, nor ever will,
till he finds it in JESUS.

Friday, August 1. The State of my Soul this Week has been much as usual. O
that the LORD would stir me up! That he would make me in earnest, and then I
should soon attain the Prize. I shall one Day perish by the Hand of Sin, unless
a Miracle of Mercy interpose. LORD, save, or I perish! Save, or I must
inevitably fall a Prey to the Evil that lies in this rebellious Heart!

Sunday 3. I found myself much encouraged while Mr. G -- k was describing the
Rest that remained to those who were Seekers after GOD: O that I might include
myself in that Number! but I sometimes fear even, this Appellation does not
belong to me. LORD, suffer me not to deceive myself, for Thy Mercy's Sake!

Tuesday 5. My poor Heart still continued dead; no Life, no Power in drawing
near to GOD. Still my Soul is as a barren Wilderness. LORD, water me with the
Dew of thy Grace! then the Wilderness will become a fruitful Land, and the
Desert, Springs of water.

Wednesday 6. My Heart was in a small Degree melted this Day in meeting my
Band. LORD, soften it more and more!

Sunday 10. In Retirement, both before and after Preaching, I found my Soul
greatly led out to pray for Faith, for myself, and my dear Parents, and a
Measure of Confidence, that GOD would hear my Prayer: But alas for me! in the
Afternoon, Levity again prevailed, and I lost both the Confidence, and Power to
pray for it.

Wednesday 20. In the Evening Mr. M -- r gave us a sweet Discourse, on Col.
iii. 11, But CHRIST is all, and in all. My Concern at parting with him, stole
away all the Benefit I might have reaped from the Sermon. Alas! that I should
be so foolish as to look more to the Servant than to his LORD, and think,
because he is going away, I shall never more be blessed under Preaching; as if
GOD could not bless me, as well by one as another. LORD, I beseech Thee, to
forgive this Sin!

Thursday 21. This Morning I arose to hear Mr. M -- 's last Discourse, which
was very affecting, and drew Tears from many Eyes. I found much Cause for
Lamentation, that I had not profited more by Him, and a determined Resolution
to set out afresh in the Strength of Divine Grace, that I may not have the same
Complaint to make, when we part with the next. LORD, strengthen this Resolution!

Sunday 24. I was some Part of this Day employed in reading Mr. Morgan's
Crucified JESUS. O that I could copy after my afflicted, self-denying Master!
He never sought to please himself; but, alas for me! how seldom is it I seek to
please any other! LORD, forgive me! Let me learn to deny myself; take up my
Cross, and follow Thee!

Sunday 31. This morning Mr. G -- d preached from Hosea vi. 1, Come let us
return to the LORD, etc. He spoke exactly to the State I seemed to be in, and I
was determined to set this Day apart, to examine myself, and to seek the LORD
in good Earnest. But as soon as I came Home, Satan prepared something to draw
my Mind off, and render me unfit for any Duty, whether Reading, Praying, or any
Thing else. LORD, make me more careful for the Time to come, that I may not so
easily let slip the Things which I have received!

Tuesday, September 2. My Soul was in a Measure blessed in meeting Class, and I
found a Resolution to set out afresh. LORD, let it not prove abortive as all
others have done, but do thou bring it to good Effect, for thy Mercy's Sake!

Wednesday 3. I think this Day I found more Solidity, and not so much Levity of
Spirit as I did the Day before. I also found my Soul in a Measure quickened
both in private Prayer, and in meeting Band; for which undeserved Mercies, LORD
make me truly thankful, and let me show my Gratitude by endeavoring to retain,
and improve them, that so I may have more!

Sunday 7. I have found no Life this Day in any Duty. In short, such an
Inactivity of Soul has crept upon me, as I cannot account for; LORD quicken me!

Friday 12. In the Evening at Preaching, I found my Soul in a small Degree
quickened, LORD, continue even this Spark, and blow it into a Flame!

Sunday 21. I went to the Sacrament at St. John's Church; but all the Time I
was there, I was so beset with a particular Temptation, that I had hard Work to
keep from yielding to it. In the Evening Mr. J -- n preached, and met the
Society; but I sadly missed Mr. M -- 's close and sweet Applications and
Exhortations, which under GOD were exceeding profitable to me. This Week my
poor unstable Mind has been much tossed with vain and wandering Thoughts. O
when shall my Heart and Treasure be laid up in Heaven! Then, and not till then,
will my Mind also be fixed, steadfastly fixed in that thrice happy Place. I have
also been dry and dead under every Means, which indeed is no Wonder, when
foolish Thoughts are given Way to; they necessarily damp the Work of GOD in the
Soul. LORD make me more watchful!

Sunday 28. I spent the Day comfortably, and found a Degree of Sweetness in
Prayer. O for a thankful Heart!

Thursday, October 10. This Day being the Quarterly Meeting, we had a Number of
strange Preachers in Town; and in the Evening one Mr. S -- t preached. He is
not a very connected Preacher, but one of the most lively and powerful, that I
ever heard. I was more stirred up and quickened under this Sermon, than I have
been for Months before. There seemed to be an awful Solemnity resting upon the
whole Congregation.

Monday 26. In the Evening it rained much; but I ventured out, and was well
paid for so doing, by Mr. M -- 's Discourse upon 1 Cor. vi. 11, But ye are
justified in the Name of the LORD JESUS, etc.

Sunday, November 2. I went to the Sacrament at Trinity Church, but found no
particular Blessing in that Ordinance, or indeed any other; my Mind being much
exercised, as it had been great Part of the last Week, in which nothing seemed
sweet or profitable to me, but private Prayer.

Sunday 9. All this Week my Mind has been much diverted from GOD, by a
Circumstance which befell me, not very pleasing to Flesh and Blood. LORD, give
me Wisdom, Grace, and Prudence to guide me through the Trials I am liable to meet
with here! And O at last receive my poor Soul to the peaceful Haven of
everlasting Rest; where all the Storms of this tumultuous Life are over, and
all is Quietness and Assurance for ever!

On Thursday Evening my Uncle preached upon Matt. xx. 32, What will ye that I
shall do unto you? My Soul was more blessed under this Discourse, than under any
since Mr. S -- t preached. In the Application, he desired each to ask their own
Soul, What is my most prevailing Desire? Riches, Honor, or Pleasure? But my
Heart rejected all these, and replied, None but CHRIST to me be given,
None but CHRIST in Earth or Heaven.


Sunday 23. I found my Soul much quickened in private Duty to Day. O how good
is it to draw nigh to GOD, and yet how loath am I to do it!

Sunday 30. In reading the Scripture, and one of the Volumes of the Library, I
found a Degree of Enlargement, and also in private Prayer, though I had felt a
great Backwardness to it.

Tuesday, December 2. After I was in Bed, my Mind was much employed in
meditating on Death, and the Vanity of all earthly Things, occasioned by
hearing that poor Miss L -- y was extremely ill, whom I had seen in perfect
Health the last Friday. O may I spend every Moment of Life in preparing for a
never ending Eternity!

Sunday 7. In none of the Duties of the Day did I find any Life; my Soul was as
a barren Wilderness unwatered with the Dew of Heaven. LORD, how long! When
shall I taste and see that the LORD is gracious, by His giving even to me the
Knowledge of Salvation by the Remission of my Sins! Monday Evening Mr. J -- n
preached on Matt. ix. 12, They that be whole need not a Physician, but they
that are sick. LORD, I am sick, sick of Sin, and truly sick of Self. LORD, heal
me; be Thou my Physician, and I shall need no other!

Sunday 14. Mr J -- n preached this Morning upon Isa. lv. 1, Ho, every one that
thirsts, etc. LORD, I do in some Measure thirst. O give me to drink of this
living Water! I was so affected when I came Home at hearing that poor Miss L --
y was not likely to recover, that I could not read or pray as I desired; but I
found many serious, and I trust profitable Reflections. O may this Providence
be productive of Good to my Soul, and to the Souls of all her Friends and
Relations, to whom it will certainly be an afflicting Stroke, if it please GOD
to require her Soul at this Time! On Monday Evening, at four o'Clock, it
pleased GOD to take to himself the Soul of my dear Miss L -- y Although I found
the Affection I had for her in her Lifetime, as strong as ever, I could not
shed a Tear, when I first heard of her Departure; I had such a Sight of her in
Glory, that instead of wishing her back, I almost rejoiced at her happy Change,
and longed for the Hour to come, wherein I also shall be released and carried
by Angels into Abraham's Bosom, where I shall be eternally happy in the
Enjoyment of his Love who lived and died for me, a poor miserable Sinner. But
afterward I found Nature recoil, and had the Cruelty to think, that could a
Wish restore her to her aged Parents, particularly her poor distracted Mother,
I should be tempted to do it. But O blessed be GOD! nothing, nothing can recall
us, when once we are landed on the happy Shore. LORD, grant that whenever Death
calls me hence, I may be prepared to meet it! Let this King of Terrors be
changed into the Prince of Peace! let the Sting of Death be drawn; and O give
me a Victory over the now terrible and victorious Grave!

Thursday 18. The Day I with my Aunt, Mrs. L --, and Miss H --, were invited to
the Funeral of Miss L -- y: The two former declined going, but Miss H -- and I
accepted the Invitation; and with four other young Women were her Bearers. O
What an Impression did this solemn Scene make on my now thoughtful Mind, to see
her, whom not three Weeks ago, I had seen in all the Bloom and Vigor of Youth,
now cut down, and her sweet agreeable Tabernacle consigned to the silent Grave!
LORD, thought I, how soon may this be my Case; how soon may I also be cut down
in the Morning of my Life, and my Parents also be lamenting my untimely End!
And am I ready? Can I say with an assured Confidence, O Death, where is thy
Sting; O Grave where is thy Victory? Alas, Alas! it is not so with me! The
Approach of this formidable Foe makes me tremble! O suffer me not to rest in
this State, but enable even me to look with Triumph on the mouldering Tomb!

Sunday 21. I did not go out in the Morning, but I spent the Day very
comfortably, finding great Sweetness in Prayer, and much Seriousness and
Solidity upon my Mind all the Day. The two following Days also my Mind was much
busied about the Things of Eternity, and my own latter End.

Thursday 25. (Being Christmas Day) In the Evening my Uncle preached with much
Life and Power, on Luke ii. 10, Behold I bring you good Tidings of great Joy.
The Enemy stirred up the Mob to make a Disturbance while we were singing the
last HYMN! But in Spite of them, we concluded Singing, and after waiting some
Minutes they were dispersed, and we returned Home in Peace.

Friday 26. This Day, and the next, my Soul was not in so sweet a Frame as a
few Days before; it might be occasioned partly from a violent Cold, which
weighed down my Body very much. O happy Day! when the Soul shall be released
from its Prison, and freed from its bodily Chain; when the disembodied Spirit
shall be received with Shouts of Joy, into the Paradise of GOD!

Sunday 28. This Morning the Family went to the House of GOD, but a violent
Cold confined me at Home; however, the LORD was present there also, for my Soul
was greatly refreshed in private Duty. Indeed all the Day I found great
Sweetness and Comfort in my Soul, though my Cold unfitted me for any set Waiting
upon GOD.

Monday 29. My Soul still continued in a serious Frame.

Wednesday 31. This Night I determined to sit up till I had begun the New-Year,
which I accordingly did, spending the Time in Reading, Meditation and Prayer,
and I found it comfortable and profitable to wait upon GOD in the Stillness of
the Night. O may the Resolutions which I this Night made, be brought to good
Effect!

Saturday, January 10. Mr. R -- s preached upon Isa. xliii. 25, 26. I, even I,
am He, that blotteth out thy Transgressions for mine own Sake. My Soul was in a
waiting, expecting Frame. LORD, how long shall it be ere Thou satisfy my
longing Heart with thy Love, the Thing I desire above all others! I can truly
say, Of all Thou have in Earth, or Heaven,
Let Love alone be mine.


Sunday 11. We went to Church, but being disappointed of the Sacrament, we had
a Sermon on Eccl. ix. 10. It was an exceeding pretty Discourse, but not a Word
of CHRIST in it. The Minister exhorted us to improve our Time in Works of
Piety, Charity, and the Duty of our respective Callings, but never told us how
we were to be enabled to do all these Things, presuming, I suppose, that his
Auditory needed no such Information. Toward the latter End he allowed us a
little innocent Diversion; and concluded with saying, that by a diligent
Improvement of our Time, in all the Duties he had recited, we should recommend
ourselves to GOD, and be accounted worthy to be admitted into Heaven. I found
much Thankfulness that I was better instructed. I was at Preaching in the
following Fortnight but twice: All this Time I was sometimes in earnest, then
too careless. LORD, pardon what is past, and O let me for the future give all
Diligence to make my Calling and Election sure!

Sunday 25. I did not go out in the Morning, but I spent the Time very
comfortably, in reading the blessed Word of GOD; and in the Afternoon, I read
Mr. Hervey's Meditations, which are also exceeding sweet and profitable.

Sunday, February 1. I went to the Sacrament this Day at Trinity Church. This
being the Place where the Remains of my dear Miss L -- y were deposited, it
brought many serious Reflections, but they did not draw me off the Duty, in
which I was more immediately engaged. For this Week past, I have at Times found
a Measure of Seriousness and Enlargement in private Duty. I scarcely know what
State my Soul has been in this Fortnight past, not having had Time to write. I
fear I am falling into the former Laodicean Spirit. LORD JESUS, quicken me, O
save me for thy Mercy's Sake!

Saturday 28. This being my Birthday, I would have spent in Retirement, but
was prevented; however I spent two Hours herein exceeding comfortably. O may I
spend each Day and Moment in the Service of Him, who has so graciously
preserved me to this Time! Surely it is of the LORD's Mercies that I have not
long since been consumed, because his tender Compassions fail not.

Sunday, March 8. My Heart was much drawn toward GOD this Morning, both before
and at Church.

Sunday 15. I spent the Morning very comfortably in reading the Scripture with
Mr. Wesley's Notes; in the Afternoon Mr. Hervey's sweet Meditations on the
STARRY HEAVENS. I found my Soul in a serious thoughtful Frame, till I was
discomposed by a trifling Incident.

Sunday 22. I spent Part of the Morning in writing out an Account of Miss H --
's Death, which quickened my Desire to live her Life, that I might die her
Death.

Sunday 29. I found my Soul much led out in Prayer, even while I was reading,
as I did during the latter End of the last Week; blessed be GOD for it.

Sunday, April 5. I was greatly distressed at Church, and afterward, upon
Account of my Sins, and at Times was even ready to believe that the LORD would
cast me off for ever. All I could say, was Guilty I stand before Thy Face,
I feel on me Thy Wrath abide,
It Is just the Sentence should take Place,
It Is just but O Thy Son has died!"


In the Evening we had a profitable and lively LoveFeast, at which my poor Soul
found some Refreshment. O may it be daily fed with the Bread of Life!

" This Manna to my Soul be given,
" Sent from the Tree of Life in Heaven."
Friday 17. This Day being Good Friday, we went to the Sacrament at the
Cathedral; but in no Means whether public or private, was my Soul blessed, though I
found great Attention to the Sermon preached by Mr. G -- d in the Evening, upon
the Words with which our once dying; though now ever living SAVIOR closed his
suffering, painful Life! It is finished, John xix. 30. Amazing Truth!

" 'Twere bold to think it true,
" If not far bolder still to disbelieve."
That the Author and Possessor of Life-eternal, should himself become a Prey to
Death! And for whom! For Angels! No, when they left their first and blessed
Estate, it was irretrievably lost. For His Friends! No, but for Enemies, for
Rebels, for vile Apostates, for ungrateful Sinners! Well might the Apostle cry
out, "O the Length and Breadth, the Depth and Height of this stupendous Love!
This Day was the sad Anniversary on which I parted from the tenderest, best of
Parents, and took a long, if not the last Farewell of my native Land; whether I
shall ever see that, or my dearest Parents more, the LORD knows.

" But O may we all meet on that peaceful Shore,
" Where Pain, and Death, and Parting are no more."
Sunday, May 3. For this Fortnight my Soul has been in general in a lifeless
inactive Frame; and I have found little Blessing in any Means, except Morning
private Prayer; in this I have been frequently quickened and refreshed.

Sunday 24. Blessed be GOD, I found my Soul refreshed in private Prayer this
Day, but I had hard Work in the Evening to keep my Mind stayed on GOD, and
attentive to the Sermon.

Tuesday 26. My Soul was very cold and dead all Day, but at the Class-meeting,
I found my Desires greatly quickened; especially during the last Prayer. This
lasted all the Evening; O may it still continue! LORD, let not my foolish Heart
rob me of the Blessing!

Sunday, June 7. I went to the Sacrament this Morning at the Cathedral, but
found no particular Blessing, though my Heart was afterward refreshed, while
waiting upon GOD in private Duties.

Sunday 14. My Soul was much blessed in private Prayer this Morning, but the rest
of the Day I was so weighed down with Drowsiness, that I could scarce read or
pray with any Satisfaction; however, my Mind was in a serious Frame most of the
Day.

Sunday 21. I went to the Sacrament at Werburg's Church, and found my Heart
affected with a lively Sense of GOD's LOVE to my Soul in sending His Son to die
for me. O that this His Love might stir me up to love Him again; for although He
is in Himself altogether lovely, yet nothing but a deep Heartfelt Conviction
that JESUS loved me, and gave Himself for me, can induce us to love Him again.
But ah! I cannot, cannot love.

" This is my Shame, my Grief, my Hell,
" I do not love the bleeding Lamb;
" The Lamb that loved my Soul so well,
" This is my Grief, my Hell, my Shame."
Sunday 28. In private Prayer this Morning my Soul was greatly blessed, and I
found sweet Enlargement in praying for the Blessing, both for myself, and for
my dearest Parents; likewise I found Liberty to pray for all my Relations and
Friends, for the Church, and for all the World. Blessed be the LORD for this
undeserved Mercy! In the Evening I was stirred up by Mr. G -- 's Discourse from
Heb. ii. 3, How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation? LORD, how
shall I escape! Only by flying to the Wounds of JESUS; that is the only City of
Refuge. O may I escape thither, as Lot did to Zoar, ere the Storm of Divine
Vengeance be poured on this guilty Head.

Monday, July 6. My Mind was much distressed this Day by that Fear, which Love
alone casts out (the Fear of Death.) What particularly brought me to reflect
upon it at this Time, was a Dream which Mrs. L -- r had had concerning me; at
first I prayed earnestly that the LORD would spare my Life, being excessively
frightened at the Thought of dying; but afterward I began to consider, what if
my Request should be granted in Wrath, as the Israelites prayed for Meat! What
would become of me then! Perhaps the LORD sees, if I live I shall dishonor
Him; be a Scandal to my Profession; a Reproach to the People among whom I am;
and a Grief to my Parents. Now, if the LORD should take me from the Evil to
come, should prevent me from doing, as well as suffering Evil, by taking me to
Himself, what Cause of Complaint should I have? Surely none; nay, it would be
Matter of rejoicing to all Eternity: Besides, should none of these Things
happen, but were I sure of gliding through this World easily and pleasantly,
would it not be better to reach the destined Haven, without putting to Sea at
all; or at least with a very short, and as yet a pleasant Passage! Did any ever
think it was too soon to go to Heaven? Surely no. No such Complaints were ever
made by one Soul that got thither at all. But alas! I am unwilling to part with
Life, because I know not where I shall go. O!

" Who can tell me whether this Strife,
" In Heaven or Hell shall end?"
LORD, shall my Soul be carried by Angels into Abraham's Bosom, or hurried by
Fiends into endless Torments! LORD, it is true, I am a great Sinner; but JESUS
is an Almighty SAVIOR! I entirely renounce all Dependence upon myself.

" This all my Hope, and all my Plea,
" For me the SAVIOR died."
Yes, my dearest JESUS, Thou did die for me; then I may be saved. LORD, I
believe; help Thou mine Unbelief.

Thursday, August 6. Hearing this Day of a very melancholy Affair, concerning a
Person whom I knew only by Sight; I was exceedingly stirred up to Thankfulness,
for being so situated, that it was almost impossible the like should befall me:
I am surrounded with tender and careful Friends, who continually watch over me
in Love: I am blessed with Parents, who by Words when present with them, and by
Letters now absent, Warn me to shun the World's delusive Snares,
Teach by their Lives, and guard me by their Prayers."


And He has inclined my Heart to listen to the Instructions and Advice, I daily
receive from one or another. I went to our private Meeting on Friday, and found
my Soul blessed, and heartily joined in Mr. B -- 's Prayer for the poor unhappy
Creature to suffer the ensuing Day, Also, I was greatly stirred up to pray for
her, when in private at Night.

Saturday 15. About One o'Clock my Aunt B -- r and little Cousins, arrived in
Chester; I was extremely glad to see them. O when will my dear Parents come!
LORD, Thy Time is best, only let me be resigned to Thy Will!

" Since none can doubt Thy equal Love,
" Unmeasurably kind;
" To Thy unerring, gracious Will,
" Be every Wish resigned.
Sunday 16. The ensuing Week I was much indisposed, and did not go out till the
next Saturday se'nnight: During this Time, my Soul was kept in a calm Reliance
upon GOD, though at Times I found Deadness; which I partly imputed to my Disorder
(a severe Cold.)

Saturday, September 13. Mr. P -- n going to Ireland, gave a very profitable
Discourse upon John xvi. 31, Do ye now believe? Indeed this was a very
comfortable Day to my poor Soul; which, blessed be the LORD, was much refreshed
in all the Means of Grace, both at Sacrament, private Prayer, and the
Preaching. This Evening Mr. T -- r arrived in Chester. O may his coming amongst
us be productive of much Good to this People, and to my poor Soul!

Friday 18. This was a Fast Day, kept to entreat the LORD to revive his Work in
this Land. Mr. T -- r, and my Uncle prayed alternately, and with much Power. O
that it may be such a Fast as the LORD approves of, and an acceptable Day to
Him! On Saturday Evening, Mr. T -- r preached from John xii. 22, Sir, we would
see JESUS. LORD, I would see Him too! O may it be now!

Monday 21. Mr. H -- n, who had accompanied Lady M -- to Town, with her and her
Brother dined with us. She is the most affable Lady I have ever seen, and
dresses almost as plain as we do.

Sunday, October 4. In the Evening my Soul was quickened while Mr. T -- r was
preaching on the Parable of the Dry-Bones.

Tuesday, November 17. On this Day were united, my Uncle F --, and my truly
dear and respected Friend Mrs. M -- L --: With unspeakable Pleasure I embraced
her as a most dear loved Relative. With the same Satisfaction she was received
by those of my Aunts, who reside in this Place, as their Sister; and I doubt
not will be by those who are now absent, when they hear the surprising Tidings.
My Heart's Desire and Prayer to GOD for them is, that they may be long blessed
with each other; that this Union may be a Means of uniting them more closely to
the blessed Bridegroom of the Church; and that finally, they and we may be
received into the Family of Heaven, with a Well-done good and faithful
Servants, enter ye into the Joy of your LORD.

Thursday 19. The committing a known Sin, threw me into exquisite Distress, so
that I hardly dared to go to Prayer, and Satan making the best of his
Opportunity sorely wounded me; yea, had slain me, had not the Sinner's Friend
stepped in to rescue me, and gave me Hope. This Hope was confirmed in meeting my
Class on Tuesday. Blessed be His Name for this. But still this cannot suffice,
unless he give me his dear Self, which my Soul truly longs for.

Sunday 29. I spent the Day profitably, and comfortably, Thanks be to GOD. My
Mind was much taken up all the Evening, and the following Day, with the
Thoughts of Death; which occasioned many serious Reflections. I think if the
LORD would make me meet for Glory, I could (Young as I am) quit the World, and
not leave a Wish behind; but the LORD's Will be done.

Thursday, Dec. 10. My Uncle gave an exceeding comfortable and profitable
Discourse from Isa. xl. 1, Comfort ye, Comfort ye my People, faith your GOD. My
Soul was much refreshed; herein GOD fulfilled that Promise, Before they call, I
will answer; for I went without the least Expectation of a Blessing, and
scarcely dared to pray for one, knowing my great Unworthiness. However, the
LORD met me, and gave me fresh Hopes and Desires, for which may I bless his
Name, while I have Breath!

Sunday 13. In the Evening Mr. C -- k preached a Sermon on these awful Words,
Rev. vi. 17, For the great Day of his Wrath is come, and who shall be able to
stand? Who indeed, but those who have washed their Robes, and made them white
in the Blood of the Lamb; who have made the Judge their Friend! These, and
these only shall stand with Boldness in that Day. LORD, shall I be one of that
Number!

Friday 25. I found a Blessing at the LORD's Table, where I solemnly dedicated
myself to Him, who gave himself for me. O may it be unreservedly and
irrevocably! LORD, here is my Heart; O take and seal it, seal it for thy Courts
above! In the Evening my Uncle preached on 1 Timothy i. 5. This is a faithful
Saying, and worthy of all Acceptance, that CHRIST JESUS came into the World to
save Sinners.

Saturday we did not go out.

Sunday 27. Our House being in such Confusion, as it has been for some Days
past, by Reason of the Sickness which has been in it, my Mind has not been in
that composed sweet Frame as I could wish, but one Blessing I have experienced,
which is, I have been enabled to exercise Patience, so as not to murmur and
fret, though every Thing has gone cross with me. Nay, through the Mercy of GOD, I
have rejoiced in it; and been thankful for having an Opportunity of cheerfully
bearing the Cross; for all which I desire to praise my GOD.

Monday, Dec. 28. In the Evening Mr. T -- r made an useful Discourse on Lam.
iii. 22, It is of the LORD's Mercies that we are not consumed, because his
Compassions fail not. He showed the many Ways whereby we might have been
consumed; and the many Mercies we have received from GOD. When I first went
into the Chapel, my Mind was exceedingly disturbed by many evil Tempers. But in
singing this Verse,

" From Anger set our Spirits free,
" It works not thy Righteousness;
" In Patience let us wait on Thee,
" And quietly our Souls possess."
The Thought crossed my Mind: Shall I thus mock GOD? Pray to Him to compose my
Mind, while I am yielding to these Tempers? I resolved to strive against them:
Through His Strength I overcame them, and found a Blessing, though entirely
unexpected.

Tuesday 29. I was confined to my Bed, being much indisposed. O what a short
Transition from Time to Eternity! I thought much of Dying, but felt no fear:
Not because I was now ready, but I firmly believed the LORD would cut short His
Work in Righteousness if he called me.

THIS Illness, after a Day or two, much increased, and appeared to be a putrid
Fever: But her Mind continued Stayed upon GOD. About a Fortnight, after she was
taken, she expressed a full Confidence in Him, being wholly delivered from the
Fear of Death. A few Days after, her Speech and Hearing were taken away, by the
Violence of her Distemper. But it was easy to discern, that her Understanding
remained, though she could converse with none but GOD. Her Eyes and Hands almost
continually lifted up, showed that her Heart was still with Him. In her
greatest Agonies of Pain, there was not the least Mark of Impatience: Till on
January 21, 1768, about Four o'Clock in the Afternoon, she quietly resigned her
Spirit to GOD.

VIRTUE, when abstractedly considered, often makes but a saint Impression on
the human Mind; but when the Lives of those are set before us, who have adorned
the ordinary Stations of Life by a steady and uniform Pursuit of Virtue, and a
cheerful and resolute Discharge of the Duties incumbent upon them, there is
scarce any Thing that can have a more happy Influence upon our Minds, or more
effectually induce us to seek for Divine Help, to rouse us from that Lethargy
and inactive State into which the Generality of Mankind are sunk: Even the
Vicious, and those who are enslaved to Corruption, from a feeling View of the
happy Effects of a virtuous Life, are ready, with one of old, to cry out, Let
me die the Death of the Righteous, and let my last End be like his, Numbers
xxiii. 10.
IN the Life of the Lady ELIZABETH HASTINGS, we meet with an extraordinary
Instance of the happy Effect, which Christianity has upon those who, by joining
with the Calls of Grace, become willing to give up their whole Hearts to follow
its Dictates. This pious Lady's first Principle appears to have been the Glory
of GOD, and the Purity of her own Heart; next to this, a continual Solicitude
and Labor to hold all her Capacities, all her Power, and all her Fortunes,
continually upon Stretch for the Good of all Men, weeping with those that wept;
rejoicing with those that rejoiced; given to Hospitality; distributing to the
Necessities of the Saints, and to those that were less so, having Joy at the
Conversion of a Sinner, or the least Appearance of it; but the Care of all her
Cares was the Stranger; the Fatherless and the Window; the Needy, and he that
has no Helper; the Lame, the Halt and the Blind. And in this Place, says the
Author of her Life, what shall I say! or how can I expect to be believed! The
Bent of her Spirit ever lay toward these: She had a Share in all their
Sufferings; she would often converse with them, and enquire into their History
with as much Poverty of Spirit, as they were in of outward Condition; she would
study their particular Cases, and put them in the Way of better Welfare; some
of these were ever in her House, and frequently in great Numbers; and it was no
Neglect of here is, if any one went away unrelieved with Meat, Physic, Raiment or
Money; many of these that lived remote, had yearly Allowances, and large Sums
frequently issued out into distant Parts of the Kingdom. Her still larger
Applications were fixed Pensions upon reduced Families, the Maintenance of her
own Charity-School, Contributions to others,etc. etc. She was a great Mistress
of all Parts of Economy with Respect to what she laid out upon herself; her
Body, she knew, was the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which the Believer must
possess in Sanctification and Honor, wherefore her Support of it in Meat,
Drink and Sleep, was ever bounded by Necessity; for they that walk in the
Spirit, as this pious Lady did, die progressively to every Vanity, and dare not
indulge the hurtful Gratifications of the Flesh, but labor to keep it under,
as knowing it to be the Seat and Repository of their most dangerous and deadly
Enemy. Nevertheless she sought not her Salvation by the Force of her Alms,
highly affluent as they were; for these, though necessary Duties, yet, she well
knew, were not the Charity of the Gospel; not that Charity which the Apostle
Paul so divinely describes at I Cor. xiii, 3. She was sensible, that JESUS
CHRIST must be revealed in the Heart, before we can have any just Claim to
Discipleship, and that it is his ruling and bringing all Things there in
Subjection to his Spirit, that was the great and only Principle of Christian
Charity. She knew, that the great Scene of Religion lay within, in the right
Government of the Heart; accordingly her Eye was ever upon her Heart, to see
that all its Principles were cleansed from evil Mixtures, had no Taint from
Selflove, were not sullied with Vainglory; her Care was to observe the
Tendency of all its Motions, how its Struggles weakened in sinful Desires,
endeavoring continually to nourish it by Acts of Faith in the Blood of her
REDEEMER. She had well learnt to overcome Evil with Good, to suffer long, and
be kind, to bear all Things, and if ever by Speech, Carriage or otherwise, she
suspected that she had disturbed the Spirit of any, she had no Peace with
herself, till she had taken Care for the Recovery of theirs.

Much more might be said of the Endowments and Virtues of this true Disciple of
JESUS CHRIST, more especially of her Patience under Sufferings, and Resignation
to Divine Will; under the painful Dispensation she passed through, during the
last eighteen Months of her Life, occasioned by a Cancer in her Breast, which,
notwithstanding she suffered it to be separated from her Body, yet in the End
occasioned her Death. This painful Operation she not only bore with Patience,
but even rejoiced, that she was counted worthy to suffer, knowing her SAVIOR
had suffered in his Flesh, and that as Sufferings was the Way to his
Perfection, it must also be the Way to ours, this being the declared. Condition
of our being glorified with Him, the truest Marks of Adoption, and the most
sovereign Medicine sent from Heaven for our Cure. These Truths this truly pious
Lady was so well acquainted with, that she declared, She would not wish to be
out of her present Situation, nor exchange it for any other at any Price. Thus
with great Meekness and Tranquillity, with Cheerfulness scarce to be believed,
in perfect Serenity and Freedom, she continued her usual Life, till the Time
appointed for the Operation. When that Time of deep Trial came, she showed no
Reluctance or Struggle, but endured all even without Complaint; only toward
the End she drew such a Sigh, as the compassionate Reader who reads this, may
do. Hence it appears, how those that follow the Lamb with Sincerity, are
endowed with Virtue and Power resulting from the true Spirit of His Religion,
which others are unacquainted with. The Night following the Operation was not
indeed a Night of much Sleep, but of truly celestial Rest; a Night of
Thanksgiving to her GOD, for the visible Demonstration of his Power in her, and
about her, for his stretched-out Arm in her great Deliverance, for the
bountiful Provision He had made for her Body and Soul, holding all the Powers
of her Spirit exercised in Acts of Love, Gratitude and Adoration. She sooner
than was expected got upon her Feet, and with every Improvement that could be
made, into the same Way of Life, that she had been in before, wholly intent
upon the Glory of GOD, and the Good of her Fellow Creatures. But the Distemper
only repressed for a Time, rose up with new Malignity, to the much greater
Affliction of Numbers in the World, than of her that bore it; for she had now
been, for some Time, in the School of Affliction, exercised with its sharp
Discipline, and found its salutary Effects. Under these Sentiments her Hope was
full of Immortality, and the eternal Weight of Glory, now in full View, made
all her Afflictions light. In this near and certain Approach of Death, her
cherishing Warmth, like that of the Sun, though it might be most felt by those
nearest, yet also reached those at greater Distance; witness the great Number
of Letters she writ, and dictated to others, when she became unable to write,
full of sweet Counsel, having for their Argument the Blessedness of Piety;
pressing Home the Necessity of it, and setting forth its true Nature; witness
also the Number of Persons of all Conditions, who resorted at her House, to
behold the living Power of Religion in her, and to be benefited by her Wisdom.
With some of these she continued in heavenly Conferences as long as she had
Strength. Her Life was near drawing to its last Stage, but her Lamp and her
Life must be extinguished together, and she must occupy till her LORD comes.
Accordingly she convened her Household, to strengthen and enforce every Thing
that she had done or shown them before, by her dying Counsels; and would have
extended this Care to the whole Village, but was restrained by the Physician.
The Path of the Just is as a shining Light, which Shines more and more unto
the perfect Day. The truly religious, whose Evidences for Heaven are clear,
rational, and well grounded, have a Tide of Joy springing up in their Minds
beyond Expression; something more moving and satisfactory than any one can
imagine, but they that perceive it. When they are just entering upon the
promised Land, the Splendour of the eternal Day dawns upon them, and shines as
through the Breaches of their shattered Bodies, and raises in the inward Man
such Earnest of Happiness, such Foretastes of Joy, as enables them to pass
through the Valley of Death in Peace and Triumph. As Death drew near, she was in
Transport, quite melted down with the Impression of Glory, broke out with a
raised Accent into these Words: Bless me, LORD! What is it that I see! -- Oh!
the Greatness of the Glory that is revealed in me, -- that is before me. And
some Time after she had so said, she fell asleep.

And now, Reader, let me ask, What Mistakes or Delusions did this Lady live
under; or what wrong Judgment did she make of the Nature and Obligation of our
common Christianity? Common I call it, for it is one and the same to every Man,
and to every Woman, wherever it is known, and to the Practice of the essential
and Life-giving Part of it, is every Man and every Woman tied down at their
utmost Peril. And if it be asked, what these are? The Answer is, That they
cannot here indeed be well drawn out in Particulars; but two principal ones, to
which the rest are reducible, are, A firm Faith in, and Dependence upon, CHRIST
-- And under the Help and Power of His Spirit, a mighty Labor to perfect that
Holiness which He has taught us.

All indeed have not this Lady's Possibilities, and cannot give in Alms
sevenfold more than they expend upon themselves; but there is scarce one, but
may give a Cup of cold Water, and great Things are promised even to that, if it
is done in a right Manner, and with a devout Spirit. Again, all have not near
the same Disengagements and Leisure that she had, nor have in common with her,
the same Command of their Time, and therefore cannot maintain so close an
Attendance upon spiritual Exercises; yet nevertheless almost all may, at all
Times, and in all Places, preserve some Sort of heavenlymindedness, may strive
against Sin, and use their best Endeavors to keep themselves unspotted from
the World, and by locking up their Senses against Temptation, in good Measure
quench the fiery Darts of the Enemy. And if of themselves they are not (as most
certainly they are not) sufficient for these Things, yet the Grace of GOD is,
if they turn to it, seek it earnestly, follow its holy Motions, and put
themselves under its Government. And that all may obtain the Grace of GOD, is
certain; for it is common to all. Our gracious and merciful SAVIOR, the sure
and faithful Friend of those who are helpless and heavy laden, repeatedly
declares it to be so, and the whole Tenor of the Gospel contains a gracious
Offer of Salvation to every Soul, who in Sincerity prays to GOD for it.

To the foregoing Testimonies of the Happiness of a Life spent in the Service
of GOD, may be added that of a faithful Servant of CHRIST from amongst
ourselves, to wit, DAVID BRAINARD, who spent the Flower of his Age in a
faithful Labor, through Divine Aid, for the Conversion of a Number of Indians of
this and the neighboring Province. In the Course of this Labor, it pleased
GOD to visit him with Sickness, it is thought, brought on through the Hardship he
endured in that Service. His Disorder proved a Consumption, which put a Period
to his Life in the Year 1747, being the 30th of his Age. The following Extracts
of some Letters he wrote to his Friends, mostly during his Sickness, will fully
evince the truly Christian Disposition of Mind of this sincere Follower of
CHRIST. May they be blessed to the well disposed Reader.

My dear BROTHER,
THERE is but one Thing, that deserves our highest Care, and most ardent
Desires; and that is, that we may answer the great End for which we were made,
viz. to glorify that GOD, who has given us our Beings, and all our Comforts,
and to do all the Good, we possibly can, to our Fellow Men, while we live in
the World: And verily Life is not worth the having, if it be not improved for
this noble End and Purpose. Yet, alas, how little is this thought of among
Mankind; most Men seem to live to themselves, without much Regard to the Glory
of GOD, or the Good of their Fellow Creatures; they earnestly desire, and
eagerly pursue after the Riches, the Honors, and the Pleasures of Life, as if
they really supposed that Wealth, or Greatness, or Merriment, could make their
immortal Souls happy. But, alas, what false and delusive Dreams are these, and
how miserable will those ere long be, who are not awal out of them, to see,
that all their Happiness consists in living to GOD, and becoming holy, as He is
holy! Oh! may you never fall into the Tempers and Vanities, the Sensuality and
Folly of the present World. You are, by Divine Providence, left as it were
alone in a wide World, to act for yourself: Be sure then to remember, it is a
World of Temptation. You have no earthly Parents to be the Means of forming
your Youth to Piety and Virtue, by their pious Examples, and seasonable
Counsels; let this then excite you, with greater Diligence and Fervency, to
look up to the Father of Mercies, for Grace and Assistance against all the
Vanities of the World. And if you would glorify GOD, answer his just
Expectations from you, and make your own Soul happy in this and the coming
World, observe these few Directions; though not from a Father, yet from a
Brother, who is touched with a tender Concern for your present and future
Happiness.

Daily endeavor to practice a Life of Seriousness and strict Sobriety. The
wise Man will tell you the great Advantage of such a Life, Eccles. vii. 3.
Think of the Life of CHRIST; and when you can find that he was pleased with
Jesting and vain Merriment, then you may indulge it in yourselves.

Again: Be careful to make a good Improvement of precious Time. When you cease
from Labor, fill up your Time in Reading, Meditation, and Prayer: And while
your Hands are laboring, let your Heart be employed, as much as possible, in
Divine Thoughts.

Further: Take heed that you faithfully perform the Business you have to do in
the World, from a Regard to the Commands of GOD; and not from an ambitious
Desire of being esteemed better than others. We should always look upon
ourselves as GOD's Servants, placed in GOD's World, to do his Work; and
accordingly labor faithfully for him; not with a Design to grow rich and
great, but to glorify GOD, and do all the good we possibly can.

Again: Never expect any Satisfaction or Happiness from the World. If you hope
for Happiness in the World, hope for it from GOD, and not from the World. Don't
think you shall be more happy, if you live to such or such a State of Life, if
you live to be for yourself, to be settled in the World, or if you should gain
an Estate in it; but look upon it that you shall then be happy, when you can be
constantly employed for GOD, and not for yourself; and desire to live in this
World, only to do and suffer what GOD allots you. When you can be of the Spirit
and Temper of Angels, who are willing to come down into this lower World, to
perform what GOD commands them, though their Desires are heavenly, and not in the
least set on earthly Things, then you will be of that Temper that you ought to
have, Col. iii. 2.

Once more: Never think you can live to GOD, by your own Power or Strength; but
always look to, and rely on him for Assistance, yea, for all Strength and
Grace. There is no greater Truth than this. That we cannot do any Thing of
ourselves. Yet nothing but our own Experience can effectually teach it to us.
Indeed, we are a long Time in learning, that all our Strength and Salvation is
in GOD. This is a Life, that I think no unconverted Man can possibly live; and
yet it is a Life, that every godly Soul is pressing after in some good Measure.
Let it then be your great Concern, thus to devote yourself, and your all to GOD.

I long to see you, that I may say much more to you than I now can, for your
Benefit and Welfare; but I desire to commit you to, and leave you with, the
Father of Mercies, and GOD of all Graces; praying that you may be directed
safely through an evil World, to GOD's heavenly Kingdom, and am your affectionate
Brother,

DAVID BRAINARD.

To a SPECIAL FRIEND.
CERTAINLY the greatest, the noblest Pleasure of intelligent Creatures, must
result from their Acquaintance with the blessed GOD, and with their own
rational and immortal Souls. And Oh, how divinely sweet and entertaining is it,
to look into our own Souls, when we can find all our Powers and Passions united
and engaged in Pursuit after GOD, our whole Souls longing, and passionately
breathing for a Conformity to him, and the full Enjoyment of him. Verily, there
are no Hours pass away with so much Divine Pleasure, as those that are spent in
communing with GOD and our own Heart. Oh, how sweet is a Spirit of Devotion, a
Spirit of Seriousness and Divine Solemnity, a Spirit of Gospel Simplicity, Love
and Tenderness! Oh, how desirable, and how profitable to the Christian Life, is
a Spirit of holy Watchfulness and godly Jealousy over ourselves; when our Souls
are afraid of nothing so much as that we shall grieve and offend the blessed
GOD, whom at such Time we apprehend, or at least hope, to be a Father and
Friend; whom we then love, and long to please, rather than to be happy
ourselves, or at least we delight to derive our Happiness from pleasing and
glorifying him! Surely this is a pious Temper, worthy of the highest Ambition,
and closest Pursuit of intelligent Creatures, and holy Christians. Oh, how
vastly superior is the Pleasure, Peace and Satisfaction derived from these
Divine Frames, to that which we (alas) sometimes pursue in Things impertinent
and trifling! Our own bitter Experience teaches us, that in the Midst of such
Laughter the Heart is sorrowful, and there is no true Satisfaction but in GOD.
But, alas! How shall we obtain and retain this sweet Spirit of Religion and
Devotion. Let us follow the Apostle's Direction, Phil. ii. 12, and labor upon
the Encouragement he there mentions, Verse 13. For it is GOD only can afford us
this Favor; and he will be sought to, and it is fit we should wait upon on him
for so rich a Mercy. Oh, may the GOD of all Graces afford us the Grace and
Influences of his Divine Spirit; and help us, that we may from our Hearts
esteem it our greatest Liberty and Happiness, that whether we live, we may live
to the LORD, or whether we die, we may die to the LORD; that in Life and Death,
we may be his, etc. etc.

To his BROTHER.
Dear BROTHER,
I HAD determined to make you and my other Friends in New England a Visit this
Fall; partly from an earnest Desire I had to see you and them, and partly with
a View to the Recovery of my Health; which has, for more than three Months
past, been much impaired. My Disorder has been attended with several Symptoms
of a Consumption; and I have been at Times apprehensive, that my great Change
was at hand: Yet blessed be GOD, I have never been affrighted; but on the
contrary, at some Time much delighted with a View of its Approach. Oh, the
Blessedness of being delivered from the Clogs of Flesh and Sense, from a Body
of Sin, and spiritual Death! Oh, the unspeakable Sweetness of being translated
into a State of Complete Purity and Perfection: Believe me, my Brother, a
lively View and Hope of these Things, will make the King of Terrors himself
appear agreeable. -- Dear Brother, let me entreat you to keep Eternity in your
View, and behave yourself, as becomes one that must shortly give an Account of
all Things done in the Body. That GOD may be your GOD, and prepare you for His
Service here, and His Kingdom of Glory hereafter, is the Desire, and daily
Prayers of your affectionate loving Brother.

To a FRIEND.
HOW amazing is it that the Living, who know they must die, should,
notwithstanding, put far away the evil Day, in a Season of Health and
Prosperity; and live at such an awful Distance from a Familiarity with the
Grave, and the great Concerns beyond it. And especially, it may justly fill us
with Surprise, that any whose Minds have been divinely enlightened to behold
the important Things of Eternity as they are, I say, that such should live in
this Manner. And yet, how rare are the Instances of those, who live and act
from Day to Day, as on the Verge of Eternity, striving to fill up all their
remaining Moments in the Service, and to the Honor of their great Master. We
insensibly trifle away Time, while we seem to have enough of it; and are so
strangely amused, as in a great Measure to lose a Sense of the Holiness and
blessed Qualifications necessary to prepare us to be Inhabitants of the
heavenly Paradise. But oh, dear Sir, a dying Bed, if we enjoy our Reason
clearly, will give another View of Things, etc. etc. etc.

To his BROTHER at College; written in the Time of his extreme Illness in
Boston, a few Months before his Death.
My Dear BROTHER,
IT is from the Sides of Eternity I now address you. I am heartily sorry, that
I have so little Strength to write what I long so much to communicate to you.
But let me tell you, my Brother, Eternity is another Thing than we ordinarily
take it to be in a healthful State. Oh, how vast and boundless! Oh, how fixed
and unalterable. Oh, of what infinite Importance is it, that we be prepared for
Eternity! I have been just a dying now for more than a Week; and all. around me
have thought me so: But in this Time I have had clear Views of Eternity; have
seen the Blessedness of the Godly, in some Measure, and have longed to share
their happy State; as well as been comfortably satisfied, that through Grace I
shall do so! But oh, what Anguish is raised in my Mind, to think of an Eternity
for those who are Christless, for those who are mistaken, and who bring their
false Hopes to the Grave with them: The Sight was so dreadful, I could by no
Means bear it. My Thoughts recoiled, and I said (but under a more affecting
Sense than ever before) Who can dwell with everlasting Burnings! Oh, methought,
that I could now see my Friends, that I might warn them to see to it, they lay
their Foundation for Eternity sure. And you, my dear Brother, I have been
particularly concerned for; and have wondered, I so much neglected conversing
with you about your spiritual State at our last Meeting. Oh, my Brother, let me
then beseech you now to examine, whether you are indeed a new Creature? Whether
you have ever acted above Self? Whether the Glory of GOD has ever been the
sweetest, highest Concern with you? Whether you have ever been reconciled to
all the Perfections of GOD? In a Word, Whether GOD has been your Portion, and a
holy Conformity to Him, your chief Delight? If you cannot answer positively,
consider seriously the frequent Breathings of your Soul: But don't however, put
yourself off with a slight Answer. If you have Reason to think you are
graceless, oh give yourself and the Throne of Grace no Rest, till GOD arise and
save. But if the Case should be otherwise, bless GOD for His Grace, and press
after Holiness.

FINIS.
BOOKS printed, and sold, Wholesale and Retail, by HALL and SELLERS, at the New
Printing-Office, opposite the Jersey Market, viz.
I. A NEW GUIDE to the ENGLISH TONGUE: In Five Parts. Containing,

1. Words both common and proper, from one to six Syllables: The several Sorts
of Monosyllables in the common Words being distinguished by Tables, into Words
of two, three and four Letters, etc. with six short Lessons at the End of each
Table, not exceeding the Order of Syllables in the foregoing Tables. The
several Sorts of Polysyllables also, being ranged in proper Tables, have their
Syllables divided, and Directions placed at the Head of each Table for the
Accent, to prevent false Pronounciation; together with the like Number of
Lessons on the foregoing Tables, placed at the End of each Table, as far as to
Words of four Syllables, for the easier and more speedy Way of teaching
Children to read.

2. A large and useful Table of Words, that are the same in Sound, but
different in Signification; very necessary to prevent the writing one Word for
another of the same Sound

3. A short, but comprehensive Grammar of the English Tongue, delivered in the
most familiar and instructive Method of Question and Answer; necessary for all
such Persons as have the Advantage only of an English Education.

4. An useful Collection of Sentences in Prose and Verse, Divine, Moral and
Historical; together with a select Number of Fables, adorned with proper
Sculptures, for the better Improvement of the young Beginner. And

5. Forms of Prayer for Children on several Occasions.

The Whole being recommended by several Clergymen and eminent Schoolmasters, as
the most useful Performance for the Instruction of Youth, is designed for the
Use of SCHOOLS. BY THOMAS DILLWORTH, Author of the Schoolmaster's Assistant.

II. The PSALMS of DAVID, imitated in the Language of the NEW TESTAMENT; and
applied to the Christian State and Worship. By I. WATTS, D. D. The
Twenty-seventh Edition.

III. HYMNS and SPIRITUAL SONGS. In three Books. 1. Collected from the
Scripture. 2. Composed on Divine Subjects. 3. Prepared for the LORD's Supper.
By I. WATTS, D. D. The Twentieth Edition.

IV. The WHOLE DUTY of WOMAN. By a LADY. Written at the Desire of a Noble LORD.
The Fourth Edition.

V. The HISTORY of JOSEPH; a Poem: In Ten Books. By a FEMALE HAND. To which is
added, The HERMIT; a Poem; and an Essay on the CREATION.

VI. The PRAYER of AGUR, illustrated in a Funeral Discourse, and the Advantages
resulting from an early and steadfast PIETY. Preached extempore, by the Author
of Two Discourses, and a Prayer. Publicly delivered at the QUAKERS Yearly
Meeting in Bristol. The Whole taken down in CHARACTERS, by a Member of the
Church of England.

VII. A MORNING and EVENING'S MEDITATION, or, A DESCANT on the TIMES. A POEM.
BY T. L. Where also may be had,

Folio, quarto, octavo, Pocket and Common bibles; Testaments; Prayer books,
different sorts; Scotch psalm books; Watts's hymns and psalms; Spelling books,
of all sorts; psalters, primers, horn-books and battledores; An assortment of
chapman books; A variety of entertaining books for children; A collection of
copper plates, by the best hands; A great choice of pictures, some painted on
glass, among which the king and queen, large; A curious collection of
perspective views, without frames; Three foot telescopes; Optical glasses, on
mahogany stands, with colored views for the same; A quantity of well chosen
paper hangings; Best temple spectacles, in steel and shagreen cases;
Tortoise-shell and fish-skin ivory memorandum books; Best black-lead pencils;
Gunter's scales and dividers; Brass ink-pots, with knives; Ditto without;
Scotch leather ink-pots; Square glass ink-bottles; Holman's ink-powder; Pewter
ink-stand dishes; Sealing wax and wafers; Slates and slate pencils; Cases for
holding paper; Letter files, etc. etc. etc.


