AN ELEGY TO THE MEMORY OF That pious and eminent Servant of JESUS CHRIST, THE
REVEREND Mr. GEORGE WHITEFIELD, Who departed this Life the 30th of SEPTEMPER,
1770.

AETATIS SUAE 56.

Nullos virtutibus pares habemus, et habebimus Gloria neminem. PLIN. Epist.
BOSTON; NEW ENGLAND: Printed by RICHARD DRAPER. MDCCLXX:

TO THE REVEREND MATHER BYLES, D. D.
These TEARS sprinkled upon the Ashes of his deceased BROTHER, are gratefully
inscribed BY his affectionate Friend, and humble Servant, The AUTHOR.

AN ELEGY, etc.
MALICE be dumb! now sheath thy pointless sting,
Let sickening Envy dart her shafts no more,
Let foul Detraction drop her Ebon wing,
And spew her poison on the infernal shore.
But come heaven's radiant Offspring! hither throng,
Behold your Prophet, your Elijah fled;
Let deep distress now palsy every tongue,
WHITEFIELD the Gabriel of mankind -- is dead.
Where are his dulcet periods? Where the grace?
The soft persuasive magic of his voice?
That heavenly harp which rung immortal lays,
And limn'd religion to the sinners choice.
Where is the vollied thunder of his zeal?
The solemn pathos of the wrestler's prayer?
That held fierce conflict with the powers of hell,
And thinn'd the dreary regions of despair.
The ice of Death has quenched the seraph's flame;
Mute is the tongue, that charmed the world before:
The Grave's strong fetters bind his precious frame,
He speaks, he pleads, he prays, he weeps -- no more.
He sprung at once, and flung corruption by,
Forsook the warfare, but to catch the prize:
Full on the crown he held his steady eye,
And stormed the golden portals of the skies.
Blessed visitant! we scarce forgive thy speed,
Scourged by surprise, we murmur at the rod,
And rebel fondness fain would interceed,
To tear thee from the bosom of thy God.
While smiling Angels thine arrival greet,
And plausive Cherubs shout thy title fair:
A world in tears shall reach thy glad retreat,
And snatch one pang, from endless raptures there.
Forgive the tempest, should our sorrows rave,
While over thy mouldering dust our heads decline;
We wish to glut the avarice of the grave,
Bid us to die, -- it is harder to resign.
Who reared yon hallowed PILE on Georgia's strand,
And led fair Science to the savage soil?
Sacred to GOD, the monument shall stand,
And tutored Orphans bless the builder's toil.
Who compassed oceans, traversed every shore,
The busy herald of his SAVIOR'S love?
Heaven's swiftest envoy scarce could labor more
Or raise such levies, to the choirs above.
Who braved the tempest, tried the various clime,
Encountered dangers, and embraced distress?
To point our view beyond the wreck of time,
And in that prospect, to instruct, and bless.
Who raised the humble, startled the secure?
And shook proud rebels, from their gilded car?
To plaintive Lazars shed the balm of cure,
And with bold skeptics waged successful war.
Who heir'd from God, sagacity divine,
To pierce the human heart's remotest cell;
To drag each fell usurper from his shrine,
And lash reluctant demons into hell.
Who cinctur'd virtue, in unsullied white,
Embossed with stars, and smiling heavenly fair?
Who vice portrayed, so baneful to the sight,
The monster shudder'd at her image there?
Such WHITEFIELD is thy praise: while here you sleep,
And deck this shore with consecrated dust;
Over thy cold urn shall widowed virtue weep,
While pensive Angels guard the darling trust.
O thou, our Father! Pastor! Guide! and Friend!
What richer benison could thou bestow?
In prayer for us thy dying heart to rend,
And fall -- still struggling to redeem from woe.
Such heaven surveyed thee with paternal care,
Swift was the summons, and with joy obeyed;
Immortal pleasures wooed thy presence there,
And everlasting love sustained thy head.
Blessed Saint! forever will we claim the tie,
For pious friendship, though allied to clay,
Is owned by God, a tenant of the sky,
To blaze and brighten, through eternal day.
Thy rich remains shall shed a sweet perfume,
There shall the worthy drop the pious tear,
And cry, while bending over thy hallowed tomb,
" LORD! may we love thee, like thy Servant here.
Hark! ALBION groans, his poor deserted Flock,
When will the blessed wanderer cease to roam?
How could our bosoms bear the dreadful shock,
Should his dear JESUS take our Master home?
Over the broad margin of the western deep,
Methinks they beckon their departed Sire;
With fond impatience wait, and gaze and weep,
Till sad and faint, reluctant they retire.
Alas! your Shepherd, will no more return,
The weeping stranger generous aid supplies;
Around his dying pillow, strangers mourn,
With tears fast-falling, strangers seal his eyes.
Along these coasts his relics shall be sought,
Some grateful hand a Monument shall raise:
Some British bard in elegance of thought,
On sculptured marble shall record his praise.
END.
Dic quibus in Terris floret WHITEFIELDIUS alter
Si poteris, Lector, dignus honoris eris? --
Sicut enim Fulgur Coelis, atque ocyor Euro
Ecce velimque Viro, tum celerare fugam --
Noster Amicus abest, animamque effudit in Auras
Talia Quis fando, temperet e lacrymis?
Utque Propheta vetus, flammante per AEthera Curru
Ascendit Coelo, semper ovare DEO --
Cum Cherubim supra Seraphim, Sanctisque beatis,
Gaudet in Orb suo -- flebimus hunc abitum!
B. C. senior.


