An ELEGIAC POEM, On the DEATH of that celebrated Divine, and eminent Servant
of JESUS CHRIST, the late Reverend, and pious GEORGE WHITEFIELD, Chaplain to
the Right Honorable the Countess of HUNTINGDON, etc etc. Who made his Exit
from this transitory State, to dwell in the celestial Realms of Bliss, on
Lord's Day, 30th of September, 1770, when he was seized with a Fit of the
Asthma, at NEWBURY-PORT, near BOSTON, in NEW ENGLAND. In which is a Condolatory
Address to His truly noble Benefactress the worthy and pious Lady HUNTINGDON,
-- and the Orphan-Children in GEORGIA; who, with many Thousands, are left, by
the Death of this great Man, to lament the Loss of a Father, Friend, and
Benefactor.
By PHILLIS, a Servant Girl of 17 Years of Age, belonging to Mr. J. WHEATLEY,
of BOSTON: -- And has been but 9 Years in this Country from Africa.
HAIL happy Saint on thy immortal throne!
To thee complaints of grievance are unknown;
We hear no more the music of thy tongue,
Thy wonted auditories cease to throng.
Thy lessons in unequaled accents flowed!
While emulation in each bosom glowed;
Thou did, in strains of eloquence refined,
Inflame the soul, and captivate the mind.
Unhappy we, the setting Sun deplore!
Which once was splendid, but it shines no more*
He leaves this earth for Heaven's unmeasured height:
And worlds unknown, receive him from our sight;
There WHITEFIELD wings, with rapid course his way,
And sails to Zion, through vast seas of day.
When his AMERICANS were burdened sore,
When streets were crimsoned with their guiltless gore!
Unrivaled friendship in his breast now strove:
The fruit thereof was charity and love
Toward America -- could thou do more
Than leave thy native home, the British shore,
To cross the great Atlantic's watery road,
To see America's distressed abode?
Thy prayers, great Saint, and thy incessant cries,
Have pierced the bosom of thy native skies!
Thou moon have seen, and ye bright stars of light
Have witness been of his requests by night!
He prayed that grace in every heart might dwell:
He longed to see America excel;
He charged its youth to let the grace divine
Arise, and in their future actions shine;
He offered THAT he did himself receive,
A greater gift not GOD himself can give:
He urged the need of HIM to every one;
It was no less than GOD's coequal SON!
Take HIM ye wretched for your only good;
Take HIM ye starving souls to be your food.
Ye thirsty, come to this life giving stream:
Ye Preachers, take him for your joyful theme:
Take HIM, "my dear AMERICANS," he said,
Be your complaints in his kind bosom laid:
Take HIM ye Africans, he longs for you;
Impartial SAVIOR, is his title due;
If you will choose to walk in grace's road,
You shall be sons, and kings, and priests to GOD.
Great COUNTESS! we Americans revere
Thy name, and thus condole thy grief sincere:
We mourn with thee, that TOM^ obscurely placed,
In which thy Chaplain undisturbed does rest.
New England sure, does feel the ORPHAN's smart;
Reveals the true sensations of his heart:
Since this fair Sun, withdraws his golden rays,
No more to brighten these distressful days!
His lonely Tabernacle, sees no more
A WHITEFIELD landing on the British shore:
Then let us view him in yon azure skies:
Let every mind with this loved object rise.
No more can he exert his laboring breath,
Seized by the cruel messenger of death.
What can his dear AMERICA return?
But drop a tear upon his happy urn,
Thou tomb, shall safe retain thy sacred trust,
Till life divine re-animate his dust.
Sold by EZEKIEL RUSSELL, in Queen Street, and JOHN BOYLES, in Marlboro-Street.


