AN ESSAY ON THE USE AND ADVANTAGES OF THE FINE ARTS. DELIVERED AT THE PUBLIC
COMMENCEMENT, IN NEW HAVEN. SEPTEMBER 11TH. 1770.

NEW HAVEN: PRINTED BY T. AND S. GREEN.

AN ESSAY, etc.
NO subject can be more important in itself, or better suited to the present
occasion, and the exercises of this day, than the Use and Advantages of the
fine Arts, and especially those of Polite Literature. These studies are perhaps
too much undervalued by the public, and neglected by the youth in our
seminaries of science. They are considered as mere matters of trifling
amusement, and despised in comparison with the more solid branches of Learning.

The knowledge of Languages, Mathematics, Metaphysics and Philosophy,
undoubtedly deserves to engage the attention of the greatest Genius. For skill
in these sciences, the World (while the world remains) will revere the memory
of a Bacon, a Newton, and a Lock. But when they are carried beyond a certain
point; when they are of no advantage to the common purposes of life; when they
are employed upon questions which human Reason can never with certainty
determine, they degenerate into mere speculations of amusement, and become no
farther valuable, than as they serve to enlarge the mind, clear the
understanding, and entertain us in the hours of leisure from the important
avocations of business. The Geometrical labors for the Quadrature of the
Circle, the Metaphysical controversies about the Existence of matter, and the
Essence of Spirit, though a field for the display of genius, in what are they
more interesting to mankind, than the contentions of Antiquaries about the
genuineness of a medal, or the disputes of Commentators about the various
readings of their ancient manuscripts?

Let us consider the advantages which arise to the world from the study of the
liberal Arts.

Mankind in the present state, are extremely liable to be led away by mean and
sordid vices, to be attached to the low enjoyments of sense, and thus degraded
almost to a level with the brutal creation. As that unceasing thirst for
happiness, which is the universal spring of action, must have some object for
its gratification; the Divine Being, to raise us above these low desires, has
implanted in our minds a taste for more pure and intellectual pleasures. These
pleasures have their source in the fine Arts, and are more especially found in
the elegant entertainments of polite Literature. They ennoble the soul, purify
the passions, and give the thoughts a better turn. They add dignity to our
sentiments, delicacy and refinement to our manners. They set us above our
meaner pursuits, and make us scorn those low enjoyments, which perhaps we once
esteemed as the perfection of human felicity. I appeal to all persons of
judgment, whether they can rise from reading a fine Poem, viewing any masterly
work of Genius, or hearing an harmonious concert of Music, without feeling an
openness of heart, and an elevation of mind, without being more sensible of the
dignity of human nature, and despising whatever tends to debase and degrade it?

These are the delights, which humanize the soul, and polish away that rugged
ferocity of manners, which is natural to the uncultivated nations of the world.

In every land, in every age, at the time when the unconquered spirit of
freedom, joined with that laudable ambition, which fires the soul to heroic
deeds; has raised the nation to the highest pitch of glory, the fine Arts have
been studiously cultivated, and have shined forth with peculiar luster. For
Learning and Glory walk hand in hand through the world. A savage people, before
the dawn of literature, may indeed be terrible in arms: but being stained with
the blood of cruelty, tarnished with that wild barbarity, which degrades
courage into brutality, they never attain to the summit of renown; and either
sink unnoticed into oblivion, or leave to posterity a name more infamous for
barbarism, than famed for heroic achievements. While every voice celebrates
the bravery of an Alexander, a Scipio, a Caesar, and a Marlborough; who
remembers the savage fierceness of the lion-hearted Richard; or what mouth is
opened in the praise of that scourge of Asia, the persian Nadir?

The same ardour of ambition, the same greatness of thought, which inspires the
Warrior to brave danger in the conquering field, when diffused among a people
will call forth Genius in every station of life, fire the imagination of the
Artist, and raise to sublimity the aspiring Muse.

Look into the annals of antiquity. View the Grecians at the era of learning
and politeness, when the fine Arts were carried to their highest glory, when
the whole nation were encouragers of science, and every person a judge of
literature; when by greatness of genius, correctness of taste and refinement of
manners, they rendered themselves famous throughout the world, and patterns of
imitation to all posterity. Then was the time that Greece produced those Heroes
that astonished Europe and Asia with the sound of their victories; then was the
time that Athens, Sparta and Thebes gave laws to the world. And could a Nation
fail of rising to the highest pitch of fame, when animated with the thundering
eloquence of Demosthenes and Pericles, fired to warlike deeds by the martial
muse of Homer, and warmed with those noble sentiments which inspire the
productions of Aeschylus, Euripides and Sophocles?

The glory of Arts and Arms sunk in Greece and rose again with renewed luster
in Hesperia. Rome distinguished herself for literature, even from the first
dawn of her greatness. In her early days, while her unpolished manners bore too
near a resemblance to the rough virtues of Sparta, she could boast an Ennius,
the boldness of whose thoughts even Virgil himself did not disdain to imitate.
Then flourished Accius, Naevius, Pacuvius, those samed dramatic poets, with the
bold and spirited Lucilius, the father of the Roman satire. But these writers
have sunk into the dark grave of oblivion, and left behind only some small
traces of their same. Then appeared the rough genius of Plautus, the milder
elegance of Terence, and the soft muse of Catullus: Then the polished
Lucretius, so distinguished for all the graces of poetic expression, that
Virgil evidently borrowed from his writings, his style, versification and
manner of description. In the mean time Eloquence rose to the highest
perfection at Rome. Be Cicero a witness, whose praise is unnecessary, whether
as an orator, a patriot, or a philosopher.

But see Rome attains to the summit of greatness. The world submits to her
sway. Satiated with the spoils of victory, she sits unmolested on the throne,
and diffuses the mild blessings of peace. Then flourish the names dearest to
same, the glories of the Augustan age: The majestic Muse of Virgil, the second
who dared to attempt the dignity of epic song; the polished elegance of Horace,
graced with the sounding lyre, and armed with the keen sword of satire; the
strong and sportive imagination of Ovid; the soft elegiac strains of Tibullus
and Propertius; and the historic grandeur of Livy. The world is conscious of
their fame. Their characters need not to be illustrated by the tedious
impertinence of praise.

The Glory of Rome faded by a gradual decay. The Muse still shone, though with
tarnished luster, in the tragedies of Seneca, the satires of Juvenal and
Persius, and the heroic poems of Lucan, Statius, Claudian, and Silius Italicus.
History produced the nervous, the manly Tacitus; and Philosophy could still
show her Seneca and Pliny. Till at length Tyranny usurped the dominion, and
Barbarism overspread the land of Italy.

For a nearer instance of the trophies of the liberal Arts, let us view the
state of Russia in the last century. In a cold unpolished land, deep-sunk in
the shades of savage ignorance, a Monarch rises, who moved with compassion for
his subjects, fired with love of glory, and endowed with a soul superior to the
age, forms a project of civilizing his country. He sails to other lands,
imports the rudiments of the arts, and affords both by precept and example the
utmost encouragement to genius. The Nation raises herself from the dust, repels
her enemies, extends her borders, leads forth her conquering armies, and now
threatens the total subversion of the Ottoman empire.

Britain alone can claim the glory of an equality with Greece and Rome. There
for two centuries the Arts have flourished with almost unabated luster: And the
slightest reflection will inform us that this period is by far the most
celebrated in the British history. In the glorious reign of Elizabeth, there
arose a Spenser, unequalled in all the pleasing charms of luxuriant
description; whose fancy transports us to fairy land, and brings us acquainted
with a shadowy race, the beings of his own creation. Then a Shakespeare, the
matchless genius of the drama; endowed with the most noble extravagance of
imagination, the strongest powers of humor, the sovereign command of the
passions, and the keenest inspection into all the mazes of the human soul. To
these succeeded the unbridled wit of Cowley, the soft graces of Waller, and the
various grandeur of all-accomplished Dryden. Then with the united charms of
every Muse, appeared the immortal Milton; who with the greatest force of
natural genius, assisted by all the aids of art, and by the noble descriptions
of the inssired writers, has produced a Poem, almost as much superior to
Homer's, in sublimity of conception, as it is in the greatness of its subject:
A Genius universal as his theme,
Astonishing as Chaos, as the bloom
Of blowing Eden fair, as Heaven sublime.
Thomson

After a short eclipse in the luxurious reign of Charles II. the reviving Arts
shone forth with superior brightness in the prosperous days of William and
Anne; while the victorious Marlborough bore Britain's thunder on her foes, and
made Europe tremble at the sound of his arms. Then flourished the polished muse
of Addison, who revived in England the classic elegance of the Augustan age;
whose works, adorned with the highest sublimity of sentiment, and the nicest
delicacy of thought, filled with easy humor which points the ridicule at vice,
(while they afford instruction and entertainment of the noblest kind to every
reader,) may boast as their greatest honor and distinguished excellence, that
they are peculiarly calculated to please and improve the fairest part of the
creation.

Then arose a Swift, the friend of virtue, the scourge of folly, and the terror
of vice; unequalled for manly sense, liveliness of fancy, the powers of wit and
humor, and the severest poignancy of satire. Happy, had not his mind, soured
with disappoinment in the earliest views of his ambition, too often endeavored
by the grossest indelicacy of description to debase the dignity of human
nature; and indulged a spirit of misanthropy, which clouds his best
productions, and while we admire the force of his Genius, bids us detest the
sentiments of his heart. What age shall forget the undying fame of Pope!
Whether in pleasing strains he paints the beauties of nature; mourns with the
softest notes of elegiac verse; or with moral rapture unfolds all the
principles and passions of the human soul: Whether in sportive lays he displays
the foibles of the gentler Sex; impales vice and dullness on the point of
satire; or holding, up the glass of translation, reflects with unabated light
the glories of the Maeonian song.

For the power of describing the beauties of rural scenes, and copying the
different appearances of nature, what writer can vie with the pleasing Thomson!
The liveliness of his paintings, his sublime morality, and his delicacy of
thought justly raise him to the highest rank of genius.

Nor must we forget the unaffected ease of Gay and Prior, the spirited wit of
Congreve, the delicate fancy of Parnelle, the dramatic powers of Otway,
Southern and Row, the cervantic humor of Arbuthnot, with the pointed satire
and strong imagination of Young. These writers will convey the English glory to
the most distant ages of posterity.

Polite Letters at present are much on the decline in Britain; not through a
scarcity of authors, or want of encouragement from the public; but by reason of
that luxurious effeminacy, which has caused a decay of genius, and introduced
a false taste in writing. Their Men of learning are infected with pedantry.
They are great admirers of antiquity and followers in the path of servile
imitation. They sacrifice ease and elegance to the affectation of classic
correctness, setter the fancy with the rules of method, and damp all the ardour
of aspiring invention. While the men of Genius (who are at present a distinct
class of writers) in contempt of the critic chains, throw off all appearance of
order and connection, sport in the wildest sallies of imagination, and adopt
the greatest extravagance of humor, which too often sinks to buffoonery, or is
soured with the malevolence of satire.

America has a fair prospect in a few centuries of ruling both in arts and
arms. It is universally allowed that we very much excel in the force of natural
genius. And although but few among us are able to devote their whole lives to
study, perhaps there is no nation, in which a larger portion of learning is
diffused through all ranks of people. For as we generally possess the middle
station of life, neither sunk to vassalage, nor raised to independance, we
avoid the sordid ignorance of peasants, and the unthinking dissipation of the
great. The heroic love of Liberty, the manly fortitude, the generosity of
sentiment, for which we have been so justly celebrated, seem to promise the
future advancement and established duration of our glory. Many incidents
unfortunate in themselves, have tended to call forth and sustain these virtues.
Happy, in this respect, have been our late struggles for liberty! They have
awakened the spirit of freedom; they have rectified the manners of the times;
they have made us acquainted with the rights of mankind; recalled to our minds
the glorious independance of former ages, fired us with the views of fame, and
by filling our thoughts with contempt of the imported articles of luxury, have
raised an opposition, not only to the illegal power, but to the effeminate
manners of Britain. And I cannot but hope, notwithstanding some dangerous
examples of infamous defection, that there is a spirit remaining in these
Colonies, that will invariably oppose itself to the efforts of usurpation and
perfidy, and forbid that Avarice should ever betray us to Slavery.

This Land has already begun to distinguish itself in literature. It is
peculiarly famed for the study of Theology; and though too much infested with
the short-lived productions controversy, can boast of some Divines, who however
inelegant in style and expression, have perhaps never been excelled in depth of
thought and profoundness of reasoning. Out late writers in the cause of liberty
have gained the applause of Europe. Many elegant essays have been produced in
the style of wit and humor; nor has Poetry been entirely uncultivated among
us. The encouragement, which is given to the Arts and Sciences, affords a
prospect of our future glory.

AND see, the expected hour is on the wing,
With every joy the flight of years can bring:
The mighty scenes the Muse shall dare display,
And unborn ages view the ripened day.
Beneath a solemn grove's delightful shade,
When Night's brown wings were over the world displayed;
(While the fair moon, that leads the heavenly train
With varying brightness died the dusky plain)
With joy entranced, to solemn thought resigned,
Long visions rising in the raptured mind,
Celestial music danced along the vale,
While these blessed sounds the ravished ear assail.
"To years far distant, and to scenes more bright,
Along the vale of Time extend thy ssight,
Where hours and days and years, from yon bright pole,
Wave following wave, in long succession roll;
There see in pomp, for ages without end,
The glories of the western world ascend."
"See! this blessed Land in her bright morn appears,
Waked from dead slumbers of six thousand years:
While clouds of darkness veiled each chearing ray;
To savage beasts and savage men a prey.
Fair Freedom now her ensigns bright displays,
And Peace and Plenty bless the golden days.
In mighty pomp America shall rise;
Her glories spreading to the boundless skies:
Of every fair, she boasts the assembled charms;
The Queen of empires and the Nurse of arms."
"See where her Heroes mark their glorious way,
Armed for the fight and blazing on the day:
Blood stains their steps; and over the conquering plain,
'Mid fighting thousands and 'mid thousands slain,
Their eager swords promiscuous carnage blend,
And ghastly deaths their raging course attend.
Her mighty power the subject world shall see;
For laureled Conquest waits her high decree."
"See her bold Vessels rushing to the main,
Catch the swift gales, and sweep the watery plain;
Or led by Commerce, at the merchant's door,
Unlade the treasures of each distant shore;
Or armed with thunder, on the guilty foe
Rush big with death and aim the impending blow,
Bid every realm, that hears the trump of fame,
Quake at the distant terror of her name."
"For pleasing Arts, behold her matchless charms;
The first in letters, as the first in arms.
See bolder Genius quit the narrow shore,
And unknown realms of science dare to explore;
Hiding in brightness of superior day
The fainting gleam of Britain's setting ray."
"Sublime the Muse shall lift her eagle wing;
Of heavenly themes the soaring bards shall sing;
Tell how the blessed Redeemer, man to save,
Through the deep mansions of the gloomy grave,
Sought the low shades of night; thence rising high,
Vanquished the powers of hell, then soared above the sky;
Or paint the mighty terrors of that day,
When Earth's last fires, shall mark their dreadful way,
In solemn pomp, the Eternal God descend,
Doom the wide world and give to nature end;
Or open heavens glories to the astonished eye,
And bid their lays with lofty Milton vie;
Or wake from Nature's themes the moral song,
And shine with Pope, with Thomson, and with Young."
"This Land her Steel and Addison shall view,
The former glories equaled by the new;
Some future Shakespeare charm the rising age,
And hold in magic chains the listening stage;
Another Watts shall string the heavenly lyre,
And other Muses other bards inspire."
"Her Daughters too the happy land shall grace
With powers of genius, as with charms of face.
Blessed with the softness of the female mind,
With fancy blooming and with taste refined,
Some Row shall rise and wrest with daring pen.
The pride of genius from assuming men:
While each bright line a polished beauty wears;
For every muse and every grace is theirs.
"Nor shall these scenes our rising fame confine;
With equal praise the Sister-arts shall shine."
"Behold some new Apelles, skilled to trace
The varied features of the lovely face;
Bid the gay landscape rise in all its charms,
Or wake from dust the slumbring chief to arms;
Bid Art with Nature hold a pleasing strife,
And warm the pictured canvas into life."
"See heaven-born Music strike the trembling string;
Devotion rising on the raptured wing."
"See the gay Dome with lofty walls ascend,
Wide gates unfold, stupendous arches bend,
The spiry turrets pointing to the skies,
And all the grandeur of the palace rise."
"Then the bold powers of Eloquence shall reign,
And bind the passions in their magic chain;
At Freedom's voice bid manly bosoms glow,
Or prompt the tender tear at guiltless woe."
"Thus over the happy Land shall Genius reign,
And fair Yalensia lead the noble train."
Oh! born to glory when these times prevail,
Great Nurse of learning, blessed Yalensia, hail!
Within thy walls, beneath thy pleasing shade,
We wooed fair Science, that celestial maid.
Fate gives no more those raptures to pursue,
Borne from thy seats we bid a last adieu.
Long may thou reign of every joy possessed,
Blessed in thy teachers, in thy pupils blessed,
To distant years thy fame immortal grow,
Thy spreading light to unborn ages flow:
Till Nature hear the great Archangle's call,
Till the last flames involve the smoking ball;
Then thy fair Sons to happier climes ascend,
Where Glory never fades, and Joys shall never end.

