AN ORATION DELIVERED April 2d, 1771.

AN ORATION DELIVERED APRIL 2d, 1771. AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF THE
TOWN OF BOSTON; TO COMMEMORATE the bloody TRAGEDY OF THE FIFTH of MARCH, 1770.

By JAMES LOVELL, A. M.

Omnes homines natura Libertati student, et CONDITIONEM Servitutis oderunt.
Caes. --: Nunc ea petit, quae dare aullo modo possumus, nisi priuus volumus nos
bello victos confiteri. Cic. BOSTON: Printed by EDES and GILL, by Order of the
Town of BOSTON. 1771.

At a Meeting of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Town of Boston,
in Town Meeting assembled, by Adjournment, on Tuesday the 2d Day of April, A.
D. 1771.
Voted Unanimously, THAT the Hon. Thomas Cushing, Esquire Moderator, the Hon. John
Hancock, Esquire Mr. Samuel Adams, Samuel Pemberton, Esquire Dr. Benjamin Church,
Richard Dana, Esquire and Mr. Henderson Inches, be and hereby are appointed a
Committee to return the Thanks of this Town to Mr. James Lovell, for the
Oration delivered by him at their Request, in Commemoration of the horrid
Massacre perpetrated on the Evening of the 5th of March 1770 -- By a Party of
Soldiers of the 29 th Regiment; and to desire a Copy thereof for the Press.

Attest, William Cooper, Town Clerk.

GENTLEMEN,
I Consent to sacrifice my COMPOSITION to Ridicule, in strong hope that the
ARGUMENT, which I am sure is well grounded, will be prosecuted by some Patron
or Friend to our CAUSE of more leisure and abilities than

your obliged humble Servant, JAMES LOVELL.

AN ORATION.
YOUR design in the appointment of this ceremony, my Friends, and
Fellow-Townsmen, cannot fail to be examined in quite different lights at this
season of political dissension. From the principles I profess, and in the
exercise of my common right to judge with others, I conclude it was decent,
wise, and honorable.

The certainty of being favored with your kindest partiality and candor, in a
poor attempt to execute the part to which you have invited me, has overcome the
objection of my inability to perform it in a proper manner; and I now beg the
favor of your animating countenance.

The horrid bloody scene we here commemorate, whatever were the causes which
concurred to bring it on that dreadful night, must lead the pious and humane of
every order to some suitable reflections. The pious will adore the conduct of
that BEING who is unsearchable in all his ways, and without whose knowledge not
a single sparrow falls, in permitting an immortal soul to be hurried by the
flying ball, the messenger of death, in the twinkling of an eye, to meet the
awful Judge of all it is secret actions. The humane, from having often thought
with pleasing rapture on the endearing scenes of social life, in all it is
amiable relations, will lament with heartfelt pangs their sudden dissolution
by the indiscretion, rage and vengeance of unruly human passions.

But let us leave that shocking close of one continued course of rancor and
dispute from the first moment that the troops arrived in town: that course will
now be represented by your own reflections to much more solid, useful purpose
than by any artful language. I hope, however, that Heaven has yet in store such
happiness, for this afflicted town and province, as will in time wear out the
memory of all our former troubles.

I sincerely rejoice with you in the happy event of your steady and united
effort to prevent a second tragedy.

Our fathers left their native land, risqued all the dangers of the sea, and
came to this then-savage desert, with that true undaunted courage which is
excited by a confidence in GOD. They came that they might here enjoy
themselves, and leave to their posterity the best of earthly portions, full
English Liberty. You showed upon the alarming call for trial that their brave
spirit still exists in vigor, though their legacy of rights is much impaired. The
sympathy and active friendship of some neighboring towns upon that sad occasion
commands the highest gratitude of this.

We have seen and felt the ill effects of placing standing forces in the midst
of populous communities; but those are only what individuals suffer. Your vote
directs me to point out the fatal tendency of placing such an order in free
cities -- fatal indeed! Athens once was free; a citizen, a favorite of the
people, by an artful story gained a trifling guard of fifty men; ambition
taught him ways to enlarge that number; he destroyed the commonwealth and made
himself the tyrant of the Athenians. Caesar by the length of his command in
Gaul got the affections of his army, marched to Rome, overthrew the state, and
made himself perpetual dictator. By the same instruments, many less republics
have been made to fall a prey to the devouring jaws of tyrants -- But, this is
a subject which should never be disguised with figures; it chooses the plain
style of dissertation.

The true strength and safety of every commonwealth or limited monarchy, is the
bravery of its freeholders, its militia. By brave militias they rise to
grandeur, and they come to ruin by a mercenary army. This is founded on
historical facts; and the same causes will, in similar circumstances, forever
produce the same effects. Justice Blackstone, in his inimitably clear
commentaries, tells us, that "it is extremely dangerous in a land of liberty,
to make a distinct order of the profession of arms; that such an order is an
object of jealously; and that the laws and constitution of England are
strangers to it." One article of the Bill of Rights is, that the raising or
keeping a standing army within the kingdom in a time of peace, unless it be
with consent of parliament, is against law. The present army therefore, though
called the peace establishment, is kept up by one act, and governed by another;
both of which expire annually. This circumstance is valued as a sufficient
check upon the army. A less body of troops than is now maintained has, on a
time, destroyed a King, and fought under a parliament with great success and
glory; but, upon a motion to disband them, they turned their masters out of
doors, and fixed up others in their stead. Such wild things are not again to
happen, because the parliament have power to stop payment once a year: but,
arma tenenti quis neget? which may be easily interpreted, "who will bind
Sampson with his locks on?" Trenchard.


The bill which regulates the army, the same fine author I have mentioned says,
"is in many respects hastily penned, and reduces the soldier to a state of
slavery in the midst of a free nation. This is impolitick: for slaves envy the
freedom of others, and take a malicious pleasure in contributing to destroy it."

By this scandalous bill a justice of peace is empowered to grant, without a
previous oath from the military officer, a warrant to break open any
(freeman's) house, upon pretense of searching for deserters.

I must not omit to mention one more bad tendency: it is this, -- a standing
force leads to a total neglect of militias, or tends greatly to discourage them.

You see the danger of a standing army to the cause of freedom. If the British
Parliament consents from year to year to be exposed, it doubtless has good
reasons. But when did our assembly pass an act to hazard all the property, the
liberty and lives of their constituents? What check have we upon a British
Army? Can we disband it? Can we stop it is pay?

Our own assemblies in America can raise an army; and our Monarch, George the
3d. by our constitution takes immediate command. This army can consent to leave
their native provinces. Will the royal chief commander send them to find
barracks at Brunswick or Lunenburg, at Hanover, or the commodious hall of
Westminster? Suppose the last -- Suppose this army was informed, nay thought
the parliament in actual rebellion, or only on the eve of one against their
King, or against those who paid and clothed them -- for there it pinches: --
We are rebels against parliament; -- we adore the King.

Where, in the case I have stated, would be the value of the boasted English
Constitution?

Who are a free people? Not those who do not suffer actual oppression; but
those who have a constitutional check upon the power to oppress.

We are slaves or freemen; if, as we are called, the last, where is our check
upon the following powers, France, Spain, the States of Holland, or the British
'Parliament? Now if any one of these (and it is quite immaterial which) has
right to make the two acts in question operate within this province, they have
right to give us up to an unlimited army, under the sole direction of one
Saracen Commander.

Thus I have led your thoughts to that upon which I formed my conclusion, that
the design of this ceremony was decent, wise and honorable. Make the bloody 5th
of March the Era of the resurrection of your birthrights, which have been
murdered by the very strength that nursed them in their infancy. I had an eye
solely to parliamentary supremacy; and I hope you will think every other view
beneath your notice in our present most alarming situation.

Chatham, Cambden and others, gods among men, and the Farmer, whom you have
addressed as the friend of Americans, and the common benefactor of mankind; all
these have owned that England has right to exercise every power over us, but
that of taking money out of our pockets without our consent Taxation and
Representation are inseparable. Chath. Cambd.

From what in our Constitution is Representation not inseparable!

-- multa a CRASSO divinitus dicta esserebantur, cum sibi illum consulem esse
negaret cui se nator ipse non esset. Cic.


. Though it seems almost too bold therefore in us to say "we doubt in every
single instance her legal right over this province", I confine myself to this
province, partly from ignorance of other charters; but more from a desire even
to vex some abler pen to pursue the idea of CHECK: which an un chartered
FREEMAN may do, as well as any other in America.
yet we must assert it. Those I have named are mighty characters, but they
wanted one advantage providence has given us. The beam is carried off from our
eyes by the flowing blood of our fellow citizens, and now we may be allowed to
attempt to remove the mote from the eyes of our exalted patrons. That mote, we
think, is nothing but our obligation to England first, and afterward
Great Britain, for constant kind protection of our lives and birthrights
against foreign danger. We all acknowledge that protection.

Let us once more look into the early history of this province. We find that
our English Ancestors disgusted in their native country at a Legislation, which
they saw was sacrificing all their rights, left its Jurisdiction Haec sunt enim
fundamenta firmissima nostrae libertatis, sui quemque juris et retinendi et
dimittendi esse dominum. Cic.
, and sought, like wandering birds of passage, some happier climate. Here at
length they settled down. The King of England was said to be the royal I choose
to bury a fruitful subject for any satirical genius of the family of PENN.
landlord of this territory; with HIM they entered into mutual sacred compact,
by which the price of tenure and the rules of management were fairly stated. It
is in this compact that we find OUR ONLY TRUE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY.

I might here enlarge upon the character of those first settlers, men of whom
the world was little worthy; who, for a long course of years, assisted by no
earthly power, defended their liberty, their religion and their lives against
the greatest inland danger from the savage natives: -- but this falls not
within my present purpose. They were secure by sea.

In our infancy, when not an over-tempting jewel for the Bourbon Crown the very
name of ENGLAND saved us; afterward her fleets and armies. We wish not to
depreciate the worth of that protection. Of our gold, yea of our most fine
gold, we will freely give a part. Our fathers would have done the same. But,
must we fall down and cry "let not a stranger rob and kill me, O my father! let
me rather dye by the hand of my brother, and let him ravish all my portion? --
ita vitam corpusque servato, ita fortunas, ita rem familiarem, ut haec
posteriora liberate ducas, -- nec pro his libertatem, sed pro liberate haec
projicias, tanquam pignora injuriae.


It is said that disunited from Britain "we should bleed at every vein". I
cannot see the consequence. The States of Holland do not suffer thus. But grant
it true, SENACA, would prefer the LAUNCETS of France, Spain or any other power
to the BOW-STRING, though applied by the fair hand of Britannia.

The declarative vote of the British Parliament is the death-warrant of our
birthrights, and wants only a Czarish King to put it into execution. Here then
a door of salvation is open. Great Britain may raise her fleets and armies, but
it is only our own King that can direct their fire down upon our heads. He is
gracious, but not omniscient. He is ready to hear our APPEALS in their proper
course; and knowing himself, though the most powerful prince on earth, yet, a
subject under a divine constitution of LAW, that law he will ask and receive
from the twelve Judges of England. These will prove that the claim of the
British Parliament over us is not only ILLEGAL IN ITSELF, but A DOWNRIGHT
USURPATION OF HIS PREROGATIVE as KING OF America.

A brave nation is always generous. Let us appeal therefore, at the same time,
to the generosity of the PEOPLE of Great Britain, before the tribunal I do not
think the QUO WARRANTO against our first charter was tried in a proper court.
of Europe, not to envy us the full enjoyment of the RIGHTS OF BRETHREN.

And now, my Friends and Fellow Townsmen, having declared myself an American
Son of Liberty of true charter-principles; having shown the critical and
dangerous situation of our birthrights, and the true course for speedy redress;
I shall take the freedom to recommend with boldness one previous step. -- Let
us show we understand the true value of what we are claiming.

The patriot Farmer tells us, "the cause of LIBERTY is a cause of too much
dignity to be sullied by turbulence and tumult. -- Anger produces anger; and
differences, that might be accommodated by kind and respectful behavior, may
by imprudence be enlarged to an incurable rage. In quarrels -- risen to a
certain height, the first cause of dissension is no longer remembered, the
minds of the parties being wholly engaged in recollecting and resenting the
mutual expressions of their dislike. When feuds have reached that fatal point,
considerations of reason and equity vanish; and a blind fury governs, or rather
confounds all things. A people no longer regard their interest, but a
gratification of their wrath."

We know ourselves subjects of common LAW: to that and the worthy executors of
it let us pay a steady and conscientious regard. Past errors in this point have
been written with gall by the pen of MALICE. May our future conduct be such as
to make even that vile IMP lay her pen aside.

The Right which imposes Duties upon us is in dispute: but whether they are
managed by a Surveyor General, a Board of Commissioners, Turkish Janissaries or
Russian Cossacks, let them enjoy, during our time of fair trial, the common
personal protection of the laws of our constitution. Let us shut our eyes, for
the present, to their being executors of claims subversive of our rights.

Watchful hawkeyed JEALOUSY ever guards the portal of the temple of the GODDESS
LIBERTY. This is known to those who frequent her altars. Our whole conduct
therefore, I am sure, will meet with the utmost candor of her VOTARIES: but I
am wishing we may be able to convert even her basest APOSTATES.

We are SLAVES 'till we obtain such redress through the justice of our King as
our happy constitution leads us to expect. In that condition, let us behave
with the propriety and dignity of FREEMEN; and thus exhibit to the world a new
character of a people which no history describes.

May the all wise and beneficent RULER OF THE UNIVERSE preserve our lives and
health, and prosper all our lawful endeavors in the glorious cause of FREEDOM.

ERRATUM. Page 15. 1. 6. for SENACA, r. SENECA.


