A DISSERTATION ON THE HISTORY, ELOQUENCE, AND POETRY OF THE BIBLE.

DELIVERED AT THE PUBLIC COMMENCEMENT, AT NEW HAVEN.

NEW HAVEN: PRINTED BY THOMAS AND SAMUEL GREEN. MDCCLXXII.

A DISSERTATION, etc.
IN a situation where almost every theme has been ingeniously handled, the
young speaker is left, utterly at a loss on which side to turn himself.
Learning has been panegyrized times innumerable -- the particular Sciences
have often received their deserved encomiums -- numerous inventions have been
racked in praise of Economy, Industry, Liberty, and America -- the Eloquence
of the Rostrum, and the Bar, has, both in precept and example, been handsomely
displayed -- a most elegant parallel has been drawn between the Ancients and
the Moderns, the excellencies of each judiciously exhibited -- the use and
advantages of the Fine Arts have been placed in a most beautiful, striking
point of view -- and this day has pleased us with many new and ingenious
thoughts on Education. What subject then is reserved for the present hour? A
subject which has, at least, novelty to recommend it -- a subject, which I
flatter myself will be agreeable to some of my audience, and I cannot but hope,
disagreeable to none. No person has ever attempted to entertain this assembly
by displaying the excellencies of the Fountain of our Religion and Happiness --
(The excellencies I mean, not of its purity and holiness, which by no means
need a panegyric; but those of fine writing, which, as they are of less
importance, so we should naturally expect they would have been little attended
to.) Could this proceed from dislike or inattention? Surely from inattention.
For whilst we are enraptured with the fire and sublimity of Homer, the
correctness, tenderness, and majesty of Virgil, the grandeur of Demosthenes,
the art and elegance of Cicero; Shall we be blind to Eloquence more elegant
than Cicero, more grand than Demosthenes; or to Poetry more correct and tender
than Virgil, and infinitely more sublime than him who has long been honored,
not unjustly, with that magnificent appellation "The Father of Poetry?" Shall
we be delighted with the majesty gravity, the lively, spirited relations which
places Livy and Robertson on the throne of History; with the (...) enthusiastic
morality which obtained Plato the surname of The Divine;" and shall we, can we
be insensible to History far more majesttic, particular Relations far more
lively and spirited than those of Livy and Robertson; and to Morality truly
divine, whose glory admits of no comparison? Volumes of Criticism have been
written to display the beauties of most of the above Authors, and can a few
moments, spent in an attempt to illustrate the beauties of the Sacred
Scriptures, be thought too many, or tedious?

The Genius of the Eastern nations, and particularly of the Jews, was in many
respects, different from that of the Greeks and Romans. Situated in a climate
nearer to the vivifying rays of the Sun, his beams acted with a more enlivening
influence on the intellectual, as well as vegetable world, and lit up a more
bright, glowing Genius in the human breast. Born in a region which enjoyed this
advantage in the happiest degree, and fired with the glorious thoughts and
images of Inspiration, can we wonder that the divine writers, though many of
them illiterate, should so far transcend all others, as well in style, as in
sentiment? Can we wonder that these superior advantages should be displayed on
every page, in the boldest metaphors, the most complete images, and the most
lively descriptions? No writers abound so much in passionate Exclamation, in
that striking way of communicating sentiments, Interrogation, or in metaphors
taken from sublime objects, and from action, of all others the most animated.
Unincumbered by Critical manacles, they gave their imaginations an unlimited
range, called absent objects before the sight, gave life to the whole inanimate
creation, and in every period, snatched the grace which is beyond the reach of
art, and which, being the genuine offspring of elevated Genius, finds the
shortest passage to the human soul. With all this license no writers have so
few faulty passages. "But" says the Critic "they don't describe exactly
according to our rules." True sir; and when you can convince me that Homer and
Virgil, from whom you gather those rules, were sent into the world to give Laws
to all other authors* when you can convince me that every beauty of fine
writing is to be found, in its highest perfection, in their works, I will allow
the beauties of the divine writers to be faults. 'Till that can be
demonstrated, I must continue to admire the most shining instances of Genius,
unparalleled in force, or sublimity.

In praise of Homer, it has been observed, that he gives life to every object
which he attempts to describe. In the Inspired writings objects are not barely
endued with life; they breathe, they think, they speak, love, hate, fear,
adore, and exercise all the most extraordinary emotions of rational beings.
Homer or Virgil can make the mountains tremble, or the sea shake, at the
appearance of a God; in the Bible the mountains melt like wax, or flee away,
the Deep utters his voice, and lifts up his hands on high, at the presence of
the LORD of the whole earth. In other writings rural scenes are often
addressed, and receive a momentary animation; in the Bible the heavens and
earth are called upon to hear, the winds and storms to praise; the fields
rejoice, Lebanon shouts aloud for joy, and the neighboring forests warmed to
raptures, break forth into songs of thanksgiving.

Such a Genius must necessarily breath an uncommon spirit, a transporting
enthusiasm into every production -- let us attend to its effects on History.

The great end of History is instruction. To gain the attention of mankind,
something more is necessary than a bare, cold relation of distant events. The
earthly part of the human soul is so disproportionate to the etherial, that
every possible method must be used to extend its regard to any thing, beyond
the present enjoyment. To awaken our lethargic inclinations, to put in motion
the vis inertiae of our constitution, is the business of the Imagination, and
the various Passions. No writers understood this, as also every other part of
the human frame, so well as the sacred Penmen. Perhaps, it may not be
unentertaining, to trace them in some of the various arts which they have used
to catch the attention of the Reader.

Sensible that the Imagination is the principal inlet to the Soul, and that it
is far more easily enkindled than the Passions, they passed by no occasion for
engaging its assistance. As their subject was better fitted to answer this end,
than any other, they have handled it to admiration -- they seize every
opportunity to introduce transactions, at once new, sublime and wonderful; for
this the frequent awful interpositions of the Deity, in the affairs of Israel,
gave them the fairest chance -- In every page, we are astonished by glorious
and supernatural displays of the divine power -- In every page, we are charmed
by fanciful, yet just poetical descriptions of a great variety of scenes. By
these methods their History has every advantage of Poetry for affecting the
Imagination, with this happy circumstance, that it is all reality.

Added to this, though their relations are all directed, more or less, to the
illustration of this great Truth "that obedience to GOD is the path to
felicity" they have yet inserted an endless variety of incidents and
characters. Convinced that Novelty has a most powerful effect on the human
mind, they have filled their writings with more new and uncommon events, than
are to be found in those of all others united. Convinced that human manners are
the most delightful, as well as the most instructive field, for readers of the
human race, they have exhibited them in every point of view -- Where are
characters so naturally drawn? Where so strongly marked? Where so infinitely
numerous and different? -- To what can the Legislator so advantageously apply
for instructions, as to the life and laws of Moses? -- Whom can the Prince
propose for examples so properly as Solomon and Iehoshaphat? -- In Joshua, and
Ioab, the General, the Hero, are magnificently displayed -- In the Prophets and
Patriarchs, the Gentleman, the Contemplator may find most excellent patterns,
not of gaming, drinking, profaneness, debauchery, and that unmeaning,
unfriendly ceremony which poisons the lip of Hypocrisy; but of meekness,
kindness to inferiors, charity, hospitality, benevolence, and every
embelishment of human nature -- In Joseph, the unwary Youth is beautifully
taught to shun the gilded bait of Temptation, and is instructed that Virtue,
sooner or later, will infallibly lift him to the summit of honor and felicity
-- Where can the Fair part of the creation find the glorious effects of beauty
and virtue so finely, so tenderly, so amiably represented, as in Ruth and
Esther? -- David's character, whether as a General, a Ruler, or a Saint, is an
exhaustless fund of amusement and instruction -- Whom should the Clergyman,
whom should every man imitate, but the Apostles, but the glorious pattern of
excellence, their great MASTER?

It is an observation of Longinus "that an Epic poet should put as many as
possible, of his sentiments, into the mouths of his heroes." Not, as some have
imagined, to dignify them -- do we reverence Ajax more than Homer? -- but to
give them the greater liveliness. How evident is it, that a man's sentiments
strike much more from his own mouth, than through the medium of a second
person? For this reason, and because we suppose Ajax to have been better
acquainted with circumstances, in which he was an actor, than any one who, like
the Poet, knew them only by hearsay; we choose to have his reflections in his
own words, rather than in those of any relator. What Homer has done in Poetry,
the Divine writers have done in History -- Great part of their History is
dramatic. By these means their characters are drawn not only in a more natural,
but more striking manner -- We don't barely hear of them; but we see them; we
hear them speak; they become old acquaintances; and, at every appearance, we
recognize them as such. Confining themselves to simple narration is what makes
a principal difference between the modern and ancient Historians, entirely in
favor of the latter.

But this is not all -- Sensible that General History, though in many respects
instructive, is dry and unentertaining -- Sensible that General Descriptions
leave very faint traces on the Memory; the writers of Inspiration, contented
with giving a plain, concise account of every thing of that kind necessary to
be known (though even this very circumstance has made their General Histories
more striking than those of any other nation) hurry on to events more
particular, relations more minute. Perhaps not one fourth part of the Sacred
History is General. To interest the attention, to employ the Memory, it is
necessary that we should have a clear, distinct, and perfect idea of any
transaction -- this can only be given by an exact relation of every minute,
important circumstance -- and such a relation can only be made of single events.

Reasoning upon principles like these, they have every where inserted
narrations of this kind; and when they have enkindled the Passions, when they
have fired the Imagination to a pitch of enthusiasm, they pour into these two
great passages to the Soul, truths at once instructive, moral and divine. Are
not instances needless? The story of Joseph is too universally admired to allow
a comment; I beg leave to make a few remarks on one less attended to -- the
subject plain and simple -- the method of handling it inimitable.

Elijah would convince the Israelites that the GOD of Heaven is the only Deity.
This is the subject. For this purpose, he bids the prophets of Baal assemble
before all the congregation of Israel, and offer a sacrifice to their God,
whilst he offers a similar one to his own: all, at the same time, agreeing that
the God, whose fire consumed the oblation, should be accounted the true one. In
the morning the prophets of Baal erect their altar, prepare their sacrifice,
and call on the imaginary Power to kindle it. From morn to noon, this was
repeated -- no answer was returned. Can their anguish and vexation be more
finely imaged than in their leaping on the altar -- cutting themselves with
knives 'till the blood gushed out? -- Can there be severer sarcasms than those
of Elijah -- "Cry aloud -- spare not -- he is a God -- either he is talking --
or pursuing -- or he is on a journey" -- and particularly that cutting remark
on his Godship -- "peradventure he sleeps."

Having allowed them the whole day, near the sunsetting, he builds an altar,
digs a trench around it, and, to put the decision beyond a possibility of
contradiction, orders twelve barrels of water to be poured upon the sacrifice.
The scene is now changed. From ridicule, the Prophet ascends to the highest
solemnity -- He calls all the people around him, invokes the DEITY in a
concise, but striking and awful manner, and is answered by a flame from Heaven,
which consumes the oblation, with the whole flood of water. What more solemn,
affecting circumstance could have concluded this relation, than the universal
voice of the people, resounding in concert, "The LORD, he is the GOD! The LORD,
he is the GOD!"

I beg leave to mention a few others. The account of Creation, -- Genesis ^4
of Eliezer and Rebekah, -- Exodus 1^.
of the Israelites' passage through the Red sea -- Exodus 19. etc.
of the Law given at Sinai -- Numb. 16.
of Dathan and Abiram; -- the Histories of Jud. 6. etc.
Gideon, Jud^ 13.
Sampson, and Jud. 11.
Iephthah; -- Judges 19, 20, and 21. There is a remarkable similarity between
this story and the Trojan war.
the story of the Levite and his Concubine -- 1. Sam. 17.
of David and Goliath -- 1. Sam. 1^ etc.
of David and Jonathan -- of 1. Sam. 25.
Abigail -- 2 Samuel 13.
of Absalom -- 2. Chron. 6 and 7.
of the dedication of the Temple -- 1. Kings 10.
of the Queen of Sheba -- 2. Kings 4.
of Elisha and the Shunammite -- 2. Kings 5.
of Naaman the Syrian -- Esther.
of Haman and Mordecai -- St. John 11.
of Lazarus -- St. Luke 7.
of the Widow of Nain -- St. Luke 24.
the Disciples' journey to Emmaus -- St. Luke ^ etc.
the birth of the Savior -- the agony in the garden -- and, above all, the
Crucifixion. Each of these is handled in a manner masterly and inimitable; each
of these is treated with that peculiar simplicity, which is a grand
characteristic of every species of inspired writing, and which affects the mind
more than all the artful, studied flourishes of Rhetoric: though, as it is an
object of universal attention, my remarks upon it are the less particular.

Nor are the effects of this Genius inspired, less apparent in the Eastern
Eloquence, than in their History. As I have already observed, all these
historical writings are chiefly dramatic and abound in a noble See Deuteronomy. 1.
etc. 28. etc. Josh. C. 14. V. 6. etc. Josh. C. 22. V. 15. etc. -- 2. Chron. C.
13. V. 4. Josh. 23 and 24. Jud. C. 9. V. 7 etc. 1. Sam. C. 17. V. 44. etc. --
Acts C. 2. V. 14. etc. Acts C. 3. V. 12 etc. C. 4. V. 8. etc. C. ^. V. ^5. etc.
C. 7. C. 13. V. 16. etc. etc. etc.
manly Eloquence. Almost an infinite numbers of brave striking sensible
speeches well deserve particular notice: But the time will only allow me to
make a few observations concerning the Eloquence of St. Paul.

It is universally known, that Longinus, a Heathen, by no means well affected
to Christianity, has placed this great Apostle on a list with Cicero,
Demosthenes, Eschines, and others, the most eminent Orators. What his Elocution
was, has ever been vehemently disputed -- to the Critics I leave it -- what
his Orations were, I think may be determined from those recorded in the Acts of
the Apostles.

Of the vehement kind of Eloquence, which raised Demosthenes to so high a pitch
of Glory, and which also abounds in Cicero* he has left us no examples; no
occasion, recorded by St. Luke being proper for that species of speaking: And
whether his having excelled them both in every other kind of Oratory, is a
sufficient proof that he would also have surpassed them in those two, the most
common, and the most easily attainable, I leave others to determine; and
omitting conjectures, will confine my reflections to the instances of his
oratorical Genius which now remain.

But what pardon can I expect from the Critic, whose life has been spent in
reading the Greeks and Romans; who scarcely knows that there can be any
applause, besides that which is paid to them, and who doubts whether he may
eat, or breathe, unless by Aristotle's rules; when he hears me boldly,
unconcernedly prefer St. Paul's address to Agrippa, for himself, before
Cicero's to Caesar, for Marcellus? As our Christian Orator knew better than any
other man, how to suit his addresses to time, place, and audience; we shall
find that a remarkable circumstance among the excellencies of this, and the
other Orations which I shall notice -- a circumstance which deservedly obtains
a first-rank among the accomplishments of a speaker. He is now a prisoner,
arraigned at the bar of Festus, surrounded by a numerous and splendid audience
-- accusers -- judges -- governors -- princes and kings. He begins with a
compliment infinitely more noble and polite, than all the thick-laid daubing,
which Cicero has made use of, to display at once his own meanness, and Caesar's
folly. -- Indeed it may be laid down as an unfailing maxim, that the most
elegant compliments are ever formed upon truth. -- From this he proceeds to
state the point, opens the case, relates his story, and adduces the reasons of
his conduct, in a manner striking -- majestic -- convincing. Of the Power of
his Eloquence, Agrippa, an Heathen, gave him a glorious testimony, in the
observation -- "Thou almost persuadest me to be Christian:" Happy, had the
word, almost, been justly omitted.

But I have a mind to trespass still farther, in a declaration, that his Acts
20. Verse 18. etc.
Farewell to the Ephesians is much more beautiful, tender, and pathetic, than
the celebrated defense of Milo. Never was the power of simplicity in writing so
clearly, so finely demonstrated, as in this incomparable Speech. Not a shadow
of art is to be found in it -- Scarce a Metaphor, and not one but the most
common, is used -- Nothing but the natural, unstudied language of affection;
and yet I flatter myself, no person can read it attentively, without a
profusion of tears. Never was the precept of Cicero so perfectly exemplified.
-- "To speak in such a manner, as that all should hope they could equal it, and
none, upon trial, be able." But this piece will by no means allow a descant --
its beauties are too frequent, in every verse, in every line, and almost in
every word.

I observed that of the vehement kind of Eloquence St. Paul has left no
examples; but this remark can by no means be extended to the animated kind in
general. What can be more animated than his speech to Elymas the Sorcerer
(which is indeed in a few words severely invective) unless his Oration to the
Athenians? I readily confess, I never was so much moved by any thing in Cicero
or Demosthenes, as when I have figured to myself, the great Apostle standing on
Mars-hill, in the midst of all the numerous Inhabitants of Athens, at that time
the Capital of the universe for learning and politeness. Behold on one side,
the young and gay of both sexes, on another, the aged and wise; on one side,
the rich, adorned with splendor, on another, in a meaner dress, the poorer,
but not less useful mechanics and husbandmen; -- Here, whitened over with age,
stand long rows of venerable Philosophers, here, in their robes of state, the
more venerable Judges of the Areopagus: all in profound silence, listening to
hear something of infinite importance. I can almost hear the glorious man break
forth with a force and elocution which made Felix tremble, which converted half
the world, and induced the inhabitants of Lystra to believe him the very Deity
of Eloquence -- "GOD who made the world, and all things that are therein,
seeing he is LORD of heaven and earth, dwells not in temples made with
hands." -- And whilst he proceeds in a manner more noble, philosophical, and
sublime, than ever delighted any other audience, methinks I can view them,
silent as the evening, leaning forward through attention, hanging on the words
which he utters; till a clear conviction of the truth of his assertions kindles
up in their faces, a smile of satisfaction and transport.

But the effects of this happy Genius, and of Inspiration, are still more
conspicuous in the Poetry, than even in the History, or Eloquence of the sacred
writings. As this cannot be illustrated by general remarks, I beg the patience
of my audience for a few particulars.

Of Poetry the most remarkable species are, the Pastoral, Ode, Elegy, Satire,
the dramatic and the Epic Poem, and a Miscellaneous kind, too various to be
reduced under any general name.

Very few strokes of a satirical pen are to be found in the Bible -- and even
these are short, but at the same time cuttingly severe. Such, is that ironical
sarcasm of Job to his three friends -- "Doubtless ye are the people, and Wisdom
shall die with you" -- his Job 30. in the beginning.
description of his enemies -- Isaiah 4^.
Isaiah's of an Idol -- Paul's observation concerning Ananias, and some others:
unless it should be thought that all the reflections on the vice of man are
such, which I would by no means deny.

Of Pastoral, I shall only observe, that Solomon's Song in beauty and
tenderness, is one of the most complete that can be imagined.

The whole Collection of Prophecies is composed of poems of the miscellaneous
kind.

As a most perfect example of the Ode I beg leave to mention the 104th Psalm.
The Ode is defined "A short Poem, proper to be sung, written in praise of some
beloved object, generally agreeable, tender, or sublime." This Ode has for its
subject, the perfections of the Deity, of all themes the most sublime and
agreeable. The Poet begins with his Power, the most awful and great of his
Attributes, and consequently, that which first engages the attention: from
this, he is led to the wonders and bounties of his Wisdom and Providence. The
incidents, chosen to illustrate these Perfections of the Creator, are the most
natural, beautiful, and striking. What can be more striking than the creation,
the heavens, the ocean, the clouds, the winds, the flood, the thunder, the
celestial Host, the glory and brightness of the DEITY? What more beautiful than
the charms of Nature and prospect, illustrating infinite Wisdom and Goodness,
and particularly, this great truth -- That GOD is the universal Benefactor of
Being? -- Who, after these contemplations, can forbear crying out with the
poet, in that most sublime Apostrophe -- O Lord! how manifold are thy Works! in
wisdom have thou made them all: the earth is full of thy riches! -- Who can
forbear concluding as he does -- "Bless thou the Lord O my Soul. Praise ye the
Lord."

Odes of a more tender kind, are to be found every where amongst the Psalms;
but I cannot forbear observing that in the 97th, the abovementioned 104th, and
above all in the 18th, the poet's imagination rises to such a height, as
Pindar, Dryden, and Gray must look up to, with astonishment and despair.

In the soft, tender strain of Elegy, where are simplicity and Grief so finely
united as in the Lamentations of Jeremiah? What can be more exquisitely
pathetic than David's Lamentation over Absalom? What than his Elogium upon the
death of Saul and Jonathan? His fear lest the Philistines should hear and
rejoice, that the Beauty of Israel was slain upon the high places -- His
Apostrophe to the Mountains of Gilboa -- The excellent character of his
Friends, for their Heroism, in that age a man's greatest glory, and for
firmly-united Friendship -- His elegant address to the Fair-ones of Israel, to
sympathize with him in his distress -- His more tender address to his beloved
brother Jonathan, upon remembrance of their Intimacy -- With the repetition of
that passionate exclamation -- "How are the mighty fallen!" are so many
different circumstances, which all contribute to raise this piece to the
highest degree of elegiac perfection.

There is no poem in the Bible, which is strictly dramatic, or heroic; but as
the word Epic, commonly used for the latter poem, signifies no more than
Narrative, the Book of Job may properly come under that denomination. The
Action is one -- the restoration of Job to the happiness, of which he had been
deprived by Satan -- The Actors, or Speakers are, the DEITY, Satan, Elihu, Job,
his three Friends and Servants. It is almost wholly dramatic, which gives it a
peculiar liveliness.

Its beauties are infinitely too numerous and various to be mentioned; but --
the bold figures -- the striking Interrogations -- the fine Chap. 14.
description of Man's frailty -- the Chap. 2^.
Panegyric upon Wisdom -- Job's Chap. 29.30. etc.
contrast of his former and present circumstances -- the Introduction, and
above all, the Speech of the DEITY, are unequalled by any poet, ancient or
modern.

Every one is sensible of the beauty of Figures. A single instance of the
Interrogation will show its fine effect in (...) liveliness to every species of
writing. The Poet observes -- "Man dies and wastes away, yea he gives up the
ghost, and where is he?" -- What can be more beautiful than Job's description
of his former, and present condition? -- The Poets introduction of the CREATOR
seems not to have been much attended to, and demands a few remarks.

To give a proper and awful pomp and solemnity to this part of his poem, and to
the infinite Being who is now about to appear, the Poet makes Elihu, referring
to the phenomena of nature around him, deliver himself in this manner --
"Behold, GOD is great, and we know him not, neither can the number of his years
be searched out. Can any understand the spreadings of his clouds or the noise
of his tabernacle (i. e. the visible heavens, poetically so called.) Behold he
spreads his light upon it; the noise thereof shows concerning it, the
cattle also (then retiring to shelter) concerning the vapor." And as the
thunder was then roaring, he cries out -- "Hear attentively the noise of his
voice, and the sound that goes out of his mouth! He directs it under the
whole heaven, and his lightning to the ends of the earth. Hearken unto this, O
Job! stand still, and consider the wondrous works of GOD. And now, other men
see not the bright light which is in the clouds; but the wind passes, and
cleanses them. Brightness comes out of the north; with GOD is terrible
majesty." What can be a more suitable and glorious attendance upon the CREATOR,
than the winds, the rain, the horror and majesty of a storm, the splendor of
the lightning, the voice of the thunder, and the brightness, or path of flame,
which proceeds him as he rides in divine pomp through the the north, and
answers Job out of the whirlwind? Upon the Speech, which is undoubtedly the
most sublime ever rehearsed to mankind, remarks would be impertinence.

As the Epic poem is the most noble of all others, the whole force of the
human* Genius is exhausted in beautifying it with figures, comparisons, and
descriptions.

Many Comparisons are to be found in the Bible, but few of them are extended to
any length. As those penmen wrote more for Instruction than Amusement, the
Comparisons which they have introduced, being made more for illustration than
beauty, are always short, though pertinent and striking. If this be thought a
deficiency, it is abundantly supplied by an exuberance of the finest Figures
which are to be found in writing. Indeed, the Eastern Genius was so animated,
that when those authors seized a Comparison, the warmth of their Imagination
instantly converted it into the principal subject, and thereby formed a short,
and exquisitely beautiful Allegory; than which Figure, nothing is more common
in all the sacred Scriptures -- An admirable instance may be seen in the 5th
Chapter of Isaiah.

Of the other principal Figures in composition -- the Metaphor, the Apostrophe,
and the Personification, as well as the Antithesis, which was better
understood, and more happily applied by Isaiah, than by any other Poet, most
perfect examples are to be found in his awful and sublime Isaiah 13 and 14.
prophecy concerning the destruction of Babylon -- Particularly in the
incomparable Apostrophe to that proud city -- "How art thou fallen from heaven,
O Lucifer, Son of the Morning! how art thou cast down to the ground, who did
weaken the nations!" -- This undoubtedly gave Milton the first thought of See
Par. (...) B. 5 -- At length into the limits of the north They came, and Satan
took his royal seat High on a hill, far blazing, etc.
Satan's rebellion, and war.

Can the matchless excellence of the sacred descriptions be better illustrated,
than by comparing the sublimest description of a God, in the sublimest of all
the profane writers of antiquity, with a similar one from the Bible? That from
Homer, translated as well as I was able, and, to give it the better appearance,
purposely cleared of several puerilities, runs thus -- " Ili^^ B. 1^*
Neptune emerged from the sea, and moved with indignation against Jove, sat
and pitied the Grecian host yielding to the force of the Trojans. Suddenly,
with swift steps he rushed down the broken precipice; the woods and mountains
trembled beneath his immortal foot. Three times he stepped, the fourth, he
reached the Aegae. There stands his glorious, incorruptible palace of shining
gold -- There he joined his nimble steeds, with brazen hoofs and golden manes,
clothed himself in gold, ascended his chariot, and skimmed the surface of
waves. On all sides, the Whales exulted around their king; the Sea with joy
parted before him; the steeds flew swiftly over it, nor moistened the brazen
axle.

The other from Habbakkuk is thus translated. -- "GOD came from Yeman, and the
HOLY ONE from mount Paran; his Glory covered the heavens and the earth was full
of his Praise. His brightness was as the light; he had horns coming out of his
hand, and there was the (...) of his (...) went the Pestilence, and burning
coals went (...) his feet. He stood, and measured the heavens* he (...) drove
asunder the nations; the everlasting (...) were scattered, the perpetual hills
did bow; his ways are everlasting. I saw the tents of Cushan in affliction, the
curtains of the land of Midian, did tremble. Thou did cleave the earth with
thy rivers. The Mountains saw thee and trembled, the over flowing of the waters
passed by, the deep uttered his voice, and lift up his hands on high. The Sun
and the Moon stood still in their habitation: at the light of thine arrows they
went, at the shining of thy glittering spear."

Of these two passages it need only be observed, that where the circumstances
are similar, the Prophet is far more lively and sublime than the Poet, and
infinitely surpasses him in those which are different.

To mention a number of Descriptions in the Inspired writings, would be
injustice to the rest; but how can I pass by Ezekiel. 1.
Ezekiel's, of the Cherubims, Dan. C. 7 V 9
Daniel's of the Ancient of days, or Revel 1.
St. John's, of the Savior amid the seven golden candlesticks?

Nothing gives greater weight and dignity to Poetry, than Prophecy. Sensible of
this truth Virgil has, with great beauty, inserted something of this kind in
the fourth, which is the finest of his Pastorals, and in the sixth, which is
the noblest book of his Eneis. But excellent as he is, the Prophets,
particularly Isaiah and John, in the beauties of this part of writing, shine
without a competitor.

Instead of wild conjuctures, instead of past events, instead of Generals and
Heroes, instead of Marcellus, instead of the Roman City and Empire; The
Prophecies are always certain, the events referred to future; Their Hero is the
Messiah, the wonderful Counselor, the mighty GOD, the everlasting Father, the
Prince of Peace. -- The Empire, that of the Universe, its extension immensity,
its duration eternity. -- The City, the new Jerusalem, the Heaven of Heavens,
the seat of light and blessedness; its walls of gold and precious stones, its
splendour that of Almighty GOD. And this advantage attends all their writings,
that every possible Reader, every one of us is infinitely more interested in
the subject, than the Romans were in that of Virgil; as we are candidates for
an immortal existence in that region of felicity, where the Sun does not give
light by day, nor the Moon by night, but the LORD himself is an everlasting
Light, and the GOD of Zion her Glory.


