THE AMERICAN VILLAGE, A POEM. TO WHICH ARE ADDED, Several other ORIGINAL
PIECES in VERSE.

BY PHILIP FRENEAU, A. B.

-- Arva, beata
Petamus arva, divites and insulas.
HOR. Epod. Ode 16, V. 41, and sequentes. NEW YORK: Printed by S. INSLEE and A.
CAR, on MOOR'S WHARF.

M,DCC,LXXII.

THE AMERICAN VILLAGE, etc.
WHERE yonder stream divides the fertile plain,
Made fertile by the labors of the swain;
And hills and woods high towering over the rest,
Behold a village with fair plenty blessed:
Each year tall harvests crown the happy field;
Each year the meads their stores of fragrance yield,
And every joy and every bliss is there,
And healthful labor crowns the flowing year.
THOUGH Goldsmith weeps in melancholy strains,
Deserted Auburn and forsaken plains,
And mourns his village with a patriot sigh,
And in that village sees Britannia die:
Yet shall this land with rising pomp divine,
In it is own splendour and Britannia's shine.
O muse, forget to paint her ancient woes,
Her Indian battles, or her Gallic foes;
Resume the pleasures of the rural scene,
Describe the village rising on the green,
It Is harmless people, born to small command,
Lost in the bosom of this western land:
So shall my verse run gentle as the floods,
So answer all ye hills, and echo all ye woods;
So glide ye streams in hollow channels pent,
Forever wasting, yet not ever spent.
Ye clust'ring boughs by hoary thickets bore!
Ye fields high waving with eternal corn!
Ye woodland nymphs the tender tale rehearse,
The fabled authors of immortal verse:
Ye Dryads fair, attend the scene I love,
And Heaven shall center in yon' blooming grove.
What though thy woods, AMERICA, contain
The howling forest, and the tiger's den,
The dangerous serpent, and the beast of prey,
Men are more fierce, more terrible than they.
No monster with it is vile contagious breath,
No flying scorpion darting instant death;
No poisonous adder, burning to enrage,
Has half the venom or has half the rage.
What though the Turk protests to heaven his ire,
With lift up hand amidst his realms of fire;
And Russia's Empress sends her fleets afar,
To aid the havoc of the burning war:
Their rage dismays not, and their arms in vain,
In dreadful fury bathe with blood the plain;
Their terrors harmless, though their story heard,
How this one conquered or was nobly spared:
Vain is their rage, to us their anger vain,
The deep Atlantic raves and roars between.
To yonder village then will I descend,
There spend my days, and there my ev'nings spend;
Sweet haunt of peace whose mud' walled sides delight,
The rural mind beyond the city bright:
Their tops with hazles or with alders wove,
Remurmur magic to the neighboring grove;
And each one laboring in his own employ,
Comes weary home at night, but comes with joy:
The soil which lay for many thousand years
Over run by woods, by thickets and by bears;
Now reft of trees, admits the cheerful light,
And leaves long prospects to the piercing sight;
Where once the lynx nocturnal sallies made,
And the tall chestnut cast a dreadful shade:
No more the panther stalks his bloody rounds,
Nor bird of night her hateful note resounds;
Nor howling wolves roar to the rising moon,
As pale arose she over yon eastern down.
Some prune their trees, a larger load to bear
Of fruits nectarine blooming once a year:
See groaning wagons to the village come
Filled with the apple, apricot or plumb;
And heavy beams suspended from a tree,
To press their juice against the winter's day:
Or see the plough torn through the new made field,
Ordained a harvest, yet unknown to yield.
The rising barn whose spacious floor receives
The welcome thousands of the wheaten sheaves,
And spreads it is arms to take the plenteous store,
Sufficient for its master and the poor:
For as Eumoeus used his beggar guest
The great Ulysses in his tatters dressed:
So here fair Charity puts forth her hand,
And pours her blessings over the greatful land:
No needy wretch the rage of winter fears,
Secure he sits and spends his aged years,
With thankful heart to generous souls and kind,
That save him from the winter and the wind.
A LOVELY island once adorned the sea,
Between New-Albion and the Mexic' Bay;
Whose sandy sides washed by the ocean wave,
Scarce heard a murmur but what the ocean gave:
Small it is circumference, or high it is coast,
But shady woods the happy isle could boast;
On every side new prospects caught the eye,
There rose blue mountains to the arched sky:
Here thundered ocean in conclusive throws,
And dashed the island as it is waters rose:
Yet peaceful all within, no tumults there,
But fearless steps of the unhunted hare;
And nightly chauntings of the fearless dove,
Or blackbird's note, the harbinger of love.
So peaceful was this haunt that nature gave,
Still as the stars, and silent as the grave;
No loud applause there raised the patriot breast,
No shouting armies their mad joy confessed,
For battles gained, or trophies nobly won,
Or nations conquered near the rising sun;
No clamorous, crews, or wild nocturnal cheer,
Or murd' rous russians for no men were here.
On it is east end a grove of oak was seen,
And shrubby hazels filled the space between;
Dry alders too, and aspin leaves that shook
With every wind, conspired to shade a brook,
Whose gentle stream just bubbling from the ground,
Was quickly in the falter ocean drowned.
Beyond whose fount, the center of the isle,
Wild plumb trees flourishe'd on the shaded soil.
In the dark bosom of this sacred wood,
Had fate but smiled, some village might have stood
Secluded from the world, and all it is own,
Of other lands unknowing, and unknown.
Here might the hunter have destroyed his prey,
Transfixed the goat before the dawn of day;
And trudging homeward with his welcome load,
The fruit of wand'rings through each by-way road:
Thrown down his burden with the needless sigh,
And gladly feasted his small family.
Small fields had shen sufficed, and grateful they,
The annual labors of his hands to pay;
And free his right to search the briny flood
For fish, or slay the creatures of the wood.
THUS spent his days in labor's pleasant, pain,
Had lived and died the homely shepherd swain:
Had seen his children and his children's heirs,
The fruit of love and memory of years
To agriculture's first fair service bent,
The work of mortals, and their great intent,
So had the Sire his days of pleasure known,
And wished to change no country for his own:
So had he with his fair endearing wife,
Passed the slow circle of a harmless life;
With happy ignorance divinely blessed,
The path, the center and the home of rest.
Long might the sun have run his bright career,
And long the moon her mantled visage rear;
And long the stars their nightly vigils kept,
And spheres harmonious either sung or wept:
He had not dreamed of worlds besides his own,
And thought them only stars, beyond the moon;
Enjoyed himself, nor heard of future hell,
Or heaven, the recompense of doing well;
Had scarcely thought of an eternal-state,
And left his being in the hands of fate. --
O had this isle such souls sublime contained,
And there for ages future sons remained,
But envious time conspiring with the sea,
Washed all it is landscapes, and it is groves away.
It Is trees declining, stretched upon the sand,
No more their shadows throw across the land.
It Is vines no more their clust'ring beauty show,
Nor sturdy oaks embrace the mountain's brow.
Bare sands alone now overwhelm the coast,
Lost in it is grandeur, and it is beauty lost.
THUS, though my favorite isle to ruin gone,
Inspires my sorrow, and demands my moon;
Yet this wide land it is place can well supply
With landscapes, hills and grassy mountains high.
O HUDSON! thy fair flood shall be my theme,
Thy winding river, or thy glassy stream;
On whose tall banks tremendous rocks I spy,
Dread nature in primaeval majesty.
Rocks, to whose summits clouds eternal cling,
Or clust'ring birds in their wild wood notes sing.
Hills, from whose sides the mountain echo roars,
Rebounding dreadful from the distant shores;
Or valleys, where refreshing breezes blow,
And rustic huts in fair confusion grow,
Safe from the winds, secured by mountains high,
That seem to hide the concave of the sky;
To whose top often the curious hind ascends,
And wonders where the arched horizon bends;
Pleased with the distant prospects rising new,
And hills over hills, a never ending view.
Through various paths with hasty step he scours,
And breathes the odours of surrounding flowers,
Caught from their bosoms by the fragrant breath,
Of western breezes, or the gale of death. South wind.

Then low descending, seeks the humble dome,
And centres all his pleasures in his home,
'Till day returning, brings the welcome toil,
To clear the forest, or to tame the soil;
To burn the woods, or catch the timorous deer,
To scour the thicket, or contrive the snare.
SUCH was the life our great forefathers led,
The golden season now from BRITAIN fled,
Ever since dread commerce stretched the nimble sail,
And sent her wealth with every foreign gale. --
Strange fate, but yet to every county known,
To love all other riches but it is own.
Thus fell the mistress of the conquered earth,
Great ROME, who owed to ROMULUS her birth,
Fell to the monster Luxury, a prey,
Who forced a hundred nations to obey.
She whom nor mighty CARTHAGE could withstand,
Nor strong JUDEA'S once thrice holy land:
She all the west, and BRITAIN could subdue,
While victory with the ROMAN eagles flew;
She, she herself eternal years denied,
Like ROME she conquered, but by ROME she died:
But if AMERICA, by this decay,
The world itself must fall as well as she.
No other regions latent yet remain,
This spacious globe has been research'd in vain.
Round it is whole circle often have navies gone,
And found but sea or lands already known.
When she has seen her empires, cities, kings,
Time must begin to flap his weary wings;
The earth itself to brighter days aspire,
And wish to feel the purifying fire.
NOR think this mighty land of old contained
The plund'ring wretch, or man of bloody mind:
Renowned SACHEMS once their empires raised
On wholesome laws; and sacrifices blazed.
The generous soul inspired the honest breast,
And to be free, was doubly to be blessed:
'Till the east winds did here COLUMBUS blow,
And wondering nations saw his canvas flow.
'Till her CABOT descended on the strand,
And hailed the beauties of the unknown land;
And ravenous nations with industrious toil,
Conspired to rob them of their native soil:
Then bloody wars, and death and rage arose,
And every tribe resolved to be our foes.
Full many a feat of them I could rehearse,
And actions worthy of immortal verse:
Deeds ever glorious to the INDIAN name,
And fit to rival GREEK or ROMAN fame.
But one sad story shall my Muse relate,
Full of paternal love, and full of fate;
Which when even yet the northern shepherd hears,
It swells his breast, and bathes his face in tears,
Prompts the deep groan, and lifts the heaving sigh,
Or brings soft torrents from the female eye.
FAR in the arctic skies, where HUDSON'S BAY
Rolls it is cold wave, and combats with the sea,
A dreary region lifts it is dismal head,
True sister to the regions of the dead.
Here thundering storms continue half the year,
Or deep-laid snows their joyless visage rear:
Eternal rocks, from whose prodigious steep
The angry tiger stuns the neighboring deep;
While through the wild wood, or the shrouded plain,
The moose deer seeks his food, but often seeks in vain.
Yet in this land, froze by inclement skies,
The Indian huts in wild succession rise;
And daily hunting, when the short-lived spring
Shoots joyous forth, the industrious people bring
Their beaver spoils beneath another sky,
PORT NELSON, and each BRITISH factory:
In slender boats from distant lands they sail,
Their small masts bending to the inland gale,
On traffic sent to gain the little store,
Which keeps them plenteous, though it keeps them poor.
Hither CAFFRARO in his slighty boat,
One hapless spring his furry riches brought;
And with him came, for failed he not alone,
His consort COLMA, and his little son.
While yet from land over the deep wave he plough'd,
And toward the shore with manly prowess rowed.
His barque unfaithful to it is trusted freight,
Sprung the large leak, the messenger of fate;
But no lament or female cry was heard,
Each for their fate most manfully prepared,
From bubbling waves to send the parting breath
To lands of shadows, and the shade of death.
O FATE! unworthy such a tender train,
O day, lamented by the Indian swain!
Full often of it the strippling youth shall hear,
And sadly mourn their fortune with a tear:
The Indian maids full often the tale attend,
And mourn their COLMA as they would mourn a friend.
Now while in waves the barque demerg'd, they strive,
Dead with despair, though nature yet alive:
Forth from the shore a friendly brother flew,
In one small boat, to save the drowning crew.
He came, but in his barque of trifling freight,
Could save but two, and one must yield to fate.
O dear CAFFRARO, said the hapless wife,
O save our son, and save thy dearer life:
It Is thou can teach him how to hunt the do,
Transfix the buck, or tread the mountain snow.
Let me the sentence of my fate receive,
And to thy care my tender infant leave.
He sighed nor answered, but as firm as death,
Resolved to save her with his latest breath:
And as suspended by the barque's low side,
He raised the infant from the chilling tide,
And placed it safe; he forced his COLMA too
To save herself, what more could mortal do?
But nobly scorning life, she raised her head
From the flushed wave, and thus divinely said:
OF life regardless, I to fate resign,
But thou, CAFFRARO, art forever mine.
O let thy arms no future bride embrace,
Remember COLMA, and her beauteous face,
Which won thee youthful in thy gayest pride,
With captives, trophies, victors at thy side;
Now I shall quick to blooming regions fly,
A spring eternal, and a nightless sky,
Far to the west, where radiant Sol descends,
And wonders where the arched horizon ends:
There shall my soul thy loved idea keep;
And 'till thy image comes, unceasing weep.
There, though the tiger is but all a shade,
And mighty panthers but the name they had;
And proudest hills, and lofty mountains there,
Light as the wind, and yielding as the air;
Yet shall our souls their ancient feelings have,
More strong, more noble than this side the grave.
There lovely blossoms blow throughout the year,
And airy harvests rise without our care:
And all our fires and mighty ancestors,
Renowned for battles and successful wars,
Behold their sons in fair succession rise,
And hail them happy to serener skies.
There shall I see thee too, and see with joy
Thy future charge, my much loved Indian boy:
The thoughtless infant, whom with tears I see,
Once sought my breast, or hung upon my knee;
Tell him, ah tell him, when in manly years,
His dauntless mind, nor death nor danger fears,
Tell him, ah tell him, how thy COLMA died
His fondest mother, and thy youthful bride:
Point to my tomb through yonder furzy glade,
And show where thou thy much loved COLMA laid.
O may I soon thy blessed resemblance see,
And my sweet infant all revived in thee.
'Till then I Will haunt the bower or lonely shade,
Or airy hills for contemplation made,
And think I see thee in each ghostly shoal,
And think I clasp thee to my weary soul.
Often, often thy form to my expecting eye,
Shall come in dreams with gentle majesty;
Then shall I joy to find my bliss began
To love an angel, whom I loved a man!
She said, and downward in the hoary deep
Plunged her far form to everlasting sleep;
Her parting soul it is latest struggle gave,
And her last breath came bubbling through the wave.
THEN sad CAFFRARO all his grief declares,
And swells the torrent of the gulf with tears;
And senseless stupid to the shore is borne
In death-like slumbers, 'till the rising morn,
Then sorrowing, to the sea his course he bent
Full sad, but knew not for what cause he went,
'Till, sight distressing, from the lonely strand,
He saw dead COLMA wafting to the land.
Then in a stupid agony of prayer,
He rent his mantle, and he tore his hair;
Sighed to the stars, and shook his honored head,
And only wished a place among the dead!
O had the winds been sensible of grief,
Or whispering angels come to his relief;
Then had the rocks not echoed to his pain,
Nor hollow mountains answered him again:
Then had the floods their peaceful courses kept,
Nor the sad pine in all it is murmurs wept;
Nor pensive deer strayed through the lonely grove,
Nor sadly wept the sympathising dove. --
Thus fared the fire through his long days of pain,
Or with his offspring roved the silent plain;
'Till years approaching, bowed his sacred head
Deep in the dust, and sent him to the dead:
Where now perhaps in some strange fancied land,
He grasps the airy bow, and flies across the strand;
Or with his COLMA shares the fragrant grove,
It Is vernal blessings, and the bliss of love.
FAREWELL lamented paid, and whatever state
Now class you round, and sinks you deep in fate;
Whether the firey kingdom of the sun,
Or the slow wave of silent Acheron,
Or Christian's heaven, or planetary sphere,
Or the third region of the cloudless air;
Or if returned to dread nihility,
You Will still be happy, for you will not be.
Now fairest village of the fertile plain,
Made fertile by the labors of the swain;
Who first my drowsy spirit did inspire,
To sing of woods, and strike the rural lyre:
Who last should see He wandering from thy cells,
And groves of oak where contemplation dwells.
Would fate but raise me over the smaller cares,
Of Life unwelcome and distressful years,
Pedantic labors and a hateful ease,
Which scarce the hoary wrinkled sage could please.
Hence springs each grief, each long reflective sigh,
And not one comfort left but poetry.
Long, long ago with her I could have strayed,
To woods, to thickets or the mountain shade;
Unfit for cities and the noisy throng,
The drunken revel and the midnight song;
The gilded beau and scenes of empty joy,
Which please a moment and forever die.
Here then shall center every wish, and all
The tempting beauties of this spacious ball:
No thought ambitious, and no bold design,
But heaven born contemplation shall be mine.
In yonder village shall my fancy stray,
Nor rove beyond the confines of today;
The aged volumes of some plain divine,
In broken order round my hut should shine;
Whose solemn lines should soften all my cares,
And sound devotion to the eternal stars:
And if one fin my rigid breast did stain,
Thou poetry should be the darling sin;
Which heaven without repentance might forgive,
And which an angel might commit and live:
And where yon' wave of silent water falls,
Over the smooth rock or Adamantine walls:
The summer morns and vernal eves should see,
MILTON, immortal bard my company;
Or SHAKESPEARE, DRYDEN, each high sounding name,
The pride of BRITAIN, and one half her fame:
Or him who waked the fairy muse of old,
And pleasing tales of lands enchanted told.
Still in my hand, he his soft verse should find
His verse, the picture of the poets mind:
Or heavenly POPS, who now harmonious mourns,
"Like the rapt seraph that adores and burns."
Then in sharp satire, with a giant's might,
Forbids the blockhead and the fool to write:
And in the center of the bards be shown
The deathless lines of godlike ADDISON;
Who, bard thrice glorious, all delightful flows,
And wrapped the soul of poetry in prose.
NOW cease, O muse, thy tender tale to chaunt,
The smiling village, or the rural haunt;
New scenes invite me, and no more I rove,
To tell of shepherds, or the vernal grove.
THE FARMER'S WINTER EVENING, A POEM. To the NYMPH I never saw.
FAR be the pleasures of the day,
And mirth and festive joy from me,
When cold December nips the plains,
Or frozen January reigns.
Far be the hunts-man's noisy horn,
And coursers fleet through thickets borne,
Swift as the wind, and far the sight,
Of snowy mountains, sadly white;
But thou, O night, with sober charms,
Shall clasp me in thy sable arms.
For thee I love the winter eve,
The noisy day for thee I leave.
Beneath some mountain's towering height,
In cottage low I hail the night,
Where jovial swains, with heart sincere,
And timely mirth dishearten care:
Each tells his tale, or chaunts a song
Of her for whom he sighed so long;
Of CLARA fair, or FLORA coy,
Disdaining still her shepherd boy,
While near the hoary headed sage,
Recalls the days of youthful age,
Describes his course of manly years,
His journey through this vale of tears;
How champion he with champions met,
And fiercely they did combat it,
'Till envious night in ebon chair,
Urged faster on her chariotteer,
And robbed him, O for shame, of glory
And feats fit for renown in story. --
Thus spent in tales the evening hour,
And quaffing juice of sober power,
Which handsome KATE with malt did steep,
To lead on balmy visag'd sleep,
While her neat hand the milk pail strains,
A sav'ry supper for the swains.
And now the moon exalted high,
Gives luster to the earth and sky,
And from the mighty ocean's glass,
Reflects the beauty of her face:
About her orb you may behold,
A thousand stars of burnished gold,
Which slowly to the west retire,
And lose a while their glittering fire.
O COULD I here find my abode,
And live within this fancied wood,
With thee the weeks and years to pass,
My pretty rural shepherdess;
With thee the cooling spring to sip,
Or live upon thy damask lip:
Then sacred groves, and shades divine,
And all ARCADIA should be mine.
Steep me, steep me some poppies deep
In beechen bowl, to bring on sleep;
Love has my mind in shackles kept,
Thrice the cock crew, nor once I slept.
O gentle sleep, wrap me in dreams,
Of fields and woods, and running streams;
Of rivers wide, and castles rare,
And be my lovely FLORA there:
A larger draught, a larger bowl
To gratify my drowsy soul;
"A larger draught is yet in store,
Perhaps with this you wake no more."
Then I my lovely maid shall see thee
Drinking the deep streams of LETHE,
Where now dame ARETHUSA scatters
Her soft stream with ALPHEUS' waters,
To forget her earthly cares,
Lost in LETHE, lost in years!
And I too will quaff the water,
Lest it should be said, O daughter
Of my giddy, wandering brain,
I sighed for one I Have never seen.
THE MISERABLE LIFE OF A PEDAGOGUE.
To form the manners of our youth,
To guide them in the way of truth,
To lead them through the jarring schools,
Arts, sciences, and grammar rules;
Is certainly an arduous work,
Enough to tire out Jew or Turk;
And make a christian bite his nails,
For do his best, he surely fails;
And spite of all that some may say,
His praise is trifling as his pay.
FOR my part I, though versed in booking,
Still saved my carcass from such cooking;
And always slyly shunned a trade,
Too trifling as I thought and said;
But at a certain crazy season,
When men have neither sense or reason:
By some confounded misadventure,
I found myself just in it is center.
ODD'S fish and blood, and noun and neuter,
And tenses present, past and future;
I uttered with a wicked sigh,
Where are my brains, or where am I?
The dullest creature of the wood,
Knows how to shun the distant flood;
Whales, dolphins, and a hundred more,
Are not the fools to run ashore.
WELL, now contented I must be,
Forced by the dame Necessity,
Who like the tribunal of Spain,
Let Us you speak once, but not again;
And swift to execute the blow,
Never tells you why or whence it is so:
Now I am asked a thousand questions,
Of ALEXANDERS and EPHESTIONS;
With fly design to know if I
Am versed in GRECIAN history;
And then again my time destroy,
With awkward grace to tell of TROY:
From that huge giant POLYPHEMUS,
Quite down to ROMULVS and REMUS.
Then I Am obliged to give them lectures,
On quadrants, circles, squares and sectors;
Or in my wretched memory bear,
What weighs a cubic inch of air.
"SIR, here is my son, I beg you would mind,
The graces have been very kind,
And on him all their blessings shed,
[Except a genius and a head]
Teach him the doctrine of the sphere,
The sliding circle and the square,
And starry worlds, I know not where:
And let him quickly learn to say,
Those learned words Penna, Pennae;
Which late I heard our parson call,
As learning, knowledge all in all."
AND there a city dame approaches,
Known by her horsemen, chairs and coaches:
"Sir, here is my son, teach him to speak
The Hebrew, Latin, and the Greek:
And this I half forgot, pray teach
My tender boy -- the parts of speech --
But never let this son of me,
Learn that vile thing Astronomy:
Upon my word it is all a sham," --
O I Am your humble servant ma'am.
There certainly is something, in it --
"Boy, drive the coach off in a minute."
And thus I Am left in street or road,
A laughing stock to half the crowd,
To argue with myself the case,
And prove its being to my face.
A plague I say on such employment,
Where Is neither pleasure nor enjoyment:
Whoever to such a life is tied,
Was born the day he should have died;
Born in an hour when angry spheres
Were tearing caps, or pulling ears:
And Saturn slow against swift Mercurius,
Was meditating battles furious;
Or comets with their blazing train,
Decreed their life, a life of pain.
Upon a very ANCIENT DUTCH HOUSE on LONG ISLAND.
BEHOLD this antique dome by envious time,
Grown crazy, and in every part decayed;
Full well, alas, it claims my humble rhyme,
For such lone haunts and contemplation made.
Ah see the hearth, where once the cheerful fire!
Blazed high, and warmed the winter trav'lers toes;
And see the walls, which once did high aspire,
Admit the storms, and every wind that blows.
In yonder corner, now to ruin gone,
The ancient housewife's curtain'd bed appeared,
Where she and her man JOHN did sleep alone,
Nor nightly robber, nor the screach owl feared.
There did they snore full often the whole night out,
Smoking the sable pipe, 'till that did fall,
Rest from their jaws by Somnus' sleepy rout,
And on their faces poured its scorched gall.
And in the compass of yon' smaller gang,
The swain BATAVIAN once his courtship made,
To some DUTCH lass, as thick as she was long;
"Come then, my angel, come, the shepherd said,
"And let us for the bridal bed prepare;
For you alone shall case my future life,
And you alone shall soften all my care,
My strong, my hearty, and industrious wife."
Thus they -- but eating ruin now has spread
Its wings destructive over the antique dome;
The mighty fabric now is all a shed,
Scarce fit to be the wandering beggar's home.
And none but me it is piteous fate lament,
None, none but me over it is sad ashes mourn,
Sent by the fates, and by APOLLO sent,
To shed their latest tears upon it is silent urn.
ERRATA.
Page 2, Line 5, for bore, read borne. 2, 17, for enrage, read engage. 4, 18,
dele the. 4, 19, for or, read nor. 4, 23, for conclusive, read convulsive. 16,
10, for class, read clasps. 16, 21, for he, read me.

