

THE FRUGAL HOUSEWIFE, OR Complete Woman Cook.

WHEREIN The Art of Dressing all Sorts of Viands, with Cleanliness, Decency,
and Elegance, Is explained in Five Hundred approved RECEIPTS, in Roasting,
Boiling, Frying, Broiling, Gravies, Sauces, Stews, Hashes, Soups, Fricassees,
Ragoos, Pasties, Pies, Tarts, Cakes, Puddings, Syllabubs, Creams, Flummery,
Jellies, Giams, and Custards.


Together with the BEST METHODS of Potting, Collaring, Preserving, Drying,
Candying, Pickling,


And making of ENGLISH WINES.

To which are prefixed, Various BILLS OF FARE, For DINNERS and SUPPERS in every
Month of the Year; and a copious INDEX to the whole.

By SUSANNAH CARTER, Of CLERKENWELL.

LONDON. Printed for F. NEWBERY, at the Corner of St. Paul's Churchyard.

BOSTON: Reprinted and Sold by EDES and GILL, in Queenstreet.

Alphabetical INDEX.
Of ROASTING.
General Directions for Page 1 BEEF Page 1 Cod's Head Page 14 Duck, Tame Page 8
Duck, Wild Page 11 Eels Page 15 Fowls Page 8 Fowls with Chestnuts Page 9 Fowls
the German Way Page 10 Goose Page 8 Goose with Green sauce Page 10 Hare Page 7
Lamb Page 4 Larks Page 13 Mutton Page 2 Mutton Venison Fashion Page 2 Mutton,
Breast of, with Force-meat Page 3 Orto^ans Page 13 Partridges Page 12 Pheasants
Page 12 Pig Page 6 Pigeons Page 10 P^ke Page 14 Plovers Page 12 Pork Page 5
Pork, Chine of Stuffed Page 6 Quails Page 11 Rabbits Page 8 Rabbit, Hare
Fashion Page 8 Ruffs and Reefs Page 13 Snipes Page 11 Teal Page 11 Turkey Page
8 Turkey, with Chestnuts Page 9 Tongue and Udder Page 3 Veal Page 4 Venison Page
7 Wige^^^ Page 11 Woodcock^ Page 11
Of BOILING.
General rules for Page 15 Artichoaks Page 32 Asparagus Page 31 Beans, French
Page 33 Beans, Bro^d Page 32 Beef Page 1^ Brocoli Page 33 Cabbage Page 34
Calf's Head Page 17 Carp Page 26 Carrots Page 36 Chickens Page 19 Cod Page 23
Cod's Head Page 23 Crimp Cod Page 24 Colliflower Page 32 Ducks Page 19 Eels
Page 28 Flounders Page 25 Fowls Page 19 Goose Page 1^ Ham Page 18 Lamb Page 17
Mackrel Page 28 Mutton Page 16 Neat's Tongue Page 18 Partridges Page 22
Parsnips Page 36 Peace, Green Page 34 Pheasants Page 22 Pigeons Page 20 Pike
Page 22 Plaice Page 25 Pork, Leg of Page 10 Pork, Pickled Page 16 Potatoes Page
36 Rabbits ^6 Rabbits, with Onions Page 2^ Salmon Page 2^ Scate Page 24 Snipes
Page 21 Soals Page 25 Spinach Page 35 Sorouts Page 34 Sturgeon Page 25 Tench
Page 27 Turbot Page 22 Turkey Page 19 Turnips Page 35 Turtle Page 28 Veal Page
17 Venison Page 18 Woodcocks Page 21
Of FRYING.
Artichoak Bottom Page 47 Beef Collops Page 40 Beef Steaks Page 38 Calf'^ Liver
and Bacon Page 41 Carp Page 42 Ce^^ary Page 48 Colliflowers Page 47 Eels Page
45 Eggs, as round as Balls Page 42 Flat Fish Page 44 H^r^^ngs Page 45 Lamb,
Loin of Page 38 Lampries Page 45 Mutton Cutlets Page 41 Onions Page 48 Oysters
Page 47 Parsley Page 48 Potatoes Page 48 Sausages with Apples Page 39 Scotch
Collops Page 40 Small F^shes Page 46 Tench Page 42 Tripe Page 37 Trout Page 44
Veal Cutlets Page 40 Veal, Cold Page 39 Sweetb^eads and Kidneys Page 41
BROILING.
Beef Steaks Page 49 Chickens Page 50 Cod Page 50 Cod's Sounds Page 51 Eels
Page 51 Eggs Page 52 Eels spitchcocked Page 52 Haddocks Page 50 Herrings Page
51 Mackrel Page 50 Mutton Chops Page 49 Pigeons Page 49 Pork Chops Page 49
Salmon Page 50 Whitings Page 50
GRAVIES and SAUCES.
Anchovy Sauce Page 61 Apple Sauce Page 59 Bread Sauce Page 60 Butter to melt
Page 57 Butter to burn Page 57 Cellary Sauce Page 58 Cellary Sauce, brown Page
58 Egg Sauce Page 58 Essence of Ham Page 55 Fish Sauce Page 62 Gravy, to draw
Page 53 Gravy, white Page 53 Gravy, without meat Page 53 Gravy, for a Turkey or
Fowl Page 54 Gravy, to make mutton eat like Venison Page 54 Gravy for a Fowl,
when you have no meat Page 54 Gravy for Fish Page 55 Lobster Sauce Page 60
Lemon Sauce Page 59 Mint Sauce Page 60 Mushroom Sauce for roasted or boiled
Page 57 Onion Sauce Page 59 Oyster Sauce Page 61 Pap Sauce Page 60 Parsley
Sauce Page 60 Parsley Sauce, when no Parsley can be got Page 60 Shallot Sauces
Page 58 Shrimp Sauce Page 61 Sauce a pretty one for boiled Fowls Page 59 Sauce
for Fish Pie^ Page 56 Sauce for sweet pies Page 56 Sauce for savory pies Page
56 Sauce for roast meat Page 56 Sauce, a standing one Page 55
STEWING.
Beef Page 62 Beef Collops Page 64 Beef Gobbets Page 63 Beef Steaks Page 64
Breast of Veal Page 66 Brisket of Beef Page 62 Cabbage Page 74 Carp or Ten^h
Page 71 Chickens Page 68 Cod Page 72 Cucumbers Page 74 Ducks Page 70 Eels Page
72 Eggs and Spinach Page 73 Fowl or Turkey Page 68 Gibblets Page 70 Hare Page 67
Hare to jugg Page 67 Knuckle of Veal Page 65 Lettice and Pease Page 74 Muscles
or Oysters Page 7^ Mushrooms Page 75 Mutton Chops Page 66 Neck or Leg of Mutton
Page 67 Neck of Veal Page 65 Ox Palates Page 63 Oysters or Muscles Page 73
Parsnips Page 73 Pea^^ with Lettice Page 74 Pears Page 75 Pig ^6 Pigeons Page
69 Pigeons to jug Page 69 Spinach and Eggs Page 73 Tench or Carp Page 74 Turkey
or Fowl Page 68 Veal in gene^al Page 64 Wild Fowl Page 70
HASHES.
Beef Page 76 Brain Cakes Page 78 Calf's Head brown or wh^te Page 78 79 Fowls
Page 80 Hare Page 80 Lamb's Head and Pluck Page 77 Mutton Page 76 Mock Turtle
Page 79 Veal, to mince Page 77
SOUPS.
Gravy Soup Page 81 G^bblet Soup Page 81 Pea^e Soup Page 82 Green Peace Soup
Page 82 While portable Soup Page 83 Brown portable Soup Page 85 Verm^celli Soup
Page 86 Soup Lorraine Page 87 Sorrel Soup with Eggs Page 88 Asparagus Soup Page
88 C^aw-fish Soup Page 89 Oyster Soup Page 89 Eel Soup Page 89 Brown Soup Page
90 White Soup Page 90 Onion Soup Page 91 Rice Soup Page 92 Turnip Soup Page 92
Soup Meagre Page 93
FRICASSEES.
Artichoak Bottom Page 104 Calf's Head Page 95 Calf's Feet Page 95 Chickens,
white ^00 Chickens, brown ^00 Cod Page 101 Eggs, white or brown ^^^ Flounders
Page 101 Hare ^9 Lamb, brown or white ^6 Lamb-stones and Sweetbreads Page 97
Mushrooms Page 1^4 Neat's Tongue Page 9^ Ox Pala^e Page 94 Pig's ^a^s Page 97
Pig's Pettitoes Page 98 Pigeons Page 100 P^aise Page 101 Rabbits, white Page 99
Rabb^ts, brown Page 99 Soals Page 101 Sw^etbreads Page 96 Tenc^, w^^te or brown
Page 102 Tripe Page 95
RAGOUTS.
A rich Ragout Page 107 Ragouts for made Dishes ^08 Beef, ca^^ed Beef a-la-mode
Page 105 Breast of Veal Page 105 Eggs Page 108 Hog's Feet and Ears Page 107 Leg
of Mutton Page 107 Neck of Veal ^06 Oysters ^^9 Snipes Page 108 Sturgeon Page
109 Veal Sweetbreads Page 106
PASTRY.
Paste for Tarts Page 110 Puff Paste Page 110 Paste for raised Pies Page 110
Paste for Venison Pasties Page 111 Paste Royal Page 111 Paste for Custards Page
111 Artichoak Pie Page 118 Apple Pie Page 119 Battalia Pie Page 115 Calf's Head
Pie Page 116 Carp Pie Page 116 Chicken Pie Page 114 Cherry Pie Page 119 Eel Pie
Page 118 Hare Pie Page 111 Hen Pie Page 114 Lamb Pie Page 112 Lamb Pie, with
currants Page 112 Lamb-(...) and Sweetbread Pie Page 115 Egg Pie Page 116
Flounder Pie Page 117 Gooseberry Pie Page 119 Lamprey Pie Page 118 Lumber Pie
Page 112 Minced Pie Page 116 Mutton Pie Page 113 Neat's Tongue Pie Page 115
Oyster Pie Page 117 Pear Pie Page 119 Pigeon Pie Page 115 Plumb Pie Page 119
Potatoe Pie Page 118 Shrewsbury Pie Page 112 Swee^ Chicken Pie Page 114 Tr^^t
Pie ^18 Turkey Pie Page 115 Venison Pie ^16 Veal Pie Page 113 Umble Pie Page 111
Tarts of diverse kinds.
Ice^ng for Tarts Page 122 Almond Tarts Page 122 Apricot Tarts Page 121 Apple
Tarts Page 120 Lemon Tarts Page 121 Lemon Puffs Page 123 Orange Tarts Page 121
Orange Puffs Page 123 Pear Tarts Page 120
CAKES.
Rich Cakes Page 123 124 Spanish Cake Page 125 Portugal Cake Page 125 Dutch
Cakes Page 125 Shrewsbury Cakes Page 126 Marlborough Cakes Page 126 Queen Cakes
Page 126 Uxbridge Cakes Page 127 A Pound Cake Page 127 Seed Cake Page 127
Almond Cakes Page 128 Saffron Cakes Page 128 Orange Cakes Page 128 Common
Biscuits Page 129 Wigs Page 130 Buns Page 130 Maccaroons Page 130 Fritter^ Page
131 Pancakes Page 131 Cheese Cakes Page 131 Cheese Cakes, without Rennet Page
132 Potatoe or Lemon Cheese Cakes Page 133 A plain boiled Pudding Page 133
Light Pudding Page 134 Quaking Pudding Page 134 Biscuit Pudding Page 134 Plumb
Pudding, boiled Page 135 ^unbridge Pudding Page 135 Custard Pudding Page 135
Hunting Pudding Page 136 Suet Pudding, boiled Page 136 Steak Pudding Page 136
Potatoe Pudding, boiled Page 137 Almond Pudding boiled Page 137 Rice Pudding
boiled Page 137 Prune or Damfon Pudding Page 137 Apple Pudding Page 138 Baked
Pudding Page 138 Bread Pudding, baked Page 138 Millet Pudding Page 138 Marrow
Pudding Page 139 Rice Pudding Page 139 Poor Man's Pudding Page 139 Orange
Pudding Page 140 Carrot Pudding Page 140 Quince, Apricot, or white Pear
Plumb-Pudding Page 141 Italian Pudding Page 141 Apple Pudding, baked Page 141
Norfolk Dumplings Page 142 Hard Dumplings Page 142 Apple Dumplings Page 142
SYLLABUBS, CREAMS, and FLUMMERY.
A fine Syllabub Page 143 Whipped Syllabub Page 143 A fine Cream ^43 Lemon Cream
Page 143 Rasberry Cream Page 144 Whipped Cream Page 144 A Trifle Page 144
Flummery Page 145 Oatmeal Flummery Page 145
JELLIES, GIAMS, and CUSTARDS.
Calf's Feet Jelly Page 146 Hart's horn Jelly Page 146 Current Jelly Page 147
Rasberry Giam Page 147 Custards Page 148 Custards boiled Page 148 Almond
Custards Page 148 Rice Custards Page 149
POTTING.
Beef Page 149 Charrs Page 149 Eels Page 150 Fowls Page 149 Lampreys Page 150
Pigeons Page 149 Trout Page 149 Venison Page 149
COLLARING.
Beef Page 150 Breast of Veal Page 150 Breast of Mutton Page 151 Eels Page 151
Pork Page 151
PRESERVING.
Angelica, to candy Page 158 Apricots to preserve Page 155 Apricots, green Page
155 Pean^, French all the Year Page 152 Bullace Page 153 Cherries Page 156
Cherries, to dry Page 157 Currants, to preserve Page 157 Damsons, to preserve
Page 153 Gooseberries Page 154 Marmalade, to make Page 153 Mulberries, to
preserve Page 153 Peaches, to dry Page 157 Peaches, to preserve Page 154 Peace,
till Christmas Page 152 Plumbs Page 153 Rasberries Page 156
PICKLING.
Asparagus Page 158 Barberries Page 169 Beans, French Page 162 Cabbage Page 162
Cucumbers Page 163 Mangos of Melons Page 159 Mushrooms Page 159 Nastert^um
buds, or seeds Page 159 Onions Page 162 Raddish pods Page 161 ^^mphire Page 161
MADE WINES.
Gooseberry Wine Page 163 Corrant Wine Page 164 Ra^fin Wine Page 164 Rasberry
Wine Page 165 Morella Wine Page 165 Elder Wine Page 165 Cowslip Wine Page 166
Mead Page 166 Balm Wine Page 167 Birch Wine Page 167 Orange Wine Page 168
A BILL of FARE, for every Month in the Year.
In JANUARY.
Dinner.
BEEF-SOUP, made of brisket of beef; and the beef served up in the dish. Turkey
and chin^ roasted, with gravy and onion sauce; minced pies.

Or,

Achb^ne of beef boiled and carrots and savoys, with melted butter; ham, and
fowls roasted, with rich gravy; tarts.

Or,

Vermicelli soup, fore quarter of lamb and sallad in season; fresh salmon, a
sufficient quantity boiled, with smelts fried, and lobster sauce; minced pies.

Supper.
Chickens fricaseed; wild ducks with rich gravy sauce; piece of sturgeon or
brawn, and minced pies.

Or,

A hare with a pudding in its belly, and strong gravy and claret sauce; ben
turkey boiled and oyster sauce, and onion sauce; brawn, and minced pies.

In FEBRUARY.
Dinner.
Chine or saddle of mutton roasted, with pickles; calve's-head boiled and
grilled, garnished with boiled slices of bacon, and with brains mashed with
parsley and butter, salt, pepper, and a little vinegar: the tongue slit and
laid upon the brains; a boiled pudding.

Or,

Ham, and fowls roasted, with gravy sauce; leg of lamb boiled, with spinach.

Or,

A piece of fresh salmon, with lobster sauce, and garnished with fried smelts,
or flounders; chickens roasted and asparagus, with gravy and plain butter.

Supper.
Scotch coll^ps, ducklings, with rich gravy; minced pies.

Or,

Fried soles with shrimp sauce; fore-quarter of lamb roasted, with mint sauce;
dish of ta^ts and cus^ar^s.

In MARCH.
Dinner.
Roast beef, and horse-^add^sh to garn^sh the dis^* salt-f^s^ with egg sauce,
and potatoes or par^^^ps, with melted b^tter; p^as^ (...).

Or,

Ham, and fowls roasted; marrow pudding.

Or*

Leg of mutton boiled, with turnips and caper sauce; co^ boiled, with oyster
sauce and garnished with horseradish; a bread pudding.

Supper.
Scollop or fried oysters; leg of lamb, with spinach; tarts and fruit.

Or,

Fricasee of co^combs, lambstones, and sweetbreads; pigeon pie and marrow
pudding.

In APRIL.
Dinner.
Ham, and chickens roasted, with gravy sauce: a piece of boiled beef, and
carrots and greens.

Or,

A roasted shoulder of veal stuffed, and melted butter; a leg of pork boiled
and pease pudding.

Or,

A dish of fish, (as in season) ^oast beef garnished with horseradish, and
plumb pudding.

Supper.
Fricas^^ of lambstones and sweetbreads, or sucking rabbits, ^oasted pigeons
and asparagus.

Or,

Boiled fowls and bacon, or p^ckled pork, with greens and butter melted; a
baked plu^^^ pudding or tarts.

In MAY.
Dinner.
Beef soup, with herbs well boiled* fillet of veal well stuffed and roasted; a
ham boiled.

Or,

Rump of (...) salted and boiled, with a summer cabbage; fresh salm^^ boiled
and fried smelts to garnish the dish, with lob^^er or shr^m^ sauce.

Or,

(...) of mutton roasted, with a spring sallad, and a dish of fish.

Supper.
(...) roasted, with gravy sauce; (...) coll^ps, with (...), and^. ^^rts.

O^,

(...), with gravy sa^ce; (...).

In JUNE.
(...).
^eg of (...) boiled, with ^apers, (...) and turnips, (...) roasted, with rich
gravy and claret sauce; mar^^w pudd^ng.

Or,

Saddle of grass lamb roasted, with mint sauce and turni^s; turbo^ boiled, with
shrimp and anchovy sauce; a quaking pudding.

Or,

A baunch of venison roasted, with rich gravy and claret sauce; tarts.

Supper.
Fricasee of young rabbits, roast fowls and gravy sauce; goos^berry tarts.

Or,

Makarel boiled, with pla^n butter and makarel herbs; leg of lamb boiled and
spinach.

In JULY.
Dinner.
Green Goose, with gravy sauce, neck of veal boiled, with bacon and greens.

Or,

Roasted pig, with proper sauce of gravy and brain^, pretty well seasoned;
mackarel boiled, with melted butter and herbs; green pease.

Or,

Mackarel boiled, with melted butter and herbs; fore-quarter of lamb, with
sallad of ^oss lettuce, etc.

Supper.
Chickens roasted, with gravy or egg sauce; lobsters or prawns; green pease.

Or,

Stewed crap; ducklings, with gravy sauce, and pease.

In AUGUST.
Dinner.
Ham, and fowls roasted, with gravy sauce; beans.

Or,

Neck of venison, with gravy and claret sauce; fresh salmon, with lobster
sauce; apple pie, hot and buttered.

Or,

Beef a-la-mode; green pease; haddock boiled, and fried sole^ or flounders to
garnish the dish.

Supper.
White fricassee of chickens; green pease; ducks roasted, with gravy sauce.

Or,

Ch^ckens or pigeons roasted, with asparagus; artich^kes, with melted butter.

In SEPTEMBER.
Dinner.
Green pe^se soup; breast of veal roasted; boiled plain pudding.

Or,

Leg of lamb boiled, with turnips, spinach and cape^ sauc^^ goose roasted, with
gravy, mustard, and apple sauce; (...) pigeon pie.

Supper.
Boiled pullets, with oyster sauce, greens and bacon; dish of fried soles.

Or,

A leveret, with gravy sauce; wild ducks, with gravy sauce and onion sauce;
apple pie.

In OCTOBER.
Dinner.
Cod's head, with shrimp and oyster sauce; knuckle of veal and bacon, and
greens.

Or,

Leg of mutton boiled, with turnips and caper sauce; Scotch collops; fresh
salmon boiled, with shrimp and anchovy sauce.

Or,

Calf's head dressed turtle fashion; roast beef, with horseradish; beef soup.

Supper.
Wild ducks, with gravy sauce; scoll^ped oysters; min^^^ pies.

Or,

Fried smelts, with anchovy sauce; boiled fowl, with oyster sauce; minced pies
or tarts.

In NOVEMBER.
Dinner.
A roasted goose, with gravy, and apple sauce, and mustard; cod's head, with
oyster sauce; minc^d pies.

Or,

Roast tongue and udder; roast fowls and pigeon pie.

Supper.
Stewed carp, calf's head hashed; minced pies.

In DECEMBER.
Dinner.
Ham, and fowls roasted, with greens and gravy sauce; gravy soup; fresh salmon,
garnished with whiting or tro^t fried, and with anchovy sauce.

Or,

Cod's head, with shrimp and oyster sauce; roast beef, garnished with
horseradish, and plumb pudding boiled.

Or,

Roast beef, with horseradish; marrow pudding, and Scotch collops.

Supper.
Brawn; pullets boiled and oyster sauce: minced pies.

Or,

Broiled chickens with mushrooms; a ^are or wild ducks, with rich gravy sauce,
minced pies.



THE FRUGAL HOUSEWIFE.
CHAP. I. Of ROASTING.
General Rules to be observed in Roasting.
YOUR fire must be made in proportion to the piece you are to dress; that is,
if it be a little or thin piece, make a small brisk fire that it may be done
quick and nice; but if a large joint* observe to lay a good fire to cake, and
let it be always clear at the bottom. Allowing a quarter of an hour for every
pound of meat at a steady fire, your expectations will hardly ever fail, from a
surloin of beef to a small joint: Nevertheless, I shall mention some few
observations as to beef, mutton, lamb, veal, pork, etc.

BUTCHERS MEAT.
To roast Beef.
If it be a surloin or chump, butter a piece of writing paper, and fasten it on
to the back of your meat, with small skewers, and lay i^ down to a soaking
fire, at a proper distance. As soon as your meat is warm, dust on some flour,
and baste it with butter; then sprinkle some salt, and, at times, baste with
what drips from it. About a quarter of an hour before you take it up, remove
the paper, dust on a little flour, and baste with a piece of butter, that it
may go to table with a good froth* Garnish your dish with scraped
horse-raddish; and serve it up with potatoes, broccali* French beans,
colliflower, horse raddish, or cellary.

To roast Mutton.
If a chine, or saddle of mutton, let the s^in be raised, and then skewered on
again* this will prevent it from scorching, and make it eat mellow: A quarter
of an hour before you take it up, take off the skin, dust on some flour, and
baste it with butter: Sprinkle on a little salt. As the chine, saddle, and leg,
are the largest joints, they require a stronger fire than the shoulder, neck,
or loin* ^arnish with scraped horse-raddish; and serve it up with potatoes,
brocali, French beans, colliflower, water cresses, or horse-raddish.

You may serve up a shoulder of mutton with onion sauce, if approved of.

To roast Mutton, Venison fashion.
Take a hind quarter of fat mutton, and cu^ the leg l^ke a haunch; lay it in a
pan with the backside of it down, pour a bottle of re^^wine over it, and let
it lie twenty-four hours* then spit it, and baste it with the same liquor and
butter all the time it is roasting at a good quick fire, and two hours and a
half will do it. Have a little good gravy in a cup, and current jelly in
another. A good fat neck of mutton eats finely done thus.

To roast a Breast of Mutton with Forced meat.
A breast of mutton dressed thus is very good; the forced meat must be put
under the skin at the end, and then the skin pinned down with horns; before you
dredge it, wash it over with a bunch of feathers dipped in eg^^. Garn^^^ with
lemon, and put good gravy in the dish.

A Shoulder or Leg of Mutton stuffed.
Stuff a leg of mutton with mutton suet, salt, pepper, nutmeg, and the yolks of
eggs: then roast it, stick it all over with cloves, and when it is about half
done, cu^ off some of the under side of the fleshy end in little bi^s, put
those into a pipkin with a pint of oysters, liquor and all, a little salt and
mace, and half a pint of hot water; stew them till half the liquor is wasted,
then put in a piece of butter rolled in flour, shake all t^gether, and when the
mutton is done enough, take it up; pour the sauce over it, and send it to table.

To roast a Tongue, or Udder.
Parboil it first, then roast it: stick eight or ten cloves about it; baste it
with buttter, and send it up with gravy and sweet sauce. An udder eats very
well done the same way.

To roast Lamb.
Lay it down to a clear good fire, that will want little stirring; then baste
it with butter, and dust on a little flour; baste it with what falls from it:
and a little before you take it up, baste it again with butter, and sprinkle on
a little salt and parsley shred fine. Send it up to table with a nice salad,
mint sauce, green peace, french beans, or colliflower.

To roast Veal.
When you roast the loin, or fillet, paper the udder of the fillet, to preserve
the fat, and the back of the loin, to prevent it from scorching; lay the meat
at first some distance from the fire, that it may soak; baste it well with
butter, then dust on a little flour. When it has soaked some time, draw it
nearer the ^^re: And a little before you take it up, baste it again. Most
people choose to stuff a fillet. The breast you must roast with the caul on, and
the sweetbread skewered on the backside: When it is near enough, take off the
caul, and baste it with butter. It is proper to have a toast nicely baked, and
laid in the dish with a loin of veal. Garnish with lemon.

The stuffing for a fillet of veal is made in the following manner; take about
a pound of grated bread, half a pound of suet, some parsley shred fine, thyme,
marjorum, or savory, which you like best, a little grated nutmeg, lemon peel,
pepper and salt, and mix these well together with the whites and yolks of eggs.

To roast Pork.
Pork requires more doing than any other meat; and it is best to sprinkle it
with a little salt the night before you use it, and hang it up; by that means
it will take off the faint, sickly taste.

When you roast a chine of pork, lay it down to a good fire, and at proper
distance, that it may be well soaked.

A spare-rib is to be roasted with a fire that is not too strong, but clear;
when you lay it down, dust on some flour, and baste it with butter: A quarter
of an hour before you take it up, shred some sage small; baste your pork; strew
on the sage; dust on a little flour, and sprinkle a little salt before you take
it up.

A loin must be cut on the skin in small streaks; and then basted; but put no
flour on, which would make the skin bli^ter: And see that it is jointed before
you lay it down to the fire.

A leg of pork is often roasted with s^ge and onion shred fine, with a little
pepper and sal^* and stuffed at the knuckle, with the gravy in the dish; But a
better way is this, parboil it first, and take off the skin; lay it down to a
good clear fire: Baste it with butter, then shre^ some sage fine, and mix it
with pepper, salt, nutmeg, and bread crumbs: Strew this over it the time it is
roasting: Baste it again with butter just before you take it up, that it may be
of a fine brown, and have a nice froth: Send up some good gravy in the dish,
and serve it up with apple sauce and potatoes. A griskin roasted in this manner
eats finely.

To stuff a Chine of Pork.
Make a stuffing of the fat leaf of pork, parsley, thyme, sage, eggs, and
crumbs of bread: season it with pepper, salt, shalot and nutmeg, and stuff it
thick, then roast it gently, and when it is about a quarter roasted, cut the
skin in slips, and make your sauce with apples, lemon peel, two or three cloves
and a blade of mace, sweeten it with sugar, put some butter in, and have
mustard in a cup.

To roast a Pig.
Spit your pig, and lay it down to a clear fire, kept good at both ends: Put
into the belly a few sage leaves, a little pepper and salt, a little crust of
bread, and a bit of butter, then sew up the belly; flour it all over very well,
and do so till the eyes begin to start. When you find the skin is tight and
crisp, and the eyes are dropped, put two plates into the dripping pan, to save
what gravy comes from it: Put a quarter of a pound of butter into a clean
course cloth, and rub all over it, till the flour is quite taken off; then take
it up into your dish, take the sage, etc. out of the belly, and chop it small;
cut off the head, open it, and take out the brains, which chop, and put the
sage and brains into half a pint of good gravy, with a piece of butter rolled
in flour; then cut your pig down the back, and lay it flat in the dish: Cut off
the two ears, and lay one upon each shoulder; take off the under jaw, cut it in
two, and lay one upon each side: put the head between the shoulders; pour the
gravy out of the plates into your sauce and then into the dish: Send it to
table garnshed with a lemon, and if you please pap sauce in a basin.

GAME and POULTRY.
To roast Venison.
After the haunch of venison is spitted, take a piece of butter, and rub all
over the fat, dust on a little flour, and sprinkle a little salt: Then take a
sheet of writing-paper, butter it well, and lay over the fat part; put two
sheets over that, and tie the paper on with small twine: Keep it well basted,
and let there be a good soaking fire. If a large haunch, it will take full
three hours to do it. Five minutes before you send it to table, take off the
paper, dust it over with a little flour, and baste it with butter; let it go up
with a good froth; put no gravy in the dish, but send it in one boat, and
current jelly melted, in another.

To roast a Hare.
Case and truss your hare, and then make a pudding thus. A quarter of a pound
of beef suet minced fine; as much bread crumbs; the liver chopped fine; parsley
and lemon peel shred fine, seasoned with pepper, salt, and nutmeg. Moisten it
with an egg, and put it into the hare; sew up the belly, and lay it down to a
good fire: Let your dripping-pan be very clean, put into it a quart of milk,
and six ounces of butter, and baste it with this till the whole is used: About
five minutes before you take it up, dust on a little flour, and baste with
fresh butter, that it may go to table with a good froth. Put a little gravy in
the dish, and the rest in a boat: Garnish your dish with lemon.

To roast Rabbits.
Baste them with good butter, and drudge them with a little flour. Half an hour
will do them, at a very quick clear fire; and, if they are very small, twenty
minutes will do them. Take the livers, with a little bunch of parsley, and boil
them, and then chop them very fine together. Melt some good butter, and put
half the liver and parsley into the butter; pour it into the dish, and garnish
the dish with the other half. Let your rabbits be done of a fine light brown.

To roast a Rabbit Hare fashion.
Lard a rabbit with bacon; put a pudding in its belly, and roast it as you do a
hare, and it eats very well. Send it up with gravy sauce.

To roast a Turkey, Goose, Duck, Fowl, etc.
When you roast a turkey, goose, fowl, or chicken, lay them down to a good
fire. Singe them clean with white paper, baste them with butter, and dust on
some flour. As to time, a large turkey will take an hour and twenty minutes; a
middling one a full hour; a full grown goose* if young an hour; a large fowl
three quarters of an hour; a middling one half an hour, and a small chicken
twenty minutes; but this depends entirely on the goodness of your fire.

When your fowls are thoroughly plump, and the smoke draws from the breast to
the fire, you may be sure that they are very near done. Then baste them with
butter; dust on a very little flour, and as soon as they have a good froth,
serve them up.

Geese and ducks are commonly seasoned with onions, sage, and a little pepper
and salt.

A turkey, when roasted, is generally stuffed in the craw with force-meat; or
the following stuffing: Take a pound of veal, as much grated bread, half a
pound of suet cut and beat very fine, a little parsley, with a small matter of
thyme, or savory* two cloves, half a nutmeg grated, a tea-spoon full of shred
lemon peel, a little pepper and salt, and the yolks of two eggs.

Sauce for a Turkey. Good gravy in a dish; and either bread, onion, or oyster
sauce in a basin.

Sauce for a Goose. A little good gravy in one basin, and some apple sauce in
another.

For a Duck. A little gravy in the dish, and onions in a tea-cup.

Sauce for Fowls. Parsley and butter; or gravy in the dish, and either bread
sauce, oysters sauce or egg sauce in a basin.

A Fowl, or Turkey, roasted with Chestnuts.
Roast a quarter of a hundred of chestnuts, and peel them; save out eight or
ten, the rest bruise in a mortar, with the liver of the fowl, a quarter of a
pound of ham well pounded, sweet herbs and parsley chopped fine: Season it with
mace, nutmeg, pepper and salt: Mix all these together, and put them into the
belly of your fowl: Spit it, and tie the neck and vent close. For sauce, take
the rest of the chestnuts, cut them in pieces, and put them into a strong gravy,
with a glass of white wine: Thicken with a piece of butter rolled into flour.
Pour the sauce in the dish, and garnish with orange and watercresses.

To roast a green Goose with green Sauce.
Roast your goose nicely; in the mean time, make your sauce thus: Take half a
pint of the juice of sorrel, a spoonful of white wine, a little grated nutmeg,
and some grated bread; boil this over a gentle fire, and sweeten it with
pounded sugar to your taste; let your goose have a good froth on it before you
take it up; put some good strong gravy in the dish, and the same in a boat.
Garnish with lemon.

The German way of dressing Fowls.
Take a turkey or fowl, stuff the breast with what force meat you like, fill
the body with roasted chestnuts peeled, and lay it down to roast; take half a
pint of good gravy, with a little piece of butter rolled in flour: boil these
together, with some small turnips and sausages cut in slices, and fried or
boiled Garnish with chestnuts.

Note. You may dress ducks the same way.

To roast Pigeons.
Take a little pepper and salt, a small pie^^^ of butter, and some parsley cut
small; (...) these together, put them into the bellies of your pigeons, tying
the neck ends tight* take another string, fasten one end of it to their legs
and rumps, and the other to the mantlepiece. Keep them constantly turning
round, and baste them with butter. When they are done, take them up, lay them
in a dish, and they will swim with gravy.

Wild Ducks, Widgeons, or Teal.
Wild fowl are in general liked rather under done; and if your fire is very
good and brisk, a duck or Widgeon will be done in a quarter of an hour; for as
soon as they are well hot through, they begin to loose their gravy, and if not
drawn off, will eat hard. A teal is done in little more than ten minutes.

To roast Woodcocks or Snipes.
Spit them on a small bird spit; flour them, and baste them with butter: Have
ready a slice of bread, toasted brown, which lay in a dish and set it under
your birds, for the trail to drop on. When they are enough, take them up, and
lay them on the toast; put some good gravy in the dish and some melted butter
in a cup. Garnish with orange or lemon.

To roast Quails.
Truss them, and stuff their bellies with beef suet and sweet herbs shred very
fine, and seasoned with a little spice: When they grow warm* baste them with
salt and water, then drudge them, and baste them with butter. For sauce,
dissolve an anchovy in good gravy, with two or three shalots shred very fine,
and the juice of a Seville orange; dish them up in this sauce, and garnish your
dish with fried bread crumbs, and lemon; send them to table as hot as possible.

To roast Pheasants.
Take a brace of pheasants, lard them with small lards of bacon; butter a piece
of white paper, and put over the breasts, and about ten minutes before they are
done, take off the paper; flour and baste them with nice butter, that they may
go to table with a fine froth: Put good gravy in the dish, and bread sauce, as
for partridges, in a boat; garnish your dish with lemon.

To roast Partridges.
When they are a little under-roasted, drudge them with flour, and baste them
with fresh butter: Let them go to table with a fine froth, and gravy sauce in
the dish, and bread sauce in a basin. Make your bread sauce thus: Take a good
piece of stale bread, and put it into a pint of water, with some whole pepper,
a blade of mace, and a bit of onion: Let it boil till the bread is soft; the^
take out the spice and onion; pour out the water, and beat the bread with a
spoon till it is like pap; put in a good piece of butter, and a little salt;
set it over the fire for two or three minutes; then put it into your boat.
Garnish your partridges with sliced orange or lemon.

To roast Plovers.
Green plovers are roasted as you do woodcocks: Lay them upon a toast, and put
good gravy sauce in the dish. Gray plovers are roasted, or stewed, thus: Make a
force meat of artichoak bottoms cut small, seasoned with pepper, salt, and
nutmeg: Stuff the bellies, and put the birds into a sauce pan with a good gravy
just to cover them, a glass of white wine, and a blade of mace; cover them
close, and stew them softly, till they are tender; then take up your plovers
into the dish; put in a piece of butter, rolled in flour, to thicken your
sauce; let it boil till smooth; squeeze in a little lemon; scum it clean, and
pour it over the birds. Garnish with orange.

To roast Larks.
Truss your larks with the legs across, and put a sage leaf over the breast;
put them upon a long fine skewer, and between every lark a little piece of thin
bacon; then tie the sk^wers to a spit, and roast them at a quick, clear fi^e,
baste them with butter, and strew over them some crumbs of bread mixed with
flour: fry some bred crumbs of a nice brown, in a bit of butter; lay your larks
round in your dish, the bread cr^mbs in the middle, with a sliced orange for
garnish. Send good gravy in a dish.

To roast Ortolans.
You may lard them with bacon, or roast them without, putting a vine leaf
between each; spit them side-ways, baste them with butter, and strew bread
crumbs on them while Roasting: Send them to table with fried bread crumbs
a-round them, garnished with lemon, and a good gravy sauce in a boat.

To dre^s Ruffs and R^efs.
You may fatten them as you do chickens, with white bread, milk and sugar: They
feed fast, and will die in their fattening, if not killed in time. When you
dress them, draw them, and truss them cross-legged, as you do snipes, and spit
them the same way; lay them upon a buttered toast, pour good gravy into the
dish, and serve them up quick.

Of FISH.
To roast a Cod's Head.
Take the head, wash and scour it very clean, then scotch it with a knife,
strew a little salt on it, and law it on a stew pan before the fire, with
something behind it: throw away the water that runs from it the first half
hour, then strew on it some nutmeg, cloves, mace, and salt, and baste it often
with butter, turning it till it is enough. If it be a large head it will take
four or five hours roasting; then take all the gravy of the fish, as much white
wine, and more meat gravy, some horse-raddish, one or two shalots, a little
sliced ginger, some whole pepper, cloves, mace, and nutmeg, a bay leaf or two;
boil this liquor up with butter, and the liver of the fish boiled, broke, and
strained into it, with the yolks of two or three eggs, oysters, shrimps, and
balls made of fish; place fried fish round it. Garnish with lemon, and
horse-raddish.

To roast a Pike.
Take a large pike, gut it, clean it, and lard it with eel and bacon, as you
lard a fowl; then take thyme, savory, salt, mace, nutmeg, some crumbs of bread,
beef suet, and parsley, shred all very fine, and mix it up with raw eggs; make
it in a long pudding, and put it in the belly of your pike; sew up the belly,
and dissolve three anchovies in butter, to baste it with; put two splints on
each side the pike, and tie it to the spit: melt butter thick for the sauce; or
if you please, oyster sauce, and brui^e the pudding in it. Garnish with lemon.

To roast an Eel.
Take a large eel, and scour him well with salt; skin him almost to the tail;
then gut, wash, and dry him; take a quarter of a pound of suet, shred as fine
as possible; put to it sweet herbs, a shalot likewise shred very fine, and mix
them together, with some salt, pepper, and grated nutmeg; scotch your eel on
both sides, the breadth of a finger's distance, wash it over with yolks of
eggs, lay some seasoning over it, and stuff the belly with it; then draw the
skin over it, put a long skewer through it, and tie it to the spit, baste it
with butter, and make the sauce of anchovies and butter melted.

CHAP. II. Of BOILING.
General Rules to be observed in boiling.
BE very careful that your pots and covers are well tinned, very clean, and
free from sand. Mind that your pot really boils all the while; otherwise you
will be disappointed in dressing any joint, though it has been a proper time
over the fire. Fresh meat should be put in when the water (...)* and salt meat
whilst it is cold. Take car^ likewise to have sufficient room and water in the
pot* and allow a quarter of an hour to every p^und of meat, let it weigh more
or less.

BUTCHERS MEAT.
To boil Beef or Mutton.
When your meat is put in, and the pot boils, take care to scum it very clean,
otherwise the scum will boil down, stick to your meat, and make it look black.
Send up your di^h with turnips, greens, potatoes, or carrots. If it be a leg or
loin of mutton, you may al^^ put melted butter and capers in a boat.

To boil a Leg of Pork.
A leg of pork must lie in salt six or seven days; after which put into the pot
to be boiled, without using any means to freshe^ it. It requires much water to
swim in over the fire, and also to be fully boiled; so that care should be
taken, that the fire does not slacken while it is dressing. Serve it up with a
pease pudding, melted butter, Durham mustard, buttered turnips, carrots or
greens.

N. B. The other joints of the swine are most commonly roasted.

To boil Pickled Pork.
Wash the pork, and scrape it clean. Put it in when the water is cold, and boil
it till the ^ind be tender It is to be served up always with boiled greens, and
is most commonly i^^^lf a sauce to boiled fowls or veal.

To boil Veal.
Let the pot boil, and have a good fire when you put in the meat; be sure to
scum it very clean. A knuckle of veal will take more boiling in proportion to
its weight, than any other joint, because the beauty is to have all the
gristles soft and tender.

You may either send up boiled veal with parsley and butter; or with bacon and
greens.

To boil a Calf's Head.
The head must be picked very clean, and soaked in a large pan of water, a
considerable time before it be put into the pot. Tie the brains up in a rag*
and put them into the pot at the ^ame time with the head* (...) the pot well;
then put in a piece of bacon, in proportion to the number of people to eat
thereof. You will find it to be enough by the tenderness of the flesh about
that part that joined to the neck. When enough you may gr^ll it before the
fire, or serve it up with melted butter, bacon and greens, and with the brains
mushed and bea^ up with a little butter, salt, pepper, vinegar or lemon, sage,
and parsley, in a separate plate, and the tongue slit and laid in the same
p^^te; or serve the brains whole, and the tongue slit down the midd^e.

To boil Lamb.
A leg of lamb of five pounds will not be boiled in less than an hour and a
quarter; and if, as it ought to be, it be boiled in a good deal of water, and
your pot be kept clean scummed, you may dish it up as white as a curd. Send it
to table with stewed spinach; and melted butter in a boat.

To boil a Neat's Tongue.
A dried tongue should be soaked over night, when you dress it put it into cold
water, and let it have room; it will take at least four hours. A green tongue
out of the pickle, need not be soaked, but will require near the same time. An
hour before you dish it up, take it out and blanch it, then put it into the pot
again till you want it, this will make it eat the tenderer.

To boil a Ham.
A ham requires a great deal of water, therefore put it into the copper cold,
and let it only simmer for two hours, and allow a full quarter of an hour to
every pound of ham; by this means your ham will eat tender and well.

A dry ham should be soaked in water over night; a green one does not require
soaking. Take care they are well cleaned before you dress them.

Before you send a ham to table take off the rind, and sprinkle it over with
bread crumbs, and put in an oven for a quarter of an hour: or you may crisp it
with a hot salamander.

To boil a Haunch of Venison.
Salt the haunch well, and let it lay a week; then boil it with a colliflower,
some turnips, young cabbages and beet roots; lay your venison in the dish,
dispose the garden things ^ound it, and send it to table.

GAME and POULTRY.
To boil a Turkey, Fowl, Goose, Duck, etc.
Poultry are best boiled by themselves, and in a good deal of water; scum your
pot clean, and you need not be afraid of their going to table of a bad color.
A large turkey, with a force-^^at in the craw, will take two hours; one
without, an hour and a half; a hen turkey, three quarters of an hour; a large
fowl, forty minutes; a small one, half an hour; a large chicken twenty minutes,
and a small one, a quarter of an hour. A full grown goose salted, an hour and a
half; a large duck, near an hour.

Sauce for boiled Turkey. Take a little water, a bit of thyme, an onion, a
blade of mace, a little lemon peel and an anchovy; boil these together, and
strain them through a sieve, adding a little melted butter. Fry a few sausages
to lay round the dish, and garnish with lemon.

Sauce for a Fowl. Parsley and butter; or white oyster sauce.

For a Goose. Onions, or cabbage, first boiled, and then stewed in butter for a
few minutes.

For Ducks. They should be smothered with onions.

Chickens boiled with Cellery Sauce.
Put two fine chickens into a sauce-pan to boil, and in the mean time prepare
the sauce; take the white part of two bunches of cellery, cut about an inch and
a half long, and boil it till tender; strain off the water, and put the cellery
into a stew pan, with half a pint of cream, and a piece of butter rolled in
flour; season with pepper and salt; set it over a clear fire, and keep it
stirring till it is smooth, and of a good thickness. Have ready half a dozen
rashers of bacon; take up your chickens, pour your sauce into the dish, and put
the rashers of bacon, and sliced lemon round.

To boil Pigeons.
Let the pigeons be boiled by themselves for about a quarter of an hour; then
boil a proper quantity of bacon* cut square, and lay it in the middle of the
dish. Stew some spinach to put round, and lay the pigeons o^ the spinach.
Garnish with parsley dried crisp before the fire.

To boil Rabbits.
Truss your rabbits close; boil them of white; for sauce, take the livers,
which, wh^^ boiled, bruise with a spoon very fine, and take out all the
strings; put to this some good vea^ broth, a little parsley shred fine, and
some barbaries clean picked from the stalks; season it with mace and nutmeg;
thicken it with a piece of butter rolled in flour, and a little white wine: Let
your sauce be of a good thickness, and pour it over your rabbits. Garnish with
lemon^ and barberries.

To boil Rabbits with Onions.
Truss your rabbits short, with the heads turned over their shoulders: Let them
be boiled off very white: Boil some large onions in a good deal of water, till
they are very tender; put them into a cullender, and when drained, pass them
through it with a good piece of butter, a little salt, and a gill of cream:
Stir them over the fire till they are of a good thickness; then dish up your
rabbits, and pour the onions over them. Garnish with lemon and raw parsley.

To boil Woodcocks, or Snipes.
Boil them either in beef gravy, or good strong broth made in the best manner;
put your gravy, when made to your mind, into a sauce-pan, and season it with
salt; take the guts of your snipes out clean, and put them into your gravy, and
let them boil; let them be covered close, and kept boiling, and then ten
minutes will be sufficient. In the mean time, cut the guts and liver small.
Take a small quantity of the liquor your snipes are boiled in, and stew the
guts with a blade of mace. Take some crumbs of bread (about the quantity of the
inside of a stale roll,) and have them ready fried crisp in a little fresh
butter; when they are done, let them stand ready in a plate before the fire.
When your snipes or woodcocks are ready, take about half a pint of the liquor
they are boiled in, and put in two spoonfuls of red wine to the guts, and a
lump of butter rolled in flour, about as big as a walnut: set them on the fire
in a sauce-pan. Never stir it with a spoon, but shake it well till the butter
is all melted; then put in your crumbs; shake your sauce pan well; then take
your birds up, and pour your sauce over them.

To boil Pheasants.
Let them be dressed in a good deal of water; if large, three quarters of an
hour will do them, if small, half an hour. For sauce, use stewed cellery,
thickened with cream, and a piece of butter rolled in flour, a little salt, and
nutmeg grated, and a spoonful of white wine; pour the sauce over them; and
garnish with orange cut in quarters.

To boil Partridges.
Boil them quick, and in a good deal of water; a quarter of an hour will do
them.

For sauce, parboil the livers, and scald some parsley: Chop these fine; and
put them into some melted butter, squeeze in a little lemon, give it a boil up,
and pour it over the birds. Garnish with lemon.

But this is a more elegant Sauce.

Take a few mushrooms, fresh peeled, and wash them clean, put them in a
sauce-pan with a little salt, set them over a quick fire, let them boil up,
then put in a quarter of a pint of cream, and a little nutmeg; shake them
together with a very little piece of butter rolled in flour, give it two or
three shakes over the fire, ^hree or four minutes will do; then pour it over
the birds.

Of FISH.
To boil a Turbot.
A turbot ought to be put into pump water, with salt and vinegar, for two hours
before it is dressed. In the mean time, put a sufficiency of water into a
fish-kettle, with a stick of horse-raddish sliced, a handful of salt, and a
faggot of sweet herbs. When the water tastes of the seasoning, take it off the
fire, and let it cool a little, to prevent the fish from breaking. Put a
handful of salt into the mouth and belly of the turbot, put it into the kettle,
and boil it gently; a middling turbot will take about twenty minutes.

When it is enough, drain it a little: lay it upon a dish sufficiently large,
and garnish with fried smelts, sliced lemon, scraped horse-raddish, and
barberries.

Sauce. Lobster sauce, anchovy sauce, and plain butter in separate basins.

To boil a Cod.
Gut and wash the fish very clean inside and out, and rub the back bone with a
handful of salt; put it upon a fish plate, and boil it gently till it be
enough; and remember always to boil the liver along with it. Garnish with
scraped horseradish, small fried fish, and and sliced lemon.

Sauce. Oyster sauce, shrimp sauce, or lobster sauce, with plain melted butter
in different boats, and mustard in a tea-cup.

To boil a Cod's Head.
After tying your cod's head round with pack-thread, to keep it from flying,
put a fish-kettle on the fire, large enough to cover it with water; put in some
salt, a little vinegar, and some horseradish sliced; when the water boils, lay
your fish upon a drainer, and put it into the kettle; let it boil gently till
it rises to the surface of the water, which it will do, if your kettle is large
enough; then take it out, and set it to drain; slide it carefully off your
drainer into your fish plate. Garnish with lemon, and horseradish scraped.

Have oyster sauce in one basin, and shrimp sauce in another.

To boil Crimp Cod.
Cut a cod into slices, and throw it into pump water and salt: set over your
stove a large fish kettle, or turbot-pan, almost full of spring water, and salt
sufficient to make it brackish; let it boil quick, then put in your slices of
cod, and keep it boiling and clean scum'd: in about eight minutes the fish will
be enough; then take the slices carefully up, and lay them on a fish plate.
Garnish your dish with horse radish, lemon and raw parsley.

Send shrimp sauce in one boat, and oyster sauce in one other.

You may if you please, take some of the largest slices, flour them, and broil
them to a fine brown, and send them in a dish for the lower end of the table.

To boil Scate.
Great care must be taken in cleaning this fish, and as it is commonly too
large to be boil^d in a pan at once, the best way is to cut it into long slips
cross-ways, about an inch broad and throw it into salt and water; and if the
water boils quick it will be enough i^ three minu^es. Drain it well, and serve
it up with butter and mustard in one basin, and anchovy sauce in another.

You may, if you please place spitch cocked ^eels, round about the scate.

To boil Soals.
Clean the soals well, and having laid them two hours in vinegar, salt and
water, dry them in a cloth, and then put them into a fish-pan with an onion,
some whole pepper, and a little salt. Cover the pan, and let them boil till
enough. Serve them up with anchovy sauce, and butter melted plain; or with
shrimp or muscle sauce.

To boil Plaice and Flounders.
Let the pan boil; throw some salt into the water; then put in the fish; and
(being boiled enough) take it out with a slice, and drain it well. Serve it up
with parsley boiled, to garnish the edges of the dish; and with a basin of
butter melted plain, and anchovy sauce, or butter melted with a little catchup.

To boil Sturgeon.
Having cleaned the sturgeon well, boil it in as much liquor as will just cover
it, adding two or three bits of lemon peel, some whole pepper, a stick of
horseradish, and a pint of vinegar, to every two quarts of water. When it is
enough, garnish the dish with fried oysters, sliced lemon, and scraped
horseradish; and serve it up with a sufficient quantity of melted fresh
butter, with cavear dissolved in it; or (where that is not to be had) with
anchovy sauce, and with the body of a crab bruised in the butter, and a little
lemon-juice, served up in basins.

To boil Salmon.
Let it be well scraped and cleansed fr^^ scales and blood; and after it has
lain abo^^ an hour in salt and spring water, put it (...) a fish-kettle, with a
proportionate quant^^^ of salt and horse radish, and a bunch of sw^^^ herbs.
Put it in while the water is lu^^^warm, and boil it gently till enough, (...)
about half an hour, if it be thick; or twe^^ty minutes, if it be a small piece.
(...) off the water, dry it well, and dish it (...) upon a fish-plate, in the
center, and g^^^nish the dish with horse rad^sh scraped* ((...) done for roast
beef,) or (...) fried smelts (...) gudgeons, and with slices of lemon round
(...).

The sauce to be melted butter, with (...) without anchovy, shrimp or lobster
sauce, (...) in different basins, served up with the fish.

To boil Carp.
Take a brace of large carp, scale the^ and slit the tails, let them bleed into
abo^^ half a pint of red wine, with half a nutm^^ grated; (keep it stirring, or
the blood (...) congeal) then gut and wash them very clea^ boil the roes first,
and then the carp, as y^^ would do any other fish, then fry them; (...) some
sippets cut corner-ways; dip some (...) oysters in butter, and fry them also,
of a (...) brown.

For the sauce, take two anchovies, piece of lemon peel, a little horse-radi^^
and a bit of onion; boil these in water (...) the anchovies are wasted; strain
the liq^^^ into a clean sauce-pan, and, as you like, (...) oysters stewed, a
lobster cut small, without the spawn, craw-fish, or shrimps; set it over the
fire, and let it boil; then take near a pound of butter, roll a good piece in
flour, put it into your sauce-pan with the liquor, with what other ingredients
you intend, and boil all together, till it is of a good thickness; then pour in
the wine and blood, and shak^ it about, letting it only simmer. Take up the
fish, put them into a dish, and pour the sauce over them.

Garnish your dish with fried oysters, horseradish, fried parsley and lemon;
stick the ^ippets about the fish, and lay the roe, some on the fish, and the
rest in the dish; send it to ^abl^ as hot as you can.

A^ this is an expensive method, you may, if you please, dress c^rp according
to the next receipt for dressing tench.

To boil Tench
Clean your tench very well, then put them into a stew pan, with as much water
as will cover them; put in some salt, whole pepper* lemon peel, horseradish,
and a bundle of sweet herbs, and boil them till they are enough.

Take some of the liquor, a glass of white wine, a pint of shrimps, and an
anchovy bruised; boil all together in a sauce-pan, roll a good piece of butter
in flour, and brake it into the sauce; when of a proper thickness, pour it over
the dish. Garnish with lemon and horseradish scraped.

To boil Mackrel.
Having cleaned the mackrel very well, and soaked them for some time in spring
water, put them and the roes into a stew pan, with as much water as will cover
them, and little salt* ^oil a small bunch of fennel along with them, and when
you send them up, garnish with the roes, and the fennel shred fine.

Sauce. Grated sugar in a saucer; melted butter, and green gooseberries boiled,
in different basins; or, parsley and butter, with a little vinegar.

To boil Eels.
Having skinned and washed your else, and cut off the back fins with a pair of
scissars, roll them round with the heads innermost, and run a strong skewer
through them. Put them into a stew pan, with a sufficient quantity of water,
and a little vinegar and salt. Garnish with sliced lemon.

Sau^e. Parsley and butter.

To boil a Pike, or Jack.
Gut and clean your pike very well with salt and water, fasten the tail in the
mouth with a skewer, then put it into a stew pan, with as much water as will
cover it, a little vinegar and salt, and a piece of horseradish sliced.
Garnish with sliced lemon, and scraped horseradish.

Sauce. Anchovy, or shrimp sauce; or melted butter and catchup.

To dress a Turtle.
Fill a boiler or kettle with a quantity of water sufficient to scald the
callap^^h and callapee, the fins, etc. And about nine o'clock hang up your
turtle by the hind fins, cut off its head, and save the blood; then with a
sharp pointed knife separate the callapach from the callapee (or the back from
the belly part) down to the shoulders, so as to come at the entrails, which
take out, and clean them, as you would those of any other animal, and throw
them into a tub of clean water, taking great care not to break the gall, but to
cut it off the liver* and throw it away. Then separate each distinctly, and put
the guts into another vessel, open them with a small penknife, from end to end,
wash them clean, and draw them through a wool^len cloth in warm water, to clear
away the slime, and then put them into clean cold water till they are used,
with the other part of the entrails, which must all be cut up small to be mixed
in the baking dishes with the meat. This done, separate the back and belly
pieces entirely, cutting away the four fins by the upper joint, which scald,
pee^ off the loose skin, and cut them into small pieces, laying them by
themselves, either in another vessel, or on the table, read^ to be seasoned.
Then cut off the meat from the belly part, and clean the back from the lungs,
kidneys, etc. and that meat cut into pieces as small as a walnut, laying it
likewise by itself. After this you are to scald the back and belly pieces,
pulling off the shell from the back, and the yellow skin from the belly; when
all will be white and clean, and with the kitchen cleaver cut those up likewise
into pieces, about the bigness or breadt^ of a card. Put those pieces into
clean cold water, wash them out, and place them in a heap on the table, so that
each part may lay by itself.

The meat, being thus prepared and laid separate, for seasoning, mix two-third
parts of salt, or rather more, and one-third part of Cayenne pepper, black
pepper, and a nutmeg and mace pounded fine, and mixed together; the quantity to
be proportioned to the size of the turtle, so that in each dish there may be
about three spoonfuls of seasoning to every twelve pounds of meat.

Your meat being thus seasoned, get some sweet herbs, such as thyme, savory,
etc. let them be dried and rubbed fine, and hav^^g provided some deep dishes to
bake it in* (which should be of the common brown ware) put in the coarsest
parts of the meat at the bottom, with about a quarter of a pound of butter in
each dish, and then some of each of the several parcels of meat, so that the
dishes may be all alike, and have equal portions of the different parts of the
turtle; and between each laying of the meat, strew a little of the mixture of
sweet herbs. Fill your dishes within an inch and an half, or two inches of the
top; boil the blood of the turtle, and put into it; then lay on force-meat
balls made of veal, or fowl, highly seasoned with the same seasoning as the
turtle; put in each dish a gill of good Madeira wine, and as much water as it
will conveniently hold; then break over it five or six eggs, to keep the meat
from scorching at the top, and over that shake a handful of shred parsley, to
make it look green; when done, put your dishes into an oven made hot enough to
bake bread, and in an hour and an half, or two hours, (according to the size of
your dishes) it will be sufficiently done.

To boil all kinds of GARDEN STUFF.
IN dressing all ^orts of kitchen garden herbs, take care they are clean
washed; that there be no small snails, or caterpillars between the leaves; and
that all the coarse outer leaves, and the tops that have received any injury by
the weather, be taken off. Next wash them in a good deal of water, and put them
into a cullender to drain. Care must likewise be taken, that your pot or
sauce-pan be clean, well tinned, and free from sand, or grease.

To boil Asparagus.
First cut the white ends off about six inches from the head, and scrape them
from the green part downward very clean. As you scrape them, throw them into a
pan of clean water; and after a little soaking, tie them up in small even
bundles. When your water boils, put them in, and boil them up quick; but by
over boiling they will lose their heads. Cut a slice of bread for a toast, and
bake it brown on both sides. When your grass is done, take them up carefully;
dip the toast in the asparagus water, and lay it in the bottom of your dish;
then lay the heads of the asparagus on it, with the white end^ downwards: pour
a little melted butter over the heads; cut an orange into small quarters, and
stick them between for garnish.

To boil Artichokes.
Wring off the stalks close to the artichokes: Throw them into water and wash
them clean; then put them into a pot or sauce-pan. ^hey will take better than
an hour after the water boils; but the best way is to take out a leaf, and if
it draws easy, they are enough. Send them to table with butter in tea-cups
between each artichoke.

To boil Colliflowers.
A colliflower is the most favorite plant in the kitchen-garden, amongst the
generality of people. Take off all the green part, and cut the flower close at
the bottom from the stalk: and if it be large or dirty, cut it into four
quarters, that it may lay better in the pan, and be thoroughly cleansed. Let it
soak an hour, if possible, in clean water; and then put it into boiling milk
and water, (if you have any milk,) or water only, and skim the pan very well.
When the flower or stalks left about it feel tender, it will be enough; but it
must be taken up before it loses its crispness; for colliflower is good for
nothing that boils till it becomes ^uite soft. When enough, lay it to drain in
a cullender for a minute or two, and serve it up in a dish by itself, and with
melted butter in a basin.

(...) are enough. Strain them off. Garnish the dish wi^h boiled parsley, and
send plain butter in a cup, or boat.

To boil Green Pease.
When your pease are shelled, and the water boils, which should not be much
more than will cover them, put them in with a few leaves of mint: As soon as
they boil, throw in a piece of butter as big as a walnut, and stir the^ about;
when they are enough, strai^ them off, and sprinkle on a little salt; shake
them till the water drains off; se^d them hot to table, with melted butter in a
cup.

To boil Cabbage.
If your cabbage is large, cut it into quarters; if small, cut it in half; let
your water boil, then put in a little salt, and next your cabbag^, with a
little more salt upon it; make your water boil as soon as possible, and when
the stalk is tender, take up your cabbage into a cullender, or sieve, that the
water may drain off, and send it to table as hot as you can. Savoys are dressed
in the same manner.

To boil Sprouts.
Pick and wash your sprouts very clean, and see there are no snails or grubs
between the leaves, cut them across the stem, but not the heart; after they
are well washed, take them out of the water to drain; when your water boils,
put in some salt, and then the sprouts, with a little more salt on them: make
them boil quick, and if any scum arises take it clean off. As soon as the
stalks are tender strain them off, or they will not only lose their color, but
likewise their flavor.

To boil Spinach.
There is no herb requires more care in the washing, than spinach; you must
carefully p^ck it leaf by leaf, take off the (...) and wash it in three or four
waters; then put it into a cullender to drain. It does not require much water
to dress it: half a pint, in a sauce-pan that holds two quarts, will dress as
much spinach as is generally wanted for a small family. When your water boils
put in your spinach with a small handful of salt, pressing it down with the
spoon, as you put it into the sauce-pan; let it boil quick, and as soon as
tender, put it into a sieve or cullender, and press out all the water. When you
send it to table, raise it up wi^h a fo^^, that it may lay hollow in the dish.

To boil Turnips.
A great deal depends upon preparing this root for boiling. They require paring
till all the stringy coat be cut quite off: for that outside will never boil
tender. Being well rinded, out them in two, and boil them in the pot with
either beef, mutton, or lamb. When they become tender, take them out, press the
liquor from them between two trenchers, put them into a pan, and mash them with
butter and a little salt, and send them to table in a plate or basin by
themselves. Or send them out of the pot in a plate, with some melted butter in
a basin, for every one ^o butter and season them, as they like.

To boil Parsnips.
Parsnips are a very sweet root, and an agreeable sauce for salt fish. They
should be boiled in a great deal of water, and when yo^ find they are soft
(which is known by running a fork into them) take them up and carefully scrape
all the dirt off them, and then with a knife scrape them all fine, throwing
away all the dirty parts; then put them into a sauce-pan with some milk, and
stir them over the fire till they are thick. Take care they do not burn; add a
good piece of butter, and a little salt, and when the butter is melted send
them to table.

But common parsnips are served up in a dish, when well boiled and scraped,
with melted butter in a basin.

To boil Carrots.
Let them be scraped very clean, and when they are enough, rub them in a clean
cloth, then slice some of them into a plate, and pour some melted butter over
them; and garnis^ the dish with the others, either whole or cut into pieces, or
split down the middle. If they are young spring carrots, half an hour will boil
them; if large, an hour; but old Sandwich carrots will take two hours.

To boil Potatoes.
Potatoes must always be peeled, except they be very small and new, then some
people fancy to eat skin and all. Some pare potatoes before they are put into
the pot; others think it the best way both for saving time and preventing
waste, to peel off the skin as soon as they are boiled; which then slips off by
rubbing them with a coarse cloth. In boiling of them take care they be enough,
and not over done; for if boiled too much, they mas^ and become watery.
Therefore it requires good attention when you are boiling potatoes, and that
they be taken up as soon as they begin to show the least disposition to break.
This is a root in great request, and served up in a dish or plate, whole for
the most part, with a basin of melted butter. On which occasion, it will be
some addition to the potatoes to set them befere the fire till they are quite
dry, and a little browned.

CHAP. II. Of FRYING.
Of BUTCHERS MEAT.
To fry Tripe.
CUT your tripe into pieces about three inches long, dip them into the yolk of
an egg and a few crumbs of bread, fry them of a fine brown, and then take them
out of the pan, and lay them in a dish to drain. Have ready a warm dish to put
them in, and send them to table, with butter and mustard in a cup.

To fry Beef Steaks.
Take rump steaks, beat them very well with a ro^ler, fry them in half a pint
of ale that is no^ bitter, and whilst they are frying* cut large onion small, a
very little thyme, some p^rsl^y shred small, some grated nutmeg, and a little
pepper and ^alt, roll a^l together in a piece of but^^r, and then in a little
flour, put this into the s^ew-pan* and shake all together. When the steaks are
tender, and the sauce of a fine thickness, dish them up.

Another way to fry Beef Steaks.
Cut the lean by itself, and beat them well with the back of a knife* fry them
in just as much butter as will moisten the pan, pour out the gravy as it runs
out of the meat, tur^ them often, and do them over a gentle fire; then fry the
fat by itself, and lay upon the lean, and put to the gravy a glass of re^ wine,
half an anchovy, a little nutmeg, a little beaten pepper, and a shalot cut
small; give it two or three little boils, season it with salt to your palate,
pour it over the steaks, and send them to table.

To fry a loin of Lamb.
Cut the loin into thin steaks, put a very little pepper and salt, and a little
nutmeg on them, and fry them in fresh butter; when enough take out the steaks,
lay them in a dish before the fire to keep hot; then pour out the butter, shake
a little flour over the bottom of the pan, pour in a quarter of a pint of
boiling water, and put in a piece of butter; shake all together, give it a boil
or two up, pour it over the steaks, and send it to table.

Note. You may do mutton the same way, and add two spoonfulls of walnut pickle.

To fry Sausages with Apples.
Take half a pound of sausages, and six apples; slice four about as thick as a
crown, cut the other two in quarters, fry them with the sausages of a fine
light brown, and lay sausages in the middle of the dish, and the apples round.
Garnish with the quartered apples.

Stewed cabbage and sausages fried, is a good dish; then heat cold peace pudding
in the pan, lay it in the dish, and the sausages round, heap the pudding in the
middle, and lay the sausages all round edge-ways, and one in the middle at
length.

To fry cold Veal.
Cut it into pieces about as thick as half a crown, and as long as you please,
dip them in the yolk of an egg, and then in crumbs of bread, with a few sweet
herbs, and shred lemon peel in it; grate a little nutmeg over them, and fry
them in fresh butter. The butter must be hot, and just enough to fry them in:
In the mean time, make a little gravy of the bone of the veal; when the meat is
fried, take it out with a fork, and lay it in a dish before the fire, then
shake a little flour into the pan, and stir it round; put in a little gravy,
squeeze in a little lemon, and pour it over the veal. Garnish with lemon.

To fry Beef Collops.
Cut your beef in thin slices, about two inches long, lay them upon your
dresser, and ^ack them with the back of a knife; grate a little nutmeg over
them, and dust on some flour; lay them into a s^ew pan, and put in as much
water as you think sufficient for sauce; shred half an onion, and a little
lemon peel very fine, a bundle of sweet herbs, and a little pepper and salt:
Roll a piece of butter in flour, and set them over a clear fire, till they
begin to simmer; shake them together often* but don't let them boil up; after
they begin to simmer, ten minutes will do them; take out your herbs, and dish
them up. Garnish the dish with pickles and horseradish.

To make Scotch Collops.
Dip the slices of lean veal in the yolks of eggs, that have been beaten up
with melted butter, a little salt, some grated nutmeg, and grated lemon peel.
Fry them quick; shake them all the time, to keep the butter from oiling. Then
put to them some beef gravy, and some mushrooms, or forced meat balls. Garnish
with sausages and sliced lemon, and slices of broiled or fried bacon.

Observe, if you would have the collops white, do not dip them in eggs. And
when fried tender, but not brown, pour off the liquor quite clean, and put in
some cream to the meat, and give it just a boil up.

To fry Veal Cutlets.
Cut a neck of veal into steaks, and fry them in butter; and having made a
strong broth of the scrag-end, boiled with two anchovies, some nutmeg, some
lemon peel, and parsley shred very small, and browned with a little burnt
butter, put the cutlets and a glass of white wine into this liquor. Toss them
up together: thicken with a bit of butter rolled in flour; and dish all
together. Squeeze a Seville orange over, and strew as much salt on as shall
give a relish.

To fry Mutton Cutlets.
Take a handful of grated bread, a little thyme and parsley, and lemon peel
shred very small, with some nutmeg, pepper and salt; then take a loin of
mutton, cut it into steaks, and let them be well beaten; then take the yolks of
two eggs, rub all over the steaks. Strew on the grated bread with these
ingredients mixed together. Make the sauce of gravy, with a spoonful or two of
claret and a little anchovy.

To fry Calf's Liver and Bacon.
Cut the liver in slices, and fry it first brown and nice, and then the bacon;
lay the liver in the dish, and the bacon upon it. Serve it up with gravy and
butter, and a little orange or lemon juice, and garnish with sliced lemon.

To fry Sweetbreads and Kidneys.
After splitting the kidneys, fry them and the sweetbreads in butter. Serve
them up with a brown ragout sauce, and mushrooms; garnished with fried parsley
and sliced lemon.

To fry Eggs as round as Balls.
Having a deep drying pan, and three pints of clarified butter, heat it as hot
as for fritters, and stir it with a stick, till it runs round like a whirlpool;
then break an egg into the middle, and turn it round with your stick, till it
be as hard a poached egg; the whirling round of the butter will make it as
round as a ball, then take it up with a slice, and put it in a dish before the
fire; they will keep hot half an hour, and yet be soft; so you may do as many
as you please. You may poach them in boiling water in the same manner.

Of FISH.
To fry Carp.
Scale and clean your carp very well, slit them in two, sprinkle them with
salt, flour them, and fry them in clarified butter. Make a ragout with a good
fish broth, the melts of your fish, artichoake bottoms cut in small dice, and
half a pint of shrimps; thicken it with the yolks of eggs* or a piece of butter
rolled in flour; pour the ragout into a dish, and lay your fried carp upon it.
Garnish with fried sippets, crisp parsley, and lemon.

To fry Tench.
Slime your tenches, slip the skin along the backs, and with the point of your
knife raise it up from the bone, then cut the skin across at the head and
tail, then strip it off, and take out the bone; then take another tench, or a
carp, and mince the flesh small with mushrooms, chives, and parsley. Season
them with salt, pepper, beaten mace, nutmeg, and a few savoury herbs minced
small. Mingle these all well together, then pound them in a mortar, with crumbs
of bread, as much as two eggs, soaked in cream, the yolks of three or four
eggs, and a piece of butter. When these have been well pounded, stuff the
tenches with this farce: Take clarified butter, put it into a pan, set it over
the fire, and when it is hot flour your tenches, and put them into the pan one
by one, and fry them brown; then take them up, lay them in a coarse cloth
before the fire, to keep hot. In the mean time, pour all the grease and fat out
of the pan, put in a quarter of a pound of butter, shake some flour all over
the pan, keep stirring with a spoon till the butter is a little brown; then
pour in half a pint of white wine, stir it together, pour in half a pint of
boiling water, an onion stuck with cloves, a bundle of sweet herbs, and a blade
or two of mace. Cover them close, and let them stew as softly as you can for a
quarter of an hour, then strain off the liquor, put it into the pan again, add
two spoonfuls of catchup, have ready an ounce of truffles or morels boiled in
half a pint of water tender, pour in the truffles water and all, into the pan,
a few mushrooms, and either half a pint of oysters, clean washed in their own
liquor, and the liquor and all put into the pan, or some craw-fish; but then
you must put in the tails, and after clean picking them, boil them in half a
pint of water, then strain the liquor and put into the sauce: or take some
fish-melts, and tos^ up in your sauce. All this is just as you fancy.

When you find your sauce is very good, put your tench into the pan, make them
quite hot, then lay them into your dish, and pour the sauce over them. Garnish
with lemon.

Or you may, for change, put in half a pint of stale beer instead of water. Or
you may dress tench just as you do carp.

To fry Trout.
Scale your trout clean, then gut them, and take out the gills, wash them, and
dry them in a cloth, flour them, and fry them in butter, till they are of a
fine brown; when they are enough, take them up, and serve them; fry some
parsley green, and crisp, melt anchovy and butter, with a spoonful of white
wine. Dish your fish, and garnish with fried parsley, and sliced lemon. You may
pour your sauce over the fish, or send it in a boat, which you please.

In this manner you may fry perch, small pike, jacks, roach, gudgeons, or a
chine of fresh salmon.

To fry flat Fish.
Dry the fish well in a cloth, rub them over with the yolk of an egg, and dust
over some flour, let your oil, butter, lard, or dripping, be ready to boil
before you put in the fish; fry them off with a quick fire* and let them be of
a fine brown. Before you dish them up, lay them upon a drainer before the fire
sloping, for two or three minutes, which will prevent their eating greasy.

You must observe on fast-days, and in Lent, never to dress your fish in any
thing but butter, or oil.

To fry Herrings.
After having cleaned your herrings, take out the roes, dry them and the
herrings in a cloth; flour them, and fry them in butter of a fine brown; lay
them before the fire to drain; slice three or four onions, flour them, and fry
them nicely; dish up the herrings, and garnish them with the roes and onions:
Send them up as hot as you can, with butter and mustard in a cup.

To fry Eels.
After having skinned and cleaned your eels, split them, and cut them in
pieces; let them lay for two or three hours in a pickle made of vinegar, salt,
pepper, bay leaves, sliced onion, and juice of lemon; then drudge them well
with flour, and fry them in clarified butter; serve them dry with fried
parsley, and lemon for garnish. Send plain butter in a cup.

To fry Lampries.
Bleed them, and save the blood, then wash them in hot water, to take off the
slime, cut them in pieces, and let them be fried in butter, not quite enough;
drain out all the fat, then put in a little white wine* and shake your pan;
season them with whole pepper, nutmeg, salt, sweet herbs, and a bay leaf, a
good piece of butter rolled in flour, and the blood that was saved; cover them
close, and shake the pan often. When you think they are enough, take them up,
and give the sauce a quick boil, squeeze in a little lemon, and pour the sauce
over the fish; send it to table. Garnish with lemon.

To fry small Fish of all Sorts.
Small fish are generally dressed to garnish a dish of fish, as smelts,
gudgeons, roach, small whitings, etc. wipe them dry with a cloth, then rub them
over with the yolk of an egg, flour them, and fry them in oil, butter,
hogs-lard, or beef-dripping; take care they are fried of a fine light brown;
and if they are sent by themselves in a dish, garnish with fried parsley and
lemon.

Whitings, when small, should be turned round, the tail put in the mouth, and
so fried; if large, they are skinned, and turned round and fried.

Plaice, flounders, and dabs, are rubbed over with eggs, and fried.

Small maids are frequently dipped in batter, and fried.

As these sorts of fish are generally dressed by themselves for supper, you may
send various sauces as you like; either shrimps, oysters, anchovy and butter,
or plain melted butter; and some choose oil and lemon.

To fry Oysters.
You must make a batter of milk, eggs, and flour; then take your oysters and
wash them, wipe them dry, and dip them in the batter; then roll them in some
crumbs of bread and a little mace beat fine, and fry them in very hot butter or
lard.

Or, beat four eggs with salt, put in a little nutmeg grated, and a spoonful of
grated bread, then make it as thick as batter for pancakes with fine flour;
drop the oysters in, and fry them brown in clarified beef suet. They are to lie
rou^^ any dish of fish; ox palates boiled tender, blanched, and cut in pieces,
then fried in such batter, is proper to garnish hashes or f^ic^ssees.

Of GARDEN STUFF.
To fry Artichoke Bottoms.
FIRST blanch them in water, then flour them, fry them in fresh butter, lay
them in your dish, and pour melted butter over them. Or you may put a little
red wine into the butter, and season with nutmeg, pepper, and salt.

To fry Colliflowers.
Take two fine colliflowers, boil them in milk and water, then leave one whole,
and pull the other to pieces; take half a pound of butter, with two spoonfuls
of water, a little dust of flour, and melt the butter in a stew pan; then put
in the whole colliflower cut in two, and the other pulled to pieces, and fry it
till it is of a very light brown. Season it with pepper and salt. When it is
enough, lay the two halves in the middle, and pour the rest all over.

To fry Celery.
Take six or eight heads of celery, cut off the green tops, and take off the
outside stalks, wash them clean; then have ready half a pint of white wine, the
yolks of three eggs beat fine, and a little salt and nutmeg; mix all well
together with flour into a batter, dip every head into the batter, and fry them
in butter. When enough, lay them in the dish, and put melted butter over them.

To fry Potatoes.
Cut them into thin slices, as big as a crown piece, fry them brown, lay them
in the plate or dish, pour melted butter, and sack and sugar over them. These
are a pretty corner-plate.

To fry Onions.
Take some large onions, peel them, and cut them into slices about a quarter of
an inch thick; then dip these slices into batter, or an egg beaten, without
breaking them, and fry them of a nice brown.

To fry Parsley.
Pick the parsley very clean, and see that it be young. Then put a little
butter into a clean pan, and when it is very hot put in the parsley; keep it
stirring with a knife till it be crisp, then take it out, and use it as garnish
to fried lamb, etc.

CHAP. IV. Of BROILING.
To broil Beef Steaks, Mutton, or Pork Chops.
SEASON the steak with a mixture of pepper and salt, and lay it on the
grid-iron. Do not turn the steak till one side be enough; and when the other
side has been turned a little while, a fine gravy will lie on the top of it;
which you must take care to preserve; and list it all together with a pair of
small tongs, or carefully with a knife and fork, into a hot dish, and put a
little piece of butter under it, which will help to d^aw out the gravy. Some
palates like it with a shalot or two* or an onion, shed very fine in the dish
or plate.

But if they be mutton or pork steaks, they must be turned quick on the
gridiron.

The general sauce for steaks is horseradish for beef; mustard for pork; and
girkins pickled for mutton. But in the season, I would recommend a good sallad,
or green cucumbers, or cellery for beef or mutton, and green peace for lamb
steaks. All which sauc^s are served up in saucers, or plates, etc. distinct
from the meat.

To broil Pigeons.
Put a bit of butter, some shred parsleys and a little pepper and salt into the
belly, of the pigeons, and tie them up neck and vent. Set your gridiron high,
that they may not burn, and have a little melted butter in a cup. You may split
them, and broil them with a little pepper and salt; and you may roast them only
with a little parsley and butter in a dish.

To broil Chickens.
Slit them down the back, and season them with pepper and salt, lay them on a
very clear fire, and at a very great distance. Let the inside lie next the
fire, till it is above half done: then turn them, and take great care the
fleshy side do not burn, throw some fine raspings of bread over it, and let
them be of a fine brown, but not burnt. Let your sauce be good gravy, with
mushrooms, and garnish with lemon and the livers broiled, the gizzards cut,
slashed, and broiled with pepper and salt.

To broil Cod, Salmon, Whiting, or Haddock.
Flour them, and have a quick clear fire, set your gridiron high, broil them of
a fine brown; lay them in a dish* and for sauce have good melted butter. Take a
lobster, bruise the body in the butter, cut the meat small, put all together
into the melted butter, make it hot and pour it into the dish, or into basins.
Garnish with horseradish and lemon.

To broil Mackrel.
Cut off their heads, gut them, wash them clean, pull out the roe at the neck
end, boil it in a little water, then bruise it with a spoon, beat up the yolk
of an egg, with a little nutmeg, a little lemon peel cut fine, a little thyme,
some parsley boiled and chopped fine, a little pepper and salt, and a few
crumbs of bread; mix all well together, and fill the mackrel; flour it well,
and broil it nicely. Let your sauce be plain butter, with a little catchup or
walnut pickle.

To broil Herrings.
Scale them, gut them, cut off their heads, wash them clean, dry them in a
cloth* flour them and broil them, but with a knife just notch them a cross:
take the heads and mash them, boil them in small beer or ale, with a little
whole pepper and (...) onion. Let it boil a quarter o^ an (...)* then strain
it* thicken it with butter and (...), add a good deal of mustard. Lay the fish
in a dish, and pour the sauce into a basin; or plain melted butter and mustard.

To broil Cod-Sounds.
You must first lay them in hot water a few min^tes; take them out and rub them
well with salt, to take off the skin and black dirt, then they will look white;
then put them in water and give them a broil. Take them out and flour them
well, pepper and salt them, and broil them. When they are enough, lay them in
the dish, and pour melted butter and mustard into the dish. Broil them whole.

To broil Eels.
Take a large eel, skin it and make it clean. Open the belly, cut it in four
pieces, take the tail-end, strip off the flesh, beat it in a mortar, season it
with a little beaten mace, a little grated nutmeg, pepper and salt, a little
parsley and thyme, a little lemon peel, an equal quantity of crumbs of b^e^d,
roll it in a little piece of butter; then mix it again with the yolk of an egg,
roll it up again, and fill the three pieces of belly with it. Cut the skin of
the eel, wrap the pieces in, and sew up the skin. Broil them we^l, have butter
and an anchovy for sauce, with a piece of lemon.

To Spitch^ock Eels.
You must split a large eel down the back, and joint the bones, cut it in two
or three pieces, melt a little butter, put in a little vinegar and salt, let
your eel lay in it two or three minutes; then take the pieces up one by one,
turn them round with a little fine skewer, roll them in crumbs of bread, and
broil them of a fine brown. Let your sauce be plain butter, with the juice of
lemon, or anchovy sauce.

To broil Eggs.
First put your salamander into the fire, then cut a slice round a quartern
loaf, toast it brown, and butter it, lay it in the dish, and set it before the
fire; poach seven eggs, just enough to set the whites, take them out carefully,
and lay them on your toast; brown them with the salamander, grate some nutmeg
over them, and squeeze Seville orange over all. Garnish your dish with orange
cut in slices.

CHAP. V. Of GRAVIES and SAUCES.
To draw Gravy.
CUT a piece of beef into thin slices* and fry them brown in a stew pan, with
two or three onions, and two or three lean slices of bacon; then pour to it a
ladle of strong broth, rubbing the brown from the pan very clean; add to it
more strong broth, claret* white wine, anchovy, a faggot of sweet herbs: season
it, and stew it very well. Strain it off and keep it for use.

To make white Gravy.
Take part of a knuckle of veal, or the worst part of a neck of veal, boil
about a pound of this in a quart of water, an onion, some whole pepper, six
cloves, a little salt, a bunch of sweet herbs, half a nutmeg sliced: let them
boil an hour, then strain it off, and keep it for use.

A gravy without Meat.
Take a glass of small beer, a glass of wate^* an onion cut small, some pepper
and salt, and a little lemon peel grated, a clove or two, a spoonful of
mushroom liquor, or pickled walnut liquor; put this into a basin, then take a
piece of butter, put it in a sauce-pan, and set it on the fire; and let it
melt, then dr^dge in some flour, and stir it well till the froth sinks, and it
will be brown; put in some sliced onion, then put your mixture to the brown
butter, and give it a boil up.

Gravy for a Turkey or Fowl.
Take a pound of lean beef, cut and hack it, then flour it well, put a piece of
butter as big as a hen's egg in a stew pan; when it is melted, put in your
beef, fry it on all sides a little brown, then pour in three pints of boiling
water, and a bundle of sweet herbs, two or three blades of mace, three or four
cloves, twelve whole pepper-corns, a little bit of carrot, a little crust of
bread toasted brown; cover it close, and let it boil till there is about a pint
or less, then season it with salt, and strain it off.

Gravy to make Mutton eat like Venison.
Take a woodcock, or snipe, that is stale, (the staler the better) pick it, cut
it in two, and hack it with a knife; put it into a stew pan, with as much gravy
as you shall want, and let it simmer for half an hour; then strain the gravy
for use This will give the mutton so true a flavor of game, that no one can
tell it from venison.

Gravy for a Fowl, when you have no Meat ready.
Take the neck, liver, and gizzard, boil them in half a pint of water, with a
little piece of bread to^sted brown, a little pepper and salt, and a little bit
of thyme. Let them boil till there is about a qu^rter of a pint; then pour in
half a glass of red wine, boil it and strain it; then bruise the liver w^ll in,
and strain it again; thicken it with a little piece of b^tter rolled in flour,
and it will be very good.

To make a strong Fish Gravy.
Take two or three eels, or any fish you have, skin or scale them, gut them and
wash them from grit, cut them into little pieces, put them into a sauce pan,
cover them with water, a little crust of bread toasted brown, a blade or two of
mace, some whole pepper, a few sweet herbs, and a little bit of lemon peel. Let
it boil till it is rich and good, then have ready a piece of butter, according
to your gravy; if a pint, as big as a walnut. Melt it in the sauce-pan, then
shake in a little flour, and toss it about till it is brown, and then strain in
the gravy to it. Let it boil a few minutes, and it will be good.

To make Assence of Ham.
Take off the fat of a ham, and cut the lean in slices, beat them well and lay
them in the bottom of a stew pan, with slices of carrots, parsnips and onions;
cover your pan, and set it over a gentle fire; let them stew till they begin to
stick, then sprinkle on a little flour, and turn them; then moisten with broth
and veal gravy. Season them with three or four mushrooms, as many truffles, a
whole leak, some parsley, and half a dozen cloves: or instead of a leak, a
clove of garlic. Put in some crusts of bread, and let them simmer over the
fire for a quarter of an hour; strain it, and set it aside for use. Any pork or
ham does for this, that is well cured.

To make a standing Sauce.
Take a quart of claret or white wine, put it in a glazed jar, with the juice
of two lemons, five large anchovies, some Jamaica pepper whole, some sliced
ginger, some mace, a few cloves, a little lemon peel, horse radish sliced, some
sweet herbs, six shallots, two spoonfuls of capers, and their liquor, put all
these in a linen bag, and put it into the wine, stop it close, and set the
vessel in a kettle of hot water for an hour, and keep it in a warm place. A
spoonful or two of this liquor is good in any sauce.

To make Sauce for Roasted Meat.
Take an anchovy, wash it very clean, and put to it a glass of red wine, a
little strong broth or gravy, some nutmeg, one shallot shred, and the juice of
a Seville orange; stew these together a little, and pour it to the gravy that
runs from your meat.

To make Sauce for Savoury Pies.
Take some gravy, some anchovy, a bunch of sweet herbs, an onion, and a little
mushroom liquor; boil it a little, and thicken it with burnt butter, then add a
little claret, open your pie and put it in. This serves for mutton, lamb, veal,
or beef pies.

To make Sauce for a sweet Pie.
Take some white wine, a little lemon juice, or verjuice, and some sugar; boil
it, then beat two eggs, and mix them well together; then open your pie, and
pour it in. This may be used for veal or lamb pies.

To make Sauce for Fish Pies.
Take claret* while wine and vinegar, oyster liquor, anchovies and drawn
butter; when the pies are baked, pour it in with a funnel.

To melt Butter thick.
Your sauce pan must be well tinned, and very clean. Just moisten the bottom
with as small a quantity of water as possible, not above a spoonful to half a
pound of butter. You may or may not dust the butter with flour: it is better
not to flour it. Cut the butter in slices, and put it into the pan before the
little water becomes hot. As it melts, keep the pan shaking one way frequently;
and when it is all melted let it boil it up, and it will be smooth, fine, and
thick.

To burn Butter.
Put two ounces of butter over a slow fire, in a stew pan or sauce-pan, without
water. When the butter is melted dust on a little flour, and keep it stirring
till it grows thick and brown.

To make Mushroom Sauce for White Fowls.
Take a pint of mushrooms, wash and pick them very clean, and put them into a
sauce-pan, with a little salt, some nutmeg, a blade of mace, a pint of cream,
and a good piece of butter rolled in flour. Boil these all together, and keep
stirring them; then pour your sauce into the dish, and garnish with lemon.

Mushroom Sauce for White Fowls boiled.
Take half a pint of cream, and a quarter of a pound of butter, stir them
together one way till it is thick; then add a spoonful of mushroom pickle,
pickled mushrooms, or fresh if you have them. Garnish only with lemon.

To make Cellary Sauce, for roasted or boiled Fowls, Turkies, Partridges, or
other Game.
Take a large bunch of cellary, wash and pare it very clean, cut it into little
thin bits, and boil it softly in a little water till it is tender; then add a
little beaten mace, some nutmeg, pepper, and salt, thickened with a good piece
of butter rolled in flour; then boil it up, and pour it in the dish.

To make brown Cellary Sauce.
Stew the cellary as above, then add mace, nutmeg, pepper, salt, a piece of
butter rolled in flour, with a glass of red wine, a spoonful of catchup, and
half a pint of good gravy; boil all these together, and pour into the dish.
Garnish with lemon.

To make Egg Sauce for roasted Chickens.
Melt your butter thick and fine, chop two or three hard boiled eggs fine, put
them into a basin* pour the butter over them, and have good gravy in the dish.

Shallot Sauce for roasted Fowls.
Take five or six shallots peeled and cut small, put them into a sauce-pan,
with two spoonfuls of white wine, two of water, and two of vinegar; give them a
boil up, and pour them into the dish, with a little pepper and salt. Fowls laid
on watercresses is very good, without any other sauce.

Shallot Sauce for a Scrag of Mutton boiled.
Take two spoonfuls of the liquor the mutton is boiled in, two spoonfuls of
vinegar, two or three shallots cut fine, with a little salt; put it into a
sauce pan, with a piece of butter as big as a walnut, rolled in a little flour;
stir it together, and give it a boil. For those who love shallots, it is the
prettiest sauce that can be made to a scrag of mutton.

To make Lemon Sauce for boiled Fowls.
Take a lemon, pare off the rind, then cut it in^o slices, and cut it small;
take all the kernels ou^, bruise the liver with two or three spoonfuls of good
gravy then melt some butter, mix it all together, give them a boil, and cut in
a little lemon peel very small.

A pretty Sauce for a boil^d Fowl.
Take the liver of the fowl, bruise it with a little of the liquor, cut a
little lemon peel fine, melt some good butter, and mix the liver by degrees;
give it a boil, and pour it into the dish.

To make Onion Sauce.
Boil some large onions in a good deal of water, till they are very tender; put
them into a cullender, and when drained, pass them through it with a spoon; put
them into a clean sauce-pan, with a good piece of butter, a little salt, and a
gill of cream: Stir them over the fire till they are of a good thickness.

To make Apple Sauce.
Take as many boiling apples as you choose, peel them, and take out all the
cores; put them in a sauce-pan with a little water, and a few cloves, and
simmer them till quite soft. Then strain off all the water, and b^at them up
with a little brown sugar and butter.

Bread, or Pap Sauce.
Take a pint of water, put in a good piece of crumb of bread, a blade of mace,
and a little whole pepper, boil it for eight or ten minutes and then pour the
water off; take out the spice, and beat up the bread with a little butter.

Mint Sauce.
Take young mint* pick and wash it clean; then shred it fine, put it into a
small basin, sprinkle it well with sugar, and pour in vinegar to your palate.

Parsley Sauce.
Tie the parsley up in a bunch, and boil it till soft; shred it fine, and mix
it with melted butter.

To make Parsley Sauce in Winter, when there is no Parsley to be got.
Take a little parsley-seed, tie it up in a clean rag, and boil it for ten
minutes in a sauce-pan; then take out the seeds, and let the water cool a
little Take as much of the liquor as you want, drudge in a little flour; and
then put in your butter and melt it. Shred a little boiled spinach, and put it
in also; and pour it into a boat.

To make Lobster Sauce.
Take a lobster, bruise the body and spawn, that is in the inside, very fine,
with the back of a spoon, mince the meat of the tail and claws very small, melt
your butter of a good thickness, put in the bruised part, and shake it well
together, then put in the minced meat with a little nutmeg grated, and a
spoonful of white wine; let it just boil up, and pour it into boats, or over
your fish.

To make Shrimp Sauce.
Put half a pint of shrimps, clean picked, into a gill of good gravy; let it
boil up with a lump of butter rolled in flour, and a spoonful of red wine.

To make Oyster Sauce.
Take a pint of oysters that are tolerably large; put them into a sauce-pan
with their own liquor, a blade of mace, a little whole pepper, and a bit of
lemon peel; let them stew over the fire till the oysters are plump; pour all
into a clean pan, and wash them carefully, one by one, out of the liquor;
strain about a gill of the liquor through a fine sieve, add the same quantity
of good gravy, cut half a pound of fresh butter in pieces, roll up some in
flour, and then put all to your oysters; set it over the fire, shake i^ round
often till it boils, and add a spoonful of white wine; let it just boil, and
pour it into your basin or boat.

To make Anchovy Sauce.
Strip an anchovy, bruise it very fine, put it into a half a pint of gravy, a
quarter of a pound of butter rolled in flour, a spoonful of red wine, and a tea
spoonful of catchup* boil all together till it is properly thick, and serve it
up.

To make a good Fish Sauce.
Take half a pint of water, two anchovi^^ split, a clove, a bit of mace, a
little lemon peel, a few pepper-corns, and a large spoonf^^ of red wine; boil
all together, till your anchovy is dissolved; then strain it off, and thicken
it with butter rolled in flour. Thi^ is the best sauce for skate, maids* or
thornback.

N. B. For other particular sauces, see the receipts for different dishes.

CHAP. VI. Of STEWING.
To stew Beef.
TAKE four pounds of stewing beef, with the hard fat of brisket beef cut in
piec^^* Put these into a stew pan with three pints of water, a little salt,
pepper, dried marjor^^ powdered, and three cloves. Cover the pa^ very close;
and let it stew four hours over a slow fire. Then throw into it as much tu^nips
and carrots cut into square pieces, as you think convenient; and the white part
of a large leek, two heaps of celery shred fine* a crust of bread burnt, and
half a pint of red wine (or good small beer will do as well). Then pour it all
into a soup-dish, and serve it up hot, garnished with boiled carrot sliced.

To stew Brisket of Beef.
Having rubbed the brisket with common salt and saltpeter, let it lie four
days. Then lard the skin with fat bacon, and put it into a stew pan with a
quart of water, a pint of red wine or strong beer, half a pound of butter, a
bunch of sweet herbs, three or four shalots, some pepper, and half a nutmeg
grated. Cover the pan very close. Stew it over a gentle fire for six hours.
Then fry some square pieces of boiled turnips very brown. Strain the liquor the
beef was stewed in. Thicken it with burnt butter, and having mixed the turnips
with it, pour all together over the beef in a large dish. Serve it up hot, and
garnish it with lemon sliced. An o^ cheek, or a leg of beef may be served up in
the same manner.

To stew Beef Gobbets.
Cut any piece of beef, except the leg, in pieces, the size of a pullet's egg.
Put them in a stew pan, and cover them with water. Let them stew one hour, and
skim them very clean. Then add a sufficient quantity of mace, cloves, and whole
pepper tied up loose in a muslin rag, some celery cut small, and salt, turnips,
and carrots pared and cut in slices* a little parsley, a bundle of sweet herbs,
a large crust of bread, and if you please, add an ounce of pearl barley, or
rice. Cover all close* and stew it till tender. Then take out the herbs, spices
and bread, and add a French roll fried and cut in four. Dish up all together,
and send it to table.

To stew Ox Palates.
Put the palates into a sauce pan of cold water, and let them stew very softly
over a slow fire till they are tender. Then cut them into pieces, and dish them
with cocks-combs and artichoke bottoms cut small; and garnish with lemon
sl^ced, and with sweet-breads stewed for white dishes, and fried for brown
ones, and cut also in little pieces.

N. B. This stew is generally used for improving a fricasee, or a ragout of
veal, lamb, rabbits, etc.

To stew Beef Steaks.
Half broil the beef steaks; then put them into a stew pan, season them with
pepper and salt according to your palate; just cover them with gravy. Also put
in a piece of butter rolled in flour. Let them stew gently for half an hour,
then add the yolks of two eggs beat up, and stir all together for two or three
minutes, and serve it up. Garnish with pickles and horseradish scraped.

To stew Beef Collops.
Cut raw beef, as veal is cut for Scotch collops. Put the collops into a
stew pan with a little water, a glass of white wine, a shalot, a little dried
marjorum rubbed to powder, some salt and pepper, and a slice or two of fat
bacon. Set this over a quick fire till the pan be full of gravy, which will be
in a little time: add to it a little mushroom juice; and the^ serve it up hot;
and garnish with sliced lemon, or small pickles and red cabbage.

To stew Veal in general.
Let the veal be raw, roasted or boiled; cut it into thick slices, and just
cover the veal with water in a stew pan. Season with pepper, salt, and grated
nutmeg, a little mace, sweet marjoram, a shallot, and lemon-thyme, or a little
grated lemon peel. Stew all together, and when almost enough, put into the
liquor a little good gravy, and mushroom liquor, a glass of white wine, and a
little lemon juice. Let these stew a little longer. Then strain off the liquor,
and thicken it with butter and flour. Lay the meat in the dish, and pour the
sauce over it. Garnish the dish with sippets, and fried oysters* or bits of
broiled bacon and sliced lemon, on the rim of the dish.

To stew a knuckle of Veal.
Boil the knuckle till there is just enough liquor for sauce. To which add one
spoonful of catchup, one of red wine, and one of walnut pickle: also some
truffles, morels, or dried mushrooms cut small if you please. Boil all
together. When enough, take up the meat; lay it in a dish, pour the sauce or
liquor over it, and send it to table, garnished with sliced lemon.

To stew a Neck of Veal.
Cut a neck of veal in steaks, and season them well with a mixture of salt,
pepper, grated nutmeg, thyme, and knotted marjoram. Stew these gently over a
slow fire, in cream or new milk, till they be enough. Then add two anchovies,
some gravy or strong broth, and a piece of butter rolled in flour. Toss it up
till it becomes thick. Then put it in a dish and serve it up hot. Garnish with
lemon sliced.

To stew a Breast of Veal.
Let the breast be fat and white, cut o^ both ends, and boil them for gravy.
Make a forced meat of the sweetbread boiled, a few crumbs of bread* a little
beef suet, two eggs, pepper and salt, a spoonful or two of cream and a little
grated nutmeg, with which mixture, having raised the thin part of the breast,
stuff the veal. Skewer the skin close down, drudge it over with flour; tie it
up in a cloth, and boil it in milk and water about an hour.

The proper sauce for this dish is made of a little gravy, about a gill of
oysters, a few mushrooms s^^ed fine, and a little juice of lemon, thickened
with flour and butter.

To stew a Pig.
Roast a pig till it is thorough hot, then skin it, cut it in pieces, and put
it into a stew pan, with a sufficient quantity of strong gravy, a gill of white
wine, some pepper, salt and nutmeg, an onion, a little marjoram, three
spoonfuls of elder vinegar, (if you have any) and a piece of butter. Cover all
close, and let it stew gently over a slow fire and when enough* serve it up
hot, pou^ed upon sippets, and garnished with lemon sliced.

To stew Mutton Chops.
Cut the chops thin, put them into a shallow tin-pan, with a cover that shuts
very close. Add a very lit^l^ water, with a little salt and pepper. Cover the
pan very close, and set it over a very slow fire. They will be done in a very
few minutes. Dish them with their own liquor. Garnish with capers, or other
pickles.

To stew a Leg, or Neck of Mutton.
Bone the joint to be stewed. Break the bones and put them into a sauce-pan,
with a sufficient quantity of whole pepper, salt and mace, to make it relish;
also one nutmeg bruised, one anchovy* and one middling turnip; a little faggot
of sweet herbs, two middling onions quartered, a pint of al^ (and as much red
wine, if you like it) two quarts of water, and a hard crust of bread. Stop it
close, and let it stew five hours. Then put in the mutton, and let it stew two
hours.

To stew a Hare.
Beat it well with a rolling pin in its own blood. Cut it into little bits and
fry them. Then put the hare into a stew pan* with a quart of strong gravy,
pepper and salt according to the palate, and let it stew till tender. Thicken
it with butter and flour. Serve it up in its gravy, with sippets in the dish,
and lemon sliced for garnish.

To Jug a Hare.
Having cased the hare, turn the blood out of the body into the jug. Then cut
the hare to pieces, but do not wash it. Then cut three quarters of a pound of
fat bacon into thin slices. Pour upon the blood about a pint of strong old pale
beer: put into the jug a middling sized onion, stuck with three or four cloves,
and a bunch of sweet herbs: and having seasoned the hare with pepper, salt,
nutmeg, and lemon peel grated, put in the meat, a layer of hare, and a layer of
bacon. Then stop the jug close, so that the steam be kept in entirely; put the
jug into a kettle of water over the fire, and let it stew three hours, then
strain off the liquor, and having thickened it with burnt butter, serve it up
hot, garnished with lemon sliced.

To stew a Turkey or Fowl.
Take a turkey or fowl, put it into a sauce-pan, or pot, with a sufficient
quantity of gravy or good broth; a bunch of cellery cut small, and a muslin rag
filled with mace, pepper, and all spice, tied loose, with an onion and a sprig
of thyme. When these have stewed softly till enough, take up the turkey or
fowl: thicken the liquor it was stewed in with butter and flour: and having
dished the turkey, or fowl, pour the sauce into the dish.

To stew Chickens.
Cut two chickens into quarters, wash them and put them into a clean sauce pan,
with a pint of water, half a pint of red wine, some mace, pepper, a bundle o^
sweet herbs, an onion, and a piece of stale crust of bread. Cover them close,
and stew them half an hour. Then put in a piece of butter, as big as an egg,
rolled in flour, and cover it again close for five or six minutes. Shake the
sauce-pan about, and take out the onion and sweet herbs. Garnish with sliced
lemon.

N. B. Rabbits, partridges, etc. may be done the same way; and it is the most
innocent manner for sick, or lying-in persons.

To stew Pigeons.
Stuff the bellies of the pigeons with a seasoning made of ground pepper, salt,
beaten mace, and some sweet herbs shred very fine. Tie up the neck and vent,
and when half roasted, put them into a stew pan, with a sufficient quantity of
gravy, a little white wine, some pickled mushrooms, and a bit of lemon peel.
Let them stew till enough. Then take them out, thicken the liquor with butter
and the yolks of eggs. Dish the pigeons, and pour the sauce over them. Garnish
with lemon.

N. B. If you would enrich this receipt -- You may, when the pigeons are almost
done, put in some artichoke bottoms, boiled and fried in butter, or asparagus
tops boiled.

To Jug Pigeons.
Truss and season the pigeons with pepper and salt; and having stuffed them
with a mixture of their own livers shred with beef suet, bread crumbs, parsley,
marjoram, and two eggs, sew them up at both ends, and put them into the jug,
the breast downwards, with half a pound of butter. Stop up the jug, so as that
no steam can get out; then set them in a pot of water to stew. They will take
two hours and more in doing, and they must boil all the time. When stewed
enough, take them out of the gravy, skim off the fat clean; put a spoonful of
cream, a little lemon peel, an anchovy shr^d, a few mushrooms, and a little
white wine to the gravy; and having thickened it with butter and flour, and
dished up the pigeons, pour the sauce over them. Garnish with sliced lemon.

To stew Ducks
Draw and clean your d^cks well, and put them into a stew pan with strong beef
gravy, a glass of red wine, a little whole pepper, (...) onion, an anchovy, and
lemon peel. When well stewed, thicken the gravy with butter and flour, and
serve all up together, garnished with shalots.

To stew Wild Fowl.
Half roast a wild duck, etc. Then cut it into bits. When cold, put it into a
stew pan, with a sufficient quantity of beef gravy, and let it stew till
tender. Then thicken it with burnt butter, and serve it up all together, with
sippets within the sides, and lemon sliced on the rim of the dish.

To stew Giblets
Let the giblets be clean picked and washed, the feet skinned, and the bill cut
off, the head split in two, the pinion bones broken, the liver and gizzard cut
it four, and the neck in two pieces; put them into half a pint of water, with
pepper, salt, a small onion, and sweet herbs. Cover the sauce pan close, and
let them stew till enough upon a slow fire. Then season them with salt, take
out the onion, and herbs, and pour them into a dish with all the liquor.

To stew Carp or Tench.
Scrape them very clean, then gut them, wash them and the roes in a pint of
good stale beer, to preserve all the blood and boil the carp with a little salt
in the water.

In the mean time strain the beer, and put it into a sauce-pan, with a pint of
red wine, two or three blades of mace, some whole pepper, black and white* an
onion stuck with cloves, half an nutmeg bruised, a bundle of sweet herbs, a
piece of lemon peel as big as a six pence, an anchovy, and a little piece of
horseradish* Let these boil together softly for a quarter of an hour, covered
close; then train the liquor and add to it half the hard roe beat to pieces,
two or three spoonfuls of catchup, a quarter of a pound of fresh butter, and a
spoonful of mushroom pickle; let it boil, and keep stirring it till the sauce
is thick and enough; if it wants any salt, you must put some in; then take the
rest of the roe, and beat it up with the yolk of an egg, some nutmeg, and a
little lemon peel cut small; fry it in fresh butter in little cakes, and some
pieces of bread cut three-corner ways and fried brown. When the carp are enough
take them up, pour your sauce over them, lay the cakes round the dish, with
horseradish scraped fine, and fried parsley. The rest lay on the carp, and put
the fried bread about them, lay round them sliced lemon (...) upon the edge of
the dish, and two or (...) p^^ces on the carp. Send them to (...).

To stew a Cod.
Cut your cod into slices an (...) lay them in the bottom of a large (...);
season them with nutmeg, beaten p^pper, and salt, a bundle of sweet herbs, and
an onion, half a pint of white wine, and a quarter of a pint of water; cover it
close, and let it simmer softly for five or six minutes; then squeeze in the
juice of a lemon; put in a few oysters and the liquor, strained; a piece of
butter as big as an egg, rolled in flour, and a blade or two of mace; co^er it
close, and let it stew softly, shaking the pan often. When it is enough, take
out the sweet-breads and onion, and dish it up; pour the sauce over it. Garnish
with lemon.

To stew Ee^s.
Skin, gut, and wash them very clean in six or eight waters, to wash away all
the sand; then cut them in pieces, about as long as your finger; put just water
enough in the pan for sauce, with an onion stuck with cloves, a little bundle
of sweet herbs, a blade of mace, and some whole pepper in a thin muslin rag.
Cover the pan, and let them stew very softly.

Look at them now and then; put in a little piece of butter rolled in flour,
and a little chopped parsley. When you find they are quite tender and well
done, take out the onion, spice, and sweet herbs Put in salt enough to season
them, and dish them up with the sauce.

To stew Oysters or Muscles.
Plump them in their own liquor; then, having drained off the the liquor, wash
them clean in fair water. Set the liquor drained from the oysters, or as much
as necessary, with the addition of an equal quantity of water and white wine, a
little whole pepper, and a blade of mace, over the fire, and boil it well. Then
put in the oysters, and let them just boil up, and thicken it with a piece of
butter and flour: Some will add the yolk of an egg. Serve them up with sippets
and the liquor, and garnish the dish with grated bread, or sliced lemon.

To stew Spinach and Eggs.
Pick and wash your spinach very clean, put it into a sauce-pan, with a little
salt; cover it close, shake the pan often, when it is just tender, and whilst
it is green, throw it into a sieve to drain, and lay it in your dish. In the
mean time have a stew pan of water boiling, break as many eggs in cups as you
would poach. When the water boils, put in the eggs, have an egg slice ready to
take them out with, lay them on the spinach, and garnish the dish with orange
cut in quarters, and send up melted butter in a cup.

To stew Parsnips.
Boil them tender, scrape them from the dirt, cut them into slices, put them
into a sauce pan, with cream enough for sauce, a piece of butter rolled in
flour, a little salt, and shake the sauce-pan often. When the cream boils, pour
them into a plate for a corner-dish, or aside dish at supper.

To stew Cucumbers.
Pare twelve cucumbers, and slice them as thick as a crown piece; put them to
drain, and then lay them in a coarse cloth till they are dry; flour them and
fry them brown in butter; pour out the fat, then put to them some gravy, a
little claret, some pepper, cloves, and mace, and let them stew a little; then
roll a bit of butter in flour, and toss them up* season with salt: you may add
a little mushroom liquor.

To stew Pease and Lettice.
Take a quart of green pease, two nice lettices clean washed and picked, cut
them small across, put all into a sauce-pan, with a quarter of a pound of
butter, pepper and salt to your palate; cover them close, and let them stew
softly, shake the pan often. Let them stew ten minutes, then shake in a little
flour, toss them round, and pour in half a pint of good gravy; put in a little
bundle of sweet herbs, and an onion, with three cloves, and a blade of mace
stuck in it. Cover the pan close, and let them stew a quarter of an hour; then
take out the onion and sweet herbs, and pour all into the dish.

To stew-Red Cabbage.
Take a red cabbage, lay it in cold water an hour, cut it into thin slices
across, and then into little pieces. Put it into a stew pan, with a pound of
sausages, a pint of gravy, a little bit of ham or lean bacon: cover it close,
and let it stew half an hour; then take the pan off the fire, and skim off the
fat, shake in a little flour, and set it on again. Let it stew two or three
minutes, then lay the sausages in the dish, and pour the rest all over. You
may, before you take it up, put in (...) a spoonful of vinegar.

To stew Pears.
Pare six pears, and either quarter them* or do them whole: they make a pretty
dish with one whole, the rest cut in quarters, and the cores taken out. Lay
them in a deep earthen pot, with a few cloves, a piece of lem^n peel, a gill of
red wine, and a quarter of a pound of fine sugar. If the pears are very large,
they will take half a pound of sugar, and half a pint of red wine; cover them
close with brown paper, and bake them till they are enough.

Serve them up hot or cold, just as you like them, and they will be very good
with water in the place of wine.

To stew Mushrooms.
Take fresh mushrooms, either in buttons, or when the tops are spread, clean
them well, washing the buttons with a wet flannel, and the tops must have their
skins pulled off, and their gills scraped out, if they happen to be found, or
else do not use them; cut the tops, if they are good, in large pieces, and put
them all together in a sauce-pan, without any liquor, cover it close, and let
them stew gently, with a little salt, till they are tender, and covered with
liquor; then take out your mushrooms, and drain them* or else put some pepper
to them, with some white wine, and when they have boiled up, pour off the
sauce, and thicken it with a little butter rolled in flour: some will put in a
shalot at the first, and other spice, but that will spoil the flavor of the
mushrooms, which every body desires to preserve.

CHAP. VII. Of HASHES.
To hash Beef.
TAKE the raw part of any joint of beef, and cut it into thin slices, about the
length of a little finger, and about the same breadth. Take also a little
water, and an equal quantity of stale beer; boil it well with a large onion cut
in two, pepper and salt: then take a piece of butter rolled in flour, and stir
it in the pan till it burns. Put it into the sauce, and let it boil a minute or
two. Then put in the sliced beef, but you must only just let it warm through.
Some add mushroom or walnut liquor, or catchup. Serve this up to table in a
soup-dish, garnished with pickles.

To Hash Mutton.
Take mutton half roasted, and cut it in pieces as big as a half crown; then
put into the sauce-pan half a pint of claret, as much strong broth or gravy,
(or water, if you have not the other) one anchovy, a shallot, a little whole
pepper, some nutmeg grated, and salt to your taste; let these stew a little,
then put in the meat, and a few capers and samphire shred; when it is hot
through, thicken it up with a piece of fresh butter rolled in flour; toast
sippets, and lay them in the dish, and pour the me^t on them. Garnish with
lemon.

To hash Lamb's Head and Pluck.
Boil the head and pluck a quarter of an hour, at most, the heart five minutes,
the liver and lights half an hour. Cut the heart, liver and lights into small
square bits, not bigger than a pea. Make a gravy o^ the liquor that runs from
the head, and a quarter of a pint of the liquor in which it is boiled, a little
walnut liquor or catchup, and a little vinegar, pepper and salt. Then put in
the brains and the harshed meat, shake them well together in the liquor, which
should be only just as much as to wet the meat. Pour all upon sippets in a
hollow dish; and, having grilled the head before the fire, or with a
salamander, lay it open with the brown side upwards* upon the harshed liver,
etc. Garnish with sliced pickled cucumbers, and thin slices of bacon broiled.

To mince Veal.
Take any part of veal that is under done, either roasted or boiled, and shred
it as fi^e as possible with a knife. Then take a sufficient quantity of beef
gravy, dissolve in it the quantity of a hazel nut of cavear to half a pound of
meat, and then put into the gravy the minced veal, and let it boil not above a
minute. Pour it into a soup plate or dish upon sippets of bread toasted; and
garnish the dish with pickled cucumbers, etc. or with thin slices of bacon
broiled.

To hash a Calf'^ Head brown.
Take a calf's head and boil it; when it is cold, take one half of the head and
cut off the meat in thin slices, put it into a stew pan, wi^h a little brown
gravy, put to it a spoonful or two of walnut pickle, a spoonful of catchup* a
little claret, a little shred mace* a few capers shred, or a little mango; boil
it over a stove, and thicken it with butter and flour; take the other part of
the head, cut off the bone ends, and score it with a knife, season it with a
little pepper and salt* rub it over with the yolk of an egg, and strew over a
few bread crumbs, and a little parsley; then set it before the fire to broil
till it is brown; and when you dish up the other part, lay this in the middle;
lay about your hash brain-cakes, with forced-meat balls, and crisp bacon.

To make the Brain Cakes.
Take a handful of bread crumbs, a little shred lemon peel, pepper, salt,
nutmeg, sweet marjoram, parsley shred fine, and the yolks of three eggs; take
the brains and skin them, boil and chop them small, so mix them all together;
take a little butter in your pan when you fry them, and drop them in as you do
fritters, and if they run in your pan, put in a handful more of bread crumbs.

To hash a Calf's Head white.
Take a calf's head, and boil it as much as you would do for eating, when it is
cold cut it in thin slices, and put it into a stew pan, with a white gravy;
then put to it a little shred mace, salt, a pint of oysters, a few shred
mushrooms, lemon peel, three spoonfuls of white wine, and some juice of lemon;
shake all together, boil it over the stove, and thicken it up with a little
flour and butter. When you put it in your dish, you must put a boiled fowl in
the middle, and a few slices of crisp bacon round the dish.

To dress a Mock Turtle.
Take a calf's head, and scald off the hair as you would do off a pig; then
clean it, cut off the horny part in thin slices, with as little of the lean as
possible; put in the brains and the giblets of a goose well boiled; have ready
between a quart and three pints of strong mutton, or veal gravy, with a pint of
Madeira wine, a large tea-spoonful of Cayan pepper, a large onion cut very
small; half the peel of a large lemon shred as fine as possible, a little salt,
the juice of two lemons, and sweet herbs cut small; stew all these together,
till the meat is very tender, which will be in about an hour and a half; and
then have ready the back shell of a turtle, lined with a paste of flour and
water, which you must first set in the oven to harden; then put in the
ingredients, and set it into the oven to brown the top; and when that is done,
suit your garnish at the top with the yolks of eggs boiled hard, and forced
meat balls.

N. B. If you cannot get the shell of a turtle, a China soup-dish will do as
well; and the setting may be omitted.

To hash cold Fowl.
Cut your fowl up, divide the legs, wings, breast, etc. into two or three
pieces; then put them into a stew pan, with a blade or two of mace, and a
little shred lemon peel: drudge on a little flour, and throw in some gravy;
when it begins to simmer, put in a few pickled mushrooms, and a lump of butter
rolled in flour. When it boils, give it a toss or two, and pour it into the
dish. Garnish with sliced lemon and barberries.

To hash a Hare.
Cut up your hare entirely, put it into a stew pan with some good gravy, a gill
of red wine, some shred lemon peel, and a bundle of sweet herbs; let it stew
for an hour; then add some forced meat balls, and yolks of twelve hard-boiled
eggs, with truffles and morells. Give them a boil up, then take out the herbs*
place the hare ^^ndsomely on the dish, and pour the (...) over it. Garnish with
sliced (...) barberries

CHAP. VIII. Of SOUPS.
To make Gravy Soup.
TAKE the bones of a rump of beef, and a piece of the neck, and boil it till
you have all the goodness of it; then strain it off, and take a good piece of
butter, put it in a stew pan, and brown it, then put to it an onion stuck with
cloves, some cellery, endive, spinach, and three carrots; put to your gravy
some pepper, salt, and cloves, and let it boil all together; then put in
sippets of bread dried by the fire; and you may add a glass of red wine. Serve
it up with a French roll toasted, and laid in the middle.

To make a rich Giblet Soup.
Take four pounds of gravy beef, two pounds of scrag of mutton, two pounds of
scrag of veal; stew them well down in a sufficient quantity of water for a
strong broth, let it stand till it is quite cold, then skim the fat clean off.
Take two pair of giblets well scalded and cleaned, put them into your broth,
and let them simmer till they are stewed tender; then take out your giblets,
and run the soup through a fine sieve to catch the small bones; then take an
ounce of butter, and put it into a stew pan, mixing a proper quantity of flour,
which make it of a fine light brown. Take a small handful of chieves, the same
of parsley, very little pennyroyal, and a very little sweet-marjoram; chop all
these herbs together excessive small, put your soup over a slow fire, put in
your giblets, butter and flour, and small herbs; then take a pint of Madeira
wine, some Cayenne pepper, and salt to your palate. Let them all simmer
together, till the herbs are tender, and the soup is finished. Send it to table
with the giblets in it.

N. B. The livers must be stewed in a sauce-pan by themselves, and put in the
dish when you serve it up.

To make a good Pease Soup.
Take a quart of split pease, put them into a gallon of soft water, with a
faggot of herbs, some whole Jamaica and black pepper, two or three onions, a
pound of lean beef, a pound of mutton, and a pound of the belly piece of salt
pork; boil all together, till your meat is thoroughly tender, and your soup
strong; then strain it through a sieve, and put it into a clean sauce-pan; cut
and wash three or four large heads of cellery, some spinach, and a handful of
dried mint, rubbed fine; boil it till your cellery is tender; then serve it up
with toasted bread cut in dice.

To make Green Pease Soup.
Have a knuckle of veal of four pounds, a pint and a half of the oldest green
pease sh^lled, set them over the fire, with five qu^^ts of water* add two or
three blades of mace, a qu^rter of an ounce of whole pepper, a small onion
stuck with three cloves, and a faggot of sweet-herbs, cover it close, and let
it boil till half is wasted; strain it off, and pass your liquor through a
sieve, put it into a clean sauce-pan, with a pint of the youngest pease, the
heart of a cabbage, a lettice or two, and the white part of three or four heads
of cellery cut small; cover it close, and let it stew for an hour. If you think
it is not thick enough, take some of your soup, and put in half a spoonful of
flour; stir it in a basin till it is smooth; pour it into your soup; stir it
well together, and let it boil for ten minutes, then dish it up with the crust
of a French roll.

To make a white portable Soup.
Take a leg of veal bone it, and take off all the skin and fat, take likewise
two dozen of fowls, or chickens feet washed clean, and chopped to pieces; put
all into a large stoving-pot, with three gallons of soft water, and let it
stove gently, till the meat is so tender, as to separate. You must keep your
pot tight covered, and a constant fire during the time of its stoving; in about
seven or eight hours, try your jelly in a cup, and when quite cold, if it is so
stiff, you cannot cut it with a knife, take it off, and strain it through a
sieve, and take off all the fat and skum first with a spoon, and then with
philtering paper: Provide China cups, and fill them with the clear jelly; set
them in a gravy-pan or a large stew pan of boiling water over a stove; in this
water boil your jelly in the cups, till it is as thick as glue. After which,
let them stand in the water till they are quite cold: Before you turn them out
of your cups, run the edge of a knife round them, to loosen them; then turn
them upon a piece of new flannel, which will draw out all the moisture
gradually. Turn them every six or eight hours, till they are perfectly dry, and
like a piece of glue; keep them in as dry a place as you can, and in a little
time they will be so dry, that you may carry them in your pocket, without the
least inconvenience. When you want to use it, take a piece about the bigness of
a walnut, and pour a pint of boiling water on it, stirring it till it is
dissolved; season it with salt to your taste, and you will have a basin of
strong broth. If you want a dish of soup, boil vermicelli in water; then to a
cake of your soup, pour a pint of water, so that four cakes will make two
quarts; when it is thoroughly melted, set it over the fire just to simmer; pour
it into the dish, put in thin slices of bread hardened before the fire, and the
vermicelli upon them. Thus you have a dish of soup in about half an hour.
Whilst this is doing, you may have any thing dressed to follow, which will not
only be a good addition to your dinner, but saving time.

Note. You must season it to your palate, as there is no salt, or seasoning of
any kind in the preparation.

To make a brown portable Soup.
Take a large leg of beef, bone it, and take off the skin, and what fat you
can* put it into a stoving-pot, with a tight cover; put to it about four
gallons of soft water, with six anchovies, half an ounce of mace, a few cloves,
half an ounce of whole white pepper, three onions cut in two, a faggot of
thyme, sweet marjoram, and parsley, with the bottom crust of a two-penny loaf
that is well backed; cover it very close, and let it have a constant fire to do
leisurely for seven or eight hours; then stir it very well together, to make
the meat separate: Cover it close again, and in an hour try your broth in a
cup, to see if it will glutinate* if it does, take it off, and strain it
through a canvas jelly bag into a clean pan; then have China, or well glazed
earthen cups, and fill them with the clear jelly; put them into a broad
gravy-pan, or stew pan, with boiling water; set in the cups, and let them boil
in that till they are perfectly glue. When they are almost cold, run a knife
round them, and turn them upon a piece of new flannel, to draw out all the
moisture; in six or seven hours turn them, and do so till they are perfectly
hard and dry; put them into stone jars, and keep them in a dry place.

This is very good for soups, sauces, or gravies. When you intend to make it
into soup, shred and wash very clean what herbs you have to enrich it, as
cellery, endive, charvil, leeks, lettice, or indeed what herbs you can get;
boil them in water till they are tender, strain them off, and with that water
dissolve what quantity of portable soup you please, according to the strength
you would have it. If you are where you can get it, fry a French roll, and put
in the middle of your dish, moistened first with some of your soup, and when
your cakes are thoroughly melted, put your herbs to it, and set it over the
fire till it is just at boiling; then dish it up, and send it to table.

To make Vermicelli Soup.
Take two quarts of strong veal broth, put it into a clean sauce-pan, with a
piece of bacon stuck with cloves, and half an ounce of butter rolled in flour;
then take a small fowl trussed to boil, break the breast bone, and put it into
your soup; stove it close, and let it stew three quarters of an hour; take
about two ounces of vermicelli, and put to it some of the broth; set it over
the fire till it is quite tender. When your soup is ready, take out the fowl,
and put it into the dish; take out your bacon, skim your soup as clean as
possible; then pour it on the fowl, and lay your vermicelli all over it; cut
some French bread thin, put it into your soup, and send it to table.

If you choose it, you may make your soup with a knuckle of veal, and send a
handsome piece of it in the middle of the dish, instead of the fowl.

To make Soup Lorraine.
Have ready a strong veal broth that is white, and clean scummed from all fat;
blanch a pound of almonds, beat them in a mortar* with a little water, to
prevent their oiling, and the yolks of four poached eggs, the lean part of the
legs, and all the white part of a roasted fowl; pound all together as fine as
possible; then take three quarts of the veal broth put it into a clean stew
pan, put your ingredients in, and mix them well together; chip in the crust of
two French rolls well rasped; boil all together over a stove, or a clear fire.
Take a French roll, cut a piece out of the top, and take out all the crumb;
mince the white part of a roasted fowl very fine, season it with pepper, salt,
nutmeg, and a little beaten mace; put in about an ounce of butter, and moisten
it with two spoonfuls of your soup strained to it; set it over the stove to be
thorough hot: Cut some French rolls in slices, and set them before the fire to
crisp; then strain off your soup through a tammy or a lawn strainer, into
another clean stew pot; let it stew till it is as thick as cream; then have
your dish ready: put in some of your crisp bread; fill your roll with the
mince, and lay on the top as close as possible; put it in the middle of the
dish, and pour a ladleful of your soup over it; put in your bread first, then
pour in the soup, till the dish is full. Garnish with petty patties; or make a
rim for your dish, and garnish with lemon raced.

If you please, you may send a chicken boned in the middle, instead of the
roll; or you may send it to table with only crisp bread.

To make Sorrel Soup with Eggs.
Take the chump end of a loin of mutton, and part of a knuckle of veal to make
your stock with; season it with pepper, salt, cloves* mace and a faggot of
sweet herbs; boil it till it is as rich as you would have it; strain it off,
and put it into a clean sauce-pan: Put in a young fowl, cover it over, and
stove it; then take three or four large handfuls of sorrel washed clean; chop
it grossly, fry it in butter, put it to your soup, and let it boil till your
fowl is thoroughly done; skim it clean, and send it to table with the fowl in
the middle, and six poached eggs round it. Garnish the dish with fried sippets,
and stewed sorrel.

To make Asparagus Soup.
Take five or six pounds of lean beef cut in lumps, and rolled in flour; put it
in your stew pan, with two or three slices of fat bacon at the bottom; then put
it over a slow fire, and cover it close, stirring it now and then till the
gravy is drawn: then put i^ two quarts of water, and half a pint of ale. Cover
it close, and let it stew gently for an hour, with some whole pepper, and salt
to your mind; then strain off the liquor, and take off the fat; put in the
leaves of white beets, some spinach, some cabbage lettice, a little mint, some
sorrel, and a little sweet marjoram powdered; let these boil up in your liquor,
then put in the green tops of asparagus cut small, and let them boil till all
is tender. Serve it up hot, with a French roll in the middle.

Rich Soups in Lent, or for Fast Days. To make a Craw fish Soup.
Cleanse them, and boil them in water, salt, and spice; pull off their feet and
tails, and fry them; break the rest of them in a stone mortar, season them with
savoury spice, and an onion, a hard egg, grated bread, and sweet herbs boiled
in good strong small beer; strain it, and pu^ to it scalded chopped parsley,
and French rolls; then put in the fried craw fish, with a few mushrooms.
Garnish the dish with sliced lemon, and the feet and tail of a craw-fish.

To make Oyster Soup.
Have ready a good fish-stock, then take two quarts of oysters without the
beards; bray the hard part in a mortar, with the yolks of ten hard eggs, Set
what quantity of fish-stock you shall want over the fire with your oysters;
season it with pepper, salt, and grated nu^meg. When it boils, put in the eggs,
and let it boil till it is as thick as cream. Dish it up with bread cut in dice.

To make an Eel Soup.
Take eels according to the quantity of soup you would make; a pound of eels
will make a pint of good soup; so to every pound of eels put a quart of water,
a crust of bread, two or three blades of mace, a little whole pepper, an onion,
and a bundle of sweet herbs* cover them close, and let them boil till half the
liquor is wasted; then strain it, toast some bread, and cut it small, lay the
bread in the dish, and pour in your soup. If you have a stew-hole, set the dish
over it for a minute, and send it to table. If you find your soup not rich
enough, you must let it boil till it is as strong as you would have it, and add
a piece of carrot to brown it.

To make a brown Soup.
Into a clean sauce pan, put three quarts, or more, of water, with raspings
sufficient to thicken it, two or three onions cut across, two or three cloves,
some whole pepper, and a little salt; cover it close, and let it boil about an
hour and a half, then strain it through a sieve; have cellery, carrots, endive,
lettice, spinach, and what other herbs you like, not cut two small, and fry
them in butter; take a clean stew pan, that is large enough for your
ingredients, put in a good piece of butter, dust in flour, and keep it stirring
till it is of a fine brown; then pour in your herbs and soup, boil it till the
herbs are tender, and the soup of a proper thickness. Have bread cut in dice,
and fried brown; pour your soup into the dish, put some of the bread into the
soup, the rest in a plate, and serve it up.

To make a white Soup.
Put in a clean sauce-pan, two or three quarts of water, the crumb of a
two-penny loaf, with a bundle of herbs, some whole pepper, two or three cloves,
an onion or two cut a cross, and a little salt; let it boil covered till it is
quite smooth; take cellery, endive, and lettice, only the white parts, cut them
in pieces, not too small, and boil them till they are very tender. Strain your
soup off into a clean stew pan; put your herbs in, with a good piece of butter
stirred in it till the butter is melted, and let it boil for some time, till it
is very smooth. If any scum arises, take it off very clean: Soak a small French
roll, nicely rasped, in some of the soup; put in the middle of the dish, pour
in your soup, and send it to table.

To make Onion Soup.
First, put a tea-kettle of water on to boil, then slice six Spanish onions, or
some of the largest onions you have got; flour them pretty well, then put them
into a stew pan that will hold about three quarts, fry them in butter till they
are of a fine brown, but not burnt; pour in boiling water sufficient to fill
the soup-dish you intend; let it boil, and take half a pound of butter rolled
in flour, break it in, and keep it stirring till your butter is melted. As it
boils, skim it very well, and put in a little pepper and salt; cut a French
roll into slices, and set it before the fire to crisp; poach seven or eight
eggs very nicely; cut off all the ragged part of the whites, drain the water
from them, and lay them upon every slice of roll; pour your soup into the dish,
and put the bread and eggs carefully into the dish with a skimmer. If you have
any spinach boiled, lay a leaf between every piece of roll, and send it to
table.

If you have any Parmezan cheese, scrape about an ounce very fine, and put it
in when you pour on your boiling water; it gives it a very high flavor, and is
not to be perceived by the taste what it is.

To make a Rice Soup.
To two quarts of water, put three quarters of a pound of rice, clean picked
and washed, with a stick of cinnamon; let it be covered very close, and simmer
till your rice is tender; take out the cinnamon, and grate half a nutmeg; beat
up the yolk of four eggs, and strain them to half a pint of white wine, and as
much pounded sugar as will make it palatable; put this to your soup, and stir
it very well together: Set it over the fire, stirring it till it boils, and is
of a good thickness; then send it to table.

To make Turnip Soup.
Pare a bunch of turnips (save out three or four) put them into a gallon of
water, with half an ounce of white pepper, a^ onion stuck with cloves, three
blades of mace, half a nutmeg bruised, a good faggot of sweet herbs, and a
large crust of bread. Boil them an hour and a half, then pass them through a
sieve; clean a bunch of cellery, cut it small, and put it into your turnips and
liquor, with two of the turnips (...) saved, and two young carrots cut in dice;
cover it close, and let it stew; then cut turnips and carrots in dice, flour
them, and fry them brown in butter, with two large onions cut thin, and fried
likewise; put them all into your soup, with some vermicelli; let it boil
softly, till your cellery is tender, and your soup is good. Season it with salt
to your palate.

To make Soup Meagre.
Take a bunch of cellery washed clean, and cut in pieces, a large handful of
spinach, two cabbage lettices, and some parsley; wash all very clean, and shred
them small; then take a large clean stew pan, put in about half a pound of
butter, and when it is quite hot, slice four large onions very thin, and put
into your butter; stir them well together for two or three minutes; then put in
the rest of your herbs; shake all well together for near twenty minutes; dust
in some flour, and stir them together; pour in two quarts of boiling water;
season with pepper, salt, and beaten mace: Chip a handful of crust of bread,
and put in; boil it half an hour, then beat up the yolks of three eggs in a
spoonful of vinegar; pour it in, and stir it for two or three minutes; then
send it to table.

CHAP. IX. Of FRICASSEES.
To fricassee Neats Tongue.
BOIL them tender, peel them, cut them into thin slices, and fry them in fresh
butter; then pour out the butter; put in as much gravy as will be wanted for
sauce, a bundle of sweet herbs, an onion, some pepper and salt, and a blade or
two of mace; simmer all together half an hour. Then take out the tongue, strain
the gravy, put it with the tongue in the stew pan again, beat up the yolks of
two eggs, with a glas^ of white wine, a little grated nutmeg, a piece of butter
as big as a walnut rolled in flour; shake all together for four or five
minutes, dish it up, and send it to table.

To fricassee Ox Palates.
Put the palates upon the fire in cold water, and let them boil softly till
they are very tender; then blanch and scrape them clean. Rub them all over with
mace, nutmegs, cloves, and pepper beaten fine, and with crumbs of bread. Put
them into a stew pan of hot butter. Fry them brown on both sides. Then, having
poured off the fat, put as much beef or mutton gravy into the stew pan as is
required for sauce, and an anchovy, a little lemon juice, and salt to make it
palatable, and a piece of butter rolled in flour. When these have simmered
together a quarter of an hour, dish them up, and garnish with sliced lemon.

To fricassee Tripe.
Take the whitest and the thickest seam tripe; cut the white part in thin
slices, and put it into a stew pan, with a little white gravy, a spoonful of
white wine, a little lemon juice, and lemon peel grated. Add to it the yolks of
two or three eggs beat very well, with a little thick cream, shred parsley, and
two or three chieves. Let them all be shook together over a stove or slow fire,
till the gravy becomes as thick as cream; but it must not boil, for fear it
should curdle. Pour all together into a dish laid with sippets. Garnish with
sliced lemon and mushrooms.

To fricassee a Calf's Head.
Take half a calf's head that is boiled tender, cut it into slices, and put it
into a stew pan, with some good veal broth; season it with mace, pepper and
salt, an arti^hoke bottom cut in dice, some force-meat balls first boiled,
morels and truffles; let these boil together for a quarter of an hour; scum it
clean; beat up the yolks of two eggs in a gill of cream, put this in, and shake
it round till it is ready to boil; squeeze in a little lemon, and serve it up.
Garnish with lemon.

To fricassee Calf's Feet.
Dress the calf's feet, boil them as you would do for eating, take out the long
bones, cut them in two, and put them into a stew pan, with a little white
gravy, and a spoonful or two of white wine; take the yolks of two or three
eggs, two or three spoonfuls of of cream, grate in a little nutmeg and salt,
and shake all together with a lump of butter. Garnish your dish with slices of
lemon and currants, and serve it up.

To fricassee V^al Sweetbreads.
Cut the sweetbreads in thin slices, the length-way. Dip them in eggs. Season
them with pepper, salt, and grated nutmeg. Fry them a light brown. Then put
them into a stew pan, with a sufficient quantity of brown gravy, and a spoonful
of lemon-juice. Thicken it with butter and flour. Serve it up altogether,
garnished with bits of toasted bacon and crisp parsley.

To fricassee Lamb brown.
Cut a hind quarter of lamb into thin slices; season them with pepper and salt,
a little nutmeg, savory, marjoram, and lemon, thyme dried and powered (some add
a shallot.) Then fry it on the fire briskly, and afterward toss the lamb up in
strong gravy, a glass of red wine, a few oysters, some force-meat balls, two
palates, a little burnt butter, and an egg or two, or a bit of butter rolled in
flour to thicken it. Serve all up in one dish, garnished with sliced lemon.

To fricassee Lamb white.
Take a leg of lamb, half roast it; when it is cold cut it in slices, put it
into a stew pan with a little white gravy, a shallot shred fine, a little
nutmeg, salt, and a few shred capers; let it boil over a stove till the lamb is
enough; to thicken your sauce, take three spoonfuls of cream, the yolks of two
eggs, a little shred parsley, and beat them well together, then put it into a
stew^pan, and shake it till it is thick, but do not let it boil; if this do not
make it thick, put in a little flour and butter, so serve it up. Garnish your
dish with mushrooms, oysters, and lemon.

To fricassee Lambstones and Sweetbreads.
Have ready some lambstones blanched, parboiled and sliced, and flour two or
three sweetbreads; if very thick, cut them in two, the yolks of six hard eggs
whole; a few pistacho nut kernels, and a few large oysteys; fry these all of a
fine brown, then pour out all the butter, and add a pint of drawn gravy, the
lambstones, some asparagus tops of about an inch long, some grated nutmeg, a
little pepper and salt, two shallots shred small, and a glass of white wine.
Stew all these together for ten minutes, then add the yolks of six eggs beat
very fine, with a little white wine, and a little mace; stir all together till
it is of a fine thickness, and then dish it up. Garnish with lemon.

To fricassee Pig's Ears.
Take three or four pig's ears, clean and boil them very tender, cut them in
small pieces the length of your finger, and fry them with butter till they be
brown; put them into a stew pan with a little brown gravy, a lump of butter, a
spoonful of vinegar, and a little mustard and salt, thickened with flour. Take
two or three pig's feet, and boil them very tender, fit for eating; then cut
them in two, and take out the large bones; dip them in eggs, and strew over
them a few bread crumbs: season them with pepper and salt. Then either fry or
broil them, and lay them in the middle of the dish with the pig's ears.

To fricassee Pig's Pettitoes.
Clean the pettitoes very well from hair, etc. split them in two down the
middle. Boil them with the liver, lights and heart, till they are very tender,
in half a pint of water or more, according to the quantity of the meat, with an
onion, a bunch of sweet herbs, a little whole pepper, and a blade of mace. But
in five minutes take out the liver, lights and heart, mince them very small,
grate a little nutmeg over them, and drudge them with flour gently. And when
the pettitoes or feet are quite tender, take them out, strain the liquor in
which they were boiled; and then put all together into a sauce pan, with a
little salt, a bit of butter as big as a walnut, and either a spoonful of
vinegar, or the juice of half a small lemon. Shake the sauce pan often; and
after it has simmered five or six minutes, and you have laid some toasted
sippets, or slices of bread round the inside of the dish* lay the minced meat
and sauce in the middle, and the split pettitoes round it. Garnish with sliced
lemon.

To fricassee a Hare.
Boil the hare with apples, onions, and parsley; when it is tender, shred it
small, then put thereto a pint of claret, one nutmeg, a little pepper and salt,
and two or three anchovies; stir these together, with the yolks of twelve hard
eggs shred small; when it is served up, put in as much melted butter as will
make it moist; garnish the dish with some of the bones, and the whites of eggs
boiled hard, and cut in halves.

To fricassee Rabbits white.
Half roast two young rabbits; then skin and cut them in pieces, using only the
whitest parts; which you must put into a stew pan, with a sufficient quantity
of white gravy, a small anchovy, a little onion, shred mace, grated lemon peel,
and nutmeg; and let it have one boil. Then take a little cream, the yolks of
two eggs, a lump of butter, a little juice of lemon and shred parsley, and put
them all together into a stew pan, and shake them over the fire, till they
become as white as cream; but do not let the mixture boil, for it will curdle
if it does. Garnish the dish with sliced lemon and pickles.

To fricassee Rabbits brown,
Cut a rabbit's legs in three pieces, and the other parts about the same size.
Beat them thin and fry them in butter over a quick fire: when fried put them
into a stew pan with a little gravy, a spoonful of of catchup and a little
grated nutmeg. Shake it up with a little flour and butter, and garnish the dish
with fried parsley, made very crisp.

To fricassee Chickens white.
Half roast the chickens, then having cut them up, as for eating, skin them,
and put them into a stew pan with a little white gravy, the juice of a lemon,
an anchovy for every chicken, and a sufficient quantity of mace and nutmeg
grated, and then boil them. Take also the yolks of eggs as much as necessary, a
little sweet cream and shred parsley; and put them into a stew pan with a lump
of butter and a little salt. Shake them all the time they are over the fire,
but do not let them boil, for that would make them curdle. Serve it up poured
upon sippets, and garnish the dish with sliced-lemon, or pickled mushrooms.

To fricassee Chickens brown.
Cut up the chickens raw, in the manner as you do for eating, and flat the
pieces a little with a rolling-pin. Fry them of a light brown; afterward put
them into a stew pan, with a sufficient quantity, but not too much gravy, a
spoonful or two of white wind, to two or three chickens, a little nutmeg and
salt. Thicken it up with flour and butter. Garnish with sippets within the
dish, and with crisp parsley on the rim.

To fricassee Pigeons.
Quarter each pigeon and fry them. Take also some green pease, and fry them
also till they be like to burst. Then pour boiling water upon them, and season
the liquor with pepper, salt, onions, garlic, parsley and vinegar. Thicken with
yolks of eggs.

To fricassee Cod.
Get the sounds, blanch them, then make them very clean, and cut them into
little pieces. If they be dried sounds, you must first boil them tender. Get
some of the roes, blanch them and wash them clean, cut them into round pieces
about an inch thick, with some of the livers, an equal quantity of each, to
make a handsome dish, and a piece of cod of about a pound for the middle. Put
them into a stew pan, season them with a little beaten mace, grated nutmeg and
salt, a little sweet herbs, an onion, and a quarter of a pint of fish broth or
boiling water; cover them close, and let them stew a few minutes; then put in
half a pint of red wine, a few oysters with the liquor strained, a piece of
butter rolled in flour, shake the pan round, and let them stew softly till they
are enough, take out the sweet herbs and onion, and dish it up. Garnish with
lemon.

To fricassee Soals, Plaice, or Flounders.
Strip off the black skin of the fish, but not the white; then take out the
bones, and cut the flesh into slices about two inches long; dip the slices in
the yolks of eggs, and strew over them raspins of bread; then fry them in
clarified butter, and when they are fried enough, take them out on a plate, and
set them by the fire till you have made the following sauce.

Take the bones of the fish, boil them up with water, and put in some anchovy
and sweet herbs, such as thyme and parsley, and add a little pepper, cloves and
mace. When these have boiled together some time, take the butter in which the
fish was fried, put it into a pan over the fire, shake flour into i^, and keep
it stirring while the flour is shaking in; then strain the liquor into it, in
which the fish bones, herbs, and spice were boiled, and boil it together, till
it is very thick, adding lemon-juice to your taste. Put your fish into a dish,
and pour your sauce over it; serve it up, garnished with slices of lemon and
fried parsley.

N. B. This dish may take place on any part of the table, either in the first
or second ^ourse.

To fricassee Tench white.
Having cleaned your tench very well, cut off their heads, slit them in two,
and if large, cut each half in three pieces, if small in two: Melt some butter
in a stew pan, and put in your tench; dust in some flour, and pour in some
boiling water, and a few mushrooms, and season it with salt, pepper, a bundle
of sweet herbs, and an onion stuck with cloves: When this boils, pour in a pint
of white wine boiling hot, let stew till sufficiently wasted; take out the
fish, and strain the liquor, saving the mushroom; bind your fricassee with the
yolks of three or four eggs beat up with a little verjuice, some parsley
chopped fine, and a little n^tmeg grated; stir it all the time it boils, from
it very clean, pour your sauce over the (...), and send it to table.

To fricassee Tench brown.
Prepare your tench as in the other receipt; put some butter and flour into a
stew pan, and brown it; then put in the tench with the same seasoning you did
for your white fricassee; when you have tossed them up, moisten them with a
little fish broth; boil a pint of white wine, and put to your fricassee, stew
it (...) enough, and properly wasted; then take the fish up, and strain the
liquor, bind it with a brown cullis, and serve it up. If asparagus or
artichoaks are in season, you may boil these, and add them to your fricassee.

To fricassee Eggs white.
Boil eight or ten eggs; take off the shells, cut some in halves, and some in
quarters; have ready half a pint of cream, a good piece of butter, a little
nutmeg, a glass of white wine, and a spoonful of chopped parsley; stir all
together over a clear fire till it is thick and smooth; lay your eggs into your
dish, and pour the sauce over. Garnish with hard eggs cut in half, oranges
quartered, and toasted sippets; send it hot to table.

To fricassee Eggs brown.
Boil as many eggs hard as you want to fill your dish; take off the shells, and
fry them in butter, of a fine brown; pour your fat out of the pan, put in some
flour, and a lump of butter, stir it till it is thick, and of a good brown;
pour in some boiling water, a gill of Madeira, a little pepper, salt, and
beaten mace; boil all together, till it is of a good thickness; scum it, and
squeeze in a little orange; cut some of your eggs in half, lay the flat side
uppermost, and the whole ones between; pour the sauce over. Garnish with fried
parsley, and a Seville orange, cut in small quarters.

To fricassee Artichoke Bottoms.
Take them either dried or pickled; if dried, you must lay them in warm water
for three or four hours, shifting the water two or three times; then have ready
a little cream, and a piece of fresh butter, stirred together one way over the
fire till it is melted, then put in the artichokes, and* when they are hot dish
them up.

To fricassee Mushrooms.
Take a quart of fresh mushrooms, make them clean, put them into a sauce-pan,
with three spoonfuls of water, and three of milk, and a very little salt, set
them on a quick fire, and let them boil up three times; then take them off,
grate in a little nutmeg* put in a little beaten mace, half a pint of thick
cream, a piece of butter rolled well in flour, put it all together into the
sauce-pan, shaking it well all the time. When (...) liquor is fine and thick,
dish them up; (...) careful they do not curdle. You may stir the sauce-pan
carefully with a spoon all the time.

CHAP. X. Of RAGOUTS.
To ragout a piece of Beef, called Beef a-la-Mode.
TAKE a buttock of beef, interlarded with great lard, rolled up with chopped
spice, sage, parsl^y, thyme, and green onions; put it into a great sauce-pan,
and bind it close with coarse tape. When it is half done, turn it; let it stand
over the fire on a stove twelve hours. It is fit to be eat cold or hot. When it
is cold, slice it out thin, and toss it up in a fine ragout of sweet breads,
oysters, mushrooms, and palates.

To ragout a Breast of Veal.
Put a breast of veal, with an onion, a bundle of sweet herbs, a little black
pepper and grated nutmeg, a blade or two of mace, and a very little lemon peel
grated into a large stew pan, and just cover it with water; when it grows
tender take it up and bone it.

Put the bones into the liquor, and boil them till it makes good gravy. Then
strain it off. Add to this liquor a quarter of a pint of rich beef gravy, half
an ounce of truffles and morels, a spoonful of catchup, and two spoonfuls of
white wine. While these are boiling together, flour the veal and fry it in
butter till it becomes to be of a fine brown. Then drain off the butter, and
pour the gravy to the veal, with a few mushrooms.

Boil all together till the liquor becomes rich and thick. Cut the sweetbread
into four, and spread the pieces and forced-meat balls over the dish; having
first laid the veal in the dish, and poured the sauce all over it. Garnish with
sliced lemon.

To ragout a Neck of Veal.
Cut it into steaks, flatten them with a rolling-pin, lard them with bacon, and
season them with a mixture of salt, pepper, nutmeg grated, mace, lemon peel and
thyme. Then deep each steak separately in the yolks of eggs. Put all together
in a stew pan, over a slow fire, and keep basting and turning the steaks in
order to keep in the gravy. When they are done sufficiently, dish them with
half a pint of strong gravy seasoned high, mushrooms, and pickles, and
forced-meat balls dipped in the yolks of eggs. Garnish with stewed and fried
oysters.

If you intend a brown ragout, put in a glass of red wine: if a white ragout,
put in white wine, with the yolks of eggs beaten up with two or three spoonfuls
of cream.

To ragout Veal Sweetbreads.
Cut sweetbreads into pieces as big as a walnut; wash and dry them, put them
into a stew pan of hot burned butter. Stir them till they are brown, and then
pour over them as much gravy, mushrooms, pepper, salt, and alspice, as will
cover them, and let them stew half an hour. Then pour off the liquor; pass it
through a sieve, and thicken it for sauce. Place the veal sweet-breads in the
dish, pour the sauce over them, and serve them up, garnished with sliced lemon
or orange.

To ragout a Leg of Mutton.
Take off all the fat and skin, and cut the flesh very thin in the right way of
the grain. Butter the stew pan, dust it with flour, and put in the meat, with
half a lemon and half an onion cut very small, a blade of mace, and a little
bundle of sweet herbs. Stir it a minute or two. Then put in a quarter of a pint
of gravy, and an anchovy minced small, mixed with butter and flour. Stir it
again for six minutes, and then dish it up.

To ragout Hog's Feet and Ears.
If they are raw or soused, boil the feet and ears till they are tender, after
which cut them into thin bits about two inches long, and a quarter of an inch
thick. Put them into a stew pan with half a pint of good gravy, a glass of
white wine, a good piece of butter rolled in flour, a little pepper and salt, a
good deal of mustard, and half an onion. Stir all together till it becomes of a
fine thickness, and then pour it into a dish, meat and gravy together.

To make a rich Ragout.
Having parboiled lambstones and sweetbreads, and blanched some cocks-combs,
cut them all in slices, and season them with a mixture of pepper and salt, mace
and nutmeg. Then fry them a little in lard; drain them, and toss them up in
good gravy, with a bunch of sweet herbs, two shallots, a few mushrooms,
truffles and morels. Thicken it with burnt butter, and add a glass of claret or
red wine. Garnish the dish with pickled mushrooms, or fried oysters, and sliced
lemon.

A ragout for made Dishes.
Take red wine, gravy, sweet herbs, and spice, in which toss up lamb stones,
cocks-combs boiled, blanched and sliced, with sliced sweetbreads, oysters,
mushrooms, truffles, and morels; thicken these with brown butter, and use it
occasionally when wanted to enrich a ragout of any sort.

A ragout of Snipes.
Take two brace of snipes clean picked; put a piece of butter into a stew pan,
and give your snipes a browning; then cut them down the back, and press them
flat, but do not take out the trails; put them into a stew pan, with some good
gravy, a small glass of red wine, a gill of small mushrooms, and a little
beaten mace, and salt: Let them stew five or six minutes; then roll a piece of
butter in flour. When it is the thickness of cream, skim it clean, and dish
them up. Garnish your dish with toasted sippets, and orange cut in small
quarters.

A ragout of Eggs.
Boil six eggs hard; then take large mushrooms, peal and scrape them clean, put
them into a sauce-pan, with a little salt, cover them, and let them boil; put
to them a gill of red wine, a good piece of butter rolled in flour, seasoned
with mace and nutmeg; let it boil till it is of a good thickness; cut the white
of your eggs round, so that you do not break the yolks; lay some toasted
sippets in your dish, with the yolks of eggs: then pour over your ragout;
garnish your dish with the whites; lay the flat side uppermost, and a Seville
orange between.

To ragout Sturgeon.
Cut sturgeon into collops, lard, and rub them over with an egg, durst in some
flour* and fry them of a fine brown in lard: As soon as they are done, put them
into a stew pan, with a pint of good gravy, some sweet herbs shred fine, some
slices of lemon, veal sweetbreads, cut in pieces, truffles, mushrooms, and a
glass of white wine; bind it with a good cullis, till it is of a proper
thickness; then take off all the scum very clean; dish it up, and garnish it
with ba^berries and lemon.

To ragout Oysters.
Open four dozen of the largest Melton oysters, and save the liquor; make a
thick batter with cream, the yolks of eggs, nutmeg grated, and parsley chopped
fine: Dip the oysters into the batter, and then roll them in bread crumbs, and
fry them of a fine brown; when they are fried take them up, and lay them on a
drainer before the fire; empty your pan, and dust some flour all over it, then
put in about two ounces of butter: When it is melted and thick, strain in your
oyster liquor, and stir it well ^^gether; put in two ounces of Pistacho-nuts
shelled, and let them boil; then put in half a pint of white wine, beat up the
yolks of two eggs in four spoonfuls of cream; stir all together till it is of a
proper thickness; ^ay the oysters in the dish, and pour the ragout over.
Garnish the dish with a Seville orange cut in small quarters.

CHAP. XI. Of PASTRY.
To make Paste for Tarts.
TAKE two pounds and a half of butter, to three pounds of flour, and half a
pound of fine sugar beaten; rub all your butter in the flour, and make it into
a paste with cold milk, and two spoonfuls of brandy.

Puff Paste.
Take a quartern of flour, and a pound and a half of butter; rub a third part
of the butter in the flour, and make a paste with water; then roll out your
paste, and put your butter upon it in bits, and flour it; then fold it up, and
roll it again; then put in more butter, and flour it, and fold it up again;
then put the rest of the butter in, flour it, fold it, and roll it twice before
you use it.

Paste for raised Pies.
To half a peck of flour, take two pounds of butter, and put it in pieces in a
sauce-pan of water over the fire, and when the butter is melted, make a hole in
the flour, skimming off the butter, and put it in the flour, with some of the
water; then make it up in a stiff paste, and put it before the fire in a cloth,
if you do not use it presently.

Paste for Venison Pasties.
Take four pounds of butter to half a peck of flour; rub it all in your flour,
but not too small; then make it into paste, and beat it with a rolling pin for
an hour before you use it; you may beat three or four eggs, and put into your
paste, when you mix it, if you please.

Paste Royal for Patty-pans.
Lay down a pound of flour; work it up with half a pound of butter, two ounces
of fine sugar, and four eggs.

Paste for Custards.
Lay down flour, and make into a stiff paste with boiling water; sprinkle it
with a little cold water to keep it from cracking.

To make a Hare Pie.
Cut the hare in pieces, break the bones, and lay them in the pie; lay on
balls, sliced lemon, and butter, and close it with the yolks of hard eggs.

An Umble Pie.
Take the humbles of a buck, and boil them, and chop them as small as meat for
minced pies, and put to them as much beef suet, eight apples, half a pound of
sugar, a pound and a half of currants, a little salt, some mace, cloves,
nutmeg, and a little pepper; then mix them together, and put it into a paste;
add half a pint of sack, the juice of one lemon and orange, close the pie, and
when it is baked serve it up.

A Lumber Pie.
Take a pound and a half of fillet of veal, mince it with the same quantity of
beef suet, season it with sweet spice, five pippins, a handful of spinach, and
a hard lettice, thyme and parsley: Mix with it a penny loaf grated, and the
yolks of two or three eggs, sack and orange-flower water, sweet spice, a pound
and a half of currants and preserves, and a ^audle.

A Shrewsbury Pie.
Take a couple of rabbits, cut them in pieces, season them well with pepper and
salt; then take some fat pork, and season it in like manner, then take the
rabbits livers parboiled, some butter, eggs, pepper and salt, a little sweet
marjoram, and a little nutmeg; make these into balls, and lay it in your pie
amongst the meat; then take artichoak bottoms boiled tender, cut in dice, and
lay these likewise among the meat, then close your pie, and put in it as much
white wine and water as you think proper. Bake it and serve it up.

A Lamb Pie.
Season the lamb steaks; lay them in the pie with sliced lamb-stones and
sweetbreads, savory balls, and oysters. Lay on butter, and close the pie with a
lear.

A Lamb Pie with Currants.
Take a leg and a loin of lamb, cut the flesh into small pieces, and season it
with a little salt, cloves, mace, and nutmeg; then lay the lamb in your paste,
and as many currants as you think proper, and some Lisbon sugar, a few raisins
stoned and chopped small: add some forced-meat balls, some yolks of hard eggs,
with artichoke bottoms, or potatoes that have been boiled and cut in dice, with
candid orange and lemon peel cut in slices; put butter on the top, and a little
water; then close your pie, bake it gently, and when it is baked take off the
top* and put in your caudle made of gravy from the bones, some white wine and
juice of lemon; thicken it with the yolks of two eggs, and a bit of butter.
When you pour in your caudle, let it be hot, and shake it well in the pie; then
serve it, having laid on the cover.

Note. If you observe too much fat swimming on the liquor of your pie, take it
off before you pour on the caudle.

A Mutton Pie.
Season the mutton steaks, fill the pie, lay on butter, and close it. When it
is baked, toss up a handful of chopped capers, cucumbers, and oysters in gravy,
with an anchovy and drawn butter.

A Veal Pie.
Raise a high round pie, then cut a fillet of veal into three or four fillets,
season it with savory seasoning, and a little minced sage and sweet herbs; lay
it in the pie with slices of bacon at the bottom, and between each piece lay on
butter, and close the pie. When it is baked, and half cold, fill it up with
clarified butter.

A Hen Pie.
Cut it in pieces, and lay it in the pie; lay on balls, sliced lemon, butter
and close it with the yolks of hard eggs, let the lear be thickened with eggs.

A Chicken Pie.
Take six small chickens; roll up a piece of butter in sweet herbs; season and
lay them into a cover, with the marrow of two bones rolled up in the batter of
eggs, a dozen of yolks of eggs boiled hard, and two dozen of savory balls; when
you serve it up, pour in a ^ quart of good white gravy.

A sweet Chicken Pie.
Break the bones of four chickens, then cut them into small pieces, season them
highly with mace, cinnamon and salt; have four yolks of eggs boiled hard and
quartered, and five artichoke bottoms, eight ounces of raisins o^ the sun
stoned* eight ounces of preserved citron, lemon and eringo roots, of each
alike, eight ounces of marrow, four slices of ^ined lemon, eight ounces of
currants, fifty balls of forced meat, made as for umble pie; put i^ ^ll, one
with the other, but first butter the bottom of the pie, and put in a pound of
fresh ^utter on the top lid, and bake it; then put ^n a pint of white wine
mixed with a little sack, and if you w^ll, the juice of two oranges, sweetening
it to your taste. Make it boil, and thicken it with the yolks of two eggs: put
it (...) the pie when both are very hot* and serve

A Turkey Pie.
Bone the turkey, season it with sauory spice, and lay it in the pie* with two
capons cut in pieces, to fill up the corners. A goose pie is made the same way,
with two rabbits, to fill it up as aforesaid.

A Pigeon Pie.
Truss and season the pigeons with sa^ory spices, lard them with bacon, and
stuff them with forced-meat; lay on lamb-stones, sweet-breads, and butter;
close the pie wit^ a lear. A chicken or capon pie may be made the same way.

A Battalia Pie.
Take four small chickens, and squab pigeons, four sucking rabbits, cut them in
pieces, and season them with savory spice; lay them in the pie, with four
sweet-breads sliced, as many sheeps tongues and shivered palates, two pair of
lambs stones, twenty or thirty cocks-combs, with savoury balls and oysters; lay
on butter, and close the pie with a lear.

A lamb-stone and Sweetbread Pie.
Boil, blanch, and slice them, and season them with savory seasoning; lay them
in the pie with sliced artichoke bottoms, lay on butter, and close the pie with
a lear.

A Neat's Tongue Pie.
Half boil the tongues, blanch them and slice them, season them with savory
seasoning, sliced lemon, balls, and butter, and then close the pie. When it is
baked, take gravy and veal sweet-breads, or palates and cocks-combs, tossed up,
and poured into the pie.

A Calf's Head Pie.
Almost boil the calf's head, take out the bones, cut it in thin slices, season
and mix it with sliced shivered palates, cocks-combs, oysters, mushrooms and
balls. Lay on butter, and close the pie with a lear.

A Venison Pasty.
Raise a high round pie, shred a pound of beef suet, and put it into the
bottom; cut your venison in pieces, and season it with pepper and salt. Lay it
on the suet, lay on butter, close the pie, and bake it six hours.

An Egg Pie.
Shred the yolks of twenty hard eggs, with the same quantity of marrow and beef
suet; season it with sweet spice, citron, orange and lemon; fill and close the
pie.

Minced Pie.
Shred a pound of neats tongue parboiled, with two pounds of beef suet, five
pippins, and a green lemon peel; season it with an ounce of spice, a little
salt, a pound of sugar, two pounds of currants, half a pint of sack, a little
orange flour water, the juice of three or flour lemons, a quarter of a pound of
citron, lemon and orange-peel. Mix these together, and fill the pies.

A Carp Pie.
To a quartern of flour put two pounds of butter, rubbing a third part in; then
make it into paste with water; then roll in the rest of the butter at three
times; lay your paste in the dish, put in some bits of butter on the bottom
paste, with pepper and salt; then scale and gut your carps; put them in
vinegar, water and salt; then wash them out of the vinegar and water, and dry
them, and make the following pudding for the belly of the carp; take the flesh
of an eel, and cut it small, put some grated bread, two buttered eggs, an
anchovy cut small, a little nutmeg grated, and pepper and salt. Mix these
together well, and fill the belly of the carp; then make some force-meat balls
of the same mixture; then cut off the tail and fins of the carp, and lay it in
the crust, with slices of fat bacon, a little mace, and some bits of butter;
then close your pie, and before you set it in the oven, pour in half a pint of
claret. Serve it hot.

Oyster Pie.
Parboil a quart of large oysters in their own liquor, mince them small, and
pound them in a mortar, with pistachio nuts, marrow, and sweet herbs, and onion
and savory seeds, and a little grated bread; or season as aforesaid whole. Lay
on butter and close it.

Flounder Pie.
Take twelve large flounders, cut off their tails, fins, and heads; then season
them with pepper and salt, cloves, mace, and nutmeg beaten fine; then take two
or three eels w^ll cleaned, and cut in lengths of three inches, and season as
before; then lay your flounders and eels in your pie, and the yolks of eight
hard eggs, half a pint of pickled mushrooms, an anchovy; a whole onion, a bunch
of sweet herbs, some lemon peel grated. You must put three quarters of a pound
of butter, on the top, with a quarter of a pint of water, and a gill of white
wine; then close your pie, and serve it hot, first taking out the onion and
bunch of sweet herbs.

Trout Pie.
Clean, wash, and scale them, lard them with pieces of a silver eel rolled up
in spice, and sweet herbs, and bay leaves powdered; lay on and between them the
bottoms of sliced artichokes, mushrooms, oysters, capers, and sliced lemon; lay
on butter, and close the pie.

Eel Pie.
Cut, wash, and season them with sweet seasoning, and a handful of currants;
butter, and close it.

Lamprey Pie.
Clean, wash, and season them with sweet seasoning; lay them in a coffin with
citron and lemon sliced; butter and close the pie.

Artichoke or Potatoe Pie.
Take artichoke bottoms, season them with a little mace and cinnamon sliced,
eight ounces of candied lemon and citron sliced, eringo-roots and prunellas, a
slit of each, two ounces of barberries, eight ounces of marrow, eight ounces of
raisins of the sun stoned, and two ounces of sugar; butter the bottom of the
pie, and put in all, one with the other, and eight ounces of butter on the top
lid; bake it, and then put on a l^ar, made as for the chicken Pie.

To make an Apple or Pear Pie.
Make a good puff paste crust, lay some round the sides of the dish, pare and
quarter your apples, and take out the cores lay a row of apples thick, throw in
half the sugar you design for your pie, mince a little lemon peel fine, throw
over and squeeze a little lemon over them, then a few cloves, here and there
one, then the rest of your apples and the rest of your sugar. You must sweeten
to your palate, and squeeze a little more lemon. Boil the peeling of the apples
and the cores in fair water, with a blade of mace, till it is very good; strain
it and boil the syrup with a little sugar, till there is but very little and
good, pour it into your pie, put on your upper crust and bake it. You may put
in a little quince or marmalade, if you please.

Thus make a pear pie, but don't put in any quince. You may butter them when
they come out of the oven; or beat up the yolks of two eggs and half a pint of
cream, with a little nutmeg, sweetened with sugar, take off the lid and pour in
the cream. Cut the crust in little three corner pieces, stick about the pie and
send it to table.

To make a Cherry, Plumb, or Gooseberry Pie.
Make a good crust, lay a little round the sides of your dish, throw sugar at
the bottom, and lay in your fruit and sugar at top. A few red currants does
well with them; put on your lid, and bake it in a slack oven.

Make a plumb pie the same way, and a gooseberry pie. If you would have it red,
let it stand a good while in the oven after the bread is drawn. A custard is
very good with the gooseberry pie.

To make Tarts of diverse Kinds
If you propose to make them in patty-pans, first butter them well, and then
put a thin crust, all over them, in order to your taking them out with the
greater ease; but if you make use of either glass or china dishes, add no crust
but the top one. Strew a proper quantity of fine sugar at the bottom; and after
that lay in your fruit of what sort soever, as you think most proper, and strew
a like quantity of the same sugar over them. Then put your lid on, and let them
be baked in a slack oven. If you make tarts of apples, pears, apricots, etc.
the beaten crust is looked upon as the most proper; but that is submitted to
your own particular fancy.

To make Apple Tart, or Pear Tart.
Pare them first; then cut them into quarters, and take the cores out; in the
next place* cut each quarter across again; throw them, so prepared into a sauce
pan, with no more water in it than will just cover the fruit; let them simmer
over a slow fire, till they are perfectly tender. Before you set your fruit on
the fire, take care to put a good large piece of lemon peel into the water.
Have the patty-pans in readiness, and strew fine sugar at the bottom; then lay
in the fruit, and cover them with as much of the same sugar as you think
convenient. Over each tart pour a tea spoonful of lemon juice, and three
spoonfuls of the liquor in which they were boiled. Then lay the lid over them,
and put them into a slack oven.

If the tarts be made of apricots, etc. you must neither pare them, nor cut
them, nor stone them, nor use lemon juice; which is the only material
difference in making them.

Observe, with respect to preserved tarts* only lay in the preserved fruit, and
put a very thin crust over them; and bake them as short a time as possible.

Orange or Lemon Tarts.
Take six large lemons, and rub them very well with salt, and put them in water
for two days, with a handful of salt in it; then change them into fresh water
every day (without salt) for a fortnight, then boil them for two or three hours
till they are tender, cut them into half quarters, and then cut them again
three-corner-ways as thin as you can. Take six pippins pared, cored, and
quartered, and a pint of fair water; let them boil till the pippins break; put
the liquor to your orange or lemon, with half the pulp of the pippins well
broken, and a pound of sugar. Boil these together a quarter of an hour, then
put it in a gallipot* and squeeze an orange in it: if it be a lemon tart
squeeze a lemon; two spoonfuls is enough for a tart. Your patty-pans must be
small and shallow. Use fine puff-paste, and very thin; a little baking will do.
Just as your tarts are going into the oven, with a feather, or brush, do them
over with melted butter, and then sift double refined sugar over them; and this
is a pretty iceing on them.

Iceing for Tarts.
Beat and sift a quarter of a pound of fine loaf sugar. Put it into a mortar
with the white of one egg, that has been well beat up Add to these two
spoonfuls of rose water, and beat all together till it be so thick as just to
run, observing to stir it all one way. It is laid on the tart with a brush or
small bunch of feathers dipped in the iceing. Set the tarts, when so done, into
a cool oven to harden. But take care not to let them stand too long: for that
will discolor them.

An Almond Tart, very good.
To half a pound of almonds blanched, and very finely beat with orange-flower
water, put a pint of thick cream, two large Naples biskets grated, and five
yolks of eggs with near half a pound of sugar; put all into a dish garnished
with a paste, and lay slips in diamonds cross the top; bake it in a cool oven;
and when drawn out, stick slips of candid citron in each diamond.

Orange Puffs.
Pare off the rinds from Seville oranges or lemons, then rub them with salt;
let them lie twenty-four hours in water, then boil them in four changes of
water, making the first salt; drain them dry, and ^eat them fine to a puff;
then bruise in the pieces of all that you have pared, make it very sweet with
fine sugar, and boil it till it is thick* let it stand till it is cold, and
then it will be fit to put in the paste.

Lemon Puffs.
Take a pound and a quarter of double refined sugar beaten and sifted, and
grate the rinds of two lemons, and mix well with the sugar; then beat the
whites of two new laid eggs very well, and mix them well with the sugar and
lemon peel; beat them together an hour and a quarter, then make them up in what
form you please; be quick to set them in a moderate oven; do not take off the
papers till cold.

CHAP. XII. To make all Sorts of CAKES.
A Rich Cake.
TAKE six pounds of the best fresh butter, work it to a cream with your hands;
then throw in by degrees three pounds of double refined sugar well beat and
sifted: mix them well together; then work in three pounds of blanched almonds:
and having beaten four pounds of eggs, and strained them through a sieve, put
them in: beat them altogether till they are thick and look white. Then add half
a pint of French brandy, half a pint of sack, a small quantity of ginger, about
two ounces of mace, cloves, and cinnamon each, and three large nutmegs all
beaten in a mortar as fine as possible. Then shake in gradually four pounds of
well dried and sifted flour: and when the oven is well prepared, and a thin
hoop to bake it in, stir into this mixture (as you put it into the hoop) seven
pounds of currants clean washed and rubbed, and such a quantity of candied
orange, lemon, and citron in equal proportions, as shall be thought convenient.
The oven must be quick, and the cake at least will take four hours to bake it:
Or, you may make two or more cakes out of these ingredients, you must beat it
with your hands, and the currants must be dried before the fire, and put into
the cake warm.

Another.
To a quartern and half of fine flour add six pounds of currants, an ounce of
cloves and mace, a little cinnamon, two grated nutmegs, a pound of the best
sugar, some candied lemon, orange and citron, cut in thin pieces; a pint of
sweet wine; a little orange-flower or rose water; a pint of yeast; a quart of
cream; two pounds of butter melted, and poured into the middle of the flour.
Then strew some flour over the butter, and let it stand half an hour before the
fire. After which knead it well together, and lay it before the fire to make it
rise, and work it up very well. Put this mixture into a tin hoop, and bake it
two hours and a half in a gentle oven.

A Spanish Cake.
Take twelve eggs, three quarters of a pound of the best moist sugar, mill them
in a chocolate mill, till they are all of a lather; then mix in one pound of
flour, half a pound of pounded almonds* two ounces of candid orange-peel, two
ounces of citron, four large spoonfuls of orange or rose water, half an ounce
of cinnamon, and a glass of sack. It is better when baked in a slow oven.

Portugal Cakes.
Put a pound of fine sugar, a pound of fresh butter, five eggs, and a little
mace, beaten, into a broad pan; beat it with your hands till it is very light,
and looks curdling; then put thereto a pound of flour, half a pound of currants
very dry, beat them together, fill tin pans, and bake them in a slack oven. You
may make seed-cakes the same way, only put in carraway-seeds instead of
currants.

Dutch Cakes.
Take five pounds of flour, two ounces of carraway-seeds, half a pound of
sugar, and something more than a pint of milk, and put into it three quarters
of a pound of butter; then make a hole in the middle of the flour, and put in a
full pint of good ale-yeast: then pour in the butter and milk, and make these
into a paste, letting it stand a quarter of an hour before the fire to rise;
then mould it, and roll it into cakes pretty thin; prick them all over pretty
much, or they will blister; bake them a quarter of an hour.

Shrewsbury Cakes.
Take to one pound of sugar, three pounds of the finest flour, a nutmeg grated,
and some beaten cinnamon; the sugar and spice must be sifted into the flour;
and wet it with three eggs, and as much melted butter as will make it of a good
thickness to roll into a paste; mould it well, and roll it; cut it into what
shape you please; perfume them, and prick them before they go into the oven.

Marlborough Cakes.
Take eight eggs, yolks and whites, beat and strain them, and put to them a
pound of sugar beaten and sifted; beat it three quarters of an hour together,
then put in three quarters of a pound of flour well dried* and two ounces of
carraway seeds; beat it all well together, and bake it in a quick oven in broad
tin pans.

Queen Cakes.
Take a pound of sugar, and beat it fine, pour in yolks and two whites of eggs,
half a pound of butter, a little rose water, six spoonfuls of warm cream, a
pound of currants, and as much flour as will make it up; stir them well
together, and put them into your patty pans, being well buttered; bake them in
an oven, almost as hot as for manchet, for half an hour; then take them out and
glaze them, and let them stand but a little after the glazing is on, to rise.

Uxbridge Cakes.
Take a pound of wheat-flour, seven pounds of currants, half a nutmeg, four
pounds of butter, rub your butter cold very well amongst the meal. Dress the
currants very well in the flour, butter, and seasoning, and knead it with so
much good new yeast as will make it into a pretty high paste: usually two
pennyworth of yeast to that quantity. After it is kneaded well together, let
it stand an hour to rise. You may put half a pound of paste in a cake.

A pound Cake.
Take a pound of butter, beat it in an earthen pan with your hand one way till
it is like a fine thick cream; then have ready twelve eggs, with half the
whites; beat them well, and beat them up with the butter, and work into it a
pound of flour, a pound of sugar, and a few carraways, well together for an
hour with your hand, or a great wooden spoon. Butter a pan and put it in, and
then bake it an hour in a quick oven.

A Seed Cake.
Take three pounds of fine flour, and two pounds of butter, rub it in the
flour; eight eggs, and four whites, a little cream, and five spoonfuls of
yeast. Mix all together; and put it before the fire to rise; then put in three
quarters of a pound of carraway-seeds, and put it in a hoop or tin rim well
buttered. An hour and a half will bake it.

Fine Almond Cakes.
Take a pound of Jordon almonds, blanch them, beat them very fine with a little
orange-flower water, to keep them from oiling; then take a pound and a quarter
of fine sugar, boil it to a high candy; then put in your almonds. Then take two
fresh lemons, grate off the rind very thin and put as much juice as to make it
of a quick taste; then put this mixture into glasses, and set in a stove,
stiring often, that it may not candy: so when it is a little dry, part it into
little cakes upon sheets of paper or tin to dry.

Saffron Cakes.
Take half a peck of the finest flour, a pound of butter, and a pint of cream,
or good milk; set the milk on the fire, put in the butter, and a good deal of
sugar; then strain saffron to your taste and liking into the milk; take seven
or eight eggs, with two yolks, and seven or eight spoonfuls of yeast; then put
the milk to it when it is almost cold, with salt and coriander seeds: knead
them all together, make them up in reasonable sized cakes, and bake them in a
quick oven.

Orange Cakes.
Take the peels of four oranges, being first pared, and the meat taken out;
boil them tender, and beat them small in a marble mortar* then take the meat of
them, and two or more oranges, the seeds and skins being picked out, and mix it
with the peelings that are beaten, set them on the fire, with a spoonful or two
of orange-flower water, keeping it stirring till that moisture be pretty well
dried up; then have ready, to every pound of that pulp, four pounds and a
quarter of double-refined sugar, finely sifted. Make the sugar very hot, and
dry it upon the fire, and then mix it and the pulp together, and set it on the
fire again, till the sugar be very well melted, but take care it does not boil.
You may put in a little peel, small shred or grated; and when it is cold, draw
it up in double papers; dry them before the fire, and when you turn them, put
two together; or you may keep them in deep glasses or pots, and dry them as you
have occasion.

Common Biscuits.
Beat up six eggs, with a spoonful of rose water and a spoonful of sack, then
add a pound of fine powdered sugar, and a pound of flour; mix them into the
eggs by degrees, with an ounce of coriander seeds; mix all well together, shape
them on white thin paper or tin moulds, in any form you please. Beat the white
of an egg, and with a feather rub them over, and dust fine sugar over them. Set
them in an oven moderately heated, till they rise and come to a good color;
and if you have no stove to dry them in, put them into the oven at night, and
let them stand till morning.

To make Wigs.
Take three pounds and a half of flour, and three quarters of a pound of
butter, and rub it into the flour till none of it be seen; then take a pint or
more of new milk, and make it very warm, and half a pint of new ale-yeast, then
make it into a light paste; put in carraway-seeds, and what spice you please;
then make it up and lay it before the fire to rise; then work in three quarters
of a pound of sugar, and then roll them into what form you please, pretty thin,
and put them on tin plates, and hold them before the fire to rise again, before
you set them in; your oven must be pretty quick.

To make Buns.
Take two pounds of fine flour, a pint of ale-yeast, put a little sack in the
yeast and three eggs beaten; knead all these together with a little warm milk,
a little nutmeg, and a little salt. Then lay it before the fire, till it rise
very light. Then knead in it a pound of fresh butter, and a pound of round
carraway-comfits, and bake them in a quick oven on floured papers in what shape
you please.

Maccaroons.
Take a pound of almonds, let them be scalded, blanched, and thrown into cold
water, then dry them in a cloth, and pound them in a mortar; moisten them with
orange-flower water, or the white of an egg, lest they turn to an oil; after,
take an equal quantity of fine powdered sugar, with three or four whites of
eggs, and a little musk; beat all well together, and shape them on wafer paper
with a spoon. Bake them on tin plates in a gentle oven.

Good Fritters.
Mix half a pint of good cream, very thick with flour, beat six eggs, leaving
out four whites, and to the eggs put six spoonfuls of sack, and strain them
into the butter; put in a little grated nutmeg, ginger and cinnamon, all very
fine, also a little salt; then put in another half pint of cream, and beat the
batter near an hour; pare and slice your apples thin, dip every piece in the
batter, and throw them into a pan full of boiling lard.

Pan Cakes.
Take a pint of thick cream, six spoonfuls of sack, and half a pint of flour,
six eggs, (but only three whites) one grated nutmeg, a quarter of a pound of
melted butter, a very little salt, and some sugar; fry these thin in a dry pan.

Cheesecakes after the best Manner.
First warm a pint of cream, and then add to it five quarts of milk that is
warm from the cow; and when you have put a sufficient quantity of rennet to it,
stir it about till it comes to a curd: then put the curd into a cloth, or linen
bag, and let the whey be very well drained from it; but take care not to
squeeze it hard: when it is sufficiently dry, throw it into a mortar, and beat
it till it is as fine as butter. To the curd, thus prepared, add half a pound
of sweet almonds blanched, and the same quantity of macaroons, both beaten
together as fine as powder. If you have none of the last near at hand, make use
of Naples biskits in their stead; then add to your ingredients the yolks of
nine eggs that have been well beaten, a whole nutmeg, and half a pound of
double refined sugar. When you have mingled all these well together, melt a
pound and a quarter of the best fresh butter, and stir it well into it.

As to your puff-paste for your cheesecakes, it must be made in the manner
following.

Wet a pound of fine flour with cold water, and then roll it out; put in
gradually at least two pounds of the best fresh butter, and shake a small
quantity of flour upon each coat as you roll it. Make it just as you use it.

N. B. Some will add to these, both currants and perfumed plumbs.

Cheesecakes without Rennet.
Take a quart of thick cream, and set it over a clear fire, with some quartered
nutmegs in it; just as it boils up, put in twelve eggs well beaten; stir it a
little while on the fire, till it begins to curdle; then take it off, and
gather the curd as for cheese; put it in a clean cloth, tie it together, and
hang it up, that the whey may run from it; when it is pretty dry, put it in a
stone mortar, with a pound of butter, a quarter of a pint of thick cream, some
sack, orange-flower water, and half a pound of fine sugar; then beat and grind
all these together for an hour or more, till it is very fine; then pass it
through a hair sieve, and fill your patty-pans but half full; you may put
currants in half the quantity if you please; a little more than a quarter of an
hour will bake them* take the nutmeg out of the cream when it is boiled.

Potatoe or Lemon Cheesecakes.
Take six ounces of potatoes, four ounces of lemon peel, four ounces of sugar,
four ounces of butter; boil the lemon peel tender, pare and scrape the
potatoes, boil them tender, and bruise them; beat the lemon peel with the
sugar, then beat all together very well, and melt the the butter in a little
thick cream; mix all together very well, and let it lie till cold; put crust in
your patty-pans, and fill them little more than half full. Bake them in a quick
oven half an hour; sift some double refined sugar on them as they go into the
oven; this quantity will make a dozen small patty-pans.

CHAP. XIII. Of PUDDINGS, etc.
To make a plain boiled Pudding.
TAKE a pint of new milk, mix with it six eggs well beaten, two spoonfuls of
flour, half a nutmeg grated, a little salt and sugar. Put this mixture into a
cloth or bag. Put it into boiling water: and half an hour will boil it. Serve
it up with melted butter.

A Light Pudding.
Take a pint of cream or new milk from the cow; in which boil a little nutmeg,
cinnamon, and mace. Take out the spice, and beat up the yolks of eight eggs,
and the whites of four, with a glass of sweet mountain wine: to which add a
little salt and sugar, and then mix them with the milk. Into which put a
halfpenny roll, a spoonful of flour, and a little rose water: and having beat
them well together, tie all up in a thick cloth, and boil it for an hour. Melt
butter, sugar, and a little white wine for sauce, and pour it over the pudding,
when dished.

A Quaking Pudding.
Take a penny white loaf grated, two spoonfuls of flour of rice, and seven eggs
beaten up. Put them in a quart of cr^^m or new milk. Season them with nutmeg
grated and white-rose water. Tie it up. Boil it an hour, and then serve it up
with plain butter melted, and with sugar and a little wine.

A (...) ^iscuit Pudding.
Grate three Naples biscuit. Pour a pint of cream or milk over it hot. Cover it
close till it be cold. Then add a little grated nutmeg, the yolks of four eggs
and two whites beaten, a little orange-flower or rose water, two ounces of
powdered sugar, and half a spoonful of flour. Mix these well, and boil them in
a china basin, tied in a cloth, one hour. Turn it out of the basin, and serve
it up in a dish with butter, wine, and sugar melted and poured over it.

Boiled Plumb Puddings.
Shred a pound of beef suet very fine, to which add three quarters of a pound
of raisins stoned, a little grated nutmeg, a large spoonful of sugar, a little
salt, some white wine, four eggs beaten, three spoonfuls of cream, and five
spoonfuls of flour. Mix them well, and boil them in a cloth three hours. Pour
over this pudding melted butter, when dished.

The Tunbridge Puddings.
Pick and dry a pint of great oatmeal. Bruise it, but not small, in a mortar.
Boil it a quarter of an hour in new milk. Then cover it close, and let it stand
till it be cold. To this, when cold, add eight eggs beaten and strained, a
penny loaf grated, half a pound of beef suet shred small, half a nutmeg grated,
three spoonfuls of Maderia or sack, a quarter of a pound or more of sugar. Mix
these well together. Tie it up in a cloth, and boil it three hours. Serve it up
with a good deal of butter poured over it.

A Custard Pudding.
Take two spoonfuls of fine flour, half a grated nutmeg, a little salt and
sugar, six eggs well beaten, and mix them all in a pint of cream, or new milk.
Boil it in a cloth half an hour; and serve it up with plain butter melted.

A Hunting Pudding.
Mix a pound of beef suet shred fine with a pound of fine flour, three quarters
of a pound of currants well cleaned, a quarter of a pound of raisins stoned and
shred, five eggs, a little grated lemon peel, two spoonfuls of sugar, and a
little bandy. Mix them well together. Tie it up in a cloth; and boil it full
two hours. Serve it up with white wine, and butter melted.

A boiled Suet Pudding.
Take a quart of milk, a pound of suet shred small, four eggs, two spoonfuls of
grated ginger, or one of beaten pepper, a tea spoonful of salt. Mix the
seasoning and suet first in one pint of the milk, and make a thick batter with
flour. Then mix in the rest of the milk with the seasoning and suet, till it
becomes a pretty thick batter. Boil it two hours. Serve it up with plain butter.

A Steak Pudding.
Make a rich crust of a quartern of flour and two pounds of suet shred fine,
mixed up with cold water: seasoned with a little salt, and made stiff. The
steaks may be either beef or mutton: well seasoned with pepper and salt. Roll
the paste out half an inch thick. Lay the steaks upon it, and roll them up in
it. Then tie it in a cloth, and put it into boiling water. A small pudding will
be done enough in three hours. A large one takes five hours boiling.

N. B. Pigeons eat well this way.

A boiled Potatoe Pudding.
Boil two pounds of potatoes, and beat them in a mortar fine, beat in half a
pound of melted butter, boil it half an hour. Pour melted butter over it, with
a glass of white wine, or the juice of a Seville orange, and throw sugar all
over the pudding and dish.

A boiled Almond Pudding.
Beat a pound of sweet almonds as small as possible, with three spoonfuls of
rose water, and a gill of sack or white wine, and mix in half a pound of fresh
butter melted, with five yolks of eggs and two whites, a quart of cream, a
quarter of a pound of sugar, half a nutmeg grated, one spoonful of flour, and
three spoonfuls of crumbs of white bread; mix all well together and boil it. It
will take half an hour boiling.

A boiled Rice Pudding.
Take a quarter of a pound of rice, and half a pound of raisins stoned. Tie
them in a cloth so as to give the rice room to swell. Boil it two hours. And
serve it up with melted butter, sugar, and grated nutmeg thrown over it.

A Prune or Damson Pudding.
Take a quart of milk, beat six eggs, half the whites, with half a pint of the
milk and four spoonfuls of flour, a little salt and two spoonfuls of beaten
ginger; then by degrees mix in all the milk, and a pound of prunes. Tie it in a
cloth; boil it an hour, melt butter and pour over it. Damsons eat well this way.

An Apple pudding.
Make ^ good puff-paste, roll it out half an inch thick, pare the apples, and
core them, enough to fill the crust, and close it up. Tie it in a cloth and
boil it. I^ a small pudding two hours; if a large one three or four hours. When
it is enough turn it into a dish; cut a piece of crust out of the top, butter
and sugar it to the palate; lay on the crust again, and send it to table hot.

N. B. A pear pudding, and a damson pudding, or any sort of plumbs, apricots,
cherries, or mulberries, may be made the same way.

A plain baked pudding.
Boil a quart of milk; then stir in flour till thick. Add half a pound of
butter, six ounces of sugar, a nutmeg grated, a little salt, ten eggs, but not
all the whites. Mix them well. Put it into a dish buttered, and it will be
baked in three quarters of an hour.

A Bread pudding baked.
Take a pint of cream and a quarter of a pound of butter, set it on the fire,
and keep it stirring. When the butter shall be melted, put in as much grated
stale bread as will make it pretty light, a nutmeg, a sufficient quantity of
sugar, three or four eggs, and a little salt. Mix all together. Butter a dish,
put it in, and bake it half an hour.

A Millet Pudding.
Take half a pound of millet and boil it over night in two quarts of milk. In
the morning add six ounces of sugar, six of melted butter, seven eggs, half a
nutmeg, a pint of cream, and sweeten it to your taste. Add ten eggs, and half
the whites. Bake it.

A Marrow Pudding.
Boil a quart of cream. Take it off the fire boiling, and slice into it a penny
white loaf. Add to it eight ounces of blanched almonds beaten fine, two
spoonfuls of white rose water, the yolks of six eggs, a glass of sack, a little
salt, six ounces of candied lemon and citron sliced thin, and a pound of beef
marrow sliced thin, and half a pound of currants. Mix all together, and put it
into a dish rubbed with butter. Half an hour will bake it; and when enough,
dust on fine sugar, and serve it up hot.

A Rice Pudding.
Beat half a pound of rice to powder. Set it with three pints of new milk upon
the fire and let it boil well, and when it grows almost cold, put to it eight
eggs well beaten, and half a pound of suet or butter, half a pound of sugar,
and a sufficient quantity of cinnamon, nutmeg and mace. Half an hour will bake
it.

You may add a few currants and candied lemon and citron peel, or other sweet
meats: and lay a puff paste first all over the sides and rim of the dish.

A Poor Man's Pudding.
Take some stale bread; pour over it some hot water, till it is well soaked;
then press out the water, and wash the bread; add some powdered ginger, nutmeg
grated, and a little salt; some rose water or sack, some Lisbon sugar, and some
currants; mix them well together, and lay it in a pan well buttered on the
sides; and when it (...) well flatted with a spoon, lay some pieces of butter
on the top; bake it in a gentle oven, and serve it hot. You may turn it out of
the pan when it is cold, and it will eat like a fine cheesecake.

An Orange Pudding.
Take the yolks of sixteen eggs, beat them well, with half a pound of melted
butter, grate in the rind of two fine Seville oranges, beat in half a pound of
fine sugar, two spoonfuls of orange-flower water, two of rose water, a gill of
sack, half a pint of cream, two Naples biskits, or the crumb of a halfpenny
roll soaked in the cream, and mix all well together. Make a thin puff paste,
and lay it all over the dish and round the rim, pour in the pudding and bake
it. It will take about as long baking as a custard.

A Carrot Pudding.
You must take a raw carrot, scrape it very clean and grate it: take half a
pound of the grated carrot, and a pound of grated bread, beat up eight eggs,
leave out half the whites, and mix the eggs with half a pint of cream: then
stir in the bread and carrot, half a pound of fresh butter melted, half a pint
of sack, three spoonfuls of orange-flower water, and nutmeg grated. Sweeten to
your palate. Mix all well together, and if it is not thin enough, stir in a
little new milk or cream. Let it be of a moderate thickness: lay a puff paste
all over the dish, and pour in the ingredients. Bake it, which will take an
hour. It may also be boiled. If so, serve it up with melted butter, and put in
white wine and sugar.

A Quince, Apricot, or white Pear-Plumb Pudding.
Scald your quinces very tender, pare them very thin, scrape off the soft; mix
it with sugar very sweet, put in a little ginger and a little cinnamon. To a
pint of cream you must put three or four yolks of eggs, and stir it into your
quinces till they are of a good thickness. It must be pretty thick. So you may
do apricots or white pear-plumbs, but never pare them. Butter your dish, pour
it in, and bake it.

An Italian Pudding.
Lay puff-paste at the bottom and round the edges of the dish. Upon which pour
a mixture of a pint of cream, French rolls enough to thicken it, ten eggs
beaten very fine, a nutmeg grated, twelve pippins sliced, some orange peel and
sugar, and half a pint of red wine* Half an hour will bake it.

An Apple Pudding.
Scald three or four codlins and bruise them through a sieve. Add a quarter of
a pound of biscuit, a little nutmeg, a pint of cream, ten eggs, but only half of
the whites. Sweeten to your taste, and bake it.

A Norfolk Dumpling.
Make a batter as for pancakes, with a pint of milk, two eggs, a little salt,
and as much flour as is needful. Drop this batter, in pieces, into a pan of
boiling water. And if the water boils fast, they will be enough in three
minutes. Throw them into a sieve or cullendar to drain. Then lay them in a
dish. Stir a slice of fresh butter into each, and eat them hot.

A Hard Dumpling.
Mix flour and water, and a little salt, like a paste. Roll it into balls, as
big as a turkey's egg. Have a pan of boiling water ready. Throw the balls of
paste into the water, having first rolled them in flour. They eat best boiled
in a beef-pot: and a few currants added makes a pretty change. Eat them with
butter, as above.

Apple Dumplings.
Pare and core as many codlins, as you intend to make dumplings. Make a little
cold butter paste. Roll it to the thickness of one's finger; and lap it round
every apple singly, and if they be boiled singly in pieces of cloth, so much
the better. Put them into boiling water, and they will be enough in half an
hour. Serve them up with melted butter and white wine; and garnish with grated
sugar about the dish.

Of SYLLABUBS, CREAMS, and FLUMMERY.
To make a fine Syllabub from the Cow.
SWEETEN a quart of cider, with double refined sugar, and grate a nutmeg into
it; then milk the cow into your liquor. When you have thus added what quantity
of milk you think proper, pour half a pint, or more (in proportion to the
quantity of syllabub you make) of the sweetest cream you can get, all over it.

A Whipped Syllabub.
Take two porringers of cream, and one of white wine, grate in the skin of a
lemon, take the whites of three eggs sweeten it to your taste, then whip it
with a whisk, take off the froth as it rises, and put i^ into your
syllabub-glasses or pots, and they are fit for use.

To make a Fine Cream.
Take a pint of cream, sweeten it to your palate; grate a little nutmeg, put in
a spoonful of orange-flower water, and rose water, and two spoonfuls of sack;
beat up four eggs and two whites, stir it all together one way over the fire,
till it is thick; have cups ready, and pour it in.

Lemon Cream.
Take the juice of four large lemons, half a pint of water, a pound of double
refined sugar beaten fine, the whites of seven eggs, and the yolk of one beaten
very well* mix all together, strain it, set it on a gentle fire, stirring it
all the while, and skim it clean; put into it the peel of one lemon when it is
very hot, but not to boil; take out the lemon peel, and pour it into china
dishes.

Rasberry Cream.
Take a quart of thick sweet cream, and boil it two or three wallops; then take
it off the fire, and strain some juice of rasberries into it to your taste;
stir it a good while before you put your juice in, that it may be almost cold
when you put it to it, and afterward stir it one way for almost a quarter of
an hour; then sweeten it to your taste, and when it is cold you may send it up.

Whipped Cream.
Take a quart of thick cream, and the whites of eight eggs beaten with half a
pint of sack; mix it together, and sweeten it to your taste with double refined
sugar; you may perfume it (if you please) with musk or amber-grease tied in a
rag, and steeped a little in the cream, Whip it with a whisk, and a bit of
lemon peel tied in the middle of the whisk. Take off the froth with a spoon,
and lay it in your glasses or basins.

To make a Trifle.
Cover the bottom of a dish or bowl with Naples biscuits broke in pieces,
macaroons broke in halves, and ratafia cakes. Just wet them all through with
sack; then make a good boiled custard, not two thick, and when cold pour it
over it, then put a syllabub over that. -- You may garnish it with ratafia
cakes, current jelly, and flowers.

Flummery.
Take a large calf's foot, cut out the great bones, and boil them in two quarts
of water; then strain it off, and put to the clear jelly half a pint of thick
cream, two ounces of sweet almonds, and an ounce of bitter almonds, well beaten
together. Let it just boil, and then strain it off, and, when it is as cold as
milk from the cow, put it into cups or glasses.

Oatmeal Flummery.
Put oatmeal (as much as you want) into a broad deep pan. Then cover it with
water, stir it together, and let it stand twelve hours. Then pour off that
water clear, and and put on a good deal of fresh water, shift it again in
twelve hours, and so on in twelve more. Then pour off that water clear, and
strain the oatmeal through a coarse hair-sieve, and pour it into a sauce pan,
keeping it stirring all the time with a stick, till it boils and becomes very
thick. Then pour it into dishes. When cold, turn it into plates, and eat it
with what you please, either wine and sugar, or milk. It eats very pretty with
cider and sugar.

You may observe to put a great deal of water to the oatmeal, and when you pour
off the last water, pour on just enough fresh to strain the oatmeal well. Some
let it stand forty eight hours, some three days, shifting the water every
twelve hours; but that is as you like it for sweetness or tartness. Groats once
cut, does better than oatmeal. Mind to stir it together when you put in fresh
water.

CHAP. XV. Of JELLIES, GIAMS, and CUSTARDS.
Calf's feet Jelly.
CUT four calf's feet in pieces, put them into a pipkin, with a gallon of
water, cover them close, and boil them softly till almost half be consumed, run
the liquor through a sieve, and let it stand till it be cold. Then with a knife
take off the fat, at top and bottom, and melt the fine part of the jelly in a
preserving pan or skillet, and put in a pint of Rhenish wine, the juice of four
or five lemons, double refined sugar to your taste, the whites of eight eggs
beaten to a froth; stir and boil all these together near half an hour; then
strain it through a sieve into a jelly-bag; put into your jelly-bag a very
small sprig of rosemary, and a piece of lemon peel; pass it through the bag
till it is as clear as water.

Hart's-horn Jelly.
Take a large gallipot with hart's-horn; then fill it full with spring water,
tie a double paper over the gallipot, and set it in a baker's oven with
household bread. In the morning take it out; run it through a jelly-bag; season
with juice of lemons, double refined sugar, and the whites of eight eggs well
beaten. Let it have a boil, and run it through the jelly-bag again into jelly
glasses; put a bit of lemon peel in the bag.

Current Jelly.
Having stripped the currants from ^he stalks, put them into a stone jar: st^^p
it close; s^t it in a kettle of boiling water half way ^he jar: let it boil
half an hour; take it out, and strain the juice through a coarse hair-sieve. To
a point of juice put a pound of sugar; set it over a fine quick clear fire in a
preserving-pan or bell-metal skillet. Keep stirring it all the time till the
sugar be melted; then skim the scum off as fast as it rises.

When the jelly is very clear and fine, pour it into earthen or china cups or
gallipots. When cold, cut white paper, just the bigness of the top of the pot,
and lay on the jelly; dip those papers in brandy; then cover the top close with
white paper, and prick it full of holes. Set it in a dry place. You may put
some into glasses, for present use.

Rasberry Giam.
Take a pint of current jelly, and a quart of rasberries, bruise them well
together, set them over a slow fire, keeping it stirring all the time till it
boils. Let it boil five or six minutes, pour it into gallipots, paper them as
you do the current jelly, and keep it for use. They will keep for two or three
years, and have the full flavor of the rasberry.

A Custard.
Sweeten a quart of new milk to your taste; grate in a little nutmeg, beat up
eight eggs well (leaving out half the whites) stir them into the milk, and bake
them in china cups, or put them in a deep china dish. Have a kettle of water
boiling, set the cups in, let the water come above half way, but do not let it
boil two fast for fear of its getting into the cups. You may add a little
rose water, and French brandy.

Boiled Custards.
Put into a pint of cream two ounces of almonds, blanched and beaten very fine,
with rose or orange flower water, or a little mace; let them boil till the
cream is a little thickened, then sweeten it and stir in the ^ggs, and keep it
stirring over the fire, till it is as thick as you would have it; then put to
it a little orange-flower water* stir it well together, and put it into china
cups.

N. B. You may make them without almonds.

Almond Custards.
Take a pint of cream, blanch and beat a quarter of a pound of almonds fine,
with two spoonfuls of rose water. Sweeten it to your palate. Beat up the yolks
of four eggs, stir all together one way over the fire, till it is thick; then
pour it out into cups. Or you may bake it in little china cups.

Rice Custards.
Boil a quart of cream with a blade of mace, and a quartered nutmeg, put
thereto boiled rice, well beat with the cream; mix them together, stirring them
all the while they boil. When enough take it off, and sweeten it to your taste;
put in a little orange flower water, then pour it into dishes. When cold, serve
it.

CHAP. XVI. POTTING and COLLARING.
To pot Beef or Venison.
WHEN you have boiled or baked, and cut your meat small, let it be well beaten
in a marble mortar, with some butter melted for that purpose, and two or three
anchovies, till you find it mellow, and agreeable to your palate. Then put it
close down in pots, and pour over them a sufficient quantity of clarified
butter. You may season your ingredients with what spice you please.

To pot Pigeons, or any other Fowls.
Your pigeons being trussed and seasoned with savoury spice, put them in a pot,
cove^ them with butter, and bake them: then ta^^ them out and drain them, and
when they are cold, cover them with clarified butter. The same way you may pot
fish, only bone them when they are baked.

To pot Charrs or Trouts.
Clean the fish well and bone them; wash them with vinegar, cut off the tails,
fins* and heads; then season them with pepper, salt, nutmeg, and a few cloves;
then put them close in a pot, and bake them with a little ver-juice and some
butter; let them be co^^red close and bake two hours; then pour off the liquor,
and cover them with clarified butter.

To pot Lampreys or Eels.
Take lampreys or eels, skin, gut, and wash them, and slit them down the back;
take out the bones, and cut them in pieces to fit your pot; then season them
with pepper, salt, and nutmeg, and put them in the pot, with half a pint of
vinegar. They must be close covered, and bake half an hour; and when done, pour
off the liquor, and cover them with clarified butter.

How to collar Beef.
Lay a flank of beef in ham-brine a fortnight: then take it out and dry it in a
cloth; lay it on a board* take out all the leather and skin, cut it cross and
cross; season it with savoury spice, two anchovies, and a handful or two of
thyme, parsley, sweet marjoram, winter savoury* onions, and fennel; strew it
on the meat, roll it in a hard collar in a cloth, few it close, tie it at both
ends, and put it in a collar-pot with a pint of claret, cochineal, and two
quarts of pump water. When it is cold, take it out of the cloth.

To collar a Breast of Veal.
Bone the veal, season it all over the inside with cloves, mace, and salt beat
fine, a handful of sweet-herbs stripped of the stalks, and a little sage,
pennyroyal and parsley shred very fine, then roll it up, as you do brawn; bind
it with narrow tape very close, then tie a cloth round it, and boil it very
tender in vinegar and water, a like quantity, with a little cloves, mace,
pepper and salt, all whole. Make it boil, then put in the collars, when boiled
tender, take them up; and when both are cold, take off the cloth, lay the
collar in an earthen pan, and pour the liquor over; cover it close, and keep it
for use.

To collar a Breast of Mutton.
Cut off the red skin, and take out the bones and gristles. Then take grated
white bread, a little cloves, mace, salt, and pepper, the yolks of three hard
eggs bruised small, and a little lemon peel shred fine; with which, having laid
the meat even and flat, season it all over, and add four or five anchovies
washed and boned: then roll the meat like a collar, and bind it with coarse
tape, and bake, boil, or roast it.

To collar Pork.
Bone a breast of pork, season it with savoury seasoning, a good quantity of
thyme, parsley and sage; then roll it in a hard collar in a cloth, tie it at
both ends, and boil it; and when it is cold* steep it in the savoury liquor, in
which it was boiled.

To collar Eels.
Scour large silver eels with salt, slit them down the back, and take out all
the bones; then wash and dry them, and season the^ with savoury spice, minced
parsley, thyme, sage, and onion; and roll each in little collars in a cloth,
and tie them close. The^ boil them in water and salt, with the heads and bones,
half a pint of vinegar, a faggot of herbs, some ginger, and a penny worth of
isinglass; when they are tender, take them up, tie them close again, strain the
pickle, and keep the eels in it.

CHAP. XVII. Of PRESERVING, DRYING, and CANDYING.
To keep green Peace till (...).
TAKE fine young pe^s, shell them, throw them into a cullender to drain, then
lay a cloth four or five times double on a table, and spread them on; dry them
very well, and have your bottles ready, fill them and cover them with mutton
suet fat; when it is a little cool, fill the necks almost to the top, cork
them, tie a bladder and a lath over them, and set them in a cool dry place.

To keep French Beans all the year.
Take young beans, gathered on a dry day, have a large stone jar ready, lay a
layer of salt at the bottom, and then a layer of beans, then salt and then
beans, and so on till the jar is full; cover them with salt, and tie a coarse
cloth over them and a board on that, and then a weight to keep it close from
all air; set them in a dry cellar, and when you use them, take some out and
cover them close again; wash them you took out very clean, and let them lie in
soft water twenty four hours, shifting the water often; when you boil them do
not put any salt in the water.

To keep White Bullace, Pea^ Plumbs, or Damsons, etc. for Tarts or Pies.
Gather them when full grown, and just as they begin to turn. Pick all the
largest out, save about two third^ of the fruit, to the other third put as much
water as you think will cover them, boil and skim them; when the fruit is
boiled very soft, strain it through a course hair-sieve; and to every quart of
this liquor put a pound and a half of sugar, boil it, and skim it very well;
then throw in your fruit, just give them a scald; take them off the fire, and
when cold, put them into bottles with wide mouths, pour your syrup over them,
lay a piece of white paper over them, and cover them with oil.

To make Marmalade.
To two pounds of quinces put three quarters of a pound of sugar and a pint of
spring water; then put them over the fire, and boil them till they are tender;
then take them up and bruise them; then put them into the liquor, let it boil
three quarters of an hour, and then put it into your pots or saucers.

To preserve Mulberries whole.
Set some mulberries* over the fire in a skillet or preserving pan; draw from
them a pint of juice when it is strained; then take three pounds of sugar
beaten very fine, (...) the sugar with the pint of juice, boil up your sugar
and skim it, put in two pounds of ripe mulberries, and let them stand in the
syrup till they are thoroughly warm, then set them on the fire, and let them
boil very gently; do them but half enough, so put them by in the syrup till
next day, then boil them gently again: when the syrup is pr^^ty thick, and will
stand in round drops when it is cold, they are enough, so put all into a
gallipot for use.

To preserve Gooseberries, Damsons, or Plumbs.
Gather them when dry, full grown, and not ripe; pick them one by one, put them
into glass bottles that are very clean and dry, and cork them close with new
corks; then put a kettle of water on the fire, and put in the bottles with
care; wet not the corks, but let the water come up to the neck^; make a gentle
fire till they are a little coddled and turn white; do not take them up till
cold, then pitch the corks all over, or wax them close and thick; then set them
in a cool dry cellar.

To preserve Peaches.
Put your peaches i^ boiling water, just give them a scald, but don't let them
boil, take them out, and put them in cold water, then dry them in a sieve, and
put them in long wide-mouthed bottles: to half a dozen peaches take a quarter
of a pound of sugar, clarify it, pour it over your peaches* and fill the
bottles with brandy. Stop them close, and keep them in a close place.

To preserve Apricots.
Take your apricots and pare them, then stone what you can whole; give them a
light boiling in a pint of water, or according to your quantity of fruit; then
take the weight of your apricots in sugar, and take the liquor which you boil
them in, and your sugar, and boil it till it comes to a syrup, and give them a
light boiling taking off the scum as it rises. When the syrup jellies, it is
enough; then take up the apricots, and cover them with the jelly, and put cut
paper over them, and lay them down when cold.

To preserve Apricots green.
Take apricots when they are young and tender, coddle them a little, rub them
with a coarse cloth to take off the skin, and throw them into water as you do
them, and put them in the same water they were coddled in; cover them with vine
leaves, a white paper, or something more at the top; the closer you keep them,
the sooner they are green; be sure you don't let them boil; when they are
green, weigh them* and to every pound of apricots, take a pound of loaf-sugar
put it into a pan, and to every pound of sugar a jill of water, boil your sugar
and water a little, and skim it, then put in your apricots, let them boil
together till your fruit looks clear, and your syrup thick, skim it all the
time it is boiling, and put them into a pot covered with a paper dipped in
brandy.

Or,

Take your plumbs before they have stones in them, which you may know by
putting a pin through them, then coddle them in many waters, till they are as
green as grass: peel them and coddle them again; you must take the weight of
them in sugar and make a syrup; put to your sugar a pint of water; then put
them in, set them on the fire to boil slowly, till they be clear, skimming them
often, and they will be very green. Put them up in glasses, and keep them for
use.

To preserve Cherries.
Take two pound of cherries, one pound and a half of sugar, half a pint of fair
water, melt your sugar in it; when it is melted, put in your other sugar and
your cherries; then boil them softly, till all the sugar be melted; then boil
them fast, and skim them; take them off two or three times and shake them, and
put them on again, and let them boil fast; and when they are of a good color,
and the syrup will stand, they are enough.

To preserve Rasberries.
Choose rasberries that are not too ripe, and take the weight of them in sugar,
wet your sugar with a little water, and put in your berries, and let them boil
softly; take heed of breaking them; when they are clear, take them up, and boil
the syrup till it be thick enough, then put them in again; and when they are
cold, put them up in glasses.

To preserve Currants.
Take the weight of the currants in sugar, pick out the seeds; take to a pound
of sugar, half a pint of water; let it melt; then put in your berries, and let
them do very leisurely, skim them, and take them up, let the syrup boil; then
put them on again; and when they are clear, and the syrup thick enough, take
them off; and when they are cold, put them up in glasses.

To dry Peaches.
Take the fairest and ripest peaches, p^re them into fair water; take their
weight in double refined sugar: of one half make a very thin syrup; then put in
your peaches, boiling them till they look clear, then split and stone them.
Boil them till they are very tender, lay them a-draining, take the other half
of the sugar, and boil it almost to a candy; then put in your peaches, and let
them lie all night, then lay them on a glass, and set them in a stove, till
they are dry. If they are sugared too much, wipe them with a wet cloth a
little: Let the first syrup be very thin* a quart of water to a pound of sugar.

To dry Cherries.
To four pounds of cherries, put one pound of sugar, and just put as much water
to the sugar as will wet it; when it is melted, make it boil, stone your
cherries, put them in, and make them boil; skim them two or three times, take
them off, and let them stand in the syrup two or three days, then boil your
syrup, and put it to them again, but don't boil your cherries any more. Let
them stand three o^ ^our days longer, then take them out, lay them in sieves to
dry; when dry, lay them in rows on papers, and so a row of cherries, and a row
of white paper in boxes.

To Candy Angelica.
Take it in April, boil it in water till it be tender, then take it up and
drain it from the water very well; then scrape the outside of it, and dry it in
a clean cloth, and ^ay it in the syrup, and let it lie in three or four days,
and cover it close: the syrup must be strong of sugar, and keep it hot a good
while, but let it not boil; after it is heated a good while, lay it upon a pie
plate, and so let it dry; keep it near the fire, le^t it dissolve.

CHAP. XVIII. Of PICKLING.
To pickle Asparagus.
GAther your asparagus, and lay them in an earthen pot; make a brine of water
and salt strong enough to bear an egg, pour it hot on them, and keep it close
covered. When you use them hot, lay them in cold water two hours, then boil and
butter them for table. If you use them as a pickle, boil them and lay them in
vinegar.

To pickle Nasturtium Buds or Seeds.
Take the seeds new off the plant, when they are pretty large, but before they
grow hard, and throw them into the best white wine vinegar that has been boiled
up with what spice you please. Keep them close stopped in a bottle. They are
fit for use in eight days.

To pickle or make Mangos of Melons.
Take green Melons, as many as you please, and make a brine strong enough to
bear an egg; then pour it boiling hot on the melons, keeping them down under
the brine; let them stand five or six days; then take them out, slit them down
on one side, take out all the seeds, scrape them well in the inside, and wash
them clean with cold water; then take a clove of garlic, a little ginger and
nutmeg sliced, and a little whole pepper; put all these proportionably into the
melons, filling them up with mustard-seeds; then lay them in an earthen pot
with the slit upwards, and take one part of mustard and two parts of vinegar,
enough to cover them, pouring it upon them scalding hot, and keep them close
stopped.

To pickle Mushrooms white.
Cut the stem of your small buttons at the bottom; wash them in two or three
waters ^^th a piece of flannel. Have in readiness a ^^ew-pan on the fire, with
some spring water that has had a handful of common salt thrown into it; and as
soon as it boils, put in your buttons. When they have boiled about three or
four minutes, take them off the fire, and throw them into a cullender; from
thence spread them as quick as you can upon a linen cloth, and cover them with
another. Have ready several wide mouthed bottles; and as you put in the
mushrooms, now and then mix a blade or two of mace, and some nutmeg sliced
amongst them; then fill your bottle with distilled vinegar. If you pour over
them some melted mutton fat, that has been well strained, it will keep them
better than oil itself would.

To pickle Barberries.
Take of white wine vinegar and water of each an equal quantity: to every quart
of this liquor, put in half a pound of sixpenny sugar, then pick the worst of
your barberries and put into this liquor, and the best into glasses; then boil
your pickle with the worst of your barberries, and skim it very clean. Boil it
till it looks of a fine color, then let it stand to be cold, before you strain
it; then strain it through a cloth, wringing it to get all the color you can
from the barberries. Let it stand to cool and settle, then pour it clear into
the glasses. In a little of the pickle boil a little fennel; when cold, put a
little bit at the top of the pot or glass, and cover it close with a bladder
and leather. To every half pound of sugar, put a quarter of a pound of white
salt.

To pickle Raddish-Pods.
Make a strong pickle, with cold spring water and bay salt, strong enough to
bear an egg, then put your pods in, and lay a thin board on them, to keep them
under water. Let them stand ten days, then drain them in a sieve, and lay them
on a cloth to dry; then take white wine vinegar, as much ^s you think will
cover them, boil it, and put your pods in a jar, with ginger, mace, cloves, and
Jamaica pepper. Pour your vinegar boiling hot on, cover them with a coarse
cloth, three or four times double, that the steam may come through a little,
and let them stand two days. Repeat this two or three times; when it is cold
put in a pint of mustard seed, and some horse-raddish; ^over it close.

To pickle Samphire.
Lay what quantity you think proper of such samphire as is green in a clean
pan, and (after you have thrown two or three handfuls of salt over it) cover it
with spring water. When it has lain four and twenty hours, put it into a brass
sauce-pan, that has been well cleaned; and when you have thrown into it one
handful only of salt, cover it with the best vinegar. Cover your sauce-pan
close, and set it over a gentle fire; let it stand no longer than till it is
just crisp and green, for it would be utterly spoiled should it stand till it
be soft. As soon as you have taken it off the fire, pour it into your pickling
pot, and take care to cover it close.

To pickle Onions.
Take small onions, lay them in salt and water a day, and shift them in that
time once; then dry them in a cloth, and take some white wine vinegar, cloves,
mace, and a little pepper; boil this pickle and pour over them, and when it is
cold, cover them close.

Or,

Take small white onions, lay them in water and salt, and put to them a pickle
of vinegar and spice.

To pickle Cabbage.
Take a large fine cabbage, and cut it in thin slices, season some vinegar with
what spice you think fit, then pour it on scalding hot, two or three times.

To pickle French-Beans.
Gather them before they have strings, and put them in a very strong brine of
water and salt for nine days; then drain them from the brine; and put boiling
hot vinegar to them, and stop them close twenty-four hours; do so four or five
days following, and they will turn green; then put to a peck of beans half an
ounce of cloves and mace, as much pepper, a handful of dill and fennel, and two
or three bay leaves. You may do broom buds, and purs^^ne-stalks the same way,
only let them lie twenty-four hours; and no longer; if they do not turn green,
you may set them on the fire in the pickle, and let them stand close covered
and just warm them; for if they boil, they are spoiled.

To pickle Cucumbers.
Let your cucumbers be small, fresh gathered, and free from spots; then make a
pickle of salt and water, strong enough to bear an egg; boil the pickle and
skim it well, and then pour it upon your cucumbers, and stive them down for
twenty-four hours; then strain them out into a cullender, and dry them well
with a cloth, and take the best white wine vinegar, with cloves, sliced mace,
nutmeg, white pepper corns, long pepper, and races of ginger, (as much as you
please) boil them up together, and then clap the cucumbers in, with a few
vine-leaves, and a little salt, and as soon as they begin to turn their color,
put them into jars, stive them down close, and when cold, tie on a bladder and
leather.

Of MADE WINES.
To make Gooseberry Wine.
TAKE goosberries when they are just beginning to turn ripe, bruise them well,
but not so as to break their stones, pour to every eight pound of pulp a gallon
of spring water, and let them stand in the vessel covered, in a cool place,
twenty-four hours* then put them into a strong canvas or hair bag, and press
out all the juice that will run from them, and to every quart of it put twelve
ounces of loaf sugar, stirring it about till it be melted; then put it up into
a well seasoned cask, and set it in a cool place; when it has purged and
settled about twenty or thirty days, fill the vessel full, and bung it down
close.

When it is well worked and settled, draw it off into bottles, and keep them in
a cool place.

To make Current Wine.
Gather your currants, when the weather is dry, and they are full ripe, strip
them carefully from the stalks; put them into a pan, and bruise them with a
wooden pestle; then let it stand about twenty hours, after which strain it
through a sieve. Add three pounds of fine powder-sugar to every four quarts of
the liquor; and then shaking or stirring it well, fill your vessel, and put
about a quart of brandy to every seven gallons: As soon as it is fine, bottle
it off.

To make Raisin Wine.
Put two hundred weight of raisins, with the stalks, into a hogshead, and fill
it almost full with spring water; let them steep about twelve days, frequently
stirring them about, and after pouring the juice off, press the raisins, Put
all the liquor together in a very clean vessel. You will find it hiss for some
time, and when the noise ceases, it must be stopped close, and stand for six or
seven months; and then if it proves fine and clear, rack it off into another
vessel; stop it up, and let it remain twelve or fourteen weeks longer; then
bottle it off.

To make Rasberry Wine.
Take red rasberries when they are nearly ^ipe; clear the husks and stalks from
them, soak them in fair water, that has been boiled and sweetened with loaf
sugar, a pound and a half to a gallon; when they have soaked about twelve
hours, take them out, put them into a fine linen pressing bag press out the
juice into the water, then boil them up together, and scum them well twice or
thrice over a gentle fire; take off the vessel, and let the liquor cool, and
when the scum arises take off all that you can, and pour off the liquor into a
well seasoned cask, or earthen vessel; then boil an ounce of mace, in a pint of
white wine, till the third part be consumed; strain it, and add it to the
liquor; when it has well settled and fermented, draw it off into a cask, or
bottles, and keep it in a cool place.

To make Morella Wine.
Take two gallons of white wine, and twenty pounds of Morella cherries; take
away the stalks, and so bruise them that the stones may be broken: press the
juice into the wine; and add of mace, cinnamon, and nutmeg, an ounce of each,
tied in a bag grossly bruised, and hang it in the wine when you have put it up
in a cask.

To make Elder Wine.
When the elder-berries are ripe, pick them, and put them into a stone jar; set
them in boiling water, or in a slack oven, 'till the jar is as warm as you can
well bear to touch it with your hand; then strain the fruit through a coarse
cloth, squeezing them hard, and pour the liquor into a kettle. Put it on the
fire, let it boil, and to every quart of liquor add a pound of Lisbon sugar,
and scum it often. Then let it settle, and pour it off into a jar, and cover it
close.

To make Cowslip Wine.
Take five pounds of loaf-sugar, and four gallons of water, simmer them half an
hour, to dissolve the sugar* when it is cold, put in half a peck of cowslip
flowers, picked and gently bruised; then add two spoonfuls of yeast, and beat
it up with a pint of syrup of lemons, and a lemon peel or two. Pour the whole
into a cask, let them stand close stopped for three days, that they may
ferment; then put in some juice of cowslips, and give it room to work; when it
has stood a month draw it off into bottles, putting a little lump of loaf sugar
into each.

To make Mead.
To thirteen gallons of water, put thirty pounds of honey, boil and scum it
well, then take rosemary, thyme, bay leaves, and sweet-briar, one handful all
together, boil it an hour; put it into a tub, with a little ground malt; stir
it till it is new-milk warm; strain it through a cloth, and put it into the tub
again; cut a toast, and spread it over with good yeast, and put it into the tub
also; and when the liquor is covered over with yeast, put it up in a barrel;
then take of cloves, mace, and nutmegs, an ounce and a half; of ginger sliced,
an ounce; bruise the spice, tie it up in a rag, and hang it in the vessel;
stopping it up close for use.

To make Balm Wine.
Take a peck of balm leaves, put them in a tub or large pot, heat four gallons
of water scalding hot, ready to boil, then pour it upon the leaves, so let it
stand all night; in the morning strain them through a hair sieve; put to every
gallon of water two pounds of fine sugar, and stir it very well; take the
whites of four or five eggs, beat them very well, put them into a pan, and
whisk it very well before it be over hot; when the skim begins to rise take it
off, and keep it skimming all the while it is boiling; let it boil three
quarters of an hour, and then put it into the tub; when it is cold put a little
new yeast upon it, and beat it in every two hours, that it may head the better;
so work it for two days, then put it into a sweet vessel, bung it up close, and
when it is fine bottle it.

To make Birch Wine.
Take your birch water and boil it, and clear it with whites of eggs; to every
gallon of water take two pounds and a half of fine sugar; boil it three
quarters of an hour, and when it is almost cold, put in a little yeast; work it
two or three days, then put it into the barrel, and to every five gallons put
in a quart of brandy, and half a pound of stoned raisins. Before you put up
your wine burn a brimstone match in the barrel.

To make Orange Wine.
Take six gallons of water, fifteen pounds of powder-sugar, and the whites of
six eggs well beaten; boil them three quarters of an hour, and skim them while
any scum will rise; when it is cold enough for working, put to it six ounces of
the syrup of citron or lemons, and six spoonfuls of yeast; beat the syrup and
yeast well together, and put in the peel and juice of fifty oranges; work it
two days and a night; then turn it up into a barrel, and bottle it at three or
four Months old.

FINIS.

