A POEM, ON THE RISING GLORY OF AMERICA; BEING AN EXERCISE DELIVERED AT THE
PUBLIC COMMENCEMENT AT NASSAU-HALL, September 25, 1771.

-- Venient annis
Sacula seris, quibus oceannus
Vincula rerum laxet et ingens
Pateat tellus, Typhisque novos
Detegat orbs; nec sit terris
Ultima Thule --
SENECA. MED. ACT iii. v. 375. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, FOR
R. AITKEN, BOOKSELLER, OPPOSITE THE LONDON-COFFEE-HOUSE, IN FRONT-STREET. M,
DCC, LXXII.

ARGUMENT.
The subject proposed. -- The discovery of America by Columbus and others. -- A
philosophical enquiry into the origin of the savages of America. -- Their
uncultivated state. -- The first planters of America. -- The cause of their
migration from Europe. -- The difficulties they encountered from the resentment
of the natives and other circumstances. -- The French war in North America --
The most distinguished heroes who fell in it; Wolf, Braddock, etc. -- General
Johnson, -- his character. -- North America why superior to South. -- On
Agriculture. -- On commerce. -- On science. -- Whitefield, -- his character. --
The present glory of America. -- A prospect of its future glory, in science, --
in liberty, -- and the gospel. -- The conclusion of the whole.

AN EXERCISE, Delivered at the PUBLIC COMMENCEMENT AT NASSAU-HALL, September
25, 1771.
LEANDER. NO more of Memphis and her mighty kings,
Or Alexandria, where the Ptolomies
Taught golden commerce to unfurl her sails,
And bid fair science smile: No more of Greece
Where learning next her early visit paid,
And spread her glories to illume the world,
No more of Athens, where she flourished,
And saw her sons of mighty genius rise
Smooth flowing Plato, Socrates and him
Who with resistless eloquence revived
The Spir't of LIBERTY, and shook the thrones
Of Macedon and Persia's haughty king.
No more of Rome enlightened by her beams,
Fresh kindling there the fire of eloquence,
And poesy divine; imperial Rome!
Whose wide dominion reached over half the globe;
Whose eagle flew over Ganges to the East,
And in the West far to the British isles.
No more of Britain, and her kings renowned,
Edward's and Henry's thunderbolts of war;
Her chiefs victorious over the Gallic foe;
Illustrious senators, immortal bards,
And wise philosophers, of these no more.
A Theme more new, though not less noble, claims
Our every thought on this auspicious day;
The rising glory of this western world,
Where now the dawning light of science spreads
Her orient ray, and wakes the muse's song;
Where freedom holds her sacred standard high,
And commerce rolls her golden tides profuse
Of elegance and every joy of life.

ACASTO. Since then Leander you attempt a strain
So new, so noble and so full of fame;
And since a friendly concourse centers here
America's own sons, begin O muse!
Now through the veil of ancient days review
The period famed when first Columbus touched
The shore so long unknown, through various toils,
Famine and death, the hero made his way,
Through oceans bellowing with eternal storms.
But why, thus hap'ly found, should we resume
The tale of Cortez, furious chief, ordained
With Indian blood to dye the sands, and choke
Famed Amazonia's stream with dead! Or why,
Once more revive the story old in fame,
Of Atabilipa by thirst of gold
Deprived of life: which not Peru's rich ore,
Nor Mexico's vast mines could then redeem.
Better these northern realms deserve our song,
Discovered by Britannia for her sons;
Undeluged with seas of Indian blood,
Which cruel Spain on southern regions spilt;
To gain by terrors what the generous breast
Wins by fair treaty, conquers without blood.

EUGENIO. High in renown the intreprid hero stands,
From Europes shores advent'ring first to try
New seas, new oceans, unexplor'd by man.
Famed Cabot too may claim our noblest song,
Who from the Atlantic surge descried these shores,
As on he coasted from the Mexic bay
To Acady and piny Labradore.
Nor less than him the muse would celebrate
Bold Hudson stemming to the pole, through seas
Vexed with continual storms, through the cold straits,
Where Europe and America oppose
Their shores contiguous, and the northern sea
Confined, indignant, swells and roars between.
With these be numbered in the list of fame
Illustrious Raleigh, hapless in his fate:
Forgive me Raleigh, if an infant muse
Borrows thy name to grace her humble strain;
By many nobler are thy virtues sung;
Envy no more shall throw them in the shade;
They pour new luster on Britannia's isle.
Thou too, adventurous on the Atlantic main,
Burst through its storms and fair Virginia hailed.
The simple natives saw thy canvas flow,
And gazed aloof upon the shady shore:
For in her woods America contained,
From times remote, a savage race of men.
How shall we know their origin, how tell,
From whence or where the Indian tribes arose?

ACASTO. And long has this defied the sages skill
TO investigate: Tradition seems to hide
The mighty secret from each mortal eye,
How first these various nations South and North
Possessed these shores, or from what countries came.
Whether they sprang from some premoeval head
In their own lands, like Adam in the East;
Yet this the sacred oracles deny,
And reason too reclaims against the thought.
For when the general deluge drowned the world,
Where could their tribes have found security?
Where find their fate but in the ghastly deep?
Unless, as others dream, some chosen few
High on the Andes 'scap'd the general death,
High on the Andes wrapped in endless snow,
Where winter in his wildest fury reigns.
But here Philosophers oppose the scheme,
The earth, say they, nor hills nor mountains knew
Ever yet the universal flood prevailed:
But when the mighty waters rose aloft
Roused by the winds, they shook their solid case
And in convulsions tore the drowned world!
'Till by the winds assuag'd they quickly fell
And all their ragged bed exposed to view.
Perhaps far wandering toward the northren pole,
The straits of Zembla and the Frozen Zone,
And where the eastern Greenland almost joins
America's north point, the hardy tribes
Of banished Jews, Siberians, Tartars wild
Came over icy mountains, or on floats
First reached these coasts hid from the world beside.
And yet another argument more strange
Reserved for men of deeper thought and late
Presents itself to view: In Peleg's days,
So says the Hebrew seer's inspired pen,
This mighty mass of earth, this solid globe
Was cleft in twain -- cleft east and west apart
While strait between the deep Atlantic rolled.
And traces indisputable remain
Of this unhappy land now sunk and lost;
The islands rising in the eastern main
Are but small fragments of this continent,
Whose two extremities were Newfoudland
And St. Helena. -- One far in the north
Where British seamen now with strange surprise
Behold the pole star glittering over their heads;
The other in the southern tropic rears
Its head above the waves; Bermudas and
Canary isles, Britannia and the Azores,
With famed Hibernia are but broken parts
Of some prodigious waste which once sustained
Armies by lands, where now but ships can range.

LEANDER. Your sophistry Acasto makes me smile;
The roving mind of man delights to dwell
On hidden things, merely because they are hid;
He thinks his knowledge never can reach too high
And boldly pierces nature's inmost haunts
But for uncertainties; your broken isles,
You northern Tartars, and your wandering Jews.
Hear what the voice of history proclaims.
The Carthaginians, ever the Roman yoke
Broke their proud spirits and enslaved them too,
For navigation were renowned as much
As haughty Tire with all her hundred fleets;
Full many a league their venurous seamen sailed
Through strait Gibralter down the western shore
Of Africa, and to Canary isles
By them called fortunate, so Flaceus sings,
Because eternal spring there crowns the fields,
And fruits delicious bloom throughout the year.
From voyaging here this inference I draw,
Perhaps some barque with all her numerous crew
Caught by the eastern trade wind hurried on
Before the steady blast to Brazil's shore,
New Amazonia and the coasts more south.
Here standing and unable to return,
For ever from their native skies estranged,
Doubtless they made the unknown land their own,
And in the course of many rolling years
A numerous progeny from these arose,
And spread throughout the coasts; those whom we call
Brazilians, Mexicans, Peruvians rich,
The tribes of Chili, Patagon and those
Who till the shores of Amazon's long stream.
When first the powers of Europe here attained
Vast empires, kingdoms, cities, palaces
And polished nations stocked the fertile land;
Who has not heard of Cusco, Lima and
The town of Mexico; huge cities formed
From Europe's architecture, ever the arms
Of haughty Spain disturbed the peaceful soil.

EUGENIO. Such disquisition leads the puzzled mind
From maze to maze by queries still perplexed.
But this we know, if from the east they came
Where science first and revelation beamed,
Long since they have lost all memory, all trace
Of this their origin: Tradition tells
Of some great forefather beyond the lakes
Oswego, Huron, Mechigan, Champlaine
Or by the stream of Amazon which rolls
Through many a clime; while others simply dream
That from the Andes or the mountains north,
Some hoary fabled ancestor came down
To people this their world.

LEANDER. How fallen, Oh!
How much obscured is human nature here!
Shut from the light of science and of truth
They wandered blindfold down the steep of time;
Dim superstition with her ghastly train
Of demons, specter and forboding signs
Still urging them to horrid rites and forms
Of human sacrifice, to sooth the powers
Malignant, and the dark infernal king.
Once on this spot perhaps a wigwam stood
With all its rude inhabitants, or round
Some mighty fire an hundred savage sons
Gambol'd by day, and filled the night with cries;
In what superior to the brutal race
That fled before them through the howling wilds,
Were all those numerous tawny tribes which swarmed
From Bassin's bay to Del Fuego south,
From California to the Oronoque.
Far from the reach of fame they lived unknown
In listless slumber and inglorious ease;
To them fair science never opened her stores,
Nor sacred truth sublimed the soul to God;
No fixed abode their wandering genius knew;
No golden harvest crowned the fertile glebe;
No city then adorned the rivers bank,
Nor rising turret overlooked the stream.

ACASTO. Now view the prospect changed; far off at sea
The mariner descry's our spacious towns
He hails the prospect of the land and views
A new, a fair a fertile world arise;
Onward from India's isles far east, to us
Now fair-ey'd commerce stretches her white sails,
Learning exalts her head, the graces smile
And peace established after horrid war
Improves the splendour of these early times.
But come my friends and let us trace the steps
By which this recent happy world arose,
To this fair eminence of high renown
This height of wealth, of liberty and fame.

LEANDER. Speak then Eugenio, for I Have heard you tell
The pleasing history, and the cause that brought
The first advent'rers to these happy shores;
The glorious cause that urged our fathers first
To visit climes unknown and wilder woods
Than ever Tartarian or Norwegian saw,
And with fair culture to adorn that soil
Which never knew the industrious swain before.

EUGENIO. All this long story to rehearse would tire,
Besides the sun toward the west retreats,
Nor can the noblest tale retard his speed,
Nor loftiest verse; not that which sung the fall
Of Troy divine and smooth Scamander's stream.
Yet hear a part. -- By persecution wronged
And popish cruelty, our fathers came
From Europe's shores to find this blessed abode,
Secure from tyranny and hateful man.
For this they left their country and their friends
And plough'd the Atlantic wave in quest of peace;
And found new shores and sylvan settlements
Formed by the care of each adventurous chief,
Who, warm in liberty and freedom's cause,
Sought out uncultivated tracts and wilds,
And framed new plans of cities, governments
And spacious provinces: Why should I name
Thee Penn, the Solon of our western lands;
Sagacious legislator, whom the world
Admires though dead: an infant colony
Nursed by thy care, now rises over the rest
Like that tall Pyramid on Memphis' stand
Over all the lesser piles, they also great.
Why should I name those heroes so well known
Who peopled all the rest from Canada
To Georgia's farthest coasts, West Florida
Or Apalachian mountains, yet what streams
Of blood were shed! What Indian hosts were slain
Before the days of peace were quite restored.

LEANDER. Yes, while they overturned the soil untilled,
And swept the forests from the shaded plain
'Midst dangers, foes and death, fierce Indian tribes
With deadly malice armed and black design,
Often murdered half the hapless colonies.
Encouraged too by that inglorious race
False Gallia's sons, who once their arms diplay'd
At Quebec, Montreal and farthest coasts
Of Labrador and Esquimaux where now
The British standard awes the coward host.
Here those brave chiefs, who lavish of their blood
Fought in Britannia's cause, most nobly sell.
What Heart but mourns the untimely fate of Wolf,
Who dying conquered, or what breast but beats
To share a fate like his, and die like him?

ACASTO. And he demands our lay who bravely fell
By Monangahela and the Ohio's stream;
By wiles overcome the hapless hero fell,
His soul too generous for that dastard crew
Who kill unseen and shun the face of day.
Ambush'd in wood, and swamp and thick grown hill,
The bellowing tribes brought on the savage war.
What could avail O Braddock then the flame,
The generous flame which fired thy martial soul!
What could avail Britannia's warlike troops,
Choice spirits of her isle? What could avail
America's own sons? The skulking foe,
Hid in the forest lay and fought secure,
What could the brave Virginians do o'erpower'd
By such vast numbers and their leader dead?
'Midst fire and death they bore him from the field,
Where in his blood full many a hero lay.
'Twas there O Halkut! thou so nobly fell,
Thrice valiant Halkut early son of fame!
We still deplore a fate so immature,
Fair Albion mourns thy unsuccesful end,
And Caledonia sheds a tear for him
Who led the bravest of her sons to war.

EUGENIO. But why alas commemorate the dead?
And pass those glorious heroes by, who yet
Breathe the same air and see the light with us?
The dead, Acasto are but empty names
And he who died to day the same to us
As he who died a thousand years ago.
A Johnson lives, among the sons of fame
Well known, conspicuous as the morning star
Among the lesser lights: A patriot skilled
In all the glorious arts of peace or war.
He for Britannia gains the savage race,
Unstable as the sea, wild as the winds,
Cruel as death, and treacherous as hell,
Whom none but he by kindness yet could win,
None by humanity could gain their souls,
Or bring from woods and subteranean dens
The skulking crew, before a Johnson rose.
Pitying their numerous tribes: ah how unlike
The Cortez' and Acosta's, pride of Spain
Whom blood and murder only satisfied.
Behold their doleful regions overflowed
With gore, and blackened with ten thousand deaths
From Mexico to Patagonia far,
Where howling winds sweep round the southern cape,
And other suns and other stars arise!

ACASTO. Such is the curse Eugenio where the soul
Humane is wanting, but we boast no seats
Of cruelty like Spain's unfeeling sons.
The British Epithet is merciful:
And we the sons of Britain learn like them
To conquer and to spare; for coward souls
Seek their revenge but on a vanquished foe.
Gold, fatal gold was the alluring bait
To Spain's rapacious mind, hence rose the wars
From Chili to the Caribbean sea,
Over Terra-Firma and La Plata wide.
Peru then sunk in ruins, great before
With pompous cities, monuments superb
Whose tops reached heaven. But we more happy boast
No golden metals in our peaceful land,
No flaming diamond, precious emerald,
Or blushing sapphire, ruby, chrysolite
Or jasper red; more noble riches flow
From agriculture and the industrious swain,
Who tills the fertile vale or mountain's brow,
Content to lead a safe, a humble life
'Midst his own native hills; romantic scenes,
Such as the muse of Greece did feign so well*
Envying their lovely bowers to mortal race.

LEANDER. Long has the rural life been justly famed;
And poets old their pleasing pictures drew
Of flowery meads, and groves and gliding streams.
Hence old Arcadia, woodnymphs, satyrs, fauns,
And hence Elysium, fancied heaven below.
Fair agriculture, not unworthy kings,
Once exercised the royal hand, or those
Whose virtue raised them to the rank of gods.
See old Laertes in his shepherd weeds,
Far from his pompous throne and court august,
Digging the grateful soil, where peaceful blows
The west wind murmuring through the aged trees
Loaded with apples red, sweet scented peach
And each luxurious fruit the world affords,
While over the fields the harmless oxen draw
The industrious plough. The Roman heroes to^
Fabricius and Camillus loved a life
Of sweet simplicity and rustic joy;
And from the busy Forum hastening far,
'Midst woods and fields spent the remains of age.
How grateful to behold the harvests rise
And mighty crops adorn the golden plains?
Fair plenty smiles throughout, while lowing herds
Stalk over the grassy hill or level mead,
Or at some winding river slake their thirst.
Thus fares the rustic swain; and when the winds
Blow with a keener breath, and from the North
Pour all their tempests through a sunless sky,
Ice, sleet and rattling hail, secure he sits
In some thatched cottage fearless of the storm;
While on the hearth a fire still blazing high
Chears every mind, and nature sits serene
On every countenance, such the joys
And such the fate of those whom heaven has blessed
With souls enamored of a country life.

EUGENIO. Much wealth and pleasure agriculture brings;
Far in the woods she raises palaces,
Puisant states and crowded realms where late
A desert plain or frowning wilderness
Deformed the view; or where with moving tents
The scattered nations seeking pasturage,
Wandered from clime to clime incultivate;
Or where a race more savage yet than these,
In search of prey over hill and mountain ranged,
Fierce as the tigers and the wolves they slew.
Thus lives the Arabian and the Tartar wild
In woody wastes which never felt the plough;
But agriculture crowns our happy land,
And plants our colonies from north to south,
From Cape Breton far as the Mexic bay
From the Eastern shores to Missisippi's stream.
Famine to us unknown, rich plenty reigns
And pours her blessings with a lavish hand.

LEANDER. Nor less from golden commerce flow the streams
Of richest plenty on our smiling land.
Now fierce Bellona must'ring all her rage,
To other climes and other seas withdraws,
To rouse the Russian on the desperate Turk
There to conflict by Danube and the straits
Which join the Euxine to the Egean Sea.
Britannia holds the empire of the waves,
And welcomes every bold adventurer
To view the wonders of old Ocean's reign.
Far to the east our fleets on traffic sail,
And to the west through boundless seas which not
Old Rome nor Tire nor mightier Carthage knew.
Daughter of commerce, from the hoary deep
New York emerging rears her lofty domes,
And hails from far her numerous ships of trade,
Like shady forests rising on the waves.
From Europe's shores or from the Caribbees,
Homeward returning annually they bring
The richest produce of the various climes.
And Philadelphia mistress of our world,
The seat of arts, of science, and of fame
Derives her grandeur from the power of trade.
Hail happy city where the muses stray,
Where deep philosophy convenes her sons
And opens all her secrets to their view!
Bids them ascend with Newton to the skies,
And trace the orbits of the rolling spheres,
Survey the glories of the universe,
Its suns and moons and ever blazing stars!
Hail city blessed with liberty's fair beams,
And with the rays of mild religion blessed!

ACASTO. Nor these alone, America, thy sons
In the short circle of a hundred years
Have raised with toil along thy shady-shores.
On lake and bay and navigable stream,
From Cape Breton to Pensacola south,
Unnumber'd towns and villages arise,
By commerce nursed these embrio marts of trade
May yet awake the envy and obscure
The noblest cities of the eastern world;
For commerce is the mighty reservoir
From whence all nations draw the streams of gain.
It Is commerce joins dissever'd worlds in one,
Confines old Ocean to more narrow bounds;
Outbraves his storms and peoples half his world.

EUGENIO. And from the earliest times adventurous man
On foreign traffic stretched the nimble sail;
Or sent the slow paced caravan afar
Over barren wastes, eternal sands where not
The blissful haunt of human form is seen
Nor tree not even funeral cypress sad
Nor bubbling fountain. Thus arrived of old
Golconda's golden ore, and thus the wealth
Of Ophir to the wisest of mankind.

LEANDER. Great is the praise of commerce, and the men
Deserve our praise who spread from shore to shore
The flowing sail; great are their dangers too;
Death ever present to the fearless eye
And every billow but a gaping grave;
Yet all these mighty feats to science owe
Their rise and glory. -- Hail fair science! thou
Transplanted from the eastern climes do bloom
In these fair regions, Greece and Rome no more
Detain the muses on Cithaeron's brow,
Or old Olympus crowned with waving woods;
Or Haemus' top where once was heard the harp,
Sweet Orpheus' harp that ravished hell below
And pierced the soul of Orcus and his bride,
That hushed to silence by the song divine
Thy melancholy waters, and the gales
O Hebrus! which over thy sad surface blow.
No more the maids round Alpheus' waters stray
Where he with Arethusas' stream does mix,
Or where swift Tiber disembogues his waves
Into the Italian sea so long unsung.
Hither they have winged their way, the last, the best
Of countries where the arts shall rise and grow
Luxuriant, graceful; and even now we boast
A Franklin skilled in deep philosophy,
A genius piercing as the electric fire,
Bright as the lightenings flash explained so well
By him the rival of Britannia's sage.
This is a land of every joyous sound
Of liberty and life; sweet liberty!
Without whose aid the noblest genius sails,
And science irretrievably must die.

ACASTO. This is a land where the more noble light
Of holy revelation beams, the star
Which rose from Judah lights our skies, we feel
Its influence as once did Palestine
And Gentile lands, where now the ruthless Turk
Wrapped up in darkness sleeps dull life away.
Here many holy messengers of peace
As burning lamps have given light to men.
To thee, O Whitefield! favorite of Heaven,
The muse would pay the tribute of a tear.
Laid in the dust thy eloquence no more
Shall charm the listening soul, no more
Thy bold imagination paint the scenes
Of woe and horror in the shades below;
Or glory radiant in the fields above;
No more thy charity relieve the poor;
Let Georgia mourn, let all her orphans weep.

LEANDER. Yet though we wished him longer from the skies,
And wept to see the evening of his days,
He longed himself to reach his final hope,
The crown of glory for the just prepared.
From life's high verge he hailed the eternal shore
And, freed at last from his confinement, rose
An infant seraph to the worlds on high.

EUGENIO. For him we sound the melancholy lyre,
The lyre responsive to each distant sigh;
No grief like that which mourns departing souls
Of holy, just and venerable men,
Whom pitying Heaven sends from their native skies
To light our way and bring us nearer God.
But come Leander since we know the past
And present glory of this empire wide,
What hinders to pervade with searching eye
The mystic scenes of dark futurity?
Say shall we ask what empires yet must rise
What kingdoms powers and states where now are seen
But dreary wastes and awful solitude,
Where melancholy sits with eye forlorn
And hopes the day when Britain's sons shall spread
Dominion to the north and south and west
Far from the Atlantic to Pacific shores?
A glorious theme, but how shall mortals dare
To pierce the mysteries of future days,
And scenes unravel only known to fate.

ACASTO. This might we do if warmed by that bright coal
Snatched from the altar of seraphic fire,
Which touched Isaiah's lips, or if the spirit
Of Jeremy and Amos, prophets old,
Should fire the breast; but yet I call the muse
And what we can will do. I see, I see
A thousand kingdoms raised, cities and men
Numerous as sand upon the ocean shore;
The Ohio then shall glide by many a town
Of note: and where the Missisippi stream
By forests shaded now runs weeping on
Nations shall grow and states not less in fame
Than Greece and Rome of old: we too shall boast
Our Alexanders, Pompeys, heroes, kings
That in the womb of time yet dormant lie
Waiting the joyful hour for life and light.
O snatch us hence, ye muses! to those days
When, through the veil of dark antiquity,
Our sons shall hear of us as things remote,
That blossomed in the morn of days, alas!
How could I weep that we were born so soon,
In the beginning of more happy times!
But yet perhaps our fame shall last unhurt.
The sons of science nobly scorn to die
Immortal virtue this denies, the muse
Forbids the men to slumber in the grave
Who well deserve the praise that virtue gives.

EUGENIO. It Is true no human eye can penetrate
The veil obscure, and in fair light disclosed
Behold the scenes of dark futurity;
Yet if we reason from the course of things,
And downward trace the vestiges of time,
The mind prophetic grows and pierces far
Through ages yet unborn. We saw the states
And mighty empires of the East arise
In swift succession from the Assyrian
To Macedon and Rome; to Britain thence
Dominion drove her car, she stretched her reign
Oer many isles, wide seas, and peopled lands.
Now in the West a continent appears;
A newer world now opens to her view;
She hastens onward to the Americ shores
And bids a scene of recent wonders rise.
New states new empires and a line of kings,
High raised in glory, cities, palaces
Fair domes on each long bay, sea, shore or stream
Circling the hills now rear their lofty heads.
Far in the Arctic skies a Petersburgh,
A Bergen, or Archangel lifts its spires
Glittering with Ice, far in the West appears
A new Palmyra or an Ecbatan,
And sees the slow paced caravan return
Over many a realm from the Pacific shore,
Where fleets shall then convey rich Persia's silks,
Arabia's perfumes, and spices rare
Of Philippine, Coelebe and Marian isles,
Or from the Acapulco coast our India then,
Laden with pearl and burning gems and gold.
Far in the South I see a Babylon,
As once by Tigris or Euphrates stream,
With blazing watch towr's and observatories
Rising to heaven; from thence astronomers
With optic glass take nobler views of God
In golden suns and shining worlds displayed
Than the poor Chaldean with the naked eye.
A Niniveh where Oronoque descends
With waves discolored from the Andes high,
Winding himself around a hundred isles
Where golden buildings glitter over his tide.
To mighty nations shall the people grow
Which cultivate the banks of many a flood,
In crystal currents poured from the hills
Apalachia named, to lave the lands
Of Carolina, Georgia, and the plains
Stretched out from thence far to the burning Line,
St John's or Clarendon or Albemarle.
And thou Patowmack navigable stream,
Rolling thy waters through Virginia's groves,
Shall vie with Thames, the Tiber or the Rhine,
For on thy banks I see an hundred towns
And the tall vessels wasted down thy tide.
Hoarse Niagara's stream now roaring on
Through woods and rocks and broken mountains torn,
In days remote far from their ancient beds,
By some great monarch taught a better course,
Or cleared of cataracts shall flow beneath
Unnumbr'd bouts and merchandise and men;
And from the coasts of piny Labradore,
A thousand navies crowd before the gale,
And spread their commerce to remotest lands,
Or bear their thunder round the conquered world.

LEANDER. And here fair freedom shall forever reign.
I see a train, a glorious train appear,
Of Patriots placed in equal fame with those
Who nobly fell for Athens or for Rome.
The sons of Boston resolute and brave
The firm supporters of our injured rights,
Shall lose their splendours in the brighter beams
Of patriots famed and heroes yet unborn.

ACASTO. It Is but the morning of the world with us
And Science yet but sheds her orient rays.
I see the age the happy age roll on
Bright with the splendours of her midday beams,
I see a Homer and a Milton rise
In all the pomp and majesty of song,
Which gives immortal vigor to the deeds
Achieved by Heroes in the fields of fame.
A second Pope, like that Arabian bird
Of which no age can boast but one, may yet
Awake the muse by Schuylkill's silent stream,
And bid new forests bloom along her tide.
And Susquehanna's rocky stream unsung,
In bright meanders winding round the hills,
Where first the mountain nypmh sweet echo heard
The uncouth music of my rural lay,
Shall yet remurmur to the magic sound
Of song heroic, when in future days
Some noble Hambden rises into fame.

LEANDER. Or Roanoke's and James's limpid waves
The sound of music murmurs in the gale;
Another Denham celebrates their flow,
In gliding numbers and harmonious lays.

EUGENIO. Now in the bowers of Tuscororah hills,
As once on Pindus all the muses stray,
New Theban bards high soaring reach the skies
And swim along through azure deeps of air.

LEANDER. From Alleghany in thick groves imbrown'd,
Sweet music breathing through the shades of night
Steals on my ear, they sing the origin
Of those fair lights which gild the firmament;
From whence the gale that murmurs in the pines;
Why flows the stream down from the mountains brow
And rolls the ocean lower than the land.
They sing the final destiny of things,
The great result of all our labors here,
The last day's glory, and the world renewed.
Such are their themes for in these happier days
The bard enraptured scorns ignoble strains,
Fair science smiling and full truth revealed,
The world at peace, and all her tumults over,
The blissful prelude to Emanuel's reign.

EUGENIO. And when a train of rolling years are past,
(So sang the exiled seer in Patmos isle,)
A new Jerusalem sent down from heaven
Shall grace our happy earth, perhaps this land,
Whose virgin bosom shall then receive, though late,
Myriads of saints with their almighty king,
To live and reign on earth a thousand years
Thence called Millennium. Paradise a new
Shall flourish, by no second Adam lost.
No dangerous tree or deathful fruit shall grow,
No tempting serpent to allure the soul,
From native innocence; a Canaan here
Another Canaan shall excel the old
And from fairer Pisgah's top be seen,
No thistle here or briar or thorn shall spring
Earth's curse before: the lion and the lamb
In mutual friendship linked shall browse the shrub,
And timorous deer with rabid tigers stray
Over mead or lofty hill or grassy plain.
Another Jordan's stream shall glide along
And Siloah's brook in circling eddies flow,
Groves shall adorn their verdant banks, on which
The happy people free from second death
Shall find secure repose; no fierce disease
No fevers, slow consumption, direful plague
Death's ancient ministers, again renew
Perpetual war with man: Fair fruits shall bloom
Fair to the eye, sweet to the taste, if such
Divine inhabitants could need the taste
Of elemental food, amid the joys
Fit for a heavenly nature. Music's charms
Shall swell the lofty soul and harmony
Triumphant reign; through every grove shall sound
The cymbal and the lyre, joys too divine
For fallen man to know. Such days the world
And such America thou first shall have
When ages yet to come have run their round
And future years of bliss alone remain.

ACASTO. This is thy praise America thy power
Thou best of climes by science visited
By freedom blessed and richly stored with all
The luxuries of life. Hail happy land
The seat of empire the abode of kings,
The final stage where time shall introduce
Renowned characters, and glorious works
Of high invention and of wondrous art,
Which not the ravages of time shall waste
Till he himself has run his long career*
Till all those glorious orbs of light on high
The rolling wonders that surround the ball,
Drop from their spheres extinguished and consumed;
When final ruin with her fiery car
Rides over creation, and all nature's works
Are lost in chaos and the womb of night.

FINIS.
JUST PUBLISHED, BY R. AITKEN, DOMESTIC MEDICINE; OR THE FAMILY PHYSICIAN;
Being an Attempt to render the Medical Art more generally useful, by showing
People, what is in their own Power, both with Respect to the Prevention and
Cure of Diseases; chiefly calculated to recommend a proper Attention to Regimen
and Simple Medicines.

BY WILLIAM BUCHAN, M. D. IN EDINBURGH.

The author of this excellent work was educated in the university of Edinburgh.
The observations delivered in it are the result of extensive and successful
practice. His remarks upon the diseases of children are rendered particularly
valuable, from his having had the care of a Foundling hospital, for many years
in England, where he had frequent opportunites of seeing the beneficial effects
of those rules he lays down, for the management of children both in sickness
and health. Upon the whole, we cannot help adding, that while the author has
treated of all his subjects in so familiar a style, that he is intelligible to
persons unacquainted with the most common terms in medicine; yet he has in all
parts of his work, adhered so closely to the present approved system of physic,
that the ablest physicians may read him with advantage.

In the Press and speedily will be Published, [On a superfine Demi
Writing-Paper] SERMONS ON PRACTICAL SUBJECTS.

By ROBERT WALKER, One of the Ministers of the High Church of Edinburgh.

N. B. Sold by said R. Aitken a very large and elegant Collection of Books,
London and Scots Editions. With a neat Assortment of Stationary.

Also Books bound in the best Manner.

The highest Price given for any old Library


