POEMS ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS, WITH SOME OTHER COMPOSITIONS.

BY NATHANIEL EVANS, A. M. Late MISSIONARY (appointed by the SOCIETY for
PROPAGATING the GOSPEL) for GLOUCESTER COUNTY, in NEW JERSEY; and CHAPLAIN to
the LORD VISCOUNT KILMOREY, of the KINGDOM of IRELAND.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOHN DUNLAP, IN MARKET-STREET. M.DCC.LXXII.

THE Author of the following Poems was born in the city of Philadelphia, June
8th, 1742; and was sent to the Academy there, soon after it was first opened,
and before the Collegiate part of the Institution was begun. Having spent about
six years in Grammar Learning, his parents, who were reputable citizens,
designing him for merchandise, put him Apprentice; but not finding either his
genius or inclination leading him much to that profession, he devoted more of
his time to the service of the Muses, than to the business of the
Counting House. Soon after the expiration of his apprenticeship, he accordingly
returned to the College, and applied himself, with great diligence, to the
study of Philosophy and the Sciences, till the Commencement, May 30th, 1765;
when, on account of his great merit and promising genius, he was, by special
Mandate of the Trustees, upon the recommendation of the Provost and Faculty of
Professors, complimented with a DIPLOMA for the degree of Master of Arts;
although he had not taken the previous degree of Bachelor of Arts, on account,
of the interruption in his course of studies, during the term of his
apprenticeship.

IMMEDIATELY after the Commencement he embarked for England, carrying with him
recommendations to the Society for propagating the Gospel in foreign parts, as
a fit person to supply the new Mission, then proposed to be opened for
Gloucester county, in New-Iersey. Upon the Society's nomination, he was
admitted into holy orders by the present Lord Bishop of London, Dr. TERRICK,
who expressed great satisfaction in his examination, and particularly in the
perusal of an elegant English piece which he composed in a few minutes, upon a
Theological question, which he was desired to give his sentiments upon.

HE returned from England, and landed at Philadelphia, December 26th, 1765;
having had for his fellow-passenger (among others) the worthy and ingenious
Lady, to whom many of his pieces are addressed. Upon his arrival, he entered
immediately upon the business of his Mission; and alas! but just lived long
enough to show, by the goodness of his temper, the purity of his morals, the
cheerfulness and affability of his conversation, the sublimity and soundness of
his doctrines, and the warmth of his Pulpit Compositions, how well he was
qualified for the sacred office, to which he had now wholly devoted himself. He
died October 29th, 1767, lamented by all that knew him; and by none more
earnestly and affectionately, than by his own Congregations, whom he had not
yet served two years!

SOON after his death, the papers which compose the following Volume were
committed to the care of myself, and the Lady already mentioned, agreeable to
some of his own last directions; and so sacred is the trust configned by
deceased friend, that I scarce know how to excuse my long delay in offering
them to the world; especially after the great encouragement given to the
publication, by the numerous and respectable list of Subscribers, prefixed to
the work. The true excuse will be the best, and I am persuaded, the most
acceptable; namely, my want of leisure to select and review the different
papers, and the interruption which the work met with, by my being obliged to
take a voyage to South Carolina, during the last winter.

WHAT high and rapturous Ideas our Author had formed of true POETIC GENIUS, may
be in some measure conceived from the following Preface, which seems to have
been intended for his Pieces, and was undoubtedly written by him, in the short
interval between his last dangerous illness, and that fatal relapse, which put
an end to his life -- This Preface I shall give literally as he left it; for
here the least variation would be criminal.

PREFACE.
POETRY, says he, has been accounted the most peculiar of all the liberal arts;
and it is the only One, in the circle of literature, which a man of common
capacity cannot, by mere dint of constant application, become master of. The
most exalted prose writers that ever graced the learned world, have rendered
themselves liable to ridicule in their addresses to the MUSES.

THE great Cicero, not less famous for the elegance of his style, than for his
universal knowledge, was a remarkable instance of the truth of this
observation. And the wonder ceases, if what a celebrated Critic RAPIN.
says, be true, to wit -- That to constitute a POET, is required an elevation
of soul, that depends not only on art and study, but must also BE THE GIFT OF
HEAVEN. I say, if this be the case, the riddle is immediately expounded, and we
are at no loss to assign a reason, why some, (comparatively speaking)
illiterate men, have been the sublimest poets of the age they lived in.

"IT is not strange, therefore, that those whom nature has thus distinguished,
should be looked on as a kind of prodigies in the world. For, according to
Horace, it is not a trifling power the man is endued with -- -- meum qui pectus
inaniter angit,
Irritat, mulcet, falsis terroribus implet,
Ut MAGUS --
LIB. II. EPIST. 1.

"THERE is a pleasing Je ne scay quoi in the productions of poetic genius,
which is easier felt than described. It is the voice of nature in the POET,
operating like a charm on the soul of the reader. It is the mavelous
conception, the noble wildness, the lofty sentiment, the fire and enthusiasm of
spirit, the living imagery, the exquisite choice of words, the variety, the
sweetness, the majesty of numbers, and the irresistible magic of expression
This sentence, so truly rich and poetic in itself, is a fine instance of the
Author's just conception and feeling of a true Poetic genius and enthusiasm.
.

THE prose writer, may indeed warm his Reader with a serene and steady fire; he
may keep up his attention with the energetic, the flowing period. But the
POET'S it is, to wrap him in a flame -- to dissolve him, as it were, in his own
rapturous blaze! The POET'S it is, to hurry him out of himself, with the same
velocity, as though he were really mounted on a winged Pegasus -- It is his to
lift him up to Heaven, or plunge him into the gloom of Tartarus -- It is his,
to unveil to him the secrets of the deep, or to exhibit to his mind, all the
novelty of this varied world -- to carry him back into the darkness of
antiquity, or waft him forwards into the vast sea of futurity -- and finally,
to inspire him with the patriot glow, or fire his soul with the heavenly ideas
of MORAL BEAUTY, and all the varied passions of Love, Fear, Terror, Compassion,
etc. etc."

SUCH is the genuine Poet, when improved by the precepts of Art; and the works
of such have been the continual delight of mankind, as they afford the
sublimest intellectual enjoyment. With such, to tread the flowery fields of
imagination, and gather the rich fruits of knowledge, is HAPPINESS indeed!

BUT it is rare, that such Natural Geniuses are seen to arrive at this envied
height. Some black obstacle still clogs their wings, and retards their progress
-- Frequently those to whom Nature has been thus bountiful, have not leisure to
attend to the cultivation of their talents -- frequently, like the rose in the
wilderness, they just bloom, and wither away in obscurity; and sometimes, alas!
the iron-hand of DEATH cuts them SUDDENLY off, as their beauties are just
budding forth into existence, and leaves but the FAIR PROMISES of FUTURE
EXCELLENCIES****

FURTHER his pen went not -- What a dreadful blank closes the foregoing
sentence, and how truly prophetic of his own fate? HE DIED in his TWENTY-SIXTH
Year -- He was my PUPIL, and truly dear and affectionate to me in his whole
demeanor -- If I had not the original, in his own hand to produce, I should
have been afraid to publish this Preface, as his, lest it should be suspected
to have been written after his death, and accommodated to that event.

HOW far his Poems will answer the idea he had formed of poetic eminence, must
be left for his readers to judge. Many of them are fragments, and unfinished;
and but few of them were revised by himself, with a view of being published.
Some corrections have, therefore, been made, where there appeared any thing
materially faulty in respect to Grammar, the exactness of the rhymes, etc. But
in these the Publisher has been sparing, and has taken care that the Author's
sense should in no case be deviated from -- The task he left to be performed
was a mournful one; but it has been executed with that fidelity, which the
writer of this would wish might be extended to any performance of his own, that
may be thought worthy of the public eye, by that true friend into whose hands
it may fall, when he himself shall be no more!

WILLIAM SMITH.
PHI^ADELPHIA, August 1, 1772.
DAPHNIS AND MENALCAS, A PASTORAL ECLOGUE.
WRITTEN 1758.
SHALL famed Arcadia own the tuneful choir,
And fair Sicilia boast the matchless lyre?
Shall Gallia's groves resound with heavenly lays,
And Albion's poets claim immortal bays?
And this new world never feel the muse's fire;
No beauties charm us, or no deeds inspire?
O Pennsylvania! shall no son of thine
Glow with the raptures of the sacred nine?
Never rouse the soul, by strokes of magic kind,
Just war to wage, or humanize mankind;
With sweetest sounds the virgin's soul control,
Or in Elysium wrap the lover's soul?
Fired with the thought, I court the Sylvan muse,
Her magic influence over me to diffuse;
Whilst I aspire to wake the rural reed,
And sing of swains, whose snowy lambkins feed
On SCHUYLKILL'S banks, with shady walnuts crowned,
And bid the vales with music melt around.
Soon as the rays that gild the orient dawn,
Tinged the blue hills, and pearl'd each dewy lawn,
Two swains arose and spread their bleating train
Over the fresh verdure of a flowery plain;
Then sought a hill where purple violets bloomed,
And fragrant scents the downy air perfumed;
Close by whose side there strayed a murmuring brook,
Where soft reclined, each fixed his oaken crook;
When gay Menalcas the long silence broke,
And pensive Daphnis, thus returning spoke.
MENALCAS, See Nature's sweets profusely round displayed,
Flowers paint the lawn, and green bedecks the shade;
The feathered choir in carols hail the day,
And new-blown hawthorns feel you heavenly ray;
Pomona spreads her dulcet charms around,
And buxom Pan o'erleaps the pregnant ground.
All but my Daphnis hail the rising ^orn;
Each face but his congenial smiles adorn.
When kindly nature thus invites to joy,
What irksome cares can Daphnis' rest destroy?
Have thy young lambs by wolves devouring bled,
Or some kind brother mingled with the dead?
O say what grief involves the troubled swain,
That thus he slights the shepherd and his strain?

DAPHNIS. Nature, it is true, exults in vernal bloom,
Each grove is music, and each field perfume;
The fruitful trees their blossomed foliage rear,
And jocund shepherds hail the golden year;
The groves, the vales, the hills and every lawn,
With sprightly echoes wake the blushing dawn --
But lawns, and hills, and vales and groves around,
Are naught to Daphnis but an empty sound;
The linnet's songs no more entice my ear,
Nor charm the beauties of the smiling year;
The day's refulgence now delights no more,
Nor night's cool shade expanded to each shore!
But since my friend can sympathize with pain,
Know then why this indifference to thy strain.
On my young lambs no prowling wolves have fed,
No brother-swain is numbered with the dead;
But cruel Delia has unfaithful proved,
And slights the swain that often she swore she loved.
Say then, Menalcas! has not Daphnis cause
To break all Nature's and all Reason's laws;
To plunge me headlong from you mountain's brow,
And end my sorrows in the waves below.

MENALCAS. Can lovely Delia ever unfaithful prove,
Or slight the swain to whom she vowed her love?
The rabid wolves may browse with harmless sheep,
And forest-doves with towering eagles keep;
The crabbed thorn with clustering grapes may bend,
And humble willows to proud oaks ascend;
The vales out-top the lofty mountain's brow --
But charming Delia cannot break her vow!

DAPHNIS. Cease shepherd, cease! for now no Delia charms,
Nor more shall Daphnis wanton in her arms;
The spreading boughs no more shall guard our love,
Nor Delia's name be figured in each grove!
For me, my sheep run bleating over the plain,
While I to woods and flinty rocks complain!
Milder than Delia flinty rocks are grown,
For in sad echoes they return my moan;
But haughty Delia scorns my ardent flame,
And bids her shepherd woo some humbler dame!

MENALCAS. The sportful trouts may leave their war'ry plains,
To dwell in woods, and tune spontaneous strains;
The warbling linnets may in rivers glide,
And dash the billows with the dolphin's pride;
You distant steers, that drag the heavy plough,
May, like the squirrel, spring from bough to bough --
But heavenly Delia cannot faithless prove,
Nor barter for vile gain her promised love!

DAPHNIS. The breeze that shakes the spangl'd dew-drops round,
The swelling floods that burst the meadow's bound,
Are not more wavering than the female mind!
Wild as the waves, unstable as the wind!

MENALCAS. With gentler manners treat the beauteous race,
Nor say, if one's unfaithful, all are base!
Let thy sweet pipe beguile this ill-timed woe,
While from my reed spontaneous notes shall flow.
Behold our flocks are scattering over the plain,
Proceed we then to chaunt the Sylvan strain.

DAPHNIS. Come, then, Menalcas! tuneful shepherd rise,
Thy song shall praise the SOVEREIGN of the skies;
Whilst I will join in that exalted theme,
Nor more repeat the faithless fair-one's name!

ODE TO A FRIEND. 1758.
I.
WHY so timorous, gentle friend?
Pri'thee, banish care and dread;
Of harmless pleasure, know no end,
Till you are numbered with the dead.
II.
What can keep thee from the grave,
If it please the Almighty power?
What destroy thee if he will save,
Or rob thee of the passing hour?
III.
What should move the power divine,
Thee, good mortal, to destroy?
Then, with me, right-pleasing join,
To gild the winged time with joy.
IV.
But not in pleasure's Syren-charms,
I mean to lose the heart:
I know that mirth has sad alarms
Where wisdom has no part.
V.
But let passion's easy gale,
Thy bark with rapture sweep,
While powerful reason shall prevail
And guide her over the deep.
VI.
Then cheerful flow thy transient breath,
With courage arm thy heart;
Immortal life begins in death,
And smiles at his grim dart.
EPISTOLARY ODE TO A FRIEND.
I.
LIKE as Lybia's burning sand,
Or the parched Arabian plain,
Which gentle Eurus never fanned,
Would drink the unfathomable main --
So is the wretch who endless craves,
And restless pines in every state --
O place him with the worst of slaves,
Whether in high or low estate.
Heap him around with massy wealth,
High-throne him on the seat of power;
Each generous joy he will use by stealth,
While want shall prey on every hour.
Let glittering pomp allure his soul,
Or nobler fame his mind dilate;
Through complicated plagues he will roll,
And dire vexations still create.
The firstborn mortal upon earth,
When round him smiling Nature played,
With discontent was void of mirth,
Though he over every creature swayed.
II.
He who contented spends his days --
Calm as the clear unruffled stream,
His life in gentle current strays,
Mild as the maiden's silver dream.
Be he born to till the field,
Or in war the sword to wield;
If he over the midnight oil,
Wastes his life in learned toil,
Studious to instruct mankind
Where true happiness to find;
Or if over the lawless main,
He roams in search of sordid gain;
Or sorts with nobles in proud ease,
Or humble swains in cottages;
Be he with content but blessed --
He Is the happy man confessed!
III.
Listen, dear Strephon to my song --
O herd not with ambitious slaves,
Nor join thou with the vulgar throng --
Their joys unstable as the waves.
Strephon, thrice blessed with fruitful plains,
The lover of a sapient theme;
Strephon, whose sweetly-soothing strains
Flow gently as thy native stream --
O leave the ruthless scenes of war,
Unfit art thou for rude alarms,
Beside thy gentle That great river on which Philadelphia stands.
Delaware,
Come, Strephon, seek more pleasing charms.
Here, while over the fertile valleys
Thou shall tuneful stray along,
I will make repeated sallies,
To catch the transport of thy song;
Then mutual joy shall swell our soul,
Attendant to bright wisdom's strain,
While we shall quaff the friendly bowl
Far from the noisy and the vain.
PANEGYRIC ODE TO THE MEMORY OF GENERAL WOLF, SLAIN AT THE SIEGE OF QUEBEC.
I.
WHAT theme propitious to the lay;
What gallant hero shall we choose,
Whose name the sounding chord shall sway,
And fire the glowing muse?
What chief in Britain's martial train,
Has fame with palm victorious crowned,
Whose deeds upon the embattled plain,
Her golden trump shall ceaseless sound?
It Is WOLF -- Beneath the spacious sky,
A hero of sublimer name,
The searchful muse shall never descry
To consecrate with deathless fame.
II.
Where great ST. LAWRENCE rolls its awful flood,
He, daring, led Britannia's warrior-band,
Scaled its proud banks* and pierced the desert wood,
That veils the horrors of the hostile land.
Soon CANADA confessed his warlike might,
If on the plain conspicuous he appeared,
Or against Quebec's aspiring tow'ry height,
His thundering arm all-dreadfully be reared.
III.
Now lights his vengeance on the dastard foe --
So once Pelides, on the Trojan field,
(Whilst death stood glaring on his crimsoned shield)
Filled every trembling Dardan heart with woe.
Thick as loud whirlwinds strew the fading leaves,
Along the autumnal plain,
Arrayed in arms, he felled the Gallic chiefs;
A welt'ring breathless train.
IV.
What shall Britannia's wrath appease,
Or what restrain her flaming ire,
When foes disturb her sacred peace,
And with just rage her champions fire?
What glorious deeds around thee beamed.
O WOLF! on Abram's The plains near Quebec, where WOLF engaged and routed the
French, are called Abraham's Plains.
purpled plain,
When the warm sanguin'd current streamed
Of all the flower of Gallia slain?
Naught but the trumpet's martial sound,
The clang of polished arms,
The thundering steed that beats the ground,
Could fill thy soul with charms!
V.
The destined hour at length appears,
Celestial victory emits her ray,
And rids Britannia of her fears,
And echoes round propitious day:
The hills around
With joy resound,
And spread the golden tidings far;
The trident-bearing god
Mounting from his deep abode,
To Albion tells the auspicious war;
Tells how, with ancient valor fraught,
Her sons resumed paternal might;
How the intrepid Towns^nd fought,
And mighty Wolf put hosts to flight!
VI.
But while superior to all fear,
With his bold ranks the hero drove,
Over heaps of slain, in full career --
A shaft, commissioned from above,
Full to his breast with fatal speed,
Took its unerring way,
Down fell great Wolf amidst the dead,
And purpled where he lay --
"How goes the fight?" he cries,
(For round his head
Grim death was spread
And dimmed his rolling eyes.)
A generous friend replied,
"The foes are fled!"
"Enough!" he said,
And without groaning died.
VII.
Such are the chiefs that merit fair renown,
And follow bold where glory leads the way!
Such are the chiefs that grace a monarch's crown,
And from the muse demand the immortal lay!
Chiefs that from Albion's billow-beaten shore,
Can risque the perils of the Atlantic flood,
And dauntless ride through fields bedewed with gore,
To bathe their youthful arms in Gallic blood!
Proud in the cause of honor to expire,
To stem the onset of the hostile band;
And dare the deep-mouthed cannon's thund'rous fire,
To crown with joy Britannia's happy land.
Though Wolf shall shine in flaming arms no more*
Now throned in bliss above the cloudless skies;
Cease, O ye sons of Britain, to deplore,
Whilst Brunswick reigns, yet other Wolfes shall rise!
ELEGY TO THE Memory of THEOPHILUS GREW, A. M. Professor of Mathematics in the
College of PHILADELPHIA.
WHY will soft sorrow thus overwhelm my soul,
And heartfelt anguish every thought control?
To scenes of woe why will the muse retire,
And cull sad-sounding accents for the lyre?
What shade neglected asks the gentle tear,
To bathe in grief the long forgotten bier?
It Is GREW descends unheeded to the grave,
With no libation of Castalia's wave.
What though the theme transcends my artless lays,
The muse shall swell her numbers in thy praise:
The murmuring streams shall echo to the sound,
And groves responsive spread the strains around;
Slow winds shall bear the heavy notes along,
And distant hills return the mournful song.
TO enlarge the soul, and clear the dubious mind,
TO unfold celestial wonders to mankind,
To stamp bright knowledge on thy youthful care,
With sweet persuasion and endearing air,
With gentle manners to entice the heart,
Was once thy happy and peculiar art.
But snatched, alas! to you immortal plains,
Where glorious angels hymn seraphic strains;
High where you beamy orbs, resplendent, glow,
He drops a tear for this sad world below.
But GREW, thy planets downward shall be hurled,
And wild confusion sink a guilty world;
Even time's white fore-lock shall in chains be bound,
Earth melt to dross, and Cynthia cease her round.
Then shall oblivion blast the hero's fame,
The pomp of monarchs, and the poet's flame;
Then thy good name with matter's self shall blend,
Forgot the father, husband, and the friend.
Quick as the shuttle fly all human things,
Time wafts us rapid on his fleeting wings;
Soon shall the swain that tunes this plaintive lyre,
Kiss the cold earth, and all his flame expire;
Then may some muse, by tender pity moved,
Moan in soft elegy the youth she loved.
Yet blooming virtue shall triumphant rise,
Spurn the dull earth, and gain her native skies;
Then shall the just with holy raptures fired,
With charms transported, and with God inspired,
Strike their gold harps, and wake the lofty chord,
In joyful chorus round the eternal Lord!
Oh! may my soul by thy example warmed,
With Virtue's rules, and Virtue's sons be charmed;
Regard them though they shine in humble state,
Far from the glitter of the wealthy great.
Blessed man, in counsel as in sense profound,
True to thy trust, and ever blameless found;
Stranger to strife, a noble mind confessed,
No raging discord harbored in thy breast;
Peaceful thou walked this wild of "weeds and flowers,"
Where envy hisses, and blind fortune showers;
Where systems endless frantic zeal inspire,
Warm youth they madden, and cold age they fire.
Led by no mode, thou followed Nature's laws,
And trusted in the one unerring cause!
Thus passed thy footsteps through this mazy round,
Whilst thy winged genius soared to worlds around;
Till grisly death with darkness closed thy eyes,
And angels snatched thy spirit to the skies!
But GOD is wise -- then, to his righteous sway,
Submit, my muse, and cease thy plaintive lay.
A RIDDLE.
WRITTEN 1759.
BARRICADO'D with white bone,
Laboring under many a groan,
Curtain'd in my room with red,
And smoothly laid in crimson bed;
It Is I dissolve the stony heart,
And comfort's balmy joys impart;
It Is I can rule the wavering crowd,
Or tame the haughty and the proud;
It Is I over beauty often prevail,
That queen of life's capricious vale;
It Is I can fire the warrior's soul,
Or passion's giddy voice control;
Senates have felt my lordly sway,
And kings my magic power obey;
It Is I, so garrulously gay,
That rouse the dames whose heads are gray;
Gilded over with truth and lies,
Under many a mixed disguise,
I dress to cheat unpracticed youth,
With falshood's garb for honest truth;
XANTIPPE bold, in dead of night,
Taught SOCRATES to own my might!
Strange enchantress, motely creature,
Oddest prodigy of nature!
As raging billows, now I Am wild,
And now as warbling fountains mild;
Now religion's laws proclaiming,
And now the good and just defaming;
Now cementing patriotism,
And now in church provoking schism.
Enough, O muse! -- kind reason cries,
The man who has this monster dies!
Expound my riddle, if you're able,
For 'twas this confounded BABEL!
ODE ON THE PROSPECT OF PEACE. 1761.
I1.
WHEN elemental conflicts rage,
And heaven is wrapped in tempests dire,
When storms with storms dread combat wage,
And thunders roll aetherial fire; --
Returning zephyrs odorous race,
And radiant SOL'S all-chearing face,
The trembling mortals most desire.
When Eurus charged with livid clouds,
Scours over old ocean's wild domain,
And Boreas rends the vessel's shrouds,
And over her swells the raging main;
If lighter breezes should succeed,
And IRIS sweet, of varied hue,
Lift over the main her beamy head,
What raptures fill the marine crew!
Thus, when Bellona (ruthless maid!)
Her empire through the world has spread,
And death his flag has proud-display'd
Over legions that in battle bled; --
If PEACE, bedecked with olive robe,
(Resplendent nymph, sweet guest of heaven)
Transfuse her balm around the globe,
A theme of joy to man is given.
Then wake, O muse! thy sweetest lays --
Returning peace demands thy praise;
And while the notes in varied cadence sound,
Eye thou the Theban Pindar.
Swan that soars over heavenly ground.
I11.
If thou from Albion's sea-girt shore,
Adventurous muse wilt deign to rove,
Inclined remotest realms t'explore
And soothe the savage soul to love;
Hither wave thy wandering pinion,
Here be fixed thy last dominion,
Warbling in For Pennsylvania.
'Sylvania's grove.
Bright-ey'd Euphrosyne! attend,
If genial PEACE can aught avail,
With all thy graceful charms descend,
And over the youthful lyre prevail.
Bounteous PEACE with lavish hand,
To every shore thy blessings strew,
O veil the blood-polluted land,
And all thy grateful joys renew.
Thy blissful pregnant reign restore,
And calm the breasts of angry Kings;
Thy horn of Amalthean store
Open, and expand thy golden wings;
Till trade secure her treasure beams,
And science re-assumes her shades;
Till shepherds quaff untainted streams,
And hinds enjoy their native glades;
Till the glad muses strike the lyre,
And virtuous social deeds inspire;
Till the loud drum no more shall bid to arms prepare,
Nor brazen trumpets breath horrid din of war.
I111.
Auspicious power, whose salutary ray
Formed this new world, and reared her infant fame,
Extend anew thy mitigating sway,
And quell the hero's battle-breathing flame.
Ye fragrant myrtles, open your peaceful bowers,
And charm the warrior with your pleasing scenes,
Shield him with woodbine's aromatic flowers,
And for his sopha spread your velvet greens.
For him the flute mellifluous shall blow
In Lydian music, sounding soft and low,
And blooming beauty with attractive art,
Shall sweetly melt the tumults of his heart;
The nectar'd bowl with rosy garlands twined,
Shall waft his sorrows to the vagrant wind,
While the victorious laurel of renown,
In verdant wreaths his manly brows shall crown.
II1.
Too long has war's terrific train,
(The barbed spear and reeking blade)
Made nations rue their chieftains slain,
And sanguin'd every muse's shade.
From distant Volga's rapid floods,
To Canada's high-tow'ring woods,
Has the deadly cannon brayed.
From where the effulgent god of day
Impearls Arabia's spicy fields,
To where his setting lustres play --
The world to British valor yields.
How has bold CLIVE, with martial toil,
Over India born his conquering lance,
For Brunswick gained the distant soil,
And dashed the aspiring hopes of France?
Let Goree, rich with flaming ore,
Heroic KEPPEL'S acts proclaim,
And Senegal's Ivory.
Eburnean shore
Resound to future times his name
Over red Germania's hostile waste,
Britannia's chiefs have conquering shone.
Brave Elliot's warlike fates have graced
His Monarch's high illustrious throne;
And Granby's deeds the muses claim
To swell the immortal trump of fame.
But victory enough has waved her glittering wand,
With British honors graced, over every prostrate land!
II11.
Witness ye plains bedewed with gore,
So late ambitious Gallia's boast,
Where howling over the desert shore,
Was seen the genius of the coast.
Thus, leaning on her shattered spear,
She wildly wail'd in deep despair,
Her fallen towers and vanquished host --
"As Niobe (when Juno's hate
Pursued to death her tender care)
I moan my offspring's hapless fate,
And vex with sighs the passing air.
Not with less grief my bosom heaves,
Than did the breast of Hector's fire,
When slain were all his Dardan chiefs,
And Ilium blazed with Grecian fire.
For lo! where heaped with slaughtered Gauls,
Is Louisburgh a ruined pile!
Her bulwarks and stupendous walls
Are whelmed in dust and ashes vile.
Imperial Lawrence heaves with woe,
Of many a Gallic chief the grave,
And as his purple billows flow,
To hoary Neptune's coral cave,
Tells how my vaunting troops, overthrown,
Britannia's matchless prowess own;
Tells how Quebec, so late for martial might renowned,
Her rocky ramparts crushed, lies smoking on the ground.
II111.
What force can Albion's warlike sons dismay,
Dauntless who mingle in the embattled plain?
What toils dishearten, or what dangers stay?
Not rocks, nor deserts, nor the boisterous main!
How torn my laurels, by her Wolfe's dread arm!
Over mountains huge, who chased my armed band,
Roused the fierce savage, with dire war's alarm,
And hurled his thunder over my carnag'd land!
No more gay trophies shall emblaze my name,
Nor Gallia's realms re-echo with my fame.
Lost are those honors which my heroes gained,
With blood my temples and my domes are stained;
But men directed by a heavenly hand,
It Is vain, it is mad, it is impious to withstand" --
She spoke, and mounting from a lofty height,
Westward she winged her solitary flight.
III1.
Thus has Britannia's glory beamed
Wherever bright Phoebus, from his car,
To earth his cheerful rays has streamed,
A down the crystal vault of air.
Enough over Britain's shining arms,
Has victory displayed her charms,
Amid the horrid pomp of war --
Descend then, PEACE, angelic maid,
And smooth Bellona's haggard brow;
Haste to diffuse thy healing aid,
Wherever implored by scenes of woe.
Henceforth, whoever disturbs thy reign,
Or stains the world with human gore,
Be they from earth (a gloomy train!)
Banished to hell's profoundest shore;
Where vengeance, on Avernus' lake,
Rages with furious Ate bound;
And black rebellion's fetters shake,
And discord's hideous murmurs sound;
Where envy's noxious snakes entwine
H^^ temples round, in Gorgon-mood,
And bellowing faction rolls supine
Along the flame be-curled flood! --
Hence, the^, to that accursed place,
Disturbers of the human race!
And with you bear ambition wild, and selfish pride,
With persecution foul, and terror by her side.
III11.
Thus driven from earth war's horrid train --
O PEACE, thou nymph divine, draw near!
Here let the muses fix their reign,
And crown with fame each rolling year.
Source of joy and genuine pleasure,
Queen of quiet, queen of leisure,
Haste thy votaries to cheer!
Cherished beneath thy hallowed rule,
Shall Pennsylvania's glory rise;
Her sons, bred up in Virtue's school,
Shall lift her honors to the skies --
A state thrice blessed with lenient sway,
Where liberty exalts the mind;
Where plenty basks the live long day,
And pours her treasures unconfined.
Hither, ye beauteous virgins tend,
With Arts and Science by your side,
Whose skill the untutored morals mend,
And to fair honor mankind guide;
And with you bring the graces three,
To fill the soul with glory's blaze*
Whose charms give charms to poesy,
And consecrate the immortal lays" --
Such as when mighty Pindar sung,
Through the Alphean valleys rung;
Or such as, Meles, by thy lucid fountains flowed,
When bold Maeonides with heavenly transports glowed.
III111.
To such, may Delaware, majestic flood,
Lend, from his flowery banks, a ravished ear;
Such notes as may delight the wise and good,
Or saints celestial may endure to hear!
For if the muse can aught of time descry,
Such notes shall sound thy crystal waves along,
Thy cities fair with glorious Athens vie,
Nor pure Ilissus boast a nobler song.
On thy fair banks, a Fane to Virtue's name
Shall rise -- and Justice light her holy flame.
All hail then, PEACE! restore the golden days,
And round the ball diffuse Britannia's praise;
Stretch her wide empire to the world's last end,
Till Kings remotest to her scepter bend!
A RURAL ODE, Written by the Author at the Age of Sixteen.
I.
YE Dryads fair, whose temples round,
Wave wreaths of odoriferous flowers;
Lead me your Sylvan scenes amidst,
Where bloom your rosy-fringed bowers.
II.
Nymph of the wave Scene, the banks of Schuylkill, which runs by the west side
of Philadelphia, and falls into the Delaware a little below the city.
, sweet Naiad hear,
While thy clear waters banks along,
With careless steps, I pleasing stray,
And warble forth my youthful song.
III.
Now the gay rays of orient light,
Bedeck the saffron-mantled morn,
And from Favonius' balmy wing,
Drops liquid pearl on every thorn.
IV.
The gilded groves, with verdure clad,
Reflect bright Phaebus' golden beams,
While his celestial glories flame,
Down the translucent purling streams.
V.
From off each daisy-painted field,
And from the lilly-paved vales,
Zephyr collects a rich perfume,
And scents his soft cosmetic gales;
VI.
Whose honied pinions round dispense,
Hygeia's heav'n-descended store,
Chasing each noxious breath away,
And sweet'ning every fragrant shore.
VII.
Here keeps his court fresh-blushing health,
His brows with blooming garlands bound;
Here bathes him in fair Schuylkill's wave,
And sports its hills and lawns around;
VIII.
Two virgins mild his train support,
In snowy spotless robes arrayed,
One guides his will to actions pure,
And ever by one his table's spread;
IX.
These virgins twain, were ever named,
Sweet TEMPERANCE, with eye serene;
And CHASTITY, whose heavenly birth,
Was pictured in her modest mein.
X.
Still, as Aurora onward moves,
His fleecy flocks the shepherd-swain
Drives from their folds, in jovial glee,
And whitens all the verdant plain.
XI.
The fawns, with nimble-footed speed,
(Fleet as the winged passing gale)
Bound over the mountains flowery side,
Or sweep the low-descending vale.
XII.
In yonder gay-enamell'd mead,
The starling plumes his golden wings,
Then towering up the azure height,
He mounts sublime, and soaring sings.
XIII.
The yellow finch, and linnet blue,
In mattins wild salute the day,
While their sweet songs, by echo caught,
In double-sounding notes decay.
XIV.
A limpid fountain gurgling flows,
From 'midst you ivy-twisted cave;
And lo! the lovely Chloe cools
Her limbs in its translucent wave!
XV.
Deep in you old sequest'red grove,
Where the down-dashing torrents roll,
Ascends on fancy's roving wing,
The rapture-breathing poet's soul!
XVI.
Lo! foaming over the rough cascade,
The laboring billows force their way,
Then mingling with the snow-white flood,
In curling eddies onward stray;
XVII.
While down the smooth-meand'ring stream,
The shining fishes, sportive, glide;
The perch with silver-glitt'ring scales,
And trout with gold-besprinkled side.
XVIII.
These are your blessings, Sylvan maids --
The sunny hills and shady woods,
Delightful valleys, pleasant plains,
Clear skies, sweet air, and crystal floods --
XIX.
For hills ye have, (though lost to fame)
That fair as thymy Hybla show,
And fields that would with Tempe vie,
Streams that might with A river in Lydia, said to flow on golden sands;
mentioned by Horace, Iuvenal, etc.
Pactolus flow.
XX.
Here could I ever, ever rove,
And quit the world's contentious scenes --
What joy, with innocence and truth,
To wrap me in your charming greens?
XXI.
But fate and fortune adverse call,
And snatch me to the busy throng!
Adieu then, rural sweets, adieu!
And cease, thou dear-deluding song!
ODE TO A FRIEND.
Quem tu Melpomene, semel
Nascentem placido lumine videris, etc.
HOR.
I.
THRICE blessed is he, whose placid birth
The warbling Muses hovered round;
Novice to all the ills of earth,
While wrapped in music's soothing sound.
II.
If stern Bellona's thundering ire,
Hurls the proud Monarch from his throne,
He whom the sacred Nine inspire
Shall make each fleeting hour his own.
III.
Let Gaul with Belgia's arms unite,
And haughty Spain resume her rage;
He whom Castalia's streams delight,
Shall every rising fear assuage.
IV.
If hostile savages alarm,
And threatening warriors fill each plain,
Sweet poesy his grief shall charm,
And sportive breezes steal his pain.
V.
If grisly death, with terrors crowned,
His heav'n-attender'd soul dismay;
Hark! he awakes the enchanting sound,
And every spectre shrinks away.
VI.
But when resplendent beauty's train
Commands the soft accordant lyre;
What transports breathe in every strain,
And kindle Love's celestial fire!
VII.
Her cheeks he paints as blushing dawn,
Her eyes to dim Apollo's rays,
Her breath more balmy than lawn
When round the orient luster plays.
VIII.
Yet if fair Friendship's hallowed flame
In his enraptured bosom glows,
His strain still rises with his theme,
Each note still more divinely flows.
IX.
Let wretched misers clasp their ore,
And vulgar breasts in sense delight;
The muse shall purer joys explore,
And wing a more exalted flight.
HYMN TO MAY.
I.
NOW had the beam of Titan gay
Ushered in the blissful May,
Scattering from his pearly bed,
Fresh dew on every mountain's head;
Nature mild and debonnair,
To thee, fair maid, yields up her care.
May, with gentle plastic hand,
Clothes in flowery robe the land;
Over the vales the cowslips spreads,
And eglantine beneath the shades;
Violets blue befringe each fountain,
Woodbines lace each steepy mountain;
Hyacinths their sweets diffuse,
And the rose its blush renews;
With the rest of Flora's train,
Decking lowly dale or plain.
II.
Through creation's range, sweet May!
Nature's children own thy sway --
Whether in the crystal flood,
Amorous, sport the finny brood;
Or the feathered tribes declare,
That they breathe thy genial air,
While they warble in each grove
Sweetest notes of artless love;
Or their wound the beasts proclaim,
Smitten with a fiercer flame;
Or the passion higher rise,
Sparing none beneath the skies,
But swaying soft the human mind
With feelings of extatic kind --
Through wide creation's range, sweet May!
All Nature's children own thy sway.
III.
Often will I, (ever Phosphor's The Morning Star.
light
Quits the glimmering skirts of night)
Meet thee in the clover-field,
Where thy beauties thou shall yield
To my fancy, quick and warm,
Listening to the dawn's alarm,
Sounded loud by The Cock.
Chanticleer,
In peals that sharply pierce the ear.
And, as Sol his flaming car
Urges up the vaulted air,
S(...) quick the scorching ray,
I (...) some covert stray;
Coolly bowers or latent dells,
Where light-footed silence dwells,
And whispers to my heaven-born dream,
Fair Schuylkill by thy winding stream!
There I Will devote full many an hour,
To the still-finger'd Morphean-pow'r,
And entertain my thirsty soul
With draughts from Fancy's fairy bowl;
Or mount her orb of varied hue,
And scenes of heaven and earth review.
IV.
Nor in milder Eve's decline,
As the sun forgets to shine,
And slopping down the aetherial plain,
Plunges in the Western main,
Will I forbear due strain to pay
To the song-inspiring May*
But as The Evening Star.
Hesper 'gins to move
Round the radiant court of Jove,
(Leading through the azure sky
All the starry progeny,
Emitting prone their silver light,
To re-illume the shades of night)
Then, the dewy lawn along,
I Will carol forth my grateful song,
Viewing with transported eye
The blazing orbs that roll on high,
Beaming luster, bright and clear,
Over the glowing hemisphere.
Thus from the early-blushing morn,
Till the dappled eve's return,
Will I, in free unlabored lay,
Sweetly sing the charming May!
AN ANACREONTIC ODE.
HENCE with sorrow, spleen and care!
Muse, awake the jocund air;
Wreathe thy brows in myrtle twine,
And assist the gay design;
Strike the trembling string with pleasure,
Till it sound the enchanting measure.
Avaunt! thou fiend, pale melancholy!
We are mortals free and jolly,
Who delight to lose the soul,
In the joy-inspiring bowl --
Fill the foaming chalice high,
Till it speak with ecstasy;
With rosy garland crown the wine,
And steep Nepenthe, herb divine,
In the bright nectareous cup,
Till it swallow sadness up.
Wine can dullest mortals raise,
To deeds of glory, deeds of praise;
If the warrior's breast it warms,
Quick he burns for glorious arms,
And nightly dreams of battles dire,
Of giants huge in steel attire;
Battlements he, proud, o'erthrows,
And rides amidst a thousand foes.
Thus, when Philip's dauntless son,
With his drinking bouts had done,
He rushed a whirlwind on the plain,
And mountain'd it with heaps of slain.
If wine inspires the tuneful band,
Who can the glowing strain withstand?
Floods of music, all divine,
Pour along in every line;
And the wild Dithyrambic strain,
Rushes through the poet's brain.
Alcaeus loved the purple juice;
Sprightly Flaccus felt its use;
And the sweet Anacreon,
Warbled best when half-seas gone.
Ivy-crown'd BACCHUS hail!
And, over my reeling song prevail!
SONG. EXTEMPORE.
I.
THE sprightly eye, the rosy cheek,
The dimpled chin, and look so meek,
The nameless grace and air;
The ruby lip in sweetness dressed,
The softly-swelling angel breast --
All these adorn my fair!
II.
See! what unnumber'd beauties rove
Around each feature of my love,
And fire my rapturous soul!
Ten thousand sweets her looks disclose;
At every look my bosom glows,
And yields to love's control.
III.
Just heavens! why gave ye charms like these,
With every graceful art to please,
To her whom rigid fate,
Permits me not my pain to tell,
And makes me sacred truth conceal
From one I wish my mate.
IV.
Curse on the sordid thirst of gold!
When tenderest passions all are sold
To win the world's applause;
When, for desire, and love, and joy,
Low interest shall our hours employ,
And gain the ignoble cause.
TO SYLVIA.
A SONG, After her recovery from a fit of sickness.
I.
WHEN at bleak WINTER'S stern command,
Fair nature's blooming beauties fade,
And the sad groves all leafless stand,
And withered is each pleasing shade;
II.
No nightingale, or linnet gay,
Is heard to wake the sprightly strain,
No turtle pours her love-lorn lay,
To sooth the soul of amorous swain.
III.
But when the jovial hours appear,
That usher in the vernal breeze,
When young-ey'd spring bedecks the year,
And clothes in verdant robe the trees;
IV.
The feathered choristers prepare
To swell the gratulating song,
While through the soft expanse of air,
Wild Music sweetly floats along.
V.
So when my Sylvia, lovely maid!
Is by the touch of sickness pained,
When on her cheeks the roses fade,
And with pale white her lips are stained;
VI.
Oh then! my heart, oppressed with woe
And inward anguish, pines away;
Nor from my lips does music flow,
A stranger to the warbling lay --
VII.
But if the charming nymph renews
The lively look, and health's soft bloom;
Into my breast it does infuse
New life, and dissipates my gloom.
VIII.
Soon then I snatch the willing reed,
And soon it sounds my Sylvia's name;
My wondering flocks forget to feed,
And listen while I tell my flame.
IX.
Again the smiling sparkling eye
Beams luster over her heavenly face;
Again the cheek of vermil dye
Sheds, blushful round, its wonted grace --
X.
Again her heaving breasts betray
A passion of sublimer kind;
There all the loves and graces play,
And there the unerring archer Cupid.
blind.
XI.
Again I clasp her round, in bliss,
And press the yielding melting palm;
Again I steal the ambrosial kiss
From lips distilling sweetest balm!
SONG.
I.
OFTEN had I laughed at female power,
And slighted Venus' chain --
Then cheerful sped each fleeting hour,
Unknown to eating pain;
II.
By Stoic rules, severely taught,
To scorn bright beauty's charms,
Sage wisdom swayed each rising thought,
And wooed me to her arms;
III.
Till Sylvia, heavenly Sylvia, came,
Sweet pleasure played her round;
Her lucid eyes snot forth a flame,
That hardest hearts would wound.
IV.
Quick from my breast each bold resolve,
In empty ether slew;
My limbs in trembling bliss dissolve,
All wet with chilling dew.
V.
O charmer! cease that ardent gaze,
Nor rob me of my rest;
Such lightning from those eyelids plays,
It burns my tortured breast.
VI.
Deluded swains, who, vainly proud,
Assume gay freedom's air,
And, boastful, scorn the prostrate crowd
That sigh before the fair!
VII.
If once fair Sylvia you should meet,
And view her heavenly mien;
To Love converted, at her feet,
You Will hug the pleasing chain.
AN ODE, Attempted in the Manner of HORACE, TO MY INGENIOUS FRIEND, MR. See an
account of the THOMAS GODFREYS, farther and son, in the American Magazine. The
above little ode is addressed to the son. Mr. Evans and he were intimate in
life, and in death not long divided. They possessed a kind of congenial
spirits, and their fates were not dissimilar. Both courted the Muses from their
very infancy; and both were called from this world as they were but entering
into their state of manhood. On Mr. Godfrey's death, Mr. ^vans collected and
published his pieces in a small volume, and soon afterward left his own pieces
to the like friendly care of others.
THOMAS GODFREY.
I.
WHILE you, dear TOM, are forced to roam.
In search of fortune, far from home,
Over bogs, over seas and mountains;
I too, debarred the soft retreat
Of shady groves, and murmur sweet
Of silver-prattling fountains,
II.
Must mingle with the bustling throng*
And bear my load of cares along,
Like any other sinner:
For, where is the ecstasy in this,
To loiter in poetic bliss,
And go without a dinner?
III.
FLACCUS, we know, immortal bard!
With mighty kings and statesmen fared,
And lived in cheerful plenty:
But now, in those degenerate days,
The slight reward of empty praise,
Scarce one receives in twenty.
IV.
Well might the Roman swan, along
The pleasing Tiber, pour his song,
When blessed with ease and quiet;
Often did he grace Maecenas' board,
Who would for him throw by the lord,
And in Falernian riot*
V.
But, dearest TOM! these days are past,
And we are in a climate cast
Where few the muse can relish;
Where all the doctrine now that is told,
Is that a shining heap of gold
Alone can man embellish.
VI.
Then since it is thus, my honest friend,
If you be wise, my strain attend,
And counsel sage adhere to;
With me, henceforward, join the crowd,
And like the rest proclaim aloud,
That MONEY is all VIRTUE!
VII.
Then may we both, in time, retreat
To some fair villa, sweetly neat,
To entertain the muses;
And then life's noise and trouble leave --
Supremely blessed, we'll never grieve
At what the world refuses.
A SONG TO MIRA; ON PARTING.
I.
CAN my MIRA leave her lover?
Two long-ling'ring months to part --
World of time! Thou gentle rover,
Where, O where is thy tender heart?
II.
Will thou thus thy person sever
From my eyes and from my arms?
For two tedious months, I never
More shall view thy heavenly charms!
III.
When, in some fair streams meander,
Thou thy beauteous looks shall trace,
May sweet echo cry, -- "Philander
"Claims, as his, that angel-face." --
IV.
When thou tread'st, in blooming luster,
Some gay meadow's flowery side,
And gay youths around thee cluster,
To behold fair Nature's pride;
V.
Then, Oh then, my Mira! mind thee
To beware each shepherd's art;
Know that heaven and love designed thee
Mistress of Philander's heart.
VI.
Then remember each sweet hour
That in pleasing pain we have spent,
When Cupid, in triumphant power,
Through our hearts his arrows sent.
VII.
Think, how by each other sighing,
We confessed the mutual flame,
Looking, melting, panting, dying --
Joy was then too weak a name!
VIII.
Think on these, and never yield thee
To a heart less true than mine;
Then shall heaven's bright angels shield thee,
As a being half-divine!
VERSES FOR THE NEW-YEAR 1762 It is a custom in Philadelphia, for the lads that
deliver out the newspapers, to present to the customers, on New Year's Day, a
copy of verses, reciting some of the most signal occurrences and transactions
of the past year, for which they commonly receive a small gratuity. These
verses are generally the composition of such young Bards as the printers lads
can make interest with. Mr. Evans was prevailed upon to write for 1762, 1763;
but as the principal occurrences of those years were the subject of some of his
odes, the repetition of several of the same thoughts became almost unavoidable.
And indeed, these New Years'-Day productions, are to be considered rather as
good-natured compliances of the Muse, than the true and genuine fruits of her
inspiration.
.
STILL as emerges from the womb of time,
Each circling ^ear, you claim our humble rhyme;
But where is the muse* whose fiery numbers best,
Shall rouse heroic ardor in each breast?
To wing the flight where conquest leads the way,
Transcends our song, and mocks the feeble lay.
Such themes sublime best suit a rapturous lyre,
And bards transported with poetic fire --
Yet when inspired with Britain's glorious fame,
What bosom glows not with the hallowed flame?
When angry Gallia poured her hostile train,
Intent on plunder, over the Atlantic main;
Strangers to arms, we knew no murderous art,
Nor crimson faulchion, nor the poisonous dart,
From earliest youth, instructed to abhor
The deadly engines of destructive war;
The cannon's sound, as dire assailed our ears,
As Jove's red thunder, when he shakes the spheres.
Yet to our aid when mighty Brunswick came,
It kindled in each breast the martial flame;
Undaunted as our warlike troops advance,
To walls, inglorious, shrink the sons of France;
Their cities stormed, their chiefs in fetters bound,
And their proud ramparts levelled with the ground.
Over this new world, thus has Britannia's arms
Restored lost peace, and exiled war's alarms;
Again rich commerce crowns the merchant's toil,
And smiling Ceres paints the pregnant soil.
Thus the good shepherd, when he views from far
The deadly wolves beset his fleecy care,
Quick to their help his guardian crook he wields,
And soon the prowling throng is scattered over the fields.
Yet not to us is Britain's care confined,
Her fame is wafted to remotest Ind;
By justice called, her chiefs, with matchless swords,
Have humbled mighty Asia's proudest lords;
Far distant scenes her martial deeds proclaim,
And Pondicherry bows to Britain's name.
See the sad chance of all-destructive war --
See LALLY captived at the victor's car;
Lally, whose soul the madd'ning furies claim,
And cursed with longings for the voice of fame.
So when a tiger, flushed with reeking blood,
Ramps over the plains, and tears the leafy wood,
A lion spies him from his secret cave,
Bursts from his stand, to seize the insulting slave;
Then hunts him, generous, from the neighboring fields*
And peace and safety to the forest yields.
Over Europe too, great George's arms prevail,
And on its seas his fleets triumphant sail;
Witness Belleisle, around whose wave-worn shore
His navies ride, and his loud cannons roar.
Oh! could we boast the seeds of epic song,
Immortal Frederick should the verse prolong;
The chief should shine, enclosed with fields of dead,
And guardian-angels hovering round his head;
There, in dread chains, the barbarous Russ should b^^,
And here, submissive, kneel the Hungarian foe;
There should be seen to bend, the sons of Gaul,
Here lesser troops, his enemies, should fall.
Thus a firm rock, begirt with raging waves,
Stands the fierce charge, though all the tempest raves;
Now round his summit dash the broken tides,
And vainly beat his adamantine sides!
But these we leave to deck the historic page,
And wake the wonder of a future age.
Now let our muse the Paphian trumpet blow,
Beauty's the theme, and melting strains shall flow.
See Neptune, mounting with his nereid train,
To smooth the surface of the azure main;
As conscious of his charge, he joys to please
The beauteous CHARLOTTE, mistress of the seas!
The jovial sailors ply their shining oars,
And now they reach fair Albion's white-cliff shores;
With warbling flutes, and hautboy's pleasing sound*
They spread sweet music's silver notes around.
On Cydnus stream, so once arrayed was seen
Fair Cleopatra, Egypt's beauteous Queen.
But here we fix, rejoiced to see you blessed,
And Britain's glory in each clime confessed!
N. B. The New Year's Verses for 1763, are omitted, the substance of them being
included in the Poem, entitled, HEROIC STANZAS on the successes of 1762, p. 64,
etc.
AN ODE, On completing my One and Twentieth Year of Age.
FATHER Time.
of old oblivion, hail!
Restrain thy swift-revolving glass;
If soothing verse can ought avail,
To charm thy moments as they pass.
Still shall I let thee onward glide,
To waft me down thy boundless tide,
And unimprov'd remain my soul,
When twenty-one quick summers from me thou have stole?
Adieu! amusements of my youth,
My childhood and my boyish days!
For virtue, probity, and truth,
I quit my sports and frolic lays!
Yet will remembrance bring to view,
The years, in playful bliss, that flew,
When careless of the passing hours,
My whistle sweet I blew, or culled the muse's flowers!
Then often in Schuylkill's silver wave,
Or Delaware's majestic tide,
My limbs, delighted, would I lave,
Or through the foamy billow's glide;
Then chase the plover over the brake,
Or treach'ry cast along the lake,
Pleased to delude the finny fry,
The perch with glittering scales, or trout of golden dye.
Often too, as Sol's resplendent ray
With ardour beamed through Cancer's sign,
Would I the river's margent stray,
Or on its velvet brink recline.
Then would Fancy open her treasures,
Pouring on the mind new pleasures,
Unlocking all her fairy scenes
Of gay enameled groves and sweet Elysian greens.
How would she then uncurtain fate,
And snatch the soul to yonder sky,
Events unknown to man create,
And read concealed futurity?
Or, ages old revolving over,
Their worthies place my eyes before;
Hero or patriot, saint or sage,
Or who ever smote the lyre with bold poetic rage.
Flushed with these glowing visions bright,
What noble frenzy seized the soul!
Each phantom then of dear delight
Would round the impassioned eye balls roll;
Then over my temples often the muse
Vouchsafed to shed nectareous dews;
How would I eye her ivy crown,
And pant, in youthful heat, for deathless fair renown?
But hence, ye dear delusions all,
It Is time I tear you from my breast;
Methinks! I hear sweet Reason call,
"Be not with empty dreams possessed!"
Away, ye pleasing shades away,
I brook no longer fond delay --
Reluctant still ye from me fly,
Your airy forms I see yet flit before my eye!
But come, thou habitant of heaven!
Inspirer of each gallant deed;
Virtue, bright queen, to whom it is given
The soul for purer joys to breed;
High-arch'd, over you cerulean plain,
Sublimely shines thy sacred fane,
The graces wait its portals nigh,
Which perfect shall endure through vast eternity.
Come, and thy gracious aid impart,
Each perishing pursuit to tame;
O root out folly from my heart,
And thou the full possession claim.
Each roving wish, each vain desire,
O purge with thy celestial fire;
What is the world's, the people's gaze?
Hence with the bubble fame, and idle breath of praise!
Whether, adown the stream of time,
I pass with easy prosperous sails;
Or over its waves I painful climb,
Forlorn and tossed by stormy gales;
Still let me check the wanton breeze,
Nor be absorbed in slothful ease;
But steadfast steer, when tempests rise
That rend my shattered bark, or mount it to the skies.
So come what will, the adverse scene,
Or fortune's gay alluring smile,
Still shall I keep my soul serene,
Superior to all sinful guile;
Then, whether Fate's resistless shears,
Shall clip my thread in ripened years;
Or, in my Prime, my doom be spoke,
Undaunted shall I yield, and fearless meet the stroke.
HEROIC STANZAS, On the Successes of his MAJESTY'S Arms, and the Greatness of
the ENGLISH NATION; 1762.
I.
HAIL sacred muse! thou harbinger of fame,
To Britain's glory sound the lofty rhyme;
A pleasing task her greatness to proclaim,
And stamp her honors on the page of time.
II.
For sure, the praises of her warlike train,
To the harmonious deathless lyre belong;
For them, sweet CLIO, raise the rapturous strain,
And the rich tide of music pour along.
III.
As when the monarchs of the bestial race,
Triumphant, rove the sterile Lybian sand;
The tiger fierce, and lordly pard they chase,
Nor dare the trembling flocks their rage withstand;
IV.
Or, as the sovereigns of the briny flood,
From shore to shore, imperial, cleave their way;
Before them fly the fearful finny brood,
And all confess their wide-extended sway;
So when Britannia lifts her glittering spear,
Her ensigns blazing over the embattl'd field;
Heart-struck with awe, and chilled with instant fear,
Her foes inglorious fly, or trembling yield.
VI.
Or if some BLAKE her navies, vengeful, lead
Over the wide bosom of the surging wave;
At her red flag, her enemies, filled with dread,
Shrink to their ports, or find a watery grave.
VII.
Not Carthage old, for opulence renowned,
Nor Tire, long noted for her purple dye;
Nor aught that in the historic page is found,
With Britain's isle in wealth and strength can vie.
VIII.
Here Is is fair COMMERCE to earth's distant end,
Whether rich India yields her spicy store,
Or Persian looms their silken beauties blend,
Or mines Peruvian give the glittering ore.
IX.
True to her ports, her numerous vessels bear
The costly freight from each prolific soil;
Soft Persia's silks, and India's spice, we share,
And gold Peruvian gain without the toil*
X.
Well does Britannia the fair path pursue,
Which ancient Rome with glory trod before;
Abroad, each haughty tyrant to subdue,
At home, t'encrease each happy subject's store.
XI.
Won by the valor of her martial bands,
Lo! this new world boasts her auspicious name;
Scant are the tracts the lordly Gaul commands,
And lessened proud Iberia's ample claim.
XII.
Through you fair isles that grace the western main,
Like gems bespangling Neptune's azure vest,
Or stars that deck the blue etherial plain,
The feats of British heroes are confessed.
XIII.
Struck with the thought, I feel unusual fire,
When MARTINICO is the glorious theme --
Heroic deeds heroic songs inspire,
And fill the bard with all the warrior's flame.
XIV.
See the brave youths, as breathes the trump of war,
Tremendous, rushing on the armed foe;
With mingled shouts they wield the deadly spear,
And over the field the crimson torrents flow.
XV.
The intrepid chiefs their fiery steeds impel,
Where glows the fury of the battle dire,
Where shrill-voic'd clamor lifts her stunning yell,
And ghastly terror rolls his eyes of fire.
XVI.
The astonished foes, as MONCKTON'S bands advance,
Fly to the hills, or shrink to dreary caves;
Over them black horror shakes his iron lance,
And desolation her dread banner waves.
XVII.
So when the princely eagles sail the sky,
If aught of meaner fowl oppose their flight,
Soon hurled headlong from the realms on high,
Vanquished, they seek to hide their heads in night.
XVIII.
Nor stop we yet the current of our verse,
Still other heroes claim our rapturous lays;
Brave ALBEMARLE'S exploits, O muse! rehearse,
And waft, to distant times, his well-earn'd praise.
XIX.
Let youths unborn say how the Iberian fled,
Before the British chieftan's conquering host;
How, over the field, Havannah's pride was spread,
And Moro's ramparts levelled with the dust.
XX.
Nor blush, O muse! thy chaplet to bestow
On him who led the unhappy sons of Spain;
Be virtue honored, or in friend or foe,
Or in Britannia's, or Iberia's, train.
XXI.
Thus fought Rome's champion, Africanus bold,
And thus the dauntless Hannibal withstood;
Till Latian Ardor, Punic rage, controlled,
And drenched the fields with Carthaginian blood.
XXII.
Thus shine the acts of GEORGE'S glorious day,
Illustrious Prince, with early honors crowned;
Ordained by heaven a matchless race to sway,
In arms victorious, as in arts renowned!
XXIII.
Give way ye wonders of an ancient date!
Enough have lived old Cressy and Poitiers;
Henry and Edward long have shone in state,
And Alfred's name subdued a waste of years.
XXIV.
These once over Europe spread their glories wide --
But now new worlds our Monarch's scepter own,
And though the deep his distant realms divide,
In every subject's heart is fixed his throne.
XXV.
Happy this America.
Tract of rich productive soil
(No more the dwelling of a savage race)
Where golden harvests crown the peasant's toil,
And cheerful plenty gladdens every face.
XXVI.
But happier still, if war's sad scenes were over,
And widows ceased to mourn their husbands slain;
When Peace shall spread her reign from shore to shore,
And orphans for their sires no more complain.
XXVII.
Then might the Muses (sweet celestial Maids!)
In this fair land vouchsafe to fix their seat;
Nor leaving A city in Boeotia, at the foot of Parnassus.
Thespiae's ever-pleasing shades,
Would the harmonious Sisters then regret.
XXVIII.
Much boots it us to court their sacred lore,
To generous deeds to animate the soul,
The sage instruction over the mind to pour,
And all the giddy passions to control;
XXIX.
To brand proud Folly, and bold Vice to shame,
To teach that Wealth is but a transient joy,
To show that Honor is the road to fame,
And Virtue is true bliss, without alloy.
XXX.
Such are the maxims which the sacred Nine
Delight to warble over the deathless lyre;
Such are the garlands they delight to twine;
Then hither haste ye soul-exalting Choir --
N. B. The foregoing verses seem to have undergone several corrections from the
Author since their first publication; but the stanzas that follow in the
manuscript are too much unfinished to be added, without making alterations that
would not be justifiable.
AN EXERCISE; CONTAINING, A DIALOGUE AND ODE ON OCCASION OF THE PEACE.
Performed at the PUBLIC COMMENCEMENT in the COLLEGE of PHILADELPHIA, May 17th,
1763.
Oh! stretch thy reign, fair PEACE! from shore to shore,
'Till conquest cease, and slavery be no more;
'Till the freed Indians, in their native groves,
Reap their own fruits and woo their sable loves.
POPE.
Pacatumque reget patriis virtutibus orbem.
VIRG.
A DIALOGUE, etc. HORATIO, PALEMON, PHILANDER.
HORATIO. WHEN flourished Athens with the Grecian reign,
And lived her heroes, an illustrious train!
When by her arms each neighboring state was swayed
And kings an homage to her warriors paid;
Even then those chiefs, with rev'rent awe adored
The fane of Pallas more than Mars's sword;
(And Latium's lords, who all the world subdued,
Low'r'd their proud This passage alludes to an incident which Pliny informs us
of, that when Pompey was about to enter the house of Posidonius, a man renowned
for his profession of philosophy, he forbad the lictor to strike the door,
according to custom; and he to whom the east and the west had submitted,
lowered his fasces to the gate of letters.
fasces to the learned and good;)
And with less glory in the rolls of fame,
Shines every hero's than each sage's name.
Hail blessed Ilissus! in whose sacred shade,
The muses warbled and the graces strayed;
There the deep Stagirite his pupils taught,
And Plato lay intranc'd in heavenly thought.
This joyful day, in miniature has showed,
Scenes that enraptured Athens would have viewed;
Science triumphant! and a land refined,
Where once rude ignorance swayed the untutored mind;
Of uncouth forms no more the dark retreat,
Transformed to virtue's and the muse's seat.
Welcome! thrice welcome, ye who grace our dome,
To Wisdom's schools so thronged the sons of Rome;
To fire their youth, and nurse their rising taste!
So the wise Greeks the fair Lyceum graced,
Come, then, my friends, your notes mellifluous pour,
And the soft soul of harmony explore;
With melting strains the happy day prolong,
What more enchanting than the charms of song?

PALEMON. Joyous we join thee in the choral lay,
To add new transports to this blissful day;
To trace the muses to their hallowed spring,
Catch the sweet sounds, and as they fire us, sing.
The pleasing theme, Philander, shall be thine,
To wake the raptures of the immortal Nine;
Say, in thy breast what sprightly thoughts arise,
Illume thy face, and kindle in thine eyes?

PHILANDER. Not with more pleasure over the fragrant lawn
Sports the fleet hare, or bounds the exulting fawn,
When to black storms succeeds the solar ray,
And gilds each beauty of the smiling day,
Than my heart gladdens at the dawn of peace,
As wrath subsides, and war's loud tumults cease.
George gave the word -- and bade mankind repose --
Contending Monarchs blushed that they were foes.
Old warriors now with rage shall glow no more,
But reap the fields their valor won before.
Such is the subject which my soul enjoyed,
In my eyes sparkled, and my thought employed.

HORATIO. Auspicious theme! for which shall be displayed
The richest chaplets of the Aonian shade.
How bright the scene! unsullied days arise,
And golden prospects rush before my eyes!
Hail smiling goddess in whose placid mein,
Celestial bliss with every grace is seen;
Over thy smooth brow no rugged helmet frowns,
An olive wreath thy shining temple crowns.
Far shall thou banish barbarous strife and woe,
With purple vengeance to the realms below.

PALEMON. Stern chiefs no more their crimsoned blade, shall wield,
Nor deadly thunders bellow over the field;
Satiate of war, the battle-breathing steed
Peaceful shall range the grove and verdant mead;
No drum shall animate the soldier's breast,
Nor piercing fife arouse him from his rest;
The trump shrill-sounding, and the clang of arms,
Shall shake the plain no more with dire alarms.

PHILANDER. The useless rampart shall its strength resign,
And over the bastion spread the curling vine;
The aspiring ivy round old towers shall stray,
And in the trenches harmless flocks shall play;
The crystal streams shall flow without a stain,
The groves bloom spotless, and each flowery plain;
Countries oppressed by war's destructive rage,
Again revive to bless a milder age;
In the same fields where groves of lances rose,
The furrowed grain shall golden ranks compose.

HORATIO. Oh haste fair peace! begin thy pleasing reign;
Come, with each lovely virtue in thy train;
Then pure Religion's precepts shall prevail,
Impartial justice poize her balanced scale;
Bright liberty shall wanton in the breeze,
Innoxious pleasure, philosophic ease,
Heart-cheering mirth, and plenty ever gay,
With rosy joy shall tend thy gentle sway!

PALEMON. Haste then, O haste, thy softening power renew,
Bless every clime, the old world and the new!
In friendly league, unite each distant shore,
And bid mankind with anger burn no more.
Commerce shall then expand without control,
Where coasts extend, or farthest oceans roll;
These spacious realms their treasures shall unfold,
And Albion's shores shall blaze with Indian gold.

PHILANDER. Hail! happy Britain, in a Sovereign blessed,
Who deems in Kings a virtuous name the best;
Guardian of right and sacred liberty,
Rome's glorious Numa shall be seen in thee;
Beneath thy smile fair Science shall increase,
And form one reign of Learning and of Peace.
Even we who now attempt the muse's shell,
Great George's kind Alluding to his Majesty's granting and subscribing so
graciously to the Brief for the establishment of the Colleges of Philadelphia
and New York.
munificence can tell,
Though far removed from his illustrious throne,
Yet have these walls his regal bounty known.
Thus universal shines the god of day,
Each land enlight'ning with his genial ray.

HORATIO. Enough, my friends! -- ye sweeter numbers flow,
And let the deep ton'd swelling organ blow;
Ye tuneful qui^e, your dulcet warblings join,
And sooth the attentive soul with harmony divine.

ODE, WRITTEN BY PAUL JACKSON, A. M.
I.
SMILING Pleasure's festive band
Swift descends to bless our land,
Sweet Content, and Joy, and Love,
Happy offsprings from above!
No more fell discord calls aloud to war,
Her crimson banners flaming from afar.
CHORUS.
Blessed era, hail! with thee shall cease
Of war the wasting train;
On thee attendant, white robbed peace
In triumph comes again.
II.
Where the grim savage devastation spread,
And drenched in gore his execrable hand;
Where prowling wolves late wandered over the dead,
And repossess'd the desolated land;
There beauteous villages and cheerful farms
Now variegate the far extended plain;
And there the swain, secure from future harms,
Delighted, views his fields and waving grain.
CHORUS.
Blessed era, hail! with thee shall cease
Of war the wasting train;
On thee attendant, white-rob'd peace
In triumph comes again.
III.
Haste ye muses, and explore
The tawny chief on Erie's shore;
Or among the forests wide,
That imbrown Ontario's side;
Bid him quick his bow unbend,
Hateful war is at an end;
And bid the Sire of rivers is a translation of the word Mississippi.
sire of rivers, as he runs,
The joy proclaim to all his swarthy sons.
CHORUS.
Blessed era, hail! with thee shall cease
Of war the wasting train;
On thee attendant, white-rob'd peace
In triumph comes again.
IV.
May Britain's glory still increase,
Her fame immortal be,
Whose sons make war to purchase peace,
And conquer to set free.
Such power is like the star of day,
That cheers the realms of night,
Before whose beam each beast of prey,
To darkness speeds his flight;
And may it grow, till round the earthly ball,
Science and liberty illumine all!
CHORUS.
Blessed era, come! when war shall cease,
With all her wasting train;
And justice, innocence, and peace
Through endless years remain.
PSALM XCVII. Paraphrased.
THERE is in no collection of devout compositions a greater diversity of matter
than in the Psalms of DAVID. They appear to have been penned while the author
was under the immediate impression of those feelings which he so admirably
describes; whether of religious pensiveness, devout contemplation, admiration
of God's attributes, pious joy, gratitude, and thanksgiving, arising from the
various state of his mind or temporal affairs. They are, therefore, wonderfully
fitted and adapted to the case of men in general, who, at one time or other,
are in some of those situations, and actuated by the same sensations: And as
they are written with great fervor of spirit, solidity of understanding,
strength of fancy, and a soul illuminated by divine inspiration, it is not to
be wondered that they have so often charmed the best and greatest geniuses. --
Sundry of our most celebrated English poets have employed their pens in
rendering diverse of those excellent pieces into verse -- and there is not a
sublimer and more musical poem in the compositions of Addison, than that which
is wrought out of the 19th psalm.

I have thus far premised, to induce, if possible, those youths among us, who
have enjoyed the advantage of a liberal education, and have leisure for
literary pursuits and a taste and capacity for poetry, which some have lately
evinced, to turn their talents toward such instructive performances. -- The
Holy Scriptures are the true fountain from which to extract the richest
draughts of poesy, both as to dignity of matter and embellishment of figures;
witness the noble use the great Milton made of them in his mavelous poems,
and though few must expect to reach to such heights as did that prodigy of
learning and genius, yet all, according to their ability, may follow his
illustrious example; and if we would wish to excel and atchieve any thing great
and laudable, we should always look to a mark superior to ourselves.

The 145th psalm, in particular, one of those paraphrased below, is a most
beautiful picture of the Supreme Being, whom the Psalmist extols for those
amiable attributes, which most of all must ^ffect men with joy, as subjects of
God's moral government, his goodness and mercy. Such a theme needs no apology;
and as to the present handling of it, if it should excite others, of a similar
taste, who, like the Author, may sometimes have an hour in the country
unoccupied by duty, business, or friends, which they would wish rationally to
employ in such like amusements, he hopes it will plead his excuse.

PSALM XCVII. PARAPHRASED.
EXULT, O earth! ye nations sound his praise,
One God supreme, with power unbounded sways;
Offspring of nature! the glad tidings hear,
The eternal Ruler makes the world his care;
Enthroned sublime, with awful glory crowned,
Vindictive thunders his bright seat surround;
Robbed in thick clouds his rapid lightning flies,
And hurls destruction on his enemies;
Celestial righteousness, with truth her own,
And perfect justice form his sacred throne;
This rolling ball he poured his light around,
And the world trembled to its utmost bound;
Mountains, whose brows in lofty ether nod,
Melt at the presence of the all-potent God.
Omniscient Lord! immaculate, divine,
Through all creation's frame thy glories shine!
Suns, at thy word, illume each distant pole,
Earth teams with joy and azure oceans roll.
Abashed, confused be those who, vain, adore
Idols of wood, or bend to imag'd ore;
Before his throne let gods and mortals all
In grateful adoration prostrate fall.
The ardent strain, lo! joyous Zion heard,
And Judah's nymphs their tuneful voices reared,
Praising transported, and in sweet accord,
Thy holy judgments, ever-righteous Lord.
For thou, Great Monarch of this mighty Whole!
Do all the powers of heaven and earth control.
Ye mortals, who to love divine aspire,
From vice polluting and foul sin retire;
Fix on the law of heaven your steady gaze,
And Wisdom's self shall pleased protect your ways.
Those who thy laws, all-gracious Sire, obey,
Are crowned with bliss, in realms of endless day.
Wake then, ye virtuous! wake the rapturous lays,
Join the loud choir of universal praise!
Hail! highest Sovereign! Godhead infinite!
Supreme in glory, majesty and might!
PSALM CXLV. PARAPHRASED.
I.
TO Thee, all-bounteous Lord and King,
My muse in sweetest strains shall sing;
Her morning and her evening lays,
Shall warble forth thy glorious praise.
Nor ever shall my grateful soul,
Forget thy goodness to extol.
Of power and wisdom, source immense!
Unsearchable to mortal sense!
From age to age, the human race
Through all thy works, the GOD shall trace,
Declaring to their progeny,
The wonders of thy majesty.
I too will join the adoring throng,
Thy name shall dignify my song,
And with thy acts my tongue shall sound,
Responsive to the world around.
II.
The world around with heaven shall join,
To tell that thou art love divine;
Compassion, grace, and mercy sweet,
Hover, like cherubs, round thy seat.
And Goodness too, whose smile alone
Can beautify thy awful throne;
Justice, with fear, would strike us dead,
But Mercy rears each sinner's head.
Thy Love inspired the breathless clay,
And man sustains from day to day;
And not alone to man confined,
It gladdens every living kind;
Show'ring its blessings in each clime,
Through all the ceaseless rounds of time;
Painting the seasons as they roll,
And scattering bliss from pole to pole;
Darting the sun's prolific beams,
Filling with silver fish the streams;
Giving sweet vegetation birth,
And breathing fragrance over the earth.
III.
To Thee, then, let all beings bend,
And shouts of joy the ether rend.
And chiefly let thy saints on high,
Laud the great Sovereign of the sky;
Leading on the exultant choir,
In strains of rapture, words of fire,
Till heaven and earth and hell profound,
With the triumphant shouts resound.
Till all confess thy glorious fame,
And tremblingly adore thy name;
Thus ever shall thy reign endure,
In endless majesty secure.
IV.
When trouble sinks us to the dust,
To Thee, for aid, O Lord, we trust.
It Is thine to heal affliction's smart,
And raise from death the languid heart.
In meagre want or poverty,
To thee we lift the suppliant eye;
Thy bounteous hand, profusely kind,
Pours the rich banquet unconfined;
To man and beast thou giv'st their food,
While all enjoy their proper good.
V.
Righteous and holy is the Lord,
And will to all his grace afford,
To all who his great name revere,
And worship him with hearts sincere.
Such in his glorious courts shall dwell,
And triumph over death and hell.
But those who his displeasure move,
Shall never share his heavenly love.
Bless then, my soul, his sacred name,
And let all nature join the theme;
All nature to its GOD shall cry,
Who lives through vast eternity.
PSALM CXXXVII. VERSIFIED.
I.
'TWAS on the gentle brink reclined,
Of fair Euphrates' murmuring wave,
When Zion's fate we called to mind,
Salt tears our languid checks did lave.
II.
There, on the willows bending low,
Our untuned joyless harps we hung;
For what but grief could from us flow,
When unrelenting foes among?
III.
Ah! how the victors mocked our story,
Exulting over our helpless state;
Sing now, said they, of Zion's glory,
And, in your mirth, forget your fate.
IV.
How shall we joy in land profane,
Or sound Iehovah's matchless praise?
How sing the wonders of his reign,
To those who slight celestial lays?
V.
^^^er than I, in evil hour,
should cease to think of Judah's wrong,
May my right arm be void of power,
And dumb, for ever, be my tongue.
VI.
Let, O Lord, thy wrath in thunder,
Speak devoted Edom's ruin;
Who, a-thrist for blood and plunder,
Worked fair Judah's sad undoing.
VII.
And thou, O Babel! doomed to slaughter,
With just return of sighs and groans!
Blessed, who each infant son and daughter.
Shall dash for thee against the stones.
Ad GULIELMUM LAUDERUM, P. P.
CASEUS pinguis, pyra, mala, nectar
Te manent mecum, Gulielme, sextam
Occidens quum Sol properabit ho^am
Axe fugaci.
Diligit pullos nitidumque nidum
Uxor, at tecum gradiatur audax:
Filio quisquam nec erit venusto
Gratior umbra.
Risus and musae comitentur almae,
Innocens et te jocus and lepores:
Linque sed curas, and amara vitae
Linque severae.
Hanc moram rugis sapiens futuris
Ponito: quamvis viridem senectam
Cautus arceto, remorare vitae
Gaudia blandae.
Vive nunc: aetas fugit impotentis
Fluminis ritu, volucrisve venti:
Vis stitit nulla, et revocavit boras
Nulla volantes.
Umbra seu pulvis su^us, aut inanis
Fumus, et nostrum remanebit olim
Nil nisi virtus, monumenta sacra
Ingeniique.
TO WILLIAM LAUDER, P. P.
PEARS, apples, cheese, dear WILL, and wine,
If thou will grace my house, are thine;
(For these are in my power.
When the last ray of you bright sun,
Shall round its whirling axle run,
And hasten the sixth hour.
Thy wife delights in her neat home
And babes, but let her boldly come,
Provided she is at leisure.
Thy beauteous boy shall also find,
Although unasked, a welcome kind,
And be received with pleasure.
And with thee haste the virgin Muse,
And jest that laughter shall diffuse,
And mirth that cheers the soul:
Banish afar corroding care,
Severity with gloomy air,
That might our joys control.
More wisely thou procrastinate
These evils to a wrinkled state,
When life's no more inviting:
Ever age comes on, while yet thy blood
Flows in a sprightly vigorous flood,
Be cheerful and delighting.
Live! live, my WILL, for now is the day;
Time, like a current, glides away,
Or the evanecent wind;
Unstaid by stout Herculean force,
Naught can protract its rapid course,
And fleeting moments bind.
Shadows we are, or empty dust,
And vapour-like dissolve we must,
Nor are we more secure;
Naught can escape the dreary pit
But virtue and immortal wit,
Which endless shall endure.
CARMEN PASTORALE.
URBS colitur priscis quondam celeberrima Scotis,
Incumbens saxo solido, cui nomen Edinae.
Venerat huc Phyllis pulcherrima Scotigenarum
Montibus ex patriis, ubi Oreadas inter agrestes
Prima fuit, denos bis non aspexerat annos
Gloria deliciaeque patris: quam forte vagantem
Viderat Urbanus subitoque exarsit, at illa
Munere nec pretio potuit precibusve moveri.
Hunc igitur vanis fundentem vota querelis
Audiit Arcturi rupes et inhospita saxa:
Audiit, et planctus gemebunda remurmurat Echo.
Echo sola meos miserata est, inquit amores;
Tristra nam moestis ex saxis assonat imis,
Flebile luctisonis responsat et usque cicutis.
Me miserum quoties exclamo, lugubris illa
Me miserum ingeminat gelidis e vallibus: Eheu
Clamanti exclamat, repetitis vocibus, Eheu!
O rupes! O mi quondam dilectaque saxa!
O valles solitas audire et reddere voces
Phyllidis auricomae! number jam mihi far potestis
Auxilii quidquam rabidos lenire dolores?
Phyllis abest, longumque vale mihi dixit; avenas,
Delicias quondam, fragiles perdamque cicutas.
Phyllis abest, nec me delectant carmina, nec me
Lanigerive greges, dulcesve ante omnia musae.
Naides, et sordent mihi munera vestra, nec ipse
Pan placeat, calamis si quando inflare miselli^
Tentet, et ingentes divellere pectore curas.
O crudelis amor! crudelia saxa! bovesque
Crudeles! qui non sentitis pectoris AEstus:
Quales fornicibus ruptis ciet AEtna Typhois
Ore vomens lapidesque feros, flammasque globosque
In Siculos agros, liquefactaque saxa revolvit.
O pecora! O caprae, crudeles vos quoque! nostri
Vos neque, pastores, miserescitis. Improba saxa
Torreat acre gelu, montisque cacumina saevi
Horrescant subitis ventis, tumidisque procellis.
Perpetuo coelum contristet bruma nivosis
Imbribus, aeternis rigeat fera terra pruinis.
Vos, pecora, insani perimant contagia morbi
Dira, vel innumeris jaceant laniata per agros
Membra lupis: scelerata lues, vel numinis ira
Ultricis vigiles miseranda morre magistro^
Tollat, et hos nemo plangat. Sed quo furor aegram
Impius abripuit menteta? Quid saxa? Quid aer?
Quid caprae? aut ovium quid commeruere magistri?
Quid vos devoveam? Piget, et malesane furenti
Dicta mihi, simul et temeraria vota recanto.
Si rata namque forent quaecunque armata flagellis
Ira, aut praecipiti furibunda insania motu
Dictitat, Urbano quae spes restaret, ut istas
Nympha memor nostri formosa reviseret oras?
Quin potius studiis conspirent omnia junctis
Phyllida blanditis iterum revocare tenellis.
Spina rosas, viridans cerealia munera fruges
Terra ferat; volucrum resonet clamoribus ether
Blandidulis; pecudum mugitus sidera pulsent.
Pabula felices caprae genialia carpant,
Balantesque greges ovium: nova gaudia vobis
Usque renascantur, pastores: tempora brumae
Perpetuum vernent, modicisque caloribus aestas
Suggerat armento foecundus graminis herbas.
Talia dicentem circumque gregesque bovesque,
Circum pastores, circumque stetere bubulci,
Et lachrymis maduere genae: ferus ipse Cupido
Condoluit, caecis mons ingemuitque cavernis.
A PASTORAL, from the Latin of the same.
ON (...) rock, enrolled in ancient fame,
(...)nds and EDINBURGH its name;
Here c(...) Phyllis from her native hills,
Whose (...) all the Scottish maids excels;
First of the rural nymphs in Venus' arms,
Not yet had twenty summers crowned her charms.
This lovely fair, her father's joy and pride,
Once, as she heedless passed, Urbanus eyed.
Quick as the lightning darts from pole to pole,
An instant passion fired his amorous soul;
With prayers and bribes he strove to win her mind,
But she, unmoved, his tender suit declined.
Soon then the ruthless rocks he roved among,
And with his plaints Arcturus' summit rung.
Echo too heard his tear-exciting strain,
And back resounded every groan again.
Echo, says he, alone laments my woe,
In hollow accents from the caves below.
My pipe sad warb'ling fills the groves around,
While she redoubles every plaintive sound.
Ah! wretched me! I mournfully exclaim;
Ah! wretched me! the vales repeat again.
Alas! alas! I sigh to every shade;
Alas! alas! returns the piteous Maid.
Ye sunny banks that once were my delight,
With precipices awful to the sight,
And vales that heard the bright-hair'd Phyllis sing,
What aid to me can all your beauties bring?
Phyllis is gone, with her my pleasures flew,
Gone, and has bid a killing long adieu.
My pipe and brittle reed I Will now destroy;
Phyllis is fled, the source of all my joy.
Not songs, nor flocks, can now my bliss recall,
Nor charming Muses, sweeter than them all.
The blue-ey'd Naiads now delight no more,
Nor frolic Pan that sports the mountains over;
His idle reed no cure for me can find,
Music enchants alone the unruffl'd mind.
O cruel love! and cruel oxen too,
With savage rocks that never passion knew;
Those ills ye feel not that my soul infest,
Nor raves the furious tempest in your breast.
Such as when swells old AEtna's restless womb,
And bursts the caverns of Typhean gloom,
Fierce stones, and flames, and globes of fiery red,
It spouts tremendous from its burning bed,
And rolls the melted sulfurous mass amain,
A flaming river down Sicilia's plain.
You are relentless too, my fleecy care,
^e, nor your shepherds, pity my despair.
May frosts severe the cruel rocks divide,
And sudden whirlwinds tear the mountain's side;
May dark December reign with icy snow,
And Boreas ever round the ether blow;
Let the hard earth with cold perpetual freeze,
Nor ever feel the balmy-breathing breeze.
And you my flock, may madness seize your joy,
And dire distempers all your race destroy;
Or wolves innumerable your members tear,
And far disperse them through the fields and air;
May the cursed plague your watchful swains consume,
Or heaven's dread thunder speak their instant doom.
But why will fancy thus wild warfare wage,
And swell my sick-mind with an impious rage?
How have the rocks and air arous'd my ire?
Nor goats, nor sheep, nor shepherds did conspire
To pain my bosom, nor to fix my fate;
Why then shall harmless these deserve my hate?
Oh, I repent! my furious vows recant,
With all my wrathful execrating rant.
For if what anger's fierce vindictive arm.
Or madness' rash precipitate alarm,
Should bid, and in their order be obeyed*
How could I hope to see the beauteous Maid?
No! let the tender blandishments of all,
Unite their charms my Phyllis to recall.
Let the rough thorn with fragrant roses blow,
And the green earth with golden harvests glow;
Let the soft air the feathered songsters fill
With wood-notes warbled from each dale and hill;
Let the glad herds their joyful lowings raise,
And blythsome flocks in foodful pastures graze;
Ye swains, for you may pleasures new appear,
And spring perpetual rule the circling year;
May winter's face with lasting green be crowned,
And gentle suns enrich the fruitful ground.
Thus, as he sung, the herdsmen, flocks and swains,
Bedewed their cheeks to hear his moving strains;
Cupid himself (the savage archer) moan'd,
And from its caves the hollow mountain groaned.
ELEGY, TO THE MEMORY OF MY BELOVED FRIEND, MR. THOMAS GODFREY, Who died near
Wilmington, North Carolina, August 3d, 1763.
O DEATH! thou victor of the human frame!
The soul's poor fabric trembles at thy name!
How long shall man be urged to dread thy sway,
For those whom thou untimely take away?
Life's blooming spring just opens to our eyes,
And strikes the senses with a sweet surprise,
When thy fierce arm uplifts the fatal blow
That hurls us breathless to the earth below.
Sudden, as darts the lightning through the sky,
Around the globe thy various weapons fly.
Here war's red engines heap the field with slain,
And pallid sickness there extends thy reign;
Here the soft virgin weeps her lover dead,
There maiden beauty sinks the graceful head;
Here infants grieve their parents are no more,
There reverend sires their childrens' deaths deplore
Here the sad friend -- O! save the sacred name,
Yields half his soul to thy relentless claim;
O pardon, pardon the descending tear!
Friendship commands, and not the muses here.
O say, thou much loved dear departed shade,
To what celestial region have thou strayed?
Where is that vein of thought, that noble sire
Which fed thy soul, and bade the world admire?
That manly strife with fortune to be just,
That love of praise? an honorable thirst!
The Soul, alas! has fled to endless day,
And left its house a mouldering mass of clay.
There, where no fears invade, nor ills molest,
Thy soul shall dwell immortal with the blessed;
In that bright realm, where dearest friends no more
Shall from each other's throbbing breasts be tore,
Where all those glorious spirits sit enshrined,
The just, the good, the virtuous of mankind.
There shall fair angels in a radiant ring,
And the great SUN of heaven's eternal KING,
Proclaim thee welcome to the blissful skies,
And wipe the tears for ever from thy eyes.
How did we hope -- alas! the hope how vain!
To hear thy future more enripen'd strain;
When fancy's fire with judgment had combined
To guide each effort of the enraptured mind.
Yet are those youthful glowing lays of thine
The emanations of a soul divine;
Who heard thee sing but felt sweet music's dart
In thrilling transports pierce his captived heart?
Whether soft melting airs attun'd thy song,
Or pleased to pour the thundering verse along,
Still nobly great, true offspring of the Nine,
Alas! how blasted in thy glorious prime!
So when first opes the eyelids of the morn,
A radiant purple does the heavens adorn,
Fresh smiling glory streaks the skies around,
And gaily silvers each enameled mound,
Till some black storm o'erclouds the ether fair,
And all its beauties vanish into air.
Stranger, who ever thou art, by fortune's hand
Tossed on the baleful Carolinian strand,
Oh! if thou see perchance the POET'S grave,
The sacred spot with tears of sorrow lave;
Oh! shade it, shade it with ne'er-fading bays.
Hallow'd's the place where gentle GODFREY lays.
(So may no sudden dart from death's dread bow
Far from the friends thou love ever lay thee low)
There may the weeping morn its tribute bring,
And angels shield it with their golden wing,
Till the last trump shall burst the womb of night,
And the purged atoms to their soul unite!
October 1, 1763.
TO BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, ESQUIRE L. L. D.
Occasioned by hearing him play on the HARMONICA.
IN grateful wonder lost, long had we viewed
Each generous act thy patriot-soul pursued;
Our Little State resounds thy just applause,
And, pleased, from thee new fame and honor draws;
In thee those various virtues are combined,
That form the true pre-eminence of mind.
What wonder struck us when we did survey
The lambent lightnings innocently play,
And down thy Alluding to his noble discovery of the use of Pointed Rods of
metal for saving houses from damage by lightning.
rods beheld the dreaded fire
In a swift flame descend -- and then expire;
While the red thunders, roaring loud around,
Burst the black clouds, and harmless smite the ground.
Blessed use of art! applied to serve mankind,
The noble province of the sapient mind!
For this the soul's best faculties were given,
To trace great nature's laws from earth to heaven!
Yet not these themes alone thy thoughts command,
Each softer science owns thy fostering hand;
Aided by thee, Urania's heavenly art,
With finer raptures charms the feeling heart;
The Harmonica shall join the sacred choir,
Fresh transports kindle, and new joys inspire --
Hark! the soft warblings, sounding smooth and clear,
Strike with celestial ravishment the ear,
Conveying inward, as they sweetly roll,
A tide of melting music to the soul;
And sure if aught of mortal-moving strain,
Can touch with joy the high angelic train,
It Is this enchanting instrument of thine,
Which speaks in accents more than half divine!
ON THE AEOLIAN HARP.
SWEET Zephyr leave the enameled plain,
And hither wave thy gentle wing;
Would thou out-rival Orpheus' strain,
O haste and touch this trembling string.
The balmy-breathing power obeys, --
It Is his my slender harp to claim;
He comes, and over its bosom plays,
And rapture wakes the slender frame!
The tender, melting notes of love,
The soul in soothing murmurs steal;
Low as the languor-breathing dove,
That, lonesome, coos her plaintive tale.
Hark! what sounds of pleasing pain,
Deep as some bleeding lovers lay,
Sad as the cygnet's moving strain,
When on the shore she dies away.
A nobler gale now sweeps the wire,
The hollow frame responsive rings,
Loud as when angels strike the lyre,
Sweet as the heavenly chorus sings.
And hark! the numbers roll along,
Majestically smooth and clear,
Like Philomel's enchanting song,
The notes mellifluous pierce the ear.
Thus as the varying accents flow,
Each passion feels the accordant sound --
This lifts the soul, that sinks it low,
We seem to tread on fairy ground.
AN EPISTLE TO MIRA.
HOW slow to him who feels the smart of love
Time's leaden hours to sweet possession move!
His winged desires outstrip each tardy morn;
Eager he cries -- long-wish'd for day be born,
When to my heart soft vows shall Mira tie,
And love's own laws the priest shall sanctify!
Dull lingering days revolve, and nights succeed,
And still on love's fond dreams I hapless feed.
The throbs of passion, and the heartfelt pain,
The hope far distant, and the longing vain;
The sigh unfeigned, the bosom's troublous swell --
Ah! what are these? -- say lovers, ye can tell!
What shall divide the pair whom love has joined,
And heaven has formed with sympathy of mind?
Shall groveling fortune basely interpose,
To part those hearts where mutual passion glows?
Forbid it love! -- For raiment, house and food,
These brows shall be with honest sweat bedewed.
Early each morn I Will wake the cherub health,
And cheerful industry's best prize is wealth;
We'll bound our wishes in a temperate round,
Yet shall our table be with plenty crowned;
No friend, nor stranger, will we send away
Without a meal, and glass, discreetly gay;
Neat elegance shall deck our little store,
And fair economy shall keep the door;
How shall the proud with wonder then behold
Our blissful lives without a hoard of gold!
Oh then! my Mira, love-inspiring fair,
Who with thy swain should then in bliss compare?
Not only that thy beauty's pleasing charms
Shall fire my panting soul with love's alarms;
Nor that thy cheek which shames the peach's bloom,
And ruby lips that breathe divine perfume,
Enchant me all; nor yet thy spotless breast,
Which gently heaves, can make me wholly blessed.
It Is that thy manners, void of guile and art,
Speak the internal goodness of thy heart;
It Is that thy sweetness heightens every grace,
And dove-like innocence adorns thy face.
It Is that thy soul is warmed with virtue's fire,
Merit can love, and real worth admire!
Can view a coxcomb's tinsel and despise,
And sense, without a But to the world no bugbear is so great,
As want of figure and a small estate.
POPE.
figure, truly prize.
Can with thy lover feel unfeigned desire,
And own that passion which thy charms inspire.
Nor blush at these, thou dearest, lovely maid;
These shall attract, when beauty's bloom shall fade;
When all the radiance of thy form shall die,
These, with fresh luster, shall thy age supply;
Enhance our love when sprightly youth is past,
Improve with years, and all our lives shall last.
AN ORATION ON SCIENCE.
Spoken at a Performance of SOLEMN MUSIC and ORATORY, in the Hall of the
College of PHILADELPHIA.
IN Wisdom's lore the tender mind to frame,
The youthful breast to fire with virtue's flame,
The thoughts to raise, the passions to control,
And plant each godlike purpose in the soul;
To SCIENCE this illustrious field's assigned,
To beam the rays of knowledge over mankind;
For this were plan'd the noble laws of art,
TO unfold the embrio powers of the heart;
To guide each movement to its native goal,
And scan the systems of this mighty whole!
Heaven has on man the reasoning gift bestowed,
And in his breast sublime ideas sowed;
But as it fares with rich luxuriant land,
When left to chance, nor tilled by culture's hand,
For fragrant flowers the rankling weeds arise,
Poison the plains and all their charms disguise;
So when the thoughts are in a lawless state,
Which in the mind's fair garden vegetate,
Soon shall intentions foul pollute the breast,
Like noxious weeds that flowery lawns infest.
Not more distinguished in creation's chain
Is man, by reason, over the bestial train,
Than man from man, by education made,
When native sense by Science is arrayed,
When every faculty matur'd by skill,
Obeys the dictates of the sapient will;
Then, led by Science, fancy wings her flight
Round the wide world, or to the realms of light,
Extracting wisdom from each scene below,
Or soaring 'mid the radiant planets glow; --
Where, wonder struck! -- she finds their sparkling rays,
But bright reflections from the solar blaze!
And views with steady eye those wandering stars,
That fright the world with prodigies and wars!
By SCIENCE youthful minds are taught to know,
What to their God, their Country, Friends, they owe;
Life's glorious scope, and whence it first began,
What springs direct the Microcosm, Man;
What bids a savage like a sage to shine,
Or makes an The tyrannical King of the Hunns.
Attila an Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, equally famed for his clemency and
philosophy.
Antonine;
All that ennobles man's exalted race,
All that Religion, Virtue, Truth, embrace!
It Is here is with loftier feelings to inspire,
And fit a mortal for the heavenly choir!
VERSES, ADDRESSED TO THE TRUSTEES of the COLLEGE and ACADEMY OF PHILADELPHIA.
Written and pronounced as an Exercise at the Public Commencement, May 30,
1765, on taking the Degree of M. A. in said College.
'TWAS nobly done! the Muse's seat to raise
In this fair land, and earn immortal praise!
To civilize our first famed sires began,
'Twas yours to prosecute the glorious plan;
They peopled deserts with unwearied toil,
Established laws and tilled the fruitful soil;
'Twas yours to call in each refining art,
TO improve the manners and exalt the heart;
To train the rising race in wisdom's lore,
And teach them virtue's summit to explore.
What land than this can choicer blessings claim,
Where sacred liberty has fixed her name;
Where over each field gay Plenty spreads her store,
Free as you The Delaware.
river laves the winding shore;
Where active Trade pours forth her jovial train
Over the green bosom of the boundless main;
Where honest Industry's bright tools resound,
And Peace her olive scepter waves around?
To such a state fair SCIENCE to convey,
And beam afar the philosophic day;
To make our native treasures doubly blessed,
Was sure a scheme to fire each worthy breast;
Was fit for generous patriots to pursue,
Was fit for learning's patrons -- and for you!
As from the east you orb first darts his ray
Over heavens blue vault, and westward bends his way,
So Science in the orient climes begun,
And, like bright Sol, a western circuit run;
From eastern realms to Greece was learning brought,
What ever Pythagoras or Cadmus taught;
Her form illustrious Athens did illume,
And raised the genius of imperial Rome;
From Latium's plains she sought Britannia's shore,
And bid her barbarous sons be rude no more;
Fierce nations roam'd around the rugged isle,
Till Science on its fields began to smile;
Fair Came and Isis heard no muse's strains,
Their shades were trod by wolves and fiercer Danes,
Till with the ARTS Augusta's grandeur rose,
And her loud thunder shook the deep's repose.
Just so, in time (if right the Muse descries)
Shall this wide realm with tow'ry cities rise;
The spacious Delaware, through future song,
Shall roll in deathless majesty along;
Each grove and mountain shall be sacred made,
As now is Cooper's hill and Windsor's shade.
Flushed with the thought I Am borne to ages hence
The muse-wrought vision rushes on my sense.
Methinks MESSIAH'S ensign I behold
In the deep gloom of yonder shades unroll'd,
And hear the Gospel's silver clarion sound,
Rousing with heavenly strains the heathen round;
Methinks I hear the nations shout aloud,
And to the glory-beaming standard crowd;
New inspirations shake each trembling frame,
The PARACLETE pours forth the lambent flame,
In renovating streams on every soul,
While through their breasts celestial transports roll.
Stupendous change! methinks the effects appear;
In the dark region sacred temples rear
Their lofty heads; fair cities strike my sight,
And heav'n-taught Science spreads a dazzling light
Over the rough scene, where error's court was found,
And red-ey'd slaughter crimsoned all the ground.
O haste, blessed days! till ignorance flee the ball,
And the bright rays of knowledge lighten all,
Till in you wild new seats of Science rise,
And such as you the arts shall patronize!
For this your names shall swell the trump of fame,
And ages yet unborn your worth proclaim.
EPITAPH, IN MEMORY OF MRS. MARGARET ROBINSON, WIFE OF CAPT. JAMES ROBINSON,
Who died March 22, 1765, and was buried in St. Catharine's Church, London.
THOU, who within these hallowed walls shall move,
Know that this stone was fixed by generous love;
A husband's fondest hopes beneath it rest,
A wife, in whom fair virtue stood confessed;
In whom sweet love, and mild compassion joined,
With each soft grace that decks the female mind;
A wife who never gave her husband pain,
But when pale death had ranked her with the slain!
What soothing joys her goodness did impart,
Ah! read them in her partner's broken heart!
Think, in his grief, thou see her virtues rise,
And pity's streams shall soon overflow thine eyes!
TO CLARINDA.
MAY 20, 1768.
I.
SOFT breathing over the velvet green,
Is felt the heart-reviving gale;
Gay Spring unfolds the blooming scene,
The budding grove and scented vale.
II.
The orchard's sweets, the garden's flowers,
The brook that babbles through the plain,
The bladed lawns and blossomed bowers,
The wild notes of the feathered train --
III.
In vain their matchless charms unite,
Poetic rapture to diffuse;
I view them with a calm delight,
But uninspir'd remains the muse.
IV.
Too dull I grow to sport in rhyme,
No rapturous warmth elates my soul;
No more the muse's hill I climb,
Nor in bright fancy's chariot roll.
V.
The glories of the vernal year,
The luster of the female form,
Could once awake the sprightly air,
And all my soul with transport warm.
VI.
But, now transformed to hermit grave,
These radiant prospects languid seem,
I haunt no more the flowery cave,
Nor loll aside the plaintive stream.
VII.
The enchanting power of verse no more
In sweet Elysium wraps my heart;
Over heaps of musty prose I pore,
Forgetful of the Muse's art.
VIII.
What then can re-illume my breast,
And light the long neglected fire,
When Nature's landscape gaily dressed,
Can scarce a glowing thought inspire?
IX.
When even CLARINDA'S winning charms,
But half excites the sprightly strain;
Though formed to raise love's soft alarms,
And ranked in beauty's lucid train.
X.
Yet though these flattering themes no more,
Allure the moral bard to stray,
Still shall the Muse a theme explore,
Deserving of her choicest lay.
XI.
Goodnature shall new string the lyre,
Which marks CLARINDA for her own;
CLARINDA'S Beauty all admire,
I praise her for this charm alone.
THE MORNING INVITATION, To Two YOUNG LADIES at the GLOUCESTER SPRING.
I.
SEQUESTERED from the city's noise,
Its tumults and fantastic joys,
Fair nymphs and swains retire,
Where Delaware's far rolling tide,
Majestic winds by Glo'ster's side,
Whose shades new joys inspire.
II.
There innocence and mirth resort,
And round its banks the graces sport,
Young love, delight and joy;
Bright blushing health unlocks his springs,
Each grove around its fragrance flings,
With sweets that never cloy.
III.
Soon as from out the orient main,
The sun ascends the etherial plain,
Bepearling every lawn;
Wild warbling wood-notes float around,
While echo doubles every sound,
To hail the gladsome dawn.
IV.
Now Celia with thy Cloe rise,
Ye fair unlock those radiant eyes,
Nor more the pillow press;
Now rise and taste of vernal bliss,
Romantic dreams and sleep dismiss,
New joys your sense shall bless.
V.
Whether along the velvet green,
Adorning all the sylvan scene,
The fair incline to stray;
Where lofty trees o'ershade the wave,
And Zephyrs leave their secret cave,
Along the streams to play.
VI.
There lovely views the Delaware.
river crown,
Woods, meadows, ships, you Philadelphia.
spiry town,
Where wit and beauty reign;
Where Cloe and fair Celia's charms,
Fill many a youth with love's alarms,
Sweet pleasure, mixed with pain.
VII.
Or whether over the fields ye trip,
At you salubrious The chalybeate spring near Gloucester.
fount to sip,
Immured in darksome shade;
Around whose sides The laurel-leaved tulip tree. This beautiful tree is one of
the greatest ornaments of the American woods, of which it is a native.
magnolias' bloom,
Whose silver blossoms deck the gloom,
And scent the spicy glade.
VIII.
These are Aurora's rural sweets --
Fresh dew-drops, flowers and green retreats,
Perfume the balmy air;
Rise then and greet the newborn day,
Rise, fair ones, join the linnet's lay,
And Nature's pleasures share.
IX.
So shall gay health your cheeks adorn,
With blushes sweeter than the morn,
And fresh as early day;
And then, that Glo'ster is the place,
To add to beauty's brightest grace,
The world around shall say.
FRAGMENTS, AND UNFINISHED POEMS.
ON TIME.
O TIME! still urging to eternity,
In thy deep womb the world's vast actions lie --
Thy hours still whirl us on in full career,
Day following day, and year succeeding year;
Old moments ending as the new ones rise --
For thy first child, Succession, never dies;
But all things human own thy sovereign power,
Just live and die -- a thousand in an hour.
Kings, empires, thrones and nations fade away,
And others still succeed as they decay;
Fair peace and horrid war still rule by turns,
With love and rage the world, alternate, burns;
And thus the same rotation shall be seen,
Till consummation shuts this earthly scene!
What then avails to invoke the sacred Nine,
Or humbly bend us at the Muse's shrine,
When we, together with our loftiest rhyme,
Shrink to oblivion, at one blast of Time?
INTRODUCTION TO A NIGHT-PIECE.
HUSHED was the air, the howling winds were still,
And icy fetters bound each silver rill;
Old Night her raven mantle cast around,
And Specter rose from consecrated ground;
The full orb'd moon a pallid luster shed,
And over each scene a livelier horror spread.
'Twas then aside the frozen Delaware,
(To the bleak north, her bosom, heaving, bare)
Revolving various troubles in her mind,
Fair Pennsylvania's genius sad reclined,
Her olive crown, scarce cleans'd from reeking gore,
She dashed, indignant, on the flinty shore;
Then, sorrowful, she turned her briny eyes
To where her Capital's proud turrets rise.
Thus, as she rested on a bank of snow,
Breathing deep sighs, and lost in speechless woe;
Sudden, a solemn murmur filled the air,
And roused the Goddess from her trance of care. --
A SEA-PIECE.
I.
WHAT solemn awe pervades my wondering soul,
While over the deep I cast my straining eye?
Around me, waves on waves, stupendous roll,
And, mounting, seem to meet the bending sky.
II.
Whether the rosy-fringed dawn I view,
Purpling the golden east with infant light,
While the red sun yet drinks the falling dew,
And dissipates the lazy shades of night;
III.
Or whether, mounted in his glittering car,
He darts meridian splendour over the main;
Or sinking softer down the western air,
He clothes with crimson clouds the etherial plain;
IV.
The heavens and ocean still my vision bound,
Nor other object save what they dispense;
Within the vast circumference is found,
To charm the heart, or rouse the eager sense.
V.
Yet still the man, by Nature's grandeur sir'd,
Whom Heaven's inimitable works can please;
Will feel his soul with generous thoughts inspired,
Struck with the power that formed those awful seas.
VI.
How sweet the morn, when aephyrs round us sweep,
And in the east, with blushing beauty gay,
Bright Sol emerging from the pearly deep,
Leads on, in dazzling majesty the day?
VII.
The orient billows seem one living blaze;
The gray mists rise, with amber skirted over,
And float afar before the solar rays,
Collecting, in their march the showery store.
VIII.
Along the boundless ether, light, they sail,
Remotest regions feel their kindly aid;
Or, on the hills they break, or lowly vale
Refresh, and fructify the thirsty glade.
IX.
Then, in meand'ring streams, they prattling glide,
Wat'ring the green savannahs in their course;
And swell the river's often revolving tide,
And mingle, foaming, with their native source.
X.
Often when, in silent calm, the noonday beam
Reflects its glory down heaven's azure steep,
Through the clear waves, resplendent dolphins gleam,
And whales, enormous, gambol round the deep.
XI.
Often in this watery region fish are found,
Resembling animals of earthly form;
Here, in black droves, the nimble Porpoise.
sea-hogs bound,
Omen to mariners of coming storm. --
TO MELANCHOLY.
COME, thou Queen of pensive air,
In thy sable, sooted car,
By two mournful turtles drawn --
Let me meet thee on you lawn,
With decent vestments wrapped around,
And thy brows with cypress bound!
Quickly come, thou sober dame,
And thy musing Poet claim.
Bear me, where thou love to rove,
In the deep, dark, solemn grove;
Where, on banks of velvet green,
Peace, with Silence, still is seen;
And Leisure, at the sultry noon,
On flowery carpet flings him down --
There, sweet Queen! I Will sing thy pleasures
In euthusiastic measures,
And sound thy praise through the lone vale,
Responsive to the hollow gale;
The murmuring rills shall spread it round,
And grottoes the wild notes rebound. --
BEGINNING OF A POEM, ON THE PASSION and RESURRECTION of CHRIST.
NOW came the hour, the important hour,
When Heaven's eternal SON,
(Who deigned the fleshly form to wear,
And all our sins and troubles bear)
His sacred blood for man must pour,
By Satan's wiles undone.
O Thou! all-hallow'd Spirit, hear!
Inspirer of the prophets old,
Who tuned the royal David's ear,
When through his breast sweet transports rolled;
Thou PARACLETE divine, o'er-rule my humble lyre,
And touch a mortal breast with thy celestial fire;
For all in vain
We wake the strain,
Our gratitude to prove
And sing MESSIAH'S love,
Unless thy holy flame our frozen hearts inspire. --
AN INVOCATION, For the Return of Spring; March 17th, 1760.
I.
YE south^^n gales, that fan Peruvian groves,
With gentle amorous wing,
Awhile suspend your tender loves,
And chide the loit'rer spring!
O gently chide the unkind delay,
That keeps the nymph so long away
From northern climes, whose drooping swains
Long to hail her on their frozen plains.
II.
Wherever the lingering maid you find,
By stream or vocal grove,
Around her waist soft osiers bind
That she may cease to rove.
Then swiftly ply your rapid wing,
The captive fair-one hither bring,
That all our fields in renovated charms may smile,
And slow'rs unnumber'd deck the loosened soil.
III.
All nature mourns thee, blooming fair --
No more the streams delight;
No more embroidered vales appear,
To check the wandering sight.
Even Phoebus darts a sickly ray,
And pours a dull dejected day,
Refusing to dispense his splendid beams
To loose the frozen glebe, and thaw the icy streams.
IV.
Yet sad Canadia's sons, with dread,
Still court the wintry gloom;
For frost and snow on them more pleasure shed,
Than thy enlivening bloom!
With eyes aghast, they view the plain
Portending thy approaching reign,
And wish St. Lawrence streams may never flow,
But, bound in icy chains, repel their conquering foe.
V.
Not such the prayer of vet'ran bands
Whom WOLF to glory led,
Beneath whose gallant warlike hands,
The pride of Gallia bled.
With ardent wish for Spring's return,
And martial rage, their bosoms burn;
Impatient once again the foe to meet,
And, in one well-fought field, their labors to complete****
ON SOLITUDE.
HAIL SOLITUDE! thou friend to virtue, hail!
To me thy blissful presence often reveal,
Lest worldly scenes my foolish heart ensnare,
And all my hopes of bliss be lost in air!
The noblest heroes ever the sun surveyed,
With joy approached thy venerable shade;
And far from wishing for the toys of state
Or mean amusements of the vulgar great,
Possessed their minds in philosophic ease,
Till nature fixed a period to their days;
Then void of fear, each anxious thought suppressed,
They gained, with joy, the land of endless rest.
When Cynthia, peerless regent of the night,
Ascends her polished car divinely bright;
Often, with care oppressed, I pensive stray,
Where Schuylkill winds his solitary way;
Beneath some mountain's wild romantic brow,
Whose pendent cliffs alarm the flood below,
I lay me down -- t'indulge the solemn hour,
And yield myself to contemplation's power;
I feel the goddess rouse my slumbering soul,
And all my vain and wandering thoughts control;
I seem to breathe on consecrated ground,
And wisdom speaks in every object round;
Each scene delights -- the breeze that gently roves,
In hollow murmurs through the illumined groves,
The moonlight dancing down the trembling stream,
Or darting through the trees with fainter gleam --
These and a thousand charms, alternate rise,
To wake sweet musing, and to feast the eyes!
And hark! from you tall mountain's cloud-wrapt brow,
What notes majestic hither seem to flow!
Angelic voices, lutes melodious, join,
To praise the maker of this frame divine --
With voice distinct, they say, or seem to say,
"Who gave you glorious orbs their bright array?
"What careful hand their golden lamps supplies,
"Or marks their courses through you azure skies?
"What wondrous power, amid the pathless plain,
"Prevents confusion in their sparkling train?
"'It Is GOD alone" -- the heavenly chorus sings --
"'It Is GOD alone" -- the wide empyrean rings --
If heavenly hosts with such devotion burn,
What equal honors can frail man return?
Yet, wake my soul, prepare the grateful lay,
In emulation of those sons of day;
Whose glorious bands, unseen by mortal eye,
Visit this earth, or hover in the sky;
For saints expiring, tune the silver lyre,
And through their doubting souls sweet confidence inspire.
Hail! all-improving sacred solitude!
Thou best companion of the wise and good!
Why should vain man from thy blessed presence run,
And all self-converse, with such caution, shun?
Can sensual pleasures so overwhelm the mind
As not to leave one trace of thought behind?
Alas! they can -- and hence, that strange delight
In all that is wicked, empty, vain and light.
Thy faithful mirror no false charms bestows,
But, in just colors, each affection shows
If pure the mind, new transports seize the breast,
And give a foretaste of celestial rest;
But if foul vice should in the glass appear,
The conscious heart is filled with black despair Since inserting the foregoing
FRAGMENTS, which were intended to complete this small volume; the following
pieces of the Author have been communicated, by a friend in whose hands they
lay, since they were at first written.

END OF THE FRAGMENTS.
ORPHEUS AND EURYDICE.
ORPHEUS, of old, as poets tell,
Took a fantastic trip to hell,
To seek his WIFE -- as wisely guessing,
She must be there, since she was missing.
Downward he journey'd, wondrous gay,
And, like a lark, sang all the way;
The reason was, or they belied him,
His yoke fellow was not beside him.
Whole grottoes, as he passed along,
Danced to the music of his song.
So have I seen, upon the plains,
A fiddler captivate the swains,
And make them caper to his strains.
To Pluto's court at last he came,
Where the god sat enthroned in flame,
And asked if his lost love was there,
EURYDICE, his darling fair?
The fiends, who listening round him stood,
At the odd question laughed aloud --
"This must some mortal madman be,
"We fiends are happier far than he.
But music's sounds over hell prevail*
Most mournfully he tells his tale,
Sooths with soft arts the monarch's pain,
And gets his bargain back again --
"Thy prayers are heard," grim Pluto cries,
"On this condition take thy prize --.
"Turn not thine eyes upon the fair,
"If once thou turn'st, she flies in air."
In amorous chat they climb the ascent,
Orpheus -- Namque hanc dederat Proserpina legem.
, as ordered, foremost went;
(Though when two lovers downwards steer,
The man, as fit, falls in the rear.)
Soon the fond fool -- Heu, victusque animi, respexit. See VIRG. GEORG. IV.
line 556, etc. where this story is beautifully told.
turns back his head,
As Soon in air his spouse was fled.
If 'twas designed, 'twas wondrous well;
But, if by chance, more lucky still.
Happy the man, all must agree,
Who once from wedlock's noose gets free;
But he who from it twice is freed,
Has most prodigious luck indeed!
AN ODE.
WRITTEN AT G -- ME PARK.
I.
HOW breathes the morn her incense round,
And sweetens every sylvan scene?
Wild warblings through the groves resound,
And opening flowers bedeck the green.
II.
Bright over the hills the solar ray
Its gaily trembling radiance spreads,
Pleased on the glassy fount to play,
And pearl the dew-bespangled meads.
III.
How sweet this hour the fields to rove,
When Nature sheds her charms profuse;
Or hide me in the embow'ring grove,
And court the thought-inspiring Muse?
IV.
What joy, aside the plaintive fount,
Dissolved in pleasing thought, to stray;
And swift on Fancy's wing to mount,
And tread the bright ethereal way?
V.
Thus musing over the charming plains,
(Where G -- me the just and good retires,
Where Laura breathes her tender strains,
Whom every graceful muse inspires)
VI.
Young Damon poured his artless lay,
Beamed from imagination's light,
When sudden from the realms of day,
A form of glory struck his sight.
VII.
Wisdom's grave matron, from the skies,
Before the trembling youth appeared,
(Though seen but by poetic eyes)
And thus to speak the dame was heard.
VIII.
Would thou, O youth, these scenes enjoy,
The solemn grove and fragrant lawn,
And pleasure taste without alloy,
Wake jolly HEALTH at early dawn.
IX.
Banish Ambition from thy breast,
And sordid-minded Avarice fly;
Nor let pale Spleen thy ease infest,
Nor gloomy Sorrow cloud thine eye.
X.
Thy heart an offering nobly yield
At Virtue's high exalted shrine;
Thy soul let Resolution shield,
And ever to dove-ey'd Peace incline:
XI.
Let Cheerfulness, with placid mein,
Hold a firm empire over thy heart,
And sweet Content shall ceaseless reign,
And never-ending bliss impart.
XII.
Then shall the immortal Nine unfold
What sweets the sylvan scenes can give;
In heaven thy name shall be enrolled,
And others learn like thee to live.
Some LINES out of MR. POPE'S ELOISE TO ABELARD.
"HOW happy is the blameless vestal's lot?
"The world forgetting, by the world "forgot;
"Eternal sunshine of the spotless mind;
"Each prayer accepted and each wish resigned;
"Labor and rest, that equal periods keep;
"Obedient slumbers, that can wake and weep;
"Desires composed, affections ever even;
"Tears that delight, and sighs that waft to "heaven.
"Grace shines around her with serenest beams,
"And whispering angels prompt her golden "dreams.
"For her the spouse prepares the bridal ring,
"For her white virgins hymeneal^ sing;
"For her the unfading rose of Eden blooms,
"And wings of seraphs shed divine perfumes;
"To sounds of heavenly harps she dies away,
"And melts in visions of eternal day.
A PARODY On the foregoing LINES, by a LADY, assuming the Name of LAURA.
HOW happy is the country Parson's lot?
Forgetting Bishops, as by them forgot;
Tranquil of spirit, with an easy mind,
To all his Vestry's votes he sits resigned:
Of manners gentle, and of temper even,
He jogs his flocks, with easy pace, to heaven.
In Greek and Latin, pious books he keeps;
And, while his Clerk sings psalms, he -- soundly sleeps.
His garden fronts the sun's sweet orient beams,
And fat churchwardens prompt his golden dreams.
The earliest fruit, in his fair orchard, blooms;
And cleanly pipes pour out tobacco's fumes.
From rustic bridegroom often he takes the ring;
And hears the milk-maid plaintive ballads sing.
Back-gammon cheats whole winter nights away,
And Pilgrim's Progress helps a rainy day.
N. B. The foregoing Parody occasioned the following epistolary contest, and
poetical Raillery, between our Author and Laura.
AN EPISTLE TO LAURA, ON HER PARODY.
I Lately saw, no matter where,
A parody, by Laura fair;
In which, beyond dispute, it is clear,
She means her country friend to jeer;
For, well she knows, her pleasing lays,
(Whether they banter me or praise,
Whatever merry mood they take)
Are welcome for their author's sake.
Tobacco vile, I never smoke,
(Though Laura loves her friend to joke)
Nor leave my flock all in the lurch,
By being lullaby'd in church;
But, change the word from clerk to priest,
Perhaps I lull my sheep to rest.
As for the table of Back- gammon,
It Is far beyond the reach of Damon;
But, place right gammon on a table,
And then to play a knite -- I Am able.
" How happy is my lot," you say,
Because from Bishops far away!
Happy I am, I Will not deny,
But then it is when you are nigh;
Or gently rushes over my mind
The idea of the nymph refined;
In whom each grace and virtue meet,
That render womankind complete;
The sense, the taste, the lovely mien
Of Stella, pride of Patrick's Dean.
O Laura! when I think of this,
And call you friend -- it is greater bliss,
Than all the " fat churchwardens schemes,"
Which rarely* " prompt my golden dreams;"
Yet, if the happiness, fair maid,
That sooths me in the silent shade,
Should, in your eye, appear too great,
Come, take it all -- and share my fate!
LAURA's ANSWER.
LAURA to Damon health does send,
And thus salutes her saucy friend.
Because you would exert your wit,
You take the cap never made to fit;
And then your sprighly verse display,
To prove me out in every way --
But I Will proceed, nor care one farthing;
Nor shall you make me sue for pardon,
Nor once recant what I asserted,
Though from my pen in haste it flirted.
Truly, because you do inherit
Some portion of the Dean's queer spirit,
You want to prove, in wondrous haste,
That Laura too has Stella's taste;
As if it must directly follow,
Since you are favored by Apollo,
That he his choicest gifts must send,
To every scribbling female friend.
I thank you, sir -- you're wondrous kind!
But think me not so vain or blind,
As to believe the pretty things,
Your muse, with ease, at Laura flings.
It Is true, the moments I beguiled,
And at a country parson smiled;
Unhappy me! who never could dream,
That you should think yourself the theme*
Unless my muse, through rank ill nature,
Had turned what follows into satyr --
"A manner frank and debonnair,
"A heart that is open and sincere,
"Plain sense, stripped of pedantic rules,
"And formal precepts, hatched in schools;
"Firm honesty without parade,
"Simplicity in truth arrayed;
"A sprightly vein of humor too,
"Known only by a favored few."
Had Madam Muse, in spleen or spite,
Placed all those graces in a light,
To make us laugh, more than admire --
Then Damon might have taken fire,
And said, -- it is past dispute and clear,
I meant my country friend to jeer.
Yet, ever I close -- allow me time,
But just to add another rhyme.
Since I esteem your bliss so great,
In penance you will choose a mate,
And tell me -- "I may share your fate!"
The scheme is good, I must confess,
If you have bliss, to make it less!
Yet take a hint, before resolved,
And in the dragging chain involved.
While youthful joys around you shine,
Haste not to bend at Hymen's shrine;
Let friendship, generous friendship, be
The bond to fetter you and me,
Vestal, Platonic -- what you will,
So virtue reigns with freedom still.
But if, in matrimonial noose,
You must be bound -- and have a spouse;
The faithful rib that heaven shall send,
I Will fondly greet, and call her friend***
TO LAURA, IN REPLY TO THE ABOVE.
LAURA, for once excuse, I pray,
The pertness of a rural lay;
And I will never again offend,
Or need the name of saucy friend;
Stella, (for now I see it clearly,
Who loves a little mischief dearly)
Resolved to carry a gay farce on,
Told me I was the country parson,
Described in your melodius strain;
To which I now return again.
I, like my namesake, without Nathaniel.
guile,
Thought in my turn that I might smile,
So seized my pen, in a brisk sally,
Determined to pay off the tally;
And, in a fit of warm regard,
Dropped a few words -- quite off my guard;
For which I Laura's mercy crave,
And shall remain her humble slave --
She Is pleased to say, that "I inherit,
"Some portion of the DEAN'S queer spirit."
If aught in me was ever seen,
Resembling Patrick's boasted Dean;
It was his faults, I fear -- rank pride,
Which, for my life, I cannot hide,
And one less vain than Swift -- or me,
Might even both proud and saucy be,
When such fine things of him are said
By Laura, the harmonious maid;
Yet still her compliments, I fear,
Are only sent her friend to jeer,
Or sugar over a little smart
And close the bleedings of a heart --
Thus, without cause, when children cry,
And put their finger in their eye,
Kind mamma gives them aught that is handy,
Cakes, marmalade, or sugar candy.
Fair Laura hints -- the hint I take,
And honor for its mistress' sake --
Yet when great Cupid is inclined,
To fix his empire over my mind,
A silken cord, no "dragging chain,"
Shall lead me to his sacred fane;
For none, I trust, shall ever discover,
In me aught like the whimp'ring lover;
The fault'ring voice, the sigh of care,
The languid look, the dying air.
When abject thus behaves the muse,
May I kind Laura's friendship lose,
That friendship which I dearer hold;
Than silver heaps or shining gold.
And now, farewell! -- may every hour
Fresh happiness on Laura pour --
Whether in sacred wedlock joined,
Or to the Vestal state inclined;
May constant joys before her rise,
Till, for low earth, she gains the skies!
VERSES ON THREE LADIES, Who filled up Filling up blank rhimes is often a trial
of skill among the French; that is, the rhimes, or final words of the different
lines, are given, and the remainder is to be filled up so as to make sense and
poetry.
Les Bouts Rimez and desired the AUTHOR to decide which was best.
WHEN the Juno.
wife of old Jove, with the child of his Pallas.
brain,
And his Venus.
daughter so fair, attacked the young swain;
Poor Paris was sadly bewildered to find,
To which of the fair-ones his heart was inclined;
Till at length, from his quiver, a mischievous shaft,
Little Cupid produced -- at which the boy laughed --
Then gave it to Venus, who straight let it fly,
And sudden as lightning reached Paris's eye;
For the queen of sweet smiles the shepherd then sighs,
And yields to bright Venus the laurel and prize.
Thus Damon was smitten with rapture and joy
When your contest, fair ladies, his thoughts did employ.
The praise of Madona vermilion'd his face
With blushes -- for want of that virtue and grace,
Which her good-natured pen could so easily paint,
Though the portrait was bright and original taint.
Next Laura, accomplished in head and in heart,
Fair daughter of Clio produced her sweet art,
Apollo himself, I fancy, with zeal,
Would wish to imprint the poetical seal.
The third tuneful lady that makes up the choir,
Entranced my poor brain, and my heart set on fire --
Ah, Clara! I fear the arrow of Cu',
Instead of the muse's soft weapon you drew;
Or why through my breast do such ecstacies roll,
And the throbs of sweet passion beat high in my soul.
In the name of Apollo, a sprig of green bays
I grant to each lady for her witty lays.
ANSWER BY LAURA, One of the THREE LADIES above mentioned.
I.
IT IS true that Paris was a beau,
But yet was not polite;
For he on Ida's top could show
To two bright nymphs a slight.
II.
Three fair ones begged him to decide
Which was the greatest beauty --
He might have soothed each lady's pride
And yet have done his duty.
III.
To one he might have given shape,
And piercing eyes to the other;
Then had he made a good escape,
And saved a mighty pother.
IV.
Minerva then had dwelt in peace,
And JUNO, without passion,
Have caused a ten years war to cease,
And saved old Priam's nation.
V.
Young Damon, in a like dispute,
Took care to shun a quarrel;
He tried each lady's taste to suit,
And gave to each the laurel.
VI.
Had one alone obtained the bays,
And wit's bright prize have borne,
The other two, throughout their days,
The willow must have worn.
SERMONS ON VARIOUS SUBJECTS.

THE LOVE OF THE WORLD INCOMPATIBLE WITH THE LOVE OF GOD: A DISCOURSE ON 1 JOHN
II.15, 16, 17.

TO THE MEMBERS OF THE CONGREGATION OF GLOUCESTER.
My respected FRIENDS,
THE partiality you have shown to the following discourse, in desiring me to
furnish you with a Copy of it, to send to the press, merits my sincerest thanks.

At the same time, I cannot but observe to you, that the honor you pay me lays
me under no small difficulty. For, to argue the unworthiness of the composition
against its being printed, would be returning you a poor compliment, and might
appear in me like an affectation of modesty. -- On the other hand, my complying
with your request, may subject me to the charge of vanity, with those who are
readier to censure than to judge with candor. I can only say, therefore, that
the reason you assign for your desire to have this discourse printed, is
sufficient for me to wave the above objections, viz. That you believe it may be
of service to some people in my mission, as it sets forth some practical truths
(as you are pleased to say) in an agreeable point of light. Whether that can be
said with propriety of the following Sermon, it becomes me not to decide.

Should it please God to bless it to any one of you, should it excite but in
one single breast, a taste for vital religion and the practice of Christianity,
whatever otherwise may be its fate, I shall rejoice that it now attends you to
your closets.

I have only therefore, to add, that it appears the same now in print, as when
delivered to you from the Pulpit, with no other than a few verbal alterations.
And, as it was not composed with any design of being sent to the press, I hope
no one will be surprised if he finds it to consist only of a few plain
arguments and admonitions, counselling plain people, so to use this world, that
(in some future state of existence) they may be found worthy to inherit the
immortal joys of a better.

Recommending you, therefore, to God's Grace, and the best of Masters and
Patterns, Jesus Christ; I remain, with true affection and regard,

Your faithful Minister, And obliged humble Servant, N. EVANS.
Haddonfield, April 18, 1766.
The LOVE of the World incompatible with the LOVE of GOD.
1 JOHN II.15, 16, 17. Love not the world, neither the things that are in the
world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all
that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the
pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. And the world passes
away, and the lust thereof; but he that does the will of God, abides for ever.


NOTHING can sound more harsh and ungrateful to human nature than precepts of
this sort. The load of sense with which we are weighed down, the variety of
alluring objects that surround us, the syren-voice of temptation, and the
prevalence of numerous example, are too apt, more especially in the springtide
of life, to give nature the conquest over Grace, passion over reason, and
vanity over wisdom. We are too apt to be hurried away into the flowery avenues
of pleasure, to yield up the will to desire, regardless of the consequences,
and impatient of control.

The eminent Apostle of the Gentiles, leaves us this account of his conflict
with the world; Romans vii.22, 23.
I delight (says he) in the law of God, after the inward man. But I see another
law in my members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into
captivity to the law of sin, which is in my members; which a great LOCK.
genius of our nation thus paraphrases; For that which my inward man is
delighted with, that which with satisfaction my mind would make its rule, is
the law of God. But I see in my members another principle of action equivalent
to a law, directly waging war against that law which my mind would follow,
leading me captive into an unwilling subjection to the constant inclination and
impulse of my carnal appetite, which, as steadily as if it were a law, carries
me to sin. This then is not a particular case, but what all mankind is liable
to, for the mind would serve the law of God; but the flesh the law of sin.
Which law of sin, as the Apostle expresses it, is the inherent propensity of
our fallen natures to gratify the violent calls of animal desire. And what St.
John means in the text by loving the world, no doubt, is the delight we take in
indulging this depraved inclination, so as to make the gross and vicious
pleasures of sense the prime object of our pursuits; instead of endeavoring to
subdue our bodies and perfect our minds in the spirit of religion and solid
virtue.

A person then may be said to love the world, according to the meaning of the
text, when his mind is under the influence and guidance of his animal passions;
when those passions are so far indulged as to occasion confusion and uproar in
his soul, to breed disorder and irregularity in society, and to alienate his
affections from the love of divine and moral excellencies; when his conduct is
swayed by corrupt customs; when he looks upon the enjoyments of this world as
his chief good, and his ideas of happiness are confined within its scanty orb;
when, to gain its applause, he barters his conscience, neglects the great
duties incumbent on him as a rational agent, and banishes the sacred forms of
religion and virtue from his heart. Negatively, he may be said to love the
world, when he does not prefer Almighty God as the first and grand object of
his thoughts; when he does not esteem his favor as the highest felicity,
endeavor to live as in his presence, devote himself to his service and strive
to imitate, as far as the frailty of human nature will admit, his adorable
perfections.

Further, by the love of the world we are to understand making an immoderate
use of God's benefits, attaching our minds solely to earthly pleasures,
following the errors and evil courses of lawless and abandoned men, giving way
to low grovelling thoughts, nor wishing to enjoy the more refined and manly
pleasure which slows from a virtuous course of action.

Such being the love of the world, we cannot wonder at its being condemned by
the good Apostle in the text; and it is a very vain thing for those who are
connected with the world in the light we have represented, to expect any
benefit from our Savior's sufferings, or hope to be saved, in time of need, by
only calling on his name. For it is written, that 2 Timothy ii.19.
every one that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity. And the blessed
Jesus has solemnly assured us, that Matthew. vii.21.
not every one that says unto him, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven; but he that does the will of his Father which is in heaven.

Some there are, who think that not loving the world consists in banishing
themselves from human society, and that turning their backs on their
fellow creatures is turning their backs on the world; and therefore fly to
deserts and cloisters in pursuit of virtue and to avoid vice. But far otherwise
is the prayer of our divine Master, when he recommended his disciples to the
care of his heavenly Father. John xvii.15.
I pray not, says he that thou should take them out of the world, but that
thou should keep them from the evil. For the world is the grand theater on
which all virtuous actions must be performed, and the merit of our performance
rests in not quitting the stage, and yet avoiding the evil. For what field have
we to call forth the duties of Christianity in, if it is not among our
brethren? By extending our love and charity among our fellow creatures, by acts
of devotion, justice, mercy, and living up to the dictates of truth and right
reason, is the best method of showing our love to God, and the genuine path
that the Gospel has pointed out. But this it is impossible to do without
mingling with mankind; and although we may meet with some whose behavior and
manners may give us a pain too big to be uttered, yet we are not to turn our
backs on the world for any such reason. Does not the eternal Majesty of heaven,
the infinite fountain of all excellence and perfection, bear with our
weaknesses and follies from day to day? and shall we lack patience then with
one another, when even the best of us are such frail, infirm creatures, as to
be unable to enter into heaven without the imputation of a better righteousness
than our own? It Is our duty to war against vicious habits, to endeavor, with
the aids of God's Grace, after an upright and blameless conduct, and to
convince the world, by the force of example, that our religion is more than a
name, and that we are really in love with the beauty of holiness.

By the love of the world, as mentioned by the Apostle in the text, it is very
manifest that he means the love of sin; or, suffering our souls to yield (in
St. Paul's phrase) to the "law of sin;" that is, debauching our reason, and
converting the talents of the mind from their proper office, the perfecting us
for heaven, to be the slaves of our appetites, to warp the judgment and blind
the understanding, to call corruption pleasure, and madness joy. But it would
be very injurious to the sacred text as well as highly absurd in its
consequences, to suppose that St. John here means by not loving the world, to
treat with contempt the good things of this life. For to what purposes were the
mercies of God so plentifully strewn over the vast and beautiful theater of
Nature, if they were not for us to use, and soberly and thankfully enjoy? Nay,
so eminently glorious is the frame of this visible world, that it compelled
many sensible Heathens, who were led only by natural light, loudly to
acknowledge that so wonderful a system could alone be effected by the power,
wisdom and goodness of an infinite intelligence; and is therefore fit for the
admiration of man, as a reasoning creature, and one of the chief sources to
deduce the most exalted ideas of his Almighty Creator. What is condemned and
forbidden in the text is our making the blessings of this life the principal
object of our pursuits, so as to make us unmindful of the shortness of our
duration in this world, and that awful eternity into which we shall soon be
translated; so as to injure our bodies and debase the nobler faculties of the
soul, to unfit us for the various offices which our connexions require of us,
and give the mind a disrelish for the rational pleasures of religion, and for
those high and important meditations, which as men and christians it becomes us
frequently to be engaged in. TILLOTSON, Sermon. XXIII.
For this world is God's school, where immortal spirits clothed with flesh are
trained and bred up for eternity. And it behooves us to be exceeding thankful to
Almighty God that he has cautioned and commanded us against an immoderate
desire after worldly enjoyments. For we shall find it our interest if we look
no further than this life to make a sober use of its refreshments. For diseases
of the body, with loss of reputation, ruin of families, the total destruction
of communities, and above all the horrors of an evil conscience, attend our
eagerly pursuing the inordinate calls of vice.

Were we born for no other purpose than to eat, drink and play, we might indeed
strive who should roll foremost in the gay circle of pleasure, and only wish to
beat the intoxicating round of licentiousness. But to other ends were we called
into this life, and for far higher exercises were the faculties of the soul
given to us than to be the ministers of iniquity. That illustrious Personage
who came down from heaven for our salvation, has set us, and all his followers,
an excellent example of all those virtues and amiable qualities which it is our
duty to practice during our stay in this world. The love and charity, which,
like another celestial glory, shed a luster around him, the universal
philanthropy which he breathed, should kindle in our breasts the warmest
benevolence for all that bear the human shape; and the public-spiritedness of
his actions should inspire us with that generous principle which directs every
thought and deed to God's glory, and the public good.

He whose soul is set upon temporal pleasures and pursuits, will rarely find
leisure for any secret communion with the Father of Spirits, or feel any
inclination to enjoy so blessed a privilege. For the human mind is so formed as
to be incapable of following the bent of two differing passions together. Or
according to the language of scripture, we cannot serve God and Mammon. If we
are in love with the world, our thoughts will altogether be engaged in mean,
selfish views. Earthly happiness will be the sole mark we shall aim at, and
whatever may interfere with, or throw a check upon such a career, will be ever
disgustful in our eyes. How can those passions, which are absorbed in carnal
pursuits, be elevated with the flame of divine love? And how can that heart,
which is coiled up in the narrow circle of self-love, distend with the true
spirit of christian charity?

The pleasure which arises from the enjoyment of the good things of this world,
though taken in moderation, is of so fleeting and perishable a nature, as to
give but a momentary satisfaction, and yields no matter for comfortable
reflection in time of need. -- Could we call, from their mansions of clay, the
votaries of sensuality, the votaries of wealth, and the votaries of ambition,
that have bustled on the stage of this world for these four thousand years past
-- what account, think ye, would they give of their former favorite pursuits?
I imagine, they would tell us, that the reflection on the time past, on these
unprofitable schemes gave them but a poor consolation in the eternal world;
that they now reflect with sovereign contempt and abhorrence on what they once
were so greatly enamoured of; that the high debauch, the dissolute frolic, the
hoard of yellow dirt, the magnificent edifice, the splendid retinue, the
nobility of blood, and the applause of the world, would appear to them
unsubstantial, as the Poet happily expresses it, as -- the baseless fabric of
a vision. But far otherwise are the pleasures of religion and virtue; they are
of an undecaying nature; a fons perennis, a perpetual source of genuine comfort
flowing in the breast of every christian. They shall live with him beyond the
grave, and shall endure when this earthly globe shall be wrapped in flames, when
you heavens shall vanish away, and the sun and moon shall dissolve. Nay, they
shall exist, when time shall be lost in eternity, when new heavens shall roll
and a new earth shall bloom, 2 Pet. iii.13.
wherein righteousness shall dwell for ever and ever.

The love of the world is a subject no way susceptible of novelty, and what
every one can speak largely upon. And yet how rare and difficult is it for us
to take the matter rightly to heart. We make no scruple of acknowledging that
all the enjoyments under the sun are vain and unsubstantial. And yet vain and
empty as they are, how hard do we find it to abstract ourselves from them? In
some serious moments, perhaps, our souls, disgusted with some disappointment,
or unpleasing occurrence, assume an air of dignity, and affect to despise the
lower pleasures, the glittering gewgaws and the painted baubles of life. But,
alas! how soon do we fall from these stout resolutions, and suffer ourselves to
be ensnared with the next flattering temptation? Thus do we continue through
life, still meeting with some new disappointment, and yet still giving way to
the next temptation that comes in our way. That active principle that stirs
within our breasts must have some object on which to employ its busy and
enlarged powers; and could we but once fix it on its proper aim, how glorious
would be its pursuits! Could we but once convince ourselves of the nothingness
of all earthly bliss; could we but once see that the pleasures of this life,
are like the glories of a painted cloud, beautiful at a distance, but, upon a
near approach, nothing but a sun-gilt vapor; were this the case, I say, our
souls would soon begin to search out for some more substantial happiness, and
would quickly fix on that high and glorious source of all that is lovely, fair
and good; where it would perceive such irresistible excellency, such
transcendent glory and divine beauty, as would sweetly surprise and captivate
all the powers of the soul. And how greatly are we blessed in having our souls
so constituted as to be able to enjoy so exalted a pleasure! to be capable of
discovering, admiring and loving the excellencies and perfections of the
invisible God, and of imitating, though in great weakness, all his moral
attributes! to be capable of pleasures far superior to those of sense, arising
from the pursuit of what is excellent, and the practice of what is right! to be
capable of receiving the highest satisfaction from the performance of acts of
devotion, justice, mercy and charity; and, above all, to be capable of the
sublimest pleasure from the reflection, that he that does the will of God in
this world, shall abide for ever in uninterrupted bliss in the world to come!

Surely, then, the man who seriously reflects on the value of his immortal
soul, on the dignity of its nature, and the design of his coming into the
world, will never be enslaved to corruptible and sublunary joys. He will use
the things of this life as though he did not use them; and though his body may
sometimes even wish to rebel against his mind, yet he will never suffer his
nobler part to be satisfied with any happiness beneath that everlasting
beatitude which the Sovereign of Heaven alone can bestow. To this end he will
be continually endeavoring to wean himself from a too fond attachment to the
delights of this life; to subdue those impetuous passions, which like some
mighty torrent are apt to bear down all the powers of the mind, if not timely
controled; to prepare himself by frequent contemplation on a spiritual life,
for that pure etherial kingdom where no corruption can dwell. And happy, thrice
happy! the highly favored christian! who has the cooperating Grace of the
Divine Spirit to aid him in the arduous enterprise of perfecting himself!

If we take a brief view of the condition of a person who has been altogether
devoted to this world, and one who, having made a just estimate of human life,
has given up his mind to the precepts of Christ, I imagine we shall make no
hesitation in determining which character we would wish to possess. -- Behold
the man of the world under the hand of adversity, and he is the image of
unhappiness. Trembling and irresolute, he dreads to look for consolation in his
own bosom, its proper residence. -- The gay ideas of pleasure flit like the
vanishing wind before his view. Are the inexorable arrows of death pointed at
his heart? alas! ten thousand dreary forms affright his imagination, and
stiffen every pore with horror! Despairing to look forward, and dreading to
think on what has passed, he feels a certain fearful looking for of judgment,
and a ^^ry indignation already burning in his bosom. A reproaching conscience
stares him in the face, and the reward of an ill-spent life is intolerable to
his thoughts. -- But not so the man who has secured his happiness on the
glorious terms of the Gospel, whose salvation is sealed with the redeeming
blood of the Lamb, and who has endeavored to practice those graces and virtues
which adorned his godlike Master, while here on earth. Having long inured his
soul to the thoughts of a more perfect existence and glorious immortality, when
these elementary bodies shall mingle with their congenial dust, he feels no
anxiety at the thoughts of leaving this transitory life; and often wishes to
cast off the sin-worn tabernacle that detains his soul from mounting to that
throne, where myriads of glorified spirits are continually pouring forth their
immortal songs to the praise and honor of the Supreme and All-creating Lord!
-- Is the good man oppressed with affliction and attacked by adversity, is he
pursued by persecution, is he on the torturing rack, or bent beneath the
merciless hand of the executioner? is he committed to the flames, limb by limb,
and his whole body tumbling into dissolution? the testimony of a good
conscience, and an immovable confidence in the victorious Son of God shall
speak peace to his soul, and like a heavenly hand stretched forth from the
clouds, shall support him through all extremes, shall rob death of its sting,
and the grave of its victory.

Who would not then strive to possess so heroic and manly a spirit? Who would
be enslaved to the paltry pleasures of sense, when the joys of angels are at
his acceptance, when the delights of virtue are so superior to all others, and
so naturally fitted for the exalted powers of the soul? Is it so trifling an
advantage to disarm death of its awful terrors? to rise triumphant over the
grave? to be distinguished in God's courts with a crown of glory, and to enjoy
the raptures of the blessed through the boundless ages of futurity? If the
thoughts of meeting with some celebrated philosophers and poets in a future
state could make a wise heathen anticipate its joys; how great, think ye, must
be the christian's exultation, when he reflects, according to St. Paul's
sublime description, that he shall be translated from this life into Hebrews
xii.22, 23, 24
the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable
company of angels, and to the general assembly and church of the firstborn,
which are written in heaven, and to God the judge of all, and to Jesus the
mediator of the new covenant.

Knowing, therefore, that the world passes away, and the lust thereof, but he
that does the will of God abides for ever; who would be so far attached to
this unstable state as to risk his everlasting happiness on its account? If we
consider the great and glorious Being we have to answer to; what it is to
appear at his awful tribunal, to give an account of our conduct; that it is he
who shall distribute rewards and punishments for the deeds done in the flesh;
that, if any man have not the spirit of Christ he is none of his; and that the
fruits of the Spirit are love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance; I say, if we duly consider these things,
they are enough to animate us with a becoming sense of religion and virtue, and
to disengage us from the fascinating delights of sense. Moreover, when we are
assured that 2 Pet. iii.10, 11.
the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the which the
heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with
fervent heat, the earth also, and the works that are therein shall be burnt up;
seeing that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought
ye to be, in all holy conversation and godliness? Philip. iv.8.
Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if
there be any praise, think on these things -- still pressing toward the mark
for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, adding grace to
grace, and virtue to virtue, till ye are made meet to be partakers of that
transcendent happiness, which surpasses all human conception, and which God
has prepared for those who love and obey him.

And now may the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus,
that great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you
that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom, with
the divine illuminating Spirit, the tri-personal and ever adorable Godhead, be
all glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and ever. Amen.


