SERMONS TO GENTLEMEN UPON TEMPERANCE AND EXERCISE.

"Turgidus hic epulis, atque albo ventre lavatur,
"Gutture sulphureas lent exhalante mephites.
"Sed tremor inter vina subit, calidumque triental
"Excudit e manibus, dentes crepuere retecti,
"Uncta cadunt laxis, tunc pulmentaria labris,
"Hinc TUBA -- CANDELAE. --
PERSII SATYRA III. "Vitam sub Dio -- agat.
HOR. LIB. III. ODE II. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOHN DUNLAP, IN MAKKET-STREET.
M.DCC.LXXII.

PREFACE.
THE Author of the following Sermons takes this method of informing the Public,
that they never were preached. The title and style of Sermons were chosen for
no other purpose than to excite the attention of the Public to subjects highly
interesting to every body. It is unnecessary to mention the Author's name, as
he seeks nothing from his countrymen, but the pleasure of doing them good. If
he fails in this, he is disappointed in the only thing he had in view in
writing them.

DEDICATION, TO WILLIAM CADOGAN, M. D. FELLOW OF THE COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS IN
LONDON.
SIR,
AS embarked in the same common cause with you, of attempting to save the lives
of his Majesty's subjects, I have taken the liberty of prefixing your name to
these Sermons, not with the view of its protecting them, for it seems it was
not sufficient to protect your own work, but from a desire I had of showing my
high esteem of your head and heart. Although we differ in some points (which
are chiefly speculative) yet I am happy in finding that we agree in those
things which are most essential, in one sense of the words, to man's salvation.
It is with pleasure we now see the same freedom of enquity extending itself to
medicine, which has long prevailed in religion. While the common people reject
infallibility in the head of a church, and a sovereign efficacy in a few rites
and ceremonies, they have unhappily remained enslaved to the infallibility of
medicine, or a few trifling prescriptions, which are as unequal to the
expectations of the vulgar in curing diseases, as a wafer or extreme unction
are to expiate their sins. Physic will never suffer by undeceiving the common
people; but, on the contrary, like the Reformed Religion, it will become
illustrious by stripping it of its pageantry. -- Thus, the Indian receives not
half the pleasure from worshipping the sun, which the philosopher does from
viewing it through a telescope.

THE clergy are not less honored now than they were formerly, although they do
not pretend to work miracles, or to grant absolution -- so physicians would not
be less respected, should they sometimes disclaim their usurped omniscience of
the causes or events of diseases, nor attempt always to cure them by receipts
composed of ingredients drawn from every kingdom in nature, and every quarter
of the globe.

THE clergy are often told, that example goes farther than precept. Upon this
account, I think it would add much to the dignity of physic, if the professors
of it would live agreeable to their doctrines.

AN OLD PHYSICIAN always carries about with him the most honorable encomiums
in praise of his art. -- That you may honor the profession as much in this
respect, as you have done in your ingenious Dissertation on the Gout, is the
ardent wish of

SIR, Your most obedient humble servt. THE AUTHOR.

SERMON I. ON TEMPERANCE IN EATING.
PROVERBS xxiii. 1, 2, 3. When thou sit to eat with a ruler, consider
diligently what is before thee. And put a knife to thy throat, if thou be a man
given to appetite. Be not desirous of his dainties, for they are deceitful meat.


MY HEAREERS,
THESE are the words of King Solomon, emphatically called the Wise Man, from
his great pre-eminence in wisdom over the whole human race. His knowledge, like
his pleasures, was unconfined, and while he tortured nature for the one, he
ransacked her no less for the other. He was none of those philosophers, who
exclaim against the world for no other reason, than because they possess so
small a share of it. He tasted, he possessed, he knew every thing which the
mind of man in its most improved state is capable of tasting, possessing, or
knowing. This raises his character above all praise, and gives the same
eloquence to every thing which comes from his pen, as if a voice had proclaimed
it from heaven.

WITHOUT taking up your time in wiredrawing the words, which are plain, and
stand in need of no illustration, I shall proceed immediately to speak of
TEMPERANCE in EATING. The method I have chosen for this purpose, is to consider
it as it relates I. To the QUALITY. II. To the QUANTITY of our ALIMENT. And,
III. To the TIME of taking it. After this I shall conclude with an APPLICATION.


I. OF THE QUALITY OF OUR ALIMENT. There has been much commonplace
declamation upon this subject. There is such a variety in the appetites and
constitutions of mankind (implanted originally for wise purposes) that no fixed
rules can be laid down under this head. In general, the more simple our food
is, the better. Animal and vegetable food should always be mixed together by
people in health. -- That nature intended man should be supported by them both,
we infer from the structure of his teeth, and organs of digestion, which are
formed upon the compound principles of carnivorous and granivorous animals. The
proportion of vegetable food should always predominate, especially in warm
seasons, and warm climates. Wild animals, and those which are full grown,
should be preferred to tame and young animals, as being more easy of digestion
and perspiration. For the same reason, flesh which has been kept for some time,
is to be preferred to that which is newly killed.

MUCH has been said against high seasoned food. To persons, in the full vigor
of health and youth, I grant it may be hurtful; but to old, and to sickly
people, who are afflicted with a general torpor of the alimentary canal, it is
not only inoffensive, but absolutely necessary. I appeal to all such of my
hearers, as labor under a weakness of the stomach -- indigestion -- acid
belchings, and the like, whether a little salted or smoaked beef has not sat
easier upon your stomachs, and been sooner digested, than the most simple food
that could be contrived. High seasoned food is likewise necessary to the
inhabitants of low marshy countries, more especially at those seasons of the
year, when the diseases of such places are epidemic. It is remarked in some of
the West-Indian Islands, as well as in those parts of South-America, which are
within the tropic, that such as eat a large quantity of spices of all kinds,
with their food, are less subject to the intermitting and bilious fevers, than
those who avoid them. -- This is easily accounted for, when we reflect, how
much they obviate the relaxing powers of heat and moisture, which always
combine to produce these diseases. It is for this reason, probably, that
Providence has so ordered it, that the spicy trees grow spontaneously in warm
climates only, in all parts of the world.

BEFORE I conclude this head, I shall remark, that little mischief is done to
the constitution by the quality of aliment. Nature, for the most part, takes
the alarm, and, unless we use violence with her, deprives us of our relish for
those things, which are destructive to our constitutions. Such persons as love
meat with those qualities which are hurtful, too often love likewise an excess
in quantity, which leads us to the next head we proposed, namely, to speak

II. OF THE QUANTITY OF OUR ALIMENT. "Temperance (says Sir William Temple)
consists in a regular and simple diet, limited by every man's experience of his
own easy digestion." -- Food, therefore, may be said to be taken in too large a
quantity, when we do not feel light and cheerful after it. -- There are few who
do not eat one third, or a fourth more than is necessary to support them. The
chief incentive to this is the variety of our dishes, which excites us to eat
after the appetite is satisfied. Few men, I believe, ever eat to excess more
than once of one plain dish.

THE Church of Rome acts with a wise regard to the health, as well as morals of
her sons, in prescribing abstinence from flesh during Lent, and in allowing
them nothing but fish. -- Most of animals, in the spring of the year, or the
season of Lent, are very poor, and upon several accounts unfit for food; but
the chief reason upon which this canon is founded, and which serves our present
purpose more immediately, is, that by confining them to fish only, there is
less danger of their eating to excess. Nature, we see, not only in this, but in
another sensual enjoyment Let thy fountain be blessed, and rejoice with the
wife of thy youth. Let her be as the loving hind, and pleasant roe; let her
breasts satisfy thee at all times and be thou ravished always with her love.
And why will thou my son be ravished with a strange woman, and embrace the
bosom of a stranger?

PROVE. v. 18, 19, 20.
, seems to have set a guard over our health, and instead of rousing our
sensations by variety or novelty, kindly keeps them suspended, till appetite
and pleasure are awakened together, which to the same object they never will be
oftener than is consistent with the health and vigor of the constitution. This
wise economy in the make of our bodies, cannot be too much admired, especially
as we are enabled to discover in it the strict connection between the positive
precepts of heaven, and our own happiness.

NEXT to our eating of but one dish, I would inculcate eating put one hearty
meal a day. In support of this piece of advice, I might here summons many of
the illustrious dead among the ancient philosophers and legislators, who never
eat more than one hearty meal in the four and twenty hours. So common was this
simplicity of living in Greece, that Plato, upon being asked when he returned
to Athens from his travels into Sicily, what he had seen that was curious while
he was abroad, answered, Vidi monstrum in natura, hominem his saturatum in die.
-- I have beheld (said he) a monster in nature -- a man who eat two hearty
meals in a day. These are more than sufficient to repair the daily waste of the
body. They oppress nature, and keep her constantly fatigued, in concocting the
immense supplies of food which are thrown into the stomach. Although she
sometimes forbears long, yet sooner or later she takes ample vengeance of such
as treat her in this manner, by afflicting them with blotches, and other
disorders, which are the legitimate offspring of this species of intemperance.
But if we are to eat only one hearty meal a day, a question very naturally
occurs here, and that is, at what time should it be taken?

THIS brings us to our last general head, namely, to speak of temperance as it
relates to the

III. TIME OF EATING. At present noon is looked upon as the most proper for
this purpose. Hence we generally find dinner the principal meal through this
country. I am aware of the difficulty of opposing popular prejudices, and that
it is often much better to swim with the multitude down the stream, than to
stem it alone. I am aware too of the fate of reformers in religion -- politics
and science. Many have lost their characters -- their livings -- and even their
lives, by advancing things contrary to the established opinions of the world.
But, should this be my case, I will not conceal my sentiments, nor resist what
I look upon and feel to be the sacred power of truth. It is well known to every
one, that exercise of mind or body is disagreeable after dinner. Nature recoils
from them both. Every full meal is a stimulus to the whole system and brings on
a temporary fever, which shows itself in that chilliness and quickness of
pulse, which are so very remarkable after eating. To add to these either
exercise of body or mind, is to divide and weaken the powers of nature in a
work, which requires the combined action of them all. Upon this account, I
think the principal meal should always be made in the evening.

THE old Romans, we find, in the early and virtuous ages of their commonwealth,
made their chief meal after night. The French (except such of them as copy
after the English manners) and the Italians always make supper their principal
meal. The Indians in this country (who live the most agreeable to nature of any
people in the world) eat flesh but once in the four and twenty hours, and that
is in the evening, after the fatigues of fishing -- hunting or marching, are
over. The Spaniards, who have not yet adopted the French and Italian custom of
making their chief meal at night, are nevertheless so unanimous in the practice
of sleeping an hour or two every day after dinner, that it is a common thing to
hear a Spaniard say, in most of the cities of Spain, that "none but Englishmen
and dogs are to be seen in their streets immediately after dinner." Sleep is
always natural after eating. Nature calls loudly for it. It is common to all
the brute animals we are acquainted with. That state of the body or mind which
approaches nearest to it, is always most agreeable to us, when we cannot enjoy
it immediately. -- Hence we read, that it was a practice among the Romans to
sit upon cushions, and to lean upon each other at their entertainments. Our
SAVIOR adopted this custom. At the last feast he had with his disciples (which
was a supper) he admitted him who sat next to him to lean upon his bosom. --
But what proves, above all things, that rest and sleep are necessary after
eating, is, that digestion has been lately proved to be carried on chiefly by
FERMENTATION, to which rest, every body knows, is so essentially necessary,
that it cannot take place without it. Unless the body enjoys more or less of
this after eating, there can be no perfect concoction of the food. This is what
all must consent to, who have been obliged to ride on horseback, or to use any
violent exercise of body, after a hearty dinner. The digestion, in such cases,
is so disturbed, that persons have complained of being indisposed for several
days after it.

BUT methinks I hear some object and say, that eating a hearty supper makes
them restless in the night, and prevents their sleeping. To such I would wish
joy. -- It is a proof, that nature has not yet sunk under the weight of two
hearty meals a day; for I never heard any one make this complaint, who did not
likewise eat a hearty dinner. Leave off dining in your usual manner, and,
instead of eating half a pound, or a pound of flesh, with vegetables
proportioned to it, allay your appetite with a little bread and cheese -- a
bowl of light soup -- a cup of coffee or chocolate -- or, after the French
custom, with a few raisins, or an apple, and I am persuaded, you will feel no
inconvenience from eating a moderate supper. Here give me leave to remark to
you, that the more of these light substances you take during the day, the
better, as they tend to lessen the sense of hunger, or the keenness of the
appetite, which too often provokes us to intemperance. Sir Francis Bacon tells
us a story of a very old man, whose manner of living he enquired into, and
found that he observed no other rules than eating before he was hungry, and
drinking before he was dry; for by these means, he said, he was sure never to
eat, nor to drink too much at a time. -- If we appeal once more to the brute
animals, they will furnish us with arguments in favor of this practice. Every
analogy borrowed from them deserves to be attended to, as they have never yet
subjected their instincts to the tyranny of fashion. The cow and the horse, as
also the sheep, when they range at large in a pasture, feed with little
interruption during the day, and thus guard against the intemperate effects of
hunger. The horse, it is true, sometimes suffers from this cause, but it is
only when he is obliged to live as we do, that is, to divide his meals into
three or four in a day, and to work immediately afterward. It is universally
agreed, that people live much longer in warm than in cold climates. May not one
reason of this be owing to the heat of such climates diminishing their
appetites, and thus preventing their wearing out their constitutions by excess
in eating? -- I would have it remembered here, that in speaking of warm
climates, I mean the improved parts of Asia and Africa only. The warm climates
of America are as yet too little cultivated, to allow us to extend the
observation to our own country. -- But to return. Methinks I hear others say,
if we make supper our principal meal, we shall overset part of an old rule,
which bids us, "After dinner sit a while,
"After supper walk a mile."
This adage, it is true, from its great antiquity, as well as from its being
delivered in rhyme, comes armed with the strength of Sampson, but it does not
require the skill of a Delilah to cut its locks. I might here mention an
hundred common sayings in several of the arts and sciences, as well as in
common life, which are equally universal, and at the same time equally false
with the above. It is a vulgar error, and is repugnant both to experience and
sound philosophy. I conclude, therefore, that it is most agreeable to the usage
of the most civilized nations -- to the practice of savages -- to nature -- and
to common experience, to eat our chief meal at night, and that the seeming
objections against it are of no weight.

I HASTEN now to the APPLICATION of this discourse. And here I might exclaim
against the depravity of man, which has converted the common blessings of life
into weapons of destruction against himself. -- I might open Pandora's box, or
show you Milton's Lazar-house, -- "Wherein were laid
"Numbers of all diseased, all maladies
"Of ghastly spasm, or racking torture qualms
"Of heart-sick agony, all severous kinds,
"Convulsions, epilepsies, fierce catarrhs,
"Intestine stone and ulcer, colic pangs,
"Demoniac phrenzy, moaping melancholy,
"And moon-struck madness, pining atrophy,
"Marasmus, and wide wasting pestilence,
"Dropsies and asthmas, and joint-racking rheums."
And might prove to you, that most of these diseases are the children of
intemperance in eating. I might conduct you to yonder grave-yard, and point to
the tombs of many of your former companions, who "came up like flowers, and
were cut down," and who strictly speaking, "lived not out half their days." --
But, without entering upon these things, I shall conclude, by fixing your
attention on the picture of a man, who has spent part of his life "among
riotous eaters of flesh." -- Mark his pale countenance! His belly is swelled --
his physicians tell us that it arises from a fixed obstruction in his liver,
which has brought on a species of dropsy of the worst sort -- See! with what
difficulty he breathe! A slow fever consumes his vitals -- His thirst is
inextinguishable -- Say ye patrons and practicers of the healing art, can
nothing be done to relieve him from this deplorable condition? -- Call for some
rich dainty -- Perhaps this may revive him -- Tell him of his past enjoyments
-- of the honor he once had of eating and drinking with the "Rulers" and chief
men of the land. Alas! these can avail nothing. -- The sight of the one -- and
the remembrance of the other, serve only to increase his pain. -- Will cordials
and bitters do nothing to rouse the languid powers of life? Their virtues have
long ago been exhausted, when there was no occasion for them. Better, far
better, would it have been for him, had he (in the words of our text) "put a
knife to his throat," or even plunged a dagger into his heart the first day he
gave himself up to his appetite, than lived to endure such aggravated misery.
In a word, all nature is up in arms against him -- The elements keep back their
medicinal aids -- They take part in their Creator's quarrel, whose bounties he
has abused -- The air refuses to expand his lungs -- water -- to allay his
thirst -- fire -- to warm his limbs, and thus he dies his own executioner. Be
exhorted, my hearers, from these considerations to temperance and sobriety. If
you have any love for yourselves -- for your families -- for your posterity --
and for the community to which you belong, think of these things. I have only
to add my best wishes, that what has been delivered upon this subject may have
due weight with you, more especially at this season of the year These Sermons
were written about Christmas.
, when, as the Poet expresses it, "Falsely, grateful man, at the full feast,
"To do God honor makes himself a beast.


SERMON II. ON THE USE AND ABUSE OF WINE AND STRONG DRINK.
PROVERBS xxxi. 6, 7. Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and
wine to those that be of heavy hearts. Let him drink and forget his poverty,
and remember his misery no more.


MY HEARERS,
THE last time I addressed you from this place, I enlarged upon Temperance in
Eating. In the present discourse, I shall lay before you a few considerations
upon the USE AND ABUSE OF WINE AND STRONG DRINK. This, I shall attempt, by
considering more particularly the words of our text. For this purpose, I shall
enquire, I. TO WHOM WINE AND STRONG DRINK SHOULD BE GIVEN. II. TO WHOM THEY
SHOULD NOT BE GIVEN; and then I shall conclude with an APPLICATION.


I. WINE OR STRONG DRINK MAY BE GIVEN,

1. To the sick. The diseases in which wine is indicated are, First, The slow
nervous fever. Here the powers of nature are weakened and oppressed, and the
poor patient may, strictly speaking, be said to be ready to perish. Wine may be
administered therefore in such cases with advantage. -- If ever it fails of
doing, service, it is because it is given in too small a quantity. Secondly, In
chronic diseases, which are accompanied with a languor of the whole system,
which shows itself in a more especial manner in the stomach, wine is a
sovereign remedy. It was to relieve a complaint of this kind that St. Paul
prescribed it to his son Timothy. By its gentle stimulus it excites the action
of the stomach -- invigorates the circulation -- opens obstructions -- and
thus, in some measure, renews the whole constitution. The relief which wine
affords in these cases, is the more certain, if the weakness of the system has
been brought on by grief, or any of those passions which are of the sedative
kind. Here the heavy heart is revived, and made to sing for joy.

2. WINE is sometimes necessary to the inhabitants of low marshy countries. The
moisture of such places obstructs perspiration, and brings on a general laxity
of the system. When used in a moderate quantity, it braces the solids, and by
keeping up a proper balance between them and the fluids, it obviates diseases.
-- Hence we seldom find those people, who live in affluence, and who can afford
to drink a glass or two of generous wine every day, afflicted with those fevers
and agues, which make such great havoc among poor people. The Hollanders have
been charged with the national reflection of loving strong drink. This censure
is unjust, as necessity at first drove them to it, and as it is by using wine
and other spirituous liquors in moderation, that they guard themselves from the
ill effects of the moisture to which their country is always exposed. Remember
you are to use wine in these cases only during that season, in which these
diseases are epidemic, which, in this climate, is chiefly during the months of
August, September and October. But,

3. WINE is principally useful to old people, or such as are in the decline of
life. It is hard to fix the limits between the beginning of old age, and the
close of manhood. At a medium, the body begins to decline at the age of
forty-five or fifty in this climate. Then the hot fit of the fever of life
begins to abate, and from the many disappointments in love -- friendship --
ambition or trade, which most of men meet with by the time they arrive at this
age, they generally feel a heavy heart. -- The decay of the vital heat -- the
slowness of the pulse -- the diminution of the strength, all show that the
vigor of the system is declining. Here wine prolongs the strength and powers
of nature. It is the grave of past misfortunes -- In a word, it is another name
for philosophy. Remember, my aged hearers, if you would expect to enjoy a long
reprieve from the infirmities of age, you must begin to use wine moderately,
and increase the quantity of it as you descend into the valley of life. -- Add
to this, you must diminish the quantity of your solid aliment. -- This nature
points out to us, by depriving us of our teeth in proportion as we grow old,
teaching us thereby, that we have now no longer use for them.

I COME now to the second general head of my discourse, namely,

II. TO SHOW TO WHOM WINE OR STRONG DRINK SHOULD NOT BE GIVEN.

IN the first place, it should not be given to children. Wine, we said
formerly, is of a heating nature, and is indicated in those constitutions and
ages, where a stimulus is necessary to support the powers of life. Children,
from the natural vigor of their systems, which shows itself in the remarkable
quickness of their pulses, and in their great activity of mind and body, stand
in no need of a stimulus of this kind. On the contrary, every thing should be
withheld from them, which tends to add to the natural impetuosity of their
fluids, or the vigorous action of their solids. Hence we are led to commend
those parents, who forbid their children to taste all kinds of animal food
(upon the account of its stimulating quality) till they are upwards of seven or
eight years of age. But,

2. STUDIOUS people, or those who have occasion to exercise their thinking
faculties much, should abstain from wine. Thinking is a stimulus to the
constitution, and wears out the springs of life beyond the most laborious
exercise of body. -- Much study is literally a "weariness of the flesh." --
Hence we find statesmen, generals, and even such as fill the learned
professions with dignity, are more subject to the gout, from small deviations
in their ordinary way of living, than other people. Wine, and a constant or
vigorous exertion of the active faculties of the soul, produce nearly the same
effects upon the body. -- This is one reason probably why Solomon, in the
chapter from whence our text is taken, says, "It is not for Kings to drink
wine, nor for Princes strong drink." Much recreation and great exercise of
body, are necessary to guard against the effects of too much application of the
mind to business; should the stimulating effects of wine be added to this,
relief will be sought from exercise and amusements in vain. But,

3. WINE should not be used by young people, or such as are under five and
thirty or forty years of age, unless they labor under some of those evils we
mentioned under our first head. The pursuits and pleasures of youth are too
often more than sufficient to keep the system in an excited state. To add wine
to these, is like throwing oil into fire, in order to extinguish it. It is
always a sign of a vitiated heart, when in full health wine is called for, in
order to impart cheerfulness to it Oh! seldom may the fatal hour return,
Of drinking deep! I would not daily taste,
Except when life declines, even sober cups.
Weak withering age, no rigid law forbids,
With frugal nectar, smooth and slow, with balm,
The sapless habit daily to bedew,
And give the hesitating wheels of life
Gliblier to play. But youth has better joys;
And is it wise, when youth with pleasure flows,
To squander the reliefs of age and pain?
ARMSTRONG'S Art of preserving health, Book II.
. By avoiding wine in the early part of life, you will receive benefit from it
when you grow old. You will likewise escape that dreadful scourge of
intemperance the gout. This is the natural offspring of wine. In the great
empire of China the gout is unknown. This is owing to their being unacquainted
with the juice of the grape, and is a proof that the other causes, which have
been accused of bringing on the gout, act too feebly to produce it, unless they
are roused into action by the use of wine. Besides all this, by refraining from
wine during this period of your lives, you may become the fathers of a
healthful progeny, whose ruddy looks, and well formed limbs, will adorn your
happy board, and more than repay you for your abstinence and self-denial.

BUT methinks I hear some of you say -- why all this noise about wine and
strong drink? -- Have we not seen hundreds, who have made it a constant
practice to get drunk almost every day for thirty or forty years, who,
notwithstanding, arrived to a great age, and enjoyed the same good health as
those who have followed the strictest rules of temperance -- or who have lived
by weight and measure like Lewis Cornaro himself? -- Some instances of this
kind I grant might be mentioned, but they are few when compared with the number
of those who have abstained from wine and strong drink. Even these have began
to drink after their constitutions were on the decline. They were moreover
generally poor people, who were obliged to work hard for their support, and
thus by their labor carried off the effects of their intemperance. But who
knows how much longer they might have lived, had they been more temperate.
Perhaps after all, they died martyrs to spirituous liquors, and at the age of
eighty, ninety, or even an hundred, were guilty of a species of suicide. If you
should see a sailor fall from the mast of a ship under full sail into the sea,
and afterward be taken up alive, would you not think his companions mad, if
they should leap from the same place, in hopes of meeting with the same good
fortune? --

BUT who is he that says, if we banish wine from company, how shall we contrive
to entertain our friends? The poets and philosophers of former ages, who abound
so much with the praises of wine, would rise up against us, should we tear so
precious a relict from the temple of hospitality. To this I answer, that more
have complained of drinking too much, than of drinking too little in company.
How many have refused to be present at entertainments, only because they were
afraid of being forced to drink to excess? How many are obliged to counterfeit
excuses, or to steal privately from company for the same reason? What confusion
-- what discord, among the most intimate friends, have you not seen follow
those feasts where the host has relied upon the quantity or goodness of his
wine for the entertainment of his guests? -- Three or four glasses of wine will
impart all its cheerful qualities to a stomach which is not rendered insensible
to it by habit or disease. These may be taken occasionally among friends by
persons of all ages and conditions, especially upon festive seasons. These
seasons, however, should not recur too often. Our SAVIOR wrought a miracle at
a wedding, in order to furnish wine to the guests; but he fed five thousand
people with a few loaves and fishes in the wilderness, without ordering any
wine to be drank after them. This is the more remarkable, as there is no food
which is supposed to require wine with it so much as fish, -- it being a common
saying, that it should always swim three times -- namely, in water -- butter --
and wine.

IT is time now to hasten to the APPLICATION of this discourse.

HERE then I would call upon the diseased and the melancholy part of my
hearers, as well as such whose misfortune it is to live in low marshy
countries, to come and partake of this sovereign antidote to disease and care.
-- Banish your cordials -- your bitters, and your magnesias, the paltry
prescriptions of mercenary quacks, and substitute in the room of them a few
glasses of good old wine. But to you my aged hearers -- my venerable fathers
would I chiefly address myself. Come here and drown all your sorrows in full
bumpers of Lisbon or Madeira. -- Here forget the inconstancy of your mistresses
-- the the persidy of friends -- the broken promises of your patrons -- and the
villainy of those who have betrayed either your interest, or character. --
Above all things, here you may forget not only to complain, but even to feel
most of those infirmities which are too often connected with your age. "The
keepers of the house, shall cease to tremble -- nor shall the strong men bow
themselves, and although your grinders may cease, because they are few, yet
those that look out of the windows, shall not be darkened. -- Ye shall not rise
at the voice of the bird, unable to sleep any longer, nor shall the
grass-hopper any more be a burden to you." The days shall never come in which
you shall say, "we have no pleasure in them." Thus will you prolong your health
and spirits till, like full matured fruit, you shall drop into the lap of your
mother earth. Your bodies, like the garments of the children of Israel, shall
not be torn by the ravages of time -- and the same stroke which puts an end to
your enjoyments, shall cut the silver cord of life.

IT is now time to address myself to another class of my hearers. First, let me
call upon parents to withhold wine from their children. It is a poison instead
of a cordial, which you pour down their little throats. No fortune which you
can bequeath them, will ever be equivalent for depriving them of the
inestimable blessing of a good constitution. Next, let me call upon statesmen,
legislators, and all those who labor for the public good, to abstain from
wine. Remember you are the guardians of your country. Public business should,
like time, have no pauses. How often have treaties been suspended, and even
marches and battles been delayed, by the principals or leaders of them being
laid up with a fit of the gout. Suffer not the short lived pleasures of
drinking to cheat you out of your fame or importance, or to obstruct your
motions through these exalted spheres which you are called to fill. But to you
young men, would I now, in the last place, address myself. -- You have heard
several arguments against the necessity of your drinking wine. None of you can
pretend to be of heavy hearts, or ready to perish. If you are not moved by a
regard to your own health and happiness -- think of your posterity. Let not
your third and fourth generations be visited for your iniquities. They will
imprecate vengeance upon your ashes every time they feel the punishment of your
folly.

BUT if, after all I have said, you are determined to persevere in your usual
manner of living, I must address you once more in the words of The Wise Man,
and say, "Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in
the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of
thine eyes;" yet remember there is a time coming when you will repent that you
have hated reproof, and turned a deaf ear to the voice of the preacher. There
is the same inseparable connection between intemperance and disease, that there
is betwixt vice and its punishment. Unless you should be cut off by some sudden
gust of intemperance, you may depend upon feeling the effects of it hereafter.
Think now, I beseech you, of the sleepless nights -- of the low spirits -- of
the scorching pains in your hands and feet which await you. To give you an idea
of the dreadful consequences of excess in drinking, let me beg of you to
accompany me to the bedchamber of a man afflicted with the gout. Be not
alarmed at his groans -- Let us go in -- Is this the man who a few years ago
was the life and soul of every company he went into? -- Is this he who boasted
of the quantity of liquor he could drink without being intoxicated? -- who
spent his youth in a constant round of gaity and pleasure? -- How is he
changed! -- It is now eleven years since he has been a prisoner in this
chamber. His physicians have long since deserted him, nor is it any reproach to
their art that they cannot cure him, any more than it is that they are unable
to raise the dead. He is a burden to his friends. In vain does he seek relief
from wine -- food -- physic -- company, or even from philosophy. His only
amusement is to number the days of his misery on the wall with the chalk which
grows on the ends of his fingers. -- Death, the last friend of the wretched,
refuses to come at his call -- He lives -- I retract the word -- He has ceased
to live ever since his confinement -- He breathes shorter and shorter, till at
last he closes his eyes for ever in the silence of death. This is no
exaggerated picture. We have all seen it at some time of our lives.

I CANNOT conclude what has been said upon this subject, with words more to our
purpose than those of Solomon, "Who has woe? who has sorrow? who has
contentions? who has babbling? who has wounds without cause? who has redness
of eyes? They that tarry long at the wine, they that go to seek mixed wine. Lock
not thou upon the wine when it is red, when it gives his color in the cup,
when it moves itself aright. At the last it biteth like a serpent, and
stingeth like an adder."

SERMON III. ON EXERCISE.
PROVERBS vi. 9, 10, 11. How long will thou sleep, O sluggard? when will thou
arise out of thy sleep? -- Yet a little sleep -- a little slumber -- a little
folding of the hands to sleep. -- So shall thy poverty come as one that
travelleth, and thy want as an armed man.


MY HEARERS,
MAN was formed to be active. The vigor of his mind, and the health of his
body can be fully preserved by no other means, than by labor of some sort.
Hence, when we read the sentence which was pronounced upon man after the fall,
"That in the sweat of his brow he should eat bread all the days of his life."
We cannot help admiring the goodness of the Supreme Being, in connecting his
punishment with what had now become the necessary means of preserving his
health. Had God abandoned him to idleness, he would have entailed tenfold
misery upon him. The solid parts of his body, particularly the nerves, would
have lost their tone -- the muscles would have lost their feeling and moving
powers -- and the fluids in consequence of this, would have lost their original
or native qualities, and have stagnated in every part of his body. But, instead
of inflicting this complicated punishment upon him, he bids him be ACTIVE, and
implants a principle within him which impels him to it. Civil society and
agriculture began together. The latter has always been looked upon among the
first employments of mankind. -- It calls forth every individual of the human
race into action. -- It employs the body in a manner the most conducive to its
health. -- It preserves and increases the species most; -- and lastly, it is
most friendly to the practice of virtue. For these reasons, therefore, it is
natural to conclude, that it is most agreeable to the Supreme Being that man
should be supported by it. The earth is a skilful as well as a kind mother to
her children. Instead of pouring her treasures in lapfuls upon them at once,
and consigning them to idleness ever afterward, she bestows her gifts with a
sparing hand, and ceases to yield them any thing, as soon as they cease to
cultivate her. Thus by entailing constant labor, she meant to entail constant
health upon them.

BUT these employments were too innocent for the restless spirit of man. He
soon deserted his fields -- and his flocks -- and sought for some more speedy
methods of acquiring fortune -- independence -- and a superiority over his
fellow creatures. These have been obtained by commerce -- war -- rapine -- and
lastly, to the reproach of the American colonies, and of humanity, be it
spoken, by the perpetration of a crime, compared with which, every other breach
of the laws of nature or nations, deserves the name of Holiness, I mean, by
SLAVERY. But in exchange for these, he has given up that greatest of all
blessings, HEALTH. He has had recourse to medicine as a succedaneum for
labor: but this has proved ineffectual; for the fossil -- vegetable -- and
those parts of the animal kingdom which are employed in medicine, have not yet
learned, like man, to rise in rebellion against the will of their Creator.
Solomon seems to have been aware of this in the words of our text, and hence we
hear him calling upon him to awake from his unhealthy "slumber" -- to rise from
his enervating bed -- to unfold his "arms," and employ them in some useful
labor, least sickness, with its companion "poverty," should come upon him like
"travail upon a woman with child," or like an "armed man," neither of which can
be avoided or resisted. But Solomon, and all the preachers from his time to the
present day, who have addressed him upon this subject, have used their
eloquence in vain. Since therefore we cannot bring man back again to his
implements of husbandry, we must attempt to find out some kinds of exercise as
substitutes for them. The most healthy and long-lived people are found among
the laboring part of mankind -- Would the rich then enjoy health and long
life, they must do that of choice which these people do of necessity. They must
by exercise, subject themselves to a kind of voluntary labor.

AS this discourse is addressed chiefly to the rich and the luxurious, who are
the most given to idleness, I shall confine myself to Exercise only; and, in
order to handle the subject in the most extensive manner, I shall consider I.
THE DIFFERENT MODES OF EXERCISE. II. THE PROPER TIME FOR USING IT; and then I
shall conclude with an APPLICATION.


I. All Exercise may be divided into ACTIVE and PASSIVE.

ACTIVE EXERCISE includes walking -- running -- dancing -- fencing -- swimming,
and the like.

PASSIVE EXERCISE includes sailing -- riding in a carriage, and on horseback.
The last of these is of a mixed nature, and is in some measure active as well
as passive. We shall treat of each of them in order.

OF ACTIVE EXERCISE.

WALKING is the most gentle species of it we are acquainted with. It promotes
perspiration, and if not continued too long, invigorates and strengthens the
system. As the most simple and wholesome drink, namely water, is within every
body's reach, so this species of simple and wholesome exercise is in every
body's power, who has the use of his limbs. It is to be lamented, that
carriages are substituted too often in the room of it. In Pekin in China, we
are told, that none but the Emperor, and a few of the first officers of state,
are suffered to use chariots. Although the intention of this law was to
suppress the number of horses, in order to make room for the increase and
support of the human species, in the number of which the riches of all
countries consist, yet we find it attended with good effects otherwise; for the
rich and the great, by being obliged to walk in common with the poor people,
enjoy with them the common blessing of health, more than people of the same
rank in other countries. To such as can bear it, I would recommend walking
frequently up a hill. The inhabitants of mountainous countries are generally
healthy and long lived. This is commonly attributed to the purity of the air in
such places. Although this has a chief share in it, yet I cannot help thinking,
that the frequent and necessary exercise of climbing mountains, which these
people are obliged to undergo, adds much to their health and lives. Every body
knows how much walking up a hill tends to create an appetite. This depends upon
its increasing the insensible perspiration -- a secretion with which the
appetite, and the state of the stomach in general, are much connected.

RUNNING is too violent to be used often, or continued for any length of time.
The running footmen in all countries are short-lived -- Few of them escape
consumptions before they arrive at their thirty-fifth year. -- Sweating and
perspiration, according to Sanctorius, have been found to be incompatible. --
The former always suppresses the latter. Upon this account, I would recommend
it to be used as seldom as possible.

DANCING is a most salutary exercise. Future ages will be surprised to hear,
that rational creatures should, at any time, have looked upon it as a criminal
amusement. To reason against it, from its abuse, concludes equally strong
against the lawfulness of every thing we hold sacred and valuable in life. --
It was a part of the Jewish worship. By its mechanical effects on the body, it
inspires the mind with cheerfulness, and this, when well founded, and properly
restrained, is another name for religion. It is common among the Indians, and
the savage nations of all countries, upon public and festive occasions. -- They
have their war -- their love -- and their religious dances. The music, which
always accompanies this exercise, has a pleasing and salutary effect upon the
body as well as the mind. It is addressed through the avenue of the ears to the
brain, the common center of life and motion, from whence its oscillations are
communicated to every part of the system, imparting to each, that equable and
uniform vigor and action, upon which the healthy state of all the functions
depends. It would lead us to a long digression, or I might here mention many
remarkable cures which have been performed, particularly of those disorders,
which are much connected with the nervous system, by the magic power of music.
Dancing should not be used more than once or twice a week. It should never be
continued 'till weariness comes on, nor should we expose ourselves to the cold
air too soon after at.

FENCING calls forth most of the muscles into exercise, particularly those
which move the limbs. The brain is likewise roused by it, through the avenue of
the eyes, and its action, as in the case of music, is propagated to the whole
system. It has long been a subject of complaint, that the human species has
been degenerating for these several centuries. When we see the coats of mail of
our ancestors, who fought under the Edwards and Henry's of former ages, we
wonder how they moved, much more how they achieved such great exploits,
beneath the weight of such massy coverings. We grant that rum -- tobacco -- tea
-- and some other luxuries of modern invention, have had a large share in
weakening the stamina of our constitutions, and thus producing a more feeble
race of men; yet we must attribute much of our great inferiority in strength,
size and agility to our forefathers, to the disuse which the invention of
gunpowder and fire arms has introduced of those athletic exercises, which
were so much practiced in former ages, as a part of military discipline.

TOO much cannot be said in praise of SWIMMING, or as the poet of Avon
expresses it -- "buffeting the waves with lusty sinews." Besides exercising the
limbs, it serves to wash away the dust, which is apt to mix itself with the
sweat of our bodies in warm weather. Washing frequently in water, we find, was
enjoined upon the Jews and Mahometans, as a part of their religious ceremonies.
The Hollanders are cleanly in their houses and streets, without remembering, or
perhaps knowing, that cleanliness was absolutely necessary at first, to guard
against the effects of those inundations of mire, to which their country is
always exposed -- so a Jew and a Mussulman contend for, and practice their
ablutions, without remembering that they were instituted only to guard them
against those cutanious diseases, to which the constant accumulation of sordes
upon their skins in a warm climate, naturally exposed them. For the same
reason, I would strongly recommend the practice of bathing, and swimming,
frequently in the summer season. But remember, you should not stay too long in
the water at one time, least you lessen instead of increasing the vigor of the
constitution.

TO all these species of exercise which we have mentioned, I would add,
SKEATING, JUMPING, also, the active plays of TENNIS, BOWLS, QUOITS, GOLF Golf
is an exercise which is much used by the Gentlemen in Scotland. A large common
in which there are several little holes is chosen for the purpose. It is played
with little leather balls stuffed with feathers; and sticks made somewhat in
the form of a bandy-wicket. He who puts a ball into a given number of holes,
with the fewest strokes, gets the game. The late Dr. M'KENZIE, Author of the
essay on Health and Long Life, used to say, that a man would live ten years the
longer for using this exercise once or twice a week.
, and the like. The manner in which each of these operate, may be understood
from what we said under the former particulars.

ACTIVE exercise includes, in the last place, TALKING -- READING with an
AUDIBLE VOICE -- SINGING and LAUGHING. They all promote the circulation of the
blood through the lungs, and tend to strengthen those important organs, when used
in moderation. The last has the advantage over them all, inasmuch as the mind
co-operates with it. May unfading laurels bloom to the latest ages upon the
grave of him Dr. Stern.
who said, "That every time a man laughs, he adds something to his life."

I WOULD remark here, that all these species of exercise which we have
described, should be varied according to age -- sex -- temperament -- climate
-- and season. Young people stand in less need of exercise than old. -- Women
less than men. The natural vigor of their constitutions is such, that they
suffer least from the want of it. This will explain the meaning, and show the
propriety of an opinion of a modern Philosopher Rousseau.
that "Women only should follow those mechanical arts which require a sedentary
life." But again, a man who is phlegmatic, requires more frequent and violent
exercise than he who is of a bilious constitution: And lastly, people in warm
climates and seasons, require less than those who live in cold. As Providence,
by supplying the inhabitants of warm climates with so many of the spontaneous
fruits of the earth, seems to have intended they should labor less than the
inhabitants of cold climates, so we may infer from this, that less exercise,
which is only a substitute for labor, is necessary for them. The heat of such
climates is sufficient of itself to keep up a regular and due perspiration. We
said in a former discourse, that the longest lived people were to be found in
warm climates, and we gave one conjecture into the cause of it. It may not be
improper here to add another. The coldness of northern climates, from the
vigor it gives to the constitution, prompts to all kinds of exercise, which
are not always restrained within proper bounds. These, when used to excess,
wear out the body. Thus, blowing a fire, may cause it to burn the brighter, but
it consumes it the sooner. The inhabitants of warm climates being less prompted
to these things, their bodies continue longer unimpaired. I confine this
observation, as in the former instance, to the improved parts of Asia and
Africa only. The inhabitants of the West-Indian islands are so mixed, and
partake so much of the European manners, that we cannot as yet include them in
any general remarks which are made upon this subject.

I COME to speak of those exercises which are of a PASSIVE NATURE. These are
proper chiefly for valetudinarians: But, as I intend these sermons should be of
use to them as well as the healthy, I shall make a few remarks upon each of
them.

THE life of a SAILOR is environed with so many dangers, that Heaven has in
compensation for them connected with it an exemption from many diseases. In
vain do the angry elements assault him. His body, like some huge promontory, is
proof against them all. Notwithstanding the dangers from shipwreck -- fire --
falling over board -- and famine, to which sailors are exposed, I believe, that
if we were to count an hundred sailors, and the same number of people on land,
in a place that was ordinarily healthy, we should find more of the former alive
at the end of ten years than the latter. The exercise of SAILING is constant.
Every muscle is occasionally brought into exercise from the efforts we make to
keep ourselves from falling. These efforts continue to be exerted by the oldest
sailors, although the consciousness of the mind in these, as well as in many
other actions we perform, is not observed from the influence of habit. By means
of this regular and gentle exercise, the blood is moved in those small
capillaries, where it is most apt to stagnate, and perspiration is increased,
which is carried off as fast as it is discharged from the body, by the constant
change of atmosphere in a ship under sail. I say nothing here of the benefit of
the sea air, it being entirely negative. Its virtue both at sea and on the
seashore, consists in nothing but its being freed from those noxious animal
and vegetable effluvia, which abound in the air, which comes across land. From
what has been said, you will no longer be surprised at the uncommon appetite
which some people feel at sea. It is owing to the great and constant discharge
of the aliment (after it has undergone its usual changes) by means of
perspiration. I would recommend this species of exercise to consumptive people,
especially to such as labor under a spitting of blood. Dr. Lind tells us Essay
on the means of preserving the health of seamen.
, "That out of 5741 sailors who were admitted into the naval hospital at
Haslar, near Portsmouth, in two years, only 360 of them had consumptions, and
in one fourth of these, (he says,) it was brought on by bruises or falls." In
the same number of hospital patients, in this or any other country, I am
persuaded six times that number would have been consumptive -- so much does the
gentle exercise of sailing fortify the lungs against all accidents, and
determine the quantity and force of the fluids toward the surface of the body.

RIDING IN A CHARIOT has but few advantages, inasmuch as we are excluded from
the benefit of fresh air; an article, upon which the success of all kinds of
exercise in a great measure depends. It should be used only by such persons as
are unable to walk or to ride on horseback. We cannot help lamenting here, that
those people use this mode of exercise the most, who stand in the greatest need
of a more violent species of it.

RIDING ON HORSEBACK is the most manly and useful species of exercise for
gentlemen. Bishop Burnet expresses his surprise at the lawyers of his own time,
being so much more long-lived (^^eteris paribus) than other people, considering
how much those of them who become eminent in their profession, are obliged to
devote themselves to constant and intense study. He attributes it entirely to
their RIDING the circuits so frequently, to attend the different courts in
every part of the kingdom. This no doubt has a chief share in it: But we shall
hereafter mention another cause which concurs with this, to protract their
lives. It may be varied according to our strength, or the nature of our
disorder, by walking -- pacing -- trotting -- or cantering our horse. All those
diseases which are attended with a weakness of the nerves, such as the hysteric
and hypochondriac disorders, which show themselves in a weakness of the stomach
and bowels -- indigestion -- low spirits, etc. require this exercise. It should
be used with caution in the consumption, as it is generally too violent, except
in the early stage of that disorder. In riding, to preserve health, eight or
ten miles a day are sufficient to answer all the purposes we would wish for.
But in riding, to restore health, these little excursions will avail nothing.
The mind as well as the body must be roused from its languor. In taking an
airing, as it is called, we ride over the same ground for the most part every
day. We see no new objects to divert us, and the very consideration of our
riding for health sinks our spirits so much, that we receive more harm than
good from it. Upon this account I would recommend long journies to such people,
in order, by the variety or novelty of the journey to awaken and divert the
mind. Many people have by these means been surprised into health. Persons who
labor under hysteric or epileptic disorders, should be sent to cold; those who
labor under hypochondriac or consumptive complaints should visit warm climates.

BEFORE I finish this head of our discourse, I shall add a few words concerning
the exercise of the faculties of the soul. The mind and body have a reciprocal
action upon each other. Are our passions inflamed with desire or aversion? Or
does our reason trace out relations in those things which are the objects of
our understanding? -- The body we find is brought into sympathy. The pulse and
the circulation of the blood are immediately quickened. Perspiration and the
other secretions are promoted, and the body is sensibly invigorated afterward.
The body partakes therefore of the torpor which the mind contracts by its
neglecting to exercise its faculties. He must be but little acquainted with
biography, who has not remarked, that such as have distinguished themselves in
the literary world, have generally been long-lived. ADDISON, SWIFT, LOCK,
NEWTON, FRANKLIN, with many others whom we might mention, all found a retreat
in the evening of their lives under the shade of laurels which they had planted
in their youth. Perhaps in most cases, they might promise themselves an
exemption from diseases, and a death from mere old age, could they be persuaded
to relinquish their midnight lamp before the oil which feeds it was consumed.
Great care should be taken, however, to avoid too great application of the mind
to study. The most powerful medicines in nature are the most certain poisons.
Many promising geniuses have sacrificed themselves, before they arrived at the
altar in the Temple of Fame. Such as are in danger of suffering from this
cause, will do well in consulting the ingenious and humane Dr. Tissot's
excellent treatise upon the diseases of literary people. The PASSIONS as well
as our reason, should always be exercised as much as possible. We shall walk --
run -- dance -- swim -- fence -- sail -- and ride to little purpose, unless we
make choice of an agreeable friend to accompany us. Solitude is the bane of
man; insomuch, that it is difficult to tell which suffers most, the soul in its
qualities, or the body in its temperament, from being alone. Too great a
concourse of people breeds diseases. Too much company is destructive to
cheerfulness. For the sake of both mind and body, therefore, we should move in
a little circle, and let heaven circumscribe it for us. Let our wives and
children be always around us, or if we are not blessed with these, let a few
cheerful friends be our constant companions. It is remarked, that more single
people die among those who are come to manhood than married, and all physicians
agree, that single men and women, compose by far the greatest number of their
chronic patients among adults. Some men may talk against the cares of a family.
They are unavoidable, it is true, but they are necessary. Stagnating waters are
never sweet. Thus, these little cares, by keeping the tenderer passions always
agitated, prevent that uniformity in life, which is so foreign and disagreeable
both to the body and mind. After all, I believe, I shall have the suffrages of
most of my hearers, when I add, that they are at least balanced by the sweets
of domestic friendship.

WE come now to the next head of our discourse, namely,

II. To enquire into the proper TIME for EXERCISE -- Sanctorius informs us
Sect. V. Aphorism vii.
, that "exercise, from the seventh to the eleventh hour after eating, wastes
more insensibly in one hour, than in three at any other time." If this be true,
then (supposing you sup at eight o'clock in the evening) that exercise which is
used from five 'till seven o'clock in the morning, will promote the greatest
discharge in a given time, by insensible perspiration. Such as make dinner
their principal meal, are excluded from the benefit of this aphorism; as the
interval, between the seventh and the eleventh hour, with them (supposing they
dine at two o'clock in the afternoon) is from nine in the evening 'till one
o'clock in the morning -- a time, in which darkness, and the unwholesome night
air, forbid walking -- riding -- and almost every other species of manly
exercise we have described.

I KNOW it will be objected here, that we often see laborers return, after a
full meal, to their work, without feeling any inconvenience from it. This is
like the argument of those who recommend raw flesh to the human species,
because the strongest and fiercest animals in nature eat it. It is because they
are so fierce and so strong, that they are able to digest raw flesh. In like
manner it is, because these men are naturally so strong, that labor
immediately after eating does not hurt them O! dura messorum ilia. Her. Epod.
III.
. But let me ask, whether you have not observed such people leave their tables
with reluctance -- How slowly do they return, -- and how many excuses do they
form to loiter away a little time, before they renew their work.

BUT further -- there is another reason why I would recommend this practice of
eating the chief meal in the evening, which is indeed a little foreign to our
present subject. -- In a country like this, where the constant labor of every
individual is so very necessary, the general use of this custom would add
several hours to every day, and thus have the most beneficial effects upon the
agriculture -- commerce -- and manufactures of the country, exclusive of its
influence upon the health of the inhabitants.

AFTER what has been said, I need hardly add, that exercise should never be
used with a full stomach. Persons who exercise either to preserve, or restore
health immediately after eating a hearty meal, resemble the man "who fled from
a lion, and a bear met him, and who went into the house, and leaned his hand
upon the wall, and a serpent bit him."

I COME now to the APPLICATION of this discourse.

I HAVE endeavored in every part of it, to lay before you the most powerful
arguments, to excite you to exercise, and have addressed them chiefly to that
main spring of human actions -- SELF PRESERVATION. I have taught you the true
art of alchymy, and furnished you with the genuine Philosopher's stone, but
with this difference from that which has been sought for, by the deluded
pretenders to philosophy in all ages, that instead of converting, like Midas,
every thing you touch into gold -- every thing which touches you shall -- not
convert you into gold -- but impart HEALTH to you -- compared with which, even
the gold of Ophir loses its weight. In a word -- I have showed you an harbor
where I have anchored safely for many years; for, from my youth upwards, I have
followed the mode of living I have recommended to you, as far as my connections
or intercourse with the world would admit; and although I received from nature
a weakly constitution, yet -- I speak it with a grateful heart! -- few men
enjoy better health -- none better spirits than myself; and was I now about to
leave the world, surrounded with a family of children, I would charge them,
among the most important lessons I should give them, to bind these things as a
"a sign upon their hands, or as frontlets between their eyes" -- to think of
them "when they sat in their houses, and when they walked by the way -- when
they lay down, and when they rose up -- that their days might be multiplied;
and that the days of their children, might be as the days of Heaven upon the
earth."

I SHALL conclude this discourse with a story, which, I hope, will not be
looked upon as foreign to what has been delivered upon this subject.

IN the island of Ceylon, in the Indian ocean, a number of invalids were
assembled together, who were afflicted with most of the chronic diseases, to
which the human body is subject. In the midst of them sat several venerable
figures, who amused them with encomiums upon some medicines, which they assured
them would afford infallible relief in all cases. One boasted of an elixir --
another of a powder, brought from America -- a third, of a medicine, invented
and prepared in Germany -- all of which they said were certain antidotes to the
gout -- a fourth, cried up a nostrum for the vapors -- a fifth, drops for the
gravel -- a sixth, a balsam, prepared from honey, as a sovereign remedy for a
consumption -- a seventh, a pill for cutanious eruptions -- while an eighth
cried down the whole, and extolled a mineral water, which lay a few miles from
the place where they were assembled. The credulous multitude partook eagerly of
these medicines, but without any relief of their respective complaints. Several
of those who made use of the German preparation; were hurried suddenly out of
the world. Some said their medicines were adulterated -- others that the
Doctors had mistaken their disorders -- while most of them agreed that they
were much worse than ever. While they were all, with one accord, giving vent in
this manner, to the transports of disappointment and vexation, a clap of
thunder was heard over their heads. Upon looking up, a light was seen in the
sky. -- In the midst of this appeared the figure of something more than human
-- she was tall and comely -- her skin was fair as the driven snow -- a rosy
hue tinged her checks -- her hair hung loose upon her shoulders -- her slowing
robes disclosed a shape which would have cast a shade upon the statue of Venus
of Medicis. -- In her right hand she held a bough of an EVERGREEN -- in her
left hand she had a scroll of parchment -- she descended slowly, and stood
erect upon the earth -- she fixed her eyes, which sparkled with life, upon the
deluded and afflicted company -- there was a mixture of pity and indignation in
her countenance -- she stretched forth her right arm, and with a voice which
was sweeter than melody itself, she addressed them in the following language:
Ye children of men, listen for a while to the voice of instruction. Ye seek
health where it is not to be found. The boasted specifics you have been using,
have no virtues. Even the persons who gave them, labor under many of the
disorders they attempt to cure. My name is HYGIAEA. I preside over the health
of mankind. Descard all your medicines, and seek relief from Temperance and
EXERCISE alone. Every thing you see is active around you. All the brute animals
in nature are active in their instinctive pursuits. Inanimate nature is active
too -- air -- fire -- and water are always in motion. Unless this were the
case, they would soon be unfit for the purposes they were designed, to serve in
the economy of nature. Shun sloth. This unhinges all the springs of life --
fly from your diseases -- they will not -- they cannot pursue you. Here she
ended -- she dropped the parchment upon the earth -- a cloud received her, and
she immediately ascended, and disappeared from their sight -- a silence ensued
-- more expressive of approbation, than the loudest peals of applause. One of
them approached with reverence to the spot where she stood -- took up the
scroll, and read the contents of it to his companions. It contained directions
to each of them, what they should do to restore their health. They all prepared
themselves to obey the advice of the heavenly vision. The gouty man broke his
vial of elixir, threw his powders into the fire, and walked four or five miles
every day before breakfast. The man afflicted with the gravel threw aside his
drops, and began to work in his garden, or to play two or three hours every day
at bowls. The hipochondriac and hysteric patients discharged their boxes of
assafoetida, and took a journey on horseback, to distant and opposite ends of
the island. The melancholic threw aside his gloomy systems of philosophy, and
sent for a dancing master. The studious man shut up his folios, and sought
amusement from the sports of children. The leper threw away his mercurial
pills, and swam every day in a neighboring river. The consumptive man threw
his balsam out of his window, and took a voyage to a distant country. After
some months, they all returned to the place they were wont to assemble in. Joy
appeared in each of their countenances. One had renewed his youth -- another
had recovered the use of his limbs -- a third, who had been half bent for many
years, now walked upright -- a fourth began to sing some jovial song, without
being asked -- a fifth could talk for hours together, without being interrupted
with a cough -- in a word, they all enjoyed now a complete recovery of their
health. They joined in offering sacrifices to Hygiaea. Temples were erected to
her memory; and she continues, to this day, to be worshipped by all the
inhabitants of that island.

THE END.

