PETTIE's-ISLAND LOTTERY, For disposing of a great Variety of curious PICTURES,
JEWELRY, etc. etc.
SCHEME. 1 of L. 120 is L. 120 1 50 is 50 2 40 are 80 2 20 are 40 5 10 are 50 6
5 are 30 8 4 are 32 16 3 are 48 80 1: 10^. are 120 1240 0 15 are 930 1361
Prizes. L. 1500 1639 Blanks. 3000 Tickets, at Ten Shillings each, are L. 1500.
Almost as many Prizes as Blanks.

THE Design of this Lottery is, to dispose of a Quantity of new and curious
Goods, viz. A most elegant Collection of Pictures, in green and gold Frames,
ditto in black and gold Frames, and a new and large Collection of Fancy Pieces,
done by the greatest Masters in the World, both in and out of Frames, and a
very fine Collection of Drawing Books, both colored and uncoloured, with a
large Collection of the newest Maps, in and out of Setts, as also in Books in
the very best and finest Colors; Albion Birds, in the most beautiful Colors;
a large Variety of Copper Plate Writings, by the ablest Penmen in England; also
the Royal Amusement, which is now extremely fashionable, and is universally
played instead of Back-Gammon, etc. together with many other entertaining
Curiosities, lately imported from London and elsewhere; Guns of the neatest
Kind, single and double barrelled Pistols: and also a fine Assortment of
Jewelry, among which are Diamonds, Garnets, Gold and Fancy Rings, with a
Quantity of other Jewelry too tedious to mention, besides a great many other
Goods, both useful and entertaining.

Ladies and Gentlemen, Adventurers in this Lottery, may depend that every
Article will be rated at the lowest Prices the Proprietor sells them out of his
Shop.

The Lots will be made out, nicely assorted, part Jewelry, Pictures, and
other Curiosities, by four respectable Gentlemen, who will faithfully
superintend the Drawing of this Lottery, and see that Justice is done to each
Adventurer.

The Lots, composed of the before mentioned Goods, etc. are to be made out to
the full Amount of the Prizes, before the Lottery is drawn, except a small
Deduction of Five per Cent. to defray the Charges.

Ladies and Gentlemen, if fortunate, may become possessed of a large and neat
Assortment of Jewelry, Pictures, etc. at the small Expense of Ten Shillings,
to the Amount of One Hundred and Twenty Pounds, or other good Prizes, as per
Scheme, which is perhaps better calculated for the Adventurers, than any yet
offered to the Public.

The Prizes are to be published immediately after Drawing, and paid as soon as
published.

There is a great Number of Tickets already engaged, which gives the Proprietor
Reason to believe the Drawing will soon commence. He hopes likewise, that those
who incline to become Adventurers, will be speedy in applying for Tickets.

The Public may be informed where Tickets are to be had, by applying to the
Bar-keeper of the London Coffee-House, and to Mr NICHOLAS BROOKS, near the
Coffee-House, in Market-street, Mr. ALEXANDER POWER, near South-street, near
the Wharf, Mr. JAMES SUTTER, near the Drawbridge, opposite to Mr. John Mease,
Merchant, Mr. EDWARD BACHELOR, Merchant, in Second-street, Mr. THOMAS BARTOW,
Merchant, Mr. JOHN PATTON, Merchant, in Water-street, Messrs. BUDDEN and
STRAKER, at their Store in Front-street, and Mr. WILLIAM DIBLEY, Western Post.


