LAMENTATIONS FOR the death of the late Illustrious Prince Henry.

AND the dissolution of his religious Family.

Two Sermons: Preached in his Highness Chapel at Saint JAMES, on the 10. and
15. day of November, being the first Tuesday and Sunday after his decease.

By DANIEL PRICE, Chaplain then in attendance.

MICAH 7.8. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy, though I fall I shall rise
again. LONDON: Printed by THO. SNODHAM, for ROGER IACKSON, and are to be sold
at his shop near to Fleetstreet Conduit. 1613.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, PRINCE CHARLES, THE JOY OF OUR SORROW AND THE
HOPE OF SVCCESSION, ENGLANDS CHARLEMAINE, DANIEL PRICE, WITH THE DEDICATION OF
THESE, HIS TWO MITES, WISHES, THE ACCRVMENT OF ALL HAPPINESS, WITH THE
DOVBLING OF THE SPIRIT, OF HIS BLESSED BROTHER UPON HIM.

TO THE Honorable, Religious, and worthy Gentlemen, the great Officers to the
late renowned Prince.
To the Ho. worthy, Gentlemen of the Bedchamber: to his Reverend Brethren the
Chaplains; and to all the rest of the Gentlemen and Officers of that Princely
family.
THe importunity of some, the expectation of many, and the kind acceptance of
all of you, has caused me to cast these two Mites into the Treasure of the
public sorrow, and to present, that now to your hands, which in my attendance
in this woeful time J provided for your hearts: They are plain, both because
sorrow dislikes descant, and plain stuffes are fittest for Mourners: they are
passionate, for in my meditation by the rivers of sorrow I sat down, and wept,
and hanged my Harp upon the willow, trees, for ever tuning it to comfort or
melody again: and when ye required this song of me in my heaviness, I knew
not how to sing any song of the Lord, but a song of sorrow, in this strange
land; strange for the sins, strange for the judgments. They are yours, they
once breathed with you, and now ever shall live with you, a pledge of that heart
that never rejoiced in any sublunary object, more, then to see, while our Sun
did shine such an happy, friendly aspect of so many principal Planets, and
sweet plants in this place: let Charity interpret me, and none will be offended
that upon impetuous importunity I publish these last offices, to the memory of
that illustrious Prince, our Master, for whom the sound of all tongues and
applause of all hands testify, never was any more honored in his life, never
any more lamented in his death, that ever beheld the light of heaven in this
land. My best devotion, and faithfulest services are presented with these; and
so I remain

Yours in all Christian duty Daniell Price.

The first Sermon.
Matthew. 26.31. I will smite the Shepherd, and the Sheep of the flock shall
be scattered.
A Great Prince is fallen in Israel; 2 Samuel 3.38. 1 Samuel 4.21. Zach. 11.2. Aust.
de Pas.
the joy of the Christian world is deceased, Ichabod, the glory of Israel is
departed: Howl ye poor Fur Trees, your Cedar is fallen, Lachrimis non
verbis, miserationibus non orationibus opus est.

I know it is contrary to the grounds of Art, presently, at the first entrance,
to hoise up sails in such a sea of lamentation and sorrow: But misery
observes no rules of Oratory, and therefore without any further Proeme, we
should all take up that Elegy of David, 2 Samuel 1. 2 Samuel 1.
O noble Israel, he is slain upon thy high places! Tell it not in Gath, nor
publish it in Ascalon, least the daughters of the uncircumcised rejoice. O ye
Mountains of Gilboa, upon ye be neither dew nor rain, there the shield of
the mighty was cast down: Jonathan was lonely and pleasant in his life, swift
as an Eagle, strong as a Lion: ye sons of Israel weep for Jonathan, which
clothed you in Scarlet, with pleasures, and hanged ornaments of Gold upon your
apparel. All of you of what condition soever, hear with silence what you
feel with sorrow, the very thunderbolt of heaven. I will smite the Shepherd,
and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered.

Take up a lamentation, Ierem.
says the Lord to the Prophet, A lamentation such as was not in the days of
our fathers. Alas, no lamentation will sit our loss, a deluge of tears is
little enough to bear the arc of our sorrow. Austin is said to weep a shoure
of tears, Ambrose a flood of tears; but you will tell me, Doct. Swale
Rhetorie intur Patres: I am sure Jeremy wished for a fountain of tears, and
my sorrowing and loving brother has brought you a Saboath days journey
toward this Fountain, him I follow with paces of lamentation and love, and
with as faithful as sorrowful observance, to his memory, for whom we are
commanded to continue these our last accomplishments of attendance: we shall
both endeavor to teach you that last lesson of our Savior, Weep not for me,
but weep for your selves. I have at this time settled the foundation of my
meditations upon the farewell of Christ to his Disciples. A prophecy found in
Zachary 400. years before it was used here; Zach 13.7. Mark. 14.28. Ioh. 16.27
repeated in Matthew, in Mark, and John, in all these places prophesying of the
death of the lord of life. Hypocrisy is a true Pharisie, but grief is a bad
Scribe, expect neither order nor matter, sorrow has divided such shares among
us, the scattered sheep and flock of this fold, that our souls are even
divided within us.

The words themselves, without any descant, be words of amazement and
astonishment, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be
scattered. Romans 1.16 Ier. 23.29. Heb. 4.12. Ephesians. 6.17.
Every word of the Lord is a power, a fire, a hammer, a Pyoner, to overthrow
strong holds, a sword to divide the reins and the marrow. But this an
extraordinary word, it is the alarm to a battle, the voice of a Trumpet, an
Earthquake, shaking the Pillars of the Earth, I will smite the shepherd, and
the sheep shall be scattered. I will smite, vox furoris and doloris, says a
Gloss, the voice of fury in God, Gloss. Bern. Leu. 27. Deuteronomy. 28. Reu. 3.19.
the voice of misery to man. It had been more mild, if, as in Leuiticus, I
will punish: or in Deuteronomy, I will correct: or in the Revelation, I will
chastise. But who is able to bear his blow? who is able to stand before him if
he be angry? by the least of his blows we are cut down, dried up, and
withered.

I will smite the Shepherd, not the sheep of his Pasture, not the Ewes great
with young, not the Lambs of the Fold: if the sheep only had bin smitten,
Psalm.
David's prayer had served; how long will thou proceed in anger against the
sheep of this pasture? But the stroke is greater, more grievous, it is fallen
upon the shepherd, the guider, the glory, the Prince of the people: I will
smite the shepherd.

And the sheep shall be scattered: his poor followers have no better phrase
then the sheep of his flock, silly, simple, innocent creatures: Wolves have
dens, Foxes holes, Birds of the heaven nests; but Sheep wander out of the way
in the wilderness, Errant in montibus agni, they have no City to dwell in. If
the servants of our Savior had no more misery then they may collect out of the
condition and consideration of being called sheep, it is much. Poor creatures,
when they are strongest together they have no means to withstand the
incursions and invasions of the Wolves; but the Text stirs up more sense of
sorrow: The sheep shall be scattered.

Be scattered: it were, as if they were scattered and consumed: Be dispersed,
it is as if they were destroyed, Lorinus. Psalm. 119.
di-sperdere is bis-perdere: they shall be, as David speaks, either gone
astray, like the sheep that perished, or as Christ speaks, as sheep provided
for the slaughter. Scattered they must be: I will smite the shepherd, and the
stock shall be seattered.

parts are two: death of the Shepherd: secondly, the dispersion of the sheep.
The death of the shepherd, plainly in these words, I will smite the
Shepherd: wherein, because I will not trouble you with unnecessary fractions:
Look upon, first, The person smiting, I will smite: secondly, The person
smitten, I will smite the Shepherd. Secondly, in the dispersion of the sheep,
in these words, and the sheep shall be scattered, observe, first, the
denomination of Christ's Servants, The sheep: secondly, the desolation of these
sheep, The sheep shall be scattered.

I will smite. Nazianzen.
Non nisi coact us percuitis, says Nazianzen, it is neither the Nature nor
pleasure of God to be smiting. Abaddon, Apolluon, be the names of Satan in the
Revelation: Reuelat.
but the Lord is a gracious God and merciful, slow to anger, and of great
kindness, and repents him of the evil. Gloss. Ord. Joel 2. Exodus 34.6.
Benignus affectu, misericors effectu, says the Gloss upon the second of
Joel: Moses in the thundering and lightning heard no other attributes upon the
Mount: David in his sorrows acknowledged no other: Jonas in the belly of the
Whale, and bottom of hell, among all the waves and surges, remembers no other:
Joel in his day of darkness, and blackness, repeateth no other affections of
the Lord, Joel 2.
but these, the Lord is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great
kindness, and repents him of the evil. Psalm. 145.
The Psalmist gives God these titles, the Lord is strong and patient, there is
honey in the Lion, sweetness in strength, he is not only strong and patient,
but strong in patience, he does foreslow his vials, and forbear his vengeance,
till the cart-roapes of sin do hurry down his judgments. It may be he will
upon long expectation cut away the lap of our garment, as David did by Saul,
but it is a rare example, that he proceeds againstany, as Satan's motion was
against Job, to stretch out his hand, Job 1.11. August.
and touch all that he had. There were four ages of the Jews, in all four
the people continued sinful: the judgments expected were fearful. In the
first age of the Patriarchs, he promised a blessing to their posterity: in the
second age, of Judges, he settled their Commonwealth and Policy in the third
age, of Kings, he built them a City to dwell in: in the fourth, of Prophets,
he built them a temple to pray in: he might have blasted them in their Spring,
but he suffers them to come to their Autumn; nay further, he endured them
till their own looseness brought them to the fall of the leaf.

It is the most vile and base condition of man, that when as God has no other
Fountain then the fountain of Grace in Zachary, Zach. 4.
nor other riches then the riches of his mercy in the Psalms, nor other bowels
then the bowels of compassion, and that the unlimited extent of his gracious
affection is beyond all imaginable proportions, yet notwithstanding, man will
vnsheath Gods sword, and will violently force him to his armory, to put on his
habergion and brigandine, as Esaias speaks; to whet his sword, (...) 59.1^.
to bend his Bow, and to provide him deadly weapons, to ordain his arrows
against them that persecute him, as the Psalmist threatens, Psalm. 7.13.
that Heaven shall afford millions of Angels; Hell, legions of wicked spirits;
Orbs, and Arches of Heaven, Stars to fight in their order; Elementary regions,
Hail, Frost, Snow, Storms, Tempests, Mildew, Blastings: and the earth his
great artillery-yard, to send out Lice, Mice, Flies, Worms, the very Nissets,
Palmerwormes, Locusts, Caterpillars, Cankerwormes, small creatures, yet great
armies, as he calls them in Joel: hereby causing Jordan to run back, Joel
2.25.
his mercy to retire, yea, constrayning him to alter his own desire and
nature, and tenor of speech, as in this place, I will smite; and not only so,
but as before, they cause the stroke, so afterward they neglect the stroke,
Pliny.
as if the judgments of God were like to those Bruta fulmina among the
Romans, which, because they fell upon the beasts, never came to observation.
So wicked and beastly men never observe, neither why he strikes, nor who it
is that strikes. A father has no joy in the continual chiding or scourging,
or cursing of his son, nay, his very bowels yearne within him for sorrow, his
affection can be no less, Prou. 31.1.
then of the mother of Lemuel, O my son, O the son of my womb, O the son
of my desires. The compassion of the Lord can be no less, whose mercies be
above all his works: yet, if a man will not turn, he will whet his sword, and
bend his bow: Chrysostom. in Psalm. 7.
acerbitatem poenae gladius, celeritatem designat arcus, says Chrysostom: In
vain do any attribute the inventions of swords to the Lacedaemonians, Plin.
lib. 7. Not. Histor. Ludolph.
or of bows, to the Scrythians, God has prepared them, eius sunt arma, cuius
sunt verba, ego percutiam.

observation collected from the words I will smite, is this, that in all
judgments we ought truly to judge of the true author: he that being asked his
name by Moses, answered, I am that I am; Exodus 3.14
he it is that afterward threatens, I will bring famine; I will bring the
sword; I will bring the pestilence. In the ten plagues of Egypt; in the
beginning of them his words be, In this thou shall know that I am the Lord,
Exodus 7.17 Exodus 15.3
I will smite. He is a man of War, in the same book: Nay, the Lord of hosts
and armies, often called in his own book: Murraine of cattle is called his
hand; Pestilence his sword; Exodus 9.3. 1 Chro. 21 Psalm. 91.
sicknesses his arrows; his bow hangs in the cloud; his sword is ever in his
hand; his axes and hammers be in readiness; he it is that does hurt and shoot,
and wound and strike, and spoil and ouerturne. Hom. Odys.
He is not Jupiter inermis, as one thought, but as another spoke, his weapons
be innumerable, and his hands irresistable. The religious Saints of God
acknowledged this; David shall speak for all. O Lord, thy anger, thy heavy
displeasure, Psalm. 38.
thy arrows stick fast in me, thy hand presses down sore. The rebellious
children of Israel acknowledged this when Jerusalem as we find in the old
Testament, had bin 7. times assailed; by Shishak King of Egypt in Rehoboams
days; 1 Kin. 14. 2 Chro. 25 23. Isa. 7.1. 2 Kin. 18. 2 Chro. 33 2 Kin. 33. 2
Kin. 25.
by Ioas King of Israel in Amaziahs time; by Rezin King of Aram in the reign
of Ahaz; by Zenacherib King of Ashur in the time of Hezekias; by the captains
of the Assyrians, who took Manasses captive; by Pharaoh Necho, that carried
away Iehoas prisoner; lastly, by the Chaldeans, who burnt the Temple, and
defaced the City: and that they had enemies round about them; on the East the
Moabits Ammorites, Assyrians; on the west side, the Philistines; on the North
the Syrians, on the South the Aegiptians, Arabians, and Idumeans, all most
infestuous to them, yet still cry out in their vexations unto God; thou have
covered us with wrath, thou have made us the offscouring of the people. Nay,
superstitious heathens have acknowledged this: Lam. 2.43 Exo. 8.19.
the Enchanters, that the plague of Lice was the finger of God: Tiberius, that
Thunder was the power of God: Homer, that the plague was the arrow of God: Hip.
in prog.
Hypocrates, that a great plague among them, was a punishment sent from God.
Nay, blasphemous reprobates have confessed this; for the damned, at what time
the storm fell upon them in the Revelation, they blasphemed God, Reu. 16.24.
because of that plague of Hail.

doctrine to confute those that put the judgments of God far from
themselves, by putting them far from the true author of them, God himself.
Natural and beastly men, who make natural causes the reasons of supernatural
events, who to the wantonness of wit, add wickedness of will, Psalm. 73 9.
and belike to those spoke of in the Psalms, that talk presumptuously, and
set their mouth against Heaven, making the power of God to be circumscribed by
the power of reason, who, because they believe no more then they see, and fear
no more then they feel, they go no further then the presence, never go into
the priuy-chamber of Gods judgments, second causes must remove it from the
first author. But I ask, as the Apostle does, O thou man, who art thou that
disputest with God? or rather, who art thou that deniest the prerogative of
God? seeing he has said, I do strike; I will smite.

incomparable loss (of which though I shall never think or speak without an
indiuidual companion, sorrow, and sorrow attended with the utmost remembrance
and reverence limited under heaven) I may urge this one part of my Text unto
them who never looking up to heavens irresistable stroke, do complain that
either the want of care, or skill in the Physicians, shipwrackt all our hope in
that blessed Arc the Prince.

I stand not here to dawbe, with untempered Mortar, neither to fear, nor
flatter any; I do believe that they were both sorrowful beholders, and
faithful helpers, so far as Art, Vigilance, and diligence, could extend. But
when ego percutiam is once proclaimed, no Physician can cure Asa his legs, or
lay a plaster unto Fzekias botch, or cure the Shunamites child, crying, my
head. No balm in Gilead can help the fevers, dropsies or bloody issues, which
Christ healed, though the patient Patients bestowal they have upon those
honorable instruments; for so the son of Syrach calls Physicians. And
therefore as those, in the Prophet cried, a Conspiracy, a Conspiracy; so
these, Poison, Poison: How probable soever that may be; let them look unto the
poison of their own souls, the only infection that brought this heavy
affliction upon us. And whatsoever second causes there might be, let us leave
the consideration thereof to them, to whom they belong: and let us (which does
only concern our selves) with fear and reverence, and humility, confess it
was Gods hand, Greg. Mar. lib. 1.
as both Gregory confesses upon the affliction of Job, and Ambrose before him
of all such punishments: Cum Diabolus vulnerat, Domini sunt sagittae:
Whatsoever the second causes be, yet the supreme rule of all is in Gods hand.

But while I am thus informing others, my own soul becomes a sceptick, and
questions thus: Could God forget to be gracious? would he in displeasure so
smite Him, that was our joy and hope? Yes, that he might more fully settle our
hope upon the true object, God himself. But would he, so smite as to take him
away in the Sunshine of his time? yes, that he might bestow far greater
brightness upon him. Alas, he was in the flower and splendour of his youth: he
was less taynted, less blemished. His death was the undoing of many his poor
servants: but God is able to provide for them better then he could: Psalm. 37.
Let them trust in the Lord, and verily they shall be fed. He was taken away in
this solemn expectation of Nuptiall-ioy and triumph: He is gone to greater
joy, to the Marriage of the Lamb; to those joys, triumphs, Angels Quire and
Songs, to which no burden, nor no end belongs. He was taken away, as it were
somewhat suddenly, and unexpectedly; yet not so suddenly as the fiery enemies
of God and the King intended in that furious sulphurous plot to have blown
him up: 2 King. 23.
neither so suddenly as Josias the dearling of God, who had no more warning
then while an arrow made a door in his breast for Death. 2 Chro. 35.20.
But our Josias was taken away in a seasonable, comfortable visitation, when he
was full of beauty, full of glory, full of piety, full of Religion, full of
admiration, full of lamentation. Beloved, in a word, as the Apostle speaks;
Comfort your selves, one another, with these words: Job 1. Jonas 2.
The Lord gave him, and the Lord has taken him: and as Jonas Mariners
acknowledge; Thou O Lord have done as it pleased thee.

(As it follows) Thou have smitten the Shepherd.

Wolf, devouring the sheep, had bin mercy; to have smitten one sheep of the
fold had bin judgment with mercy, but to smite the shepherd may seem
judgment and fury. In this hour and time of mourning, now we sit as in the
shadow of death; it is fitter for you to feed on the tree of life, then on the
tree of knowledge, and therefore I desire to confine my speech only upon
meditation; but the word shepherd leads me forth further then I thought,
besides the waters of comfort. A shepherd was the first tradesman; though the
second son of all the children of Adam; Genesis 4.2.
and after Abel many shepherds were in near attendance upon God. Cypri. sermon.
de Not. Chri.
Saint Cyprian has collected them, and has the Catalogue of them. Abel Pastor
outum fuit, fuerunt et Patriarchae pastores, suarum tandem familiarum
principes; Pastor fuit Moses; Pastor David, etc.

In the beginning after the creation, in the old Testament, God chose
shepherds to be his servants. In the beginning of the time of redemption, in
the new Testament, Christ chose fishers to be his disciples: shepherds have a
solitary life; fishermen a watery life. In shepherds the ancients have
hierogkiphically observed contemplation, in fishermen lamentation. A shepherds
life, says Philo, Phil. lib. 1. de vit. Mois.
is praeludium ad regnum; of which phrase Homer and other Grecians have made
use: and the old Testament has none of more esteem then shepherds. Moses,
that kept Iethro his sheep; Jacob, that kept Labans sheep; Joseph was sent to
Jacobs sheep; Amos a Prophet, taken from the heard; Moses a Priest and
Prophet, from the sheep; David, the Lords soldier, and whoeuer had such
victories as David? taken from the fold; Elias, the Lords Seer, and you know
what the spirit of Elias was, yet he taken from the cattle. But more then
this, God the Father is called a shepherd in the Psalms; Psalm. 80.1. Ioh.
10.11.
O thou shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a sheep. God the
Son does name himself a shepherd in the Gospel: God the holy Spirit, is
named a shepherd in Peter; 1 Pet. 2.
the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls. I have lead you so far, only to
show in what honor the name, function, person of shepherds have been: you may
the more wonder at the words percutiam Pastore^. Abel the first shepherd may be
slaughtered; but this shepherd, by excellency called the shepherd, he that is
bonus Pastor, magnus pastor, Princeps Pastorum. Formosi pecoris custos, etc. He
that was white and ruddy, the fairest of ten thousand; full of grace were his
lips; spetiosus suae filijs hominum: he whose head was fine as gold, whose
locks were curled, who had cheeks as a bed of spices, lips like lillies,
hands as rings of Crysolites, legs as pillars of marble, whose countenance
was as Lebanon, whose mouth as sweet things; who was wholly delectable: O my
God; is he stricken? yes, and smitten with such a deadly blow, that the Axeliree
of heaven could not have born it. Esaias called him, vir dolorum, and Jeremy
expresses his inexpressible grief, dolor non sicut dolor, never sorrow like
his sorrow. Sorrow followed him from his birth to his burial. In his birth
persecuted by Tyrants; in his life tempted by devils; at his death apprehended
by Traitors; scourged and spitte upon by soldiers; vile fied more then a
murderer; crucified with Thieves; a Cross, the curse of the Law, to bear
him, and he to bear all the sins of the world; his most blessed body to be
mangled and goared, his soul to drink up sorrow, and thus to give up the
ghost. Pastor, Pelican.
Christus, dilectus filius, Populi, Doctor, super hunc excitantur persecutorum
manus: upon Christ, who was primogenitus, nay, vnigenitus, the beloved son, the
Doctor of his people, the Shepherd of his sheep, the Lamb of God, the Lion
of Judah, the express Character of his Father, the light of the Gentiles, glory
of his people Israel; the hands of his persecutors are lifted up, and fall
down with this heavy, heavy blow.

observation hence is, that the great height of sins, bring down so heavy
weight of judgments, as that God will not spare his own only one, his dear
one, his fair one, his Son Christ Jesus. I say no more in this, but what
Aquinas gathers from that of Esaias, Aquin. in Esaias.
Propt^r scelus populi mei percussi eum: for sin he was smitten, who had no
sin; and the blow was so heavy that the mountains trembled.

Not only was Christ taken away for sin, but in fierceness of Gods wrath, he
often gives the world such a shocke and stroke that it reeles, and almost
ouerwhelmes, with the dart of vengeance that strikes into the heart of a
kingdom, by taking away the chosen servants of God, the chosen shepherds of
the world, such as are Kings and Princes, who as Christ communicated of man's
misery, so these participate of Gods Majesty: and yet in his fury he will
smite these. Witness Josias the dearling of God, the apple of his eye, the
signet on his right hand; Prophesied of three hundred years before his birth:
lamented among the posterity of the Jews after his death: yet Josias must be
smitten; Josias, Eccle. 49.
whose remembrance is like the perfume that is made by the Apothecary, sweet as
honey in all mouths, and as music at a banquet of wine; he that was a
pattern of reformation to all succeeding Princes: yet Josias must be smitten;
he that destroyed the idolatrous Priests, and monuments of Baal, the Sun,
Moon, Planets with all their high Places, or Valleys, or Groves, or Altars,
or Vessels, and cut down, burnt to ashes, beat to powder, threw into the
brook, and left no sign of them: yet Josias must be smitten: 2 King. 23. 2
Chro. 35
Josias whose Epipoheneme and acclamation was; like unto him was no King before
him; whose Elegy and Lamentation was such as never the like before or after
him; all singing men and singing women lament him to his day, and never the
like mourning as that of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo; yet Josias must
be smitten. Non similis, for his honorable reformation: Non similis, for his
memorable lamentation, yet the right hand of the Almighty spared not Josias. In
the Chronicles of all the Kings, from Saul to Zedekiah, containing fourteen
generations and forty Kings, there was not one that gave or took the like
example of perfection. For as among the bad, Rehoboam did ill, Jeroboam worse,
Omri worse then he, Ahab worse then all; so on the contrary, though Asa did
right in the eyes of the lord, 1 King. ^^.
and his son Iehoshaphat walked in the ways of Asa his father. Amasiah did
uprightly in the sight of the Lord, 1 King. 22
and Azariah his son did according to all that his father Amasiah did. 2 King.
14
2 King. 15
David was a man after Gods own heart, and Solomon his son for his wisdom,
honor, riches and happiness, exceeded his father David, 1 King. 10
yet every one of these had some scarre, some blots, some blemishes, an
eclipticke line ran through each of their Zodiackes; only Josias is without
any noted spot or wrinckle; like him was no king before him. What then was the
reason that this Rose of the garland must be blasted; the diamond of the Crown
be darkened; the Paragon of all the Kings of Israel and Judah must be smitten;
that percutiam, the word of my Text, served his execution so violently upon
Josias? Why would he that breaks the bow, Psalm.
knappeth the spear in sunder, and casts the arrows in the fire, I say, why
would he let the Archers shoot at King Josias? 1 King. 22
It was the voice of the King of Aram to his Captains, concerning wicked King
Ahab, fight ye neither against great nor small, but against the King; but that
the Lord should direct that fatal arrow to be the death of his darling Josias,
this arrow strikes us with admiration. I cannot but bear part with those
mourners in Megiddo; Alas for this great day, Alas for that good Prince, Alas
that Josias is smitten.

When David numbered the people, the people dyed, they suffered for his sin, 1
Chro. 21
plectuntur Achiui; and David cries, What have they done? it is even I that
have sinned, Is it not I that have commanded to number the people? but these
sheep what have they done? O Lord my God, I beseech thee, let thine hand be on
me, and on my fathers house, and not on thy people for their destruction. There
the people were plagued for the offense of the Prince, but here the Prince is
smitten for the offense of the people.

I find especially two causes why Josias was smitten. First, for the sins of
the time: The first cause of the death of Josias.
the sins of those days I collect out of Zephany, to be strange and horride.
In the front of the Prophecy you may see that he prophesied in the days of
Josias: Zeph. 1.1.
in the second verse of that Chapter there is a fearful destruction
pronounced; such as in so few words, is not to be found in all the Prophets.
It is a general observation, that where we hear some strange desolation
threatened, there is some strange abomination committed. Observe both here:
first the desolation thretned; I will surely destroy all things from the Land,
Zeph. 1.1.2
says the Lord: I will destroy man and beast; I will destroy the fowls of the
heaven, and the fishes of the sea, and ruins shall be to the wicked, and I
will cut off man from the land, says the Lord, etc. It is so terrible, as if
that in the Psalm were fulfilled, Destructions are come to a perpetual end:
Psalm. 9.
a deluge and Cataclisme, a deuastation and desolation unspeakable. The
greatest plagues that ever came on the world were either the particular, in the
Judgments on Egypt; or the general, in the drowning of the World. In Egypt,
beside^ flies, and lice, and frogs, and darkness, there was the killing of the
firstborn, Murraine of Beasts, death of Fishes, by the water turned into
blood; but I find no where that their foul of heaven were destroyed: In the
drowning of the World, all mankind was not destroyed, eight Souls were
preserved, and although the beasts of the field, and fowls of the air
perished, yet I can no way collect the destruction of the fishes; those watery
creatures kept their Colonyes. In Egypt, beasts and fishes were destroyed, not
the fowls: In the flood, beasts and fowls, not the fishes; but in this, Man
and Beast, Fish and Foul, all things threatened to be destroyed from the earth.
Secondly therefore consider the abomination committed in those times; you may
at first sight collect them out of the following verses. In the 4. verse, Zeph.
1.4.1.
there was a remnant of Baall in the land, resembling our Papists. Secondly,
Priests and Chemarims, fit parallels to our Priests and Jesuits. some that
swear by the Lord, and swear by Malcham, equalling the false-harted, half
hollow-harted Hipocrites of two Religions in these days. some that turned
back from the Lord, like to our Ephraimitall Apostaticall reuolters. Fifthly,
some that sought not the Lord, nor inquired after him, shadowing the Atheists
of our land. strange apparel, the characters of the guls and gallants of our
days. daunced upon the threshold so proudly; the note of the quaint
Crane-paced Courtiers of this time. Lastly, those that filled houses by cruelty
and deceit; the brand of the sinful and covetous Citizens of this City. Now
measure with the cubit of the Sanctuary, whether desolation be not fitted to
abomination. Run to and fro through the street of that Chapter, and see,
and hear, and fear, and tremble: Sins were the cause of that threatened
destruction, sins were the Cart-ropes, Engines, Pioners, the Earthquakes,
Whirlewindes, Thunderbolts, final downfall and funeral, and deuastation of
that State.

In the time of the Judges, Judge. 20.44.
the Lord almost extinguished the Tribe of Benjamin, eighteen thousand at one
time. 1 King ^2.
In the time of the Kings ten Tribes fell from Israel. But this misery is
more; Root and Branch, head and tail, as the Prophet sore-told, Man, Beast,
Fish, and foul are destroyed. For sins he does stretch out his hand upon
Judah, and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem: for sins he does worry the
Sheep, and smite the Shepherd. This is the first reason why Josias is smitten.

The second cause of smiting Josias.
The second reason that Josias was smitten, was, that he might not see the
misery threatened to be brought upon Israel; his eyes should not see that
evil. Evil must come but not in the days of Josias. The word of the Lord is
good, (says Hezekias) only let peace be in my days. The Israelites must be
bond-slaues in the land of Egypt, Genesis.
but not till the Patriarchs sleep in peace. Ten Tribes shall be divided
from the twelve, yet Salomons eyes shall first be shut. Jerusalem shall be
destroyed, but not till they who mourn in Zyon be marked. Ezekiel. 9.4.
Al Italy grievously troubled, but Ambrose must first be at rest. Africa shall
be spoiled, but not till Austine decease. Germany was distracted, but Luther
first must peaceably and honorably be buried. England was persecuted and
fiered, but blessed King Edward must first be received into Abraham's bosom.
God reserueth his just and determinate plagues, and stays his Vyals till his
appointed times. All the States of the World have their Critical days, and
Climactericall years, beginnings, settled stations, declinations, and
dissolutions at Gods appointment.

Certo veniunt ordine Parcae. Seneca.
It was a speech that commands admiration from us, that God should say to Lot,
Get thee hence; I can do nothing till thou art gone hence. Was the power of
God limited by himself? he did actiuely limit his power, it was not passiuely
limited by Lot; God did limit his will; Genesis.
or rather, both were determinated, then limited or terminated. It exceedes our
thoughts that he in so favorable a Compassion will forbear, for his love to
some particular Servant, the great wrath he has laid up in store for a Nation.
Genesis 39 5. Genesis 30.27.
He does not only bless Potiphar for Joseph, and Laban for Jacob, but hold
his hand, stay his Vials, forbear his vengeance upon Israel for Josias sake;
holy and reverend be his name for ever.

I have numbered and weighed the words hastily, and in the Scales of sighs and
sorrow; let us see what measure of them comes to our share. sin the cause
of smiting the Shepherd? Indeed, Sin is the overthrow of Judgment, the
stain of Conscience, the root of all peruersitie, infection of all actions
and affections: but is it so harmefull to us, so hateful to him, that is, the
all-seeing, all-being, all-pure and sacred Majesty, that not only his own
Son, blessed for ever and ever, was smitten, Esaias.
propter scelus populi, as Esaias speaks; but also those excellent, and choice,
and blessed Instruments of his glory, Kings and Princes, are oftentimes taken
away for the sins of the people? Let us all then look into the Calender of
these days, we have seen, and found, and felt their effects; and let us
observe whether the sins of this Land, and especially this City and Court,
be not equal to any of any Land: see whether the sins now be culpable, or
damnable, winckt at only by the eyes of men, or crying in the ears of Heaven.
You shall find them to be aspiring, mounting, towering sins: Sins of the
highest elevation; and those sins now committed, which in times past durst not
be named. Men like women, women like Devils, common; to salute and stab, kiss
and betray, common; cheating, whoring, drinking, swearing as common as
breathing.

Never were such varnishes put upon rotten causes, or Laws made such quirkes
for mercenary wits; or goodness so deformed, Justice so guilty, Virtue so needy,
Religion so scorned, or Whoredom so painted. In a word, to let pass the
Covetousness of the rich, idleness of the poor, want of age, wantonness of
youth, profaneness of all; I ask the honest Religious Soul that mourns
for the misery of Zyon. Is it not strange that after so long preaching of the
Gospel, there should be such an inundation of Popery, this generation of Vipers
seeming to multiply in our time, as the Arrians did increase in the time of the
ancient Fathers, who preached and wrote against them? Ezekiels Prophecy may
seem fulfilled, the Idol of indignation is among us; there be some Ancient
Idolaters, some idolatrous women, some idolatrous Priests in our Land. These be
causes why our Josias was smitten: our sins opened that Vena Basilica.

Secondly, would no other Sacrifice serve, but the death of Josias? No. Zeph.
1.7.8
The former Prophet Zephany makes it plain, in his 1. Chapter 7. and 8
verses. The Lord has prepared a Sacrifice, and in that day of the Lords
Sacrifice he will visit the Princes, and the Kings Children. No other sacrifice
will serve but the branches of the Olive tree, the blossoms of the Fig tree,
the beautiful young Cedar, the glory of the Forest, the beauty of the
Garland, the Coronet of succession, the Patron of Religion, the joy of the
old, hope of young, comfort of all. Nothing would serve but that precious
Jewel, which Nature only showed the world, and so put up again, that happy
New Star, new eye of Heaven, of whose station and influence while we argued,
it went out again. Nothing must serve but Josias? Si sic in viridi, quid fiet
in arido? what shall become of the negligent, ignorant, windy, empty, shadowy
Creatures, who live to eat, and eat to play the Beasts? He was taken from the
evil to come upon such, to the joy he enioyes: He is gone to rest with more
tokens of Gods favor then ever Josias had, his precious Soul is bathed in the
precious blood of his blessed Savior; Patience did here comfort him;
Confidence did hence crown him; anointed Cherub, blessed Angel, gracious
Master, thou art now in glory, though we poor scattered sheep have lost
thee. Tears blind me, and sighs chooke, and here I cease; sorrow does silence
me.

Correct us no more in thy fury O Lord, let not thine arrows stick so fast in
us, northy hand press us so down, lest we be consumed, and brought to nothing.
Magnify thy arm of Mercy, as thou have exalted thine arm of Judgment: and
let never the like loss come upon us again, till thy Son our Savior come
to us again. Amen.

The second Sermon.
Matthew. 26.31. The Sheep of the flock shall be scattered. WHen Elias was
departing, the Whirlewinde moving, the fiery Chariot mounting, and Elias in his
transmigration, neque inter viuos nec mortuos, (as Bias spoke of Sailors) being
not gone up into the air, as Moses on the Mount, or rapt up into the third
heavens for a time, as Saint Paul in his Vision, but as Henoch before, so he
under, the Law, caught up into the heavens for ever. 2 King. 2.14.
Elisha the Prophet lamenteth Elias with the same words that afterward Ioash
the King lamented Elisha; 2 King. 13.14.
O my father, my father, the Chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof. A
lamentation sitting our loss, who have lost our Father, our Master, the Cedar
of Lebanon, and Chariot of Israel.

In the 16. of Numbers, it was an heavy, Numb. 16.49.
weighty judgment, that in so small a time, so great a number as 14700 should
die; Moses then cries out, as if with sorrow shaking his head, and wringing
his hands; There is wrath gone out from the Lord, the plague is begun. We will
borrow the words of him, it is (miserable men that we are) I say, it is our
case; Wrath is gone from the Lord, the plague is begun. Now is a time of
mourning, of clothing our selves in sack cloth and ashes; nay, in dust and
ashes, and in the shadow of death, that as we spent our first days in sin,
so we may spend our last days in sorrow. Is not wrath come from the Lord,
when our Lilly of the vallyes is blasted; our Rose of the field is blemished? I
say not that our Olive branch is cut off, but the Dove with the Olive branch is
fled from us.

We are the men whom Jeremy mentions in his Lamentations; we have seen the
affliction in the rod of indignation; the breath of our nosthrils, the blessed
of the Lord, is taken from us; our dance is turned into mourning; and the
crown of our head is fallen: Lam 5.15.
Woe unto us that ever we sinned; our heart is heavy, and our eyes are dim,
because this Mount of Zion shall be desolate. My Text does epitomize what ever
my sorrow can convince; The Shepherd is smitten, and the sheep of the flock
shall be scattered.

I have gathered so much dew of Meditation from the first part, as a day and
night could yield my sorrowful head and heart to receive: that was our
Masters part; this next ours; The sheep shall be scattered. In speaking
whereof, as that wonder of misery, the unhappy Mother in the besiege of
Jerusalem, having eaten one part of her Child, could not think of eating the
other without unspeakable sorrow; so assure your selves, my sobs and throbs,
and throws will be many, before I am delivered of this part, which will part
us all, the dispersion of the Sheep. I will smite the Shepherd, and the sheep
shall be scattered.

The sheep.] Silly, simple creatures, yet decent, innocent creatures, quietly
feeding in the Field, hearing the voice of the Shepherd, yet fearing their
ravenous Enemies, though they be together, though they have both a shepherd and
a fold; but when they shall [be scattered] their case is more miserable, having
no defense, no hope, no help, no safety. Put both together, a shepherd, but
he smitten; Sheep, and they scattered, then you will say, this Text and our
state is the same that the Proclamation was in the Army after the death of the
King of Israel; Get every man to his City, 1 King. 22.
and every man to his own country: for the shepherd is smitten, and the sheep
shall be scattered. The parts be already opened: In this remainder of the
former work, these two particulars fall in sunder. First, the denomination of
Christ's servants, sheep. Secondly, the dispersion of these sheep: they shall
be scattered. And first, for sheep, they be creatures, neither noisome nor
fulsome. I will borrow but one authority for them, out of the list and limit
of the Sanctuary:

-- Tonsa tacet,
Carne iuuat, pelle, vellere, lacte, fimo,
In Sacrifices no creature so frequently offered; in the Sin- offering, Peace-
offering, Burnt- offering, Pass- over, Saboth offering, and especially in the
daily offering; every day they offered a Lamb at morning, Number. 28.9. Lorinus in
8 Act. Apost.
and a Lamb at evening. Lorinus observes it out of Chrysostom, Euthimius,
dustine, Origin, Cyrill and others, Aug. 4. tract. in Joan. Orig. hom. 24. in
Number. Chris. hom. 37 in Math.
mact abant agnum iugis nostri sacrificij typum: And so not only these, but
Gaudentius, Paulinus, and Cyprian give that common known reason, why a Lamb
was so continually offered; namely, as a type of the offering of Christ, who in
28. several places of the Revelation, is called the Lamb of God.

For the name of Sheep, Notatissima est dicendi forma, says a Writer. In the
34. of Ezekiel the Prophets are 13. Buc. Ezekiel. 34.
times called shepherds, and the People 21. times also called sheep: and in
the last verse the Lord expresses himself thus; Ye my sheep, ye the sheep
of my pasture are men, Ezekiel. 34.31
and I am your God, says the Lord God. The 23. Psalm is plain to this
purpose, Lor. in Psalm.
a Psalm truly called Dauidis Bucolicon; there you have shepherd, sheep,
green fields, still waters, ways, paths, vallyes, shadows, yea, the rod and
shepherds crook. The Lord is my shepherd, Psalm. 23.
he shall rest me in green pastures, he leads me by the still waters,
brings me into the paths of righteousness, etc. The Chalde Paraphrase
understands this Psalm of Isreal's deliverance out of Egypt. Called. Par.
Athanasius.
Athanasius of their return out of Babylon, here prophesied: some interpret
this leading, resting, guiding, feeding, to be the power of the Word, so
Lyranus; some of the sacraments, so S. Austine; Lyranus. Aug in Ps. Athanas.
some of the Ascension of Christ, so Nyssenus: Athanasius wishes Marcellinus,
when he did enter into consideration of the Lords gracious direction, and
bountiful feeding, then thankefully to sing this Psalm. And Saint Ambrose much
grieved in his time, Ambros lib. 5 de Sacra. cap. 3.
that men not considering the blessing they received by being named the sheep
of Gods flock, did so often hear, and so little regard the blessing of this
Psalm. I lead you further then may seem necessary in this Psalm, but it is
the sweetest Pasture, and the aptest proof in Scripture for my purpose.

Eli. Scho. Nazian. in Orat. 2. de Filio.
A Scholiast upon Nazianzen expounds those green fields to be the Church, the
grass the Word, the waters the Sacraments, the Pastor God, the flock the
people, the rod and staff instruction and correction: denique as he
concludes, Deum esse Pastorem, amissos reducentem, confractos obligantem,
correptos corroborantem: God is that Shepherd, bringing back the lost, as
Paul; strengthening the weak, as Peter; binding up the broken in heart, as
Matthew that followed him; Magdalen that anointed him; the Thief that
confessed him. Gods sheep, sometimes feeding, as in this Psalm; sometimes
traveling, as Jacobs flock, sometimes suffering, as our Savior foretold, as
sheep appointed for the slaughter.

The sheep in my Text be the Disciples; Matthew implies so much; Ioh. 16.32.
Mark expresses it; but S. John more plainly thus, ye shall be scattered,
the speech being appropriated to the Disciples, whom in that Gospel he calls
his sheep, his flock, his fold: yet it is but pusillus grex, a little little
flock; little indeed, because so few, the number but twelve, as of Patriarchs
and Prophets, as of the twelve Tribes of Israel, twelve fountains of Elim;
twelve foundations of Jerusalem, twelve signs of Heaven. They be Pauci,
pauperes, pusilli, Poor sheep, poor silly souls, to be sent our among those
ravenous bloodseeking blood-sucking Wolves.

It was the last Sermon that ever Christ preached on earth to his Disciples; it
was as his farewell, the night before he suffered: the last glimpse of a Candle
is often most bright; the last glance and luster of the Sun sometimes most
clear. They should now have expected some joyful news; all their life before
was sorrowful, now they might look for some Legacy, that Christ would have
blessed them, as old Jacob did. But our Savior, who had formerly told them
there was no comfort for them in the world, because they were not of the world;
that they were but as sheep among Wolves, gives them no other title in his
last Legacy but sheep.

that the servants of Christ ought to be clean, quiet, simple, and peaceable
in the world; for they are but sheep. Origin.
In sheep says Origin is described Cogitationum munditia; clean, honest,
sanctified cogitations ought to be in Christ's servants. In sheep, says
Gregory, is observed Actionum innocentia; Greg.
righteous, religious, innocentactions ought to proceed from Christ's sheep. I
could multiply and increase fathers and sons for the manifestation of this
point, but this only reason shall serve, Christ himself was such a sheep,
and therefore such ought we to be. He was not ouis, but tanquam ouis, for he
was agnus Dei, says Lorinus. Lor. in Act. Ap.
And another wondereth hereat, Hoc mirum est, Christum et agnum esse, et ouem
esse, et pastorem esse. Christ indeed was so, and never any other so. Which is
easily made plain; for though we should not speak without admiration, nor
think without adoration of all the mysteries of our Redemption: yet in the
deep well of this mystery, even he that has nothing to draw, may understand
it. As in the Kingly, Priestly, Prophetical offices of Christ, he did
communicate two of those offices to some, but never all the three to any.
Melchisedech was a King and Priest not a Prophet: Moses was a Priest and
Prophet, as the Psalm speaks, Moses among his Priests, but was not a King:
David was a King and Prophet, but not a Priest. So the same David was a
shepherd, Psalm. 78.72. and a sheep, Psalm. 78.72
Psalm. 119.176. but he was never called a Lamb, Psalm. 119.176.
this name was never given to any but to our Savior, until the day of his
Ascension, when he commanded Peter to feed his Lambs: and yet not they neither
were called lambs in the same sense and meaning that our Savior was.

It is observed, Genesis 49.
in the Emblematicall blessings, that Jacob left his children, Judah as a Lion,
Dan as a Serpent, Issachar an Ass, Nepthali a Hind, etc. he gives none the
motto tanquam ouis, none of them is called a sheep, or a lamb, and yet out of
Judah, whose Emblem was the Lion, Christ came, who was both the Lion and the
Lamb.

Our Savior in the two Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords supper, among
other miracles, wrought these two: he blessed the fowls of heaven in Baptism
by the Dove that descended on him: he blessed the beasts of the field in the
Paschall lamb, at the last supper eaten by him. But the unspeakable blessing
whereby he has blessed not only his Disciples, Chrisost.
and their successors, but all his servants, is this, that they are his flock,
his foul, his lambs, and his sheep.

servants of Christ his sheep? First then, how ought they to live, an honest,
simple, innocent life in these last and worst, and abominable days? Christ was
the Lamb, and he has left us an example to follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.
as S. Peter exhorts: but alas how far are we from his example, from his
steps? Passibus aequis none can follow him I confess, were all the righteous
spirits of the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs and Saints put together
in one man, yet it were impossible to follow him with equal paces. I will not
prescribe his misery, his poverty to you; I know you will not follow it; you
esteem it a heavy yoke, his misery, his poverty, was unsupportable; he was
Lord of all things, yet inioyed nothing; he had not a house to be borne in, he
borrowed a stable; not a bed to be laid in, he borrowed a cratch; not a vessel
to drink in, he borrowed a pitcher; not a room to eat his passover in, he
borrowed a parlour; not a grave to be laid in, he borrowed a sepulcher. Of
these things you will ask me, as the Poet, quis legit, who can read these
things? or rather as Esaias, quis credit, in speaking of these who will believe
our report? I do not forbear to press the imitation of this: I prescribe his
chastity; he was the Virgin-Son of the Virgin Mother, Aug. de Temp.
imitate this. Cum Virginis filio non erit tua luxuria: Chastity becomes his
sheep. I prescribed his charity; he healed Malchus ear, though he drew upon
him; he saluted Judas by the name of friend when he betrayed him; he prayed for
his enemies when they crucified him. Cum charitatis authore non erit malitia
tua: Charity becomes his sheep. I prescribe his meekness and humility; all
the practice of his life was humility, and his lesson was humility; Aug. de
Temp.
Learn of me to be humble and meek. Cum humilitatis doctore non erit superbia
tua; Humility becomes his sheep.

It was not long before Christ's death, that the Disciples did propose a strange
question among themselves, striving for prioritie: Mark 9.
they disputed who should be the greatest among them. A wonder, that two such
ambitious twins should be among the Disciples: I pray God there never has
been any such question of contention and opposition among any of you. Sure I
am, we were all grown proud, and placed our strength in the arm of flesh, and
that for this and other sins, the Lord has taken our sweet and blessed
Master from us.

mind, in unity, amity, unanimity: the places are frequent, where Christ his
servants are called members of one body, sheep of one fold, branches of one
Vine: how is it then that Caine will seek to kill Abell, or Ismaell to jest at
Isaac, 1 Ephesians. 2 Ephesians. John.
or Esau to hate Jacob, or Ioab to stab Amaga? Children, Brethren, dearly
beloved, be the phrases of Saint John to those that are Christ's servants.

It is well worth the observation, that one notes upon our Church Lyturgie, in
every article of devotion, that we come to perform in the Church, the
salutation still is, Dearly beloved: a phrase used in the very beginning of
the Communion, the administration of Baptism, the solemnizing of Marriage, at
the burial of the Dead, at the general Commination: How shall your conscience
bear you witness that the Church speaks to you, as Dearly beloved, if
there be an envious, malicious, scandalous, slanderous, pining, repining,
uncharitable spirit amongst you? Remember, branches must grow together, members
agree together, sheep feed together.

Christ's sheep? then hear Christ's voice: it is one of the true notes of
Christ's true sheep, Audiunt vocem meam, says Christ: Audiunt and vocem mea:
Audiunt, that is, a necessity of hearing. Romans 10.14. Matthew. Psalm. 119.
Faith comes by hearing, knowledge comes by hearing, comfort comes by
hearing: They that stop their ears, and will not hear, are not Christ's sheep.
Though thou be lame as Mephibosheth, or blind for a time as Paul, or dumb as
Zachary, Mark. 9.25
yet thou may be in Christ's fould: but if the deaf devil have possessed
thee, if thou stop thy ears, thou art none of his flock.

What joy had David in hearing but of going to Church? Psalm.
It did me good, says he, when I heard them say we will go to Jerusalem.
Audiunt vocem suam, not only they must hear, but hear his voice: therefore
our Savior gave a double caveat, quid, and quomodo: In Mark, Mark. 4.24. Luke
8.18.
Take heed what ye hear, there is quid: in Luke, Take heed how ye hear,
quomodo. If ever it were a time to set a watch at those open ports of our
ears, these be the days; wherein some like the soldiers of Gastro, are
armed with the adversaries arguments, as they were with the enemies armor.
Some coining inventions, of which says David, I have hared inventions; others
with traditions, of which Christ forewarneth; others with infallible notes of
seasoning the sense of Scripture; which notes, howsoever they seem to have
warrant out of Vincentius Lirinensis; Vine. Lirin.
yet of the three, he acknowledges that Heretics have claimed two of them,
the Arrians universality, and the Donatists antiquity; and denies not but
that the third may be challenged by inueterate heresies also: and I ad further,
that the Devils may plead for it Consent, and not Heretics only; for Satan
is not divided against Satan: wherefore let not any voice be here to be
believed; but that one voice, vnam regulam, Scripture, as worthily Vincentius
in his 41 Chapter does plainly deliver. Vine. Lirin.


Fourthly, be ye all Christ's servants, Christ sheep, by honest living, hearty
loving, and diligent hearing. So much of the first part.

The second part.

Psalm.
[The sheep shall be scattered.] Dissipentur inimici, let his enemes be
scattered: Quid meruere oues, what have his poor sheep deserved? Misery enough
to be such helpless creatures as sheep; but scattered, Lorinus.
disperdere is bisperdere, this is a greater wane of misery; poor disciples,
now they might sit sobbing day and night, breaking their breasts with beating,
wearing their hands with wringing, their hearts aching with sighs, and their
eyes streaming with sorrows; bruised reeds the staff of their comfort, taken
from them; the Children of the Bride chamber, mourning for the absence of the
Bridegroom; Lambs sent out into the vast world among Wolves; poor souls,
discouraged, discomforted creatures, hearing their woe, feeling their want;
solitary are they now to be left, that had been his daily waiters, that had
been the witnesses of his miracles: Look upon the Mother, the near kinsewoman
of our Savior, leading her two sons to be preferred to our Savior his
service; did they think of this scattering? Look upon his Disciples disputing
for prioritie who should be greater; did they think of this scattering? Look
upon those two Disciples in Luke, traveling to Emaus, Luke 24.13
how were they dejected, when they remembered this scattering? they trusted it
had been He that should have delivered Israel. All the life of his Disciples
was a scattering, iourneying, troublesome life: they were still in progress;
our Savior had no standing house, but heaven. He promised them in the Gospel,
Matthew. 19.
Quando sedebit filius hominis, Bernard.
vos sedebitis* But when did he sit, says Bernard? He had no ease, no place to
rest on. These his sorrowful, and as it were forlorn followers, had heard
Christ often, that he was the light of the world, and the bread of life, that he
had overcome the world, yet shall they bescattered: It had been enough to have
caused their hope to vanish like smoke, and their Faith to wither like grass,
and death to sting them to the death, Hell to triumph over them: but they were
sheep, therefore silent, they expostulate not, but obediently and patiently
hear their ensuing misery; The sheep shall be scattered.

scattered, is, that the servants of Christ must be content to be severed from
their fellows, and friends, and comforts whatsoever. One must be like a
Pelican in the wilderness, another like a Storcke in the desert, some like
the Turtle on the housetop, others like Doves in the holes of the rocks, they
cannot be together, but like grapes after a vintage, here one, there one. The
indorsement of God to his Saints, is like that of S. Peter to the Jews, 1 Pet.
1.2.
To the strangers dispersed. These Apostles were dispersed, and translated into
diverse countries, Peter into Antioch, Eusebius.
James to Jerusalem, John into Asia, Andrew into Scithia, Philip into Gallia,
Bartholomew into Armenia, Matthew into Ethiopia, Thomas into India, Jude into
Egypt, and Simon Zelotes into Mesopotamia.

There was a dispersion, and dissolution, more horrid then this; for in this
there was a blessing; but the scattering (I mean) was of the Jews, was a full
measure of misery, that when the Jews had bin assailed often, as may be found
six times in the old Testament, at the length their utter destruction, their
final downfall and funeral came upon them; the desolation of their country,
detestation of their Nation, abhorring of their Names, the scattering,
fettering, consuming of their City, Temple, peace, prosperity, and of all
blessings, suddenly ouer-tooke them.

Christ his Prophecy of them was fulfilled, Behold, your house shall be
desolate unto you: for neither the aged for their gray-haires found reverence,
nor the suckling relief for his infant innocentage, nor Matrone, nor Priest
nor Virgin, nor Senator, for Modesty or order, Iudolph.
found any pity. But this is no such scattering.

There is dispersio tegumenti, Bern.
and dispersio Tritici the wind scatters the chafe, the Husbandman
scatters the Wheat; the Wicked are the chafe, as in the Psalms and.
Prophets frequently; Osca. Ier. Ezekiel.
the Godly are the Wheat, sown, reaped, threshed, ground to powder; yet
howsoever scattered, Gods promise was still, Capillum de capite iusti non
periturum; Psalm. 1.
nay, more, Quodcunque faciet, prospere faciet: he not only cares for the
bones, that the bones which he has broken may rejoice; but the shadow of Peter
shall recover the sick; the handkercher of Paul deliver the diseased; the
Cloak of Elias divide the Waters; and the Bones of Elizeus revive the dead:
and as Saint Paul spoke by his experience: 2 Cor.
As unknown yet known; as dying, yet behold we live; as chastened, yet behold
not killed; as sorrowing, and yet rejoicing; as poor, and yet making many
rich; as having nothing, and yet enjoying al things: in a word, as scattered,
yet comforted.

The first name that ever was given, the name Adam, was a name of scattering:
Aug. in Joan.
it contaynes, says Austine, in four Letters, the four Parts of the World,
East, West, North, South; yet the Lord promises to gather together the
scattered flock of Israel, from the East, West, North, and South.

weak and weather-beaten Mediatations upon this Text. Application must begin
where Meditation ends When our Savior entered into the Synagogue upon the
Saboth day, Luke 4.18.
he opened the Book upon those words of Esaias, The spirit of the Lord is upon
me, he has sent me, that I should heal the broken hearted, etc. And he shut
the Book, and said, this day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears:
Beloved, if ever Scripture were fulfilled in your ears; if ever Scripture made
your hearts to ache, and your ears to tingle, this is the day, this the Text:
if ever any Scripture did take down the crest of Pride, and abate the edge of
Revenge, to move you thoroughly to leave and loath the World, this is it: I will
smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered.

Oh, why is there not a general thaw through-out all mankind? why in this
debashed Air do not all thing expire, seeing Time looks upon us with watery
eyes, disheueld locks, and heavy dismal looks; now that the Sun is gone
out of our Firnament, the joy, the beauty, the glory of Israel is departed?

Gentlemen, who either in the greatness of your Offices, or in the neerenesse
of your attendance, lived under the Branches of our Princely Cedar: to you this
is a dissolution, not a dispersion; disperdere is not perdere with you, you
only return to your own Families to drink of your own Vines; and to eat
under your own fig trees; yet remember hereafter, as the wise Egyptians did
bestow more on their Tombs then Houses, so hereafter dispose of more time for
consideration of death, then of provision for the things of this life: Let
mortality be your meditation, you are but earth; your best clothes, earth,
worms made them; your best fed bodies, earth, worms must eat them. You may
say, Vidimus stellam, we have seen his Star, and vidimus gloriam, we have
seen his glory; you saw it rising and setting, you will now believe, that that
GOD who has called Princes Gods; he, qui homines coelestibus aequat, has made
Princes but men; quia sceptra ligonibus aequat. You have served (and therein
your posterity may rejoice) the most religious, gracious, holy, chaste;
virtuous, valerous Prince of his growth, that ever the Christian world enjoyed,
yet you see HE is departed: season therefore this lump of luggage, all
worldly thoughts with the remembrance of death. Embrace all holy acts of
religion; Psalm. 37.
keep innocence, and do that which is just, and seek peace, for this shall
bring a man joy at the last. You are all of you I hope, to serve another
Prince, I doubt not you are in Check-roll already; mistake me not, I mean no
other Prince then the Prince of Peace, spoke of in Esaias; I mean no other Roll,
but his book of life: Rejoice in this, Esa 9 6.
that your names be written in the book of life; that service is heritage:
instead of your white staves, you shall have Palms in your hands, and your
entertainment will be, Good servants and faithful, you have been faithful in
a little, I will make you rulers over much, enter into your Masters joy. This
joy the Lord in mercy, in his due time, grant unto you.

You of the middle sort, whose wound is not mortal, and yet are ready to sink
under the burden of this sorrow, as having lost the most incomparable Prince,
that ever the World had: you that settled your thoughts, and hoping to have
seen him the Head over many Nations, have said to your souls, under the
shadow of his wings we shall be safe; here will we dwell for ever. Let your
dare-bought experience teach you the lesson that David, a great Prince, gave to
his People; Psalm. 146.
Trust not in Princes, for they be sons of men, there is no health in them,
their breath departs, and every one of them returns to his earth. Chri^.
Si dicendum sit aliquid mirabil^, says a Father, If a man may speak any
thing worthy of the greatest admiration, it is this, Trust not in Princes, they
themselves are not in safety; their sublimitie is but sublunary; they are
within the verge; the Earth has provided an Auello for every of them to be
laid in: yield them faithfulness and obedience, but settle not in them your
faith and confidence. Yield them duty, tribute, yea, your goods and lives, but
withal remember, Psalm. 146.
Blessed is the man that puts his trust in the Lord, and has the God of lacob
for his refuge: live honest, holy, religious lives, but a while; the end is at
hand, we shall all meet in aequalitie with our blessed Master in glory.

You poor souls, the poor silly sheep of his flock, who was wont to give
you meat in due season; you that like those in Jerusalem do arise, and cry in
the night, Lament. 3.
and in the beginning of the watch pour out your hearts like water, and lift
your eyes to heaven, for your selves, your wives, and children: Take the
counsel of David; Trust in the Lord, Psalm. ^7.
and being good, commit thy ways unto the Lord; wait patiently upon the Lord,
hope in him, and he shall bring it to pass: Trust in the Lord, and verily thou
shall be fed. Hear David's example, I have been young (says he) but now am
old, yet I never saw the righteous forsaken, nor their seed begging their
bread. Honesty is the best patrimony, leave but a good report of an honest
life behind you, and your Children then have sufficient Legacies.

All of you, beloved, that are in this valley of tears to hear me this day,
repent you of your former lives, turn from the wickedness of your ways, or
else ye may fear a more fearful scattering.

The outrage of apparel, surquedry in meat, choice of new oaths, new
exchange of sins, and the sluice of vengeance that hell has opened, Since the
yee^. ^^^^.
have brought many fearful scatterings among us within these few years: the
death of nine Counselors of State, sixteen Bishops of the Church, fifteen
Judges of the Law, and in one year, in this one City, thirty seven thousand
three hundred and two, stricken with the Plague of Pestilence, Lady Mary Lady
Sop^ia.
and which is more then all this, three of his Majesty's Children, the hope and
joy to all true hearted Subjects, Prince Henry, who dyed in the nineteenth
year of his his age, the 6. of November, 1612 and was honorably buried at
Westminster, the 7. day of December following.
is taken away from among us: and which equals all other losses, Isaac is
offered, Ichabod, our glory, is departed, Prince Henry is deceased, whom if
ever any of us in his most obseruant reposed thoughts shall forget, let his
right hand rot, and forget her cunning, and the harp of his Tongue hang up for
ever in the roof of his mouth.

O God, how have thou plagued us, as Lament 2.22.
Jeremy complained even in the solemn day? In that Month thou once gave us
Queen Elizaheth, to take away Prince Henry? In that Month thou gave us
Noble Prince Charles, the succeeding Charlemaine, in that Month to take away
his blessed Brother? In the Month thou did preserve us from that furious
sulphurous plot of our enemies, in the same Month are we, to our great
sorrows, insulted on by our Enemies? Had thou not left us a remnant, we had been like to Sodom and Gomorh. Wherefore good Lord look down from Heaven,
behold and visit us, look upon that Vine thy right hand has planted; bless
the root and branches of the Royal remnant: let the light of thy Countenance
shine ever in the Sun, and Moon and Stars of this Firmament; let never be
wanting one of this race to sit upon the British Throne, till the Sun has
run his last race, and the world has finished his last course. Say thou
Amen, thou faithful witness of Heaven, to the prayers of us poor, wretched,
afflicted, miserable souls: Say Amen thou Truth, and witness of thy Father,
to our Petitions that come not out of fained lips; and let Heaven and Earth
seal it, and say, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

