Praelium and praemium.

THE CHRISTIANS WAR and reward.

A SERMON PREACHED before the Kings Majesty at White Hall the 3. of May. 1608.

BY

DANIELL PRICE Master of Arts of Exeter College, and Chapleyn in ordinary to
the PRINCE.

Vincenti dabitur.

OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1608.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, THE LORD Archbishop of Canterbury his
Grace, Primat and Metrapolitan of all England, one of his Majesty's most
Honorable privy Counsel, and the right worthy Chauncelour of the famous
University of Oxford.
MOst reverend, religious, and rightly honorable, so small a present for so
great a Patron is not tolerable by the rule of proportion, especially when
so great weakness lies open to the eye of so great worthiness. My
apprehension at the first conceited me so strongly that I designed this to
aternal oblivion and resolved that it should have dyed and been buried in the
place it first breathed, but fearing lest an action of presumption would be
commenced against me, for burying so poor an Orphan in so princely a place as
the Kings Chapel, I adventured to lay it in the grave of the press, wrapping
it in these sheets, as in a Syndon, and mantling it on a sable letter, as in a
hearse, and yet after four aates pressing to death, it revived, and is crept
to present it self unto your Grace presuming that as you affoorded it gracious
attention at the preaching, so you will afford it gracious acception in the
printing. If there be any thing worthy Patronadge in it, or in me, I humbly
prostrate it, rejoicing much I may tender any observa^ce unto him, whom his
royal Majesty, the gracious Queen, my Princely Master, the noblest
Personadges, the greatest scholars, both the Universities, the Church, Common
wealth, arts and schools, do for his studies, conferences, labors, and
imployme^ts, acknowledge, reverence, and prefer to the Confluence of all
honor. I must confess it had many very honorable friends who desired after
the preaching to be acquainted with it, but I was then doubtful whether I
should publish it or no, sometimes dissolving it, sometimes resolving for it,
til now at length I have adventured to let it see the sun. It is the first
tender of my duty, and the first dedication from our University Press, since
the time your Grace was pleased to entertain the protection of us. The Lord
preserve your Grace to continue for many and many years, that the Church may
long enioie so worthy a Pillar, the Common wealth so wise a Counselor, and
this famous University so honorable a Chancellor.

Exeter Coll. this 19. of June. 1608. Your Graces, in all humble duty DANIELL
PRICE.

The Text.
Revel. 2.26. He that overcommeth, and keeps my works to the end, to him
will I give power over nations.


THE whole book of God written by his finger, delivered by his power, inspired
by his spirit, and revealed by his will, is as Cassiodore observes, Schola
coelest is, eruditio vitalis, auditorium veritatis, disciplina singularis,
profitable to teach, to instruct, to reprove, to correct, that the man of God
may be perfect in all good works: whatsoever is contained in this book, God
has revealed to man, (...) is become (...), secretum, relatum, nay not only
relatum but revelatum, The whole book from Genesis to the Revelation is the
Genesis of a Revelation, here begins the Exodus the end, termination,
complement, accomplishment of the Revelation. Job may conceive Secreta Dei,
Job. 11.6. Daniel may observe abscondita Dei. Dan. 2.22. The Apostle may
discern profunda Dei, 1. Cor. 2.10. And Paul wrapped up to the third heavens
may hear arcana Dei, 2. Cor. 12.4. But now secreta, profunda, arcana,
abscondita, be revelata. The Aenigma is disclosed, the knot unloosed, the
mysteries interpreted, the veil removed, all things revealed, and he that was
veiled in the flesh is revealed in the spirit, and in this book, is the
manifestation of our God and of his will, of the Lamb, and of his life, of the
spirit, and of his truth, of his seals, trumpets, angels, viols, thunders,
lightnings, threatenings, judgments of heaven, hell, the earth, the sea,
consumption, destruction, dissolution, desolation and final consumation of the
world.

Jf the whole Scripture may be called the Library of the holy Ghost, then
this is the Closet of that library, if the Lantern of Jsrael, then this is
the light of that Lantern, if the Alphabet of God, then this is then of that
Alphabet, this is the end of his book, who is the beginning and the end, the
last of his book, who is the first and the last, the O of his book, who is a
and O, the Amen of his book, who is yea and Amen. The holiest place not more
worthily called sanctum sanctorum, or the Iubile Sabbatum sabbatorum, or the
Canticles Cantica Canticorum, or Empireum Coelu^ Coelorum, I say not more
truly called so, then this Revelatio Revelationum, the Compendium and Epitome
of all the works, wonders, secrets, depths, and mysteries of God, so that as a
father well speaks of the whole scripture, Hugo.
I may also in particular speak of this Apocalips, pascit miraculis, oraculis,
figuris, verbis, mysterijs, Greg. Moral
And as Manna as Gregory observes, habet omne delectamentum, and omnis saporis
suauitatem, so I may speak of this book of the Revelation, (which is the hid
Manna, kept long in the Arc, inter arcana, and now manifested among Reuelata.)
O then come, and see, and see hear, and taste how good and sweet this Manna
is, it will give to every man his gust and relish, if ye be ignorant here ye
may be instructed, if weak, hear ye may be strengthened, if fearful, here ye
may be hartened, if fighting here ye may be comforted, if triumphing, here ye
may be crowned, and more the^ this, here is the greatest blessing pronounced
that ever was to any book, Blessed is he that reads, Revel 1.
and he that hears, and he that understands, and he that keeps the words
of this book.

Out of this book and out of that Manna of this book have J chosen this
portion of scripture, as a portion of meat in due season, which if you will
stay till J have prepared it for you, J will present it to be panem nostrum
hodiernum, or rather, panem nostrum quotidianum. He that overcomes and keeps
my works to the end to him will I give power over nations. what subject more
sit for Heroical spirits then an encitement to chiualtrie, nay what subject
may speak of a fitter subject before a most royal King, then of a kingdom.
Behold both these in this He that ouercometh etc. He that ouercometh, here a
christian is made a conqueror, and keeps my woorks to the end, hereof a
Conqueror he is made a Continuer, J will give him power over nations, hereof a
Continuer he is made a king. He that ouercometh here he is approved a
Christian and keeps my works, here he is a Catholic, I will giu^ him
power over nations, here he is Defe^der of the faith A Conqueror, a Continuer,
a King, a Christian, Catholic, Defender of the faith. In a word in these
words ye shall find, a Conflict, and a Conquest, Martyrs misery, Saints
dignity, the state of servants, in this life laborious, the state of Saints in
the life to come glorious, a precept to take up the Cross, a promise of the
Crown, an exhortation from God to man, a Co^pensation for man from God. All
this in these words he that ouercometh and keeps my works to the end I
will give him power over nations.

Observe breefly these 2 parts praelium and pramium, Diuis.
praelium admortem; praemium advitam, a war, and a rewa^d, war to the end,
the end of that end to be rewarded, In praelio, in the warrfare observe, 1 that
the true Christian must overcome, Subdiuis.
He that ouercometh, 2. that he must continue, and keep my works to the end,
in praemio, the reward, observe 1. the giver promising. I will give him. 2. the
gift promised* power over nations ^hus you see the body and soul, the heaven
and earth of my Text, the parts and particular circumstance, thereof, of al
which in their order, and first of the first. He that ouercometh.

Man the Model of the world in respect of his misery, 1. Obs.
has his life compared to things most mome^tary. by Eschilus to smoke, by
Varro to a bubble, by Crates to hey, by Socrates to a Journey, by Epictetus to
a Torrent, by Pindarus to a shadow, by Plutarch to a Flower by Petrarch to a
feather, by Jacob to a Pilgrimage. Genesis 47.9. wherein is casualtie by David to a
span. Psa. 39.5. wherein is brevity by Hosea, to a cloud, Hosea. 13.3. wherein
is mutabilitie, by Paul to a Race. 2. Tim. 4.7. wherein is Celeritie, by James
to a vapor. James 4.13. wherein is inconstancy, and by Job to a warfare. Job.
7.7. wherein is much conflicting misery, God that is himself, a man of war,
Exodus 15.3. made man also to be a man of war. Genesis 3.15. put emnitie
between the woman and the serpent, and between the feed of the woman and the
feed of the serpent. In the 3. of Genesis you may see the beginning of this
war, there was the first quarrel about the first broken head, Genes. 3.15.
he shall break thine head* and thou shall bruise his heel. here upon the
challenge was proclaimed, the Camp pitched, the battle fought, and the hatred
continued even to this hour. Hereupon God provided for man an armor, knighted
him a Christian, prepared the Cross for his ensign, blood for his Colors,
Christ for his Captain, and taught his hands to fight, and his fingers to
battle, so that now Job may truly speak Militia est vita hominis super
terram, non super coelum qui super coelum triumphant, non sub terra qui sub
terra quie scu^t sed super terram quia qui super terram pugna^t Tsaba as the
Hebrews read a continual dimication, or (...) as the Greeks a Piracie by sea
and a Conspiracy by land or a temptation, as the septuagint translate it, a
Conflict, Combat, battle, a warring agonizing kind of life, in which al quoad
maius and minus have their parts as Petrarch observes, Hic in castris, ille
in Rostris, in scholis, in memore an agro, in pelago, in palate so: hic ferro
corpus, ille animum dolis, hic argutijs linguam armat, hic pedibus, ille equo,
hic currit, ille nauigat omnes militant. Many strive says the Apostle but one
receaueth the Crown, so many sight but there is but one sort of soldiers that
receive the reward. Benaiah was honorable among thirty but he attained not to
the first 3, And so many a Benatah may fight and yet in fighting not attain to
the holy warfare of the Trinity, which is the first three. Therefore as there
is a So run that ye may obtain, so also is there so fight that ye may
overcome, Non pugnanti, sed vincenti, Not to him that fights, but to him that
overcomes the aim, the mark, the scope, the end, the Cynosura the Causa
Causae of our fighting to overcome. To him that overcomes. But is man able to
overcome, has he power to will, will to desire, desire to effect, effect to
continue. Has he strength to stand that is so weak, force to fight, that is
so weary, means to overcome, that is so unworthy. The Pelagian and his heir
apparent of that heresy Bellarmine in his 5. book de gratia and libero
arbitrio, Bell* lib. 5. de gra. and lib. arb.
answer that man though he be seeble, weak, weary, unworthy, yet has he
liberty, and strength, and free will to run, and to continue and persevere, else
were al precepts and exhortations and expositions and reproves altogether in
vain. For as the Pedestri senatores among the Papists ask what folly were it
to exhort, or command us, to do that which is not within our power, or
liberty to perform, it were as if a man should exhort one to run, which were
fast enclosed in a prison. For answer whereunto I say Austine by anticipation
in his book de gratia and libero arbitrio, answers Bell. argument in his
book de gratia and libero arbitrio. Ideo Deus, etc. Therefore God commands
somewhat that man cannot do, that man may learn to seek ability of God to
do it, Fides enim impetrat quod lex imperat, for faith obtaines from God by
prayer, what God prescribes to man by law. So that the Imperative in God
begets an Optatiue in man, not an Operative: and therefore when in David in one
verse, Psalm. 119.
we read Tu praecepisti, thou have charged that we should keep thy
commandments, he adds vtinam sic vie meae parentur, O that my ways were
made so direct, that I might keep thy statures, his command excitants gratia,
his assistance operans gratiam. Commandment may extend further then
strength, but Gods assistance stretches as far as his commandment. He has
not only in an Active commanded Reuertere Return, but also in a Passive
Convertere, be thou converted, and therefore man's power is never operant
unless God be Cooperant. We are al as spring locks, shut we can of our
selves, not open, for our naturales Potentiae, Aquin.
as the schools speak, be become naturales impotentiae, and as S. Austine
speaks, Libero arbitrio male vtens homo and se perdidit and ip sum. So that
whosoever will ascend Jacobs ladder must acknowledge still Dominus super
scala^, and howsoever the sword of the Lord and the sword of Gedeon may go
together, yet the hand of Gedeon or the sword in his hand, or the edge on his
sword is not able to pierce unless God give power, Non enim tam agimus quam a
Deo agimur, Zanch.
says Zanchius, for man is not so properly said to do good, as to be
compelled to do it by the good spirit of God. And the Apostle teaches, that
it is not in him that wills or in him that runs, but in God which enableth
us, we can do al things. Austen ends all this in his 3. book de lib. Arbit.
16. Esaias. Deus and velle praecepit and posse praebuit et non impune nolle
permisit. God commands all men to be willing, he gives unto some his grace to
be able, he permits others to remain unwilling but never to remain
unpunished. And therefore our prayer must be as the same fathers is, Da Domine
quod iubes and iube quod vis, give us O Lord ability to do what thou
command, and command what thou will, for without thee our knowledge is
ignorance, our power is infirmity, our sight is blindness, our light is
darkness, our strength is weakness. But J have founded a retrait too long from
my warfare, he that over comes.

The heathens had sundry times, at which they did especially practice
military actions, and points of chiualtie, and had their Nemea, Istmia,
Pythia, and Olympia, in which they did exercise striving, wrestling, running,
fighting, and other feats of Martialisme. The very sa^e exercises has God
appointed for his servants, he has appointed them to run, 1. Cor. 9.24. per
viam man datorum. Ps. 119.32. per viam patientiae. Heb. 12.1. he has appointed
them to resist. Ephesians. 6.13. in fide. 1. Pet. 1.9. In sanguine. Heb. 12.4. he
has appointed them to wrestle. Ephesians. 6.12. vsque ad auroram. Genesis 32.35.
adversus principatus, adversus potestates, adversus mu^di d^minos. adversus
spirituales astutias. Ephesians. 6.12. he has appointed us to fight. Job. 14.14.
non secundum carne^. 2. Cor. 10.3. sed bonam militiam militare 1. Tim. 1.18.
and in all these the life of a Christian is a busy, stirring, agonizing trade
of life, a pressing to the mark a striving to enter in at the narrow gate,
and a violent suprising of the kingdom of heaven. So the doctrine hence to be
observed is this, Doct.
that Christianity is not a lice^tious, or a libertine like security but an
earnest, painful, watchful, Conflicting, Combating life.

And whosoever will undergo this and be co^te^ted to take press money in this
warfaring life shall be sure to have God still helping strengthening, encouraging,
Co^forting, and assisting, so that what is faynedly reported of Pindarus to be
continually assisted by Apollo, Lycurgus by Pithia, Numa by Aegeria, Socrates,
by his Genius, Phiddias by his Jupiter, and Philemon by the Muses, may more
truly be said of the Lord our God, who does continually assist his servants
to the last of their life to overcome.

Many things are said to overcome, the word of God to overcome man, that word
made man to ouerco^e for man, man himself by repentance and prayer to overcome
God, by faith, hope, and charity, to overcome al spiritual aduersaties. The
word of God powerful to overcome strong holds: and to cast down and overthrow
every high thing, 2. Cor. 10.5. witness Nineveh imperious, insolent,
intolerable Nineveh, Nineveh, the imperial co^mander of the Eastern parts,
proud of her walls and bulwarks, Niniveh the mother City of Assiria, the
Metropolis of the Country, the golden head of the picture, the glory of the
earth, the seat of the Empire, the Lady of the East, and the Queen of the
Nations, so strong, so potent, overcome with this word, yet forty days and
Niniveh shall be destroyed. The message* of their overthrow, overthrew the
message says Chrysostom. the prophecy fell, the City fell not because her fall
was prophesied, Vincit verbu^. The word made man, overcame for man. Christ
says, Ioh. 16. I have overcome the world, witness, that bloody conflict,
when Mount Calvary was the field, the Cross the bloody banner, his blessed
body the weapon of his warfare, his anguishes his armies, My God why haste thou
forsaken me, the Trumpet, his death, the life, his misery, the victory, his
crucifying, the conquest, his Tortours the Triumph, Vincit Christus. Repentance
overcommeth. Affliction is said to overcome man, and Repentance is somewaie
said to overcome God, for as Affliction causes man to turn to God; so
repetance causes God to turn to man. Apostrophe in man from God breeds
Apostrophe in God, from man, Epistrophe in man to God begets Epistrophe in God
to man. Repentance in man begets Repentance in God, non per naturam sed per
effectum, though the heavens be ready to plague us, the sun and moon to
reign down blood upon us, the fire hot burning coals, the air I
hunderbolts, the earth ready to swallow us, the water to drown us, hell to
devour us: nay, all the hosts of the God of hosts, to overcome us, yet by
faithful repentance we overcome them all. Vincit Penitentia. Prayer does
overcome. For it is not only Angelis solatium, Aug.
Daemonibus flagellum, animae praesidiu^, as Austine speaks. But it is more,
it is Eliahs key, Moses rod, Jacobs sword and bow, David's shield and spear,
the most powerful of all the weapons of a Christian. I will fetch but one drop
from the Ocean, to prove this. When Egypt was smitten, and Pharaoh plagued, and
their waters, and rivers, and streams, and ponds, and pooles, and vessels of
stone, were silled with blood, and frogs, and lice, and botches, and soars,
and hail, and thunder, and lightning, and grasshoppers, and morreine, and
darkness, were sent upon the Country, By Moses praiet they were removed,
dispersed, scattered demolished, utterly dissipated as the dust before the
wind. Vincit Oration, Oration paenetrat coelu^. So might I speak of faith, hope,
and charity, which be most forcible, singular, effectual, powerful,
energeticallie potent, I had almost said omnipotent in the trials, trauils,
battles, warfare, combats, conflicts, conquests, victories, triumphs, trophes
of the Saints.

To end this point God has made man a Christian, and dubd every Christian a
knight, Ephesians. 6.
provided him the armor of God, nay God for his armor, given spirit to his
sword, for it is the sword of the spirit, given safety to his helmet, for it is
the helmet of salvation, righteousness for his brestplate, for it is the breast
plate of righteousness, faith for his shield, for it is the shield of faith,
verity for his girdle, for it is the girdle of verity, given him the Gospel
of Peace for his feet, for his feet be shod with the preparation of the Gospel
of peace. This is now that Complete knight, Having on his feet spurs guilt with
his blood, who took away the guilt of the law, on his head, a helmet
salvation, on his heart, a breast plate righteousness, on his loins, a girdle
verity, in his hand, a sword the spirit, on his whole body a robe, the
seamelesse garment the Lord Jesus Christ, and upon this garment putting on an
armor, Armaturam Dei. naie more, Armaturam Deum, the whole armor of God, naie
whole God for his Armor. Every man is this Christian, every true Christian
must thus arm, watch, stand, run, wrestle, resist, strive, fight and overcome.

The use of the doctrine is to encite all the servants of the Lord to be
Martialists to be soldiers in this wicked world. Our life is militia, Use.
we have an oath sacramentu^ militiae, we have an armor Armaturam militiae we
have a place locum militiae, we have a combat luctam militiae, we have a reward
coronam militiae, our dangers diverse, our conflicts mighty, our adversaries
many, Cic. pro Arch Poet.
Nihil horu^ ora vultus mouerunt? within us guilty consciences oppressing us,
before us trapps for our destruction to ensnare us, behind us memory of sins
past to torture us, over our heads, the wrath of God to terrify us, under our
feet the dungeon of damnation, to entrappe us, the flesh insulting, the world
triumphing, the devil tempting, sin slinging, Nihil horum ora vultusque
mouerunt? Well my beloved at the length Arise, arm your selves fight the Lords
battles. Alexander the young Prince did more earnestly desire to learn, because
Arist. the Prince of Philosophers taught him, And the soldiers did more
streniously fight because that the renowned Alexander did lead them Beloved
your Arist. is Alexander, your Alexander is Christ, he does teach you to fight
and does fight to teach you, In him ye are Conquerours, by him ye are more
then Conquerours. Never did any Conqueror so victoriously, if you fight as ye
have him for an example. The Philistin with his spear, the Israelite with his
slinge, the Indian with his darre, the Persian with his bow, the Schithian with
his lance, the Mirmadon with his strength was never able to be so powerful in
conflict as thou may be, And as the conflict is victorious so the victory
is as glorious, never had Moses such a victory over the Caananits, Joshua over
31. kingly Captains, Israel over the Philistines, David over the Amalekits,
Alex. over the Barbaria^s, Themistocles over the Persians, Aemilius over the
Macedonians, Marcellus over the Sithia^s, or Scipio over the Carthaginians, as
thou may thy self obtain by thy Christ. O the^ who would not in a spiritual
ambition desire so to triu^ph, so to Celebrat his Trophies. But yet if any will
desire this, let him remember the tenor of his knights service is the Cross,
and as the Romans could not come to the temple of honor, but by the Temple of
virtue, so he by noe means can come to the Crown but by the Cross. He must
come to fight before he fight to overcome. He must overcome the world, the
devil, the flesh, in the world, he must overcome himself a little world, in
himself he must overcome his tongue a world of wickedness, himself a little
world in the great world, his tongue a great world in that little world, a
world of wickedness. James 3.6. If he can overcome the world and himself, he
shall be able to overcome tribulation, anguish, persecution, famine, nakedness,
peril, sword, life, death, angels, principalities, powers, things present, or
things to come, height or depth, or any other creature especially if he be able
to overcome and to hold fast til C. come. For the promise is made to him that
ouercometh and keeps my works to the end, and so J end this point and come
to show that we must overcome to the end.

Not the hearers but the the doers of the law are justified. Romans 2.13. 2.
Obs. 1. part.
Not the doers for a time but the continuers, beyond time, the faithful unto
the death, Reu. 2.10 Many herd C who understood him not, so the vulgar Jews,
many understood him who believed him not so the Scribes and Pharisees, many
believed him who professed him not so the Hypocrite, many professed him for a
time, but after fell away so the Apostats. This answers al Iewes-Scribes
Pharisais Hypocrites and Apostates, he that keeps my works to the end. Not
hears but keeps, not words, but works not for a time but to the end, he
that keeps my works to the end to him and to none but to him.

It was a brutish speech of Brutus, Liuy
Te colui virtus vt rem ast tu nomen inane es, that Piety, Honesty, Religion,
be but names, for Christ here makes a sufficient explication of his will in
these words, He that keeps my works unto the end, gives the name, and
nature, the words, and works, affections, and actions, all that is to be
performed. The in vndation of hypocrisy has almost drowned the world how many
good words, in the world, how sewe good works, how many be like Christians,
yet noe Christians, like Professors yet no Professors of whom the observation
of Guicciardine may be true Caesar Borgia and his father Pope Alexander the 6
had a proverb fastened on them by the Italians of that time, Guicc. lib. 5.
that the one of the^ never thought as he spoke, and the other never spoke as
he thought. Many are like to Panarches aenigma, to the Poets Hermaphrodites,
Athaen. Dipnosoph.
to the Grammarians Participles, to Banacles which are fish and noe fish, foul
and noe foul: many are outward not inward Christians, extra mittendo, non
intramittendo, by profession not by practice by sight not by faith.

God requires the externe and interne, soul and body, heart and face, words
and works, he requires that his servant should not only keep the ways of
the Lord, Genesis 18.19. and the covenants of the Lord, 1. Kings. 11.11. and the
commandments of the Lord, Neh. 1.5. and the Sabaoths of the Lord, Levit.
26.2. and the ceremonies of the Lord, 1. Kings. 2.3. and the judgments of the
Lord, Esec. 18.19. the statuts of the Lord, Ps. 119.5. and the words of the
Lord, Rev. 22.7. but here the works of the Lord which Hugo expresses to be
mandata the precepts, or as he expresses himself the practice of the precepts
of the Lord.

In which words, to keep my works, he ioineth faith and works together, to
keep credendo my works. faciendo, to keep by believing, to express by
practicing. For the Gospel is not a doctrine of liberty, Epicurisme or
sensuality, but a Gospel of exact action and perfection, not a gospel of
believing only, but of living, not of Theorie only, but of practique,
consisting not in hearing, but doing, not in affecting, but an effecting faith
So that hence J observe this doctrine that true Christianity must be
manifested in a lively, effectual, Doct.
powerful practice, otherwise our faith is no faith, our faith must differ from
the only knowing faith of the Devils, for that is Historical, from the bragging
faith of the Jews for that is Pharisaicall, from the bare faith of Hypocrites,
for that is ineffectual, from the fained faith of the Apostates, for that is
but Temporal, from the false faith of the Papists, for that is fantastical.

A doctrine very needful in these our times where in works are changed into
words, walking into talking hands into tongues, hearts into ears, which has
caused the Roman faction to traduce us for a solyfidian profession, as if we
did pluck up good works as weeds, and cast them out of doors: which how much
contrary to our profession it is, any indicious and ingenuous may
understand. So we that hold this against me^ and Angels, that a true,
effectual, lively faith does only justify, so that we remove not works from
faith, but works from justifying. We grant works to be vta regni non causa
regnandi, Aug. Aquin. Hill. Origin.
as Austine speaks, and to be required, necessitate praesentiae, non
necessitate efficientiae, for as Hilary in his Comment upon Math. teaches,
Fides sola iustificat, and S. Austen on the 4. of the Romans fides sola mundat,
and as Origin on the same Chapter, fides sola sufficit. But then they reply
out of S. James, ye see says the Apostle, that of works a man is justified
and not of faith only. Yea but says S. Paul, we conclude that a man is
justified by faith, without the work of the Law. To reconcile both which
places I say, that as we are justified by faith without the works of the Law,
so by the works of the Law must our faith be justified. So that there is one
righteousness imputed, another righteousness excercised, there is a justice
of justification, and a justice of testification, the one acquiteth before God,
the other approves before men. Paul speaks of the former of these two,
James of the later. The one establishing a real, Christian, justifying faith,
Aquin.
the other confuting a false, fained, divelish faith, Aquinas in this one
distinction ending this Christus iustificat effectiue, fides iustificat
apprehensiue, opera iustificant declaratiue, our works by faith, and faith by
Christ does justify us. Our works may claim a part in our faith, but not in
our justifying, for in that great act of Ca^celing the handwriting, acquiting
the conscience, pacifying Gods anger, and presenting us blameless before Gods
holy eyes, faith is wholly and solely employed, and our works not claiming any
part therein.

I speak not this to stop the blessed fountain of good works, I know that
he that has proclaimed of Mary Magdalen wheresoever this Gospel shall be
preached, mention shall be made of this woman, he has also promised that he
that shall give to one of the lest the very least gift, a Cup of cold water
in his name shall not want their reward. And therefore if any have been to
busy in this kind, I say to such, why cause ye the people to stay from their
works, get ye to your burdens, lay upon the people the number of works which
they did in the beginning diminish nothing thereof, for they be idle, let them
work and work, and continue in working, that when Christ comes to judgment
he may find them working, and say, good servants and faithful ye have been
faithful in a little, I will make you rulers over much, enter into your
masters joy.

Let the use of this doctrine move you al to consecrate your external, and
internal, Use.
inward and outward actions, unto God, that ye may show forth the virtue of
him that has called you, if ye have only outward sanctity ye deceive
others, if only inward, you deceive your selves: if neither inward, nor
outward, ye deceive God. But be ye not deceived, God is not mocked. S. Peter
proves, that if temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly kindness and love
be in you, you shall neither be idle nor unfruitful in the knowledge of
Christ. 2. Pet. 1.8. Amor Dei says Gregory, otiosus non est, operatur magna,
si est, si operari renuerit amor non est, where the love of God is, it is not
idle, and where it is idle it is not. Be earnest, zealous, religious, and be ye
so religiously zealous, that you may continue to the end, for Nemini palma
datur priusquam cursus conficiatur, and therefore God required not a working
only, but a continuing perseuering, keeping to the end. For the end of that
shall be rewarded. O beloved shall not we continue, Tantum boni in bono quantum
mali in malo? shall the drunkard continue so long as his longues last, the
adulterer so long as his loins last, the glutton while his skin, the proud man
while his purse, the wicked man while his life, and shall not we continue? To
the end that you may continue to the end, Remember that God in his
Arithmetique requires Multiplicatio^, not Substraction, in his iournies
progreds not regredi, in his Philosophy motum velociorem in fine quam in
principio. Mistake me not, I say he requires motum velociorem, not
violentiorem, for I know violent motions be unnatural, and yet there have been
lately so many violent motions in our Church, that had not the divine
gubernation of our primu^ movens restrained the heat of inferior Spheres, our
Church had been on fire and the Clerolaicall presbiterie had brought among us
a Cyclopical anarchy. But I need not to bring these in public. Theophilact
upon Luke, observes that Lady Philautia, Lady self love was married to the
Pharisie in the Gospel. Theoph. in Luke
The Pharisie I am sure is dead, she was then left a widow. The Anabaptists,
Brownists, Barronists, and Humorists, are in competition yet for her, The
Presbiterie is corriual with them, they much torture themselves in the suit, we
are not much troubled with them, and I hope, we shall be less. I come not
hither to trample them, if there be any thing good in them I honor it, the
exorbitancie I pity, I would they would remember that as knowledge without
zeal is not religion, so zeal without knowledge is not discretion. They would
not then be so violent and virulent.

Our motions beloved, they must not be violent as these but natural, it must
be a perpetual motion to the end, we may stretch out our selves but not out
stretch our selves, run but not ouerrunne, we must continue in a civil,
sober, sanctified course, running our race, fighting our fight, til we have
finished our course, and we shall be sure to find help in running, comfort in
continuing, joy in obtaineing, a reward in triumphing, though all the world be
against us, yet we shall be as Mount Syon that shall not be removed, as
Socrates who never changed countenance, or as the Cypress tree which never
changes color. Troubles may assault the godly, but never insult over them,
they shall have a refection in their affliction, and Consolation after
desolation post praelium praemium, and so J come from praelium to praemium, my
second part.

I will give him power over nations, were there not greater reward for
delightinging in the Lord then the delight of that delight, the joy of that
joy, ^. Pars.
the pleasure of that pleasure it were sufficient dilectionis nulla mayor
expetenda est remuneratio quam ipsa dilectio says leo. But behold the
bountifulness, mercy, liberality, munificens of our good god, he inciteth,
and allureth, and hears, and promises wages, yea promises to reward his
own merits in us, by his own mercy on us. So true is he in his word, so
faithful in his promises, man cannot object against God, Ovid. Met.
as the Poet does against man Mobilis Aesonide vernaque incertior aura curtua
policiti pondere verba care^t, He deserves not to be called Doso as Antigonus
was who promised much and performed little, he will not equivocate with man, as
he did that promised centum oues and brought but centum oua, Austine
witnesses Deum fecisse Chirographum promissorum suorum, Austin.
non debendo sed promittendo. He owes us nothing, because he never received
any thing, and yet he makes his promise his debt, his deed, his word, his
work, and his mercy a merit, yet not our merit, for St- Paul anticipateth the
doctrine of merits in the 2. Ephesians. 8. we are saved not of our selves, not of
our works, least any man should boast (...) but it is the gift of god whereupon
Bernard concludes demeritis sufficit scire quod non sufficiant merita. Bern.
So that again I say he promises to reward his own merits by his own
mercies, he promises this and he performs this, his word, his deed, his
promises, his reward, be not as the worlds be. In the world some promise what
they cannot do as Satan to Christ Math. 4.9. some what they ca^ do but mean
not, as the sonns of Jacob to the sons of Sichem Gen 34 16. Some what they
meene for a time but afterward deny it, as Laban did to Jacob, Genesis 29.23.
Some what they promise willingly, but give unwillingly, as Herod Io. Baptists
head. Mark. 6.16. So^e what they give willingly but afterward repent, as
Joshua his grant to the Gibeonits. Ios. 9.23. But Gods promises be
performances, and therefore be to be believed, In spe, extra spem-supra spem,
contra spem.

And in this God has done with man as the rulers of states, and makers of
statutes, who have sought not only to punish the bad, and to provide some
sharp and fearful tortors for them, but have ever a regard to encorage and
reward the virtuous office of the God. So did Zoroaster among the Persians,
Trismegistus among the Egyptians, Charondas among the Carthaginians, Minos
among the Cretians, and Solon among the Athema^s, that as in Hercul. Biuiu^
they were 2 ways, the on via virtutis Non est ad astra mollis e terris via,
the other via voluptatis, facilis desce^ sus Auerni. So there should be also
diverse respects had for the followers of these two diverse ways, as
Antishenes the Philosopher in Laertius and Achilles, that valiant martialist in
Homer do testify. So God the life giver of all, these law-giuers, has
provided the one and the other for the wicked who will be warned by noe
warning, feared by noe threatening, affrighted by noe terrifying admonished by
noe exhorting, he has provide fearful, and horrid and eternal pains,
tumultuous horror, fiery Chains, flamming whipps, schorching darkness,
tormenting Devils, upon whom houling, roaring, lamenting, blaspheming, and
eternal death gnawing on them, shall be powered out, the full flood of Gods wrath
and the dreggs of the unsavory composition of the cup of Gods displesure.

But for his servants (as in all other things he is a god of great mercy,
magnificence, liberality, and princely munificence so) in this above all the
rest, he is most munificent in rewarding his Saints, and servants, with many,
and most infinite blessings, as he often promises and here expresses I will
give, out of which words J observe this doctrine, Doct.
that God is able and willing to reward his Saints that which he promises. The
scripture gives proof to this doctrine. God has made promises before the
beginning of the world. 1. Pet. 1.12. firm and stable promises. 2, Cor. 1.8.
most great and precious promises. 2. Pet. 1.4. having a time of promise Act. 7
17. given a word of promise. Romans 9.7. proclaimed a Gospel of promise 1. Tim.
1.9. purchased inheritances of promise Heb. 6.12. adopted sonns of promise Gal.
4.28. drawn covenants of promise Ephesians. 2.12. appointed the spirit as the
scriuener of these covenants of promise Ephesians. 1.14 and added yea and Anen as a
seal to these couena^ts of promise. Cor. 1.10. So that a Christian may now be
sure that al bands, bills, obligations, leases, Indentures, alienations,
contracts, Covenants made never so curiously by the Meander of Lawyers wit
shall be annihilated before the least of the promises shall fail, nay heaven and
earth shall fail before the least Iota of his promise.

The comfort of this made St- Bernard to be almost in a heavenly ecstasy, when
he considered, Charitate^ Adoptionis, Veritatem Promissionis Potestatem
redditionis, Gods love in adopting his truth in promising and his power in
performeing, and surely it cannot choose but stir and incite every true
Christian to a most fervent and earnest embraceing, of these promises.

Let the use therefore of this Doctrine be this, Use.
that we remove al misdoubting and unbelieving thought* from us that at no
time there be found an evil mind in us, not crediting the promise of God. Let
us assure our selves that if we can credere and vivere believe and live after
our belief, we shall surely receive the performance of this promise in due
time. The bargain between God and us, is Creed quod habes and habes, like to
Ithiell and Vcall. Ithiell signifies God with us, Vcall is to prevail, so
that Ithiell and Vcall must go together, if we prevail God is with us. It is
double, a mutual, reciprocal, interchangeable duty, a twofolde Indenture on
our behalf, as well, as on Gods. If we overcome he has promised, and having
promised, he will perform, he will give to him that overcomes power over
nations, and so I come in few words to the last and best words of my Text. Vlt
Cir
I will give him power over nations.

There is a power given, and a power usurped, a power given to man over Gods
creatures, given to the K. over men. A power usurped by the Devil over
Christians, by the Tyrants over kingdoms, by the Pope over Kings; for the Pope
hearing that the Devil has power, he thinks that he also may have a power,
because he is the Devils vicegerent in causes Ecclesiastical and Temporal: but
in this the Pope is deceived for the Devils patent is more potent, his power
stronger and and longer then the Popes.

Bellarmine in his 1. book de sumo Pontifice the 22. Chapter, and since
Baronius in his letter to Paul the Venetian prove out of scripture, that the
Pope has special power, and is the head of the Church, out of the Acts, 10.13.
Kill and eat. Bellarmine proves it out of the word Eat, Baronius out of the
word kill, a killing argument, I should think Bellarmine might rather prove
him out of the word eat, to be the mouth then the head and Baronius might
prone out of the word kill, that he is not the head, but the headsman of the
Church. For out of the word eat, we may conclude him to be the mouth and I
may say as Cato spoke to Lentulus, Dicam cos falli qui te negant habere os, I
say they are much deceived, who deny him to have a mouth and a foul one to.
Even such a mouth as utters blasphemies. Whose lips have the poiso^ of Aspes.
Whose tongue is sharpened like a Serpents. Whose teeth be like to Lions teeth.
And whose throat is an open sepulcher. Yea a devouring Sheol, hell it self.
Thus he is the mouth. Now that he is not so much the head as the headsman of
the Church, may be proved by those many stratagems, engines, tortures,
burnings, broylings rackings, dilaniating, murdering, and massacring, whereby
the Pope has made the Church the shame and shambles of the world, as may be
seen by the manifold floods of warm, reaking, gore blood, that he has shed
and by the souls of the Martyrs crying under the Alter, How long Lord Jesus.
Bellarmine and Baronius* in this are like to those wicked Judges, found in a
diverse tale, the one out of kill, the other out of eat, making him their
head, and therefore they well deserving by him to be rewarded, the one by
being his butcher, the other his cook, I could proceed further in the
discribing of this child of the devil and father of darkness, whose religion is
rebellion, whose planters are suppla^ters, whose professors be Traitors, whose
oracles be lies, whose miracles be strawes. But J come to my Text. Jn that
potestes data we must consider another 2 fold power, power in hoc seculo,
power in futuro. That the Saints of God shall enioie power over nations, In hoc
seculo as the Gloss interprets in finali Iudicio as Lyra reads, In vtroque
as Austin testifies, Gloss. Lyra. Austin. Hugo. Hierom.
In this life to come super motus Carnales says Hugo, and in this life to come
super thronos iudica^tes tribus Israel says Hierome. So that here, and hence,
in this life and that to come in earth and in heaven.

Saints shall be sure to receive power over Nations the Doctrine is this that the
Saints of God shall receive in this in God and in the life to come with God more
true glory, and honor, and power, then ever any Monarch had upon the earth. I
need not to prove this the very text promises to give power over nations.
This power Christ calls a kingdom, Luke 12. Math. calls it an heavenly,
Mat. 21.24. Luke a blessed kingdom, Luke 14.15. Peter an eternal kingdom, 2.
Pet. 1.11. and because you shall not think it a kingdom without a Crown, C.
has promised a Crown, yea an immarcessible Crown 1. Pet. 5.4. and to the
inestimable price, he has added glory a Crown of glory, Esaias. 28.5. and to
this glory he has added Righteousness, a Crown of righteousness. 2. Tim. 4.8
and to this righteousness he has added life, a Crown of life. Revel. 2.10.
strive, resist, wrestle, run the race, fight the finish the course that you
may overcome.

My most gracious sovereign let it not be offensive that I have beeene so
bold in a time of such gracious and glorious peace to move this assembly to
fight especially, seeing the Gospel, is a Gospel of peace, and we that preach
that Gospel are bound to the peace by S. Paul.

Seeing I have begun to speak, 1. Tim. 3.3.
O let not my Lord the king be now angry, God has chosen and appointed and
anointed your Majesty, to fight his battles, he has given you the head of
Solomon, the heart of David hand of Gedeon, to make you able to overcome. He
has already given you power over nations, in the va^quishing of Heresy,
Popery, Idolatry. He has enabled your highness in this high work, to
establish true religion in one kingdom, to confirm it in a another, to found
it in on, to find it in a another, to plant it in the oue, to water it in the
other, and at the length to join both in on, so that male diut sum, is become
been coniunctu^. O let these kingdoms never know that fallacy a been
coniunctis ad male diuisa, Those that God has joined to gether let no man put
a sander.

If ever the Lord verified that prophecy of Esekiell, Faciam eos ingentem vnam,
he has now surely, they are one, and noe more two peoples neither divided any
more, so that your Majesty may say with Caesar veni vidi vici but J hope your
Majesty will rather speak with (a more Christian Caesar then he was) Carolus
Quintus whose words were vidi, veni, at Deus vicit, by him you live, move,
breath, have being to be a King and Conqueror. For if ever God overcame for
any, or ever any over came by God, your Majesty may glory in it, as much as
ever any that breathed and J may say that God overcame more gloriously for
you by a weak, small vnimaginarie, Charactericall army then ever he did, by
the sun against the Aramits by the fire against the Sodomits, by the stars
against the Cananits, by the water against the Egyptians, or by the earth
against the Murmerers, he overcame more powerfully, more miraculously for your
highness in an army of letters, by a Schedule, schrole, paper gu^ne of their
own making, then ever be overcame for any since the first day of the world.
As he has overcome for your Majesty, so has he appointed your Majesty to
ouerco^e for him, to overcome and Conquer all the monsters you find in this
king dome, the Bethauen of Idolatry, the Gilgall of Heresy the houses of
bribery, the Churches of Symony, the seats of injustice, and offices of
oppression, the possessions of sacrilege the professions of Athessme,
Matchavelisme, Anabaptisme, Barrowisme, Paganism, Pa pisme, And this shall be
the victory, whereby ye shall overcome even your faith, your Majesty is the
defender of the faith, O be an overcomer in this faith, that so this land may
obey you, your subjects may serve you your servants may pray for you, the
whole world may honor you, the Lord may reward you. And there may never be
wanting one of your roial seed to sit in holiness and happiness upon the throne
of these kingdoms until Christ Jesus come to judgment. Let al true Christian
subjects say Amen.

My Honorable Lords, ye oracles of our wisdom and Chariots of our Jsrael,
seeing I have been bold to speak unto my Lord the King, let me find favor
in your sight to show you, how you may find favor in Gods sight Heaven is
the haven whether ye desire to come, otherwise though now your state be
honorable it will be most miserable. To heaven if ye desire to come here ye must
overcome, yea you your selves my thrice Hon: Lords must your selves endeavor to
overcome, though worthily you be employed in the greatest state of the
kingdom, O forget not the state of the greatest kingdom, though ye be Domint
Terrae, yet ye are but terra Demint, and though ye were the Lords of the
whose world, yet the whole world cannot overcome for you. It is only your
faith, this is the aim, the scope the mark, the armor, the complement, the
weapon of your warfare, the victory of your combat eue^ your faith. Not your
wit, wisdom, honor, followers, not armies, not navies be able to overcome for
you. Not wit, it is virtues wanton, judgments overthrow. Not wiscom it is the
peoples talk, the statists opinion. Not eloquence, it is deceipts Counselor,
Hipocrisies advancer. Not honor, it is ennies object, cares subject. Not
friends, they are but profits guard, affections we thercockes. Not armies, they
are wraths executioners deaths purseuants. Not navies, they are the Oceans
wrack, and the winds run awaies. Not all the world and the power thereof, for
the victory of that power, is but the swords whetstone, and cruelties want. O
the^ remember the weapons of your warfare are not carnal, but spiritual, and
therefore take unto you the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to
resist in the evil day, and having finished all things stand fast. Ye have
lately celebrated the festiuitie of S. Georges knights, with many laudable,
honorable, and religious ceremonies. Long may ye so celebrate it to the
glory of your God, joy of your King, honor of your nation, and eternal
perpetuity of love among your selves. Might I presume I could show your Honors
another order of knighthood, not an new order, for I am sure it was the first
that ever was in Christendom and in the scriptures heraldrie you may find it
emblasoned by the proper arms, robes, motto, Schutchion, that belong to this
order, The order of S. Vincent.
it is the order of the Saint in my Text, Vincenti, the order of Saint Vincent.
But it is such an order, that whosoever be knights of this order, must first be
knights of the bath, they mustwash and bathe themselves as David did, and then
they shall be dubd and double knighted, and then God who is the sovereign of
the order, and Christ Jesus the Prince of Peace, the President of the order,
and the holy spirit, the Bishop of our souls, and Prelate of the order, and
the Angels the guardians, and heavenly heralds of that order shall bring forth
the under robe purity, the upper robe righteousness, the Helmet salvation, the
sword the spirit, the Eschouchion a white cross, in a bloody field, under the
Cross a Serpent latent and a Lion coucha^t, Death and hell, over the Cross a
Crown triumphant, a laurel slorant honor and power, and the motto Vincenti
dabitur. And this is the most honorable order of knighthood, he that is of this
order of S. Vincent is not only a knight of the Bath, but a knight of S.
Michaell, for he has overcome the devil, and a knight of Saint George, for he
has overcome the old Dragon, and a knight of the Temple, for he is the Temple
of the holy Ghost, and a knight of the holy Ghost, for the holy spirit of God
dwells in him.

O that ye were such knights, such Conquerours? I should now return again
unto my Lord the King, to beseech his Majesty, to establish this order, but
who am I, that should I presume so much? I fear me, I have already presumed
to too much, I will go to my heaunely Lord the King, and beseech him to
establish it in you all, that you may all overcome, and be al rewarded, and
that what at this time ye have herd carefully, you may conceive rightly,
believe faithful lie, discern fruitfullie, and practice effectually, that at
the length you may receive your reward in the Court of that celestial City,
the gates whereof be of pearl, the streets of gold, the walls of precious
stones, the Temple God, the light the lamb, the Cheer joy, the exercise
singing, the Quire Angels, and the Hymn Haleluiah. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

