EFFIGIES IOHANNIS PRESTONI VIRI CLARISSIMI SS THEOLOGIAE DOCTORIS.


How can this shadow please thee: when thou know
The substance was but Dust at best, at most.
Go rather view his Volume, and there find
A picture far more curious more refinde:
Pervse thou This, and yet neglect not That:
That tells thee, Who he was; the to there, What.
What here thou see, salute, and pass it over;
^
THE SAINTS QVALIFICATION: Or A TREATISE I. Of HUMILIATION, in Ten Sermons.
II. Of SANCTIFICATION, in nine Sermons: WHEREUNTO IS ADDED A Treatise of
Communion with Christ in the Sacrament, in three Sermons.
PREACHED, By the late faithful and worthy Minister of JESUS CHRIST, JOHN
PRESTON, Doctor in Divinity, Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, Master of
Emmanuel College in Cambridge, and sometime Preacher of Lincolns INN.

When men are cast down, then thou shall say, There is lifting up: and be
shall save the humble person, Job. 22.29. Cast away from you all your
transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed, and make you a new heart and a
new spirit: etc. Ezekiel. 18.13. He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood,
dwells in me and I in him, Ioh. 6.56. LONDON, Printed by R. B. for NICOLAS
BOURNE, and are to be sold at his shop at the Royal Exchange. 1633.

ILLVSTRISSIMO, NOBILISSIMO VIRO, PHILIPPO, PEMBROCHIAE ET MONTIS GOMERICI
COMITI, BARONI HERBERT DE CARDIFFE ET SHERLAND, ORDINIS GARTERII EQVITI, REGIAE
DOMVS CAMERARIO, REGIAE MAIESTATI A SECRETIORIBVS CONSILIIS, etc.

TRIPLICEM HVNC JOHANNES PRAESTONI, S.S. THEOLOGIAE Dri. COLLEGII IMMANNUELIS
NVPER MAGIST. ET REGIAE MAY. A SACRIS, TRACTATVM, DE HUMILIATIONE, DE NOVA
CREATURA, DE PRAEPARATIONE AD SACRAM DE SYNAXIN.


INDEVOTISSIMAE, TAM AVTHORIS, QVAM IPSORVM OBSERVANTIAE TESTIMONIVM,
L.M.D.D.D. RICHARDUS SIBS. JOHANNES DAVENPORT.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THE good acceptance, the Sermons of this worthy man have found amongst well
disposed Christians, has made us the willinger to give way to the publishing
of these, as coming from the same Author. The good they may thus do,
prevails more for the sending of them forth, than some imperfections (that
usually accompany the taking of other men's speeches) may do to suppress them.
Something may well be yielded to public good in things not altogether so as we
wish. They are enforced upon none that shall except against them, they may
either read or refuse them at their pleasure. The argument of them is such as
may draw the more regard, being of matters of necesarie and perpetual use.

For Humiliation Treatise.
we never so deeply see into the grounds of it, (sinfulness of nature, and
life) or so far as we see, look upon it with that eye of detestation we
should, and therefore a holy heart desires still further light to be brought
in, to discover whatsoever may hinder communion with God, and is glad when sin
is made loathsome unto it, as being its greatest enemy that does more hurt than
all the world besides, and the only thing that divides between our chiefest
good, and us. As this humiliation increases, so in the like proportion all
other graces increase: for the more we are emptied of our selves, the more we
are filled with the fullness of God. The defects of this appear, in the whole
frame of a Christian life, which is so far unsound as we retain any thing of
corrupted self, unhumbled for.

The foundation of Christianity is laid very low; and therefore the treatise
of Humiliation is well premised before that of the 2 Treatise.
New Creature. God will build upon nothing in us. We must be nothing in our
selves before we be raised up for a fit Temple for God to dwell in, whose
course is to pull down before he build. Old things must be out of request,
before all become new, and without this newness of the whole man from Union
with Christ, no interest in the new heavens can be hoped for, whereinto no
defiled thing shall enter as altogether unsuitable to that condition and place.
Nothing is in request with God but this New Creature, all things else are
adjudged to the fire, and without this it had been better be no Creature at
all. By this we may judge of the usefulness of discourses tending this way.
One thing more thou art to be advertised of (Courteous Reader) and that is, of
the injurious dealing of such as for private gain have published what they can
get, howsoever taken, without any acquainting either of those friends of the
Authors that resided in Cambridge (to whose care he left the publishing of
those things that were delivered there) or of us, to whom he committed the
publishing of what should be thought fit for public view, of that which was
preached in London. Hereby not only wrong is done to others but to the
deceased likewise, by mangling and misshaping the birth of his brain, and
therefore once again we desire men to forbear publishing of any thing, until
those that were entrusted have the review. And so we commit the treatise, and
thee to Gods blessing.

RICHARD SIBS. JOHN DAVEN-PORT.


A BRIEF COLLECTION OF THE principal Heads in the ensuing Treatises.
Part 1.
Doct. 1.
HVmiliation must go before Justification: Page 6 Two things in Humiliation: 8
Reas. 1.
In reference to Justification: 13
Reas. 2.
In reference to Sanctification: 14
Use 1.
To labor for Humiliation: 18 Five helps to Humiliation: 26
Use 2.
The best men should labor to be Humbled: 30
Doct. 2.
The nature of man is full of all Unrighteousness, and Ungodliness: 33 Man's
nature evidenced to be so by the Law: 34 Original Sin: 40 The corruption of
the Understanding, in five things: 43 The corruption of the Will in four
things: 48 The corruption of the Memory, in two things: 53 The corruption of
the Conscience, in three acts of it: 54 The corruption of the Sensitive
appetite: 58 The corruption of the Affections: 63 Actual Sins: 68 Man's
Nature showed to be corrupt by the rule of the Gospel: 76
Use 1.
The ignorance of those that know not the corruption of Nature: 78
Use 2.
To Labor to prize CHRIST the more; 81
Use 3.
Our Sinfulness should drive us to Christ: 82 Circumstances agravating Sin:
89 Excuses of Sin: 101 Helps against those Excuses: 108
Doct. 3.
There is a revelation of wrath against all Unrighteousness of men: 111
Use 1.
To teach us what Sin is: 118
Use 2.
To labor for a Sense of GODS wrath: 119
Use 3.
To make us go to Christ: 121
Doct. 4.
All men before regeneration with hold the Truth in unrighteousness: 126 The
greatness of this Sin in three things: 136
Use 1.
To Humble us: 931
Use 2.
The misery of men that are near and not in the Kingdom of God, in three
things: 143 How far men Unconverted may go, showed in five things: 151 How
far they come short in five things: 153
Use 3.
Most sin out of love to Sin: 163
Use 4.
The danger of disobeying the Truth: 167
Use 5.
To give the Truth leave to rule. 169
Doct. 5.
The Truth or Law of every man's judgment is made manifest by God: 180
Use 1.
The greatness of men's sin against this Truth: 184
Use 2.
To be thankful for the Truth: 192
Use 3.
To do nothing contrary to the Truth: 193
Use 4.
To expect happiness or misery as we observe or neglect this Truth: 215
Doct. 6.
God has revealed so much to every man as makes him Inexcusable: 219 Excuses
that men frame to themselves: 221
Use 1.
To justify God, and to blame our selves: 234
Use 2.
To give God the glory of his long suffering: 237 The Contents of the Sermon
before the Commons house of Parliament.
FAsting necessary: 248 Fast defined: 248 Defects in Fasting: 249

Doct. 1.
God only does Good and Evil: 253 Four Connections to demonstrate it: 255
Reas. 1.
Else God were not God: 261
Reas. 2.
Else the Creature should be God: 262
Use 1
To labor to see God in his greatness: 265
Use 2.
To look to God in all our business: 269
Use 3.
To set Faith on work to judge of these things: 270
Doct. 2.
Sin causes Wrath: 271 Gods Wrath a treasure, in three respects: 273
Use
To see Sin in the effects of it: 275 How to prevent Gods Wrath: 278
Doct. 3.
Zeal turns away Wrath: 283
Use 1.
Not to discourage those that be Zealous: 286
Use 2.
Four convictions of our want of Zeal: 288
Doct. 4.
Want of Zeal makes GODS Jealousy grow hotter: 299
Doct. 5.
Jealousy for the most part shall proceed to utter destruction: 301
Use
To learn to Fear: 302
Part 2.
Doct.
Justification and Sanctification are inseparable: 4 How Sanctification arises
from Justification: 5
Reas. 1.
None saved by the second Adam that are not borne of him: 18
Reas. 2.
It is the Will of God: 19
Reas. 3.
It is the end of our Ingraffing into Christ: ibid
Reas. 4.
It is the end of Christ's coming: 20
Reas. 5.
Christ is Prophet and King where he is a Priest ibid
Reas. 6.
All the means of Grace tend this way: 21
Use 1.
To pray for Sanctification: 22 Six encouragements to Pray for it: ibid
Use 2.
To esteem Sanctification as highly as Justification: 36 The excellency of
Grace: 37
Use 2.
To take heed of ch^llenging Justification without Sanctification: 44 Four
signs of a New creature: 49 New Creature what: 61 The Heart new framed: 62 The
Conversation changed: 66 A new quality of Holiness infused: 71 Old man what:
73 Mortification of the Old man: 83 Where God pardons he heals Sin: 88
First, it stands with Gods Honor: 89 Secondly, with our Comfort: ibid Thirdly,
with Gods Service: ibid
Doct.
Those that are in Christ have another Nature: 95
Use 1.
Not to Defer coming to God: 98
Use 2.
Not to content our selves without a new Nature: 101
Use 3.
To see that good Performances be natural to us. 107
Use 4.
To abhor our Old Nature and labor for a change: 114
Use 5.
Not to fear Falling away: 117
Use 6.
Not to be discouraged with the difficulty of any Duty: 120
Use 7.
Change of Nature a ground of comfort: 121
Doct.
We must be New Creatures: 122
Consect. 1.
We are redeemed from old customs. Ibid.
Consect. 2.
Not to wonder that the World wonders at us. 124
Consect. 3.
To pull down all that is old. 127
Consect. 4.
Not to wonder at unevenness in men's lives. 131
Consect. 5.
To expect a combat. 137
Consect. 6.
Not to wonder at Aukednesse that we find in the ways of God. 140
Consect. 7.
To give God the praise of the changing of natures. 144
Doct.
The New Creature is Gods work: 149 Four arguments to prove it: ibid
Use 1.
To show our condition in Christ is better than in Adam: 154
Use 2.
God sets us not about an impossible work. 155
Use 3.
To make us love Christ. 156
Use 4.
Not to put off Christ's call. Ibid.
Use 5.
To see with whom we have to do in hearing the Word. 156
Use 6.
To give God the praise of any good in us. 161
Use 7.
Expect not that Ministers come with excellency of Wisdom or words: 162
Use 8.
Observe what the preaching of the Word works on our hearts: 164
Doct.
First, in Christ, and then New Creatures: 169
Doct.
To be in Christ is the ground of all Salvation: 171
Use 1.
First, to increase Union with Christ in those that have it: 176 Five helps to
do it: 178 Secondly, to seek it, if it be wanting: 185 Five motives to seek
this Union: 186
Part. 3
Doct.
IN the sacrament there is a communication of the very Body and blood of
Christ: 2 Arguments against Transubstantiation First, there is no Necessity of
it: 3 Secondly, no Possibility of it: 8 Thirdly, it is against Sense: 10
Fourthly, against Reason: 11 Fifthly, against Scripture: 13 Sacrament of the
Lords Supper what: 15 Condition of the Covenant on Gods part: 16
Use 1.
To confirm our faith in the forgiveness of sins: 19 Conditions of the
Covenant required on our part: 24 Papists objection out of Ioh. 6. of eating
Christ's Flesh answered: 33
Use 2.
To see the greatness of Christ's Love to us: 39 And to Love him again and
serve him: 41 Two things to move us to come in to Christ: 45 First, our Misery
out of him: 46 1 We are subject to Death: 47 2 To the fear of Death: 48 3 To
Hell: 49 Secondly, our Happiness by Christ 54 Benefit by Christ: 1 We shall
have Life: 55 2 Our Debts shall be paid: 61 3 We shall have Rest: 68 4 We
shall have a Kingdom which consists in: 72 Liberty: 73 Plenty: 74 Peace:
75 Glory: 76 Riches: 77 5 We shall have a Feast: 86 Properties, of spiritual
Food: 88 6 Apparr^ll: 93 What this spiritual Clothing is: 94
FINIS.
CERTAIN SERMONS UPON HVMILIATION.
ROMANS 1.18. For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, which withold the Truth in
unrighteousness.


IT is true, we that are the Ministers of the Gospel are to make it our
chief business to preach Christ; indeed that is all in all. But we may preach
Christ long enough to men, telling them of Remission of sins, and
Justification, but they will not hearken to us, because before they can come to
Christ they must be humbled. It is true our end is Consolation, for that is
indeed the end of the Scriptures; I say, the end of the Scriptures is
Consolation, that through them you might have hope: and so is it the end of
this doctrine of Humiliation, as, though a purge or lancing are troublesome to
the body, yet the end of the Physician using them is health, and help; and
without this course there is no help. And for that cause we have fallen on
this Text, that it may teach us to know our selves, and the need we stand in of
Christ. You shall find these three to be the three great parts of the
Apostolical Embassage: First, to humble men, to make them know what need they
stand in of Christ. Secondly, to raise them again, to preach Remission of
sins. Thirdly, to teach the doctrine of Sanctification. These three,
Humiliation, Justification, and Sanctification, are the three maine things
wherein our condition to God consists. Therefore my Intent is to go through
these three. And we will do it briefly, beginning with this Text which we have
in hand. The occasion whereof is this.

Paul tells the Romans that his intent was To come to them: But what should he
do there? He would preach the Gospel: yea, but it was an ignominious thing to
be a Christian, a thing that would expose him to much persecution and shame. It
is no matter, says he, I am not ashamed of the Gospel, for it is the power of
God to salvation. But how does he prove that it is the power of God to
salvation? We see that in the Gospel the righteousness of God is revealed,
that is, there is no way in the world for men to be justified, to be counted
righteous before God, but to have a righteousness revealed from heaven, even
another kind of Righteousness than any man has in himself; a righteousness
of Christ, a righteousness that is to be imputed to men; and this, says he,
is revealed in the Gospel: and therefore the Gospel only is the power of God
to salvation. But here comes the great question; Why is it needful that there
should be a new kind of righteousness revealed, a righteousness wrought by
another, and made ours only but by Imputation, says he: It must be so, else no
flesh can be saved: every man must needs be condemned, for all men are
unrighteous, every man is full of all impiety and wickedness, which he
delivers in this verse; thence concluding that it is needful to have the
Gospel revealed, for that is it that reveals the righteousness of Christ. A
righteousness of Christ, which is only wrought by Christ, and will only
stand out before the Iudgement-seat of God.

So that the end of the words is to convince men, to show unto them that they
have no righteousness of their own, to assure them, that if they stand in the
condition, they are in by nature, they remain in condemnation, for he that
believes not, is condemned already: there needs no new condemnation, John 3.
ult.
if he have not the Son, the wrath of God abides on him.

Doct. 1.
So that the maine thing in these words is this assertion, Man's nature is full
of ungodliness and unrighteousness.
That man's nature is full of ungodliness and unrighteousness. Two things are
charged upon man's nature. First, a fullness of all kind of sins against God.
Secondly, of all injustice and unrighteousness to men; one touching the first
Table, the other the second. Now when he says, All ungodliness, and all
unrighteousness of men. The meaning is, That in man's nature there is all kind
of ungodliness, and unrighteousness of all sorts. And again, that is to be
marked unrighteousness of men: he sets it down in general, because he speaks
it of all men, none excepted, so you must take both in; Every man (none
excepted) is full of all unrighteousness, all impiety, all parts of impiety,
all kinds of unrighteousness are found in him.

But how will this be proved? He proves it by two Arguments. First, because the
wrath of God is revealed against every man* and God being a just Judge, his
wrath would not be kindled against men, except there were just cause; and that
is one Argument. But how shall we know that God is angry with men? says he,
It is revealed from heaven. Whence three things may be noted. For thence you
may see the evidence of his wrath, It is revealed.

And secondly, the surenesse of it, it comes from heaven, and God will be as
good as his word. And thirdly, the Terriblenesse of it, it is revealed from
heaven. For when God is said to sit in heaven, and to laugh them to scorn. And
2 Cor. 6. to sit in heaven, it argues he does things powerfully.

But you will ask, how is the wrath of God revealed from heaven? It is
revealed by the light of nature. Every man has so much light in him, as to
know that he deserves wrath, and judgment, and punishment.

And partly it is revealed by the Scripture, and partly by continual
experience, God is ever and anon executing his wrath and Judgment on sinners.
And that is the first Argument.

The second argument to prove their unrighteousness, is, because they
Withold the truth in unrighteousness. And here is a secret objection
answered. For it may be objected, There be many excellent things in men, as
your moral Philosophers, had they not much light in their understandings? much
rectitude in their lives? Did they not practice many moral virtues? That is
all one, it will but increase their condemnation. It was Gods work to put so
much light, so many excellent things in them, which had they used as they
should, and might, those Principles would have shed themselves into their whole
soul and conversation, but they imprisoned them, shutting them up within the
walls of their Conscience: men do not use the light they have, nor improve it,
they do not bring it out in their lives and conversations, but Withold it in
unrighteousness. So that in the words there are three points laid down, all
which will help exceedingly to humble us. First, That man's Nature is full of
all impiety and unrighteousness. The second is, The wrath of God will surely
fall on men for this. If sin went alone it would not so much amaze men, but
when the wrath of God comes too, accompanied with the fruits of his wrath, men
out of self-love will be moved therewith. The third, That all the good in a
man before his regeneration serves only to help forward his condemnation.

But before I come to the handling of these points; one point we must needs
observe out of the method of the Apostle. This that he says here in few
words, is amplified to the middle of the third Chapter. All which time he
spends in expressing particularly how man's nature is full of impiety, and
unrighteousness: and when he has done that, he urges Justification by Christ;
and after that he comes to Sanctification.

Wherein the Apostles method is very observable: and therefore from his method
(before we come to the maine) we will briefly deliver this point. Doct.
That Humiliation must go before Justification: You may observe it from the
method used. Men must first be convinced of their impiety and
unrighteousness, before they can be fit to receive the Gospel. As the
Physicians have their method in curing, first to purge and cleanse the body,
and then to give Cordials: so it is a rule in Divinity, you must be humbled
before you can be justified, or, Humiliation goes before Justification. Which
may be gathered not only from this, but likewise from many other places. You
shall find it is the course God takes every where with men, and it is a very
necessary thing to be known; for by reason of the ignorance of this method,
men do not take the right course, they go not the right way to work. This is
the cause many continue in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of
iniquity, they know not the right way to come out. I say, you shall find this
in other places. Observe, Deuteronomy. 8.2, 3. you shall find there how God deals
with his people, he carries them through the wilderness, and to what end? to
humble them; And how does he humble them? Two ways; First, by showing them the
sinfulness of their hearts, letting them know their rebellions and startings
aside, when he led them along, says he, I have carried thee these forty years
in the wilderness to humble thee, and prove thee: All thy sin and corruption
was there before, but thou know it not. But that is not enough, for if men
saw never so much sin in themselves, yet if they have a bottom to stand on,
if they have health, and strength, they regard it not: therefore he adds
further, I humbled thee, I made thee hungry, and then I fed thee with Mannah;
that thou might see thou had nothing without me. And this I did, that
when I bring thee into the good Land, ye may know it was not for your own
righteousness, but for the Covenant I made with your Fathers Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob. This is nothing but a resemblance of the same God does now. Carrying
men through this world, he first humbles them, he lets them fall into sin, that
they may know themselves, and withal afflicts them, suffering them to fall
into other necessities, that they may know what they are, that they may see
their miserable condition, and that God brings them not to heaven for their
righteousness, but for his Covenants sake, with Abraham and Isaac, that is,
for his mercy sake in Christ. So Zechar. 12. and 13. Chap. You shall find first
God powers on them the Spirit of compunction that they shall mourn for their
sins, as a man mourns for his only son; and when they are humbled, then
(and not before) I will open a fountain to Judah and Jerusalem for sin and
for uncleanness; that is, it is shut before they be humbled, but when that is
done, the fountain is opened. So you shall see Paul when he had to do with
Felix (a place worth your marking) Act. 24.26. you shall find that when Felix
and his wife Drusilla, a Iewesse, called Paul before them, it is said, They
heard him of the faith of Christ: But how began he? He began, says the Text,
with preaching of Temperance, Righteousness, and the Judgment to come: He
told Felix what Righteousness, and what Temperance the Law of God required,
and likewise the Judgment to come; for those two things must be in
Humiliation. An Endictment to show how far short we be of the Righteousness
and Temperance that the Law of God requires, and withal a pronouncing of the
Sentence, a declaration of the Judgment to come. And this course made Felix to
tremble.

So John the Baptist, that came to prepare the way of the Lord, to make way for
Christ: How did he make way? He came as with the Spirit and power of Elias; so
with much Terror calling them a Generation of Vipers, told them of their
miserable condition, as much as he could, to humble them. And that was the way
to prepare them.

So when Christ went about to convert any, this was his Method, as in Ioh. 4.
when he had that discourse with the woman of Samaria, meeting her by Accident;
first he tells her of her sin; The man whom thou have is not thy husband,
thou have committed adultery: whereby he amazed her, and made her look into
her self; and then he tells her he was the Messiah, and, that in him there was
hope. So he deals with Nichodemus, he tells him he was flesh, that all that
was in him was naught, and not any thing good; and then he preaches the
Gospel, telling him, he must be borne again. But of all places you shall find
the clearest to be that in Ioh. 16. where Christ promises that he would send
His Spirit into the world, and three great works the Spirit should do (which
were wrought by the ministry of the Apostles) he should Convince the world of
Sin, and of Righteousness, and of Judgment. First, he says of Sin,
Because they have not believed in me; mark that, there were many other sins
that the Holy Ghost convinced them of, but the contempt of the Gospel, the not
taking of Christ offered, that is the maine sin. And the Holy Ghost shall
convince men of this sin. All the men of the world cannot do it. We may
tell you long enough of particular sins, you have done these and these
sins, sworn such oaths, defiled your selves with such abominations, and yet
all will come to nothing; but when the Spirit sets in, and makes a man sensible
of sin, that works to purpose. Then it follows in the Method, He shall
convince the world of righteousness, because I am risen again and gone to the
Father: he should teach that there is another Righteousness, in me, by which
you must be justified, when you see no righteousness in your selves, then the
Holy Ghost shall show you the righteousness that I have wrought. But how will
this appear? In that I am dead and risen again, and gone to my Father, whereby
it is declared that i am righteous, that I have overcome death, and satisfied
my Fathers justice. And then when that is done, he shall convince the world of
Judgment, that is, of holiness, for so the word is there used, that is, then
the Prince of this world shall be judged. Satan reigns in the hearts of men,
in the children of disobedience, till they be justified and engrafted into
Christ; but when they be once justified, then Christ shall cast him out; you
shall see him fall like lightning out of the hearts of men and this is that
which was before prophesied, He shall bring forth Judgment unto victory; that
is, he shall overcome the Prince of the world, take away sin, and enable men
to serve him in holiness. And this is the method you must observe in turning
to God, labor to be convinced of Sin, then of Righteousness, and then of
Judgment.

And to show the necessity of this, take that one place, Gal. 3.24. a place
you all know, The Law must be a Schoolmasters to bring us to Christ. No man
living can come to Christ, till the Law be his Schoolmasters. Now how is the
Law a Schoolmasters? It gives lessons that we cannot go through with, thereby
is such a Rectitude required, as we are not able to reach, like the
Schoolmasters task to the scholar, which he is not able to perform, and is
therefore feign to go to another to do his exercise for him. So the Lord
tells men, you must be exactly holy, perfect righteousness must run through
the whole course of your life: when we see we cannot do it, it makes us run
to Christ, to have his righteousness imputed to us; such a necessity is there
that men be humbled.

Now that you may a little better understand this point, Doct. 2.
Two things keep men from coming to Christ.
you must know that there are but two things that keep men off from coming to
Christ. One is unbeleefe, when they do not believe that he is the Messiah, or
that they are to be saved by him. Unbelief.
This was the great hinderance in the Apostles time, and that is the reason
that you have faith in the Messiah pressed so much, to believe that that was
he. But that is not the thing to be pressed so much in these Times. But, as you
see in the Old Testament, when the Prophets spoke to a Church to confirm it in
the truth, they do not press so much to believe there is a God, and that he
is One God, and that a God of Truth, but to trust in God, and to make use of
their knowledge. So must we do. There is therefore another thing that hinders
from Christ, Negligence, which is twofold.
and that is, Negligence: Men care not for Christ, they are not affected with
him; and this is twofold, Total, or Partial: Total.
Total is that which they were guilty of that were bidden to the Feast, and
excused themselves, and had bought a yoke of oxen, another had married a wife,
another had taken a farm, and therefore they could not come. They were
persuaded there was a Feast of fatlings provided, but they minded other things,
for they were not hungry, and therefore cared not for it. And in this kind the
greatest part of men, of your common Protestants, neglect the Gospel: Tell
them of Remission of sins and Justification, they mind it not. Secondly,
Partial.
there is a Partial neglect: And so many profess Christ, do many things for
him, but regard him not. And in this the second and third Ground failed: the
second did much, but not so far regarded him, as to endure persecution. The
third did respect him more, but not so as to forgo their lusts for him, this
is a partial neglect. And that that helps this double neglect is Humiliation.

Now to give a Reason or two of this point, and so we will make use of it, and
come to the other which is the maine, and that I most intend. God will have it
thus, for these two Reasons:

First, Two Reasons of it.
with reference to our Justification; he will justify none till he has
brought him to acknowledge both his Justice and his Mercy, Reason 1.
he will have men know what he does to them, In reference to Justification.
before he justifies them, and receives them to favor: I say, he will have a
man acknowledge his Justice, that is, confess himself to be a sinner, to be
ashamed of his sins, to acknowledge himself worthy to be destroyed. As in
Ezekiel. 36. there you shall find how God justifies men, and washes them with
clean water from their sins. Then when I do this, whenever I shall
justify any man, then you shall remember your deeds that were not good, and
shall acknowledge your selves worthy to be destroyed. God will have this
honor given him, he will have men know that it is not done for any thing in
themselves, he will have the glory of his Justice and Righteousness; and that
is the sum of the fourth verse of the one and fiftieth Psalm, Against thee
only have I sinned, etc. that thou might be justified when thou speak,
and be clear when thou judge: that glory may be given to God, and shame
taken to himself. This God will have done. As in the work of Redemption, his
Justice and Mercy are both satisfied; so in the application of it, in taking
hold of this Redemption, God will have a work wrought, wherein his Justice
shall be acknowledged. Secondly, he will have his Mercy acknowledged; as
Princes, when they will make a condemned man be sensible of their mercy, they
will bring him to the uttermost, they will bring his neck to the block, then
he will know that he was saved, he shall have more sense of his pardon. And so
God in the work of Humiliation, humbles a man exceedingly; and when that is
done, then He is seen in the Mount. He is not seen till men be in
extremity, that is, he will have them on their knees, and so be sensible of
that mercy of his, which otherwise they would not prize. The end of all is
Christ, he will have Christ esteemed and known; and this men will never do
till they be thoroughly humbled.

Reason 2.
Secondly, God will have it so with reference to Sanctification, In reference to
Sanctification.
that is the second Reason, and that for these Causes.

God is not in all the thoughts of a wicked man, before he be humbled, that
is, God is not there to any purpose,, nor the things belonging to the kingdom
of God, but vanity is in their thoughts, and that raises such a Tumult and
noise within, that they attend not to what we say, but lock up the doors of
their heart, that what we say can have no entrance. We shall see it in 2 Chro.
33. when Manasses had corrupted himself with monstrous abominations there set
down, the Lord spoke to him, but he regarded it not, till he was humbled, but
when being led into captivity and bound in fetters, he was humbled, then he
besought God, who was entreated of him. In the fifteenth of Luke you shall find
this phrase, The Prodigal son came to himself; It is Parable showing every
man's natural condition, he was not himself before, he was a drunken man, or
a mad man; and that is the case of every man before he be humbled, he is as a
drunken man; now come and speak to a drunken man, as long as you will, so long
as he is in his drunkenness and madness he hears not: it is only this
Humiliation that brings a man to himself. In 2 Chronicles. 6.37. you shall find
this phrase, If they shall turn with all their hearts in their captivity, and
repent for their transgressions, then do thou hear in heaven, etc. I name it
for the phrase, if they shall turn with their heart, which they will not do
till they be humbled, till then they be busied about pleasures, or profits, or
something else, but they look not into their hearts. The phrase imports so
much: suppose a man be instant in some sport and recreation, and one come and
tell him in the midst of his sport, there is an officer without ready to take
you and carry you to prison; such a message will turn to his heart, and make
him consider what he has done, and what a miserable condition he is in: so
when the Law comes it humbles a man, making him to draw in his Thoughts, and to
see his misery; and when he is wounded with the sense of his sins, and with the
wrath of God, then, and not till then, the feet of them that bring glad Tidings
of salvation are beautiful.

the Kingdom of heaven by violence; and they must take it so, else they shall
never have it: now by the Kingdom of heaven is meant the Gospel; you know it
is called the Gospel of the Kingdom, that is, righteousness and grace
therein revealed and offered. In Matthew. 11. and Luke 16.16. you shall find that
from the time of John the Baptist, The kingdom of heaven suffered violence,
and the violence take it by force: The meaning is this, says Christ to them,
we preach the Gospel, so did John, with him it began to be preached; but
deceive not your selves, many think they take the kingdom of heaven, but you
must know there be two kinds of taking; some are content to be saved, and to
do many things as Herod did, and as the second, and third ground did, but this
is a false taking, and deceive not your selves thereby. There is another kind
of taking, when a man takes this kingdom violently, and indeed none shall have
it, but after this manner. Now, what is it to take it violently? When a man
takes a thing violently, he does it with all his might, he puts all his
strength to it, he does it not coldly, and slightly, and overly, but with all
his might. So the meaning is this; The kingdom of heaven is as if one were to
come within a narrow door, which cannot be without difficulty, when he puts
to all his violence and strength to do it. According to the phrase in Luke,
Since the time of John the Baptist, they press into the kingdom of heaven,
that is, with violence, as if God seems to hold the kingdom of heaven in his
hand, that unless you pull it, and extort it from him, as it were, you shall
never have it: Now will any man do thus till he be humbled? It is impossible
he should. When a man is brought into fear of his life, and is like to die,
the fear of loss of natural life will make him work any thing with violence,
much more then when a man sees eternal death, that he shall die for ever, will
he take the kingdom of heaven with violence, that is, he will not perform
duties in a slight manner, as if God were beholden to him, not with that laxity
in his judgment of the truth, as he conceives, nor with that coldness in the
duty. Those that will be saved, must take Salvation by force, which a man will
never do till he be humbled. There is much profession, and many kinds of
taking Christ in the world, but the right taking is, when a man will be at this
cost, to part with all, to deny himself perfectly, and every way, and take up
his cross, and every cross, when his lusts are thoroughly mortified, and this
cannot be till he be humbled: For mark, nothing mortifies but joy and love,
that does properly and immediately mortify; for no man will part with his
lusts, till he find Christ sweeter than they, till then he will never part
with them in good earnest; now Christ will never be sweet, till we have found
the bitterness of sin, till God has so pressed it on their consciences, that
they feel the weight and burden of it. And so much for the reasons of it.

Use 1.
Now the use of this is double: First, is this so necessary? Then labor to see
your self humbled, if ever you look to be saved and justified; for though God
offers Salvation to all (as it is true none is excepted) yet he looks to none
with a gracious eye to save him indeed, but him that is poor and contrite in
heart, and trembles at his Word. And good reason, for none else will look
after him; the poor receive the Gospel and none else: When we preach the
Gospel, it is like Cyrus his Proclamation, it was a general proclamation,
that all that would might go out of captivity and build the Temple, but says
the Text, only they went, whose heart the Lord stirred up to go; other would
no^ go: So when we preach, we offer Salvation to all men, that is our
Commission, Mark 16. Go and preach to all Nations, that is, offer Grace and
Salvation to all men; but when it comes to the point that men must go out of
their captivity, and build a Temple to God, they will not do it, they will
rather live in captivity still, because they be not humble. To go out of their
sins wherein they have been captivated, a great while, and to build a Temple to
Christ, that is, to make their hearts fit Temples for Christ, to purge
themselves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, to labor to walk in his
fear, to leave all, even the beloved sins, and to delight in the Lord, in
the Inner man, they will not, what is the reason? they are not yet humbled, and
therefore they cannot be saved. The Iubile among the Jews may be a very fit
resemblance hereof, and for ought I know, may be so intended, to resemble the
glorious Liberty in the times of the Gospel. Now the Iubile was this, All
servants should then go free, but if any would not, (as of them there were
many) then he was to be bored in the ear, and to be a perpetual servant. So
when we preach the Gospel, this is the great Iubile, every man may be free,
the Son comes to that end, and it is the end of the Truth to make men free: The
Son comes to deliver every man out of the Jail, if he will, but men will not
be at liberty, they will be servants still, because they were never humbled,
they never felt the heaviness of Satan's yoke, they were never wearied with
sin; for if they were so, this would be acceptable news, but it is not so.
Now mark this by the way, if a servant would not go free, he should not
afterward be at liberty to go, and stay when he list, but his ear shall be
bored, and he should be a perpetual servant. So if you defer this, when you
hear the Gospel preached, and think I will not always live in this condition,
I will repent and come out of it, know, that is not enough, God will not wait
thy leisure, if thou will not come out, take heed lest God bore thee in the
ear, that is, never give thee an heart to come out. Do not say, If it be so
necessary, I will do it hereafter: take heed that thy opportunities be not
wholly taken from thee, and know that Christ came into the world not only to
take away sin, for that was but a part of it: But what was his business? he
came like wise to purify to himself a peculiar people zealous of good works.
Titus 2.14.
If men might run out their age in sin, and Christ forgive them in the end,
when they please to give over sinning, then he might have one of his ends made
good, which is to take away thy sins, but thou could not be a people
zealous of good works, neither could he have any service of thee. But thou
must know Christ has hired thee for the whole day, that is, all the Time of
thy life. When he went out in the morning to call in laborers into his
Vineyard, they did not make answer. Well, we will come at noone, but when his
pleasure is to call, whether at one or two a clock, that is his call, but if
he call thee in the morning, that is, if thou have the Word preached, if he
knock at the door of thy heart, and by his Spirit suggest many good motions
in thee to come home, if his will be revealed to thee, it may be thou may
not have such an opportunity again; that is his call: take heed that thou
defer it not, lest so his wrath should be kindled against thee; and woe unto
thee if his wrath be kindled but a little; this is a thing not considered. In
Ezekiel. 24.13. Thou remainest in thy wickedness; And why is that? He gives this
reason for it, I would have purged thee, and thou would not be purged,
therefore thou shall never be purged till my wrath light on thee. That is, when
God makes an offer, when the powerful Word sounds in our ears; when he calls,
and we cannot deny his knocking at our doors, and yet we will not come in;
because then, and there at that time, thou would not be purged, therefore
thou shall never be purged, till Gods wrath light on thee; therefore defer it
not.

But you will say (and that is a thing that keeps men off) I have done it
already, Object.
and what need you to press this? I hope I am not now to practice these
principles and rudiments, I hope I have done this duty of Humiliation long
ago.

It is well if thou have, Answ.
but take heed thou deceive not thy self in this case, than which there is not
a greater evil in the world, even to think thou have done it, when thou have
not. I will give thee one note of it: Is it such an humiliation as has brought
thee to Christ? To count him the chiefest good, to over-goe any thing rather
than him, to stand out against all persecutions, rather than to forsake him;
can thou forsake all Sirens, all lusts and pleasures which allure thee? Art
thou thus brought home to Christ, to esteem him above all things, that come
what will come, had thou an hundred lives to part with for him, all were
nothing? Art thou thus brought home with Humiliation, that thou will not let
Christ go for any thing, neither losses, nor pleasures, for Temptations on the
right and left hand, then thou art come home indeed; otherwise thou have not
taken him truly, neither art humble, for thou must know there is much
counterfeit Humiliation, there be many light wounds that may trouble thee, but
not bring thee to the Physician. God awakens sinners, but what kind of
awakening is it? With such awakning that they fall asleep again. God may send
many messengers of wrath to knock at the door of their hearts, which perhaps
disquiets and troubles them a little, but they return to their rest again.
And this God may not only do outwardly, but he may cast many sparks of his
displeasure into their hearts, which may there lie glowing for a time, but they
last not, they go out in the end. And this is the condition of most men,
therefore they make many profers, as if they would be saved, and come to
Christ; and this they take for Humiliation. But this is not the Humiliation
that is required. When God means to save a man, he will go through with the
work, and never give over till he has brought him home, causing sorrow to
abide on his heart. As it is Christ's office to give repentance to men, and
remission of sins; so it is his office, Luke 1.79. To guide men's feet into
the way of Peace; Now when he will save a man, he will set it on so, that his
heart shall never be quiet till his feet be guided into the way of peace.
Others may have much Humiliation at time of a Sacrament, or under some great
sickness or cross, or in a good mood, or for apprehension of some Judgment
and wrath to come, but it is like a flash of lightning that quickly vanishes;
but when Christ will humble a man, he sets a Pillar of fire before him, that
leads him along from time to time, till he be brought home to Christ. A small
thing, when God has the setting of it on, shall work, and never give over
working, till our hearts be qualified aright, till we believe in Christ, and
embrace the Gospel. And such an Humiliation you must have, else it is nothing:
If it be a right Humiliation, I say, it will bring you home; for you must know
this is the condition of every man, they cannot abide the net, no man will come
in if he can choose. Now the Gospel is a Net that catches men, and as in the
taking of fishes, if they will take the Fish, they beat the sides of the River,
and will not suffer them to rest in any corner, for if they can find any place
to rest in, they will not come into the Net: So man has many starting holes,
and feign would be quiet; God humbles him a little, but he gets in a nooke,
and there hides himself, that if God beat not the River thorow-out, that is,
if God do not pursue a man, he will not be brought in. As it was with them
that fled to the City of refuge; you know if one man killed another at
unawares, if he could get into the City of Refuge he were safe; but were not he
pursued by the Avenger of blood, he would not fly thither: if God ever give
over pursuing a man till he be just at the City, he will step aside and not
regard it; but when God shall charge sin upon the conscience, and pursue him,
never giving him rest, this brings him to the City of Refuge. This is
exemplified in the Prodigal son, so long as he had any thing to restrain
him, while his goods lasted he never thought of going home to his Father: When
he had spent his goods, so long as he could get work, or had any thing to do,
though he hired himself in a very mean condition to keep the Swine, yet he
was well content; but in the end, when he came to have Husks, his utmost
shift, (and yet if he could have had husks, he would not have come home) when
he had no sustenance, but must needs perish, then he goes home. And indeed a
man will never go home till he have no bottom to stand on, nothing to hold
by, to sustain him; when a man is nothing, is cut off the Tree he grew on
before, and sees that he must now perish eternally; this is true Humiliation.
You that are to receive the Sacrament, what do we therein, but offer Christ to
you? we preach Christ in the Sacrament, he is therein indeed offered more
sensibly: Now what have you to do with Christ, if you are not humble? Consider
if this be not wrought in you; and remember this, that whosoever comes to the
Sacrament without this Humiliation, that wants this brokennesse of heart,
receives it unworthily, and provokes God to wrath. The Passe-over was to be
eaten with sour herbs, and the maine business therein was to remember the
condition they were set at liberty from, to remember their bondage in Egypt,
and their miseries endured there; for by that, they saw the greatness of Gods
mercies. So one of the maine businesses you have to do, is to consider your
sins, and be humbled, to consider your miserable condition, and to think it
not a light matter that you may omit it. Consider but that one place, Levit.
23.29 you shall find there that in the day of Expiation, in the day of
Atonement, when they came to offer sacrifice, he that on that day did not
afflict his soul, he was to be cut off from his people. You have it two or
three times repeated, It is an ordinance, and this is still put in, He that
comes to make an Atonement, to be reconciled, and offer a Sacrifice, remember
this ordinance for ever, He shall afflict his soul, and he that does it not,
shall be cut off from his people: Therefore you have occasion to make use of it
that are to receive, and not you only, for the Doctrine is general, Whosoever
does not afflict his soul, he shall never be reconciled, but shall be cut
off from his people.

Object.
But, you will say, I should be willing to do this, but how shall I be able to
do it? If God would humble me, and set it on, and convince me by his Spirit,
it might be done, but how shall I do it my self?

Answ.
I answer; Thou art to go about it thy self* It is not for nothing that those
words are used in Joel 2.13. Helps to humble and afflict the soul for sin.
Rend your hearts and not your garments: He says, rend your hearts. And Ier.
6.4. Plow up the fallow grounds of your hearts; that is, you shall afflict your
souls: And James 4.9. Be afflicted, that is, suffer your selves to be
aff^icted for your selves, sorrow and weep, that is the way to cleanse you.
Therefore a man should go about the work himself, that is, take this
resolution, Well, I see I must be humbled, else I cannot on good grounds take
Christ, for I shall not prise him, therefore I will not give over laboring of
my heart till it be humbled. Suffer thy self to be afflicted, as if he should
say, Men are not willing to suffer it; if they do hang their heads for a day,
they are quickly weary, outward business comes, or pleasure commands, and the
work grows tedious. Therefore is that in Joel 2. Sanctify a Fast, that ye
may rend your hearts; that is, sequester your selves from all other businesses,
from all other occasions, sanctify a Fast, that ye may have leisure to do it;
if one Fast will not do it, take another: Let a man go alone and resolve
never to give over till it be done, till he has brought his heart to do it.

When I have done this, Object. 2.
what shall I then do?

Consider your sins, Answ.
look back and consider how many oaths you have sworn, how often you have
broken the Sabbath, whether you have defiled your selves with sins of
uncleanness, how often you have broken the Commandments; look on your
idleness, your omissions, your sinful silence, your neglect of prayer and
other duties. Go over all particular sins, and their multitude will amaze
you: Remember the sins you have committed twenty years ago, and take this
rule withal, that these sins are the same now that they were, though not in
thy apprehension, that is, the weakness of our nature; as it is the weakness
of our eye, we cannot discern a thing that is a great distance from it, it is
its weakness that it cannot see things as they are, but that will seem little
or nothing which in it self is big. So it is with the sins that we have
committed many years ago, we think them little, and past, but know that they
are the same in themselves, and, in Gods esteem, as they were before, for he
sees them as they are: Therefore, I say consider them, lay them together, and
see the multitude, and that will help to amaze thee.

And not that only, but consider them with their circumstances: some, it may
be, have been committed against light of conscience, and that aggravates sin,
it makes a small sin out of measure sinful: When it is committed against
knowledge, it is not the same with the sin against the Holy Ghost, but it is
near to it.

Again, consider the hardness of thy heart, in sinning, the very sin does
not hurt so much as that, when a man slights it, he knows he has sinned,
yet goes about his business, and neglects it, and this God looks at. When a
man is injured, the injury is not so much to him, as it is to see the other to
neglect it, he cares not for angering me. So you look back on your sins in a
cold, regardlesse, and negligent manner.

Again, consider your relapses and falls into the same sins, again, and
again, though you have been often admonished of it, yea, and have made a
covenant and vow to God never to fall into it. And know this, that relapses and
fallings into sin, often stand for so many sins as in numbers the second figure
is in proportion to the first, which is ten times as much as the first, and the
third an hundred times as much: So the addition of sins, by falling into them
again and again, and that carelessly too, that makes the sin a great deal
more; consider this.

Object.
And if you go about to excuse our selves, It is true if God should mark all
that is done amiss, who can stand, but I hope I shall be pardoned, my nature
is violently carried, I am flesh and blood, and I hope God will pity me.

But this should humble you the more, that you are ready to fall into sin
again, Answ.
and again, if it be thus in your actions, it is much more abundant in the
heart. For put case there be a necessity, have not thou caused it thy self?
Again, you must know actual sins intend original corruption, and there is no
man that is guilty of any prevalent lust, but he was the cause of it, for if he
had not by committing it often, carelessely and negligently given so much
strength to it, it had not so prevailed. Addition of sin in every act of sin
varnishes over original sin, it makes it more active, more efficacious in his
life. A man's weight in the balance weighes down the scales, but if he put to
his strength too, that is as much more as his weight. So if you have any strong
sins, you have cause to be humbled for it, but when you put your strength to
it, it intends that original habit of sin: So that the necessity that lies on
thee, by reason of thy nature, it aggravates thy sin. Ier. 13.23. The Prophet
aggravates their sin from their custom in it, they could choose not to sin
no more than the Black-moore could change his skin: The Prophet, I say, brings
it in for this purpose to aggravate sin. See it in our own case, when a man
comes to be accused before a Judge, if he plead he is accustomed to such a sin,
to swearing or drinking, does it not increase his condemnation? So that though
you say, I d^d slip through frailty, yet, I say, you have cause to be humbled
for it.

I will but name the second use (for I have respect to the Time and Weather).
Secondly, not only evil men, Use 2.
but good men within the Covenant should make this use of it, to humble
themselves, for they have need of it. A man must know this, when he is once
humbled and come into state of Grace, he has not then done with Humiliation,
it is to be practiced still. For there is this difference between a wicked man
and another. Many are like a land-floud, none more ready to be religious than
they, (as your great land-flouds swell, though they have no spring to feed
them) but with a godly man it is otherwise, Humiliation is in him as a Spring,
he has not done with it at his Conversion, but practices it still.

And not only so, but he must labor to add to the measure of it, and that
will add to his love, and to his faith, and draws him nearer to Christ, the
more his sin is discovered. It is said of the woman, she loved much, because
much was forgiven her: Others had as much mercy as she, but she had more sense
of it, because she was more humbled, the more you see and are sensible of your
sins, the more it adds to your love, it makes you to prise him, when you see
you are so much beholden to him. Again, it will add to faith, I mean not
only the act of believing, but the act of taking Christ. The more a man sees
the need he stands in of Christ, the more he is convinced of sin, the more he
takes Christ; for there be degrees of taking him. When a woman takes an
husband, there be degrees in her will, there may be additions to her will, she
may be morefully contented in him, and more prise him. And so in taking of
Christ for our Lord, and Husband, and Savior. It is true, if we will take him
in earnest, any measure of true faith will save us, but we may do it more
abundantly, for the more sense we have of sin, the more greedy shall we be of
him. Again, the more empty the soul is, the more a man is humbled, the more
he sees into himself (as faith comes with an empty hand) the faster hold is
laid on Christ. Therefore, add still to Humiliation, let it be your exercise,
the worser you be persuaded of your selves, and the better you conceit of God,
it is the more for your advantage; the more you can hate and abhor your
selves, the more you are improved thereby, for the flesh in you must be
abhorred, and it is our fault we do it not enough; and again, the more you
apprehend Christ, the nearer you draw to him. And take this withal,
Humiliation does not weaken assurance, but works the contrary: Indeed, the
less sincerity, and the less mourning for sin, and the less Humiliation, the
less assurance. But reckoning up, and thinking on thy sins increases it. If
I have so many sins, how can I be saved? Yes, so much the rather, the more thou
can see and be humbled for them, the more thou addest to thy assurance, and
so to thy love and faith. Therefore a man should make a daily practice of
Humiliation, for it is to a man's great advantage, it is a thing too much
omitted, we should take time for it. And think it your advantage to be able to
see what we have in our nature, how much guilt we have contracted by sin, and
how our sins may be aggravated; for this will teach us to prise Christ. And so
much for this point.

The end of the First Sermon.
CERTAIN SERMONS UPON HVMILIATION. The second SERMON.
ROMANS 1.18. For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, which withold the Truth in
unrighteousness.


WE come now to the matter of Humiliation, contained in these words which I
have already opened and showed the points that may thence be drawn. The first
whereof, which we will begin with, is this:

That the Nature of man is full of all unrighteousness and ungodliness. Doctr.
You know by that which you heard before, how it is gathered. It will be a
vain labor to go about to prove it, you know how plentiful the Scripture is
in it, and you are not so ignorant of the Grounds of Divinity, as not to
confess it. The business will be to show wherein it consists, and how the
Nature of man is corrupted, for by making this evident, we shall by the same
labor, prove and confirm it to you.

Now the way to evidence this, that the Nature of man is full of all
unrighteousnes and ungodliness, is to look to the rule. If you will find out
the disorder and distemper that any thing is subject to, the way is to look to
the rule to amend it by. Now every Creature has a law, the Fire, the Water,
the Sea, yea, every Creature sensible, and insensible has a law given to it,
which, as they observe, they continue in perfection, and look how far they
go aside, that so far they be imperfect. Now the Law given to man, is the
Moral Law and the Gospel, and these two he is to observe. And if you will
find out the truth of this, That the nature of man is full of all ungodliness
and unrighteousness, look to these two. First, look to the Law of God, and
see if that do not conclude all men under sin, look therein to both the
Tables. It is true, Hypocrites make a good show of keeping the first Table,
they seem to be forward in the duties belonging to God; but look to the
second Table, and that discovers them. Civil men seem to be exact in the
second Table, in performing duties to man, but look to the first Table, what
their carriage to God is, what little conscience they make of taking his Name
in vain, of sanctifying his Sabbath, of performing holy duties in an holy
manner, of love, and fear. This discovers civility: (that is, when there is
nothing else but civility.) Again, look to sins of all sorts, some gross
sins, Peccata vastantia Conscientiam, crying sins, and smaller sins too,
sins of less moment, the Law discovers all.

Now, by the Law you must not only understand the ten Commandments, but that
rectitude which runs through the whole Book of God expressed in the whole
Scriptures. As in the Scripture, the Law and the Prophets are put together, as
if the Prophets were but a Commentary on the Law; look on the Scriptures,
look upon the straitness, the rectitude in the whole Book of God.

Then when that is done, look on your own Natures, your own Errors, the
secret windings, and turnings of the heart, your own thoughts and affections,
and see what a disproportion, a dislikenesse there is; see how far you are from
that holiness, that purity, and rectitude described in this Book of God, for
that, I say, you are to understand by the Law. And when you have done that, you
shall find your sins to be exceeding great for their quantity, and exceeding
many for their number, and that will amaze you. This amazed Paul, when he once
understood the Law, when he looked on all the parts of it, not only on grosser
sins forbidden, but on the rectitude, the holiness which is required that
amazed him, Romans 7.9. That made sin alive, he was alive before, and sin was
dead, but when the Law discovered Lust to be sin, then Sin was alive, and he
died. So if we could see the Law, the strictness of it, it would do thus
with us. And mark what is said of the Law, for we may press the Law long
enough, but many are remiss in attending to it. Therefore, to stir you up
(as I know it is but a small matter) I will name but one place, and let that
stay in your memories, Matthew. 5.11. Heaven and earth shall pass away, but one
tittle, one jot of this Law shall not pass away: Mark that, not one jot of
the Law shall perish. That is, look through the whole Law of God, take all the
Commandments there, you shall give account of every idle word, you must keep
the Sabbath exactly, you must not speak your own words. Take any Commandment
that you think the Nature of man is most ready to break, and consider that
saying of Christ, Not one jot of the Law shall perish; heaven and earth shall
pass away, but the Law of God in the least part of it shall not perish: That
is, there shall not be one of these small things, that the Law commands, but if
you neglect it, by disobeying it, God will surely require it; there is not the
least thing, wherein you have gone aside this rectitude, and disobeyed this
Law, but it shall be required of you. And that is the meaning of that phrase,
Thou shall pay the uttermost farthing. Though we reckon them trifles, the
uttermost farthing shall be paid, For this is our fault, though we press the
Law, and tell you of your sins, yet you think this is a small thing, and God
may bear with me in this, for we be apt to judge of God, as of our selves: A
small fault I can bear with in my servant, therefore God may in this dispense
with me. We think of the Law of God, as of man's law; but we must not judge of
God so, we must judge of him according to his own rule, his Thoughts are not
as our thoughts; he has given a rule, and has said, The least jot of it shall
not pass, but be fulfilled, not the least breach of it, but it shall be
requried. Consider this, and it will amaze us, and make us to tremble, when you
know that the sins you have forgotten, and the least breach of this Law shall
be surely required to the uttermost.

But, Object.
you will say, you talk of Impossibilities, which no man is able to perform?

It is true, Answ.
it is a thing we are not able to perform: But therein is seen the Terror of
the Law, and that should humble you the more, for I cannot compare the Law to
any thing better, than to the Taske-masters in Egypt, the people had enough to
do, indeed more than they could perform, complaining of their sore bondage;
what relief had they? they are told, they shall give in the same number of
Brickes that they did before, and yet shall have no straw; Now how should they
do this? So it is with the Law, it commands, Do this; you complain, Alas, I
know not how to do it, I have no ability; you bid me make Brick, but allow
me no straw; that is all one, the same Tale of Brick shall be required of
you, that is, the same measure of obedience that was required of Adam, as if
you had the same abilities remaining in you.

And yet God is not unjust, he does not reap where he did not sow before; he
sowed it once in Adam, and consequently in his Posterity. And that no man may
think this hard, look to the first sin that Adam committed, and if we be
guilty of that sin, there is equity that the Law be required of us, though we
have not ability to perform it. Now, why should it seem unreasonable that I
should be liable to Adams account? Even to the same exactness, though I want
ability to perform it? It is true, Adam ran in debt, but do not we pay many
debts of our Grandfathers and Fathers, which we never drunk for? though we
run not into them, yet we stand liable to the payment. In the Law, if a man had
committed an offense, and was adjudged to be a bond-slave, it was his
particular offense, but were not al his children bondslaves after him? and yet
it was not their offense. So Adam forfeited his liberty, became a Bond-slave to
sin and Satan, and the same is the condition of all his Posterity.

And besides the common reason, which is a true one, and a good one, that if in
equity we should have stood with him, therefore in equity we should fall with
him, I will add two considerations, and then you shall find it very
reasonable that we should fall with him, and that the same should be required
of us, which was of him, though we have not the same ability.

One is, that the Angels (though we did not sin as they did, for they sinned
every one in his own person) are justly condemned, because every Angel sinned
himself, he committed the sin, he was the Author of it; and therefore it is
reason they should be punished. But come to Adams Posterity, consider that they
had a means given them, and that they that are condemned (except children) of
Adams Posterity, they are condemned for their own sins, they might do much
more than they do, they sin against the Law, they have, and so they are not
only condemned for Adams sin, but for the sins committed in their own persons.
For God intended to give them a second Board after the great shipwreck in Adam,
on which they might save themselves if they would, if the fault were not in
themselves; for, it is true, they might do more if they would, they might
keep the Law of Nature better than they do, and for that they are condemned.

Again, as we are condemned for Adams sin, though we did not commit it, so we
are saved by the righteousness of Christ, though we did not perform it; and
therefore there is an equity in that regard: We can see an equity for our
Salvation, and is there not as much equity in the other? that we should stand
guilty of it, though we never acted it: For as we are condemned by Adams sin,
though not done by us, so are we saved by Christ's righteousness, though only
imputed to us. So that in equity the severe righteousness of the Law should be
required of us, though we have not power to fulfill it.

Now that we may not stay in Generals only, telling you that the Law of God is
holy, and pure, and you carnal, and contrary to it, we will come to
particulars. And that we may help your memories, observe the breaches of this
Law in the several faculties of the mind. And we will begin first with the
General: the general sore over-spreading all our nature, and that is it which
the Divines call Original sin: first consider that, and see how your nature
is full of all unrighteousness and ungodliness. First, I say, consider your
original sin, and the general corruption of your nature thereby, John 3.6.
Whatsoever is borne of Flesh, is flesh. And Romans 7.18. I know that in me (that
is, in my flesh) dwells no good thing. Mark that, he says no good thing.
We think we have something that is good, for all our general corruption,
but there is nothing good at all; As Gal. 3.22. The Scripture has concluded
all under sin: Not only all men, but (for the word is in the neuter Gender)
all things. Therefore in Genesis 6.5. he does not only say, The frame of a man's
heart is evil but it is only evil, and always evil. In all actions, at all
Times. This is a common Truth, but men consider not of it, they think there is
some goodness in them, they will not be persuaded of this Truth in good
earnest. And therefore when a man comes into the state of Grace, it is not
mending two or three things that are amiss, it is not repairing of an old
house, but all must be taken down, and be built anew, you must be New
Creatures. And therefore God promises, I will give you a new heart, and a new
spirit: For all is out of order, and nothing good. And there is an equity in
this; for, as in Psalm. 49.12. Man being in honor abides not, but is like the
beasts that perish: That is, as God raised man above himself, giving him
supernatural glory, in which he was created (for he was created in holiness,
and perfect righteousness) so man not keeping this condition, he was cast
beneath himself. And in this there is equity, that being raised above
himself, having an holiness given him transcending common nature, he should
now be made worse than himself, even as the beast that perishes. Consider
this corruption, and know it is a thing that makes you loathsome in Gods sight.
For this, Tit. 1. ult. Men are called Abominable: that is, men that God abhors,
as you abhor the snuff of a candle, or name any filthy thing your nature
abhors; such is the nature of men to God. You know how we hate Toads and
Serpents for their loathsome poisonfull nature, though they do us no hurt. Now
God looks on the corruption of our nature, as we look on Toads that are
contrary to us, against which we have an Antipathie.

It is disputed by the Schoolmen, whether this be unum peccatum, one sin or
more, we may easily answer it: It is one in act, one in essence, but many in
virtue, and power, and efficacy. As a seed is one individual, but it is many,
as many branches may arise from it: As Drunkenness, (which will better
express it) is but one fault, but it disorders the whole man, neither the
head, nor the feet, nor the reason is excluded: So original sin, though it be
but one sin, yet it distempers the whole man, it sets the whol^ soul out of
order. And when the Instrument the heart, is out of tune, every sound, every
action is unsavory, and sinful, and thus should you look upon your selves.

It is further disputed, whether this be privative or positive, likewise I
answer, It is only privative, it is nothing but a mere want of righteousness:
But seeing it falls upon an active subject, as the soul of man is, which is
never idle, but ever stirring; thence it comes that the habites and fruits
thereof are active and positive. It is true, the want of sight to guide, is
enough to cause error, but the vigor of nature is enough to make it positive.
Therefore Divines say well, It is not only compared to Darkness, which is a
mere privation of light, but to sickness, where is not only want of health,
but corrupt humors which are contrary to health. That is the first thing to be
considered, even the corruption of Nature which is in you, which will
exceedingly aggravate sin, as I have showed heretofore, and shall more largely
hereafter have occasion to speak of it, Therefore I will say no more of it
now, but so much shall serve for the general Original corruption that is in
us.

And now we will come to the particular faculties, The corruption of the
Faculties.
and will show how they are corrupted, that we may know our selves, and the
truth of this point, which I am to prove, that the nature of man is full of all
impiety and wickedness.

And first, The Understanding.
we will begin with the Understanding or mind of a man.

In this, The Vanity of it.
mark first the Vanity of it, How ready it is to attend to trifles; which was
the disposition that the Apostle found fault with in his Epistle to Timothy and
others, That they gave themselves to Fables, and Genealogies, and this is in
every man by nature. How full of questions were the Schoolmen? and so every
man is ready to turn Religion into questions of curiosities, which shows a
sickness in the understanding, it sets a man on work to find out what is
propounded to it, that he may not lose his labor. And thence come so many
errors, this is the vanity of the mind. The Lord knows the thoughts of men
(says the Psalmist) that they are vanity. And this should humble us, that our
minds are no more ready to attend the means of salvation. As the Schoolmen
spent themselves in idle speculations, so are we ready to attend to idle
questions, but that which is wholesome and sound we neglect.

The blindness of it.
Secondly, consider the blindness of the mind, we are unwilling to learn, and
so long must needs be in an Error, and not come to the knowledge of the Lord.
To other things we are forward enough, but to do well we have no
understanding. Therefore it is, that men continue ignorant, notwithstanding so
much preaching; when they learn other Arts, they are quick and dexterous, but
in the things belonging to Salvation, how ignorant do they continue? The
Schoolmen give a good reason of it, and we may take it from them; because
spiritual light is above us, it transcends us, we have not enough in us to see
spiritual objects, for they be supernatural, and above our reach, but other
things are proportionable to us; Bats and Owls in the night can see well,
because the glimmering light, and their weak eyes agree well together: So can
we discern vain things, but things truly spiritual we do not: 1 Cor. 2.14.
Spiritual things must be discerned by spiritual light, A natural man cannot
conceive of them; Why? They are spiritually discerned, that is, they are above
him, and his nature is not able to reach them. Consider that blindness in the
understanding, that unaptnesse, how quick and ready men are to bring their
own ends to pass? How wise are they for other things? but they desire not to
come to the knowledge of the Truth, and when they apply themselves to it, they
profit not by it.

Add to this blindness the unteachablenesse of the understanding, The
V^te^chablenesse of it.
the resistance that is in it; for it is not a simple blindness, but a
resistance of the Truth, and an unaptnesse to receive it. Now this is distinct
from the second, which you may see by this comparison. The air is dark, but
it is fit to receive light, if the Sun cast light into it; but the
understanding of a man is not so, it is not fit to receive light, but resists
it. Philosophers were wont to say, that the Soul, the Mind of a man, is, Rasa
Tabula, that having nothing written on it, it is a Table of wax to any thing
that is evil, and will receive a quick impression, but a Table of Flint, of
Adamant, to any thing that is good. Therefore the mighty God must write his Law
in our hearts, for we want that which is good, and are of our selves
unteachable. And therefore this disadvantage we have that preach the Gospel,
above others. If an Astronomer come and tell a Countryman, that a Star were
bigger than the earth, it would seem a strange position at the first hearing,
but if he might have liberty to deal with him, and to demonstrate his Grounds,
he might make him to believe it, and to see reason for it: But we cannot do
so, we can only propound things to Faith, and there is not only a blindness in
men, but an unteachablenesse, and resistance against the Truth.

Add to this the incredulity of the understanding, how unapt it is to believe.
The Incredulity of it.
In other things it is too credulous, and apt to believe, and to be deceived
with false tales and idle stories; but come to the Scripture, doubts and
questions arise. Therefore, this unaptnesse of the mind to believe, is to be
considered. This I take to be the meaning of that, 2 Cor. 4.4. where it is
said, The god of this world has blinded the minds of them which believe not:
As if he had said, The light of the Gospel is clear, you may as well see the
light of it, as you see the light of the Sun at noonday, but the god of
this world has blinded your eyes, not by a privative extinction of the light,
for that is more than the Devil can do, but by a positive blindness, a
positive ignorance, that is, the Devil tells you something against it, and that
you believe: And that is our nature, we are more ready to believe the Devil
than God. This may seem strange, yet Eve you know did it, and that sin is
transmitted to all our natures, we are ready to believe false suggestions
against the Truth, which weaken faith rather than the sure Word of God.

The Enmity of it.
Last of all, add to all this the Enmity of the understanding, which is more
than all the rest. Romans 8.7. The carnal mind is Enmity against God: That is,
the understanding is not only vain, ready to pitch on idle speculataions, and
not only blind, ready to resist, and not only slow and backward to believe,
but it is an Enemy, and fights against the Truth; and the reason is in these
words: It is Enmity, and why? It is not subject to the Law of God, neither
indeed can be; and therefore, it is an Enemy, that is, when the mind of a man
looks on the exactness, and strictness of holiness and pureness that God
requires, he does not mean to be subject to it; and seeing he will not be
subject to it, he resists it, fights against it as an Enemy, looks on it, as a
thing contrary to him; did it give more liberty, he would be ready to embrace
it, and think well of it; but because it is too strict, he breaks these cords,
and casts them away, and fights against the Truth, and this is the nature of
every man. Now when we say the wisdom of the flesh is Enmity, we do not say
that men oppose the Truth, for there is not any Truth in Divinity, but a man
may fully embrace and assent to it, and yet be an Enemy to Holiness, to the
Image of God stamped therein, to the saving knowledge, that is, the saving
manner of knowing the Truths he assents to. Therefore the Apostle says, Many
know much, but nothing as they ought to know: So many may know these spiritual
Truths, and confess them to be good in themselves, and yet may have a
reluctance against them, a distaste of them, they savor not the things they
understand. Tit. 1. ult. They are to every good work reprobate; which I take
not to be meant passively, but actively, that is, men that cannot judge aright
of any work, that look not on it with a right eye, as a thing lovely, and
imitable, as right and good, but in this regard they strive against it.
Therefore, the Apostle speaks of some that exalt themselves against the
knowledge of the truth; that is, that fight and defend themselves against it,
that speak evil of the things they know, (for they know them, else they would
never speak of them) but they know them not so, as to love them, and delight
in them; therefore they resist, and fortify themselves against the ways of
God, against the strictness and holiness that God requires, and persuade
themselves to think amiss of them, that they need not to be so exact: This is
the nature of every man, and the Enmity of the understanding.

And now my brethren, if the understanding be thus bad, think it is no small
matter, if the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness?
The understanding is that that must guide thee, and when the stearne is out of
order, when the Auriga, the Waggoner is blind, or amiss, and sees not the
right way, think what a case you are in. But you will say this is Ignorance.
But is not this of great Consequence? When a man is blind he knows not
whither he goes, he is altogether a stranger from the life of God: Therefore
first let this humble you, labor to see how your minds are full of
wickedness, and unrighteousness.

The Depravednesse of the Will*
Secondly, let us come to the will, and you shall find that to be no less
corrupt than the understanding; for the will takes every thing as the
understanding presents it; and if the understanding, the mind of a man be thus
corrupted, the will must needs be corrupted. As a man that looks through a
colored glass, every thing he sees is colored; or as a man that has his
Palate possessed with a vicious humor, every thing seems bitter according to
the humor: so the will of man sees every thing through the understanding, as we
see through a glass, but (Seeing) is not so proper a word to express it: the
understanding tastes things, it is as the palate is to the stomach, when it
is out of order, it perverts the ways of God, it sees no such beauty, nor
excellency in them; and the will disposes of it self accordingly. Now you
shall find that the understanding reckons the ways of God both Enmity and
folly, and godly men to be partly fools, and partly Enemies, and contrary to
them. Therefore you shall find a disposition, an affection, a frame of the
will to answer that, mingled partly of hatred, and partly of contempt, and a
man partly hates, and partly contemnes, and thinks light of holiness: And this
is the disposition of the will of every man before Regeneration, I say, the
holiness described in the pure Word of God, and expressed in the lives of the
Saints, he partly hates as a thing contrary to him, and partly contemns it as
folly. But we will show you the particulars of the will, as we did of the
understanding.

Therefore, Of the Contrariety of the will to God.
first consider the Contrariety of the will, it is contrary to God in all
things; look what Gods will is in any thing, you shall find your will
contradicting it, and going a contrary way: It is said of the Jews, as a thing
that exceedingly aggravated their sin, and the miserable Condition they were
in, they were contrary to all men; and if it be so much to be contrary to men,
what is it to be contrary to God, to resist him, to go against him? and yet
what he will have done, that we will not do; and what he will not have done,
that we do, that is the disposition of our will.

The Pride of the will.
Secondly, consider the Pride of the will, how ready it is to exalt it self
above its measure, for the will of man should be a dependant will, a subject
will, waiting on God, as the servant waits on the master, or as the handmaid
waits on her mistress, that is, a man's will should be disposed in every thing
as God pleases. If he will have him to be poor, in disgrace, or in a lower
place and condition, the will should be subject, for we must remember, GOD is
the Creator, we are creatures, and must be subject to the will of the Creator;
but our Will will not stoop to Gods Will: As Adam would be in another
condition than God had placed him in; so we exalt our selves above measure, we
are not content to be disposed of, to be carried from condition to condition,
to have our affairs ordered as God pleases, we will have plots and projects
of our own, we will shape out our own Condition, else we murmr and are
discontent, and that is the pride of the will.

The Inconstancy of it.
Thirdly, consider the Inconstancy of the will, the weakness of it in good
things, and its peremptorinesse in evil; in good things our resolutions are
weak and inconstant, and as bubles come to nothing; but in evil things we are
stiff and peremptory, and will do what we list. Our tongues are our own, we
will use them, Who is Lord over us? This is the nature of men, they swear and
break the Sabbath, they do it, and will do it, though they say it not in
words, yet God looks on it, and sees it; many purposes they have, they will
change their courses; but what come they to? It is but by accident, when the
wind is in that corner, when the weathercocke stands that way, so that there is
no constancy in our wills.

Again, The Disobedience of it.
mark the Disobedience of our will, and that is not a small thing, that is the
great and proper fault of the will, that it is disobedient to God, that is,
when God commands a thing, and says, this I will have done, for the will to be
disobedient to it, negligent of it, is a great and fearful sin, the eating of
the forbidden fruit was unlawful, because God commanded Adam the contrary; If
Gods command be on the least thing, the neglect of it makes it a disobedience;
when God came to Adam, says he, Have thou eaten of the Tree concerning which I
have said, thou shall not eat of it? That is, have thou been disobedient? Have
thou broken my Commandment? You see what followed on it. So Saul, when God
bade him destroy the Amalekites, you would not reckon it a great sin to save
a few Cattle alive; but because God commanded the contrary, the fault was
great. So the Prophet, 1 King. 13. One would not think it to be a great matter
for him to go that way or the other: yet because he went that way, God sent a
Lion that devoured him. The sin of Disobedience you may think a small thing,
no man thinks it so gross a sin as Idolatry, Adultery, and Murder; but see
how God judges of it, 1 Samuel 15. 23. Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft,
and stubbornenesse is as Iniquity and Idolatry, that is, thou think it no
great matter to save as few cattle, and to keep the King alive, though thou
destroyest all the rest: thou think it a small thing, but it is not so,
look what thou think of the sin of Witchcraft and Idolatry, such is
Disobedience. Now let men apply this to themselves, look what is revealed to
you to be a sin, I know this is a sin, I know it is Gods command not to commit
it; if thou fall into it, it is now a Disobedience, as Adams was, and as Saul's
was, and as the Prophets was, and consider how God will take it; you see how he
dealt with them. Come to particulars, do you not know, it is his Command you
should not swear, not only greater, but lesser oaths? To keep the Sabbath, to
keep your vessels pure, your bodies clean, for they are the Temples of God,
and therefore that you ought not to defile them with any uncleanness,
Drunkenness, or Gluttony: Do not you know, he commands that you should be
constant in prayer, that you perform it constantly, and earnestly, and
fervently? Now consider what Disobedience is; Remember that speech, Have thou
eaten of the Tree concerning which I commanded, saying, Thou shall not eat of
it? This is the Disobedience of man's will, labor to see this, how apt thy will
is to break the Commandments of God, and how in this respect thy nature is
full of all unrighteousness, and ungodliness.

Next we will come to the Memory, The corruption of the Memory.
and you shall find that out of order likewise, that the things God commands
us to remember, those we are exceeding ready to forget, and the things we
should forget, we are too ready to remember, wherein I will be brief.

First, In the things we are commanded to Remember.
for the things he commands us, he does command, Remember thy Creator in the
days of thy youth. In your youth you shall serve me, and yet how apt is youth
to forget God? And for the Sabbath he bids us Remember to keep holy the
Sabbath day: How apt are we to neglect it, to disobey it? it is out of our
minds. So Psalm. 78.11. He would have his wondrous works, and the great Acts he
did for the children of Israel, Remembered, but they remembered not (says he)
his wonders in Egypt. And so we may go through any thing else, Hebr. 12. You
have forgot the Consolations, etc.

Again, In things we are commanded to Forget.
we are ready to remember what God bids us to forget. We are apt to remember
Injuries, yea, one Injury will be thought on more than many years good
service, or many good turns. We should not do thus, but should remember the
benefits from God and man for the increase of love. So Idle tales we are ready
to remember, but good things, though they be accompanied with the motion, and
quickening of the spirit go out like sparks in wet tinder, they go out
again quickly, as if they had not been. So for hearing the Word, Iam. 1. we
are called forgetful hearers, when we are about that duty, if a tale be told
us in a Sermon that we can remember, but what is profitable and wholesome, that
we forget. Our minds are like strainers, all the milk passes through them; that
that we should grow by, that which is wholesome, and necessary for nourishment
runs through, but the dross remains: Trifles and vain things we can remember,
and carry away with us, and this is the sinfulness of our memories. You may
call it weakness of memory, and may think that it is not so great a matter.
No, it is not the infirmity of thy memory, but the corruption of thy nature, if
we forget other things as much, it were another case, but because holy things
are spiritual, and the frame of the heart is naught, our corrupt ill
disposition makes us ready to forget them; and more than that, there is a
carelessness in our minds, we regard not the things of God, but every vanity we
regard, and our mind is instant thereon, and that is the reason we remember
it, but forget the things that concern God, and our Salvation.

The corruption of the Conscience.
Come we from the Memory to the Conscience. The Conscience of a man is that
which should have life; It should be like Jobs last messengers, to bring us
word that all the rest is dead: There should be a remaining light of Conscience
to tell us that all the rest of our faculties are dead, disordered, and
corrupted, but look upon the Conscience, you shall see how short it is in that
which belongs to it, and it is a great matter to have that out of order.

There be but three Acts of the Conscience, In three Acts.
and it is disordered in them all.

The first Act of the Conscience is to be a Remembrancer, As it is a
R^membrancer.
to be a faithful Register, to set all down, and to present it to us, but it
is a false Register; like the Steward in Luke, that when there were hundreds,
set down fifties: So the Conscience sets down things by halfes, it thinks
not what is done, it recals them not; if it were as it should be, it would
recall our sins, and their Circumstances, in another manner than they do: And
so is in that regard corrupt.

The second Act or office of Conscience, As it is an Instigatour to good, or a
Restrainer from evil.

Wherein three Virtues are required.


is, to instigate to good, and to restrain from evil, but in this you shall
find it exceedingly corrupted.

In this Act there be three Virtues which should be in the Conscience.

The first is Clearness; the Conscience should be so clear as to see all
things that are amiss, Clearenesse.
but in this it sails exceedingly, Tit. 1. It is said, Their mind and
Conscience are defiled, mark that; look as in a Glass, which is in it self
clear, when it shall be covered with dust, it shows nothing, it presents not
things clearly, for it is defiled, so the Conscience of man should be clear
as a bright looking-glass, that should present every thing that is amiss in a
man's heart or life, but it is defiled, and you can see nothing by it.

Sensiblenesse.
The second virtue in this Act of Conscience is, as to see sins clearly, so to
feel them, to be sensible of them: like a fine flesh which is sensible of the
least prick, or like the eye that is sensible of the least mote. Now in this it
fails more than in the other; there is a brawninesse grown over the
Conscience, and in some it has lost all sense, and therein you may see the
Corruption of it. If you look to the Glass, and there find swearing to be a
sin, you are not sensible of it, you feel it not.

Activenesse.
But there is a third Virtue wherein it fails more than in these two. It should
stir us up, and give us no rest, till it had constrained us to do the good
thing God commands, and restrained us from the Evil he forbids, it should
awaken us, but it being dull and sleepie, stirs up sometimes good purposes,
thereby awaking us, but it lets us fall asleep again; we can rest in sin, we
can sin, and our minds be quiet in it, and can put off our turning to God. This
is a great Corruption of the Conscience which should amaze us: This is the
sinfulness of it, which should persuade us that our natures are full of all
unrighteousness and ungodliness.

As it is an Accuser, or Excuser.
Last of all, the third office or Act of the Conscience, is, to accuse aright,
and excuse, and in this we shall see it fails as much as, or more than in any
of the other. But you will say, the Conscience is ready enough to accuse; it is
true, but the light it has, by which it is able to see sin, and to accuse us
for sin, it abuses, and perverts to a wrong end, for this you shall find in
the Conscience when we preach the Law, and the Conscience should join with us
to accuse, then it excuses, making every thing seem small and little. And
again, when we preach the Gospel, and the Conscience should excuse, then it
accuses; my sins are so great and many, that there is no mercy for me. And this
perverting of the light, this excusing, when it should accuse; and this
accusing, when it should excuse, causes us, Declinare Ictum, to escape the blow
of Law and Gospel, and we are robbed of the fruit of both, because the
Conscience does not his part aright. And so you may see how far off you are
from a good Conscience.

But, Object.
you will say, I do many things in secret out of Conscience, and I hope it is
not so much corrupted?

I will add this then to that I said before, Answ.
you must know it is not a good Conscience which only suppresseth and
restrains from evil. The matter is, in what terms it stands with God; If it
look on God, as a chaste loving wife looks on her husband, or a son on the
father, that out of reverent loving respects, fears to offend him, because
they prize their favor more, than any man's favor in the world, and after this
manner restraines, it is a good Conscience; but if it restrain us, as a
servant is restrained under an hard master, or as a thief under the Judge,
trembling at his word, at his Judgment, this is not a good Conscience. Your
Conscience may restrain you from many things; nay, you may do many things in
secret between you and God alone, and yet for all this have no good, but an
evil Conscience. So you see the corruption of man in the Understanding, Will,
Memory, and Conscience. I will add another, and that is the sensual Appetite.

The corruption of the sensitive Appetite.
And this you shall find exceedingly out of order above all these faculties I
have named, it is ready to run over, and beyond all measure. By this I
understand, that appetite in a man, by which he takes pleasure in sensible
things, such as are conveyed by the eyes, the ears, or the taste; set any
object before it, it is ready to run out quickly, by inordinate affections, as
to women, to meat and drink, to any kind of sport, or recreation, or sensible
thing. How corrupt is this sensual Appetite? How prone to evil? How ready to
run out? to break over the Pale, to go aside the rule? If any delightful
object be propounded, how ready is it to embrace it?

Object.
But, you will say, (and indeed it is Bellarmines quarrelling.) The rebellion of
the sensual Appetite is but natural, the same that is in beasts, because,
before original sin was committed, he was in the same constitution, there was
such rebellion between the sensual appetite and reason, as there is now, and
therefore being natural, it is not sinful.

But this is his Error, though every man be hereby ready to excuse himself,
Answ.
thinking the rebellion of the sensual Appetite not to be so great a matter.
But to take his own words, he says, the same as it is in Beasts; It is true,
if it were with us, as it is with beasts, it were no sin, and so not a thing
which gives us cause to be so much humbled: for in beasts the sensual Appetite
has no superior governor, but is supreme. To express it to you, Take an
horse in a pasture that is loose, and free, if he run up and down and play, we
find no fault with him, for he is loose; but if he does this under the bridle,
when the rider is on his back, will you not now reckon him a stiff-necked
horse, and count it a fault in him, for there is a rider on his back. So for
this sensual Appetite in beasts, where there is liberty, and no superior
command to keep them in order, the beasts are not to be blamed. But take a man
where God has set reason above the sensual Appetite, and grace above reason
to guide it; in him this sensual Appetite rebels against reason, which it
should obey, and this shows it to be a great sin in men, considering that
reason should be the rule to guide, and keep in the sensual Appetite, for God
has giv^n it for that purpose. Indeed some desires are natural; Christ
desired life, which was lawful, and a right object of desire; but take this
withal, it was perfectly subjugated and brought under, and made obedient to
the will of God, as his will was holy and sanctified: So we may desire meat and
drink, but many times the Law of God may forbid it, as in many cases it does,
for it may differ from the will of God, as it is holy, and yet in it self it
may be right. Here is no more but subordination required. But when this runs
out amiss, affecting of things inordinately, though you do suppress it, yet
that affection is sinful, and you must be humbled for it; God sees it in you,
and it is hateful, and abominable to him.

These things I should make use of, But I am less careful of that, because
all these points are immediately useful. Why? It is to make you know your
selves, and to be acquainted with the corruption of your nature. And do not
you think it to be enough, that this be as an hand in the margent, pointing to
the corruption of your hearts, or that you may content your selves with the
contemplative knowledge of these things, so to cause a new light to shine in
your understanding. Our end is to make you examine the corruption of your
natures, your disobedience, your rebellions, to see how you have behaved your
selves, to be acquainted with your own particular sins, your own particular
failings, and to labor to be humbled for them. Otherwise you may have a
knowledge of these Truths, but not a saving knowledge, and such as will be
profitable: But this you shall see when I come to make use of them. And now for
the Sacrament these things be of special use, because, as you heard before out
of Levit. 23. On the day of reconciliation, when an atonement was to be made,
he that afflicted not his soul, was to be cut off from his people. When we
come to the Sacrament, there is a reconciliation, an atonement to be made in a
special manner; What must you do then? Afflict your souls, consider your
sins, see what debts you have run into, see what corrupt natures you have, and
likewise know what you have in Christ, and rejoice therein, (for those must go
together) an humbling of the soul for sin, and rejoicing in CHRIST for your
Deliverance from it.

The end of the Second Sermon.
CERTAIN SERMONS UPON HVMILIATION. The third SERMON.
ROMANS 1.18. For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, which withold the Truth in
unrighteousness.


THe last faculty, The corruption of the Affections.
is, The Affections, and here you shall find exceeding great cause to say that
they are full of unrighteousness and ungodliness, for they come like a
mighty Tempest, like a turbulent wind that carries us away, even then, when we
are well set. The disorder of them exceeds the disorder of all the rest, for
they are quickly moved, nothing sooner, and when they are moved, they are
exceeding apt to exceed, to transcend their limits, for such is the
fullennesse, the awkednesse and waywardness of our affections, either they are
not active, not placed where they should be, or if they be placed as they ought
to be, they are ready to run over, to over-love, and over-grieve, and over-joy.
I say, where we may love lawfully, and rejoice lawfully, they are ready to
exceed.

If I should come to particulars, you should find how exceedingly they are out
of order. Come to love and hatred; we little think we hate what is good, and
love sin; come and tell any man so much, he will not believe it, but examine
it a little. Do not you hate holiness in others? You will say, No, we hate no
man for his Goodness: But consider, the nature of man does so, every
unregenerate man does so. David was hated for that cause. And Cain hated his
brother, because his works were good. And Genesis 3. The Enmity between the seed
of the Woman, and the seed of the Serpent: Whence comes it, but from the
holiness of the one, and the wickedness of the other? Look to our actions,
and you shall find we do not hate sin, we do not hate our lusts, for if we
did, we should not be angry with them, that speak evil of them; if we hated
these things, we should like them that speak against them, but we be Enemies to
those that be Enemies to them, and Friends to those that be Friends to them.
Do we not lodge them? Do we not feed them with the things they desire? They
can ask nothing, but they have it. Godly men hate their sins, though they be
carried away with present objects, but a wicked man loves the lust it self; he
can say, I could wish I were free from this lust, from the vexation it puts me
to, but for all this he is not angry; he may indeed be angry with it, as with
a friend, when he has done some unkind Turn, but he hates it not, for if he
hated it, he would not be at peace with it again, for hatred is implacable.
Again, if a man hates, he hates all the kind: But why do thou love one
more than another? If thou did hate any one, because it is a sin, because
it is a rebellion against God, thou would love none: As the Lamb hates all
Wolves. Again, if thou hate them, why wilt not thou labor to have them
utterly destroyed? Why will thou cherish them a little? Where hatred is, it
will have the thing hated utterly taken away, as if there were no such thing;
and that shall be labored for, not remissely, but we will put our strength to
it, and do it with all our might, and in good earnest. But seeing we do not
thus, it appears we hate goodness, and love sin. It is true, we are ready to
lay it on other things, and to say, The Infirmities of the Saints, which we
see, we hate, but their goodness we love, if it be every way right. But let
me ask you a question; Did thou love them for their holiness, would not
thou rather labor to cover their Infirmities, grieving for them? Do you not so
out of love? then your hearts are deceived, when you think you hate the
Infirmities, and not the goodness in them, you hate the goodness it self;
and this is the nature of every man before Regeneration.

Besides these of Love and Hatred, look to your Delight, and see if that be
not turned upside down. The wheel turns the quite contrary way. We delight
in things we should not delight in; you know we delight in vain things, in
sinful things, in things that are suitable to our lusts and humors. Again, we
delight in the false and sufferings of others; as 1 Cor. 5. They were puffed up
when others fell, and they stood. It should no be so, we should be humbled at
the falls of others, and be grieved for them, that they being members of the
same body with us, should be any way blemished. Again, the things we should
delight in, are they not tedious to us? are they not grievous? The Sabbath
should be kept with delight, but how burdensome is it to give God his whole
time, to keep it holy, and not to rob him of any part of it? That is, not to
pollute it with unholy actions. And so holy company should be our delight, we
should think our selves in our Element among them, and so the hearing of the
Word; how tedious are these to our natures. But I cannot stand on this.

Come we to Fear. Do not we fear men? Do not we fear the Creature, and
this and that particular evil? But God we fear not. Take it in that one sin
of lying: A man will lie to a man, to keep his credit with him; but he cares
not to lose it with God. This is a sign you do not sanctify God in your
hearts, that is, not reverence him, not value him.

Come to Sorrow, how ready are we to exceed in worldly sorrow? Let us be told
of an Injury in our names, loss in our estate, of troubles and calamities any
way, it affects us much, but sin we make nothing of; we think it is but a
passion, a trifle, and it is not so great a matter to be in passion. Yes, my
beloved, it is a great matter to have passion; these passions shall condemn
us, if they be not mortified, if you kill them not, they will be your death:
Whosoever is in Christ, has crucified these.

Again, consider that affections are the Principles of Actions, therefore it
is not so light a matter to err in your affections, for they will cause error
in your actions.

Consider that your estimation is taken by your affections, according to them
you are said to be good or evil. Therefore, an holy man is described to be one
that loves God, fears God, delights in his Commandments, so as it is no
slight matter to be distempered in your affections; and know this, if it be no
more than lust, you know what Christ says of that; He that looks on a woman
to lust after her, has committed adultery already with her in his heart. Now
if lust breaks the match in the marriage of men, these inordinate affections,
these whorish affections, these adulterous affections will break the marriage
between God and us. Affections are placed in us for this purpose, to draw
nearer to God, but we misplacing them, and setting them on the Creature, they
draw us further from God.

Again, when they be thus distempered, they grow hindrances: As the
Israelites could not pray for the anguish of their hearts; and Peter's fear
made him to deny Christ. So that this distemper of our Affections, as well as
the disorder of the rest of the faculties does show the Truth of this point;
That the nature of man is full of all unrighteousness and ungodliness. And so
much shall serve to show the corruption of Nature by the faculties.

Actual Sins.
Now this is not all; there are besides these actual sins, whereby likewise
this Truth will be made manifest. And these are of three sorts, that is, in
Thought, in Word, in Action; for they be all actual sins, though inwardly
they be the Acts of the mind.

First, let us see it by the Thoughts, and you shall see in them this great
corruption of Nature, and the great cause you have to be humbled, and it is
that that should amaze us, we shall find in us abundance of idle Thoughts,
and wicked thoughts, which like a shower of rain, you cannot number for
multitude.

In Thoughts
If a man should write down all the Thoughts that pass through his mind in one
day, and observe their little dependence one up another, so vain are they, and
so foolish, when he comes to read them at night, he will think he was half
out of his wits, and be amazed at himself.

And think not this a small matter, for The importance of thoughts.
the first plotters of good, and evil, and therefore are of more moment than
that which immediately acts it.

Again, are not they things which we should

Again, consider, Thoughts are other things angry with the Tree that bare no
fruit: And when he comes to the understanding of a man, that should be full of
good thoughts, and finding nothing b^ loose, nothing but empty and frothie
thoughts, what will he think of it? We do not give a due esteem to
Thoughts, and that is the reason we give such liberty to them, that we are not
more humbled for them; for Thoughts are the water wherewith is driven the wheel
of businesses, and why do we let so much water run beside the Mill? that is,
they are the things we should occupy in every thing we do, they are precious.
And as Esaias says of a cluster of Grapes, Destroy it not, for there is a
blessing in it: So your Thoughts, which you so little account of, have a
blessing in them; then why do you make such waste of them, as if they were of
little worth?

Simon Magus, Pray to God, if perhaps the Thought of thy heart may be forgiven
thee. If thou see a Christian in poverty, and despisest him for it, God sees
it, and it is a sin in Thought.

In our Words.
The second actual sin is our words; And here likewise you shall find the
Truth of this, that our natures are full of impiety and wickedness, and
exceeding proane to evil. The tongue of man is very slippery, nothing being so
cheap as breath, it is ready at hand to do any evil. If a thing be to be
acted, there is time required to prepare for it, but a word is quickly out: So
the frequencie of offending with our tongue should humble us.

And again, The importance of our words.
as our offenses herein are frequent, so it is a matter of much moment, which
we have cause to mark, because we do esteem Iam. chap. 2, 3. verse. 4. you
shall find three Similitudes, by which the Tongue is expressed, and there you
shall find what it is to offend in words. It is compared to a Bit, which will
keep in the wildest horse; and to a Rudder, which (though it be exceeding
great) will turn the Ship. And thirdly, to a fire, what a great matter will a
little fire kindle? Men think it a small thing to offend in speeches, but God
will have them know it is another kind of matter. Therefore, consider this,
you that suffer your tongues to walk up and down at random, from morning
till night, and think it a small thing. I will ask you these questions out of
these Similitudes. Is it a small matter to neglect the Rudder of the Ship? will
it not quickly run to the Sands? Suppose a man ride on an unruly horse, Is
it a small thing not to keep the hand on the bridle, to neglect it? To have a
tongue without a bridle, is as an unruly horse in a dangerous place, or on a
narrow bridge, the neglect is not small. Therefore consider it, and if you have
not yet learned the meaning of that place, learn now to understand it.

Secondly, you shall give account for every set a great City on fire; you see
what the tongue did in Arrius for evil, and in Luther for good. There is no
Element so active as fire, and nothing so efficacious as your tongue, which you
so lightly esteem of. Again, fire flies about, so does the tongue, it has
wings. Fire likewise assimulates, turning things quickly into its own nature;
so the tongue assimulates the hearts of men, to whom we speak, it changes
them, and now consider if it be a light thing to neglect it. You are wont to
say, Take heed to the fire, for you know not what a spark may do, and is it a
small matter to neglect your tongues? specially where there be thatched-houses
and combustible matter near? And are not the hearts of men, to whom we speak,
as Tinder, ready to take fire at the least spark, if you heed it not? And is
it then so small a matter to neglect words? Gather this out of all these
Similitudes to humble you. If the tongue be as a Bridle, as the Rudder, and as
Fire, then it is of much efficacy; that cannot be denied, for to prove that,
it is the only end of these Similitudes. And if it be so, then learn hence to
know what the illness of your speech is; for the more efficacious any thing
is, if it lie idle, the greater is the sin; look what good you have done with
your tongues, the more that is, the more is on your reckoning. Again, if you
have employed them amiss, a little rudder turns the whole ship, the meaning
is, it is very effectual: and therefore, I say, if there be such efficacy in
them, consider of how great moment they are, when you use your tongues amiss,
to corrupt speaking, to lying, dissembling, slandering, backbiting, think it
not a matter of small moment, it is a fire, and if the State provides death for
them that set barnes, and houses on fire, what punishment shall they be worthy
of, that set the souls of men on fire, the Temples where God dwells? And this
the tongues of men do; Ignem in ore gestamus, we carry fire in our mouths.
Take heed lest we kindle such a fire in the breasts of others, as we shall never
live to quench again, and so kindle the fire of Gods wrath, which shall smoke
to our destruction. Thus by your words, learn to know the sinfulness of your
natures.

Lastly, In our Actions.
see it by your Actions. Now sins in actions are of two sorts, either sins
of Commission, and here you are to go back and consider what sins you have
committed, whether drunkenness, uncleanness, inordinate affections, or
injuries to men, what provocations or rebellions against God, and when you see
them, look on the number of them, and on the greatness of them: Consider their
circumstances, and among the rest, the frequencie of them, your relapses into
them; and that will make you with David, Psalm. 19. to cry out, Lord, who can
understand his faults? But we will not stand on this, because i^ is obvious,
every one knows that actions are sins: we will come to the second sort:

And that is sins of Omission, Si^^es of Omission. 1. Of (...).
which we are ready to slight and forget as no great matters; but they are
other things than we take them to be, nothing has more cause to humble us
than they; I say, the sins of Omission, the barrenness and unfruitfulnesse
of our lives may humble us, as well as the rebellions and sinfulness of them.

We will run through them. As first to be idle on the Sabbath Day, is a sin of
Omission, and provokes God to anger, as well as polluting it, and breaking it
with positive Acts. So the restraining of Prayer, to neglect it, to omit it, or
to perform it slightly (for God takes prayers by weight, and not by number,)
this is not a small thing. Again, to neglect the hearing of the Word, to
neglect the Sacraments (a fault we have much cause to be blamed for in this
place) and thing you have often been admonished to, I beseech you learn by
our Admonitions, for they are the Admonitions of God; let them, I say, learn
that are guilty of it. So Communion of Saints is a thing we think not of: But
Heb. 10.25. You shall see what a matter it was to neglect that Ordinance: So
Fasting and Prayer we think are not required at our hands, and if nothing but
the neglect of that were laid to our charge, it were nothing. But see what that
is, when the time is that God calls for it, I say, the very omission of that
when God calls for it, is a sin, says the Prophet, which shall never be purged
away by sacrifice, but shall remain to death.

Besides these omissions of Acts, come to the omission of Graces, Of Graces.
I mean the want of them, as the want of Love to Jesus Christ. Yet who
confesses this want of love, although 1 Cor. 16.22. He is pronounced accursed
that loves not the Lord Jesus, let him be had in execration to the death. So
the want of Delight in God, who thinks of it?

Come to our Callings, Of time.
and see our negligence and idleness in them; shall we give account for every
idle word we speak, and not for every idle hour we spend? Let young
Gentlemen look to this, that pass from vanity to vanity, spending their time
idly, and unprofitably trifling out their Seed-time. Consider what this sin of
Omission is. And so for growing in spiritual graces and knowledge, that we
gather not more knowledge, it being the key of heaven; that we grow not in
good works, but are poor in them, omitting our times and opportunities.
Again, our sinful silence not speaking when we should, either out of
sluggishnesse, or fear of men, or by-respects, this is no small thing, God
will call thee to an account for it.

Consider whether you have let go occasions of doing good; Of Occasions.
denying of meat and drink kills a man as well as poison, so the neglecting of
duties, the omission of what tends to salvation shall be death, as well as
actual sins, by which you provoke the eyes of Gods glory to vengeance.
Therefore in that sentence of Christ, he does not tell them what they have
done, but what they have not done; You have not clothed me, you have not
visited me: Learn therefore to judge aright of these sins of omission, that
they may help to amaze us, and so much for actual sins. And so much for the
Law, the first part of our rule, wherein we have run through the corruption of
the Faculties, and so have discovered our habitual sins, and now through the
three kinds of actual sins, in Thought, in Word, and in Action.

Rule, the Gospel.
The second rule, which I told you we are to observe, is the Gospel. And here
you think you shall escape well enough, for the Gospel brings damnation to no
body.

Sins against the Gospel.
But if you consider of it right, you shall find that the Gospel is much more
terrible in this case than the Law, that it will humble us more, and that the
sins against the Gospel are much greater than those against the Law.

Unwillingness to take Christ.
Mark this in brief: The refusing of Jesus Christ when God offers him, and
remission of sins by him, that you may have him when you will, if you will have
him on such consequent conditions as are required, which is to deny your
selves, to take up your cross and follow him; this we preach continually: I
say, this contempt of the Gospel, your unwillingnesse to take Christ is a
great sin, and that that should humble you above all the rest. The greatness
of this Sin.


And that you may know that I have reason It shall be more easy for Sodom and
Gomorrah, than for such a people, for such a City, as when the Gospel of the
Kingdom was preached to them, neglected it, so that the sin of Sodom is not
so great a sin as the refusing of Christ. You know the greatness of that sin,
the punishment shows it, yet it is not so great as this.

Again, it is said of Moses and Christ, being That if they that sin against
Moses Law are condemned, how much sorer punishment shall they be worthy of,
that break the Law of Christ, that believe not the Gospel? It exceeds the
sin against the other.

Again, consider, is it a small thing to cause

Again, consider, It is the chief Command, To believe on him whom the Father
had sent. So 1 Ioh. 3.23. This is his Commandment, that we should believe in
the name of Jesus Christ.

Again, the Gospel is the uttermost, the Law

Again, consider, God was angry for the contempt of this, you shall not find
in all the Psalm. 2. ult. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry: The contemning of
this condemns a man most of all to wrath.

Cor. 6.1. I beseech you take not the Grace of God in vain: It is a greater
matter than you think it to be, that when God shall offer Christ, shall
profound to marry his Son to you, you should refuse him; consider the sin,
and be humbled. And by this is seen the corruption of our nature, and this
should humble us more than any sin committed against the Law

And thus much shall serve to make plain the point in all the parts of it,
that the Nature of man is full of all unrighteousness, and ungodliness.

Use 1.
Now to make use of it. And first, if this be the Condition of all men by
nature, then he that sees not this, he that is not persuaded of it, he is
deceived, he is an unskilful, an ignorant man, he has not yet his wit
exercised to discern between good and evil. And let him so reckon of
himself. If this be the Condition of every man by nature, and yet God has not
opened the window for him to see it, and to stand amazed at it; he is, I say,
an unskilful man, he is not yet enlightened, the true light has not yet shined
into him. For when God enlightens a man truly, it works such an alteration as
was in them, in Act. 2. that were pricked at their hearts and were amazed, at
that, which before, being as other men, they saw not.

So that you may observe a double disposition in men; one is a complaining, a
selfe-accusing disposition, when a man is apt to complain of himself, and can
never find too much fault with himself, delights in the exactness of other
men's conversations, loves that doctrine which is selfe-separating, wonders at
his own corruption; so that no man can say so much against him, but he can say
much more against himself. This is a good sign, and such a Condition was in
Iesiah, when his heart melted, and in Paul, Romans 7. where you may see how he
complains of the abundance of his Corruption.

But there is another excusing disposition, when a man sees nothing amiss in
himself, that will not have any such doubts made between man and man, and
that for his own part, he will not be shut out of the number, but answers
for his own righteousness, that he is rich, and increased in goods, when
indeed he is naked, and poor, and miserable: I say, this is an ill sign that
thou have not yet received the Holy Ghost, that thou art not yet partaker of
the righteousness of CHRIST, for the Holy Ghost will first convince thee of
sin, and if thou art not so convinced, it is a sign thou have not yet
received that righteousness; and know this, that in all the Saints, in all to
whom God has revealed himself, you shall find this disposition to complain
of themselves. How abundant was it in David? He was ever complaining that his
sins were more than the hairs of his head. As in Psalm. 19. who can
understand his faults. And, my sins are too heavy for me, and they are gone
over my head; he is still complaining of himself. And what is the reason? It
was because a vein of clear light shone into his heart. Others have but a
common Illumination, and there is great difference between a bright beam that
shows the smallest mote, and common light. Another may have light to see great
deformities, but not to see motes; thou may have a common light, and may
carry it to hell, for it is no better than darkness. Therefore know that if
thou have not in some measure been persuaded of all these Truths, the
righteousness of Christ is not yet revealed to thee; for this is Gods method,
first he reveals his wrath against unrighteousness of men, and then
discovers the righteousness of Christ by faith. And if this be not done, if
thou art not thoroughly humbled, so that God has opened a crevise of light to
see this corruption of Nature, so as to abhor it in thy self, and to be vile
in thine own eyes, to be much humbled for it, not to hang down thine head for
a day, but to take it to heart in another manner, I conclude, thou art not a
man enlightened, thou art an unskilful, an ignorant man, and you know what
condition that puts a man into.

Secondly, Use 2.
if men's natures be thus full of Corruption, even the Saints themselves, then
godly men may make this use of it, to learn to prise Jesus Christ: Do you
make this use of the Table we have drawn for you to look into, and to see
the multitude of your sins, and the Corruptions of your natures, to learn to
prise JESUS CHRIST? For you must take this for a rule, no man will ever know
the length, and breadth, and depth of GODS mercy in JESUS CHRIST, and his love
therein, unless he first know the length, and breadth, and depth of his
sin, and this use you must make of all these explications. To see the
greatness of sin is of much use to the Saints, that they may know how much
they are beholden to GOD; you will never see how GODS Grace has abounded
toward you, if you do not see how your sins has abounded toward GOD:
Labor to see it, that you may love much, because much is forgiven you, that
you may prise CHRIST much, and be brought much more into love with him. That
use the Saints should make of it, and it will be profitable. And they that
receive the Sacrament should specially consider of it.

When they came to the Passover, one of the chief things they were directed
to do in that Ceremony, was to remember their bondage.

Again, look on the Concomitants of the Passover; their sour herbs, their
going in haste, their staff in their hand. Again, the Passover it self;
their sprinkling of blood on the doore-postes, all was to put them in mind of
their misery, and their deliverance, which was the only way to magnify his
mercy.

So in this spiritual freedom, remember your bondage, the Sins you have
committed, your Condition by nature, that you may learn to magnify your
freedom by Christ, and give God the praise of it, to magnify and love him
with all your heart, and strength: The more you do this, the more it will
enlarge your hearts, to know the love of CHRIST, which passes knowledge. Of
many ways to know which, this is one, and a principal One, even to know the
greatness of your sins.

Use 3.
The third and chief use of all the rest is this: This Corruption of Nature,
this abundance of Corruption which has been showed to you, should drive us to
Christ.

And that is our end, we do not preach damnation, our end is Salvation.
Therefore we would have men to know their condition, to know that they be in
state of death. For that that keeps men from coming to CHRIST; and the reason
that so few are saved, that so few take the Gospel, is, they are not poor in
spirit.

And why are they not so? Object.


Because they see not their sins. Answ.


And for this cause we have been thus long in opening this point, that you
may know your selves. And this I dare say, If you did know your selves, if GOD
had kindled a light within, whereby to see your Corruptions, you would not
stand cheapning the Kingdom of Heaven as you do; you come now in a lame, and
remiss manner, but you would then come, and give all that you have for it, and
go away rejoicing, and think you have a good bargain.

God should not then deny you, you would wrestle with him, as Jacob did, and
give him no rest till you have obtained a blessing. This would awaken men out
of their dead sleep of security, as that is the condition of every man by
nature, as he is sinful, so he is secure, he considers not his sins.

Therefore, to all that I have said, you must add something of your own; what
I have said, is no more able to show you the sins you are subject to, than a
little Map is to show you the whole world, it does but point to the sins
you are subject to, as a point in the margent: The way to make it profitable,
is to go home to your own hearts, to consider these things particularly, to
see how your mind, your Conscience, Will, and Memory is out of order, to
consider how you have offended in thoughts, in words, and in actions, by sins
of Omission, and of Commission; and by that means you shall read your Natures
in your hearts, and make what I have said profitable to you. And do not think
you may go too far. Do not think we wrong your nature, in saying it is
more guilty than it is; for we do not so, I may boldly say this, Take that
man that thinks worst of himself, he is worse than he thinks himself to
be; and that I may not speak without Ground, look upon the first Epistle of
Saint John, the third Chapter, and the twentieth verse, If our Conscience
condemn us, God is greater than our Conscience, and knows all things: That
is, the Conscience of man has some light, but what is it to the eye of GOD? to
the light that is in him? And so much as his light is greater than ours, so
much more he sees what is amiss in us. The heart, says Jeremy is deceitful
above all things, who can know it? There is a depth of evil in the heart,
which no man can search, it is deceitful, and puts false glosses on things, to
hide them from our eyes.

Therefore do not think thou can exceed, but labor for thy Humiliation, to
see all these things in a greater measure in thy self, than as they be here
described, and that not nakedly, but with all Circumstances.

The end of the Third Sermon.
CERTAIN SERMONS UPON HVMILIATION. The Fourth SERMON.
ROMANS 1.18. For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, which withold the Truth in
unrighteousness.


AND this is a thing we are very unwilling to do, for the Medicine shows the
Disease. The Apostles taking of so much pains to persuade men that they shall
not be saved by their own righteousness, is an argument, that it is an hard
matter to persuade them. It is the hardest thing in the Word to persuade a
civil man that he must not stick to his own righteousness, till God
himself puts his hand to the work, for it is not in any man's power to
convince him of his sin, or of the deficiencie of his righteousness.
Therefore that use we should make of all that has been said, to see the
necessity that lies on us to go to Christ, and that there is no salvation
without him.

To quicken our desires after Christ.
Now to make this Doctrine more effectual, to awaken you the more, to rouse men
out of that sleep, wherein they are by nature, we will handle these two
points: First, that the aggravations of sin are more than the sins themselves.
Consider.
Secondly, we will take away all excuses, that so every mouth may be stopped,
and when these two are done, you will have much ado to find any starting-hole
to keep you from coming to Christ. For that is our End; And these are very
necessary: For though you do consider in your selves all the sins formerly
named, if it be done negligently, without the Circumstances; sin is a sword
without an edge, the Circumstance is that that gives it an edge, that sharpens
sin, that makes it fit to wound us: And secondly, if the sword be never so
keen, and sharp, and yet we be forced to keep it off, it will not wound us:
Therefore we will, I say, in the second place, take away the excuses, by which
men fence themselves, and decline the stroke of truth, decline this wound of
the Law: And so we will conclude this point, and hasten to the rest.


For the first, The Circumstances that do aggravate sin.
to make all you have heard before effectual, we will add the Circumstances,
which is a thing necessary, for it is a true rule the Schoolmen have, that in
moral things, the circumstance is more than the thing it self. Many times in
natural things, accidents are nothing in comparison of the form; but, In
moralibus (as they say) Circumstantia plus valet quam forma: For it is the
Circumstance by which an action looks, if you look round about it, and see
all that borders on it, it will aggravate, and make sin out of measure sinful.
To run through them briefly.

First, The Majesty offended.
Consider this Circumstance in sins committed (I speak of the corrupt nature
of man) that every sin committed against God, is not only an offense committed
against so great a Majesty (for I will not stand to enlarge that Circumstance,
The affection wherewith it is committed.
that the sin is greater, as the person is greater, against whom it is
committed) but consider the affection with which you commit it, and you shall
find all this in a sin committed by a natural man.

First, Hatred of God.
an hatred of God in the sin. They think they love God; but if it be so, what
is the reason that word is put in, Romans 1.30. where the Apostle speaking of the
rebellion of mankind, he reckons up particularly, that which here he puts up
in the gross, in the general, Haters of God. You will say you do not hate
God; but let me ask you this question, Would thou not live at liberty?
Would thou not have that removed which restraines thee? Could thou not
wish that there were no such strict law, as Gods Law is? Could thou not wish
that there were not any Judge to call thee to account? Every natural man had
rather be at liberty, he wishes with all his heart that there were no such
God, no such Judge. Now if thou wishest God were not, certainly thou hate
God; when we wish a man not to be, to be taken out of the nature of things, out
of the subsistence of being, this man we properly hate; and thus every man
hates God. Therefore, Romans 5.10. the Apostle speaking generally of mankind,
says, When you were Enemies. It is the condition of every man, he is an
Enemy to God, and sins out of Enmity, and what obedience he performs is out
of a false servile fear, that is the first.

Denial of God.
Secondly, that is not all, but he denies God, dethrones him, and sets up
another god; natural men little think they do so; when they follow their
Covetousness, Lusts, Honors, Ambitions, they little think they do it; But
they do, Tit. 1. ult. They profess that they know God, but in their works
they deny him. When they are charged with this, that they think there is no
God, and told of the greatness of the fault, as it is the greatest Treason to
deny the King to be the King, this Atheism every man is ready to disclaim, he
thinks it is not so with him: But I beseech you consider there be two kinds
of Thoughts in a man's heart, some we call reflex thoughts, when a man thinks a
thing, and knows that he thinks it; other we call direct thoughts, which are
in the heart, but a man knows it not; and these must be found out by the
Actions, for they are discovered by the fruits. But God that knows the meaning
of the spirit, knows likewise the meaning of the flesh: Now, says the Text,
they profess they know him, but in deeds they deny him, that is, in truth they
deny God, there be certain direct thoughts which have not such reflection in
the heart of every natural man, by which he denies God, for he honors not God
as he ought, he denies the Power, the Omni-presence, the Justice, and
Omni-science of God, and if you can see this in his works you may say, there
be such thoughts in him, because he lives as if there were no God.

But you will object; Object.
every man thinks there is a God?

It is true, Answ.
there is naturally some light in them; but where there be two different
Principles, there be two different conclusions, there is some light planted in
them that teaches that there is a God, but take the darkness that is in their
heart, set aside from this light, there is nothing but Atheism, he sets God
aside, and puts up something else in stead of him: some make pleasures their
god, some make their riches their god, some make their belly their god, etc.
But we cannot stand on this.

Despising of God.
Thirdly, they despise God in the Commission of sin; see it in the sin of lying,
wherein a man respects man more than God, and so despises God; he cares not
though God knows it, and is a witness to it, and so it is an injury to God, a
contending with God. We little think it is so, but see that place, 1 Cor.
10.22. the Apostle speaking there of one particular sin, that is, of eating
meat offered to Idols, says, Will you continue to do it? Will you provoke God
to jealousy? Are you stronger than he? It is as if you set your selves against
him of purpose, to do him an Injury. And these affections are in the sin of
every natural man. And that is the first Circumstance.

That it is against Knowledge.
A second Circumstance to aggravate sin, is, when it is committed against
Knowledge, and indeed no Circumstance does it more than this, that a man sins
against the light he has, when he knows it to be a sin, and (it may be)
bethinks himself of it, and yet commits it. You know how it is with men; An
offense committed, an Injury offered to a King, after Proclamation, comes to be
a rebellion, because his will was made known. And so it is with God, when he
has revealed a Truth to me, that I know this to be a sin, and am convinced of
it, and yet go on in it, this alters the nature of a sin, it is not now a bare
Transgression of the Law, but a Rebellion, and so God is provoked in an high
degree; for in a sin against Knowledge, there is more harm, more
disobedience, more presumption: If a Prince be in a place where he is not
known, and finds not respect suitable to his worth, he matters it not, he
will not take it amiss, for he is not known, but if h^ be known, and taken
notice of, and yet neglected, it is great dis-respect, and taken for a great
offense. So when men sin against light given, it aggravates sin exceedingly. As
in the one and twentieth verse of this Chapter, this that the Apostle laid to
the charge of the Romans, aggravated their sin; they knew God, but they
glorified him not as God, as if he had said, If you had not known him it were
another case; but to know God, and not to practice according to knowledge, to
know God, and not to glorify him as God; this God will not take in good part,
it shows you are sinners, and in a condition of death. Therefore in Acts 17.
says dthe Apostle, The times of Ignorance God regarded not, but now he
admonishes every one to repent, that is, when the Gentiles walked in their own
ways, before the Gospel came, before God published and made known his will,
he wincked at it, but now regards it, not a year nor a day shall now pass
without an account for it; the axe is now laid to the root of the Tree, he will
defer no longer, he will take it no more as he did heretofore. Therefore the
Apostle Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 13. says, I was a persecutour, and blasphemer, but am
received to mercy, because I did it ignorantly. Why does he add that? Because
if he had had knowledge, and so had done it wittingly, and willingly, his sin
had been out of measure sinful, and exceedingly aggravated it. Therefore
Daniel tells Balthazar (as an addition to his sins) Thou know all this, and
yet have not humbled thy self; if thou had not known it, if thou had not
had an example, if it had not bin revealed to thee, thy sin had been so much
the less, and perhaps God would have suffered thee to live, but thou know
all this, and yet did not humble thy self. But of all places, take that in
Romans 7.13. Was that then which was good, made death unto me? God forbid: But
sin, that it might appear sin, working death in me by that which is good:
that sin by the Commandment might become exceeding sinful. The meaning is
this, When a man knows that the Law of God discovers this and that to be a
sin, if he commits it, his knowledge makes it out of measure sinful. The same
Irregularity may be in others, the same sin may in it self be as great in
another that knows not the Commandment, but the knowledge of it, makes it to
exceed in greatness; for when a man knows the will of God, and yet sins
against it, it is a resisting of the Holy Ghost, and such sins offend God
more, than the sins against the Father and the Son, for the HOLY GHOST
enlightens, and when one is once enlightened, there is a great contempt against
the whole Trinity; and therefore when a sin is fully against the Holy Ghost, it
is never forgiven. Take heed of this resisting of the Spirit, of this tempting
of the Holy Ghost, for so it is called, Act. 5.9. As any man has more
knowledge, has been more instructed, so it adds the more to his sin. Romans
2.9. Tribulation and anguish to the Jew first, and then to the Greek; for the
knowledge of the Jew was greater than the knowledge of the Greek: So that as
any man has more light, he has so much more condemnation, his sin is so
much the more out of measure sinful: they that sin only against light of
nature, their sin is so much the less, because they had but that one Law, and
so not so much light. The Jews that had another light above the light of
Nature, are sunk deeper into sin than the mere Naturalist, and so are in a
more miserable condition; but we that live under the Gospel, sin against both
the former Laws, and against the Gospel too, which makes our sins the greater.
And this is a Circumstance that should much humble us, as for general sins, so
for particular sins, when they are committed against knowledge.

A third Circumstance, When it is done without Temptation, or with small
Temptation.
is, when sins are committed without Temptation, or with less Temptation,
but when they proceed merely out of the perverseness of the will, for when the
Temptation is less, the sin is greater; Quanto major facilitas non peccandi,
tanto majus peccatum; When the fault is only in the wills being amiss, it is a
sin that exceeds: and that is the case of many natural men. As for example,
suppose the will be right, and the affections be well ordered, and the
understanding only be ignorant, this we call a sin of Ignorance; and that is
a Circumstance which rather lessens a sin simply considered. Secondly, suppose
the understanding be right, and the will well disposed, but passion transports
a man, this is a sin of Infirmity: But when the understanding shall inform,
such a sin is a sin, and no violent passion be stirred up to transport the
soul, but the will nevertheless chooses it, this I call a sin without
Temptation, and this Circumstance aggravates sin, because there is more will in
it, and it is much to have the will stirring in a sin: Therefore, Hebr. 10.26.
you shall find this expression, If we sin wilfully after we have received
the knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for sin. It is
true, he speaks there of the sin of Apostacy, but mark that word, If we
sin wilfully, that is, if the will have much to do in it, when the other
faculties are rightly informed, and well set, when there is no Temptation, no
resistance, it is an ill sign that the sin is out of choice. It is true, a man
may have his mind set the right way, and yet a gust of wind may come, and
carry him out of the way; but when the wind is still, and the Sea calm, and
there is nothing to trouble him, and yet he turns the Rudder the wrong way,
and aims at a wrong haven, he now sins out of will and perverseness. There are
many sins of this nature, as swearing, when there is no Temptation, when the
Understanding knows it to be a sin, and no great affection is stirred up, but
men will do it, because they will do it. So ordinary neglect of the Sabbath,
which can have no violent Temptation to carry a man to it. So neglect of
hearing the Word, and Prayer (I speak not of falls through infirmity.) So the
favoring of sin in others, as also scornful and corrupt speeches, tending to
the disgrace of holiness and purity of Conversation. These be sins out of
choice, which a man is not transported to, not carried to through any violence
of passion: It is one thing for a man to sell himself to sin, as Ahab did, and
another thing to be sold under sin, as Paul, it is one thing to go into
Captivity, another thing to be led thither with a kind of overruling
violence, for in such a case the most upright-hearted man may be miscarried,
when sin shall get on the hill of passion, when it shall have the wind of him,
and stand on the higher ground, he may be foiled; but when a man shall be on
even terms with sin, when it shall have no such advantage, but a man is every
way himself, and yet then sin against God, this aggravates it ex^eedingly, for
he does it not out of passion, but ^n cold blood, and out of choice; and when
he ^hooses to sin, it is a fearful thing. When it ^s with him, as Augustine
speaks of himself, ^ho when he had Apples enough, yet out of ^elight in the
action, he would go to another Orchard and rob that, without Temptation,
because he would do it. So that there is difference between a man that is
overruled, and overcome out of violence and passion, and a man that seeks
Company and occasions, and incentives to whet and quicken his lusts, that so he
may have more pleasure and delight in it. Let those that are guilty consider
this* Circumstance.

What it is done against Vows and Covenants.
Fourthly, sinning against Vows and Covenants made with God, aggravates sin;
for God has said he will require our Vows, if a man have covenanted, God will
either have the thing done, or else he will surely punish the party for
breaking it, it is a thing he will not omit. Now besides particular Vows and
Covenants, consider the general Vows we entered into at Baptism, besides
those which we have renewed at the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: Gal. 5.3.
When a man is once Circumcised, he is bound to keep the whole Law: So he that
receives this Sacrament, binds himself in a solemn bond to keep the whole
Law: now it is usual, that after men have received the Sacrament, we see no
alteration in their carriage; if they were given to swearing before, they
swear still; if they were given to ill company, to vain and idle courses,
they continue the same still, and think the sin the same; but they are
deceived in that, for sin after Covenant is greater than it was before. Ezekiel.
16.32. Sin is there aggravated from this reason, says the Prophet, Thou have
been an harlot, as a wife that commits adultery, that takes strangers in
stead of her husband. As if he had said, Thou art married to me in holiness
and righteousness, and so thou plaist the harlot as a wife, and that makes the
sin out of measure sinful. And it is true of particular vows, that you may
judge aright of sin, and know the greatness of it.

Lastly, When it is done against much means.
sin is aggravated from the means you have to resist sin, consider how many
means we enjoy, and yet profit not by them. The mercies of God should draw us
to him, God expects a return of that fruit at our hands; and yet (as the
Prophet complains, Ier. 5.22.) You have not said in your hearts, Let us fear
that God who gives us the first and later rain, and keeps for us the
appointed times of harvest. As if he had said, God expects this at your hands,
he gives the first and later rain for this end, that you may remember him,
and think of him, and when we say not in our hearts, Let us fear that God
that does this and that for us, God takes it amiss, for his bountifulness
should lead us to repentance; and therefore the despising of it must aggravate
sin. So after Corrections (as no man can say he has had no correction) a sin
is much aggravated. Therefore, Ierem. 5.3. it is complained of, I have stricken
you, and you have not sorrowed; I have wounded you, but you have refused to
receive correction. As if he had said, This is it God takes exceeding ill at
your hands, and it shows that your rebellion is come to a great height; he
has smitten you, and you have not sorrowed, that is, you have not taken the
sin to heart, that has caused this smiting. Therefore he is angry, as Hos.
4.14. I will visit your daughters no more, etc. because they have not profited
by what I have done already: that is the meaning of the place. But chiefly, and
of all the rest of his mercies, he will not bear the contempt of his Word. I
will name but one place, 2 Chronicles. 36.15. says the Prophet there, I rose early,
and sent my messengers, but how did you carry your self toward them? You
mocked my messengers, and despised my Word, till my wrath rose against you, and
there was no remedy. As if he had said, When a man once comes to this, that
when God shall once speak in his Word, shall declare his truth, shall make
known sin, and call him home by the Gospel, but he shall neglect it, take no
good by it, not suffer it to work on him: Now there is no remedy. What then?
the wrath of God rises against him, and then comes destruction, so that it
rises not the second time; so that as God has showed you more mercy, so are
your sins more. Do but think what an unreasonable unequal thing it is, that
you should take so many mercies, health and wealth, from his immediate hand,
and yet never so much as think of him, never worship him, nor fear him, nor
take his mercies to heart: How many taste of his goodness, and yet continue to
despise him, and not to bring forth fruit by his Word? which is no small thing.

And so much shall serve for the aggravations of sin.

Now we will come to take away the Excuses. And first, Every man is ready to
say, Though I fail in many things, To quicken our desires after Christ, take
away the Excuses of sin.
yet I hope my meaning is good, I have as good an heart as another man, though
I make not such a show.

But I will ask thee this brief question. Excuse.
Whence come thy evil words? Good meanings.
etc. are they not fruits and buds that proceed from a sap within? Quest.
When sparks fly out of the Chimney top, shall we not say, there is fire in
the house? If we see evil words and actions, shall not we say the corruption
is greater in the root, than in the branches.

Thou will excuse it, Excuse.
It is my nature, and I hope I shall be excused, Badnesse of nature.
and that God will not deal so hardly with me, he knows I am flesh and blood,
and the strength of my nature.

Well, I will add something to that I have formerly said, it being a point
hard for us to believe, and to make use of.

I say, Answ.
the badnesse of thy nature is so far from excusing thy sin, that it
exceedingly aggravates it. I have showed many reasons, and will now add these
four, and then it will be evident to you.

First, whereas you think your sin is excusable, Matthew. 15.19. Out of the
heart comes Adulteries, Fornications, etc. And if out of the heart, is it not
thence as from the cause, the Principle? Are they not minted there? And is not
every thing strongest in the Cause? If the Dough be sour, how sour was the
Leaven? If so much ill be in the fruit, there is much more in the Parents of
that fruit.

Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: As if our Savior had
said, There is some evil in the tongue, but it is abundant in the heart: so
that, take any sinful action, it is a dish of water taken out of the Sea, or
like a drop taken out of the fountain, for there is an abundance, a sea of
corruption within.



sin in action. This I say that you may make this use of it. When you meet with
any particular sin which appears heinous, let it be as a River to lead you to
the Sea. When you see a sin of covetousness, of vanity, of wrath, of
uncleanness, let that lead you to the heart, and conclude, that you have an
unclean heart, a contentious heart, a covetous heart, a rebellious heart. This
use David made of his murder, and upon that occasion he was brought to conceive
aright of original sin, which, perhaps, he never so considered before. Psalm.
51.4. In sin has my mother conceived me; the greatness of his sin made him
break forth in that manner, Against thee have I sinned, that amazed him, it
made him to know what Original sin was, whereof this was but a fruit, and
being the spring it must needs have more efficacy. If a man find any pride in
his actions, let him look to his heart, it may be God has left him to such
falls that he may see what is within; as it was with Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32.31.
For this cause God left him to try him, that he might know all that was in his
heart, that it might be discovered to him what an heart he had. The Apostle
speaks, Romans 9.22.23. (a place very considerable, for it may help to humble
us) of vessels prepared for honor, and of vessels prepared for wrath, and
destruction: the vessels be of two sorts; those for honor, they have a fashion
peculiar to them, which when you see, you may say, this is made for such a
purpose, and in other vessels you shall see another fashion and may say, This
is not a vessel of honor, but of dishonor. So look on thy heart, see how it
is framed, and when thou see the fashion of it thou may say, for ought I
see my heart is framed, and fashioned to destruction. This use we should make
of our nature, it should be so far from excusing sin, that it should
aggravate it.

The times are times of the Gospel, not of the law.
The third Excuse is; But we live in times of the Gospel, and God is full of
mercy, and will not deal with us now, as he did with them in the time of the
Law.

Object.
Will you make God all Justice?

Answ.
I answer, and show that there is a great deceit in this, out of that place,
Matthew. 5.20. Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, you cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. This is
spoken to them that were under the Gospel, for he says, I say unto you, etc.
The meaning is this, The Pharisees did many things, they kept the Law in a
great measure, and thought to be saved by it; but except you do more than
that, you shall never be saved. As for example, in the sequel of this chapter
he names four particulars: The Pharisees say, Thou shall not kill; but that is
not enough: I say, Thou shall not be angry unadvisedly. Again, they say, Thou
shall not commit adultery: But I say, If thou cherishest any lust, though thou
never come to act it, thou committest adultery. Again, the Pharisees say,
Forswear not: But I say, Swear not at all, but let your yea, be yea, and your
nay, nay, for whatsoever is more than that, is evil. Let them that swear, By
Faith and Troth, consider this. Again, the Pharisees say, An eye for an eye,
and a tooth for a tooth. But I say, You shall do good to them that hurt you,
and bless them that curse you, and except you do this, (which is more than
the Pharisees do) you cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. You that think
your condition so good, because you have a new Priesthood, a new Iubile, a time
of liberty, I tell you, except you yield an Evangelicall obedience to all I
have now named (which are but some of many more) at all times, and in every
particular, although you live under the Gospel, you cannot be saved, for
otherwise the Publicans and Pharisees can do as much as you, and you must do
more than men can do by nature, you must do something that is singular, and
above the reach of Nature, you must strive to perfection, laboring to be like
your heavenly Father. So much for that.

The fourth Excuse is. Object.
But we do many things that will balance our sins, Excuse. The good things
we do, will balance the evil.
although we do some things amiss, yet we do many things well, we give
Alms, receive the Sacrament, it may be, we come to Church diligently; and
these things, in their conceits, balance their sins; and though they sin, yet
they ask God forgiveness morning and evening, and their sins are not so
heinous, as if they had done no good at all, and for this they think God may
deal better with them.

But it is true in this, as in your Law, Stoppage is no payment. When a man
does somethings that God commands, Answ.
and leaves othersome undone; let him know God requires a perfect obedience to
every Commandment, Iam. 2.10. He that keeps the whole Law, and fails but in
one, that is, omits one duty, he is guilty of all. If that be so, then every
bush can stop but one gap, you have no more than was your duty. If you could
do something superfluous, and more than God requires at your hands, it were
some satisfaction. But if there be other sins wherein you spare your self, and
would have a little more liberty, you would not be so strait laced in this;
seeing, I say, God requires an exact obedience to all, all that you do is
nothing. It matters not how much you do, if you fail in one, though you be
careful to do all the duties of new obedience, so that there is no
Commandment but thou endevourest to perform it to the full, yet if there be
one thing wherein thou take liberty, it is enough to condemn thee.

Object.
Again: But I hope I am not so bad as others; I am free from many sins, Excuse
Others are worse.
wherewith others are tainted; and I have many good things in me, that they
want. To this I answer briefly, Answ.
and so will pass from it: First, thou may deceive thy self much, in
thinking thou art not so bad as others. Art not thou cut out of the same piece,
and made of the same mass, the same clay? Have not thou the same nature that
other men have? And what is the reason thou runnest not into the same Outrages
that others do? Not because thy nature is better, but because thou art more
restrained. A Wolf that is tied up, is the same with the Wolf that does all
the mischief. This therefore know, that every natural man is restrained by
by-respects. That rule is general, Romans 3.18. They have not the fear of God
before their eyes, when he would have a reason why the nature of man is so bad,
having spent the former part of the Chapter in reckoning up the sins to which
it is inclined, he gives this reason, They have not the fear of God before
their eyes; all are alike in this, one is not more restrained than the other.
The difference of restraint is in regard of outward actions, there is no new
spring of Grace in them, as is in the Saints. Again, for thy Virtues, take
heed thou deceive not thy self, for thou must know there be natural virtues
that imitate those which be true, and are very like them; as the Bristow stone
is very like the Diamond, yet there is great difference, one is a Pearl, the
other is only a shining stone: So I say, natural virtues may be very like
true, but in Gods sight there is a great deal of difference. For example, two
men may come to die,; One man is not afraid out of a stupidity of spirit, and
on false grounds may be as secure as another, that has peace on the best
grounds, and this imitates true faith: So a man that is naturally meek, may
carry it better than one that has true meekness, therefore it is hard to
find the difference; But if you look to the principles whence they come, the
masters whom they serve, you shall find, they may be good all the way, but not
at the journeyes end, they have an ill scope, they aim at a wrong mark: Let
them have what they will, Circumcision, nor Uncircumcision, availes nothing,
unless they be New Creatures, else God regards them not. And so much shall
serve for Excuses.

Means to arm us against these Excuses.
Now add this to the rest, labor to aggravate your sin by removing the Excuses
which the nature of man is witty to invent; use the ordinance of God which he
has appointed to humble you, and to work these things on your hearts, and
that is his Word, The Word.
Ier. 23.29. Is not my Word as fire, and as the hammer that breaks the
stones. The scope of the place is to show the power of preaching the Word
purely; what is the chafe to the Wheat? you shall know my Word, and
distinguish it from the word of men, my Word when it is right, is as a fire
which melts and thawes the hearts of men, and as an hammer to break their
strong and stony hearts: Come to the Word powerfully preached, as it is in its
own nature, delivered in the Evidence of the Spirit as it should be, and it
will be a means to soften the heart, and break thy stubborn spirit, as an
hammer and fire, not suffering thee to be at rest, until thou come under
the power of it.

The Spirit of bondage.
And if with this thou art not satisfied, go one step further to the Spirit of
God, thou must have a spirit of Bondage, else thou can expect no power. All
that we have said in drawing this map of sin, in adding these aggravations,
and removing these excuses, is nothing, if God give not a spirit of Bondage to
cause you to fear, for it is that that makes the Law effectual, as the Spirit
of Adoption makes the Gospel, no man without it can see sin with a saving, and
feeling sight.

But how does it work this effect in a man's heart? How it works this in a
man?
Not by making him fear God as a slave, for that the Holy Ghost will not do;
therefore that is not an Act we can attribute to him, but my meaning is, The
Holy Ghost by the spirit of bondage enlightens a man to see his sin, and the
sentence of the Law against it, and to judge of his estate with a righteous
Judgment, and when he sees things as they are, he knows and feels the
bondage he was in before, though before he felt it not.

I say, the Holy Ghost enlightens us, which enlightening discovers to us, and
convinces us of sin; and then we look on the Law, and there find, Cursed is
he that continues not in all these Commandments to do them. Then observing
our hearts, and seeing how far we are from that rectitude the Law requires,
our spirits begin to fear, like a man in bondage, that is shut up in prison,
and in danger of his life: therefore, as for the Word, so labor for this
Spirit; the Word is a sharp sword, but how can it wound us without an Arm to
handle it? And when you have done that, you will easily do the thing I have
exhorted you to do, that is, you will then come to Christ, you will not stand
to cheapen the Kingdom of God, but you will buy it, though you give all you
have for it, and yet will think you have a good bargain; you will not seek
the Kingdom of God in such a lazy, and laxe, and remiss manner as you were
wont to do, but will take it violently. And if you come to God after this
manner, if you be driven out of your selves, and see what your own
righteousness is, that it will not serve your turn, and therefore seek for a
righteousness at his hands, you may be sure he will not deny you. You may see
what Paul says, Galat. 3.8. That you may be assured, that seeking you shall
obtain, says he, If an Angel from heaven preach another Gospel, or if I my
self should do it, believe not the Angel, and let me accursed: As if he had
said, I have made this Truth known, that you shall be justified by mere
Grace, without works, that you are to come to Christ with an empty hand,
bringing nothing with you. If any man now should question this Gospel, and
think to bring something of his own, and will not stick to this clear
promise; nay, if an Angel come from heaven and contradict it, let him be
accursed.

This is the true Gospel, and you may believe it. If you can therefore do as
Paul did, Philip. 3.9. That reckoned all as dross and dung, that he might be
found in Christ, not having his own righteousness of the Law, but that which
is through faith in Christ. That when you came to see your condition, you
desire the righteousness of Christ with that earnestness that he did, when he
reckoned all as dross and dung, even his own righteousness, which he knew
would not serve the turn. If, I say, thou can thus go to Christ, knowing
that no antecedent condition is required, but only thirsting for him, being
fully persuaded that thine own righteousness is unsufficient, and having a
saving and firm knowledge That man's nature is full of all unrighteousness and
ungodliness. Christ cannot deny thee, he will receive the to mercy.

We will now briefly come to the next point, and that is this: There is a
revelation of wrath against all unrighteousness of men. Doct. 2.
There is a Revelation of wrath against all unrighteousness of men.


And that is another thing that will humble us, for there must be two things to
do it; one is to see our sins, to know that there is no worth, no excellency,
no worthiness at all in us: And the second is, to have an apprehension of
wrath due for sin, and so his misery under the same. Though a man be never so
miserable, yet if he have a bottom to stand on, he will not go to Christ; but
when he sees his own nothingnesse, and withal, that the wrath of God hangs
over him, so that he must sink utterly, and that there is no way to help him,
when both these concur, a man is humbled. Men may have one without the other;
As the Scribes and Pharisees (O ye Generation of vipers, who has warned you
to fly from the wrath to come,) they were sensible of wrath, and had so much
to humble them, but they did not see that viperous serpentine evil disposition
that was in themselves.

Again, many men may see their sins, and acknowledge the insufficiency of all
they have, but they are not sensible of wrath, God has not charged sin upon
their consciences, nor revealed his wrath; and therefore they go on in a
senseless manner, and are no more moved with the other than stocks and stones.

Now the scope of all this being to bring us to Christ. I will run over a few
things, which may from hence be observed. Things to be observed.
I say, There is a revelation of wrath from heaven against all
unrighteousness. Wherein mark two things.

The certainty of this wrath.
First, the certainety of this wrath, It shall come on all that are unrighteous:
And secondly, what this wrath is; I will but briefly name the heads, and
dispatch the point.

Proofs of it.
First, I say, there is a certainty in it, for God Romans 2.15. They had Thoughts
accusing and excusing them, the light of Nature told them that they deserved
wrath, Judgment struck them with fear.

Vestigia of the wrath of GOD in the world continually.

Lastly, by the Scriptures, Cursed be every one that continues not in the
whole Law to do it. And as the Law, so the Gospel reveals it, shall come to
judge the secrets of men's hearts according to my Gospel. Nay, it is an old
Truth delivered before the Scriptures, As in Iudes Epistle, Enoch preached,
Behold, the Lord shall come with ten thousands of Angels, etc. And if this will
not persuade, we will reason with you a little, for it is not needless to
strengthen these common truths with reason, because we are not convinced of
them enough, which is the cause men live without God in the world.

Therefore consider, if there be a God, he is

Again, if there be a God, he will be feared

Again, if there be any God, he must needs be delighted in goodness, he must
needs have a certain inclination to that which is holy and right; and if so,
then he must needs hate that, that is evil. If he love light, he must needs
hate darkness, if he loves life, he must needs hate death, and indeed love of
goodness proceeds from hatred of evil, and hatred of evil arises from love
of goodness; and if it be so, why should not hatred be active, as well as
love? Therefore, it is certain there shall wrath come against all ungodliness
and unrighteousness of men.

What this Wrath is.

Three things observable.


Secondly, what kind of wrath is this? In this Wrath you shall observe three
things.

First, there is a treasure of this Wrath, Romans 2.5. It is a Treasure.
Thou according to the hardness of thy heart, that cannot repent, treasurest
up wrath.

Now in a Treasure you shall find three things: First, it is an heap, and
there is still an addition thereto, a man grows richer, and richer, saving
shillings and pence, and they still add to the heap. So GOD adds to the
heap of his wrath, as men add sins, he adds drops to his Violl, and when the
measure of our sins is full, then the Violl of his wrath is full, it is still
increasing. Let not a man think, that when he is over the shoes, he can go
no further, for wrath receives addition. Secondly, Treasures are close, and
covered, there being no use of them for the present. It is therefore said,
Wrath is ^owne for the wicked, as joy is sown for the righteous, it lies under
the ground for a time: Therefore, do not say God is slack, because you find
not his wrath presently powered forth. It is not slacknesse, but patience: And
if you do of negligence sin, and God marks it not, but is patient toward
you, and suffers you, know that he will not suffer that patience of his to be
abused, but for every hour that you spend after the commission of a sin,
without returning to God, you shall fare the worse. Revel. 2.20. I gave her
space to repent, and she did not; What then? Therefore I will cast her into
great Tribulation. So that as God is angry, and as his wrath increases, so it
lies hid for a time. Thirdly, there is an expense of Treasures, in time of need
they bring them forth, and use them; so does God partly in this life, when he
shall smite a man with destruction, that shall quite sweep him away, as he did
Saul and Judas, partly and specially in the life to come, which is called the
declaration of the just judgment of God, that shall then be declared, which is
now for a time hid.


Secondly, The power of it.
as there is a Treasure of his wrath, so there is a power of his wrath, Psalm.
90.11. Who knows the power of thine anger? That is, it is not a wrath like the
wrath of men, but a wrath that has much power it it; so that look how much
God is stronger than man, so much does his wrath exceed the wrath of men. God
shows all his power in executing his Justice on the wicked: Therefore, it is
said, Romans 9.22. What if God, willing to show his wrath, and to make his power
known, endure with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to
destruction? That is, he will show his mighty power in punishing them, as he
shows the great riches of the glory of his mercy on the Saints. God is known
by executing Judgment, and the greatness of God is known by the greatness
of the punishment inflicted, and you shall know him to be an Almighty God
as well in punishment as in mercy; there is a transcendent power exercised in
one as well as in the other: Therefore it is said, Who knows the power of his
wrath? You know the wrath of a King is great, because he is powerful; and how
much the power of God exceeds the power of a King, so much his wrath exceeds
the wrath of a King. It is therefore compared to a consuming fire that devoures
all, to the wind that breaks the rock in sunder, and to an overflowing River
that carries all away with it. Consider God therefore in the greatness of his
power, for such is he in his wrath.

The suddenness of it.
Thirdly, consider the suddenness of it, it comes suddenly on men, and that
makes it the more fearful: If God gave warning, it were another case, but he
surprises men before they be aware. It is true that Damnation sleeps not, but
travels as fast as thy self, and will meet with thee at thy journeyes end, but
men know it not. Therefore, when you see this to be your case: What makes you
secure? you feel it not, you have no sense of evil, you live by sense, and
not by faith. But consider, wrath comes suddenly, which is enough to awake a
man out of his sleep of security; for let him thus reason, If GOD meant to
save me, he would give me no rest in sin, for whom he intends to save, he
afflicts beforehand, that they may not perish with the world, but those that
will go with the world he suffers to go. That is a terrible saying in the
first Book of Samuel, the third Chapter and eleventh verse, speaking of Hophni
and Phinees, says GOD, When I begin, I will make an end, and this is the
sentence of all the wicked. It is small comfort that you are free, it being
with you, as with them that be seldom sick, that when they be sick, for the
most part die for it. When all things go well with the wicked, then the wrath
of GOD comes like an Earthquake, which by reason of the winds being enclosed
in the bowels of the earth, has a calm preceding it; and so there is a calm
in men's spirits, before the Earthquake of Gods wrath comes, and then it is as
a thief in the night, who comes when they be in a dead sleep, and least look
for him: After this manner, comes the wrath of God on the wicked, as it is
threatened, Prove. 1.27. There shall come on them sudden desolation, and
destruction shall over-take them as a whirlewind, it shall surprise them on a
sudden; and this may make men to tremble, when they consider that sin is
attended with destruction; when they sin, either GOD punishes them presently,
and then there is small cause of joy, for the bitterness is more then the
pleasure, or else he lets them alone, and there is nothing in the world worse
than to thrive in sin, for then destruction will come suddenly.

Use 1.
The use then you are to make of it, is, First, to teach you to see what sin
is, See what Sin is.
in that it has the wrath of God for its Concomitant. We are apt to make a
mock of sin, we are ready to slight sin, and to lay it in the light balance
of Common opinion, and not in the balance of the Sanctuary, and so we come to
be deceived: Therefore this word, Revealed, must be marked, it intimates that
we are backward to take notice of it; except the LORD reveals his wrath from
heaven, and take us in hand to convince us of sin, to show us our corruption in
its own colors, for we look on these things by a false light.

Think with your selves therefore, what that must be which God punishes with
eternal punishment. See what it is in the punishment of CHRIT our Surety,
think what that is that brought CHRIST from heaven, what that is that cast
those Angels into hell, to be bound in chains of everlasting darkness.

Again, see it as you use to see it in the day of Death, for then men are
commonly awake, see how it is then presented, if it be not then terrible.

Again, judge of sin as men enlightened do look to holy men how they judge of
sin; And, which is without exception, see how the Scripture presents sin with
this Concomitant, the wrath of God, as an evil, and bitter thing. See the
Prophet Jeremy, the second Chapter, and it is certain that the judgment of
the Scripture is right. And let all this humble you.

Secondly, Use 2.
make this use of it, learn to add this to your humiliation. Labor for a
Sense of the wrath of God.
As you must labor to see your state, to have that corruption of nature, which
is in you, discovered: So you must labor for a sense of the wrath of God,
which if you get not, you will never be humbled: Labor to see God himself in
his wrath, look not nakedly on an affliction, but see God in it. If a man has
a sight of him, the Creator, it will wholly amaze, and humble the Creature.
Eliah was not moved with the wind that tare the rocks, nor with the
Earthquake, though terrible, but when God came (though in a soft voice, yet)
the presence of GOD humbled him, that made him cover his face with his Mantle.

There be two kinds of Affliction, one is that which the Creature is able to
bear, the other sort is, when GODS hand is in it, when they are mingled with
his wrath. These be like Arrows dipped in venom, that make a deeper wound,
and such an one as is incurable: when you feel the wrath God in any
affliction, let it be but a light apprehension in it self, yet when the LORD
shall set it on, and mingle it with his wrath, it will grow insupportable.

Judas before his Treason thought thirty pieces of silver to be a great
matter, and that he had got much by it, but when God did manifest himself, and
revealed his wrath a little, so that he saw God, and had a feeling of him, (as
every man shall have sooner or later) you see what a condition he was in.

So it was with Belshazzer, It was his fear of GOD when he saw the Hand, it
was not the hand, but the apprehension of GODS wrath that raised his thoughts,
and loosed his loins, and made his knees knock one against the other.

So Paul, when he heard the Word of GOD by false Samuel, it cast him on his
face, he cared not for any thing that men did to him, (you know how David
described his valor,) but when GOD comes to him, that humbles him.

Consider what it is to have the mighty GOD of Heaven and Earth to be thine
Enemy, who has all things at his Command, and if he be thine Enemy, all
things shall work together for thine hurt, as every thing shall be for thy
good, if thou be in favor, and covenant with him.

If thou say, But I feel nothing for the present; Remember, though thou
feel it not for the present, yet there is wrath laid up for thee, God has
it in store: Remember Gods dealing with them that sinned against him; Shimei
had committed a sin that in Gods sight deserved Death; so did Adonijah; so
did Saul and his seven sons, that were hanged for breaking their oath with
the Gibeonites: You see how long these lay, as if God had forgotten them, but
at length he brings them all to death.

He does not power out his wrath on the sudden, perhaps thou shall feel
nothing of a long time, but thou art condemned, and when the Gaole-delivery
comes thou shall be executed, for God remembers thy sins. Cains sin lay at his
door, though he saw it not, it was not taken away, but continued, and it not
only continued, and kept awake, but it cried day and night unto him, until
the cry entered into the ears of the Lord.

The cry of sin is like the cry of an Hireling, to whom the just Master,
when the day is finished, pays such wages as he deserves: So a sinner, when
his time comes, is remembered before God; though wrath has been restrained for
a time, yet now it shall seize on him.

We should learn by this to humble our selves.

And lastly, if we find the wrath of God, Use 3.
and no way to escape it, Go to Christ.
then go to Christ for these two things we must do: First, We must have our
mouths stopped, that so all men may be culpable before him. Secondly, We
must be shut up in prison, he shuts up all under sin, that the promise
might be to them that believe; when a man is shut up under the wrath of GOD,
so that there is no evasion, this will bring him in.


Indeed, if the mind of a man can find any way to get out, he will never
come in to CHRIST.

But when he shall not tell how to escape the wrath of GOD, if he sin
against man, man shall judge him; but who shall, when he sins against GOD?
If he consider the Terror of GODS wrath, if he shut up, and his mouth
stopped, and he left inexcusable, and shall see himself a miserable man; I
say, this will make him go home to CHRIST.

And that is the use you should make of it, and be sure he will receive you,
if you go to him.

Sin is like the fiery Serpent, and the Wrath of GOD like the Sting, when you
are wounded therewith, then know there is no way to be healed, but to look up
unto JESUS CHRIST, the Brazen Serpent, (and if a man be not wounded, he will
not look up) GODS promises are general, he has bound himself in his Word,
Go and preach the Gospel to every Creature, none excepted, and let him that
is a thirst come, and take the waters of life freely. Let these drive thee to
the LORD CHRIST, and thou shall certainly be accepted. And so much shall serve
for that point

The end of the Fourth Sermon.
CERTAIN SERMONS UPON HVMILIATION. The Fifth SERMON.
ROMANS 1.18. For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, which withold the Truth in
unrighteousness.


AND now we have almost gone through these words; Of withholding the Truth in
unrighteousness.
the last part of them remains, that is, which withold the Truth in
unrighteousness.

Wherein, after the Apostle had declared the corruption of man's Nature in
general, he now pitches on one particular, especially, that is, such as
withold the Truth in unrighteousness; against whom the wrath of God is
revealed.

Three things considerable.
In these words, mark these three things: First, that there is a truth which
God has written in the hearts of natural men. Secondly, that this truth is
withheld by them. The word in the Original, (...), signifies keeping it in
Prison, it is kept down, not suffered to rise up, and show it self in
practice and action. Thirdly, the cause of it is, out of love to
unrighteousness, or delight therein, that is, of unrighteous lusts. But we
will put all these into this one Proposition.

Doctr.
It is the condition of the best men before Regeneration, to withold the Truth
in unrighteousness. That is the point. Paul speaks not of the condition of
some few, but of the condition of men in general. And these be the men against
whom the wrath of God is chiefly revealed, these be the men that of all other
think themselves the free, civil men, that carry themselves soberly, deal
justly with men, that do well in many things, that indeed know much, but
practice not according to knowledge: these, I say, be the men against whom the
wrath, etc.

Object.
It may be you will object here, That is strange, that the more truth is
revealed to men, the more knowledge they have, the more moral virtues they
practice, the worser it shall be with them?

Answ.
For answer to this, you must know, that the having of this Truth, the bestowing
of any of these common graces, puts no man into a better condition. It is Gods
work, and put upon his reckoning only. Indeed the using or abusing of them is
his own work, and put upon his own reckoning. And therefore in regard he
may abuse them, they may do him hurt. And those that have much of these
Truths, but use them not, or that if they do use some of them, yet do it for
their own Ends, and not simply for Gods glory, are as abominable to God, as
those that run into the greatest outrages. Men that are more civil, are like
Wolves tied up, others are like Wolves at liberty. It is true, other men do
more mischief, that is, they commit more sinful actions, and consequently run
into more guilt, and their Condemnation shall be greater; but those that are
tied up, that by civility have their lusts restrained, are no less abominable
in Gods sight than others: a wolf tied up is as hateful to a sheep, as one
that is at large; and so it is with these men, for it is the condition of the
best men, before Regeneration, to withold the Truth in unrighteousness.

Now in this point we will handle three things: First, what this truth is.
Secondly, how it is withheld. Thirdly, the greatness of the sin of
withholding the Truth, etc.

For the first, what this Truth is, What this Truth is.

A threefold Truth.


you must know there is a threefold kind of Truth: First, a natural Truth
written in the hearts of men, to whom the Scripture was never revealed.
Secondly, a common Truth, or common knowledge, such as they have that live in
the


The subject of this Truth.
First, where this Truth is: now there is a Truth placed in the speculative part
of the mind, or understanding, which is that, by which we know and judge aright
concerning God and moral virtues, what is good, and what is bad, what is just,
and what is unjust; whereby many men can discourse learnedly and clearly, as
Seneca, and Tully, and others of the Heathen, in whom we find many glimmerings
and sparkles of true light. As we may find Flowers in the waste, though the
proper place be the Garden. The Church is the Garden of God, as in Canticles,
My Sister, my Spouse is as a Garden enclosed: and it is true, these Flowers
properly grow there, and if you will have them, you must seek them in the
Scriptures, in the Church of God: but we may likewise find them abroad.

Secondly, this Truth is placed in the practical part of the understanding,
and that is when we judge of good things to be done, and of ill things not to
be done; and that as having reference to God that judges or rewards: And this
is it Divines call Conscience, and it differs from the other in this, that that
judges simply, whether it be good or bad, but this gives laws, and rules, and
edicts of life, it tells us, this must be done, and this must not be done: so
there is a Treasure first of speculative, then of practical Truth. But besides
them, there is in the third place, another thing issuing from both these, which
shoots it self into the will and affections. And that is it which the
Schoolmen call Synteresis, that is, a certain Inclination to that which is
good, and a reluctance to the contra^y. There is in natural men not only a
light to know that this is good, or not good, and a Conscience to dictate; this
you must do, or not do, but there is even an Inclination in the will and
affections, whereby men are provoked to do good, and to oppose the Evil. And
therefore the proposition is true, that natural men have some truths, because
they have this Inclination remaining, even in the worst of them. As the air
though it be dark in the night, yet there is a little light (though it be very
little) by which we can discern something. So that thus far men may go, to
know the Truths of God, to have a practical knowledge of them, to have an
inclination to that which is good, and a dislike to that which is evil.

Secondly, whence comes this knowledge: It comes from JESUS CHRIST, the second
Person in the Trinity, The Author of it.
Ioh. 1. John was not the Light, but he was the true Light, which enlight^neth
every man that comes into the world: It is he that infuses light into the heart
of every man, as he is the true good, that makes good; and as it is true fire
that begets fire, so it is true light that enlightens. John was not that Light,
neither is any Minister of the Gospel, for they enlighten only by way of
propounding the object, but Christ opens the understanding, and puts light
within, therefore he is the true Light.

The extent of it.
Now thirdly, for the Extent of this, to know how far it reaches; It
enlightens every man that comes into the world, none is excepted, every man
has a part in this Light. And if that be questioned, has every man such
light, such Truths revealed to him, by which he knows what he ought to do, in
a great measure, and what he ought not to do, the Apostle proves it by four
Arguments in this Epistle (to go no further for proof:) First, they must
needs know much, for they have means to know it. The invisible things of God
are made known by the things they see. The heavens are the work of his hands,
and they declare it, and every man understands their language. If we should
preach in Greek or Latin, every man, happily, could not understand us, but
their language every man understands.

Secondly, Every man has thoughts excusing or accusing him, says the Apostle,
Romans 2.14. which shows that he has this Light, for that proceeds from
Conscience and light, showing what is evil, and what is good; there is a
secret remorse of Conscience in the worst.

Thirdly, They do the things contained in the Law, therefore they show the
effect of the Law written in their hearts; they do many moral things, which
shows that they have the Moral Law.

And last of all, they judge other men, they are able to find fault with the
best, to spy out what is amiss in the most holy man, and be ready to blame
him for it, Romans 2.1. Thou which judge another, do not thou condemn thy
self? All this makes the point evident, that every man is enlightened. And so
you see what this Truth is, where it is placed, whence it comes, and how far
it extends.

And now we come to the second particular, How this Truth is withholden.
to show how it is withheld. It is withheld, says the Apostle, out of
unrighteousness, that is, after this manner: When men know that such things
are true, and that they ought to do them, yet out of their love to, and
delight in their unrighteous lusts, they practice not according to knowledge,
they have some light in them, but their darkness will not suffer that light to
shoot forth it self into their actions, into their whole Conversation: As it
is excellently expressed in John 5. a place worth your considering; The light
shone in darkness, but the darkness comprehended it not; or, the darkness
received it not. The meaning is this, When Christ shines in the hearts and
Consciences of men, there the light stays, it goes no further, it is shut up
within the walls of their Consciences, within the compass of that one faculty,
it does not shed it self into all the rest of the soul; therefore it does not
enlighten the soul, though there be some light, yet it does not turn the
darkness to light, and thence it is, that it is imprisoned, for it is shut up,
and cannot put it self forth.

Thus the light in a natural man is shut up: As for example, Take the light of
a Star in a dark night, and compare it with the light of the Sun, the
Star will show it self, and no more, it cannot turn the darkness to light,
but the light of the Sun, though never so little, look in what measure it
appears, it scatters the darkness from East to West: So there is light in the
minds of men, which is but as a Star in a dark night, which does not take
away the darkness; but if it be a sanctifying light, it is like the light of
the Sun, not shut within a narrow compass, but spreading it self into all
the parts of the soul: Or, as if a candle be brought into a room, it lightens
all the house, but if it be a spark of fire, it shows it self, and glowes,
and does no more, it does not enlighten the house.

It is so in carnal men before Regeneration, all the light they have does but
glow in their breast, showing it self there, and making it evident that they
have such knowledge, but it is not a Candle that enlightens all the room, that
enlightens all the corners of the soul. Therefore in Matthew. 6. Christ speaks
of a single eye, when the eye is right, it makes the whole body full of light,
that is, when the knowledge is right indeed, when the knowledge a man has is
sanctifying, and powerful, then it enlightens a man round about, that he may
see which way to go, but if it be a common light, which he terms a double
eye, it will not sufficiently direct. Like those holy men that the Apostle
speaks of, Philip. 2.15. that shine as lights in the world, that is, men see
them, they look on them, but they do not change their darkness into light;
or like that light spoken of by Peter, 2 Pet. 1.19. that shines in a dark
place.

If you will know what is the reason that there should be a light in the
Conscience, Quest.
and the mind of a man, which nevertheless works not on the will and
affections, but is shut up there.

I answer, Answ.
There is a double reason: The first is that spoken of in 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. They
received the Truth, but not the love of the Truth, and therefore they hate it:
Now what a man hates he keeps off as much as he can, it must not come near
him, for he counts it his enemy, and therefore will not suffer it to diffuse it
self into the rest of the faculties of the soul.

Another reason, which goes hand in hand with this, is, they love darkness
rather than light and therefore they are not every way enlightened, for what a
man loves, he desires to preserve, to hedge about, and to keep safe: thus men
cannot abide to have darkness taken away by any Information or Admonition, for
they desire to preserve it, Romans 1.21. Their foolish heart was full of
darkness, they knew God, but they glorified him not as God: Though there was
light, yet their heart was full of darkness, and because they loved this
darkness, therefore they would not have it expelled. As a man commits a filthy
act, or unseemly thing, he desires to have the light put out, because it is
contrary to that which should cover and cloak his action: thus men imprison
and shut up the light,, not suffering it to disperse it self into their soul.

Four ways of imprisoning the Light.
But in this imprisoning of this light, you must know all go not the same way
to work, for there be these four different ways of doing it.



right, they do not think that such things ought to be done, they are not
persuaded that such an exact strictness of holiness is required, they think
men may live after another manner; and thus they do imprison the light; so do
all heretics that believe lies, and so withold the Truth.

Thirdly, There be some that fail in neither Stephen, Act. 7.51. speaks of
some that resisted the Holy Ghost, that is, when their opinion's right, and
they remembered it too, but they suppress it, they keep it down, they suffer
it not to come forth, out of their love to unrighteousness, to some lust
wherein they are resolved to please themselves.

Lastly, there be some that imprison the good, but now the question is,
whether the action I do at such a time be Sabbath-breaking or no? here they
find a distinction to put it off; so vain Company I know is to be avoided,
but whether this be ill Company is all the question. All these ways men are
said to imprison the Truth. And so much for the second particular.

How great a sin it is to withold the Truth in unrighteousness.
and that will appear from hence.

It is that which brings the greatest Condemnation This is the condemnation,
Ioh. 3. that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness better than
light: As if he had said, there be other things for which God will punish men,
but this above all the rest deserves condemnation, it brings great, and swift
Condemnation, that light is come into the world, but men etc. that is, when men
shall be informed, when God shall reveal his Truth, so that his light glares
in their eyes, and they cannot but see it, and yet they love darkness more
than light, this puts men into far worse condition, than if they were
altogether ignorant of the Truth. Else why should Peter say, It had been
better they had never known the way of righteousness? They shall perish that
be ignorant of these Truths, and of the degree of them, but at the day of
Judgment it shall be a great deal harder with them that know and do not
practice them: As Ier. 5.4. Surely, says the Prophet, they are a poor and
foolish people, they know not the ways of the Lord, nor the Judgment of their
God: They shall therefore perish; but then there is another Generation that
know God: I will get me to the great men that have known the ways of God, but
these have altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bonds: That is, these be
the men with whom God is most angry, upon whom this condemnation shall fall
heavy, that know the Judgment of their God, and yet break his bonds, that
know, and do not practice.

Secondly, (to go no further than this place) The wrath of God is revealed from
heaven, but against whom? against them that withold the Truth in
unrighteousness: That for which God is angry, for which his wrath is revealed
against men, in a special manner must be a sin. It is true he will punish
other sins, but these words are not here used in vain, for they that do thus,
sin out of contempt, and amongst men, a sin out of contempt kindles wrath; so
they that know Gods will, but practice not according to knowledge, provoke Gods
wrath against them. An excellent place for this, is Heb. 3. you shall find
this the case of the people, when they knew not God at all, or but a little
number of them, God blessed them all that time, but when he had revealed
himself fully to them, and had endured them forty years, when they tempted
him proved him, and saw his works, then he swear in his wrath that they should
not enter into his rest. His wrath was then kindled, and that in such a
measure, that he entered into such an oath. Now when God takes an oath the
decree is peremptory, and never to be reversed; and that is the Condition of
them that withold the Truth in unrighteousness, The wrath of God abides on
them, Ioh. 3. ult. God may be angry with his own children, as a father is with
his son, but his wrath abides not on them, he takes them to favor again;
but they are in a miserable Condition, on whom the wrath of God remains. And
consider what his wrath is, The violence of a Lion is terrible, the wrath of a
King is great, but who knows the power of Gods wrath? And therefore since the
wrath of God shall in such a manner be revealed against such as withold the
Truth in unrighteousness: You need no other Argument to show that the sin is
great.

For this cause (says the Apostle, Romans 1.26.) God gave them up unto vile
affections: And afterward in the eight and twentieth verse, As they regarded
not to know God, even so, or therefore, God delivered them up to a reprobate
mind: that is, a mind without knowledge, an injudicious mind, that cannot
judge of things. And look in all the book of God, among all the Armies of
sorrow, there is not any like this, to be given up to vile affections, to
lusts, to an injudicious mind, in matters of God, and things belonging to their
Salvation. This punishment shows the greatness of the sin, but men slight
this, as it is the greatest judgment, so it is the least felt; men lie at
rest, they are cast into a dead sleep, but it is like the sleep of them that
have crazie brains, they wake in a frenzy, so these shall wake in an horrible
astonishment, their sleep is such a calm, as will end in a tempest, and such
a tempest as shall never be blown over. Therefore, let no man bless himself
in this, I feel none of these things, for thou have the greatest judgment on
thee when thou feel it least. And so much for the three things I propounded
to you, what this Truth is, how it is withheld, and the greatness of the
sin: now we will come to make use of it.

And the first use we are to make of it, Use 1.
is that which is the maine scope of the Apostle here, and that for which we
pitched on these words, and that is to humble us, to learn to know our selves,
to know in what Condition we are, for the Truth is revealed to us, but we
withold it in unrighteousness. This Truth that should rule in the hearts of
men, that should be as the supreme governor in the soul, of which it may be
said, as it is said of the Peace of God, let it rule in your souls, that where
by men should be acted, is by men imprisoned. Therefore, Romans 2.9. the Apostle
denounces Tribulation and anguish upon every one that disobeyes the Truth:
Intimating that Truth is our King, that should govern and rule in our hearts;
now when men disobey it, nay, go further, imprison this Truth, it is as when
men imprison their lawful King, or servants their Master, and they run riot,
and at liberty in the mean time. And this is our case; we do with it, as
children do with their Masters, we desire to be rid of it, because it watches
over us, and so we grow enemies to it. And this is no small sin, for if we
consider whence this comes, who puts it into our hearts, it will appear
heinous; by the Law of man it is death to kill children that are begot by man,
but this Truth is begot by the Holy Ghost, it is put in by the Spirit of God,
and to extinguish this Truth, not to suffer it to live, not to nourish it, not
to bring it forth, is the great sin of all. Even the Heathen shall rise in
judgment against Christians for this, who maintained the Vestall fire, because
they conceived it to come from heaven, they for that cause never suffered it to
go out. But this Truth is a fire which came from heaven, a spark put into the
breasts of men to guide their feet into the way of Peace; when men shall
extinguish this Truth, let it go out, and not maintain it, the Heathen shall
rise against them in judgment; as the men of Niniveh should rise up against
the men of that Generation among whom Christ lived. We were wont to take care
of precious things, consider the preciousnesse of this Truth; what is precious
we will not be willing to destroy, as the Prophet said of the bunch of Grapes,
Destroy it not, for there is a blessing in it. And what do you think of this
Truth? is it not a precious thing? Yea, it is the chief thing in a man. In a
ship a wise man will have an eye to the rudder, for that turns all the rest of
the body of the ship. Of all things in our selves we look to our eye, the
guide of the body; so we should learn to watch, and be tender over this Truth
as over our eye, for the one is the light but of this life, the other is the
light of the soul to eternal life. In Micah 3.5. It is threatened as a great
Judgment, when God shall turn their Visions into night, and their Divinations
into darkness, when the Sun shall go down on their Prophets, and the day
shall be dark on them, and will you bring this Judgment on your selves? They
that are guilty of this, that have not used this Truth, but imprisoned it, and
labored as much as they can to cause the Sun to go down, and rise no more,
to turn the day into night, let them consider what the sin is; when you read
the story of the Kings, and hear them saying to the Prophets, prophecy not,
imprisoning them, as Ahab did Micaiah, and slaying them, as Ioash did
Zecharial, you will little think you are guilty of the same sin, but when
this Truth comes as a Prophet from God, and tells you, such and such things
ought to be done, and such and such evils ought to be abstained from, and you
shall desire it to be silent, and shall say, Prophecy not, when you shall not
suffer it to speak freely, I say, your sins shall be as great as theirs;
therefore learn to consider of it, and be humbled for it: men are wont to
think their Condition better, because they know more than others, but it is
quite contrary, for nothing aggravates sin more than that. It is an extreme
folly in men when they cannot deny the fact, they slight the fault, and will
not acknowledge it. It was Adams fault, when God came toward him, he fled, and
hides his sin; and it is the fault of all Adams posterity. But let men know,
that the quite contrary way is the way to Salvation. It is not with God, as it
is with men, among whom confession makes way for condemnation, for with God
confession is the way to salvation. Therefore be not unwilling to examine your
selves, consider how much you have known, what truths have been revealed to
you. Do this with one eye; with another eye look on your lives, and see how
short your practice has been of your knowledge, come willingly, and if you
confess, you shall be forgiven. This will drive you out of your selves, it will
be your Schoolmasters to bring you to Christ. They that carry this light in a
dark Lantern, that rake these sparks in the ashes, that as they would not
have others see what they do, so neither would they have their own Consciences
take notice of it that will sin, let men say what they will, that live
loosely, that either hear not, or regard not what they hear, let them
consider it, for they do in a special manner imprison the Truth, they
withold it in unrighteousness, labor to know the sin, your miserable
condition, and learn to be humbled under it.

A second use we may make of this, Use 2.
is from hence to discern the condition of those men which are miserable,
Shows the misery of th^se men that are near the kingdom of God, but not in
it.
but see not their misery that are near the kingdom of God, but not in it:
Men that are merely civil, that hear much, and do much, and go far, keeping
their lights burning till the very point of the Bridegroomes coming, and for
want of a little more oil are excluded; as Ananias for a little reservation
lost all; and the young man in the Gospel, that kept all the Commandments of
the Lord from his youth up, that came within a step, but never into the
mountain of the Lord. This is a race many miss of, as the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9
speaking of many running in a race, says, Many run, but all obtain not, that
is, there is a company of men run in the ways of God, as well as the Saints,
both run, both do very much, if you look on the ways they go, you shall
scarce find difference in any outward action that they do, yet, many obtain
not; and why? they either run not as they ought, or else they hold not out to
the end: Amaziah and Ioash ran long, almost to the end of the race, but because
they continued not faithful to the death, they received not the Crown of
life, these be the men that come near the kingdom of heaven, but never enter
into it. And the scope of the Text serves to discover these men; when we hear
therefore that there is such a Generation, it concerns every man to desire to
know his Condition, lest he should be of that number; for that cause we will
spend this use in discovering these three things: Their misery is in three
things.
First, that the good things that these men have in them do them no good.
Secondly, that they do them much hurt. Thirdly, I will set down how far they
go, and yet how far short they be of that which is proper to the godly.

The good things, that they have, do them no good.
First, I say, the good things in them do them no good, for they are the gifts
of the Holy Ghost, and shall be found to the praise of the Hebr. 6. the Apostle
speaks of men enlightened, and that have tasted of the gift of the Holy Ghost,
that is, there be gifts that the Holy Ghost puts into their heart, as we lay
flowers in the window, which do not grow there, or as some Outlandish fruit
which is brought over, but it will not grow in our Country, except the soil
be altered, and changed, it will not thrive there, nor bring forth fruit to any
purpose: So though these things be in them, yet they are not theirs, neither
shall they be to their own praise, and advantage.

redundare in personam, they make not any man's person better, though a man, not
yet truly regenerate, have never so many excellent things in him, yet his
person is never the better for them. As we say of godly and regenerate men,
though they commit evil, yet their persons are good in Gods sight. God sees
their evil, but he scowres them by affliction, and he hates the evil, but
loves the person, which shows that the person is not accounted evil, for if
the person were evil, he must needs hate it: On the other side, they that have
received common Graces, though they have gone far, yet their persons are not
the better, but the same: And there is good reason for it, for it is not the
person that does the good thing: But, as Paul says of ^in, It is no more I
that do it, but sin that dwells in me; so they may say, It is not I that do
it, but the good that is in me: therefore it is reason it should not do them
good, when it makes not their persons good, but leaves them the same
notwithstanding. So that it may be said of the good things in them, as is said
of beauty in an evil woman, or as of a pearl in a swines snout, the things be
good and precious, the pearl is a pearl indeed, yet notwithstanding they may
be evil women, in whom beauty, and swine in whom the pearl is found. So you
see the first, that though a man have excellent things in him before
regeneration, yet they shall do him no good.

Secondly, They do^ them much hurt.
which may make every man look about him, and to consider with fear and
trembling, if it be not his own case: If a man shall have these Truths
revealed, but he shall either let them lie still, and rust, or if he bring them
to action, shall check and curb them, and not use them as he should, they
shall increase his Condemnation.

Romans 2.9. Tribulation and anguish on every soul that does evil, to whom? To
the Jew first, and then to the Grecian: Mark it, They that do evil are of
two sorts, Jews or Grecians. Jews were they that knew and were acquainted
with the Law, and the Grecians were ignorant of it; therefore Tribulation shall
be first, and in greatest measure on the Jew; so that their knowledge
aggravates their sin, it had been better for them that they had not had the
Truth, that they had never heard of the Gospel of Christ, nor been acquainted
with the ways of God, because when they have light, and sin against it, the
more light they have, the more resistance there is, and so the more inexcusable
they are, and the more inexcusable they be, the greater is their sin.

end is to have Christ's righteousness revealed, but these men having a Conceit
of their own righteousness, regard it not, and so resist God. What else is
the reason of that in Luke 15.1. There resorted to him (says the Evangelist)
Publicans and sinners, but the Pharisees murmr at him. What is the meaning of
that? It is as if he had said; They that were righteous more than others, that
were in all their Conversation unblameable, that did more good, and abstained
from more ill than others, these men did not come to Christ, for they thought
themselves in a reasonable good condition already. But the Publicans and
sinners resorted to him. So these men that have many good things in them, we
have most ado to drive them out of themselves, and to bring them to Christ; so
that they that resist Christ's righteousness, which is Gods chief end, must
needs do themselves most hurt.

Again, they in whom Gods Justice does most Isaiah, and Ezekiel, etc. it was
not only to convert men, to win their souls, to bring them to Salvation. What
then? To clear his Justice, and to increase their condemnation. How was that
done? by making known these Truths, that knowing them, and not practicing
them, their Condemnation might be greater. So we Ministers come not only to
convert the souls of men, not only to build, but also to pluck down, not
only to open the hearts of men to believe the Truth, but to harden men's hearts
to hate the Truth; not but that we long for the salvation of men, and that the
proper end of the Word is to save men, but the use they make of it serves to
increase their condemnation: So that the more Truth is revealed, if it be not
practiced accordingly, the greater is the sin.

I am not as other men, or as this Publican: Therefore, says Christ, The
Publican went to his house justified rather than the other.

Again, they be further from Sanctification than others, for they be wise in
their own eyes, and will carve out their own ways, they are not willing to
resign themselves to God, they chose ways of their own, thinking the Word to
be foolish, and common, for the more the knowledge, the stronger is the
resistance, and therefore they are said to contend with the Truth, Romans 2.8. To
them that are contentious, and obey not the Truth. The meaning is, Men that
know much, that are much enlightened, but not truly sanctified, they quarrel
with the Truth, they except against it, they have many things to allege
against the ways of God, the resistance is stronger in them than in others,
they are contentious men, that is, not men that contend with men, nor simply
with God, but they contend with the Truth, not only in will and affections,
but in their understandings also, men reason against it, and therefore are apt
to disobey the Truth, and so of all others furthest off from Sanctification,
they will go their own course, and will not be taught. So you see the second
thing, That the good things that are in these men do them much hurt.

The end of the Fifth Sermon.
CERTAIN SERMONS UPON HVMILIATION. The Sixth SERMON.
ROMANS 1.18. For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, which withold the Truth in
unrighteousness.


NOw to come to that which remains, How far they go, and yet how far they
fall short of that which is proper to the godly.
which is the third thing, that is, to set down how far these men may go, and
yet how far they fall short of that which is proper to the Saints that shall
be saved. And thus far they may go.

First, they may be enlightened to understand all the truths of God; there is no
Truth we deliver to you, In inlightning.
but an unregenerate man may understand it wholly, and distinctly, and may come
to some measure of approbation, he may be well acquainted with the mysteries of
Faith and Repentance, so as he may discourse thereof better than many that have
the things indeed.

In their Conscience.
Secondly, not only so, but he may have a Conscience that shall do its duty in
many things, he may make a Conscience of many duties, as you shall find of
diverse in Scripture, who notwithstanding were not sanctified. When God sent
Rohoboam that message, not to go to war against Jeroboam, knowing it was
Gods command, he made Conscience of obey-it, and likewise for some years he
served the Lord. So when the Lord would have Amaziah send back the Israelites,
he durst not disobey the voice of the Lord, although if he had looked on all
probabilities it might have ruined him. So Abimelech durst not meddle with
Abraham's wife, when God had given a charge to the contrary. So Balaam in many
things restrained himself, and would not do but as the Lord commanded him: So
that an unregenerate man may keep a good Conscience in secret, when no man
sees it or knows it.

Thirdly, In common gifts.
he may not only have his judgment enlightened, and his Conscience enabled to
do its duty in many things, but likewise he may have many common gifts planted
in his will and affections, many excellent moral virtues of Justice, and
Temperance, and Patience, and in these he may many times exceed the godly, as
many times Blazing-starres go beyond true Stars for light; so may these
exceed the godly in outward appearance.

Fourthly, In their actions.
there is not only all this wrought within them, but they do many times
express it in their actions. Come to their lives, they are able to do many
things; as it is said of Herod, he heard John gladly, and did many things: So
the second and third ground, as they knew something, so they practiced
according to their knowledge. In their performances they may not come short of
any of the godly, and may for a long time have as fair, specious, and probable
shows of goodness as any.

Fifthly and lastly, In their Conflicts.
they may go thus far, they may have two men in them, as well as regenerate
men, one that contendes for the Truth, the other that resists it. And what
stronger sign is there in regenerate men, to evidence their regeneration, than
this Contention between the flesh and the spirit? yet this may be found in
them, there may be strong Inclinations to that which is good, and a resistance
of it. This Truth may lie in their breast, as a fire that would rise, and break
out, but much quench-cole, and wet stuff within may keep it down; so that
there may be, and are two men in the Civil man, as well as in the Regenerate.

Now to show how far they fall short of How far they fall short*
them that be truly sanctified. First, in matter of light and understanding
that they have, you shall find a double difference. In light and
understanding. In two things.


First, though in the Truths they know they go exceeding far, as I have
showed you, yet Jerusalem, O Jerusalem, that thou had known the things
belonging to thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes! What was hid from
them? not the things themselves simply considered, for they were fully
revealed, Christ himself Preached there, there wanted no light to shine to
them; yet it was hid from their eyes, that is, there was a certain secret,
which, if God had revealed, it would have persuaded them to have turned to him
effectually, but that was hid from their eyes, and so they were strangers from
the life of God. So the life of holiness and religion these men understand
not, there is something spiritual which they cannot comprehend. There light
goes as far as it may; when a man has a natural, a common light, it will
apprehend common objects, such as are suitable to it, it apprehends; but that
which is spiritual, it cannot reach unto. 1 Cor. 2.14. A natural man
understands not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are spiritually
discerned, that is, the very thing wherein the Image of God consists, wherein
true holiness expresses it self, they do not understand. Therefore it seems
a strange thing to them (as in 1 Pet. 4.4.) that others run not into the same
excess of riot. It seems strange, (now mark that word) nothing seems
strange but when a man is ignorant of its cause, is not acquainted with it, and
therefore he is still finding fault with it. Therefore, unholy men have a light
that reaches to common Justice, and to a common care of serving God, to common
moral virtues, and to an upright behavior to men, but further they cannot
go, they know not what it is to be exact, and strict in all things, and that
is the first difference, they know not the secret of God, they may go through
the whole course of Divinity, and be acquainted with all the mysteries of
Salvation, but that secret of his they understand not.

Secondly, there is this difference in the things Jude 14. they speak evil
(says the Apostle) of the things they know not. You see there be some things
they know not, and therefore they speak evil of them: And what things they
do know, as be^sts without reason in them, they corrupt themselves, that is,
they do not practice according to their knowledge, though they are acquainted
with the ways of God in that measure, that they know they ought to abstain
from these and these sins, yet in these things that they know naturally they
are corrupt: So you see the difference between them and the truly regenerate
in matter of understanding.

In their Conscience.
Secondly (to keep the same method I did in the other) for matter of
Conscience, you shall find this difference, and in this they fall short. Though
they do make Conscience of many things, notwithstanding they have not a good
Conscience; for, Conscience is good in two respects; either because it
witnesses good to us, and so we commonly use it, or as it is subjectively
good, and so the love of God, is good, and the fear of God is good, and in
this they have not a good Conscience, for it is required that the Conscience be
inherently and subjectively good, that a man make Conscience not out of slavish
fear, but out of willingness, as a chaste wife desires to please her husband,
because she loves him, she is loath to displease him, will not lose his favor
for any thing, and therefore she observes him exactly, and will not offend
him, when the Conscience stands in this reference to God, it is a good
Conscience. On the other side, let a man make Conscience of never so many
things, yet if it be out of fear, as a servant fears his Master, or as the
Thief fears the Judge, his Conscience is not good. So that the civil men
cannot be said to have a good Conscience in the things they abstain from out
of Conscience, Note.
because they do it not willingly, but as of necessity. Now all God looks to
is to have what is done, done willingly, and therefore it is no wonder that
Divines give this as a sure rule that Desire is a sign sure enough of Grace:
If a man has a true desire to please God, it cannot deceive him, for the
desire is more than the deed, as Saint Paul says in 2 Cor. 8. In matter of
giving, You have not only been ready to do, but to will, and to be forward;
as if the will were more than the deed; and so it is indeed. A man may perform
many actions of Religion, abstain from many sins, reform his life in many
things, but it is another matter to desire to please God, according to that of
Nehemiah 1.11. Let thine ear be attentive to the prayer of thy servants that
desire to fear thy Name: there is none but the servants of God that desire to
fear him. If others be asked whether they could not be content there were no
law to restrain them, that no necessity of holiness lay on them; they will
answer, they could desire that there were none, that they were at liberty; and
therefore when they make Conscience of any thing, it is not out of
willingness, but out of a slavish fear, though it be out of Conscience, yet
the Conscience is not good, and in this respect they fall short.

Thirdly, for matter of moral virtues, they may have many excellent virtues
planted in their hearts, Moral Virtues.
which are the gifts of the Holy Ghost, for the Holy Ghost does not only
enlighten the understandings of some that shall never be saved, but also places
many gifts in their will and affections. But this defect they have, they
neither come from a right Principle, nor tend to a right end, they come from no
higher a Wellhead than Nature, they be common to them that be only natural;
and therefore it cannot be proper to them that shall be saved. I say, Nature is
able to bring forth these virtues, even as the earth (for that similitude will
express it) is able to bring forth two things, Weeds, and Grass: You know
weeds are unprofitable, and many of them hurtful, but grass is good and
useful: But corn and flowers of the chiefest sort the earth cannot bring
forth without plowing and sowing; so it is with man's nature. Take it as
secluded from Grace, it is able to do two things, to bring forth Sin and
Lust, which comes from the corruption of it, and likewise many excellent
virtues which proceed from common nature, which is in a man unregenerate, as
well as sinful nature. These things be good and very commendable, but this is
their fault, they go no further, there is no more than nature in them, they
are very like true Grace, as false Jewels are like true ones, and as your wild
corn is like true corn, there is a great similitude between them, but yet
there is a great deal of difference, if you look on them with a curious eye,
and judge of them with a righteous judgment.

Fourthly, for matter of Actions, it is true they do many things, In Actions
In two respects.
but they fall short in these two respects:

First, they do not all, they are always wanthing Herod did all, but many
things, He heard John gladly, and did much; this rule will not fail, they are
not general in their obedience, there is not a general change: Now the effect
cannot go beyond the cause, but it is true of the regenerate. They are New
Creatures every way, and therefore there is a general observation of the Law
of God, I speak of an Evangelicall observation competent to the Saints, I say,
they have a respect to all the Commandments; the other have not, because their
hearts are not fully, not generally changed, they have light, but it is shut up
within the compass of one faculty, it turns not the soul into light, and
therefore they know many things, and do many things, yet because the work is
not general, they have still some exception, something there is wherein they
favor themselves, some duty there is that they omit, and that constantly from
time to time.

Again, as they do not do all, so what they will among men, or to avoid
shame, or they do it to escape judgment, and to attain that safety which
Nature it self may desire, or else to satisfy natural Conscience: many other
respects there be, but they do it not in sincerity to the Lord.

Object.
But, it may be objected, when they do things in secret, do they not do them
to the Lord?

Answ.
It is true, they do it to him as to a natural good, as a Judge that punishes
and rewards, as a Dispencer of good and evil; so they do it to the Lord, but
not to him as a Father, as holy and pure, as abstracted from all punishment,
and reward, they do not fix their eye on the Person of God, to love him, to
desire favor and Communion with him; after this manner they desire him not,
and so they fail in the good actions they do.

In their Conflict, in four things.
Fifthly and lastly, there are two men in Civil men before Regeneration, that
is, an instigation to that which is good, and a reluctancie to it, a renitencie
against it, something contrary thereto, as well as in the Regenerate; but you
shall find them to fall short of the Saints in these four regards.

enlightened, but in the Saints the Controversy is between every faculty and it
self, between the understanding and it self, between the whole Soul, as it
is compared with it self, there is something good in every part of it, and
something ill, and these two con^end.

Secondly, as it differs in the subject, so likewise

Thirdly, it differs in regard of the effect and Medea, Deteriora sequor; but
it is not so with the Saints, for in their Combat ordinarily they have the
better; as Paul, when this combat and strife was within him, he was still so
sustained by the Grace of God that he had the victory, and that I take to be
the meaning of that in 2 Cor. 12.9. when there was that strife in him about the
thorn in the flesh, that is, some strong lust that Satan had sharpened against
him, The Grace of God was sufficient for him, and in the issue thereof he did
Meliora sequi, but the other goes away with the worst.

Aequilibrio, the balance may hang equal for a while, but at last they give
the rain to their lust, they are weary of contending; but the Spirit in the
Saints grows stronger and stronger, as it was said of the house of Saul, it
waxed weaker and weaker, but the house of David grew stronger and stronger. And
as it was said of Peter, When he should be old, he should be carried whither he
would not; showing by what death he should glorify God, that is, this strife
should continue til he was old, till the latter end of his days, yea, and
about that which is hardest of all, that is, to resist the desire of life, to
be content to die for CHRIST. So you see how far they may go, and yet how
far they fall short.

And now have I done with those three things, that the good things, that
carnal men have, do them no good. Secondly, that they do them hurt. Thirdly,
that they may go far, and yet, (that you may not be deceived, in
apprehending what men they are, and what Condition we speak of) that they fall
short of that which is proper to the Saints, and so much for the second use.

Thirdly, Use 3.
if this be the Condition of men to withold the Truth in unrighteousness;
Men sin not out of want of information, but out of love of unrighteousness.
then this will likewise follow, that commonly men sin not out of mistake, not
out of want of Information and conviction, but out of the very love of
unrighteousness: And this serves to take away the Common excuse whereby men
do usually mitigate, and extenuate their sins, as if they were committed by
accident, out of incogitation, or want of due consideration; you see it is not
so, but that is the case of every man out of the state of Regeneration to
commit sin out of love to unrighteousness. And this is a point that needs much
to be urged, because men are not humbled; you know the scope of this Text is
to humble men, to convince them of their sins, to show them the Circumstances
by which their sins are justly to be aggravated; now because men will pretend
they sin out of Infirmity, and their meaning is good, and they intend not to
do such and such evils, or if they do them it is not with an ill mind; I
advise you, take heed you deceive not your selves, you know it was Jonas his
case, when he had no mind to go to Niniveh, he pretends fair reasons. God
that searches the heart, knows your hearts, howsoever you defend and dispute
for your sins, and there is a Truth within that tells you such and such things
ought not to be done. Therefore, learn from hence to know your sins, and the
quality of them. And, if you object, we do not resist this Truth, we obey it
in many things? Let me ask you, Do you obey it in those things that cross
that particular unrighteousness wherein you are delighted? (for there is the
proof) there be some personal sins to which a man's nature is most inclined,
examine if out of love to them you do not withhold the Truth, for it fares
commonly with Truth in this case, as it did with John Baptist, all the while he
preached Herod heard him willingly, yea, gladly, but when he came to touch upon
Herodias, then he took away his head; and as he dealt with John, so do we
with Truth, so long as it suggests nothing to us that crosses our desires, we
are willing to obey it in all things that it shall dictate to us, but when it
tells us of sins that we are unwilling to hear of, we first imprison it, and
then extinguish it, as there be degrees in restraining of it, first in one
degree, then in a greater degree, and at last we put it quite out: Therefore
take heed to it, labor to know your sins, to see those which are most natural
to you, How the Truth is withheld in unrighteousness.
whether in these you do not withold the Truth in unrighteousness; which is
done after this manner: When a man shall have his heart set upon any particular
thing which he is not willing to part with, and the Truth shall tell him
something that is contrary thereto, now let him try himself. Pilate (the Text
says) knew that the Pharisees had delivered CHRIST for Envy, this he knew,
but yet to content the people, says one Evangelist, and out of fear of
Caesar, says the other, he delivered him to them. Out of those two respects,
because he would not part with his love of the people, nor with the good will
of Caesar, he would part with CHRIST. Now here is the Trial, Suppose thou
esteemest credit, and applause with men, the Truth comes and tells thee thou art
to do a thing that crosses this, mark what thou art ready to do in this
case; you shall see an instance in John 12.42. There were many among the chief
Rulers which believed on CHRIST, but for fear lest the Pharisees should cast
them out of the Synagogue, they durst not confess him, for they loved the
praise of men more than the praise of God. They believed on him, the Truth did
its part, they were thereby informed well enough what they were to do, but
because they loved the praise of men, they resisted this Truth out of love to
unrighteousness. So put case thy mind be set upon wealth, and in that thou will not be crossed, This truth tells thee, thou must do one thing, but it will
cross thee in matter of thy estate, as the Young Man had that Trial put on
him, Go and sell all thou have, and thou shall have Treasure in heaven:
Compare thine own with the Young-mans behavior, he went away sorrowful.
Whence we may gather that he was enlightened to see the Truth, he knew it was
best to follow CHRIST, the Truth was thus far revealed to him, for otherwise
why should he go away sorrowful? If he had not believed him to be the
Messiah, he needed not to have sorrowed, but in that sorrow was left in his
heart, it manifested what his mind was set upon. Is it thus with thee? Learn
hence to humble your selves, to judge aright of your sins, and of your
Condition by them.

And if all this will not persuade you, take this one instance which I will
give you. Take a view of thy self as thou art affected at some apprehension of
Death, in some dangerous sickness, in some good mood, after some quickening of
the Spirit in thee, after some great trouble into which thou art cast, and see
what thou will do in such a case: See what liberty this Truth has at such a
time, how ready thou art to obey it in all things, how ready will the Truth be
to inform thee, these and these things thou ought not to do, and thou have
neglected these and these duties; how imminent this Truth is, to dictate to
thee what thou ought to do. Consider again what thy behavior is in time
of health and strength, in time of Peace, when thou live in abundance of all
things. See how far short thou art of performing what in those times thou
would do, and in the same measure thou with-holdest the Truth in
unrighteousness; in such measure thou imprisonest it, for that declares what
light is in thee.

Take a survey of one or two days, go through the actions that pass by thee
in the same, see what evil thou have done, and what good thou have omitted,
and say thus, Might not I have forborne this evil, if I would have set my
self to do it? Might not I have performed this duty, if I would have gone
about it? and let this humble thee. For this cause I have chosen this Text,
that you might be driven out of your selves; and why should you be backward in
it, seeing it is the first step to Salvation? And so much shall serve for this
third use.

Fourthly, Use 4.
if this be the case and miserable Condition wherein every man is before
Regeneration, Consider the danger of disobeying the Truth.
to withold the Truth in unrighteousness: Then take heed of putting thy
self into that Condition, consider the danger of disobeying this Truth, of
offending it, of doing any thing contrary to it, of restraining and curbing it,
for it is of that nature, that if thou offendest it, it will offend thee. It is
a Truth that God has set in thy heart, and appointed it to rule there, if thou
oppose it, and set up usurpers, he will do as Iehojada did, that set up the
right King, he will even set up this Truth at the day of death to accuse thee,
and to reign over thee as a Tyrant. It sits in thy Conscience, it marks what
is done amiss, and will be assuredly revenged, for every rebellion, and
offense committed against it, as it is said of Truth in general, Magna est
veritas and praevalet, if thou be for the Truth, it will be for thee, and if
thou be against it, it will be against thee, and it has God on its side, it is
attended with the wrath of the Almighty, who will be ready to execute upon thee
whatsoever this Truth shall allege against thee, though he does it not
presently, yet all the while thou art in the way to Damnation, as it was with
Judas and Achitophel. Therefore be sure to keep this Truth well, that thou
offend it not; as thou art tender over thy weak stomach, to give what
contents it, to avoid what may offend it, and then it shall be as a continual
feast to thee, otherwise it shall be as a sick stomach to thee, that do what
thou will, yet whether walking or sitting still, it will trouble thee: So this
Truth thou will not be able to deceive, it will see what is amiss, whether
thou will or no: 2 Cor. 4.2. says the Apostle, We commend our selves to every
man's Conscience in the sight of God, by manifestation of the Truth: That is,
the Conscience within will see thee through, do what thou can, there will be
an agreement between it, and the Truth that is presented to it, it cannot but
observe all the obliquities of thy life, all thy errors, thou can not
deceive it, nor long shake it off.

But, Object.
it may be objected, May not a man observe this Truth too much, May not a man
be too scrupulous.
may he not be too scrupulous, too careful in regarding it?

I answer, Answ.
the Conscience may mistake, and give that charge that it ought not; but as we
say of Thistles, they are a bad weed, but it is a sign of a good ground where
they grow; so though scrupulousness be not good, yet it is a sign of a good
heart where it is. If a man be to go through a narrow passage, or over a narrow
bridge, it is good to go in the midst; so it is good not to be scrupulous, and
yet not to give it offense, for if thou do withold it, imprison it, or
restrain it, thou shall find it will be revenged on thee, for it is attended
with the wrath of God.

Fifthly, Use 5.
if this be the miserable Condition of all unregenerate men, Give the Truth
leave to rule.
thus to withold the Truth in unrighteousness. As there have been words of
Humiliation and reproof, so let me shut up with a word of exhortation. Be
exhorted therefore from hence to give this Truth leave to rule and govern in
thy heart, and life; do not make a bancke against it, or an hedge about it,
restrain it not, fetter it not, but suffer it to walk freely in every part of
thy conversation, to rectify and reform every faculty, speech, and action,
for so it ought to do; and, as I said before, thou shall find it a dangerous
thing to restrain it.

Among men, he that imprisons one whom he should not, The danger of restraining
it.
runs into a Praemunire, and forfeits all he has. Commonly we fail both these
ways, we give Lusts liberty, which should be restrained; and imprison Truth,
which should be at liberty, therefore our judgment shall be accordingly. For
letting thy lusts go at liberty, take heed lest God say to thee, as he did to
Ahab for letting King Benhadad go, Thy life shall be for his life: lest on the
other side by imprisoning the Truth you forfeit all things, and God take
advantage of your forfeiture. Since the fall of Adam, man does turn all things
upside down, according to that which is complained of those Prophets, They did
slay the souls of them that should live, and gave life to the souls that
should die. So do men, the Truth that should live they slay, and the lust that
should die, they give life unto: But you know what Gods judgment was on them,
Ezekiel. 13. He would destroy both the dawber and the wall of untempered mortar.
God requires at thy hands that thou give account of the Authority committed to
thee, and take heed of abusing it. If the King send a Privy Counselor, or a
great man about him to reveal his will, to express his commandment in this
or that particular, that so men may know it, and be free from the danger of the
Law; if a man, in stead of obeying it, imprison him, how will the King take it
at his hands? What then will God do in this case? He has put his Truth into
the hearts of men, he has sent his messengers to show his will, that this he
will have done: If thou imprison this Truth, be assured, God will not hold thee
guiltless, therefore let it have liberty, let it rule and reign in thy heart,
let it do what it will.

This benefit thou shall have, The benefit of setting it at liberty.
Thou sets it at liberty, and it shall set thee at liberty, Ioh. 8.32. If you
continue in my words, etc. the Truth shall From what? or what great benefit
has a man by this freedom? a benefit unspeakable, thou shall be free from the
fear of Death, from the hands of all thine Enemies, to serve God in holiness
and righteousness, from the fear of Judgment, from the fear of hell, from
the guilt, and punishment of sin, from the rule and tyranny of sin, and is not
this to be desired?

Again, if thou set this at liberty, if thou will much more the practice, if
thou will let it go at liberty, if it may pacify, and purify thy heart, if
thou be much in contemplating thy privileges in Christ, thou shall find the
sweet of it. And so I may say of love, and patience, and every grace: Knowledge
of things is like W^ne or Cordials standing on the table, thou can view them,
and look on them then, and have them presented to thee, but if thou feed on
them by practice, how do they warm thy spirits, and quicken thee, and put
life into thee, if they be digested, and distributed into all the parts, into
all the faculties, (for that is digesture) till they turn to flesh and blood,
and spirits, as it were, then thou shall find their sweetness, even more than
any man can express, who himself has not felt it.

Object.
But now all the question is, how shall a man be able to do this? It may be
many will be ready to say, I could be content to do it, but I am not able; I
have many good purposes and desires, and am willing to practice what I know,
but I am weak in performance.

Answ.
I will only point to the heads, by these means thou shall do it. Means how
to set the Truth at liberty.


First, thou must seek to God, beseech him Prayer.
in thy self, that if thou go about it by thine own strength, thou shall
lose thy labor: In his own strength no man shall be strong, it is Gods power
must do it, Psalm. 119.22. I will run the way of thy Commandments, when thou
shall enlarge my heart. David had this Truth, but it was not in his power to
set it at liberty; therefore he goes to God, acknowledg^s his own
insufficiency, desires God to enlarge his heart, and when he has set it at
liberty, the harshnesse will be taken off, and thou will run freely the way of
Gods Commandments. The like is in 2 Cor. 10.4. The weapons of our warfare are
mighty* but how? Through God to bring down the strong holds, in our hearts,
these be strong holds in men, certain reasons in the understanding, certain
lusts in the will and affections, and these cannot be beaten down by all the
wit in the world, and all understanding that thou can learn out of any
Moral Writer, or the Scriptures themselves; but there is a power through God
to do it, to bring down these strong holds, to bring all into subjection;
therefore go to God, beg it earnestly, and let him give thee no denial.

Secondly, Practice the Truth.
as thou must go to him, so thou must do something thy self, thou must
practice thy self, and the more thou do so, the more thou shall be set at
liberty; the more thou set thy self to work, the more ground thou shall
get, the more Truth will be enlarged; as it is in marble, the more you rub it,
the more it will shine; so the more this Truth is used, the brighter it will be
in our actions; the more thou put it in practice, the more power shall thou
have in thy life, as Christ says, If ye believe my sayings, ye shall
understand my words, Therefore, if you will have this power, be doing, have a
good Conscience, for that is the seal of this Truth. How did Paul do to give
this Truth liberty to rule in his life? Why, says he, I exercise my self to
keep a good Conscience, that is, If I knew any thing that was to be done, I
set my self about it; and as the Musician by often practicing his lesson, or
as one that writes, by practicing his hand does increase his skill: So in these
Truths, the more thou do, the more thou may do, letting them lie still
extinguishes them, and for that God often gives men up to a reprobate sense, On
the other side, if thou do use them, doubt not but God will delight to
enlarge them. As in other Talents, laboring to improve them, is the way to
increase them.

Communion Saints.
Again, add this to it: The Communion of Saints you shall find a great means
to enlarge this Truth, and to set it at liberty; by walking with the wise, you
will be more wise, and what is said of Wisdom, may be said of Truth, for they
are the same: Saul, when he was among the Prophets, had a spark of the Spirit
of Prophecy, which though it was but a common action in a wicked man, yet this
spark of a natural and common gift of the Spirit, Saul had when he came among
the Prophets. It is the Apostles direction, Provoke one another to love and
good works: As one soldier encourages another, and a fast goer stirs up
one that is slow; so good Company whets Graces. On the other side, ill Company
imprisons the Truth: If thou will keep company with them that are not good,
thou must correspond with them, and this will cause thee to choke this Truth,
for many times thou can not do duties without shame, because thou can not
hold in with them, and with duty too. It is not for nothing that David uses
that phrase, Psalm. 119.115. Away from me ye evil doers, for I will keep the
Commandments of my God: As if he had said, When I go about to keep the
Commandments of God, if I have Company about me that is not good, they will
be a bar unto me, and as fetters to my soul; so that it is true both ways:
the company of Saints enlarges Truth, the other straitens it. Saint Paul and
others were good men, yet when they were mistaken in that, you shall see what a
fetter it was: When Saint Paul was to go to Jerusalem to preach the Gospel of
CHRIST, Act. 21.13.
they at Cesarea wept, and wailed, desiring to stay him; But, says he, What
do you breaking mine heart? You may see by that speech they were a great
Impediment to him: And as CHRIST said to Saint Peter, Get thee behind me Satan:
And as David said to the sons of Zerviah, 2 Samuel 16.10. What have I to do
with you ye sons of Zerviah, when they advised him to take off Shemei his
head: So if you would have the Truth to have liberty, take heed of ill company.
As James says of refraining the Tongue, I am. 1.26. He that refraineth not his
tongue, his Religion is in vain: So we may say of Company, He that looks not
to his Company, his Religion is in vain, he shall find it so, for this Truth
will never be at liberty, except it be among them, among whom it will have its
liberty.

The end of the Sixth Sermon.
CERTAIN SERMONS UPON HVMILIATION. The Seventh SERMON.
ROMANS 1.19, 20. Forasmuch as that which may be known of God, is manifest in
them, for God has showed it unto them.

For the invisible things of him, that is, his eternal power and Godhead are
clearly seen by the creation of the world, being considered in his works, to
the intent that they should be without excuse.


WE have purposed still to go on in this point of Humiliation, and then, God
willing, we will proceed to that of Justification, which we promised to handle.

These words do second the former, which we have gone through, The wrath of God
is revealed from heaven, etc. The Apostle having set this down, has two
things to prove: First, that there is such a Truth revealed. Secondly, That
they withold it in unrighteousness: Both which he proves in the sequel of
this Chapter. That there is such a Truth, proved four ways.


First, there is such a Truth revealed to men, for (says he) That that may be
known of God is; that is, there is a certain portion of Truth, a certain
measure of knowledge which God has made-knowne to every man; indeed there be
different measures, but to every one some measure is given, set forth by the
Author thereof, God (says he) has showed it to them. Secondly, it is set
forth more particularly by the thing that is revealed: And thirdly, by the
means whereby it is revealed: Fourthly, by the end.



Thirdly, will you know the means how it is revealed? It is revealed by his
works, and chiefly by the creation of the world. Object.


But, you will object, his eternal power and Godhead are invisible, shut up
from the view of men, how shall men do to see and understand these things,
Answ.
seeing they are so remote?

(Says he) They are known by the things that are seen: You may see the
world, you may see the works of his providence; these things run into the
senses, and by these they are known: As the soul of a man is a thing in it
self invisible, but yet you may see it by the motions of the body, the effects
of the soul in the body, this the senses are capable of; so the invisible
things of God are known by the things that are seen.

Last of all, this is set out by the end, wherefore GOD has done this, the end
is, that they may be without excuse: And so far he proves the first part, that
there is a Truth revealed to men.

In the next words he comes to prove, That they withold the Truth in
unrighteousness.
That they withold the Truth in unrighteousness; For they knew God, but they
glorified him not as God, and not negatively only, but affirmatively also,
Their foolish hearts are full of darkness, they became vain in their
imaginations.

But, Object.
they were wise men, Grecians, Athenians, men excelling in wisdom all other,
how did they detain it, one would think they did enlarge it? It is true, they
were wise in their own conceit; but thinking themselves wise, they became
fools, how does that appear? They turned the glory of the incorruptible God,
into the image of corruptible man, etc. So much for the scope of the words.

We will not run to every particular, because this is a place of Scripture
on which we mean not to dwell, but these three points we intend to handle out
of these two verses. In the handling of which, you shall see all these
particulars will be brought in: The first is, That that Law, or Truth, or
Knowledge, by which every man shall be judged, is made manifest by God
himself. Secondly, The works of God, or the Creation, are the means by which
he has made it known. Thirdly, They are so much made known to every man, as
will make him inexcusable.


Doct. 1.
To begin with the first, I say, That truth, or that Law, That Truth or Law, or
knowledge, by which every man shall be judged, is made manifest by God himself.
or that knowledge, by which every man shall be judged at the last day, is made
evident to him by God himself. In this proportion you must mark three things:

First, what it is that is made known; It is that Law or Truth, What this
Truth is. (...).
by which every man shall be judged, the word in the original^, is, (...), That
which may be known of God, that is, there is a certain measure and portion of
Truth, which God disposes and reveals to men, to some one measure, to some
another measure, and according to the measure of Truth he must conform
himself, and for breaking that rule only, he shall be condemned at the last
day: The Gentiles have one measure of Truth, the Jews have a greater measure,
but Christians, to whom the Gospel is revealed, have the greatest measure of
Truth given them: Again, some Christians that live under better Ministeries,
they whose education is better, they have more Truth than others: Now seeing he
says it is made manifest, the meaning is, every man has a measure, and that
is to be made manifest; as light when it comes into a room, it shows all the
glory, all the beauty and deformity round about, it shows the right way and
the wrong way, if you come to the light, all things are made manifest now,
which were covered, when you were in darkness: thus God enlightens men, he
kindles a certain light in their mind (for so the word signifies) he puts a
light into their hearts, by which they are able to judge of that which is good
and evil, of that which is agreeable to his will, and contrary to his will; of
that which is the way to happiness, and that which is not; and this is made
known.

The second thing to be marked in this proposition, How it is made known.
is, to show, how it is made known; you see that the thing is made known to
us: Not it is made known to us these four ways: Four ways.
First, By the light of Nature.
it is made known to us by the light of Nature, God has written the Law in
their hearts, Romans 2.15. They show the effects of the Law, which Law is written
in their hearts, that is, God has implanted it there, God has written it
there, he has fastened it there, he has revealed to men some Truths: but the
question will be how it shall be known that God has done so; why (says he)
you shall know it by the effects, every man, even Heathens, though they have
not come to the knowledge of the Scripture, ye^ they have the Law written in
their hearts, for they do the things contained in the Law, their actions show
it, they could not do these things, if they had not the Law written in their
hearts. Again, their consciences accuse and excuse. Again, it is seen by
their judging of others, for in judging of others, they judge themselves, and
make it evident, that they do know, though they do not practice, and so it is
revealed by the Law of Nature. By Gods works.
Secondly, God makes it known by his works, specially, by the creation of the
world, by his works of Providence, which be ordinary, and extraordinary, as
miracles, that is, when a man looks on the great volume of the world, there
those things which God will have known, are written in capital letters, and
such letters as every one may understand and read; so as that which the
Papists say of Images, they are Laymens books, and ignorant men's books; so
(and in a much better sense) this Book of the world is the Heathen man's book,
wherein he may see there is a God, and his eternal power, and wherein all men
may see what they ought to do to this God. By the Scriptures.
Thirdly, it is manifest by the Scriptures, Ioh. 5.39. says Christ, Search the
Scriptures, for therein you think to have eternal life, and they testify of
me: This is out of question, that the Scriptures testify of GOD, they make GOD
known to men. By the Saints.
Lastly, it is made known by the Saints, as in the same Chapter, Ioh. 5. John
bare witness of me, and what is said of John, may be said of others, the
Saints bear witness of God. Therefore in the second to the Philippians, they
are said to shine as lights in the world, that is, they make God known to men:
So by these four ways God makes it known, namely by the Law of Nature:
Secondly, by his works. Thirdly, by the Scriptures. Fourthly, by the faithful
that live in the world. The two first make it known to the Heathen; the two
last to them within the Church, that is, the faithful, and these be the means
by which it is evident.


Now the third thing to be observed, It is God that makes this Truth evident.
is, That it is God that makes this Truth evident; This is enough to prove
that it is God, because it is universally done, go to all Nations, to savage
men, that seem to be most remote from the light, that come not near any
means of the knowledge of the Truth, yet these men believe there ^s a God,
every man, without exception, does so; now where there is an universal effect,
it must needs come from an universal cause; therefore from God himself.

Now this is not added in vain, Hence these Consectaries may be deduced.
but this you may observe in that it comes from God.

First, if it come from God, it is not a deceiveable rule, it is not a fancy,
but a firm Truth

Again, if God make it known, it is not done

Again, if God have made it known, then it is a thing you must take heed to,
you must not



Use 1.
Now we will come to make use of it: First, if there be such a Truth made known
to men by God himself; To show the heinousness of men's sins against this
Truth.
then learn hence to aggravate your sins, to know the greatness of the
guilt of your sins: Hence we may learn to know, that the looseness and
licentiousness men take to themselves against this Truth is more desperate,
and heinous, and inexcusable: for God himself has made it known to them: For
every precept of men is of more or less moment, according to the quality of
the Author, the Law is to be valued according to the person that gives the Law,
therefore men's Laws are of some moment, but Gods Laws are of more moment:
This Truth is most pressed in Scripture, when CHRIST preaches the Word, he
says, every sin is increased that is committed against this Word: When Jonas
came to Niniveh, it had been a great sin if they had not repented, God would
have visited them for neglecting the word of Jonas, but a greater than Jonas is
here, says Christ: So the Queen of the South came to hear the wisdom of
Solomon, but a greater than Solomon is here: That is, every sin committed
against this Truth, is out of measurable sinful. Therefore, if they that
break Moses Law shall die under two or three witnesses, how shall they escape
that neglect so great Salvation, which began to be preached by the Lord
himself? He has made it known; therefore it is a fearful thing to neglect
it. Therefore you may see what an Emphasis God puts on that, Have thou eaten of
the tree, of which I bade thou should not eat? As if he had said, the thing
is a small matter in it self, yet it being the Commandment of the great GOD,
I have commanded it, and thou did neglect it, therefore thou shall die the
death.

And there is good reason for it, if we consider it, if God gives the Law it
is his; now Saul, In that thou have cast me away, I will cast thee away. And so
siath Christ to his Disciples, Whatsoever is done against you, is done against
me; it is terminated in me: Therefore, think when you shall come to die, or to
any case of extremity, and God shall speak to your consciences and tell you,
Thou have broken the Law I gave thee, thou have rebelled against me, thou have
given thy members as weapons of unrighteousness against me, now I will be
avenged of thee, thou shall know I am Just, thou shall know who it is that thou
have offended, this is no small matter. If we Ministers come and tell you, you
must not swear, but your yea, must be yea, and your nay, nay, and whatsoever
more is evil; you must swear no kind of oaths, if we tell you, you must not
dissemble, not lie, not keep vain company, not mispend your Talents, not
restrain prayer from the Almighty, if we tell you this, it is no small matter
to neglect it, it being the Commandment of God; do not say of sin as you
were wont, Indeed it is a fault, and I would I could do otherwise, but seeing
they be sins against God, know what it is to sin against the Judge of all
the world, this will make thee think of sin in another manner. Therefore in
your sins labor to fix your eyes on God, and it will aggravate sin. As
David in the one and fiftieth Psalm says, Against thee, against thee only
have I sinned, repeating it twice in that place; he composed that Psalm to set
forth his sin, but that which wounded his conscience, that made him see the
heinousness of his sin was this, Against thee I have sinned: So the
Prodigal son, this is the circumstance by which he aggravates his sin,
Against heaven and against thee I have offended: So learn to know that your
sins are against god, and therefore to press this Truth a little more.

Consider well with your selves, what is the

Again, what is the reason God should appoint but admire, and in heaven we
shall stand amazed at it; which evidences the greatness of sin: Learn to
know this, put al these four together, and see how these do hold
correspondencie one with another, and you shall find out the nature of your
sin.

First, consider the greatness of God his infiniteness, the greatness of his
Authority, the wonderful vast Sovereignty he has over all creatures; from
this greatness of God, comes the second, the greatness of sin, I have made
known this Truth, but thou have withheld it, thence it comes that sin is
so great, that the least sin which thou make nothing of, is a thing of so
great moment. That is the second, which follows on the greatness of God.

Thirdly, upon the greatness of sin, you see the greatness of the
punishment; if such an one as Aristotle, or a stranger from the Truth should
hear of this punishment (the greatness whereof appears herein, that the
worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched,) how would he wonder at it? but
knitting these together it will not seem strange.

Last of all, the greatness of the punishment causes the greatness of such a
Mediator, to take away this punishment and sin: So there is a correspondencie
in them, come from God to sin, from sin to the punishment, from punishment to
the Mediation or redemption, by which this sin is taken away. Learn
therefore to know what sin is, I know not a truth of greater moment. And to all
add that, 1 Cor. 15.56. The sting of death is sin: If you look on death, it
is the most terrible thing in the world: You know what the Philosopher said of
it, of all terrible things, it is the most terrible, the most fearful, but sin
is the sting of death: As if he had said, Death is a small thing in comparison
of sin; let a man want sin, and death is nothing, it is but sleep, it is
nothing to have the body and soul separated. Again, suppose there were no
death, but let body and soul remain together, yet sin is a terrible thing, it
is above all the Terrors in the world, as in Judas, see his Terrors, though
there was no death on him; see Adam when he was not in Hell, but in Paradise,
yet how was he Tormented with his sin. Therefore weigh not sin in a wrong
balance, look not on it with a wrong light, take heed of being deceived, for
in this of all other things men are most apt to be deceived: That is the
corruption of Nature, that strange darkness is brought on men by Adam, that in
the thing that most concerns him, which is sin, in that he is most ignorant,
most apt to be deceived: Therefore when the Apostle speaks of sin, he comes in
still with this caution, Be not deceived, 1 Cor. 6.9. Be not deceived, neither
Fornicatour, nor Idolaters, nor adulterers, etc. shall inherit the kingdom of
God; as if men in that were most apt to be deceived: So Ephesians. 5.6. Be not
deceived, for, for such things the wrath of God comes on the children of
disobedience: And observe when Christ goes about to show to any man, or to any
Church what their sins are, or what their danger is, he adds this, Let him
that has an ear hear, what the Spirit says to the Churches, his end being
to tell them of their sin, still that comes in, He that has an ear to hear,
let him hear: As if he had said, when I come to speak of matter of sin, there
be many here that can tell what I say, that can understand me well, but few
have ears to understand indeed. As when the Prophet came to Jeroboam, he heard
the Prophet so as it angered him, he knew what his sin was, but he heard it not
to purpose: So when Christ pronounces a woe to the Scribes and Pharisees, they
heard it well enough, but they had not an ear to hear it to purpose: Men may
hear what flesh and common reason, and common men say of sin, but not what the
Spirit says of it, there is another kind of sinfulness in sin, which is the
spiritual evil of sin, and what the Spirit says of this they do not hear:
Therefore you must even be brought to Christ, as the deaf man was, who being
both deaf and dumb, was brought to Christ, that he might lay his hands on
him, now Christ put his finger into his ears and says, Ephata, be thou
opened, and then the man heard and spoke; so of all men that hear this Word,
there is not a man but he is deaf, according to this inward kind of hearing:
therefore you must be brought to Christ, and beseech him to give you ears to
hear; for few has ears to hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches,
when it discovers their sin and misery: Therefore, let not this Doctrine be in
vain to you, but learn from hence to humble your selves, to come to God, and
say to him, Lord, I am now amazed and confounded, I thought before losses and
crosses were great matters, but now I see they are but flea-bitings to sin, I
was heretofore troubled at a small cross, but little or nothing at sin; Lord,
I confess, this was my case, but I see now sin is another thing: Thus we
should learn to humble our selves before God.

But, if any object; Object.
This is the way to discourage men, to make them desperate, to make them fly
from Religion by telling them sin is so terrible?

I answer, Answ.
it is not the way to discourage men from coming to Christ, but to encourage
them and drive them to him; This is the way to Salvation: Indeed, if there were
no remedy for sin, it were a desperate case, but there is a remedy, if you will
but see this sin of yours, and mourn for it, for all that mourn in Sion,
and are broken hearted, shall be comforted: Therefore you must know, there is a
passive sorrow for sin, when God shall affright a man with the Terror of his
wrath, and that is a flash of hell fire: if our end were only to kindle these
sparks, it were indeed to breed Torture in the soul; but there is an active
humiliation, when a man labors to be convinced of his sin, to know all he can
against himself, and this is it which leads to life; for this is the end of
our preaching, the end of our discovering of sin. And this use you may make of
the heinousness of sin; and so much shall serve for the first use.

Use 2.
Secondly, if there be such a truth, such a knowledge made evident by God
himself, Be thankful for the Truth.
then men should learn hence to be thankful to God for it: for whereas all men
might have perished as the Devils did, as the Angels that fell did, yet God
has showed this mercy to mankind, he has given them Secundam Tabulam post
naufragium, and that is this light, which is the thing which you have cause to
be thankful for; for this light is worth all the world beside, nothing is so
precious, because it shows the way to escape Hell and damnation; therefore you
ought to be thankful to God for it: You specially that live under the
Sunshine of the Gospel; you must think you might have been borne in other
ages, when darkness covered the world, or in another Nation, and not in
Goshen, where the light shines; and if in the Church, you might have been
ignorant, as many of our Country people are, even almost as ignorant as Turks
and Jews, but when God has discovered light in great measure, and has given
a great portion thereof to you; you must know all this is not come to pass by
accident, but by Gods providence; you are to take notice of it, and learn to
be thankful, not in show only, but indeed and in truth, that is, by practicing
according to the knowledge you have, for it is a thing most precious, Mat. 7.6.
An Admonition is compared to a pearl, whereas the admonition is but one part
of this light, and what is said of a part, may be said of the whole. Solomon
could not find a fit thing to compare this Wisdom to: It is more precious
than pearls, nay all that can be named or desired cannot be compared with it:
Therefore seeing it is a precious thing, trample not these pearls under your
feet: know that God has put a price into thine hand, and that is thy light,
and it is a price that will buy heaven, it will bring thee to salvation; but if
thou want an heart (as the fool has a price, but he wants an heart) it
will do thee no good: take heed thou do not neglect it, do not abuse it, take
not the grace of God in vain, but see thou use this light; When the great
promise of Christ his coming was made, what was it but this, that they should
have a new light, that the people that sat in darkness and in the shadow of
death, should see a light they never saw before: you that live in this light,
that enjoy that which was so many years ago promised to the Gentiles, and is
now fulfilled; take heed of abusing it, use it to the purpose for which it is
given, that is, to guide your feet into the way of peace.

Again, Use 3.
thirdly, to join that with it: As you must be thankful, Do nothing contrary
to the Truth.
so in the third place, you must take heed of doing any thing contrary to this
Truth, it is a very dangerous thing to neglect it. There is not a spark of it,
not a beam of this light, which is conveyed to you by the ministry of the
Gospel, which shall be in vain, Though you do not prize it, it shall set you
a step nearer heaven or hell, even every spark and beam of this; and this
is it which may make men afraid, and look about them, seeing that when this
light is made known, it is so dangerous to neglect it: Therefore think this,
when God has sent a right Ministry, Consider who has sent this light; God
has done it, and will GOD send a vain m^ssage? A wise man will not do so; if
then God send it not in vain, it is to some purpose, to do either good or
hurt; Now suppose that this light have done you no good, that you have lived
long under this light, but have attained no good, you have known much, but
practiced little, then know this shall exceedingly increase your condemnation.
Paul says, We thank God that he has caused us to triumph in JESUS CHRIST, in
making manifest the savor of his knowledge in every place. What is the reason
he should rejoice that this was made manifest, seeing to some it did no good?
Yes (says he) it shall increase their condemnation, it shall be the sweet
savor of God in them that are saved, and in them that perish. So when we
preach, if the light do you no good, it does you hurt: As Isaiah his
Commission was, Go, preach to this people, and shut their eyes, lest they
should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears; If we are not sent to
enlighten men, we are sent to make their hearts fat, and their ears heavy,
Thou shall do no good by thy ministry, yet I have sent thee, that they may
know there was a Prophet among them. Therefore take heed, you to whom this is
sent, that it be not sent only to this end, that it may be known there has
been a Prophet among you: Those to whom God has revealed much, let them know
it shall not be in vain; If the King send a Message, and men will obey it, so
it is, if not, if they make his authority worth nothing, he will elevate his
Authority, and will inflict a Penalty: So God sends not in vain, if you will
not obey him, God will not suffer any to slight his Authority, but he will be
surely revenged. Therefore take heed how you detain this Truth in
unrighteousness, that when GOD has discovered this knowledge, you do not
practice it.

But, Object.
every man will be apt to say, (and indeed they that are most guilty) but I
hope we do practice it, and not detain it?

Therefore I will set down (though not all, Answ.
yet) many of the Cases wherein they detain this Truth and withold it in
unrighteousness, Seven Cases, wherein men detain this Truth in
unrighteousness.
wherein they do not practice according to this knowledge, and these are seven
in number.

First, In the Commission of known sins.
in the Commission of all known sins, there you detain this Truth, there you
imprison it, whenever you find this to be your Case that you commit any
known sin, therein you are a detainer of the Truth, an imprisoner of it. As
for example, when a man shall know that these duties ought to be done, I ought
to pray fervently, and frequently, I ought to sanctify the Lords Sabbath, but
out of an unlistinesse to it, out of love to ease and pleasure, that carries
him another way, he neglects it, and so the duty lies undone: This is the
Commission of a known sin: So again, I know I ought not to remember an
injury, I ought to forgive mine Enemy, yet thou invitest him to do thee a new
injury, when this is known and not practiced, in this case men commit a known
sin; so again, do thou not know that thou ought not to use any
dalliance, any touch of uncleanness, any chambering or wantonness? if a man
know this, and yet will commit it, because his lusts intend his mind to such a
sin, and it is a thing to which he is strongly inclined, this is a known
sin; so in many other things, in cases of election, or in doing of businesses
this man ought to be chosen, and businesses ought to be carried thus, but yet
out of some by-respects, a man will have it carried otherwise, this is
committing of a known sin; so in case of Envy, this man's preferment may be
profitable, but because his eminency may be hurtful to me, I cannot affect
him, this is a known sin; so in Case of the Sacrament, do you not know you
ought to receive often, and not to neglect it in the Congregation where you
are? Are you not bound to that? You think it a sin not to hear the Word,
and is it not so, not to receive the Sacrament? If he shall be cut off that
came not to the Passover; shall not he be cut off that comes not to the
Sacrament? So you know you must renew your repentance; are not these Truths
known? and yet will you commit these sins? Go through any known sin, and in
this Case you do withold the Truth in unrighteousness. But what is it to
commit a known sin, because it may be I am not convinced sufficiently of that?
By this thou may know it if thou find thy Conscience to give a secret
intimation that it is naught, it is a sign it is a known sin, though thou
have got many Arguments for it, and can dispute for it; for thy Conscience
shall witness against thee: as in case of Usury and inordinate gain, and
matters of the Sabbath, many of which things be in question; see what thy
Conscience says, and take heed of disobeying the secret intimations of thy
Conscience, whatsoever thou have to say for thy sin before men: Men think a sin
not to be a known sin, because they are not willing to search it out: Now if
thou find this to be thy Case, that thou art not willing to search it out, to
see all that can be said for it, or against it, thou shall find it a known
sin: And this is a notable difference between the faithful and others. A
godly man whose heart is set to serve God with a perfect heart in all things;
there is nothing that comes under the name of a sin, nothing that has the
shadow of a sin, but he is willing to search it out, to examine it to the full,
he is willing to let all say, what they can against it, and when all is done,
he desires God to try him: Another is not willing to search, because he is
willing to lie in some sin, or because he will not have his Conscience troubled
with it, This is a sign of a false heart, though they do not know that this
is a sin, yet it having the shadow of a sin, and they being unwilling to
examine it to the full, it shows it is no less.

Case 2.
Secondly, the second Case wherein a man withholds this knowledge, In
unwillingnesse to increase a man's Knowledge.
and detaines this Truth which God has made manifest, is when he is not
willing to enlarge it; a man that has already some knowledge (as every man
has some) and is not willing to add to this knowledge, to increase it, that
man properly withholds the Truth in unrighteousness: For he that withholds
fuel, puts out the fire, as well as he that casts water on it, and he that
takes away food from a living Creature, kills it, as well as he that takes away
its life with violence; so if thou do not feed this with fuel, with that
which may make it grow and increase, if thou do not labor to enlarge it,
thou do extinguish it.

Two sorts of those.
And of these men there be two sorts.

First, such as do not care for any knowledge they be ever learning, and never
come to the knowledge of the truth: These be the first sort of men.

But there is a second sort, and that is those Felix (he went not far, but I
use it as a resemblance) when Paul preached, and began to know some measure of
this Truth, when some of these sparks began to be revived and stirred up in
him, he bade him go away, and said, he would call for him another time, but he
was not so good as his word; so when a man is loath to be brought to that
strictness and exactness that is required as our duty, when he is not willing
to be strait laced, that lives at liberty, and thinks he will do it before he
dies, but puts it off, this man imprisons the Truth; when the Truth is brought
to their doors, to such an high degreee that it is almost loose, yet they let
it lie there still; when they shall come to Agrippa's Case, to be almost a
Christian, this is to withold it, the uttermost end and finishing of the
work is all, and that is the reason men are so shie of it: So when we care not
for admonition to live exactly and perfectly in all things, when there shall be
little reservation, when we will have a little liberty in this or that* I say,
the not admitting of this, the not going through with the work, is an
imprisoning of the Truth: When men shall come to be unwilling to be called on,
it is as if a man shut the door, and draw the curtens about him, it shows
that he delights to sleep, that he means to sleep, and to continue so; when
a man puts off the Truth, and will not be brought to the uttermost, this is the
second way of imprisoning the Truth, when he is not willing to add fuel, to
give that which may strengthen and increase it.

Thirdly, I will name but the third, and that is when a man is past this
degree, Case 3.
and is come to be willing to know all Truths, In not acting and practicing the
Truth, by the use of means.
does not desire to have any concealed from him, does not say to the Prophets,
prophecy not, but is willing to be informed to the full, yet when he has it
he acts it not, he does not exercise, nor practice this Truth: That is another
degree of withholding it. And this is a frequent Case; for a man may know and
be informed in all Truths, yet they may lie there unused, and unacted, they may
lie there idle: Now when a man is not willing to practice the means by which
these Truths are used, he does properly withold the Truth in
unrighteousness: As for example, the way to act the Truths we have to stir
them up, to blow up these coals, to bring them to present memory, so as they
may be brought to present practice, is the Communion of Saints, the company of
holy men, that when a man has forgot, godly company may bring to mind again;
so frequent reading and hearing these do act the Truth; for the end of our
ministry is not only to make you to know these things, but to bring those
things to mind which you have forgot; if we will not use, but neglect the
means of acting the Truth, then we withold it. So for private prayer,
whereas a man should bring his heart to God every day, should do it thoroughly,
should call himself to a reckoning for every sin, for all sorts, of Omissions,
or of Commissions, this is a means to act this Truth, this good purpose and
inclination, this spark which God has kindled, were it not for this, they
would be raked up in the ashes again; now performing prayer in a devout and
fervent manner, does liven them, whereas to do things for fashion, or to
satisfy natural conscience, and not thoroughly, is to neglect them; so that
when a man does not practice, not exercise the Truths he has (as the very
exercise quickens them again) when he does neglect any of the means by which
these coals are blown up, by which these Truths are to be stirred up, he
properly imprisons the Truth.

Let no man say, Object.
But when a man imprisons a thing, he bars the door, but to let the Truth
lie is a matter of negligence, how is it then an imprisoning?

Yes, Answ.
it is an imprisoning, a surprising of it, as it is with fire, if it have not a
vent, though you cast no water upon it, yet you put it out; as on the contrary
side, if you give it vent, you increase it; so you are guilty in this Case of
murdering the Truth, of putting it out: As in any Art that a man learnes, if he
let his Art or Trade lie still and unused, he forgets it, so these Truths are
extinguished, when a man is not diligent in using all means of grace. The
receiving of the Sacrament is a means to quicken and Act these Truths; fasting
and prayer, when God calls for it, is a means to quicken them; go through all
means which God has ordained to put us in mind of these Truths, and so far
as you neglect the means, so far you detain these Truths in
unrighteousness.

The end of the Seventh Sermon.
CERTAIN SERMONS UPON HVMILIATION. The Eighth SERMON.
ROMANS 1.19, 20. Forasmuch as that which may be known of God, is manifest in
them, for God has showed it unto them.

For the invisible things of him, that is, his eternal power and Godhead are
clearly seen by the creation of the world, being considered in his works, to
the intent that they should be without excuse.


THe fourth Case wherein we withhold this truth in unrighteousness, Case 4.
In suffocating, and suppressing it.
and imprison it, is, when we directly suppress it, when we do indeed
suffocate it, when we do this of purpose, this is an evident Case, when a man
not only withdrawes fuel, when he does not only not act it, neglecting the
means, but Two ways.
As for example, when God shall kindle a good spark in any man's heart, and put
in a good motion, not only reveals, but stirs up some Truths which concern
his salvation, and he does endeavor to put it out, to quench it, and labors
to lay that truth asleep, and is glad when by any means he can forget it,
lest it should trouble him, this is a great suppessing of the Truth, and by
this we not only suppress this Truth, but we do harden our own hearts
exceedingly; as in iron, when we quench it, we do not only put out the fire,
but harden the Iron: so when God stirs up many Truths (as it is in hearing the
Word, in apprehension of death, in suffering some calamity in a good mood) the
putting out of these does harden the heart. Therefore, when a man shall have
good purposes, and think with himself, I will now begin to be another man,
and to change my courses, and yet shall go into ill company, such as it may be
he has kept before; this is an evident suffocating of the Truth, a thing often
spoken of, and blame me not that I speak of it again; for it is the great
quench-coale of Religion, a man cannot prosper therein, if he look not to his
company, because it is as a continual dropping on a firebrand, which will be
sure to put out the light, and life and grace which one has. Chrysostom
compares ill company to putting in of swine, when a man has planted an Orchard
with tender Plants, when he has sowed it, and the corn, or whatsoever it is,
appears, leave the hedge open, and let the swine come in, and they will
overturne all by the roots: So when we Ministers have sowed the Seed, and it
begins to grow, a little to put forth, when ill company come in they spoil
all, they mar all, they pull up all by the roots, so that we have lost our
labor, it is indeed so effectual to keep down the Seed, and to make us
imprison the Truth.

Again, custom in sin, giving your selves liberty

And herein you must observe a notable difference between men that live godly,
and others; the godly when they fall into sin, it is so far from putting out
this Truth, that it helps it forward, for their falls do but discover such
sins, and so it causes them to search themselves, by which means they find
out that to be in them, which they never knew of before, it may be it is
Covetousness, or it may be Envy, one thing or other is discovered, and when it
is discovered, there is a winnowing of themselves, they see there is dross,
and when they see it, they labor to purge it by repentance: It is quite
contrary with the other the more they fall into sin, the more they suffocate
the Truth, their falling into sin, gives sin more ground, it makes them more in
love with sin, it is the more prevalent against them, the more they delight in
it; so that every sin is like the Sea, getting ground of the Land, which they
know not how to recover: So this is the fourth way by frequent quenching of
good motions, by ill company, and falling into sin, they do harden their
hearts, and so suffocate and quench this Truth.

Case 5.
The fifth way is, when we do not remove the impediments, In removing
impediments.
which if they were taken away, the Truth would rise and show it self, for
that is it, that keeps down the Truth; God has written it plain enough on
men's hearts, but when we let dust and soil lie on it, we cannot read it: This
Idleness and Laziness suffering these impediments to lie on you, to cover the
Truth in you, is to withold the Truth. Therefore, Seneca has a notion in
this Case, though he was an Heathen; the soul of man, were it free from
passions and distractions, and were quiet, Truth should be seen clearly, as
you see a penny, or a stone in a clear river, so Truth would appear: Do but
remove the impediments that commonly rise from us, and which Satan injects, and
this Truth will show it self: for these words (they withold the Truth) show
that the Truth is ready enough of it self to come forth.

Now there be certain impediments which we remove not, and they are these two;
either business, and from thence proceeds fear, and care, and grief, or else
recreations, and the pleasures and joys that come from them, one of these two
are always the impediments.

First, for business, when a man takes too much on him, even more than he is
able to weald, or does give himself to too much fear, and care, and grief,
which are contrary to this Truth, as Luke 1. it is the promise that we should
serve him in holiness and righteousness all our days without fear: But let
a man be filled with carnal fear, it suppresseth the Truth, and keeps it
down. So for Care, Philip. 4. Cast your care on God, for he cares for you;
and the peace of God which passes all understanding, shall keep your hearts
and minds in Christ Jesus: The meaning is, if you will care for your own
matters, pester your selves with Cares and perplexities, it will interrupt your
Communion with Christ Jesus, it will interrupt your peace, and if your peace,
then your Communion with Christ; therefore he exhorts them to cast their care
on Christ. So for Grief, it is a great hinderance, the Israelites could not
hearken to Moses for the anguish of their hearts, and he that minds things too
much, pierces himself through with sorrows, this was the thing that
suffocated the third ground, they were kept down, partly with care, and partly
with diverse lusts: Martha was troubled with many things: Therefore take heed of
too much business, or intending it too much, or inordinately.

Secondly, Sports, Pleasures, and Recreations, things wherein men delight too
much, these are impediments to the Truth, if any of these get predominancie in
your minds, they hinder this Truth, if you will set it at liberty, remove this
impediment; diverse lusts keep it down, as cares, as we may see in the third
ground: And Esaias 1. Woe be to you that laugh; If there were not something in
this inordinate mirth and jollity that keeps down the Truth, why should that
be added? and the removal of these Impediments is of great consequence. For
there may be many hundreds of men which, perhaps, have not so ill meanings with
them, yet are carried away with the tract of vanity, that are not so opposite
to the Truth, as forgetful of it, that do not so much resist it, as neglect
it, that yet keep down the truth. These men partly busied with cares, partly
intent on pleasures, death shall come upon them as a thief in the night, and
shall lead them captive to hell, because they held this Truth captive, which
had they set at liberty, it would have set them at liberty, free from death and
condemnation: That is the fifth Case.

The sixth Case wherein they withold this Truth in unrighteousness, Case 6.
is, when they have it, and do not use it, and communicate it to the good of
others, and herein many fail: As first, Ministers that have their charge, yet
do either Non residere, or segniter residere; but that concerns not this
Auditory: Therefore I will not meddle with it; but it concerns not only them,
but common Christians likewise: When men are converted, a charge lies on them
to endeavor to convert their brethren, they should labor to use this Truth, to
kindle it in others, the neglect thereof is a suppressing of it; for there is a
charge laid upon them, that according to their measure, in their sphere,
according to their callings, they should endeavor as much as they can to
enlarge this Truth: So likewise masters of families are bound to do it, shall
he be worse than an Infidel, that provides not food for his family, and
shall it not be a greater sin in him that provides not spiritual food? does it
not concern him in private, as well as the Minister in public? Was it not
that which God took special notice of in Abraham, I will not hide it from
Abraham, for he will instruct his family, and his sons, and they shall know
the ways of the LORD: Therefore, when they neglect this Charge, they withold
the Truth in unrighteousness: So Patrons of livings, if they do not their
part to bring faithful laborers into the Vineyard, and uphold them when they
are there, they withold the Truth in unrighteousness; for they hinder it,
though it be not their calling properly to bring forth fruit (for that is the
Ministers) yet it is their part to uphold them: It is the Vine that brings
forth the Grapes, but the Proppe is to hold it up: So it is the office of
Patrons to sustain Ministers in the Lords Vineyard: Likewise Lawyers and
Advocates have a charge to minister the Truth, not to cloak it: It is the
office of Justice, to rectify the Truth, and not to adulterate it, but to
inform rightly, and properly, when they do not discover the Truth, they do
withold the Truth, if they should not labor to do that, it were a hurtful
calling; but there is no calling that is not for the benefit of men, but if it
be thus used to conceal the Truth, it were hurtful, and not useful: so
likewise they that be Governors, Justices of Peace in the Country, they
withold this Truth, if they perform not their duties diligently for this
Truth: As it is committed to us Ministers to preach it, so it is committed to
you, that are Governors, to bring men into the obedience of it, you are to go
your way by the Sword, and by your Authority, for it is committed to your
keeping, as it is said of the great Magistrate, he is Custos utriusque tabulae;
you must look that Truth have his progress, as well as that the Commonwealth
suffers no detriment: Therefore let not your Authority lie as a Sword in a
scabbard, but let it be kept sharp, to cut down Popery, and whatsoever is an
Impediment to this Truth, and think it no small thing to neglect it; for
whatsoever sins are committed, which you have Authority to restrain, these
sins are put on your reckoning: Look on the first Epistle of Timothy, the
fifth Chapter, and the two and twentieth verse, Lay hands on no man suddenly
(says the Apostle) and be not partakers of another man's sins: If any be
under thee whom thou have to do with, if thou do not bring him in, and
restrain him, thou art partaker of his sins; you know what was said to Ahab,
Thy life shall go for his life; and you know that not to strike the Nocent, is
as abominable in Gods sight, as to strike the Innocent: Therefore take heed of
neglecting it, whether it be out of fear, (as that is one Impediment) or out
of negligence, Romans 12.8. Let them that rule do it diligently; let them that
give Alms do it cheerfully: As if that were a thing wherein givers are too
blame, that they do it not cheerfully and diligently: Therefore be you
diligent in your places, to set the Truth at liberty, to bring men into
subjection to it, so far as may be: And so much shall serve for this, being
the sixth Case.

Now the seventh and last case, Case 7.
is, when we know these Truths of God, and do not profess them, when God
kindled a light, and you put it under a bushel: When God works Grace in any
man's heart, his Intent is, it should shine forth to the eyes of others, you
must not shut up the windows, that no body may see; if you do, whatsoever
your respects be; you withold the Truth in unrighteousness: He that shall
know the Truth, and out of fear shall not profess it openly, this fear is a
sin, and he that withholds it out of that respect, withholds it in
unrighteousness; It is that which GOD requires of necessity, With the heart
we believe, and with the mouth we confess to Salvation, GOD requires the one
as well as the other; this is that, that shut out the Pharisees, the chief men
among the Rulers that believed, they durst not confess him for fear of the
Pharisees, you shall see a brand set on them, they lost their souls for it.
Therefore do not say a man may keep Religion to himself, may have a good
mind, and be devout in secret, and that to bring it to view is hypocrisy, it
is not so, it is a false opinion; In doing so, you rob GOD of his glory, and
your selves of salvation: It it the bearing witness to the Truth, which you
are bound unto, and you cannot have this Truth in you, but it will appear,
Grace cannot be concealed, it cannot be hid; and if it could, yet you must
know that the very concealing of this Truth, puts an imputation on it; for we
conceal nothing but what we are ashamed of, and shame implies (you know) that
there is something amiss; so that though you little think of it, this
concealing of the Truth, this hiding of it, is a degree to blasphemy, it lays
an imputation on the HOLY GHOST, for it does on the Light and Truth which is an
effect of the HOLY GHOST: Therefore know GOD desires both, he will have the
inside clean, and the outside too; Indeed, if the inside be clean, the
outside will be so also, but it is not true on the contrary; A man may have a
clean outside, as in Matthew the three and twentieth Chapter, Make the inside
clean, that the outside may be clean also: The meaning is, If a man have a
clean inside, it is not possible but a clean outside will follow: It is true,
there may be leaves, and no fruit, but there can be no fruit, but there will
beleaves; many counterfeit pieces may look yellow, but there is no Gold but it
looks yellow: Do not say then it is hypocrisy, in them that profess
Religion, for they would not take the profession of these things to themselves,
but that they see a beauty, and excellency in them.

Therefore consider it, and know there lies a necessity on you; do you think it
unequal that God should be ashamed of you, and will you be ashamed of him? Is
he such a Father that his children should be ashamed of him? or such a Master
as we should be ashamed to wear his Livery? Do this to earthly Masters, and
see how they will take it: Indeed if there were not some loss to men in
undertaking this profession, we need not spend so much time to press men to
it, but there is a loss in professing the Truth; you may lose many friends,
and procure many enemies, undergo many crosses, lose many benefits and
preferments, which you might have had, this CHRIST tells you beforehand, but
if you love him, you must deny your selves in these. They breed an emnity in
men, instance that place of Ahab, Have thou found me, Oh mine enemy? And am I
your enemy, because I tell you the Truth? All men shall hate you for my Names
sake: And the more the Truth appears, the greater is the hatred, because the
object of hatred is greater.

Object.
But, if you object what is the reason Peter says, 1 Pet. 3.13. Will any man
deny to follow that which is good?

Answ.
I answer, There is a double good, and that is profitable to man, as to be Just,
Meek, Gentle, Patient, ready to do good; in a word, all goodness of this
kind men will love you for; but there is another thing in Religion, and that
is practice of true Righteousness, and Holiness, and that crosses men:
Therefore Saint Peter adds, Blessed are ye, if ye suffer for righteousness
sake: As if he had said, though for your goodness men love you, yet for your
righteousness you must suffer persecution; therefore that must be made account
of beforehand and you must be ready to bear it: So much shall serve to set
down the Cases, Wherewith men withold this Truth in unrighteousness.

Fourthly, if there be such a Truth made known to us by God himself, then in
the observing of this Truth, Use 4.
look for happiness, in the transgressing of it expect misery, ruin and
destruction: If God that is the Governor, the Summum bonum, shall appoint the
Truth, and set man a Law, whatsoever that Law is, in observing of that Law,
there is happiness: It is so with every creature, he has given every creature
a Law, and so long as he keeps to that, he is in a good condition and state:
Now the Law given to us is this Truth, in observing it thou shall keep thy
life, thy happiness; take heed, therefore, of departing from it, whenever a
man departs from it he is deceived, and no man will willingly be deceived.

But, Object.
you will say, a man is not deceived in sin, for I know it is a sin.

Yes, Answ.
in this thou art deceived, no man commits a sin, but at that time he thinks
it better that he commit it, and worse that he abstain from it, and in this
thou art deceived: Go through all the Scripture, and find any one sin there
recorded, and see if the party be not a loser: Go to Jeroboam, did he not
lose his Kingdom by that, by which he thought to save it: Go to Judas, to
Gehezi, was it not his ruin* I say, every man is deceived; as it was said of
Eve, Eve was deceived; so it may b^ said of all the sons of Adam, when they
commi^ a sin they are deceived.

But if you object, Object.
Adam was not deceived* 1 Timothy 2. The woman was deceived, but the man was not.

Answ.
I answer, the meaning is, there is an immediate deceiving, when a man is
merely coozened, because there is a fault in his reason, and for that mistakes
a thing, and so was Eve only deceived, she being the weaker: But there is a
second kind, when a man is not immediately deceived, but transported by a
lust, and that was Adams Case; and that lust arises from deceit: Suppose it be
a lust of envy that transports a man to a sin, although that does not
immediately deceive, yet this (as all sins) arises from Error. Therefore
when any temptation comes, see if it be a sin, if it be a sin, be sure thou
art deceived, and though thou can not find out the deceit, yet remember it is
there, Ephesians. 4. you shall find these put together, The old man is corrupt
through lusts proceeding from deceit, and be renewed in the spirit of your
minds after the Image of God in holiness and righteousness, which comes from
the Spirit of Truth, you shall find there is not a lust but it comes from
deceit, and not any holiness, but it comes from a rectifying of the
Apprehension and from Truth; for in these two things (mark it) the Image of
God and Satan consist: The Image of God consists not only in holiness, but in
truth; therefore the Image of God is renewed in holiness proceeding from
Truth: As on the contrary side the old man does not only stand in lusts, but in
deceit, from whence the lust comes. Therefore take heed of that deceit, and
know this, when any sin is committed, it is contrary to Truth, to the Law, to
this knowledge, and let that be an Argument against it. I cannot stand to
press it more: So much shall serve for this point.

The end of the Eighth Sermon.
CERTAIN SERMONS UPON HVMILIATION. The Ninth SERMON.
ROMANS 1.19, 20. Forasmuch as that which may be known of God, is manifest in
them, for God has showed it unto them.

For the invisible things of him, that is, his eternal power and Godhead are
clearly seen by the creation of the world, being considered in his works, to
the intent that they should be without excuse.


THe third point then which now remains to be handled, Point 3.
is this, There is so much revealed to every man, There is so much revealed to
every man as will make him inexcusable.
as will make him inexcusable, we see the words are clear, GOD has made it
known to them by the Creation, by his works, to the intent they should be
without excuse; or if you will translate it, so that they are without excuse,
the words will bear either. There is so much revealed then, as will make every
man inexcusable: For the manifestation of this Truth, go no further than this
Chapter.

First, consider, God has made himself known to every man by his works of
Creation, this is the book every man may read, this is exposed to every man's
eye, it is a language which every man understands.

Secondly, you shall see what they do, they did not glorify him as GOD,
neither were thankful, but became vain in their imaginations, and their
foolish hearts were full of darkness, that is their carriage toward God.

Thirdly, when God does behold this carriage in them, he gives them up to a
reprobate sense, to vile affections, to their hearts lusts, till they be full
of all unrighteousness, as it is expressed in the latter end of the Chapter,
because they regarded not to know God, he delivered them up to a reprobate
mind, to do things uncomely, being full of all unrighteousness. And if you
mark this prophecy, you shall see how God is excused, and how all the world
is inexcusable:

First, God did that which was sufficient on his part, he made himself known.

Secondly, they did wilfully and stubbornely despise this knowledge, they
regarded not to know God, nor practiced according to knowledge, but provoked
him with their sins, and became vain, making no conscience of offending him:
Then comes in this in the third place, they are delivered up to a reprobate
sense, so as they cannot heal themselves, they are brought to an irrecoverable
state, as a man in quick sands that goes deeper and deeper, and knows not how
to get out, they are given up to vile affections, so as they cannot loose
themselves out of the bands of the Devil, but mark the progress: First, God
reveals himself, then they provoke him by precedent sins, then he gave them
up to these affections. But to open the point at large, and to show the excuses
men have, and their weakness, and how they are taken away, and then it will be
evident that all men are inexcusable. The Excuses; whereby men endeavor to
purge themselves.


The first pretense men have, is that they know not God, they are not
acquainted with him, Excuse 1.
they are ignorant of his ways: That is easily answered, Tha^ they know not
God.
that they that know him least, yet have so much knowledge as will make them
inexcusable: Answ.
They that have only been acquainted with the Creation of the world, salvage
men that never heard the Word, that were never acquainted with the Scripture,
yet these know God, for God has manifested himself to them. This I proved at
large in the former point, so that no man can deny but he knows God, that is,
that there is a God, and this very thing, if no more, is enough to make them
inexcusable, for they knew God, but glorified him not as God: when such a man
knows there is an almighty power, by his natural wit, he is able to deduce,
if there be a God, I must behave my self well toward him, I must fear him as
God, I must be affected to him as God, I must worship him with all reverence as
God; but the most ignorant man confesses there is a God, no Nation denies it,
but how far are they from glorifying him as God? from carrying themselves
toward him, as it becomes men to carry themselves toward an Almighty God
maker of heaven and earth.

But secondly, Excuse 2.
the second pretense is, but God requires more of me than that, God requires
more knowledge than men have of him.
if that were enough to know God, that there is an invisible God, to
acknowledge the Deity and eternal Power, it were well, but God requires more.

Answ.
To this I answer, God requires no more of any man than either he does know, or
might have known; go through the whole Universe, all men of the world that are
or have been, and I say, God requires of no man more than either he does know,
or might have known: I put that in, because there be many men that might know
more than they do, spoken of 2 Pet. 3.5. Some there are that are willingly
ignorant: He means men that are willingly ignorant of some things, but it is
all one as if they knew them. And this makes men of this Nation inexcusable,
The inexcusablenesse of ignorant Country people.
as your ignorant Countrey-people, who though they know nothing, yet because
they might have known, they are as inexcusable as if they had known as much
as any; for though every Parish have not a preaching Minister, (which is a
thing much to be wished) yet there is no Country but some light is set up in
it, whither they may resort if they will, and this will make them inexcusable:
So they that live under much means, that are ever learning, and never come to
the knowledge of the Truth, and so have brought a sottishness on themselves,
they are inexcusable, because themselves are the cause of their not profiting,
as a man that is drunk, though he is not able to understand the commands of
his Master, yet because he was the first Author of the drunkenness, (which
caused such sottishness) he is inexcusable; so they that neglect the Word, or
when the Word enters not into the heart, because men delight not in it, (as you
shall find these put together, Prove. 2.10. When wisdom enters into thy soul,
and knowledge delights thee) when the cause that men profit not, is because
they delight in other things, the stream runs another way; and so as the
Sun puts out fire, and the outward heat extinguisheth the inward heat, so
they do drive out the Word by diverse lusts, when they might have abstained
from those other delights, and have attended to the Word with more diligence,
they are inexcusable: So that God requires no more of any man, Pretense 3.
than either he does know, We h^ve no ability to perform the things we know.
or might have known.

The third pretense is, and that is greater than the other two, I but we have
no ability to perform the things we do know.

Quest.
That every man is ready to say, Who is able to practice according to his
knowledge?

Answ.
To this I answer, It is false, there is ability in every man to do according to
that he knows; for so far as light goes, so far there is ability in the
will and affections to follow that light; there is a common light in men that
are in state of unregeneration (indeed sanctifying light they have not) and
they are able to go as far as their light goes, and I will appeal to any
man's experience, let him look back to the course of his life, and examine
himself, was there ever any particular action in all thy life, from which thou
wast so hindered, that thou can say thou could not do it? was there ever
any particular sin, of which thou could say, this sin I could not
abstain from? And howsoever we may make it a matter of dispute in the Schools;
yet the worst man, one in whom we may think corruption of nature to be most
strong, when he comes to die, he does not excuse himself, but acknowledge he
is guilty. If you consider the nature of liberty, there a spontaneity in
beasts, by which they are carried to that which their appetite desires, but
that is not Liberum, though Spontaneum: But when a reasonable creature looks
on a thing as Elegibile or non Elegibile, and not only so, but is able to
reason on both sides, is able to see arguments for both, that makes it differ
from Spontaneity, when there is no outer impediment, when you may take or
refuse it, when you have Arguments to reason, and see the commodity and
discommodity of it, your will is now free, so that I may truly affirm every
man has a free will to do that, for the not doing of which he is condemned;
mark it.

But you will object, Object.
I but a man is condemned for not believing, for not turning to God, for not
having his heart changed, for not being a new Creature, but these no man has
power to do; therefore a man is condemned for something which he is not able
to do.

To this I answer, Answ.
It is true, a man has not power to perform these, but yet withal, I say, he
has power to do those things, upon the neglect of which, God denies him
ability to believe and repent: So that, it is true, though a man cannot believe
and repent, and nevertheless for this is condemned; yet withal take this with
you, there be many precedent Acts, which a man has in his liberty to do, or
not to do, by which he ties God, and deserves this Justly, that God should
leave him to himself, and deny him ability of believing and repenting, which
as a necessary duty lies on him: So that though a man has no ability to do
this, yet he has ability to abstain from the things, by the which he provoks
God to anger, and by which he deserves this at his hands, not to be able to
believe, etc. For proof go to this Chapter, They knew God, but they glorified
him not as God, therefore (they having not done the precedent Acts which they
should have done) says the Text, God gave them up to their lusts: He took
away all ability to repent, he deprived them of all the sparkles of common
grace and knowledge which before they had, but this is a thing which they
themselves deserved first. So much for the Third, when we come to the use we
will be more large.

Pretense 4.
Fourthly, men excuse themselves from this, their natures are corrupt, From the
corruption of nature, which they cannot resist.
and they have strong inclinations, strong lusts inclining them to this or that
sin which they cannot resist, therefore are excusable.

Answ. 1.
To this I answer, It is not so, none has so strong an inclination to any sin,
but he is able to resist it. This is the Argument; Let a man have hell and
death set before him, nay, let some temporal shame or punishment be set before
him, which he shall immediately undergo, when such a sin is committed, and
see if this will not restrain him, when the lust is most impetuous. Therefore
it is not, because he cannot restrain it, but because he will not.

Answ. 2.
Secondly, have not thou brought on thy self that strong Inclination, that
strange power of sin? Art not thou the cause of it? For though there be
original sin in us, yet we may intend that original sin by frequencie in
any actual sin: As Varnish intends colors, it puts on no new colors, but
intends it, makes it more bright; if there was a glimmering light before,
addition of light makes the former light greater, so frequencie of sin, makes
sin more active, more efficacious, more vigorous, as humors being accustomed
to a place, are ready to break forth there; so a sin wherein you have had an
issue, wherein you have given your selves liberty, there sin gets greater
victory over you; therefore consider if you be not guilty of the power of sin,
of the impetuity of your lusts.

Lastly, Answ. 3.
consider if you have not deserved that God should give you up to these lusts;
many are taken in sin, as the fish on the hook, which cannot get off, it
seizes as an Apoplexy on a man that cannot be cured: When the sin gets
ground, it is like the sea, getting ground on the land, which cannot be
recovered. I confess this is the Case of many hundred men, but consider if you
have not made way for this; for as the lower stayres lead up to the higher; so
there be lesser sins which make way for greater, not by way of efficacy, as
Acts beget an habit, but by way of merit, God may Justly give them over to
this strength of sin: Therefore though their lusts be strong and impetuous,
yet this does not make them inexcusable.

Fifthly, Pretense 5.
when none of this will serve the turn, From Temptations of company,
business, etc.
then they are ready to lay it on their temptations: How can a man do
otherwise when it stands in such circumstances, that is, subject to such
company, to such occasions, such businesses, and so many things to draw him
away: When that within will not excuse him, he comes to that without.

To this I answer, when a man is drawn to any thing without, it is the
concupiscence within that does it; Answ. 1.
put fire to that which is not combustible, it will not burn, it is the
corruption within that does all. Therefore, observe that in Act. 5. It is
Peter's speech to Ananias and Saphira, Why has Satan filled thy heart? As if he
had said, It is true, Satan has put this into thy heart, he has tempted thee
to the sin, to lie to the Holy Ghost, but know, thou wast the cause of it, thou
had the keys of thy heart, if thou had not suffered Satan to have entered,
he could not have done it.

Answ. 2.
And besides, consider if thou have not put thy self into this Temptation; It
is one thing for God to lead into temptation, and another thing to lead our
selves into it. You know what is said of Ahaziah 2 King. 8.27. He walked in the
ways of the Kings of Israel, and did as the house of Ahab had done, because he
had the daughter of Ahab to wife: As if he had said, It is true, it was Ahabs
daughter that led him into those sins, but he led himself into the temptation,
he should not have married Ahabs daughters: Consider whether thou have not put
thy self into this circumstance, and led thy self into this temptation.

Pretense 6.
Last of all, another Pretense and Excuse is, as I have the temptation that
others want, From the want of means.
so I want the means others have; If I had the means others have, I should do
well enough.

Answ.
I answer, first consider if thou had not means, and did not profit by
them, consider how many means God affoorded thee, from whence thou receivedst
not that fruit and profit, which thou might have done: And if thou did
not, and God deprived thee of the means, know thou art the cause of it thy
self: for when men neglect the means, when God shall set up a light, and men
will not work by that light, he does, as Masters do with their servants, when
they set them a candle, and they play by it, and will not use it as they
should, they take it away in anger; so God removes away the light, he takes
away the Gospel, he sends a famine of the Word, when we neglect it, or as
parents do, when their children play with their meat, they take it from them:
When men will not use their Talents, God takes them away, and this Talent of
the Word above all other, when it shall be abused, and not used to Gods glory.

If all this will not serve to excuse them in general, Other particular
Excuses.
then are they ready to excuse themselves, in particular: First, by denying the
fact; or, Secondly, by slighting the fault.

First, First, by denying the Fact.
by denying the Fact, they deny that they are guilty of a thousand sins of
which they are guilty; this disposition you shall find in them in Malach. 1.
You have despised me, and you say, Wherein have we despised thee? And you have
robbed me, and spoiled me, and you say, Wherein have we robbed thee? And you
reckon it a weariness to serve the Lord, and you say, wherein are we weary? So
it is the nature of man to deny the Fact, if it be possible: See Gods answer,
when they have asked these questions, You have offered the lame and blind in
sacrifice. Consider what you do? do you not despise God in the prayers that
you make, do not you perform them in a slight and perfunctory manner? Do
you not offer to God of the worst? There be men that Solomon speaks of, that
despise their way, that is, some things they neglect, which they think are not
worth looking after, some things they reckon as trifles, which they will not
care for, this is to despise God.

Secondly, Secondly, By sleighting the Fault.
If they cannot deny the Fact, they slight the Fault, and one of these they
say, either the sin is small which they commit, and hope that will excuse
them; or if they be greater sins, they fall into them by humane frailty, and
infirmity, and are sorry for what they have done, so extenuating what they do,
and making it a matter of nothing.

Ob. It is a small sin.
But to answer first for small sins, sins are not to be measured by the bulk,
but by the circumstances with which they are committed, Answ.
though thou think it a small sin in it self, yet considering it with the
circumstances it may be great: A sin committed against light of conscience,
and with deliberation, is a great sin, as the Prophet that turned another way,
it was a small thing for him to do it, yet having the sure Word of God for a
rule not to do it, you see God punished him, not, as for a small sin, and he
being just, we may argue from the greatness of the punishment, that the sin
was great; so Adams eating of the forbidden fruit, to eat an Apple was a small
matter, but there being the Almighty God's Command to the contrary, the
punishment shows what the sin was: So men think that to swear a small oath,
is no great matter, but Christ says, Let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay;
and when God has commanded a thing, though it be never so small, yet that makes
it great: so it was a small thing for Saul to sacrifice before Samuel came, but
you see what it cost him, God for that cast him away for ever? So in the things
you reckon small, take heed you be not deceived, be the thing never so small,
yet for that you may be contemned, as well as for the greatest sin, for he that
is unfaithful in the least, will not be faithful in much: And take the least
sin, there is the same reason of sinfulness in that, that is in the greatest,
as a drop is water, as well as the Ocean: If thou abstain from sin, because
there is an Antipathy between sin and thee, as it is with every man after
regeneration, thou will abstain from all sins. You know a Pigeon will not
meddle with any feather of an Hawk, because there is an Antipathy between
them, and the sheep hates every Wolf, and men hate every Toad, his stomach
rises at a little Toad; so a right gracious heart abhors every thing that is
evil, and cleaves to every thing that is good, indeed he fails much in
performance, but his heart is sound.

Again, there is no small sin, but it makes way for a greater, as playing at
small games, makes us afterward to play at greater: Therefore the littleness
of the sin excuses not; for one sin admitted is of great consequence, because
it draws on many that are great.

Ob. I fell into by infirmity.
Now for the second, some they say are small, some are great, and for them that
be great, they commit them by Accident, out of infirmity, and are sorry for
what they have done.

Answ. 1.
You must know this, if they were committed by infirmity, the Excuse were good,
for even the faithful themselves fall into diverse sins out of infirmity; but
take heed of deceiving thy self.

If thou find this thy Case, that thy heart is renewed, that thou wagest a
continual war against thy sins, resolvest never to make peace or truce with
them, usest all means thou can againts them, admittest of no occasion to
lead thee to sin, and yet fallest into it against purpose, and sincere desire
of heart, it is a sin of infirmity, and God will so Judge of it, but put case
thou holdst not a continual war with thy self, but say, I see it is a sin
which I am strongly inclined to, I shall be weary with resisting, therefore I
must give out, I cannot choose; now if thou leave striving, and lay down thy
wasters, this is not a sin of infirmity.

thou fallest into it by infirmity, or by accident, for thou allowest thy self
in it, thou lie and continuest in it.

So again, have thou used thy uttermost

But they say, Ob. But I am sorry that I so sinned.
I am sorry for what I have done; Take heed thou be not deceived in that. Is it
not a false sorrow? Answ. 1.
art not thou more sorry for the effect of sin, than for the evil of sin, for
the burning of the coal, than for the blackness of the coal? There is much
present evil in sin, that may make thee repent it afterward.

Again, Answ. 2.
if it be not so, is it not a slight sorrow? not proportionable to thy sin: Is
it a sorrow that continues on thy heart? Is it a sorrow effectual to work any
change in thee, to prevent sin for the time to come? Otherwise, if thou say
thou art sorry for it, and yet fallest into it again and again, it is no true
sorrow: Go to thy Neighbor and say, I have done thee an Injury, and am sorry
for it, and yet fall into the same again and again, it will seem that it was
but a false sorrow: So if thou do pretend sorrow for thy sins, and yet
relapsest into them again, it is a slight sorrow that God regards not. So much
shall serve to take away the Excuses, learn to lay this to heart, and consider
it, and see how you be inexcusable: Now to make use of it.

The first Use is to justify God, Use 1.
learn to lay the blame where it is, that is, on our selves; think not that
God condemns any without cause, for every man is inexcusable. And here this
point is specially to be marked: I do not say, men are inexcusable only, in
regard of Adams sin (that being a Truth we all assent unto, that in regard of
Adams sin, the ability we had, we lost in him) but I will go further, men are
inexcusable in regard of their present condition, and their actual sins, mark
it well. The reason whereupon he inferres that they are inexcusable, is; God
has made himself known to them, namely by his works and creation, he goes
not to Adams sin, but they had knowledge enough; this knowledge they practiced
not, and in regard of the present actual evils which they committed, they are
inexcusable. Therefore, that God may be glorified and justified, that he may be
true, and every man a liar, know that God condemns not for any more than he
has revealed, as some have only the Law of Nature, so they are condemned
only for breaking that Law, they are not condemned for not worshipping God
according to the Law of Moses or the Gospel, but simply and only for breaking
the Law of Nature; They that have sinned without the Law, shall be condemned
without the Law, Romans 2.12. That is, at the last day there shall no more be
laid to their charge, this you knew, and this you broke: So again, they that
only knew the Law of Moses, yea, at this day, if there be any Jew in the
world, which never heard of Christ, which never had means to know him, he
shall not be condemned for not believing in Christ, but for the breach of the
Law of Nature, and the Law of Moses, and the reason is good, for by the same
reason that the Gentiles shall not be condemned for breaking the Law of Moses,
by the same equity and ground, they that have not the knowledge of the Gospel,
shall not be condemned for breaking the Law of the Gospel: So that if we
consider this, There is no man (go through all) but God shall lay this to his
charge at the day of Judgment; Do not say, I bound thee to impossible things,
that I laid on thee a Law, thou could not keep, thou shall not have this
excuse left thee, I gave thee ability to do much, but thou did not do that
thou were able to do, for that is the condition of every man, he is able to
do more than he does, and if any man perish, it is for not doing the things he
was able to do.

But you will say, Object.
God might have revealed more.

I answer, Answ.
God does lead along, but men do Ponere obices, lay blocks in his way; God
deals not only in Justice, but in much mercy with any vessel of wrath: Indeed
he loves the godly in a special manner, but mercy he shows to every man, and
the reason why he is not brought to more light, is, because he lays blocks,
and when God reveals still, he lays more, till at length there be an end of
his patience and long-suffering.

To give an instance in Saul and David; God led Saul along, but he sins still,
God leads him on, till at length he went his way, and God leaves him quite;
but in David you shall find as many frailties as in Saul; if you look on
David's nature, the strong temptations to which he was subject, he was ready to
lay blocks too; but because God had a peculiar love to David, he removed them
all; yet God dealt with Saul in much mercy, he showed much patience, and
long-suffering; but David he loved with a peculiar love, therefore he carried
him through all: So it is with all the faithful, I will put my fear in thine
heart, that thou shall never depart from me, says God.

Object.
But, you will say, this is to preach Free Will, and if men have free will and
be condemned for not doing what they might do, what is the difference between
the Doctrine of the Papists and this?

Answ.
I answer, Though there be a free will to do that, for the not doing of which
they shall be condemned; so as you cannot come to any particular that these men
cannot do, yet God has kept it in his power to draw whom he will, to
sanctify whom he will, for God keeps these two together, he keeps men within
compass of common grace, so that they may do much of themselves, and the
changing of men's hearts, the enabling of them to believe effectually, or
repent, the drawing of them to God, that is, proper to God: So that these may
well stand together, this freedom they have, yet it is not in any man's power
to believe, to repent effectually.

The second use we should make of it, Use 2.
is for practice; learn hence then to justify God, and to condemn our
selves, to think well of him, and ill of our selves, to give him the glory of
his mercy, and patience, and long-suffering; and to take shame to our selves,
lay the blame where the blame ought to be laid: for let a man have committed
never so great, never so many sins, if he has something to say for himself,
he will never be humble; labor to come to this, to see that thou have nothing
to say for thy self, to see that thy sin is out of measure sinful, as indeed
it is; and this will put a necessity on thee, and teach thee to love much,
because much is forgiven thee, and till this thou can not be a man fit to
come to Christ: Therefore you shall find these two expressions, Romans 3. All
are under sin: And the like is in Galath. 3.22. He has shut up all under
sin, that the promise by the faith of JESUS CHRIST might be given to them that
believe, that every mouth may be stopped. That is, before God will show mercy,
he will bring them to see that they are inexcusable, that their mouths may be
every way stopped, that they may have nothing to say for themselves, that they
may have no excuse, no Postica, no back-doore when a man is shut up in sin,
when there is no evasion, nothing to extenuate sin withal, then his soul is
humble, and begins to sin^e before God; then he sees the necessity of coming
to Christ, and is brought into the case they were in, in the second Chapter of
the Acts, Men and brethren, what shall we do to be saved? As if they should
say, before we thought we were in a good condition, at least we had something
to hold by in our apprehension, but when Peter shows them their guiltiness,
then, men and brethren what shall we do to be saved: This is it the Scripture
calls, Afflict your selves, Iam. 3. Now the Greek word for Affliction, is,
(...), that is, when sorrow stands round about a man, when there is no way to
get out, when one is hedged in on every side, for when there is any escape, it
is not properly an Affliction, because there is an evasion, a way to help out,
but that makes it an Affliction, when it compasses us round, when we have
nothing to say, when all objections are removed, so that we are througly
convinced of sin, this stirs up present apprehension of danger, present
sorrow for sin, and when any Affliction is present, it will have present ease.
There be many excuses, but when the Holy Ghost removes all these, then men are
driven to Christ, indeed; before they clave to sin, as to their Center, still
departing, and loath to depart, for men come out of the state of
unregeneration, as Lot did come out of Sodom, who was so loath to come out,
that the Angel was feign to draw him out; so till we be all nothing, till
there be no twigge to hang by, till there be no Fibrae to nourish us on our
own bottom, we will never come to Christ: as Ioab, if he could have escaped
Solomon, he would not have flowne to the horns of the Altar, but when he saw
no hopes, then he laid hold on them, and said, If he will kill me, he shall
kill me here: So if we can subsist in our natural condition wherein we are, we
will love it, we will cleave to it; but when God has ferited us out of all our
turnings, that there is no hope left, then we go to Christ, then we take hold
on the horns of the Altar; as when a man has a cord let down to him into the
sea, you need not bid him hold fast: So when God takes away all excuses, takes
a man quite from his own bottom, cuts him from the root of Nature on which
he grew, this makes him come to Christ. When we tell men of their sins, that
they are accursed, that do not keep every part of the Law, they deal with us
as the Egyptians did, when it was told them, that in every house the first
borne should die, except the destroying Angel saw their dooreposts sprinkled
with blood, they regarded it not, they minded it not, till the very day, and
then where the blood was not found, they died for it: So we may tell you of
sin, of the danger you are in, we may tell you, that you shall die, yet you
believe it not, only a few, whose hearts are sprinkled with the blood of the
Lamb, they indeed defer it not, for they do not know how soon the destroying
Angel may come. Therefore labor to be convinced, this is to know what a
Mediator is, and not to have it in speculation only. And here it were good to
consider, what that is that holds men on their roots; there is an Anchor under
water, though men see it not, that keeps them in their old condition, if we
could hit on it.

Means whereby men are kept in their old condition. First, Inconsideration.
And it is either Inconsideration, men consider not what they have to do, they
look not about them, according to that in Deuteronomy. 29. You have seen all what the
Lord did to Pharaoh, but the Lord has not given you hearts to consider it to
this day: Now if you ask what Consideration is; I answer, Consideration is
nothing else but an Act superadded to Knowledge, when a man not only knows,
but returns and reflects on what he knows, when he stays and abides on it,
when he looks round about a business, not on a corner of it, but fully and
weighes every circumstance: Therefore we are said to ponder our ways, when we
do not only look to that which is present, but to the time past and to come,
when all things are taken in: Now when a man shall lay all together, when he
shall consider, that is, think seriously, and remember that he has but a
little time to live here, and that there is another place where he shall live
for all eternity, that he has an immortal soul, and that his state is
dangerous, that his sins are great, and the wrath of God is as a consuming
fire; when these are laid together, when he considers them, and stays on them,
by these means he comes to see with his eyes, and understand with his heart,
and to be converted and healed; but because men do consider, thence it is that
they grow on their root still, and are not brought to this inexcusablenesse,
nor have all Arguments taken away.

Or another reason is, some Lust, Some Lust.
there is world credit, riches, pleasures, or something which they are loath to
part with, the rich man will not part with his possessions, they in the twelfth
of John will not part with their credit with the Pharisees, Jeroboam will not
part with his Kingdom, till these Arguments shall be answered, and God shall
cut off those snares, for so they are termed, 2 Timothy 2.25. Waiting if God will
give them repentance, to know the truth, and to come out of the snare of the
Devil, who takes them at his will: The meaning is, every man, before he be
regenerate, is holden by some snare, the snare is some lust, the root of it is
some false reasoning; now when men come to know the truth, and to be delivered
out of the snare of the Devil, when God convinces a man, and opens that
truth, undoes that false reasoning on which that lust is founded, he cuts the
snare asunder, and then they are set at liberty: Every man says, I cannot live
without credit, without my state, without my kingdom, (as every man has a
kingdom of his own) when God teaches that this is vanity, and if we will be
happy, the best way is to serve God with a perfect heart, when God teaches the
contrary Truth, then he is out of the snare of the Devil, when he has awaked
his conscience, that he is sick of sin, that he feels his rebellions, then
the thing he magnified before, is nothing now; As when a man is sick, the
houses and orchards he magnified before, are now not regarded, his dainty fare,
and gorgeous apparel, he has no pleasure in them, for he is sick: So it is
with the Soul when God charge sin on the Conscience.

Again, when God shows better things than these, as Heb. 10.34. They had in
heaven a better, and an enduring substance, and therefore cared for nothing:
They cared not for parting with their goods, when they had another
righteousness to trust to: So when God opened the heavens and showed himself
to Paul, He reckons all as dung and dross, he does not magnify what he did
before. And thus are men freed from the snare of the Devil: Therefore when a
man shall defer and think I am ready to come, but I will not yet: I say,
these must be taken away, for they are false reasonings by which we are built
on our root: Now when a man shall be persuaded of the danger of putting the
evil day far from him, when the Holy Ghost shall give him wisdom to number
his days, then he will take to himself new thoughts. Every man naturally
fears death, but because it is far off, no man regards it; and so because we
put the evil day far from us, we turn not to God; now when God shall
convince a man of the Truth, and teach him to number his days: Well, thou art
now in healt^ and strength, but when thou come to num^ber the days that
remain, they are very small. Put case a man had an hundred dishes of meat
before him, if one come and says, Take heed what you do, for one of these
dishes is poison, he will not taste of any of them, except he have taken an
Antidote before: So when the Holy Ghost teaches, it is true, In one of these
days is death, thou shall find poison that shall take away thy life; whether
first or last it is uncertain, if thou were wise to consider thy latter end,
that is, if thou had the wisdom, which God must teach, thou would see
little reason, why to venture thy soul on one of these days, if thou have not
made thy Election sure; for this is as to eat of one of those dishes when there
is poison in it.

Therefore consider (beloved) what uncertainty of life there is, what it is to
venture the soul, and what eternity is: When God shall each this, and stir
up present affections of fear, and apprehension of wrath, it will teach a man
not to defer, but to come home speedily.

Again, when this place of Scripture, and the like, shall be seriously
considered, That if the Good Man of the house knew at what time the Thief
would come, he would have an eye to him; That Christ has threatened all before
hand that do not watch, And I will come at a time thou think not of me: If
thou did consider this when thou art most secure and furthest off from God,
in the midst of thy jollity, and fast asleep, I will come at a time when thou
look not for me: And did thou think this threatening in vain? Did thou
believe this Scripture and lay it to heart? thou would not defer thy
Turning to God.

Again, consider, put case thou have liberty, if sickness come and give thee
warning, alas how far art thou from being able to repent? Are the times in
thine hand? Must not the Holy Ghost change thine heart? If thou do now take
resolution to amend, have not thou cause to suspect that it proceeds from
self-love? For if it had been not of love to God, would thou not have
turned sooner? And if it be out of self-love, God accepts it not. All this
while we have spent in showing the Disease, and now we must show the Remedy.

FINIS.
A SERMON PREACHED AT A GENERAL FAST BEFORE THE COMmons-House of Parliament:
the second of July, 1625. In the time of the Plague. By the late faithful and
worthy Minister of JESUS CHRIST, JOHN PRESTON, D. in Divinity, Chaplain in
ordinary to his Majesty, Master of Emmanuel College in Cambridge, and
sometimes Preacher of Lincolns INN.

LONDON, Printed by R. B. for NICHOLAS BOURNE, and are to be sold at his shop
at the Royal Exchange. 1633.

A SERMON PREACHED AT A General Fast, before the Commmons-house of Parliament,
July 2. 1625.
NUMBERS 25.10, 11. And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying,

Phinehas the son of Eleazar the son of Aaron the Priest, has turned my
wrath away from the children of Israel, (while he was zealous for my sake among
them) that I consumed not the children of Israel in my jealousy.


WE are met together, you know, to sanctify a Fast to the Lord. I will
therefore speak a word, or two, of that Duty, before I come to the Text,
which I have read to you: But I will do it briefly, the Common place thereof,
being too large a subject at this time to enter into.

Fastiug is no Arbitrary duty.
And first, we will say thus much to you; That this duty is a necessary, not an
arbitrary thing, which we may do, or leave undone at our pleasures: You know
there be many examples of it, many commands for it in Scripture; but of them
we will only repeat two: The first is that in Joel 2.15. Which is proved by
^ex^s of Scripture.
(a place you well know) Sanctify to me a Fast, call a solemn Assembly. When
the Lord began to send Judgment on the Land, he straightly enjoined the
performance of this duty, which shows that it may not be left undone at
pleasure.

To which I will add that in Esaias 22.12, 13, 14. The Lord called in that day
to weeping, and mourning; but because at that time they fell to rejoicing: It
was revealed by the Lord of hoasts, that that sin should not be purged away
till their death. When there is a time for Fasting, and when there are Just
occasions for mourning and humiliation, the Lord does then so require it, that
if you do it not, but will do the contrary, the Lord will never forgive it;
it is a sin that shall not be purged away till you die.

The definition of a Fast.
You will say then, What is a Fast? In a word, a Fast is nothing else but the
sanctifying or setting apart of a day for humiliation, reconciliation, and
reformation. I say, it is to sanctify a Day; because the day of a Fast must be
equal to the Sabbath; the very word used in that place of Joel, Sanctify to
me a Fast, shows as much. In that day you may do no servile work, but must
keep it holy to the Lord.

That you have to do in that day is first to humble your selves, as in that
place of Joel, Turn to me with fasting, mourning, and weeping. Secondly, it is
for Reconciliation, Lev. 23.27. it is called a day of Atonement. Lastly, it is
for Reformation, and therefore in the day of fasting, the whole people entered
into covenant with God; as in Nehem* the ninth chapter, and the beginning of
the tenth verse, you shall see the Princes, and people came altogether, and
seal a Covenant to the Lord, to reform their sin of taking strange wives,
and entered into a curse, and an oath to walk in Gods law.

I will say no more of that, The defects which we are subject to in performing
that duty.
but will only tell you, what are the failings which we are most subject to in
this business; for we may know the disease by the medicine: if God takes
great care to prevent our falling into a sin, it argues that we are apt to
fall into it. And first, To rest in the work done
we are very ready to rest in the work done, in opere operato, to think that
the very action will please GOD. Therefore it is carefully added in Joel 2.
Rend not your clothes, but your hearts: that is, when you come to sanctify a
Fast, do not think that the very outward performance of the duty moves me:
It is the heart that I look to, therefore you must take care that at this
time, your greatest business be with your hearts. Lev. 23.29. He who in that
day (meaning the day of the annual Fast, which was then instituted) does not
afflict his soul (for so the word is to be translated) shall be cut off from
his people. The outward performance is not the thing that God respects, or
accepts; he does not regard that, (for he is a Spirit, and beholds the
behavior of the spirit;) he considers how we are affected in secret before him.

To do it for a fit.
A second thing werein we are apt to fail, is, to think that One day is
enough, and when that is done, there is an end of the business: but it is not
so, that is but the beginning of it. Esaias 58.5. Is this a Fast, to hang down
your head for a day? Is it to bow it down as a Bulrush? Bulrushes you know in
a storm hang down their heads, but when fair weather comes they lift them up
again. So when affliction is upon us, we are apt to humble our souls for a
time, for a fit; but when a little peace or prosperity comes, we forget to be
longer humbled: whereas the end of a Fast, is so to begin the work of
Humiliation, that we may the better continue it afterward.

Not to reform upon the doing of it.
A third defect is this; we are perhaps content to do the duty, and with some
affection too, but there follows no reformation of life. Therefore in the same
Chapter, see how carefully that is put in; Is this an acceptable day to the
Lord? Will I accept such a Fast as this? When you find pleasure, and continue
in strife and debate? That is, the Lord regards not the bare performance of the
duty, unless the end of it be attaynd; now the end of it is nothing else, but
that every man in particular reform the evils he is subject to; yea, his
particular weaknesses, and personal infirmities, the mending of which, is
carefully to be endeavored when we sanctify a Fast to the Lord; else we
assemble together for Wine and for Oil, Hos. 7.14. As if he should say, you
have not sought Me when you howled upon your beds; but your Wine and your
Oil: That is, men are affected with the Judgments of the Lord, they desire to
have them removed, they wish for ease and prosperity, and for that they
assemble themselves; but to Me, says he, ye return not. A beast will do as
much when it feels any evil oppressing it; and therefore God calls it, howling
on their beds, an action proper to beasts: but the Lord looks, that you seek
him in sincerity, and that you labor to make your hearts perfect in him.

In a word; There is a double performance of duties.
to conclude this, remember, That there is a double performance of every holy
duty; one is, when we do the work as a task, and are glad when it is over;
when we do it as servants that do eye-service to their masters: When they be
performed as Fasts.
another is, when not only the thing is done, but your hearts also are wrought
upon; for that is the end of the outward performance, and the work is so far
accepted as it has an operation on our hearts and affections. When its
affections are wrought upon in the duty.
It is so in every duty; as in Prayer, when you call on God in private, does
God regard the words of a prayer? No, but 'its working on your hearts, 'its
humbling of them, 'its bringing of them into frame, and making them perfect
with God every day, by a through renewing of your repentance, and this is the
doing of the thing. Amongst your selves, if a servant does only make a show of
doing a thing, it is not regarded; but he that brings the thing to pass is
accepted of you: and that is it, which the Lord requires and accepts in our
performances. Now we shall see that this Text will help us to all that is
required in a Fast, as will appear in the particulars.

Ver. 1.2.
Phineas the son of Eleazar, etc.] In the former part of the Chapter the
disease is set down, The Analysis of the Text. The Israelites disease Sin. The
consequent of sin is wrath.
and that is Sin, (which is indeed the only disease of the soul)
illustrated from two consequents. First, from the wrath of God, who (as the
Text says) was very angry with Israel, for they had committed whoredom and
joined with Baal-Peor. Ver. 3.
That was the disease, the sin, for which they had brought on them Gods wrath.
The effect of Gods wrath. the Plague.
And secondly from an effect of that wrath, the Plague; (God struck them with
pestilence, that is the punishment.

The remedy was the turning away of Gods wrath.
In this verse is set down the remedy, and that is the turning away of Gods
wrath. For as the Physician says, Morbi curantur contrarijs, so it is true in
Divinity: as the wrath of God was the cause of the Plague, so the turning away
thereof is the remedy.

This turning away of his wrath, is set forth by the cause of its turning away;
Which was done by zeal. And that for two reasons.
and that was the zeal of Phineas, while he was zealous for my sake; and that
is made good by two reasons. One is in the latter end of my Text; therefore
have I not consumed them in my jealousy. As if he had said, If Phineas had
not been zealous, my jealou^ should have burned more and more, and the
jealousy of that should have been utter destruction. The second is Gods own
Testimony, set down before my Text. The Lord himself said unto Moses, that
his wrath was turned away.

I will say no more for opening the words; but in them you shall see these five
points lie evidently before you. Five general points raised out of the text.


First, in that the removal of the Plague is attributed to God, and to the
turning away of his anger, this is clearly deduced: That it is God only that
does good and evil; for you see his anger brought the Plague on them, and the
turning away of his anger healed them again.

Secondly, it is sin that causes Gods anger: anger in God has always relation
to sin, for sin is the cause of it.

Thirdly, the way to turn away the Lords anger, is zeal, for his sake.

Fourthly, if there be want of this zeal among us, his jealousy shall grow
hotter and hotter, it shall increase upon us more and more.

Fifthly, and lastly, the issue of this jealousy of his, will be utter
destruction.

We will begin with the first, General point.
which is, That it is God only, God only does good and evil.
that does good and evil to every Nation, to every Church and Kingdom, yea to
every particular person. As you see here; it was not the corruption of the Air
that brought the Plague, nor the clearing of it with f^ost and wind, that
turned it away; but the cloud of the Lords wrath shed this storm on them; and
when he was appeased with them there followed health and peace: The Lord
wounds, and the Lord heales. For what is the Plague but a sword in the hand of
an Angel, who draws it out, and puts it into its sheath again, at his
Masters appointment? And is not there the same reason of all other evils? War
you know is a terrible thing, when Enemies come as Bees on a Land; but does not
the Lord hiss for them? And again, they are driven away as with a breath at
his appointment. Famine is a lean devouring evil, which causes the Land to
eat up the inhabitants thereof; but is not the Lord the only cause of it?
Does not he make the Heaven as Brass, and the Earth as Iron? Does not he when
he will, open the windows of Heaven, and unstop the bottels of the clouds, and
power outraine unseasonably? And is not he the cause of death, which is the
journeys end of both the former? To which, every one of us is subject, yet we
consider it not. Though we see men fall from the Tree of Life every moment yet
we regard it not. This the Lord takes only to himself, Psalm. 68.20. To the
Lord belong the issues from death: and therefore let us give to the Lord, this
great Prerogative of his; That he only does good and evil, and let no man
question it.

You will say, who does question it? It is very true; we do not question it in
words, but if we question it in our deeds, it is an argument that our hearts
make a doubt of it, though our tongues do not question it. Therefore let us
examine the matter.

If we think the Lord only does good and evil, Certain convictions for
demonstrations of the point.
why then will not we obey him and serve him, and please him in all things? But
provoke him to anger, by our words, and by our works, as the Prophet speaks.
Perhaps you will say to me, Conviction; The frequency of our sinning.
as Saul answered Samuel, when he came from the war of the Amalekites; Oh
thou blessed of the Lord, I have fully kept the Commandment of the Lord; but
says Samuel, If thou have done so, What means the bleating of the Sheep, and
the lowing of the Oxen: So I say to you, if you obey the Lord, what means so
many sins amongst us? What means Fornication and Whoredom which is so
frequent? What mean those Oaths amongst us, for which the Land mournes? Not
only greater oaths, but smaller oaths, which exceed the greater for
frequency, though the greater exceed them, in that they take the Name of God in
vain. Again, what means the breaches of the Sabbath? Of which I will speak
a word by the way: and that you may know that I do not blame you for that as a
sin, which is no sin, I will make this digression. Do you not think that
Sabbaths are to be kept, A digression touching the Sabbath, proving that it
ought to be sanctified.
and to be kept holy? I will name but two reasons to make it good; you shall
find them in Esaias 57.30. It is My Holy Day. First, it is a Holy Day, and if it
be holy, you may do nothing thereon that is common. A Vessel that is
sanctified and made holy, Because it is a Holy Day.
may not be employed to take up common water, or used in common services, for
it is holy. So the time of the Sabbath is holy, therefore you must not spend it
about common actions, for if you do, you profane that which is holy.

It is Gods day.
Seeondly it is My Day, and if it be My Day, rob me not of it: every hour of
that day that you spend in common speeches and actions, you rob the Lord of
that hour, for all the day is his.

It is further convinced.
And do not think that men were tied to this observance only, under the Old
Testament; but know that it continues still: From the hazard of Religion by
leaving man at liberty.
for do but consider with your selves, if the Lord should have left it merely
in the power of the Church to appoint a Sabbath day, it might have been brought
from a week to a month, and from a month to a year, and so if of meeting
together had bin no necessity put upon us by God himse^fe, where would religion
have bin? And do you think God would not have provided for his Church better
than so.

From the Antiquity of its celebration.
Besides, why should it be questioned, when it is transmitted to us from the
most ancient times. Justin Martyr says, that on the day which we call Sunday,
the Christians met together to worship God; and the people came out of the
Country for that end, and it was a Solemn day.

Tertullian in his Apology says as much: and therefore because they spent
that day in worshipping God, all the Heathen called it Sunday. And in all
ancient times it was never controverted, never called into question.

From the usefulness of a Sabbath.
Again, do we not need such a day? Therefore the Lord says, Sabbath was made
for man; as if he had said, I could have spared the Sabbath. It is not for my
own sake and for my worship sake, but for man's sake, that is, lest he should
forget God, and be a stranger to him, which would redound to our own hurt. And
therefore shall not we be willing to keep it, when it was for our own sakes
that the Lord appointed it? What gainers might we be in grace and holiness,
if we would sanctify every Sabbath as we should? Should we be losers by it:
but this is a digression, and I speak it by the way. But mark it, I say, if
you keep the Commandments of God, What means this bleating of the sheep?
These acts of disobedience on his own Day?

We will go on in the examination. Conviction is our neglecting of duty.
If indeed we think that it is the Lord that does good and evil; why are we
so inobservant and negligent of him? why do we reckon it a weariness to serve
him? why turn we Religion into formalitie, posting over holy duties in a
careless and negligent manner, when we should be careful and fervent in the
same? Why is there so little growth in religion, so much barrenness in good
works, the price whereof is more than gold and silver? In a word, Why do we
turn the maine into the by, and the by into the maine? That is, why go we
about all other business as our maine and chief scope, and take in holy
duties by the way, more to stop the mouth of natural Conscience (as carnal
men may do) than for any delight we^ have in them? If we think God to be the
Author of good and evil, why are these things so? Every man is ready to
profess his faith in the Truth hereof, but if we did believe it, we should
be more careful to please the LORD in all things.

Conviction is our not fearing and trusting him alone.
Again, if we think that God only does good and evil, why have not we our
eyes on him altogether? why do we not fear him, and nothing else, trust in
him and in nothing besides, depend on him, and upon no other? In all our
calamities and dangers, why do not we seek to him, as to one that only can
help us, and heal us?

Quest.
You will say, we do depend on God, we trust in God, and none but him?

Answ.
It is very well if you do; but consider, that to trust in God, Discovering
the Nature of trusting in God, which is to be content with God alone.
is to part with all for his sake, and to have an eye only unto the recompense
of reward, to be willing to deny our selves in our profits, and credits, and
pleasures, to be content to have him alone. Thus Saint Paul expresses it, 2 Timothy 1.13. Therefore, says he, have we suffered these things, for we know whom
we have trusted. As if he had said, we have parted with all, we are content to
be led from prison to prison, we are content with God alone, for we know the
power and faithfulness of him whom we have trusted.

To rely upon him in Exigents.
Again, to trust in God, is then to rest on him, when the case is such (mark
it) that if we fail we are undone, then to build on him as a sure rock; that
is the nature of true holiness, and exact walking, when God puts us into an
exigent, removes from us friends, takes away worldly helps, yet in this case
to trust him. Thus Hester trusted God, Which is instanced in Hester.
when she undertook that dangerous enterprise, If I perish, I perish, when if
the Lord had failed her, she had lost her life. So Daniel trusted God, And
Daniel.
when he would put himself upon him, being in such danger for the open
profession of his Religion, which by death they would have forced him to deny.
Thus Asa trusted God, when he went with a small number against a great
multitude, the Text says of him, That he trusted in God. Now do we thus trust
him? Surely we do not: but when faith and sense come into competition, when
they meet together on a narrow bridge; we are ready to byas our conscience the
wrong way, to go aside, and decline the blow, that is, we are ready in such a
case, though with breach of a good conscience, so to trust in God, that withal
we will keep a sure foot on some outward, probable, sensible means, that if
God fails us, yet, we may know what to trust to. The truth is, we do not
lean to the Lord. For what ^^ it to lean to him? You know a man is then ^^id
to lean, when he stands not on his own^ ^eet, but so rests the bu^ke of his
body on a ra^^e, or staff, or the like, that if it fail him, he falls down:
To rest on God in this manner, is to lean to him; and did we think that he
had all power to do good and hurt to the Creature we should thus trust in him;
but in that we do it so little, and so seldom, it it an argument that
whatsoever we profess we do not indeed believe it. Conviction, or not
walking perfectly with the Lord.
Last of all (to make an end of this examination) if we think indeed, that the
Lord only is able to do good and evil, why do we not that which is a
necessary consequent th^r^of, which you shall find in Genesis 17.1. it is Gods
speech to Abraham, I am God all-sufficient, therefore walk before me and be
perfect. Mark that, when any man thinks God to be All-sufficient, that he has
all power in his hands, that he is Almighty (for so the word signifies) that
which will necessarily follow on this belief, is this; he will be perfect with
the Lord. You will say, I hope we are perfect with God: But if we be, why are
our actions so dissonant? why do we serve God so by halfes, and by fits? why
are we so unequal and uneven in our ways? we are zealous for a fit, and in
some particulars, but grow cold again, as if we never had been the men. We
go on in a good course, till we meet with some cross, and then we baulke
it; till we meet with some advantage and preferment, and then we step out of
the way to take it: Is this to be perfect with God? But if we thought the Lord
to be All-sufficient and Almighty, we would walk perfectly before him. For
what is the reason that any man steps out from God? It is because he finds
something in the Creature, which he sees not in God; therefore says God, I am
All-sufficient, that is, let a man look round about him, and consider
whatsoever it is that he can desire or need, he shall have it in the Lord, for
he is All-sufficient. Why then should not you be perfect with him? why will you
start from him at any time, or upon any occasion? And this shall suffice to
make it evident, that it is a very hard thing to believe this indeed, that God
only is able to do good and evil.

Indeed we care for the favor of Princes, and think that they can hurt us, or
do us good; and therefore we are so intent about them, so busily occupied
about them, but this would not work on us so much if we did believe that which
I have now delivered unto you that God only is the Author of good and evil.

Therefore will we reason with you, Reason 2. To prove the point.
and see if we can plant this principle in you, and strengthen your belief
thereof. For it is certain that all the errors and obliquities we find in
the lives of men, come from this, that these common Principles are not
thoroughly believed, but by halfes, and of them we fail in none more than in
this; for if we did believe that God is the cause of all, we should serve him
with willing hearts and ready minds in all things. It is true, we think God
has a chief hand in good and evil; yet we think the Creature can do
somewhat too, but consider this one reason.

If the Creature were able to do you good or hurt, Reason 1. If the creatures
could do good or evil, God were not God.
I will be bold to say to you, that God were not God, and you might be
absolved from worshipping him: For this is a principle planted in every man's
nature, by the Author of Nature, that we regard or neglect every Creature more
or less, as they are more or less able to do us hurt: now if the Creature
could but in part do us good or hurt, we need not then care to worship the
Lord only, for he only could not benefit or hurt us, but God only is to be
worshipped; therefore he only has power to do good or hurt. For on this
ground we worship him alone; that he only is able to do good or hurt,
otherwise he were not a complete adequate God to the worship that is required.

Reason 2. The Creature should be God.
Again, if the Creature could do any thing, it might challenge part in the
Deity, but it is impossible there should be any more Gods than one: Therefore
it is the Lord only that does good and evil. Thus Amos concludes it in his
third Chapter, Is there any evil in the City that he has not done? And so we
may say, Is there any good that he has not done; where mark the generality,
Is there any evil that he has not done? Therefore glorify him in thy life,
and in all thy ways: Dan. 5.23.
For, as Daniel told Belshazzar, In his hands are all our ways. That is, we
take not the least step to prosperity or adversity through the whole course
of our life, but it is the Lord that guides our steps. Therefore in 2 Cor. 1.3.
Paul calls him the God of all comfort exclusively, so that no Creature is able
to join with him in giving the least comfort.

Object. 1.
But you will say to me, Is this so? Do not we find by experience, From the
operation of second causes.
that riches, and friends, and credit, and wisdom and the like do comfort us?
And that the want and absence of these does us hurt.

Yes, but I may give you this double answer: Answ. 1.
First, The Lord works by them.
these things are at Gods disposing and command, therefore it is not they that
do any thing, but the Lord by them. It is the hand that brings to pass a
thing, yet it is not vertually in the hand, but in the will of the man that
commands it.

But secondly, Reason 1. Which is illustrate by some comparisons.
I answer, It is not these things that do you good or hurt, but the Lord by
them. You know when water heates the hand, you do not say, the water does it,
but the heat that is by the fire in the water. When you take a medicine in
Beer or Wine, it is not the Beer or Wine that cures, but the medicine that is
taken in that Beer or Wiine: So it is the Lord that refreshes and comforts,
he wounds and he heales by the creature, but the creature does neither.

But you will say, this ability is borne and bred with the creature, and is
never separated from it.

I answer, it is very true, the Creature has a fitness in it to do us good or
hurt; but it is not able to put forth that fitness, or that strength, till it
be acted by God; that is, till it be set a work to do it, by his blessing or
cursing: For example, The bread has a fitness to nourish, but if God says
not to the bread, nourish such an one, it shall not be able to do it; for we
live not by bread, but by the word of God, by his blessing of it, and
commanding the Creature to do it. On the other side; take a disease, or any
Creature that is fit to do us hurt, it shall not hurt, unless the Lord say,
go and strike such a wretch, be an instrument of mine to punish him. Let an
Axe be never so sharp and keen, till the Worke-man take it in his hand and
apply it to the work, it shall do nothing: So Gods blessing and cursing does
all; for Gods blessing is nothing else, but his bidding of the Creature to do
such an one good; and his cursing is nothing else, but his bidding of a
Creature afflict such an one: By their different effects.
and therefore sometimes men are cheered by the Creature, sometimes again they
want that cheering; sometimes they have contentment therein, and sometimes
again they have not And hence it is, that there may be abundance of all
things, and yet be no more than as the husk without the grain, as the shell
without the kernel, affording nothing but emptiness. Again, you may have a
hundredfold with persecution, that is, God can give you more comfort in
persecution, and the want of every thing, than you had in prosperity, when you
had every thing supplied: therefore in Ier. 9.23. By places of Scripture.
see how the Lord reasons, Let not the strong man rejoice in his strength, nor
the wiseman in his wisdom, and why? For it is I the Lord which exercise loving
kindness, and judgment, and righteousness in the earth. As if he had said,
if these things were able to do you good or hurt, you might rejoice in them,
but it is I the Lord that show justice and judgment, and am only able to do
all. So in Psalm. 62.10. If riches increase, set not your heart on them, and
why? For power belongs unto God. But they might object, The Lord uses the
means; that is answered in the last ver. It is true, but GOD rewards according
to our works, and not according to our means. And so much for the clearing of
this: and now we will apply it.

First, Use 1.
if the Lord be able to do all good, and evil, To labor to see God in his
greatness.
then learn we hence to see God in his greatness: the Lord is forgotten in the
world, we do not see him in his greatness and Majesty, and Almighty power;
if we did, it would draw all our thoughts and affections to him, which are now
occupied about so many several fancies: Which would draw our affections to God.
I say, they would be all pitched upon him, whereas seeing they are conversant
about poverty and riches and friends and disgrace, as able to do good or
evil: it is an argument, we attribute that to the creature which belongs to
God, The want of it carries us to the Creature, and brings us upon the danger
of Idolatry.
which is no better than Idolatry: as in Colos. 3.5. Mortify your earthly
members, fornication, uncleanness, and covetousness which is idolatry; mark
that. Now Idolatry is of two sorts, either when you worship the true God in a
wrong manner, or else when you make the creature God: and that you do either
when you conceive the creature under the notion of God as the heathen did the
Sun and Moon: and as the Papists do the bread, (for if there be Idolatry in
the world, that is Idolatry) or else when you attribute to the Creature that
which is proper to God, that is, when you place your comfort and safety in the
creature, and so place your joy and delight in him. And thus we do when we
think riches or poverty by their presence or absence can do us good or hurt.
Esaias 41.23. you shall see there, the Prophet uses two arguments to prove that
Idols were not gods: First, They tell us, not things to come: Secondly, They
do neither good nor evil. As if he had said, if they could do good or hurt,
they were gods: yet there is a secret opinion that lodges in our breasts
though we observe it not, By advancing the creatures in our opinions.
that these things can do us good or hurt; and therefore, because our
affections follow our opi^nion, we lust after them inordinately; and thence it
is that they steal away our hearts, as as Absalom was said to steal away the
hearts of the people: that is, he who was not the owner took them. And
secondly, he did it secretly, and so deal the creatures with us, when we have
a secret opinion of them. The rich man in Luke having much wealth about him
concludes, Now soul take thy ease. And when David's Mountain was made strong,
he says, therefore I shall not be moved; and have not we the same thoughts in
us? Are not we ready to think, if I had such an advantage, such a friend, I
should do well? But I say to you, that if you had all these, you should not be
a jot the better, nor in the want of all these are you a jot the worse; for it
is God only that creates peace and commands comforts; that you may set down
for a conclusion. That is his Prerogative Royal, and thence it is that we must
love him with all our hearts, and withal our souls; thence it is, that we are
not to regard the creature at all, because he only can make our lives
comfortable or not comfortable.

If this were believed, how would it change our joys into tears? What an
alteration would it make in our lives? If we did believe it indeed, should we
be so taken up in seeking of wealth, and outward excellencies, and not rather
in growing rich in faith and good-workes? If it were well planted in our
hearts, we should mind nothing but grace and sin: for you know grace only
finds acceptance with God, and sin only provokes him to anger. And indeed
what in the world else is worthy our intentions: you may joy in these things,
but still remember the Apostles rule, Buy as if you bought not, and grieve as
if you grieved not, etc. Why so? Because these things can do you neither hurt
nor good, if they could, they might have your intentions, but they cannot.
Therefore do as Moses did, Heb. 11.27. He endured, for he saw him that was
invisible. What then? Therefore he forsook Egypt not fearing the wrath of
Pharaoh. When he saw God in his greatness, when he saw him that was
invisible, that is, when he saw him as if he had been visible, it removed all
fear of the creature. When a man sees the Sun, what is a Candle or torch to
him? And so will all these things seem to thee, if thou could see God in his
might. If God only does good and evil, why then do you hasten after outward
things and weary your selves in vain for that which will not profit? Therefore
the Schoolmen call sin Aversio a Deo and Conversio ad Creaturam, a turning
from God, and a turning to the Creature.

Question concerning the use of the Creatures.
But you will say, to what end then are the creatures? And what will you have us
to do?

Answ.
I answer, you may make use of these things (I deny you not that liberty) only
use them with a dependant affection, They are to be used with a subordinate
affection.
so as still you have an eye on God; you may take water out of the stream so
as you have an eye to the Fountain; you may take light from the Air, so as
your eye be on the Sun. So that if the glory of the Sun set, you account
all your light to be gone though you have the Air still: that is, you may
enjoy all these outward comforts, you may use your wealth and friends, and have
wife and children, etc. but your comfort shall not be more nor less, nor your
prosperity longer nor shorter, than as God is pleased more or less to shine on
you, by the enjoyment or want of whose favor, you may be happy in the want of
all, and abundantly miserable in the having of them all. Therefore says the
Prophet, You have forsaken God the fountain of living waters, and dug to
your selves Cisternes that will hold no water. What is that? It is as if the
Lord said, what do you mean? It is the Lord that does all; he is the
Fountain, and the creatures are but Cisternes, and all their comfort is but
borrowed. Again, you have in God living waters, that is, comforts of a better
nature; but the water that you find in these pits is but muddy water. Again,
he is a fountain that is never drawn dry, but these are broken pits that hold
no water.

Again, To look to God in all our business.
if God only do all good, and evil, then let us consider that what business
so ever we have in the world, what outward employment soever we exercise our
selves in, yet our maine business is in heaven; we be ready on all occasions
to look to the face of the Ruler, of the Physician of men, and creatures: but
we forget that the swaying of the balance this way, or that way, is from the
Lord, When Jacob had prayed earnestly to be delivered from Esau, God answers
him, thou have prevailed with God, and thou shall prevail with men; so
whatsoever business you have on earth, if you will bring your enterprise to
pass, prevail with God, and you shall be sure to prevail with men; turn
him, and all is turned with him, for all depends upon him. Whatsoever is done
on earth, is first done in heaven, and concluded there, He does instance in
particulars.
and then we feel and taste the fruit of it here. From this general we may
descend to particulars; and from hence you may learn, That it is not our Army
by Land, nor our Navy at Sea that shall secure us at home, or prevail abroad,
though it be well that these things be done, and therefore you do well in
contributing cheerfully to his Majesty, for the maintenance thereof, for the
common good: yet still remember that all your business is in heaven; and that
you must trust more to your faithful prayers, then to your preparations for
success in all enterprises.

It is not our wooden walls that will guard us, it is not the Sea wherewith you
are environed, nor our policy, counsel, and strength that will secure us, and
defend us, but it is turning to the Lord, and cleansing the Land from the
sins wherewith he is provoked that will do the deed. Turn to him and then
he will turn to you, that shall be a blessing on us and all our enterprises.
This is to see God in all things, this is to sanctify and exalt him for God,
in our hearts; and without this all is nothing.

Use 3.
I will end this point with this brief direction: you know there is in every
man (I speak now of every man that is holy, Set Faith and the Spirit on work
to judge of these things.
and not of others who are strangers from God) the flesh, and the spirit; there
is faith and sense: and one of these two every man sets on work to take a view
of the things that are before them. If you set faith and the spirit on work to
look on things, they will tell you, it matters not what outward things are,
what the Creature is, for it is God that does all: set the flesh on work, set
sense and carnal reason on work, and they will bring quite contrary news;
like the wicked Spies that were sent into the Land of Canaan, who when they did
but cast their eye on the state of things there, they were first discouraged
themselves, and then discouraged the hearts of the people; Oh there be Giants,
and walls reaching up to heaven! Whereas the good Spies that looked on things
with another eye, brought another kind of message. Just thus it is with us, in
sending out our Spies to look upon the state of things before us, if we send
forth the Flesh, Sense and Reason, they bring report of terrible Walls, and
cruel Giants, their power is so great, their forces so strong, that there is no
meddling with them; but send Faith, and the Spirit, and the Will, like good
Spies look on things with a right Judgment, and indeed that is all the
difference between an holy man, and another; the one looks on things with
another eye, he sees a vanity in the Creature, which the other does not, he
sees an All-sufficiencie in God, which the other cannot. And therefore he has
only an eye to the Lord, all his care is to serve him, and please him in all
things. So he has no ill news from heaven, he cares for nothing on earth. The
other cares not how matters stand betwixt God and him; so all things be well
below, so his Mountain stands strong; and therefore that we may judge of
things with a righteous judgment, we must be careful to see them in their
true nature, which only Faith, and the Spirit will present. And so much shall
serve for that point.

You see then, Two general points.

Sin c^uses Wrath.


that it is the wrath of God that does all hurt, and the favor of the Lord
that does all the good. We come now to the second point, which will come in
well upon the former: That it is sin that causes wrath; sin and wrath are
knit together, they are inseparable. So that as Elisha said, Which he
illustrates by a Compa^^^^n.
when Iehoram sent a messenger unto him to take away his life, when he was
sitting in the house with the rest of the Elders, Shut the door upon him, and
hold him fast, for is not the sound of his Masters feet behind him? So I say to
every man, If sin and wrath come together, then first shut the door of sin,
which is the Messenger, suffer it not to come in, give it no entertainment, for
is not the sound of his Masters feet behind him? Does not the wrath of God
follow? And shall not that wrath take away our head, as Elisha said? Therefore,
if you will keep out GODS anger, keep out sin.

Object.
But you will say, I feel no such thing. I have committed sin, From the
insensiblenesse of wrath.
and yet have no experience of his wrath following so close upon it?

Answ.
I answer, you must know this, that as diseases must have a time of ripening,
Containing in it the proofs of the Doctrine.
so must sin. You know the poison of a disease enters not into the heart at
first: Sin has certain Vestigia, which are set down, James 1.14. When Lust
is conceived, it brings forth sin, and when sin is ripened and perfected,
it brings forth death. The reason why it brings not death presently, is,
because it is not perfect, because it is not ripe. The sins of the Amorites,
says God, are not yet full. Ahab had committed a sin, he had got the
Vineyard, and slain Naboth, and yet heard nothing of it; but when he had
killed, and taken possession too, then came the Messenger of wrath, and
execution followed. God let Judas go on, till he had made the match, taken
recompense, and betrayed his Master, but than wrath came in upon him. God
stayed a great while, till the sin of Pharaoh was perfected, till his
hardness of heart was come to a ripeness, and then he was drowned in the
Red Sea.

Therefore, in the second to the Romans it is said, There is a Treasure of
wrath.

Now in a Treasure there are three things: Gods wrath is a Treasure.
First, when a man is once able to treasure up any thing, Because our sins
add to his wrath.
he is still adding to it, and by degrees it grows: and in that sense the Lord
has a Treasure of wrath, as we add sins, he adds drops to the vial of his
wrath, till it be full.

Secondly, Because it lies still for a time.
it is a Treasure for a Time, it lies still a while, for else it were not
Treasure.

And thirdly, Because in time it is expended.
when the time of expense comes, then it is opened: And so it is with the wrath
of the Lord, it is gathered by little and little, as you heap up sin by
little and little, then it lies covered for a Time, but in due Season there
shall be an expense of it; if you sow to the flesh, the seed must lie covered a
time, and then it must have a Time of ripening, but at length comes reaping.
Therefore be not deceived in this, though you feel not the wrath presently,
yet think not that it will not follow. No, be assured this link between
sin and wrath cannot be dissolved. You shall find a phrase in 2 Pet. 2.3.
Whose damnation sleeps not; What is the meaning of that? That is, they bring
on themselves swift Destruction, though they think Damnation sleeps, yet it
does not so, it goes as fast as we, and will be sure to meet us in the
journeyes end. So Moses uses this phrase, Your sin shall find you out: And
David in the Psalm says, Evil shall hunt the violent man to overthrow him,
that is, Sin when it is committed, is like a Bloud-hound, which, though a man
be got far from the place where a thing is acted, yet follows the Tract, he
pursues, and gives not over till he has found: So God sets sin upon the
Sent, as it were, and it will be sure to find us out. And for the most part
when we think our selves safest, it destroys us suddenliest. Do not think
therefore, that these two linkes of sin and wrath can be severed. That which
deceives us is this, we see all is quiet, and hear no more of sin, but you
must know that all that while sin is sending its cries to heaven for
vengeance, which are like unto the Vapors in the middle Region, Sin is like
a stormy cloud.
that are sent up insensibly, we see them not, we hear them not, but they come
down in a Storm. As God said to David, Thou offendedst in secret, but thy
punishment shall be before this Sun. Simile.
We think sin a small thing: A great body, when we are past a mile or two
from it, we think very little, which proceeds from the weakness of the eye.
The same imbesillity is in our minds, when sin is past a great while since,
we look not on it as the same thing, whereas the sin is the same in it
self, the same in Gods Account, and shall have the same punishment.

Object. 2.
But you will say, Is this the case of every man, From the generality of sin.
who then shall be saved?

I answer, Answ.
there is a difference in sins. Sin does not always bring the same thing to
pass in all, Yet all sin not alike.
though in some cases it may; both godly men and evil men do sin, Pearls and
Pibbles may both fall into the mire, but one is a Pearl, the other a Pibble.
And therefore are differently punished.
And there is this difference in the punishment, if a son offend, his father
will chastise and admonish him, but not cast him off, the father will spare his
son in whom he delights, but if a servant offends him, he turns him out of
doors, and will no more have to do with him; if you be servants of sin,
eternal wrath shall come on you, he will turn you out of doors, and utterly
cast you off.

We will apply this. Use 1.
And first, it shows you, that if sin still draws on wrath, Of the Point.
To see sin in its effects.
then if you cannot see sin in it self, yet see it in its Effects, in its
Concomitants, as it is attended on by the wrath of God; though you care not for
the blackness of the cole, yet care for the burning of the cole; though you
care not for the foulness of sin, which holiness should teach you to
regard, yet let the fire that is in it move you, specially considering it is
the wrath of God, Which is urged from the Terror of Gods wrath.
which fear and self-love should persuade you to decline: Psa. 90.11. says
the Psalmist there, Who knows the power of his wrath? As if he had said, no
man knows it, but those that have felt it. I say, it is a thing we do not
know: Romans 9.22. says the Apostle there, What if God to show his wrath, and to
make his power known, suffer with much patience the vessels of wrath fitted to
Destruction? Mark it; the meaning is, when the Lord comes to execute his
wrath, he will show his Almighty Power therein: As he shows the Riches of
his glory in his mercy to others, so his very Power, yea the transcendent
greatness of his Power shall be declared in his Wrath. But, alas, wherefore
do I go about to enlarge my expressions of this Wrath? The Truth is, you will
never understand it by the speaking of others, it must be the LORDS work.

If he will manifest himself to you, that is, if he will open a crevise to
let in to your soul the least Glimpse of him in his wrath and anger, it will
amaze and confound the stoutest hearted of you all. Saul was a stout man,
Achitophel was a wise man; but when God manifested himself to them, as he did
to Saul the day before he died, when GOD would not answer him, when he
apprehended God in his wrath, he fell down to the ground. If God be set
against us, let but an imagination, an apprehension, yea, the least thing, come
as a Messenger of his displeasure, as an Arrow dipped in the venom of his
wrath, it shall be insupportable.

Object.
But you will say, I never felt it to be so terrible.

From the not present feeling of Wrath.
I, but if once the Lord shall mingle the least troublesome thought with his
wrath, Answ.
so that you shall see him in it; It is not felt, because it is not apprehended.
I say, that will amaze and confound you, as the handwriting did Belshazzar:
It was not the handwriting that did so distemper him, but the apprehension of
an angry God, that was able to take away his life from him. When God came to
Elijah, 1 King. 19.11. he first of all sent a wind that broke the Mountains,
and rent the Rocks; then he sent an Earthquake, and then a Fire, to let him
know what a God he is: And thus shall every man find him, that meets him not
by repentance. Therefore do not trust to this, that the sins you committed
are long ago past.

I will for that purpose commend unto your remembrance Ioabs case; Sin
remains on Record.
and Shimei's case: Ioab had committed a sin long ago, but he was never a
whit the better for that, his pardon being not sued out, God so ordered it in
his providence, that his Gray-haires should be brought to the grave in blood.
So Shimei seemed to be quiet a great while, but at last the Lord met with him.
I may also tell you of Saul's sin in wronging the Gibeonites, though it rested
a while, yet it was brought home to him at the end.

But, And at length God will strike once for all.
you will say I feel nothing? But let not that deceive you; remember that
terrible saying in 1 Samuel 3. Samuel threatened from God a great judgment on the
house of Ely; but the house of Ely flourished still: It is no matter for that,
says Samuel, I would have you know this, that when the Lord begins, he will
also make an end, that is the greatest terror of all others. When a man
observes this to be his case, to lie in sin, and go on in sin, and think
there is no Judgment, nor greater terror, it is an argument that when God
begins, he will also make an end. As when one that is seldom sick, is seized
upon by sickness, he is as one that is left by the Physicians, there remains
nothing but death.

Object.
But you will say to me, If this wrath of God be so terrible, The remedy
prescribed, is to meet the Lord.
and it be sin that brings this wrath, what shall we do?

Answ.
I answer, It is your wisdom then to meet the Lord: Amos 4.12. Therefore, says
God, will I do thus unto theee, and because I will do thus, prepare to meet
thy God, O Israel. When the Israelites had sinned, says Moses to Aaron, Behold
his wrath is gone forth, run quickly with Incense, and stand betwixt the
living and the dead. It is our case, Wrath is gone out, the Plague is begun
amongst us; therefore let every one look to his own privates, and know that
the way to prevent further Judgment, is to meet the Lord.

But what is it to meet the Lord? It stands in two things: First, in
Humiliation of our hearts; Secondly, in Reformation of our lives.

Which consists, first, in Humiliation.
First, there must be Humiliation, and indeed till then, no man will go in to
God. We preach Reconciliation in the Gospel, but men regard it not because
they be not humbled; men will only cheapen the Kingdom of GOD, but they will
not buy it; they will go through for it, till they know the bitterness of
sin. Men do in this case, as the Israelites of whom when Cyrus made a
Proclamation, that every one that would might go out of Captivity, only they
went, whose hearts the Lord stirred up; and what should stir up our hearts to
go out of the bondage of sin? Surely nothing but this sense of sin,
Humiliation for, and Apprehension of the wrath of God. In the Iubile, every man
would not go out of servitude, some would continue servants still; and why?
They felt not the yoke, for if they had they would have gone out. So I say,
this very Gospel that we preach is a general Iubile, every one may go out
from under the yoke of Satan if he will; but till men feel the bitterness of
sin, the heaviness of his yoke, till men be humbled they will not go out,
but continue servants still. And therefore Humiliation is first required; for
as long as a man has any thing to trust to, he will not come in. It was the
case of the Prodigal Son, as long as his goods lasted, he thought not of
returning home, when they were spent, he hired himself forth, and if that
could have afforded him a living, he would not have come home, nay, if he
could have got husks to maintain life, he would still have stayed abroad;
but when all means of comfort failed him, when he had nothing to support him,
then says he, I will go home to my fathers house. And so till we be humbled
throughout, so that we can see no means of longer subsistence that our hearts
be thoroughly touched with the sense of sin, we will never come in to God; and
that is the first thing we must do.

In Reformation*
Secondly, this is not enough, but that you may meet the Lord there is required
reformation likewise. And herein I will say this briefly, you must remember
that this reformation be general, of greater sins, and of smaller too.

Object.
You will say, I hope there is some difference, and every small sin is not
such a matter. The smalnesse of sin.
I will show the danger even of small sins, Answ.
and so will end this point. The least sin is disobedience against God.
Instance of the example of Saul.
You shall see what a small sin is by that speech of Samuel, 1 Samuel 15.23.
when the Lord had bidden Saul to go and slay the Amalekites, and destroy them
and theirs utterly, but Saul did not so, for he spared the best of the flocks
and Agag their King: Samuel gives him this answer in effect; Saul, says he, be
the thing never so small, yet thy not doing of it is disobedience, yea, it is
stubbornness and rebellion. And so I say to every one, be the sin never so
small, instance in what you will, is it not disobedience? Suppose it be the
least Oath, yea, but a vain speech; suppose it be careless performance of
holy duties be they what they will, yet is it not disobedience? Is it not
repugnant to what the Lord has commanded? The example of Adam.
As the Lord said to Adam, the matter was not the action of eating of the Tree,
but have thou eaten of the Tree of which I said Thou shall not eat. And if it
be disobedience, whether it be in greater or smaller matters; see what Samuel
judges of that, Disobedience and rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, thou
have cast the Lord away by doing it. The meaning is this, When a man comes
under the Lords government, he applies himself to him as the Soldier does to
his General, always to follow him, and in all things to obey him; now he that
disobeyes his General, he casts his General away and leaves him. And thus
Saul was said to cast the Lord away, because in that particular he would not
follow him.

Again, Every sin is the setting up of another God.
why do you cease to follow the LORD, but that you set up some other god to
follow? And therefore Samuel adds, stubornnesse and disobedience is as
Idolatry; that is, you never disobey God, but you take another god to you,
therefore it is no small sin, because every sin is disobedience. And since
God commands exactness, since he has commanded me to keep the Sabbath, to
pray, and to be fervent, and frequent in it: consider it, shall I neglect what
the Lord has commanded me? If there be a command to this or that duty, am not
I bound to endeavor to keep it? And if I go aside, ought I not to return
again, for else it is disobedience.

It is true, A difference betwixt a godly and a wicked man in regard of sins.
the best of the Saints are not able to do all this; that we do not deny, yet
this they do, they endeavor to do it, they carry a constant purpose of heart
to do it, they desire to do it, they never come to give over striving to do
it; they never say, I must give liberty to my self in this, I cannot choose
but fail in this, and so lay aside their wasters: they have continual war
with Amalek, they never make peace with Sin; and that is the difference
betwixt spiritual men and others, they are as a Spring: for if an unclean
thing fall into a Spring, the Spring is not unclean, because the Spring works
it out again: Indeed if it fall into a Pond or Pit of water, that shall be
unclean because it lies there, it cannot work it out. So it is with every
godly man; in every regenerate heart there is a Spring of grace, though he may
sometimes fall into foul sins, yet he will work them out, and clear
himself again: whereas another man when he is fallen into sin, continues
in it, the guilt and power of it remains upon his soul, and he excuses
himself with the smalnesse of it.

No sin is small, for it is committed against an exact Law. Mat. 5.18.
This is a common fault, and therefore I will press it the more. Consider that
which Christ says, Heaven and earth shall pass, but the least jot of this Law
shall not pass: What is the meaning of that? It is as if he had said,
somethings in the Law of God you may think small, which are but iotas, though
other things be greater; but take you heed that you keep every particular, for
there is not a jot of it, but the Lord will have all his servants regard it
exactly; they shall have respect to every Commandment, and to every part of
that Commandment, the least particular in his Law shall not pass away. For
consider, if it were not so, it would be a prejudice to the Lords wisdom, for
there would be something that he commands which we might slight. But the
Lord that has commanded all, both great and small, knows that it is best that
all shall be kept, and therefore though heaven and earth shall pass, yet the
least jot of that Law shall not pass; that this is the meaning of the place
you may see by Christ's exposition of the Law.

The Pharisees said, Adultery must not be committed, but I say (says CHRIST,)
He that lusts has committed adultery in his heart: They said, You must not
swear by the Temple, but I say, Swear ^ot at all: they said, An eye for an
eye, and a tooth for a tooth, but I say, You must forgive your brethren. Thus
we must labor to resist sin in every, even the least particular, and reform
our selves in the omission of the least particle of the Law. And so much
likewise for the second point.

Thirdly, The third general point, Zeal turns away wrath.
we come now to consider what it is that turns away his wrath, and that is
Zeal. Phineas has turned away my wrath, while he was zealous for my sake; so
that Zeal turns away the Lords wrath.

You shall see it exemplefied in Elijah's answer to the Lords demand, Proved by
Scripture and instances.
1 Kings 19.4. What do thou here Elijah? 1 Elijah.
As if he had said, what have thou done abroad in the world? Says he, I have
been zealous for the Lord of Hosts, because the children of Israel have broke
thy covenants, thrown down thine Altars, and killed thy Prophets, and I only
am escaped. As if he had said, I have done the most I could for the safety of
the Church, I have been zealous for the Lord, and therefore he prevailed with
God for his own deliverance. You may see it likewise in Iehu, who being
zealous not in word only, but in deed also, turned away the wrath of the Lord.
The truth of it appears from the danger of luke-warmenesse.


And you may know it by the contrary, that it is zeal that turns away the
Lords wrath, because it is coldness and luke-warmenesse that brings on his
wrath. Rev. 3.16. consider there, what is the reason why the Lord will spue out
the Church of Laodicea, and cast it away? Because it was lukewarm, and
therefore the means to continue or procure his favor, is it not heat and
zeal? Again, Rev. 2.4. The Church of Ephesus fell from her first love, what
then? Therefore I will come against thee shortly and remove thy Candlestick.
Then to abound in love, so that our works may be more at last, than at first;
to be zealous for the LORD, is the way to stay the Lord among us, and to
continue his Gospel of peace.

Coldness provokes as much sin.
Therefore (by the way) it is not only the great sins of the Land that are
causes of Gods wrath, but the coldness of them that are otherwise good, that
causes the Lord to remove the Candlestick. The very coldness of the Church
of Ephesus, in falling from her first love; the luke-warmenesse of the
Laodiceans, the LORD would not endure in them.

Let every man consider this; is his zeal now as much as it has been, if
not, let us know that it is reckoned coldness, and luke-warmenesse: the
falling from our first love, is the cause of bringing Gods judgments on a
Nation.

But what is this zeal? Zeal is nothing else but the intention of all holy
affections and actions. I will go no further than this Text to show the nature
of it.

Phineas was zealous, Which is a stirring up of affection.
that is, he not only did the thing, but his heart burned within him with
zeal for GOD. So as, First, there must be a stirring up of affection; For the
Lord.
Secondly, it must be holy, it must be for the Lord; and this is it that
discovers true zeal, to look only to the Lord, to have no by-respects, as
there may be zeal that makes a great deal of hea^e, and yet it comes from the
earth, although it makes as great a show as the best.

Again, There must be with it intention of action.
there must be intention, not only of affections, but also of action.
Therefore it is said, while he was zealous for my sake among them: as if he
had said, this zeal of Phineas was not kept smothered in his own breast, but
it brak^ forth into action; he did something for the Lord.

And indeed, it is action that glorifies GOD, and that benefits men, only
actions stand on our reckoning: for you know God judges every man according to
his works. It is action that does our selves good, that makes us useful, and
serviceable to men; and the Church, that makes us instruments of Gods glory.
Therefore add action to affection, and know that zeal stands in both, for it
is the intention of holy actions and affections. I will add no more in the
explication, but will briefly apply it.

Use 1.
And first, if it be zeal that turns away the Lords wrath, Not to discourage
those that be zealous.
then why should we discourage zeal; by it I dare be bold to say the City
stands.

Why do wicked men cry down all religion and zeal under the name of
preciseness, The frequency of such discouragements.
and overmuch strictness of life, walking bouldly in the streets, and
reckoning it their glory to wound God through the sides of men? So that they
make those that bear the name of Christ, The ill effects.
ready to reckon that their shame which is their glory; to hang down the wing,
and to seek corners to hide their heads in: whence it is, that the servants of
Christ follow their Master a far off, as if they were half ashamed of his
service, when as they should wear his Livery in open view, as accounting that
their greatest honor. It were well, if some means were used to prevent this.
If it be zeal that turns away the wrath of God, we should do well then to
nourish and cherish them that are zealous.

Are not religion and zeal the two which hold all up? Zeal and Religion, the
pillars of Church and Commonwealth.
Are they not the pillars that bear up the Church and Commonwealth? Are not
they the rescues that deliver the City? Yet do not wicked men with them, as
those that to lop the Tree are still hacking at the boughs? But the Lord still
holds them up, and the world for their sakes. For why is this heap of chafe
preserved from burning? Is it not because there is some Corn some Wheat mixed
therewith? If the Corn be once out, will not the Lord (as men use to do after
winnowing) set the chafe on fire? As women with child are grieved to be
delivered, so the Lord stays till the world be delivered, as it were, of all
his Elect ones, of all the Saints, of all his holy and zealous ones, and then
shall be brought forth the Judgment of the great day.

The World may cast out these men, They are Gods Pearls, though cast out in the
world.
as the Sea does Pearls, among mire and dirt, but they are Pearls
notwithstanding; God knows them to be so, and wisemen know them to be so,
yea, Pearls excelling other men, as much as Jewels do common stones, as much
as Lilies and Roses do Thorns and Briars, among which they grow. What Is the
reason that Elijah is called the Chariot of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof,
but because he was an holy man, that did much for Gods glory, that did more
advantage the State at home, and did more prevail abroad, than all the
Chariots and Horsemen. And may not we apply this to the zealous among us:
Therefore, when we injury any of them, do not we cut off the hair from
Sampsons head, wherein the strength of every Country and Nation, and every
City and Town consists? Yea, the cutting off of them, is like the cutting off
of his locks, which the more the grow, the more strength a Kingdom has. I
say no more, but commend it to every man in his place, wishing that you would
let it be your general care to encourage true Religion and Zeal, the omitting
whereof, I am persuaded, is one of those things which causes the Lords hand to
be stretched forth against us.

Use 1.
Secondly, if it be Zeal that turns away the LORDS wrath, Containing many
Convictions of our want of Zeal. 1. From the formality of the Times.
then where is the Zeal that should be among us?

Are we not rather fallen into those later times the Apostle speaks of, which
should have a form of Religion without the Zeal, and Power and Life of it?
And if Zeal turns away Gods wrath, certainly then this formalitie, this
overlinesse of Religion, this coldness without Zeal and Power, is it that
brings on his wrath. It is true, and we cannot deny but knowledge abounds
amongst us, as the waters in the Sea: But where is the Salt? That is, where is
that Zeal, and holiness that should season all our knowledge? Where is the
Fire that should add practice to our knowledge, and make it an acceptable
sacrifice to GOD? We have the light of former Times, but not their heat: As he
complains, Ignis qui in Parentibus fuit calidus, in nobis lucidus; The Fire
which in ancient Times was hot, is now only light. We think it enough to go
to Church, to receive the Sacrament, and so to keep a round, as it were, to
do as most do, being carried about with the general course of the World, as
the Planets are with the rest of the Spheres, contrary to that which should be
their proper motion. But, I beseech you, consider it. Is this Religion? Is this
the Power of Godliness; is this to be Baptized with the Holy Ghost, which is
as Fire? Surely, Religion stands not in these outward formalities, but in
changing the heart, in making us New Creatures, in mortifying our Lusts, and
thoroughly purging out the love of every corruption. Therefore, if you will turn
away Gods wrath, turn your formality into Zeal, that is, content not your
selves with the performance of the duties of Religion externally, but get that
wherein the power of godliness consists, else the outside of Duties will not
divert Wrath.

Again, Conviction. From our want of affection for the Lord.
did Zeal turn away the wrath of the Lord, then where are our zealous
affections? Why are we not zealous for the Lord, and zealous against sin? You
know Christ died for this end, that he might purify unto himself a peculiar
people zealous of good works. Titus 2.14. Men do good actions as a Task,
they are glad when they be over; but do you them with much intention, much
f^rvencie, much desire, be you a people zealous of good works. Therefore in
Romans 12.11. They are put together, be fervent in spirit, and serving the Lord;
implying that the Lord respects no service, but as it is joined with fervencie:
Therefore know, that it is not enough to serve the Lord in an ordinary Tract,
you must mend your pace to heaven; it is not enough to go, but you must run
the way of Gods Commandments.

And as you must be zealous for him, Against sin.
so you must be zealous against evil: For you must know this (and mark it
well) it is not enough to abstain from sin, it is not that alone that God
will accept, but he looks that you should hate sin. As it is said of Lot,
his righteous soul was vexed with the unclean conversation of the Sodomites,
that is, his heart rose against them, there was an inward distaste against
them; the like you shall see in David and Moses.

Differences betwixt Hatred and Anger.
You will say, I hope I detest sin, and am angry with it.

Hatred is constant.
It may be so; perhaps you are angry with sin, but Zeal you know is an
intention of the affection of hatred, and it is required that you hate sin:
Revel. 2.6. This thou have, that thou hate the work of the Nicolaitans,
which I also hate.

You will say, How do they differ? You shall know hatred by this.

First, it is a constant affection, it abides with us; Anger goes away as all
passions do, it is but for a fit, for a flash, on some occasion.

It sets against the whole Species.
Again, hatred is always of generals; the sheep hates all Wolves, we hate all
Toads, all Serpents. I say, wheresoever there is hatred, it turns to the whole
Species. Now do you hate all sin, all kinds of sin, one as well as
another? Do you not only abstain from them, but also hate them, of what sort
soever they be.

Lastly, Hatred seeks the utter destruction of the thing hated. It ^ests not
but in utt^r de^t^uction.

Judge of our Anger by these ^arkes.


Anger would have but a proportion of Justice, as Aristotle says. Now is it so
with you? Do you seek the utter destruction of sin, abstaining not only
from gross sins, but from all dalliances, from the least touch of sin,
cleansing your selves from all pollusions of the flesh and spirit? If you will
be zealous for the Lord, then know that this is required, that you not only
do things, but that you do them zealously, that you not only abstain from
sin, but that you hate it.

Again, Conviction. From our want of courage for the truth.
if it be Zeal that turns away the wrath of the Lord, then where is our
boldness, our courage, our forwardness for the Truth? Why are we so fearful
and shie of doing the thing that otherwise we think meet to be done? For
Zeal has that pr^pertie among the rest, it makes men bold; the Zeal of the
Apostles was known by their boldness.

But you will say, Object.
A man may be too bold

It is very true; From the danger of too much boldness.
when the horse runs up and down, and is at liberty, the more mettle the
worse, but under the bridle, and in the way there cannot be too much; Answ.
keep the stream within the banks, Danger of Excess must be prevented by a
well regular^ ^g our boldness.
and let it run in a right Channel, and then the stronger the better. It is
good therefore in this case to come to a disjunction, which is the thing that
Elijah advised, If Baal be God, follow him; but if God be God, follow him; and
follow him to purpose. And as Luther wrote to Melancthon, when he began to
faint; Why, Melancthon, if this be the Cause of God, why should we be
discouraged? why should we go coldly about it? If it be not the Cause of God,
why do not we desist altogether? This Disjunction put life into him.

The Objection is prosecuted.

And more fully answered.


I, but discretion and moderation must be used. It is true, but does this
cross your zeal? Does one Grace cross another? Prudence does not abate
diligence, but guides it in its work. It teaches not to do less, but to do
better. Therefore, as for Moderation, you must know it stands in avoiding the
Rock, in declining the extreme, but Moderation in a right course, is not
moderation, but lukewarmenesse, and coldness.

Conviction. From our want of Zeal for the Church.
Last of all, to conclude this point, and only to name the rest. If Zeal turn
away the wrath of God, then where is our zeal for the Church of God? Why do
not we take its case to heart? why have not we the bowels of compassion to
lament over its condition, as if it were our own? It was a most commendable
thing in old Ely, when he heard the news that the battle was lost, that his
sons were slain, that moved him not so much; but when he heard that the Ark of God was taken, that amazed him, so that he fell from his seat and brake his
neck. Consider this, and know, that it is required that you be zealous for the
Church. Let our Gallants consider this, that care not how things go, And those
that will have the Church negligently regarded, let them consider that a curse
abides him Who does the work of the Lord negligen^ly. Ze^le for the Church is
acceptable to God, even when he is angry with her.
And know, that though the Lord be angry with his Church, as many times he is,
yet your zeal^ on its behalf, your prayers for it, your cost upon it, your
labor about if, yea, whatsoever you do, for it is acceptable to God even then
when he is angry with it, when he afflicts i. David was angry with Absalom,
Ioab makes a suit to ^i^ to call home his banished, though David was angry with
Absalom, yet Ioabs suite to David was very acceptable, he could not have come
of a better message. So you cannot do a more acceptable work, than to seek
for the Churches good, and to pray for its prosperity. It is true indeed, the
Lord will take care of his Church, and they that, be enemies to it shall not be
gainers; as Zach. 12.6. It is dangerous to wrong the Church.
They that seek to hurt the Church of God, shall be as a company of sheaves
that go about to suppress a cole of fire, which shall consume them all. And
they that go about to devour the Church, shall be like a man that thinks to
devour a cup of poison, but by it is killed himself, or like a man that goes
about to throw up a stone that is too heavy for him, which falls back, and
crushes him to powder. All these expressions there be in that Chapter. It is
true, he will not cast away the care of his Church, he will defend it against
them that oppose it; but in the mean time, if you do not your part, you shall
lose your glory, nay, you shall be guilty of Negligence, which will bring a
Curse with it upon you.

Direction what we must do for the Church.
But you will say, What would you have us to do for it?

I answer, We must consider the Church abroad, and at home.

Abroad.
For the Churches abroad we will not prescribe unto you any particular
direction, only we will commend to you this general, That you seek their
safety and preservation, and the propagation of Religion among them, with all
care and intention, as you shall see occasions and circumstances to require.

At home.
But for the Church at home, you see the Lord has begun to make a breach upon
us. And as it is in Ezekiel. 22.30. He seeks for a man among us that may stand
in the Gappe.

It is well done that you have gone so far, as you have, but remember that it
is a thing that the Lord desires. And know withal, that the Lord marks what
every man does for his Church, he observes who is zealous, and who sits still,
he takes notice who does nothing, who does something, and how much every man
does: As in Malach. 3.16. The Lord harkened, and heard, and a Book of
Remembrance was written. The Lord harkens and hears what every man speaks,
what every man does, yea, to what end, with what heart; how his Church is
thought upon. Concerning the Church at home three things are ^^mmended to
^onsideration.
Consider this therefore, that you may be stirred up to do more.

You will say, What would you have us to do more? I will commend these three
things unto you, and so conclude this point:

First, Execution of Judgment.
do as Phineas is in the Text said to do, the thing he did to turn away the
wrath of the Lord was, executing of judgment in the punishment of Z^mri and
Cosby that had committed that great si^ne. And mark this, when Phineas began
to stir, the Lord ceased to strive. And know, that the Lord regards not so
much what the particular sins of a Nation or Church are, as what the action,
the behavior, the carriage of the S^ate tow^^^s them is. Doubtless the action
of both the Houses of Parliament declaring their zeal both ^^w and heretofore,
has ^^^ne a great mea^es of turning away the Lords wrath, and will ^e more and
more, if you do so more and more. This is a thing I cannot b^^lke seeing the
Text casts me on it; that this zeal of Phineas, this act of his in punishing
sin turned away the Lords wrath.

You will say, Specially against three things:
what things should we punish?

Three things, First, Whoredom: you see here ^he people committed whoredom as
it is plainly mentioned by the Apostle. Whoredom
Be not ye fornicators as some of them were, and fell in one day so many
thousands.

Another sin was Idolatry, Idolatry.
they joynd themselves with Baal-peor.

And there is a third sin, Injustice.
not mentioned here, but is as frequently mentioned by the Prophets, to have a
hand in common judgments as any other, and that is Injustice; when
righteousness^ is turned into Hemlocke, and judgment into worme-wood; that is
a thing that must be remembered among the rest. Indeed there may be mistakes in
the administration of Justice, which through ignorance and the not perfect
knowledge of a cause may be fallen into; but the Injustice, that turns
righteousness into wormwood, as I said before, must be remembered, and that
is, either Briberie, or that respecting of persons in Judgment, which is
equivalent thereunto, and will come in among the rest. These be sins, the
punishment whereof turns away the wrath of the Lord. Therefore remember these
in particular, and consider what it is to spare in this case; Saul was lost by
sparing Agag: and remember what Elijah gained, and Iehu gained by being
zealous. The manner we will wholly leave to you, only, be zealous for the Lord.

Contention for the Faith.
The second thing you must do for the Church, to turn away the Lords wrath,
is, to contend for that which maintains the Church, I mean, Faith; maintain
that which maintains you, preserve that which preservs you, the whole Church
and Kingdom. We will therefore commend to you, that of Judges, I exhort you,
says he, that you contend for the faith which was once given to the Saints:
Mark it, you are to contend earnestly, for so much the word implies, herein we
are to be contentious men. The very example of our adversaries may teach us to
contend for the Truth, if we consider, how they contend f^r the contrary; To
which we should be provoked by the practice of her enemies.
if we observe what unity there is among them, what joint consent in opposing
the truth. Again, remember what you are to contend for, it is for Faith, for
the whole doctrine of Faith, every jot whereof is precious, and it is the faith
that was once given to the Saints. As if he had said, look to it, if you lose
it, it shall be recovered no more. Christ will not come again from heaven to
deliver this point of doctrine. And again, it was once delivered to the
Saints, for what? Certainly to be kept as we keep Pearls and Jewels, that it
may not suffer the least detriment.

And let no man say he has nothing to do with this, for it is the common faith
which every man has to do with: you know in common things wherein every man
has interest, every man is ready to maintain his right. Consider this, and
stand for the whole Faith, for all the doctrine of Faith, and know, that these
are matters of exceeding great moment; all that we have said before of the
punishment of Injustice, Whoredom, Idolatry, and Superstition, etc. is not so
much as this; for a man may turn aside to these sins, and yet have a right
judgment, but so long as the judgment is perverted, the soul is
irrecoverable.

Again, these are of exceeding great consequence, for what Elisha did with the
Syrians, who when they thought they were led to the man whom they sought to
take, were brought into Samaria to be taken; the same falls out where there is
an error of faith: that which men think builds them up unto the Kingdom of
GOD, leads them to that which will be their destruction. Therefore contend for
the Faith, for the whole doctrine of Faith, for every point of Faith, and
remember to contend for it earnestly.

Advancement of the Ministry.
The third and last action that we will commend unto you, is this, Labor to
do that most which will most glorify God, that is, endeavor to set up a
learned Ministry in the Land and Church: you know it is a great complaint, My
people perish for want of knowledge; and who are they that perish? Acts 20.28.
Even the flock that God has purchased with his own blood.

And at whose hands must it be required? It is true, we are the Vines that
bear the Grapes, but you are the Elmes that must hold up the Vines. It is
true, we are the Shepherds to defend the flock, but it must be your care to
see that every flock have a Shepherd. Is it not a lamentable thing to see how
many perish for want of knowledge in Wales, in the Northern Countries, By
setting a Candle in every candlestick.
and in many places besides. Is it not your part to take care and labor as
far as you may, that every Candlestick may have a Candle set in it to give
light? That every P^rish have an able Preaching Minister. It is true, every
Parish cannot be provided for alike; Stars are of different magnitudes, some
Stars are greater, some are lesser, some Stars shine not at all, some again
shine in another Hemisphere, and not in our own, some shine like Meteors for a
little time, and then disappeare again: let it be your care, that all S^rres
that are in the firmament of the Church, I mean those that are to dispense the
mysteries of salvation, may (though weakly yet) like true Stars shine. These
things we must commend to your care, only remember this, you know the wrong
that is done to the flock, By keeping out dogs that will devour.
if dogs be suffered among them, therefore let them be removed; I mean those
that endeavor to put out the light, that so they may the better prevail, and
teach their doctrines of darkness. As when the day is done, the beast wanders
abroad; and do not we find it so amongst us? For where does Popery abound so
much, as in the dark places of the Kingdom? I beseech you consider this and
be zealous. I should have added more, but so much shall serve for the third
point. General point If we be not zealous, Gods jealousy grows hotter.


The other I will but name; and indeed I will the rather name them, though I
do no more, because they follow so one upon another. You have heard that GODS
anger brings all evil, that sin is the cause of that anger, that it is zeal
that turns away that anger.

Now Fourthly it follows, that if you be not zealous, his jealousy shall grow
hotter, it shall increase more and more. The very word Jealousy has something
in it; when the Lord looks on a Church or Nation, the loss of their affection
breeds a jealousy, which is intended more and more if there be not care to
prevent it.

Therefore when the Lord is jealous, he sends some tokens of his jealousy; as
when a man strikes, we know he is angry; so when the Lord sends a plague among
us, we may conclude he is angry. When a messenger comes, the sooner he hat^ his
answer the sooner he is gone, but he will stay till he has his answer: And
his messenger must have an answer
and will the Lord send this messenger in vain? Does he not send it for an
answer? And what is the answer the Lord looks for? That you fast and pray, and
humble your selves, and turn from your evil ways, and be zealous for his
sake. What else is the end of all his judgments? Are they not as medicines, or
plasters to heal a Church, or a Nation or a particular person? They will
stick on till the sore be healed, but when it is healed they will fall off: so
you shall find these judgments of the Lord, as long as we remain unreformed
they will stick by us, till we be healed the plaster will continue. Therefore
are those phrases in Scripture, his hand is stretched out still and still; as
in Deuteronomy. 28. Till we be healed, he will not make an end of correcting: he is
now as it were engaged; and you know when a man is engaged to proceed in a
thing, he must go on till he has brought it to an issue, else it will be
counted rashness; and do you think the LORD will turn from his wrath now it
is begun, unless we give him an expected issue? It cannot be.

Means to stop his wrath is to stand in the gap.
What shall we then do? The way to stop his wrath is to stand in the gap: when
a breach is made in the Sea, or in a River, as long as the breach continues,
the waters come in upon the Land; the way to prevent further inundation, is to
make up the breach. This plague is but a gap, a few may yet stand in the gap
and stop it: you see what Phineas did here alone, and it is much what one man
may do; therefore let every man for his own part humble himself for his own
sins, let him turn from them, and be zealous with God by prayer, by striving
and contending with him; for there be but two ways to stand in the gap, Which
consists in faithful prayer.
one is faithful and fervent Prayer, the other is Zeal against sin, and in
defense of that which is good. I will say no more of this (for I do but name
the point) only remember, that except you do thus, this jealousy of GOD
shall go on, grow upon us, and wax hotter and hotter.

Now the last point of all is this, General point Jealousy for the most part
shall proceed to utter destruction.
that the effect of this jealousy (if it goes on) shall be utter destruction;
therefore says the Text, That I consumed them not in my jealousy: as if he
had said, else my jealousy should have gone on, and that jealousy should have
been confusion. It is yet but a plague, the Land is yet safe (wherein you may
see the Lords great patience, and long-suffering;) but if something be not
done, if this jealousy of his be suffered to go on, if nothing be done to
prevent its further progress, his wrath will end in utter destruction; you
know I need not tell you, how near we were to this destruction in Eighty
eight, Two great deliverances we have had. Beware the third time.
the Gunpowder-treason we were brought much nearer; the Ax was then laid to the
root: this was twice. I will say thus much unto you, take heed of the third
time. The Lord says, well, let the Tree stand yet a while longer, let no more
blows be yet given it, that I may see if it will bring forth any more fruit:
but as I said (and remember it) take heed of the third time; the Lord has
appointed sin to destruction, and he expects your execution of it. I will
put you in remembrance of the story of Ahab and Benhadad, It were good that you
would read the whole story, The story of Ahab is considerable to this purpose.
1 Kings 20.26. you know what was Benhadads behavior to him; the LORD
delivered him into his hand, he offered him what he would have, he entered
into Covenant with him, spared him, and sent him away; but you shall see what
message was sent afterward, Because thou have spared him that was appointed
for destruction, therefore shall thy life go for his life. Sin is now in your
hands, let it not escape execution; I do not speak particularly of
punishment, that I leave to you, to do according to your wisdom, and
according to justice, according to discretion and observance of all
circumstances. Only I say this to you, be zealous, and remember, yea, let it
remain with you as an irreversable truth, that this jealousy of GODS, if it
goes on, will be destruction.

Therefore, learn hence to fear; Security is like a Calm before an
Earthquake: you know it is said of Laish, it was a secure people, and you know
how they fared: They were so secure, that when an enemy came against them, it
was like the shaking of a Fig Tree that has ripe Figs on it, which being
shaken, the Figs fall into their mouth: There is a double fear:
Be not secure, but fear, A fear that puts us upon indirect means.
which is both a sign, and a means of safety.

It is true, there is a double fear: One kind of fear indeed brings evil on
us, and that we shall find was the fear of Jeroboam, who being afraid, that
by occasion of the peoples going to Jerusalem, the Kingdom would return to
the House of David; therefore he falls to indirect policy, and out of that
fear, caused Golden-calves to be set up in Dan and Bethel. Indeed, a fear
that sets us on wrong means is unlawful, as that very thing was the
destruction of him, and of his House, for it lost them the Kingdom. So Saul
had a fear, but that fear was his undoing, because it set him a work to use
ill means, for when he was afraid, he went to the Witch of Endor, which was
his ruin, A fear that sets us to work on good means.
whereas it may be, if he had sought to the LORD, he might have obtained
help.

But then there is the good fear that I commend to you, which is opposite to
security, that is, such a fear as sets you on work to use good means: You
see David, when Zig^ag was burnt with fire; and his men were ready to stone
him, what his fear set him on work to do, to pray, to encourage himself in
the Lord, and this fear turned away the evil. Such a fear was Iehosaphats,
when he feared, he humbled himself before the LORD by fasting and prayer.
Let this be your fear, and let it have such an effect among you, to use such
means as shall turn away the Lords wrath.

And, in a word, to conclude, and it shall be the last word I will speak to
you, mark it well, and harken to it as news from Heaven, as a message from
God. 2 Chro. 15.2.
When Asa came home with that great Victory, the Spirit of God came upon
Azariah; And he met Asa, and said unto him: Oh Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin
hear me: If you be with the Lord, the Lord will be with you, but if you
forsake the Lord, the Lord shall also forsake you. And this I say to you all;
If you will be with the Lord, the Lord shall be with you, and if you forsake
the Lord, he will reject you.

But you will say, what great news is there in this? Mark it; We are apt to
think, that to be with the LORD is not enough, but we must have other
means, and proppes, and helps. No, says he, it is enough for you to stick
close to the Lord, and to take no other care, for the Lord will be with you,
who is Almighty, and able to defend you.

Again, we are apt to think, that though we forsake the Lord, yet he will
not forsake us: else why are we so bold in sin? Why are not we more zealous
against sin? Why mourn we not for the abominations that are amongst us? But
the Prophet answers us for that; If you do forsake the Lord, the Lord will
also forsake, and depart from you. Consider it, and the Lord give you
understanding.

FINIS.
THE NEW CREATVRE: Or A TRATISE OF SANCTIFICATION. Delivered in Nine Sermons,
upon 2 Cor. 5.17. By the late faithful and worthy Minister of JESUS CHRIST,
JOHN PRESTON, Doctor in Divinity, Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty,
Master of Emmanuel College in Cambridge, and sometime Preacher of Lincolns
INN.

ROMANS 12.2. Be not conformed to this world, but be ye transformed by the
renewing of your mind. GALATH. 6.15. For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision
avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature. LONDON, Printed by
R. B. for NICOLAS BOURNE, and are to be sold at his shop at the Royal
Exchange. 1633.

CERTAIN SERMONS UPON THE NEW CREATVRE.
2 COR. 5.17. Therefore if any man be in Christ, let him be a new Creature.


WE have propounded to our selves this method.

First, to show what we are out of Christ, and there our work was to humble
men.

Secondly, to show what we have by Christ, and how we are made partakers of
him, and that is done by faith.

The third is to show what we should do for Christ, and here begins the work
of Sanctification: for (as I told you) these were the three parts of the
Apostles Embassage: To preach the Law first, that it might be a Schoolmasters
to bring us to Christ: And then to preach Justification by Christ: Thirdly, to
preach Sanctification.

Now we have chosen this Text as a ground for the last, having finished the two
former.

We will show you in a word how it depends upon what goes before, that you may
see the scope of the Apostle in these words.

In the thirteenth and fourteenth verses of this Chapter, the Apostle tells
them that he was ill used by them; Some of you (says he) think we are no
better than out of our wits. It is no matter, whether we are in our wits, or
out of our wits, yet we must go through the work of the Ministry, of the
Gospel committed to us for Christ's sake, that is, we look not to you, It is
the love of Christ that constrains us, we can do no otherwise. When he had
said this, he gives the reason, why the love of Christ carried him along to
do his duty, whether he had wages or not, whether he had good report or not
yet for the love of Christ he did it: For (says he) we thus judge, that if one
died for all, then were all dead, that they that live should not henceforth
live to themselves, but to him that died for them: As if he had said, Is there
not reason that we should thus neglect our selves for Christ, seeing he died
for this end, that we should no longer live to our selves, but to him, that
is, he has bought us at a dear rate; therefore we should no longer make our
selves our end, but we must live to him, we must think what Christ would have
us do, what work he will set us about.

Now when he had said this, he insisteth in one particular, wherein he showed
that he did not live to himself, but to Christ: Wherefore, henceforth we know
no man after the flesh; no not Christ himself, that is, we do not regard any
man for any outward respects, we do not magnify any man for any outward honor
and excellency that he has.

Again, we do not vilify any man for the want of any outward excellencies,
but we magnify every man as he excels in grace: yea, Christ himself, though
he had outward excellencies, as other men, yet we love him now only in
spiritual respects, as he is our Mediator; we behold now every thing
according to the Spirit. Now, when he had gone thus far, he draws this
conclusion.

Therefore if any man be in Christ, let him be a new Creature.: As if he
should say, this is a consequence that must needs follow. If this be true that
Christ died, that every man that lives should live to him; then if any man will
have part in Christ, if any man think he have any interest in him to be
justified by him, he must be another man than he was before, he must be a new
Creature, he must know no man nor thing after the flesh, he must live to the
Lord, and not to himself, in all things. So that now he draws it from
himself, and raises it to a more high and general conclusion: It is
required, says he, of every man living, that, if he be in Christ, he must be
a new Creature, that is, he must put off himself altogether, he must be no
more the same man he was, he must lay aside himself, and put on Christ Jesus,
he must be made like him.

We will not stand longer to open the words, because we shall do that in the
handling of the several points that shall be delivered to you out of them. And
first we will take this plain point that the words afford us.

Doct.
That Sanctification must needs follow Justification. Or, Justification, and
Sanctification are inseparable.
if you will, take it in the words that are laid down in the Text, Whosoever
is in Christ, that is, whosoever will be justified by Christ, must have a new
Nature created in him by God, for that is the meaning of it, whosoever is in
Christ, must be made a new man, he must have another Nature, which is created
in him by GOD, that is, intimated by this word Creature.

Now in the handling of this point, we will do these two things: First, we
will show how Sanctification arises from Justification, because that is the
main scope for which we chose this Text. Secondly, we will show you the
reasons why they are inseparable, why the one must needs follow the other, and
then further open this doctrine to you, that whosoever is in Christ, must have
a new Nature created in him by God.


The first thing that we have to do is to show you how Sanctification arises
from Justification, How Sanctification arises from Justification.
and it has a double rise.

The one is from the Spirit that is infused into us presently after we are
justified, or at the same time, only there is a difference in the order of
Nature.

Secondly, it arises from some actions wrought in the mind, whereby a man
comes to this conclusion; If Christ have accepted me for his, if he be mine,
and will justify me, and free me from my sins, then I will serve him in all
things.

For the first, By the work of the Spirit.
as soon as any man has taken Christ, and received that Righteousness of his
by faith, there is an union between Christ and him, and upon this union the
Spirit of Christ is shed into him, Gal. 4.6. Because you are sons, God has
set the Spirit of his Son into you; that is, as soon as you receive him, you
have the same Spirit sent into your hearts that dwells in Christ: and so Gal.
5.2. Received you the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of
faith preached; that is, by hearing the doctrine of faith: I say as soon as a
man is justified, he receives the Spirit. So likewise, Romans 8.9. You are not in
the flesh, but in the Spirit, etc. and he that has not the Spirit of Christ is
none of his, that is, as soon as we are justified, God sends the Spirit of his
Son into us, and if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is not yet
justified. And the like you have Romans 6.2. when some had made this objection,
If grace abound, why do we not sin the more, that grace may more abound? The
Apostle says, It is impossible that those that are dead to sin, should live
any longer therein; as if he should say, Set aside all your carnal reasonings,
it is impossible for him that is dead to sin, to live yet therein; how can
he? as if he should say, Whosoever is in Christ, the Spirit of Christ is sent
into his heart, that mortifies sin so, that he cannot live any more in it,
there is such a change wrought in him, he is a new Creature, if he be once in
Christ; that is the first rise, as soon as we are justified the Spirit of
Christ is sent into our hearts.

Objects.
But is not the Spirit sent into our hearts before, when he works faith?

Answ.
It is true, but the meaning is, when we are once in Christ, the Spirit of
Sanctification is shed more plentifully, and in a greater degree than before,
for there is a certain work of the Spirit that begets faith, and the same
work of the Spirit, in its time, begets the degrees of Sanctification.

But now, that this may not be in notion only, we will show you, how the Spirit
works this, that you may not think these to be things carried in clouds, and
to have place only in our understandings, but that you may know it in the
experience, that every man finds in himself, that after he has taken Christ,
there is indeed such a Spirit shed into his heart that changes him. For the
understanding of this, know, that when we come to invite men to come into
Christ (as it is all our business to invite men to the marriage) all the world
stands out, and every man gives that answer that they did in the Gospel, they
have bought farms, and married wives; every man is so set on these outward
things that his carnal heart carries him to, that they will not hearken to
us, so that we may preach in vain: you see to how many Christ himself
preached in vain, and the Apostles had preached in vain, if there had been no
more than their own preaching.

So likewise, now the Spirit is sent into the hearts of men, that when we come
and invite men to come into Christ, the Spirit also secretly compels them to
come in. We are indeed bidden to compel men to come in, but unless there be
another compeller, that is, except there be the Spirit within to do it, the
work is not done, unless there be two compellers at the same time, the Holy
Ghost within preaching to your hearts, when we preach to your ears; except
there be two callers, that when we call men, the Lord send his Spirit to call
you too, it is in vain: And that you may understand this, you must know that
it is as hard a thing to move a man to leave his pleasures, and diverse lusts,
and his vain conversation, as to turn the whole course of nature (which I
call the instinct that God has put into every creature, to move that way that
it goes, as the water to move downward, and the fire to go upward:) Think
with your selves now, whether there must not be an Almighty Power to turn the
course of nature; because the heart of man naturally goes downward to sin, it
descends downward with the same propensity, it has the same (...), as we call
it, the same forwardness and pronenesse to evil that any natural thing has
to go the course, that is natural to it.

Now unless there be an Almighty Power to turn this course of Nature, no man
will ever come to Christ. As for example, That rectitude of Gods Image, that is
expressed in the Word, come to experience, and look upon every man's heart
living, and see whether it be not quite contrary to it in all things, even as
contrary as the motion of the stone is from ascending toward the heavens, but
when the Spirit comes he turns this course of Nature. Now when we come to
do this, do you think that any man in the world is able to work it in the
hearts of men? It is true, a man may go thus far; It is possible for a King,
or for a man in authority, to set preferments on the one side, and punishments
on the other, to make a man to do much, or to suffer much, but all this while
here is but a turning of the actions of men, but to turn the inclinations of
man's heart, it is proper only to God, man is not able to do it in any
particular: If a man's heart be set upon covetousness, Christ says it is
impossible all the men in the world can change his heart: But put the case a
man could do it (as no man can) if he could turn a man's heart, it would be
but in a particular or two, but to turn the whole frame of the heart, to make
a general change, to make him another man, another Creature: It is impossible
for any man in the world to do it.

Or, put the case he could do so, it must be after long reasoning, but to do
it upon the sudden, and at one Sermon, as the Spirit sometimes does, to take
one word, and by it to change the heart of man, it must needs be the work of
an Almighty Power.

Therefore in the 2 Cor. 3. Chap. and the last verse, when the Apostle speaks
of this great change, he says, when we read or hear the Word, we see there
the Image of God, as one sees his face in a glass, and are changed into it
from glory to glory, that is, from one glorious degree to another: But how is
this done? It is done, says he, by the Spirit of the Lord. As if he should
say, It is impossible for a man to be turned into the glorious Image of God,
and not by the Spirit of God. A man may as well say, I will make a clod of
earth a shining Star, as to say he can make the carnal and dead heart of man
to be like the Image of God: It must be the Spirit of God himself that must
do it, it is a work above Nature: It is therefore done by the Spirit, which
does so enlighten the understanding, and so bow the will, that whereas before
there was in man such a strong appetite, such a strong propensity to ill, such
a strong inclination that would over-weigh all the reasons that could be
brought to the contrary, when the Spirit has wrought this work, there is such
a contrary inclination, such a propensnesse to God, and to that which is good,
that it over-ballanceth all the temptations that the world, the flesh, and the
Devil can lay against it.

Is not this a mighty Power that must do this, that whereas there was in a man
before such a strong inclination to sin, there is a disposition so contrary
now, such a desire wrought in him, such a strong impression that carries him to
God, to Christ, and to holiness, that let all the reasons in the world be
brought to the contrary, they cannot keep him off.

Quest.
But, you will say these things that you speak are wonderful things, how shall
we have this wrought in us?

Answ.
By being in Christ this wonder is wrought in us, when a man is once ingrafted
into Christ, when he has once received him, this great work is wrought in
him in his heart, he is made a new Creature.

But if you add to this the second way of raising this Sanctification from our
Justification, then you will understand it yet more fully and distinctly.

There are certain actions wrought in our souls, by which this Sanctification
follows Justification, and those are these.

First, By certain actions in the mind and heart, which are the effects of
the Spirit in him.
when a man sees great reason for it, for when a man is once convinced of a
thing, that it is best for him to do it, and takes a resolution to him to
perform it. Now when a man has been humbled, and knows what sin is, Upon
the understanding.
when he has had his heart prepared, when he comes in once to take Christ,
that is, when he sees his own baseness, and Christ's excellency; what he was
without Christ, and what he has by Christ, that when he expected nothing but
death, then the Gospel came and said, Thou shall live: when he sees that
Christ deals with him after this manner, then he thinks surely, It is good
reason that I should serve him, before indeed we think his service to be an
hard service, and we do with him, as people that are under a tyrannous King,
they refuse to obey such an one; so does all the world with Jesus Christ; they
think his Law to be an hard Law written with blood, and they think him to be
an hard Governor, such a King as they know not how to be subject unto: But
when a man is once convinced by the Spirit, when he sees reason for it, when he
is persuaded that Christ will govern him for his wealth, that Christ has
suffered for him, and freed him from the wrath of God, then he thinks thus;
There is reason that I should suffer him to rule over me, and when a man sees
reason for it, he comes then willingly to submit himself to Christ. This is
the work of the Spirit, whereby he persuades a man that there is reason for
it, and it is attributed to the Spirit. John 16 The Spirit convinces of Sin,
of Righteousness, and of Judgment; that is, it shows us that we are sinful,
and that there is a Righteousness in Christ to heal that.

And thirdly, it convinces us that there is reason for it, why we should serve
God in Sanctification and Judgment. The meaning of the word, He shall
convince, is that the Spirit shows us reason why we should embrace
Sanctification, and serve the Lord in all things: Now when the heart of man is
brought to this, to see reason and equity in this, then a man takes resolution
to cleave to Christ, to serve him.

Upon the affections.
Secondly, as he deals with the reason, so he does likewise with the
affections, for he begets love in us, which love sanctifies us, it sets us on
work, and turns the whole heart, as the Rudder turns the Ship, for it sits
in the stern of a man's Soul, and the reason (that when we are justified we
love Christ) is, because when as before a man magnified himself, setting
himself at an high rate, like a virgin that is coy and curious, thinking no
man good enough for her: now the Law coming and convincing him of the need he
stands in of CHRIST, and showing him what he is in himself, he is hereupon
content to marry with the Lord Christ: Nay further, the Spirit of God not only
shows him the need that he stands in of an husband, he being not under covert,
and deeply in debt, the whole weight of his debt lying on himself, but it
goes further, and shows him the beauty of Christ, as Ioh. 14.21. To him that
loves me I will manifest my self; that is, I will declare my beauty, and when
the Spirit shows Christ to the Soul, it makes it in love with him.

We may show him to you an hundred times over, and yet beget not this affection
in you, but the Spirits showing is effectual to that end, and when you love
him, you must needs please him in all things, it being the care of the married
wife to please the husband.

So that when the heart is prepared by humiliation, and takes Christ, love is
wrought in the Soul, and love sanctifies; for Sanctification is nothing else
but a setting our selves apart from common uses, and keeping of the heart close
to God, making it peculiar to him, and this love makes us to do: when the wife
loves the husband, she will be his altogether, she will be only to him, she
will be divorced from all Adulterers, and have nothing to do with them; and
thus the Lord deals with the affections.

Thirdly, there is wrought not only a love to the Lord, Self-love is
sanctified.
but a persuasion that it is good for our selves to serve him in holiness:
Indeed many times, to satisfy our affections, we love a thing too much, though
we do not think our selves gainers thereby, but in this matter the Lord
persuades us, that it is best for our selves to sanctify him in all things, to
draw near unto him, to sanctify his Name in our hearts; so that now not only
love to Christ, but even self-love also is set on work to the making us New
Creatures; for the ways of God are propounded as good and profitable, and
pleasing things, and when the heart looks on them, it sees them as good for it
self, so that the heart turns toward them (as it cannot but do to every
thing that it apprehends to be good and profitable to it.

So that when the Holy Ghost shall persuade a man that it is best for himself,
that he shall best provide for himself every way, by taking Christ, he cannot
choose but come in, when he shall see it is best for him to go to the City
of refuge, that he cannot live else, and that if he comes there he shall have
life, and not only life, but a kingdom too, and that the way that leads
thereto is grace and holiness; he will go, and go fast enough. When a man
is persuaded, Christ is the City of Refuge, to whom I must go, else I cannot
be safe, and that the way to him is to be a new Creature; this makes him to go
on, and willingly too, for it is out of self-love.

Ingenuitie is wrought.
Again, when a man is justified and has taken Christ, there is bred in him an
holy Ingenuitie which makes him so thankful to Christ, that he is ashamed to
join Christ with any sin: As Romans 6.21. What profit had ye in those things
whereof ye are now ashamed; you are now ashamed to commit them any more.

A man will think it now an unreasonable thing, that Christ should do so much
for him, be crucified for him, and so give him life, being before dead men,
that he should take flesh for the remission of his sins, and that he, in
recompense of this kindness, should serve his lusts. Therefore he reasons, as
Joseph did with his Mistress; Shall I do this, and so sin against God, and
my Master, he has committed all to me; he has done thus much for me, and
shall I thus requite him? And as Nathan taught David to reason, Has the Lord
made thee King over Israel, and done thus and thus for thee, and will thou
serve him thus? So that I say there is an holy Ingenuity bred in us, whereby
out of thankfulness we will shun whatsoever may offend him.

Besides this, Nobleness of Spirit.
we are taught that we sustain another person, and every man desires to
maintain the dignity of the person he sustaines. When a man is once in
Christ, he thinks not the courses he lived in before, to be suitable to the
condition he is now in. Therefore the Apostle reasons, 1 Pet. 1.14. Fashion
your selves no longer after the lusts of your former Ignorance, but be holy, as
he is holy; that is, if you take your selves to be in Christ, and that you be
come unto God, admit not any more those lusts, which though they suited with
your former (yet not with this condition) he reasons as Nehemiah did, Shall
such a man as I do this?

A strong inclination.
Lastly, which is the chiefest reason of all, As soon as a man has taken
Christ, and is justified, there is a strong impression made upon his Soul, by
which he is caused to cleave unto him, and to long after him, as the Iron does
after the Lodestone, that cannot be at rest until it has attained it. A man
shall set himself in the ways of God, though it were but to give satisfaction
to the desires of his Soul. And indeed, were it not for this, we should not
serve the Lord; this makes us New Creatures: I say, there is a strong
inclination in every man that is justified, that he can do no less than serve
the LORD even to satisfy that.

For example, when Eliah had called Elishah, he could not choose but follow
him, all the reasons in the world could not keep him back: At the time when he
cast his mantle on him, there was an impression made on him; as when Christ
said to Levi, and Peter, and Andrew, and the rest, follow me, their profits,
and nets, and fathers were nothing, they needed no more persuasion, for there
was a secret impression made upon their hearts together with Christ's Word, and
to satisfy that they must needs follow him. Such an impression as this, was
made on the heart of Ruth to follow Naomi, you know how she put her to it, but
Ruth would not go back for she loved her, and therefore nothing but death
should separate them. And the same was in Jacob to Rachel, seven years, and
seven years service, the length of time and hardness of labor could not keep
him from his Uncles house, nor drive him off, such a strong desire was planted
in his heart toward her: and such a desire is planted in the heart of every
Christian that is justified, a strong Instinct (as I may call it) a strong
affection after Jesus Christ, and he must needs go on in the ways of
Sanctification, seeing there is no other way to satisfy himself.

So that putting all this together, when a man shall see such reason for
holiness, when he shall have affections of delight therein, of love thereto,
when he shall see it best for him, and that it is impossible he should have
the Lord Jesus Christ (whom he so much desires) if he serve him not in the
duties of Sanctification, he must needs come to a fixed resolution, I will be
another man, and run another course, I will change my life altogether, I will
serve him in holiness, and in the duties of new obedience. And after this
manner does Sanctification arise from Justification? first from a work of the
Spirit, and then by all these passages that go through the mind of a man,
which though they be not marked distinctly, yet are truly in the heart. And so
much for the first point. Sanctification and Justification are inse^^


Now we will come to the second, which is, That Justification and
Sanctification are inseparable, they cannot be disjoined.

But you will say, this is a point that needs no proving, I would (my Brethren)
it did not, I would that men were persuaded of the truth of it, but we may see
by the lives of men that they are not persuaded of it, for their lives be
loose, and they think, that if they can call on Christ in the day of death,
and cry for pardon, it will be enough, and that without such strictness a man
may be saved.

Reason 1.
Therefore, to make it clear to you, you must remember this as a ground: No man
can be saved by the second Adam, except he be borne of the second Adam: As no
man could be condemned by the first Adam, that was not borne of the first Adam;
for the reason why all men's natures are corrupted is, because all are borne of
him. If a man were created and did not descend by generation from him, he
should be free from Sin, and so could not be condemned, but coming out of
his loins, puts us into a condition of condemnation: And so on the other side,
except you be borne of the second Adam, you shall not be saved; What is that?
You must be made New Creatures, Ioh. 1.12. As many as received him he made the
sons of God: What is that a mere title? No, verse the thirteenth, They are
borne not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but
of the will of God. that is, they are borne of the second Adam: and Ioh. 3.5.
Whosoever is not borne of the Spirit, shall not enter into the Kingdom of God.

Now as our nature was corrupted in the first Adam, there being a compact and
covenant between God and him, that if Adam stood, all his seed should stand
with him; but if he fell, then that all that were borne of him should by virtue
of that covenant, compact, or agreement have his sin imputed to them, and so
should be corrupted, as he was, and die the death. So there was a second
covenant between us and the second Adam, which is the new Testament spoken of
in Ier 31 and in Heb. 8. I will make a new Covenant, says God: And what is
that? I will put may Law in your mind, and write it in your inward parts: that
is, by virtue of the compact and agreement, which is the new Testament
following upon the former, all that shall be saved by Christ, shall be borne of
him, they must be new men; whosoever shall be justified by him must be a new
Creature.

Secondly, Reason 2.
because it is the will of God; It is true, God might have saved us without it,
if it had been his pleasure, it had been no more but calling men at the hour
of death; but is otherwise, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3* This is the will of God even your
Sanctification. And if there were no other reason but Gods will, that those
that be justified shall be sanctified, it is enough: God has called you to
holiness; he has appointed it, he wills it, and his will is sufficient to
enforce it.

Again, consider when we are ingrafted into Christ, Reason 3.
it it not simply an ingrafting, but we are ingrafted into the similitude of
his death and resurrection, Romans 8. that is, no man is ingrafted into Christ,
but sin is crucified in him, he is dead thereto, that is, he is a dead man
in regard of the life of sin, and is alive to God, as Christ rose from the
dead, so he is raised to newness of life. If it had been simple ingrafting
into Christ, there had needed no further Relation, but we are ingrafted into
the similitude of his Death and Resurrection.

Reason 4.
Again, it was the end of the Lords coming; If he had come only to save men,
there had been no need of being New Creatures, but he came also to purify
unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works, and to destroy out of
man the works of the Devil, and to purchase to himself an holy Generation,
and Royal Priest hood. Now whatsoever the Lords end is, he never fails of.

Reason 5.
Again, you must consider, that to whomsoever Christ is a Priest, he is also
to them a Prophet and a King, he is anointed to all these Offices: And
therefore if you will be saved by him, by the virtue of his Priesthood, you
must take him as a Prophet, that is, you must take his counsel in all things,
and not only so, but he must also be your King; you must not only learn his
way, but you must also be perfectly subject and obedient to him, to walk
therein. Indeed as a Priest, he reconciles God unto us, but not us to God,
except he come with his other two Offices, for man stands out and will not
know the way; and therefore as a Prophet, He is to guide our feet into the way
of peace: and that is not all, therefore because our hearts are stubborn, and
will not come in, he exercises his Kingly Office, And brings into subjection
every thought to the obedience of his will.

Again, look to all the means, as first to Faith, the same Faith that
justifies, does also purify the heart; Having their hearts purified by faith,
Act. 15. And as many as are sanctified by faith that is in me, Act. 26.28.

And likewise the blood of Christ not only covers, but also heales, Hebr. 9.14.
How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through his eternal Spirit
offered himself to purge your Consciences from dead works, etc. It has not
only virtue to take away the guilt of Sin, but it is effectual also to purge
the conscience from the power of sin.

Again, the Gospel we preach does not only offer Christ, but likewise
cleanses, You are clean through my Word, Ioh. 15. And in the hundred and
nineteenth Psalm, and the ninth verse, Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his
way? by taking heed thereto according to thy Word.

The Spirit as it is a Spirit of Adoption, so is it of Sanctification, making
clean the room where it dwells, and making it a fit Temple for the Lord.
Consider the Sacraments, Baptism does not only wash from the guilt of sin* but
from the filth of sin also, from the blot and deformity of sin. And so I have
done with these two points, how Sanctification rises from Justification, and
that they cannot be separated.

Before we proceed to other Observations, we will, by way of Use from the
inseparability of Justification and Sanctification, Use 1.
draw this consequent, that, Pray that seeing God has justified us, he would
also sanctify us.
if they be inseparable, we should go to God and beseech him, that having
given us the first, that he would grant us the second also. If you have any
assurance that your sins are forgiven you, Encouragements to pray for
Sanctification.
let him not deny you this to make you new Creatures, they be inseparable, and
therefore you have just cause to pray him not to separate them, Gods promise in
the Covenant.
therefore you may claim them both as your due, seeing you have his promise
for both, and you must urge him on his promise; we desire Justification ^or our
own sake, but Sanctification that we may glorify God: and therefore, when you
come to God with this request, Lord make me a new Creature, that I may bring
glory to thy Name, that I may serve thee, and do good in the place wherein I
live, he will not deny thee. Consider but this very Sacrament which we are now
going to receive; The Covenant sealed in the Sacrament.
you must know that the Sacrament seals the whole Covenant of God, as 1 Cor.
11. 1 Cor. 11.25. opened.
This is the New Testament in my blood, that is, this Cup is a sign and seal
of the new Covenant which I have made with man, and which is confirmed with my
blood. Now what is that Covenant? You shall see it it, Ezekiel. 36.26. and it
contains three parts, all which are sealed by this Sacrament. First, he
promises to wash them from their filthiness, that is, from the guilt of their
sins, which is the first part. Secondly, A new heart will I give you, and a new
Spirit I will put into you, that is, I will make you new Creatures, which is
the second part of the Covenant. Thirdly, I will call for the Corn and will
increase it, and will lay no famine upon you, etc. that is, he will give all
outward comforts, you shall inherit he Earth, and be heirs of the world, and
of ^ll in the world, for the world is yours; 1 Cor. 3. All, and all in it is
yours.

This is the whole Covenant of God, and this he seals to every one of you,
when you come to receive the Sacrament, If you receive it worthily, for it is
the New Testament in his blood.

And therefore, seeing he seals it to you, that he will give you a new heart,
and a new Spirit, and make you new Creatures, you should go to him and claim
it of him, for you may sue him of his own bond written and sealed, and he
cannot deny it; therefore beg it, and you cannot miss of it.

This is a very comfortable doctrine, if it be well considered. For what is
that that keeps a man from coming to Christ, but his discouragements? He
thinks it so hard a thing to be a new Creature, that he cannot attain it,
that he cannot leave such a course of life, and therefore he stands off, and
though he will come in, yet he will not as yet, because it is a bondage
intolerable.

But you do not consider what it is to have a new Nature: If it were to have a
new life and an old heart, it were otherwise; but the Lord will give a new
heart, and if he will not deny you, but make you new Creatures, you may be
encouraged to go to him: If there be any Rebellion in your heart, any
untowardnesse in your nature; if you go to him for the removal of it, it is
impossible he should deny you, having made you a sure promise, and confirmed it
with a oath.

The Covenant confirmed with an oath.
What the Lord swears to, he is sure to perform. In all the Book of God, you
shall not find that he swear unto the first Covenant, but there is an oath put
to both parts of the second, Heb. 6.13. Because he could not swear by a
greater, he swear by himself, that we might have strong consolation and
assurance of forgiveness of sins. And so the first part is confirmed.

And for the second, Luke 1.73. The oath which he swear unto our Fathers that
he would give us, that we being delivered from our Enemies, should walk before
him in holiness all the days of our life. Why then will you not believe it?
Why will not you urge the Lord with this, and by prayer desire the
accomplishment of it? As indeed though he gives holiness of life, yet you must
pray for it, as well as you must pray for the forgiveness of sins.

It was Ananias his speech to Paul, Act. 22.13. Rise Paul and wash away thy
sins, calling on the name of the LORD; though his sins were forgiven, yet
he could not have assurance of it, without calling upon the Name of the LROD.

Christ promised to baptize us with the Holy Ghost and with fire, that is, to
sanctify us in greater measure, yet we must call and call again: So Luke
11.5, 6, 7, 8. You must knock as at a man's door that is a sleep with his
children and loath to rise, but if you knock long, and weary the Lord out, and
not suffer him to rest, then he will give the Holy Ghost. Therefore, have you
prayed, and yet find not your selves New Creatures? You have your old hearts,
and old lusts prevailing; yet you must at length wash away your sins by
calling on the Name of the Lord.

And hereto you may be stirred by the Sacrament, The end whereunto the
S^crament is appointed.
which is not only to give assurance that your sins are forgiven, but
likewise to draw more virtue from Christ, to make up the breaches of our
hearts, and to get more grace, and to be made New Creatures in a greater
measure.

So that when a man comes hither, he must consider wherein he is faulty, what
breaches there are in his heart and life, what imperfection there is in grace,
and then he must go to Christ to repair them.

And as you bring more faith with you, so you shall carry more strength and
comfort from the Sacrament.

So that thus much I can assure you of, let any man come with a strong desire
to receive Christ, and to be a New Creature, and let him bring faith in the
promises of Sanctification, and it cannot be but he shall be filled: The LORD
will send his Spirit into his heart, and make him a New Creature: Wheresoever
God has a mouth to speak, Faith has an ear to hear, and an h^nd to take:
Men forgot this, they think that Faith is only occupied about promises of
pardon and forgiveness; but it is not so, you must set your faith on work, on
the promises of Sanctification, and when you come to receive the Sacrament, you
must know that you come to a table where you have fatlings, where you have new
Wines.

And thus you must feed on CHRIST, not only taking to your selves the promises
of pardon, but likewise of Sanctification, that you may be filled with the
Spirit, which is as wine to quicken you, and to strengthen you in the Inner
man, as well as the outward Elements of Bread and Wine strengthen thine outward
man.

So that thou may not think thou receivest the Sacrament as thou ought,
when thou go away as weak as when thou come, when there is no strength,
no vigor in the Inner man.

And so in all thy daily services, when thou come to Christ, thou must eat
the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, as the Israelites did
every day feed on the Mannah.

You must remember his Covenant, not only to pardon, but to sanctify you, and
then you shall live thereby, and every day grow stronger and stronger.

The end of the first Sermon.
CERTAIN SERMONS UPON THE NEW CREATVRE.
2 COR. 5.17. Therefore if any man be in Christ, let him be a new Creature.


THE Woman of Canaan, though she had no countetenance from Christ, The
success that others have had by Prayer.
though he seemed not to hear her a long time, though he gave her cross
answers, yet he commends her faith in an extraordinary manner at the last. She
had never had that commendations, if she had not been put to that difficulty
a little: therefore, when you press God, when you do stand it out, and are
not discouraged, in the end you shall have it in a greater measure, and it will
be a greater commendations of your faith.

And so it was with Jacob, if he had not wrestled as he did, he had never had
that great reward which he had; he never had a greater reward for any thing
that ever he did in his life, than for his contending with God, when God
refused (as it were) when he strove with him, when he would not do it, when he
seemed to be of a contrary mind; yet when he held out, and did not give over
till he had gotten it, he never got so much at Gods hands.

And so I say to every one of you; if you find it an hard task to get this
change, to be made New Creatures, you pray and have sought, and yet you have
not gotten it, yet be encouraged, do it still, never give over, you shall have
a greater measure as your prayers are stronger: for this you must know, that
when you make requests to God, according to Gods will, that then it is the
voice of his Spirit; therefore when you desire to be made New Creatures, do
you think it is possible for God to deny you? No, because this desire comes
from his Spirit. Now it is true, a man may desire to be made a New Creature, he
may desire grace, and yet do it in a carnal manner, that is, he may desire
it, because he sees that he cannot be saved without it, he may desire it as a
thing of necessity, that will make him safe and whole, as a thing, without
which he shall perish: Nature may go thus far, but to desire to be made a New
Creature, out of the beauty and taste of it, out of a desire to please God, and
to glorify him, whose Name is called upon you, out of a desire to please the
Spirit that dwells in you, this is proper to the Saints, it is the voice of the
Spirit, and therefore go on boldly, God has promised to hear you, he cannot
deny you.

See how Christ did when he was upon the earth, those that were lame and
blind, when they came and cried after him, and would not give him over, he did
not refuse to heal every one; there was not a man that was importunate with
him, but, howsoever his Disciples slighted them, Christ respected them. Now do
but think with your selves; do you think he less pities the diseases of the
Soul, than he did the diseases of the Body? Do you think that he has less
compassion now he is in Heaven, than he had when he was on Earth? Or do you
think that His Arm is shortened, that he cannot do as much now to heal the
running sores that are on thy soul, as he did on earth to heal bodily
diseases? My Brethren, if you do but seek to him, if you can get but a word
from him, if he say but to you, Be whole, if he do but rebuke thy sinful
lusts, as he rebuked the Fever, it shall presently obey him: He that was able
to calm the sea, and that has the strong winds in his power, is he not able
to dissolve a strong inordinate apprehension, a strong lust, a strong unruly
affection, and so set them at liberty? certainly he is able.

You know, the woman that had spent so many years, and all that she had upon
Physicians, and could do her self no good by all, yet when she comes to
Christ once, you see it was done in an instant. So, I say, a strong lust, an
old lust, which is contrary to this New Creature, which, it may be, thou have
been contending with many years, and cannot get the victory over it; yet if
thou can come in this manner to him, and contend with him, and knock at the
door, and never give over till thou have awaked him, certainly he will give
thee the holy Ghost, he will change and renew thy heart, he will set thee at
full liberty.

This he has confirmed with an oath, and whatsoever God has sworn, he will
perform it without all reservation (where he is said to do a thing without
an oath, there may be a reservation left, therefore we never find an oath to
the old Covenant) but he has sworn to perform the new Covenant, and you know
this is a great part of the new Covenant, to give a new heart, to make a man a
new Creature; therefore, where the new Covenant is made, there this is repeated
in Ier. 31. and Heb. 8. I will make a covenant with my people, and what is
that? I will put my Law into their minds, and in their hearts will I write them
(that is) I will make them New Creatures.

Therefore, I say, this is a matter of much use to you, If you go to Christ,
and labor to have this done. The great importance of it to us.
My Brethren, there is nothing left for us to be assured, nor any other
experiment that we need have that there is another life, that Jesus Christ
has done these great things for us, and that the Gospel is true, I say, there
is nothing else left for us, no other experiment in comparison of this, that we
see we are made New Creatures: This is all the miracles that we have; nay, I
dare be bold to say more, It was the greatest miracle that they had in that
time, when all the miracles were wrought.

And therefore you shall find that Paul gives this as the maine argument, among
the rest, That they shall be raised again at the last day, that they were in
Christ, that the Gospel is real and true. For, says he, We have received the
Spirit: we have had the Spirit, which is the earnest, the pledge, the
anointing, you shall find it every where scattered in his Epistles, the
receiving of the Spirit is the maine ground that he builds on, as in the 2
Cor. 1.23. He has established us together with you, and has anointed us,
and sealed us, by giving the Spirit as an earnest into our hearts: As if he
should say, this is the Argument we have, that we shall be saved; not, for all
the miracles so much as this, that we have received the Spirit; for that is the
true anointing we feel it in our selves, that seals and confirms us, we
cannot doubt, having had experience of such a mighty work in us, that is, the
earnest and the pledge we have; and therefore, Ephesians. 1.19. He prays that they
might see the exceeding greatness of his power working in those that believe;
as if that would be a great confirmation to them, if once they should find an
experiment of the greatness of his power: And so, Phil. 3.10. I care not for
all the world, on this condition, that I might know him, and the virtue of his
resurrection (that is) that I might know him by the power of his Spirit,
changing my heart, killing my sins, raising me again, and, in a word, making
me a New Creature, that I might know this experiment; I look upon all the
world as dross and dung, as things not to be named. So, I say, seeing there is
nothing else left in comparison of this, and when miracles were wrought, there
was nothing like this, that we might have this experiment in our selves, we
should go to God, and not give him over, till the work be wrought in us, that
we might be made New Creatures.

That which keeps men off from religious courses, for the most part is
discouragement, they think they shall not be able to go through it, when they
hear they must be made new men in all things, that there must be nothing that
is old left, but all the old leaven must be purged out, it discourageth men,
because they think they shall never be able to reach it, whereas this is an
assurance to thee, that if you go about it, you shall not fail of your
purpose, but you shall certainly bring it to pass, because if you seek it at
Gods hands, he cannot deny you, only I told you, you must pray.

It may be for this purpose God will not heal thee altogether, but suffer many
lusts to grapple and to contend with thee, that thou may be taught to do
this duty: and therefore we should learn to go to Christ, we should feed on
him every day, and by that means we shall be renewed, we shall get new
strength; otherwise what is the meaning of that, In this mount he will make a
feast of fined wines, and of fatlings, of fat things full of marrow, of wines
fined and purified? Esaias 25.6. Esaias 25.6. opened.
The meaning is this; when you come to Christ to renew your Communion and your
Covenant with him, which is done through faith and prayer, you draw nearer to
him, and that strengthens the soul, as Mannah strengthened them in the
wilderness, that you live by it; for every day there grows new distances
between Christ and us, we let go our hold, as it were, in some measure, and
begin to fall off from him a little; therefore, every day we should renew this
Covenant, especially when we come to the Sacrament: As Jonathan and David, they
renewed the Covenant of God again that was between them, as if there were a new
Solemnity of marriage, if it were often to be renewed, to make the parties
joined more united: make no question of it, we should renew our match with
Christ, we should come nearer to him, that we may strengthen our souls,
because we recover our Communion with him. For what is Sanctification, but a
drawing near to the Lord? And then we draw near, when we renew our Communion,
and our Covenant with him, when the match is renewed between us; and if we do
so, we shall go from him every day, as men refreshed at a banquet, like men
that have fed on fat things full of marrow, as men full of wine. Be you filled,
not with wine, Ephesians. 5.18. opened.
wherein is excess, but with the Spirit: What is the meaning of that
Antithesis, but to show that the Spirit is like wine, it strengthens, and how
receive we the Spirit? Is there not the same means of renewing of it from day
to day, Is not the same means of renewing it, as there is of receiving of it at
the first? Did not thou get it first by going to Christ, and shall not thou
still regaine and repair thy strength by that means? I cannot stand to press
this farther.

Use 2.
Secondly, in that they are put together thus, Justification and Sanctification,
Set Sanctification as high in our esteem as Iustifi^a^^on.
hence we should be stirred up to prise it, to set it at the same rate as we
do Remission of sins, because we see the Holy Ghost does so. For seeing this
thing is promised, seeing it is chosen out among the great benefits we have by
CHRIST, that we shall be renewed, we should learn so to judge of it, to set it
at an high rate, in our conceits, to conform our Judgment to the Judgment of
the Scriptures.

Every man would be content to be saved, but to be made a New Creature, men
are so far from reckoning it a privilege, that they reckon it a bondage: you
would fain be free from Hell, you would feign go to Heaven without such a
necessity put upon you; this is the common fashion of men; but, mark, the Holy
Ghost puts this among the great benefits we have by Christ. You know the
coming of the Messiah, how it was magnified by the Jews, what great things
they should have when Christ should come. What were those great things? One of
the chief was, to make them New Creatures, to set them at liberty from their
spiritual enemies, That they should be taught of God, that they should have
his law written in their hearts, and have their hearts circumcised to love him,
that they should have new hearts and new Spirits given them; this is that great
benefit that has been so much magnified so many years before the coming of
Christ. It is that, which the Apostles, when they came to preach the Gospel,
set out as so great a Privilege; learn we to prise it, for certainly there is
nothing in the world so precious a grace, whereby we are made New Creatures. It
is a true saying, because indeed there is no excellency that is like it, if
you would rectify your judgments, and teach them to apprehend things as they
are; therefore let us reason with you a little for that old man, The
excellency of the New Creature.
those lusts that you prise so much, Above old Lusts.
that you will not part with, that you cherish and nourish in your selves, and
you are Enemies to those that are Enemies to them, I say, consider what you
do, this old man, is it not the sickness of the soul? is it not the filth,
and the foulness of the soul? is it not the slavery and bondage of the
soul? And the new man, is it not the contrary? does it not excel it?
Therefore as much as health exceeds sickness, as much as cleanenesse exceeds
impuritie, foulness and filthiness, as much as liliberty exceeds slavery and
bondage; so much and more does the New man excel the Old man.

Above all worldly excellencies.
Besides, if you look to other things, take all other things which the world
has, all the profits, all the pleasures, all the learning and knowledge
whatsoever it is, that in the world is precious, yet to be made a New Creature
goes beyond all, because, indeed, it puts you into the same condition that Adam
had in innocence: you will say, to be made like Adam again, to be restored to
that happiness, it is beyond all that the world can afford: Now to be made a
New Creature, it puts you into that estate.

Object.
But, you will say, that is not so, Adam was in Paradise, he had outward
contentments in abundance, but to be made a New Creature is not so?

Answ.
It is true, there were two Conditions that Adam had; Two conditions of Adam.
one was his outward Condition, being placed in Paradise; the other was his
happiness, to be a New Creature: this was incomparably beyond the other, as
we shall easily make that plain to you. Put case there were a man that had
fair Palaces, and Gardens, and Orchards, and all things that his heart could
desire to have, but all this while he has not health; would he regard all
this? On the other side; suppose he had health, put him into a Cottage, if he
have strength, would he not bear it well enough? That is our case. When Adam
had all that, yet when he had lost Gods Image, when he had lost being a New
Creature, he was like a man that was fallen into a great sickness, he was
fallen into terror and horror of conscience, what good could all that do. A
man that is out of Paradise, that lives as we do among men, that has Gods
Image renewed on him (which he lost) that is, made a New Creature, he is
happy, when Adam was miserable. Let us consider a little; What was it, think
you, that made Adam happy in Paradise? Was it the being in a Garden full of
pleasant things? No, it was not that, but his Communion with God that made him
happy. Therefore you see wherein his misery consisted, it consisted not in the
loss of Paradise, for there he was still, he had all that he had before for
outward things, but he felt shame and horror of conscience, he felt inward
trouble and anguish of spirit, when he heard the voice of God walking in the
Garden: therefore it stands not in that, but to be made a New Creature, is to
be put into the inward condition that Adam was in, and therefore you have
reason to seek it. If any thing in the world be worth the seeking, it is this,
to be made a New Creature. All other things are not: the proper excellency of
a man, you know the Angels and the Saints want them, and the Beasts enjoy them,
but the excellency of man is to be made according to the first Rule, to be
squared according to the Image of God, after which he was first created, and
he is never well till he come to that. As no Creature is well till it have
that excellency belonging to the kind of it: this is an excellency peculiar
to man, therefore seek happiness as long as you will in other things, you
shall never find it, but in being made New Creatures, in having Gods Image
repaired, in being sanctified in Body, and Soul, and Spirit, this puts you
into an happy condition.

Object.
But, you will say, these are but Notions, imaginary Assertions, we feel not
such things, give me that man that has the sense of this, that feels more
sweetness in this, than Adam did in all his outward Paradise which he had?

Answ.
To this we answer:

apprehension of all the comforts we have, is not that which stands in the
outward senses, that is not worthy the name, but the apprehension that the will
and understanding has of things; it is every man's mind, that makes a man to
live happy or miserable, that is, his apprehension of things, when thou live
a new life, and thy apprehension is altered and changed, thou have as quick a
sense of those spiritual privileges in Christ, of peace of Conscience, of joy
in the Holy Ghost; of all the benefits that rise from his Passion, thou will
have as quick a sense, as ever thou had of outward delights.

Again, if thou would have such a sense, We are the sons of God, 1 John
3.2.
but it appears not what we shall be: It is true on both sides, those
worldly men that brag so much of their present sense that they have, and that
others want, it appears not yet what either shall be, but you are mingled
together, and there is one common condition to all, because this is the time of
trial. Mark the wise General, he does not like of a Soldier at the first, but
when he has tried him, and has suffered both to run out their course, the
valiant man, and those that are cowards; when their course is finished, and
when the battle is done, that is the time of conferring of honors. The wise
Master does not reward his servants at the first, but he lets them alone, the
good servant and the bad, till their time be out, till the time of their wages
come, that is, the time when he makes the difference. So does the Lord, for
this time the Battle is not to the strong, that is, men have not their reward
here for the present time. Even as it is upon a Stage, both are let alone till
they have acted their part, there is no alteration, but when they come off from
the Stage, that is the time, when the one is commended, and the other is
discommended. So it is with the Sons of God, and the Sons of men, God lets
you both alone for the time, till you be gone off the Stage, that is the time
that you must look for the difference; therefore be not preposterous in your
expectation, be not discouraged, because you have not such outward
contentments, because you are not above, but below, for the present life, the
time is not yet come; for God does not yet rule the world, as he will do; he
has, as it were, left the world to be ruled by others, he has left men to
rule: now error comes from the face of the Ruler (as the Wiseman says) that
is, Eccles. 10.5.
there is that obliquity in the hearts of men, those that are in place of
government generally, That Servants ride on Horseback, and Princes and
Wisemen go as Servants on foot. The Reason is, because men rule the world;
For error (says Solomon) is from the face of the Ruler. But now when God
shall take all the government into his own hands, when he shall be absolute
King in the exercise of his dominion, then he will set all straight, and not
before: then Servants shall go on foot, and Princes and Wisemen shall ride on
Horseback; therefore expect not thou it yet, the time is not yet come that
thou should be on Horseback, thou must be content to go on foot yet. And
therefore, though you have not the present sense, go on notwithstanding, hold
out thy expectation a while, though it appear not yet what thou shall be, yet
it will come when thou shall have the sense of it in abundance.

Thirdly, and lastly, though thou have it not Prove. 22.4.
To humility and the fear of God, to them is promised Riches, and Honor, and
Life: And God performs it in this life, though the full harvest be kept for
afterward: though you have but the first fruits of the reward, as well as you
have but the first fruits of the Spirit; yet, in this life, as you walk more
perfectly with him, so he will with you; and the less you walk with him, the
less he will walk with you (that is) such an evennesse you shall find in
the ways of God to you, such a measure of Judgment and mercy, as there is
evennesse or unevenness of your hearts, as there is so much new, or so much
old. Let us labor to make our ways more perfect, and we shall be more perfect
in our outward estate, we shall be better in our wealth, we shall be blessed
better in our name, thou shall be more cheerful in thy Spirit, thou shall be
blessed in thy wife, and in thy children, at thy going out, and at thy coming
in, in every thing: so that the present wages that you shall have, set aside
that which is deferred for the future, it is exceeding large to the New
Creature; there is comfort enough in the thing, holiness is reward enough to
it self, if you should have no more. If a man be in strength and in health,
what if you put him into a Cottage, what if he be put into prison? he can bear
it well enough: If there were no more but to be made a New Creature, it were
enough to make your hearts to desire that condition; but besides that, it
brings outward comforts in abundance; or, if you have not abundance, it will
make a little instead to you of a great deal.

So much for this, because I have other things to deliver.

Use 3.
Thirdly, are they inseparable? Then take heed of challenging the one without
the other; Take heed of challenging Justification without Sanctification.
do not think that you are in Christ, if you find not that New Creature: And
this Doctrine is of much moment, for this is that, that we shall all be tried
by at the last day, and it is that peremptory Sentence that can never be
revoked, because it is the Sentence of the Gospel, therefore you must know
this, that all the judgments that are pronounced in the Gospel, they are
without all reservation, there is no more revoking of them, therefore Paul
says, Romans 2.16. He shall judge the secrets of men's hearts according to my
Gospel: So that you must know that the Gospel has a judgment, and a
terrible judgment as well as the Law. (There is a judging by the Law, that is,)
men that have lived without the knowing of Christ, they shall be judged by the
Law, but when we come to Christ, to live under the Gospel, (as we all do) we
shall be judged by the Gospel; What is that? those that receive not Christ
shall be damned: that is one part of the Gospel you know; therefore you see
that there is a judgment there; He that believes shall be saved, but he that
believes not shall be damned. Well, as it is true concerning the point of
Justification, he that believes not and takes not Christ, shall be damned for
it: So it is as true in the point of Sanctification, he that is not a New
Creature, he that is not borne again, he shall not enter into the Kingdom of
God, John 3.3. There is a peremptory judgment: therefore consider with thy
self, when thou come to die, what thou will say then, Satan will then come
and lay thy sins to thy charge, thou must then think what thou have to
answer, thou have nothing to say but I am in Christ: well, but how do thou
prove that, he will ask thee that question, Art thou a New Creature? If thou
do find that thou art not a New Creature, thou art not in Christ, and thou
need not a new condem^ation, but thou art condemned already. John 3.18.
For Christ found all the world in a state of condemnation, and if thou be not
in him, thou art in the same estate: and therefore if you should but hear
these words, if we should be silent, and should but read these words,
Whosoever is in Christ, let him be a New Creature: it may make a man tremble,
and look about him, and consider his state, and take heed of disjoyning these
things that the Lord has joined together: if being in Christ, and being a New
Creature be inseparable, think not that thou can take Christ divided, that
thou can take him half, and leave the other part, that thou can take him
as a Savior, and not take him as a Prophet, and a King; think not to have
Justification, and to want Sanctification: and therefore, you see, when the
Gospel was preached, this was the maine thing that was urged, Mark 6.13. when
the seventie were sent out (says the Text) this was their preaching, it sets
down the sum, that men should amend their lives. When Christ himself was to
preach, Matthew. 4.17. this was the sum of his Doctrine, Amend your lives, for
the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. Paul, when he would tell them what was the
sum of his preaching, Act. 20.21. says he, We go about preaching,
witnessing to Jews and Grecians repentance toward God, and faith toward
Christ. So that this Repentance that makes a man a New Creature, it was pressed
as a thing of absolute necessity, as well as the taking of Christ. You know,
when John Baptist came, what he called for, Matthew. 3.8.
Fruits worthy of amendment of life. Deceive not your selves, apply not the
promises of the Gospel, except you find this Symptom of being in CHRIST,
that you are made New Creatures.

This distinguishes between a Temporary Believer, and another; both go thus
far, both have an insition into the Root, but the Temporary Believer partakes
not of the fatness of the Root* he receives not life from the Root: It may be
thou have taken Christ in thy sense, but have thou tasted of the fatness of
the Root, have thou drawn life from him, art thou made a New Creature, as a
graft that is put into a new stock: when we are ingrafted into Christ, there
is an inversion of the order, there the stock changes the graft; in the
other, the graft changes the stock into its Nature. Again, when thou take
Christ without this, it is as putting stones one upon another, when there is
nothing to sement them, and to glue them together: whosoever is in Christ, is
built upon him, as upon the cornerstone; now an Hypocrite may be built on him,
as well as a true Professor; but here is the difference, they are living
stones, their Nature is altered, they differ as much from themselves what they
were before, as living things differ from dead stones; so, it may be, thou have
had an adhesion to the Body of Christ, thou have stuck to it, as it were; but,
if thou be a true member, then thou art knit to it by ligaments and sinews,
thou have communion with the head, there is an influence of blood and spirits
into thee: therefore consider that with thy self; it may be, thou live in
the Church, and art such a member of it, as a glasse-eye is of the body: but
have thou communion with the head, art thou made a New Creature by being in
Christ? Is thy heart changed and sanctified by being in him? If it be so; then
conclude, thou art in Christ; For, if any be in Christ, he is a New Creature.
Examine thy self in this, deceive not thy self, to whomsoever he is made
Righteousness, he is made Sanctification. It is impossible they should be
disjoined, (as I told you in the morning,) his blood has not only a virtue to
cleanse thee from the guilt of thy sins, but a power to purge thy conscience
from dead works, to serve the living God, Hebr. 9.14.

And wheresoever it is a plaster to cover thy sins, it does likewise heal
and cure them: therefore think not that thou art in Christ, except thou find
this to be thy condition.

Object.
Yea, but you will say, Is there such a condition in the world? who is it that
finds himself such a New Creature? this I find that my old lusts return, the
same Inclinations I had, I find them still, and this experiment of being all
new, that all old things are passed away, I have not yet had; what shall we say
to this?

We will answer it very briefly:

Though thou have it not already, yet thou must not be discouraged, Answ.
thou must not say, there is nothing done, because al is not done: for motions
are denominated from the terms they tend to, not from that they are already:
when a thing is a little white, though it be not perfectly white, we say, it
is white: when the Lord begins new qualities, if it be in sincerity, it is
properly said to be a New Creature, for in time it will come to that, that will
be the issue of it: therefore that which stands you in hand, is to consider,
whether you be so or no; for indeed it is a difficult thing to discern, and
needful for you to consider it: therefore I will briefly show you how you
shall discern it.

First, Signos of a new Creature.
you must know you shall have a present Sense of it, A Sense of it.
you shall feel it in your selves, you shall know that such a change is
wrought in you: for this is the difference between the Soul of a Man, and the
soul of a Beast; a Beast cannot return upon his action, to know whether he
have done such a thing or no, but the Soul of a Man is able to do it, it is
capable of reflect Acts, as we say, it can recoile and return upon it self,
and can consider what is done with it: therefore examine thy self by this,
thou may know, whether such a change be wrought in thy heart or no. See it
in other things, thou can tell what thou delightest in, thou can tell what
thine inclination is; for a man's inclination is of a quick sense, it puts him
forward, it carries him to that which he desires: therefore thou may see the
scope of this, thou may deceive another, thou can not deceive thine own
heart, especially in judging this, whether thou be a New Creature. If thou
judge strictly of thy self, if thou have a right rule to examine it by, the
present sense of it may be an assurance that thou art made a New Creature: for
to be a New Creature is nothing else, but to be turned upside down, when a man
changes his course (as it were, from East to West) when he sails to a quite
contrary point of the Compass, when the Rudder of his life is turned:
therefore Paul says, he came to preach, ^^ct. 26.18.
To turn men from darkness to light, from the power of Satan of God:
Therefore there is a contrary course, it is a turning, it is true, if the New
Creature were but a buckling, but a bowing of the course, it would be hardly
discerned, but when it is from contrary to contrary, such a thing is easily
found.

I know such a thing as I hated, now I love it; I know such a duty that was
tedious, now it is delightful; such a thing I could not do, now I can
perform it; go through all the parts of thy life thou may have ^ present
sense.

Wonder not at this Doctrine, for if it were not thus, no man could have
assurance at the first conversion of his heart to God, if it were not that you
might judge your selves by a present sense you have, by that alteration, by
that reflect act of the Soul; for when I say sense, I mean that inclination
of thy Soul; If we could not judge our selves by that, no man at his first
coming to CHRIST could judge of himself, till he had stayed some time; and
then at what time shall we set limits, shall we stay at a day, or a week, or
at a month, or a year, or seven year: therefore a man may have assurance
from the inclination of his Soul, that there is a change in him, or else we
should never be able to comfort men in an exigent: For, except they had had
trial, except they had a long time to live, except they might come to
converse, and be put upon it by temptation and trial, no man could comfort
himself: therefore that is one thing to try it, you shall find a change
wrought, you shall find the inclination of the Soul turned another way: Go
through all the particulars, look through the whole rectitude of the Image of
God, expressed in all the graces of that whole line, and look to your heart
what it was before, and thou shall find in every thing an alteration, that is
one thing to judge it by.

Secondly, The Universality of it.
you shall judge something by the universality of it; Whosoever is in Christ is
a New Creature: The meaning is not, that the substance of a man is changed, but
the order and frame of his Soul is altered, there are the same strings, as it
were, but there is a new tune put to them; there is the same Soul, the same
faculties, but there is a new order there. Mark, as it is in all things that
consist in order, there you must have the whole, or none at all, the harmony
that has not every string set right, in some measure, it is no harmony, but
the harmony is dissolved. Beauty that consists in a conformity of all the
parts, except there be a concurrence of all, the Beauty is dissolved, it is
nothing; so in all things else: therefore consider with thy self, art thou
made all new? for thou must know that God works not by halves; no man ever had
an heart half new and old; in the work of Redemption and re-creating, and
repairing of mankind, there is not a work of the Lord but it is perfect. It is
true, it is not ripe yet, there is a time for the maturity of it, it shall grow
to full ripeness; but yet the Lord looks on it, and it must be very good,
that is, there must be all of it: therefore consider with thy self, Art thou
all new? Is there not some exempted place in thy heart and life that is yet
old, as old as it was? If there be, certainly thou art not yet made a New
Creature.

Take Judas for example, you shall find this, he had old still, his
covetousnes yet remained in him that was not renewed: thence it was, that in the
Passover, there was such a strait charge, that all the leaven should be purged
out; you see how it is repeated, not a jot of leaven shall be left. So, says
the Apostle, All must be new and unleavened, 1 Cor. 5.7.
because Christ our Passover is offered for us.

Object.
But the natural man will say, this is impossible; for then we shall have no
sin?

My Brethren, that is not the meaning of it; the meaning is, Answ.
that thou must be purged from all the old leaven, that is, thou must allow
none, thou must strive against all, thou must hate all, thou must do thy best
to cleanse it out, and not suffer any to be there willingly, as to take
possession in thy heart; it may be there as a thief, (as it were, as a Creeper
in) but otherwise it is not to be there: therefore consider that, Let them
look to this, that think stoppage is payment, that take liberty in some
things, and think to recompense it by a more strict care in other things: for
when a man comes to this, to super-errogate in some things, and to be negligent
in others, It is an evil sign, it is a sign thou art not a New Creature, for
then all would be new; I say, it is an ill sign, that there is no life there,
it is a sign that all that thou do otherwise is but counterfeit: therefore
it is worth your observation, that when any man serves the Lord, when he does
it not with his whole heart, it is reckoned as counterfeit, if there be but
one old place in the heart, if there be but one old lust living there, God
takes all as fained, Ier. 3.10. You did not turn to me with your whole heart,
but fainedly: As if he should say, If it be not done with the whole heart, it
is fained, it is a sign there is no life there, if a man abound in duties
never so much; let him be excellent in prayer, excellent in almsdeeds, in
doing justice, let him come to Church, let him do what he will, if there be
any thing old, yet it is a sign he wants life, for where there is life, there
is augmentation of parts; a man that is living increases in all. If thou find
some part of thy soul, of thy life, to be augmented, and not the rest, thou
art dead, a dead thing may be capable of it, you may increase one part of
Wheat, or of Silver, or Gold, but the other part continues as it was, but all
increase in living Creatures, it is a general increase, there is nothing
stands at a stay; if thou find a reservation in some things wherein thou
take liberty, and stand at a stay, thou art not yet a New Creature.

Looking upon every thing with a new eye.
Thirdly, thou shall know, if thou be new by this, thou look upon every thing
with a new eye, every thing is presented to thee in a new manner: this I take
from this very Chapter, the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 5.16.
We know no man after the flesh, therefore whosoever is in Christ let him be a
New Creature: As if he should say, I am a New Creature, or else I could not be
in Christ; as I, so every man else must be* for that instance he gives of
living to the Lord, of being a New Creature, he knew no man after the flesh.
Look to thy self in this, do thou look upon every thing in the world with a
new eye, (that is) upon all the particulars; thou look upon sin in another
fashion than thou did before, thou see more in it, than ever thou did?
Thou look upon spiritual Grace in another m^nner, thou see more
excellency in it than thou did; thou look upon the world in another
manner, than when thou did magnify it, and the things of it, the dignity,
the honor and the wealth; thou art now able to say as Paul, They are as
dross, as a withering flower: thou look upon good and ill men after another
manner, a vile person will be despised in thine eyes, let him have all outward
excellencies, and he that fears the Lord, thou will honor him, let him be
never so base: thou look on thy self after another manner, thou do no
more behold thy self as thou did, to think thy self perfected, by adding
to thy outward condition, to thy outward comforts and conveniences, though that
be a thing that is not to be despised, yet a man's self lies not in that, but
himself is the inward man, the Regenerate man; thou will not care to have thy
outward man perish, thou will not care what loser thou be in any thing else,
thou will reckon that thy self, therefore thou will deny those things, because
thou reckonest not them thy self; for it is impossible that a man should deny
that which is himself, but thy judgment is altered, thou look with another
eye upon another self, than thou did before, and therefore thou deniest that
which before thou tookest for thy self, and nourished'st for thy self. Now a
man looks upon God with another eye, now he sees his beauty, and his
excellency, he sees there i^ nothing in the world to be desired in compa^^son
of him; before he was shie of him, and ran away from him, as Adam did. It is
the state of every carnal man, he presents God terrible, he has no delight in
God, he looks upon him, as upon a Judge, as one he serves of necessity; but I
say then, you will know the Lord, Ier. 31. when you are taught of me, then you
shall know the Lord; when you are made New Creatures, then you shall know me,
that is, yo^ shall see me in another fashion than ever you did, you shall
look on me with another eye, you shall know me then, as to love me, to desire
me, to long after nothing so much as Communion with me. I might run through
more instances, but the time calls me away. Thou will look upon every thing
with another eye, they will be presented with another shape, for there will be
a new Heaven, and a new Earth to thee, I say, all will be new to thee: for
mark the newness of any sense, or of any faculty, when it is renewed by any
infused quality, it is not so much discerned by it self, as by the object; as,
if a man have a new taste, and a new savor, a new taste in health, How shall
he know it? Give him meat, and drink, and what you will, in all the objects
of the taste, you shall find a new relish.

So if you would know of your heart, if it be new, go to the objects that thy
heart is conversant about, see if thou look upon them in another fashion, if
thou have a new taste, and a new relish in thee: for if there be a new heart
in thee, thou may see it outwardly; thou will say as Paul said, I know no
man, or any thing after the flesh, after the outward condition; this note will
try it, if you apply it to your selves, after once the change is wrought, that
you are made New Creatures, there is nothing that is presented to you after the
same manner as it was, every thing is changed with you, as if you were brought
into a new world, you will see them to be other things than you did before; but
I cannot stand to press this further.

Again, New works.
if you would know whether this be in you or no, then consider, whether your
works be altered: for we have a rule in Philosophy and a true one, and we will
apply it here; As a thing is in being, so it is in working: If there be a new
disposition in thee, if there be another Nature, there will be a new kind of
work, for all things in the world work according to their being, and there is
nothing that has an essence and a being, but the operations and acts of it are
suitable to it: therefore, if thou would know, look to what thou do; It
is not therefore thy good purposes or thy good meanings, but thy doing:
therefore examine thy self, Have thou left any old courses? Have thou given
over thy drinking, thy gaming, thy sin of uncleanness, thy breaking of the
Sabbath? Will thou say that thou have a new heart, and yet keep thy old
company still? That thou have a new heart, and yet usest thy old speeches
still? That thou have a new heart, and yet ploddest in the same old tract that
thou did? Look what thou wast wont to do, thou do still; thou wast wont
to spend the Sabbath thus and thus, and thou do so still; thou wast wont to
neglect prayer, to perform it in a remiss manner; thou wast wont to be a
negligent hearer, without recalling it, and working it upon thine own heart,
without growing in knowledge, and thou art so still; thou wast wont to have
secret by-ways, that thy heart knows were not good, and thou hold them
still: will thou say thou art a New Creature? It is impossible. If we be New
Creatures, there will be an alteration certainly in our lives: And therefore
to you that say, I purpose to do better, and I intend it, my meaning is good,
I say to you, 2 Cor. 4.20.
the Kingdom of God stands not in word, and in purpose, and in meaning, but in
power. Thou art made a New Creature, that is, the inward frame of thy heart is
altered, and, if that be altered, there is an ability follows it, that inables
thee to do the duties of new obedience, and to abstain from the contrary:
therefore examine thy self by thy actions, and say not now, though I do not
live strictly and precisely, for show, as others do, yet I do as much in
substance; for if thou be a New Creature, thou will be as much in show too, the
operation and action will follow, if the inside be clean, Mat. 23. the
outside will be so, though it be true, we often find the outside clean, when
the inside is not.

Therefore, it is no strange mark that I give, that examining your selves by
the outside should be a means to know if you be New Creatures; for, though
we cannot say that because the outside is good, the inside is so too; yet we
may conclude, if the outside be not good, certainly thou art not a New
Creature yet.

Therefore, let none say they have a good intention although their works be
bad. For although this be not a good Affirmative Argument* if the outside be
good, the inside will be so also; yet it is a good Negative Argument, if the
outside be not clean, the inside cannot be clean: As in Ier. 3.4, 5. Will
you not from this time cry unto me, Thou art my Father, and the guide of my
youth? etc. All this is well spoken. But behold, thou have spoken and done
evil things as thou could. So that good professions will not serve the
turn when we do evil; God judges not by our intentions, but according to
our works.

The end of the Second Sermon.
CERTAIN SERMONS UPON THE NEW CREATVRE.
2 COR. 5.17. Therefore if any man be in Christ, let him be a new Creature.


OUR business now shall be to show what a New Creature is, and to apply it as
we go along, that you may know upon good grounds whether you be New Creatures
or no, that so you may have comfort if you be, or else that you may seek it,
if you be not. A New Creature, what.


To be a New Creature is nothing else but to have a heart new molded by the
infusion of a new quality of grace, and by the destruction of the old. There
are three things to be marked: Three things in it.
First, the heart must be new molded. Secondly, it must be done by the
infusion of a new quality. And thirdly, there must be a mortification of the
old man. Let us go through these three distinctly, and apply them as we go.


The heart must be new molded, or cast into a new frame.
First, the heart must be new molded, or cast into a new frame. You may see
this by comparing it with the old man, we shall know the one by the other: You
shall find that when Adams nature was corrupted, there was a disorder in all
the faculties. As for example, in the Ruin of a Palace, there are the
materials left still, only the order is taken away; so in the corruption of
nature, there are the same natural operations, but all is disordered and
turned up-side down; thus was the confusion of man after the fall. But the New
Creature does work the contrary, it sets up the house again, and restores us
unto our first state in Adam. When a man is made a New Creature, his Soul is
put in joint again, so that the face of every faculty looks toward God,
whereas before it looked toward the World, Sin and Hell, the Soul is quite
altered, as a man that turns his face from East to West, whereas a man before
had his back, now he has his face turned to heaven; therefore it is called
Turning to the Lord. Observe here two things:

First, when we say, you must be cast into a new frame, it is not enough to
have the actions of the Soul changed, but the whole bent of the Soul.

In a regenerate man, Principally, his inclination is changed.
the turning of the actions is nothing, for even when he does that which is
evil, the bent or positure of his Soul stands to God, although it be
transported to do evil, and it is true on the other-side, although an evil
man does good actions, yet the bent of his Soul looks another way, for therein
stands the alteration of the New Creature, even in the bent of the faculties,
which is to turn us from Satan unto God.

Aristotle has an observation; It is one thing, says he, to do an Act of
Art, and another thing to do it like an Artist; It is one thing to do an Act
of music, and another thing to do it Artist-like: If one does a thing, and
have no Art in the doing of it, he deserves no commendation; so there is a
great difference between doing any Act of goodness, and having the actions of
the Soul well habited; for when you only do the act without the bent of your
Souls, that way, God regards it not at your hands, but when the inward frame
of the heart is set right, whereas it was contrary before, it is a sign of a
New Creature: Apply this to your selves.

But how shall we know whether the frame of our Souls be thus altered or no?
Quest.


You shall know it by this: Answ.
If there be such an alteration of the inward faculties, you shall find your
selves ready to every good work. When a man has no natural inclination unto
goodness, How this alteration of the inclination may be known.
without forcing himself, it does undo the action, but when a man's heart is
sanctified He is ready to every good work, for every good work, and stands
ready for it; he does what he does readily, without much ado; for when the
heart is changed in a man that is a New Creature, he is like a Conduit, do
but turn the cock, and there needs no forcing of the water out; so when a man
is become a New Creature, he is ready to every good work (like a good wife
that is ready to bring forth fruits unto her husband) whereas before he brought
forth fruit unto sin and death.

delight in the Lord his God; and what he delights in, he makes his own, what
he does, he does with facility; The Commandments of God are not burdensome to
him, the yoke of Christ is easy: therefore, if thou art new, thou art easy in
thy obedience, whereas another man that has no such change wrought in him,
does delight in nothing but to do evil, to do well he has no pleasure, Gods
Commandments are burdensome to him; therefore the Laws of God are too strait
for him, that he cannot march in them, as David could not march in Saul's
Armor, for it was too heavy for him. A man that is a New Creature does things
with facility and delight.

But this is not all; If thy Soul be fashioned Prove. 26.7. As the legs of the
lame are not equal, so is a Parable in a fools mouth: When they come to do
any good Actions, it is like a Parable in a fools mouth, the Parable is not
fit for his mouth; as when a man has one leg longer than another, he is
lame* so a Parable in a fools mouth is not equal to his mouth, the action may
be good, yet he does it but lamely, it is beyond his reach, he does not do
actions as he should, but an holy man does them as a workman. I speak not of
doing of them before men, but before God, who judges righteously, when he
comes to perform an holy duty, he does it as it is meet, he prays
fervently, and consecrates himself unto the Lord with delight, He shows
mercy with cheerfulness, and every grace has his peculiar property, wherein
the goodness of it consists, as Faith, Love, and Hope, are the concomitants of
his actions, wherein their excellency consists, whereas other men do the same
duties, but not with that affection that they should, and they do it but with
a dead heart, they are works of virtue, and have the lineaments of true ones,
but they are dead works, because life is not in them.

Therefore consider how thou do things; the matter is not so much what thou
do, as how thou do them.



This change is in his whole Conversation.
One thing more observe in this new Frame, there is not only a bending of the
Soul to a contrary point (as it were) but moreover all must be changed; as for
example, Cast any thing into a new mould, there is not only one part altered,
but all; so, if you be New Creatures, you must find this in your selves, that
you do not make choice in the duties of godliness, but take all, and omit
nothing; You must be holy in all manner of conversation; those words are
added, in all manner of conversation, and they are much to be observed, that
is, in all the turnings of a man's life: As, if he be a Magistrate, he must be
exact in hearing of Causes, neither to fear any man's face, nor to be moved by
any man's favor: if he be an husband, his speeches and actions must be holy,
his speeches must be gracious: If thou be a Subject in reverence to the King,
and respective to others, thou must be holy in all manner of conversation,
otherwise the frame is not altered, this must be of necessity; for that which
God requires of us, is the keep^ng of the whole Law, as James says, Iam. 2.20.
where he speaks of keeping the Law Evangelically, For whosoever shall keep
the whole Law, and yet fail in one point, he is guilty of all.

Go through the whole Latitude of our obedience; if in one part thou will
favor thy self, thou art guilty of all. In the same Epistle, Iam. 1.26. If
any man among you seems to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but
deceives his own heart, that man's Religion is in vain. That which is here
said of the tongue, may be said of any thing else: Do thou do thus and
thus, do thou sanctify the Sabbath, do thou go to God in prayer, go to
all particular duties, I know not what to name unto you, and yet in any of
these do fail; consider that the Apostle might as well have said unto thee,
for that thy Religion is in vain (he speaks of keeping the Law in an
Evangelicall manner) a man must set himself to keep every Commandment, and
if he do but take liberty in any, he is guilty of the whole.

Take this for a sure rule, what God requires of us in the Gospel, he gives us
strength to perform, but if our hear^s were not altogether new molded, the
work would be more than our strength; therefore, of necessity, the heart must
be altogether new molded. Therefore the Apostle says, (and what he says is
common to all the Saints) I can do all things through Christ that strengthens
me. Every man that has this new frame wrought in him may say so: If thou be
in Christ, thou have a new frame in thy heart, which makes thee able to do all
things through Christ.

Use.
Consider of this, and apply it to your selves, for it is a matter of much
moment, (as the Apostle says) We are not ashamed to write unto you of these
things again, and again: So it is a point we have touched before, (yet we
will speak of it again and again.) Consider with thy self, whether there be
such a general change in thee or no: for the goodness of a thing consists in
the order, else the whole is dissolved; as in beauty there are two things
wherein it consists, the frame and order of it, that we say is beautiful, when
the frame is good, and no part is to be admired above the rest; so it is the
frame and order of the Soul wherein its beauty consists, when the whole frame
is right, and thou art enabled to do the whole duties of new obedience.

Observe Gods dealing in this case; when Saul had failed in one thing, God cast
him off.

But, you will say, this was an heard judgment, did not David fail many times
as well as he?

It is true, but here is the difference, Saul had a natural heart to do
evil, although his profession was good; Answ.
yet when he was put to the trial, whether he would take the fat sheep and
the oxen, he did it; yet, you must know, it was not for that, (...) new
(...)itie of ^odlinesse.
that God cast him off, but because the frame of his heart was not good; for
he would have done it again and again, an hundred times over; I say, the
disposition of his heart was evil. Balaams eye unto the wages of iniquity
marred all, though he kept himself aloft and carried the matter fairly, but
like the Eagle he had his eye upon the prey; this secret eye marres all. Do
not think that this is but a notion, do not say, who is it but does sin?
and we may go to heaven although we be not so exact, as the Preacher says we
should be. No, it is more than so, we may see good reason for it, if we observe
it well: It is a good argument which we have in Philosophy, A cup or a dish
that is boared through is no dish, yet there is but one hole in it, because it
is now of no use, which makes it none, because it is as good as none. Take a
dish boared through, power water into it, The new qua^^tie, what.
it will hold none: so take a man's heart, (for the reason will hold good in
that) and let there be but some secret leake in it, or some secret evil
disposition, although Saul does well in every thing else, yet if he harbor any
sin; or although Balaam does well in all things else, yet if there be respect
unto the wages of Iniquity, they are both but like a dish with an hole boared
through, that take up any thing, there will be an issuing out.

Therefore deceive not thy self, thou art no New Creature, except thy heart be
perfect in all things: This which we deliver unto you, take it no otherwise
than what with reason you shall find grounded upon a sure word in Ier. 2. They
sought me not with their whole heart, but fainedly: When a man seeks God, but
not with his whole heart, God reckons it but a counterfeit seeking of him.

Therefore, I beseech you, look unto your selves, see, whether you be holy in
all manner of conversation, I cannot go through particulars, but I must leave
this to every man's breast, who must reflect upon his own heart. Consider with
thy self, if sometimes thou give liberty to thy self in ill, or in the
duties of new obedience to perform them slightly, as good never a whit, as
never the better: if thou do any duty, which thou know to be a duty, and
not truly, know it is not accepted: If you continue in sin, and will not know
it to be a sin, as in your inordinate gaming, and the vanity of your speeches,
although thou think them small, yet they are able to kill thee; the biting
of a Viper is as small a thing, yet it will bring death with it: so if any sin
be allowed in thee, thou art not a New Creature, thou want this new
moulding, thou art not yet cast into a new frame. So much for the First part.

The second thing which we observed in this description of a New Creature, is
that, A man must be cast into a new mould, by the infusion of a new quality of
Grace.

A man's heart is not put into a new frame by the transient Acts of the Holy
Ghost (as in building of an house, It must be done by infusion of a new
quality of godliness.
there is no more for a man to do, but with his hands to join one thing with
another) but it is done by the infusion of a new quality.

As in Adam there was not only a defect of weakness, but of wickedness, so
there must be a new quality infused into thy heart, else thou art no New
Creature. In all things in the world that have actions, there is a quality; as
the fire moves upward, and there is a quality of heat in it; as our Savior
Christ says of the tree, it must be good before it can bring forth good fruit,
and as in the Heb. 12.28. Wherefore seeing we receive a Kingdom that cannot be
shaken, let us have grace whereby we may so serve God, that we may please him
with reverence and fear; that is, there must be a new quality wrought in the
heart, whereby we may be enabled to serve the Lord with reverence and fear.

The question, The new quality, what.
you will ask me, will be, what is that new quality? Not to stand upon
generals, for it is not that which profits, but to pitch upon it, I will show
you what it is by two places of Scripture, Gal. 6.15. For in Christ Jesus
neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision; but a New
Creature: Compare this with Gal. 5.6. For in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision
avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but Faith which works by love: Would
you know what this new quality which is infused, is? It is faith and love, that
is, when this is once wrought in thy heart, that thy heart is humble and
broken, which makes thee to know what sin is, and what the wrath of God is for
sin, and thou desire Christ, and thou have thy heart calmed again through
believing; thou do believe that God offers his Son unto thee, and thou art
willing to take him, not as a Savior only, but as a Lord also to obey him, not
as a Priest only, but as a King to be subject to him, not as a friend only,
but as an husband, if this be done, it is properly faith.

Again, consider whether it be done out of love or out of fear, lest thy
Creditours should come upon thee, and cast thee into that eternal prison,
where thou shall pay every farthing, this is not out of love.

Again, do thou take him for his kingdom and his wealth only? That is the
disposition of an harlot, who takes her husband for his wealth, and not because
she loves him, but thou must take him for love; The Virgins love thee, Cant.
1.2. The harlots do not so, but the Virgins love thy goodly person.

Again, thou must not take him in a good mood, but till death do part you,
thou must love him for ever: No man loves a man truly, but he is rooted and
grounded in his love; when thou do find thy heart so humbled, that thou
do reckon sin the greatest evil, and do hunger after Christ, and do
keep him as thy life, when thou do all this from a love unto him, thou art
a New Creatures, when thou take Christ with love, and such an one as is a
working love, now be assured that thou art a New Creature, for this is that
wherein it consists.

I observe this by the way, for those that think they never have been humbled
enough; the New Creature, consists not in that, but in faith and love: Have
thou faith and love? Then thou have the thing it self, and if thou have that,
thou have the preparation. That is the first expression. Another is in Ephesians.
4.22, 23, 24. That ye cast off, concerning the conversation in times past, the
old man which is corrupt through deceiveable lusts, and be renewed in the Spirit
of your mind, and put on the new man, which after God is created in
Righteousness and holiness proceeding from truth.

There you have the thing named, what it is to be a New Creature, and what it
is to be the old man still.

To be the old Creature, or the old man, is nothing else but to be guided by
lust, which comes from error in judgment and understanding. But wherein
consists the new man? The new man consists in holiness wrought in the will,
which proceeds from truth revealed unto the understanding; so when the
understanding and the judgment is rectified, thou art made a New Creature.
Again, when the will is corrupt by lusts, proceeding from error in the
understanding, thou art in state of an old Creature. The old man stands
properly in lusts; therefore, says Peter, 2 Pet. 1.4. Fly the corruption which
is in the world through lust: All the corruption of mankind stands in these
inordinate lusts. Others we may look on as the fruit, but this as the Root.
What are those lusts? John shows them by three heads, 1 Ioh. 2.16. The lusts
of the flesh, the lusts of the eye, and the pride of life. The old man stands
in these three. Take the first Lust, even the lust of the Eye. A man looks
upon wealth to make him happy in this life, (I mean no otherwise) and looking
upon this, he lusts after it: Do but rectify his judgment, and let wealth be
presented to him (as it is in it self, and he will come to be affected with
it, as Paul was, who accounted all but dross and dung, he will say then, why
should I set my heart upon that which is nothing but vanity? I say, when the
understanding is rectified, you will look upon wealth aright, and as you shall
see it at the day of death; for then we are as a man awakened out of a dream,
we will look on it then, as it is Iam. 1.10. Let the Rich-man rejoice that he
is made low, for as a flower of the grass so shall he vanish: The meaning of
this is, when a man is made a New Creature, he is brought down in his conceit,
whereas before he thought himself a great man, because of his wealth: Now
Religion comes, and that makes him low, and let him be glad of it; Why? What
reason has a man to be glad of it? Indeed if wealth were a thing of moment, it
were another matter, but he was deceived. Riches are but as the flower of
grass. A wise man looks on Riches as flowers of the Garden with children, and
the weakest do much magnify. Indeed, if they were of great moment, he lost by
it, but, as James says, They are but as flowers of the grass worth little?

For the Lust of the flesh; that is, another thing whereby this old man is
seen. A man looks on outward pleasures or delights, as able to give
satisfaction, and as the greatest delights in the world, let his Judgment be
rectified, he looks upon them as Enemies that fight against the Soul, as the
works of darkness which he abhorres, and so he comes to Lots disposition,
Whose righteous Soul was vexed to see the filthiness of the Sodomites: When
his Judgment is right, he looks on them as base and vile things, as Enemies
unto his Soul, that will be his destruction.

For the Pride of life: Man looks on outward things as the only excellencies,
which makes him admire them so, but when his Judgment is once rectified, he
looks upon them as the Apostle does, who accounted them but empty things, as
bubbles blown up by Boys.

To conclude, when the Judgment is rectified, in stead of Error and Deceit,
which is the Root of the old man, whence comes these three great Lusts (which
are the maine, and from which all the rest will follow) then the lusts are
dissolved, and the new man comes from truth, as the other is corrupted, and
comes from deceit. So you see; what it is to have this new quality, to have the
Judgment rectified, and the lust dissolved.

And not so only, but there must be new desires wrought in thee. A carnal man
over-values carnal things, and in spiritual things he comes far too short,
like a man that looks upon a banquet when his belly is full, he has no
appetite unto it: So a carnal man looks upon Sin and forgiveness. But when
a man has his Judgment rectified, he comes to have many holy desires, and in
this stands the New Creature.

Again, it comes from knowledge of the Spirit.

Object.
But, you will say, we have knowledge, and, if that would do it, then they that
know most are best men?

Answ.
But you must know what kind of knowledge this is; The new man must be renewed
in knowledge: This is such a knowledge of holiness, as the Holy Ghost reveals
unto us, and except this knowledge be revealed unto you, our revealing is
nothing; We preach Wisdom, which the Princes of the world know not, neither
can know.

Take Aristotle or others which are the Princes of the world for wisdom; they
know not these things, nay, if they were taught them, they could not learn
them, for they are revealed by the Spirit; and if we preach unto you never so
often, if the Spirit do not reveal them unto you it is nothing: We see that by
experiience, that a man that can reason against these and these sins, can
speak of the vanity of these things, can give twenty better reasons against
them than another man, yet he seeks after them as much as any: The wisemen
and strongest wits which can say most against them, yet have not their lusts
dissolved, when a poor man that is truly sanctified, although he cannot say
the hundredth part against sin, as another man, yet he does hunger after Jesus
Christ.

Therefore it must be the work of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. ult. But, we all
behold as in a mirror the glory of the Lord with open face, and are changed
into the same Image from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord: that is,
when we look into the Word we see the Image of God, so may another man too,
but he does not see the glory of it, he does not look on it as a desirable
thing, as a thing he is in love withal. God shows Moses his glory; he never
showed his glory but to the Saints: The greatest request that Moses desired,
was to see the glory of the Lord; I will show thee my glory, says God, that
is, thou shall see as much as shall be needful for thee to see in this life.
God shows himself unto us in his Word, and when he will show a man his
glory, he makes him to have a love to it, and then he is transformed into his
Image. Another sees it, but he is not transformed into such a knowledge as
convinces the mind of sin: when we teach knowledge, it is as the Sparks
in a dark room, or as the Stars in a dark night, the room is dark still;
so it is with all knowledge, till the Holy Ghost does teach it: we may beget a
thousand sparks in you, but they will not turn the darkness into light. But
when the Holy Ghost comes, it does not only appear there, but it changes us
from darkness into light.

You must know that when we preach only, it is as when the light shines, the
windows being shut against it, there is none shines into the house; so when
men think they understand most, yet they want this light to shine into the
house, Luke 24.45. Then opened he their understandings, that they might
understand the Scriptures. They had heard Christ before, but they understood
not his Word; like those which sowed seed on ill ground, and therefore received
not the fruit of it, but when the Holy Ghost comes into thy heart, that will
convince thee of evil: it will expel darkness, and set right thy Judgment:
otherwise, though you heard Paul preach, yea, Christ himself, were your
Judgments never so good, yet it would not be done till the Holy Ghost teaches
you, you will never know him, never see him aright in his glory, never see him
so, as to delight and long after him, so as to desire nothing in the world so
much as communion with him.

Thus it is when his Image is renewed in Knowledge and Truth, and where this
Knowledge and Truth is, Holiness instantly follows.

There are many that know and practice not; and there are many which neither
know nor practice, but where this Image is, what ever they know they practice.

Well, let us apply this unto our selves briefly.

If to be a New Creature, Use.
there is required of us this Faith and Love, Truth and Holiness, Knowledge
and Righteousness; then let us learn not to be deceived, to regard nothing
else in comparison of this. Do as the Apostle, Gal. 6.15. For in CHRIST JESUS
neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but a New
Creature: that is, it is no matter for any thing in a man, Circumcision is no
better than Uncircumcision: Go through all the duties of Religion, you shall
find them nothing till you be made a New Creature. I know many do many
things, they come to Church, and give alms; well says the Apostle,
Circumcision and Uncircumcision is all one; so say I, Prayer and no Prayer is
all one; doing justly and unjustly, it is all one, until a man be a New
Creature: Therefore, says Paul, 1 Cor. 13.3. Though I give all my goods to the
poor (which is a glorious action; nay, though I could be content to be a
Martyr) though I give my body to be burned, and have not love, it profits
nothing: So except you be New Creatures, your labor is lost, for Nature may
do much with the knowledge of the Gospel. As the Earth brings forth grass of
it self, and some flowers of the lowest sort, but to bring forth a crop, and
flowers of the finest sort, it must be tilled, and there must be seed put in;
Nature, I say, may do much, but this New Creature must come from an Immortal
seed sown in the heart, by God himself.

Therefore, look whether thou have that wrought in thee or no. For this is all
the comfort we have, when the body is decayed and waxen old; yet, let us not be
discouraged, though this outward man decay and perish, there is a new youth
springing up.

This is all the comfort we have, that when the old house is going down, we
have a new house setting up in stead of it. Every man is glad to see an old
house pulled down, and a new set up in stead of it; but to see an old house
going down, and no new one to be set up, the ruin of it is a most miserable
Spectacle.

Take an Husbandman, who has taken great pains in plowing and sowing his
ground, when he sees his corn is rotten, he is glad of it, because he knows
new will come up in stead of it; so when we see the body decaying, and our day
drawing toward evening, when the Sun of life is ready to be set upon us,
when we shall grow no more: this presents nothing but confusion, yet here is
hope for us; There is light Sown unto the righteous: All the consolation and
all the comfort we have in these days of our vanity, is, that we have a New
Creature, that is not subject to vanity.

The end of the Third Sermon.
THE FOVRTH SERMON UPON THE NEW CREATVRE.
2 COR. 5.17. Therefore if any man be in Christ, let him be a new Creature.


NOw we come to the last thing to be observed in the New Creature; There must
be a mortification of the old man
which is, that there is not only an infusion of a new Quality, but a weakening
of the old: Therefore we put that into the description. A man is a New Creature
when his heart is cast into another mould, by the infusion of a new quality of
grace, and by a destroying of the old.

And this is specially to be observed, because there be two parts of the New
Creature, a mortification of sin, as well as a vivification. For, Common
Nature is like a Bowl between two byasses, Corruption is the wrong byas,
carrying us out of the way; and Grace the good byas, carrying us into the way:
So you must knock off the old byas, as well as put on a new one, that is,
Common Nature lies as an indifferent thing between Grace and Sin, the Flesh
and the Spirit, Corruption and Holiness; so that as the body is between
health and sickness, so is Common Nature between original sin, which is as
the sickness or death of the Soul, and Holiness, which is the health of it.
Now it is not only required that there be an infusion of the new Quality, but
likewise a weakening of this old, both cannot stand together, so far as you
strengthen one, the other is weakened, it is always so where is contrariety,
where there is no contrariety two may stand together; but when things be
opposite, the coming in of the one, is the weakening of the other, the coming
of heat is a weakening of cold, this is of special use.

Use.
And this use we are to make of it; that hence then you see this will follow,
that, if you find much newness in your selves (according to your own
opinion) you find you can do many things, you could never do before; you are
able to do these and these duties of new obedience: well, suppose it, yet
except there be a mortification of the old lusts; if thou find that there be
any lusts continue in thee, in strength, that, in that regard, thou art the
same man still, whatsoever addition there be, it is no matter, it is certain
thou art not yet a New Creature: for a New Creature consists not in
superinduction of the new Quality, the old remaining; but in a weakening of the
old too. It is not only a superaddition of the new, but the death of the old
also: Therefore, if thou find any corruptions continuing in the fullness of
their first strength, not weakened at all; though thou have all signs of grace,
all parts of a New Creature, to thy seeming, yet thou art deceived; because if
thou were new, there would be a mortification of the old lusts.

So again, it is true on the other side: Put case thou find a great change in
thy self, such lusts as have been vigorous and lively, thou find to be now
dead, except it be by the ingresse of this New Creature, thou have little cause
to comfort thy self; for those lusts are but covered and laid asleep for a
time, and will wake and rise again: as Sampson, when he was tied with cords,
rose again, and was as strong as ever he was, when the opportunity came, And
it was told him, The Philistims are upon thee, Sampson: So lusts are laid
asleep, till the opportunity comes, when all the thread of good purposes
breaks, and they rise again in their strength: therefore, if there be not a
New Creature brought within thy soul, thy lusts are but laid asleep, they
will rise again: Or put case they be dead, and rise no more; yet, except it be
by the ingredience of this New Creature, they are but dead of themselves, and
so long as they die of themselves, God regards not that death: for that which
is required of us in Romans 12.1. is, that we sacrifice our selves: Now two
things are required in the Sacrifice; one, that it be slain, that it die not
of it self, for that is not a Sacrifice. Secondly, that it be offered to God,
and not to any other god. Now this we often find, that lusts die of themselves,
change of age, experience, operation of circumstances, time, place, and many
things may alter the desires: for, you must know, The world passes away, and
the lusts of it: that is, they are of a transitory Nature. A man does not
desire that, this year, which he did the last. Do we not see, many have
been riotous and prodigal in youth, yet there is a great change in them, not
for grace, but age, and use, and experience, and many things, make alteration:
These are not slain to the Lord, but they die of themselves, so God would not
accept them.

Again, they may be slain, but not to the LORD, thou may offer them to thy
self, which is the same, as if thou offeredst them to another god, that is, a
man may find much evil and inconvenience, much bitterness in them, it may
be, they have brought shame and misery on thee.

Again, thou may fear Gods judgments; and therefore may restrain thy
self. In a word, If thy self be thy end, in abstaining from any sin what ever
it be, there is a Sacrifice, thou have slain it, but not offered it to the
Lord, it is not done to him, It is not because thou love the Lord Jesus:
therefore it is not a fruit of the New Creature, for till then, every man makes
himself his end in all he does, but when he is made a New Creature, he makes
the LORD his end.

This therefore is the use of this: there must be two parts of this New
Creature, Vivification, and Mortification, an infusion of the new Quality, and
a weakening of the old. Because this is a point of much moment, I will press it
a little further, and deliver this Rule, I say, this other Consectary may be
gathered: If it be so, then thou must find in thy self these two things:

Thou must find in thy self something more than Nature, Use or Consectary.
and again, thou must find in thy self something less than Nature: Thou
must have less than what thy corrupt nature had in it, and more than common
nature has in it, or else thou want this third part of the New Creature,
this third thing wherein it consists, the induction of a new Quality, and a
weakening of the old: We will urge this a little.

There must be something les^e than corrupt nature.
First, there must be a lessening and a weakening of that was there before: for,
you must know every man has some personal infirmities, some sins more
peculiar to his Nature than others, something wherein he is weak, every man
has it, Where ^^od forgiveth, he heals; where he pardons, he purifieth.
one of one sort, another of another sort; every man has a more inclination to
this or that sin, which is bred and borne with him. If thou find that this
continues with thee still, that thou have the same running-sore on thee, that
thou had, that thou find no alteration in that, that there is no
lessening, no weakening, no destroying and mortifying of that, then thou art not
a New Creature, and consequently, thy sins are not forgiven, for Justification
and Sanctification are inseparable. It thy sins were pardoned, they would be
healed, that is the thing you must consider. It is certain therefore, if you
do not find them healed, you are not yet in Christ; for if thou were in Christ
truly, there would a virtue come out of him that would heal thy bloudy-issue;
for the virtue of his death is never disjoined from the merit of his death,
where ever he forgives sin, he cures sin: therefore if thou find that he
has not cured any sin, know it is not forgiven. You may see it every where;
Mary Magdalen, as much was forgiven her, so she had a great cure wrought in
her, she was changed, she became another woman, you see how exceeding holy she
was; when Christ said, Thy sins are forgiven, she went away with another
heart: So it was with Paul, when once his sins were forgiven, when God sent
word by Ananias that he was a chosen vessel, withal he was made a glorious
Professor of a raging Persecutour, there was a healing of sin, as well as
forgiving of it. So David, when his sin was forgiven, when God told him by
Nathan so much, his sin was cured, he did not commit adultery again: therefore
in the one and fiftieth Psalm, the cure stands on record, that all the world
may know, that where God forgiveth, he heals likewise. So Peter, when God had
forgiven him that sin of denying his Master, he cured it too.

To add a little more, Reason 1.
I say, Sin must be healed, if it be forgiven; for it cannot be otherwise,
if God take any man to bear his Name, and his sins be not healed, his Name
should be blasphemed, it would redound to his dishonor.

Again, Reason 2.
if he should forgive and not heal us, we should have no comfort from him, nor
he no service from us: we should have no comfort from him, because of the rage
and vexation of ruling lusts.

Again, Reason 3.
he should have no service from us; for how can we serve him when we are not
healed? Can a sick man do any service? He must be healed, and restored to
health first. Now do you think, God will put his children in a condition,
that neither they shall have comfort from him, nor he service from them;
therefore it is of necessity, wheresoever sin is forgiven, it is healed:
Therefore in Hosea 14. When I take away your iniquities, I will heal your
rebellions* So in Deuteronomy. 30.6. when he will have mercy upon them, says he, I
will also circumcise your hearts, and the hearts of your seed, that you shall
love me with all your soul, and with all your strength: He never pardons,
but he likewise circumciseth. So in Ier. 24.7. I will set mine eye upon you for
good: that is, I will pardon you, and receive you to mercy, and also will give
you an heart to know me, so that you shall be my people, and I will be your
God: For you shall turn to me with all your heart. In a word, they are never
disjoined; take it for a sure rule, as Ezekiel. 26. I will wash thee from thy
Idols, that is, from thy lusts and idolatry, and will give thee a new heart and
a new Spirit, he never does one without the other; therefore apply it. It may
be there be many particular sins which thou think are forgiven,
Sabbath-breaking, Swearing, Uncleanness, go through any particular sin* if
they be not healed, they be not forgiven, and so thou art in a miserable
condition. Therefore, do not say, though I sin again and again, yet God is
merciful, and, I hope, ready to forgive. It is very true; but thou must know,
that he is never merciful to forgive, but he is as ready to heal and cure thy
sins likewise; therefore deceive not yourselves in that.

Caution.
Only before I pass from this point, mistake me not, my meaning is not, that it
is so healed, that there is not the least vigor left in it, that it is so dead
and buried, that thou shall never hear of it again, that the Spring of
original corruption is dried up, that none of it is left; but the meaning is,
it is healed, that is, Sin is pulled down from his Regency, it may assault
thee, as a Rebel, but it comes no more as a Lord, as a King; Note.
it is put out of possession, it may creep in as a Thief, but it comes no
more as the owner of the house; for that is resigned up to grace and the New
Creature. Sin creepes in, as it were, but there is another Master of the house,
so that now thou may say, I do it not, but sin that dwells in me, that
is, that creepes in; thy denomination is from that, that bears rule in thy
heart; for that is all that is done in Regeneration; Sin is put out of
possession, and Grace is now the Ruler, the Lord of the heart; therefore we may
say, it is healed, that is, it is so shut out, that thou have dominion over it,
it may assault thee now and then, it may overcome thee now and then, but it
dwells not in thee, thou never entertainest as a guest, thou never biddest it
welcome, thou never make peace with it, thou have perpetual war with it,
as there was with the Amalekites.

Again, As there must be less than corrupt Nature; so there must be more than
mere Nature.
corrupt nature must be lessened, weakened, and mortified; so there must be
more than nature in thee; that is, thou must be able to do more than any
natural man in the world can do, or then thou wast ever able to do before
this change was wrought in thee; for, you must know, Grace does not only
mortify and heal Sin, but it goes beyond the power of Nature; as we say,
Physic helps where Nature fails, and Art helps where Nature falls short:
Such a thing is Grace where Nature fails, there is use of Grace, indeed else
what were the efficacy of the Word, and the virtue of the Spirit, and the
power of Christ? If they did not enable a man to do more than Nature does.
Grace comes from an higher Wellhead than Nature, therefore it raises a man to
an higher pitch than Nature can ascend to. Therefore consider, if thou have
that which goes beyond Nature; Sampson had a strength beyond Nature, he could
do what a common man could not do, but God being with him, he had more than
the strength of Nature. How do we know that? He was able to carry away the
gates of the City, etc. which none else could do; therefore there was in him
strength above Nature: Now examine, can thou do that which no man else can
do that is a mere natural man? Thou must have a strength put into thee,
which none can reach to, that has nothing but Nature in him, that is, can
thou love the Lord Jesus and the Saints? An Hypocrite can counterfeit many
things, but not love. Again, can thou delight in the Law of God, in the
Inner man, I ask not if thou can approve of it, but can thou delight in
it, counting it as meat and drink to do the will of thy Father? This is a
thing which cannot be counterfeit. So, can thou deny thy self? I ask not,
if thou can deny this or that particular sin, but the whole body of sin, if
thou favourest the things of the Spirit, if thou can mortify the deeds of
the Body, and walk according to that Spirit. In a word, whatsoever it is, if
thou art a New Creature, thou must find thy self able to do that which no
natural man can do, and which thy self could never do before; for,
otherwise what will thou have to answer for thy self, when the Destroying
Angel shall come, if he find not in thee more than Nature, the Destruction
shall pass on thee, as it was in the Passover, except there was found blood
on the door-posts, they died for it: Now the blood that this Destroying Angel
must see; when he shall pass over the world, is that which is, more than
Nature. You must know the blood of Christ leaves an impression, Their garments
were made white in the blood of the Lamb; that is, not only the guilt of sin
is taken away, but a new virtue is put on them, a new efficacy is put into
them, and if thou have not the virtue of the blood of Christ, as well to purge
thy conscience from dead works, as to take away the guilt of sin; all is
nothing, you must know all the old world shall be destroyed, and the works of
it, and whatsoever is in it, whatsoever is old shall be destroyed; the Lord
will spare nothing but what is new, he makes a new Heaven, and a new Earth; and
what is new shall be spared, when he comes to take an examination of men, and
finds nothing but old in thee, thou art sure to be destroyed; if thou be new
he will spare thee, there is a blessing there, this is the mark in the
forhead, this is that new Name, this is that certain watchword, which, if a
man know not, he is counted as an enemy: you have a fashion sometimes to give
marks, if they have that mark, that token in their hand, they are known to
be of them that are allowed. So there is a certain sealing of men to life, God
gives a new name, a white st^ne with a new name written on it, which none can
read but God and thy self: I say, except thou art a New Creature (for that is
the new name) the Destroying Angel shall not spare thee, but thy sins shall
be cast on thy conscience, as usually he does when thou are on thy deathbed;
he never binds the burden till then, you have it before, but you never feel
it till then, but when God shall charge it on thy conscience, what will thou
say? if thou find not these two things, a weakening of this old nature, an
healing of sin, and something morethan Nature, thou can not apply the comfort
of Justification, thou art not in Christ, for thou art not a New Creature,,
which consists of these two parts, Vivification and Mortification. So much for
this point; So we have done with this, that Justification and Sanctification
are inseparable: all this is drawn from the conjuction, Whosoever is in Christ
is a New Creature,] they are not disjoined, if you have one, you have the other.

Observe. 2.
Now this is further to be observed, If he must be a New Creature, then he
must have a new Nature; He must have another Nature, for he is made another
man, that is, he is so altered, as if he were another man, as if another Soul
came to dwell in that body; therefore, there must be another Nature.

Again, Observe. 3.
it must be a New Creatures: therefore we must observe something from that
word New.

And fourthly, Observe. 4.
we will observe something from this, that it is a Creature, and so is created
by God, no man is able to do it.

And last of all, Observe. 5.
the order; first in Christ, and then a New Creature. These be the four things
we have to do.

First, Observe. 1.
there must be in thee another Nature, that is, Those that are in Christ have
another Nature.
it is not enough to be altered in this and that particular, but thou must have
another Nature; for you shall find, that when any man is in Christ, the whole
nature is changed, Lions be turned into Lambs, that is, the very Nature is
altered. A Lion does not carry himself like a Lamb, and remains a Lion
still; nor a Serpent like a Dove, and remain a Serpent still; but the Lion is
turned into a Lamb, that is, there is another Nature given; 2 Pet. 1.4. We
are made partakers of the Divine Nature: there is the very word used, that is,
we have another nature given like the Nature of God, and it has in it all the
properties of Nature. As how will you know when a thing is natural? You may
know When a thing is said to be Natural.
not which is begotten by precedent action, but when the faculty is infused,
and then we exercise the operations of it. So it is in all the faculties of
Nature, you have first a sense of seeing given you before you see: In the
things that are not natural, there the actions go before the thing, before
the faculty or habit; as, when a man learnes any thing, that is not natural,
as to play on a Lute, or any other Art, he does many actions, and then he
has got the habit; and when he has got it, he does it easily, for what is
natural is planted in a man; so is this, it is planted in the heart, as the
senses are, it is infused into the Soul, and then we exercise the operations
of it; so that it is another nature, it is just as the thing that is natural.

New Creature is wrought by God, and by it, we are made like him. Therefore,
Christ is said to be formed in us; I travel in birth till Christ be formed in
you: that is, till the Holy Ghost do change the whole Soul into another
Creature; so as it is made like Christ in every thing, as the Son is like the
Father; only the difference is in the degrees, Caution.
as the Son differs from the Father in degrees, yet he has all the
lineaments of the Father, so you are borne of Christ, and are like him; Borne,
not of the will of man, nor of the will of the flesh, but of the will of God,
if you be New Creatures.

Species, to the whole kind; what is not natural, one man has, and another
man wants, and this we find in the New Creature, the whole kind, that is, all
the Saints that are living in all places, they have the same Nature in them,
that is, they have the same Spirit in them, though they be a thousand miles
asunder, though they never saw one another, yet they may know one another
minds, for one mind dwells in them, when one mind dwells in diverse, they be of
the same disposition, so this Nature is common to them all.

Again, what is Nature it cannot be altered Aristotle observes, throw a stone
up a thousand times, it will return again, because it is the nature of it to
return; so what is the nature of a man, put him from it an hundred times and
an hundred times again over, yet he returns to it again, because it is
natural to him: So it is with this New Creature, when the heart is once framed
aright, though the Saints are sometimes transported, though sometimes they are
not like themselves, though sometimes strong lusts lead them captives, yet they
return again, though it were an hundred times done; for Nature will not be
put off, you cannot lay it aside again.

Last of all, Nature is a thing that cannot be may show what it is to be a New
Creature, we may declare it to you, but God must do it. Indeed he calls it
Teaching, but it is such a teaching (as I told you) he teaches Bees and Ants
to do after their kind, he teaches the Storke and other creatures to do
thus and thus, that is, he puts into them an instinct to do so: In this sense
he teaches thee to be a New Creature, he puts an instinct into thee. All these
properties are in Nature; therefore we may conclude, whosoever is in Christ
must have another Nature. We will now make use of it.

Use 1.
There be many things profitable arising from this, Not to defer coming to
God.
that there must be another Nature.

First, then learn hence, not to defer coming to God, because if Repentance
were nothing else, but an abstinence from the acts of sin, a resolution to
change your courses, and a seconding of it with some suitable endeavors, you
might go far, and it may be, come in hereafter, when you will your selves:
But if it be another Nature that is required, take heed of refusing, when God
will come and make an offer to thee, because another nature is required. What
will thou do? Put case thou had never so much warning before thou die, if
thou had Ezekiahs warning, if thou had fifteen years given thee, art thou
able to change thy nature? why then art thou bold on? why do thou defer to
turn to God? When ever God calls for thee, there must be beauty in thee, thou
must have (as I may say) a countenance well favored in some degree; now if thy
face be but besmeared with dirt, thou may wash it off, but if it be the
changing of a Black-moores skin, how will thou do that? Can the Black-moore
change his skin. Therefore, seeing it is a change of Nature, be not too
secure: Think not thus (for it is the only thing that keeps men from coming
to God) I will come in, but it shall be hereafter, I will go yet a little
further; this is a very dangerous case, because it is a changing of Nature that
is required, and no Creature in Heaven and Earth is able to do this.
Therefore, when thou come to die, or when any cross comes, thou may be
willing to change, and thou may take purposes to thy self; but do we not
see, by experience, in such cases, the Nature is not altered, do not all
return to their byas, there is not one of a thousand but does it, because it
is a forced action. Now a stone forced upward returns again, so there be many
forced actions in times of Temptation, and the hour of death, but still the
nature is the same, therefore men return again. Therefore know this very
heart of thine, the very nature of it must be altered, it must be changed
into a light ayrie vapor, that may ascend, else it will not hold out, and thou
shall have no comfort from it, and when it is turned into an ayrie vapor, it
must be done by a light and heat that comes from heaven: So must thy heart, it
is the Holy Ghost that must do it, it is only the Author of Nature that can
change Nature, he that made it can renew it. And as only fire begets fire, so
only the Spirit begets the qualities called the Spirit; the Holy Ghost must
breathe this breath of life in thee. This is a thing not considered, therefore
you are bold to put it off, if the Holy Ghost, were at thy command, if he
would breathe when thou listest, it were another case, but he breathes when
and where he lists, nothing is so free as the will of the Spirit, he breathes
where he lists: That it is no more in thee to alter him than the winds, when
they blow to the East, can thou cause it to blow to the West, no more can
thou alter the will of the Spirit: Therefore take heed of refusing the offer,
when the Lord will offer, it is a dangerous thing to refuse.

What the Lord bade them in the Gospel to do, he is ready to do himself;
When you come into a City, offer peace, if they will receive it, so it (...),
let it come on them, but if they will not, stay not there, let them go, shake
off the dust off your feet against them; such a people shall perish. Consider
that, and see if the Lord be not ready to do it himself. If he make an
offer, as he did, when he gave his Disciples this command; take heed that he
go not away in anger, he knocks at thy heart again and again, take heed that
he go not away in wrath. It is the Lords manner, no man knows the time of
his offer, sometimes at the third, sometimes at the fifth, and sometimes at the
last hour; the time is not in thy hand, but whenever he offers take heed off
refusing, for if he grows angry, he returns no more, When he shall swear in
his wrath, etc. Psalm. 95. ult. that is a place worth considering.

The Apostle persuades them not to defer Repentance, but to come while it is
to day, put it not off; and he gives them two reasons, Lest you be hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin, that is, you will not be able to come in,
sin will harden you again, lest the Lord swear in his wrath, as he did to the
Israelites. Now, you must mark, they offended him, once, twice, and thrice,
still the Lord bore with them, they were rebellious at the Red Sea, and
presently after, yet this the Lord bore with, but there was a time, when the
Lord will bear with them no longer, yet they lived many years after, then he
swear in his wrath, and then they were destroyed. It is true, the Lord is not
so angry for every refusing and sin, which thou committest, but when he comes
to swear, there is no retracting of it then, wheresoever you find an oath in
the Scripture, there is no reservation, when he swear, he never returned
again. Therefore take heed of angring the Lord Jesus, though he be the Savior
of the world, yet kiss the Son lest he be angry. Take heed of deferring, for
a change of Nature is required, which is a thing that thou can not do, but
the LORD must do it.

Again, Use 2.
if it be a change of Nature, Content not your selves with any thing if this be
wanting.
I will but urge this a little.

Then we may learn hence to know, that all the desires that come from Nature
are nothing, for that is not to have another Nature: they are Flowers, All the
desires that come from Nature are nothing.
that have a beauty in them, but they are the Flowers of the grass, subject
to corruption, as well as the stalk on which they grow, therefore GOD accepts
them not.

Moral Virtues.
Again, it is not Moral Virtues, for that is not changing of Nature, for they
may be got and lost again.

Transient acts of Holiness.
Again, it is not the Transient acts of Holiness which the Holy Ghost works
in the heart, when he comes as a Passenger for a night, or as a Sojourner for
a month or two, but he must come to be an Inhabitant, and so as the Soul is
in the body, to make the Nature another Nature.

Good Intentions and Purposes.
Last of all, it is not any good Intentions, any good Desires, any good
Purposes, but another Nature.

Therefore, take heed that you do not deceive your selves, and that is a thing
we are exceeding apt to be deceived in, because we have other purposes we
think all is well: this we must look to, for there be many times when men
are very prodigal of good purposes, as when they come to receive the
Sacrament, or in time of apprehension of death, or it may be you will purpose
to leave sin, when you have smarted for some sin you have committed; you
then mean to alter all, and you think you are well, because you have other
desires and purposes in you, but it is not so, there must be another Nature,
that is, these purposes God regards as nothing, for indeed they are worth
nothing, when there are new purposes, and the old Nature continues still, they
come to the birth, and when they have done so, There is no strength to bring
forth, that is, when the purposes are new, and the nature old, they are not
able to dwell there, but it is like a new piece in an old garment, that is, old
nature is not able to suit with new purposes, but the piece breaks forth, and
the rent is greater than it was. So usually it is, when we have the old nature,
and take new purposes, there is not a sutablenesse, and the rent is made
greater than it was. A man returns again to sin and is worse than he was;
but when there is another Nature, as well as other purposes, then the purposes
live there, as Creatures live in their own Element, and as branches live and
grow on their own roots, but when purposes are holy and good, and the nature
bad, they are as Plants planted in a soil not proper to them, where they will
not grow nor prosper, because the soil is not suitable to them: therefore let
us not content our selves with these good Purposes and Transient Acts, there
must be another Nature. For these good purposes, what are they but as
blossoms nipt with untimely frosts? they may make a fair show, and come to
nothing, as a tree that promises largely, has blossoms very fair, but you
shall find no fruit on it; so it is when Nature is not good: There is so much
in Nature, that is in a man not sanctified, that he has thief two things:
First, he may approve of the Law of GOD. And secondly, have a desire to be
saved.


Put these two together, Approbation of the Law of GOD, and Desire to be
saved; they will bring forth a purpose of change of life, they are able to do
that, but now the heart is not changed: As in Deutronomie the fifth chapter,
and the nine and twentieth verse, you shall find an expression of it there,
when Moses told the people, that GOD would speak to them by a man like
themselves; they made a fair promise that they would do all that the LORD
commanded them; Moses answered them, You have said well; But, O that there were
an heart in this people to keep GODS Commandments, and to do them, that it
may go well with them and their children. As if he had said, I know you speak
no more than you think, I know that you are resolved to do what the LORD will
appoint, but you have your old hearts still: O that there were an heart there.

So they that take new Purposes to themselves, it is well: but we may say, Oh
that there were in them an heart! For it fares with men in this case, as with
them spoken of in Scripture; One said, he would go into the Vineyard, and did
not.

It is a frequent case, when men say, they will go into GODS Vineyard, they
do not, because they are not able, till they have another Nature: It is an
intent above their strength; therefore content not your selves with Purposes.

The end of the Fourth Sermon.
THE FIFTH SERMON UPON THE NEW CREATVRE.
2 COR. 5.17. Therefore if any man be in Christ, let him be a new Creature.


THirdly, Use 3.
if this be required of every man, Look that good performances be natural to
you.
that he have another Nature, then we must lead you a step further than we did
before, you must not only, not content your selves with good purposes and
desires, bu^ more than that with good and holy act^ons: It is not enough that
you do the actions that are holy and good, that your lives be holy and good
in great measure, or for a fit, but the Nature must be altered, that is, it is
not enough that thou exercisest meekness and temperance, gentleness and
humility, but thou must be an humble man, and a meek man, a man lowly in
spirit, of a sober and temperate disposition, thy very nature must be turned
into this; that is, these Graces must be so incorporated into thee, as if they
were con-naturall to thee: therefore it is said of David, not only that he
did what was good, and Gods will, but he had an heart after Gods heart: so it
must be true of all the Saints, for God delights not but in the heart:
Therefore in Psalm. 51.6. Thou love truth in the inner parts, therefore have
thou taught me wisdom in the secret of my heart: that is, though the outward
performances be good in themselves, yet thou delightest not in them, that which
thou delightest in, is to have another Nature, to have truth in the inward
parts; that is, when the inward frame of the heart is altered, when that is set
right, therefore thou have taught me wisdom in my hidden parts, in my heart,
thou have not only given me wisdom to behave my self well abroad in my
actions and carriage, but thou have made me wise in the secret of my heart.

It is said of Joshua, he had another Spirit, else he had not come into that
Land: therefore see if thou have such a change in thy heart, that thou do
not only do good things, but that thou do them in that manner, that thou
do natural actions, that is, in such a manner, that thou can not but do
them, as 1 John 3.9. They cannot sin, for they are borne of God. They have
another Nature, what follows on that? therefore they cannot sin, as a man
cannot do against Nature; they cannot do any thing against the truth.

Again, on the other side, they cannot choose but do good, as a man cannot
choose but do that which is natural to him.

Do not say, This Rule is strict, who can hear it?

Do we make it straiter than the Holy Ghost does? What else is the meaning of
it, Whosoever is in Christ is a New Creature? that is, has another Nature; all
we do, must come from another Principle, which is the same to thee now, which
Nature was before, all must be altered; as we say of Creatures, that which is
dogs-meat, is a sheep poison; so it is true of men, when the Nature is
changed, there is not only an alteration of acts, but what was his meat
before, is now his poison; and what was poison to him before, is now his
delight, it is that he feeds on.

But, Quest.
you will say, How shall I know when my Nature is altered? It is a matter of
great moment, no man can be saved without it, and it is nothing to have holy
purposes, desires, and actions, but, the Nature must be altered; therefore it
stands us in hand to know it.

You shall know it briefly by this: First, what you do naturally, you do it
constantly, you Answ.
for Nature is a constant thing. In things not natural, there may be much
inequality, they may continue for a time, and be laid aside again, as a piece
gilded over, long wearing will wear off the gilt; but what if the lead or
silver be turned into gold? then it will be still the same: so it is with the
man, whose nature is changed, he will be constant, the same nature will hold
out and continue. A Wolf that puts on a Sheep clothing, may be like a
Sheep, but is not turned into a Sheep: we are turned into Sheep, as Christ
turned Lions into Lambs, Serpents into doves, that is, he alters the very
Nature, when that is done, then a man is always like himself, indeed he does it
by degrees, as you shall hear hereafter, but he is still the same. Therefore,
consider what constancy, what evennesse, what equality is in your Nature; for
if there be another Nature given you, if you be other men, you do not act
another person, for then you may be ready to put it off, and lay it aside, but
your Nature is altered, and so your carriage will be constant.

Convenientissima Naturae, is the pleasantest light. Now if thou have another
nature, all the ways of God will be pleasant to thee, It will be meat and
drink to thee to do his will.

Again, if it be natural, thou will not be The eye is not weary with seeing,
nor the ear with hearing, because it is natural: The assiduity of holy
duties, wearieth out any man that has another nature; but let the Nature be
altered, and he holds out, they be so far from wearying him, that they
abilitate him, they make him more able, the burden grows lighter, and the way
more easy, when to another man it is hard, and he casts it off.

Again, if it be natural, it will out-grow the contrary, it will weary it
out; for Nature is Simile,
as a Spring does mud, let mud fall into a Spring, it will work it out, for it
is a living water, still working. So if a man's nature be changed, if a man fall
to sin, yet there is a Spring, and that Nature will return again and
again, and work it out, if not to day, it will to morrow, because there is a
Spring there. Again, where there is not a New Creature, it will never leave
settling till it have corrupted the whole.

But an Objection will come in, I cannot find this change of Nature, I find
that the sins I delighted in before, Object.
I delight in still, those evil inclinations which I had before, I have them
still, I find not such an inward alteration, I find that I can suppress them,
and restrain them, but the change of Nature I find not.

This is a great Objection, and needs answering.

Answ.
To this therefore I answer, two things thou shall find in thy self, if thy
nature be changed, if thou have another nature in thee, hough there be
something in thee, that does like the objects of thine own lusts, yet there is
something in thee that abhorres them, though there be an inclination that
carries thee toward them, yet there is a contrary inclination that resists
them, so there is something still that contradicts and opposes them.

And that is not all, there is, besides this, a weakening of the vigor which
before they had, there is not that strength in them that was before. So that
there are two things in every man that has a new Nature: First, though there
be much of the old there, yet it is exceedingly weakened and mortified. And
secondly, there is much new that was not there before. In every faculty there
is something new, that puts a good tincture, a beauty, and gloss on every
action thou do; so as though thou do much of the old, yet not so much as
thou did before, and thou do much that thou could not do before.
Therefore be not discouraged, though there be some Inclinations left still,
yet the stream is weakened, the vigor is abated: and again, there is a
contrary stream that opposes, resists, and overcommeth it. It may be at the
first, thou may find it more difficult, but in continuance thou shall find
it more evident. I cannot better resemble it to you, than by a man newly
recovered out of sickness; Simile.
take a man that is newly recovered, as soon as his disease begins to lose his
strength, and health begins to enter, the health is exceeding little at the
first, but you shall find this in such a man, that health is in every part,
and you shall find it will grow still and get ground. And again, although a
man be exceeding weak, not able to go out of his chamber; not able, it may
be, to go out of his bed, yet the sickness is gone and subdued, and health
has got the victory; so the sickness grows weaker and weaker, and health
stronger and stronger: so Sincerity is the least of all Graces at the first,
and grows to be the greatest at the end: therefore, though there be the same
Inclinations in thee still, yet it is like a sickness when a man is upon point
of recovery, when the health begins to enter in, there is a great weakness
remains, but the health over-ballanceth it.

Therefore, be not discouraged for that, only, be sure that thou find those
Inclinations die in thee more and more, and that health grows more and more;
for lusts are said to be mortified, not because they are actually dead already,
but because they are dying, a wound is given them, and they will be dead. And a
man is said to have a new life, because he is growing toward it; so a man is
a New Creature, not because he i^ perfectly new, but that is the end he looks
to.

Use 4.
Fourthly, if we must have another Nature, then surely, To abhor the old nature,
and to ^^^ke to have it chan^ed.
the Nature we had before the old Nature, must needs be very bad, for nothing
is to be changed, but you change it for the contrary. Now if this be required
as good, the other must be abhorred as evil: therefore learn* not to excuse
your own Nature, or your sin from it, but abhor it; this is a point of
great use, and directly flowing from the words: If another Nature be required,
the old nature is bad, and must be hated, abhorred, and emptied forth: now
because men are exceeding apt to excuse themselves from their nature; they
think their sin is so much less, because they have a strong inclination to
it. They are deceived in this, for the sin is so much the greater; if the
Spark be so much, what is the furnace within? If the Branches be so bitter,
what is the Root? Therefore make this use of the actual sins which you
commit, they should be as Rivers to lead you to the Sea of corruption within
you? You shall see, the Saints made this use of their inward corruptions. Romans
^*
Paul, seeing the rebellion of his flesh, it led him to the body of sin,
ama^zed him, he complained before, but when he came to that, he grew to an
extremity of complaint, as if that were worse than all the Branches. So David,
considering his murder, etc. made him to know what it was to be conceived in
sin, for at that time he comes to that complaint in the one and fiftieth
Psalm, I was conceived in sin, and in iniquity has my mother brought me
forth: I say, these particular sins should lead us to know our Nature. So did
Job when he saw what his failings had been, he looks to himself and
abhorres himself. It may be, this has been taught you, you are to be humbled
for your sins, and for the evil actions that you have done; and this you
ought to do, but we must lead you further, you must be humbled for your
Nature, and indeed this humbles a man, a man is never humble till then; for a
man may think his actions bad and confess them, yet he may think his Nature
is not bad; but when he sees that his Nature is bad, he abhors himself; now,
humiliation is like that: when a man comes to abhor himself, it is a greater
degree, than for a man to abhor his actions; as it is said of Job, he
abhorred himself; so thou must learn to abhor thy self, to abhor that
nature that is in thee. We are very backward in this, every man is ready to
excuse himself, though I did this and that, it is my nature, but thou must
know that the corruption within, is more than the sin without.

Now this humiliation must not rest merely in this, to abhor thy self, but
it must lead thee further, to have it renewed, as thou will never seek to have
another Nature till thou be humble; when thou come to abhor thy self,
thou will labor for another self, and not before, thou will then be content,
yea desirous that that old heart of thine may be broken in pieces, and that
thou be made new.

Quest.
But, you will say, What shall I do to have this old Nature made new?

Answ.
Go to Christ, the same actions he used when he raised Lazarus, the same
actions he does, when he raises any to life; therefore the same course must
be taken, that was taken to raise Lazarus from the dead: What was that? To
believe in him. You have in John 11. it is said, This is befallen him, that the
glory of the Son of man may be seen: that is, that Christ may be glorified. So
the blind man was said to be blind for the glory of God: So it may be said
of the old Nature in man, of the death that has gone over all mankind;
therefore it is that God may be glorified, that is, may show his power in
renewing it: Therefore, as Christ said to Mary, Did not I say to thee believe?
Believe only, and thou shall see the power and glory of God: So say I to every
one of you; only believe, that is, go to God, beseech him, and give not over,
and believe that he is able and willing to do it, and he will not deny thee,
he will raise thee from the dead, h^e will change that old nature of thine,
and know it is no small matter to believe, he can do it; Lord, says he, If
thou will, thou can make me clean. It was a great matter to say so: Examine
thy self, and see if it be so with thee, can thou say to Christ, Lord, if
thou will, thou can heal this nature and disposition of mine? Men are
discouraged when they see sin has got ground of them, they have had a long
comb^te with it, and cannot overcome it. It is an hard thing to go to Christ
and say, Lord, thou can make me whole; but thou must believe, for he can do
it, and does it daily, therefore go to him, beg earnestly of him, and he will
change this nature of thine, and make thee a New Creature.

Again, Use 5. Fear not falling away.
fifthly, if we have another nature, then do not fear falling away, for when
a man is made a New Creature once, he has another nature, if Grace were
nothing but a thing infused, an adventitious quality, that did only adhere to
us, we might lose it again, but having another nature, never fear that thou
can be changed to the contrary, for thou have another Nature. Indeed you may
go thus far, you may lose Florem (as we say) but not Radicem^ actum, but not
Potentiam, you may lose the Flower, the Branches may be cut down, but life
remains in the Root; you may lose the Act, but not the power, you may lose the
degrees; you may lose it Gradualiter, not Totaliter. And lastly, you may lose
the sense, you may have Gratiam sine sensu gratiae, you may lose the sense of
it, but not the thing; you may lose the use, the Roo^ and s^bstance you cannot;
you may lose the degree, not the whole: that is, when you are once a member of
Christ, there may be a benumming, that may hinder the influence of blood and
spirits, but so as it shall never be gangred, it shall never die again; there
may be a cloud on you, but the Sun shall never set on you.

Object.
But, you will object, Grace of it self is of a mutable nature; for that which
is subject to decay in part, is subject to decay in the whole. Again, it is a
Creature, and every Creature is subject to perish. Again, we see that the
Angels and Adam in Paradise had grace as true as we, yet they fell from it?

Answ.
I answer, It is true; Grace of it self may perish, it is possible, it may die,
for it is a Creature, and may perish as well as any other, considered in it
self, but if we consider it as united and joined to CHRIST JESUS, so it cannot
fail you; for, you must know, Grace in every man's heart, is like light in the
air, and like water in the Cisterne: Now it is true, if the Sun set, the light
will vanish, and if the Spring should dry up the water, the River would dry
up too: but seeing the Sun never sets, that is, Christ never departs from
you, when he has taken you to himself, and seeing the Spring never dries up,
though Grace of it self be of a mutable nature, yet by reason of that
conjunction with him, it can never be altered, and thence it is that you cannot
fall off. It is true, if we were cut off from Christ, Grace should wither, as
the Branch being cut off from the Root, but being knit to him, the Sap must be
in the Branches, because it is in the Root, and life will be in the members,
because it is in the Head: therefore, we say, no man can fall from Grace,
because he cannot be cut off, once on, and never off, once his, and never
separated again, as Romans 8. The Apostle goes through variety of things, that
may seem to be able to separate us, but nothing can, and seeing nothing can
separate you, you shall have always Sap, that is, Grace, it shall never be taken
from you, when once you have it. So that, if a member may be cut off from
Christ's body, it might perish and die, but as Christ dies no more, so every one
in Christ dies no more; Romans 6.9. Christ dies no more, so every one in him dies
no more: that is, he lives as Christ lives: Therefore, if there can be no
disjunction from Christ, thou may comfort thy self, thou shall have grace
for ever. Therefore comfort your selves, my Brethren, with these words, Do you
regard an Inheritance above a Lease, because an Inheritance is a constant
thing? Do you regard Pearls above Flowers, because they will not wither? Why
then do you not get Grace, which is so constant a thing. Be not discouraged,
give not over your fight; for, seeing Grace shall never have an end in you, you
shall be sure to overcome, you may have many an hard bickering, but you are
sure to hold out. Discouragement is a great means to make a man sit still; I
shall never get victory over my sins, and then I shall be cut off. No, it is
impossible, when it is once planted, it shall grow, thou shall have the victory.

Use 6.
Sixthly, if coming to Christ, we shall have another nature, Be not discouraged
with the difficulty of any duty.
then be not discouraged to set upon so holy a work. Indeed, if this necessity
were laid on thee, to serve God in newness of life with an old heart, it were
an hard task, and very intolerable, thou had reason to sit down and never
attempt it. But this is for comfort, Thou shall have another nature. All
difficulty arises from disproportion, between the faculty and the object,
or the thing to be done. As for a man of a shallow understanding, to be put to
study an hard thing, the difficulty is, there is no proportion between his
understanding and the burden of the thing: lay a great burden on a child,
and he cannot bear it, but were he as strong as the burden, it were nothing.
If God should impose on thee newness of life, and suffer thee to keep thy old
nature, it were an hard task, and thou will never perform it, thou will find
that difficulty in it by reason of the disproportion between thy nature and
the duty; but seeing thou shall have another nature, be not discouraged, go on
with comfort, and remember that the best nature in the world, if God change it
not, will not serve the turn. And the worse nature, if thou think thou have
a worse nature than others, if he will change it, he is able to do it, with
readiness and facility, therefore be not discouraged

Again, if thy nature be changed, thou must be comforted: Comfort your selves
in this, that you have another nature (and so we will end this point) for it
is a very great comfort, Use 7.
A change of nature is a ground of comfort.
a comfort beyond that which perhaps you imagine, for the Saints are too slow,
too backward to consider their consolations, their privileges, the glorious
condition they are in: therefore glory in that, comfort thy self in that, that
thou have another nature given thee.

But, Quest.
you will say, what benefit have I by that?

I will not stand on it, Answ.
but name one place, James 1.18. He has begot us again with the Word of
truth, that we should be a kind of first fruits of his Creatures: that is, he
has given us another Nature: And what do we get by that? By this means you
are made Primitiae, the first fruits of his Creatures.

There are two things in that, when we are said to be first fruits, we are the
cream and the prime of all his Creatures, as the first fruits were the cream
of all the field, the top of all the Creatures of God; and is not that a
glorious condition that Nature puts us into, that be changed, that it will make
you the highest in that kind, this is a great privilege: there is a
wonderful difference between Angels and Devils, one is the top, and the other
is the bottom, all the difference is only this, New Nature: therefore, when
thou have a New Nature, thou art put into an high and glorious condition, and
this is the first sense, that we are New Creatures.

Then there is another, by being the first fruits, you sanctify the whole
field; all the world fares the better for you; for the first fruits are, not
only the best, but they sanctify all the rest, that is, all mankind receives
good from you.

When Lot was out of Sodom, it was set on fire, when the Israelites were once
out of the Red Sea, the waters returned and drowned Pharaoh: So Gods children
sanctify the whole lump: therefore you have a great privilege by being New
Creatures: So much for this, that you must have another Nature.

Observe. 3.
Now the next point is, there must be a Newness, Whosoever is in Christ, It
must be a new Creature. Consectaries thence.
let him be a New Creature: From thence many things are to be gathered; As
first, if we must be New Creatures, then are we redeemed from old customs,
That we are redeemed from old Customs.
there is a lingering in our nature after that we have been long accustomed to
do, old haunts are very prevalent. Custom is as an Iron chain, to tie us to
the things that are evil. Now thou must be a New Creature, Old Customs are
such as Christ died to redeem thee from, Even from the vain conversation you
have received from your Fathers. Therefore, you that are held in any by-ways,
remember that you are bound to be New Creatures, and take heed that custom
prevail not with you; for it is exceeding prevalent, because it is pleasant,
as what a man is long accustomed to, is very pleasant, for custom breeds
another nature, and what is so suitable to us, as things connaturall with us,
and what are so, are very pleasant?

A man will be loath to come out of a thing which he has much been accustomed
to; Custom has many advantages against us.
First, it wins off our Judgments, It gains upon our judgments.
off our opinions, and that is the reason why young men are not able to judge,
and other men that are accustomed to evil courses have judged already, and
will not judge again; and by this means custom prevails exceedingly, for it
is not only pleasant, but it wins off our Judgment.

Again, It is troublesome to alter it.
it is exceeding troublesome to change, when a man is accustomed in a thing, it
is easy to continue in that course, but to go out is troublesome.

And again, We plead for it.
we think it a disparagement, what have we lived thus long, thus many years
together in this tract, and shall I now change it?

And which is worse than all the rest: It breeds Senselessness.
Custom breeds a senselessness; Take heed that you be not hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin: that Custom takes not away all sense; Consuetudo
peccandi tollit sensum peccati; It is not an easy thing to leave an old
custom; but remember, that if you be in Christ, you must be New Creatures: He
shed his blood to redeem you from sin, that is, he has paid a dear price
to redeem you from the bondage of customs, from your old Conversation;
therefore do not say you have long done it, and will do it still, Ant^qua
consuetudo, is nothing else but vetustas erroris: Men do excuse their evil
actions from their custom in them, but know it is no good excuse, to excuse
second errors with a former.

Do thou think it a good excuse to say, I have done it thus long, and
therefore will do it still? Yield not to it, but know, thou ought to be
changed, have this still in thy mind, thou must have a new Nature, thou art
redeemed from thy old customs: And this I speak not only to the old, but to
the young. I call it old, not because men have long continued in it, but
because it is suitable to the old nature. You should therefore rather make a
contrary use of it, and be ready to say, seeing I have continued in such a
course so long, it is time for me to alter; it is enough and too much that I
have spent so much time amiss, I have suffered Christ to want, and knock till
his head be wet with the dew, he shall wait no longer, I will now open to him;
for therefore are we New Creatures, that we may be redeemed and freed from
these old customs.

Consect. 2.
Secondly, if thou must be New, then let it not seem strange to thee, Wonder
not that the world wonders at thee.
that the world wonders at thee; for any thing that is new, we are apt to
wonder at, as at new Stars that have not appeared before, and at new fashions.
This is the condition of all Saints to be wondered at, I and the children whom
thou have given me, are as signs and wonders in Israel. If it were among
Turks it were another matter, but it is so in Israel.

Be not discouraged for this, make account of it, the world will wonder at New
Creatures, and let it not seem strange; for when thou know that all the
world lies in wickedness, as in the 1 Ioh. 5.19. And know that thou art a
New Creature, why will thou be discouraged? Let the Mathematitian be working
according to his Art, he draws lines according to his Rule, if a Countryman
laugh at him, will he give over, and be discouraged? He will not do so, for he
knows it is the man's ignorance: so if thou approvest thy self to God, if thou
keep a good conscience in all things, toward God, and toward men, the
world will wonder at it, yet thou go by Rule, it is their ignorance, it
seems strange to them, and therefore they speak evil; It is the multitude
that does it, and the multitude does always cast shame on that, which shames
them: know it is the fashion of the world to do so, the life of the Saints is a
secret censure, now there is no way for the world to help themselves, but to
blemish that which shames them, to cast shame on that, to blemish that as much
as can be.

Therefore the old world does put away all, that may discover them: As the
Painter when he had pictured a Cock very ill, commands his Boy to drive away
all true Cocks from the picture; for, says he, if they come near it, all men
will see what a bungler I am, but if no true Cocks come near, it may pass
well enough: After this manner does the world, As long as no New Creature comes
near, their oldnesse is not seen, it is not taken notice of, they do well
enough, but if there be one in a Country or Town, or one of a Society, whose
course is of another fashion, that has another life, that is, a New Creature,
when he stands by, the old will appear, and they will have it driven away: I
would the times were not such as that I need press this.

Indeed it is a great weakness to be discouraged in the ways of God, and to
be ashamed of that which should be our glory. It has always been the manner of
the world, and that may comfort thee; for the world is as the Sea that casts
out Pearls, but this is thy comfort, some will gather them up, some know them
to be Pearls, and prize them so, though the world casts them out as mud, yet
the Lord knows what thou art, The world loves her own, but what is not like
themselves, the world cannot love; as the Aethiopians picture Angels black and
Devils white; so does the old world, what is black like themselves, they
reckon beautiful, but they that have the true beauty they honor not, because
they are not like them.

Therefore, if thou find ill entertainment in the world, thou must know,
every New Creature shall have it: And let me say this of the old world, that
are ready to cast shame on the New Creatures, you say you do it not to the New
Creatures, not to them that are religious, but you do it to Hypocrites: Let me
say thus much to you before I pass this point. Those men whom of all others
you may think not to be New Creatures, may be the best men; as a Philosopher
answered, and it was a wise answer, when an ignorant man asked him, who was an
happy man, whereas men reckon Kings and Princes happy men? He answered, He
that of all others, thou think most happy, may be most unhappy; and he
whom thou think most unhappy, may be most happy: So those that be disliked
for the most part, are these New Creatures, and those men spoke well of, are of
another stock, like themselves.

Thirdly, Consect. 3.
if we must be New Creatures, then pull down all that is old; Pull down all
that is old.
for whatsoever is old must be rejected, a man must in every thing be another
man than he was: So as thou may say, I had such a lust, such a disposition,
my delight was in such things, such men, such company; now I am changed, all is
made new. So that thy business is to pull down now, and to build up, that is
the business of every man to be still plucking down the old building,
whatsoever is old, whatsoever is in thy self, in thy old self, thou must be
emptied off, and thou must be new, that is, Thou must purge out the old leaven,
1 Cor. 5.7. Purge out the old leaven, for Christ your Passover is offered: If
that was to be done for the shadow, must it not be done for the substance. The
Apostle presses it so, Purge out all the old leaven, all must be purged, all
old things must be taken away; there was a strait charge that they must search
their houses, yea, every corner of their cup-boord, not any place should be
left unsearched, and it was to be done exactly, that in the least corner there
should be no leaven left: So thou must search all the corners of thy heart, all
the turnings of thy conversation, the old leaven must be purged out of all, out
of thy understanding, out of thy tongue, there must be no more thy old speech
and language, out of thine eyes, there must be no more wantonness; out of
thine ears, every part of the old man, of the old leaven, must be purged out
of the whole Soul, there is no question of that, and of thy body too; all the
manner of conversation must be holy; all old leaven must be purged out, because
it is old leaven; and you must keep the Passover with that which is new, with
new dough, with the New Creature.

For Sin is like old leaven, now leaven when it is old is the worst, as every
thing gets strength from their age, and it is of that nature, that if they do
not purge it out, it will leaven the whole lump: If there be any jot of leaven
left, it shall sower all thy heart. Sin is like a fretting leprosy that will
run over all; So leaven is strong, it sowres quickly and speedily.

Object.
But, you will say, How shall I do that, then I shall be free from all sin?

Answ.
The meaning is, thou must dislike all, Sin must be put out of possession, it
must be emptied forth, thou must be in war with it all, that is, thou must
resist all, if any be not purged out, that thou suffer it to lie quietly
without resisting, it will leaven the whole, therefore purge all out.

But must all the old building be pulled down; Quest.
Is there nothing to be left there? what shall we do with our natural
dispositions?

You must know, Answ.
that only the oldnesse is to be taken away, but the nature it self is to
continue, there is much use of nature, only you must know, grace takes away the
obliquity, the oldnesse, the sowrenesse of it, and puts a sweetness into it.
As a ship under sail, the wind is profitable to drive the ship, else it will
not go, all the matter is in the Rudder, that it be turned the right way. So
Nature, the strength of nature, affections, or whatsoever they be, are like the
wind to drive the ship, thou may retain them, only godliness must sit at
the Stern, the obliquity must be taken away, the nature must be left, thou
must so pull down the old building, that the same materials may be used
again, the natural affections may continue in thee still, but there must be
another Auriga, another to drive them, and that is this Newness.

For example, a man is naturally sad, he may continue this, the oldnes of that
is, that it spends it self in earthly sorrow and worldly discontent, when
grace comes, when the new man comes, it powers it self forth in Prayer, Is any
man sad? Let him pray.

So it may be thou art naturally merry, grace takes not away this disposition,
but whereas before it was spent in vanity; now he that is merry sings Psalms;
Let him that is merry sing Psalms; that is, a man's merrinesse is turned to an
holy cheerfulness, the dissoluteness is taken away, but the disposition
continues still: Religio est laeta; though not, dissoluta. So it may be thou
art of a facile nature, before it was to evil, thou wast ready to be drawn
away by evil, when grace comes, thou must be facile to good. It may be thou
have a sturdy disposition, full of metal, and courage, whereas before it was
to attempt evil things with much violence, now it is set on good enterprises
with as much zeal, so there is nothing to be pulled down, only the oldnesse
must be taken away*

The end of the Fifth Sermon.
THE SIXTH SERMON UPON THE NEW CREATVRE.
2 COR. 5.17. Therefore if any man be in Christ, let him be a new Creature.


Again, Consect 4.
if we must be New Creatures, Wonder not at the unevenn^sse which is found in
the lives of the b^st men.
if that must be the condition of every man to have another new man begun in
him; then wonder not at the unevenness which is found in the lives of the best
of the Saints. For, if there be something new, and something old, (as there is)
there must needs be an unevenness, as where there be two contrary Principles,
moving two contrary ways, the body must needs be moved with some unevenness,
and unequality: therefore be not discouraged, for that you are not perfect in
all things, you have something new in you, and something old; only take heed
you be not mistaken in it. For there is a great difference between the
unevenness befalling the Saints, which are New Creatures, and the unevenness
in the ways of the wicked, there is a great difference between the failings
that they are subject to, who are upright hearted, and between the failings of
them that are rotten and not sound at heart.

Object.
You will ask, how I shall know the difference?

Answ.
This is the difference:

Difference between unevenness in the Saints, and in the wicked.
There be some men whom Saint James complains of in his first Chapter, that are
unstable in all their ways, and in the sixth Chapter of Saint Matthew, that
have not a single eye: If the eye be single, all the body is light; but if the
eye be double, all the body is full of darkness: That is, there are causes
why men walk unevenly, one is because they are as in bivio, hey know not which
way to choose, they are yet in doubt what to pitch on; as a man standing
between two objects, and not knowing which way to choose, but sometimes will
be with one, sometimes with the other, according as his different temper guides
him, he will not pitch resolutely on either: So it is a double eye, because of
the objects; it looks on two objects, now on one, and now on another; now it is
carried this way, now that way. This is a thing every where condemned in the
Scripture; but there is difference between this and a single eye, that has
one object, that has chosen God for his God, but follows him with much
weakness, with much imperfectnesse; this man has a single eye, and has
pitched on God; another has two things in his eye, One thing I do desire,
says David, and one thing will I seek for, etc. And I have chosen to run
the way of thy Commandments. So all the Saints, one thing they desire which
they pitch on, they have resolved to serve God with a perfect heart; another
man is unresolved and knows not which to choose, therefore is to and fro, off
and on, now very forward, and then backward, religious in a good mood, and then
off again. This you must take heed of, for here you ought to be discouraged,
this is not our meaning when we say you must not be discouraged for your
unevenness.

But how shall I know it, Object.
a little further?

By this, Answ.
if your eye be single, that you have chosen that one way, that you have
pitched on it, that you be more than in Aequilibrio, where the balances hang
even, you shall know it by this, the fa^lings of the Saints are never in that
degree that theirs are, that have not sound hearts, that is, such a man though
he serve God for a fit, yet when he is off again, he is like a man in a mask,
he is no more the same man he was, but there is a broad alteration between
what he was before, and what he is now. The Saints in their worst state have a
tincture of holiness, a thread of skarlet runs through their whole lives, after
they are once changed, they never fall in that degree, they have a seed in them
that will never let them go so far.

Object.
But, you will say, this is a notion, how shall we see it by experience?

Answ.
Thus they never lie so long when they fall into a sin, they are not well, and
they show it by resisting again, they cannot continue in it: for there is a
certain reluctance against it, that raises them again, they fall sometimes
into ill company, sometimes into ways of wickedness, sometimes into deadness
of spirit; but they are not content with this, they are like men out of their
own element. Another man for the fits of his religion is out of his element,
and is never well till he be settled in his own Center again: you see it by
Saul, Saul had very good fits when he persecuted David, surely he was in good
earnest when he said, he would do it no more, and David was more righteous than
he, he wept, and his heart melted, but he was sick of it, he was out of his
element. The Saints have certain fits, but they are sick of sin, the other
are sick of the goodness and godliness which they have, and are never well,
till they be set at liberty again, that they may walk again in their old
ways, so there is great difference in their degrees.

Again, such a man, says Saint James, is unstable in all his ways, that is,
a man whose heart is upright, there is some inequability to be found in his
life, some unevenness, yet it is but now and then, and by accident as it were,
because the graces he has be true, and good, and though sometimes he falls,
it is but by accident. Take a true drugge, and a false and counterfeit drugge;
when ever you will put a false drug to trial, it will not work. Take a drugge
that the Apothecary gives you, it may have the color and smell of a true one,
it may be you cannot tell how to find it out, but in working you may, if it be
false it works not: So take a Bow that is rotten, draw an arrow to the head,
and it is sure to break; this similitude the Scripture uses, They started
aside like a broken Bow, that is, when I put you to trial, you fly back, for
you are rotten: So those that are not sound, it is not their stability that
makes them go on in the ways of God for a time, but want of temptation to put
them to it. Put Judas to it, put Saul to it, and you shall quickly find them:
But take a true drugge, ordinarily it works well, but by accident it may not
work: A good Bow may be broken, by accident; so a grace that is true and
right, may sometimes fail of working. I cannot better express it, than by
this similitude: Take a ship bound to a certain Haven, it pitches there, the
Compass is set the right way, but it may be carried away by cross winds, yet
there is a certain Haven which it tends to: So there is a certain Haven,
which all the Saints of God go to, howsoever they are transported by
temptations and lusts, yet the Compass stands the right way: Another is
carried aside by uncertain winds, (for that is a Scripture similitude) that
is, there is the wind of a good mood carrying them toward God, let them be
turned, they go another way, they are not bound to a certain Haven, they are
not pitched, the others are carried aside by accident, sometimes they mistake
the way, sometimes they fall, and slip in the way, but that is their journey
they travel to heaven.

Last of all, those that are uneven; out of falsenesse of heart, and not
weakness of grace, they never bring forth fruit. I find that to be the
Scriptures Rule in the eight Chapter of Saint Luke, in the Parable of the Seed,
you shall see, it is said of the three grounds, which went furthest of the
three, that it brought not forth fruit; for the thorns grew up, that is, the
world and the pleasures of diverse lusts, and choked it; so these men bring not
forth fruit.

Object.
But, you will say, they do bring forth fruit, do they not do many actions in
good moods? may not an hypocrite go far? may he not have many blossoms?

Answ.
Yes, but they are but blossoms, there is something green, but they are but
blades, the corn never comes to earing, that is, they are never ripe: now a
thing must be ripe before it can be called good fruit, they never bring forth
ripe fruit, that is, fruit indeed; they bring forth sour grapes, Esaias 5. I did
thus and thus to my Vineyard, and it brought forth wild grapes; it may be, to
men's seeming they be as good as any, they may look as well as the best, but
taste them and they are sowrest, there is not any fruit, that is only the
property of the last ground, to bring forth fruit with patience. Now it is true
of all the Saints, though they be weak, yet they bring forth fruit, and true,
and ripe, and pleasant fruit, such as God delights to eat of; Come let us walk
in the Garden, and gather some fruit, as in Cant. The other bring not forth
fruit. Take the best action they do, being rightly examined, it is not good,
there is something there that marres it; and God sees this, they may be very
fair in the eye of man, but they are abominable in Gods sight. Therefore, if
thou have a New nature, be not discouraged for thy unevenness, which the best
of the Saints are liable to.

Again, Consect. 5.
this is another Consectary from this point, Expect a combat.
and we may put these two together, because they are two Branches coming from
the same Root: If there be another new Nature put into us, then expect a
combat; for certainly new and old will not agree together; you cannot put two
contraries together, but there must needs be a fighting, there must be a
contention: therefore expect that, and know you are not right; there is no new
Nature there, except you find such a controversy within.

But, you will say, this is not so sure a sign, for before this I found many a
combat; Object.
and do not Heathen men express what reluctance they have had? Have not
civil men, carnal men, and men ignorant of the ways of God, a great conflict
many times, between the conscience checking them within, and the actions they
do?

Answ.
I answer, It is true, but there is a great difference between the Combat,
Differences between the combat in the New Creature, and that fight that
seems to be in natural men.
that is, between the New Nature, and the remainders of the old, and between
the natural conscience, those glimmerings, those sparks, those good desires
which even they may have that are not sanctified, for you shall find all these
differences.

alia seeds belli, there is another seat of the war: for where before it was
in the conscience, it is now throughout the whole soul, there is a difference
in the Subject, every faculty is set against it self; because before, the
light was shut up within the walls of conscience, but it was not shed into the
whole soul, it lay glowing as a Spark there, but it was imprisoned, you
imprisoned the truth, and would let it go no further; but now it sheeds into
the soul, what the understanding knows, is infused into the will, and all the
affections; so there is a general change, and when the change is general, the
combat must needs be general; the combat must now be in every part, whereas
before it was but in one.

Again, there is a difference in success, for The House of David prevails
against the House of Saul: There must needs be wars between two contraries,
but the House of David grows stronger: So, by which our Divines use to resembe
this, Jacob got the better in the end: So there is a different success, the
new man out-wrestles the flesh. Sometimes a man is foiled, but we do not say a
man has lost the battle because he has a wound, or a foil, or has been
beaten back a little, he has got the victory that wins it in the end, and
that is the case of all the Saints.

Thirdly, there is difference in the object they have not that peculiar light,
therefore they are never troubled about motes: So the contention differs in the
object; the Saints contention is about small things, about the very manner of
doing holy duties, about the inward turnings of the affections, about the
sanctifiednesse of them about ill thoughts, they have a peculiar light; this
does not put out common light, but makes you see more than you did before;
there be many hundred sins now, which you never saw to be sins before. Had
not Paul a new light? Before, he had not considered that lust was sin, but
afterward he knew it: In the Saints, the affections wherewith they perform
holy duties, yea, their affection to their ill affections, the controversy is
about that.

Consect. 6. Think it not strange that you find some aukednesse in the ways
of God at first.
be sure there is no new Nature there.

The sixth Consectary, that I will deliver to you, is, that if you must be New,
then let it not seem strange to you, though you find a little aukednesse in
the ways of godliness at the first; for new things are a little troublesome,
sudden changes are so, when the thing is New. Be not discouraged, it is that
you must expect, and remember that custom will make it pleasant, when you are
used to it a little. Therefore complain not, lay not aside the Armor of God,
because it is a little heavy and ungainsome at the first; as David, who would
not go in Saul's armor, because he was not accustomed to it; lay it not aside
when thou art accustomed to it, thou will bear it well enough. Custom makes
the worst things, even grievous things pleasant, how much more, when one falls
on that which is good indeed? Therefore you must know, this is the nature of
the burden of Christ's Commandments which he calls a burden, the more you
bear it, the lighter it is, and there is good reason for it, because indeed it
is not a burden to the new man, but a delight, though to the flesh it is a
burden, the longer you bear it, the better it is: If you reckon it a burden,
as it seems to be at the beginning; yet remember it is, as Physike is, a
burden to a sick man; you know a sick man reckons it a burden to take
physike, and eat wholesome meats, but it is that that takes away the disease: So
is godliness, it is a burden as Physike is, and as wholesome diet is, but it
partly heales, and partly strengthens: therefore the longer you go in his
ways, the less burdensome they will be, the disease will be taken away: As
the more physike and wholesome meat, the more the disease is weakened, and the
man strengthened. This deceives us (and take heed of being deceived) we think we
must be tied from drink, and have the dropsy still, and have our fever still,
we think, we must eat wholesome meats, and be sick still, it is impossible it
should be so, you must know therefore, that the dropsy is healed, and then
what if abstinence be commanded? you must know that sickness is cured, and
health is come in the room; then what matter is it, if you are bound to these
duties? they are burdensome before, they will not be now. Therefore be not
discouraged, the insolence, the uncouthnesse, the unaccustomednesse of a thing
makes it usually burdensome. It is not so with the ways of wickedness, they
are pleasant in the beginning, but bitterness in the latter end: but the ways
of godliness, though they are a little auke and hard at the first, yet they
are pleasant in the end, and you must be content to endure a little pains (as
we say) Qui fugit molam, fugit farinam: If you will not take pains at the
mill, you shall not have any meal; if you will not take a little pains at the
beginning, you shall want the fruit of it: therefore be content with it, that
you may have the fruit. A man does not say, because a new suit, or a new pair
of shoes is hard at first putting on; therefore I will go in rags, but he
says, the new is better than the old, and after I have worn it a while, it
will be more easy. So be sure the ways of God will be as easy as pleasing,
yea, more pleasing than any thing, for they are jucunda per se, pleasing in
their own nature, others are pleasing to this or that humor, to this or that
case: now this is a true rule, whatsoever is so, per se, is always so. So thou
shall find this new man more easy and pleasant, for thou shall find it to be
so at all times, it is a continual feast pleasing in all conditions. Take all
other things that please thy nature, it is but when thou have such a lust, such
an humor in such a time, it is not so at all times, it is not a continual
feast.

But, Object.
you will say, I find it not so, I find that since I began this new course, I
have more trouble and perplexity of mind than I had before, I was quiet before,
and all at rest?

I answer, Answ.
it may be so, but stay a while till the Son of Grace has got higher, till
it has got more strength, and thou shall find it able to disperse those
vapors, and to scatter all those clouds. It is true at the beginning, there is
but strength enough to move them, to raise them a little; but when it has more
strength, they are scattered and dispersed: therefore though there be a little
hardness at the first, yet go on, and thou shall find it pleasant. The
Heathen man could say, Elige vitam optimam, and consuetudo faciet jucundam:
Choose the good way, and though it be hard at the first, afterward it will be
the more easy. If we appointed you a new work without a new heart, it were
another case, but you must know what we said before, you shall have a new
Nature, and being so, it will be pleasant, because the ways of God will be
suitable to it. So much likewise for this.

Consect. 7. Give God the praise of chanting thy Nature.
Last of all, if we must be made New Creatures, then give God the praise of that
great work, of changing old men into new men; I say, give him the praise of
it, for he looks for that at your hands. Will you magnify him for healing a
lame man, a blind man (for they were true maladies, and he was worthy of praise
for them) and is he not worthy to be magnified for changing the whole Nature,
for altering the whole frame of it? Are the cures of the soul less than the
cures of the body? What if Christ should now make the lame to walk, the blind
to see, to take away the blindness of the mind, to heal the sickness of the
soul, to make a man a New Creature: Is not this a work of an higher Nature?
When the Centurion saw the Veil of the Temple rent, he said, Surely this was
the Son of God: So when thou shall see the Course of Nature turned, that old
Nature of thine rent to pieces, be ready to say, Surely this was the Son of
God: Shall we say Christ was God for turning water into w^ne, and shall we not
give him the praise of his power, when we see him turn one Creature into
another? making Lions Lambs, making you New Creatures? This is a turning of
the course of Nature, is not your Nature carried as violently to sin, as the
Sun in his course? And to turn it, is as much as to stay the Sun in his
course; It is no less to make you New Creatures: No man considers it,
therefore let me put you in mind what it is, for this is a thing you should
mark.

Therefore John Baptist gives this sign of Christ, by which he might be
distinguished from himself, and all men, I baptize you with water, but when he
comes, he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire, that is, when
that is done, be assured that the Son of God is come in the flesh. This is
the great miracle that John will have them attend unto; and is not this daily
done? Does not Christ baptize us with fire and with the Holy Ghost? Therefore
you shall see what answer he gives to John Bapt. when he would know, Art thou
he, or look we for another? Go and tell John the blind see, the lame walk,
and the poor receive the Gospel, that is, I have made them New Creatures:
This is put with the other miracles of healing the blind and lame. It is true
we that live, see not this done, the blind to see, or the lame to go, yet we
see men receive the Gospel, that is, are regenerate by the Gospel, are made
New Creatures: This is a thing we should hearken to; as it was a great sin in
them in Christ's time, to neglect the miracles he did; so it is with us when we
neglect this. Therefore Christ takes up Nichodemus, when he tells him that men
must be made New Creatures; he wondering at it, says, what do thou mean by
that? Christ says, what will thou do, when I tell thee of things in heaven,
if thou will not believe, when I tell thee of earthly things: The meaning is
this, Regeneration is a thing done on earth (that is the meaning of the place)
this you see before your eyes, this you have experience of, if you will not
believe this, how will you believe things that are remote from your eyes? that
are shut up from you, which you have no experience of, but only that I tell
you, and therefore you ought to believe me? Therefore, when you see New
Creatures, argue thus with your selves, Certainly there is a renewing God, and
a renewing Spirit, that is, there is a Redeemer; for as by the common
creatures, which you see, you know there is a Creator (as, opus monstrat
efficientem) if you see a creature, then you know there is a Creator, then why
should not that renewing of Christ, his exercising that act of renewing among
the sons of men, put you in mind of glorifying Go^ and of giving you the
praise of it? When C^^ ^t wrought miracles, you shall find what different
success they had, says the Text in more places than one, (therefore I need
not quote it) some of the people glorified God, when they saw such a thing
done, others envied, some glorified God, others went and told the Pharisees.
You shall see when Lazarus was raised from the dead, some believed and
glorified God, others went to the Pharisees: Now, I say, when you see this
done, (for this is the greatest miracle, and all the miracles that is now left)
that men are made New Creatures, and it is done before your eyes, if you will
see it; (as Christ said) He that has ears, let him hear. Take heed how you
look on it, consider with what eye, God never makes a New Creature, but when
men look on it, there is a different judgment; some there are that magnify
it, and desire to be made so likewise, that make this use of it, and so you
ought to do, surely there is virtue in the Spirit, a virtue in Grace, an
efficacy in the Word; surely these be the ministers and servants of the most
high God. This you ought to do; but on the other side, how many hundreds and
thousands are there that do as they did, when they saw the miracles, they
envied? Yea, as they did with Lazarus, When the Jews saw that, for Lazarus
sake, many went away, and believed on him, they consulted how to put Lazarus to
death: That is the fashion of the world, when they see New Creatures, men
regenerate, that holiness and purity of godliness shines forth in their
lives, and when that causes others to go away, and that, for that they will
believe on Christ, they will do as they did with Lazarus, they will have him
put to death, that is, they will have him removed out of the way, they will
have him taken, ex rerum natura. Take heed of this.

But, Object.
you will say, If we knew they were New Creatures, we would not do so?

It is very true, Answ.
but do you think, when they would have killed Jesus and Lazarus, they knew
them to be so? They did not know Christ to be the Lord of life, the Scripture
says so. Again, they thought Lazarus to be an Impostor, it is likely they
did, but it is taken for a persecution of Christ. The Jews that killed the
Prophets, do you think, they thought them to be Prophets when they slew them?
Take heed of that, you know the danger of it, when JESUS CHRIST wrought
miracles by the power of the Holy Ghost: No, say they, he does it by Beelzebub:
Christ tells them, in this they blasphemed the Holy Ghost. When thou shall see
a man made a New Creature, when thou shall see a man Regenerate, take heed of
saying, this is guile, and cunning, and imposture, for it is done by the
Spirit; take heed of blaspheming the Holy Ghost. It is a dangerous case: I say,
when such things be done, we should praise God, and glorify GOD for it,
laboring to come in our selves, and not look on it with an eye of envy, and
hatred, and distate. The different effects Christ's miracles had, such has
this: Our scope is, that you may glorify God, and give him the praise of it,
that when he has done such a work, you may say, this is the power of Grace,
and the virtue of the Spirit. So much for this point, that you must be New
Creatures, and so we have gone through three things, which were observed out of
the words: First, the inseparability between Justification and Sanctification.
Secondly, the having of another Nature. Thirdly, it must be New.


Observe. 4.
Now the fourth is, it is a Creature wrought by God, for that Word is not in
vain, Whosoever is in Christ, let him be a New Creature: The New Creature is
Gods work.
] The meaning is this; we are New Creatures, that is, it is God that works it
in us, for Creation is proper to him, no Angel nor Creature under the Sun
can knit those things together, which have an infinite distance, as something,
and nothing; therefore it is proper to him, it is he that makes us New
Creatures, not that himself is the beginner, and something else perfects it,
as some say, but Deus est causa totius entis, He is the beginner and ender, he
makes us New.

And there is much reason, This is proved by four Arguments
for it cannot be otherwise, for if it were in our power, of our selves to come
in:

First, Arg. 1.
it will follow that the Saints in heaven should be no more beholding to God,
than those that are condemned in hell: For, if God did give every man
sufficient means of salvation, and I have taken it, and another refused it,
whom may I thank when I am in heaven, and another in hell, not God (for he
gave the means equally) but my self, I took it, and another did not and so
the love God shows, it should be as much to the damned, as to the Saints, if
he has done on his part equally to both.

Again, Arg. 2.
it should not be God that makes the difference, but man, and so you may stand
up and contradict what Paul says, Who art thou that boastest, who has put the
difference? If man has free will to take Grace, or refuse it, and if God has
given to all sufficient means, then, thou have made the difference, God has
not.

Again, if this were so, we must take away all Election and Reprobation; Arg.
3.
for what is Election? Election is nothing else but this, God has taken some
to life, and makes them holy, as godliness is an effect of his Election, and
the wickedness of men is a fruit of their rejection: But now here would be no
Election, but a mere prejudication of a reward to the thing done only; but
therefore God is said to have chosen us, because he makes us good; now by this
you take that quite away.

Object.
But, you will object, Why should there be those different kinds of working? We
see in all other things, if there be an end propounded and sufficient motives,
it is enough: and why should God give different objects? therefore they say, it
is but as propounding of the bough to the sheep, and the sheep will follow:
If God propounds congruous objects to the faculties of the soul of man, he
will come in.

Answ.
But I answer it briefly, if he will come in for this congruity of objects,
because a bough is propounded to him:

voluntatem Lupinam into Agninam; therefore thou must have another nature
before thou can follow the bough.

opens our eyes and inlightens us, we cannot see the excellencies of the ways
of God, and therefore we shall not follow it.

Again, there must be strength to follow, Saul looked on it for a time, but
not to the end, there must be a power of God to carry a man through all
objects, all impediments to the end; therefore, No man can come to me (says
Christ) except my Father draw him: Not some men, but no man, though he have
great means; he does not say, will come, but can come; he does not say, except
my Father allure him with congruous objects, but except my Father change his
Nature; for drawing signifies a reluctance, and backwardness in us. Arg. 4.


Go to experience, you shall find it so; when we speak to men, it is true, we
say, they be dead in sins and trespasses: Do not men hear us as dead men? No
man stirs up himself, they go away as they came, and till God put life into
them, they will not hearken to us.

Again, how perverse are judgments of men? they see no excellencies in the
ways of God; therefore are apt to quarrel and speak against them.

Again, do we not find our desires so pitched on present things, and our
lusts so set upon them, that without an Almighty Power they cannot be loosed?
Therefore Christ says, It is impossible for a rich man, that is, one that sets
his heart on riches, to enter into the kingdom of heaven. That place is as
strong as any place in all the Book of God, to show that there is no freedom
of will; It is impossible for a rich man; for a man that has this one lust,
(he might have said of any other lust) whose heart is set on gaming, on any
other sin, it is as impossible as for a Cable-rope to go through the eye of a
needle: But then (says Peter) No man shall be saved: and indeed no man shall
be saved, if there be no more than his own strength, but God will put to his
Almighty Power, to change his nature, to mortify these lusts. Therefore, this
we find by experience, it is not a notion that men are not able to come in.

Object. 1.
But, you will say, this is a discouraging doctrine, if God must do all, what
shall we do? it teaches every man to sit still?

Answ. 1.
I answer, No, it will not teach men to sit still, because there is no man ever
went about it, that ever found any impediment: Therefore he must know,
Impediments of two sorts.
what is an Impediment. Impediments (when a man cannot do a thing) are of two
sorts: One is, when I see such a thing as I desire, but there is a door locked
on me, and I cannot come at it, or I am fettered, and cannot go to it, or it
is in another man's hand, and I cannot get it out of his hand; here a man may
complain. The second Impediment is, when the thing lies before thee, thou
may have it, if thou will; every thing lies ready, and simply it is because
thou will not. Here now no man can complain, saying, Why is there such an
Impediment? Why may not I come in? Was there ever any man resolved with
himself, I will live a godly life, if I can? No, it is not that, all the
extrinsecal impediments are taken away, and all the matter is in thy will, thou
refusest to come in, and wilt not walk in that way. Here lies the Impediment.

Again, Answ. 2.
it is not a doctrine of discouragement; for, you must know, though God does it
by his Almighty Power, yet he works in us, In modo intelligentium, He uses us
in the work, and he uses us after the manner of men; for every man does Actus
agere; he works in us by propounding reasons, and arguments to move with all;
thou understandest them, and know them: therefore it is as much as thou
can do in the beginning to think, what reasons there are to move thee to
go in, to betake thy self to a godly course, and to change the old haunts
thou have lived in before.

Again, Answ. 3.
thou must keep from the Impediments, thou must keep out of ill company, that
destroys this. Thou have many good sparks in thee, thou must blow them up,
thou must lay thy self by the people, till the Angel comes, and moves the
waters; there be many things thou must do, and though the candle cannot light
it self, yet, when it is lighted, it is but putting oil to it, and we may
maintain the flame: though thou can not begin thy life, though thou can
not make thy self a living man, when thou art dead, yet, when there is life,
thou may stir, and move thy self, thou may eat and drink in strength of
that life; when the fire is kindled we may maintain it.

I say, we preach Free Will to the Regenerate; for certainly, so much grace as
they have, so much Free Will they have, for Free Will follows Grace, as the
Shadow does the Body; so far as we are restored to Adams condition, so far
we have Adams Free Will.

Therefore we maintain Free Will in the Regenerate, and as far as thou art
Regenerate, thou have Free Will, thou may do more than thou do.

Therefore do not sit down and say, I cannot do it, for thou may do it;
and if thou have but a little strength, thou may improve and husband it, as
well as any other talent, and it shall increase and grow in thee.

Object. 2.
Last of all, you will say, But what use is there of this doctrine, To what use
serves this doctrine?
to tell us that we are New Creatures, and God must make us New Creatures, and
he must beget us by the Word of Truth? Answ.


To four uses.
What use is there of it?

Use 1. To let us see that our condition in Christ is better than in Adam.
Very great use. One great use of it is this, if we do not thus hold with God,
that we are dependant upon him, and know that it is he that wrought that work,
we should be but in the state of Adam. Now this is the great advantage we have
by the Gospel, we have not a stock in our own hands, but are kept by the
power of God to salvation. Otherwise, if it were true that we take Grace, and
refuse it, according to liberty of will; you must know, this will consequently
follow on it; if thou can take it out of liberty of will, thou may let it
go again: never any man holds one, but he holds the other also; I say, thou
may fall from it again. Now, if thou may take it, and fall from it
again, thou art as Adam was; how miserable then is thy condition? But by this
doctrine that we are in Christ, that Christ has made us New Creatures, that
the work has been begun by him, and we are now committed to his keeping, we
are in another condition than we had in Adam.

Again, Use 2. That it may appear that God sets us now about a work,
which he does not enable us to perform.
there is this end of this doctrine: if this doctrine were not preached, thou
would go about a work, which thou would never be able to perform; for,
if thou have this opinion, I may do it out of liberty of will, thou will go
about a work without strength, thou will go about to leap over a great ditch
with a short staff. Now when a man will not seek to God, the work lies
undone: he that will not be strong by Gods strength, shall not be strong: when
thou art taught, it is God that does it, it will teach thee to go to God and
Christ, and pray them to do it, and so the work will be done to thine hand,
which before could never have been done.

Again, if thou could take Christ, and come in, thou would be less
beholding to Christ, Use 3. To make us love Christ the better, seeing how much
we are beholding to him.
and so love thy self and be less humble. On the other side, when thou see
thou have nothing, thou will do as wives, who, seeing they have nothing, no
beauty, they love their husbands better all the days of their life: Why does
Christ press it so, I have loved you, and you have not loved me, I have taken
you, and you have not taken me? It is a great matter when the wife says, I
have took you, I have chosen you, I loved you: we cannot argue thus with
CHRIST, for CHRIST'S Memento is ever and anon, I have loved you, and not you me.

Use 4. To make us take heed of putting off the work when Christ calls.
Last of all, this use you may make of it, learn to depend on Christ with much
fear, to take heed of putting off the work, when he calls, take heed of
denying him, if the other doctrine were true, you might be bold to put off your
Repentance, but take heed of that, when it is God that works in you, when God
must do it, and he does when he lists, when it is the Spirit that does it, and
it breathes when and where it lists; this may make you fear and tremble. Use
1. See what the business of Preachers is, and with whom you have to do, when
you hear the Word.
So you may see there is an end of this doctrine: now we will make a little use
of it, and so end.

First, if it be Christ's work, if it be he that must begin it, (for it is a
creature) then you see what business we have in hand, that are Preachers of
the Gospel, our business is to make men other Creatures, which is a
transcendent work, it is the work of God, and not of man: this is the errand
we are sent about, and the work we are taught to do every Sabbath; and every
Sermon which we preach to you, to turn Lions into Lambs, to transform the
heart of man, and to make you New Creatures. This I speak of, not for our
sakes, but for yours, that you may make use of it: you must learn to know,
when you hear the Word, what action you have in hand, and whom you have to do
with, that is, with the Almighty God, and not with man; for, alas, my Brethren,
what are we able to do? Ephesians. 2.10. You are Gods workmanship in Jesus Christ,
created to good works, that you should walk in them: It is true, we are the
Instruments, but ye are Gods workmanship. Take the best Instrument wherewith we
make any artificial thing, an Axe or a Chisell, or whatsoever it is, you know,
if there be not an influence from the Artificer, it will make no artificial
thing, it will strike when you use it, but it will not make any artificial
thing, if there be not an influence from the Artificer: So we are Instruments,
and the Word is an Instrument, but if there be not an influence from God, the
work will not be done, you will never be made New Creatures. Therefore you are
Gods workmanship created to good works; he does it, and remember you have to
do with him: You have an elegant expression of it in 2 Cor. 3.2. You are
Christ's Epistle administered by us, and written not with Ink, but with the
Spirit of the living God: That is, the Law of God is written in your hearts.
You know, Regeneration is in many other places of Scripture, A writing the Law
of God in their hearts; then there is a writing, and in this sense the Saints
are called an Epistle, but they are Christ's Epistle, we are the pen, and he is
the Writer, he handles the pen, and what shall the pen do, when there is paper
and no Ink? will there be any Epistle written? Now what is that, you are
Christ's Epistle not written with Ink, but by the Spirit of God? We do but
apply the pen to the paper; but if God put not Ink into the pen, that is, the
Spirit of the living God, nothing will be written in your hearts. Therefore,
remember what you have to do, and with whom; not with us, for we are able to
do nothing: not Paul or Apollo mighty in Scriptures, We are the Ministers by
whom you believe. It is God that does it, we are but those by whom you believe:
Peter, if that ever any man was able so to do it, he was, that had his tongue
set on fire by the Holy Ghost, yet he was not able to do it, Galath. 2.8. He
that was mighty by Peter over the Circumcision, God was mighty by Peter: but
the work was none of his; we are the Rams horns, but who throws down the
walls of Jericho? Are we able to do it? No, my Brethren, no more than Peter
was able to open the Iron-gates. It is true, when Peter came to them, they
opened, and not before, but it was the Angel that did it. So when we preach
the Gospel, there be everlasting doors; can we open the Iron-gates? No more
than any man can open Iron-doores. Therefore Lidia's heart was opened, else
Paul might have preached long enough in vain; in Luke the last Chapter, He
opened their understandings, that they might understand the Scriptures. If he
had not opened their understandings, as he was God, he had done them no good,
when he preached to them as man: Therefore it is God that does it.

But, Learn hence.
you will say, To come to hear the Word with reverence and fear.
of what use is this to us, that God does it?

It is of much use: therefore, when you come to this place every Sabbath day to
hear the Word, when you see you have to do with the mighty God (we are the
Pen, it is God that does it) learn to come with reverence and fear; learn to
say of this place, as Jacob did, when he saw God, when he saw the Ladder, and
Angels ascending, and descending, Surely this is a fearful place, and no
other than the gate of Heaven, and the House of God; it may be, you thought of
it before: You come to hear Sermons, as Lectures and Declamations, to have
your understanding bettered, but you do not remember that it is the gate of
Heaven, and the House of God: you see not God standing over us, you should
over-looke us, it is the gate of Heaven, that is, you shall never come to
Heaven ordinarily, if you go not through this gate, it is the House of God: And
indeed when you come hither, your eye must be upon him more than upon us;
expect and wait what God will do on you hearts, in such a time, if you come
and hear; and God has done nothing, observe that, and say, it is because God
has withheld his hand, therefore my heart is not quickened at this Sermon;
if any thing has been done, know, it is a Sparkle kindled from Heaven,
therefore cherish it, look well to it, for it is a spark kindled from heaven:
therefore, do as they did in the Law, see what David did on the Altar which he
built on Mount Moriah, when the Altar was built, they laid the wood and
Sacrifice, and looked to God, when he would send fire from heaven: So we are
the wood, look to God for fire, if you can get a Spark, be sure to maintain
it; for that was the manner of the Priests, when they had a little fire from
heaven, they always gave fuel, they never let it go out again. Look to it
diligently, if you have got a spark from heaven, let it not go out again,
(as it is the case of many thousands to do) there may be sparks, and you may
heat your selves by them, and it may be but fire from earht: When a Sacrifice
was kindled by common fire, God accepted it not, though it burnt as other fire,
yet it was no sacrifice to God. Moral reason and natural wisdom may kindle a
fire, that may be very like true fire, but it is not from heaven: Therefore
come with much fear to this place, like men that have your eyes on GOD, seek
him not for fashion, and know it is to no purpose, if God send not his Spirit
from heaven.

Again, you will say, what use is there of this, that it is God that does it
and not man.

I say therefore, To give the praise of any good you receive by the preaching
of the Word, to God only.
give the praise and glory of it to God, give it not to us, but to him, this is
not a light notion, but of great moment, for it will make thee love the Lord
Jesus: Saint Paul puts this among the greatest mercies; He has been merciful
to me with faith and love: 1 Timothy 1.
that amazed him, that he could never be thankful enough for it, that is, he
has wrought in me faith and love, therefore gives him the praise. It is God
that does it, we are but the instruments; we praise not the Trumpet, but the
Trumpetter, we praise not the Pensill, but the Painter. It is God that does the
work, give him therefore the whole praise of it, this is a matter of much use
to you. For when there is a Minister of God, that has been an instrument of
bringing you to heaven, you will love this man, prize him, and magnify him in
your thoughts, and you do well; but remember, that you take nothing from
Christ; alas! what is the Pen to him that writes the Epistle? What are we, my
Brethren? give not to us what belongs unto him; nothing unto us, says Paul, we
have done thus and thus, but it is nothing, it is Christ that has done all,
and let him have all: as the servants of Christ, we must be wary, that we rob
not our Master of men's affections, for we are but spokes-men to present you to
Christ: therefore be exceeding wary, give your affections to the Lord, to whom
they belong: If ever you receive any good by any Sermon, if you be ever
quickened, if ever a little enlivened by the powerful preaching of the Word,
give glory to Christ, and say he has done it, let him have the praise of it,
love him so much the more, for of all graces, nothing is like that to work
grace in your hearts.

Again, if you will say, what use is there of it? That it is not the Minister,
but GOD that does it.

expect not that the Minister should come with excellency of wisdom, or of
words.
Then do not expect from us, that we should come with excellency of wisdom, or
of words, that we should come with wit, and eloquence, and learning. Will this
make a New Creature? No, it will not do it; for it is God, that makes men New
Creatures, and, if it be so, he will do it by his own Instruments, that is,
by his own Word: Thus Paul reasons, 1 Cor. 2. We preach the Gospel, not with
excellency of words; for then the death of Christ would be of no effect; that
is, no man will be a New Creature, and Christ would die in vain: therefore we
preach the Gospel in the evidence of the Spirit and Power, these go together,
evidence of Spirit and power. What then is this preaching in evidence of the
Spirit? Certainly, it is never evident that the Spirit speaks, but when you
know the Word speak: therefore, when any man knows, that this is the Word we
preach, there is an evidence, it is a speech of the Spirit, and when the Spirit
speaks to the heart, there is Power, and that was the reason that Christ did
so much good? He taught with authority, and not as the Scribes. What is that to
come with authority? As when a Constable comes in the name of the King, he
shows his evidence, he has that which makes evident to him, with whom he has
to deal, that he comes from the King: We preach with authority, then only
when we speak from God to the consciences of men; this consists not in
excellency of words, but so much as there is of God, so much authority.
Therefore come not with affectation of excellency of words and wisdom: If we
had all the wit in the world to set Word of God in it, it is better than that in
which it is set; as the Diamond is better than the Gold in which it is set. If
you were to choose a Minister, choose not such an one, desire it not, expect it
not, the foolishness of preaching is wiser than men, it will do more than all
the wisdom of man, though it is but foolishness to some; We speak wisdom to
them that are perfect, says Paul, they, that be perfect, will recount it
wisdom, it is foolishness to them that are children and unable to discern.

Again, though it be but foolishness on the outside, yet there be treasures
within, and God has hid these treasures under base outsides, that men may
stumble at them, as men that hide treasure under straw, the foolishness of
preaching saves the souls of men; therefore seeing it is God that does it, he
will use his own Instruments, God works by it. Can words, can all moral wit
make a New Creature? No, it is God; then why do we make a question? The more
the Word is discovered and brought home, the better it is; because, indeed,
when we preach any thing else, you do but see a Creature, and you think you
have to do with a Creature; for you can answer wit with wit, and learning with
learning; and when you see you have to do with men, though never so excellent,
yet they are men: But when Christ speaks to the conscience, now the heart is
brought down, when it sees it has to do with God, that only has to do
with the consciences of men; therefore expect not the contrary, and remember
that God is the doer of it, it is he that writes the Epistle, though we be the
Ministers. It is therefore not without use that we preach this doctrine to you.

Observe. 4. What works you find upon your own hearts, in the preaching of
the Word.
And to all that I have said add this one more: Therefore if you find there
has not been a mighty work of God wrought in your hearts at any time, when you
have heard the Word, know you have heard in vain, for the labor is lost, if
there be no more than the work of a man. Therefore you must know there be two
Preachers at the same time, one that speaks to the heart powerfully, that
makes you New Creatures, that baptizeth you with the Holy Ghost and with fire,
and then there is a preaching to the ears: And there are two hearings, one is
when you can repeat, and recall the Word to memory, but there is another saving
hearing, that is, when is it ingrafted? And when it is ingrafted? even then
when it makes you New Creatures, as a graft is then grafted, when it changes
all the Stock. Therefore consider whether you do so hear, or no, that it
has bred such a change in you, and know, otherwise you have heard it in vain.
For what do we do when we preach the Word? we do as Gehezi did, he came
running with Elisha's staff to raise the child, but he could not do it, for
though he had Elisha's staff, he had not Elisha's spirit: So we come with the
staff, but not with the Spirit; therefore thou art not raised to life, for
there is the staff without the Spirit: therefore do not think thou have
heard to any purpose, if the Stock be not turned, if thou find not the
Spirit there. What do we, when we dress up a Sermon never so well? it is but
the rigging of the sails, and what will all this do without wind? Is not the
Spirit the wind? What are Organs without breath? there is no music made: And
what is all our preaching, when the Spirit is absent? That is all in all,
indeed it is the sword of the Spirit, but what is it without the Almighty hand
of God? It is said of one, who hearing that Scanderbegs sword had done such and
such strange works, would needs see it, and sent for the sword; when he saw
the sword, he said, he saw no such matter in it; Is this the sword that has
done all this? Scanderbeg sent him word again, I have sent the sword, but not
the Arm that handled it. So the Word we preach to you, is but the Sword of
God, God lends you the Sword many times, when he keeps the Arm to himself:
It may be you have not seen so great things done by it as we tell you of, That
it is the Power of God to salvation, that it is that Word of Truth that begets
men again; the reason is, because God reserves the Arm to himself:
Therefore, when you come to hear, as you have the Sword, pray earnestly that
the Arm may go together with the Sword, that God will make it lively and
mighty in operation, to cut down your lusts, to pierce as a two-edged sword,
dividing between the bones and the marrow, the joints and the spirit; that is,
that you may know your selves better than you did before: And all this use you
may make of this, that you are Creatures, and no man can make you New
Creatures: It is God must do it.

The end of the Sixth Sermon.
THE SEVENTH SERMON UPON THE NEW CREATVRE.
2 Cor. 5.17. Therefore if any man be in Christ, let him be a new Creature.


But, Object.
you will object, GOD works in us the deed, even every deed, so that a man
has not Free Will after he is Regenerate. Answ.
In what sense he would be understood, when he affirms the will of
Regenerate persons to be free.


To this we answer, that so far as his grace, and the strength he has, goes,
so far he is able to keep the Commandments of God, by virtue of a general
concourse: It is not denied that a man cannot move his hand, nor do any action
without the general concourse of God; but that God never denies, but as he
gives the Creature ability, so he vouchsafes a general concourse to it. As it
is true in that, so in all actions of grace, a man cannot do any thing without
a concourse: But when a man has grace, there be two things wherein a man has
need of special supervenient help from God: First, when he is called to do a
work, which is above the strength he has received; here must be more
strength, there must be a new addition, for the work goes beyond the strength:
As a child may go on plain ground, but if you will have him go up a pair
of stairs, you must lend him your help: So a Christian may do actions
proportionable to the grace he has received; yet being called to somewhat
above that pitch, he must have a new help from God. Secondly, when a man is
assaulted by a temptation, beyond the strength he has received, here needs
strength beyond his own to hold him up: A child may stand alone, but if one
thrusts him, you must hold him up, else he falls; so the Lord must put under his
hand, and we must have help above that we have received, but otherwise the
position is true, so far as we are regenerate, so far we have Free Will,
which follows grace: So much life as we have, so far we may move and stir
our selves. And in these cases it is true, that we need more help from God
beyond the grace we have received.

The fifth thing to be observed is the order, first in Christ, Observe. 5. The
order; first in Christ, and then New Creatures.
and then a New Creature; out of which we are briefly to observe this.

Let no man look for Sanctification, before he is justified, Hence learn.
that is, Let no man be discouraged from coming to Christ, Not to be
discouraged from going to Christ for any defect, or imperfection that is in us.
because he finds not in himself that godly sorrow for sin, that ability to
repent, that disposition of heart, which he desires to have: for a New Creature
follows it; we must first be in Christ before we can be New Creatures. And
this is a common fault among us, we will feign have something before we come,
we think Gods pardons are not free, but we must bring something in our hand:
You know the Proclamation runs thus, Buy without money, that is, come without
any excellency at all, because we are commanded to come and take the water of
life freely: Therefore, do not say, I have a sinful disposition, and an hard
heart, and cannot mourn for sin as I should, therefore I will stay till that
be done; it is all one as if thou should say, I must go to the Physician,
but I will have my wounds well, and my disease healed first; and when that is
done, I will go to the Physician. What is thy end of going to him, but to have
thy dis^^se healed? Do thou think to have thy disease healed before? I say
it is the same folly: The end of going to Christ is, that this very hardness
of thy heart may be taken away, that this very deadness of spirit may be
removed, that thou may be enlivened, and quickened, and healed, that thou
may hate sin; for he is thy Physician, look not for it beforehand, thou
must first be in Christ, before thou can be a New Creature.

Reason 2. From your union with Christ, to persuade you to good works.
Again, if we must first be in Christ, before we can be New Creatures, if that
be the order, if that be the motive and the thing that carries us on, then let
us be content to use the motive that God uses. The Papists propound other
motives to good works; they tell them, they shall have heaven and escape
damnation for them. Is this a good reason to move men to good works? But the
course of Scripture is otherwise: Thou art in Christ, he is thine, therefore be
a New Creature, consider what he has done for thee; therefore labor to turn
to him again. Consider what thou had been without him, what thou have by
him, and, by that, stir up thy self to do for him, what he requires.
Therefore the Apostle coming to answer that question, If grace abound, why
does not sin abound? why does not a man sin more? He does not say, you
shall have these and these motives to draw you from sin, but he tells them,
whosoever is in Christ, is dead to sin, and if you be dead to it, how shall
you live therein? If you be in Christ, you will be New Creatures, there needs
no other motive to make you so. And so much for this, because we will hasten to
the point, we intend to handle at this time.

If any man be in Christ, let him be a New Creature.]

The last point we are to observe in this Text, is:

That to be in Christ is the ground of all Salva^tion: Doctr.
That is, To be in Christ, is the ground of all Salvation.
of all the privileges we have, and of all the graces we have (for in those
two things does the Kingdom of God consist) it is the ground of all the
privileges we have; we have them therefore, because we be in Christ; It is the
ground of all the graces we have, because we are in Christ, therefore we are
New Creatures; therefore we have the Image of God repaired in us, which is
nothing but the bundle of all graces, as the old man is the bundle and heap of
all corruption and sin.

Now we will show what it is to be in Christ, What it is to be in Christ.
and of what moment it is; then we will make use of it: The two first are so
near conjoined, that we will handle them together, what it is to be in Christ,
and of what moment it is to be in Christ, that is, to be united to Christ. A
man then is said to be united to him, when he may truly say that which is in
the Canticles, My Beloved is mine, and I am his: When a man can say Christ is
mine, and I am Christ's, then we are in Christ, for then we are his. Now that
this may be done, there must be a mutual act of giving and receiving, that is,
it is God that gives his Son, and Christ that gives himself, as the Apostle
speaks, He loved me, and gave himself for me. When this is done on Gods part,
and we have taken him, that makes Christ ours; So there must be a giving and
taking to unite us unto Christ; there must be a giving, that is, the Father
must give Christ: What giving is.
now giving is nothing else but Quod meum est, efficere tuum, nullo jure
cogente. This definition the Civil Lawyers give of it, and it is a true one:
So the Lord gives Christ to us, he makes him ours, nothing compels him to it,
for if it were by law, it were not by gift, but by debt: I say, he gives
Christ, and freely, and to give him, is nothing else, but to make him ours. But
to give him is nothing, it is not enough except we take him likewise, for
giving and taking are Relatives, remove one, and the other is taken away.
Though God give his Son freely, yet except we take him, that gift is no gift;
therefore there must be a taking on our part, and when these two are done, when
God has given Christ, and we have taken him, then we are united to Christ, and
we are in Christ, and he in us; as in marriage, the husband gives himself to
the wife, and she takes him; again, the wife gives her self to the husband,
and he takes her; and when this is once done, and done really, they are united
together. And such a match is made between Christ and us, there is a mutual
giving and taking on both sides; and when this match is made, Christ is said
properly to be in us, and we in him: Yea, to go a little further, Marriage is
a near union, yet but a Relative union; but there is something more in this,
Christ has taken our Nature, He is bone of our bone, and flesh of our f^esh:
And again, he has given us his Spirit, that the very same Spirit dwells in us,
as does in him, that we may be said to be spirit of his Spirit. This is more
than is in marriage, this is a nearer union; therefore the Scripture uses a
nearer expression, we are as members of the same Body, he the Head, we the
members, we have the same Spirit that he has, we are flesh of the same flesh,
and bone of the same bone, so near an union there is between us. So then,
there is more than a Relation, in our being in Christ, he indeed comes in to
us, as the Sun is said to come into the house: You know, the Sun is in the
heaven, but when the light comes in, we say the Sun comes into the house; for
there comes a real light, which is an effect of the Sun: So the Son of God
JESUS CHRIST, though he be in heaven, yet he comes into the heart, by his
Spirit, as the Sun does, by the light which revives us, and quickens us, and
works a change in us. Again, we grow into Christ, as the branches grow into
the Vine, into the Root, into the Stock, so that we are one in another, and we
grow one in another, as the branches grow in the Vine, and the Vine grows in
the branches: Such a mutual union there is between us.

And thence comes all the benefits, Of what moment this union is.
(which is the second thing I will show you, that is, of what moment it is;) I
say, hence come all the benefits we have by him, in that we are united to him
after this manner, that we are in him* as the branches in the Vine; thence it
is, that we are made New Creatures, that is, there is a new Sap shed into the
branches, which wears out the old Sap, the old man, original sin which was
there before, and changes it by the ingredience of the new Sap. So does
Christ: Therefore we are said to be ingrafted into the similitude of his Death
and Resurrection, that is, the old nature in us is worn out by the coming in
of the new: now as Christ did die, but revived again; so we put on another
nature, so we have this benefit by this union, we are made New Creatures.
Besides this, we have an hundred others, when we are in Christ we are under
covert, he has interest in all our debts, and we have interest in all his
riches, as the husband is bound to pay all the debts of the wife, when he has
married her, she is under covert, she has interest in all her husbands riches;
So we have interest in all the wealth of Christ, and that is a very large
wealth, as you have it expressed in 1 Cor. the last Chapter, Paul and Apollo,
etc. and the world is yours, it is a wealth beyond all that men can give you.
The world is yours, no man in the world can go so far, Princes may reach
through their own Kingdoms, but the World is yours, that is, Christ who has
the command of it, causes every thing there to serve your turn, even every
Creature that man cannot command; the wind and the seas obey him for your good;
for you have interest in all his riches, there is nothing in the world but is
yours, Things present and things to come, are ours. If men can help you to
things present, yet things to come, are beyond their reach. If the things of
this life be theirs, yet death is not theirs; but herein Christ likewise
furnishes you. In a word, you have interest in all his wealth, look how far
he can go beyond a man, so far are you advantaged by him, and have interest
in all his riches, he has interest in all your debts, you are under covert,
and nothing can hurt you, the gates of Hell, Men, Devils, Sin, and all the
Creatures in heaven and earth are not able to hurt you, because you are in him,
you are as Coneyes in their Burrowes, he covers you, he keeps you safe. If our
eyes were opened to see this, as the Apostle Paul's were, we should magnify it,
and stand amazed at it, when he comes to express what we have by Christ, he
knows not how to express it; In him are all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, and they are ours; he has a Kingdom that is ours: He is a Son,
so are we; he is an Heir, so are we, nothing can hurt us, but it hurts him.
Therefore make use of this, when any thing is objected that is terrible and
grievous, answer it with this, I am in Christ? When thou want any thing,
know thou can not be denied, for thou art in CHRIST. Set all your though^s on
work, to look to all the things man's nature is capable of, that you desire to
make you happy, we have them all in him. O the length, and height, and depth of
his mercy! Indeed it is such a depth that we cannot fadome, and a height we
cannot reach, and a length we cannot measure; all this we have by Christ: If we
had but Paul's spirit to apprehend it, and a little crevise of light opened to
us, as there was to him, that we might see into this unsearchable riches of
Christ, we would stand amazed. I cannot stand to enlarge it any further, you
see what it is to be united to Christ, and of what moment. Now we will come to
make some use of it.

If it be so glorious a condition to be united to Christ, it should inflame us
then with a desire to be in him, with a desire to be in this condition; for, if
you have the Son, you have life, 1 John 5.12. He that has the Son, has
life, and all things else pertaining to life, godliness, and happiness; He
that has not the Son, has not life; that is, he is yet in death and
condemnation; have Christ, and have all things; therefore it is an happy and
glorious condition.

Use 1. Exhortation twofold.
Therefore let those, that have it, desire to enlarge it more and more, and
those that want it, let them seek to get it.

Those that have this union with Christ let them seek to enlarge it more.
First, I say, those that have it, let them labor to enlarge it.

You will say, If a man be in Christ, how can he be more? If he be united, if
he be married to him, how can he be more? Justification admits of no degrees:
Therefore this is a point worth your consideration, That you may be more in
Christ.

It is true; Justification, in this sense, admits of no degrees, In what sense
this is to be understood.
but it is indivisible, either you are married, or not married; either you are
in him, or not in him; so far, indeed, it admits of no degrees: But now when
a Spouse takes an Husband, she has so much will as to resolve to make such an
one her husband, yet there may be degrees of willingness, she may will it
more, there may be more desire of it, there may be a greater approbation of it;
so, though it be true, that every man that is justified in Christ, is within
the Covenant, within the door; yet he may go in further, or less far when
he is within: So I say, you may be within the Covenant, but this taking of
Christ, this being in Christ, this receiving of him, admits of degrees,
because, though one be married to an husband, that there is so much will, as to
resolve to take him, rather than refuse him, yet this very will of taking may be
stronger, as her affections to him are more, the reasons are stronger and
larger that invite her to take him: So the union with Christ may be nearer,
yet, the knot may be yet straiter, and, as that increases, so all the effects,
and consequences of it increase: Therefore the thing we would exhort you to, is
to be more in Christ, to get yet nearer to him.

You will say, Object.
How shall that be done?

Consider what it was that drawed you to him, Answ.
How it may be done.
and to labor to intend all that, that when you have taken him, you may yet
make the union nearer and better than it was.

And these five things will do it:

First, consider your misery without him, you did consider it before, Five
helps to do it.
which caused you to take him for your Husband, Consider your misery without
him.
when you saw you could not live without him, but when you find that misery to
be yet more, your resolutions will be stronger, you will more approve your
action of taking him, you will prize him more: Therefore, if you will be yet
nearer Christ, reflect often on your selves, on your own condition, and see
what you are without him. Consider what your sins are, how you should have
perished, if you had not taken him; how miserable you are still, how unable to
help your selves; and the more humble you are, the poorer in spirit, and the
more greedily you will receive him, the more degrees will be added to the
taking of the Lord Jesus. For that is one great means, to teach us to prize
Christ, even to know our misery. The Prodigal son was taught to prize his
being in his fathers house by the extremity of want he was in, the more he felt
the want of it, the more he prized it. Labor therefore to know what you are,
out of Christ, to feel the want of it, to know that you cannot subsist, you
cannot be without him.

Labor more to know the Virtues and excellencies of Christ.
Again, secondly, labor more to know the virtues and the excellencies of your
husband; for as they are more explicated and discovered to you, so you will
love him more. As one that is married, the more she sees in her husband, the
more she desires him, the more glad she is that the match is made, there is the
greater degree of will to take her husband. Labor to see this beauty in
Christ, to see what he has done for you; Was he not crucified for you? He
loved me, says Paul, and gave himself for me, he died for me: Consider all
that he has done, consider the great dowry, the riches he brings with him, all
the benefits and privileges he brings with him, and you have by him, look
well upon him, consider the number of them, and the weight of them; think of
all the advantages you get by him, the more you see this, the more those
virtues and excellencies of Christ are explicated, and unfolded, and made
manifest unto you, the more you will love him, and the nearer is the union
between you.

Thirdly, Be persuaded of his love to you.
be persuaded of his love to you, the more you are persuaded of your husbands
love, the nearer your hearts grow to him. Think what it was that made Paul love
the Lord Jesus so much, it was the strength of his faith, he knew the Lord
loved him, and that Christ had received him. If we could but once get into
Paul's condition, that we could see the unsearchable riches of Christ, the
beauties of our husband, the advantages we have by him, if we had Paul's faith
to believe his love, we should be able to do as he did, to reckon all as
dross and dung, we should prize nothing but CHRIST, and we should draw nearer
to him: Therefore, labor to strengthen your faith. So did Moses, it was the
strengh of his faith that made him cleave so fast to GOD, as he did.

Fourthly, get experience of him; for it was Paul's experience that united him
nearer to Christ, Get experience of him.
the experience that he had of Christ in the mortification of his lusts, in all
the courses of his ministry, in all the distresses and troubles that he passed
through, he still had experience of him, and the more experience you have of the
Lord Jesus, the nearer you come to converse with him, and the more you will
love him, and join to him: Strangeness disjoynes affections, we say there is
strangeness when men salute not, when there is not a near conversing:
Strangeness does dis-joyne the heart. Again, nearenesse of conversing and
walking with him from day to day, draws us nearer to him, and intends the will
of desiring him to be our Husband.

Pray that the Holy Ghost may draw thee to Christ.
Last of all, there is a certain impression made in the spirit of man by the
Holy Ghost, which causes him to draw near to Christ, that makes him prize him
more. As there is in the Iron a certain natural quality to follow the
Lodestone; so there is in the Saints toward Christ: And if we seek a reason
why Paul and the rest of the Saints that excelled so, were able to prize Christ
above all things, and to count all things loss in respect of him, the true
reason is, it was the impression made upon their spirits by the Holy Ghost;
there is a certain attractive virtue put into them, enabling them to prize
Christ above all, and to draw near to him; therefore you must know, it is the
gift of the Holy Ghost to enable us to prize him. Therefore to all the rest
add that, seek to the Lord that he would work it in your hearts, that you
may learn to magnify him. Thus you must seek to increase the union, to add
degrees to the will, by which you are content and resolve to match with Christ,
and to be made one with him: And this is the thing that you are to be exhorted
to, not only to know this, but to exercise it: when Paul had once tasted the
sweetness in Christ, he could relish nothing else, he counts all other things
as dross: So should we, if we had once experience of it.

Therefore we should learn to renew this union from day to day, and, as I said
before, We should eat his flesh, and drink his blood every day: that is,
every time we renew the covenant with God, we renew the match, as it were,
between us, we eat Christ's flesh, and drink his blood, He is that Bread that
came down from heaven; they ate Mannah in the wilderness and died, but he
that feeds on me, shall have life everlasting: Therefore eat my flesh and
drink my blood, that is, take me, come to me, for eating of his flesh is
nothing but to come to him, to take him, to receive him: Now, says he, the
very act of taking me is your duty, as you renew that every day, so you take me
anew, as it were, and so there will come new strength to you, as from bread or
Manna, when you eat it, or from flesh and wine, when you eat and drink it, so
does there from from me, when you renew your eating of my flesh, and drinking
of my blood, that is, when you renew your act of taking and receiving me, there
comes new strength to you, that is, you shall have new comforts and
consolations, you shall be encouraged the more, herein you draw nearer to me
than before: For, as your union with Christ at the first, does make way for the
Spirit, and causes it to be shed in your hearts, so the more this union is
increased, the more you are filled with the Holy Ghost: So you get new strength
from day to day, as this union is more confirmed: It is like a new eating and
drinking, your Peace is more abundant, and your strength is more enlarged, you
are more full of joy in the Holy Ghost; every grace is more increased and
strengthened in you, therefore exercise this union, eat his flesh, and drink
his blood every day.

Object.
But, you will say, what needs that, when we have once done, is it not enough?

Answ.
No, it is not enough; for there grows a distance between Christ and you from
day to day, a little neglect, the very omission of duties, yea, though it were
no sinful omission may cause it. As the body is subject to waste, and needs
eating and drinking that it may be repaired; So does the soul and inner man,
there is a continual wasting of strength, and you must eat his flesh and
drink his blood every day to repair it, that is, you must renew the union,
that grace may be strengthened and renewed in your hearts, that those spirits may
be repaired, that you spend every day, that your very strength may be renewed;
you shall find this true by experience, the more you do this, more near you
get to Christ, the more you renew that match and make a new marriage with him,
you shall and new strength coming to you, you shall find your hearts draw
nearer to him, and further from sin, you shall find your selves made more
spiritual, more heavenly minded, you shall find your selves more strengthened,
you will be ashamed to sin, when you stand in such near terms with him,
there will be a secret influence of the Spirit in your hearts.

Therefore exercise this union, and, as you must exercise it from day to day,
so know the comfort of it, and improve and husband it well. If I have Christ
for my husband, shall he be my husband in vain? Shall I have him, and not make
use of him? No, you must learn to make use of him, learn to use him, as he is
a Prophet, a Priest, and a King: If you would be more enlightened, go to him as
a Prophet, beseech him to enlighten thee, to give thee wisdom, to give thee
the Spirit of Revelation, and he cannot deny thee. If thou have committed a
sin, use him as a Mediator, as a Priest; for he is thy Husband, thou have
him for that purpose, forget not that Christ is a Mediator: We fall into sin
from day to day; but, if we knew really what it is to have Christ an
Intercessour, to have him our Priest, to make an atonement for our sins
every day, we should learn to prize him more, we should be full of comfort, we
should do in another manner than we do: If there be any strong lust which
thou can not subdue, know that it must be done by him, as a King, he must
bring it into subjection, he must circumcise thy heart: Therefore, know what is
in Christ, for all that is in him is thine, and he is full of treasure: When
thou have the field, what should thou do but dig the treasure, to know
what is there; when thou know thou have such a treasure in him, that he is
full of all grace; Will thou go poor, and miserable, and naked, and in rags?
having such a full wardrobe there, why do not thou go and suit thy self
from top to toe? Why do not thou get grace of all sorts to adorn and
beautify thy self withal? For all treasures are in him. Why do thou go
starved, hungry and thirsty, drooping all the day? If thou have him, he has
fatlings, and fined wines, he bids thee to a Feast, that is, there is abundance
of comfort in him, there be Privileges there, if you consider of them, if you
will feed on them, as a man does on meat, you shall be comforted with them, as
a man refreshed with wine. Consider what is in Christ, and make use of it, and
know there is not only plenty in him, but bounty too; in him is all fullness,
and why is it in him? not for his sake, but for ours, he has filled himself
for us, and he is not only full, but bountiful, he has an even hand to
dispense that goodness; therefore make use of it.

Now the second part of this exhortation, I told you, belongs to them that yet
are not in him, Those that want this Union, let them seek to get it.
that they would be content to take the Lord Jesus for their husband; for, if
the being in him be the ground of all salvation, it is motive enough to bring
you in: Now you must know that the Lord offers him to you, he is exposed to
you, if you will but take him.

You will say, In what this taking consists. In two Acts.
in what consists this taking?

It consists in these two Acts; one is a persuasion, that the Lord is willing
to come to thee to be thy Husband, to be thine: The second is a resolution, on
thy part, to be his, if thou can be content to give thy self up to him, to
serve him, to love him, to live no more to thy self, but to him altogether.
Now, when we exhort men to come into Christ, it may be, for the first Act, you
will be content to be persuaded of it, that he is willing to take you; though
there be a difficulty in that, yet, it may be, you will go so far; but when
you come to the second, to resolve to give up your selves to him, to be his for
ever, and to serve him in newness of life: here every man is at a stand, here
men deal with God, as they, that were invited to the Marriage, they made light
of it, and went their way, one to his Farm, another to his Oxen, etc. So is it
here with us, for the most part, they make light when we offer Christ, they go
about their business, one about this vanity, another about that, they will not
come in, and take him; and what shall we say to persuade men, to come into
Christ? Indeed it is a dangerous thing to refuse to come in. You are the men
that are invited, and we are messengers sent to invite you; every man must
apply this to himself, he must think, I am the man invited; therefore I must
consider what answer to give; for you shall find, of them that were invited and
did not come, not a man of them shall taste of the Supper, not a man of them
that was invited must com. There were many thousands that were never bidden,
yea, many hundreds that live in the Church were never bidden to the Feast; that
is, Christ was never clearly offered to them; but when Christ is propounded to
you, (as you know he has often been) this is the very bidding of you to the
Supper. Take you heed of refusing; It may be, many others there are that were
never bidden, but when you have been bidden, take heed; not a man of them that
have been bidden and refused, shall ^aste of the Supper. Now, you know, we are
bid while we are in this life, this is the time of grace, but yet when a man
refuses this bidding at this time, or at any other time, take heed lest he bid
you no more; he sent no more to them that refused, Let them alone, and they
shall be slain before me: But howsoever, our business is to compel you to
come in, that is, by strong arguments, by reasoning with you, by persuading you
effectual to come in. Motives.


Mot. 1. You shall find rest.
Therefore, consider these Motives:

First, you shall find rest to your souls, Come unto me all ye that are weary
and heavy laden, and you shall find rest, Matthew. 11.28, 29. Rest is that
which every man would have: For Sin is a weariness to the Soul, it wearies
you with the guilt of it, with the taint and corruption of it, You shall find
rest unto your souls, that is, if you were in me once, you should have your
sins forgiven you. Which David magnified in Psalm. 32.1. Blessed is he whose
sin is covered.

But you will say, Object.
this is a small mercy, you shall have your sins forgiven, will this move men
to come in? who cares for forgiveness of sins; if we should come and make
offer to men, that they should be free from crosses and troubles, that they
shall have present benefit, and honors, and riches, that were a motive indeed
to bring men to Christ?

Thou fool, Answ.
if thy sins be forgiven thee, shall not all misery be taken away? Forgiveness
of sin makes a man blessed four ways.
Is not sin the first link of the chain? the first wheel that draws on
all thy miseries; If thy sins be forgiven, all thy miseries shall be
scattered, In taking away that which is the cause of all miseries.
all those clouds shall be dispersed: Therefore the Scripture compares Sin to a
Cloud: What hinders good things from thee but sin? When a man's sins be
forgiven him, he shall have them in abundance; Be of good comfort, says he,
Thy sins be forgiven thee: Till then, a man's heart is never filled with
comfort; but, as I said, it is clouded with many discomforts, sorrows and
perplexities; therefore they are compared to clouds, because they shall be
dispersed as clouds: when thy sins are forgiven thee, all thy life after is
as a Sunshine day, when all the clouds are scattered: Therefore, Be of good
comfort.

In giving boldness.
Again, thou have boldness by it; The Innocent is bold as a Lion: thou art
bold with God, For thou come with boldness unto the Throne of Grace: and
thou have boldness, when thou have to do with men, when trouble and
persecution comes, then art thou as bold as a Lion, when thy sins are
forgiven thee.

In taking the sting out of affliction.
Again, when thou come to bear any affliction, it is nothing when sin is
forgiven; for sin is the sting of affliction, and what is the Serpent when
the sting is gone? Affliction is nothing, death is nothing; you see what they
were to Saint Paul, imprisonment and death were nothing to him, because the
sting was taken away. In a word, thou art a blessed man, if thy sins be once
taken away: David says, Blessed is he whose sins are forgiven. When David
looked round about, and considered who was blessed, he pitched on this, Blessed
is the man whose sin is forgiven. If some other had looked about him, he
would have said, Blessed is a rich man, a man in honor and dignity, in credit,
and that has health, he is a blessed man.

No, says David, but he is a blessed man whose sins are forgiven, whose
iniquities are covered, because such a man GOD sets himself to make blessed;
for blessedness is the heap of all good things. Now, who can give that but
God, who has the command of all things? Can any but he cause all things work
together for thy good? And if any thing be wanting, thou art not blessed.

Again, In making God ours.
when thy sins be forgiven thee, God is made thine, he is reconciled to thee,
for thy sin is taken away; and when GOD is thine, thou art a blessed man; for
he brings all good things, and he is the Buckler that keeps off all evil, he
is the Master of the Creatures. Now, you know, the Master is he, who can rate
the dog when he falls on a Guest or a stranger, and it is only the Master
that can do it. It is he that can rate any evil and suppress it, thou have
him; therefore thou art a blessed man, and thou have him by having thy sins
forgiven thee; that is the great promise, that he should save his People from
their sins, he needs say no more; Matthew. 1.21.
when he says, He shall save his People from their sins; for then he saves
them from all trouble and misery in the world. Therefore, this may be a great
motive, it was CHRIST'S own motive, when he would invite men to come to him,
he says, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will
ease you: That is, thy sins, that are as an heavy burden, shall be taken
off of thee.

But, Object.
you will say, I feel no burden of it?

No, Answ.
but thou shall find it a burden, when GOD shall set every man to bear his
burden, when GOD shall charge it on thy conscience, and it is thy wisdom to
have it taken off, Sin is a burden in two respects.
though thou find it not a burden. I say, guilt is a great burden, which
will bind thee over to damnation. As it brings a man under guilt.
It is a great burden when conscience is awaked.

As it is a sickness or disease of the soul.
Again, Corruption is a great burden, for it wearies a man. Sickness is a
weariness to the body; and Sin is the same to the Soul, that Sickness is
to the body. A sick man is weary of every thing, weary of his bed, of his
chamber, of his diet, he is weary of sitting, of standing, for he is sick. So
it is with every man that has not his sins forgiven him, he is weary not
only of the guilt, but he is weary of every thing. Put him in the best
condition, he finds no rest, and in that he is weary of every thing. That
which they say of Folly, it may be more truly said of every wicked man, that
every condition is miserable to him, he is weary of himself, he is weary of
every thing, he has no rest.

Further, when thou art in CHRIST, he will give rest to thy soul, that is, he
will take away the power, as well as the guilt of sin, he will heal thy
sickness, and then the worst condition will be pleasant to thee, thou will
find rest in a Prison, thou will find rest in sickness, thou will find rest
in death, every condition, yea, the worst, will be sweet unto thee; before, in
the best thou foundest none, for there was a restlesnesse within, but when thy
sins be forgiven thee, thou shall find rest to thy soul.

The end of the Seventh Sermon.
THE EIGHTH SERMON UPON THE NEW CREATVRE.
2 COR. 5.17. Therefore if any man be in Christ, let him be a new Creature.


GOD has planted in every man self-love, Mot. 2. If you be united with him,
you shall be free from all evil, and enjoy all good.
every man seeks his own happiness.

Two things every man would have, they would be freed from all evil, and enjoy
all good things; if they could find these in Christ, men would be persuaded to
come in. Now we can assure you that both these you shall find in Christ, you
shall by him be freed from all evil, and be compassed about with mercy on every
side: First, I say, you shall be freed from all evil, for what Christ says to
all his Disciples, Luke 10. You shall tread on Serpents and Scorpions, and all
the power of the Enemy, and nothing shall hurt you, may be applied to all the
Saints, though there be many hurtful things in the world, yet nothing shall
hurt them. It is true indeed, they may have to do with Serpents and Scorpions,
that is, evil things may fall upon them, as well as upon others; you see the
same condition falls to all, yet it shall not hurt them; according to that in
Luke 1.74. That we being delivered from our enemies, is that, we may serve him
without fear: Mark that, you shall be delivered from all your enemies, if you
will come in, that is, there shall not an enemy in the world be able to do
you hurt, and you shall live without fear, that is, the great advantage you
shall have, as if he should say, other men fear a thousand things, they fear
death, they fear sickness, they fear loss of friends and good name; but
when a man is one in Christ, he shall be delivered from all his Enemies, he
shall serve the Lord without fear, because nothing is able to hurt him; for
what could hurt him? Either it must be the Devil or men, or some other
Creature, but none of these can hurt him. Is not God the Governor of the
house; Is he not the Master, Is not he able to rate the Mastives from flying in
the face of any of his friends that come to him, yea, he is able to do it, and
none but the Master of the house is able to do it: None can keep the Creatures
from hurting of you, but he that has the command of all the Creatures,
therefore if you will come in, nothing shall hurt you, he is a Buckler and a
Shield to compass you round about: He will be your strong fortress, into
which no Creature shall be able to shoot an arrow.

But besides this, you shall have all things else that you can desire, The Lord
himself shall be your habitation, from generation to generation, Psalm. 90.1.
That is, you shall dwell in the Lord, and you shall not dwell in him for a fit,
as we do in our houses of clay, but for ever, and look what an house does,
that does he, he will keep you safe, and defend you from evil, he is an house
that it shall not rain through, and such an house he is, as will go with you
whithersoever you go, he is our habitation from generation to generation; yea,
an house as will not only defend you, but refresh you with all manner of
comforts, for houses are made for delight, as well as for defense. Whatsoever
you want, he will help you to; If you be sick, he is able to heal you; if
you be weak, he is able to strengthen you; if hungry, to satisfy you;
whatsoever condition you are in, he is able to furnish you; if you need any
service from any Creature in heaven or earth, he will give command to all the
Creatures to wait on you: In a word, every man that comes to Christ shall be
like a Spouse, whom her husband has placed in a^ house well stored with
abundance of all things that her heart can wish, and all this you shall have if
you will come in.

But because Generals move not so much, we will come a little to Particulars,
In particular, consider.
and will insist upon these two, as the only things that can move us to come in.

Man's misery out of Christ.
First, the miseries, hurts, and inconveniences you are exposed to, out of him.

Man's happiness by being in Christ.
And secondly, the happiness you shall have by being ingrafted in him, and
married to him. If you were to persuade a woman to marry such a man, you know
these are the two Arguments which must win her. If you marry no^ you will be
undone, you know you are in debt, and the debts be debts which you are not
able to pay; and, if you cannot pay them, you are sure to be cast into Prison,
and to lie in that Prison till you have paid the utmost farthing, this is your
condition if you will refuse. Again, on the other side if you will take him,
you shall have a husband that shall make you rich, that will pay all your debts
for you, and make you honorable, you shall want nothing. If you will take an
husband whom you may love, take Christ, for whatsoever is amiable is in him.
These two serious considerations will make her come in, and be willing to marry
and to take him for her husband. And so it is with us, if we consider what we
are out of Christ, and what we shall have by him, it will move us to take him.
You know, it moved the Prodigal son, he saw that if he lived out from his
Fathers house, he must needs perish, he could not get husks to live by.
Again, if he would go home, there was bread enough, his fathers servants
living there in plenty, and these two moved him to resolve to come home.

You will say, Object.
what are those evils in particulars that we must needs fall into, if we come
not in to Christ, and what good shall we get by him?

To this end, Answ.
I will name such arguments as are used in Scripture for this purpose, for you
know that the business of Christ himself, and his Apostles was only to bring
men unto him, and therefore we will open such arguments as we find there, as
briefly as we can.

And first, If you believe, you shall be saved; if not, you shall be damned.
you have this for one maine motive to bring men in, Mark 16 16. If you will
believe and be baptized, you shall be saved, if you will not believe, you shall
be damned: Go, says Christ, into all the world, preach the Gospel to every
Creature. What shall we say when thou have given us commission? says he, no
more but this, Go to all the world, Tell them if they will come in and be
united to me, if they will take me for their husband Lore, they shall be
saved, use that for a motive on the one side, and on the other side tell them,
if they will not come in, they shall be damned: And this you shall find was
practiced, Matthew. 3. John tells them, If you will come in and repent, you shall
have the Kingdom: That is, if you will leave your sins, if you will be
married to the Lord, if you will be divorced from all other husbands, and turn
from all your evil ways, you shall have a kingdom, that is, you shall be
saved; but if you will not, what then? The Axe is laid to the root of the tree,
and you shall be cut down. So, we see, when the Apostle Paul came to do this
business with Felix, to have brought him to Christ, if he could, what course
takes he? he tells him of his miseries out of Christ, Reasoning of Temperance,
Righteousness, and Judgment to come; he told him what Sobriety, and
Righteousness, and Temperance was, in another manner than ever any Morallist
had done: Now the Endictment being not enough without the Sentence, he adds
the Judgment to come. And it is, as if he had said; Thou see how short thou
art of that Temperance and Righteousness, that even natural conscience
requires of every man, and thou must know, there is a Judgment to come, though
thou perhaps feel it not for the present, yet there is a damnation and wrath
reserved for thee; thereby showing the misery he was in, if he came not home to
Christ; and that is partly set down, and is probable, the other was not
omitted, though it be not expressed there. And so Peter dealt with them, Act.
2. He showed them their misery; and so the Lord dealt with the Jailer, he
teaches him to see what case he was in, and upon the sight of tha^ to enquire
after salvation. As indeed the thing that brings men into Christ, is to make
them sensible of salvation and damnation, and when the Jailer came to this, to
think of salvation, Sirs, what shall I do to be saved? That was it that made
him willing to do any thing, whatsoever Paul appointed him to do; for now he
had a sense of the wrath of God, a sense of those terrors, he began to see the
Almighty Power of God, he began to have his heart smitten with the apprehension
of Judgment, and when he was smitten with that he began to enquire after
salvation, and his heart thus prepared with these two motives, the fear of
salvation and damnation, he was fit to come in, then says the Apostle, Believe
and thou shall be saved: So I say, that is one motive, if you will not come in,
you shall be damned, if you will, you shall be saved.

But now we have another business to make men regard these. One would think
that men should not need much persuasion to tell them of damnation, that great
evil, and of salvation, to be a thing that much concerns them, but there is
that deadness in the heart of man, that it regards neither. Therefore, let me
say a word or two, to show that these two be matters of great moment:
Salvation and Damnation, are matters of great moment.
First, this Salvation and Damnation chiefly concerns you all, other things
are but trifles in comparison thereof, because Salvation and Damnation belong
to the Soul. They belong to the soul.
It is the Soul that is to be saved, or to be damned. Now the Soul of man is
a man's own self; other things are but the outside, as it were, and that is
the reason that Christ says, What matters, it if you win the whole world, and
lose your own soul: As if he should have said, Thy Soul is thy self;
therefore to win other things and to lose that, it is great folly; what is it
to save the ship, and lose the fraught? To save the shoe, and lose the foot,
to save the clothes, and to have the body destroyed? So, what is it to thee, to
have thy body, thy estate, and name, and all outward conveniences right, and
such as thou would have them to be, and thy Soul that dwells within, thy
Soul which is thy self, for those do but cloth the Soul and wait on it,
when this is lost, what are all these? Therefore, if there be any wisdom in
the world, it is wisdom certainly to regard that, and if there be any folly
in the world, it is to neglect that, because that is all in all to a man. If
news come to a man, your friends are lost, your goods are lost, you are
wronged in your name; Suppose he had as many messengers of ill tidings, as Job
had, yet when a man considers seriously, this is but a rending of the clothes,
but the tearing of the sheath, but the breaking down of the house, as it were,
but the man is whole and safe, as long as the soul is safe, as long as
salvation is sure, as long as a man is free from damnation, all is nothing:
Therefore to a wiseman, that will consider things seriously, there is no
motive to this, if you will not come into Christ, you shall be damned, if you
will, you shall be saved.

But let me add this more, Salvation and Damnation continues for ever: Take
all other things, They continue for ever.
even the best, and worst things in the world, they are soon blown over, and,
as you know, of no continuance; but Salvation is a thing that abides for ever.
And this is a thing you regard much in smaller matters; take any good thing, if
it will last but a day or two, you regard it not, but as things are of more
durance, so you set a greater price on them. Why will you not mind this then?
If you come in to Christ, you shall be saved, you shall have eternal life.
But, now comes in the other, If you will not, you shall be damned, and that
remains for ever: Remember, says the Wiseman, the days of darkness, for
they are many, that is, infinite; and this should work on a man that damnation
shall be perpetual. Take a man now, when he is fallen into any misery, and
see what it is that comforts him, you shall find nothing comforts a man in
misery but hope; for, if there be no hope (as we say) the heart would break:
But, now come to this, of damnation there will be no end, there is no hope
there; when a man is in misery, he looks about him, and begins to think, Is
there any evasion? If he find there is none, he begins then to think, yea, but
is there any comfort to mingle with it? No. But what kind of misery is it? It
may be by one misery I shall be freed from another, this does moderate it, but
if all kind of miseries come, that a man has no way in the world to evade
them, not any thing to mitigate them; this is that, that swallows up the
Soul, and this over-whelmes it with grief; and this is the condition of a man
subject to damnation. Now, I say, this brief argument we are to use; If you
will not come in, you shall be damned, if you will come in, you shall be saved.
Well, perhaps all this will not work upon you, then we have this to say to
you, Our commission extends no further; if this will not move you, you are not
to be wrought on by us, but we must leave you to your selves, and to your own
ways, to go on and perish, and receive your Portion with those that are
hardened through unbelief, whose end is damnation, and your blood shall be upon
your own heads, for that is all our Commission to propound these two to you. It
must be Gods work to make your hearts sensible of these things, we can but
propound Objects: And so much for the first, He that comes in shall be saved,
he that does not shall be damned.

Mot. 3. Your thirst shall be satisfied and healed.
The third Motive, I take from John 4.10. when the Lord had that converse with
the woman of Samaria, what says he to cause her to come in? Woman, if thou
had asked of me, I would have given thee the water of life: He that drinks
of this water shall thirst again, but he that drinks of the water that I
shall give him, shall thirst no more, but it shall be in him a Well springing up
to everlasting life: So that is the Argument, if you will come in to Christ,
you shall thirst no more, but you shall have your thirst satisfied, and you
shall have water given you, which will be water of life.

What is that? Quest.


That is, Answ.
If you will come in to Christ, two things you shall have by it: First, your
thirst that you had before, that disease of thirst, that every man living is
subject to, until he be in Christ, that shall be healed; that is, every man
has many things he thirsts after; as take every natural man, he thirsts after
credit, and wealth, and honor, and life, after a thousand things, which the
nature of man is sensible of: Well, says Christ, this thirst shall be healed
in you, if you come in to me.

How shall it be healed? Quest.


By breeding in you a right thirst, Answ.
by bringing the soul into health, as it were; It is, as if he had said, I
will reveal things to you, which you shall prize above all these, when you
shall see their preciousnesse, and the need you stand in of them: for these two
things make thirst, then the other, Christ heales it in you: As, take every man
that is regenerate, to whom God has revealed better things, Even such as the
eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, neither has entered into the heart of
any natural man. I say, the heart sets so by these things, it so magnifies
them, that they take up his heart altogether, that he no more thirsts after
other things, but his desires grow remiss in them, though they were all taken
away, he could be content, he has better things, there is a true thirst come
in, which has cured the false thirst, as the true Serpents devoured the false.

Object.
But, you will say, we find not this experience, do not regenerate men thirst
after these things as well as others.

Answ.
I cannot deny it, they thirst after them too much, but yet this thirst is
healed, for now they do not thirst after them, as things wherein their
happiness consists, their hear^s are in a good measure taken off them, they
look on them with a right eye, and so their thirst is said to be a healed, not
because the work is perfect, but because it is in the way to be healed, and
will be perfected. And so we must supply all the rest. Lusts are said to be
mortified, not because they are fully dead, but because they are in the way of
death, and will die perfectly; therefore we apply the name of mortification to
them: So it is in other things, we say water is hot, though it have but little
heat, and a thing is white, though it do but begin to be white; and so we say
a thing is healed, though it be but begun, and be not perfectly healed: Even
so, in this case, every man that comes to Christ, his thirst is healed, he
thirsts no more, because his soul is put into health: As if you should say to
a dropsy man (for when his thirst is healed, his disease is cured) you shall
have the thirst of an healthful man, but this diseased thirst you shall have
no more. So if you will come in to Christ, this may invite you, you shall
thirst no more, you shall be put into that happy condition, that your strong
lusts that were your thirst before, shall be healed in you.

And besides, another thing is, you shall not die; It is water of life that
Christ gives, as if he had said, you may drink this Well-water and thirst
again, and drink again, and thirst again, and then you die; this water will
not give life; therefore he adds that word, Water of life; This water that I
give you, shall make you live for ever, it shall give you eternal life. I am
the living Bread that came down from heaven, John 6.
he that eats of me shall not hunger, and he that believes in me shall not
thirst, but shall live for ever. But this I pressed in the other, and therefore I
will not stand longer on it.

We will name a fourth Motive, Mot. 4. If you be united with Christ, all things
shall work together for your good, if not, for your hurt.
that you find ordinarily in Scripture. If you come not in to Christ, all
things shall work together for your hurt, and if you take him, All shall work
together for your good: I say, if you do not, all things shall work together
for your hurt. This is the misery of every man out of Christ, let him be in
what condition he will, every thing owes him an ill turn, and will do it one
time or other: Prosperity is bad for him, that stays him, and his afflictions
come for hurt to him, they are like the lopping of a tree out of season, which
tends to the destruction of the tree; but it is quite otherwise with the godly,
they have afflictions, but they are in season, which makes the Tree grow
better. Take the best things in the world, the very Word that is preached, the
enlightnings and good motions they have from the Spirit, they all tend to the
hurt of the wicked, for they increase their comdemnation, every thing works
together for their hurt whatsoever they enjoy: On the other side, if you will
come in, all things shall work together for your good, that is, they shall join
together for your advantage, one thing shall be ready to help another, and
nothing shall befall you, but it shall work for your good, because when all is
summed up, as whatsoever befalls the wicked, puts them further from God: Again,
whatsoever befalls a good man, it drives him nearer to God, and that is a sure
rule, nothing does good, but that which draws us nearer to the fountain of
all good, and nothing does hurt but that which drives us from God. Now,
whatsoever befalls a good man, it draws him nearer to God: Sin, which of all
other seems to do him most hurt, yet it drives him nearer to God, because it
makes him to empty himself, of himself more, it makes him see his own misery
more, and to prize JESUS CHRIST more, though they be in themselves poison, yet
God turns them into medicines, every thing works for his good, 1 Cor. 3.18.
that is the meaning of that, All things are yours, Paul and Cephas, that is,
every thing in the world (do but serve God) life and death are for your
advantage, that is, whatsoever is in life, life and all that belongs to it, is
for your advantage, that you may grow rich in good works, the longer you live
the better: Again, when death comes, with all the harbingers of it, it is for
your good; Sicknesses, which are degrees thereof, they being but the stairs by
which we descend down to the chambers of death, death and all the precedents
of death, even all these petty deaths are for your advantage, yea, whatsoever
is in the world is for your good; Things present, and things to come, are
yours: Even as in the field, we say, every thing is for the Wheat, the stalk,
the ear, the chafe, the sowing, the plowing, the threshing, the winnowing,
the barn and granary, every thing is for the wheat: So the Wheat that grows
in this great field of the World, are only the Saints, and every thing in the
World is for their advantage, Summer and Winter, Frost and Snow, wet and dry,
that is, weal and woe, good and evil, affliction and prosperity, all is for
the advantage of the Saints, their winnowings and temptations, all their
threshings work together for their good. And this you shall have by Christ, if
you will come in to him, every thing shall owe you a good turn, you shall
look on nothing, but it is for you; All men, yea, the best of them, Paul and
Apollo, and Cephas, are for your service, whatsoever gifts they have, they are
all given for your use. Let this move you to come in; if you will not, how ever
you may live in this world, and enjoy some sweetness with them, that have
their Portion in this life, yet they shall do you hurt, and in the latter end
so you shall find it.

The end of the Eighth Sermon.
THE NINTH SERMON UPON THE NEW CREATVRE.
2 Cor. 5.17. Therefore if any man be in Christ, let him be a new Creature.


THere is one motive that remains, Mot. 5. If you be out of Christ, you are
poor, and naked, and miserable.
and that is this, which you shall find, Revel. 3.17. For thou say, I am
rich and increased in goods, and have need of nothing, and know not that
thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. Because we
are moved much with sensible things, it pleases the Holy Ghost to express our
spiritual misery, by that misery, which we are sensible of, which is outward;
If you be out of Christ, you are poor, and naked, and miserable; If you come
in to him, you shall have the contrary; we will pitch therefore upon these
three particulars:

Poor.
First, if you be out of Christ, you are poor.

What that poverty is.
What is that poverty?

It is the want of whatsoever may make the soul rich; for, you know, there is
a double riches; Charge those that are rich in this world. where there is an
intimation, that there are men that are rich in another world: And so Luke 12.
So is he that is rich in this world, and is not rich toward God. And Revel. 2.
I know thy poverty, but thou art rich: that is, thou art rich in grace, and in
good works, though thou art poor otherwise, and therefore there is a poverty
that concerns the soul, a spiritual poverty which is found in every man out
of Christ. Poverty, you know, it is a thing that every man shuns, he would not
be poor, and you shall find, that look what reasons there are, why a man
should not be poor in his outward estate, here is the same reason, why they
should not be poor in their spiritual estate. For to what end serve riches?
Riches serve but for this purpose, to procure things needful for us, if we
want bread, or wine, or houses, or any thing riches will procure them, and
therefore we prize riches: And so likewise there are spiritual riches, that
will procure things needful for our souls, and, if we want them, we shall
want that, that is profitable for us, we shall want that, that is necessary for
our salvation. For riches do but set men a work, to do us service; riches
can do no more, than men can do: but these spiritual riches set God a work,
to do us good; they are beyond the other, as much as the help of God goes
beyond the help of man, when you need any thing. If you be rich in Christ, if
you be rich in grace, if you be rich in good works, it is but putting up your
request, and you shall have it at the hand of God, if you want them, you shall
have whatsoever he is able to do for you: Now if you be out of Christ, says
the Text, you are poor, (that is) you want these spiritual riches, you have
no ground to go, and to make your suit to go for any thing.

Again, riches stand us in stead in the time of need; for, why do men lay up
treasures? that when dearth comes, when there comes a time of need, the riches
that they have laid up, may serve their turn, they may have those ready for
their use, when other men want them. Are not these riches for the same purpose?
Will there not come a day of need, will there not come a time of spending, when
there will be no leisure to gather at the day of death? Then all the seed sown
to the spirit, all the good works that we have laid up, will be as a treasure,
and at that time will do us good: And that is the difference between the death
of a godly man, and another: when a wicked man comes to the time of need, he
has nothing to sustain him, he has no oil left in his lamp, he has
nothing to help him up; but the godly man has a treasure, that he has
gathered, all his life was to lay up a treasure: And this, my Brethren, you
shall find to be a great comfort at that time, that when you come to die, all
the faithful prayers that you have made, all the good works that you have
done, all the sincerity that you have showed in denying your selves, in passing
by the things that worldly men catch at, in doing things, that it may be, has
brought trouble, and slander, and disgrace, and persecution on you, you shall
then find it a treasure. Take two men, when they come to that day, the one rich
in this world, another rich in good works, and consider which of these two
conditions you would choose; and therefore it is not a small matter to be rich:
Now when you are in Christ, you are rich; out of him, you are poor, and have
nothing to stand you in stead in the time of need.

Again, this a man has by riches, that he is independent, he needs not to
serve others, and therefore you know the proverb is, that a rich man, he can
live by others, and without others, and that is it, they boast of: So it is
with all the Saints, they may say to all the world, they can live without it,
because they have God to be theirs, they have all his treasures open to them,
they have enough in him, for he is all-sufficient, though they have but him
alone for their portion, yet he is enough, as he says to Abraham, I am
all-sufficient; and why? there are but two things that a man can desire, to be
free from evil, and to enjoy good, says he, I am thy Buckler, to keep thee
from evil, and thy exceeding great reward to give good to thee: that is, thou
shall have enough, if thou enjoy me. Now, if you be out of Christ, you shall be
poor, that is, you shall want these riches, you want the riches of grace, and
of good works, that should stand you in stead in the time of need, which will
fetch any thing in for you, when you want it, which will make you more
independent, and stand upon your own bottomes, which is that that every man
desires.

Again, Naked. Nakedness, what.
if you be out of Christ, you are naked. Nakedness is a want of that which
should adorn us, which should beautify us, and that is the case of every man
out of Christ, there is no beauty in him. It is the Lord only that clothes us
with beauty. As it is said of Saul, Weep for Saul, ye Daughters of Jerusalem,
for he clothed you with Scarlet, and did hang ornaments of gold upon your
apparel. It may be truly said of Christ, that he clothes us with scarlet, and
hangs ornaments of gold on our apparel, that is, it is he that makes us
Priests to his Father: Now the Priests in the old Law, were but a type of us,
we are the true Priests indeed; you know, they had Jewels, and embroidered
garments; and so all the Saints have the shining graces of the Spirit, which
adorn and beautify them: when a man becomes so beautified, then his sight is
comely, his voice is pleasant, and his prayers are acceptable. This benefit we
have by being in Christ, that it makes us comely in the sight of the Lord, we
shall be made beautiful; Indeed Solomon in all his Royalty was not so
beautiful as one of the Saints. It is said, the Lilies are much better
clothed than he: And why? Because that was a clothing of Gods own work; this
is the clothing of Nature; but the clothing of Grace goes beyond the clothing
of Nature; If the clothing of Nature, be beyond that of Solomon, (as indeed it
is for natural excellency) surely the clothing of Grace goes beyond that,
this you shall have by Christ: when you come to him, you come to a rich
Wardrobe, where you may suit your selves from top to tooe, that you need want
nothing; and by the way, that use you may make of it, when you come to him,
where there are garments of all sorts, where there is change of raiment, why
should you suffer your souls to be naked in any part, I know you reckon it
undecent for a man to be unevenly clothed, to have some garments rich and
precious, and to have some v^le and base; and why will you suffer your souls
then to go so unequally clad? It may be, you have graces in one kind, but you
want others, if you come in to him, it is he that clothes you, you are naked
without him, this benefit you shall have by him, you shall be clothed and be
made beautiful, you shall have that glorious attire, that will make you
glorious within, which will make you comely in the sight of God, if not, you
shall be naked, and therefore you shall be rejected, you shall want that beauty
which God only accepts.

Again, Hungry.
if you be out of Christ, you shall be hungry, you shall be wretched and
miserable, for I pitch on that general one, because that is one of the outward
miseries, when a man is hungry, when he is starved, when he wants that which
should strengthen him, and refresh him, and maintain his life. This is the
case of every man out of Christ, he wants that which should feed him, that
which should strengthen him, for you must know, that the soul has a meat as
well as the body; otherwise, why does Christ say, I have a meat to eat that you
know not of? They wondered to see him neglect his dinner, when he stood talking
with the woman of Samaria, John 4. Why, says he, I have another meat to eat.
And why does David say, Thy Law is sweeter to me than the honey, if there were
not somewhat that his soul did feed on? And so, why is it said that Manna was
Angels food? You know Manna was a material thing, such as a spiritual
substance cannot feed on, but because by that Manna Christ was represented? You
know he is said to be the true Manna, The true Bread that came down from
heaven; the Angels they feed on this, and in that respect, it is called Angels
food, they feed on the same spiritual meat, 1 Cor. 10. Your Fathers did eat
that spiritual meat, that is, the corporal meat did typifie the spiritual
meat, which is Angels food; therefore there is a food, that the soul feeds on,
out of Christ, there is none of this, but your souls are starved, are
miserable and wretched. For what is it that food does? It maintains life in a
man, take away food, and you die for it. Now it is Christ that gives that, His
flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed: that is, Whosoever
believes not in him, whosoever partakes not of him, he dies for ever.

Again, meat strengthens, and so does the Lord when we come to him, he gives
spiritual strength, Without him we are able to do nothing: As you have it,
Ioh. 15. Without me you are able to bring forth no fruit: But as the Apostle
speaks, Phil. 4. Through Christ I am able to do every thing: It is the Lord
that gives strength: If you will come in, you shall have strength given you,
which is the property of meat.

Again, meat refreshes and revives the spirits, so does the Lord by his
graces, by the joy of the Holy Ghost, by peace of conscience, by those things
that he puts into the heart of every believer, I say, they refresh the soul,
more than flaggons of wine, and there is as evident refreshing: and therefore
you know that metaphor is used often in Esaias 26. I will make a feast of fined
wines, and of fat things: And in Mat. 22. he calls them to come in, for his
fatlings were prepared, and all things were ready.

What is the reason that the Lord resembles spiritual things by a Feast,
because they do the same things as a Feast does; a Feast is a refreshing to a
man, a continual feast is a continual comfort, and this you shall have; if
you will come in to the Lord: if you will not come in, you shall be starved,
you shall be wretched and miserable. This you shall have by the Lord Jesus. Let
this move you to come in.

But now a man will be ready to object, Object. 1.
you tell us of these things, and indeed these are goodly things, if they were
present, if they were real, if they were not Imaginary things only, that
consisted in notion, and in speculation; if they were things that were
sensible, but they are not so; these things are future things, they are remote
things, they are things but in Imagination, they are things that we have no
feeling of, they are things that if we look after them, we shall lose other
things in this life?

This objection all the world makes against such motives as these; Answ.
and therefore I will answer these briefly, and proceed:

First, whereas men say, they are things that the Saints, whose hearts are made
glad with the light of Gods countenance; these things, I say, are beyond the
wine and oil, beyond the dainties and honors which they have, who have their
portion in this life; therefore you have something for the present: indeed the
outside of these things are but base, but the inside is precious. This is the
difference between heavenly things and earthly; in heavenly the worst is
first, the best is last: In outward things it is true, the beginning is sweet,
but the latter end is bitterest: but let that be one answer to it, that you
have much of it for the present.

be content to want a little, that we may have the more afterward.

And besides, if you consider what men are,

But it will be objected again, Object. 2.
It is true; but these things that you tell us of, they are not real things,
they are things that consist but in notion and speculation?

It is not so, Answ.
you must know that these spiritual Privileges are real; All that are in
Christ, are as truly Kings and Priests, they are as truly Sons and Heirs
apparent, and have all the promises of God intailed upon them and theirs, (as
any Princes in this world) and there is no regenerate man that knows this,
that will change that glory that is reserved for him in heaven, for any earthly
kingdom.

Object. 3.
But we have no feeling of these things?

Answ.
We answer again, that there is a sense of them, as quick a sense and
apprehension of them, as there is of any other; for what is it that makes men
sensible of these outward riches, and kingdoms, and honors? nothing but this,
because the understanding magnifieth such things, and the affection loves and
desires such things, when you enjoy them, then you are refreshed with them; for
pleasure is nothing else, but the suting of a man's desires whatsoever they be:
No man would take pleasure in any outward things, but because, first he desire;
them, and the satisfying of that, is that that breeds a pleasure: now when you
come home to Christ, you must know that you shall have other desires, as you
have it in this Text, You shall be made New Creatures, you shall have other
affections than you had before, and when these are satisfied, you shall have as
true Pleasure and rejoicing, as ever you had in the other; for, if that be a
true definition of Peasure and rejoicing, Pleasure, what.
that it is a satisfying of the desire, a satisfying of the appetite,
whatsoever it is, when that is changed; Why should you doubt, that you shall
not have as much sense, and as quick an apprehension, yea, why may we not say,
you shall have more? For this I will be bold to affirm, that the object is
greater, and the faculty is more capacious and apprehensive.

The object is greater, for it is durable riches, it is durable honor, a
durable kingdom, greater than any kingdom upon the earth. Look on all things
that God propounds to the sons of men, and they are far beyond the things that
are here below: To be the son of God is more than to be the son of any King, to
be an heir of heaven, to be an heir of all things, is more than to be an
heir apparent to a Crown; whatsoever is propounded, I say it is beyond it,
therefore the object is greater. Then come to the faculties, they are more
capacious, they have a more quick and lively sense and apprehension, as the
rational faculties, the understanding, and the will, their apprehensions are
deeper than those of fancy, of sense, or sensual appetite; and therefore you
see the grief of the reasonable part is more than that of the senses, and
hence it is, that the misery of those that are in hell, goes beyond the
miseries of any in this life; and so the joys of those that are in heaven, is
beyond the joy of any in this life: Man, as he is more happy, so he is more
miserable than the Beast, and why so? because the faculty is larger, and
therefore a man that is heavenly minded, a man that lives by faith, that is, in
Christ, he has greater things to enjoy, than a worldly man has, or can have.

Again, the thoughts, the faculties that are taken up about them, they are of
a larger apprehension, and have a more deep and quick sense than the others
have; and therefore in matter of sense, we cannot yield that these things are
not sensible, For it is Peace of Conscience that passes all understanding, it
is joy unspeakable and glorious. It is said so of no outward thing, and
therefore these are far beyond them; that shall serve to answer that
objection.

And so we have gone through three of them, that they are things absent, that
they are things that are not real, that consist in notion and speculation,
that they are things not sensible.

Object. 4.
Now there is a fourth objection, but I must lose present things for them; if we
might have him and enjoy our pleasures, if we could have him, and enjoy riches
and honor, we would be content, but we must be at a loss?

Answ.
But to this we answer, that you shall be no losers, no not for this life, you
shall but make an exchange, and change for the better; What is it that Christ
requires of you? it is but to do some thing for his sake, and to suffer
something; if you do, it is but seed sown to the Spirit, and as in other
seeds, every seed brings forth more abundantly, it rises with a greater
plenty; so every good work you do, it will do you good at one time or other,
you shall be sure to have present wages for it, and for that you suffer, Mark.
10. You shall have an hundred fold in this life, and set aside eternal life,
for every thing that you lose for Christ's sake, you shall have an hundred fold:
Many particulars there he reckons up, if you lose friends or goods, whatsoever
you lose, you shall have an hundred fold in this life with persecution; for
there is the objection.

O but we see they are persecuted, they are beneath and not above, they are
trampled on, they are miserable.

Why though they be, yet with persecution you shall have an hundred fold, that
is, you shall have an hundred fold more comfort: As, I will give you but this
instance.

Take Paul, he was persecuted and afflicted, had not he an hundred fold? Take a
man that lives in abundance, and in plenty of all things, compare his condition
with that Apostles, and see whether he have not more joy of heart, more comfort
in those afflictions, when he went from Prison to Prison, from affliction to
affliction, than Nero had in his Palace, or that men have that enjoy outward
things in abundance, for they are not outward things that will comfort us, them
a man may have in plenty, and yet want the comfort of them, as many thousands
have had. So much shall serve for the answering of these objections. Therefore,
since there are so many motives to move you to come into Christ, the
impediments which you find in the way, the objections of the flesh, and the
objections that come from Satan are but delusions. Why should you not come in?
He is the ground of all comfort; have him, and have all; want him, and want all
things: 1 John 5. He that has the Son has life, he that has not the Son, the
wrath of God abides upon him: That is, he that has the Son, has life, and all
things that pertain to life; that is it that makes a man happy, as you know
every thing is said then to be happy, when it has that which is agreeable to
that being, agreeable to that life that it leads. A man that leads the life of
nature, is happy for this world, according to his condition, when he has
every thing that belongs to this life, when he has wealth, when he has
houses, when he has all conveniences. Now, when a man has the Son, he has
spiritual life, and all things pertaining to it, there is nothing wanting to
make him happy; when he has not that, The wrath of God abides on him; that
is, the Lord is his Enemy, that is the Governor of the world, and he is not
his enemy for a fit, but the wrath of God abides on him for ever. And
therefore, since the Lord is the cause of all our comfort he is the ground of
all Salvation, both of all the graces, and of all the Privileges that follow
upon it, this should move us to come in, and to take him; those two arguments,
I say, the misery that you are in out of him, and the happiness you shall have
by him, but I will urge this no further, so much shall serve for this Text.

FINIS.
THE CVPPE OF BLESSING: DELIVERED IN three Sermons, upon 1 COR. 10.16. By the
late faithful and worthy Minister of JESUS CHRIST, JOHN PRESTON, D. in
Divinity, Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty, Master of Emmanuel College in
Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher of Lincolns INN.

LONDON, Printed by R. B. for NICHOLAS BOURNE, and are to be sold at his shop
at the Royal Exchange. 1633.

(...) draw nearest to him, as we do in this holy Sacrament of the Lords
Supper. And therefore, nothing concerns us more than that we do not receive
it unworthily, because the Lord will be sanctified in those that draw nearest
unto him, that is, either in the holiness of their hearts, or in executing his
just judgment upon them: And therefore that at this time, and others also, you
may not come unprepared to the holy Sacrament, we have purposely pitched on
these words: The Cup of blessing that we blesse] etc.

In which ye shall find these three parts: First, that in this Sacrament there
is a true communicating of the body and blood of Christ. Secondly, the means
whereby this communication is made to us, it is the breaking of the bread, and
by pouring out the wine: Is not the bread that we break the Communion of the
body of Christ? etc. And thirdly, the setting apart, or the blessing, or
sanctifying of these elements to such a purpose; The Cup of blessing which we
bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ?


Now for the first of these, I say, in the Sacrament there is a communication
of the very body and blood of Christ: The Papists affirm the same; but all the
question is, in what manner there is this communicating of his body and blood,
they say, corporally that there is. Transubstantiation there; we say the thing
is really done, but it is done spiritually, it is done mystically, it is done
sacramentally.

The reason of our difference, is, because of these words of our Savior, This
is my body. And the Popish indeed is so strange an opinion that I would not
waste time in confuting of it, but that I know there are diverse amongst our
selves that do willingly leave the Papists in other points, yet they are held
with some scruple with this, they know not how to contradict such plain words,
This is my body, and therefore they cannot be persuaded but that there is
somewhat in it more than our Divines affirm; and therefore it shall not be
needless to spend a little time in showing you the falsenesse of this opinion:

First, I would ask this question, whether there be necessity or no, that
there should be such a Transubstantiation; for surely, if there be not
necessity, if that be but an arbitrary thing, we may as well deny it, as they
affirm it.

Again, such a monstrous conceit as this, compounded of so many ingrediences,
of so many strange miracles, the least of which goes beyond the highest in all
the Scriptures, I say, is not to be put upon us without necessity; themselves
grant, that, unless there be a necessity, we have no reason to receive it at
their hands: And therefore we will enquire first, and see what necessity there
is.

First, I say, there is no such necessity that there should be any such
Transubstantiation, any such corporal presence of Christ in the Sacrament,
neither in regard of the thing, nor in regard of the words, This is my body.

I say, it is not necessary in regard of the thing, look to all the ends of
the Sacrament, you shall find that you may have all without such a
Transubstantiation.

First, if the end of the Sacrament be to bring Christ to our remembrance, as
himself says, that it was his end, Do this, (says he) as often as you do
it, in remembrance of me: certainly, it is not necessary that there should be a
change of bread into his body for that purpose, because the Sacrament it self
with those words instituted are enough for his remembrance: And besides this,
the very word, Remember, shows that he is rather absent than present, for we
remember not things present, but remembrance is of things absent: Besides, the
other Sacrament represents Christ, and calls him to remembrance, where there is
no such Transubstantiation: and therefore it is not for remembrance that it is
needful that Christ should be corporally present.

Or secondly, is it needful for this, the showing forth the Lords death till
he come? Surely, for this it is not needful neither, for in preaching we show
forth the Lords death, as the Apostle says to the Galathians, Christ was so
plainly preached, that he was as good as crucified amongst them: And therefore
it is not needful for the showing forth of the Lords death till he come:
Besides, there is a particle put in there, that may help us a little, till he
come, which presupposes that he is not yet here, and therefore it is not
necessary for that end.

But again, is it necessary for our union with Christ, for that is another end
of the Sacrament, that we may be united to him; surely if the union were
corporal, then indeed there might seem some necessity of it, if we were so
united to Christ, as when two boards are clapped together, where one touches
another: but you know there is no such corporal union, it is spiritual, and
not corporal, it is by faith, and not by sense? What is the union between
Christ and us? Partly relative, as the union between the husband and the wife,
and you know if the husband and the wife be a thousand miles asunder there
might be such an union: And partly it is real, a true real unity, when
Christ's Spirit dwells in us, which may be done without the corporal presence of
Christ: And therefore certainly it is not needful for the uniting of us to
Christ, because this union is spiritual, it is done by faith, by communicating
the Spirit of Christ in us; and therefore in this regard it is not necessary
that there should be a corporal presence in the Sacrament.

Last of all, is it necessary to increase our faith, for that likewise is one
end of the Sacrament that our faith may be strengthened: Why surely, it is not
needful for this purpose, no, I say, it cannot strengthen faith, because the
means, you know, is subordinate to the end, it is less than the end, whereas
the faith that is required to believe Transubstantiation, is far beyond the
highest pitch of faith expressed in all Scripture: I say, it cannot be that,
that should be made a means to help faith, that is beyond the thing that is
to be believed (mark it) consider what it is we are to believe, we are to
believe that Christ took man's nature on him for us, that his sufferings and
crucifying belong unto us, etc. Is it not much easier to believe this, than to
believe that a piece of bread is turned into the body of CHRIST? Though you see
nothing, though you taste nothing but bread, I say, it is much easier: Now, as
we say, we must not blow a spark too much for putting it out, now to have such
means as these to help faith, that cherishes not the spark of faith, but
blows it out, it does not help faith, but over-whelmes faith, when the means
used to strengthen are such as are beyond the thing to be strengthened:
Therefore in regard of the thing there is no necessity, that there should be
any corporal presence of Christ in the Sacrament. But let us consider whether
there be any necessity in regard of the words, This is my body: Surely, there
is not any necessity here, for the words may have another meaning, This is my
body, that is, this is the figure of my body, or this is the Sacrament of my
body, and therefore it is not necessary, specially seeing it is so frequent
with Scripture to use metaphors in this kind, I need not name them to you, you
know Christ is called a Rock, he is said to be a Lamb, to be a Lion, and in
another case Judas is said to be a Devil, the Seed is said to be the Word,
nothing more frequent, Christ is said to be a Vine: I need not give you more
instances: Herod, Christ calls him Fox: The meaning of all this is, that they
are types and signs, like such and such things. But yet it is the manner of
the Scriptures speech, and therefore it is not of necessity that those words
should be so taken, for words are like clothes that may fit more backs than
the owners; the words may agree to somewhat else, there is not a word here, but
it may agree to diverse things: Body, it signifies diverse bodies: the word,
This, signifies as many things as you point to: and therefore there is no
necessity that they should signify a corporal presence of Christ.

But you will object, I, but in a matter of this moment, as the Sacrament, the
Lord speaks distinctly and expressly, there he uses no metaphor, though in
other cases he do.

To this I answer briefly, it is so far from being true, that he uses them
not in the Sacrament, that there are none of all the Sacraments, but it is
used. In the Sacrament of Circumcision, This the Covenant, etc. In the
Sacrament of the Passover (which were the Sacraments of the old Law) the Lamb
is the Passover, in this very Sacrament: To go no further for instances, take
but the second part of it, This is the Cup of the new Testament in my blood,
where you shall find two types and figures, this Cup, taken for this Wine;
This is the Cup of the new Testament, that is, the Sacrament of the new
Testament: And therefore we see, there is no necessity in regard of the words:
And there is no necessity since with a little buckling and swarving, This is my
body, that is, this is the figure of my body, we may have a convenient sense,
why should we feign such a monstrous thing that bread is turned into the very
body of Christ, and the wine into the very blood? What needs such a monstrous
fetch as this, to help the words to a meaning? What need or necessity is there
that they should be so interpreted? And therefore we see in the first place
that there is no necessity, and if there be no necessity, it is not to be put
upon us, for if that be an arbitrary thing, we may as well deny it.

Secondly, as there is not necessity, so there is not possibility, (though it
were possible) they would not get much, for there are many things that are
possible that are not done: But it is not possible, if it were possible, then
it must stand with the power of God: But the power of God is not used, but
where the glory and wisdom of God go before, for it is the harbinger of his
glory and wisdom. The power of God is not used, but if it be for his honor,
therefore it is said, God cannot lie, because it is not for his honor, and he
cannot deny himself, because it is not for his wisdom and his glory: Now I
say since this is not for the glory of God (for it is against his glory that
there should be such a conversion of the bread into the body of Christ, and it
is against his wisdom: And if it be against these, then certainly, the power
of God must not be called to it: Now, I say, it is against his glory, because
whenever the Lord appeared, he appeared always in glory, though sometimes he
appeared as a man, yet there was such a majesty that caused them to tremble
that beheld him: Shall we see God and live? You see when he appeared to Elias,
what majesty he came in? what harbengers he sent before him, the Wind that
rent the Rocks, and a Fire, etc.

But, you will say Christ humbled himself to death as a man, therefore he does
not always appear in glory.

It is true, and that was the lowest degree of Humiliation; and yet when he
appeared as man, there was some spark of his Divinity appeared there: But
that Christ should appear in the likeness of a piece of bread that thou
may put in thine own mouth, surely this is a monstrous thing, it is against
the glory of God. Do you think, if Christ should come down upon the earth,
after his Ascension, and exhibit himself to be worshipped amongst us, that he
would present himself in the form of a piece of bread? It is impossible, it
is not for his glory, and if it be not for his glory, then certainly the power
of God must not be brought down for the working of it. And as it is against
his glory, so it is against his wisdom, for the Lord does nothing to no
purpose, he does nothing in vain, he never wrought miracles when they might
be spared, where the thing might be done without a miracle. Since this might be
done without a miracle, all that we have by Christ, all that is represented in
the Sacrament, what necessity is there? and if there be no necessity, it
beseemes not the wisdom of God to do it: Again, would not the smallest
miracle, really and visibly exposed to sense, help more than such a miracle as
this: Besides all this, I say, it is not possible (make your own senses
judges) you see nothing but bread; now this is a sure rule, that of all
demonstrations of reason that we have to prove things, nothing is so firm as
that which is taken from sense: to prove the fire is hot, we feel it hot, or
honey to be sweet, when we taste it to be sweet: There is no reason in the
world makes it so firm as sense: As it is true in these cases, so it is an
undoubted truth in Divinity, that in all matters of sense, sense is a competent
judge: Indeed, if it be a matter of reason, there sense is not able to judge,
the eye is able to judge of his own sense, of sounds it cannot judge; but, I
say, objects proper to sense, peculiar to sense, in these sense is a competent
judge: And therefore Christ himself, in this very business, when he would
prove that he had a true body, he sends them to their senses, A spirit has
not flesh and blood as you see me have: And Thomas he bids, Put thy hand into
my side and feel, etc. He sends them to their senses: Look through the
Scriptures, and see if there be one miracle there, if sense be not a competent
judge according to that part of the miracle that concerns the sense; would you
not think it strange, if Christ should have come to the master of the feast,
when he wrought the miracle, and have said, Sir, you must believe that this is
wine, though you see nothing, though you taste nothing but water, yet you must
believe that it is turned into wine; And if GOD should have said unto Moses,
Though you see nothing but a Rod, thou must believe it is turned into a
Serpent: If there had been no change indeed, and such as sense might see, we
would think it a ridiculous thing, and next door to an Imposture: And
therefore certainly in matters of sense, sense is a competent judge; and
therefore when all the senses tell us that it is bread when we taste, when the
eye and the touch, when every thing makes it evident that it is bread, why
should we say there is any thing else but bread.

Besides, if we will add to sense, reason; it is against reason, as well as
against sense: It is against reason that Christ should be in heaven, and yet
have ten thousand bodies on earth, and yet Christ has but one body, and a body
can be but in one place: And again, this body must be without all
circumscription and qualities and properties of a body: And again, that the
bread that we see should be no bread, say they, there is the whiteness of
bread, there is the taste of bread, there is the quantity of bread, and that
is all: I would but ask them one thing, when this bread is eaten, since there
is nothing there, but these accidents, there is nothing but the mere quantity,
and the like: I would ask whether it nourish the body or no; they must needs
answer no, if they follow their principles, because the body of Christ is not
there, they say it is removed as soon as the bread is destroyed, when it
begins to turn into flesh, it loses these accidents; well, the bread returns
not again, there is nothing but accidents of the bread, and yet certainly it
does nourish; for it is reported by credible Authors, that some have been so
holy, that they would feed upon nothing else but the Eucharist, for a Priest
may consecrate a Cellar of wine, and as much bread as he will, and may feed
upon this, and with these he may be nourished, and yet there is nothing but
accidents of bread: In a word, the Schools that traverse this so accutely, are
not satisfied at all in this, but they leave it as a wonder, as a thing that
cannot be explained: So it is against reason, as it is against sense.

But, you will say, faith is beyond sense and reason, it is true, it is beyond
both, but it is not contrary to both; faith teaches nothing contrary to
reason, for sense and reason are Gods works as well as grace, now one work of
God does not destroy another, if they should, there must be an imperfection in
the workman, and therefore grace and faith contrary not sense and reason;
indeed it elevateth reason, and makes it higher, it makes it see further than
reason could, it is contrary indeed to corrupt reason, but to reason that is
right reason, it is not contrary, only it raises it higher: And therefore
faith teaches nothing contrary to sense and reason.

But besides these, if we show them Scripture too, what will they have then to
say? when we say it is against sense and reason, say they, the Scriptures
affirm it, if it do we will yield. Let us examine the words if the Scripture
affirm it: Yes, say they, the Scripture says, This is my body, they are
Christ's words; but if the Scriptures say so, yet the Scripture says no where,
that that bread is turned into the body, that no where says, that there is
such a Transubstantiation, only those words used, which, as you heard, may
have a metaphorical, tropicall, figurative sense: But besides this, what if
the Scripture say the contrary; you shall find this in the next Chapter five
times called Bread, and after it is consecrated too, as the Apostle says, The
Cup of Blessing that we bless, and the bread that we break: After he had
blessed the bread, then he took it, and after he had took it, then he brake
it, he thus took that which is called Bread.

Again, they say the body of Christ is not broken, but that is broken, which
is always after the words of Consecration, but it is the bread that we break.

Again, if it could be understood otherwise, you see what a Tautologie would
be in the words, The Bread that we break, it is the Communion of the body of
Christ; if the meaning was, that it is the body, here the words must be thus
rendered; The body that we break, is it not the communion of the body? But, I
say, five times you shall find it in this next Chapter, that it is Bread after
the words of Consecration; and you know it is said to be Wine: Christ says, he
will not drink of the fruit of the Vine; by which he means the very wine
which was before in the Sacrament: and therefore certainly they find nothing
that affirms it.

Besides, if it were the meaning of Christ, This is my body, what is the reason
the Disciples never asked any question about it? What is the reason the
Fathers, that followed in the first times, spoke not of such a thing: I need
not trouble you with that. Now you shall find all along from the first, that
the Fathers make no such mention of that; but not to stand to press this
further, because I see the time passes, and this thing I intend not to stand
on: You see therefore the falsenesse of this opinion, that this Communion of
the blood of Christ, and of the body of Christ, should be through any real
corporal Transubstantiation. But what is it then? We are to distinguish
between the inward and the outward action, there need no more but that with
the outward action, with the mouth of the body, we take the bread and wine; and
with the inward action, that is, by faith we take the very body and blood of
Christ; these we distinguish, these they confound: But, I say, we agree in the
thing, we say Christ is communicated to us in the Sacrament, as truly and
really as they, only there is difference in the manner, we say it is
spiritually, they say it is corporally.

For what is the Sacrament? (to open it to you) and so I will come to make some
use to you.

This Sacrament is nothing else, but the Seal of the Gospel of the new
Covenant; and it is indeed nothing else, but a visible Gospel; for what is the
Gospel? the Gospel is but an offer of Christ, to all that will take him, for
remission of sins; now the same thing which the Gospel preaches to the
ear, the same the Sacrament preaches to the eye, that is, in the Sacrament
there is an offer of Christ to us, Take and eat, that is, take Christ, whose
body was broken, and whose blood was shed for you, take him for remission of
sins: I say the same is done, only the Gospel presents it to us under
audible words, and the Sacrament presents it to us under visible signs: this
is all the difference: If we would know what the Sacrament is, consider what
the Gospel is, and the Covenant, and you shall know what this is, for it is
but a Scale, but a memorial of the Gospel; now what is this Gospel? It is
nothing but this, when God looked on mankind, as fallen in Adam, he took a
resolution in himself to recover them again, by giving his Son to them: Now
this must be manifested to men, therefore he sends his messengers to declare to
the sons of men, to let them know their estate by nature, and to tell them
that he has given them his Son to save them from their ^innes, and to
reconcile them to himself, to give them title to the kingdom, from the hope
of which they were fallen: this is one part of the Gospel, this promise which
he has made, which, I say, is nothing else but a mere office of Christ.

But there is another part which is the condition required on our part, when
Christ is thus given, you must serve him, and love him, and obey him, and turn
from all your evil ways, you must be his, as he is yours: now when this
covenant and agreement is made between us, he puts his Seal to it, this
Sacrament of the Lords Supper: As Jacob and Laban, when they had made an
agreement one with another, that they should not hurt one another, they pitched
stones upon an heap, This shall be a witness between us, that is, if either
of us break the bargain, let this heap witness that there was such a
covenant made: And as God himself did, when he made a covenant with Noah, that
the waters should no more overflow the earth, he set his bow in the clouds, and
that was a witness, that when I see the Bow in the cloud, if I go about to
drown the earth again with water, let this witness against me: So in the
Passover, when he made a promise that the destroying Angel should spare them,
he commands them that they should sprinkle the doore-cheekes with blood, that
when he sees the blood, that witness might secure them, that the Lord would
remember what he had promised when he had seen that: And as among men, when a
man conveyes either lands or money, to another man, they use to confirm the
bargain with seals or with some sign or memorial, that when they forget the
bargain, or deny it, or go about to break it, it may be said to them, This
is your hand and seal, the thing is done, you have past it, it cannot be
recalled; if you do, this will witness against you: So the Lord here, when he
has made his Covenant with us, I will give you my Son: And you again shall
give your selves up to him, he puts his hand and seal to it, as it were, he
adds this Sacrament that will be a witness against him, if he should go about
to break his covenant, as it is a witness against us, if we break the
Covenant of faith and repentance, that is required on our part: You see
therefore what the Sacrament is, it is nothing but the Seal of the Gospel,
presenting that to the eye, which the Gospel presents to the ear, for it
presents God, as it were, he comes with Christ in his hand, saying this to us,
This is my Son, his body is broken for you, and his blood shed for you, take
Him, let Him be yours, only remember that you serve him, that you love him,
that you obey him again, and let this Sacrament be a sign and a witness
between us: so that as the Gospel has two parts, one is a relation of all
that Christ has done; and another is the giving and offering Christ to us, so
in this Sacrament there is a representing of Christ, he was crucified, his body
was broken, his blood was shed, and a deed of gift is delivered of Christ to
us, Take and eat: And therefore know that it is not a bare sign, but it is a
sign of the Covenant; and there is a difference between those two, to say the
Sacrament is a sign of Christ, and a sign of the Covenant, even as there is a
great difference between the wax that only bears the impression of an image
stamped upon it, and between that which is a seal to a Deed; that is a sign
of the covenant, or bargain, and agreement, for that gives interest into the
thing, that gives Title to the thing, that conveyes the thing to us, that binds
the owner perpetually to the performance of the thing; so the Sacrament is not
a naked sign, representing this act of Christ, but it gives us interest, not
only into some benefits, no, he says not, you shall have remission of sins,
or you shall have adoption, but he says, Take, this is my body: By body is
meant whole Christ, by a Synecdoche, we have Christ and all things else.

What use are we to make of this? Surely it is of great use many ways: First,
we must make this use of it, which is the maine end of the Sacrament, to
confirm our faith in the assurance of the forgiveness of our sins, as
likewise to renew our Covenant, and the Condition required on our part, when
God has said he is willing to pardon our sins, if he had but barely said it,
it had been enough, God cannot lie: But lest it should not be enough, he has
not only said it, but he has sworn it, Hebr. 6. He has sworn by himself,
that by two immutable things we might have strong consolation: Being willing,
says the Apostle, to show to the heirs of Promise the stablenesse of his
Council, he bound himself with an oath, but yet lest that should not be
enough, he has added seals to it, he has given the inward seal of the
Spirit, and the outward seal of the Sacrament; as if he should say, I have
promised to forgive you your sins, let the Sacrament witness against me, if
I perform it not: Here by the way observe, how difficult a thing it is for us
to believe, you may think it an easy thing when you are in health, when you
are well; but when death comes, when temptation comes, when trouble of
conscience comes, I say, you shall find it a difficult thing, you shall find
a need of all these helps; for certainly God swears not in vain, he would
not have bound himself with an oath, to be ready to forgive sins, if there
were not exceeding need of such helps to confirm us; and therefore you have
need to set your selves more diligently about it, make this use of the
Sacrament, labor to confirm your selves in this assurance: So that as the
Apostle says, You may have strong consolation, that is, when the temptations
of Satan shall assault you with objections to the contrary, you may be strong,
and not shaken: And why should you be doubtful (if we should a little reason
with you) that you may receive the fruit of this, for why should you fear it?
For first, the Lord professes, I would not the death of a sinner as I live:
And why will you die, oh you house of Israel: What is the meaning of this? but
to show that the Lord has an exceeding great desire, earnestly longs to save
the souls of men. Indeed he says not that he will give every one grace to
come in, but if he do, As I live, says the Lord, I will not his death, that
is, I am ready to forgive him: Besides this, consider what a man is ready to
do, consider how tenderhearted fathers and mothers are to their children; if
we find so much mercy there, consider how much there is in God; that mercy
that is in us, is but a drop to the Ocean, it is but a beam, to the fullness
that is in him: If you that are evil can give good things to your children,
Luke*
how much more shall your heavenly Father do it? Again, consider if the Lord
were not ready to show mercy to you, that Christ should not be of none effect,
that is, the blood of Christ should be shed in vain. And do you think the
Lord would send his Son to suffer death, and to suffer it in vain? and that
should be in vain, if he should not be ready to receive men to mercy, when
they come to seek it at his hands; besides, if the Lord should not do this,
no flesh should be saved: Psalm. 130.1. says the Psalmist there, If thou Lord
should mark all that is done amiss, who could stand? The meaning is this,
if the Lord should not be ready to do this, which he has given to the
Sacrament to confirm, namely to forgive sins, if he should not be ready to
do it, if he should mark straightly what is done amiss, who could stand, that
is, who should be saved? Now certainly the Lord has made man for that purpose,
many shall be saved, none were made for damnation: Besides, there is another
argument, There is mercy with thee, that thou might be feared: Fear is
taken for the worship of God, that is, if the Lord should not receive men, none
would worship him, none would serve him; when there is no hope, take away all
hope, take away all endeavor. If this will not persuade you, consider what the
Lord has done for others; how many thousands of others have had their sins
forgiven, and then think, had he mercy for such and such, and has he not
mercy enough for me? Has not Christ taken thy nature as well as theirs? If all
this will not persuade you, consider how merciful Christ was in the days of
his flesh, he was exceeding gentle, easy to be entreated, you shall never
find that there was any that asked at his hands, but he granted it: And think
you that he is less pitiful now to men's souls, than he was to their bodies?
Do you think that now he is in heaven, he has laid aside his merciful
disposition? No, Hebr. 4. We have a merciful high Priest that is touched with
our infirmities, that is ready to forgive: Oh, but my sins are exceeding
great, what though they be, is not the Lords mercy exceeding, is it not like
the mighty Sea, that drownes mountains as well as mole-hils: My sins are of
diverse sorts, what if they be, in the Lord there is multitudes of mercies, as
many as thou have sins: I, but they have often been repeated, I have often
fallen into them again and again: What if thou have? Is not his mercies
renewed every morning: And, Zachary 15.1. There is a fountain opened for the
house of Judah and Jerusalem to wash in: Not a cisterne, but a fountain, that
is, as there is a spring of sin in us, so there is a spring of mercy in God,
there is no end of his mercy, therefore doubt not in regard of that.

But again, I am unfit, if I were fit and ready for this, I might receive
fruit from the Sacrament, but I am unfit? Why? If thou thought's thy self fit,
thou should not have it; even therefore, because thou feel thy self
unfit, the rather thou shall be received to mercy: the Lord looks for this a^
thy hands, that we find and feel such ^^fi^resse in our selves, the more we
are humbled, the less we find in our selves, the more ready the Lord is to
receive us to mercy: Besides, this very unfitness, I would ask thee, but what
i^ is; Is it not sin? If all sins be forgiven, if the pardon be general,
then it is contained among the rest, and shall not be any impediment: And
therefore make this use when you come to the Sacrament, think not that God is
backward to forgive, that he will not be as good as his word, certainly he
will; and know this, that what he has said, and sworn, he will perform,
Heaven and earth shall pass away, but his Word shall not pass. This indeed is
our chiefest consolation, that our says is not built upon persuasions and
imaginations of our own; that our sins shall be forgiven, but it is built
upon the sure Word of God: And as Saint Paul says, Gal. 1. If any Angel from
heaven should preach any other Gospel, you should not receive it from him. So
when you have this sure Word that God has given you a general pardon, Come
unto me all ye that are weary, and heavy laden, etc. You may build upon this
sure Word: Now when you put all these together, that the Lord has said it, and
put his seal to it, if he should not do it, the death of Christ should be of
none effect, no flesh should be saved, no man would worship God. Again, there
is nothing can be an impediment to us, not of greatness, and multitude of our
sins, nor our relapse into sin, not our unfitness; Why should we doubt? But
now this is the Condition on Gods part.

Then see the Condition required on our part; What is that?

First, it is required that we take the Lord Jesus Christ, for though the Lord
give him in the Sacrament, though he offer him in the Gospel, except we take
him he is not ours. If we believe that one will give us a thousand pound, that
makes not a man rich, if he be ready to give it, it is the taking that makes us
rich: If we believe that there is such a sovereign Electuary that is able to
heal, that believing does not heal, it is the taking of it, if it be not
taken, it heales not: And therefore, there is required a taking of Christ; So
many as received him, Ioh. 1. he gave power to be, etc. So many as received
him. If a Virgin believe that such a Suitour is willing to take her for his
wife, except she take him for her husband it is no match. And so to believe
that Christ is ready to forgive and pardon our sins, to believe that God the
Father will give Christ to you as he has; To us a Son is given, Esaias 9.6. To
believe this, except we take him, does not profit, he is not ours till then:
This taking is that which the Scripture calls Faith, this is a believing in him:
If you would know what this taking is, it is nothing else but the very
accepting of Christ for our King, for our Lord and Husband: So that look what
it is among men, if you would ask what it is for a spouse to take such an one
for her husband, for a servant to take such an one for his master, for a
subject to take such an one for his King, it is no more, but this, the very act
of the will, whereby they consent, and accept such an one for their Husband,
for their Master or King; it is the taking of him, and this is the taking of
Jesus Christ; I say, when we shall accept him, when we see God has given him
to us, and that he has given himself, when we take him for our Lord and
Master, that is the very act of the will, whereby we resolve to make him ours,
and resolve to give up our selves to him, as he is given to us: That is the
first condition that is required, we must take him; and this the Scripture calls
faith. Is this all? No, there is somewhat else required, you must take him in
deed, as well as in will, that is, you must so take him, as to serve him, and
only him, to turn from all evil ways, and therefore the pardon runs so,
though it be a general pardon; as there is a general proclamation; whatsoever
your rebellions be, it is no matter, for all kind of rebellions, there is
neither any sin, nor any person excepted, but then this condition runs
along with it, you must take him for your King: Is that all? No, you must lay
down your arms of rebellion, you must renounce the Colors and Tents of the
Enemy, and come in and be subject to him, you must live by his Laws: And
therefore, besides taking of him, there is required that we be ready to obey
Christ in deed, and not to take Christ only as a Savior: Every man is ready
to take him as a Priest to save them from their sins, but to take him as a
King and a Lord, so as to be subject unto him, here all the world is at a
stand; as the young man when he came to Christ, and he tells him what he must
do, Go sell all, etc. He would not take him with this condition; here every
man is ready to refuse him: We are willing to follow Christ through fair way,
but not through foul and rough way; we are willing to take him with a Crown of
glory, but not with a Crown of thorns; we are willing to take the sweet, but
not the sour: But we must know, if we will take Christ, we must likewise obey
him, and take him as an Husband, our will must be subject to his will; we must
take him as a Lord, we must be subject to him in all things, we must keep his
Commandments; and therefore he has so expressed it, If you will suffer with
him, you shall reign with him, not else; If you will obey me, and keep my
Commandments, then you shall be my Disciples, if you will follow me, and deny
your selves, and take up your cross, etc. Take up my cross daily.

Therefore a second Condition is this, which the Scripture calls sometimes
repentance and conversion to God, sometime obedience.

But is this all? No, there is one more required that we do all this out of
love, for when a man is in extremity, when he is driven to an exigent, now to
take Christ, and to keep his Commandments; perhaps he will be willing to do,
to expedite himself out of such a strait: but will the Lord regard this?
Surely no* except it be from love; therefore, Gal. 5.5. you shall find them
all three put together, Neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but faith that works by love: there you have the first
Condition, which is faith. The second which works, it is not an idle faith,
but it is a faith that sets you a work; and then you have the third, they are
works that come from love. A man will be ready to do any thing to save his
life; you know a Merchant when he is on the sea, casts away his goods, when he
is in extreme danger, not because he and his goods are fallen out, but to save
his life he will do it; Take a covetous man, let him be on the rack, he will
be ready to do any thing, but yet the man is the same: And so for a man to do
much for Christ, to do as we are ready to do in the time of extremity, when
death comes, when sickness comes, when we are under some great cross that is
upon us, when conscience is troubled, I say, in these cases to do it, the Lord
regards it not: This therefore is the Condition that is required to be done out
of love; it is a rule in the Civill-law, Contractus qui fit per minas, nullus
est; The contracts that are gotten by threatenings, are no contracts at all; but
if a Virgin consent, when she is free, when it is done without compulsion, that
makes the match: So it is between Christ and us, for us to take him and keep
his Commandments, and to do it out of fear and other respects, this Christ
regards not, it is love that makes the match: If we take him out of love, if
all we do, be done out of love, then there is a match between us, otherwise
not. And there is good reason for that, because fear is of a fleeting nature,
it soon passes and vanishes away, but when it is rooted and grounded in love,
when that which we do, comes from this principle, then we hold out and cleave
to Christ, without separating again; when that proceeds from fear, we do it
not with delight, we do it not with propensenesse, with proclivity of mind,
with an inward willingness. Now the Lord so loves a cheerful giver, a
cheerful servant, and a cheerful performer, that he loves no other: And
therefore that Condition is required, to Delight in the Law, in the inward man,
that we do not only keep his Commandments, but that they be not grievous to
us, that what we do, be done out of love; and therefore it is required, when
we do this, that we love the Lord Jesus Christ; I will be bold to say, a man
may pray day and night as earnestly as Hannah did, he may keep the
Commandments of God without reproof, as Zachary and Elizabeth did for the
outward act, he may abound in the work of the Lord, but whatsoever he does, if
he do it not out of love, God looks upon such works, as upon a dead carkase;
so they are called, Hebr. 9. Dead works, that is, works that are good for
substance, and for circumstance too, but yet they are dead, because they come
not from love, there is no life in them: Therefore, in 1 Cor. 16.22. Whosoever
loves not the Lord Jesus, says the Apostle, let him be accursed. Whosoever
loves not the Lord Jesus, that is, whatsoever a man does besides, let him
profess what he will, and perform what he will, if he love not the Lord
Jesus, he is accursed: And that I speak not this without ground, look 1 Cor.
13. Take the most glorious actions that a man can perform, if a man give his
body to be burnt, that is, to be a Martyr, if he gives his goods to the poor,
which is an high action for a man to part with all he has; if he do that
which Christ required of the young man, to deny himself: If a man were able to
preach the Gospel, if he had gifts as an Angel, as the Apostle speaks, If he
were able to speak with the tongue of men and Angels, and if it were without
love, God regards it not: Love is a distinguishing Character, an Hypocrite may
go very far, but love he cannot; it is love therefore that sets an high price
upon all that we do: And therefore you shall find from the beginning of
Genesis, to the end of the Revelation, the Promise is made still to the
Affection, and it is the Affection that makes a man a good man; he that fears
the Lord, and he that loves the Lord, and he that delights in the Commandments
of God, etc. And therefore it is not enough that we take Christ, and that we
believe in him, that we do the works that he commands us, but that we do
them out of love: And this is the Condition that is required on our part. So
you see now what the Gospel is, what the sum of it is, that is sealed in the
holy Sacrament, it is this Covenant on Gods part, that he is ready to forgive
us; wherein you must strengthen your faith, when you draw near to him. And
again, this condition on your part, Faith and obedience out of love, as you
have heard: This is the first use that you are to make. I should proceed.

The end of the First Sermon.
THE CUP OF BLESSING: DELIVERED IN THREE Sermons, upon 1 Cor. 10.16. The
Second SERMON.
1 CORINTHIANS. 10.16. The Cup of blessing, that we bless, is it not the Communion
of the blood of Christ? etc.


SEEING we have the same occasion for which I took this Text, being to receive
the Sacrament again the next Sabbath, and so along; I thought it better to
continue it, than to divert to another: When we handled it the last time, we
told you there were these three parts in the words: First, there is a true
Communion of the body and blood of Christ. Secondly, the means by which it is
conveyed to us, the bread and wine, the outward elements which God has
Sanctified to that purpose. The third is the adopting or fitting these elements
for such an end; and that is by sanctifying them, by blessing them by setting
them apart; The Cup of Blessing which we bless, etc.


The point we delivered was this, that in the Sacrament there is a real and
true Communion of the body and blood of Christ to every Receiver.

We told you the difference between the Papists and us, we both agree that
Christ is really in the Sacrament, they say it is corporally, we say it is only
done by faith. But to use an expression of Augustine, which he has upon the
very Text, says he, John Baptist said he was not Elias, and yet Christ says,
John was Elias; Why, says he, how shall we reconcile these two? they are
thus reconciled; John speaks properly, and Christ spoke figuratively, and
therefore they cross not one another (he gives this very instance) so says
he, when Christ says, This is my body, and we say it is not his body, but
bread, they are Augustines own words) says he, the meaning is this, It is the
body, if we take it figuratively, and it is not his body, if we speak
properly; so that as it was with the Temple of his body, when he spoke of it, I
will destroy this Temple, and build it in three days; they understood it of
the material Temple: and, says the Text, They were reckoned as false
witnesses against Christ: So when Christ speaks thus of his body, This is my
body, when they understood it materially and corporally, when it is a thing so
frequent and usual with him to speak Metaphorically, I say, they shall be
found false witnesses against him, in applying this to his material and
corporal body, that he understands of his mystical body, which is received by
faith. I will not stand to repeat more of that I delivered then, lest the time
prevent us in that which remains.

Only one thing which I then omitted, and that is a great objection of the
Papists, out of the sixth Chapter of Saint John, where Christ speaks so much
of eating his flesh, and drinking his blood, which, say they, must needs be
understood of a corporal manducation, of eating his body and drinking his
blood in the Sacrament; we will speak one word of this.

First, that this cannot be the meaning of that clause, is evident, because the
Supper of the Lord was not then instituted; and therefore it could not be he
should have relation to that, because Christ spoke to those that might
understand him, the words were intelligible at the least: Now it was impossible
that those that heard him, should understand him of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, because it was a thing that was not; and if they say that was their
dullness: I answer, it is not dullness not to conceive that which simply could
not be known: This that had no being, could not be known; and therefore this
is certain he had not relation to that.

Besides that, if you mark the course of the words, you shall find he says
there, that rather the flesh is turned into bread, than the bread to flesh,
says he, I am the true bread that came down from heaven, he repeats that
often in the Chapter, verse. 51. I am the living bread, and my flesh is bread,
and I give life to the world: So that you shall find more reason, if you read
that Chapter, why the flesh should be turned to bread, than the bread into
flesh.

But besides that, the eating of Christ's flesh, and the drinking of his blood,
is always taken in a good sense, and it is always peculiar to the Saints: And
therefore, verse 53, 54. you shall find both expressed: Except a man eat his
flesh, and drink his blood, he has no life in him: Again, Whosoever,
(without exception) eats his flesh and drinks his blood, he has eternal
life, and Christ will raise him up at the last day: So if you take the words
generally as Christ expresses them, and so they must needs be understood. Then
it is impossible that his flesh should be eaten in the Sacrament, and his blood
drunk, because many that should eat his flesh there, in a corporal manner
shall not be saved, which you know themselves grant. Besides, there are many
that never eat his flesh, nor drink his blood in the Sacrament, that are
saved, and have life in them, as you know the Thief on the Cross, went
immediately to Paradise, though he never eat the flesh of Christ in the
Sacrament, nor drank his blood: All the Patriarchs before Christ, Did not they
drink the same spiritual drink, did they not eat the same spiritual meat,
as we do? but they never eat it in the Sacrament: Mary Magdalene, when she had
never tasted of the Sacrament, says CHRIST, Go thy way, thy sins are
forgiven thee: What need I give you instances of children that die; It is the
opinion of the Council of Trent, they set it down in plain terms, That
children, that are baptized, though they eat not the Sacrament, and drink of
the blood of Christ, and eat his flesh, are saved: And therefore Christ's own
words must be meant in this sense, and cannot be understood of a corporal
eating of his flesh, and drinking of his blood. But because those words,
Unless ye eat my flesh, and drink my blood, ye cannot have life; are a
place which the Papists do much urge, as if it were impossible to be answered,
and appeal herein to the Fathers. We will show you briefly, that it was so
interpreted by the Fathers that lived near the Apostles times, as by us now,
before there were any Popish Doctors to corrupt the Gloss, as Origin (that was
very ancient) upon the fifth of Matthew, says this, That if it could be that
he that remains an ill man, could eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his
blood, then it could never be said, John 6. Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks
my blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. Again,
also, Augustine in his 26. Tract, upon the Gospel of Saint John, says this,
Whosoever is not a member of Christ, he eats not his flesh, he drinks not his
blood, though visibly and corporally he crush with his teeth the Sacrament of
the body and blood of Christ. Mark the words, The Sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ: But it is vain for me to insist upon the particular saying of
Augustine, because those that are acquainted with his sayings, if they deal
ingenuously, they know they are every where scattered, that he is very clear
and evident: But I will name one that is exceeding perspicuous, in his third
book, De Doctrina Christiana, cap. 13. he gives us this rule for the
interpreting of Scripture; If we find that commanded that is flagitious, and
hurtful, and evil, we must not interpret Scripture so, that such a thing is
to be done: As for example, he gives this instance, John 6. Christ speaks of
eating his flesh and drinking his blood, says he, this is a flagitious, an
evil, and an heinous thing, that a man abhors when he thinks of it; and
therefore the words are not so to be understood, but you must understand them
spiritually, and figuratively; you must, when you hear those words, remember
that Christ's flesh was crucified for you, and that his blood was shed; and so
the words are to be interpreted. Ambrose upon the 118. Psalm. having occasion to
speak of the Sacrament, has reference to this, Ioh. 6. says he, Christ is
the bread of life, he that eats life cannot die, for how shall he (says he)
die, Christ is the bread of life, he that eats him, therefore, cannot die,
therefore (says he) none are said to eath the flesh of Christ, and drink his
blood, but they must needs live for ever, for he eats that which is life.
Athanasius has speeches as plain as these, It is not, (says he) corporal,
but it is spiritual, that which Christ speaks concerning eating of his flesh,
and drinking of his blood, (says he) that small body of his, could that feed
so many, says he is reckoned the meat of the whole world: And therefore, says
he, in the latter end of that Chapter, John 6. When Christ had finished his
speech of eating his flesh, and drinking his blood, he speaks of his Ascension
into heaven, that he might draw us from carnal conceits, to raise our mind to
understand the thing spiritually to ascend to him by faith, and to know the
spiritual nourishment of the soul, and not corporal of the body. Besides
him, Tertullian in his book, De resurrectione carnis; Eusebius contra
Marcellium, not to name other particulars, they all interpret the place thus:
And therefore let not our Adversaries say* it is a new interpretation; it is
fastened on the words by Calvin and Beza, as they do; it is the interpretation
of the Fathers, nay, I will go further, it is the interpretation not of the
Fathers only, but of some of their own Writers Cajetan upon the third part of
Thomas, the 80. Question, says plainly, To eat the flesh of Christ, is to
believe in Christ. And Biel in the Canon of his Mass, and Canisius upon the
Corinthians* and others of their own Writers, which is enough to make it
clear to them, that this is the meaning of the words, that we have said
before. So much shall serve for the answering of that Objection.

We showed the last day in what manner Christ is in the Sacrament (I will not
stand to repeat it) we came to draw some consectaries from the point, that
there is a real Communion of the body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament:
The first was for the strengthening of our faith: If God had said it only, it
had been enough, God that cannot lie: But I told you, he had not only said it,
but sworn it, and not only sworn it, but has put to his Seal: And therefore
we have reason to believe him; only I told you what was required, if we will
partake of Christ: First, we must take him by faith: Secondly, that is not all,
we must take him in deed, as well as in word, that is, we must obey him, and
live by his Laws; we must lay down the arms of rebellion, and come in, if we
will have pardon: Thirdly, it is not enough to do this, but we must do all
out of love. Now when a man hears of this, that all this is required in taking
of Christ; here, I told you, all the world is at a stand, there is no body will
be content to take him, when they hear these conditions, that they must deny
themselves in every thing, in their profit, in their pleasures, in their
credit, and must take up every cross; and when they meet a cross, they must
not balke the way, but they must go through, when they hear they must follow
him and serve him: I say, when men hear this, they refuse Christ, they will
not come in to God: Now what is our business, but to invite men to come in to
God, and to compel them, as he says, That my house may be full; we are the
Messengers of the Lord, sent, that we may invite men to this Banquet, I mean
not to this Sacrament, but to the thing: And therefore we will make it the
second Consectary, and so proceed.

If there be here a real Communion of the body and of the blood of Christ,
then here is the gift or offer of his body and blood: Consider therefore the
greatness of Christ's love, that he should regard us so much, as to take our
Nature, to cloth himself with our flesh and blood, that he might be
crucified, in that, I say, this is an extraordinary love: Compare but our
condition with the Angels that were fallen, and we shall see the greatness of
this love: The Angels that were fallen (and we were sunk in the same mire)
when God looked down from heaven, and saw the miserable condition of both,
(says the Author to the Hebrews) he had compassion on us, but on the Angels
he had not compassion: Which difference shows his liberty, and magnifieth his
mercy toward us, as you shall find in Malachy* the Lord reasoning with Israel,
Thus have ^ ^oved you, and yet you say, Wherein have thou loved us? says he,
Was not Esau Jacobs Brother, and yet Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated.
So, I say, the Lord has loved us, in doing this for us, in giving this body of
his to be broken, and his blood to be shed, he has loved us, and hated them?
And why has he put this difference, but because he loved us? And therefore
Paul, as he is excellent, when he comes to set forth this point, Ephesians. 2. he
says, When we were children of wrath, when we were dead in trespasses and
sins, when we were enemies, he that is rich in mercy, according to the
greatness of his love, has quickened us, and set us together with Christ in
heavenly places, (mark it) when we were in this condition, dead, it was he
that was rich in mercy, according to the greatness of his love, etc. You shall
find that the Apostle, whenever he comes to this matter, knows not how to
express himself, but as a man that stood amazed at the greatness of Gods
love, he had his thoughts swallowed up with it, Ephesians. 3. That you may know the
love of Christ, which passes knowledge, that you may comprehend the length,
and breadth, and depth, and height of the love of Christ, etc. which cannot be
measured: that is, the love of Christ was exceeding great: And this is that you
are to do now when you come to the Sacrament, and not only then, but at all
times: For it is profitable for us to do this, Do that (says Christ) in
remembrance of me; what is that we should remember? His love: And why his love?
to gaze upon it, only to know it? No, but to be moved with it, to love him
again, to take him, to fear him, to serve him, to obey him, for that end, you
should remember it.

When Paul was going to Damascus, you know the Lo^^ met him by the way, and
when he had met hi^* Paul (says he) I am JESUS whom thou persecutest, I am
JESUS that was crucified for thee, I am JESUS that gave my body for thee, and
as many as receive me: You know when Paul heard this, it melted, it softened his
heart, and draws from him that holy, and good, and humble expression; Lord,
what will thou that I do? As if he should say, I will do whatsoever thou will
have me. I say, it was this love, I am JESUS whom thou persecutest, that melted
the heart of Paul: So I may to every one that hears me at this time: If there
be any among you, that live in any sin, whatsoever it is, be it swearing, be
it drinking, be it fornication, be it Sabbath-breaking, be it what it will, I
may say to him, as if a voice should come from heaven, as it did to Paul, It is
Jesus whom thou provokest, it is he, whom thou offendest, whom thou wrongest,
whom thou dishonourest, it is Jesus that was crucified for thee, that Jesus,
that gives his body and blood for thee, shall not this melt thee? shall not
this affright thee somewhat? shall it not bring you on your knees, and make you
say, I am a sinful wretch, not worthy to be received into the number of the
Saints; Lord, what will thou that I do, I will do it, I will continue to do
this no more: Surely this is a strong motive; Paul thought so: I beseech you by
the mercies of God that you would come in: Take it in the Prodigal son, when
he comes home, and expects little (as he had reason to expect little from his
father, when he had carried himself so rebelliously) when his father used him
in that manner, when he provided a feast for him, and put the robes upon him,
and rings upon his fingers, how thankful was he? how was he affected? how
would a man be affected in such a case? So, I say, that is our condition, we
have cause to look for nothing but death thereupon comes the Gospel, that
comes and offers life, that overcomes with kindness, as it were: the Lord
comes and tells us* Well, notwithstanding all this, you shall be received to
mercy; go, Take, this is my body which is given for you: I say, this would
move an ingenious disposition: You know Mary Magdalen was moved with this, when
she was such a sinner, and saw that God had received her in that manner, that
melted her heart; so that she watered his feet with her tears: So should we be
affected, if we did seriously consider the greatness of CHRIST'S love, I will
give you my body and my blood, this is a great thing, if we were able to
consider it aright, that the Lord should give us his body and his blood. There
is no love like this, He has loved me (says Paul) and has given himself
for me: And this is that indeed which should be the most effectual motive of
all others, that there is a pardon that Christ still makes offer of to you
indeed; there is nothing else brings us into Christ but this, other things may
prepare us, but nothing brings us in but this: You know, a Pirate, as long as a
proclamation of rebellion is out against him, will not come in, but a pardon
being promised, and advancement annexed to it, that, if any thing, will bring
him in: The thief runs away, as long as he is pursued with Hue and Cry, but
the promise of pardon makes him return back: So, I say, it is not the Law that
brings you in, that may prepare you, but it is this Gospel; for, as I told
you, the Sacrament preaches the Gospel to the eye, as we do to the ear; and
when mercy is promised, when a pardon is promised, a general pardon, without
exception of persons, or sins; my thinks this should affect you, and bring
you in: As it is said, Ier. 3. Says the Lord, If one of you have put away his
wife, will he return to her again? No, but you have played the harlot in many
places, and many times, and yet return to me says the Lord: And so I may say
to every man that hears me, though thy sins be never so great, like that sin of
Idolatry, like that sin of playing the Harlot, though that were frequently
committed, though it were done often, many times; yet return says the Lord, if
thou will come in, thou shall be pardoned, and not so only, but whosoever
receives me, says Christ, shall be made the son of God.

Consider this, be affected with it, let it not be in vain unto you when you
hear those patheticall speeches, 1 John, He came to his own, and his own
received him not: And again, Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have
gathered thee, etc. I say, when you hear these things, it may be you think
with your selves, these were rebellious people to use Christ thus, you think
if it had been the case, if you had been there among them you would not have
done it: Well, I say, it is the case of every man that continues in any known
sin, Christ offers himself, we make offer of him, when we preach the Gospel,
in the Sacrament he is offered, he is made like a common dole, all may come
that will, and certainly all that hunger do come; but when thou go on still
in thy sins, thou art one of them to whom Christ is come, and thou will not
receive him; thou art one of them, whom he would gather, and thou will not: No,
but thou will go on, thou take the Grace of GOD in vain, thou tramplest the
blood of CHRIST JESUS under-foot, as a common thing, thou do what thou
can, that the death of CHRIST should be of no effect, thou recompencest to
the Lord evil for good, do thou think that the LORD will bear this at thy
hands? No surely, he will be revenged on such a man, on such a people as this:
But you will say, it is an hard thing to do this that you exhort us to: And
therefore, that I may not only show you what the duty is without affording you
some help to do it, we will add some things, that may invite you to come in:
And take Christ thus offered in the Sacrament, and which is continually offered
by and in the Gospel.

And what is it that should invite you? But two things (to go no fur^her) one
is the misery out of Christ; the second is the happiness you shall have by
him: And that is the business we have principally to do, at this time, that
we might invite you to take the body and blood of Christ, that is, to take the
Lord himself, who is offered effectually and freely to you? He makes
proclamation to all that will come and take of the waters of life freely. Now
if we consider what should invite the sons of men to come in, these two things
will do it, their misery out of Christ, and their happiness by him: As the
Prodigal, what did invite him to come home? The misery he was in, he saw he
could not live, he could not get husks to sustain him: On the otherside, in
his fathers house there was bread enough; those two together wrought on him,
and brought him home: So we, when we invite men to the mar^iage of ^he Kings
Son, that is, to marry the Son himself; What should we say to invite them?
We bring them to consider on the one side, I cannot live without Christ; I am
undone, I perish if I do: Again, on the otherside, by matching with him, I
shall have all by Grace that he has by Nature: I shall be a son of God, a
King, and heir of all things, I shall have all that Christ has: I say, these
two should invite us to come in; and therefore we will do these two.

First, show you the misery you are in out of Christ, John 3.18. says the
Evangelist there, He that believes not in Christ is condemned already: (Mark)
he needs not a new condemnation, but he that believes not in Christ is
condemned already; He that has not the Son, has not life: Is not this
misery enough to be in a state of condemnation? John 5. He that obeyes not the
Son, the wrath of God abides on him: And what is that wrath of God? If the
wrath of a King be a messenger of Death, what think you of the wrath of God?
Who knows the power of his wrath: Romans 9. What if he will to show his wrath,
and to make his power known, suffer with patience the vessels of wrath,
appointed to destruction, that is, when the Lord shall come to execute his
wrath on evil men, he will use all the power he has to execute the
fierceness of his wrath on them: And therefore it is a terrible thing to be
subject to the wrath of God: But because that moves not so much, being
general, you will ask wherein this wrath of GOD is seen, and wherein more
particularly is this misery in being out of Christ; I will name but these three
particulars.

First, you shall be subject to Death, subject to Him that has the power of
Death: You will say this is no such misery, for are not holy men subject to
death, as well as evil men? I, but there is great difference; the evil shall
be subject to death, as an enemy, the last enemy that shall be destroyed is
Death, which shows that Death is an enemy; I say, they are subject to Death
as an enemy; Death may come to two men, and be a friend to the one, and an
enemy to the other, that which he says, Death is the rich man's enemy, and
the poor man's friend, we may better apply it, to the godly man, and to the
evil man: And surely it is true, Death is the Godly man's friend, and the
wicked man's enemy; the same Death, as you know, the same messenger comes to
call Pharaohs Butler and his Baker, he came as an enemy to the one, and as a
friend to the other, he came to call the one to promotion, and the other to
execution, so does Death: Now Death, when that comes as an enemy, is terrible,
when that comes with a sting, Death indeed without a sting is nothing; but
Death, when it comes with a sting, and the sting of Death is sin; this we
consider not, that Death has a sting, it is a Serpent, that often stings
without hissing, without warning, it comes suddenly, it comes certainly, we see
continually how men fall from the tree of life, as leaves in Autumn, we
consider not this: but this is among the miseries, that we are subject to
death, and this is a great misery. Those that can look upon other miseries and
dangers, and outface them, without being daunted, when Death comes, that
appales them, that looses the joints, that makes them tremble, that makes their
knees knock together: You know it is said of Saul, David professes that he
was valiant as a Lion, in his Songs of him, when the news of Death comes, he
falls to the ground, there was no strength in him: All are petty miseries to
this, this is the great Giant that makes the stoutest heart to tremble at his
approach. But is this all, that we are subject to death, when we are out of
Christ? No, we are subject to the fear of death likewise, which is an hundred
times worse that death it self, Heb. 2.14. He has delivered us from him that
had the power of death, he has delivered us, that for fear of death were all
our lives subject to bondage: I say, the fear of death, is worse than death it
self, because death continues but a moment, it is soon gone, but the fear of
death continues always, a long time, like the handwriting which kept
Belshazzer in fear; so this fear of death keeps us in a continual
trembling, this is that that imbitters all our comforts, that sowres all our
joy, this fear of death, they were all their lifetime subject to bondage
through the fear of death: Therefore it is not said that death is bitter to
him that lives in pleasure, but the remembrance of death; all the joys and
comforts that we have in this life, what are they when they are accompanied
with this, I say, there is nothing terrible, but so far as it is mingled with
this fear: All evil and dangers are so far terrible, as they are harbengers
of death, as they are crackes to give warning of the fall of the whole house
that shall never be repaired again: Whatsoever pleasure we enjoy, this is the
gall that takes away the sweetness of all, though the pottage were otherwise
good when the Colloquintida was in them, there is death in the pot; so I may
say, when death is joined, what sweetness is in them? That is the condition of
every man living out of Christ, he is not only subject to death, but to the
fear of death continually.

But is this all? No, there is yet more, there is Hell, Death has a Page that
comes behind him, that is ten times worse than himself, Rev. 6.7, 8. I looked
and saw a pale horse, and the name of him that rode on him was Death, and
behind him followed Hell: That is, Hell is the hook that is hid in Death,
when we are once taken with that hook, we are kept there for ever: If Death
should come without Hell, it were another matter, Death is but the lightning,
it is Hell that is the crack of thunder: and shall we like children be afraid
of the lightning, and not be afraid of the bolt? It is hell that is the gate
that keeps us for ever, Death is but the arrest, that carries us thither.
Therefore consider what it is to be subject to Hell; as our Savior says, What
will that avail a man to win the whole world, and lose his soul: Consider
well of that speech, What will that avail you to save all things else, if you
lose your souls, as if a man should save the paring of his nails, and lose
his finger, as if he should save his shoe, and lose his foot, as if he should
save the ship, and lose the fraught, as if he should save the house, and
destroy the man that dwells in it; so it is to save other things, and to lose
the soul: No, it is the terrible thing, Hell, that follows Death: In all
other miseries, yet this is our comfort, that Death will come in the end, and
put a full point and period to them; but this second death, Hell, is such a
death, as has no other death to end it: Therefore, as we say, But for hope
the heart would break; surely there is no hope, and therefore there is a
breaking of the soul, as well as torment of the body: Therefore consider what
Hell is, what eternity is, this is the misery we are in out of Christ, you are
subject to the fear of death, you are subject to Death, and to Hell too: Death
is but the Stalking-horse, it is Hell that is the Fowler, that has the piece
and the shot to destroy us utterly. And therefore consider what case you are in
out of Christ, what misery you are in out of him, that when Hell and Death
come; as she said, Up Sampson, for the Philistims are on thee; so, when we
shall say, Hell and Death is on you, and your hairs are cut off, that is,
Christ is gone from you (for the cutting off his locks, was but an emblem
that God was departed from him) I say, when they are on us: If Christ be away,
what a case are we in? Shall they not take us and carry us to that prison,
there to lie for ever: Therefore consider this, it is certain the destroying
Angel will come, and commonly he comes in the night; Death comes when thou
least look for him, as a thief: I say, the destroying Angel will come;
What will their condition be then, when there is no sprinkling of the blood on
the doore-posts of thy soul? It is the case of every man out of Christ; What
are we out of him? when the avengers of blood, when the pursuers shall set on
us, and pursue us, from whom we cannot fly. And when we shall be shut out from
the horns of the Altar, when we cannot come to Christ, the City of Refuge, it
is a terrible thing, if we consider it seriously. It is said that Aaron, when
he caused the people to commit that sin, or was an instrument rather, it is
said that he left the people naked, why? because he deprived them of the
presence of the Lord: Now when Christ shall be taken from us, when we are
without him, when we are deprived of him, are we not naked? is not the hedge
broken down? there is nothing left to shelter us; what are we without him? but
as the Conneyes out of the rocks, that have nothing to shelter us from the
devouring Lion: Now Moses was but a type, it is Christ that holds the hands of
God that he cannot destroy us, it is he that stands in the breach, and keeps
out the inundation of evils, that we be not overwhelmed with them; he is the
Ark of God, that causes the house of Obed-Edom to be blessed; and we have
more cause to take to heart the want of him, a thousand times, than they had to
lament the loss of the Arc, when it was among the Philistims, for the Arc
was but a type of Christ: This is the case of every man living out of Christ.

Object.
I but, you will say, Christ is merciful, he is very ready to forgive, I hope I
am not out of him, but he is ready to receive me?

Answ.
It is very true, he is merciful, but to whom? surely not to the wicked, he
holds not the wicked innocent; so speak plainly to you, Whosoever continues in
any known sin, be it never so small, to such a man Christ will not be
merciful: No sin shall have dominion over you, Romans 6. for you are not under
the Law, but under Grace: As if he should say, there are none whom Christ takes
to himself, and puts into the condition of Grace, but he frees them from the
dominion of every sin, there is not one ruling lust there: You know there are
many paths that lead to hell, the way that leads the right way is but one,
error is manifold; there are a thousand paths that lead the wrong way, and
will not one path lead to hell as well as a thousand? He that is in Christ has
crucified the flesh, and all the affections, there is not one reigning lust
there; so that as Antichrist had his mark, and they received the mark of the
Beast: So Christ has his mark too; as you have it, Ezekiel. 9. The Writer marked
all that mourned, God set a mark upon them, and he sets a mark upon all those
that he is merciful to.

You will say, what is this mark of the Lord? You shall find, 2 Cor. 5.17.
Whosoever is in Christ, he is a New Creature, that is the mark of the LORD
JESUS: And therefore, if thou would know whether Christ will be merciful to
thee, consider if thou find that mark there, Art thou a New Creature? that
is, art thou made all New, as if thou had another soul dwelling in thy
body, for thou must not be new by halfes, thy whole spirit must be New.

Again, if you will come more properly to this mark, you shall find, Ephesians.
1. 2 Cor. 1. what it is, The Seal and mark that Christ sets, is his Spirit:
Whosoever has not the Spirit of Christ is none of his: You know Merchants set
seals upon their goods, to know them, that when they meet with their seal
they may say, This is my parcel of goods: So it is in the multitudes of men:
All that Christ will be merciful unto, he sets his seal on them, and where he
finds his seal and his mark, those he knows to be his; That Seal is his
sanctifying Spirit that he has given us, it is as a Seal or earnest, 2 Cor.
1. and Ephesians. 1. He has sealed us with the Spirit of Promise: that is, with
the Spirit that he has promised to us. So consider if thou have that Spirit
then, to sanctify and to change thy heart, to make thee another man than thou
art by nature, to enable thee to do more than thou can do by nature; If thou
have not this seal of God, thou art yet none of his: But you will say, I have
the Seal, I hope I have the Spirit: Well, it is well, if thou have; but know
this, that Christ never gives that privy Seal and Signet of his, that inward
Seal that none knows, save those that have it; but there is a Broad-seale
likewise that follows, that Seal spoken of, 2 Timothy 2. This foundation of the
Lord remains sure, and has this Seal, The Lord knows who are his, and let
them depart from iniquity that call upon the name of the Lord; he adds to
that other, a parting from iniquity, from all kind of iniquity, there must be
none exempt place in thine heart, nor in thy life, wherein thou will have a
privilege, thou continuest not in the least sin, but departest from all
iniquity, then thou have this Seal as well as the other: If thou want these two
Seals, if thou be not a New Creature, if any sin have dominion over thee, if
there be one living lust in thee that is not mortified, that is not healed, I
assure thee thou never had yet any part in Christ: and if thou be out of
Christ, thou see what thou art subject to, to the wrath of God, and you see
the particulars, you are subject to death, you are subject to the fear of
death and to hell; and this is the case of every man out of Christ, and me
thinks this should somewhat move us to come in, and to take him. But this is
not all, that which we have by Christ may invite us a great deal more
forcibly: If we could but open the Casket, and show you the Jewels, or if we
could but unlocke the treasures that are hid in Christ, it would bring a man in
love with him, it would make men do as Paul, Account all dross and dung, that
they might have him. Well, though we cannot do it fully, yet we will endeavor
to do it a little: You will say, What shall we have by Christ? First, you
shall have life by him, John 6. the place spoken of in the beginning, He that
believes in me, shall have eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last
day: When he comes to speak of water to the woman of Samaria, John 4. when he
would commend to us a motive to stir us up to come and take him, and to drink,
etc. he says, He that drinks this water shall thirst no more: That is, he
shall live for ever; it is water that shall keep life in him for all eternity;
when she heard this, she harkens to hear of water that could keep life for
ever. When you read the story in Genesis, that the Angel was set with a sword
shaken, to keep man from coming to taste of the tree of life; you should
think with your selves, if the Angels were removed now, or there were a man so
happy, that the Angel would give way to him, that he might come and eat of the
tree, and when he had eaten to live for ever, you think that man in an happy
condition. Now the Lord does say, Revel. 2. He that overcomes I will give to
eat of the tree in the midst of the Paradise of God: That is, he shall eat of
me, and live for ever; this is the great happiness we have.

When Christ would use a compelling argument to move, Revel. 2.11. He that
overcomes shall not be hurt of the second death: Why, is it so great a matter?
Oh that is all, not to be hurt of the second death: The first death is nothing;
the first death is but the door, it is but the gate that leads to the passing
through; the first death is but a going over the threshold, the breadth of it is
but a step, and the length of it is but a moment of time or two: But the second
death, there are the chambers of death, as Solomon speaks, where you shall be
led from one misery to another, and where you shall dwell for ever: And
therefore consider this, if you take Christ, you shall not be hurt of the
second death: I beseech you consider seriosuly, reckon nothing so sweet; if
this life be sweet, that is but a spanne long, is not abundance of life much
sweeter: It is natural to every man to desire immortility, if you could but
have this life continued, let every man ask his own breast what he would give,
that his life might be continued, that he might be immortal? If there were
such a thing as the Alchymists speak of, I could draw out the thread of this
life to keep it firm and even as they dream of; what would you give to
obtain? And will you not regard this that will do that indeed? Will you not
take Christ, which is life indeed, which will give you another life of
immortality, for you must know that it is not immortality simply that man
desires. The Naturalists were deceived in that, for a man had rather not to be
than to be in misery: And the soul in hell are immortal; and therefore it is
not immortality that we desire simply, for death is not the extinguishing of
life, but the misery of life: And therefore, where the Scripture speaks of the
loss of the soul, it is to be meant thus; a man's finger or his joint is lost,
when it is seized on by any incurable sore: So when eternal misery is on the
soul, then the soul is lost, and yet you have the joint still, you have the
soul still, you have life still: and therefore it is not immortality simply
that we desire, if we consider what it is, but it is happiness, it is such a
life as is not only immortal, but happy withal: this life Christ has
promise, we shall live, and an happy life, such as S. Paul expresses, 2 Cor.
5. says he, We desire not to be unclothed, but to be clothed upon, that
immortality might be swallowed up of life: As if he should say, consider with
your selves, you that love this life so well, that you neglect that which is to
come, says he, we love our lives as well as you, we are not weary of them, no
more than you are, we desire not to be unclothed, no, but we desire that
immortality may be swallowed up of life, how swallowed up? as we see a rude
draught in a picture, swallowed up with the picture when it is perfected, as
childhood is swallowed up of manhood, as the glimmering light is swallowed up
of the perfect light; so their immortality is swallowed up of life, that is, if
there be a small poor glimpse of comfort here, says Paul, we would not be rid
of these, we would be content to have these as well as you, only we would
have them swallowed up of perfect life, we would have imperfection swallowed up
of perfection: And therefore Job says, I will wait till my change shall come;
he says not till my destruction come, till my perishing come, or till my death
come, but I will wait till my change come: and he that changes does it for the
better: If you will take Christ, you shall have this immortality and life,
perhaps you will say, but I could be content to have this temporal life
continued: And happily, my brethren, if the Lord would make that promise, that he
would proclaim to men that they should have immortal life here, it may be he
shall have more follows than now he has, when he promises immortal life in
heaven: but to take away that in a word; I say, it is a foolish choice, if you
might have it: For what have you here? Here the body is tormented with
diseases, the spirit is wearied with vexation, and the state is assualted with
losses and crosses; evil things wound us with sorrow, and the good things we
here, do but infect our affections, and weary us still, and yet they whet our
tired appetites with a new edge. In a word, every condition here is pestred and
troubled with business; one invites and draws on another: we are hampred with
succeeding fetters, and makes this short life more short than it would be with
careful grief, with bitter fears, and with corrupt joys; and at last, all
cut off and end, as many men many times spread their branches and flourish;
their estate over-swallowes their wishes, their suceesse excceds their desires:
now on a sudden, this pomp is no where to be found, their desires vanish, the
flood of their wealth is dried up, the owners and their goods perish together;
they will not see this by experience. What is it in this life you would have,
if there were immortality? But I say, it cannot be so, that is not so; you
cannot have immortality in this life, but as evidently as you see the heavens
roll about evey day, so plainly we may see, if we will take it into
consideration, mankind hurried along with an unwearied motion to the West of
his days; their posterity posting after them by an unrepealeable law of
succession: our fathers you know are gone before, and we are passing, and our
children shall follow us at our heels: that as you see the billows of the
Sea, one tumbe on the neck of another, and in the end, all are dashed upon the
shore; so all generations and ages in the end, are split on banks of death,
and this is the condition of every man? Is it not our wisdom then to provide
for another life? Certainly, if there be any wisdom in the world, it is
wisdom to remember our latter end. The wisest among the Heathen were wont to
say, There should be nothing but a meditation of death: that is, a wise man
though the course of his life, should be still fitting and preparing himself
for death; and shall Christians ^me behind them? It was a wise speech of Peter
to our Savior, Lord whether shall we go, thou have the words of eternal
life: as if he should say, there is no motive to that, surely we will not
leave thee: therefore, I say, consider, here we are but Tennants at will, we
may be turned out of doors to morrow, therefore let this be a motive to win to
Christ, you shall have life. But you will say, I hope death is far off, yet I
have time enough: well, take heed thou be not deceived in that, for there is a
collusion there: as the Painter by collusion of colors, makes a thing seem
far off, when it is near at hand: so we by our folly and vanity, our fancy
mis-apprehending of things, we look on death as far off, when it may be it
is at our heels, at the next door; thou know not how soon thou may meet
with it, therefore say not, it is far off; but think with thy self, go sit
alone, but a little time together, and then think with thy self I must die; it
is appointed to me as to all men once to dye: Consider, if a man might dye
twice or thrice, perhaps he would be ready, he would be prepared; but consider
thou must dye but once, if thou be not prepared, there is not a second
opportunity: and then consider thy soul is immortal in another place, it must
live for ever. And then remember Christ says, thou shall have life, if thou
take him, thou shall live for ever: then thou will find it an exceeding
blessing worth the having, it is that that may woo you and win you to come in
and take Christ, to love him, and to serve him, and to obey him; certainly if
you will not now be moved with it, yet when death shall come, then you shall
find that beyond all the treasure, to have that white-stone with a new name in
it: that stone was a sign of absolution that a man was quitted, that his sins
are forgiven, that he has interest in Christ and eternity, that eternal life
is for him in heaven; this is the first motive to win you to Christ.

Secondly, if you will come into him, you shall have all your debts paid, you
shall be under cover, that is, you shall have all your sins forgiven, that
when the creditors come with an arrest, with a judgment and execution, you may
be able to say; no, they are none of my debts, go to my husband, he must pay
them and not I: I say, when you have Christ when Satan shall come, and when sin
shall come, you may put them over to Christ; for now you are his and he is
yours, he has taken our debts on him: is this a small thing? Psalm. 32.1. says
David, Blessed is the man whose sins are forgiven, and whose iniquities are
covered: mark, Blessed is the man whose sins are forgiven. Perhaps if one of
us should seek a happy man, we would say, that he is a happy man that lives in
health and in wealth, in credit and abundance of all things: he that has the
favor of Princes, he that has some notable excellency to make him famous
among men, some such thing we take for happiness: But when David comes to
look through the world, and all the felicity in it: oh says David, He is a
happy man that his sins are forgiven! And there is good reason for it,
because when our sin is forgiven, we are reconciled to God, and God only can
make man happy. For wherein does happiness consist, but in a freedom from all
evil, and in enjoying of all good, you know this is happiness: Now sin, is it
not the first link in the chain of ills? As the under-wheeles in a Clock or
Watch depends upon the first, so all miseries depend upon sin, as the
Master-ill of all; take away that and all the wheels stand still, they move
not a jot to do us the least hurt: take away sin, take away all; this ill in
sin is a bar, and stops from us all good things; take away sin, and you shall
enjoy all that in abundance that your hearts can desire: If you have not your
sins forgiven, what will it avail? If you come to a Prisoner and tell him,
you shall have the best Lodging, you shall have a Palace, you shall have
Orchards, and Gardens to walk in, you shall have Gold and Silver, as much as
you will desire, you shall have honor put upon you: would not he answer? Alas,
what would all this avail without a pardon? So I say to men, that magnify the
things of this world so much, and remission of sins they think not of; I say,
what is all this, will it avail without a pardon? No, therefore this is a
great motive to bring us into Christ, that our sins may be forgiven. Therefore
that great promise went of the Messiah, that when he should come into the
world, he should save his people from their sins: and this is a mercy, which
though you may slight now in health and strength, yet when the times come that
God shall charge sin upon your consciences, that they feel the weight and
burden of it, you shall find no mercy like to this, that you may come to have
your sins forgiven; then he that brings the glad tidings of peace, his feet
will be beautiful: the thing is the same if we had hearts to consider of it:
if we were poor in spirit, if we knew what sin were, if we had ever felt
the bitterness of Satan's yoke, that we were weary of it, we would come in
and reckon it a great matter, to have our sins forgiven: this is the second: I
shall prosecute the rest at some other time.

The end of the Second Sermon.
THE CUP OF BLESSING: DELIVERED IN THREE Sermons, upon 1 Cor. 10.6. The Third
SERMON.
1 CORINTHIANS. 10.16. The Cup of blessing, that we bless, is it not the Communion
of the blood of Christ? The bread that we break, is it not the Communion of
the body of Christ?


THE point you know we have delivered out of these words, is this, That in the
Sacrament, there is a true real Communication, or giving, or offering of Jesus
Christ; of his body, and of his blood, to all worthy receivers: We have showed
you the difference, between the Papists and us in this point.

They will have here, a real corporal presence of Christ.

We say, it is true; but it is Spiritual, but it is Mystical, but it is
Sacramental.

We have showed you the reasons, by which we refelde that opinion of theirs;
That there is no necessity, neither in regard of the thing, nor in regard of
the words; and if there be no necessity we may not grant it: other reasons we
showed the last day; but not to stand to repeat them.

The last day, (because they stand so much on Fathers) in this point, we showed
you the opinion of diverse of them: Of Origin, or Athanatius, Ambrose,
Tertullian, Augustine, and the rest. To that we will add but this, to clear
that point con^erning the opinions of the Fathers. You shall find that Ireneus
that lived within seventy years after the death of Saint John, The time when
some Fathers lived.
is clear in this point; That the Bread and Wine, are but Sacraments and
Figures of the body and blood of Christ: after him thirty years, lived Clemens
Alexandrinus, Tertullian and Origin, for they lived much about a time.

Why the Fathers are not so distinct in the doctrine of Transubst.
Origin was the Scholar of Clemens Alexandrinus; these do as evidently explain
it, as any of our Divines, though not so distinctly, because the controversy
was not then moved: and therefore you must not expect so full and so clear and
distinct expressions, as you have in these times, when we have more occasion
to do it. I will not trouble you with Citation, lest I spend time too much:
but you shall find it so in them. After their time, Augustine expresses it so
fully, as that Calvin, or Beza, has not done it more clearly, as I showed by
some Allegations out of him the last day. From his time I do not find, that
this opinion of theirs had any footing in the Church, till the time of
Damascens, that lived in the year, seven hundred thirty. He was the first that
began in the Eastern Churches: this opinion of transubstantiation, Chrysostom
has sore hard speeches, but such as may well be interpreted; if you look on
him in the tract of his writings, you shall see evidently, that he never
dreamed of any such real presence as the Papists affirm. But I say, Damascene
set transubstantiation a broach in Grecia, 730. years after Christ.
Damascene was the first that set this false opinion abroach in the Eastern
Churches, in the Greek Churches about a hundred years after. In the Western
Churches, in Italy, and those parts, it began a little to be set on foot, in
the time of Carolus Calvus Emperor; who being troubled with that controversy
set Bertram a work, a Presbyter, a learned man, one of the most learned of
those times; and desired him to express his opinion in that point: He writ a
learned book of it, and so the controversy continued in good state and
condition, till two hundred years after, or less, between one, and two
hundred. And the first man that began to infuse this poison into the Church,
was one Lanfranke, Archbishop of Canterbury in England: a man learned, but
very pernicious to the Church. After his time, Lan^ranke Bishop of Canturbury,
1030 years after Christ brought transubstantiation into England.
the opinion began to be somewhat hot: and then Beringarius writ against it;
who upon his condemnation retracted it, but before his death repented the
retraction; and upon writing his retractation, it began to be put upon men
by necessity, by the Pope: which was done in the time of Bernard, B^ringerius
lived four hundred years since.
four hundred years since. I have done this, that those may be satisfied,
that are not satisfied with the Scriptures, and with the reasons that were
brought, but would know the opinion of the Fathers. To stand to cite all the
particulars were a vain work: So much for that.

After we showed the falsenesse of their opinion; we showed in what manner
Christ is communicated to us in the Sacrament: Not to stand to repeat it. We
are now to come to those other particular blessings or comforts which we have
in Christ, The benefits by Christ.
which should invite us to come in and take him.

The next therefore is this, you have it in Matthew. 11.30. Come to me, says he,
all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you; you shall find
rest to your souls: that you shall have to invite you, if you will come in and
take Christ, you shall find rest to your souls: that is, look what the haven
is to a Seafaring weather-beaten man; look what a cool refreshing shade is,
to a man that is scorched with the heat of the Sun; look what a cover is to
a man that is beaten with the storm to the shore, such is Christ to those that
come in and take him: And therefore that we may know what this rest is, which
you shall find if you come into Christ. Let us find out what this weariness
is.

Now in sin you shall find this weariness.

First, What the weariness of sin is.
there is a weariness in the service of sin, In the service of sin.
there is no bondage to the bondage of tyrannous lusts, they are hard masters,
they set you to hard taskes; if they say go, you must go; if they say come,
you must come.

Christ sets you at liberty from this bondage, by mortifying of sin, and
killing it, as Moses did the Egyptian, that strove with the Hebrew, which is a
deliverance far exceeding that out of the bondage of Egypt, which was so
much magnified, as much as the substance exceeds the shadow.

This is one kind of rest you shall have by Christ; Rest by Christ.
you shall be delivered from the bondage of sin.

Again, Weariness in the guilt of sin.
there is a weariness in the guilt of sin committed, which haunts us like
furies, and ever and anon gives secret whippes, secret twinges to the soul;
from this Christ delivers us, For being justified by faith, we have peace with
God, Romans 5.1. That is, the conscience is calmed, it is quiet, which before was
full of horror and vexation. Weariness in the fruit of sin.


Again, there is a weariness in the fruits of sin, the losses, the crosses,
the sickness, the imprisonment, disgrace; all which are but the fruits of
sin: There is a weariness in these, and from all these Christ delivers us,
partly in freeing us from many of these, that otherwise we should have felt;
and partly in taking away the venom and sting from those we do feel: For
that which is said of Death, Oh death where is thy victory, etc. The sting of
death is sin, it may be said of every calamity. The sting of imprisonment,
the sting of sickness, the sting of disgrace, the sting of all misery is sin.

Afflictions without sin, as the Adder without a sting.
What is the Adder when the sting is away; So what are all these, when sin is
removed.

You know what they were to Paul, what he endured, how many prisons he went
through, how often he was whipped, how often he was stoned, how many things he
suffered; you have a catalogue of them, ten or eleven, and yet all was nothing
to him; he was happier in these than Nero was in his Palace: But what, should I
give you an instance,

Take Adam in Paradise, when he was in Paradise, yet when he had but the sting
of conscience, you know he was filled with horror.

Paul again, when he was sore whipped in the day, and his feet were fast in
the stocks, and the sting of sin was took away, and he enjoyed a good
conscience; Silas and he sung that the Prison rung of them: I say, this
condition you shall have in Christ, you shall be delivered from sin, from the
sting of sin, from the fruit of sin; but besides this, as there is a
weariness in the service of sin, and a weariness in the guilt of sin, and
in the fruit of sin. So yet there is more weariness.

There is a weariness in the habit of sin, Weariness in the habit of sin.
(for sin is to the soul, as sickness is to the body.)

Now a man that is sick is weary of every thing, Sin to the soul, as
sickness to the body.
he is weary of sitting, he is weary of lyving; so the soul while sin
abounds in it, is weary of every thing; a man is weary of himself, he is weary
of his own company.

Now when Christ comes, he takes away this weariness, and gives grace, which
is to the soul as health is to the body, that cures all the distempers and
give ^^st unto it, but yet there is more than this.

There is a weariness in all that sin touches, In all that sin touches.
in all the conditions of this life there is a weariness.

A man is weary of solitariness, and he is weary of company, he is weary of
business, he is weary of idleness, he is weary of high condition, for that is
subject to Envy, as the wind is most boisterous upon the top of hills. And he
is weary again of low condition, for the valleys are over-low, there a man is
still subject to injuries, and to be trampled on; that place us where you will,
by reason of sin it makes every condition weary to us.

But Christ comes to take away this weariness, likewise by teaching us how to
accommodate our selves to all conditions, by teaching us how to want, how to
abound, how to be well, how to be sick, how to live, how to dye, and this he
does by giving wisdom; for folly will quarrel, at the best condition: wisdom
makes the worst condition comfortable. Folly quarrels at the best condition.

Wisdom makes the worst condition comfortable.


This the Lord does: thus he delivers you from the weariness of sin: this
rest you shall have if you will take him, because when he comes into the soul,
he casts out sin, the cause of all these Tempests.

As Jonas when he was cast out, you know then there was a calm: I say, such
rest you shall have in Christ; out of him, there is nothing but trouble, and
disquiet, and restlessenesse: and this is the third benefit, that (...) invite
you to come in and take him. Come unto me you that are weary, and you shall
find ease, and rest to your souls. And now, what would you have besides?
There is nothing that your hearts can desire, but you shall have it in him. And
because we are so much moved with sensible things; the Scriptures sets forth
the good things we have by Christ, under notions of such things as are
sensible, as we feel the sweetness of them, as we can taste in this world:
that is a kingdom, riches, peace, godly apparel, etc.

4 Benefit by Christ.
First, therefore if you will come into Christ, you shall have a Kingdom: the
Kingdom, that is the Epitome of our happiness, and the journeyes end to all
our desires.

You know when the Messiah was to come, what expectation the Jews had of a
kingdom that should be restored to them: how frequent are the Prophets in
setting forth the glorious luster of that kingdom; When the Messiah came it
was fulfilled, for says he, Matthew. 3. Repent, for the kingdom of God is at
hand: and, Fear not little flock, it is your Fathers will to give you a
Kingdom: and Rev. 1. He has made us Kings and Priests.

You will say, wherein is this Kingdom; wherein does this kingdom consist?
Look to all the properties of a Kingdom, and you shall find all in this:

First, Kings have
one thing wherein the freeness of Kings consists, Liberty.
is, that they have their liberty; others are Subjects.

Now, what is liberty?

Liberty is nothing else, but a power to live as you will. Liberty what,
This you have by Christ; because, he gives his spirit as soon as you take
him; he sends his Spirit into your hearts, that rectifies your will, that sets
all right and strait within us

Now when your will is rectified, Christians live as they list, because they
list not but to do that which is good.
you will that which you ought; when you have this, you live as you list,
because you list not to do but that which is good: and so you have liberty in
John 8. The Son shall make you free; that is, you shall be subject to
nothing: as Paul says, we will be brought into subjection to nothing; we
will not be subject to lust, we will not be subject to any thing, you shall
serve nothing, as he says. We are bought with a price, we are not the
servants of men; we need fear nothing. Luke 1.74, That being delivered from
the hands of all our enemies, we might serve him without fear; because when
you fear him, you need fear nothing besides. As the true Serpent ate up the
false; so the true fear eats up the false. When you are in him, you are at
liberty, you are delivered from all your enemies. Take any other man, still he
fears something, he fears death, he fears sickness, he fears loss of
friends, he fears loss of the favor of the Prince, he fears the loss of
something or other. But when a man is in Christ, he is delivered out of the
hands of all his enemies; he need fear nothing; for what should hurt him? It
must be some of the creatures: but all they are like Mastives rated by the
masters command, as it is only the master that can do it, and he does rate
them that they shall not fly in the face of his friend, though they may
assault his enemies: and do but think with your selves, what a happy
condition it is, what safety you have in Christ, that nothing can hurt you, and
therefore we are bidden be in nothing careful. If any thing could hurt you, we
might be careful in something, No, says he, Be careful in nothing, Christ
takes care for you: nothing shall hurt you, and so, All things shall work for
your good. And if so be then nothing can hurt you, this is that you shall have
by Christ, one thing, you shall have liberty.

Plenty.
But another thing wherein a Kingdom consists, is Plenty: that is, you shall
have abundance of all things. What was Salomons Kingdom? And what were other
kingdoms of the world but plenty of all things?

What shall we have then, Quest.
you will say? Shall we have Meat and Drink, Answ.
Houses and Vines?

No, those are too base things for the Kingdom of God to consist in, Romans
14.17. The Kingdom of God consists in righteousness, holiness, peace, and
joy in the Holy Ghost: that is, there shall be a rectitude in all your souls,
that it shall be free from disorder, from distemper, from obliquity.

Besides, Peace.
you shall have peace, that is a companion of a Kingdom; you shall have peace,
that is, your souls shall be quiet, there shall be a serenity there, as the
Sea is when it is without wind or storm.

Again, you shall have joy, your hearts shall be filled with the consolations
of the Spirit, these things you shall have if you will come in to Christ, which
goes far beyond the pomp and plenty and abundance of any other Kingdom.

But besides this, That you shall have the liberty, the plenty, and abundance
of Kings; you shall likewise have the power of Kings: as the Apostle says, The
Kingdom of God, is not in word, but in power; that is, you shall not only
say, I wish I could live a holy life as others do; I wish I could mortify
such and such lusts; I wish I could abstain from such sins, and do such
duties, but you shall have power and ability to do them. I am able to do all
things, says Paul, through Christ that strengthens me.

Again, besides this, you shall have the victory of Kings, you shall be
overcome of nothing, to be in disgrace, To overcome, what.
to be in Prison, is not to be overcome.

But to be diverted from a man's way, to be put besides his intention, to fall
from a man's steadfastness, this is to be overcome: Thus says the Apostle, We
are in poverty, but not overcome: Such Kings were all the Apostles, they
marched as Kings in the world, they triumphed over all the oppositions they
found, they tread under foot Satan, and the power of the Enemy.

Glory.
Again, besides all this, you shall have the glory of Kings: For what are you,
when you come to Christ, but sons of God, heirs apparent, in Psalm. 45.
Princes in all Lands, others are but Princes in their own dominion, but he
will make you Princes in all Lands.

Object.
But you will say, we see no such things.

Answ.
No, but Eccles. 10. You are Princes, though you walk on foot as servants; and
they are but servants, although they ride on horseback like Princes.
Therefore, 1 Ioh. 3. You are the sons of God, but it appears not yet what you
shall be: When we have acted our part, and are gone off the stage, when the
part that we have sustained shall be taken from us and them; then they shall
appear that they are servants, and that those that are come into Christ are
Princes.

Object.
You will say, This were a goodly thing, if it were a real Kingdom; but these
are imaginary things.

I answer, it is not so, the kingdom of Christ is as real as these outward
external kingdoms are, Answ.
and why should it be worse esteemed, because it consists not in outward
things; for what is the body but the sheath, the sachell, the shell of the
soul, it is the soul that is the man, the perfecting of the soul, is
perfecting of the man. Therefore, the kingdom that is spiritual, must needs
be beyond that which is outward and corporal, especially such a kingdom as
this, that consists not in the titles of authority, but is such a kingdom, as
the wise Philosopher speaks of, says he, Some, nature has made Kings, as the
Eagle the king of birds, the Lion the king of beasts; there is an excellency
in some, and those Nature has made Kings.

I say, such Kings Christ will make you; for when the Kingdom of Grace comes
into the heart, it puts a Royal disposition into you, it makes you excel
other men, as much as Eagles excel other birds, as much as Lions excel other
beasts, as much as Lilies exceed other flowers, such a Kingdom you shall have,
if you will come into Christ, you shall have the liberty of Kings, the
abundance and plenty of Kings, the power of Kings, the victory of Kings, and
the glory of Kings: And this is the fourth thing you shall have by him, if you
will come in and take him.

But is this all you shall have by him. Object.


No, Answ.
You shall not have an empty kingdom; but you shall have riches with it; Christ
will make you rich, and Riches you know is that which all the world seeks
after. In Revel. 3. I counsel thee, come and buy gold tried by the fire, that
thou may be rich: And Revel. 2. to the Church of Smerna; I know thy poverty,
but thou art rich. Luke 12. Such are those that are rich in the world, and not
rich toward God: So that there is another kind of Riches, the Riches that
Christ gives:

And what are those?

Riches are but a Metaphor, that is, you shall have abundance of good things;
for if we have much, if it be dross it is not Riches; if we have gold, if we
have little, it is not riches; but when there is that which is precious, and
abundance of it, then it is said to be Riches: I say, you shall have abundance
of good things by Christ.

Object.
But you will say, what are those?

Answ.
First, you shall be made rich in all graces, in faith, in love, in patience, in
temperance, in meekness, these are riches, these graces you shall have from
him, that shall make you ready to every good work, as you have it, 2 Timothy 2.
You shall be vessels of honor prepared for every good work: It is a Metaphor
taken from vessels, that as you would take any vessel, as a Salt, or a Spoone,
or a Cup, they are fit and ready for your service that they are applied to: So
if you would know what you shall have by these Graces, when we tell, you shall
have Grace; they shall fashion and fit your hearts, as vessels are fitted for
the doing of all the duties of new obedience: this you shall have by grace, and
without these graces you are able to do nothing: as without the faculty of
hearing, without the faculty of seeing, without the faculty of memory, you are
not able to do any of these, but with them you are able to do them; with
facility, without weariness.

A man that has the faculty of seeing, sees easily: the eye is not weary of
seeing, nor the ear of hearing. This benefit you shall have; you shall be made
rich in these graces, that shall make you ready to every good work, it shall
fill your lives with the fruits of righteousness. As when a tree is full of
sap, it will soon be filled with blossoms, and with fruit. So will you when
you are rich in grace; therefore the Saints are said to be rich in all speech.
Why? For they were rich in knowledge first, and every grace; that is the way to
make you rich, to be rich in grace.

But is this all?

No, you shall likewise be rich in good works; as Christ says, John 15.
Without me you can do nothing, but by me, you shall be able to do all things.

But you will say, what are these riches worth, to be rich in grace, and to
be rich in good works?

They are much worth every manner of way: for first, why do you prize riches,
but because they can procure any thing that you need? If you need Wine, if you
need Bread, if you need apparel, if you need convenient houses, riches you
know will procure them of the hands of those that have them, when you want
them: So these riches will procure at the hands of God, what you need.

If you need counsel in difficult cases, if you need success in doubtful
business, if you need health when you are sick, these riches will fetch them
in for you; as they did to Hezekias when he was sick, Lord thou know that I
have served thee with a perfect heart.

And what then?

Therefore give me health, and he prevailed: it will bring you friendship when
you need it from your enemies, that can hurt you, and are ready to do you
hurt: as Jacob, you know what a fear he was in of Esau, but when he went to
God he prevailed with him. When you are in the jaws of death and would have
life, this will procure it at Gods hands; as it often did to David, Psalm. 116.
When the snares of death had compassed me about, I sought unto thee and thou
deliveredst me; I say, this you shall have by these riches, whatsoever you want
it will fetch in to you. For as it is said, sin lies at the door to do you
hurt at one time or another. So you may say of grace, of the good works you
have done, they will do you good one time or another: for as it was with
Cornelius, his prayer and his good works came into remembrance before the
Lord, when it may be himself had forgotten them: So I say, God will remember
all these; and as ye therefore reckon riches precious, because they will set
men a work, to do you service, to do you kindnesses: and Riches can do no
more than men can do, and they are precious because they set men a work:
these set God a work, and they will do as much for you as God can do.

Now these are riches indeed, as far exceeding the others, as the help and
power of God, does exceed the help and power of man; because they set God a
work, they will fetch from the Lord whatsoever you have need of.

But besides this I say, they can do much for you every manner of way.

Another property of riches is, to make a man undependant, to make him stand on
his bottom; as rich men say, I can live by you, and without you: So those that
are rich in grace and good works, they may say to the world, and to the shop
of vanity in it, as Paul says, They are dross, I have better things provided;
I can live by you, and without you; this you shall have by Christ, and there is
no way to have independance but this: but besides, this is our comfort beyond
all, that these riches will stand you instead in the day of dearth. For why do
men gather treasure, but for a day of dearth, for a time of poverty, for a time
of necessity; for he says, then my treasure will stand me in stead. I say,
such treasure is this that you have by Christ, when death comes which is a time
of spending, and not of gathering, then this treasure shall stand by you to
sustain you, to comfort you, to uphold you; all this you shall have by these
riches that Christ gives you, and this is a small thing?

Take two men when death comes, when the time of need comes; take one that is
rich to the world, and another that is rich to God and rich in good works;
(now by good works by the way) know that I mean not almsdeeds only, for
that is the error of Papists: but by good works I mean also, the laying up
of many faithful prayers, the keeping of simplicity and sincerity in all our
conversation, the keeping of a clear conscience to God and men, the serving of
God with a perfect heart, these are the riches I say.

Take two men, the one rich in these kind of riches, another that is rich to
the world; when these two die, which of the two riches would you choose? I say,
this is a thing that may win you to come in to Christ; he will make you rich,
you shall have treasures laid up, you shall be rich in grace, and in all good
works.

But is this all?

No, you shall be rich in all kinds of blessings, in all kinds of comforts, in
all kinds of privileges, it may be this will win you more. In 1 Cor. 3.23.
Paul is yours, and Apollos is yours, the world, life, death, things present,
and things to come, they are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.
Mark; there is nothing but a Catalogue, an Inventory of a Christians riches,
says he, Paul and Apollos. What are these, all the gifts and learning that
they have it is for your sakes; they are your servants, they are but men that
watch over you for your salvation; all the excellent gifts that God has given
to the sons of men, they are but your riches.

But is this all?

No, Object.
the world is yours and all in it.

You will say, we find not this, for who has the world at will? Who amongst
the Saints?

Though you have not, Answ.
yet the misery that you find in the world, the want of wealth as well as the
enjoying of it is yours, that is, it tends to your advantage, all is but for
you. As in the field of wheat we may sow, all is for the wheates sake; the
soil is for the wheat, the Husbandman is for the wheat, the stalk, the ear,
the dew, the barn, the threshing, all is to serve the wheat; so we may say
of a Christian in this world.

The world it self that is the field, is but for the wheat, for Christians:
the Husbandmen, Paul and Apollos and Cephas are but for you.

And if you object; but alas, we have many bitter ^^ormes and afflictions,
Object.
for all you make these promises unto us.

It is very true, but all these are for the wheat; as you know the wheat must
have a summer and a winter, Answ.
it must have frost and snow it must have wet and dry, or else it will not
ripen: no more will you, you must have weal and woe, you must have affliction
as well as prosperity; but this is for your comfort, all is for you: the world
is yours.

Is this all?

No: life is yours, death is yours; that is, this life is nothing but a
fitting, a preparing, a squaring of you for a better life, for eternity.

Why? But death is terrible.

Object.
No, it is your advantage, for you shall dye just then, Answ.
when it is best for you; death shall serve but as a servant for your
advantage. That as a man would have a tree that should grow, he lops it just in
the time and season; but trees that he would have destroyed, he cuts them at
any time. All the Saints have this comfort, that death comes for their
advantage; God cuts them not down, he lops them not, he puts not in the sickle
till they be just ripe: for death is theirs, and lest this should not be
enough, he says, things present and things to come are yours.

Object.
Men will say, you promise for eternity indeed, but what do ye for the present?

Answ.
Why, godliness has the promise of the present life.

Object.
Yea, but if it be well with us for the present, yet we know not what may befall
us.

Answ.
Things present therefore, and things to come, says he, all this is yours: and
if all this will not content you, I will add one thing more, the Lord himself
is yours; so that take God and look on him in his greatness, in his mighty
power; God that is Lord of Heaven and Earth, I say, he is yours, all that he
has is yours, all that he can do is yours. And therefore when he speaks to
Abraham, Abraham, says he, I will be thine, if thou will be mine, I will be
to thee an exceeding great reward: you shall have God himself for your portion.

You will say, how can God be your portion?

Yes, he himself is yours, for you must know that finding Me are the best
riches: Object.
Loving favor, Prove. 22. is better than life; Answ.
he that is rich in friends, is better than he that is rich in money; and among
friends, who is like to God?

It was the speech of the heathen, when he was asked where his treasure was,
says he, Where Cyrus my friend is, that is, I reckon my friend my chief
treasure. I say, God is your friend as he was the friend of Abraham; so he is
the friend of all the Saints, you have him and all that he can do, for that we
may truly say, there is no end of a Christians riches.

Paul when he considered this, Ephesians. 3. says, This is a glorious privilege,
that I should preach among the Gentiles. The unsercheable riches of Christ, the
unsercheable riches of Christ, he could find no bottom, he knew not the
measure the length, the breadth, the height, of these riches, and unsercheable
riches of Christ. We give you but a little glimpse; if God open a crevise of
light to you to see these riches, you will be content to do as the Merchant,
to fell all for the pearl, for it is worth all that you can sell for it: I
say, if you could see what it were, if you could discern and judge of it with
righteous judgment, you would regard nothing in the world besides; but you
would then say, I will go and take Christ, for there is riches indeed and he
is a happy man of whom God says, as he says of that Church, I know thy
poverty, but thou art rich: So you see you shall have a kingdom by Christ, and
you shall have riches.

But is this all?

No: for I tell you, the Scriptures present them to us under sensible things,
things that we can feel, because that we are lead with senses in this life;
Benefit a feast.
he says, if you will come into Christ he will make you a feast; Esaias says,
25.16. In the Mount of the Lord, he will provide a Feast, of fined Wines, of
fat Wines fined and purified, of fatlings full of marrow: and frequently it is
repeated in Scripture, that Christ will make you a feast, They were sent to come
unto the feast of the King, Mat. 22 His Wine was drawn, his Fatlings was
prepared; that is, any thing you shall have by Christ: you shall have a Feast.

Object.
What is this?

Answ.
Look what meat does: meat is called a feast, because it maintains life; and
so does this, it breeds and maintains life, yea immortal life; as the food is
of an immortal nature, it is the bread of life.

Again, meat breeds strength; so this strengthens you in the inward man to do
holy and spiritual duties, as the corporal meat strengthens the outward man to
labor and exercise.

Again, a Feast breeds joy and cheerfulness; So does this. As the corporal
feast cheeres the heart and refreshes the spirit; so if you would know what
this feast is, it is that which breeds and maintains spiritual life and
strength and cheerfulness.

You will say what is that?

By induction of particulars what it is not, you shall find what it is.

First, it is not that which continues you in a being, for that stones have,
and yet are far from having this life.

Again, it is not that which gives you vegetation and motion and sense, for
that Beasts have, and that have not this life.

Again, it is not the exercise of reason, and understanding; for that
reprobates and devils may have, yet dye the second death.

What is it then?

It is that which breeds and maintains, that holy and regenerate men live
hear, and with the Angels live in Heaven for all eternity; that which breeds
that life: for you must know that the soul that is within us, has its food to
feed on, as well as the body. The soul has its food, that is, whersoever
there is the hidden man, where there is the new man the hidden man of the
heart, as Peter calls it, it must be fed as well as the outward man; it must
have dinners, and suppers, and break-fasts; if there be life, there it must
have all this: otherwise, what is Christ's saying when he said, Ioh. 4. I have
other meat that you know not of: and what is David's meaning when he says? Thy
word is sweeter to me than the honey or the honey comb. If it be not that
the soul, the regenerate man within, is fed with a kind of food. And what is
Jobs meaning, when he said? He found it better than his appointed meals; that
is, he would let his body starve; it should want at least, rather than his
soul should be deprived of the ordinary meat it should have. In this sense,
Manna is said to be the food of Angels: why could Manna be the food of
Angels? If these material and substantial souls and the Angels had not
somewhat else to feed on: Manna was Angels food; Angels have not mouths to
eat Manna, therefore it is not the corporal Manna, that is said to be Angels
food.

What then?

It was Christ that was typified by Manna, as he says, John 6. I am the true
Manna, the true bread that came down from heaven: The Fathe^s eat the same
spiritual meat; so it was then the spirituatll Manna that was Angels food;
and if Angels food, then the food of our souls, for our souls and Angels
feed alike.

You will say, yet clear unto us further, what this is.

If we come to eat Angels food, you shall find in John 6. Seek not for the
meat that perishes, but for the meat that endures for ever, says Christ,
which the son of man shall give you, Property of spiritual food it endures
for ever.
for him has God the Father sealed. Mark, Seek the meat that endures for
ever; so then there is another feast, another meat: and if you would know what
it is this is one property, it is meat that endures for ever: That is, other
men when they eat, the sweetness is gone as soon as they have eaten; but the
sweetness of this continues: that is, what profit you have had from hearin^
the word, what comfort you have had from praying to God, from serving God with
a perfect heart; these comforts continue for ever. As twenty years after a man
may feel the sweetness of a good Sermon, of a faithful prayer, of a good
work, of serving God with a perfect heart and a willing mind; I say, many
years after he may find the sweetness. So that here the Glutton has his
wish; you know the Glutton wished that he had a long neck, that he might be
long in tasting of the sweetness of his meat, I say, here you may be long in
tasting the sweetness of it; for the sweetness of the meat continues here,
and not the sweetness only, but the strength of it continues for ever. The
strength of other meat vanishes in a day, as the sweetness is gone in a
moment, but the strength of this endures for ever, and will make you live for
ever; that is one property of this meat; seek this meat for it endures for
ever.

Another you shall find in Esaias 55. This meat satisfies; Satisfies.
why do you lay out silver and not for bread, and why do you labor and are
not satisfied; come buy of me Wine and Milk, that you may be satisfied.

Take other meat in the world, it does not satisfy, I mean, perishing meat;
outward things they do not satisfy: and therefore this is called a feast,
because in a feast there are all sorts of dishes, there is variety of dainties,
there is nothing wanting: and so says he, if you come home to Christ; the
soul shall have whatsoever it can desire, remission of sins, reconciliation
with God, joy, peace, freedom from the second death, provision, all things.

In a word, as in a Banquet, in a great Feast, there is all sorts of things;
you have sweet odours you have music, and all variety of dishes, all sorts of
wine: So says he, if you will come home to Christ, you shall have all things
that your heart can wish and desire.

Now, there is nothing in the world that can give satisfaction to the soul,
you shall never have all things else; but as Christ says, If you drink of
other water, you shall thirst again; this is that which satisfies, because
all other things are but particular.

Health, you know, will serve but against sickness. Wealth and profit will
serve but against poverty. Credit and honor will but serve against disgrace.

The soul now is of a greater latitude; it is only God, the universal good,
that can make a great Feast to satisfy it, he only can fill all the corners
of the soul; none can make a Feast to satisfy the soul but only the Lord,
because he is the universal good, he fills the soul every way.

Other things do but weary, they satisfy not; when a man has all he can
have, something more he would have, though he know not what: I say, there is
nothing can satisfy but the Lord only, it is he that makes the Feast; and
thence is that speech, Why do you lay forth money, and not for bread? Why do
you labor without being satisfied?

But yet there is one property more, by which you shall know what this Feast
is: it is a continual Feast, that is, it is not only a Feast: but as I said
before there is a continual tract, a continual stream of comfort without
interruption or intermission; A good conscience is a continual feast; that
which is said of a good conscience, may be said of this Feast that Christ
shall make you. Other feasts be not continual, the sweetness of one bit is
gone, before another comes; and when you eat well and are satisfied, you
desire no more, you are glutted with it, and there is an end: but it is not so
here with this meat in this Feast, because here both the appetite and the meat
continue; therefore I say it is a continual Feast, because both the stomach
and the Feast continue, they last and endure: the stomach and the Feast, the
desire and the object; that is, your drinking shall not take away your thrist,
and your thirst again shall not want drink: and that is the meaning of that,
Ephesians. 5. says he, Be not filled with Wine, wherein is excess, but be filled
with the Spirit. Mark, the meaning of that is this, says he, if you taste
Wine and the sweetness of it, in time you are subject to excess; when you
drink a little your thirst is gone, go further and there is excess.

But now come to spiritual things, your desire continues; still there is
thirst, and still there is drink; you shall still have a strong appetite, and
you shall still have meat, one takes not away another, there is a continual
feast, and therefore be not filled with Wine wherein is excess: that is, the
pleasure of it is soon gone; but be filled with the Spirit that shall refresh
you, more than any cups of Sack, than any Flagons of Wine. I say, this comfort
you shall have, that this feast shall continue with you.

When sickness comes, what will other things do us good? Take all the
comforts in the world, they admit interruption. If a man live in abundance of
all things, yet many cases there are, many troubles, wherein he shall have no
comfort from these, but this feast shall continue with you, it shall lie down
with you; it will go with your sick beds to you, and there a good conscience
will be a continual Feast; it will go to prison with you, and there it will
refresh you; it will pass with you through ill and good report, and there it
will comfort you; it leaves you not in death, but there and in all the changes
of this life, it shall be with you to refresh you, and to cheer your spirits
more than any Cordial: this you shall have by Christ if you will take him,
such a Feast he will make you.

But you will say, Quest.
we find no such thing, we find no such sweetness in Christ.

Answ.
It is because you are not hungry. Come and tell such an one as Paul was, of
such a banquet; oh, how acceptable would it be! Come and tell a dying man that
has felt the bitterness of sin, the fierceness of Gods wrath, such a man
would come as an hungry man to it, to such a man it would be meat and drink
indeed; and so it would be to you if you were hungry.

Where there is a great Dole made, the poor come, those that are hungry come:
so the poor receive the Gospel, those that are hungry will come, and to those
it is a Feast. And therefore as Christ concludes his Sermon, when he had
spoken of things belonging to the Spirit, things belonging to eternal life,
says he there, He that has an ear to hear, let him hear: as if he should
say, We propound to you these things, but if there be not an heart within, if
there be not an ear to hear, all our labor is lost: So I say, except you
have that taste, that you taste how bountiful the Lord is, and what a Feast
Christ has prepared for you; all our labor is to no purpose.

But is this all we shall have by Christ?

Sure here is much; you shall have a kingdom, you shall have riches, you shall
have a feast, I will add but one.

You shall have gorgeous apparel; Benefit, apparel.
a thing that we prize to be somewhat, out of the weakness of our flesh so
trifling as that: yet because we prize it, it pleases God to set out the
glorious condition we have by Christ under this notion. In the second of the
Revelation, I will cloth you with white raiment; and Rev. 3.2. To him that
overcommeth will I give the morning-starre: Buy of me white garments to cover
your nakedness: So I say, if you will come into Christ, you shall have
gorgeous apparel; now every man naturally seeks some excellency in one kind
or other.

Now what is so excellent as this? To have the image of God renewed in us: that
excels all others, as the beauty of the morning-starre excels others. This you
shall have by Christ, you shall have your souls clothed with beauty, you
shall have them adorned with Rubies and Saphires, that is, with all the shining
graces of the Spirit; you shall be justified, that is, you shall be washed, you
shall be sanctified; so shall all the Saints be clad, so shall all the Saints
be clothed, that will come home to Christ.

But you will say, tell us in plainer terms, what this clothing is.

This white array, partly is a sign of the dignity which you have by Christ;
as Kings in ancient time were wont to be clothed with white apparel on
solemn times, which was a sign that they were Kings.

Again, as Tertullian reports; Servants were wont to wear white array when
they were set at liberty, in token of manu-mission; so it is a token of the
freedom you have by Christ.

Again, Christians, as Tertullian reports, were wont to wear white array all
Easter week, in token of the sincerity that Paul bids us keep the Passover
with, 1 Cor. 5. So when he says you shall be clothed with white array; the
meaning is you shall have the dignity of Kings, the freedom of Servants that
are set at liberty; you shall have sincerity given you; you shall have in a
word whatsoever may adorn the soul. I will not hold you long.

This clothing of the soul stands in two things.

In Justification;

And Sanctification.

There is a clothing of Justification, that you shall have if you will come
into Christ.

First, we are said to put on the Lord Jesus, that is, you shall come clothed
with him; and when you come clothed with Christ, come and welcome; as you know
Jacob got the blessing when he came in his brothers clothes. In Rev. 12.
there is mention of a woman clothed with the Sun: what is that, every man by
nature is vile and base and miserable; but when he is clothed with Christ, he
is like one clothed with the Sun.

Now you know the Sun is a most glorious creature; of all the creatures that
God has made, that when he would choose a creature, that was the most glorious
that our eyes have seen, he pitcheth on that: and such are we when we are
clothed with Christ; that is, God looks on us, as on men that are as glorious
as the Sun in his brightness; and this you shall have by Christ.

But is this all?

No: although it were all it were much, because by this, you may be admitted
to the presence of the Lord: without it you cannot. But this is not all; you
shall be clothed likewise with the graces of sanctification; that is, when you
come to Christ that shall be purified; which David says of Saul; Oh you
daughters of Jerusalem weep for Saul, he cloatheth you with Scarlet, and hung
ornaments of gold on your apparel: I say, Christ clothes the soul with
Scarlet. Psalm. 45. The soul goes clothed in imbroidered gold, in garments of
needleworke; that is, when the Lord comes to a soul, he comes as a King of
glory; other Kings bring their glory with them, and when they go they take it
with them; but when Christ comes to the soul, he makes it a glorious house
for himself to dwell there: the material Temple that was so stately and so
glorious; the Temple of the Jews, you know it was but a type of the Temple of
the Holy Ghost; that is, of the soul of a Christian; for indeed, those are the
Temples wherein the Lord delights to dwell: it is certain, that Solomon in all
his royalty was not clothed like one of these: for shall Christ's power be
less in grace than it was in nature: He that clothes the Lilies, shall he
not cloathe his servants with beauty: and consider this, that this is not a
small matter to be thus clothed.

The great God of heaven and earth, and not God only, but holy and wise. Men
that are able to see through these trappings, regard not what clothing the
body has, but they look how men's souls go apparelled. I say, Christ will
thus apparel the souls of all that come in to him: that as Aaron had all
variety of precious Pearls, of gorgeous apparel; such Priests will Christ
make every one to God his Father: and therefore if you will come in to Christ;
this we can promise you; you shall put on the Lord Jesus, you shall put on the
Sun.

Again, you shall be clothed with Diamonds, that is, with all the shining
graces of the Spirit.

And now what will you do when you come to a rich Wardrobe, for such is
Christ's to us, there you may suit your selves from top to toe.

You reckon it undecent, for a man to wear some part of his apparel rich and
precious, when other parts are base, and old, and ragged: why, do you not do
this with your souls? Why do you suffer your souls to go ragged as it were,
to be so unequally, so unreverently clad? It may be thou have the grace of
bounty, but not of chastity; it may be thou have the grace of governing thy
hands, but not of governing thy tongue; it may be thou have the grace to
speak well, but not to pray fervently: there is some unevenness in the
clothing of thy soul.

What will thou do then?

Go to Christ; there is change of raiment, that is, there is garments of all
sorts to cover thy nakedness and to adorn thy soul: all these things you
shall have by Christ; you shall have a Kingdom, you shall have Riches, you
shall have a Feast, you shall be clothed with white array.

So you have seen now, the second consectary that rises from this Doctrine,
wherein we are exhorted to take Christ, to invite us to it: we have showed you
your misery out of him, and the happiness you shall have by him.

Now there remains no more, but that you be content to come in and take him
and serve him for the future; so you may have him: therefore what should hinder
you, why do you not come in and take Christ.

Only you must know this, that you must take him for your Master, so as to
serve no other Master; you must take him for your husband, so as to be
divorced from all other lovers: for this know, that Christ and good fellowship,
that Christ and fornication, Christ and swearing, Christ and ambition, Christ
and serving your selves and the times will not stand together, you must be
divorced from all these: If you will have Christ you must take him as a
husband, to be to him a love, to love him, to have your wills subject to his
will, you must take him for better for worse; you must take him with all
variety of conditions, denying your selves and taking up your cross and
following him; if you take him thus you shall have him, and when you shall have
him, you shall have all things with him.

As Christ says to his father, We are one, thou in me and I in thee; and then
all mine are thine, and thine are mine. So we may say, every one that takes
Christ, is made one with him; all Christ's is yours and yours is his; that is,
he takes your names, he takes your debts and you bear his name, and have
interest in all that is his; what he has by nature, you have by grace; and
when you have him once, then you may be bold to come and take these Elements
of Bread and Wine; but if you have not him, then know that you are but
intruders upon the Lords Table; for his Table is provided for his friends, and
if his enemies and strangers come in, and intrude on it, he will not take it
at your hands, but command you to be bound hand and foot and to be cast out:
I say, consider therefore, the offers of Christ are large; you that are to
receive the Sacrament at this time, or at any other time, I say, consider it;
if you have Christ himself then you may boldly come; if you have not the Lord
you have nothing to do with these. And know if it was such a fearful thing
to touch the Arc, which was but a type of Christ, and had but a legal
holiness in it, that God struck Vzziah with death, because he was so bold as
to do it. If it were so dangerous a thing to meddle with common fire, as we
see in Nabab and Abihu, that was but a type of this; what will it be, when we
shall dare to take the body of the Lord Jesus, not being worthily prepared. He
is the substance, there is the holiness of which that was but a type;
therefore take heed of meddling with them, except you have taken him indeed,
except you have changed your hearts; except you be new Creatures, except you
have the Lord himself you may not meddle with the Bread and Wine, the
Sacrament of his body and blood; and so I end.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A
Ability.
MEN excuse their sin from want of Ability: Part 1, Page 223 Ability of Christ
to sanctify us: 2, 31
Accusing.
Conscience corrupt in the office of Accusing: 1, 56
Actions.
Corruption in our Actions: 1, 73 Actions of carnal men: 1, 153 Actions of
natural men defective in two things: 1, 159 Intention of Action in zeal: 1,
285
Activenesse.
Activenesse of conscience corrupted: 1, 56
Adam.
God just in requiring of us according to that he gave to Adam: 1, 38 Adams
sin charged on us: ibid. Two conditions of Adam: 2, 38 Our condition in
Christ better than it was in Adam: 2, 154 See Borne.
Affections.
Affections corrupted: 1, 63 Affections must be wrought upon in the performance
of duties: 1, 251 God esteems us according to our Affections: 1, 67 What
should draw our Affections to God: 1, 265 Zeal a stirring up of the
Affections: 1, 285 Want of Affections to God argues want of zeal: 1, 289 Work
of the Spirit upon the Affections: 2, 12
Afflictions.
Forgiveness of sins takes the sting out of Afflictions: 2, 188
Altered.
Nature cannot be Altered: 2, 97 Custom hardly Altered: 2, 123
Alike.
All sins not Alike: 1, 275
All.
Carnal men do many duties, but not All: 1, 159
Anger.
Difference between hatred and Anger: 1, 290 Zeal for the Church acceptable
to God, when he is Angry with it: 1, 293
Apparel.
Apparel, one benefit by Christ: 3, 93 What that Apparel is: 3, 94 How to
make use of this Apparel: 3, 97
Apprehesion.
The Apprehension makes happy or miserable: 1, 241
Assurance.
Assurance increased by humiliation: 1, 31
Authority.
To preach with Authority, what: 2, 163
B
Baptism.
Baptism tends to sanctification: 2, 21
Believer, Believing.
Difference between temporary and true Believers: 2, 47 Believing difficult:
3, 19
Blindness.
Blindness of man's understanding: 1, 44 Why man's understanding is Blind:
ibid.
Boldness.
Excess of Boldness, how prevedted: 1, 291 Forgiveness of sin causes
Boldness: 2, 188
Bondage.
Spirit of Bondage, an help against sinful excuses: 1, 108 Spirit of Bondage,
how it works: 1, 109
Borne.
Those that are saved by the second Adam are Borne of him: 2, 18
Burden.
Sin, in what respect a Burden: 2, 190
Business.
Too much Business a great impediment: 1, 207
C
Causes.
GOd works by second Causes: 1, 263
Change.
How to know we are Changed: 2, 109 To give God the praise of our Change: 2,
144
Christ.
What keeps men from Christ: 1, 11.2, 23 What makes us prize Christ: 1, 81 End
of our ingraffing into Christ: 2, 19 Sanctification by the blood of Christ: 2,
21 How to take Christ: 2, 73 What should move us to love Christ: 2, 156 Before
we are new Creatures, we are in Christ: 2, 169 To be in Christ, what: 2, 171
Privileges of being in Christ: 2, 174 See Righteous.
Church.
Pillars of the Church: 1, 286 Want of zeal for the Church: 1, 292 Danger of
wronging the Church: 1, 293 Directions what we must do for the Church. 1, 294
Circumstance.
Consideration of Circumstances, help Humiliation: 1, 28 Circumstances
aggravating sin: 1, 89
Civil.
Difference between profane and Civil men: 1, 127
Clearenesse.
Clearenesse of conscience corrupted: 1, 55
Cloud.
Sin like a stormy Cloud: 1, 174
Coldness.
Coldness provokes God as much as sin: 1, 284
Combat.
Combat to be expected of Christians: 2, 137 Difference of the Combat in
Christians and others: 2, 138
Comfort.
Comfort the end of the Scriptures: 1, 2 Sanctification for our Comfort: 2, 89
Comfort from the change of Nature: 2, 121
Coming.
The end of Christ's Coming: 1.20.2, 20
Compel.
The Spirit Compels men to come in: 2, 7
Communion.
Communion of Saints sets the truth at liberty: 1, 174
Communication.
Communication of the body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament: 3, 2 See
Truth.
Condemnation.
Imprisoning Truth, brings great Condemnation: 1, 136 God just in the
Condemnation of men: 1, 234
Conflict.
Conflict in carnal men: 1, 153 Conflict in wicked men failing in four
things: 1, 60
Content.
He that trusts in God, is Content with him only: 1, 258
Conscience.
Conscience corrupted by nature: 1, 45 Wherein Conscience is corrupted: 1,
55.56 Sign of a good Conscience: 1, 57 Conscience in natural men may do many
things: 1, 152 Conscience good in two respects: 1, 156
Contrary, Contrariety.
Contrariety of the will to God: 1, 49 Nature works out what is Contrary to
it: 2, 111
Conversation.
Conversation, the change in it: 2, 66
Constant.
Hatred Constant. 1, 290 What is natural, is Constant: 2, 110 Constant feast
by Christ: 3, 91
Conviction.
Convictions of unbelief: 1, 255 Conviction wrought by the Spirit: 1, 10
Corrupt.
We must have less in us than nature Corrupt: 2, 87 See Nature.
Covenant.
Covenant sealed in the Sacrament: 2, 22 Covenant on Gods part: 3, 16 Covenant
on our part: 3, 24
Creature.
Creature cannot do good or evil: 1, 261 Creature* how to be used: 2, 268 See
God.
Custom.
Custom in sin suppresseth the Truth: 1, 205 Custom, the advantages it has
against us: 2, 123
D
Damned.
HE that believes not shall be Damned: 2, 197
Day
Sabbath Gods Day: 1, 256
Debt.
Our Debt paid by Christ: 3, 61
Defect.
Not to be discouraged for Defects: 2, 169
Delay.
Delay, when God calls, dangerous: 1, 20 Coming to God not to be Delayed: 2, 98
Not to Delay when Christ calls: 2, 156
Delight.
Delight corrupted: 1, 66
Denial.
Denial of God in sin: 1, 90 Denial, one excuse of sin: 1, 229
Death.
Why God punishes sin with eternal Death: 1, 187 Christ's Death showed forth
in the Sacrament: 3, 4 Death of Christ, how made void: 3, 20 Out of Christ we
are subject to Death: 3, 47 Death, how it is ours: 3, 84
Despised.
God Despised in the commission of sin: 1, 92
Destruction.
Hatred seeks the Destruction of a thing: 1, 192 Jealousy of God brings
Destruction: 1, 301
Desires.
Desires from corrupt nature, nothing: 2, 102
Disgrace.
Disgrace of good men from the world: 2, 125
Disease.
Sin the Disease of the soul: 2, 190
Difference.
Difference between men, made by God: 2, 149
Difficulty.
Difficulty in duties should not discourage us: 1, 120
Discouragements.
Discouragements hinder from Religion: 2, 34
Disobedience.
Disobedience of man's will: 1, 51 Disobedience in small things, great: ibid.
Disobedience against God in the least sin: 1, 280
Disposition.
Disposition in man double: 1, 79
Divinity.
See Persuade.
Dogs.
Dogs to be kept out of Christ's flock: 1, 299
Doubting.
Reasons against Doubting of forgiveness: 3, 20
Duty.
Performance of Duty double: 1, 251
E
Earth.
THe mercy of Christ when he was on Earth: 3, 22
Effect.
To see sin in the Effects of it: 1, 275
Election.
See Reprobation.
Enemy.
Enemies of the faith, what to learn of them: 1, 296
Enmity.
Enmity of the understanding: 1, 46
Envy.
Most men Envy the new Creatture. 2, 147
End.
End of God, by whom it is crossed: 1, 146
Evil.
See Good.
Ever.
Salvation and damnation continue for Ever: 2, 201 Spiritual food endures for
Ever: 3, 88
Experience.
Experience shows God to be the Author of grace; 2, 151 Experience of Christ
helps to unite us to him: 2, 180
Excellency.
Grace preferred before all other Excellencies: 2, 38 Grace the proper
Excellency of a man: 2, 40 Knowledge of Christ's Excellency unites us to him?
2, 178
Exigent.
Trial of trust in God, is in an Exigent, 1, 258
Expend.
Gods wrath in time is Expended: 1, 273
Excuse.
Conscience corrupt in the office of Excusing: 1, 56 Excuses of sin: 1,
101.221 Means to arm us against these Excuses: 1, 108
Eye.
The New Creature looks on things with a new Eye: 2, 54 Eye double and single:
2, 133
F
Faculties.
FAculties in man corrupted: 1, 43
Faith.
Faith to be contended for: 1, 296 Faith sanctified. 2, 21 Faith works on the
promises: 2, 26 Faith increased by the Sacrament: 3, 5 Transubstantiation
against faith: 3, 12
Fast.
Fast, no arbitrary duty: 1, 248 Fast defined: ibid.
Falling away.
Falling away, why, not to be feared: 2, 117
Fault.
Men excuse sin by slighting the Fault: 1, 230
Fear.
Fear corrupted: 1, 66 Fear to be placed on God only: 1, 258 Gods jealousy
should make us Fear: 1, 302 Fear double: 1, 303 The Word to be heard with
Fear: 2, 159 Gods children freed from Fear: 2, 194 Fear put for the
worship of God: 3, 21 Fear of a flitting nature: 3, 28 Out of Christ we are
subject to the Fear of death: 3, 48
Feast.
Spiritual things resembled to a Feast, why: 2, 217 Feast, promised by Christ:
3, 86
Feeding.
Necessity of daily Feeding on Christ: 2, 181
Fit.
What Fits us for mercy: 3, 22
First Fruits.
Two things in First Fruits: 2, 136 Spiritual things we have in the
First Fruits: 2, 217
Fire.
Fire from heaven to be cherished: 2, 160
Flesh.
To eat Christ's Flesh, what: 2, 181
Food.
Properties of spiritual Food: 3, 87
Forget.
Memory corrupt in that we ought to Forget: 1, 53 Men choke the Truth when they
labor to Forget it: 1, 204
Forgiveness.
Forgiveness of sins, how it makes blessed: 2, 187 Confirmation in the
assurance of Forgiveness: 3, 19
Formality.
Formalitie argues want of zeal: 1, 288
Free.
The work of the Spirit Free: 2, 100
Fruit.
Hipocrites bring not forth Fruit: 2, 126 Weariness in the Fruit of sin: 3,
69
Fullness.
Fullness reserved for heaven: 2, 218
Future.
Helps to mind Future things: 2, 219
G
Gifts.
COmmon Gifts in natural men: 1, 152
Giving.
Giving, what: 2, 172
Glory.
Transubstantiation against Gods Glory: 3, 9 Glory appeared in Christ's
humiliation: ibid. Glory, one benefit by Christ: 3, 76
God.
The law of man's judgment mamanifested by God: 1, 180.183 None can do good
and evil but God: 1, 261 If the Creature could do it, it were God: 1, 262 In
all things to look to God: 1, 269 Every sin sets up another God: 1, 281
Conversion of the heart proper to God: 2, 9 New Creature the work of God: 2,
149 The praise of all good to be given to God: 2, 161 God, how he is made
ours: 2, 189 Sin drives the Saints nearer to God: 2, 206 See Portion.
Good.
Men excuse the ill in them by the Good: 1, 105 Good things in ill men do them
no Good: 1, 144 God only does evil and Good: 1, 253 Those that are Christ's,
all works for their Good: 2, 205
Gospel.
Gospel shows man's nature to be corrupted: 1, 76 Sins against the Gospel,
the greatness of them: 1, 77 Sin excused by living under the Gospel: 1, 104
Gospel tends to sanctification, 2, 21 Judgment of the Gospel: 2, 45 Gospel,
what, 3, 16 Gospel, two parts of it: 3, 18
Grace.
Grace desired by carnal men: 2, 30 Christians rich in Grace: 3, 78
Greatness.
We should labor to see God in his Greatness: 1, 265
Guilt.
Sin a burden as it brings under Guilt: 2, 190 Weariness in the Guilt of
sin: 3, 69
H
Habit.
Weariness in the Habit of sin: 3, 71
Happiness.
Happiness, a motive to come to Christ: 2, 193 Man's Happiness by Christ: 2,
196 Happiness, what: 2, 224
Hardness.
Hardness of heart in sinning: 1, 28
Hatred.
Hatred the properties of it: 1, 65 Hatred of God: 1, 89 Hatred of the Truth:
1, 133 Hatred and anger differenced: 1, 290
Heals.
Where God forgiveth he Heals: 2, 88
Health.
Grace the Health of the soul: 2, 39
Help.
Supervenient Help needful in two things: 2, 160
Heart.
The Heart must be new framed: 2, 62 Our Hearts should melt at Christ's love: 3,
41 See God.
Hell.
Out of Christ we are subject to Hel^: 3, 49 Aggravations of the misery of
Hell: 3, 50
Hid.
The state of Gods children Hid: 2, 41
Honor.
Sanctification stands with Gods Honor: 2, 89
House.
What kind of House God is: 2, 195
Humbled. Humiliation.
Humiliation must go before Justification: 1, 6 Israelites, how God Humbled
them: 1, 7 Humiliation, two things in it: 1, 8 Humiliation to be labored for:
1, 18 Trial of true Humiliation: 1, 22 Helps to Humiliation: 1, 26 Good men
shoud desire Humiliation: 1, 30 Humiliation a remedy against Gods wrath: 1,
278
Hundredfold.
Hundredfold with persecution: 2, 223
Hunger.
Hunger out of Christ: 2, 215
I
Jealousy.
Jealousy of God provoked by want of zeal: 1, 299
Idolatry.
Idolatry to attribute that to the Creature, that belongs to God: 1, 265
Idolatry, a sin of Israel, 1, 295
Impediment.
Impediments not removed, suppress the Truth: 1, 206 Impediments of two sorts:
2, 152
Impossible.
That which GOD requires of Christians not Impossible: 2, 255
Transubstantiation a doctrine Impossible: 3, 8
Imprison.
See Truth.
Inclination.
Inclination wrought by the Spirit: 2, 16 Inclination changed: 2, 63
Inclination changed, how to be Known: 2, 64
Independent.
Independent riches make men independent: 2, 212
Inconsideration.
Inconsideration keeps men in their old state: 1, 240
Infirmity.
Men excuse sin from their Infirmity: 1, 232
Incredulity.
Incredulity of man's understanding: 1, 45
Instigate.
Conscience corrupted cannot Instigate to good: 1, 55
Enlightened.
Carnal men may be Enlightened: 1, 152
Inconstancy.
Inconstancy of man's will: 1, 50
Instrument.
Ministers and ordinances Instruments: 2, 158
Insensible.
Ill sign to be Insensible of Gods wrath: 1, 272
Inexcusable.
So much revealed as makes man Inexcusable: 1, 219
Joy.
Joy mortifieth Lusts: 1, 18
Israelites.
See Humbled.
Iubile.
Iubile, a resemblance of liberty in the Gospel: 1, 19
Justify. Justification.
Why we are Justified by another righteousness: 1, 3 Justification and
sanctification inseparable: 2, 4 Justification, how it admits degrees: 2, 177
The clothing of the soul in Justification: 3, 95 See Humiliation and
Sanctification.
Judge.
How to Judge of things: 1, 270
Judgment.
Sin in time brings forth Judgment: 1, 272 Execution of Judgment commended:
1, 295
Justice.
What makes men acknowledge Gods Justice: 1, 13 Justice of God, on whom it
appears most: 1, 147 Want of Justice, a cause of Judgment: 1, 295
K
Kind.
NAture common to the whole Kind: 2, 96
Kingdom.
Kingdom we have by Christ: 3, 72
Knowledge.
Knowledge an aggravation of sin: 1, 92 Knowledge in natural men without
relish: 1, 155 Knowledge sinned against, imprisoneth Truth: 1, 195 A sin of
Knowledge, what: 1, 197 Sin excused for want of Knowledge: 1, 221 It is a
sin not to increase Knowledge: 1, 198 Men might have more Knowledge: 1, 222
Knowledge of our estate at the first conversion: 2, 51 What kind of Knowledge
makes new Creatures: 2, 76
L
Law.
THe Law shows man's nature to be corrupted: 1, 34 Law, how to be understood:
1, 35 Law, the least breach of it punished: 1, 36 Law compared to Egyptian
Tasks-masters: 1, 37 Law against which men sin is exact: 1, 282 Law of God
approved by natural men: 2, 104 See Schoolmasters.
Leaven.
Sin likened to Leaven: 2, 128
Liberty.
Benefits of setting the Truth at Liberty: 1, 171 Means to set Truth at
Liberty: 1, 172 Liberty by Christ: 3, 73 Liberty, what: ibid. See Iubile.
Life.
Life promised to the taking of Christ: 3, 55 Life spiritual, the excellency
of it: 3, 56 Exhortation to partake of this Life* 3, 57 Life, how it is a
Christians: 3, 83
Light.
Light imprisoned four ways: 1, 134 Aggravations of sins against Light: 1,
146 Natural men defective in Light: 1, 154 The burden of Christ in bearing
grows Light: 2, 141
Long-suffering.
We should give God the glory of his Long-suffering: 1, 237
Lord.
Zeal for the Lord 1, 285 Sacrifice offered to the Lord: 2, 86
Love.
Love mortifieth Lusts: 1, 13 Men sin out of Love to evil: 1, 163 Love of
Christ, the greatness of it: 2, 39 Love cannot be counterfeit: 2, 92.3, 29
Perwasion of Christ's Love unites to him: 2, 179 To serve Christ in Love, a part
of the Covenant: 3, 26 Love constant: 3, 28
Lusts.
Lusts detained, keep men in their old state: 1, 241 Lusts, why God suffers
them in his children: 2, 35 Excellency of the new Creature above Lusts: 2, 37
Old Lusts must be mortified: 2, 84
M
Mannah.
MAnnah, how it is Angels food: 2, 215
Manifest.
The Law of Man's judgment Manifest four ways: 1, 181
Mark.
Mark of Christ, what: 3, 53
Means.
Means enjoyed aggravate sin: 1, 99 Sin excused from want of Means: 1, 228
Difference of fear in respect of Means: 1, 303 Means of Grace tend to
Sanctification: 2, 21
Meaning.
Sin excused from good meaning: 1, 101
Mediator.
Why God has appointed us such a Mediator as Christ: 1, 187
Memory.
Memory, the corruption of it in two things: 1, 53
Mercy.
Mercy of God, the greatness of it: 3, 22 Mercy, to whom it is showed: 3, 52
Metaphor.
Metaphors used in the Sacraments of the old Law: 3, 7
Ministry.
Ministry to be advanced: 1, 298
Misery.
Our Misery out of Christ: 2, 178 Forgiveness of sins takes away the cause
of Misery: 2, 18 See Apprehension.
Moral virtues.
Moral virtues nothing without change of nature: 2, 102
N
Naked.
OVt of Christ we are Naked: 2, 209 To be Naked, what: 2, 213
Nature.
Man's Nature full of ungodliness: 1, 4* 33 All in man's Nature corrupt: 1, 41
Badnesse of Nature aggravates sin: 1, 101 Men by Nature, how far they may
go: 1, 151 How far men by Nature fall short: 1, 153 God made manifest by the
light of Nature: 1, 181 Sin excused from corruption of Nature: 1, 226 What
keeps men in the state of Nature: 1, 240 Conversion of men are turning the
course of Nature: 2, 8 More than Nature required in the New Creature: 2, 91
Those that are in Christ have another Nature: 2, 95 Not to be content without a
new Nature: 2, 101 Two things in a new Nature: 2, 112
Natural.
When a thing is said to be Natural: 2, 95 Good duties must be Natural to
us: 2, 107
Necessity.
No Necessity of Transubstantiation: 3, 3
Need.
Riches help in time of Need: 2, 211
Neglect.
Neglect keeps men from Christ: 1, 12 Neglect in serving of God: 1, 257
Net.
Gospel a Net: 1, 23
New Creature.
New Creature, the excellency of it: 2, 37 New Creature, signs of it: 2, 49
New Creature, what: 2, 61 New Creature, the parts of it: 2, 84 New Creature
required: 2, 122
Nobleness.
The Spirit works Nobleness of spirit: 2, 15
Number.
Consideration of the Number of former sins helps humiliation: 1, 27
O
Oath.
THE Covenant confirmed with an Oath: 2, 24
Object.
Faculties known by their Object: 2, 56
Objection.
Objection of Papists out of John 6. concerning eating Christ's flesh answered:
3, 33
Offices.
Offices of Christ go together: 2, 20 Offices of Christ to be improved: 2, 183
Old.
Old man, what: 2, 73 Old man must be mortified: 2, 83 Old nature to be
abhorred: 2, 114 Old custom we are redeemed from: 2, 122 All that is Old must
be pulled down: 2, 127 Grace takes not away Nature, but the Oldnesse of it.
2, 129
Omission.
Sins of Omission: 1, 73 Omission of acts: ibid. Omission of graces: 1, 75
Omission of occasions: ibid.
Opinion.
Opinion advances the Creature in our thoughts: 1, 266
Original sin.
Original sin: 1, 40 Original sin, how it is one sin and many: 1, 42.
How it is privative and positive: ibid. Actual sin leads us to Original: 1,
103
Others.
Sin excused from the badnesse of Others: 1, 106 Success of Others with God,
should encourage us: 2, 29.3, 21
Outward.
Men fare not the worse in Outward things for holiness: 2, 43
Overcome.
To Overcome, what: 3, 76
P
Parents.
NAture received from Parents: 2, 96
Passover.
Passover, why eaten with sour herbs: 1, 25
Peace.
Peace one benefit by Christ: 3, 75
Pearl.
Zealous men Pearls: 1, 287
Personal.
Men condemned for their Personal sins: 1, 39
Persuade.
Hard to Persuade men in Divinity: 1, 45
Perfect.
Of Perfect walking with God: 1, 260
Pleasant.
That which is natural, is pleasant: 2, 110
Plenty.
Plenty one privilege by Christ: 3, 74
Portion.
God is a Christians Portion: 3, 85
Poor.
Out of Christ we are Poor: 2, 209 To be Poor, What: 2, 210
Power.
Power of Gods wrath: 1, 115
Practice.
Practice sets the Truth at liberty: 1, 173 Want of Practice of known truths a
great sin: 1, 200
Prayer.
prayer sets the Truth at liberty: 1, 172 Prayer stops Gods wrath: 1, 301
Prayer unites us more to Christ: 2, 180
Preaching.
The Ministers business in preaching. 2, 156 To see how the Word works in the
Preaching of it 2, 164
Pride.
Pride of the will of man 1, 50
Prize.
New Creature how to be Prized: 2, 79 See Christ.
Privileges.
Privileges of a Christian, real: 2, 219
Profane.
Difference between civil men and Profane: 1, 127
Profess.
Truth not Professed, is unrighteously detained: 1, 211
Pronenesse.
Pronenesse to sin, no excuse of it: 1, 29
Promise.
Promise of God should encourage us to pray: 2, 22
Punishment.
Punishment of withholding the Truth in unrighteousness: 1, 138
Purpose.
Good Purposes in extremity seldom true: 2, 99 Good Purposes nothing without
change of nature: 2, 102
Q
Quality.
NEw Quality infused in sanctification: 2, 71 New Quality, what: ibid.
R
Reason.
TRansubstantiation against Reason: 3, 11
Record.
Sins committed remain on Record: 1, 277
Recreation.
Recreation too much used, is an impediment: 1, 208
Reformation.
Reformation must be joined with fasting: 1, 250 Reformation a remedy against
Gods wrath: 1, 280
Relapse.
Relapse into sin: 1, 28
Relish.
See Knowledge.
Religion.
Religion impaired by the neglect of the Sabbath: 1, 256
Reluctancie.
Reluctancie in the Saints when they sin: 2, 134
Remain.
Sins Remain in Gods people: 2, 90
Remember. Remembrance.
Memory corrupt in that we ought to Remember: 1, 53 Conscience corrupt as it
is a Remembrancer: 1, 55 End of the Sacrament to bring Christ to Remembrance:
3, 4
Renewed.
How to get our natures Renewed: 2, 116
Reprobation.
Election and Reprobation, how frustrate: 2, 150
Rest.
Men prone to Rest in duties: 1, 249 Rest, a motive to take Christ: 2.186.3, 68
Restrain.
Conscience corrupted in its Restraining power: 1, 56
Riches.
Riches, for what end they serve: 2, 210 Riches of a Christian is Christ: 3, 77
Riches by Christ, what: 3, 78 Riches, the property of them: 3, 80
Righteousness.
Righteousness of Christ imputed: 1, 39 See Justify.
S
Sabbath.
SAbbath ought to be sanctified: 1, 255 Antiquity of keeping the Sabbath: 1,
256 Usefulness of keeping the Sabbath: ibid.
Sacrament.
Sacrament a seal of the Covenant: 2, 22.3, 15 Sacrament, the end of it: 2,
25.3, 4
Sacrifice.
Two things in Sacrifice: 2, 86
Salvation.
Being in Christ the ground of all Salvation: 2, 171 He that believes has
Salvation: 2, 197 Damnation and Salvation of great moment: 2, 199 God desires
man's Salvation: 3, 20
Sanctification.
Justification and Sanctification inseparable: 2, 4.17 Sanctification, how it
rises from Justification: 2, 5 Sanctification, what: 2, 13 Encouragements to
pray for Sanctification: 2, 22 Sanctification, the necessity of it: 2, 33
Sanctification, how to prise it: 2, 36 Not to challenge Justification without
Sanctification: 2, 44 Clothing of the soul in Sanctification: 3, 95
Satisfy.
Spiritual food Satisfies: 3, 89
Seals.
Two Seals: 3, 19.54
Schoolmasters.
The Law a Schoolmasters, how: 1, 11
Scripture.
Gods truth manifested in the Scripture: 1, 182 Transubstantiation against
Scripture: 3, 13
Secrets.
Secrets of God not known by carnal men: 1, 154
Self-love.
Sel^e-love sanctified: 2, 13
Sense.
The new life has new Senses: 2, 40 Present Sense a sign of the New Creature:
2, 49 Transubstantiation against Sense: 3, 10
Sensible.
Sensiblenesse of conscience lost: 1, 56 Spiritual things Sensible: 2, 220
Sensitive appetite.
Sensitive appetite corrupted: 1, 58
Selves.
Men must be humbled to know them- Selves: 1, 14
Serve.
One part of the covenant to Serve Christ: 3, 25 Weariness in Serving sin: 3,
69
Short.
See Natural.
Sin.
Sins thought to be less than they be: 1, 27 Sin aggravated by
circumstances: 1, 89 Difference in Sins: 1, 96 Sin, we should labor to
see what it is: 1, 118 Frequencie of Sin, argues want of faith: 1, 255
Difference of men in regard of Sins: 1, 281 Zeal against Sin: 1, 290
Striving against Sin: 2, 53 Turning from Sin, a part of the Covenant: 3, 25
See Personal and Wrath.
Sincerity.
Sincerity wanting in carnal men's actions: 1, 159 Sincerity, little at the
first: 2, 113
Sickness.
Sin the Sickness of the soul: 3, 71
Sleep.
Sin seems dead when it is a Sleep: 2, 85
Small.
Men excuse sins by thinking Them Small: 1, 230 No sin Small, and why: 1,
282
Species.
Hatred sets against the whole Species: 1, 290
Spirit.
Good things in evil men wrought by the Spirit: 1, 144 Moral virtues, the
gifts of the Spirit: 1, 158 Work of the Spirit in sanctification: 2, 5 Spirit
works holiness: 2, 21
Sorrow.
Sorrow corrupted: 1, 67 Sin excused by pretended Sorrow: 1, 233
Soul.
Matters of the Soul of great moment: 2, 199 Soul to be regarded especially:
2, 200
T
Taking.
TAking of Christ, what: 2, 185.3, 24 No loss by Taking of Christ: 2, 222 Two
things should invite us to Take Christ: 3, 45
Taught.
Nature cannot be Taught: 2, 97
Temptation.
The less Temptation, the greater the sin: 1, 95 Sin excused from
Temptation: 1, 227 Evil men do good for want of Temptation: 2, 135
Thank.
See Truth.
Thoughts.
Thoughts corrupted: 1, 68 Thoughts, the importance of them: 1, 69 Thoughts of
two sorts: 1, 91
Thirst.
Thirst satisfied in Christ, 2, 202 What Thirst healed in the Saints: 2, 204
Transubstantiation.
Arguments against Transubstantiation: 3, 3 Fathers not distinct against
Transubstantiation: 3, 66 Transubstantiation set abroach by Damascene: 3, 67
Transubstantiation brought into England: 3, 68
Treasure.
Gods wrath a Treasure: 1, 273
Trust.
Trust in God, the nature of it: 1, 258
Truth.
Truth withheld in unrighteousness: 1, 126.179 Truth, what: 1, 127.180 Truth,
the subject of it: 1, 128 Truth, the Author of it: 1, 130 Truth, the extent of
it: ibid. Truth, how it is withheld: 1, 131 Truth, why men imprison it: 1, 133
Truth imprisoned, a great sin: 1, 136 Truth, how withheld: 1, 165 Truth
should rule: 1, 169 Truth, the danger of restraining it: 1, 170 Truth, the
benefit of giving it liberty: 1, 171 Truth manifested four ways: 1, 181
Truth, the heinousness of sins against it: 1, 184 Truth, to be thankful for
it: 1, 192 Truth, to do nothing against it: 1, 193 Seven cases of detaining
the Truth: 1, 195 Truth should be communicated to other: 1, 209 Happiness and
misery attend neglect or observing the Truth: 1, 215 Want of courage for the
Truth, shows want of zeal: 1, 291
V
Vain.
GOds Name taken in Vain, how: 1, 186
Vanity.
Vanity of man's understanding: 1, 43
Violence.
Humbled men take Heaven by Violence: 1, 16 To take heaven by Violence, what:
1, 17
Vnevennesse.
Vnevennesse in the best men: 2, 131 Vnevennesse in Saints, and others,
different: 2, 132
Unbelief.
Unbelief keeps from Christ: 1, 11
Ungodliness.
See Nature.
Universality.
Universality of the new Creature: 2, 51
Union.
Union with Christ, the nearenesse of it: 2, 172 Union with Christ, of what
moment: 2, 173 Union with Christ to be increased: 2, 176 Union with Christ, how
increased: 2, 177 Union with Christ to be sought after: 2, 185 Union with
Christ, the end of the Sacrament: 3, 5
Unwearied.
That which is natural is Unwearied: 2, 111
Understanding.
Understanding in man corrupted: 1* 43 Understanding, the vanity of it: ibid.
Understanding blind: 1, 44 Understanding unteachable: 1, 45 Understanding, the
incredulity of it: ibid. Understanding the enmity of it: 1, 46 Understanding
wrought on by the Spirit: 2, 11
V^teachable.
Understanding of man Unteachable: 1, 45
Unrighteousness.
Wrath revealed against men's Unrighteousness: 1, 111 See Truth.
Vows.
Vows broken aggravate sin: 1, 98
W
Want.
RIches supply what we Want: 2, 210
Weariness.
Weariness in sin, what: 3, 69
Whoredom.
Whoredom to be punished: 1, 295
Will.
Will, the depravednesse of it: 1, 48 Will, the contrariety of it, to God: 1,
49 Will, the pride of it: 1, 50 Will, the inconstancy of it: ibid. Will, the
disobedience of it: 1, 51 Will of God our sanctification: 2, 19 Will free in
men regenerate: 2, 154 Will of regenerate men, how free: 2, 167
Willing.
Willingness to be humbled for sin: 1, 26 Christ willing to sanctify us:
2, 31
Wisdom.
Wisdom of words not to be expected from Ministers: 2, 162 Transubstantiation
against Gods Wisdom: 3, 10
Wonder.
The world Wonders at the Saints: 2, 124
Word.
Words corrupted: 1, 70 Importance of Words: 1, 71 Word of God a help against
excuses of sin: 1, 108
Works.
Gods truth manifests his Works: 1, 182 New works discover a new Creature: 2,
57 Motives to good Works: 2, 170 A Christian rich in good Works: 3, 79
World.
World is a Christians, how: 3, 83 See Disgrace.
Wrath.
Wrath of God, how revealed: 1, 5 Wrath revealed against unrighteousness: 1,
111 Two things in Gods Wrath: 1, 112 Wrath of God, what: 1, 114 Wrath of God,
the certainty of it: 1, 112 Wrath of God, the power of it: 1, 115 Wrath, the
suddenness of it: 1, 116 Wrath, we should be sensible of it: 1, 119 Wrath
provoked by imprisoning the Truth: 1, 137 Wrath caused by sin: 1, 271 Wrath
increased by our sins: 1, 273 Wrath, why it is not felt: 1, 277 Wrath,
remedies against it: 1, 278.283.300
Z
Zeal.
Zeal turns away wrath: 1, 283 Zeal, what: 1, 285 Zealous men not to be
discouraged: 1, 286 Convictions of want of Zeal: 1, 288.
FINIS.
Errata.
Part 1.
PAge 12. line 14. Read one. p. 34. l. 18. r. aside from that. p. 66. l. 17.
r. not. p. 74. l. 18. r. and a thing. p. 98. in the margin, r. what. p. 110.
l. 20. r. me be cursed. p. 113. l. 29. r. contemn. p. 120. l. 17. r. Saul. p.
131. l. 31. r. John 1.5. p. 231. l. 15. r. condemned. p. 296. l. 23. r. Jude.

Part 2.
PAge 5. l. 24. r. sent. p. 19. l. 23. r but it is. p. 21. l. 13. blot out to.
p. 24. l. 10. r. another. p. 26. l. 8. r. forget. p. 37. l. 24. r. as a grace.
p. 68. l. 30. r. hard. p. 75. l. 5. r. which p. 91. l. 18. r. it as. p. 95. l.
3. r. creature. p. 121. l. 25. r. this new nature. p. 124. l. 20. r. wait. p.
136. l. 20. r. third ground. p. 139. l. ult. r. moats. p. 143. l. 17. r. Sun.
p. 155. in the margin, r: not. p. 163. l. 14. r. to set the word. p 174. l.
22. r. 1 Cor. 3. ult. p. 195. l. 21. r. such an house. p. 197. l. 27. r. and
Lord. p. 205. l. 24. r. slayes. p. 211. l. 10. r. God.

Part 3.
PAge 41. l. 20. r. may say. p. 44. l. 12. r. your case. p. 72. l. 25. r.
goodly. p. 87. l. 15. r. which.


