THE BEAVTY OF HOLINESS: OR THE CONSECRATION of a House of Prayer, by the
Example of our Savior.

A Sermon Preached in the Chapel at the Free- School in Shrewsbury. the 10.
day of September, Anno Dom. 1617.

At the Consecration of the Chapel, by the Right Reverend Father in God, the
Lord Bishop of Couentrey and Lichfield.

BY SAMPSON PRICE, Doctor in Divinity, and Chapleine in Ordinary to his Majesty.

LONDON, Imprinted by B: A: for Richard Meighen, and are to be sold at his
Shop near S. Clements Church without Temple-Barre. 1618.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, the Bailiues of Shrewsbury, the 12. Aldermen, the
24. Counselors, together with the other Members of that flourishing
Corporation: Grace, Mercy and Peace be multiplied unto you from GOD.
KIng Solomon began to build his temple in the month April or Zif, Vatablus,
and the Chaldee Paraphrase.
when flowers open; and finished it in the month Bull, when herbs begin to
close up and wither, answerable to our December: This Sermon was preached among
you in the beginning of Winter, and since has been shut up yet now upon the
importunity of some friends comes to life again, with the beginning of the
Spring, My warning for it was short, and being then in the Country with you to
tender my labors among you according to my promise, upon your free grant of a
worthy favor unto me; I was constrained to use only the help of my dear
and Reverend Fathers Library: Your former acceptance of my pains assure me,
that I shall not be misconstrued in this labor, which I undertook out of that
love I owe unto you all and yours. Many things in themselves of no moment,
Pliny.
have been highly prized, because they have been dedicated to Temples. This
sudden Sermon I hope shall find acceptance, because it was dedicated at the
Consecration of your little Temple. Your School founded by gracious King
Edward, a Prince of blessed memory; and confirmed by Q. Elizabeth, a Princess
worthy never to be forgotten, for love to the Gospel, still flourishes, and
long may it: yet never was consecrated till now. Continue your care of it: your
love to the church, and respect of those who are instruments to instruct you in
the way to Heaven; So shall you continue those many blessings, which already
you enjoy; and multiply them for your posterity, which I shall pray for; and
endeavor by all Christian respects, which I may perform unto you.

From my Study in London: April. 5. 1617. Yours in the Lord, in all faithful
observance, SAMPSON PRICE.

THE BEAVTY OF HOLINESS.
Lord Jesus, begin and end.
JOHN X. XXII. XXIII. And it was at Jerusalem, the Feast of the Dedication,
and it was winter, and Jesus walked in the Temple in Salomons Porch.
WHEN King Solomon, that mirror of Wisdom, Understanding, Riches, and Honor
(so that there was None like him before him, neither after him shall any arise
like unto him, 1. King. 3) had raised a levy out of all Israel, 1. King. 3.12.
of thirty thousand men to fetch Cedars from Lebanon, threescore and ten
thousand to bear burdens, fourscore thousand hewers in the mountains, and
three thousand and three hundred, which ruled over the people that wrought in
the work, 1. King. 5. 1. King. 5.16.1. 1. Ring. 6. 2. Chr. 3, 1.
In the four hundredth and fourescorth year after the children of Israel were
come out of the land of Egypt, he began to build the house of the Lord at
Jerusalem in Mount Moriah: Aquila, of ^oorth, Light: Mo^, Myrrh Raah; to see.
where the Lord appeared unto David his Father, a place so called (says
Aquila) of shining, because there was the Oracle of God: or of the abundance
of myrrh, which was there as Oleaster deriueth it: or more fitly it was so
called of seeing, because there the Lord was seen of Abraham, when the Ram
was offered by him in stead of his Son, Genesis 22.13; Genesis 22.13.
and the Lord foresaw that there his Temple should be built. Damast. l. 2.
defi^e Ortho. l c. 14 Genesis 8.4.
Upon a Mountain Paradise was situated: the Arc rested upon the mountains of
Ararat, Genesis 8. Lot was commanded to escape to the mountain, lest he should be
consumed, Genesis 10. Upon a Mount the Law was given, Genesis 19.17. Exodus 19 2^.
Exodus 19. Christ is described by the Church to come, leaping upon the
mountains, Chap. 2. He was tempted upon a mountain, Chap. 2.8.
Math. 4. Preached upon a mountain, Math. 5.1. wrought Miracles upon a
mountain, Mat 4.1.
Mat. 15.29. Ordained the twelve upon a mountain, Mat. 3.13.14. Departed to a
mountain, when by force they would have made him a King, John 6.15. Conferde
with the woman on a mountain, Ioh. 4.20. Prayed on a mountain all night, Luc.
6.12. Celebrated h s last Supper in a large upper room, Luc. 22.12, which
Ambrose places on a mountain, Amb. l. 10. (...).
Was crucified on mount Caluarie, Luc. 23.3^. Appeared to his Disciples after
his resurrection upon a Mount, Math. 28.16. Ascended into heaven from a mount,
Act. 19.12. and therefore appointed his Temple to be built upon a mount. His
Foundation is in the holy mountains, Psalm. 87.1: The first ground of his
Temple. He will be worshipped at his holy hill, Psalm, 99.9. A hill which he
desires to dwell in, yea the Lord will dwell in it for ever, Psalm. 68; which
Solomon truly acknowledged at the feast of the dedication of the Temple, where
were the Elders of Israel, and all the heads of the Tribes, the chief of the
Fathers of the children of Israel, and all the Congregation, sacrificing sheep
and oxen, that could not be numbered, and the glory of the Lord filled the house
in a cloud. He had made a brazen Scaffold, and set it in the midst of the
Court, and kneeling down upon his knees before all the Congregation, he
spread forth his hands toward heaven, and said; Have respect to the prayer
of thy servant, that thine eyes may be open upon this house day and night, upon
the place, whereof thou have said, that thou would put thy name there. Arise
O Lord God into thy resting place, 2. Chr. 6. For howsoever as Prosper
speaks: 2. Chr. 6, 13, 20.41. Prosper. ex Aug.
Volens in templo orare, in te ora: and ita semper age, vt Dei templum sis: Art
thou willing to pray in a Temple, pray within thy self, and so still carry thy
self, that thou may be a Temple. Howsoever Heaven, and the Heaven of
Heavens cannot contain him, much less such a house. Howbeit the most High
dwells not in temples made with hands, 2. Ch,. 16.18. Act. 7.48.
Act. 7. and that prophecy is fulfilled which Christ delivered to the woman of
Samaria, when he was a fruitful bough by a well. Ye shall neither in this
mountain, Genesis 49, 22, Joseph. in Ant. 41. c. 7.
nor yet in Jerusalem worship the Father, that is neither in Gerizim, where
the Samaritanes built a Temple out of a proud aemulation of the Jews; neither
at Jerusalem the glory of the World: For God is a Spirit, and they that
worship him, must worship him in Spirit and Truth, John, 4 Loco non
coneluditur, Ioh. 4.24.
He is not shut up in place: When we think upon his dwelling, Theoph.
we must remember (says Aug: Aug. E^. 57.
) the congregation of Saints especially in Heaven: where God is said to dwell,
because there his will is perfectly done, 1 Kin. 8 43.
where there is perfect obedience: yet his next habitation is his Church upon
earth, a dreadful place, none other but the house of God, Genesis 28.17. Is. 56.7.
and gate of heaven, Genesis 28. A house of Prayer for all people. Is. 56.
Whereupon David reasoned: I dwell in an house of Cedar: but the Ark of God
dwells within Curtains, 2 Samuel 7.2.
purposing to build an house to the Lord God of Israel, but he was inhibited by
Nathan, because he had shed blood abundantly, and made great wars, 1 Chapter
22, 8
1. Chr. 22. yet in his trouble he prepared for the house of the Lord, a
hundredth thousand talents of gold, 1 Chapter 22.14.
a thousand thousand talents of silver, and of b^asse and iron without weight,
timber also and stone, charging Solomon to arise and be doing, and the Lord
would be with him. He built this house of Habitation for the Lord, a place for
his dwelling for ever: 2. Chr. 6.2. but it was conditional from God: 2. Chr.
6.2.
If ye turn away and forsake my statutes and my commandments, this house
which I have sanctified for my name, will l cast out of my sight, and will make
it to be a Proverb and a byword among all nations. And this house which is
high, shall be an astonishment to every one that passes by it: 2. Chr. 7.
Nabucadnezzar King of Bayblon in the ninth year of his reign, 2 Chr. 7.21.
besieged it: Nebuzardan Captain of his Guarde, in the nineteenth year of his
reign, burnt this house of the Lord, and the Kings house, and all the houses
of Jerusalem, and every great man's house, with fire, 2. King. 25. 2 Kin. 25.9.
So that there was little hope ever to see it restored again: yet Cyrus
proclaimed the reedefying of it, restored the five thousand and four hundredth
vessels of gold and silver, which Nabucadnezzar had put in the house of his
gods, Ezra. 1.11.^.7
and gave a grant to bring Cedar trees from Lebanon to the sea of Ioppa. Yet
again it was hindered till the second year of Darius, who was so resolute for
the building thereof, that he made this decree: Whosoever shall alter this
word, let timber be pulled down from his house, and being set up, let him be
hanged thereon, and let his house be made a dunghill for this: And the God
that has caused his name to dwell there, destroy all Kings and people, that
shall put to their hand to alter and to cestroy this house of God, which is at
Jerusalem. I Darius have made a decree, let it be done with speed. Ezra. 6. It
was finished, Ezra. 6.12
and afterward Judas Macchabeus purged it from the profanation of the
Gentiles, upon the five and twentieth day of the Month Casleu answerable to
our December; ordayning that the dedication should be kept in its season, from
year to year with mirth and gladness. 1. Macc. 4.59
A Ceremony continuing til Christ, and honored by his presence in an annual
memorial mentioned in these words. And it was at Jerusalem, etc. Great was
the glory of Salomons Temple, the length whereof was 60. cubits, and the breadth
20. cubits, and the height 30 cubits, 1. King. 6.7. years in building, ouerlayd
with pure gold, 1 King. 6.38, 21.
the altar and tables whereon the Shewbread was set were of gold, the
candlesticks, flowers, lamps, tongs of perfect gold, the snuffers, basins,
spoons and censers of pure gold, the entry of the house, 2 Chr. 4.22
and the doors of the house of the Temple, were of gold, 2. Chr. 4. insomuch
that many of the Priests and Levites, and chief of the Fathers who were
ancient men, that had seen the first house, when the foundation of the second
was laid before their eyes, Ez. 3, 12. Hagg. 2.9.
they wept with a loud voice, Ez. 3. Haggai encouraged them, The glory of this
latter house shall be greater then the former, Ribera in Hag. 2 King 45.
Hag. 2. which Ribera thinks fulfilled in Herod's reparations, when the gold
ouerualued all the rest, and the stones were in length 25. cubits, in breadth 12.
in height 8, I sephus l. 15. antiq. c. 14. Mat. 13. 1. Mar. 13, 1. Orig. Chrysostom.
Theoph.
which made the Disciples show Christ the buildings of the Temple, Mat. 24. and
say, Master, see what manner of stones, and what buildings are here. Mar. 13.
pitying that ever it should, or thinking it impossible that ever it might, be
left desolate as was threatened, Mat. 23.38. but howsoever it was Satan's policy,
says iuditious Calvin, by Herod's imposture to draw away the minds of men from
adorning their spiritual Temples, Calu in Agg. 2.
by looking upon the superfluous glory of that outward Temple: Carthus.
Abulensis: Ios. l. 8 Ant c. 3 sic vocatur in hystoria Ethiopica, quam cit it
Glossa, 1. King. 10.7. Vatablus. Dec. in. Agg. Au. l. 18. ciu. c. 45.
I cannot believe it came near to Salomons for state, which the Queen of Saba
wondered at, Malceda which came to prove him with hard questions, and concluded
seeing his wisdom, and the house that he had built: thy wisdom and prosperity
exceeds the fame which I heard: 1, Kin. 10. In another respect this Temple
was more illustrious then Salomons, In Christ's presence in it, and miracles, as
Ierom and Austen think. Now he graced the Feast of the Dedication at
Jerusalem. And it was at Jerusalem.

A Text well befitting the occasion of this Christian Assembly, met to behold
the Consecrating and Dedicating of a little Temple unto God, warranting the
blessing and sanctifying of it, by the Prayers of a Reverend Father of our
Church. I will not follow the words in an Allegory, that Christ being a
new-Lawgiuer, bringing a New Testament, 2. Cor. 3. a new Spirit, Ez. 36. A new
commandment, 2. Cor, 3 6, Ez. 36.26. Ioh. 13.34. Reu. 21, 1.
Reu. 21. He would therefore come to a new Temple: to the Porch of Solomon in
that Temple, because as in Salomons time Peace was in Israel, 1. Ch 22.9.
1. Chr. 22. so Christ came to make Peace betwixt heaven and earth In Winter
because their hearts were frozen, and love cold, Bulling.
no life or spring of goodness appearing amongst the Jews. I cannot handle the
particulers as they offer themselves, and would be followed if the time outran
me not: Aug. Bed. Euthym.
the place Jerusalem, the triumph at Jerusalem in a Feast: the quality of the
feast of the Dedication, the season when it was solemnized, Winter, the
Honourablest personage of the Feast, though the Jews would have stoned him,
Jesus, his abode there, for he walked: Ver. 31.
His public walking in the Temple: His method in walking in that part, which
was most fit for him. In Salomons Porch,

I observe only two circumstances as the body and soul of these words.

1 The lawfulness of Churches, their dedication or consecration, the
remembrance whereof Christ abhorred not but frequented the annual
commemoration of a Temples Dedication, even in Winter, And it was at
Jerusalem, the Feast of the Dedication, and it was Winter.

2 The honor of Christ's presentation of himself especially in Temples the^, in
Churches now. And Jesus walked in the Temple in Salomons Porch.

The 1 is for building, repayring and dedicating of a Church,

The second is, for the establishing, continuing, and felicity of a Church.

In the first, we have Gods house prepared in a place of unity.

In the second, we have it frequented by the Author of Grace, and Peace, and
Mercy.

In the 1. we have Salomons temple beautified and re-edefied.

In the 2. we have a greater then Solomon in it, whereby it is exalted and
honored.

Of which while I shall speak, as my sudden summons shall suffer me, scarce
having so many hours warning for this burden, as there are words in my Text:
Let me request you all to remember that speech of Sa nt Augustine: Qui in al^^s
habitat, humilibus appropinquat: Aug.
He that dwells on high, discendeth down to the lowly: Descenae, vt ascendas:
Let us with meekness affoorde our best attention, that we may ascend to the
true understanding of this Text. Let us cast away all bitter censures and
by-thoughts, for the place whereon we stand is holy ground. Let me desire you
to assist me with your prayers, that what I speak may be to the glory of his
name, and winning of souls unto Christ, who for this cause, at the feast of
the Dedication went unto Jerusalem, as my first part leads me in order.

Jerusalem was the holy City, Ia.
Mat. 4. the Temple, Mat. 4, 5.
a place which the Lord chose that his name might be there: He sanctified it,
that his eyes and heart might be there perpetually 2. Chr. 7. David could not
forget Jerusalem Isai badde her put on her beautiful garments: 2 Chr. 7.16.
Isa. 52. Isai. 52.1.
Promised that the sons of them that afflicted her, should come bending unto
her; all they that despised her, should bow themselves down at the soles of
her feet, and call her the City of the Lord, Isai. 60. Isa. 60.14.
So did Zachary, that the Lord of hosts would dwell in the midst of
Jerusalem, and Jerusalem should be called a City of truth, and the Mountain of
the Lord of hosts: the holy mountain, Zech. 8. Zech. 8.3.
In Jerusalem the Prophets preached, there it was fit that the Apostles should
begin to preach repentance and remission of sins, Luc. 24. Luc. 24.47.
So it was foretold that the Word of the Lord should go forth from Jerusalem,
Isa. 2.3.
Isai. 2. Christ was promised to be sent to the Jews to be borne of David,
Psalm. 89. ver. ^32. of Abraham, Psa. 89, 4. Psalm. 132.11 Genesis 22, 18. Gal ^.16.
Amb. l 1. de Ab^ac 18.
Genesis 22. as Saint Paul expounds that place, Gal. 3.16. Christ was there
crucified, dead, buried, and thence he ascended. His virtue was to be diffused
throughout the whole world, and therefore in the midst and nauill of the
habitable world, he showed himself most conspicuously. It was fit for his
humility as to suffer the shamefullest death, In medio terrae ^^e^atus est
(...). Psalm ^5* ^2. (...) 3, (...)
so not to be ashamed of the most eminent place: He took upon him the form of
a servant, and therefore as he chose Bethlehem for his birth, so he chose
Jerusalem for his passion. He that would not suffer a Prophet to perish out of
Jerusalem, c. 13.33. would suffer there himself, being the Prince of Prophets.
He charged his Apostles not to depart from Jerusalem, Act 1.4, Chrysostom.
but wait for the promise of the Father, Act. 1. confirming them lest they
should faint living amongst the crucifiers of their Lord, or fastening them
there a while, least departing thence suddenly, others might have thought they
had despayred of their Lords resurrection. Oecumen. I^st Ant. l. 7. c. ^
Some call it Jerusalem, because David compassed it with a wall. Masius,
because the Lord especially looked toward it. Ierch. Salem. Salem: Alta.
Salmecon, because it was exceeding high, Eusebius of Salomons Temple. Sydonius
Apollinaris notes that when it is read Jerusalem, (...) Others of Raah and
Salem. Visio Pacis.
it may signify Heaven: but when Ierosolymae, it must be taken for an earthly
City. Beza reads it here, Hierosolymis: It was famous for Herod's Hall, the
Sepulchers of David, Steven, Nichodemus, Gamaliel, Zachary, Mount Syon, Mount
Oliuet, the brook Cedron, Ieremyes cave, the Virgins house: but more famous
for Salomons Temple, which being repaired was solemnized with a dedication.
Famous for

The many names of it mentioned by Tostatus-Solyma, In Mat. 4, q, 32,
Luza, Bethel, Ierosolyma, Iebus, Elia, Vrbs sacra, Jerusalem dicitur, atque
Salem.

Famous for the safety of it, which was secure, as David told old Barzillai:
Come thou over with me, and I will feed thee with me in Jerusalem: 2. Sam.
19, 33,
2. Sam. 19. yet all these and the abundance of wealth, silver being there as
stones, and Cedars as the Sycomore trees that are in the vale for abundance.
1. King, 10. made it not so famous as the Temple and the Feasts: 1. King. 10.27
the Jews had a Feast of the Sabbath, the Passover, first Fruits, of
Pentecost, of Trumpets, of Atonement, of Tabernacles, Leu. 23. Leu. 23.
Solomon had his feast of Dedication of the Temple, and all Israel with him, a
great Congregation, from the entering in of Hamath, unto the river of Egypt, 1.
King. 8.65
seven days and seven days, even fourteen days, 1. King. 8. So has our
Church solemn Feasts, in stead of the Passover, which was instituted in
remembrance of the deliverance from Egypts bondage; of pentecost, a remembrance
of the Law given at Mount Sinai; of the Feast of Tabernacles, a remembrance of
Isreal's dwelling in Tents, forty years in the wilderness: We have Christmas
in honor of Christ's Incarnation; which Chrysostom calls the Metropolis of
all other Feasts: Chrysostom.
Easter in honor of Christ's Resurrection, which Ignatius calls the Kings
day, and the eminentst of all others; Leo the Feast of feasts; Nazianzen holds
it as far excelling the rest, Leo. 1.
as the Sun does other Planets; Whitsontide, Tertul. l: de Corona militis.
Orig. l. 8. contra Celsum. Act. 20.16. Question.
in honor of Christ's confirmation of the Gospel, by sending unto us the Holy
Ghost; a Feast which caused Paul to hasten his journey toward Jerusalem, Act.
20. So that if any question it,

Why does one day excel another, when as all the light of every day in the
year is of the sun?

It may be answered: Answer.
By the Knowledge of the Lord they were distinguished, and he altered seasons
and Feasts: Some of them has he made High days, Eccl. 33, 8.
and hallowed them, and some of them has he made ordinary days.

Would we know the Authors of Feasts to Jews or Christians: By the
commandment of God himself in the mouth of Moses those were ordained, Leu. 23.
and some others called Regular, Ordinary and usual: Or by the Will of the
Magistrate, upon some reasonable cause; yet no part of Will Worship, being not
contra Legem Dei, against the Law of God; but secundum analogiam Legis,
according to the analogy of the Law, as this feast of Dedication, that feast
of the 14. and 15. of the month Adar, Est: 9.21. and some others. The Jews
not only added to the number of the Feasts instituted by Moses, but augmented
the solemnity of those feasts which Moses appointed: For whereas Dies
Calendarum, or Neomeniae the first day of the month, or Feast of New Moons
was appointed only for sacrifice to God, and not mentioned amongst those
solemn festiuities, yet the Jews appointed for the increase of the service of
God, that not only sacrifices should be offered in them, but also men should
abstain from all servile labor, and so make it an Holy Day, and great
solemnity. Thus was it in David's time: Blow up the Trumpet in the new Moon, in
the time appointed on our solemn feast day: Ps. 81. It was celebrious for the
benefit of government; Psalm. 81.3. Nigh, de Lyra.
for in the New-Moone there appeared the change of time: and therefore was it
so used in Elishaes time, to whom when the Shunamite woman desired to go for
her dead child; her husband said, Wherefore will thou go to him to day: It is
neither New-Moone, nor Sabbath, 2. King. 4. 2. King. 4.23.
Which argues, that they were freed from labor, because her husband
insinuated, that she should go upon a day when he might be at leisure from
his business, making in that respect a similitude betwixt the Calends and the
Sabbath: and in S. Aug: Aug. l. de 10 Apocd. 15 c. 3.
time, reproving the Jewish woman, holding that they were better to spinne, or
do any work then immodestly dance in their New Moons.

For the Feasts of Christians, Christ instituted no Holy Days in his life
time, he abrogated not the law of Moses, but observed those Feasts: Neither did
the Apostles till the Law of Moses being dead, it might be buried honorably.
It was not fit that Christian Religion should have so many ceremonies or
Holy Days in the Cradle, as it had in the full age of it. Yet in the Apostles
time, the Lords day, Apoc. 1, 10. Act. 20, 7. 1. Cor. 16, 2. Mar. 16.2.
Oecumen. Anselm. Primas,
Apoc. 1. our Sunday was instituted by the Apostles in remembrance of the
Resurrection of our Savior: For the Sabbath is ceremonial for the manner,
though moral for the matter. The substance of it is de iure diuino, though
some ceremonies of it, de iure humano. The Jews celebrated their Sabbath the
seventh day, We the eight: They gave God the last day of the Week: Philo. l
de opificio Mundi.
we the first: They kept their Sabbath in honor of the Worlds creation: but
we ours in memorial of the worlds Redemption, a work of greater might and
mercy. The Most of our great festiuities, Aug ad Lanuar. Clem: l. 5, c. 20.
S. Austen ascribes it to the authority of the Apostles, or general Councels,
as the Feasts of Christ's Nativity, Circumcision, Passion, Resurrection,
Ascension, sending of the holy Ghost, and some besides these, kept upon set
days every year: Aug:
Ne volumine temporum ingrata subrepat obliuio (says he) lest in success of
time, unthankful forgetfulness creep in by little and little, and cause
such things to be forgotten which the Righteous have done, who should be in
everlasting remembrance amongst men.

Hence is it, that the Church keeps those Holy days, which Antiquity has
prescribed, that all things be done decently and in order, 1. Cor. 14.40.
1. Cor. 14.40. But what order would there be, if every man should serve God at
his own pleasure, at his own time, after his own manner? We retain the
Festiuals of Saints, because we desire to praise God in his Saints, Psalm. 150.1
for his great gifts and virtues bestowed upon them; being as bequeathed
Legacies, and only true Relics for us, that we may follow their good
examples. These days are for the service of God, and partly, as Socrates spoke
of old (Quo se a laborum contentione relaxent) for relaxation from labor.
Socrat. l 5. c. 21
These we keep holy as the Lords day, in the same manner, though not in the
same degree; not for worship to them, or imploring of them, but to worship the
God of Martyrs and Saints; abstayning from lawful labor in them, not for
superstition, in conscience to the day, but obedience to the Church: And if it
be held contemptuous to spend that day in lawful labor, wherein the Church
shall indict a solemn fast, notwithstanding that liberty of the six days
which God has given: why shall that be lawful in a case of deiection, which
may not in praise and exultation? If the Church had power to appoint a
festival for the dedication of the Temple and the like, then it has power to
continue the memorial of the blessed Apostles. We see the Jews did keep the
feast of the Dedication, which was threefold as Alcuinus notes: The first by
Solomon in the time of Autumn: Aleuinus.
The second by Zorobabel, in the time of the Spring: The third by Judas
Macchabaeus in Winter, the remembrance whereof contitinued until Christ's time.
The Grecians call to dedicate or initiate, (...), but to consecrate, (...) *
To dedicate is one thing, to consecrate is another: Things are said to be
consecrated, when of profane things they are said to be religious and holy:
and to be dedicated, when they are appointed to God. The Hebrews did not
only dedicate Temples which were newly built, but also those which were
repaired and cleansed from uncleanness: as Judas Macchabaeus did the Temple
here, when it was polluted by the Ethniques, with the most filthy Idolatry of
Antiochus. Which Feasts they called (...), Renoualia, or Renouales dies, days
of renewing; which are not once celebrated, but the solemnities of them are
done every year once, as now when Christ came to the feast of the Dedication;
whence I infer this doctrine.

That the consecrating of Churches to the right service of the true God is a
warrantable ceremony, Doct.
allowable by our Saviors presence.

The Reason of this thing may be drawn from that rule of the Apostle, 1. Ioh.
4 4.5.
1. Ioh. 4. Every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it
be received with thanksgiving: Pet. Mart. 4.4. of common place, page: 66.
For it is sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer: It is meet that we
should give thanks unto God, who has given a place unto his people, wherein
they may meet together for the practice of holy things; and that we should
pray for a right and perfect use of such a place, that God there may be
glorified, sins confessed, holy doctrine administered, zealous Prayers
frequented, a right discipline exercised, and alms cheerfully distributed.
Was it not a Law, Deuteronomy. 20.5.
Deuteronomy. 20 that an Officer should speak unto the people in battle? What man is
there that has built a new house, and has not dedicated it? Let him go and
return to his house, lest he dye in the battle and another man dedicate it:
and shall not Gods house be dedicated? Psalm. 20,
Thus David did dedicate his house, and entitled the thirtieth Psalm, Schic
Channucath Beth Le David: A song at the Dedication of the house of David. And
Solomon his son dedicated Gods house, At the dedication of the wall of
Jerusalem, the Levites were sought out of their places to keep the dedication
with gladness, with thanksgiving, and with singing, with Cymbals, Psalteries and
with Harpes; and the sons of the Singers gathered themselves together, both
out of the plain Country round about Jerusalem and from the villages of
Netophathi, Neh. 12.28. Eusebius. l. 9. c. 10. bist: Eccles. and l. 4. de vita
Constable Magni.
Neh. 12. Thus Constantine when he had repaired Bizantium, and determined to
use that City for the seat of the Roman Empire, desired to dedicate it to God,
and to that end called 318: Fathers which then held the Synod of Nice. This
great Emperor went to Jerusalem, and built a Temple, dedicating unto God the
same by Bishops, which held a Council at Tyrus. Gregory Nazianzene gives a
reason, why Churches were dedicated, Greg: (...) de vsu Eccl^siae Psalm. 51, 10.
(...) 4.24. Col. 3.10.
to remember the hearers of renewing themselves by a right Spirit, as Psalm. 51.
To put on the new man, Ep. 4. which is renewed in knowledge, Col. 3. For there
is no holiness in outward things, they are not capable of divine qualities,
but being consecrate do become instruments of the Spirit, whereby our Faith
is stirred up. The Lord by his Word commands the faithful to use common
Prayers, Calu. Ins^^^: l. 3. c. 20, s. 30.
and for this purpose there must be common Temples, so that men refusing to
communicate their prayers with the people of God, and entering into their
chambers, break the commandment of God. These common Temples must be
dedicated by common prayers: For if Saint Paul would not undertake his journey
without Prayer, Act. 20.36.
Act. 20. If David dedicated the morning unto God by prayer, Psalm. 143. and the
Evening by Prayer, Psalm 143.8. Psalm, 77.6. Psalm. 71.18. Psalm. 141.2. Soz. l. 4,
c. 13.
Psalm. 77. and his old age by prayer: Psalm. 71. and his prayers by a prayer.
Psalm. 141. Why should not the house of Prayer be dedicated unto God by Prayer?
By Prayer Basil dedicated a Temple which he had newly built, calling unto him
his Neighbor Bishopps. Clem. Ep. ad Licobum.
So Clemens ordained; Make Churches in fit places and let them be sanctified by
Prayer. So Athanasius confessed of the African Churches, that they were thus
dedicated. Athan: in Apo, ad Constantin. Lau^e Su^ius to. 1. de vitis Sanctorum.
So practiced Auxibius a Scholar of Saint Mary's, and an Archbishop, if we
believe Metaphrastes: He came into a Church newly built, fell down, wept and
prayed: Lord God, which made heaven and earth, the Sea and all that therein
is: Strengthen me thy servant: give me boldness that I may preach thy word
freely, and without fear: Illuminate these present with thy grace, that being
converted from the error of Satan, they may acknowledge thee to be the true
God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. Merciful God, let thy holy Spirit
dwell in this holy house, which is built in thy holy name; confirm and
establish it, keep it immovable in thy faith, even unto the end of the world.
This was the form of Dedication then; and that Salomons consisted of a Prayer,
1. King. 8.22.23.
we find, 1. King. 8.

Use 1. Which being so, it may direct us to avoid the errors of the Church of
Rome in her dedications, holding from the 2. Council of Braca, Conc: 2. C^n: 5.
that a Church should not be consecrated till provision be made for gifts and
revenues, and that there should still be lights in the Church; the first part
whereof is convenient, but the second needless: what use is there of lights,
unless men meet early in the mornings, as those Christians were constrained
to do in Plinies time; Can. de conscer. Did: 1.
or late in the dark euenings? holding, that Temples should not be built or
consecrated, Con. of Worms, c. 3. and in c. Missarum solennia. Tribis ^ensis
Synod: Ann. 812
but by the will of the Bishop of Rome, which is a palpable tyranny and usurped
authority: holding, that service must not be said or sung, but in places so
dedicated; whereas in case of necessity it may be otherwise, and devotions may
be performed sometimes in other places; as Izhak prayed in the field, Israel in
Egypt, Moses at the Sea, Elias under a tree, Jeremy in a dungeon, Jonas in the
belly of the Whale, Christ upon the top of a mountain, the Disciples in a
ship: holding that all things must be done now in the dedicating of the
Temples of christians, which were done in dedicating the Temples of the Jews;
Gratian, did. 1. de Consecr.
whereas howsoever in moral duties we are more bound then they were, yet not
in ceremonies, figures, shadows, seeing the commandments of that kind were
abolished by the death of Christ: Holding that the dedicating of Churches
drives thence Devils, Cont. Col: Anno ^^ 36 ^^ 14.
whereas Romanists cannot challenge this power to drive away Satan at their
pleasure: For the Spirit divides severally to every man, as he will: 1. Cor.
12. They know not whether any bad Spirits be there, 1. Cor. 12* 11.
though sometimes it appears that in some wicked places evil Spirits have
haunted and inhabited; Pln. 2 l. 7. Epist.
as by their effects has appeared, which has caused none willingly there to
inhabit: they may as well conjure the whole world, seeing Saint Paul calls
the Devils, the Rulers of the darkness of this World, Ep. 6. Yea often it is
known, that worse Spirits can not frequent those places then themselves. Epi.
6.13.
Their other Ceremonies are ridiculous, of twelve Candles before twelve Images,
signifying the twelve Apostles, Hospin: de Orig: dedicat:
and that we must walk in light: of three times walking round, signifying
Christ's triple circuit (more then he made) from heaven to the world; from the
world to Limbus; Io: Sleid: l. 21. Commenta^.
from Limbus to heaven: or the threefold estate of the Church; of married, of
widows, of Virgins: Dura: in Rationali Diu^no^u^ l. 1: c. 6.
of three times knocking at the door, signifying the threefold right which
God has in our hearts, because he made us, redeemed us, and has given
himself unto us: of sprinckling water, signifying Baptism and Repentance: of
making characters in ashes cast upon the pauement, with lines drawn from the
right hand unto the left, and from the left hand unto the right, signifying the
conjunction of two people: Their ascribing pardons at such times of Dedication,
are as vain; Anns Dom. 1066.
as Alexander the second gave unto any one that came devoutly to the dedication
at Cassina, 40, days remission: G^eg. Nicae: Synod* 2. Anno 788.
their burning of incense in them; their bringing of relics to such
dedications; their inuocating of the Martyrs, to whom they build Churches. We
stand for a Dedication by prayer of such places, but cast away those gulleries.
Aug. de Ciu l. 8. c. 27.
The Gentiles (says Austin) erected temples to their Gods: so did our
Britains sometimes in Scotland, a Temple to Mars; in Cornwall a Temple to
Mercury, Stow: Ann^l. Cambd: Brittan. B. Jewel. Tract: de Sacris Scriptu^.
page 129.
in Bangor a temple to Minerua, in Essex a temple to Victoria, in Leycester a
temple to Ianus; in York where Peter's is now, a temple to Bellona; in London
where Paul is now, a temple to Diana: No more then three and fifty years
before the Incarnation of Christ (when Julius Caesar came out of France into
England) so absurd were our people to serve these falsely supposed Gods and
Goddesses: but now the gospel being preached, these are banished, and such
darkness dispelled. Our Churches and Chapels are dedicated to the true God;
the very name Kirk, or Church, an abbreuiation of ((...)) the Lords house,
sounding so much. D^n l. 4 c. 16
We say as Damascene, We build Temples unto God in the names of the Saints; as
Aug: Aug. l 8. de Ciuit. Dei c. vlt. and l. 22. de Ciu. c. 10
We build not temples unto our Martyrs as unto Gods, but memorials as unto dead
men, whose Spirits with God are still living. We do not cry at the Altars, O
Peter! O Paul! O Cyprian! we offer unto thee our oblation; but at their
Memorials, we offer to God, who made them men and Martyrs, giving thanks for
their victories, and encouraging our selves by calling upon God, to the like
Crowns of Martyrdom. If we retain the names of some, who were not Christians,
by calling Churches after their names, we do but as Saint Luke, who used the
name of Mars hill, where the Areopagites sat, Act. Act. 17.19.22 Act 28.11.
17: and the names of Castor and Pollux false Gods, Act. 28: and Job and Amos
the names of Arcturus, Job. 9.9.38.31 Amos 5.8.
Orion, Pleiades, Job. 9, notwithstanding, they had fabulous and poetical
fictions. The most of our Churches have the names of Saints and Martyrs, which
we use, as they do also in Geneua (that miraculous Sanctuary for many
distressed Protestants) their chief church retayning the name of Saint Peter,
another of Saint Magdalen, another of Saint Geruase, whither they usually
resort to holy exercises.

If any of our Churches were erected by the superstitious, we must acknowledge
how much we are bound to God, that we may have such houses which we builded
not; wels which we dug not; Deuteronomy. 6: enjoy those Churches which we
prepared not, Deu. 6.11.
as Noah had the benefit of that Arc, which was framed by some profane
Ship-wright: Ludolphus.
Our Churches have the pure Gospel, the true Sacraments, and are dedicated
unto God by prayer; which we defend as following our Savior, who will have his
house to be called a house of Prayer, being present at the Feast of the
dedication of it in Jerusalem.

USE. 2.
Use 2. Which may serve for an Instruction to us, to be careful for the
dedicating of our Temples unto God, both Material and Spiritual. A Material
Temple.
Our Material Temples are Houses of wood and stone prepared for the assemblies
of Christians: yet Few use them as dedicated unto God. Popish Recusants are out
of love with our dedicated houses becau^^ ^^erein their Mass Priests and
unknown languag^ is silenced, their Images defaced, their idolatrous
inuocations and adorations abandoned; and would have their refractarie fancy
to be called by the name of Conscience: they are invited here to the Supper of
the Lamb, yet will not come; and therefore well by the Magistrate may be
compelled to come in, Luc. 14.23.
that the house may be full. A blessed compulsion it is for a man to be driven
to truth, for a woman to be forced to heaven. The idle Libertine prefers
his Couch before our dedicated Temples, Amban Psalm. 129. Isa^. 29.13.
herein worse then the Jew, who did yield his speech and presence to the word;
but he (forsooth) will not come so far as the Church, though he be very near
it: or if such come, we may say as Chrysostom, of some in his time; We see
them stand and trifle while Prayer is said; Chrys^^^om. 24 in Acta.
yea, not only when Prayer is said, but when the Priest blesses. Do you not
know that you stand with the Angels, sing and say Hymns with them, and stand
you laughing? It were no marvel, if God should send out a thunderbolt not only
upon them, Hom, 36. in 1. ad Cor.
but upon us also: for surely these things deserve a thunderbolt. The Church
is not a Barbars shop, or an Apothecaries house, or a common court; but a
place of Angels, the Court of Heaven, and Heaven it self. Chrysostom. 15, in Heb.
Were they to enter into a Princes court, they would order their habit, look
and gate; but entering into the Church, the Court of the heavenly King, they
laugh, iangle, walk, and make bargains. It is Gods house: Aug. Regula.
Let nothing be done here, but what may be fit for the presence of God; the
name of it teaches us to pray: It is house of Prayer. Reverence is due to the
very Cloisters and Churchyards; the bodies of many Saints lodging there in
peace, whose souls rest with God in Heaven. The Anabaptist or Donatist (an old
Rogatian) is so peevish, that he abstaineth from the assemblies of all other
men whatsoever, not of his opinion; and upon conceit of some spots in our
dedicated Churches, singles himself with his schismatical troop to some odd
corner, in a private house, wood, or barn in the night and darkness* loving
darkness, and therefore walking in darkness: or thinking their private
conuenticle to be the only true Church, because they conceive some spots, and
spotted men do remain amongst us, not lamenting, praying, laboring for a
redress; but avoiding the land, which is no true valor to run away;
especially to places which are common harbors of all opinions and heresies,
where they cannot but draw in some stench of these; having left the free and
clear air of the Gospel, swallowing in Camels there, who could not endure
Gnats here. Augustine took another course, For the chaffes sake we do not
forsake the threshing-floore of the Lord; Aug. Ep. 48.
nor for the bad fishes do we break the net of the Lord; nor for the Goats
which are to be severed in the end, do we leave the Flock of the Lord; nor for
the vessels made to dishonor, do we flit out of the house of the Lord. Let
us resolve so, to pray for any thing that may seem to be amiss, knowing that
the Spouse will be black, while she is upon earth, Cant. 1: Can. 1.5.
that in the best field where Christ sowed seed, and the best seed, tares
spring up as well as wheat, and both must grow together till the Harvest, M^^
1^.30.
Mat. 13. Let us not fly from these material dedicated Temples, but hold it
our joy, that here we may come to dedicate and deuote our selves unto God. We
our selves are spiritual Temples, 1. Cor. 3.17. A^pirituall Temple.
Our souls are the Temples of God: If any man defile the Temple of God, him
shall God destroy; for the Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are. Our
bodies in comparison of our souls, are but as walls of clay, encompassing a
treasure; as the wooden boxes of precious Jewels; a course case to a sweet
instrument, or a mask to a beautiful face: It is holy, we must not profane
it: God created it in infusion, and infused it in creation. It should be holy
as he is holy: without holiness we can neither be named, nor be Christians.
It is the Riches of the Saints, the beauty of Angeis, delight of God. Whosoever
has this, is a Temple of God; and he that wants it is a dwelling place of
Satan. Let the soul be free from sin, (...).
and Satan will be driven far from the soul of the finner, and he shall
dedicate this Temple unto God. A celestial Temple.
There is another Temple, and it is celestial, which if we desire to feast
in, we must be dedicated in bodies and souls unto God; we must glorify God
here, and then we shall be glorified by him there: Blessed are al they that
dwell in this house, they shall ever be praising of God; Psalm. 64.4.
there Charity shall be perfect: ^umb l. 4. l. 49.
Every man shall rejoice as much for another good as he does for his own:
they that looked downward here at sorrow not to be repented of, shall there
look upward at joy: they that walked here in read, shall there be clothed
with white. Think that thou one day may come into this Temple, as thou
do now into a material Temple. Per (...) Ecclesia intramus in ^o^^a^
Paradisi.
This is the gate by which we must enter in. Here we must be polished as
corner stones for the heavenly City of Jerusalem. Here we fit our selves
with wedding garments, that we be not cast out into that place, where is
weeping and gnashing of teeth. Here we are in Gods chamber of Presence, that we
may be brought into his presence and chamber of joy, whence we shall never be
shut out. Let us then while the house of the Lord is established, encourage one
another, saying; Let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of
the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his
paths, Isa. 2. Isa. 2.2.3.
The Temple was Christ's walk, as we find in these words: And Jesus walked in
the Temple, in Salomons Porch.

Amongst the Jews the Temple was had in much reverence, Chrysostom, in Act. 6.14.
Ier. 7.4. Act. 4.1. Bar. Ioh. 12.20, Act. 8.27. Ios. 11. Ant. c. vlt.
and it was held a great honor to live near unto it; their common cry was,
The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, Ier. 7.
The Temple had a captain, Act. 4. as afterward Soldiers called Templarij,
dwelling near to the Temple, Knights of Jerusalem, instituted Anno 1230. The
Gentiles came to worship at the Temple, as that Eunuch of great authority under
Candace Queen of the Ethiopians, Act. 8. and Alexander the Great; 2. Mac. 3.3,
35,
Seleucus King of Asia, Heliodorus, Ios. Gor. l. 3. c. 1.
Antiochus and others mentioned by Gorionides. Famous have been the temple of
Caesar, the temple of Bellona, M. Purch. in Pilg
having six thousand servants a^out it in Cappadocia; the temple of Jupiter,
in Morimena with three thousand votaries: at Carrhae they had the Temple of the
Moon: at Taxilla a temple of the Sun: at Athens they had a temple of Mercy,
(...)
causing a decree to be made, that they which fled thither for succor, might
not be pulled away from thence. Such a Sanctuary was the Temple of Theseus;
such an immunity was translated unto the Temples of Christians, to Abbeys, and
Monasteries, (...).
when Princes had dedicated their names unto Christ; providing by laws, that
whosoever should violently draw away any from thence, they should incur the
crime of treason; which was the cause, that when Alaricus the King of the
Goths had surprised the City of Rome, so many as fled unto the great Church
of Saint Peter, were through a wonderful work of God preserved: But abuses
having hence grown, and the Church and Commonwealth iniuried, these are in
many places abrogated; when servants hence took occasion to be disobedient,
and undutiful; unconscionable debtors defrauded their creditors; thieues
increased, and that was verefied, Nullos tam saepe ad Ecclesiae asylum sugere,
quam qui nec Deum, nec Ecclesiam curabant; None more usually and often fled
to the Sanctuary of the Church, then they that cared neither for God nor the
Church. The Temples of our times are for prayer, preaching, administration of
the Sacraments, and so Sanctuaries for troubled souls, who desire to be fed
with the sincere milk of the word; wherein not only the Lamb may wade, but
the Lion may swim. Christ honored the Temple with his walk in Salomons
Porch. His passion was near, and as it were at the door; therefore he walked
in the Porch, in Salomons porch, where sacrifices were offered: that we might
much more frequent those places, where there is a remembrance of his offering
up of himself once for all. In Salomons Porch, because there often Solomon
used to pray: or it is called Salomons Porch, because it was made in imitation
of that; the length whereof was twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof ten
cubits, 1. Kin. 6.3.
1. King. 6. Here he walked, showing that sometimes a man may retire and rest
himself, but not so that he rust; for he took occasion by walking, Aret:
to offer himself to the oppositions of his Adversaries. Josephus notes, that
the Temple had four Porches: the first, for all generally, except menstruous
women: the second, for the Jews and their wives: the third, for the only
Males of the Jews: the fourth, for those that brought the Priests robes. This
Porch of Herod's Temple is called Beautiful, where the lame man was asking alms
of them, that entered into the Temple: Act. 3.2.
Act. 3. A fit spectacle, teaching men to be merciful to such, who
themselves come to crave mercy from God, and to respect these whom God places
as Porters of his Court; teaching us to open our wounds unto God, Chrysostom. hom.
28. ad Pop. Antioch
as they open theirs unto us. The beauty of this Porch is described by
Josephus, Salmeron, Baronius, Ribera: Ios. 6. de bell: Iud. c. 6.
Gods house is beautiful and amiable, therefore did David long and faint after
it; preferring one days being here, before a thousand elsewhere, wishing
rather to be a dore-keeper in the house of God, then to dwell in the tents of
wickedness, Psalm. 84.10.
Psalm. 84. And Jesus walked in the Temple, in Salomons Porch. Wisdom walked in
the house of the Wise man; whence we may learn, That it is a fit thing for
Christians often to frequent Gods house, his Church.

Christ's action herein may be our instruction. Doctr.
8, days after his birth, he was brought into the Temple, Luc. 2, to suffer
circumcision according to the Law: When he grew and waxed strong in Spirit,
and was twelve years old, Lu. 2.27. v. 40.41.46.
He was in the Temple, sitting in the midst of the Doctors, both hearing them,
and asking them questions; not to learn of them, but to instruct them: as he
was man, he hearkened unto them; as he was God, Orig:
he opposed and answered them: He so asked and answered, Eed:
that all that heard him were astonished at his understanding and answers. He
taught and preached the Gospel of the Kingdom in the Synagogues, Mat. 4.23.
He taught daily in the Temple, v. 47.
Luke 19.47. Early in the morning he came again into the Temple, Ioh. 8.2.
He ever taught in the Synagogue, and in the Temple, Ioh. 18.20. Here he
walked in the Temple. This was the walk of David; As for me I will come into
thy house in the multitude of thy mercy, and in thy fear will I worship toward
thy holy Temple, Psalm: 5.7.
Psalm. 5. We took sweet counsel together, and walked unto the house of God
in company, Psil. 55.14.
Psalm. 55. I was glad when they said unto me; Psalm. 122.1.
Let us go into the house of the Lord, Psalm. 122. The Apostles continued daily
with one accord in the Temple, Act. 2.46.
Act. 2. Peter and John went up together into the temple, at the hour of
prayer, being the ninth hour, Act 3.1.
Act. 3.1. Peter and John together went to prepare the Passover, Luc: 22 8.
Ioh: 18 16
Luke 22. Peter and John went together into the Palace of the high Priest, Ioh.
18. Peter and John ran both together toward Christ's Sepulchcre, John 20.
Ioh: 20, 4
Peter and John were sent together to Samaria, when it had received the word of
God, Act. 8. Peter and John answered the Council boldly, Act: 8 14
Whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you more then unto
God, judge ye, Act: 4, 19.
Act. 4. Peter and John are yoked together; the old and young, that the young
might be instructed and guided by the old. He leads his fellow to the Temple.
An Angel commanded the Apostles, Go, stand and speak in the temple to the
people all the words of this life; and when they heard that, they entered into
the Temple early in the morning and taught, Act: 5.21
Act. 5. Paul and Barnabas went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and sat
down, Act. 13. Paul prayed in the Temple, Act: 13.14 Act: 22.17
and was in a trance, Act. 22. The Church is not for secular but religious
offices. Anna a Prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, a widow of about
fourscore and four years, departed not from the temple, Bas: lib. 2. de
Bapt: quaest: 8.
but served God with fastings and prayers night and day, Luke 2. Theodosius
went to all the places of prayer he could. In these Temples, Luc: 2.37 Ruff: l:
2, ca: 33
and the true professors (which are members hereof) God dwells and walks in
them, 1. Cor. 6. And Jesus walked in the Temple. 1. Cor: 6.16


A just censure this may be then of any, who despise or abuse temples: Use. 1.
we hold not an inherent holiness in the places; and that private prayers are
bettered, Wolfius in 2^ Re: 12. ex Tertull:
when uttered within a consecrated circle: Christ is our catholic temple; and
by him wheresoever our prayers are made in spirit and truth, they are alike
acceptable to God; yet God especially has chosen these places to himself.
This Action of our Savior warranteth our assemblies in Churches: for, though
Abraham made his covenant in the open wilderness, Genesis 21.21.27. Genesis 24.63.
Genesis 21; and Izhak prayed in the fields, Genesis 24; and it is uncertain what
places Adam, Abel, Enos, Seth had to worship in: yet God has now marked out
his houses, and they must be frequented. Christ came to this Temple after it
had been profaned, Ios. l. 15.
and re-edefied for popular vain glory; and he that forbear not to employ the
water pots of the Jewish and superstitious purification, in the work of his
gracious miracle, Ioh. 2.6.7.
Ioh. 2, avoided not the Jewish Temple: Why then do so many seek to pull
down the Temples and Churches of Christians? from a swelling they are fallen
to a shrinking in the sinews; from ful-fed bodies, to a pining; so that vix
faucibus haerent; scarce do the stones in many of our Churches hang together,
they have sustained a long penance for their excess. Simoniacall Patrons sell
presentations to our Churches; heirs to Judas, whose Latin goes no farther
then Quid dabis: They enquire of the purse of a man, not of his virtues;
selling oxen, sheep, doves; all Church-preferments they have of their own, or
are put in trust with by others, to those who cannot feed the flock committed
to their charge; or if they do feed them, it is with untempered and often
poisonous food. A sin now become vulnus cancrosum, Amb.
a wound that has a canker in it, and crept along through many joints, and
requires ignitum ferrum, a hot coulter or sharp sword; the extremity of
civil punishment. Lest as before the coming of Christ in the flesh, Aug. de
Ciu. Dei. l. 2, c. 19
the Roman Common wealth by little and little being changed, Ex pulcherrima
and optima, pessima ac flagitiosissima facta est: So the Common wealth of
England, and Christianity, by buing the charge of souls before the second
coming of Christ, of a most religious and well ordered Common wealth, will
become irreligious and profane. The Eagle-clawed Church-robber, sees a far
off a little portion remaining to the Church, and will so are at this by all
politic inventions, though he take but a coal to fire his nest. These
Locusts nibble at that which the Palmer-worme has left; worse then Pharaoh,
who had their diet with Pharaoh in the dearth, that they might not sell their
land, Genesis 47: they must have to their heaps of ill gotten, Genesis 47.22.
and miserably kept goods, an Impropriate Tithe, which is most improper for
any but the Church; though the Minister and his family sterue. Are not these
snares unto them, when having committed spiritual theft, they are so followed
by Gods hand into their houses, which receive such stolen goods, that Revenge
shakes the foundation of them for sin, and they in themselves and theirs are
usually punished. The scornful Atheist despises the calling of the Teachers
of our Temples; scorning Priests, whose spiritual sacrifice of prayer, God
accepts as well as he did incense in the old law; and like railing Rabshakehs
seek to make themselves sport in blaspheming the God of Israel, by rending in
pieces his Messengers, in their drunken, lascivious raging discourses, where
they foame out their own shame; not being terrified by the examples of
Ieroboams withered hand; two Captains and their fifties fired from Heaven;
forty two chidren torn in pieces by wild Bears; Corath and his Accomplices
devoured by the earth; Miriam a woman, stricken with a leprosy for abusing the
Lords servants. The Lord has and will make good his promise to Leui; Bless
Lord his substance, and accept the work of his hands; Deuteronomy. 33.11.
smite through the loins of them that rise against him, and of them that hate
him, that they rise not again, Deuteronomy. 33. They that have honored the Temple
have been honored; Eccl. 50.
Simon the son of Onias repairing the Temple, how was he honored in the midst
of the people? he was as the Morning-starre in the midst of a cloud, and as the
Moon at the full; as the Sun shining upon the Temple of the most high; and
as the Rainebow giving light in the bright clouds; as the flower of Roses in
the spring of the year, as Lilies by the rivers of waters, and as the branches
of the Frankincence tree in the time of Summer, as fire and incense in the
Censer, and as a vessel of beaten gold, set with all manner of precious
stones; as a fair Olive tree budding forth, and as a Cypress tree which
grows up to the clouds: Simon Magus that thought so basely of the best gifts
belonging to Gods Temple, he, on the other side has been put to open shame,
and his neck broken. Thus they that stand for holy things dedicated to God,
have stood and flourished; but others have perished for abusing the place of
the Temple, or men of the temple, Aq. 2.2. q. 99.2.3.
or things dedicated to holy uses in the Temple: Such think this to be no
sin now, because Christ is not present with a whip for the^, as he was in
Jerusalem; but they may fear a more terrible whip hereafter, without
restitution and contrition; and learn of Jesus to defend the Temple, and
frequent it. Jesus walked in the Temple, in Salomons Porch.

How may this encourage us, Use 2.
who have Churches and Chapels for our frequent and religious assemblies: God
is not included in any one place: He is every where by his power and
operation, by his knowledge and vision, by his immensitie and
incircumscription; he is in the humanity of Christ by an hypostaticall union;
In his Saints by love, in Heaven by his Majesty, in the Church by an especial
assistance and direction; he is every where, whole filling Heaven and earth;
his power being present, Aug. l. 7. de Ciu. Dei. c. 30. Cyp. l. de vanit.
Idolorum.
his nature not absent. All the world is his Temple; yet must we not upon this
pretense avoid Churches, as Jeroboam dissuaded from set times and places of
Gods worship, Ios. Ant. l. 8. c. 3.8.
because God hears every where; he especially affords his presence in those
places, which he calls his houses; and therefore Cain for his murder, not
daring to come to the place appointed for the service of God, is said to go out
from the presence of the Lord, Genesis 4: And when Jonas is said to fly from the
presence of the Lord, Ion. 1, Aben Ezra says, Genesis 4.16. Ion. 1.3.
that he fled from that place where the Prophets stood, and offered themselves
to be sent of God, when he should command them: If God be in the midst of two
or three, gathered together in his name, how much more graciously is he with
the multitudes of godly, whose prayers are as thunderclaps, or the roaring of
the sea. Such oratories do we enjoy, founded by Jews and Gentiles, Bas:
as well as any of Romish Religion: what was it for them in Popery to build
Churches, or repair them. Campians speech at the funeral of Sir T: White.
In maxima rerum vilitate, and multorum opibus adiuti, in a time of great
cheapnesse of every thing, and helped with the riches of many men? It is a
slander that our Faith or Credo pulls down those Churches, which their Pater
Noster founded: Their claim is false, to be founders of Churches. Constantine
the great built Churches before Popery was hatched: Charles the great, B. Bad:
in Exodus
Schools of Divinity, and Universities in Germany, France, Italy, not for
Popery, but for the Bible to be taught in; and the Britains ancient
Inhabiters of this nation, had their Churches and Temples, and yet no Popery:
If they built or repaired our Churches, Bid:
we may frequent them, being swept and purged, and reformed. Some zealous
professors the Lord rayseth up, to add more unto these, and to uphold those
already built, that they may be dedicated houses unto God; especially having
so Religious a Leader as our Solomon, who daily encourages and commands to
such charitable works, The Lord his God having now given him rest on every
side, 1. King. 5: to these we call, as to Fountains of the water of life, that
men would taste, and see that the Lord is good, 1. King. 5.4.
Psalm. 34: We say come hither old men and Fathers, Psalm, 34 4.
and learn of Simeon to sing a Nunc dimittis; Be not loath to depart in peace:
Come hither, young men and brethren, We will teach you the fear of the Lord.
We here sing: Praise the Lord all ye Nations, Psalm. 127.1.
praise him all ye people. To this end is this Chapel this day dedicated
unto God; and the lawfulness of dedication we have seen. We may rejoice now,
and be glad in the Lord; It will become us well to be thankful, and to testify
our thankfulness by continuing our care in our several places.

Ne longo sermon morer tua tempor a Praesul: Reverend and Honorable Father of
this Diocese, Be as hitherto you have been to this religious town, a
faithful Patron to Church and School; as Timothy to Ephesus, Titus to Crete,
Polycarpus to Smyrna, Paulinus to Nola, Primasius to Vtica, Eucherius to Lions,
Chrysostom to Constantinople, Cyprian to Carthage, Ambrose to Millaine, Austin
to Hippo: This town yet flourishes in many blessings; and so it will, if
faction and schism prevail not against the peace of it.

Worthy and careful Magistrates, M. John Nichols, M. Richard Winn, then the
two Bailiues, both present, and some of the 12 Aldermen, and 24 Counselors. A
Sermon before the election of new Bailiues.
Be you with your Brethren trusty Guardians of the Schools and Scholars;
defend their foundation, revenues, privileges: The Magistrate defends the
scholar with his sword, and the scholar defends the Magistrate with his
pen. Let Learning be countenanced by you, and the learned shall praise you. I
shall hereafter give you a more ample charge out of another Text of Scripture;
where you shall see that you must give an account of your office to the God of
Gods.

Provident and industrious Masters of this School, so teach your Scholars,
that they may have this testimony which Cyprian gave Christians; Cyp: ad
Iubaianum.
Veniunt vt discant, Discunt vt viuant, They come to learn, and learn here
the Art of living well: All your Art is now reduced into two words, Deus and
Rex: Instruct them to Fear God and honor the King; Intus si recte, ne labora.
and then the Motto of your School, may be engraven upon your consciences; We
deserve not just censures, and pass by unjust: Be content with that you have,
countenance none to challenge that which is the portion of another: If they
pull from the Church that which is due, and pretend to bring it hither; it is
like Judas project, that would not have Christ's body anointed, but the poor
relieved: It is an hon^^ring of the members, and uncovering of the head: That
little which they take away (and but little all is left) eats, as we see,
into their wealth, who seek to rob Church or School: Let your diligent
labors make such, that may defend you from unjust wrongs; and then, as Herod
the great, though at home, Joseph Antiq: l. 16.6.
was most unhappy in his wife and children, yet abroad was most happy for his
friends, acquaintance, and other prosperity; so though you may have some who
seek your hurt, being near; yet others who are employed far from you, may
defend you.

Young Plants of this consecrated Vineyard, I say to you, as Solomon to his
young man: Remember now your creator in the days of your youth, Eccl. 12.1.
Eccl. 12.

Dum vires annique sinunt, -- While strength and years suffer you, Be diligent
and constant in preparing your selves to be hereafter ornaments of the Church
and common wealth. Now is your Harvest; Let your School be as it is called
Ludus literarius, a place wherein you take pleasure to learn, rather then a
pain; Redeem the time, the days are evil; Life is short, Hippocrates.
Art is long.

Let us all Beloved, hear the end of all: Fear God, and keep his
commandments, for this is the whole duty of man: All of us must appear, Eccl.
12 13.
where we must give a reckoning of our Stewardship, as yesterday divinely we
were admonished. In a Sermon by the reverend Bishop, in S. Chaddes Church.
Let us perform all duty to our Temples; Let us remember that we were
redeemed to be Temples of the holy Ghost: Holiness becomes Gods Temples: If
we labor here truly to be holy, then hereafter we shall be truly happy;
and being received into the holy Jerusalem, which is above, and only free, and
the mother of us all, we shall sing Hosanna the song of children; Halleluiah,
the song of the Elders; Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, the song of
Cherubims and Seraphims; and shall for ever live in glory with the Father, the
Son, and the Spirit: To which Frinitie we shall ascribe praise and power in a
unity, for ever and ever: So be it, Amen.

FINIS.

