THE TWO TWINS OF BIRTH AND DEATH. A SERMON PREACHED in Christ's Church in
London, the 5. of September. 1624. By SAMSON PRICE, Doctor of Divinity, one of
his Majesty's Chapleins in Ordinary. Upon the occasion of the Funerals of Sir
WILLIAM BIRD Knight. Doctor of the Law, Deane of the Arches, and Judge of the
Prerogative Court of the Archbishop of Canterbury.

PHILLIP. 1.21. To me to live in Christ, and to dye is gain.



AT LONDON: Printed by Edward All-de, for John Hodgets. 1624.

TO MY CHRISTIAN AND LOVING PARISHIONERS OF CHRIST'S CHVRCH IN LONDON.
Beloved in Christ Jesus:
IT is the promise of the Word, that the righteous shall be in everlasting
remembrance, Psalm. 112.6.
as registered in the book of eternal life, so graciously mentioned to the joy
of posterity in this life. Chrisost:
The best monument is not in stately houses, strong walls, high Towers,
glorious Sepulchers, Antomin: 1. P. Tit. 2. C. 9. S. 2.
but in righteous actions, grounded upon memory, which considering the
infirmity of nature, loss by sin, examples of the good, folly of the wicked,
necessity of the miserable, and looking upon God, as a Creator, Redeemer,
Rewarder, makes a man live according to his will revealed in his Word; Mic.
6.8.
in doing justly, loving mercy, and walking humbly. The memorial of such a one
I present to you (and to those whosoever shall read this passage from birth to
death) in Sir William Bird deceased and gone to the Lord, whom I know you
esteemed Inter raros and paucos excellentissimae gratiae viros, Amongst those
few choice pearls of excellent parts, Aug. de Cyp. li. 6. de Baptismo
left in these decaying times. Imperfect it is, and this birth had died as
soon as it had been borne ( without pressing) had not I perceived how tender
it was taken among some, and earnestly desired to be published by others. We
shall learn to live well by remembering our death, and we shall live to God if
we dye to the world. As long as I am in this Tabernacle I shall put you in
remembrance of this, 2. Peter 1.13.
that you may love the Lord your God, walk in his ways, keep his
commandments, statutes, judgments, and live, and multiply, and that the Lord
our God may bless you: and we may be preserved and delivered at the hour of
death and day of judgment.

From the new Rents in your Parish, October. 18. 1624. Yours in Christ Jesus,
Samson Price.

THE TWO TVVINS OF BIRTH AND DEATH.
Lord Jesus begin and end.
ECCLES. 3.2. A time to be borne, and a time to dye.


IT was a divine confession of that sweet Singer of Israel, holy King David, a
man concerning whom GOD did swear in his holiness, Ps. 89: 33.
that he would not suffer his faithfulness to fail him: His glory is great in
thy salvation, honor and majesty have thou laid upon him. Ps. 21.5.
Great were his deliver ances from the Iawe of the Lion, Pawe of the Bear,
Iauelin of Saul, Spear of Goliath; from the Counsel of Achitophell, Slander
of Doeg, Reuiling of Shemei, Mouth of the Sword, from the murraine of his
Subjects, multiplicity of his sins, and the rebellion of his son Absolon.
Honorable were his dignities in the love of his people, glorious wearing of a
Crown, triumphant victories over his enemies. He was higher then the Kings of
the earth: Ps. 89.27.
such a son did the Lord send him: Solomon a King, passing all the Kings of
the earth in riches and wisdom, 2. Chapter 9.2^. 2. Sam. 12.24 Eccles. 1.1. 2.
Sam. 12.25
called Solomon by his father David, when Bethsheba had borne him: the Preacher
by himself in the forefront of this book, and Iedidiah by Nathan the
Prophet, by whose hand the Lord sent so to name him. Hier. in Eccles. orig. in
Can. Am. pro. in Lu. Salonius viennensis in Prou.
Three names agreeable to three books he wrote, Solomon to that of the
Proverbs, the Preacher to Ecclesiastes, Iedidiah to his Canticles: the Proverbs
containing morrall Instructions, the Preacher many natural secrets, Prou.
4.1.3.
his Canticles the supernatural mystery of that marriage betwixt Christ and
his Church. Tria volumina Salomonis misle Cobel. th. Sir Hasirim. Heir. Praef.
in Prou. Solom.
In the Proverbs as a Father he teaches tender children the offices of life:
in Ecclesiastes the young man that for all things he must be brought to
judgment: in the Canticles, him that is grown to some perfection how to be
joined with divine embracings to God, Cant. 1.2.
and to be kissed with the kisses of his mouth. In the Proverbs, he teaches
how to live in the world: In Ecclesiastes, Hie. Prae. in Ec.
how to despise the world: In the Canticles, how to love God above the world.
As Solomon, he wrote his Proverbs, a King of peace giving laws, which being
kept by us, shall work internal, external, eternal peace for us, peace with
our selves, neighbors, God. As a Preacher he wrote his Ecclesiastes: for no
doctrine more fit for the Pulpit, and to be preached to the whole world, then
man's mortality the chief subject of the book. As Gods favorite, he wrote
the Canticles, containing the mutual love of Christ and his Church. King David
was Gods beloved, and hence comes his name, David of (...) Dod Amor. Amicus.
Dilectus.
his son Solomon was so, a wise son of a wise father, a Prophet from a
Prophet: for howsoever the spirit of prophecy goes not ever by inheritance
and succession; Basil.
yet David by prayer obtained this blessing, to have a son like himself, a
son by generation, and a son by similitude. King David delighted to teach
transgressors the ways of God, that sinners might be converted: Ps. 51.13.
Prou. 1.2. Bid Ecles. 12.14.
so King Solomon wrote to make men know wisdom and instruction, and to
perceive the words of understanding, how men should live according to the truth
of knowledge: direct their intentions, and govern their actions: For God shall
bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good
or whether it be evil. Thales therefore (answered well, when demanded what was
the wisest amongst creatures: Time (said he) for it finds out all things. O
then that we were wise, that we understood this, that we would consider our
latter end. Deuteronomy. 37.29.
Things past must be considered, the good omitted, Patritins de transitu animae
ad Deum.
not providing for a time to come, neglecting the day of grace, desisting from
doing good: the evil committed against God by disobedience, our neighbors by
hurt done, our selves by consenting to sin: the time lost which is precious,
a benefit from God, irreuocable: Things present must be considered, the
shortness of life which flies as a shadow, fades as a flower, is only
certain in uncertainty: the worlds vanity, whereby the covetous are deceived,
the carnal led, the proud caught: the space given to repent, wherein our
estate should be remembered, our passage considered, our good foreseen. Things
to come must be considered, the giving up of our account, when we must answer
for our thoughts, words, works, the day of death which is at hand sure, unsure:
the day of judgment which is the last doom, to the evil fearful, to the
good joyful. This was the song of Moses, not only merely prophetical, as
Rabo, Paulus would have it, but exhortatory also. This is the wisdom from
above, making men pure, peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy
and good fruits, Iam. 3.17.
without partiality, without hypocrisy. Other wisdom perishes, the wisdom
of the serpent in a curse, Is. 29.14.
the wisdom of the Pharisees in a woe, the wisdom of Achitophel in folly, of
Nimrod in confusion, of the unjust steward in expulsion, the wisdom of
Iezabel in death. Moses prayed for this heavenly wisdom: So teach us to number
our days, Ps. 9.12.
that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom: Hier. ep. 139.
Nothing so deceives men, as to be ignorant of the paces of their life, and to
promise long times to themselves; unless we think upon death we can never
fashion our selves to a godly life. Repentance has no such enemy, as to
think that any time will serve to repent, Hardly can a man think of a short
life here and think evil, or of a long life and think well. The act of
living well is very long, but life it self short, and God would have the time
of death unknown unto us, because we should be ready for him at all times,
having no more certainty of one hour then another, yet Salomons lesson shall
make us ready to leave the world cheerfully, when we remember a time to be
borne, and a time to dye.

A text showing the short progress of man's life, his inconstancy and
mortality who comes up and is cut down like a flower, flies as it were a
shadow, and never continues in one stay: in the midst of life is in death,
whirling by a swift wheel, which should admonish us, that we have a set time
for our task, the clock counting our hours, and should work out our
salvation with fear and trembling, while we have light, least we be benighted,
and our eyes shut, and we sleep in death. A great task it is, and we should
not lose one minute, but make a good use of time, and seeing we were borne to
glorify God, and must dye, we should labor that after death we may live for
ever with him in glory, because there is a time to be borne, and a time to dye,
as sure as we have been borne, so sure we must dye.

Oritur Moritur.
Birth and Death are Twinnos. The sum of the words is, the Revolution of
time, or watch of time, or the Race of life, or Man's mortality, or his
pilgrimage, consisting of two parts:

1. Upon his birth, a time to be borne. 2. Upon his death, and a time to dye.
The first, shows us his coming forth, the second, his returning back. In
the first see his beginning: In the second his ending. The first, opens his
day: the second, threatens a night. Here is the Prologue and Epilogue of the
state of man, wherein, first his Birth comes to be considered.

Prima pars. Caietan.
A time to be borne. Amongst Salomons couples; which are 14. in this Chapter,
the four first contrarieties concerning the generation and corruption of men,
plants, other creatures, and things made by Art: the four next concerning the
delectable good: the other three a profitable good: and the three last, humane
society: First, here is mention made of the Birth and Death, Nyssen and
Olym^iod.
to rowze up the sluggard, to raise up the worldly minded men, who neglect
things future, remembering them, that because they were borne, they must dye; as
Moses, who having written his book of Genesis, the beginning, creation,
production of creatures, vvrote an Exodus next to that, a going out. No man
must murmur against Gods providence: It is not in the power of man to come into
the world, Hugo Victorinus.
nor in his disposition to depart out of the world. A divine hand rules all,
every thing has its season, as a time ordained by God. The creature is
governed by the Creator. Righteousness that came down from heaven, first
appeared in the glimpse of the rudiments of nature; when the law came it was
in the infancy, Tertul. de Virg. Veland. c. 10.
when the Gospel was preached, it had a flourishing youth; and at the
coming down of the holy Ghost, it grevv to more maturity. When the fullness
of time was come, Gal. 4.4.
God sent forth his Son. It is folly for men to murmr, that they were borne
at such times and not other: we are borne at Gods pleasure, and his periods of
time. There is a time of conception, and a time of birth; For that has not
ever a birth, which has had a conception, though sometimes one word be used for
another, the birth for the conception, as that which shall be borne of thee
shall be called the Son of God: Lorinus in textum. Luke 1.35.
and sometime it signifies any increasing, as Nascere Dardanio promissum semen
Iulo
Tu modo nascenti puero -- castae faue Lucina:
And that Sometimes Birth is taken for creation, as that, Martial l. 6. Epig.
7. Virg. Aeglog. 4. Job 15.7.
Art thou the first man that was borne? Understood of Adam: But here in the
proper signification opposed to Death, and limited by God, Psalm. 73.9.
who disposes of all things though some set their mouth against the heavens,
and cast the faults they commit upon the Planets under which they were borne,
Amb. and Euth. in illud Psalm.
never considering how providence governs time, never referring any thing to
their own corruptions. God has sent us into the world to use our time well,
that vvhither we live we live unto the Lord, or dye, we may dye in the
Lord, so we shall exchange a troublesome life for a peaceable, a temporal for
an eternal. Man is borne miserable. For other creatures which are but base
borne in respect of man; have couerings to defend them, and Bucklers to offend
their enemies. Fishes of the Sea have shells, Pli. not. hist. li. 7. proem.
Trees of the Forest have knotty barks, Beasts of the field hard hides, Bees
stings, Hogs bristles, Hedgehogs prickles, Bears rough hair, Birds feathers,
Fishes scales, Sheep fleeces, Serpents stings, Cocks spurs, Elephants and
Bores teeth and tuskes, yet man comes from the prison of his mothers womb as
a poor worm, Ar. l. 3. de generat. animal. c. 4.
Yea nudissimum omnium animalium: Most naked of all living creatures. He
enters into the world bathed in blood, an image of sin, Dr. Wilk.
his first song is the Lamentation of a sinner, weeping and sobbing, the mother
lies, by but half flaine by the birth, and when she looks upon the fruit
of her labor pranked up, it is as the Thief when he is pardoned, looks
back to the string that was like to strangle him: and knows this child had
been her death, had not God given her a safe deliverance in the great danger
of childbirth. The child being borne, requires nourishment, and the mother
should do this, if her breasts be as able bottles, and her strength
sufficient, and no maine let to hinder the nursing of her own child: yet
often (upon a needless wantonness) the mothers send abroad their Infants to
strange Nurses and remote places, not enduring to embrace little children in
their arms, which Christ himself did, having been once a child, and wrapped
in swaddling clothes, but rather will embrace a Whelp or Puppy, worse then the
Sea monsters, they draw out the breast, La. 4.3.
and give suck to their young ones: yet if this young Gallant be nursed by
his own mothers paps, and tender, and only beloved in her sight, Pro. 4.3.
as once borne in her womb, and ever borne in her heart; tender in her eyes,
because she is ever tenderly careful and fearful of him: what is he borne
to but a succession of miserable times, if he outliue the birth? for he might
have dyed from the womb, and given up the ghost when he came out of the
belly: Job 3.11.12.
the knees might have prevented him, and the breasts from sucking. What is
Infancy but an Apprentiship of seven years infirmity, Jsidore reckous 6.
ages. Infancy, Puerility, Man's state. youth, gravity, o'de age. Marcius
Aurelius: Galen makes but 5. Childhood to 15. years, Adolescencie to 25.
Lusty youth to 35. Man's age to 49. The last old age.
wherein there is no use of expressing almost a reasonable soul? Childhood to
10. but an untoward fantastical toying; shake the rod, it is persecution:
Man's estate to 28. but headie, aduenturous, voluptuous, passionate, prodigal.
Youth to 50. but a season, wherein Nature reareth against him a more furious
combat, and all the vices of the world there plant their siege: Gravity or
vnweldinesse to 70, bring all the diseases that ever Christ came to cure. Old
age having no stint as the other, because the remains of life are referred to
this, yet the dregs only and powder of man's life, and a continual necessary
expectation of death. Thus man never continues constant, and scarce is his
life a life in his mutable conditions, tossed by time, which continually runs
on and is irreuocable. THIS is our wisdom to apprehend it, and not neglect or
abuse it. All Gods works have (...) and (...), a time and season, and we
should make our time seasonable, for it is an high part of wisdom to follow
opportunity: Natures Secretary the Physician looks at this, and every man
shows himself wise or foolish in this.

Temperibus medicina valet: Data tempore prosunt
Et data non apto tempore vina nocent. Ou. 1. de remed. amor.

Pitacus best advise was (...): know the season. He that is young in years may
be old in hours if he loose not time, and as fit for judgment as invention,
for counsel as execution. If he remember the times, he will not embrace more
then he can hold, stir more then he can quiet, fly to the end without
consideration of the means and degrees, use extreme remedies at first, be
like an unruly horse that will neither stop nor turn. Time brings changes
and therefore it is good to be wise in time: The Ancients painted this as an
Image on a swift wheel, having feathers at the foot, running swiftly in a
round, rough at the foretop, bald behind, when offering it self easy to be
taken, afterward impossible: some as a goodly Boy with his hairs hanging over
his eyes: Politian. in Miscell. c. 49. John Tzetzes in historijs. Pier. l. 14.
page 130. Id. l. 56. p. 536
some paint it deaf without ears, reaching a sword to him that shall follow
it. The Egiptians describe it by a Serpent streatching it self in length
wreaths and foulds, the long courses of days and years, creeping along
without noise. Others by a sith represent it, Id. l. 52. p. 505 Id. l. 44. p.
437
because it moweth, reapeth, cutteth all things down. Others by a Poplar tree
having leaves of two colors, signifying the day and night. Others by a Star,
for nothing so keeps the appointed times as the heavenly bodies, and so
should we from that globe of examples: For our times run on and slip away
and we cannot hold in the swift post of our days.

Ovid.
Tempora labuntur, tacitisque senescimus annis,
Et fugiunt fraeno non remorante dies.
Time consumes wit, fame, youth, honor, old age, strength. Nothing lives
here but is subject to the law of time; It is the watch of the morning,
sentinel of the night, ruin of proud buildings, spoil of antiquities, tamer
of wild beasts, waster of huge stones with small drops. It makes an Embrio
to become a child, a child a man, and an old man as it were a child again: The
time of birth we see described by the wise man; Wosd. 7.2.3.4.
a fashioning there was of us to be flesh in the wombes of our mother in the
time of ten months; and being borne, we drew in the common air and fell
upon the earth which is of like nature; the first voice we uttered was crying:
we then come to be nursed in swaddling clothes and that with cares, and no King
had another beginning of birth. Natiuitas mirabilis. Ier. 23.5.
There is an admirable Nativity wherein flesh is borne without spot, there is
his purity, as in Christ's birth arighteous bra^ch, a child of a Virgin, there
is the nouelty: God of a woman, there is humility, the highest himself shall
establish her: Is. 7.14.
Fruit of a Rod, there is our commodity; unto us a child is borne, Ps. 87.5.
borne as an example of humility, Is. 9.6.
testimony of verity, figure of love, covenant of reconciliation: but our
Nativity is miserable because vile and unclean: what is he which is borne of
a woman that he should be righteous? Miserabilis. Job. 15.14.
poenal and inflamed by hell, clouded with darkness and passing as a shadow:
Job. 3.6.
In this birth man has another following making him blind in his birth, Ioh.
9.1.
unworthy to teach others, weak to do good, Vituperabilis.
frail to resist evil: we have had time to be borne, and as a man that has
passed over a dangerous bridge if he turn bake quaketh to remember the danger
he was in; so if we look back upon the danger we escaped till our birth, and
in it, we may say as King David Thou art he that took me out of the womb,
but few consider the use of their birth and so much abuse time, Ps. 22.9.
that better it had been for them they had never been borne.

reproves many who mispend their time in chambering and wantonness, Romans 13.13.
gluttony and drunkenes, and vicious games, having no portion to themselves or
posterity in earth, never thinking of a portion in heaven, having no conscience
for their souls, no discretion for their goods. Some complain of the iniquity
of the times and no whit mend themselves: say not, Former times were better,
thy virtues make good times, Hic in Eccls. 1.
thy vices bad. All things are others, time only is our own, yet hasteneth,
and therefore should not be wasted away, as by him, who being asked how long he
had lived? answered, Stob. se. 9. de Simouide.
a very little time though many years: Or as those lewd servants who having a
candle allowed them to go to bed withal, spend it in carding, dicing, or
drinking. What a curse is it to spend al thy time in vanity, and to send thy
hoary head to thy grave in ignorance and folly? Will thou give Satan the
finest of thy flower and sweetest of thy wine, and present the bran and dregs
of thy dottage to thy Lord? will thou lay the heauiest burden upon the weakest
beast, and force old age (so feeble that it cannot bear it self) to bear all
the burden of thy Repentance? O take heed, for when the strong man is grown
stronger by praescription, the rotten tabernacle is ready to fall down:
custom has turned infirmity into nature; sin is soaked into substance: when
thy bones shall be full of the sins of thy youth, then to repent it will be
hard, if not impossible. Did not we bring sin enough with us into the world
to condemn us? we must all confess as he did, Behold I was shapen in
inquinity and in sin did my mother conceive me: words which David uttered,
Ps. 51.5. 2. Kin. 18.42.
as Eliah when he put his face between his knees, for so is the child in the
womb. Boast not of thy goods, Inheritance, countenance, and blood by thy
Parents, it is tainted with sin: this is the poison. Pineda in Job. 15.24.
Hipoer. lib. de natura pueri.
We had Birth from our mothers, but withal the reward of sin, death;
clothes and wrapping from the but withal nakedness and shame. What must be
done, but as that woman sick of the bloody issue, having been long physicked,
but ill handled of the Physicians, having suffered many things of many
Physicians, and spent all she had and nothing bettered, but rather grew worse;
Mar. 5.26.27
when she heard of Jesus, came to be physiked a new of him; So we who are thus
base borne, must take our time to be borne a new. This is an Honorable and
commendable birth if we respect the causes. Natiuitas commendabilis.
Faith: whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ is borne of God. Love: 1.
Io. 5.1.1. Io. 4.7.1. Io. 3.9.
Every one that loves is borne of God and knows God. Righteousness:
whosoever is borne of God does not commit sin, presumptuosly, desperately,
impenitently. It is an honorable birth if we respect the effects, to conquer
the world; whatsoever is borne of God overcomes the world, 1. 10. 5.4. Ioh.
3.3.
to bring to heaven, for except a man be borne again he cannot see the
Kingdom of God. This makes new men, new affections, gives another spirit,
another will, a loathing of the world, a love of God. It causes us not so much
to observe days, and months, and times, and years, as to know The TIME that
now it is high time to awake out of sleep, Gala. 4.10. Romans 13.22.
for now is our salvation nearer then when we believed. Sicut nec capillus de
oapite sie nec momentu seribis de tempore: Bar.
This makes us good husbands and ever to think upon our reckoning, and to
consider that as not a hair falls to the ground without providence, so
neither a moment of our time is unaccountable: How busy was the Devil above a
thousand years since, because he knew he had but a short time? Will you plant,
build, buy, Reu. 12.22.
sell only for the world, and do nothing for eternity? Will you be prodigal
of the golden days given us to redeem time, and let heaven fly away and hell
steal on? Be not lulled a sleep in ease, mirth, prosperity, as the Dalilah
of the world or flesh, or Devil persuade. Satan will come with fearful
arrest and sease upon thee in sickness, weakness, discontent, as the Raven
upon the fainting sheep; and write, and urge, and open bitter, unanswerable,
terrible things against thee: O then that men would fly out of the midst of
Babylon, Reuela. 2.22.
and deliver every man his soul that he be not cut off in iniquity, for there
is a TIME of the Lords vengeance. Iezebell had her space to repent of her
fornication and repented not, therefore a bed of tribulation is threatened her.
Jerusalem not knowing the time of her visitation, had their enemies to cast a
trench about them, compass them round, keep them in on every side, lay them
even with the ground, Luke 19.44.
and their children within them, and not to leave one stone upon another. Am.
5.13.
If we see the TIME when the prudent keep silence because it is an evil time:
Mic. 2.3.
when men work evil upon their beds, and covet fields, and take them by
violence because it is an evil time: when men dwell in their fieled houses,
and yet say the time is not come, that the Lords house should be built: Hagg.
1.2.
when being possessed with Devils and reproved, they cry as those did to
Jesus, Mat. 8.29.
what have we to do with thee, Art thou come hither to torment us before the
time? When those perilous times come wherein men are lovers of themselves,
covetous, boasters, proud, 2. Tim. 3.1.2.
blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful, unholy; Wherein when for
the time men ought to be teachers, they have need that one teach themagain,
Heb. 5.12.
which be the first principles of the Oracle of Gods: When the last times bring
forth those who walk after their own ungodly lusts, Jude 18.19.
separating themselves; sensual, having not the spirit. Let us pray, It is
TIME for thee Lord to work, Ps. 119.126.
for they have made void thy Law. Job 22:16.
He shall cut them down out of time and ouerflowe their foundation with a
flood: their false Gods cannot arise and save them in the time of trouble: Jer.
2.27.
They shall fall when others fall. When they are visited and shall be cast
down, Jer. 6.15.
They shall be smitten and have no healing; look for peace and there shall be
no good, for a time of healing and behold trouble: Jer. 14.19.
They shall be like a thrashing flower, for the Lord sees it is time to thrash
them, yet a little while and the time of their harvest shall come: An end is
come, it watches for them, Ier. 51.33.
the time is come, the day of trouble is near: a time of trouble, such as
never was since there was a Nation, Ezekiel. 7.7.
even to that same time. Da. 12.1.
Man knows not his time; As the fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as
the birds that are caught in the snare, so are the sons of men snared in an
evil time, when it falls suddenly upon them. Ecles. 9.12.
The fish is cheerful devouring the bayt not seeing the hook, but the
fisherman drawing him up, torments the bowels and dragges it to destruction.
August. de agone Christi. cap. 7.
So many run away with presumptuous sins, but the time shall come that they
shall feel the plagues of it; when time shall be no longer. One woe shall be
past and another woe come quickly: from death to judgment, from judgment to
hell. Reu. 10.11.14
They may come up as floods, their waters may move as the rivers, they may
say, we will cover the earth; they may rage with their Charets, but when the
day of vengeance comes, in vain shall they use many medicines, for they
shall not be cured; their cry shall fill the land, they shall be swept away
when the Lord drives them, they shall appear to have been but a noise when
they have passed the time appointed. Jer. 46.17.


Instruction must be, not to walk as fools, but circumspectly, as wise,
redeeming the time, because the days are evil: we are borne of women, Ep.
5.16.
of few days, full of trouble. Ioh. 14.1.
Let us remember how short our time is: what man is he that lives and shall
not see death? Ps 89.47.48.
Be not overmuch wicked, neither be thou foolish: why should thou die
before thy time? Eccles. 7.17.


Stat sua cuique dies. Every man's days are determined, Virgil. 10. Aeneid.
the number of his months is with God, he has appointed him his bounds that
he cannot pass: Ioh. 14.5.
this is a measure of his days, in respect of Gods prescience and providence,
Psalm 39.4.
but in respect of the course of nature, the thread of life which might have
been lengthned is cut off by Gods command for sin, and men live not out
half their days: Psalm. 55.23.
as that Bishop applied this text in his time, Bernardinus to. 2. in Qua.
dragesimali de Euang. oetern. Do. 2. quadra. sermon. 17. a. 3. cap. 1.
when in Catalonia a city near Valentia, a strippling of 18. having been
disobedient to his parents, and so fell to robbing, and being executed on the
tree, and thus remaining for a spectacle to disobedient children; on the next
morrow, a Beard and gray hairs appeared on him, which the people hearing of,
and wondering how suddenly these should come to a young dead body, and urging
how young he was at his death; the Bishop said, he should have lived to be so
old as he appeared then, had he not been disobedient. Thus the Lord
threatens the family of Eli, all the increase of thine house shall dye in the
flower of their age. 1. Sam. 3.33.
He dies before his time who dies unwillingly, not prepared, not ripe in
years, though ripe in sin; which hasteneth death and destruction as God
threatened to the Amorrhites when their iniquity should be full. Genesis 15.16.
Happy is he who can triumph with that flagge of defiance against all enemies
as St. Paul. Herein do I exercise my self to have always a conscience void
of offense toward God and toward men. Act. 24.16.
Happy is he who every night thinks with himself, a day is gone, a part of
my time is cut off, so much less have I left of a short and miserable life.
God has appointed the time of life short, in respect of prosperity and
adversity in this world, that our appetite may be stirred to future things
whereof here we have but a taste, as were the trees in Paradise and Manna; If
these pleasures below delight us, how much more shall those above? Punishments
here are but essays of those hereafter ordained for the wicked, as those upon
the Sodomits, Chorah and his accomplices, and if the short plagues of this life
are feared; how much more those of another? A little time we have, that by
little consolations we may be invited to glory, and by small troubles fear
greater. A little time is given us, least our troubles being over long we
should despair: onour joys, we should neglect God. Adversity sometimes must
exercise us, else prosperity will pull us down. There are but four times, a
time of deuiation as from Adam to Moses when death reigned: Romans 5.14.
a time of Reuocation from Moses to Christ, the Law being added because of
transgressions: a time of Reconciliation from the birth of Christ to the
sending of the holy Ghost, Gal. 3.19.
the spirit it self bearing witness with our spirit that we are the children
of God; a time of Peregrination from the sending of the holy Ghost till the day
of Judgment, Romans 8.16.
while we are at home in the body, 2 Cor. 5.7.
we being absent from the Lord. 2. Cor. 5.7.
In this Pilgrimage we must walk by faith. The times are dangerous in regard of
troubles which must fail out, such as never were since the beginning of the
world: Mat. 24.21.
Of Satan's liberty; Reu. 20.8.
who being loosed, deceived the Nations of the four quarters of the earth: of
the multitude of many false Prophets rising and deceauing many: Math. 24.11.
of the rareness of good men, Math. 24.12.
iniquity abounding: the love of many waxing cold. Let not the time run away
without observation. Think upon time past and be thankful for benefits
received; Creation, Redemption, Justification: repent for sin committed;
imitate the godly: Think upon the time present, the opportunity urging us to
work while we have time; the breuity compelling us to be instant, the
irreuocability stirring us up to constancy. Think upon the time to come and
provide to give a fair account. Barn. de trip. custodia. 1. Cor. 4.7.
Nothing ought to be of so precious esteem as time, it is Gods gift, we have
nothing but what we have received; we are answerable for it, and must deliver
back all things in number and weight: we must gain according to the talentes
delivered unto us: Ecc. 42.7.
we must grow in grace, Math. 25.20.
And to this end as in bodily growth, there are 4. helps, so in a spiritual:
There is nourishment in the womb, here is a proficiencie of knoweledge; there
we are brought into the light of the world, here we show forth some fruits of
the illumination of Baptism: there is milk given unto us, here the word of
God delivered out of both Testaments: there we are carried to our Parents
table, here we come to the Supper of the Lord, our heart and our flesh
rejoicing; that Now is the accepted time: 2. Cor. 6.2.
now is the day of salvation wherein God the Father begets us, the Church
our mother conceaueth us: The seed whereby we are borne again is the word:
the nurses to feed, weane, cherish us, are the Ministers of the Gospel, and
preaching is the food we must require, which will make us new creatures, have
new souls, affections, members; a new heart, hand, ears, eye: but if there be
no appetite in us after this; we are a Golgotha, having a name to live but are
dead in sin and dead in desires, unborn and better unborn then untaught.

Was it miraculous for Elias to live forty days without food of the body,
Animas portant mortuas in corporibus viuis. Aug.
and shall we think to live for ever if we neglect the food of our souls,
which should nourish us to life everlasting, having a name to live but are dead
and carry about us dead souls in living bodies? Have we hereetofore lived an
idle, profane, ungodly life? O let us live the rest of our time in the flesh
no longer to the lusts of men, but to the will of God, for the time past of our
life (as the Apostle speaks) may suffice us to have walked in the will of the
Gentiles, wherein the Apostle allows not the former life but reproves it:
1. Pet. 4.3.
It is like that, more over this was not enough for them that they erred in
the knowledge of God, Non approbat sed reprobat vitam praeteritam. Lyra.
but whereas they lived in the great war of ignorance, those so great
plagues they called peace: and like that, O ye house of Israel, Wisd. 14.22.
let it suffice you of all your abominations. Ez. 44.6.
There is no loss to the loss of time: it is folly to expect time while we
have it before us. He that has life has time, and this runns swifter then a
Weauers shuttle: Remember how greiuous it will be to think upon the neglect of
time, as Titus Vespasianus meditated, Suction.
Amici diem perdidi: A day misspent is lost. It was the lamentable Epitaph of
Similis Captain of the Guarde to the Emperor Adrian after he had retired
himself and lived privately seven years in the country, Xiphilinus in vita
Adriani.
that he had lived only seven years.

Hic iacet Similis: cuius aetas
Multorum annorum fuit, ipse
Septem duntaxat annos vixit.
Let us consider how long it is since we were borne, and number our years,
not from the time of our old birth, but New birth. Let us often consider how
our time runs on, let us remember the day of DOOM, the end of this time, and
beginning of immortality to come. 2. Esd. 7.43.
Let us look upon our threefold disease, the beginning, middle, end: our
Nativity, life, death, Our Nativity unclean, our life perverse, our death
dangerous: Let the meditation of the birth of Christ purge our birth; Bar: in
transitu malachiae pessima mors peccatoru^, quorum Natiuitas mala, vita peior.
of his death destroy our death; of his life instruct our life. Our Nativity
has been sinful, let not our life be badde, least our death be worse: Let us
endeavor to dye the death of Saints by living as Gods best servants: then
precious shall our death be in the sight of the Lord, as the end of out
labors, consummation of our victories, the gate of life, an entrance into
glory: Let us get to be borne again, which is our new Regeneration in Body
and Spirit. Bar. declamat. and apol. ad Gulielmu^ Abbatem.
We fell together in soul and body, but first must rise in soul if we would
be raised up at the last day in bodies to glory. Let us first esteem our
souls and not as those of the school of Hipocrates and Epicurus who neglect
the soul and provide only for the body, who fear not to commit sin, but to
endure shame. Let us know that as far as the spirit is above the flesh, God
above men, heaven above the earth, eternity above frailty; so far is the new
creation above the old; the one is mortal and corruptible, the other
immortal, from heaven, a work of God, abiding for ever: This brings to
life, the other to death, as it follows the Birth here.


There are many reasons why Death is come into the world: the disobedience of
Gods prohibition. Of the fruit of the tree in the middst of the Garden, God
has said, ye shall not eat least ye dye. Genesis 3.3.


The Malice of the Devils temptation; Wisd. 7.24.
through envy of the Devil came death into the world, the folly of the woman's
condition: she saw that the tree was good for food, pleasant to the eyes, and a
Tree to be desired to make one wise, and took of the fruit thereof and did
eat: The man's greedy apprehension, and he did eat: ibid.
Hence some observe that mors comes of mordeo, because our first Parents did
eat of that forbidden fruit. A memorable punishment drawing a man from pride:
Ecc. 10.9. facile co^temnit omnia qui nouit se moriturum. Aug. and Hier
why is earth and ashes proud? from covetousness: Easily despises a man the
world when he sees he must dye: from earthly pleasures, corruption being the
father, the worm a mother and sister, Job. 17.16.
when man goes down to the bowels of the pit, and rest must be in the dust.
It stirs up a man to good, to alms, to repentance, to disposing of his
house, as appears in Hezekiah when he had received the message of death, he
turned his face to the wall, If. 38.14.
prayed and mourned as a Dove. Now he settleth himself by a lively faith the
foundation of salvation, a search and confession of his former sins, in a
broken and contrite heart, Ps. 51.17.
by remission of injuries, submitting himself to Gods good pleasure, vnlading
himself of ill gotten goods, running to obtain. Howsoever man has thought of
himself before he be summoned to dye, and have bragged with proud Phaeton in
the Poet, that Apollo were his father; yet now he must call to mind, that
Climene was his mother: he sees that his strength is not of brass, his
matter is not of gold, silver, precious stones, but earth: that life and death
are in the hands of God, and have their date and destiny by him: that we are
carried away as Merchants in a ship, whither we stand or sit, watch or sleep,
Sensim sine sensu ^^nescimus, old age steals on, that he that p^^^^seth
himself a long life, does as he that looks through a perspectiue, conceive
those things great which are very small; that Death is a commanding Tyrant and
will have nodenyall. Hence is it called Dust, If I have rewarded evil to him
that was at peace with me, let the enemy lay mine honor in the dust: A brook:
Ps. 7.5.110.7. Ps. 8 l. 3. Job. 3.13. 1. These. 5.2. 2 Timothy ^.8. Ios. 2^.^4.
he shall drink of the brook in the way: The grave, my life draws nigh unto
the grave: A sleep, A coming, as a thief in the night: A time of departure:
the way of all the earth: Of Abell whose sacrifice God accepted, as of Cain,
whose sacrifice God despised: of Abraham the Father of the faithful, as well
as of the children of unbelief: of Izhac the son of the free woman, as of
Ismael the son of the bond woman: of Jacob whom God loved, as of Esau whom he
hated: of chaste Joseph as of incestuous Ammon: of meek Moses as railing
Rabshekah: of zealous Phinees as the lukewarm Minister of the Church of
Laodicea: of David a man according to Gods own heart, as Saul from whom God
took his spirit: of Solomon the wise, as Nabal the fool: of tender hearted
Josiah, as hard hearted Pharaoh: the humble Publican, as the proud Pharisee:
poor Lazarus to be carried into Abraham's bosom, as the rich glutton to be
carried into hell: John the beloved Disciple, as Judas the traitor: Simon Peter
the Apostle, as Simon Magus the Sorcerer: The death of Christ has freed from
the second death, but not the first: He has altered the use of the first
death, but not taken it away: it was ordained as a punishment, but he has made
it a passage into Heaven: and as by life man comes to bondage, so by death
his freedom is wrought, yet dye he must first; be he Natures Paragon, he is
but a lump of flesh, and straight after Birth is due the fatal Beer. Death is
the Emperor of graves, common Inn, the punishment, tribute, Conqueror,
receptacle of all: and as the Sun where it shines melts the hardest ice,
so where this Centurion commands there must be obedience. This place enemy
strikes with a bloody dart, the wretched Caitiffe and the King alike: It sends
out a Commission, as that voice to Abraham, Exi de terra tua, Go out of thy
Country wherein thou were bred and borne: come forth ye souls from those
bodies, and though there be but one manner of coming into the world, yet are
there many thousand ways of going out of the world. We are full of holes and
breaches, One dies young, another in a good age, some when their breasts are
full of milk: Eriyere vita^ nemo non homini petect. At nemo mortem, mill ad
hanc patent aditus Se^. trag. 3. Ac. 1.
Wait we must for our change, and patiently expect the execution of that
Decree, which is so various and manifold, that no one man's tongue can possibly
describe it.

Abell was slain by his brother, Abimelechs brains beaten out by a woman,
throwing a piece of a millstone from a wall: Agag washewed in pieces: Isay cut a
sunder with a wooden saw: Epipha de vitis Prophetarum.
Amos slain with a door bar: the Infants of Bethlehem were slain in their
Cradles, Eglon in his Parlour, Saul in the field, Isbosheth in his bed,
Sennacherib in the Temple, Ioab at the very Altar: Bears slew the boys that
mocked Elizeus, worms Herod, Lions Daniels accusers, Dogs Euripides.
Extremity of joy has killed some, as Zeuxes, Diagoras, Rhodius, Sophocles:
Sorrow others, as old Eli, Homer, Vrbain the third. Fire destroys some, as
the Sodomits, Nadab and Abihu, Zimri, Perillus. Water others, as M. Marcellus,
Laurentius Laurentinianus that great Physician. Earthquakes, Chore, Dathan,
Abiron, M. Curtius. Hunger destroyed Cleanthes the Philosopher. Thirst, Thales
Milesius. Watching, M. Attilius Regulus. The fall of an house Athenaeus.
Philippe a young French King called Grossus, fell from his horse dead: Iezabell
being cast out of a window dyed: Fulgo li. 9 c. 1^.
Anacreon the Poet was choked with the kernel of a raisin: Valentinian the
Emperor came to his end by strayning himself with crying too loud: Pli. not.
li. 7.7. Hier. op. 9 to. 9 Fulgo vbi supra Guido. Full. ib. Pli. vt supra.
Florus. lib. 3. c. a 3. Suides. Polyd. Virgil. hist Ang.
the yolke of an egg stifled Saufeius: a fish bone Tarquinius Priscus: a pear
Drusus Pompeius: an hair in his milk Fabius the Senator: a smoke Caetullus
the Orator: the hot Sun Chrysostom: a crumme of bread, Goodwin Earl of
Kent. A Plurisie killed Charles the Great, a Dissenterye, Anastasius the
second, the Cholicke Antiochus.

Julius Caesar disputing the night before of the good of sudden death, was the
next day by Brutus and Cassius slain suddenly in the Senate: Johannes
Mathesius having preached of the raising of the Widdowe of Naimes son, within
3. hours dyed: Luther having sat at supper, and discoursed divinely of the
joys of Heaven, about midnight after he slept in the Lord: Iouian an Emperor
was found dead in his bed: Pope Adrian the fourth was choked with a fly: Soz.
hist Eccl. 6.6. crimonesis
can we forget that doleful DOLEFVLL EVENSONG of that Popish assembly in the
Blacke-Fryers, miserably misled to hear a Jesuit? Oct. 25.1623
90. or 100. whereof perished while they heard Antichrist exalted: I dare not
be so uncharitable as from their temporal destruction to collect their
eternal confusion: But by these we may see no place is privileged from the
arrest of death. Some we see come to their graves by Apoplexies, Lethargies,
dead Palsies, some by sudden blows, some as a wasted candle, go out
naturally. How many does that violent FEVER now sweep away in our City, and
in the most parts of the Kingdom? an argument of Gods anger against us, as he
threatened the disobedient children of Israel, Dc. 28.15.22.
that if they would not hearken to his voice to observe to do all his
Commandments and Statutes (the SIN of ENGLAND) he would smite them with a
FEVER, and with an inflammation, and with an extreme BVRNING. Our Neighbors
visitation shows us Belshazzars emblem upon our doors and walls, that our
days are counted, Vita cito auolat nec potest retineri mors quotidie ingruit
nec potest resisti.
that our life flies away daily and cannot be retained, and death is
continually ready to rush upon us and cannot be resisted, but as we have had a
time to be borne, so a time to DIE.

Let the Egiptians call man a reverend and admirable creature, Mercury a great
miracle, Pythagoras the measure of all things, Plato the wonder of wonders,
Aristotle a politic creature, framed for society, Synesius the Horizon of
corporeal and incorporeall things, Tully a divine creature full of reason and
judgment, Pliny the worlds Epitome, and Natures darling, yet he is mortal,
and must yield to this heavy cold enemy, which sneapeth the brauest
blossoms, and makes them fade anon which ere while flourished: the longest
liver dies, and DEAD, the lowliest creature as the loathsome carrion lies. This
is it that daunteth all earthly things, They were borne to dye: If they had a
beginning, they must have an end. Death is impartial, cutting off good and
bad, It self known to all, the hour of it unknown to any: Nothing can
resist it, No Peers, Princes, mortal wight; No Towns, Realms, Cities,
Towers: All must run this course, and whatsoever lives it is sure to dye:
Nothing under the Sun is immortal: Death may claim his right upon birth,
God permits it, All have their times dated in his book of all disposing
providence: when the hour comes let none ask whence or why? All should
prepare for it: The goodliest Cities have been equalled with the ground,
stateliest buildings leuelled with the earth, greatest Empires brought to
nothing: Kings have been bound in chains, Nobles in fetters of iron. We wax
old as a garment, dwell in houses of clay, our breath goes away, and we all
perish: Mathuselah with his years, Samson with his strength, Absolon with his
beauty, Solomon with his wisdom, they had a time of birth, and a time of
burial. Young men have death at their backs, and old men before their eyes;
yet few desire to look upon it, nay they cannot endure to hear, that as they
have had a time to be borne so a time to dye.

reprove many, who never seriously think upon their mortality, and therefore
are dead and buried in pleasures while they live, holding Repentance but an
hours work, Faith fancy, Religion a lip-labor, of whom we may say as
Martha of Lazarus, John 11.39.
He stinketh: Would we think upon our end, we would not so offend, but the
forgetfulness of this, causes wisdom to be tainted with craft, Justice with
corruption, Faith with dissimulation, Godliness with hypocrisy, Friendship
with hope of gain, Lending with usury: We live in a quarrelling age, the
most making ill use of Gods mercies, not enduring any correction. We have
enjoyed a long time of peace, plenty, and above all, the free passage of the
Gospel, yet our own consciences do accuse us, that we have neither worthily
esteemed, nor sufficiently expressed the sweet comfort of the Gospel revealed
unto us; but works be changed into words, walking in goodness into talking of
God, hands into tongues, hearts into cares: to cure superstition we neglect
true devotion. Some have Israelitish stomachs, and loath Manna the bread of
heaven; others Athenian cares itching after new Teachers and new Doctrines: Men
rather seek for profound knowledge, then for faith that works by love:
Preach we death and judgment? men say (blessing themselves in their hearts) we
shall have peace though we walk in the imaginations of our hearts, Deu. 29.19.
to add drunkenness to thirst. Hence

Heu viuunt homines tanquam mors nulla sequatur
Et velut infernus fabula vana foret.
Many live as if they should never dye, and as if hell were but a gulle and
fable, But the Lord will not spare such, his anger and jealousy shall smoke
against them, they shall have sickenesses and wounds, and the Lord will be unto
them as a moth and as rottenness. Hos. 5.12.
Better a living Dog then a dead Lion, so long as we live we may repent, but
after death Judgment, Heb. 9.
ordinary arguments; and the use of them has taken away the force of them, but
none so necessary. Is a man persuaded that these are nigh? It will easily
dispatch, that which no Law, Prince, prison, Parents or punishment could do:
they that before could take no counsel, now give good counsel. Nothing so
teaches as the remembrance of death, as not only appears in Ezekias his
devout meditations, put upon a perpetual record by the holy Ghost, when he had
but a tallie of days left him, but in Baltashazar who seeing the number of his
days and that he was found too light, began to quake and learn wisdom:
Deaths remembrance brings horror: O death how bitter is the remembrance of
thee, to a man that lives at rest in his possessions: Ecc. 41.1.
: It comes with trouppes of sorrows, Dr. Haywatd in his Sanct: of a troubled
Soul.
the head shooting, the back aching, the heart panting, the throat rattling, the
tongue faltring, the breath shortening, the flesh trembling, the veins
beating, the heart strings cracking, the eyes waxing dim, the nose sharp,
the brows hard, the cheeks cold and wanne, the lips pale, the hands numme,
the joints stiff, the whole body being in a cold-sweat, the strength fainting,
the life vanishing, the standers* by like flesh flies crying or craving,
offering to molest the dying body. Death separates the soul, deuideth friends,
spoils a man of worldly goods though he heaps vpsiluer as the dust, and
prepare rayme^t as clay. Job. 27.16.
Be not puffed up with prosperity, you know not what a day may bring forth,
the rankest corn is soonest laid: I see that all things come to an end: This
we must teach as David did, Ps. 119.96.
and that surely men of low degree are vanitye, Pl. 62.9.
and men of high degree are a lie to belayd in the balances, they are
altogether lighter then vanity. Tot quotidie occidimus quot ad mortem ire
tace^tes videmus Gr. lib. 33. epi. ad Venantium. Ac. 20.26.
In this point we must not be silent, so many we kill as we suffer to run on
to death without warning. St. Paul would keep nothing back from the
Ephesians, and shunned not to declare unto them all the counsel of God,
because he would be pure from the blood of all men. I have heard that News
came to a certain Town, that AN ENEMY was approaching, yet he came not:
hereupon a Law was made, that none should bring such rumors of wars and
news of an Enemy: Not long after the enemy came, besieged, assaulted,
ruinated the Town, and thence grew a Proverb, THAT PLACE WAS DESTROYED BY
SILENCE: Let us lift up our voices as Trumpetes herein, and though men be as
gods upon earth, Let us preach Man's mortality, and press for fruits worthy
amendment of life, that there may be comfort in death. Has God made thee a
little world, and above all earthly creatures, given to thee an immortal
soul, foreseing things to come, remembering things past, judging of things
present, bearing the image of God? made thee erect to behold the Heavens,
promised a resurrection of thy body and life everlasting, and will thou abuse
the goodness of God which leads to repentance? If he be provoked, he is a
consuming fire: He which in health has been diligent to fear God and to do
good, shall feel in sickness an unspeakable comfort, which he will not miss
for all the whole world, and a mighty boldness to speak unto God, But he
which whiles the world prospered with him never thought upon God, nor regarded
his word, when the visitation of the Lord is upon him, when his soul is ready
to be taken from him, his heart being hardened in sin, and he having made no
preparation for DEAEH; terror shall take hold on him as waters; a tempest shall
steal him away in the night; a storm shall hurl him out of his place, men
shall clappe their hands at him, and shall hiss him out of his place: Job.
27.22.23


Instruction for us to have our accounts in a readiness, that whenever the
Lord shall call us by his Bayliefe Death, he may find us prepared; that we may
keep a Calendar, and Ephemerides of our time, how it passes away; that as our
bodies stoop downwards by years and infirmities, so our souls soar upward;
that we may have our Loins girt and our Lamps burning. While we are in the
world, we are in a Sea of troubles; we sail as Pilgrims, tossed by the
tempests of adversity, oppressed by three Pirates; the Flesh, World, Devil:
Yet by the Bark of a lively Faith, this Mariner Death may transport us from
Aegipt to Canaan. For howsoever death (to the Reprobate) be the Curse of God,
Suburbs of Hell, Pyrate of life, the Devils Serieant to arrest and carry them
without bail to a Prison of utter darkness; his Cart to bring them to
execution, from which there can be no repriuement: Yet to the Godly it is not
exitus, but transitus: a departure but a passage: Cyp. sc. de mortal.
Fratres mortui non sunt amissi sed praemissi. Our dead Friends are not lost,
they are but sent before. Profectio est quam putas mortem: that thou think
death, Au. ep. 6.
is but a journey to them, Tert. de Patientia.
to the Land of the living; The key to unlock from misery, and send abroad to
liberty: A Bridge to pass from a vale of tears, to a paradise of joys. Like
the Brazen Serpent, so far from hurting true Israelites, that it heals
them. The beginning of joy, first fruits of pleasure, Prince of delight, and a
Massenger of glad tidings: A passage from labor to rest: Blessed are the dead
which dye in the Lord, Reu. 14.13
that they may rest from their labors: From vileness to glory; Lazarus was
carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom: From fear to security, The wicked
is driven away in their wickedness, Luke 14.22.
but the righteous has joy in his death: Pr. 14.32.
From trouble to peace, as old Tobit prayed, command my spirit to be taken
from me, Tob. 3.6.
that I may be dissolved, that I may be delivered out of this distress, and
go into the everlasting place: From an uncertain commorancie to a settled
habitario^, an eternal house in the Heavens: 2. Co. 5.1.
From captivity to liberty; therefore St. Paul wished: O wretched man that I
am, To. 7.24.
who shall deliver me from the body of death? From vanity to glory, which
made the same Apostle so confident; To me to live is Christ, and to dye is
gain. Ph. 1.21.
To the Godly it is a coast for them banished out of this world, a landing at
the Haven; a laying down of a heavy burden of the body, the consumption of
all diseases, the escaping of all perils, breaking of all Bonds, return to
our own home. Est vitae virtus maxima posse mori. Mat. 24.42.
THIS we should often think upon, because the greatest work we have to do,
is to dye well: And because Christ commands; watch, for ye know not what
hour your Lord will come: what I say unto you, I say unto you all, watch: Mar.
13.37.
Like unto men that wait for their Lord, when he will return from the
wedding; Luke 12.36.
that when he comes and knocks, ye may open to him immediately. It is too
late to recall the Bargain, the Bond being sealed; to defend the Walls, when
the City is overcome; to sound a retraite, when the Battle is fought; to
send for a Physician, when the sick party is dead: When time is past, it
cannot be recalled. Therefore says the wise man, whatsoever thy hand finds
to do, do it with thy might; for there is no work, nor devise, nor
knowledge, Ecl. 9.10.
nor wisdom in the Grave whether thou go. Guil. paris. p 5. de. vitijs tr.
de accidia. Gr. Ho. 13. in Eua. Bonau. Sanchez in Ecles.
Hereafter is no time of working, but rewarding: Hereafter Aristotle's arguments
will not serve to excuse or defend, but rather to accuse. If we fear death
before it come, we shall conquer it: There is no deliberating hereafter: There
shall be no profit of the knowledge of Divine or Humane things hereafter, unless
we use it well in this life. God has given a Talent to exercise every man;
some work for every one against his coming into the world: Skill and
knowledge is long and difficult, life is short and sickly; we should as
opportunity serves, perform our duty toward our God, Ars longa, vita breuis.
Hipocr.
toward our Neighbors, toward our selves. The time of Working cease in
the grave: None can be benifited by our works, wisdom, skill, counsel, when
we are dead: We cannot praise God nor glorify him in the grave. Now is the
time of using and bestowing those gifts that God has given for his glory in
this life; And this time says Job is swifter then a Post, passes away as the
swift Ship; and as the Eagle hastes to her pray: Nothing so swift in the Land,
Sea, Air; Job. 9.26.
as a shadow so passes our time; or as when an Arrowe is shot at a Mark, it
parts the air, which immediately comes together again; Wis. 5.9.12.13
so that a man cannot know where it went through. Even so we in like manner as
soon as we are born, begin to draw to our end. Our Bodies too and froe; we
shall not be that to morrow which we are to day.

Nostra quoque ipsorum semperequieque sine vlla
Corpora vertuntur, Ou. Metam. l. 1.
nec quod fuimusque sumusque
Cras erimus.
Let us not till the day of death delay our conversion. when sickness
summoneth and binds upon the Alter, for the sacrificing of the Soul; wicked
actions, words, thoughts, will appear armed with Gods anger, and with the
Curses of of the Law heaped together, agrauated to the uttermost, giving the
Conscience many a cold pull, and lying upon the heart as heavy as Lead: The
Conscience will accuse, the Memory give bitter evidence, Reason will sit as
Judge, Fear shall stand as executioner. Let us now therefore get a good life,
that it may be an usher to a good death. Let us draw good out of evil, and
provide for immortallity in the time of mortallity. Let us dye willingly,
seeing we must dye necessarily, we shall live eternally. Let not the worlds
pleasures detain us, but rather draw our affections to those things which are
above; knowing that if there be such delight in any thing of this mortal life,
Giselbertus in li. Altere. c. 3. Hic vel accipienus vel amittimus vitam
eternam. Cyp.
which consists in the presence of the Soul in a corruptible body; what
immortal pleasure shall there be, when the presence of the Godhead shall fill
the reasonable Soul? Now is the time to get this assurance; here we may win or
lose it: Gal. 6.7.
Let us not be weary in well doing: As we sow, so we shall reap.

Quod sibiquisque serit, praesentis tempore vitae
Hoc sibi messis erit, cum dicitur Ite, venite.
If we would not hear in the great Harvest of the last judgment that terrible
voice, which shall be used to them on the left hand, Depart from me ye cursed
into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25.41.
Let us Now hear that sweet voice calling to repentance, Come ye Blessed
children of my Father: Learn of me for I am meek and lowely, and ye shall
find rest unto your souls. Mat. 11.29. Qualem te inuenerit Deus cum vocat,
tale^ pariter iudicat. Cyp. lib. 4. de morte.
As the day of Death finds us, so shall the last day judge us. Let us stand
upon our watch, and wait for it all the days of our appointed time. Let us
learn now to be acquainted with God in his world. Let us consecrate to him
the Temples of our bodies, and Altars of our souls, who created them of
nothing, redeemed them when they were worse then nothing, and has appointed
mansions for them with himself in glory. Let us get AGOOD NAME which will be
better then all ointments and treasures: They may be bought for money, but this
is the gift of God not to be purchased with base metal. They are corruptible,
this is everlasting. They heave a man in death, and betake them to a new
Master, but the praise of the JUST man remains still his own. It taryeth
behind him on earth, and goes with him to heaven, and will crown him with
glory at the last day. Let us esteem the day of Death better then our
Birthday. That was an entrance into misery, this will give us a pass for
felicity. Let us now remember our Creator. Let us take time while it is
offered unto us to prepare for Heaven, Time will away. Let vt not neglect our
tide, but be wise in passing the time of our pilgrimage here on earth. All
must dye: our stroke will come, how soon and suddenly, when or where, we
know not. We should impart this in our memory, especially seeing the Lord
strikes those who were near unto us, and we may complain, that THE RIGHTEOUS
PERISH: As they had A time to be Borne so a time to Die.

My Text is occasioned to me upon the taking away of a Worthy flower of our
Parish Sir Willam Bird, a Father of the law, and a Just and merciful Patron
of Widows and Orphans, a meek Moses, an upright Samuel, a zealous Job,
fearing God, eschewing evil, a man of courage, dealing truly, hating
covetousness: I confess that his soul being taken into the society of
heavenly Saints, neither cares for, nor seekeeth our praises, Yet let not the
godly be forgotten: though dead we may commend them. It is lawful in it self,
and profitable for the living for imitation: Therefore David commended Jonathan
for his love: 2. Sam. 1.26. 2. Chapter 35.23.
the holy Ghost King Josiah for his integrity: St. Paul in that Epistle to the
Hebrews the Patriarchs and Prophets: Christ commanded that wheresoever the
Gospel should be preached, Math. 26.18.
mention should be made of that good work of the woman: we may commend a
Sayler when he arriues at the haven, and a Soldier when he has conquered.

The University bred him, Ancient Oxford, a grave mother of many worthies in
Israel, All souls College.
where in he took his degrees, ex merito not ex mera gratia.

In that worthy and flourishing Society wherein he lived, he was no factious
Incendiary (And O let peace as plenty ever be within those walls) For
howsoever Bee-keepers judge that swarm to be most fruitful in making honey,
Aral. 9. de hist. Animal. c. 40.
apud quod strepitus sufurrus, frequensque tumultus plurimorum est, which
buzzeth most and makes the greatest tumult; yet in a civil Hiue they are
judged to make the most honey who are most peaceable, for Busy bodies work
nothing at all but canuases.

He was no Mushrum to rise up in a moment, like those Giants simul sati and
editi, sown and grown in an instant, supposing themselves of sufficiency
enough because they can give enough for a preferment, their passions being
guided by pride and followed by injustice, and when greatest are but as a
puddle upon which the Sun shines. He rose to his degrees of dignity by just
and fair degrees, honoring the places he had with his worth as they him with
their greatness: For as Tully told Caesar to set the unworthy in high places
is not so much to grace the persons by place as to disgrace the place by such
persons.

He was fit for government having a sound head and sanctified heart, careful
to avoid the worlds scandals, diligent in coming with his family to the
Church, reuerendly attentive in hearing the word, religiously humbled in
receiving the Sacrament. How cheerfully would he discourse as his table of
what had been delivered in. Gods house?

It has often reioycedime to see the true loves Christian knot a sweet unity
and harmony betwit him and his joyall and virtuous Lady: and where should we
find love and Concord, if not twixt husband and wife? They are one flesh by
original creation, for the woman came of the man, and by a Nuptial
conjunction, the woman is flesh of the flesh of man, and stands on even ground
with the man, though drawing on the left side: No bitterness should be there,
and therefore among the Heathen, the galle of the sacrifice that was slain and
offered at the wedding was thrown out at doors, Plut. in praee. Coning.
signifying that the married folks should be either to other as Doves without
galle. Husband and wife have a triple band of love A natural as neighbors, A
spiritual as fellow members of the body of Christ, An holy and honorable as
one flesh by marriage.

The love of this learned man was great to Gods word, Hier. de Nepetiano.
so that pectus suum Bibliothecam fecit Christi, he made his breast a library
to Christ to be bound up there: Hereby he learned to carry himself so
temperatly and fairly, knowing that the Hill of greatness howsouer it yield a
delighfull prospect, yet is subject to lightning and thunder, remembering that
he was to give his account to him that is Iudex viuorum and mortuorum, from
whom there is no appeal: and howsoever many opportunities of bribes, letters,
and other engines of corruptions were offered him some times, he kept his hands
clean, because he had a pure heart. This made him rejoice in the the testimony
of a Good conscience, which as he professed in his sickness was as aqua vitae
to cheer up his drooping spirits: The Fathers call it the field of
blessedness, garden of delight, Aug.
Joy of Angels, house of the Holy Ghost, Paradise of the soul. It made Job
more happy in stercore, Job. 27.6.
on the dunghill, then Adam was in memore, in the midst of Paradise, That his
heart reproched them not. It makes a man though he had Giges ring to walk
without the controlement of any eye, to walk uprightly.

He was often desired not to trouble himself so much in his place of
Judicature, but to suffer Surrogates to dispatch business for him, which he
seldom did, saying, I will do what I may possible by my self, I (and not
they) must answer if wrong be done: And when I shall be upon my death Bed,
clamoures will trouble me if any be injured.

He labored to make his House a spectacle of devout discipline to others,
Hier, de Nepotiano. Domus eius erat magistra publicae disciplinae.
humbling himself and his whole family before God, with Riligious prayers,
often three times a day. A Method which he learned from holy King David.
Evening and morning, and at noone, will I pray and cry aloud, and he shall
hear my voice: Ps. 55.17.
Which the Fathers ascribe to the Mystery of the Passion, Resurrection,
ascension of Christ: Aug. Hier. Ruff Bed. Remig.
Three times a day the Apostles enjoined that the Lords Prayer should be used:
Cle. 7. Constit. 25. Mr. hist. schol in Daniel. c. 9.
Three times a day the Jews prayed, the third hour because the Law was then
given, the sixth because the Brazen Serpent was then erected, the ninth because
then water came out of the Rock. Three times a day the Church of the ancient
Christians had prayers, because at the third hour the holy Ghost was given;
the sixth Christ was crucified, the ninth he was pierced through with a spear:
Dan. 6.9.
Three times a day Daniel kneeled upon his knees, and prayed and gave thanks
before his God: Three times a day Prayers have been enjoined, either in honor
of the holy, blessed, glorious three persons of the Trinity: or because we
should get the practice of the three Theological Virtues, Faith, Hope, Charity:
or because we should have a watch over three doors, the heart, mouth, action:
or three Tempters, the lust of the Flesh, pride of the eyes, pride of life: or
our three great Enemies, the Flesh, World, Devil: or because nothing does so
adorn man in the three parts of his life, Childhood, Youth, Old age.

This learned and reverend Judge had the six Properties required in a Judge;
Skill, Goodness, Diligence, Nuizanus ex Ioh. Pirrho in l. imperia. ff. de regul.
iur. Barbatus. in Capit. Quoniam s. in alijs.
Eloquence, constancy, Prudence: He had salem scientiae and conscientiae,
conscience to season his knowledge; without which the mind of a Judge is
diabolical and vnsanory.

He was truly Miles Christianus a Christian Knight, in whom it is esteemed no
less greatness of heart to resist vice then to fight against enemies: the
goodness of a Knight consisting not in Pomp and great magnificence, Guenara.
but in the tranquillity and innocence of a good conscience: For he that
walloweth in the wealth of Craesus and sleeps not in the bosom and
quietness of Abraham holds no more then if he were Lord of a goodly vessel
replenished with corrupt and poisoned liquor: To have rich tapistrie, massy
plate, great horses, and other preparations to sportes and pleasures, be things
rather to get honorable names then to keep Souls in safety.

My wish is that as the trophies of Miltiades would not suffer Themistocles to
sleep, til by the like acts, he had purchased to himself the like glorious
name: Val. Max. l. 8. c 15. and Plut.
so all of that hourable profession of the Law, would look into this glass,
and make him a Canon of their Civil and Christian imitation, Vitam caelestem
egit in terris. Hi^. vita Pauli Eremitae.
following him as he followed Christ, in a heavenly course.

If I should spend many words more about him, I should but strike wounds into
their minds whom I desire to comfort. His hearty devotion to God, tender
compassion to poverty, affable kindness to his friends, In illo vno non vnum
sed plures amissos requirimus. Amb. de excessu Satyr.
mild affection to his servants, harmless behavior and meaning to all, make
us complain, that In his loss alone we have not lost him alone, but in him
many a worthy one. He lived like a Dove, dyed like a Lamb: when God stroke him
abroad and summoned him to death by sickness, From Grausende.
he was persuaded to return by water, where how sweetly did he sing Psalms?
as knowing that a Psalm is mirth of the mind, tra^quility of the soul, an
Ambassador of peace, a ruler of the affections, a procurer of charity,
reconciler of love, Bas. homil. in Psalm. 1.
neither is any so troubled in mind and disturbed in thought, but if he takes
the Psalms he may be straight appeased. Dyon. c. 3. de diu. nom. p. 3.
The Psalter is a brief of all the mysteries of the Bible: A Psalm sung with
the intention of the heart makes way for the soul to God: Greg bom. 1. in Ez.
Innoc. 3. proe. in Ps. 7. poenit. Hier. ep. 17.
Next to the Lords prayer, there cannot be better forms of prayer used then
out of the Psalms: Jerome commended the Plough-men of Bethlehem for singing
Psalms while they followed the Plough: In Epitaph. Paulae. Conc. Nannetense
cap. 4.
the Lady Paula for singing the Psalms, A Counsel enjoined that the seven
poenitentiall Psalms, which are the 6.32.38.51.102.130.143. should be sung by
the Priest at the visiting of the Sick. Christ and his Apostles sung a Hymn
after the Sacrament, Mat. 26.30. Paul. Burge. in Marc. 14.
the Jews sung seven Psalms after the eating of the Paschall Lamb, Baro.
Annal. p. 1. Hier.
from the 112. to the 119. and one of these it is probable Christ sung:
Cantator Cygnus funeris ipse sui Martialis.
and some think the 113. though others think it were the 21. He sung as a
Swan before his death: Philo Iud. l. de supplicum virtutibus.
singing of Psalms was used by the primitive Christians.

Upon his return to his house, he being lodged upon his bed of sickness in a
burning fever (the disease of the time which the right hand of the Lord remove
from us) how did he possess his soul in patience and a humble submission to
the hand of God, acknowledging Gods great mercies which he had received and
found now continued, and herein graciously that God had chastised him, but
without extraordinary sensible pain, and so had no heavier a burden upon him
then he could bear. He sent for me being his poor Pastor, but my occasion
of Attendance had called me abroad: yet another Messenger of Gods word came to
him: He welcomed him with all respect; confessed his sins, his sorrows, his
faith, prayed earnestly and fervently with sighs and groans, and often cried
out, Lord JESUS be merciful unto me, and receive my soul, and so as he had a
time to be borne so a time to dye: He slept in the Lord: Extremity of pains
has chased his soul out of his body, and I assure my self Angels have
carried it into the bosom of Abraham. Currum conscendit, non est iam trepidare
ne cadat. Bar. in transitu Malachiae.
He is Now secure where he cannot fall: He is in the Quire of the Saints, his
body is gone to earth, his soul to Christ: Happy he taken away not to see the
continuance of sins and consequents of punishments: Sanctorummixtus est
choris, corpus terra suscepit, Anima Christo reddita est. Foelix qui haec non
vidit: foelix qui haec non audit. Nos miseri attamen viuere volumus. Quem
corpore non valemus, recordatione teneaemus: cum quo loqui non possumus, de co
loqui non esinamus. Hier. ad Heliodor. Epitaph. Nepotiani. Ecc. 39.2.
Wretched men that we are who desire nothing but life. His body we cannot
hold, yet let him not be forgotten in our minds. We cannot speak with him,
Let us often speak of him, how he gave his mind to the Law of the highest,
sought out the wisdom of the Ancient, was able to power out wise Sentences, and
therefore his Memorial shall not depart away from us: Blessed is he in his
happy change from night to day, from darkness to light, from death to life,
from sorrow to solace, from a factious world to a Country of peace, new
Jerusalem, where our God shall at the last day keep his great Sessions for
eternal peace, conscience being the Clarke of that peace, an Angel the crier
of peace, the MESSIAH the Judge of peace, Saints the Jury for peace, Innocent
the verdit of peace, Come ye Blessed of my Father the Oye of peace, Receive the
Kingdom the Sentence of peace. Let us wait for the Redemption of the body,
and lift up our heads after our Home above: Let us labor to be found without
spot and blameless, Let us learn to live well, that we may dye well: Let us
lament our loss of our worthies, but rejoice for their gain: Let us comfort
our selves in hope of a joyful Resurrection, through Jesus Christ our
Resurrection and life, To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed
all honor, and glory, now and evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

