SAVLS PROHIBITION STAIDE.

OR THE APPREHENSION, AND EXAMINATION OF SAVLE.

And the Indictment of all that persecute CHRIST, with a reproof of those that
traduce the Honorable Plantation of VIRGINIA.

Preached in a Sermon Commanded at Paul's Cross, upon Rogation Sunday, being
the 28. of May. 1609.

By DANIEL PRICE, Chapleine in ordinary to the PRINCE, and Master of Arts of
EXETER College in OXFORD.

LONDON Printed for Matthew Law, and are to be Sold in Paul's Churchyard, near
unto Saint Austines Gate, at the Sign of the Fox. 1609.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THOMAS Lord Ellesmere, Lord Chancellor of England,
and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel.
MY Honorable and rightly eminent L. it is a Question whither God has more
blessed you, or the Land by you, the heavens have been so gracious to your
Honor, and you so ready to return Grace and Honor to the Heavens. The Courts
of Judgment, and Chauncerie of Mercy witness your exquisite Wisdom in the
temper of both, by your Lordships sitting in the one sidus beneficum, a happy
Star in the Star Chamber, in the other numen pacificum, a good Angel in the
Chauncerie, and not only so, but in the Church, where your Honor has
vouchsafed favor to help many a Clergie-man into Bethesdas poole, without the
superstitious mediation of Angels. In regard of which pious and glorious
Patronage, all that are able to speak or write in the Church, be they Scribes
or Pharisees, I mean Rabbis, or Neophyts owe much respect to your Lordship.
Among the rest of the least I offer up this my poor Morning sacrifice, which
first took fire at the Altar of Paul's Cross, it was a Sacrifice without the
Temple, yet my Prayers shall be that this be like the fire in the temple which
was never extinguished. And so with my hearty devotions to the Lord for the long
health and happiness of your Lordship, the Noble Countess your Lady, and your
worthy and Honorable Son, I rest,

Your Lordshippes in all observance Daniel Price.

SAVLS PROHIBITION STAYED. OR THE APPREHENSION AND EXAMINATION OF SAVLE.
ACTS. 9.4. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?


I Fear to speak of Judgment, it made Foelix tremble, or of Mercy, for then
the Wicked will not tremble, I cannot speak of Piety, for Piety is sick,
nor of Faith, for Faith is dead, nor of Works, for Works are buried: Not of
Devotion it is become Ostentation, nor of Religion, it is made a vain
Speculation, nor of Prayer, for Prayer is contemned, nor of Alms for Alms are
neglected, nor of Fasting for Fasts are banished, nor of Charity for Charity
is Out lawed, Hope is become a vain presuming, Holiness Hypocrisy, zeal
fury: The Common-wea^th oppressions, safety virtues deprivation, hospitality
depopulation: The Church Symonies possession, Schisms division Atheists
expectation: This World a wilderness, a dry, heathy, thornie, bare, barren
wilderness, wherein Satan the Serpent, Sin the Satyr, Wrath the Lion, Lust
the Leopard, Zi^m and I^m, the Ostrich and the Scritch-owle and the Vulture do
inhabit, wherein Virtue is an exile, Conscience a Hermit, Honesty a Stranger,
Truth a Prisoner, a wild wilderness wherein all things are most miserable:
The Ways rough and crooked, the Wealth base, the Pleasures false, the Hopes
vain, the Promises lies, the Delight light, the Glory short, the Sta^e a
banishment and a Dungeon of condemned Persons, scrawling about the Globe of the
Earth, the Theater of their misery and mortality. In a word ALL THINGS are in
such confusion, by reason of the Catechlisme and inundation of sin, that if
ever even now, we may take up the speech of Esaias unto God. O that thou would
break the heavens and come down, either in Merci: to pardon, or in Judgment
to punish the sins of the people.

In the Lion there was sweetness and strength, In the Cherubims the face of a
Lion and the face of a man, Iud. 13.
with God there is aureum and aereum scepirum. Eze. 1.
And he has sent down a Commission from the King's Bench of his judgment,
Austen.
and another from the Chancerie of his Mercy, his fountain has sent forth
sweet and bitter water, his mouth cursing, and blessing: It is the speech of
David in his 32. Psalm, that joins both these together, Many plagues are
provided for the ungodly, but he that puts his trust in the Lord, Mercy
shall compass him on every side. Behold in that one verse, Olives and Prickles
upon one tree, punishment and pardon in one breath, life and death in one word,
Gerezim and Eball in one place, winter and somer in one day, the fall and
spring in one season, Mercerus.
the red Ensig^e of the wrath of God, and the red Ensign of the blood of
Christ, an army of miseries, sorrows, punishments, anguishes, and an army of
comforts, promises, hopes, mercies, deliverances; not so many darts on the one
side, but so many sheeldes on the other, Justice not such indignation, but
mercy has as much compassion, if plagues compass, yet mercy shall nearer
compass, if there be bitter waters of Marah, there is sweet wood cast in, to
season it; if a red sea, yet Moses rod to divide it; if the Cananites pursue
Israel, yet a Joshua to defend it.

There was mercy and judgment together, and yet not together, in one verse but
not in one place, there was a distance between them, as between Dives and
Lazarus; but in the Text, I have read unto you, there is both, in one place,
person, action. Transient in God, Immanent in Paul, judgment so sweetened,
mercy so edged, that sweet and sour, life and death, love and fear, alluring
and terrifying, never came nearer together, then in this Text, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me?

For if ever mercy and judgment met together, here may ye behold iudicium
misericordiae, misericordiam iudicij, August. in Psalm.
the judgment of mercy, and the mercy of judgment, a voice and a stroke, the
one striking down to the earth, and the other lifting up to the heaven, a
light shining from heaven, and a light shining to direct him to heaven, a light
shining to him that was in darkness, and in the shadow of death, to bring him
from the snare of darkness to the glorious liberty of the Sons of God: he
that was the way met him in the way, he that was the light met him with a
light, he that was the word, met him with the voice of the word, Saul, Psalm.
29, 3.
Saul, why persecutest thou me? It was a voice indeed, it was the voice of the
Lord, mighty in operation, the voice of the Lord is a glorious voice, the voice
of the Lord breaks the Cedars, yea the Lord breaks the Cedars of Libanus,
The voice of the Lord shakes the wilderness, yea the wilderness of Cadesh.
It was that voice that made Jonas Mariners to shake, Foelix to fear, Herod to
tremble, and the Devils to roar, It was the voice that struck the Soldiers
with amasednesse, Elimas the Sorcerer with blindness, Zacharias with
dumbness, Ananias and Saphira with deadness, Job. 31.
and of this voice Iohs Epiphonema and acclamation serves, Quis poterit
tonitruum magnitudinis illius intueri? who can understand the fearfulness o^
his power, or hear the voice of his thunder? The walls in Ierito could not
stand, the C^da^ in L^banus could not but shake, he wilderness in Cadesh could
not but tremble, the Army at Mount Oliuet could not but fall, the Auditory of
S. Peter at Jerusalem near stabde to the heart with this voice, and then how
shall Paul a weak, single, simple, abortiue birth, but fear and tremble, and
become terrified, amassed, and astonished at the Echo of this voice? O It was a
powerful voice, the voice that Josephus speaks of, crying, vox ab Orient,
Joseph. de bell. Judai.
vox ab Occidente, a voice from the East, a voice from the West, a voice from
the four winds; it was no more powerful then this voice, and yet the voice
not so powerful as merciful, it is vox suauiter fortis, fortiter suauis. S.
Chrysostom observes, Chrysostom. in Act.
that they that came to betray Christ in the conuoy of Judas, and were stricken
to the earth with Christ his words, were now in the company of Paul, when Paul
was stricken to the earth by the words of Christ. If it were so, the miracle was
the greater, and their sin the greater; but as my Savior, so my Text singleth
out none but Saul, and strikes Saul to the earth, it was the heauiest fall,
and yet the happiest fall that ever any had; it was his fall and his rising,
his funeral and his resurrection, his burial and his birth, his killing and
quickening.

I divide the little body of this my Text into the form and matter thereof.
Division.
The form an Interrogation, the matter Saules violence in persecution. In the
form observe first a question, Secondy, an Ingemination. In the matter,
observe first, Soul persecuting, Secondly, Christ persecuted. Thus be these
words divided, that divided the soul and the spirit, and the joints and the
marrow of Saul, and of these in their order, first of the question.

The Lord that in Deuteronomy is a Physician: in Job a Bonesetter: Deu 32.39.
Job. 16.11 Esaias. 5.1. Ioh. 15.1 Luk 2.46. Mat 8.25. Mat. 2.30 Exodus 15.3.
In Esaias a Vine-dresser: in John a husbandman: in Luke a moderator, among the
Doctors: in Matthew a Pilot amidst the Floods: in Mark a Lawgiver among the
Lawyers: in Exodus a man of war among the Armies. He is here a Justice to
apprehend and an Examiner to questionize with Saul: Saul, Saul why persecutest
thou me? He was in Esaias, a Prince of Peace, and here is a Justice of Peace,
though he was sometimes put out of the Commission of Peace to work our Peace.

The Lord might without any expostulating have powered down vengeance upon him,
and so he had never come to his answer, he might have turned him into hell
with all the people that forget God: he might have summoned out some punishment
or other to have served the execution of wrath against Saul, Psalm. 11.
his arm is not shortened, he had his greatter armies and his lesser armies,
Joel. 1.
he might have sent out the least of his great ones, or a great army of his
least, he might have sent the fire he used against the Sodomites, or the Sun
with which he fought against the Ammonites, or the stars wherewith he plagued
the Cananites, or the sea wherewith he drowned the Egyptians, or the earth
wherewith he swallowed the Murmurers, or the Bears wherewith he devoured the
mockers, but he takes another Course, he sends out no Out-lawrie before Saul
come to his answer, no castigation, nay no expostulation, but a mild and
merciful speech. I should have expected burning coals from his lips, coals
of fire from his nostrils, vials of wrath the furious servants and serieants of
indignation, against such a rampant ravening wolf, a merciless Tiger, an
insatiat Tyrant, spirans minarum and caedis, (...), 1. Tim. 1. Chrysostom.
breathing out threatenings and shughter, nay a murderer, oppressor,
blasphemer, as he confesses himself. Yet (...), in Correction Moderation, in
Reproof Compassion.

The Doctrine, that the Lord is slow to anger, and in his indignation ready to
show compassion, Doctrine.
when the Lord in Micah had called a congregation of the Mountains to hear
his quarrel, as in Esaias a convocation of heaven and earth, men and Angels to
be witness against his people, Mich. 6.
yet hear what his speech was, O my people what have I done unto thee, or
wherein have I grieved thee, Esaias. 1.
testify against me: no threatening, no cursing, no fire or brimstone, storm
or tempest, O popule mi, quid fecitibi? When his Prophet Jonas had fled from
his presence, and rebelled against him not only in flying, but in murmuring,
and fuming, fretting in a querulous, contumacious, and contumelious contesting
with God. God relpyeth only this; Do thou well to be angry. He raged that
God would not destroy Niniuie, a great and glorious, spacious, populous City,
the Lady of the East, Queen of the Nations, Metrop^lis of Ass^ria, beauty of
the world, that had so many 10000. noble, rich, honorable inhabitants, besides
Infants and Innocents, and Jonas to be angry to the death, that Niniuie was
not destroyed, and afterward that a Guord, Ion. 4.9.
a weak* creeping, sprowting, fading, guorde of no conti^^^nce, springing in
one night, dying in the other, and yet that Jonas again is angry with God,
very angry even to the death, for the death of this Guord, and Gods reply unto
him is only this, Jonas do thou well to be angry? Saul here that had his
hand in so many murders, in so many bloody, tragical, barbarous executions,
against whom the blood of the Martyrs cried for vengeance, yet God mercifully,
and favorably, in as kind, and as familiar sort, with as much indulgence, as
if the Spirit of Eli, or the soft voice in Elias had spoken, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? If John Baptist speak to the Pharisees, he cries out, O
generation of vipers. If Peter to Ananias and Saphira, why has Satan filled
thy heart to lie, Mat. 3.3. Acts. 5.10. Acts. 13.10.
why have ye agreed to tempt the spirit of God, he strikes them dead. If
Paul to Elimas the Sorcerer, O thou full of all subtlety and mischief, the
child of the Devil, Acts. 7.5.
and enemy of righteousness. If Stephen to the Jews, O ye of stiff necked
hearts and ears. Nay servants with their fellow servants, Brethren with their
Brethren, that had the same Commission and profession, tied by all the bonds of
nature and grace, yet in their writings and speeches, there have been bitter
inuectiues, contestings and withstandings to the face, Paul and Barnabas,
Cyprian and Cornelius, Origin and African, Chrysostom and Theophilus, Ruffinns
and Jerome, Jerome and Austine, Austine and Symplician, Frosper and Hilary,
Gregory and Eutichus, who have almost all fought as fiercely with their pens,
as ever Caesar and Pompey did with their swords. But behold the Creator of all
things, whose throne is heaven, whose footestoole is the earth, who has his
garrisons of Angels in the heaven, of stars in the firmament, of storms in
the wind, of mil-dew in the air, of Dragons in the deep, of all creatures in
the world; he receives him friendly and favorably, even as a Master that had
caught his runnagate servant, and having him fast, thus (says S. Chrys^stome)
bespeaketh him; Chrysostom. in Act.
Quid tibi v^s faciam nunc, ecce venisti sub manus meas, quo reeidit furor tuus
insania, zelus intempestinus, vbi vincula? etc. Now I have apprehended thee,
whatsoever thou will I will do to thee: whether has thy madness tended, thy
fury, thy unseasonable, unreasonable zeal, where be thy bonds or stripes or
imprisonment, Crimen obijcit non tam arguendo, Locinus in Act.
quam defendendo: he obiecteth his fault, not so much reproving Saul as
defending himself, as he did in John to the Jews, Many good works have I
showed you from my father, John.
for which of them do ye stone me! So that Christ here his Mollis
interrogat^o tollit iram, his sweet, soft, heavenly interrogation shows, how
far he was from indignation. Blessed and thrice blessed be his name for
ever and ever.

The use of this Doctrine, our Lord and Master, even in our reproves and
exprobrations to mitigate our anger and fury and fervor. The Philosopher in
his Ethickes, confineth and limiteth the Sea of anger to his bounds. Ethic.
lib. 4.
Why against whom, how, when, and how far it may proceed: and surely,
Christians may learn that lesson to observe the cause wherefore, the persons
with whom, the season when, the manner how, and the end of the Term, how
far it may pass, and how long endure. The greatest thing in that
incomprehensible goodness, that we vespertilionum oculis, Aristotle.
with our Wants eyes can behold is his mercy, his justice exceeds his works,
his mercy exceeds both; he is slow to anger, and he keeps not his anger
for ever. O then, if the natural edge of anger be whetted and sharpened on thy
stony heart, to wound those thou art angry with; Remember to be slow unto
anger, to be short in thy anger, to be mild in thy anger, remember how far
this sword may be unsheathed.

I know there is a time to hate, and a time to love, a time of peace, and a
time of war, a time wherein Clergy and Laity that be in office may whet
their tongues like rasors, their salt must be quick, their voice pearcing,
their sound powerful; yet in all these kinds, Subesse debet iracundia non
praess^, as Gregory counsels, let anger rather attend your reprehension,
Greg. in Job. Angustaa Psalm.
then command it; Non vt dominando praeueniat, sed vt simulando subsequatur:
so that it bear not a fury by going before, but a show in coming after, and
continue not in an odious, tedious passion and perturbation of anger: as thy
anger must not be unadvisedly, not unjustly, so neither rashly nor perpetually.
Anger is defined to be furor breuis, if it be furor, let it be breuis also, of
Pompey it is observed, dies natalis fatalis, the day of his death, was on the
day of his birth, Polychr.
and of Ionahs Guord, that it came up in a night, and withered in a night; and
of Plinies (...), borne in the rising, dies in the setting of the sun, and
the Toad-stoole, oritur moritur, Plin.
grows in a night and dies in a night: so let anger perish, consume and
consummate it self in a day, sufficit dei malitta, the day has enough for his
own malice, says the Prophet; nay, a day is too much, let it continue but a
night, let it be like the untimely fruit of a woman, let it perish ere ever
it see the Sun, says David; nay, a night is too much, sufficit ad trom vna
vel altera hora, an hour or two is enough for anger says Chrysostom; nay,
an hour is too much; Chrysostom. in Mat.
be no longer angry then thou may say over the Greek Alphabet, says the
Heathen Philosopher; nay, that is too much, says the Divine, if thy violent,
usurper Anger will hold the crown of reason, and manage the kingdom of
understanding, let it be but for a moment, for the anger of God endures but
the twinkling of an eye, says Scripture: Let not the Sun that glorions eye
of the world, be as of thy wrath a faithful witness in heaven, so not of thy
vengeance the swift witness in hell: and when thou art angry, be angry, but
sin not, Leo Ep^st.
let it be cum animo medentis, non santentis, as Leo speaks, not with the
mind of a persecutor, but of a helper: speak thou unto thine enemy mildly
without choler, moderately without fervor, as thy Master here did, Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me?

Saul, Saul, the ingemination, Nomen bis tinctum sanguine, Austine.
a name again and again dyed deep enough in blood, once in the old, and
once in the new Testament repeated, both of the Tribe of Benjamin, both
Tyrants. It was a gracious favor of the Lord to vouchsafe to question with him,
but to call him by his name, Be^. Lorinan Act. 9.
and to ingeminate that name, Hoc indicat affectum commiserationis, it was a
sign of his great affection and commiseration. When he was saluted by Judas
with a kiss, he uses no other word then this, Judas betrayest thou the son
of man with a kiss? Why Judas? thou one of my friends and followers, but
twelve and one a Devil, one of my own trees to be so blasted, of my own
foundations to be so undermined, of my own, that had professed to forsake all
to follow me, and now none of all the world else to betray me, who vowed to
follow to their losing of life, and now to follow and pursue, and entrappe, and
betray my life? Judas thou to betray me, what, and to betray me with a kiss,
the sign of perfect amity, and the seal of love, and do thou seal thy
treason with a kiss? Judas my Apostle, my friend Judas, as Luke calls him;
Do thou betray the son of man with a kiss? It was a sign of his great
affection, in speaking to Martha, who was more busy to provide for his body
then for her own soul, Martha, Martha, thou art troubled about many things:
but a greater sign of his affection, Luke 22.31.
when he beheld Peter weak, wrackt, weather-beaten, leaking, sinking Peter:
he doubleth his speech, Simon, Simon, behold Satan has sought to winnow thee.

How mercifully dealt he with Peter, who when he was miraculously called from
among Fishermen, to be a Fisher of men: yet fell most fearfully, and
notwithstanding all his fainting and falling, yet he was restored and
received: his story is an Ocean of mercy; you shall find him sometimes doubting,
sometimes sinking, sometimes distrusting, sometimes denying, so peremptorily,
and so blasphemously, as if he had been reprobate. Nay, in the greatest
mysteries of our salvation, Peter was possessed with a dead, dull, heavy,
drowsy sleep. Look upon him in the transfiguration, Luke 9.32.
Peter was a sleep. Look upon him in Christ's Prayer, Peter was a sleep.
Mat. 26.39*
Look upon him in the very hour of the power of darkness, when Christ was to
be betrayed, Peter was a sleep. Mar. ^3.34.
In the Persecution of the Church, when earnest prayer was made by all the
Church for Peter, Acts. 12.6.
even then also Peter was a sleep: And yet after all these slips and sleeps,
and falls, and faults, Peter is received to be Angelus terrestris, Coelestis
homo, Magister Gentium, Forma Martyrum, Formido Daemonum, Aug. de Temp.
Indultor criminum, Fons virtutum, etc. as Austen speaks, and to be, though
not Primas, yet Primus Apostolorum.

but of all other that ingeminated Lamentation of his, even Jerusalem, O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem which killest Prophets, and stonest them that are sent
unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, Luke 22.31.
as the hen gathers her chickens, under her wings, and thou woulast not.
The passionate compassion that our Savior had over these, Mat. 23.27.
and so over all his, is so infinite, that no dimension in Art, no affection
in nature, no proportion in the Creature can express it. O height of heaven,
depth of hell, breadth of the world, distance of the Poles, love of friends,
fathers, mothers, nurses, they are but shadows and semblances, kennings, not
skannings of his favor, his mercies cannot be sufficiently descried or
described; they be the heads of Nilus, rivers of Paradise, springs of Lebanon,
fountains of Hermon, streams of Sion, Jordan that makes glad the City of God.
They be the Charter of heaven, covenant of grace, assurance of glory, music
to the ears, splendour to the eye, odor to the smell, dainties for the taste,
pleasures for the sense, and solace for the soul: Misericordia Christi
germinat, and ingeminat, he gives grace liberally, multiplieth his grace
given, conseruing his grace multiplied, rewarding his grace conserved.

Out of this doubling and reiterating of the name, Doctrine.
I observe this doctrine, that the Lord does so much desire the repenting of a
sinner, that he will vouch safe his servants that favor as to double his
call, and not at the first to proceed in judgment against loitering and
lingering conuerts: Expectat torpentes, inui^at repugnantes, he expects them
that linger, Austen.
inuiteth them that repugne, stirs them that loiter. He calls Saul 2.
Samuel 3. his Spouse, 4. Sodom shall have some days, 2. Sam. 3.4.
Niniuie shall have forty days, Jerusalem forty years, There was a time when
he did not call once, nay, for sinning once, he punished for ever, he thrust
the Angels out of heaven for one sin, expelled Adam Paradise for one Apple,
stoned Achan for one wedge, plagued Gehezi for one bribe, Ananias for one
dissembling, Corah for one rebelling: and yet since to move us to repentance,
has borne with sinners years and years after a thousand falls of weakness
and wilfulness in thought, in word, in deed: Every thing in God is worthily to
be admired, and wondered at, but his mercy is to be embraced with amasednesse,
that he is merciful in so rich, so deep, so long, so broad, so unmeasurable a
measure, in so great, so mighty, manifold, miraculous manner. Hilary on the 144.
Psalm, has a sweet saying to this purpose, Hoc magnum est, hoc mirum, Hilary
in 144. Psalm.
this is an especial thing in God, this is mightily to be wondered at in that
mighty one, not that he made heaven, because he is powerful, nor that he
settled the earth, because he is strength, nor that he distinguished the year
by stars, because he is wise, not that he gave man a soul because he is
life, not that he moves the sea by ebbing and flowing, because he is a
Spirit, but that he should be so merciful, who is so just, that he should so
familiarly deal with us, who is a God; Hoc mirum, Hilary. 144. Ps
hoc magnum, and all this only to draw us to repentance.

The use of this, to move you to conversion, by the merciful compassion of the
Lord: In the manifold care he has of careless man, Bernard.
which though it be via anfractuosa, is not via infructuosa, though a hard,
rough, craggie way, yet is it not an incommodious or a fruitless way, but the
virtues thereof are eternal life: the world misconceiuing this way, they
utterly refuse it, they like not the pace, because they must run, they like
not the race because it is long, they like not the passage because it is
strait, they like not the entrance because it is narrow, they like not to
clime, they fear the hill, they like not to sail, they fear the sea, the way
hard, the race long, the race running, the passage straight, the door narrow,
the sea perilous, the hill promontorious; alas, they cannot endure it: and so
they tire or retire with the thought of fear. Hereby they loose the life of
Saints, and foreslow that holy conversion and conversation of the servants of
the Lord. O my beloved, seeing the Lord is slow to anger, and of great mercy,
draw near to him by a true, hearty, speedy conversion. It is a special gift
of God, salve of sins, haven of sinners, joy of Angels, terror of Devils, the
new creation of the Soul, the new life of the Saints, a consumption, yet not
sickness, a mortification, and yet no death, a compunction, A Enigma Diumum.
yet scarsly sorrow, a killing and yet a quickening, a Crucifying, and yet a
Reviving: It is an A Enigma, wherein when we are borne, we are buried, and when
we are quickened, Hugo de Victor.
we are killed, and when we are mortified, we are raised, and when our old
man is consumed, our new life is consummated. O that ye were all sick of this
Consumption, that Prayer might be your Physic, your Diet might be fasting.
Compunction your blood letting, your potion the tears of sorrowing, faith your
handmaid watching, and good works the signs of your recovering. If ye were
sick of this Consumption, it would be the means to bring health to your
bodies, happiness to your Souls, length to your lives, life to your days,
for evermore it would be a means, you would live more religiously, love the
Lord more sincerely, serve him more obediently, tender his glory more dearly,
hear his word more carefully, practice it more conscionably, pray more
deuoutely, believe more faithfully, profess more fruitfully, which the Lord in
mercy increase for ever in us; and so I come to my second general part, and
therein first of the Person persecuting.

Saul, And here first of all, 2. Part.
if ye Catechize Saul with what is thy name, or discharge such a peale of
Gunne-shot upon him, as the Mariners did upon Jonas, Jonas ^.
what art thou? whence came thou? what is thy name?, thy people, thy trade?
You shall receive answer out of his own words, he is an Hebrew of the
Hebrews, an Israelite of the Israelites, of the seed of Abraham, of the Tribe
of Bentamin, by birth a Jew. by Privilege a Roman, by sect a Pharisie, by
zeal a Persecutor, his personal advantages, prerogatives, dignities,
excellencies of profession, aemulation, conversation, wonderful! none ever had
greater endowments and blessings of Nature then Saul. It is a worthy
observation upon that comitiall exercise had between Stephen and his
Adversaries, Sigonius. Lorin. in 7. Act.
that there were some of all the world Opponents and Opposites in that
Disputation and Persecution of Stephen, out of Europe Romans, out of Affricke
Alexandrians, out of Asia Cilicians, and of all these out of all the parts of
the world, that were then known, and out of all those Nations reckoned, there
was none, Acts. 2.3.
more violent for strength, more virulent for sting, more zealous in
profession, more powerful in prosecution, more Tragical and tyranicall in
execution then Saul, he wasted the Church, dispersed the Disciples, destroyed
the christians, magna insania imo vesania says Chrysostom, quod and in domos
ingrediebatur, Chrysostom.
and quod nec mulieribus parcebat: He followed Christians not only from the
Synagogue into the streets, but from the streets, into the houses, their own
houses, and violently, inhumanely drew out even the women unto their death. He
was a Saul indeed, nay a Sheol, a very Hell, Lombard.
as Peter Lombard out of the Nature of the Original observes, or Shaul as
others observe, Lorin. in 9. Act.
Excitatus a Demone ad persequendum Ecclesiam, stirred up by the Devil to
persecute the Church. He was a Wolf among the Lambs, a Bear among the
Saints, a Lion ramping and roaring for his pray, nay, put together the wilines
of a Fox, strength of a Lion, sting of a Serpent, Saenity of a Wolf, the
Sauadge madness of Bears, Boares, Leopards, Tigers, Crocodiles (for by all
these in Scripture the wicked are described) they were all in Saul; his ZEAL
had fiered him, and therefore he says of himself, by zeal I persecuted the
church of God, so that Christ speaking to him now, and crying, Saul, Saul,
means, zeal, Zeal, why persecutest thou me? Is it possible that a sweet
grape should be so sour? that poison should infe and such a fountain of
life? that such an endowment should deserve such a punishment? such a blessing
prove such a curse, the heat of the spirit, should be as hell fire? The
glorious lustrous splendour of the Sun should be Cymerian Egyptian darkness,
and make a man a dog, a Christian a Devil? It is, it is, behold one for
example for all, Saul his spur of zeal, proved a sting a piercing,
poisoning, enuenoming assacinating sting, by zeal he persecuted the Church of
God. I am sure true zeal is the true seal of the holy Ghost, it is the Leaxen
that leaueneth the whole lump; it is the grain of Mustardseed, the spark of
fire, the fire of the Temple, the measure of the Tabernacle, the Cubit of the
Sanctuary the beacon of Mount Sion, and yet zeal has marked Saul a
persecutor, oppressor, maligner, blasphemer of God and his Gospel. I know the
Kingdom of Heaven must suffer violence; Jacob obtained by wresling, David by
running, Paul by endeavoring, the Wise Virgins by watching, Austen.
the good servants by working, vis intrare in regnu^ coelorum, will thou enter
into Heaven? violentus esto, be violent (says Austen) nay, says Christ the
King of Heaven suffers violence: But yet not a more hasty then wary
violence, for as S. Bernard speaks, Et feruor discretionem erigat, and
discretio feruorem dirigat, zeal must stir up discretion, Berna d.
discretion must direct zeal. As the hope of a Christian, so the zeal of a
Christian, is as Susanna between two Adulterers, as Virtue between two
extremes, as In ocency between two Tirants, Hercules between two Serpents,
the grain between two Milstones: blind Ignorance on the one side, proud
Insolence on the other side, a blind zeal, a proud zeal, the one
superstitious, the other supercilious. The zeal of a Christian must be as
Christ was before he came from heaven, he was in the midst of Angels, in the
Cratch, he was in the midst of creatures. In the temple, in the midst of the
Doctors. In the transfiguration, in the midst of the Prophets and Apostles. In
the Cross, in the midst of the thieves. In the resurrection, in the midst of
his Disciples, In the coming to judgment, in the midst of the elect and
reprobate Lambs, on the one hand, Goats on the other, semper in medio, quia
medium, semper medium, qui a mediator: Non in omnibus quadrat similitudo,
Bernard.
as Austen spoke in the like, August. con Don.
but let zeal ever go in the midst, sail in the midst, pass in the
midst; let diligence raise up negligence, be not cold, let moderation rule
the passion, be not to hot, not bewitched with fiery fury, as Saul was, as that
Saul's zeal should persecute Christ.

The Doctrine hence is, Doctrine.
that every Christian let moderation govern the stern of his violent opinion,
or else his zeal is abominable before God; the Prayer of the reprobate is
abominable, the Faith of the Hipocrite is abominable, the zeal of the fiery
obstinate is abominable. In the Law they must bring no sacrifice without salt:
zeal is that salt, they must bring no sacrifice without an eye, discretion is
that eye: no unseasoned sacrifice, no service without zeal, no blind
sacrifice, no zeal without discretion. Romans 12.
The Apostle Paul directs to Wisdom, Be wise, there is the Spur, zeal:
but according to Sobriety, there is the bridle, discretion. The Disciples were
commended for their duty in following Christ. There is zeal, but they were
condemned for their zeal when they prayed for vengeance, there wanted
discretion. The Jews were commanded to gather Manna, there is a portion of
zeal, but neither too much nor too little, there is the proportion of
discretion. The holy Ghost descended with fire: there is zeal, but with a wind
also that cools fire, there is discretion, Let zeal be like to Moses and
Phineas, Ambrose.
Moses for mildness, Phineas for feruencie, there is a Seraphicall zeal, like
to that in E. Zechiels vision, Ezech. 1.16.
the face of a Lion, the face of a man; there is a Cherubicall zeal; let zeal
and moderation be like Naomi and Ruth, let them go together, or if that pace
will not serve, let them like Peter and John at the Sepulcher run together.

Vespasians Emblem on his coin, did well moralize the meaning of zeales
moderation, there was a Dolphin and an ancor, the Dolphin out strips the
ship, the anchor stays the ship; if stayednesse and swiftnes, earnestnes
and peaceablnes did go together, then were zeal, that true zeal that the
holy Prophets and servants of God had. It was a fervent zeal that was in
David, when he cried The zeal of thy house has eaten me up, wherein David
cried not, My zeal has almost eaten up thy house, but the zeal of thy house
has almost eaten me up: Austen. Oscrius.
Saul was zealous as ever any was, and in zeal as outrageous as ever any; he
was of the Tribe of Benjamin, and was the true Benjamin: Jacob on his death
bed, breathed and bequeathed him this blessing, Benjamin shall rauin as a Wolf
in the morning, he shall devour the pray, and in the evening he shall divide
the spoil. Paul was this Benjamin, Benjamin was Benoni, Paul was this Benoni,
he was Benjamin the son of the right hand, and he was Benoni the son of
sorrow; Benjamin the joy of his Father, Benoni the death of his mother:
Bentamin filiorum minimus, Lor. in Ps. 75.
Paulus Apostolorum vltimus, Benjamin the death of Rachel his mother, Paul the
death of the Church, vastans Ecclesiam says Austen, the death of the
Synagogue, Austen. Hierome.
tollens legem says Hierome, Saul was a Wolf indeed in the morning, when he
devoured the pray, etc. and made a pray of the Church, but in the evening he
did divide the word richer then great spoils.

The Use of this Doctrine, absit, far be it from me to speak it, from you
to think it: I know that Palsies and Apoplexies are more commonly incident in
Christian zeal, then hot Agues: we need not quench the Spirit, O that we
could kindle it: But my desire is, that you please so to moderate your zeal,
that ye add with your zeal faith, so with your faith, knowledge, and with
knowledge temperance, and with temperance patience, and with patience brotherly
kindness, and with brotherly kindness love, or else if your zeal be never
so hot, the hot fever or fervor thereof shall not avail you. Ye shall be
like to those Fishers, with S. Peter, Fish all night but catch nothing, or
those scholars in S. Paul, being always learning, profiting nothing; or those
Petitioners in Saint James, asking always, receiving nothing, James. 5.
Bernard. AElian. var. hist. Plutarch.
or the Eutichoei in S. Bernard, Praying always but obtaining nothing; like
Atalanta running but a far off; like Diogenes Archer, shooting but a far
off; like Peter following but far off, far off indeed, for your zeal shall
make you enemies to the Cross of Christ, Oppressors, maligners, murderers,
persecutors, to whom these Presents shall come greeting; Saul Saul, why
persecutest thou me? If, therefore any of you have been so zealous,
Barrowifts, Brownistes, Humorists, Atheists DEVILS, none else against Bishops
that you could have in zeal eaten up Bishoprics, and Ecclesiastical
Endowments, and in zeal have persecuted our reverend Fathers the Chariots of
Israel, and the horsemen thereof, know it, that your zeal is a Saul, a
persecutor, a Wolf, a Betraier of the Church of God. Look upon Saul a
Pharisie by his Father, a Pharisie by his Master, a Pharisie by birth,
breeding, zeal, sect, and profession, his knowledge more, his tongues more,
his labors more then any Pharisie of our time, yet he confesses, by zeal I
persecuted the Church of God. In the bowels of Christ Jesus, truly with a
religious soul consider it, and so turn as he did from an Impostor to a
Pastor, from a persecutor to a professor, from a Wolf among Lambs, to a Lamb
among Wolves, from shedding their blood, to offer for them to shed his own
blood; from Saul to Paul, from a fierce, fiery, furious, mad monstrous Traitor,
to a holy, happy, gracious, glorious Martyr, for he was as zealous for the
Church, as ever against the Church; witness his afflictions, necessities,
distresses, stripes, prisons, tumults, labors, watchings, fastings, and
manifold sufferings, in enduring the Cross. But I end this point, and come
from Paul's Cross to Christ's Cross in my last words, Why persecutest thou me?

Maximam Emphasim habet illud me, perfecutest me? this was the word that stroke
him to the earth, Austen. Chrysostom.
stroke him from his horse, stroke him down from his presumption, Persecutest
thou me? it stroke him down earth to earth. The Fathers compare the state of
Saul at this time unto some riotous young man, who by noctiuagating and nightly
disorder in the streets, quarrels, and fights, and wounds whosoever he
meets, at the length meets with his own Father in the dark, and wounds
him; his Father at the length discerning him, cries out, Son, Son, why
have thou slain me? thou my flesh and blood, and thou the shedder of my
blood, I the cause of thy life, and thou the cause of my death, thou my son
and I the father of thy beginning, thy sword my son, and thou my son, the
father of my ending, O Son, why have thou slain me? the Son replyeth, what
thee my Father? my Father, the light of my eyes, breath of my nostrils, joy of
my heart, honor of my name; what thee my Father? It is I thy Father that thou
have wounded, that thou have slain, thy Father that begat thee, bredde thee,
fed thee, fostered thee, nourished thee, exalted thee, endowed thee, that
thought nothing too dear for thee, and now thou have slain me. All the
goary, gaping wounds that Caesar had, came not so near him, as the stabbe that
Brutus gave him: what thou my Son? the Son of my hopes, and the Son of my
desire, what Brutus my son, what Absol^n my son, my son? have thou
rebelled, have thou persecuted me, O the wonderment, astonishment, amazement of
such a Father, Osor. Euan. Part. Hiem.
and of such a Son? Such the Emphasis of this voice, persecute me: why was it
not sufficient, I was born poorly, bred barely, clothed meanly, fed miserably,
pursued violently, entrapped and betrayed treacherously, but that yet thou must
persecute me? was not my hungring, thirsting, fainting, sweating, bleeding,
dying, sufficient, not all my labors in travailing, travels in preaching,
temptations while I hungered, sorrows when I fainted, Austen.
fears when I retired, tears while I pitied, blood while I suffered, sub
iniustis, pro iniustis, cum iniustis, sub niustis iudicibus, iniustis causis,
Graeca Liturg
iniustis poenis, (...), all the miseries, needs, anguishes, scorns, thorns,
whips, nails, drops, tears, clots, streams of blood that issued from me,
would not these serve?

It is observed that Paul knew neither the voice nor the speaker, for what had
been the sting that Paul had been touched with, if he had known he had
persecuted Christ, but he did persecute Christ, for his servants be his Church
and the temples of the holy Ghost, and they be his members, his Temples
therefore his Church, his members therefore his body.

The Doctrine, Doctrine.
that he that does violently persecute any of the servants of the Lord, does
persecute Christ himself: I need not to expatiate in the proof of this,
those titles of servants, sons, brethren, children, spouse, branches of his
vine, sheep of his fold, members of his body, shows sufficiently how dearly
he loves them and their profession, Qui vos tangit me tangit, he that
touches you touches the apple of my eye. And my SOVEREIGN interpreting this
my Saviors Text in his Megasine of Learning, The Kings Majesty his Book to
all Christian Princes.
that divine and royal book against Antichrist, proves hence that none that
ever knew Scripture, can deny but by Christ often is meant his saints and
servants.

The use of this Doctrine is to stand in fear of entering into the number of
the persecutors of Christ, Caine wandering, the beastlines of sin in
Nebuchodonosor grasing, the terror of sin in Balthazar trembling, the shame of
sin in Haman hanging, the punishment of sin in Dives burning; these are
examples to astonish and deiect the greatest sinners, but to an honest and
religious soul that ever has tasted of any part of the goodness of the Lord,
this is the most potent reason to fear him, that by sin he does persecute
Christ, he does crucify again the son of God. When God in a Christians
conscience cries within him, why persecutest thou me? and yet he continue in
sin so often and so long, that his mind is never troubled, his spirit never
daunted, his thoughts never checked, his soul never grieved: O this is a
wound and a grievous wound, from which the Lord for ever and ever deliver us.
Lorizus observes out of the Legend, that it is a received opinion among the
Papists, that whosoever is borne upon the day of Saint Paul's Conversion, shall
ever be free from any harm by venom and poison. I doubt not but it is a
fable: but I could wish that you that have heard this calling of S. Paul at the
time of his Conversion, would now be converted, that the poison of wickedness
may never do you hurt again. It is the labor of all that come hither, and
the Lord give a blessing to their labors. You have received all kinds of
exhortation and of instruction: Aarons belles, Moses rod, Esayes trumpet,
Ierem^es hammer, David's harp, Salomons songs, Ebals curses, Geresims
blessings, Peter; keys, Paul's sword; the milk of exhortation, wine of
compunction, the oil of consolation, and the Water of regeneration. What could
ye have desired more then ye have received? O let not all these arise in
witness against you, let not the Lord continue his cry, why persecute ye the
Lord? Semel loquutus est Dominus Paulus semper conuersus est, Austen.
He spoke but once to Paul, and Paul was a Convert; and by this one call,
conuerts many Churches. O come ye not so often to the Cross, to return enemies
to the Cross of Christ.

And now to come to some Application for this place and presence, and to omit
the particular sins of our Nation, the Pride of the Court, usury of the City,
Dissension in the Clergy, oppression in Gentry, disobedience in the Comminalty,
the lies, lusts, oaths, uncleanness, drunkenness, profaneness and
wickedness of all, and of all sorts. I will only aim at the two Monsters of
this time, Atheism and Apostasy, which do bring and continue the over
streaming sloud of Gods wrath upon us: they are both General, both fearful;
the extent of my speech cannot say enough, either of them, or against them; for
Atheism howsoever some Schoolmen distinguish that there is none that denies
a God, quoad omnipo entiam, sed quoad prouidentiam, yet I say our age, and this
your CITY, Lombard. Zincbius.
affoordes such Devils, that neither confess or care for the providence or
omnipotency of God, who abound in the fullness of iniquity, to whom nothing
is accounted evil, because nothing accounted good, nothing can be a sin,
because nothing is a law; the first Article of whose Creed is in profession,
that there is no God: the second, that the story of the Creation is a fable,
the mystery of the Incarnation fallible, the doctrine of Redemption improbable,
of Election unprofitable, of Predestination vnavaileable, of the Resurrection
impossible: The next, that there is no Heaven no Hell, adding the Corolary,
that if there be a Hell, and they must to it, they hope that they shall not
lack Company: O who can express the misery of such a hardened heart, or who
without a heart harder can choose but tremble at such a lamentable state? O
what can be called Judgment, when nothing does sear, what can be called
Love, when nothing does allure, O what does he either hope or fear, who
acknowledges no Religion, no Resurrection, no Reprobation, no Judgment, no
Heaven nor Hell, no God at all. To these belong for ever all the curses,
vengeance, woes fire, brimstone, storm, tempest, cups of Gods wrath, dregs
of his cups, vials of the dreggs of desolation and damnation, Mors sine
morte, sinis sine fine, Greg. in Job.
numerus plagarum sine numero. These be Murderers, assacinats, persecutors of
Christ; they stretch out his arms, bow his neck, pierce his side, nail his
hands, and imbrue his body with these blasphemous stripes and scourges. Heavy,
O heavy is the sleep of that Soul, that is not awakened by these warnings:
Stony, O stony is that heart that is not feared with these terrors.

The other grande persecutors of Christ, PAPISTS.
be the Papists and Apostates to Popery, that bane and poison of Reason, and
Witchcraft of Religion, that cup of Fornication, that venom of Babylon,
wherein they maintain, that they may eat their God, kill their king, subvert
the Scriptures, adore Bones, pray to Stones, Deifie the Dead, deserve Heaven,
contest with God, and equalize their Popes with God; Onuphrius Platina Benno.
etc.
Some whereof have been Heretics, some Negromancers, many blasphemers, all
Traitors. O that ever any Soul purchased with the blood of Christ, should be
so traduced, their reason so blinded, their understanding so darkened, and their
salvation so endangered, as to be guilty of crucifying the son of God day by
day, and violently incurring his own damnation.

The general Apostasy from the true profession unto his Souls confusion, who
lives and sees not, who sees and lamenteth not? Pity, O for ever pity,
that ingenuous, generous, worthy Spirits, should be so blindly led by those
children of darkness, the Priests and Jesuits among us. O Beloved, stop
your eyes and ears, and solemnly vow to God, that you will for ever, even to
the death resist these charms and incantations of those men of sin: Let them
urge what ever they can, all is false: their antiquity, wherein their claim is
false, yet the Devil is more ancient then they, or their Learning, which is
also a false claim, yet the Pharisees more learned then they, or their good
works, which is also a false claim, yet the Hypocrite in Micah is more
glorious then they: Micah. 6.8.
or their miracles, which are also false; yet the Devil the Angel of light is
more powerful then they, or their blasphemies, murders, treasons, barbarous
conspiracies, wherein I confess the Devil is scarce more abundant then they,
and when all these things are described, if then they be not found to be
bewitched, to be enemies to the Cross of Christ, to crucify again the Lord
of life, and to persecute as Saul here did, then burn the Oracles of the
Prophets and Apostles, pull down your Churches and Temples, profess that
Christ's merits do not suffice, or rather deny that there was a Christ.

Let it be the common slander of our discontented Runnagates beyond seas,
Higgons the runnagate against D. Morton.
casting base aspersions upon the strong men of our Israel, the Reverend
Bishops and worthy Doctors that have labored against the common Adversary: Let
it be their devilish calumny, that they do it only to serve the time, and to
attain their preferment; But let never so hellish uncharitable a thought come
into any of your souls, as that so many wise, indicious, religious, absolutely
learned Fathers, should ever dissemble with their God. If ever any such should
be found, let that curse of Judas fall upon him, let his place be void, and
let another take his room, let his children be vagabonds, and his seed begging
their bread, let his habitation be a dwelling for Foxes. But if it be found
that they deal sincerely, as in the sight of the allseeing God, and that upon
the fear of the loss of body and soul, if they should beguile you. O then
hear them and believe them, for with them are the words of eternal life.

Paul had a Commission to go to persecute, I have by Saul received a
Commission to enquire of those that do persecute. And therefore leaving these
two Monsters, let us briefly descend to examine some persons and let all of you
now enter into due examination, whether any of you have persecuted Christ or
no; If there be among you a common Drunkard, a common Usurer, a common
Swearer, a common lewd liver, a common hinderer and slaunderer of Gods word,
know thou that thou art a Saul, thou do persecute Christ: If there be an
Atheistical Degge, that does revile the Messengers of God with base and
scandalous slanderous aspersions, abusing and abasing scornefully that Reverend
and Honorable Title of PRIEST, Know, that if thou have not part in the
Priesthood here; thou shall have none in the Kingdom there and in that thou
do it to the least of these, thou do it to Christ, thou art a Saul, thou
do persecute Christ: If there be any one that viper-like has eaten out his
birth, building upon the ruins of broken poor Citizens eating up his Brethren
like bread; the stone out of the wall shall cry against thee, and know it, that
thy house is Golgotha, the place of dead men's skuls, and thy possession is
Acheldema the field of blood: The bread thou eatest is the flesh of man, the
wine thou drinkest is the blood of man, thou art a Canibal, thou art a Saul,
thou do persecute Christ.

If there be any amongst your men of Traffic that ever have afforded any
Engines of Artillery, to that great enemy of Christ and Christians the Turk,
thereby to work the massacre of Christians, and effusion of their blood know
it that that blood does cry against thee, thou art a Saul, thou do persecute
Christ, any, thou art a Judas, thou do betray Christ. If there be any among
you that may deserve the style of a quarrelling, querulous, litigious wrangler,
and spend the greatest time of his life in Law, like that Triuultius in
Millaine, of whom this Epitaph was made; Qui nun quam quicuit, hic quieuit,
he that never rested* nor let any others, here he rests; If there be any such
know thou art a Saul, thou do persecute Christ.

If there be any such that have engrosed the livings of the Church, to make a
common sale of Souls hereafter, Simoniacally to sell that which the Kings of
this Land, so many years have given: Let them beware, for though the Devil
plead for them by Scripture, that they have not freely received, and therefore
not freely to give them: Let them remember that though the Clergy must labor,
yet buy they must not, and to beg they are ashamed: Let them know they are
sacrilegious Balthazirs,, and the gold they receive shall be aurum Tolesanum,
it shall bring a curse upon them, Erasmus. Adag.
their families and posterities, they are like bloody Saul, to whom Christ
speaks, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?

If there be any such Lawyers, that undertake any unjust and false causes, or
proterminate their Clients, as Innocentius observed; Nec terminantur negotia,
Jano. de vita. hum. Conditi.
donec euacuat a marsupia, and never suffer their causes to be ended until
their purses be consumed, Aelian. Var. hist. lib. 9. cap. 18.
which made Themistocles so sharply to censure the Law, that if two ways were
showed him, the one going to Hell, the other to the Bar, he would sooner
take the way that leads to Hell: If there be any such unconscionable Lawyer,
let him know he is a Saul, he does persecute Christ.

If there be any that have opposed any action intended to the glory of God,
and saving of souls and have stayed the happy proceeding in any such motion;
let him know, that he is a persecuter, and an adversary of Christ.

Plutarch. The Drones that lie at home. traducing honorable end auours of
these abroad, are to be expelled the common wealth.
In which Quaere give me leave to examine the lying speeches that have
injuriously vilified and traduced a great part of the glory of God, the honor
of our Land, joy of our Nation, and expectation of many wise, and Noble
Senators of this kingdom, I mean in the Plantation of VIRGINIA. When the descry
of the Indians, was offered to that learned and famous Prince Henry the
seventh, Some idle, dull and unworthy Skeptics moved the King not to
entertain the motion. We know our loss by the Spaniards gain, but now the
Souls of those Dreamers do seem by a Pithagericall Transanimation to be
come into some of those scandalous and slanderous Detractors of that most Noble
Voyage. Surely, if the prayers of all good Christians prevail, the expectation
of the wisest and noblest, the knowledge of the most experimented and
learned, the relation of the best traueld, and obseruantst be true, it is
like to be the most worthy Voyage that ever was effected by any Christian, in
descring any Country of the world; both for the peace of the Entry, for the
plenty of the Country, and for the Clymate. Seeing that the Country is not
unlike to equalize (though not Inata for gold, which is not impossible yet)
Tyrus for colors, Basan for woods, Persia for oils, Arabia for Spices, Spain
for silks, Tharsis for shipping, Netherlands for Fish, Bononia for fruit, and
by tillage, Babylon for Corn, besides the abundance of Mulberies, Minerals,
metals, Pearls, Gummes, Grapes, Dear, Foul, drugges for Physic, herbs
for food, roots for colors, ashes for Soap, timber for building, pasture for
feeding, rivers for fishing, and whatsoever commodity England wants. The
Philosopher commends the Temperature, the Merchant the commodity, the
Politician the opportunity, the Divine, the Piety, in converting so many
thousand souls. The Virginian desires it, and the Spaniard enuyeth us, and
yet our own lasie, drousie,, yet barking Countrymen traduce it: who should
honor it, if it were but for the remembrance of that Virgin Queen of eternal
memory, who was first godmother to that land and Nation. As also that VIRGIN
Country may in time prove to us the Barn of Britain, as Sicily was to Rome,
or the Garden of the world as was Thessaly, or the Argosie of the world as is
Germany.

And besides the future expectation, the present encouragement is exceeding
much, in that it is a Voyage countenanced by our gracious King, consulted on by
the Oracles of the Council, adventured in by our wisest and greatest Nobles,
and undertaken by so worthy, so honorable, and religious a LORD, and furthered
not only by many other parties of this Land, both Clergy and Laity, but also
by the willing, liberal contribution of this Honorable City, and as that
thrice worthy Deane of Gloucester, D. Morton.
not long since remembered his Majesty and his Nobles, that it is a Voyage,
wherein every Christian ought to set to his helping hand, seeing the Angel of
Virginia cries out to this land, as the Angel of Macedonia did to Paul, O
come and help us. There is a fearful woe denounced against those that came
not to assist Deborah; Curse ye Meroz (says the Angel of the Lord) Curse
ye the inhabitants thereof, Judge 5.
because they came not to help the Lord, to help the Lord against the mighty:
Whosoever they be that purposely withstand or confront this most Christian,
most Honorable Voyage, let him read that place and fear. Has God called this
land ad summum munus Apostolicu^ to that great work of Apostleship, that
whereas this was one of the first part of Christendom that received the
Gospel, so now it is the first part that ever Planted and Watered the Gospel
in so great, fair, fruitful a Country, and shall Scepticall Humorists be a
means to keep such an honor from us, such a blessing from them? No my
Beloved, to the present assurance of great profit, add this future profit,
that whosoever has a hand in this business, shall receive an* unspeakable
blessing, for they that turn many to righteousness, Dan. 12.
shall shine as the stars for ever and ever: you will make Plutarches (...),
Athenocus (...) a Sauadge country to become a sanctified Country; you will
obtain their best commodities, they will obtain the saving of their Souls,
you will enlarge the bounds of this Kingdom, nay the bounds of heaven, and
all the Angels that behold this, if they rejoice so much at the conversion of
one Sinner, O what will their joy be at the conversion of so many, Go on as
ye have begun, and the Lord shall be with you, go and possess the land,
it is a good land, a land flowing with milk and honey; God shall bless you,
and those ends of the world shall honor him.

I will end with one word of exhortation to this City, many excellent things
are spoken of thee, as sometimes of the City of God. Hither the Tribes come,
even the Tribes of the Lord, herein is the Seat of judgment, even the seat
of the house of David, Peace be within thy walls, plenteousnesse within thy
Palaces.

Yet remember how manyfold infections hence as from a fountain have issued
out, all the tricks of deceyuing, the diverse lusts of filthy living, the Pride
of attire, the cause of oppression, gluttony in eating surfeit in drinking, and
the general disease of the fashions: Lactant. 7. divine Justit.
so that as Lactantius out of Sibilla prophesies of Rome, (...) So may it be
said of the Transformation of London. It should be Jerusalem the City of God,
and it is become Murders slaughterhouse, Thefts refuge, Oppressions safety,
Whoredoms Stews, Vsuries Bank, Vanities Stage, abounding in all kind of
filthiness and profaneness O remember that sins have been the Pioners of
the greatest Cities, His Majesty's speech the 21. of May to the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen at Greenewitch.
and have not left one stone upon another.

My Honorable L. Mayor, I need not to remember you in this behalf; The last
Sabbath you received a Lesson though not from the Cross yet from the Crown by
our royal Ecclesiastes, practice that lesson both concerning the infection of
the body, and infection of the soul of this city: remember the charge, your
year must end, and your life must end and you must give account of your
Stewardship. My Honorable Lords, ye Reverend Fathers of the Law, your
judgment is the Harbenger to the greater judgment, Ye are Gods, but ye
shall die like men, as God has honored you, Psalm. 82.
so honor him in setting forth of his glory, in punishing of his enemies, in
countenancing of his servants. O my Lords, if there were not negligence either
in Spiritual or Temporal Judges, could there be so many hundred Priests and
Jesuits, Locusts of the bottomless pit among us, and so many thousand
Papisticall Apostates, since the death of the late Queen of blessed Memory.
Remember to punish these, and to proceed in judgment against them, lest God
proceed in judgment against you. And not only punish his Enemies, but
countenance, yea and reverence his servants: O look upon the dejected state of
the royal Priesthood, the Clergy, They seek not their ancient honors,
their honor lies in the dust but it shall revive: They seek now but ordinary
favors: It was a faithful witness of a religious and good heart in one of
the chiefest and honourablest among you, in the L. Bishop of Winchesters case,
that the contempt of the Clergy, My L. Cook in his reports.
will be the downfall of Religion: had the Levites in the Law their
Privileges, and have the meanest Clarks in your law their privileges, and
shall the Clergy be PROHIBITED theirs? it is Gods cause not theirs, and if
God take it in hand, all your Prohibitions will not serve. Remember then to
countenance and reverence his servants.

All of you my Beloved, hear the Sum of al, fear God and keep his
commandments, let there be unity and verity in you of the Clergy, judgment
and mercy in you of the Magistracy, obedience and religion in you of the
Comminalty. You all know God is angry, wrath is come out, the Plague is
begun, yea continued from year to year, rides progress from Country to
Country, executes judgment upon high and low, and keeps Court at this time
within this City. O serve the Lord in fear, Kiss the son lest he be angry,
and so ye perish from the right way, with true repentant sinners appease him,
with poor distressed wretches entreat him, with Patriarchs and Prophets, and
Apostles believe him, with all his Saints and servants love him, with the holy
Angels praise him, with Heaven, Earth and all the Creatures duly and dutifully
serve him, which Grace the God of all Grace grant us all Amen.

FINIS.

