THE CREATION OF THE PRINCE. A Sermon Preached in the College of Westminster,
on Trinity Sunday, the day before the Creation of the most Illustrious PRINCE
of Wales. By DANIELL PRICE, Chapleine in Ordinary, and then in attendance on
the PRINCE.

printer's or publisher's device

AT LONDON Printed by G. Eld, for Roger Iackson, dwelling near Fleet
Conduict. 1610.

To the right Honorable Lord, worthy the confluence of all honorable
happiness, ROBERT Earl of Salisbury, Lord high Treasurer of England, one of
the Oracles of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel, Knight of the
tres-noble order of the Garter.
MOST HONORABLE, most Wise, most Worthy Lord, it is the second time I present
a testimony of my most humble observance to your honor: The beams of that
splendour of goodness in you, have shined upon many sons of those two
Sisters, the Church and Commonwealth, among whom I do most joyfully
acknowledge my happiness, in obteyning an honorable promise, by the mediation
of My royal Master, the illustrious PRINCE.

The Widow in the Gospel offered to the treasure, a little Money; the Woman a
little Oil, to her Savior: Another in the Story, a little water to his
Sovereign: my little I offer to your honor, is much less then theirs: If
this shall add any life to my suite, and procure any more favor from your
honor, I shall acknowledge how you worthily imitate God himself, who
rewards an hours work with a days wages: which God as he has already
endowed you with the heart of Prudence, so I hope he will euer-direct your
Lordship with his hand of Providence, that you may be famous to posterity,
gracious to This Kingdom, and glorious in His Kingdom: this I wish, this I
pray for, thus I rest.

Your honors in all dutiful observance DANIELL PRICE.

A Sermon preached in the Abbey of Westminster, on Trinity Sunday, the day
before the Creation of the illustrious and gracious Prince HENRY Prince of
Wales.
Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a new heart.


RIght Reverend, Right Honorable, Worshipful, and Well-beloued: They that have
wayed sins in the balance of iniquity, have found some to be more heavy
then others, by many degrees, either in the Causality, Albertus in Compend.
Theolog.
(as the Schools speak) as that sin of Lucifer, or in the generality, as
the sin of Adam, or in the deformity, as the sin of Judas, or in the
difficulty of Pardoning, as the sin of Julian: These be sins of the highest
elevation, towering, and mounting up to call for perpetual desolation, and
branded with the blackest character that ever any sins were.

For other sins the ancient have compared them to sundry beasts, to show the
beastliness thereof, Envy to a Dog, Anger to a Woolfe, Sloth to an Ass,
Avarice to a Hedghogge, Gluttony to a Bear, Luxury to a Boar: Some others
have described them by some diseases, to manifest the fulsomnesse and
loathsomeness thereof, Pride by an inflammation, Luxury by a Fever, Envy by
a Leprosy, Anger by a Frenzy, Sloth by a Lethargy, Avarice by a Dropsy,
Superstition by the Plague, and these be common, O too common ever since the
sons of Adam received the tainture of blood from the first offense of their
first father!

But what commerce have the Saints with sins? there is no fellowship between
righteousness and unrighteousness, no communion between light and darkness;
Genesis 25.22. 1. Sam. 5 4. Math. 21.13. Reu. 12.7. 1. Ioh. 3.9.
and if one womb cannot contain Jacob and Esau, one house the Arc and Dagon,
one Temple prayer and merchandise, one heaven Michael and the Dragon, how shall
one soul retain polution and sanctification? Saint John testifying, that he
that is borne of God does not sin, neither can he sin, because he is borne
of God: Austin.
but David has confessed though a Saint, a King, qui habuit sanctitatem, non
solum vnctionis sed functionis, that by his own experience he found it, that
seven times a day does the righteous fall. Epist. 46.
And hereupon Saint Hierom to reconcile these two places, asks the question,
Si iustus quomodo cadit, si cadit quo modo iustus, and answers himself, that
he falls by sin, rises by grace, falls by his fault, rises by his
faith, or as another, homo cadit non iustus, Zanchius.
as a man he offends, but as a Christian man he reconcileth himself to
God: and being borne of God, sins not: nay as Saint John speaks, he not
only does not sin, but he cannot sin, that is, 1. John. 3.9.
desperately, without remorse they cannot sin, and presumptuously without
fear they do not sin, neither do, nor can, sin desperately as Cain did,
presumptuously as Pharaoh did; maliciously as Judas did; blasphemously as
Julian did, for the seed of God remains in them.

Howsoever therefore the slips and slidings of the best servants of God be
registered, that he that stands may take heed least he fall, yet no one of
them has fallen finally, totally: And howsoever, this sweet singer of Israel
(whose heavenly Antheme I have chose for this solemn celebrity) though his
foot had almost slipped, nay though he had fallen, and descended down, down,
down into the shadows of death, into the snares of death, into the Chambers
of death, yet behold his sunne-rising as Orient as ever it was, he is again
created to walk in righteousness and holiness before God all the days of
his life. The word CREATED, will be the sum of my succeeding discourse: first
thereby to remember those many that have this day received holy order here,
from that honorable Prelate, Lord Bishop of Lintolne.
and most reverend Father, who most carefully advised them of the dignity and
duty of that function, and who are now created anew, and are to forsake all the
world, nay their own selves, as the Disciples did, and in the prime of the
Church those Primitiues that would be no Possessiues, Lorinus in 2. Act. Apost.
some left all they had, others sold all, others gave all; so these should so
much neglect all things for Christ's sake, as that they were at the first
created to the image of the earthly man, earthly, so now they should be created
to the image of the Lord from heaven, heavenly.

And secondly, my choice of this Text was chiefly to solemnize this great Feast
of the CREATION and inuestiture of my most gracious Lord and Master the
Prince, to add solemnity to which Feast, Psalm. 148.
were I as able as willing, I would take the course that David in 140. Psalm,
to call from the heavens, the Angels, and armies thereof, Sun, Moon,
Stars, heavens of heavens, and the waters that be above the heavens, I would
descend from the orbs and arches, and summon the air, fire, snow, vapors, and
winds. I would enter into the Ocean, Psalm. 8.
and raise the Dragons, and all deepes, fishes of the seas, and all that
passes through the paths of the seas. I would warn a Convocation of all the
world, and muster together mountains, and all hills, fruitful trees, and all
Cedars, beasts and all cattle, creeping things and feathered fowls, Kings
of the earth, and all people, Princes and all Judges of the world, young men
and maidens, old men and children to praise the name of the Lord: for if ever,
now we may say, Blessed be the eyes, that see the things that we see, so
royal, learned, and religious a King, so noble, worthy and gracious a Prince,
the kingly father so happy, so excellent, the princely Son so rarely
virtuous, so obedient, though I will not say as those heathen did of the
Apostles, gods have descended to us in the likeness of men, yet I will with
the heathen Historian confess, Xenophon.
(...), a Prince is an Image of God, which title is the most glorious chaplet,
coronet, frontlet, tablet, bracelet of a Christian Prince.

Aug. de Temp.
At the Feast of the Nativity we are taught to be borne again: at the Feast
of Easter to rise again, at the Feast of Whitsontide to pray for the spirit,
at this Feast of Trinity to receive the spirit, and by this great and solemn
long wished-for Feast of this CREATION, we are taught to pray for the creating
of new hearts, good souls, religious spirits, honest consciences. And
howsoever the head of my Text serves only for the Prince, the CREATION, yet
the body of my Text serves for all people, it is the renouation of the mind
[Create in me a new heart] I have provided this messenger to send up to heaven
for new souls; an ambassador quick of speed, faithful for trust, happy for
success, whom neither the tediousness of the time, nor difficulty of the
passage can hinder, but as a chariot of fire will presently be lifted up into
the presence of the Almighty to seek his assistance. It is the messenger that
Ezekias used to have the charter of his dares renewed: Esaias. 38.3 2. Kings.
4.32. Math. 5.7.
that Elisha used to have the Sunamites childs soul renewed: that the sick of
the palsy used to have his hands, and feet renewed, and that David used to
have his heart renewed. It is prayer, the language of heaven, the tongue of
Canaan, Austin in Soliloq.
the speech of Zyon, the music of Jerusalem, the harmony of sinners, the
melody of Saints. It is that fire which being kindled by the spirit of God, in
the Temple of the soul, will ever burn upon the Altar of the heart, and ever
ascend from the censor of the Tongue, till thou have obtained of God the
petition of David, Create in me a new, clean, pure, undefiled, uncorrupted
heart. Diuisio.
I will only insist upon these two parts; first the greatness of his suite;
Duae parts.
no purgation, or clensing, or curing, or recovering, or quickening, but a new
creating; Create in me. Secondly, the greatness of his sore and sorrow, not his
hand, or foot, or eye, or head, only ill affected, but his heart, the best
member, the Metropolis of his soul, Create in me a new heart. And of these
briefly, praying as Saint Austin did on the like occasion, Deus faciet hunc
textum tam commodum quam accommodatum. God make this text so commodious for our
souls, as accommodated for these our times. And first for the Creation.

Prima. pars. Hosiod. Ovid. Plato. vide Phillip. Mornay lib. 10 de vera
Religione. Tull de Not. Deor.
The Creation is the Genesis of the book of God, the first Act in Nature, as
Heathens confess, the first ouerture of Gods power, as Divines witness, a
work so wonderful, that the Atheist inquireth of Plato, quae ferramenta, qui
vectes, quae mollitiones, quae machinae, tanti operis fuerunt, what were the
Engines, posts, machinations, pullyes, leauers, pillars, scaffolds, of so great
and wonderful a work.

Who can imagine that so many things, diverse in quality, immense in quantity,
high in sublimity, deep in profundity, could ever be made: that so many
sinews and joints, and connexions and con-catenations should be so orderly
disposed in that great Fabrique: Nasci, to be borne is a wonder, a body though
little, to be so framed, the joints to move so actiuely, the sinews to stir
so nimbly, senses to utter force so sharply, the lungs to breath so powerfully,
Job.
it drew Job into admiration, and to ask who has framed thee in the womb?
but to be Created, a world so massy, so mighty, unless man look with the
eyes of Grace, through the windows of Nature, he cannot as a natural man
perceive it: but Moses taught it, Plato Moses, Atticus. Genesis 1.
Plato learned it, and though the Atheist do not believe it, yet in the first
of Genesis, in the Capital Characters of Heaven and Earth it is described, and
some undertake to free Aristotle from denying the Creation, though his works
do much oppugn it, he being as ambitious to overcome all other opinions, as
his Scholar Alexander to conquer other Nations.

The word Create, Aquiuas.
in Scripture is taken by the Schoolmen and Fathers diversely, pro prefectione
ex nihilo, In the Image of God he created man: pro generatione ex propria
substantia: Genesis 1.27.
These are the generations of the Heaven and the Earth, as in Genesis. Genesis 2.3.
Pro renouatione, as in Esaias. I will Create a new Heaven, Esaias. 65.17.
and a new Earth; pro donorum Christus infusione, as in the Ephes^^ns. Created
by his spirit to good works: Ier. 31.22.
pro filij Dei incarnatione, as in Jeremy, The Lord has created a new thing, a
woman shall compass a man. And in this place pro regeneratione, as some, pro
iustificatione, as others. Improperly it is used many ways, as either that in
our Anniuersary Act and Commencement of the Universities, the Creation of our
Doctors: or as at this feast the word is used for the Royal inuestiture and
Creation of the most noble Prince. But to return to our purpose.

Regeneration may fitly be called a Creation; In the one, the other is
shadowed: In praedestination the huge and vast deep, the dark form whereof
can hardly be discerned: In vocation, the seperating of light from darkness,
of knowledge, from ignorance in the soul. In justification the Sun is
created, the beams of grace begin to shine. In glorification, the new Adam is
framed after the image of God, and placed in the Paradise of immortality: David
had tasted of these rivers of Paradise, he had been praedestinated, called,
justified, but now these streams and currents were dried up, his form was in
a chaos, his sun in a cloud, folly had polluted his eyes, filth had possessed
his thoughts, blood had defiled his hands, shame had covered his head, sin
had profaned his heart, not only, no whole part in his body, but no whole
part in his soul, no means to cure him, to create him a new. There was a time
when he cried out Concaluit cor, et exardescit ignis, my heart is hot, Psalm.
39.3. Aust. in Psalm.
and the fire is kindled within me. But now his heart is cold, the fire is
quenched, the spirit is departed, his soul is expired, and he is even as a
dead man, Corpus inane animae.

Of Hermotinus it is recounted that he sometimes lost his soul, that it would
depart from him at times, and come home again: such was David's state, he was
in a trance, not a slumber alone, but a strange Lethargy: Jonas that slept so
fast, when the waves, winds, storms, outcries of the Sailors, stretchings of
the tacklings, the Sea, the ship, the Heavens could not awake him: David slept
as sou^dly as he did, days, weeks, months, a whole year, he had in the
course of his life many enemies; Saul warring, Shemei railing, Doeg intrapping,
Philistines betraying, Absolon rebelling, Adoniah usurping, but all these not so
great, as the two enemies that had set now upon him, besieged him, boorded him,
possessed him, adultery and murder: adultery had adulterated his soul, and
murder had almost murdered his heart: he was almost in that sorrowful state
that Saint Bernard describes a hardened heart, Bernard ad Eugenium.
which be it extimulated and exulcerated never so much, yet will not be cut
with compunction, nor softened with love, nor moved with mercy, nor allured
with entreaty, yields not to threatenings, unthankful for benefits,
unfaithful in Counsels, unmerciful in judgments, shameless in dishonesty,
wretchlesse in danger, in things apertaining to men void of humanity, in
matters concerning God full of temerity, unmindful of what is past, negligent
of what is present, improuident of what is to come. Such almost was this heart
of David, as secureles, and careless as any heart could be: Idleness had
vshered Concupiscence, Adultery and blood reuel'd in his Court, nay in his
heart, in the^ the vileness of his thoughts, hateful to God, nor the
filthiness of his mind, hurtful to himself, nor the sight of his subjects,
nor the observation of his servants, nor the blood of Vriah, nor the great
belly of Bethsheba, nor the crying of those two cursed twins, Adultery, and
Murder, could cause him to fear, till that Nathan had raised him, and the new
spirit had created him.

No marvel, though Pharaoh add sin unto sin, Exodus 10.20. Mat. 2.16.
or Herod join massacre to ambition, or Nebuchadnezzar join pride unto blood,
Dan 5.27.
or Nero join villainy to mischief, or Catiline serve to join ruin to riot,
or the wicked join the cartropes of iniquity to the cords of vanity, when the
bowels of Gods elect, shall be so filled and possessed with carelessness. What
shall refrain the wicked from sinning desperately as Cain, rebelliously as
Saul, presumptuously as Pharaoh, aspiringly as Lucifer, trecherously as Judas:
when David, a man after Gods own heart, his Psalmodist, his Organist, his
Prophet, his sweetest singer of Israel, should so offend the God of Israel, and
need such a transformation?

But the doctrine herein for us all, is this, Doctrine.
that though the godly may be in a trance for a time, and the fit of that
sinful fever so strongly handle them, yet the Lord has a mind to relieve
them, and a power to revive them. David had the Practique of this Theorique, in
all his soundings he sends to the well of Bethel, flies to the city of
refuge, the Well of Gods favor, the city of Gods power, he remembered even
now, when his soul is brought to the uttermost pit, nethermost hell, yet by
his respiration, by Gods inspiration there is life in him, he sigheth out, and
groneth out, Create in me a new heart. That, as in the Acts when Eutiches,
overcome with sleep, fell down from the third loft, Paul spoke, Trouble not
your selves, Act. 20.10.
for his life is in him: so may I speak unto you all, Right Reverend, Right
Honorable, and Well-beloved, that he are me this day, though ye have seen David
in his folly, in his fall, and that Scripture has uncovered his nakedness so
far, that he seems to be dead and buried, and to smell in the grave, as the
Fathers expound that of Lazarus 4. days; Austin Ambros.
the 1. day by conceiving finne, the 2. by consenting, the 3. day by comitting,
the 4. day, by continuing in sin, yet there is life in him, and as David was a
type of Christ, so the words spoken of Christ may be true of David, He was
dead, but is alive, and he shall live for evermore: for whom God loves, he
loves unto the end: all the devils in hell, all infernal accomplices cannot raze
one of Gods servants out of the book of life. Reu. 1.18.
None of them shall be lost, Ioh. 17.12.
though the sownings of their faith cause them sometimes to draw their breath
so inwardly to it self, that no man can perceive it, yet the good nes of God
shall embrace the^, as Paul did Eutiches, their life in them, 1. Ioh. 3.9.
their seed is in them. Solomon in the trance of Idolatry, Jonas in the trance
of recusancie, Jeremy in the trance of impatiency, Peter in the trance of
apostacy, Thomas in the trance of infidelity, God shall in these have a
blessed purpose, both to such as are in these spiritual Apoplexies, and to
others.

Ireneus gives 3. Ireneus.
reasons in respect of us, why the infirmity of the Saints are Chronicled in
the book of God: 1. to give us warning, that both they and we have but one God,
who was ever offended with sin, how great soever the persons were that
wrought it. 2. to teach us to abstain from sin: for if the ancient Patriarcks
who went before us, both in time promise, covenant, love, and grace of God, and
for whom (sins being yet not so many) the Son of God had not suffered, if they
bare such reproaches among their posterity, that their corruptions are
registered, what shall we sustain, that live in a brighter and later age of the
world, and have continued beyond the coming of the Lord Jesus. 3. to give us
warning and instruction, that there was a cure behind, the sacrifice of the
Lamb which was not then slain but for such as sin now, Christ dies no more,
no more sufferings, no more satisfactions. And as another well notes, If that
an apple, a wedge, a bribe, the turning back of the eye in Lots wife, smile of
the countenance in Abraham's wife, discontent once in Miriam, false fire once in
Corah, and the like, if these deserved such punishment, what shall our
customary sins, open and secret, of the eye and hand, in word, in works private
within our own tent, public to the great Eye of heaven.

S. Austen handling the point upon this Psalm, Austin. in Psa 51.
makes this enarration, Commissum atque conscriptum est, it is done and
written, not for thy imitation, but for thy instruction, to inform thee thus
much, that if thou take the wings of the morning, and fly from one end of the
earth to the other, thou can not find a soul so pure that has not sind, the
chiefest, greatest, strongest, wisest, goodliest, godliest, have fallen;
Patriarckes, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, stars, Angels, al have
sinned, yea and some so fallen, that they never rose again: sin thou not,
that thou may rise; but so rise from sin, that thou may never fall again.
Fear, O fear the fall, swallow not the hook of delight, Conscientia,
contrist ans scientia, Bernard in Cant.
as Saint Bernard does etymologize the word, Conscience will follow, if sin be
the Prologue, shame will be the Epilogue, the woorme, the whip, the scourge of
conscience will fear thee, she is marked and observed by her own eye, though
no other eye perceive her, followed and chased by her own foot, though
nothing in heaven or earth pursue her, she flees, fears, and yet stingeth
and fretteth, and has a thousand witnesses within her own breast when she is
free from all the world: Happy then if the conscience finding her misery, seek
the promise, the promise take hold on faith, faith ask prayer, prayer ask
God, that God hear, and mercy answer, that again, we may be created in
holiness and righteousness all the days of our lives.

Triplex Creatio spiritualis.
This Creation is spiritually wrought, first by Baptism, the character of
Christians, mark of the Church, sign of the Chosen, oath of the Saints, livery
of the Servants, assurance of the Sons of God, A peccato mundans, Poenam
relaxans, rationalem illuminens, Albertus in Comp. Theol. Eusebius.
Concupiscibilem ad bonum inflammans, Characterem inueniens, as Ratisbonensis
collecteth the power and virtue hereof. Constantine never Baptized before he
was dying, and David never so baptized as here, when he was almost dead and
then in his last gasp, wash me, cleanse me, purge me. Never any a more true
knight of the Bath then he, he had the waters of Jordan, pooles of Shiloan,
fountains of Lebanon, springs for the Spring, and fall of the leaf: But our
Baptism does create us anew, no sacrifice or sacrament of the old law so
powerful, they were but remembrances gratulatory, no oblation propriatory, but
this so energeticall as that the form and frame, soul and body be changed:
It is the great seal of the Charter of heaven which is proclaimed Omnibus
Christi fide libus. Gratia gratis data. Gratia gratum faciens. Gratia praeuaen.
Gratia subsequens.
To all the Christian people of the world.

Secondly we are Created by Grace, Grace is shed into our hearts. The
distinctions of Grace among the Schoolmen will be harsh to many in this
assembly, but all must know that in this we must acknowledge with the Prophet,
Grace, Grace, Zechariah. 13.1
all is Grace, even that fountain opened to the house of David. For our
righteousness cannot Create us, no more then we can Create it, for had we
Iustitiam Gentilium, it were but vain and Philosophical, had we Iustitiam
Pharisaeorum, it were but shadowy and legal, had we only Iustitiam Viatoris,
it were but imperfect, and casual, no spark of our own can inflame us, only
Grace can Create us: A sweeter word then Grace was never uttered, Miriams
Tabrel, Asaphs Trumpet, Ieduthun his Neginoth, David his Cimballs, Salomons
Songs, the Spouses sonnets, never made sweeter melody, then this beloved voice
of the beloved GRACE. It is the Balm that runs from the head to the beard,
and from the beard unto the skirts of the garment, it is Jordan that makes
glad the City of God, it is the roabe of righteousness that covers the whole
man, and God gives liberally thereof to every one, Gratiam dat, datam
conseruat, conseuatam multiplicat, multiplicatam remu^^ erat, gives Grace,
freely, conserueth Grace given, multiplieth Grace conserved, and rewards
Grace multiplied. Creati sumus per gratiam, we are Created by grace.

Thirdly, Creati sumus per poenitentiam, we are Created again by Repentance,
it is the spring of the life of man, the budding of the fig tree, the
reviving of the withered lilly, Plyn. Not. Histor.
that as the Swallow renews sight, the Eagle renews youth, the Heart
renews strength, Psalm. 103,5
so Man by repentance casts of the sin that presses down, and is again
Created and restored, purged, washed, sanctified.

This Creation requires many conditions as the Fathers observe: Aust. in Psalm.
Alber. de sacr.
for Repentance must be tota, wholly, with all the heart. Secondly, Amara,
bitter, make lamentation, Joel 2, 12 Ier 6, 26 Wisdom 6.18
and bitter mourning. Thirdly, Voluntaria, voluntary, come freely, and
willingly unto the Lord. Fourthly it must be Accelerata, speedy, Eccles. 5, 3
Cant. 5, 3
defer not to pay that which thou have paid unto God. And fifthly it must be
Continua, continual and perseuerant, if thou have put put off thy coat how
shall thou put it on? If thou have washed thy feet how shall thou defile them?
Thus observing the conditions and binding thy self by this obligation thou
shall be Created as David was.

If we should look upon him, when he was taken from the sheepfolds, from
following the Ewes great with young, from being so mean in his brothers eyes,
nay in his own eyes, even then when his fathers house was of the poorest in
the Tribe, himself the least of his family, lowest of brethren, and if after
we shall behold him advanced from being a Shepherd to follow sheep, to be
(...), Homer.
a shepherd to govern and lead people, from being the meanest of his
brethren, to be Lord, and then to change his coat for a Court, his
sheep-hooke for a Scepter, to become wiser then his teachers, greater then his
enemies, more puisant then Saul, more victorious then Ammon, more honored then
the Aged; this in the eye of man was a new Creation, but yet not to be
compared with this: Then his state was changed from poor to rich, now his
soul is changed from sinful to a sanctified state. And being so Created
again, the words of the Psalm may fit him, O well is thee, and happy shall
thou be, thou art fairer then the children of men, full of grace are thy lips,
because God has blessed thee for ever.

The use of this is to direct us to a due regard of our corruption, Use.
who have need so to be reformed in our lives: and yet in this consideration
even to behold the mercy seat, the throane of grace, from whence by the
powerful operation of Gods spirit we may be created. Vides miseriam agnosce
misericordiam: August.
do thou behold thy misery, acknowledge Gods mercy ever able to change thee,
and to purge thee from actual deprauations, and natural corruptions, from thy
many, mighty, heavy, filthy, bloody, crying sins: and therefore to call
frequently to God, to pray heartily for this reformation, to pray that we may
power in our prayers: Solinus.
for as the stone Diacletes is said to loose all her excellent power and
operation if put into the mouth of a dead man, so Prayer if put into a man's
mouth whose heart is dead, or whose hand is unclean, it loses all the
sovereign properties. Some of the Fathers have deciphered the three
Theological virtues of faith, hope, and charity, by the three that attended
Christ at the transfiguration on the Mount, and at his agony in the garden,
Peter, James, and John; Peter by faith, James by hope, John by love: If thou
did imagine thy self to have all these three, and had not the power of
Prayer, it were nothing: Not to speak of the efficacy of hope or love, the
wonders of faith be many, to remove mountains, to quench the fire, to stay the
winds, to resist enemies: Prayer has all these, it remooueth mountains, thy
sins be as Mountains before the Throne of GOD, it remooueth them further
from thee, then the East is from the West, it quenches fire, if the fire of
lust kindle within thee, by Prayer thou may quench thee, if the windy storm
of any dejected desperate thought do blow within thee, pray up, Lord let thy
enemies be scattered: if the Devil, world, and flesh, set upon thee, yet by
this thou shall put to flight all infernal accomplices. It opened and shut
heaven, it brought plenty and dearth, drought and rain, and will if thou be
acquainted with her, be the sweetest companion that ever accompanied any on the
face of the earth, to say no more, it will prefer thee, and create thee heir
apparent of the kingdom of Heaven.

The festiuity of the Creation now celebrated, should infuse greater spirits
into us then heretofore, such occasions of joy to us, of happiness for us,
such triumphs, applauses, Jubilees as these, do draw from us gratulation and
acclamation, in that God has not only given his judgments unto the King, but
his righteousness to the Kings son, 72.1.
leaving such a hope for the young, such a comfort for the old, such happiness
for all; such a young Ptolomey for studies and Libraries; such a young
Alexander for affecting martialisme and chivalry, such a young Josiah for
religion and piety. This should stir us up to acknowledgement of Gods mercies
by his Highness, and move us to a spiritual ambition, for our own
happiness: That as in such honorable state he is to be created PRINCE of so
great place here on earth, by his Purple robes, Sword, Signet, Golden Staff,
(the earnests of his glorious and triumphant royalty in Heaven) so seeing God
has Created us Kings and Priests, as Saint John speaks, Reu. 1.
we should desire the benefit of this spiritual Creation to put on the roabes
of righteousness, the sword of the spirit, to receive the staff of
protection, to be placed as signets on Gods hand.

There was as Creation of a Prince in Scripture, but it was the poorest and
meanest that ever was. The Prince his name is found in Esaias: Esaias. 9.6.
The PRINCE of Peace, and of his creation mention is made in Jeremy: The Lord
has CREATED a new Thing on the earth, Ier. 31.22.
it was new indeed as Augustine confessed, a saeculo non est auditum, Aug. de
Temp.
never since the beginning of the world was the like news heard, and Bernard
stood at an amazement at this Creation, Bernard. de Jncarnat.
there was Lux non lucem, verbum infans, aqua sitiens, panis esuriens: At that
creation there was a light not shining, the word an infant not speaking, the
water of life thirsting, the bread of life hungring, God himself descending,
and the Creator Created, if I may so speak. A body have thou Created says the
Psalmist, a body without sin, to endure the sufferings for sin, and to
undergo all the torments that the unbounded invention of hell could devise:
This was a new thing, Nouum et omnium nouitatum nouitas supereminens, Jerome.
says Jerome, such and so merueilous, miraculous and extraordinary a nouelty
as the world of worlds cannot yield the like president. Let the Sibills speak
of their new Rutilans Sydus, Aug. de Ciuit. Dei.
the Astronomers of their new stars in Cygno and Serpentario, let the
Imaginaries find out a new Vtopia, the Cosmographers their newfound America:
let Pancirolla write whole volumes De nouis Repertis, and Mercurius
Gallobelgicus (the worlds Postmaster for news) supply news every year, yet
no like news to this, no Creation since the first Creation of the world like
to this, the Court then to like in a poor Inn, the stable to be the
bedchamber, the cratch the Royal pallat; VVinter and Hunger to attend, and
yet the Wise Men to offer, Angels to honor, Shepherds to sing of him, Oracles
then to cease, Devils then to tremble: this was a New, a strange Creation.

To Zebedees children Christ answered, Ye cannot be baptized with the Baptism
wherewith I must be baptized: so I may say, we would be loath to be CREATED
in that order, that he was CREATED. But let it be our morning and evening
prayer, that we may be created according to his likeness, that as he of God
became man, so we of men may become the sons of God. Delay not, it is
dangerous; presume not, it is perilous: David sought it and found it; unless
thou seek it with hearty prayer, thou may seek it and not find it: Austin.
Huic fit misericordia, tibi non fit iniuria, though he showed great mercy to
David, and will not to thee, he does thee no injury. Take heed least
impenitencie cause him to prove a wrath-reuenging God, and let no man continue
in sin, that grace may abound: Reprobates, Devils can do no more, if any do
so, he may sleep his everlasting sleep of sin, never be warned, never be
wakened more: God may say to thee as he said to the Disciples, and pronounce
that sentence against thee for thy sleep of the soul, as he did to them for
the sleep of the body: For henceforth sleep and take thy rest, till thy eyes
sink into the holes of thy head, I will never come, nor send, nor call, nor
waken thee, the night shall compass thee, and the pit shall shut her mouth
upon thee. In our Church Lyturgie, which is in these days like to Christ
crucified between two, there is a most comfortable promise drawn from
Scripture, At what time soever a sinner does repent of his sins from the
bottom of his heart, God will put away all his wickedness out of his
remembrance: thereupon many take their pleasure, and glut themselves with
sin, refer all good thoughts till the last hour, never put their hands
into their bosom, to see how leaprous they be, their mouths continue to be
the vents to breath forth the putrified savor of their soul, their eyes the
windows, their ears the doors of destruction, their understandings flaues to
their wills, their wills common curtizans of pollution, their memories the
table-booke of their corruptions. O miserable and fearful state of such! If
any at any time, in any case had reason to cry with David, these have [Create
in me a new heart.] And so much of the first part, Create in me.

The part to be created, Secunda pars.
is the heart, [Create in me a new heart] As is gold among the mettalls, the
sight among the senses, the Nerve Opticke among the sinews, so is the heart
among the members, and yet of the heart Jeremy complains, The heart of man is
deceitful and wicked above all things, who can know it, Ier. 17.9. And
although the heart be so little, as that it will scarce serve a Kite for a
bait, yet the windings and turnings in the heart contain many Maeanders. The
Heathens accounted it the Sun of the body: for as in the midst of Heaven
the Sun is situated, which enlighteneth all things with his rays, and
cherishes the world, and the things therein contained with his life-keeping
heat, so the heart of man, the fountain of life and heat, has assigned to
it by nature, the middle part of the body for his habitation, from whence
proceeds life and heat unto all the parts of the body, as it were into
rivers, whereby they be preserved and enabled to perform their natural
function. In Divinity we shall find it to be Sacram Palladis arcem, the
seat of reason, the Metropolis of the soul, Andr. Laur.
the Sanctuary of the mind, the Arc of the understanding, the Temple of
faith, the holy Place of the holy Ghost, so that with a good heart there is
ever a wise tongue, a diligent hand, a wary foot, a watchful eye, an
attentive ear, and a humble mind, this being like the great wheel in a
watch, all the lesser depend upon it, the tongue will not praise, unless the
heart do love the ear will not hear, unless the heart do mind: the hand will
not give, unless the heart do pity: the foot will not go, unless the heart
do strive: the heart like the Judge gives the charge; like the Captain gives
the onset: it is the warning piece of the castle: when the heart is prepared,
the senses ate ready to perceive, the imagination to represent, the knowledge
to form, the wit to find out, the reason to judge, the memory to conserve,
the understanding to apprehend, and so of all the other faculties.

Saint Austin defines the heart to be the seat of the soul, and the soul to
be the whole inward man, wherewith the mass of clay is quickened and governed,
and held together, changing her names according to her sundry offices which
she bears in the body: when she quickens the body, she is called the
soul: when she desires any thing, the will: for knowledge, the mind: for
recordation, the memory: for giving life, the spirit: for apprehending
outwardly the sense. All stars receive light from the Sun, so that if the
light be dark, how great is this darkness. In the Temple there was the Altar
and the Censor; a Christian must have both; the Censor is the tongue, it
polisheth the best operations of the senses, and is the Ambassador, Speaker,
Interpreter, between God and man: but the heart, the Altar, is of more honor:
for howsoever the Romans so much honored the hand, and Esop preferred the
tongue, and the Optickes the eye, and the Anatomists the head, yet God of all
other parts desires the heart: and therefore David so much prays for the
Creating of a heart.

The languishments of the body be nothing to the soul: as the soul is in
comparison of the body full of glory, so is the grief of the soul more full
of inward misery, and therefore the hazard of the soul more to be feared, and
the safety of the heart more to be tendered. In the greatest distemperature of
David, when his body was so ill affected, Psalm. 38.2.
no health in his flesh, no rest in his bones, his loins filled with a sore
disease, his wounds putrified and stunke, the marrow and moisture quite dried
up, when he was almost dissolved into the dust of death, yet his soul might
have been safe and sound: but if the soul be sick, can the body have any
comfort? it was ill with those that cried out in Scripture, My head, my head:
and another, My belly, my belly, but when they cry out of the heart, of the
soul, all will be out of tune.

The Italian observes by a Proverb, that the Germans wits dwell in their
fingers end; and so must all true goodness, it must have a descent from the
heart to the hand: for when the heart does indite a good matter, the hand will
easily be the pen of a ready writer.

The Anatomists observe, that there be strings that pass from the heart to
the tongue, and so what the heart thinks the tongue utters, then the ear
hears, the eye observes, the tongue prays, sings, praises, records:
and howsoever the tongue be in the highest part of the body, and yet is the
speaker of the lower house, it delivers only that which the nobler parts
have agreed to, nothing but that which the heart and the faculties of the soul
have determined. And as all good comes from the heart, so all good that
comes to us, comes into the heart: it is the School Maxim, Virtutes
Theologicae non sunt in nob is per acquisitionem, sed per infusionem, the
acquisition of the head cannot obtain faith, hope, charity, it must be the
infusion into the heart: for as Biel teaches of faith, Fides est non suasa sed
inspirata, not persuaded, but inspired: so of the other Theological virtues,
and of every good and perfect gift it is infused by the Father of light into
the heart. So that God dwells in the soul, and the soul dwells as in his
Metropolis, in the heart. And this caused David to require the new heart, the
good heart.

The doctrine hence proceeding is, that a good Christian must ever pray, and
study, to keep his heart undefiled; and if it chance to be never so little
polluted, presently to wash it, to cleanse it: for the heart is the inner side
that is to be purged, it is the Parlour where the Savior will eat the
Passover, it is the Gedeons fleece, the Goshen, the Chanaan, the Temple, the
Sanctum Sanctorum of the Temple. It is the inner room, the Treasury, the
Tower, the Arc; here dwells zeal, of Elias, for zeal in Christianity is
ignis sanctus: next zeal dwells knowledge, of S. Paul; for zeal without
knowledge is ignis fatuus: here dwells faithfulness, as in the Pastor of
Smyrna, for faithfulness to the truth is suffimentum redolens: and next
faithfulness dwells charity, as in Saint John; for faithfulness without
charity, is suffitus non redolens, sed olens: here dwells practice, as in
the Ninevites; for practice is stella lucens: next practice dwells
perseverance as the Corinthians; for practice without perseverance, is but
Stella cadens: here dwells belief in God as in the Disciples; for belief in
Christianity, is lucerna ardens: next belief dwells love in God, as in the
Psalmist; for belief without love, is Cymbalu^ tinniens: here dwells
obedience as in Abraham; for obedience is virga consolans: next obedience
dwells patience, as in Job; for obedience without patience, is baculus non
dirigens. In a word, in this Paradise is the tree which Hugo describes, Arbor
bonitatis quae per timorem seminatur, Hugo de Sancto victore.
the tree of goodness which is set by fear, strengthened by faith, watered by
grace, germinated by godliness, will wax green by hope, will fructify by
love, will build by learning, will blossom by long-continuing, will grow ripe
by patience, and the fruit of life will be gathered at death, the fruit of
grace now, and of glory hereafter; for these differ, but, Tempore and loco,
but in time and place, as the Schoolmen speak: then every honest unmasked
Christian may say as David did, Cor meum dilatasti, thou have expatiated my
heart, a great door is open, and here dwell mercy, and truth, and
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. In such a sanctified
heart, there dwells not the affectation of the titles of the world, which be
but follia terrae, the liuelesse leaves of the earth; or the desire of the
fortunes of the world, which be Lollia terrae, Bernard.
the empty windy chafe of the earth; or the earnest seeking for the wealth
of the world, which be but Illia terrae, the exenterated guts, and garbage of
the earth; or the prosecution of the pleasures of the earth, which be but
Lillia terrae, the fading, falling, failing, strawing-flowers of the earth. All
these have not habitation or commoration here; the good HEART (with Saint
Bernard) counts them shadows, and in accounting them so, it thinks too well
of them: for there is much excellent Art in delineating a shadow: or it
thinks them dreams, A Elian. histor.
and sleeps, Chrysostom.
as Chrysostom; and this thought is also too good; for in sleeps there be
much ease and sweet comfort: or holds them with Sirach to be smoakes, and
that censure also is too good for them, for in incense there is sweet savor
in smoakes: or further with Nazianzene, calls them follies, and this, as the
rest, is too good a name for them: for Erasmus wrote much in the praise of
Folly. And therefore upon little advise, concludes with Saint Paul, that they
be (...), Stercora, dung, and filth, and stench, Adams Apple, Esaus broth,
Philip. 3.
Babilons Cup, Judas soppe, the Sorcerers Serpents, the Spiders web, the
Cocatrices Eggs, the waters of Tema, which in a moisture swell, and in a
drought fail: All these cannot fill the heart; Orontius describes the world
in the form of a Heart, and leaves many spaces void in the figure of the
Heart, that cannot be filled up with the world, for a Circle cannot fill up a
Triangle, so that the heart is more then all the world; nothing can fill the
heart but God; the parts of the heart be a Trinary, and nothing can fill up
this Trinary, but the three persons of the Trinity.

Ecclesiast. mencioneth a vain heart, Esaias a barren heart, Jeremy a deceitful
heart, the Psalmist a sinful heart, Paul a double heart, Moses a hard heart:
But David desires the new, the clean heart, When the Sun rises, then the
beasts arise from their dens, the Fowls from their nests, and men from their
beds. So when the Heart sets forward, all the members will follow, nothing
will stay after the Heart, but as the eyes of servants look to the hands of
their Masters, and the eyes of hand-maides to their mistress, so the members
of the body wait upon the heart, until the Lord have mercy upon us, and
therefore Christ spoke, Make clean within in the heart, and all will be
clean; Math. 13.26. Luke.
and therefore the Publicane beat upon his heart as if he were angry that it
waked not all the rest: therefore Saint Paul speaks, Make melody to the Lord
in your hearts, Ephe. 5.19.
showing that the members make a sweet harmony, when the heart is in tune; and
therefore Solomon, Gods Purueyor, cries for the heart. Pro. 23 26.


If Pilate had washed his heart when he washed his hands, Math. 27.42.
he had been as clean as Naaman coming out of Jordan: 1. Kings 5.
If the Sichemites had circumcised their hearts, Genesis 34.22.
when they circumcised their flesh, they had saved their souls when they lost
their lives. Genesis 4.2.
If Caine had offered his heart, Math. 5.20.
when he offered his fruits, his offering had been as acceptable as Abels: If
the Pharisey had looked into the inside, as well as to the outside, his heart
had been as clean as his hands. It is not enough to say my foot stands
upright, Psalm 26.12. Psalm. 88.9. Psalm. 25.15. Psalm. 108.1. Psalm. 42.1.
or my hands I stretch forth toward thy holy Temple, or mine eyes are ever
toward the Lord: or mine ears O Lord have thou opened: or O God my Tongue is
prepared. But as the HEART desires the water-brooke, so longs my HEART after
thee O GOD, so being renewed in heart, the heart shall be capable of a new
Soul: the Soul of a new body; that body of a new garment, that garment of a
new girdle: And the Christian being so altered, and changed, and reformed, and
CREATED a new, GOD will manifest to him those new things in Esaias; Esaias 42.9.
Ier. 31.31.
those new Covenants in Jeremy, those new Commandments in John, John. 13.14.
Math. 26.28. Heb. 10.20. Ezech. 18.31.
those new Testaments in Matthew; those new living ways in Paul; those new
believing hearts in Ezechiell, to make them new Creatures, yea new men, to give
them new names, and to make them capable of a new Heaven, and new Earth.

The use of this is, to exhort every one in this great and Honorable assembly,
to leave off the iniquity of his heart, and to be changed by the renewing of
his mind, that he may prove the good will of GOD, acceptable and perfect;
Cast of the Morian skin, expunge the Leopards spots, fly out of Babell,
haste out of Zodome, Go not back, look not back, but for ever Consecrate thy
self, thy soul, thy body, to thy GOD, and let his word dwell plenteously in
thee in all wisdom. Col. 3.16.


You my Brethren, now admitted into the sacred function of the Clergy,
remember this, Preach this, practice this, Let not a white hair of lightness
be found upon your black garments, nor a black spotte of filthiness polute
your white surplisses, take heed of the moate of Schism, and beam of
superstition; let your Garments have the high Priests Pomegranates, as well as
Bells, your Lamps be as well inwardly burning, as outwardly lighting, and
never be weary of the work of the Lord, 1. Cor. 15.
in as much as your labor is not in vain in the Lord, and he that promises will
perform, though in this last and worst age, he that has stepped but two
steps from the dunghill, such whose fathers Job would not have placed with
the Dogs of his sheepfold, though these crauen gallants be ready to abase
and abuse this sacted Calling, yet remember ye that Christ Jesus in his own
person, has dignified this profession, and at this day there is no Prince in
the Christian world, but has in him some part of a Priest, besides that Christ
Jesus has, in washing us all from our sins, made us Kings and Priests to God
his Father. Revel. 1.5.
Think upon this dignity, practice that duty, and so the Lord be with you, and
with your spirits.

All of you my beloved hear the sum of all: you that come to be either
spectators, or necessary attendants at this great solemnity of the CREATION,
power forth your prayers; First for the most gracious PRINCE, who is to be
Created, that he may answer all those worthy expectations of him, and be as
renowned as Solomon, that preaching Prince, or Constantine that praying Prince,
or Theodosius that religious Prince, or our most Religious, Gracious, Zealous,
and miraculously-preserued Sovereign, who has so happily by Peace blessed us,
and so worthily by his Pen conquered his enemies: And if for Nebuchadnetsar and
Balshassar his son, prayers were appointed to be made when they were
Heathens and oppressors, much more now are prayers to be powered forth
plentifully, for our most sacred Sovereign, and his Princely Son, that their
days may be as the days of heaven, that in their time the righteous may
flourish, and there may be abundance of peace so long as the Sun and Moon
endures, that they may deliver the poor when he cries, the weary also, and
him that has no helper, they may live, and unto them may be given of the gold
of Arabia, their names may endure for ever among the posterities, which shall
be blessed by them, and all the people shall praise them.

And for our selves let us celebrate this happy Creation with a new Creation;
the Sun renueth, the Moon renueth, the year renueth, the spring renueth,
the morning renueth, this very hour renueth. Shall we continue old, dull,
dead? The Heart renueth strength, the Swallow sight, the Eagle youth, yea the
very Viper renueth and casts his slough, shall we be worse then the Viper?
Do we look for new wonders, and make our selves new prodigies? Is the misery
of the world such, that men will not be renewed or anew created? unless the
course of the world be altered, or the pillars of the earth moved, or the
chambers of the deep discovered? must the Sea divide as to Moses? or Jordan
fly back as to Israel? or the Sun stand still as to Iosuah? or go back as
to Hezechiah? or a voice be heard from heaven as to Paul? The Lord does use
ordinary means, the preaching of the Gospel, but extraordinarily: if it
pierce thy soul, thou art new Created, God rather desires bleeding hearts,
then itching ears. If thou find this word to be powerful in thee, and to
move in thy soul as John Baptist leaped in his mothers womb, Take up thy bed,
and rise, and walk, thou art healed, thou art this day Created, make much of
that sweet Nightingale in the cage.

Christ goes home with thee, and will enter, dwell with thee, and thou shall
serve the Lord in righteousness and holiness all the days of thy life:
practice this, and pray for this, and cry every man unto God, Blessed be the
Lord God of Israel, who only does marvelous things, and blessed be the name
of his Majesty for ever and ever: And let all the people say, AMEN.

FINIS.

